The Story of Wabaskaha

An interesting story is that of Wabaskaha, an Omaha brave, the facts
related in which occurred about a {272} century ago.  A party of
Pawnees on the war-path raided the horses belonging to some Omahas
dwelling beside Omaha Creek.  Most of the animals were the property of
Wabaskaha, who immediately followed on their trail.  A few Omahas who
had tried to rescue the horses had also been carried off, and on the
arrival of the Pawnee party at the Republican River several of the
Pawnees proposed to put their prisoners to death.  Others, however,
refused to participate in such an act, and strenuously opposed the
suggestion.  A wife of one of the Pawnee chiefs fed the captives, after
which her husband gave them permission to depart.

After this incident quite a feeling of friendship sprang up between the
two peoples, and the Pawnees were continually inviting the Omahas to
feasts and other entertainments, but they refused to return the horses
they had stolen.  They told Wabaskaha that if he came for his horses in
the fall they would exchange them then for a certain amount of
gunpowder, and that was the best arrangement he could come to with
them.  On his way homeward Wabaskaha mourned loudly for the horses,
which constituted nearly the whole of his worldly possessions, and
called upon Wakanda, his god, to assist and avenge him.  In glowing
language he recounted the circumstances of his loss to the people of
his tribe, and so strong was their sense of the injustice done him that
next day a general meeting was held in the village to consider his
case.  A pipe was filled, and Wabaskaha asked the men of his tribe to
place it to their lips if they decided to take vengeance on the
Pawnees.  All did so, but the premeditated raid was postponed until the
early autumn.

After a summer of hunting the braves sought the war-path.  They had
hardly started when a number of {273} Dakotas arrived at their village,
bringing some tobacco.  The Dakotas announced their intention of
joining the Omaha war-party, the trail of which they took up
accordingly.  In a few days the Omahas arrived at the Pawnee village,
which they attacked at daylight.  After a vigorous defence the Pawnees
were almost exterminated, and all their horses captured.  The Dakotas
who had elected to assist the Omaha war-party were, however, slain to a
man.  Such was the vengeance of Wabaskaha.

This story is interesting as an account of a veritable Indian raid,
taken from the lips of Joseph La Flèche, a Dakota Indian.


The Men-Serpents

Twenty warriors who had been on the war-path were returning homeward
worn-out and hungry, and as they went they scattered in search of game
to sustain them on their way.

Suddenly one of the braves, placing his ear to the ground, declared
that he could hear a herd of buffaloes approaching.

The band was greatly cheered by this news, and the plans made by the
chief to intercept the animals were quickly carried into effect.


Nearer and nearer came the supposed herd.  The chief lay very still,
ready to shoot when it came within range.  Suddenly he saw, to his
horror, that what approached them was a huge snake with a rattle as
large as a man's head.  Though almost paralysed with surprise and
terror, he managed to shoot the monster and kill it.  He called up his
men, who were not a little afraid of the gigantic creature, even though
it was dead, and for a long time they debated what they should do with
the carcass.  At length hunger {274} conquered their scruples and made
them decide to cook and eat it.  To their surprise, they found the meat
as savoury as that of a buffalo, which it much resembled.  All partook
of the fare, with the exception of one boy, who persisted in refusing
it, though they pressed him to eat.

When the warriors had finished their meal they lay down beside the
camp-fire and fell asleep.  Later in the night the chief awoke and was
horrified to find that his companions had turned to snakes, and that he
himself was already half snake, half man.  Hastily he gathered his
transformed warriors, and they saw that the boy who had not eaten of
the reptile had retained his own form.  The lad, fearing that the
serpents might attack him, began to weep, but the snake-warriors
treated him very kindly, giving him their charms and all they possessed.

At their request he put them into a large robe and carried them to the
summit of a high hill, where he set them down under the trees.

"You must return to our lodges," they told him, "and in the summer we
will visit our kindred.  See that our wives and children come out to
greet us."

The boy carried the news to his village, and there was much weeping and
lamentation when the friends of the warriors heard of their fate.  But
in the summer the snakes came and sat in a group outside the village,
and all the people crowded round them, loudly venting their grief.  The
horses which had belonged to the snakes were brought out to them, as
well as their moccasins, leggings, whips, and saddles.

"Do not be afraid of them," said the boy to the assembled people.  "Do
not flee from them, lest something happen to you also."  So they let
the snakes creep over them, and no harm befell.  {275} In the winter
the snakes vanished altogether, and with them their horses and other
possessions, and the people never saw them more.


The Three Tests

There dwelt in a certain village a woman of remarkable grace and
attractiveness.  The fame of her beauty drew suitors from far and near,
eager to display their prowess and win the love of this imperious
creature--for, besides being beautiful, she was extremely hard to
please, and set such tests for her lovers as none had ever been able to
satisfy.

A certain young man who lived at a considerable distance had heard of
her great charms, and made up his mind to woo and win her.  The
difficulty of the task did not daunt him, and, full of hope, he set out
on his mission.

As he travelled he came to a very high hill, and on the summit he saw a
man rising and sitting down at short intervals.  When the prospective
suitor drew nearer he observed that the man was fastening large stones
to his ankles.  The youth approached him, saying: "Why do you tie these
great stones to your ankles?"

"Oh," replied the other, "I wish to chase buffaloes, and yet whenever I
do so I go beyond them, so I am tying stones to my ankles that I may
not run so fast."

"My friend," said the suitor, "you can run some other time.  In the
meantime I am without a companion: come with me."

The Swift One agreed, and they walked on their way together.  Ere they
had gone very far they saw two large lakes.  By the side of one of them
sat a man, who frequently bowed his head to the water and drank.
Surprised that his thirst was not quenched, they said to him: "Why do
you sit there drinking of the lake?"

{276}

"I can never get enough water.  When I have finished this lake I shall
start on the other."

"My friend," said the suitor, "do not trouble to drink it just now.
Come and join us."

The Thirsty One complied, and the three comrades journeyed on.  When
they had gone a little farther they noticed a man walking along with
his face lifted to the sky.  Curious to know why he acted thus, they
addressed him.

"Why do you walk with your eyes turned skyward?" said they.

"I have shot an arrow," he said, "and I am waiting for it to reappear."

"Never mind your arrow," said the suitor.  "Come with us."

"I will come," said the Skilful Archer.

As the four companions journeyed through a forest they beheld a strange
sight.  A man was lying with his ear to the ground, and if he lifted
his head for a moment he bowed it again, listening intently.  The four
approached him, saying: "Friend, for what do you listen so earnestly?"

"I am listening," said he, "to the plants growing.  This forest is full
of plants, and I am listening to their breathing."

"You can listen when the occasion arises," they told him.  "Come and
join us."

He agreed, and so they travelled to the village where dwelt the
beautiful maiden.

When they had reached their destination they were quickly surrounded by
the villagers, who displayed no small curiosity as to who their
visitors were and what object they had in coming so far.  When they
heard that one of the strangers desired to marry the village beauty
they shook their heads over him.  Did he not {277} know the
difficulties in the way?  Finding that he would not be turned from his
purpose, they led him to a huge rock which overshadowed the village,
and described the first test he would be required to meet.

"If you wish to win the maiden," they said, "you must first of all push
away that great stone.  It is keeping the sunlight from us."

"Alas!" said the youth, "it is impossible."

"Not so," said his companion of the swift foot; "nothing could be more
easy."


Saying this, he leaned his shoulder against the rock, and with a mighty
crash it fell from its place.  From the breaking up of it came the
rocks and stones that are scattered over all the world.

The second test was of a different nature.  The people brought the
strangers a large quantity of food and water, and bade them eat and
drink.  Being very hungry, they succeeded in disposing of the food, but
the suitor sorrowfully regarded the great kettles of water.

"Alas!" said he, "who can drink up that?"

"I can," said the Thirsty One, and in a twinkling he had drunk it all.

The people were amazed at the prowess of the visitors.  However, they
said, "There is still another test," and they brought out a woman who
was a very swift runner, so swift that no one had ever outstripped her
in a race.


The Race

"You must run a race with this woman," said they.  "If you win you
shall have the hand of the maiden you have come to seek."

Naturally the suitor chose the Swift One for this test.  When the
runners were started the people hailed them as {278} fairly matched,
for they raced together till they were out of sight.

When they reached the turning-point the woman said: "Come, let us rest
for a little."

The man agreed, but no sooner had he sat down than he fell asleep.  The
woman seized her opportunity.  Making sure that her rival was sleeping
soundly, she set off for the village, running as hard as she could.

Meanwhile the four comrades were anxiously awaiting the return of the
competitors, and great was their disappointment when the woman came in
sight, while there was yet no sign of their champion.

The man who could hear the plants growing bent his ear to the ground.

"He is asleep," said he; "I can hear him snoring."

The Skilful Archer came forward, and as he bit the point off an arrow
he said: "I will soon wake him."

He shot an arrow from the bowstring with such a wonderful aim that it
wounded the sleeper's nose, and roused him from his slumbers.  The
runner started to his feet and looked round for the woman.  She was
gone.  Knowing that he had been tricked, the Swift One put all his
energy into an effort to overtake her.  She was within a few yards of
the winning-post when he passed her.  It was a narrow margin, but
nevertheless the Swift One had gained the race for his comrade.

The youth was then married to the damsel, whom he found to be all that
her admirers had claimed, and more.


The Snake-Ogre

One day a young brave, feeling at variance with the world in general,
and wishing to rid himself of the mood, left the lodges of his people
and journeyed into {279} the forest.  By and by he came to an open
space, in the centre of which was a high hill.  Thinking he would climb
to the top and reconnoitre, he directed his footsteps thither, and as
he went he observed a man coming in the opposite direction and making
for the same spot.  The two met on the summit, and stood for a few
moments silently regarding each other.  The stranger was the first to
speak, gravely inviting the young brave to accompany him to his lodge
and sup with him.  The other accepted the invitation, and they
proceeded in the direction the stranger indicated.

On approaching the lodge the youth saw with some surprise that there
was a large heap of bones in front of the door.  Within sat a very old
woman tending a pot.  When the young man learned that the feast was to
be a cannibal one, however, he declined to partake of it.  The woman
thereupon boiled some corn for him, and while doing so told him that
his host was nothing more nor less than a snake-man, a sort of ogre who
killed and ate human beings.  Because the brave was young and very
handsome the old woman took pity on him, bemoaning the fate that would
surely befall him unless he could escape from the wiles of the
snake-man.

"Listen," said she: "I will tell you what to do.  Here are some
moccasins.  When the morning comes put them on your feet, take one
step, and you will find yourself on that headland you see in the
distance.  Give this paper to the man you will meet there, and he will
direct you further.  But remember that however far you may go, in the
evening the Snake will overtake you.  When you have finished with the
moccasins take them off, place them on the ground facing this way, and
they will return."

"Is that all?" said the youth.

{280}

"No," she replied.  "Before you go you must kill me and put a robe over
my bones."


The Magic Moccasins

The young brave forthwith proceeded to carry these instructions into
effect.  First of all he killed the old woman, and disposed of her
remains in accordance with her bidding.  In the morning he put on the
magic moccasins which she had provided for him, and with one great step
he reached the distant headland.  Here he met an old man, who received
the paper from him, and then, giving him another pair of moccasins,
directed him to a far-off point where he was to deliver another piece
of paper to a man who would await him there.  Turning the first
moccasins homeward, the young brave put the second pair to use, and
took another gigantic step.  Arrived at the second stage of his journey
from the Snake's lodge, he found it a repetition of the first.  He was
directed to another distant spot, and from that to yet another.  But
when he delivered his message for the fourth time he was treated
somewhat differently.


"Down there in the hollow," said the recipient of the paper, "there is
a stream.  Go toward it, and walk straight on, but do not look at the
water."

The youth did as he was bidden, and shortly found himself on the
opposite bank of the stream.

He journeyed up the creek, and as evening fell he came upon a place
where the river widened to a lake.  Skirting its shores, he suddenly
found himself face to face with the Snake.  Only then did he remember
the words of the old woman, who had warned him that in the evening the
Snake would overtake him.  So he turned himself into a little fish with
red fins, lazily moving in the lake.


{281}

The Snake's Quest

The Snake, high on the bank, saw the little creature, and cried:
"Little Fish! have you seen the person I am looking for?  If a bird had
flown over the lake you must have seen it, the water is so still, and
surely you have seen the man I am seeking?"

"Not so," replied the Little Fish, "I have seen no one.  But if he
passes this way I will tell you."

So the Snake continued down-stream, and as he went there was a little
grey toad right in his path.

"Little Toad," said he, "have you seen him for whom I am seeking?  Even
if only a shadow were here you must have seen it."

"Yes," said the Little Toad, "I have seen him, but I cannot tell you
which way he has gone."

The Snake doubled and came back on his trail.  Seeing a very large fish
in shallow water, he said: "Have you seen the man I am looking for?"

"That is he with whom you have just been talking," said the Fish, and
the Snake turned homeward.  Meeting a musk-rat he stopped.

"Have you seen the person I am looking for?" he said.  Then, having his
suspicions aroused, he added craftily: "I think that you are he."

But the Musk-rat began a bitter complaint.

"Just now," said he, "the person you seek passed over my lodge and
broke it."

So the Snake passed on, and encountered a red-breasted turtle.

He repeated his query, and the Turtle told him that the object of his
search was to be met with farther on.

"But beware," he added, "for if you do not recognize him he will kill
you."

{282}

Following the stream, the Snake came upon a large green frog floating
in shallow water.

"I have been seeking a person since morning," he said.  "I think that
you are he."

The Frog allayed his suspicions, saying: "You will meet him farther
down the stream."

The Snake next found a large turtle floating among the green scum on a
lake.  Getting on the Turtle's back, he said: "You must be the person I
seek," and his head rose higher and higher as he prepared to strike.

"I am not," replied the Turtle.  "The next person you meet will be he.
But beware, for if you do not recognize him he will kill you."

When he had gone a little farther down the Snake attempted to cross the
stream.  In the middle was an eddy.  Crafty as he was, the Snake failed
to recognize his enemy, and the eddy drew him down into the water and
drowned him.  So the youth succeeded in slaying the Snake who had
sought throughout the day to kill him.