The story of the many tricks and pranks played by Blue Jay, not only on
the long-suffering members of his tribe, but also upon the denizens of
the supernatural world, must have afforded intense amusement around
many an Indian camp-fire.  Even the proverbial gravity of the Red Man
could scarcely hold out against the comical adventures of this American
Owl-glass.


Thunder-Gods

North America is rich in thunder-gods.  Of these a typical example is
Haokah, the god of the Sioux.  The countenance of this divinity was
divided into halves, one of which expressed grief and the other
cheerfulness--that is, on occasion he could either weep with the rain
or smile with the sun.  Heat affected him as cold, and cold was to him
as heat.  He beat the tattoo of the thunder on his great drum, using
the wind as a drum-stick.  In some phases he is reminiscent of Jupiter,
for he hurls the lightning to earth in the shape of thunderbolts.  He
wears a pair of horns, perhaps to typify his connexion with the
lightning, or else with the chase, for many American thunder-gods are
mighty hunters.  This double conception arises from their possession of
the lightning-spear, or arrow, which also gives them in some cases the
character of a war-god.  Strangely enough, such gods of the chase often
resembled in appearance the animals they hunted.  For example, Tsui
'Kalu (Slanting Eyes), a hunter-god {126} of the Cherokee Indians,
seems to resemble a deer.  He is of giant proportions, and dwells in a
great mountain of the Blue Ridge Range, in North-western Virginia.  He
appears to have possessed all the game in the district as his private
property.  A Cherokee thunder-god is Asgaya Gigagei (Red Man).  The
facts that he is described as being of a red colour, thus typifying the
lightning, and that the Cherokees were originally a mountain people,
leave little room for doubt that he is a thunder-god, for it is around
the mountain peaks that the heavy thunder-clouds gather, and the red
lightning flashing from their depths looks like the moving limbs of the
half-hidden deity.  We also find occasionally invoked in the Cherokee
religious formulæ a pair of twin deities known as the 'Little Men,' or
'Thunder-boys.'  This reminds us that in Peru twins were always
regarded as sacred to the lightning, since they were emblematic of the
thunder-and-lightning twins, Apocatequil and Piguerao.  All these
thunder-gods are analogous to the Aztec Tlaloc, the Kiche Hurakan, and
the Otomi Mixcoatl.[10]  A well-known instance of the thunder- or
hunter-god who possesses animal characteristics will occur to those who
are familiar with the old English legend of Herne the Hunter, with his
deer's head and antlers.


[10] See _Myths of Mexico and Peru_.


The Dakota Indians worshipped a deity whom they addressed as Waukheon
(Thunder-bird).  This being was engaged in constant strife with the
water-god, Unktahe, who was a cunning sorcerer, and a controller of
dreams and witchcraft.  Their conflict probably symbolizes the
atmospheric changes which accompany the different seasons.


{127}

Idea of a Future Life

The idea of a future life was very widely disseminated among the tribes
of North America.  The general conception of such an existence was that
it was merely a shadowy extension of terrestrial life, in which the
same round of hunting and kindred pursuits was engaged in.  The Indian
idea of eternal bliss seems to have been an existence in the Land of
the Sun, to which, however, only those famed in war were usually
admitted.

That the Indians possessed a firm belief in a future state of existence
is proved by their statements to the early Moravian missionaries, to
whom they said: "We Indians shall not for ever die.  Even the grains of
corn we put under the earth grow up and become living things."  The old
missionary adds: "They conceive that when the soul has been awhile with
God it can, if it chooses, return to earth and be born again."  This
idea of rebirth, however, appears to have meant that the soul would
return to the bones, that these would clothe themselves with flesh, and
that the man would rejoin his tribe.  By what process of reasoning they
arrived at such a conclusion it would be difficult to ascertain, but
the almost universal practice which obtained among the Indians both of
North and South America of preserving the bones of the deceased plainly
indicates that they possessed some strong religious reason for this
belief.  Many tribes which dwelt east of the Mississippi once in every
decade collected the bones of those who had died within that period,
carefully cleaned them, and placed them in a tomb lined with beautiful
flowers, over which they erected a mound of wood, stone, or earth.
Nor, indeed, were the ancient Egyptians more considerate of the remains
of their fathers.


{128}

The Hope of Resurrection

American funerary ritual and practice throughout the northern
sub-continent plainly indicates a strong and vivid belief in the
resurrection of the soul after death.  Among many tribes the practice
prevailed of interring with the deceased such objects as he might be
supposed to require in the other world.  These included weapons of war
and of the chase for men, and household implements and feminine finery
in the case of women.

Among primitive peoples the belief is prevalent that inanimate objects
possess doubles, or, as spiritualists would say, 'astral bodies,' or
souls, and some Indian tribes supposed that unless such objects were
broken or mutilated--that is to say, 'killed'--their doubles would not
accompany the spirit of the deceased on its journey.


Indian Burial Customs

Many methods of disposing of the corpse were, and are, in use among the
American Indians.  The most common of these were ordinary burial in the
earth or under tumuli, burial in caves, tree-burial, raising the dead
on platforms, and the disposal of cremated remains in urns.

Embalming and mummification were practised to a certain extent by some
of the extinct tribes of the east coast, and some of the north-west
tribes, notably the Chinooks, buried their dead in canoes, which were
raised on poles.  The rites which accompanied burial, besides the
placing of useful articles and food in the grave, generally consisted
in a solemn dance, in which the bereaved relatives cut themselves and
blackened their faces, after which they wailed night and morning in
solitary places.  It was generally regarded as unlucky to mention the
name of the deceased, and, indeed, the {129} bereaved family often
adopted another name to avoid such a contingency.


The Soul's Journey

Most of the tribes appear to have believed that the soul had to
undertake a long journey before it reached its destination.  The belief
of the Chinooks in this respect is perhaps a typical one.  They imagine
that after death the spirit of the deceased drinks at a large hole in
the ground, after which it shrinks and passes on to the country of the
ghosts, where it is fed with spirit food and drink.  After this act of
communion with the spirit-world it may not return.  They also believe
that every one is possessed of two spirits, a greater and a less.
During illness the lesser soul is spirited away by the denizens of
Ghost-land.  The Navahos possess a similar belief, and say that the
soul has none of the vital force which animates the body, nor any of
the faculties of the mind, but a kind of third quality, or personality,
like the _ka_ of the ancient Egyptians, which may leave its owner and
become lost, much to his danger and discomfort.  The Hurons and
Iroquois believe that after death the soul must cross a deep and swift
stream, by a bridge formed by a single slender tree, upon which it has
to combat the attacks of a fierce dog.  The Athapascans imagine that
the soul must be ferried over a great water in a stone canoe, and the
Algonquins and Dakotas believe that departed spirits must cross a
stream bridged by an enormous snake.


Paradise and the Supernatural People

The Red Man appears to have possessed two wholly different conceptions
of supernatural life.  We find in Indian myth allusions both to a
'Country of the Ghosts' and to a 'Land of the Supernatural People.'
{130} The first appears to be the destination of human beings after
death, but the second is apparently the dwelling-place of a spiritual
race some degrees higher than mankind.  Both these regions are within
the reach of mortals, and seem to be mere extensions of the terrestrial
sphere.  Their inhabitants eat, drink, hunt, and amuse themselves in
the same manner as earthly folk, and are by no means invulnerable or
immortal.  The instinctive dread of the supernatural which primitive
man possesses is well exemplified in the myths in which he is brought
into contact with the denizens of Ghost-land or the Spirit-world.
These myths were undoubtedly framed for the same purpose as the old
Welsh poem on the harrying of hell, or the story of the journey of the
twin brothers to Xibalba in the Central American _Popol Vuh_.  That is
to say, the desire was felt for some assurance that man, on entering
the spiritual sphere, would only be treading in the footsteps of heroic
beings who had preceded him, who had vanquished the forces of death and
hell and had stripped them of their terrors.

The mythologies of the North American Indians possess no place of
punishment, any more than they possess any deities who are frankly
malevolent toward humanity.  Should a place of torment be discernible
in any Indian mythology at the present day it may unhesitatingly be
classed as the product of missionary sophistication.  Father Brébeuf,
an early French missionary, could only find that the souls of suicides
and those killed in war were supposed to dwell apart from the others.
"But as to the souls of scoundrels," he adds, "so far from being shut
out, they are welcome guests; though for that matter, if it were not so
their paradise would be a total desert, as 'Indian' and 'scoundrel' are
one and the same."


{131}

The Sacred Number Four

Over the length and breadth of the American continent a peculiar
sanctity is attached by the aborigines to the four points of the
compass.  This arises from the circumstance that from these quarters
come the winds which carry the fertilizing rains.  The Red Man, a
dweller in vast undulating plains where landmarks are few, recognized
the necessity of such guidance in his wanderings as could alone be
received from a strict adherence to the position of the four cardinal
points.  These he began to regard with veneration as his personal
safeguards, and recognized in them the dwelling-places of powerful
beings, under whose care he was.  Most of his festivals and
celebrations had symbolical or direct allusions to the four points of
the compass.  The ceremony of smoking, without which no treaty could be
commenced or ratified, was usually begun by the chief of the tribe
exhaling tobacco-smoke toward the four quarters of the earth.  Among
some tribes other points were also recognized, as, for example, one in
the sky and one in the earth.  All these points had their symbolical
colours, and were presided over by various animal or other divinities.
Thus the Apaches took black for the east, white for the south, yellow
for the west, and blue for the north, the Cherokees red, white, black,
and blue for the same points, and the Navahos white, blue, yellow, and
black, with white and black for the lower regions and blue for the
upper or ethereal world.


Indian Time and Festivals

The North American tribes have various ways of computing time.  Some of
them rely merely upon the changes in season and the growth of crops for
guidance {132} as to when their annual festivals and seasonal
celebrations should take place.  Others fix their system of festivals
on the changes of the moon and the habits of animals and birds.  It
was, however, upon the moon that most of these peoples depended for
information regarding the passage of time.  Most of them assigned
twelve moons to the year, while others considered thirteen a more
correct number.  The Kiowa reckoned the year to consist of twelve and a
half moons, the other half being carried over to the year following.

The Zuñi of New Mexico allude to the year as a 'passage of time,' and
call the seasons the 'steps of the year.'  The first six months of the
Zuñi year possess names which have an agricultural or natural
significance, while the last six have ritualistic names.  Captain
Jonathan Carver, who travelled among the Sioux at the end of the
eighteenth century, says that some tribes among them reckoned their
years by moons, and made them consist of twelve lunar months, observing
when thirty moons had waned to add a supernumerary one, which they
termed the 'lost moon.'  They gave a name to each month as follows, the
year beginning at the first new moon after the spring equinox: March,
Worm Moon; April, Moon of Plants; May, Moon of Flowers; June, Hot Moon;
July, Buck Moon; August, Sturgeon Moon; September, Corn Moon; October,
Travelling Moon; November, Beaver Moon; December, Hunting Moon;
January, Cold Moon; February, Snow Moon.  These people had no division
into weeks, but counted days by 'sleeps,' half-days by pointing to the
sun at noon, and quarter-days by the rising and setting of the sun, for
all of which they possessed symbolic signs.  Many tribes kept records
of events by means of such signs, as has already been indicated.  The
eastern Sioux {133} measure time by knotted leather thongs, similar to
the _quipos_ of the ancient Peruvians.  Other tribes have even more
primitive methods.  The Hupa of California tell a person's age by
examining his teeth.  The Maidu divide the seasons into Rain Season,
Leaf Season, Dry Season, and Falling-leaf Season.  The Pima of Southern
Arizona record events by means of notched sticks, which no one but the
persons who mark them can understand.

The chief reason for the computation of time among savage peoples is
the correct observance of religious festivals.  With the rude methods
at their command they are not always able to hit upon the exact date on
which these should occur.  These festivals are often of a highly
elaborate nature, and occupy many days in their celebration, the most
minute attention being paid to the proper performance of the various
rites connected with them.  They consist for the most part of a
preliminary fast, followed by symbolic dances or magical ceremonies,
and concluding with a gluttonous orgy.  Most of these observances
possess great similarity one to another, and visible differences may be
accounted for by circumstances of environment or seasonal variations.

When the white man first came into contact with the Algonquian race it
was observed that they held regularly recurring festivals to celebrate
the ripening of fruits and grain, and more irregular feasts to mark the
return of wild-fowl and the hunting season in general.  Dances were
engaged in, and heroic songs chanted.  Indeed, the entire observance
appears to have been identical in its general features with the
festival of to-day.

One of the most remarkable of these celebrations is that of the Creeks
called the 'Busk,' a contraction {134} for its native name, Pushkita.
Commencing with a rigorous fast which lasts three days, the entire
tribe assembles on the fourth day to watch the high-priest produce a
new fire by means of friction.  From this flame the members of the
tribe are supplied, and feasting and dancing are then engaged in for
three days.  Four logs are arranged in the form of a cross pointing to
the four quarters of the earth, and burnt as an offering to the four
winds.


The Buffalo Dance

The Mandans, a Dakota tribe, each year celebrate as their principal
festival the Buffalo Dance, a feast which marks the return of the
buffalo-hunting season.  Eight men wearing buffalo-skins on their
backs, and painted black, red, or white, imitate the actions of
buffaloes.  Each of them holds a rattle in his right hand and a slender
rod six feet long in his left, and carries a bunch of green willow
boughs on his back.  The ceremony is held at the season of the year
when the willow is in full leaf.  The dancers take up their positions
at four different points of a canoe to represent the four cardinal
points of the compass.  Two men dressed as grizzly bears stand beside
the canoe, growling and threatening to spring upon any one who
interferes with the ceremony.  The bystanders throw them pieces of
food, which are at once pounced upon by two other men, and carried off
by them to the prairie.  During the ceremony the old men of the tribe
beat upon sacks, chanting prayers for the success of the buffalo-hunt.
On the fourth day a man enters the camp in the guise of an evil spirit,
and is driven from the vicinity with stones and curses.

The elucidation of this ceremony may perhaps be as {135} follows: From
some one of the four points of the compass the buffalo must come;
therefore all are requested to send goodly supplies.  The men dressed
as bears symbolize the wild beasts which might deflect the progress of
the herds of buffalo toward the territory of the tribe, and therefore
must be placated.  The demon who visits the camp after the ceremony is,
of course, famine.


Dance-Festivals of the Hopi

The most highly developed North American festival system is that of the
Hopi or Moqui of Arizona, the observances of which are almost of a
theatrical nature.  All the Pueblo Indians, of whom the Hopi are a
division, possess similar festivals, which recur at various seasons or
under the auspices of different totem clans or secret societies.  Most
of these 'dances' are arranged by the Katcina clan, and take place in
dance-houses known as _kivas_.  These ceremonies have their origin in
the universal reverence shown to the serpent in America--a reverence
based on the idea that the symbol of the serpent, tail in mouth,
represented the round, full sun of August.  In the summer 'dances'
snake-charming feats are performed, but in the Katcina ceremony
serpents are never employed.

Devil-dances are by no means uncommon among the Indians.  The purpose
of these is to drive evil spirits from the vicinity of the tribe.


Medicine-Men

The native American priesthood, whether known as medicine-men,
_shamans_, or wizards, were in most tribes a caste apart, exercising
not only the priestly function, but those of physician and prophet as
well.  The name 'medicine-men,' therefore, is scarcely a misnomer.
{136} They were skilled in the handling of occult forces such as
hypnotism, and thus exercised unlimited sway over the rank and file of
the tribe.  But we shall first consider them in their religious aspect.
In many of the Indian tribes the priesthood was a hereditary office; in
others it was obtained through natural fitness or revelation in dreams.
With the Cherokees, for example, the seventh son of a family was
usually marked out as a suitable person for the priesthood.  As a rule
the religious body did not share in the general life of the tribe, from
which to a great degree it isolated itself.  For example, Bartram in
his _Travels in the Carolinas_ describes the younger priests of the
Creeks as being arrayed in white robes, and carrying on their heads or
arms "a great owl-skin stuffed very ingeniously as an insignia of
wisdom and divination.  These bachelors are also distinguishable from
the other people by their taciturnity, grave and solemn countenance,
dignified step, and singing to themselves songs or hymns in a low,
sweet voice as they stroll about the towns."  To add to the feeling of
awe which they inspired among the laymen of the tribe, the priests
conversed with one another in a secret tongue.  Thus the magical
formulæ of some of the Algonquin priests were not in the ordinary
language, but in a dialect of their own invention.  The Choctaws,
Cherokees, and Zuñi employed similar esoteric dialects, all of which
are now known to be merely modifications of their several tribal
languages, fortified with obsolete words, or else mere borrowings from
the idioms of other tribes.


Medicine-Men as Healers

It was, however, as healers that the medicine-men were pre-eminent.
The Indian assigns all illness or bodily {137} discomfort to
supernatural agency.  He cannot comprehend that indisposition may arise
within his own system, but believes that it must necessarily proceed
from some external source.  Some supernatural being whom he has
offended, the soul of an animal which he has slain, or perhaps a
malevolent sorcerer, torments him.  If the bodies of mankind were not
afflicted in this mysterious manner their owners would endure for ever.
When the Indian falls sick he betakes himself to a medicine-man, to
whom he relates his symptoms, at the same time acquainting him with any
circumstances which he may suspect of having brought about his
condition.  If he has slain a deer and omitted the usual formula of
placation afterward he suspects that the spirit of the beast is
actively harming him.  Should he have shot a bird and have subsequently
observed any of the same species near his dwelling, he will almost
invariably conclude that they were bent on a mission of vengeance and
have by some means injured him.  The medicine-man, in the first
instance, may give his patient some simple native remedy.  If this
treatment does not avail he will arrange to go to the sufferer's lodge
for the purpose of making a more thorough examination.  Having located
the seat of the pain, he will blow upon it several times, and then
proceed to massage it vigorously, invoking the while the aid of the
natural enemy of the spirit which he suspects is tormenting the sick
man.  Thus if a deer's spirit be suspected he will call upon the
mountain lion or the Great Dog to drive it away, but if a bird of any
of the smaller varieties he will invoke the Great Eagle who dwells in
the zenith to slay or devour it.  Upon the supposed approach of these
potent beings he will become more excited, and, vigorously slapping the
patient, will chant incantations {138} in a loud and sonorous voice,
which are supposed to hasten the advent of the friendly beings whom he
has summoned.  At last, producing by sleight of hand an image of the
disturbing spirit worked in bone, he calls for a vessel of boiling
water, into which he promptly plunges the supposed cause of his
patient's illness.  The bone figure is withdrawn from the boiling water
after a space, and on being examined may be found to have one or more
scores on its surface.  Each of these shows that it has already slain
its man, and the patient is assured that had the native Æsculapius not
adopted severe measures the malign spirit would have added him to the
number of its victims.

Should these methods not result in a cure, others are resorted to.  The
patient is regaled with the choicest food and drink, while incantations
are chanted and music performed to frighten away the malign influences.


Professional Etiquette

The priestly class is not given to levying exorbitant fees upon its
patients.  As a rule the Indian medicine-man strongly resents any
allusion to a fee.  Should the payment be of a perishable nature, such
as food, he usually shares it with his relatives, brother-priests, or
even his patients, but should it consist of something that may be
retained, such as cloth, teeth necklaces, or skins, he will carefully
hoard it to afford provision for his old age.  The Indian practitioner
is strongly of opinion that white doctors are of little service in the
cure of native illnesses.  White medicine, he says, is good only for
white men, and Indian medicine for the red man; in which conclusion he
is probably justified.


{139}

Journeys in Spirit-land

In many Indian myths we read how the _shamans_, singly or in companies,
seek the Spirit-land, either to search for the souls of those who are
ill, but not yet dead, or to seek advice from supernatural beings.
These thaumaturgical practices were usually undertaken by three
medicine-men acting in concert.  Falling into a trance, in which their
souls were supposed to become temporarily disunited from their bodies,
they would follow the track of the sick man's spirit into the
spirit-world.  The order in which they travelled was determined by the
relative strength of their guardian spirits, those with the strongest
being first and last, and he who had the weakest being placed in the
middle.  If the sick man's track turned to the left they said he would
die, but if to the right, he would recover.  From the trail they could
also divine whether any supernatural danger was near, and the foremost
priest would utter a magic chant to avert such evils if they came from
the front, while if the danger came from the rear the incantation was
sung by the priest who came last.  Generally their sojourn occupied one
or two nights, and, having rescued the soul of the patient, they
returned to place it in his body.

Not only was the _shaman_ endowed with the power of projecting his own
'astral body' into the Land of Spirits.  By placing cedar-wood charms
in the hands of persons who had not yet received a guardian spirit he
could impart to them his clairvoyant gifts, enabling them to visit the
Spirit-land and make any observations required by him.

The souls of chiefs, instead of following the usual route, went
directly to the sea-shore, where only the most gifted _shamans_ could
follow their trail.  The sea {140} was regarded as the highway to the
supernatural regions.  A sick man was in the greatest peril at high
water, but when the tide was low the danger was less.

The means adopted by the medicine-men to lure ghosts away from their
pursuit of a soul was to create an 'astral' deer.  The ghosts would
turn from hunting the man's soul to follow that of the beast.


The Savage and Religion

It cannot be said that the religious sense was exceptionally strong in
the mind of the North American Indian.  But this was due principally to
the stage of culture at which he stood, and in some cases still stands.
In man in his savage or barbarian condition the sense of reverence as
we conceive it is small, and its place is largely filled by fear and
superstition.  It is only at a later stage, when civilizing influences
have to some extent banished the grosser terrors of animism and
fetishism, that the gods reveal themselves in a more spiritual aspect.


{141}