The Legend of Poïa

A variant of this beautiful story is as follows:

One summer morning a beautiful girl called Feather-woman, who had been
sleeping outside her lodge among the long prairie grass, awoke just as
the Morning Star was rising above the horizon.  She gazed intently at
it, and so beautiful did it seem that she fell deeply in love with it.
She awakened her sister, who was lying beside her, and declared to her
that she would marry nobody but the Morning Star.  The people of her
tribe ridiculed her because of what they considered her absurd
preference; so she avoided them as much as possible, and wandered
alone, eating her heart out in secret for love of the Morning Star, who
seemed to her unapproachable.

One day she went alone to the river for water, and as she returned she
beheld a young man standing before her.  At first she took him for one
of the young men of the tribe, and would have avoided him, but he said:

"I am the Morning Star.  I beheld you gazing upward at me, and knew
that you loved me.  I returned {201} your love, and have descended to
ask you to go with me to my dwelling in the sky."

Feather-woman trembled violently, for she knew that he who spoke to her
was a god, and replied hesitatingly that she must bid farewell to her
father and mother.  But this Morning Star would not permit.  He took a
rich yellow plume from his hair and directed her to hold this in one
hand, while she held a juniper branch in the other.  Then he commanded
her to close her eyes, and when she opened them again she was in the
Sky-country, standing before a great and shining lodge.  Morning Star
told her that this was the home of his parents, the Sun and Moon, and
requested her to enter.  It was daytime, so that the Sun was away on
his diurnal round, but the Moon was at home.  She welcomed
Feather-woman as the wife of her son, as did the Sun himself when he
returned.  The Moon clothed her in a soft robe of buckskin, trimmed
with elks' teeth.  Feather-woman was very happy, and dwelt contentedly
in the lodge or Morning Star.  They had a little son, whom they called
Star-boy.  The Moon gave Feather-woman a root-digger, and told her that
she could dig up all kinds of roots, but warned her on no account to
dig up the large turnip which grew near the home of the Spider Man,
telling her that it would bring unhappiness to all of them if she did
so.


The Great Turnip

Feather-woman often saw the large turnip, but always avoided touching
it.  One day, however, her curiosity got the better of her, and she was
tempted to see what might be underneath it.  She laid her little son on
the ground and dug until her root-digger stuck fast.  Two large cranes
came flying overhead.  {202} She begged these to help her.  They did
so, and sang a magic song which enabled them to uproot the turnip.

Now, although she was unaware of it, this very turnip filled up the
hole through which Morning Star had brought her into the Sky-country.
Gazing downward, she saw the camp of the Blackfeet where she had lived.
The smoke was ascending from the lodges, she could hear the song of the
women as they went about their work.  The sight made her homesick and
lonely, and as she went back to her lodge she cried softly to herself.
When she arrived Morning Star gazed earnestly at her, and said with a
sorrowful expression of countenance: "You have dug up the sacred
turnip."


The Moon and Sun were also troubled, and asked her the meaning of her
sadness, and when she had told them they said that as she had disobeyed
their injunction she must return to earth.  Morning Star took her to
the Spider Man, who let her down to earth by a web, and the people
beheld her coming to earth like a falling star.


The Return to Earth

She was welcomed by her parents, and returned with her child, whom she
had brought with her from the Sky-country, to the home of her youth.
But happiness never came back to her.  She mourned ceaselessly for her
husband, and one morning, climbing to the summit of a high mound, she
watched the beautiful Morning Star rise above the horizon, just as on
the day when she had first loved him.  Stretching out her arms to the
eastern sky, she besought him passionately to take her back.  At length
he spoke to her.

"It is because of your own sin," he said, "that you are for ever shut
out from the Sky-country.  Your {203} disobedience has brought sorrow
upon yourself and upon all your people."

Her pleadings were in vain, and in despair she returned to her lodge,
where her unhappy life soon came to a close.  Her little son, Star-boy,
was now an orphan, and the death of his grandparents deprived him of
all his earthly kindred.  He was a shy, retiring, timid boy, living in
the deepest poverty, notwithstanding his exalted station as grandchild
of the Sun.  But the most noticeable thing about him was a scar which
disfigured his face, because of which he was given the name of Poïa
(Scar-face) by the wits of the tribe.  As he grew older the scar became
more pronounced, and ridicule and abuse were heaped upon him.  When he
became a man he fell in love with a maiden of surpassing beauty, the
daughter of a great chief of his tribe.  She, however, laughed him to
scorn, and told him that she would marry him when he removed the scar
from his face.  Poïa, greatly saddened by her unkindness, consulted an
old medicine-woman, to see whether the scar might not be removed.  She
could only tell him that the mark had been placed on his face by the
Sun, and that the Sun alone could remove it.  This was melancholy news
for Poïa.  How could he reach the abode of the Sun?  Nevertheless,
encouraged by the old woman, he resolved to make the attempt.
Gratefully accepting her parting gift of pemmican and moccasins, he set
off on a journey that was to last for many days.


The Big Water

After climbing mountains and traversing forests and wandering over
trackless prairies he arrived at the Big Water (that is to say, the
Pacific Ocean), on the shores of which he sat down, praying and fasting
for three {204} days.  On the third day, when the Sun was sinking
behind the rim of the ocean, he saw a bright pathway leading straight
to the abode of the Sun.  He resolved to follow the shining trail,
though he knew not what might lie before him in the great Sky-country.
He arrived quite safely, however, at the wonderful lodge of the Sun.
All night he hid himself outside the lodge, and in the morning the Sun,
who was about to begin his daily journey, saw a ragged wayfarer lying
by his door.  He did not know that the intruder was his grandson, but,
seeing that he had come from the Earth-country, he determined to kill
him, and said so to his wife, the Moon.  But she begged that the
stranger's life should be spared, and Morning Star, who at that moment
issued from the lodge, also gave Poïa his protection.  Poïa lived very
happily in the lodge of the Sun, and having on one occasion killed
seven birds who were about to destroy Morning Star, he earned the
gratitude of his grandparents.  At the request of Morning Star the Sun
removed the scar on Poïa's face, and bade him return with a message to
the Blackfeet.  If they would honour him once a year in a Sun Dance he
would consent to heal their sick.  The secrets of the Sun Dance were
taught to Poïa, two raven's feathers were placed in his hair, and he
was given a robe of elk-skin.  The latter, he was told, must only be
worn by a virtuous woman, who should then dance the Sun Dance, so that
the sick might be restored to health.  From his father Poïa received an
enchanted flute and a magic song, which would win the heart of the maid
he loved.

Poïa came to earth by the Milky Way, or, as the Indians call it, the
Wolf-trail, and communicated to the Blackfeet all that he had learned
in the Sky-country.  When they were thoroughly conversant with the Sun
{205} Dance he returned to the Sky-country, the home of his father,
accompanied by his beautiful bride.  Here they dwelt together happily,
and Pola and the Morning Star travelled together through the sky.


A Blackfoot Day-and-Night Myth

Many stories are told by the Blackfoot Indians of their creator, Nápi,
and these chiefly relate to the manner in which he made the world and
its inhabitants.

One myth connected with this deity tells how a poor Indian who had a
wife and two children lived in the greatest indigence on roots and
berries.  This man had a dream in which he heard a voice command him to
procure a large spider-web, which he was to hang on the trail of the
animals where they passed through the forest, by which means he would
obtain plenty of food.  This he did, and on returning to the place in
which he had hung the web he found deer and rabbits entangled in its
magical meshes.  These he killed for food, for which he was now never
at a loss.

Returning with his game on his shoulders one morning, he discovered his
wife perfuming herself with sweet pine, which she burned over the fire.
He suspected that she was thus making herself attractive for the
benefit of some one else, but, preserving silence, he told her that on
the following day he would set his spider-web at a greater distance, as
the game in the neighbouring forest was beginning to know the trap too
well.  Accordingly he went farther afield, and caught a deer, which he
cut up, carrying part of its meat back with him to his lodge.  He told
his wife where the remainder of the carcass was to be found, and asked
her to go and fetch it.

His wife, however, was not without her own suspicions, and, concluding
that she was being watched by {206} her husband, she halted at the top
of the nearest hill and looked back to see if he was following her.
But he was sitting where she had left him, so she proceeded on her way.
When she was quite out of sight the Indian himself climbed the hill,
and, seeing that she was not in the vicinity, returned to the camp.  He
inquired of his children where their mother went to gather firewood,
and they pointed to a large patch of dead timber.  Proceeding to the
clump of leafless trees, the man instituted a thorough search, and
after a while discovered a den of rattlesnakes.  Now it was one of
these reptiles with which his wife was in love, so the Indian in his
wrath gathered fragments of dry wood and set the whole plantation in a
blaze.  Then he returned to his lodge and told his children what he had
done, at the same time warning them that their mother would be very
wrathful, and would probably attempt to kill them all.  He further said
that he would wait for her return, but that they had better run away,
and that he would provide them with three things which they would find
of use.  He then handed to the children a stick, a stone, and a bunch
of moss, which they were to throw behind them should their mother
pursue them.  The children at once ran away, and their father hung the
spider-web over the door of the lodge.  Meanwhile the woman had seen
the blaze made by the dry timber-patch from a considerable distance,
and in great anger turned and ran back to the lodge.  Attempting to
enter it, she was at once entangled in the meshes of the spider-web.


The Pursuing Head

She struggled violently, however, and succeeded in getting her head
through the opening, whereupon her husband severed it from her
shoulders with his stone {207} axe.  He then ran out of the lodge and
down the valley, hotly pursued by the woman's body, while her head
rolled along the ground in chase of the children.  The latter soon
descried the grisly object rolling along in their tracks at a great
speed, and one of them quickly threw the stick behind him as he had
been told to do.  Instantly a dense forest sprang up in their rear,
which for a space retarded their horrible pursuer.  The children made
considerable headway, but once more the severed head made its
appearance, gnashing its teeth in a frenzy of rage and rolling its eyes
horribly, while it shrieked out threats which caused the children's
blood to turn to water.


Then another of the boys threw the stone which he had been given behind
him, and instantly a great mountain sprang up which occupied the land
from sea to sea, so that the progress of the head was quite barred.  It
could perceive no means of overcoming this immense barrier, until it
encountered two rams feeding, which it asked to make a way for it
through the mountain, telling them that if they would do so it would
marry the chief of the sheep.  The rams made a valiant effort to meet
this request, and again and again fiercely rushed at the mountain, till
their horns were split and broken and they could butt no longer.  The
head, growing impatient, called upon a colony of ants which dwelt in
the neighbourhood to tunnel a passage through the obstacle, and
offered, if they were successful, to marry the chief ant as a
recompense for their labours.  The insects at once took up the task,
and toiled incessantly until they had made a tunnel through which the
head could roll.


The Fate of the Head

The children were still running, but felt that the head had not
abandoned pursuit.  At last, after a long {208} interval, they observed
it rolling after them, evidently as fresh as ever.  The child who had
the bunch of moss now wet it and wrung out the water over their trail,
and immediately an immense strait separated them from the land where
they had been but a moment before.  The head, unable to stop, fell into
this great water and was drowned.

The children, seeing that their danger was past, made a raft and sailed
back to the land from which they had come.  Arrived there, they
journeyed eastward through many countries, peopled by many different
tribes of Indians, in order to reach their own territory.  When they
arrived there they found it occupied by tribes unknown to them, so they
resolved to separate, one going north and the other south.  One of them
was shrewd and clever, and the other simple and ingenious.  The shrewd
boy is he who made the white people and instructed them in their arts.
The other, the simple boy, made the Blackfeet, but, being very stupid,
was unable to teach them anything.  He it was who was called Nápi.  As
for the mother's body, it continued to chase her husband, and is still
following him, for she is the Moon and he is the Sun.  If she succeeds
in catching him she will slay him, and night will reign for evermore,
but as long as he is able to evade her day and night will continue to
follow one another.


Nápi and the Buffalo-Stealer

There was once a great famine among the Blackfeet.  For months no
buffaloes were killed, and the weaker members of the tribe dropped off
one by one, while even the strong braves and hunters began to sink
under the privation.  The chief in despair prayed that the creator,
Nápi, would send them food.  Nápi, {209} meanwhile, was far away in the
south, painting the plumage of the birds in gorgeous tints.
Nevertheless he heard the voice of the chief over all the distance, and
hastened northward.

"Who has summoned me?" he demanded.

"It was I," said the chief humbly.  "My people are starving, and unless
relief comes soon I fear we must all perish."

"You shall have food," answered Nápi.  "I will provide game for you."

Taking with him the chief's son, Nápi travelled toward the west.  As
they went the youth prayed earnestly to the Sun, the Moon, and the
Morning Star, but his companion rebuked his impatience and bade him
hold his peace.  They crossed the Sweet Grass Hills, which Nápi had
made from huge handfuls of herbage, and where he loved to rest.  Still
there was no sign of game.  At length they reached a little lodge by
the side of a river, and Nápi called a halt.

"There dwells the cause of your misfortunes," said he.  "He who lives
in that lodge is the Buffalo-stealer.  He it is who has taken all the
herds from the prairies, so that there is none left."

To further his design, Nápi took the shape of a dog, and turned the
youth into a stick.  Not long afterward the little son of
Buffalo-stealer was passing that way, and immediately desired to take
the little dog home with him.

"Very well," said his mother; "take that stick and drive it to the
lodge."

But the boy's father frowned angrily.

"I do not like the look of the beast," he said.  "Send it away."

The boy refused to part with the dog, and his mother wanted the stick
to gather roots with, so the father was {210} obliged to give way.
Still he did not show any good-will to the dog.  The following day he
went out of the lodge, and in a short time returned with a buffalo,
which he skinned and prepared for cooking.  His wife, who was in the
woods gathering berries, came home toward evening, and at her husband's
bidding cooked part of the buffalo-meat.  The little boy incurred his
father's anger again by giving a piece of meat to the dog.

"Have I not told you," cried Buffalo-stealer irately, "that he is an
evil thing?  Do not touch him."

That night when all was silent Nápi and the chief's son resumed their
human form and supped off the buffalo-meat.

"It is Buffalo-stealer who keeps the herds from coming near the
Blackfoot camp," said Nápi.  "Wait till morning and see."


The Herds of Buffalo-Stealer

In the morning they were once more dog and stick.  When the woman and
her child awoke they set off for the woods again, the former taking the
stick to dig for roots, the latter calling for his little dog to
accompany him.  Alas! when they reached the spot they had fixed upon
for root-gathering operations both dog and stick had vanished!  And
this was the reason for their disappearance.  As the dog was trotting
through the wood he had observed an opening like the mouth of a cavern,
all but concealed by the thick undergrowth, and in the aperture he
perceived a buffalo.  His short, sharp barking attracted the attention
of the stick, which promptly wriggled snake-wise after him.  Within the
cavern were great herds of deer and buffalo, enough to provide the
Blackfeet with food for years and years.  Nápi ran among them, barking,
and they were driven out to the prairie.

{211}

When Buffalo-stealer returned and discovered his loss his wrath knew no
bounds.  He questioned his wife and son, but they denied all knowledge
of the affair.

"Then," said he, "it is that wretched little dog of yours.  Where is he
now?"

But the child could not tell him.

"We lost him in the woods," said he.

"I shall kill him," shouted the man, "and I shall break the stick as
well!"

Nápi overheard the threat, and clung to the long hair of an old
buffalo; He advised the stick to conceal itself in the buffalo's hair
also, and so the twain escaped unnoticed from the cave, much as did
Ulysses from the Cyclops' cavern.  Once again they took the form of
men, and drove a herd of buffalo to the Blackfoot camp, while
Buffalo-stealer and his family sought them in vain.

The people met them with delighted acclamations, and the famine was at
an end.  Yet there were still some difficulties in the way, for when
they tried to get the herd into the enclosure a large grey bird so
frightened the animals with its dismal note that they refused to enter.
This occurred so often that Nápi suspected that the grey bird was no
other than Buffalo-stealer.  Changing himself into an otter, he lay by
the side of a river and pretended to be dead.  The greedy bird saw what
he thought to be a dead otter, and pounced upon it, whereupon Nápi
seized him by the leg and bore him off to the camp.  By way of
punishment he was tied over the smoke-hole of the wigwam, where his
grey feathers soon became black and his life a burden to him.

"Spare me!" he cried.  "Let me return to my wife and child.  They will
surely starve."

{212}

His piteous appeals moved the heart of Nápi, and he let him go, but not
without an admonition.

"Go," said he, "and hunt for food, that you may support your wife and
child.  But do not take more than you need, or you shall die."

The bird did as he was bidden.  But to this day the feathers of the
raven are black, and not grey.