CHAPTER IV: IROQUOIS MYTHS AND LEGENDS


Iroquois Gods and Heroes

The myths of the Iroquois are of exceptional
interest because of the portraits they present
of several semi-historical heroes.  The earliest
substratum of the myths of this people deals with the
adventures of their principal deity, Hi'nun, the
Thunder-god, who, with his brother, the West Wind, finally
overcame and exterminated the powerful race of Stone
Giants.  Coming to a later period, we find that a
number of legends cluster round the names of the
chiefs Atotarho and Hiawatha, who in all probability
at one time really existed.  These present a good
instance of the rapidity with which myth gathers round a
famous name.  Atotarho, the mighty warrior, is now
regarded as the wizard _par excellence_ of the Iroquois,
but probably this does not result from the fact that
he was cunning and cruel, as some writers on the tribe
appear to think, but from the circumstance that as a
great warrior he was clothed in a garment of serpents,
and these reptiles, besides being looked upon as powerful
war-physic, also possessed a deep magical significance.
The original Hiawatha (He who seeks the Wampum-belt)
is pictured as the father of a long line of persons
of the same name, who appear to have been important
functionaries in the tribal government.  To him was
ascribed the honour of having established the great
confederacy of the Iroquois, which so long rendered
them formidable opponents to the tribes which
surrounded them.  Like many other heroes in myth--the
Celtic Mananan, for example--Hiawatha possessed
a magic canoe which would obey his slightest behest,
and in which he finally quitted the terrestrial sphere
{218}
for that shadowy region to which all heroes finally take
their departure.


Hi'nun

Many interesting myths are related of the manner in
which Hi'nun destroyed the monsters and giants which
infested the early world.  A hunter, caught in a heavy
thunder-shower, took refuge in the woods.  Crouching
under the shelter of a great tree, he became aware
of a mysterious voice which urged him to follow it.
He was conscious of a sensation of slowly rising from
the earth, and he soon found himself gazing downward
from a point near the clouds, the height of many trees
from the ground.  He was surrounded by beings who
had all the appearance of men, with one among them
who seemed to be their chief.  They asked him to cast
his eyes toward the earth and tell them whether he
could see a huge water-serpent.  Unable to descry
such a monster, the chief anointed his eyes with a
sacred ointment, which gave him supernatural sight
and permitted him to behold a dragon-like shape in
the watery depths far below him.  The chief
commanded one of his warriors to dispatch the monster,
but arrow after arrow failed to transfix it, whereupon
the hunter was requested to display his skill as an
archer.  Drawing his bow, he took careful aim.  The
arrow whizzed down the depths and was speedily
lost to sight, but a terrible commotion arose in the
lake below, the body of the great serpent leaping from
the blood-stained water with dreadful writhings and
contortions.  So appalling was the din that rose up
to them that even the heavenly beings by whom the
hunter was surrounded fell into a great trembling;
but gradually the tempest of sound subsided, and the
huge bulk of the mortally wounded serpent sank back
{219}
into the lake, the surface of which became gradually
more still, until finally all was peace once more.  The
chief thanked the hunter for the service he had rendered,
and he was conducted back to earth.  Thus was man
first brought into contact with the beneficent Hi'nun,
and thus did he learn the existence of a power which
would protect him from forces unfriendly to humanity.


The Thunderers

Once in early Iroquois days three braves set out
upon an expedition.  After they had journeyed for
some time a misfortune occurred, one of their number
breaking his leg.  The others fashioned a litter with
the object of carrying him back to his home, as Indian
custom exacted.  Retracing their steps, they came to a
range of high mountains, the steep slopes of which
taxed their strength to the utmost.  To rest
themselves they placed the disabled man on the ground and
withdrew to a little distance.

"Why should we be thus burdened with a wounded
man?" said one to the other.

"You speak truly," was the rejoinder.  "Why
should we, indeed, since his hurt has come upon him
by reason of his own carelessness?"

As they spoke their eyes met in a meaning glance,
and one of them pointed to a deep hole or pit opening
in the side of the mountain at a little distance from the
place where they were sitting.  Returning to the injured
man, they raised him as if about to proceed on the
journey, and when passing the brink of the pit suddenly
hurled him into it with great force.  Then without
loss of time they set their faces homeward.  When they
arrived in camp they reported that their comrade had
died of wounds received in fight, but that he had not
fallen into the enemy's hands, having received careful
{220}
attention from them in his dying moments and
honourable burial.  The unfortunate man's aged mother was
prostrate with grief at the sad news, but was somewhat
relieved to think that her son had been kindly ministered
to at the end.


When the brave who had been thrown into the pit
regained his senses after the severe fall he had sustained
he perceived a man of venerable aspect bending over
him solicitously.  When this person saw that the
young man had regained consciousness he asked him
what had been the intention of his comrades in so
cruelly casting him into that abyss.  The young man
replied that his fellows had become tired of
carrying him and had thus rid themselves of him.  The
old hermit--for so he seemed to be--made a hasty
examination of the Indian's injuries, and announced
that he would speedily cure him, on one condition.
The other pledged his word to accept this, whatever
it might be, whereupon the recluse told him that all he
required was that he should hunt for him and bring
home to him such game as he should slay.  To this the
brave gave a ready assent.  The old man lost no time
in performing his part of the bargain.  He applied
herbs to his injuries and assiduously tended his guest,
who made a speedy and satisfactory recovery.  The
grateful warrior, once more enabled to follow the
chase, brought home many trophies of his skill as a
hunter to the cave on the mountain-side, and soon the
pair had formed a strong attachment.  One day, when
in the forest, the warrior encountered an enormous
bear, which he succeeded in slaying after a desperate
struggle.  As he was pondering how best he could
remove it to the cave he became aware of a murmur of
voices behind him, and glancing round he saw three
men, or beings in the shape of men, clad in strange
{221}
diaphanous garments, standing near.  In reply to his
question as to what brought them there, they told him
that they were the Thunderers, or people of Hi'nun,
whose mission it was to keep the earth in good order
for the benefit of humanity, and to slay or destroy
every agency inimical to mankind.  They told him that
the old man with whom he had been residing was by no
means the sort of person he seemed to think, and that
they had come to earth with the express intention of
compassing his destruction.  In this they requested his
assistance, and promised him that if he would vouchsafe
it he would speedily be transported back to his mother's
lodge.  Overjoyed at this proposal, the hunter did not
scruple to return to the cave and tell the hermit that
he had killed the bear, which he wished his help in
bringing home.  The old man seemed very uneasy,
and begged him to examine the sky and tell him
whether he perceived the least sign of clouds.  The
young brave reassured him and told him that not a
cloud was to be seen, whereupon, emerging from his
shelter, he made for the spot where the bear was
lying.  Hastily picking up the carcass, he requested
his companion to place it all on his shoulders, which
the young man did, expressing surprise at his great
strength.  He had proceeded with his burden for some
distance when a terrific clap of thunder burst from the
menacing black clouds which had speedily gathered
overhead.  In great terror the old man threw down his
load and commenced to run with an agility which belied
his years, but when a second peal broke forth he
suddenly assumed the shape of a gigantic porcupine,
which dashed through the undergrowth, discharging
its quills like arrows as it ran.  A veritable hail of
thunderbolts now crashed down upon the creature's
spiny back.  As it reached the entrance to the cave
{222}
one larger than the rest struck it with such tremendous
force that it rolled dead into its den.

Then the Thunderers swooped down from the sky
in triumph, mightily pleased at the death of their
victim.  The young hunter now requested them to
discharge the promise they had made him to transport
him back to his mother's lodge; so, having fastened
cloud-wings on his shoulders, they speedily brought
him thither, carrying him carefully through the air and
depositing him just outside the hut.  The widow was
delighted to see her son, whom she had believed to be
long dead, and the Thunderers were so pleased with
the assistance he had lent them that they asked him to
accompany them in their monster-destroying mission
every spring.  He assented, and on one of these
expeditions flew earthward to drink from a certain pool.
When he rejoined his companions they observed that
the water with which his lips were moist had caused
them to shine as if smeared with oil.  At their request
he indicated the pool from which he had drunk, and
they informed him that in its depths there dwelt a
monster for which they had searched for years.  With
that they hurled a great thunderbolt into the pool,
which immediately dried up, revealing an immense
grub of the species which destroys the standing crops.
The monster was, indeed, the King of Grubs, and his
death set back the conspiracies of his kind for many
generations.  The youth subsequently returned to
earth, and having narrated to the members of his tribe
the services which Hi'nun had performed on their
behalf, they considered it fitting to institute a special
worship of the deity, and, in fact, to make him supreme
god of their nation.  Even to-day many Iroquois allude
to Hi'nun as their grandfather, and evince extraordinary
veneration at the mention of his name.


{223}

Hiawatha

Much confusion exists with regard to the true status
of the reputed Iroquois hero Hiawatha.  We find him
variously represented as a historical personage and a
mythical demi-god, and as belonging to both the
Iroquois and the Algonquins.  In solid history and in
the wildest myth he is a figure of equal importance.
This confusion is largely due to the popularity of
Longfellow's poem _Hiawatha_, which by its very excellence
has given the greater prominence to the fallacies
it contains.  The fact is that Longfellow, following
in the path of Schoolcraft, has really confused two
personages in the character of Hiawatha, one the
entirely mythical Manabozho, or Michabo--which
name he at first intended to bestow on his poem--and
the other the almost wholly historical Hiawatha.
Manabozho, according to tradition, was a demi-god
of the Ojibways, and to him, and not to Hiawatha,
must be credited the exploits described in the poem.
There is no doubt that myths have grown up round
the name of the Iroquois hero, for myth is the ivy that
binds all historical ruins and makes them picturesque
to the eye; but it has been proved that there is a
solid structure of fact behind the legendary stories of
Hiawatha, and even the period of his activity has been
fixed with tolerable accuracy by modern American
historians.

Hiawatha, or Hai-en-Wat-ha, was a chief of Iroquois
stock, belonging either to the Onondaga or the
Mohawk tribe.  His most important feat was the
union of the Five Nations of the Iroquois into a Grand
League, an event which was of more than national
significance, since it so largely affected the fortunes of
European peoples when they afterward fought for
American supremacy.  As the Five Nations are known
{224}
to have come together in the sixteenth century, it
follows that Hiawatha must have lived and worked
about that time.  In later days the League was called
the Six Nations, and still more recently the Seven
Nations.

When the Iroquois, or 'Long House People,' were
found by the French and Dutch they occupied the
western part of what is now New York State, and were
at a much more advanced stage of culture than most of
the Indian tribes.  They tilled the ground, cultivating
maize and tobacco, and were skilled in the arts of war
and diplomacy.  They were greatly strengthened by
the Grand League, or 'Kayanerenh Kowa,' which, as
has been said, was founded by the chief Hiawatha, and
were much the most important of the North American
tribes.

If we look to tradition for an account of the origin
of the Grand League, we learn that the union was
effected by Hiawatha in the fourteenth century.  The
Hurons and Iroquois, we are told, were at one time one
people, but later they separated, the Hurons going to
the lake which is named after them, and the Iroquois
to New York, where their five tribes were united under
a General Council.  But tradition is quite evidently
wrong in assigning so early a date to this important
event, for one of the two branches of the Iroquois
family (that which comprises the Mohawks and the
Oneidas) has left but few traces of an early occupation,
and these, in the shape of some old town-sites, are
judged to belong to the latter part of the sixteenth
century.

The early connexion between the Iroquois and the
Hurons, and their subsequent separation, remains
undisputed.  The Iroquois family was divided into
two branches, the Sinnekes (Onondagas, Cayugas, and
{225}
Senecas) and the Caniengas (Mohawks and Oneidas),
of which the subdivisions composed the Five Nations.
The Sinnekes had established themselves in the western
portion of New York, and the Caniengas at Hochelaga
(Montreal) and elsewhere on the St. Lawrence, where
they lived amicably enough with their Algonquin
neighbours.  But in 1560 a quarrel arose between the
Caniengas and the Algonquins, in which the latter
called in the aid of the Hurons.  This was the
beginning of a long war, in which the Caniengas had the
worst of it.  Gradually the Caniengas were driven
along the shores of Lake Champlain and Lake George
till they reached the valley of the Mohawk River, where
they established themselves in a country bordering on
that of the Onondagas.

Now the Onondagas were a formidable tribe, fierce
and warlike, and the Caniengas, being long accustomed
to war, were not the most peaceable of nations, and
ere long there was trouble between them, while both
were at war with the Hurons.  At the head of the
Onondagas was the great chief Atotarho, whose
sanguinary exploits and crafty stratagems had become
the dread of the neighbouring peoples, and among his
warriors was the generous Hiawatha.  Hiawatha was filled
with horror at the sight of the suffering caused by
Atotarho's expeditions, and already his statesman's
mind was forming projects of peace.  He saw that in
confederation lay the means not only of preserving
peace among his people, but of withstanding alien
foes as well.  In two consecutive years he called an
assembly to consider his plan, but on each occasion the
grim presence of Atotarho made discussion impossible.
Hiawatha in despair fled from the land of the
Onondagas, journeyed eastward through the country
of the Oneidas, and at last took up his residence
{226}
among the Mohawks, into which tribe he was adopted.
It has been said by some authorities, and the idea does
not lack probability, that Hiawatha was originally
a Mohawk, and that he spent some time among the
Onondagas, afterward returning to his own people.
At all events, the Mohawks proved more amenable to
reason than the Onondagas had done.  Among the
chiefs of his adopted tribe Hiawatha found
one--Dekanewidah--who fell in with his confederation
plans, and agreed to work along with him.  Messengers
were dispatched to the Oneidas, who bade them
return in a year, at the end of which period negotiations
were renewed.  The result was that the Oneida
chiefs signed a treaty inaugurating the Kayanerenh
Kowa.  An embassy to the Onondagas was fruitless,
as Atotarho persistently obstructed the new scheme;
but later, when the Kayanerenh Kowa embraced the
Cayugas, messages were once more sent to the powerful
Onondagas, diplomatically suggesting that Atotarho
should take the lead in the Grand Council.  The grim
warrior was mollified by this sop to his vanity, and
condescended to accept the proposal.  Not only that,
but he soon became an enthusiastic worker in the
cause of confederation, and secured the inclusion of the
Senecas in the League.

The confederacy of the Five Nations was now complete,
and the 'Silver Chain,' as their Grand Council
was called, met together on the shores of the Salt
Lake.  The number of chiefs chosen from each tribe
bore some relation to its numerical status, the largest
number, fourteen, being supplied by the Onondagas.
The office of representative in the Council was to be an
hereditary one, descending in the female line, as with
the Picts of Scotland and other primitive peoples, and
never from father to son.

{227}

So powerful did the League become that the name
of 'Long House People' was held in the greatest awe.
They annihilated their ancient enemies, the Hurons,
and they attacked and subdued the Micmacs,
Mohicans, Pawnees, Algonquins, Cherokees, and many
other tribes.  The effect of the League on British
history is incalculable.  When the Frenchman Champlain
arrived in 1611 he interfered on behalf of the
Hurons, an action whose far-reaching consequences he
could not foresee, but from that period dated the
hatred of the Iroquois for the French which ensured
Britain's success in the long struggle between the
European nations in America.  Without the assistance
of the native factor, who shall say how the struggle
might have ended?

But the Iroquois were not altogether a bloodthirsty
people.  A strong bond of brotherhood existed between
the Five Nations, among themselves they were kind and
gentle, and in part at least Hiawatha's dream of peace
was realized.  It is not, of course, very easy to say how
far Hiawatha intended the scheme of universal brotherhood
with which he is credited.  Whether he conceived
a Grand League embracing all the nations of the earth
or whether his full ambition was realized in the union
of the Five Nations is a point which history does not
make clear.  But even in the more limited sense his work
was a great one, and the lofty and noble character
which Longfellow has given to his hero seems not
unsuited to the actual Hiawatha, who realizes the ideal
of the 'noble savage' more fully, perhaps, than any
one else in the annals of primitive peoples.

As in the case of King Arthur and Dietrich of
Berne, many myths soon gathered round the popular
and revered name of Hiawatha.  Among barbarians
three, or even two, generations usually suffice to render
{228}
a great and outstanding figure mythical.  But one
prefers to think of this Iroquois statesman as a real man, a
bright particular star in a dark sky of savagery and
ignorance.


The Stone Giants

The Iroquois believed that in early days there existed
a malignant race of giants whose bodies were fashioned
out of stone.  It is difficult to say how the idea of
such beings arose, but it is possible that the generally
distributed conception of a gigantic race springing from
Mother Earth was in this instance fused with another
belief that stones and rocks composed the earth's bony
framework.  We find an example of this belief in the
beautiful old Greek myth of Deucalion and Pyrrha,
which much resembles that of Noah.  When after the
great flood which submerged Hellas the survivors' ship
grounded upon Mount Parnassus they inquired of the
oracle of Themis in what manner the human race might
be restored.  They were bidden by the oracle to veil
themselves and to throw the bones of their mother
behind them.  These they interpreted to mean the
stones of the earth.  Picking up loose pieces of stone,
they cast them over their shoulders, and from those
thrown by Deucalion there sprang men, while those
cast by Pyrrha became women.

These Stone Giants of the Iroquois, dwelling in the
far west, took counsel with one another and resolved to
invade the Indian territory and exterminate the race of
men.  A party of Indians just starting on the war-path
were apprised of the invasion, and were bidden by the
gods to challenge the giants to combat.  This they did,
and the opposing bands faced each other at a spot near
a great gulf.  But as the monsters advanced upon their
human enemies the god of the west wind, who was
{229}
lying in wait for them, swooped down upon the Titans,
so that they were hurled over the edge of the gulf, far
down into the dark abyss below, where they perished
miserably.


The Pigmies

In contradistinction to their belief in giants, the
Iroquois imagined the existence of a race of pigmies,
who had many of the attributes of the Teutonic
gnomes.  They were responsible for the beauty of
terrestrial scenery, which they carved and sculptured in
cliff, scar, and rock, and, like the thunder-gods, they
protected the human race against the many monsters
which infested the world in early times.


Witches and Witchcraft

The Iroquois belief in witchcraft was very strong,
and the following tale is supposed to account for the
origin of witches and sorcery.  A boy who was out
hunting found a snake the colours of whose skin were
so intensely beautiful that he resolved to capture it.
He caught it and tended it carefully, feeding it on
birds and small game, and housing it in a little bowl
made of bark, which he filled with water.  In the
bottom of the bowl he placed down, small feathers,
and wood fibre, and on going to feed the snake he
discovered that these things had become living beings.
From this he gathered that the reptile was endowed
with supernatural powers, and he found that other
articles placed in the water along with it soon showed
signs of life.  He procured more snakes and placed
them in the bowl.  Observing some men of the tribe
rubbing ointment on their eyes to enable them to see
more clearly, he used some of the water from the bowl
in which the snakes were immersed upon his own, and
{230}
lo! he found on climbing a tall tree that nothing was
hidden from his sight, which pierced all intervening
obstacles.  He could see far into the earth, where lay
hidden precious stones and rich minerals.  His sight
pierced the trunks of trees; he could see through
mountains, and could discern objects lying deep down
in the bed of a river.

He concluded that the greater the number of reptiles
the snake-liquid contained the more potent would it
become.  Accordingly he captured several snakes, and
suspended them over his bowl in such a manner that
the essential oil they contained dropped into the water,
with the result that the activity of the beings which had
been so strangely bred in it was increased.  In course
of time he found that by merely placing one of his
fingers in the liquid and pointing it at any person he
could instantly bewitch him.  He added some roots
to the water in the bowl, some of which he then
drank.  By blowing this from his mouth a great light
was produced, by rubbing his eyes with it he could see
in the dark, and by other applications of it he could
render himself invisible, or take the shape of a snake.
If he dipped an arrow into the liquid and discharged it
at any living being it would kill it although it might
not strike it.  Not content with discovering this magic
fluid, the youth resolved to search for antidotes to it,
and these he collected.


A 'Medicine' Legend

A similar legend is told by the Senecas to account
for the origin of their 'medicine.'  Nearly two hundred
years ago--in the savage estimation this is a very great
period of time--an Indian went into the woods on
a hunting expedition.  One night while asleep in his
solitary camp he was awakened by a great noise of
{231}
singing and drum-beating, such as is heard at festivals.
Starting up, he made his way to the place whence the
sounds came, and although he could not see any one
there he observed a heap of corn and a large squash
vine with three squashes on it, and three ears of corn
which lay apart from the rest.  Feeling very uneasy,
he once more pursued his hunting operations, and when
night came again laid himself down to rest.  But his
sleep was destined to be broken yet a second time, and
awaking he perceived a man bending over him, who
said in menacing tones:

"Beware: what you saw was sacred.  You deserve to die."

A rustling among the branches denoted the presence
of a number of people, who, after some hesitation,
gathered round the hunter, and informed him that
they would pardon his curiosity and would tell him
their secret.  "The great medicine for wounds," said
the man who had first awakened him, "is squash and
corn.  Come with me and I will teach you how to
make and apply it."

With these words he led the hunter to the spot at
which he had surprised the 'medicine'-making operations
on the previous night, where he beheld a great fire
and a strange-looking laurel-bush, which seemed as if
made of iron.  Chanting a weird song, the people circled
slowly round the bush to the accompaniment of a
rattling of gourd-shells.  On the hunter's asking them
to explain this procedure, one of them heated a stick
and thrust it right through his cheek.  He immediately
applied some of the 'medicine' to the wound, so that
it healed instantly.  Having thus demonstrated the
power of the drug, they sang a tune which they called
the 'medicine-song,' which their pupil learnt by heart.

The hunter then turned to depart, and all at once he
{232}
saw that the beings who surrounded him were not
human, as he had thought, but animals--foxes, bears,
and beavers--who fled as he looked at them.  Surprised
and even terrified at the turn matters had taken, he
made his way homeward with all speed, conning over
the prescription which the strange beings had given him
the while.  They had told him to take one stalk of
corn, to dry the cob and pound it very fine, then to
take one squash, cut it up and pound it, and to mix the
whole with water from a running stream, near its source.
This prescription he used with very great success among
his people, and it proved the origin of the great
'medicine' of the Senecas.  Once a year at the season
when the deer changes his coat they prepare it as the
forest folk did, singing the weird song and dancing
round it to the rhythmic accompaniment of the gourd-shell
rattles, while they burn tobacco to the gods.


Great Head and the Ten Brothers

It was commonly believed among the Iroquois
Indians that there existed a curious and malevolent
being whom they called Great Head.  This odd
creature was merely an enormous head poised on
slender legs.  He made his dwelling on a rugged rock,
and directly he saw any living person approach he
would growl fiercely in true ogre fashion: "I see thee,
I see thee!  Thou shalt die."


Far away in a remote spot an orphaned family of
ten boys lived with their uncle.  The older brothers
went out every day to hunt, but the younger ones, not
yet fitted for so rigorous a life, remained at home with
their uncle, or at least did not venture much beyond
the immediate vicinity of their lodge.  One day the
hunters did not return at their usual hour.  As the
evening passed without bringing any sign of the missing
{233}
youths the little band at home became alarmed.  At
length the eldest of the boys left in the lodge
volunteered to go in search of his brothers.  His uncle
consented, and he set off, but he did not return.

In the morning another brother said: "I will go to
seek my brothers."  Having obtained permission, he
went, but he also did not come back.  Another and
another took upon himself the task of finding the lost
hunters, but of the searchers as well as of those sought
for there was no news forthcoming.  At length only
the youngest of the lads remained at home, and to his
entreaties to be allowed to seek for his brothers the
uncle turned a deaf ear, for he feared to lose the last of
his young nephews.

One day when uncle and nephew were out in the forest
the latter fancied he heard a deep groan, which seemed to
proceed from the earth exactly under his feet.  They
stopped to listen.  The sound was repeated--unmistakably
a human groan.  Hastily they began digging in the
earth, and in a moment or two came upon a man covered
with mould and apparently unconscious.

The pair carried the unfortunate one to their lodge,
where they rubbed him with bear's oil till he recovered
consciousness.  When he was able to speak he could
give no explanation of how he came to be buried
alive.  He had been out hunting, he said, when
suddenly his mind became a blank, and he remembered
nothing more till he found himself in the lodge with
the old man and the boy.  His hosts begged the
stranger to stay with them, and they soon discovered
that he was no ordinary mortal, but a powerful
magician.  At times he behaved very strangely.  One
night, while a great storm raged without, he tossed
restlessly on his couch instead of going to sleep.  At
last he sought the old uncle.

{234}

"Do you hear that noise?" he said.  "That is my
brother, Great Head, who is riding on the wind.  Do
you not hear him howling?"

The old man considered this astounding speech for
a moment; then he asked: "Would he come here if
you sent for him?"

"No," said the other, thoughtfully, "but we might
bring him here by magic.  Should he come you must
have food ready for him, in the shape of huge blocks
of maple-wood, for that is what he lives on."

The stranger departed in search of his brother Great
Head, taking with him his bow, and on the way he
came across a hickory-tree, whose roots provided him
with arrows.  About midday he drew near to the
dwelling of his brother, Great Head.  In order to see
without being seen, he changed himself into a mole,
and crept through the grass till he saw Great Head
perched on a rock, frowning fiercely.  "I see thee!" he
growled, with his wild eyes fixed on an owl.  The
man-mole drew his bow and shot an arrow at Great
Head.  The arrow became larger and larger as it flew
toward the monster, but it returned to him who had
fired it, and as it did so it regained its natural size.
The man seized it and rushed back the way he had
come.  Very soon he heard Great Head in pursuit,
puffing and snorting along on the wings of a hurricane.
When the creature had almost overtaken him he turned
and discharged another arrow.  Again and again he
repulsed his pursuer in this fashion, till he lured him
to the lodge where his benefactors lived.  When Great
Head burst into the house the uncle and nephew began
to hammer him vigorously with mallets.  To their
surprise the monster broke into laughter, for he had
recognized his brother and was very pleased to see him.
He ate the maple-blocks they brought him with a
{235}
hearty appetite, whereupon they told him the story of
the missing hunters.

"I know what has become of them," said Great
Head.  "They have fallen into the hands of a witch.
If this young man," indicating the nephew, "will
accompany me, I will show him her dwelling, and the
bones of his brothers."

The youth, who loved adventure, and was besides
very anxious to learn the fate of his brothers, at once
consented to seek the home of the witch.  So he and
Great Head started off, and lost no time in getting to
the place.  They found the space in front of the lodge
strewn with dry bones, and the witch sitting in the
doorway singing.  When she saw them she muttered
the magic word which turned living people into dry
bones, but on Great Head and his companion it had
no effect whatever.  Acting on a prearranged signal,
Great Head and the youth attacked the witch and
killed her.  No sooner had she expired than her flesh
turned into birds and beasts and fishes.  What was
left of her they burned to ashes.

Their next act was to select the bones of the nine
brothers from among the heap, and this they found no
easy task.  But at last it was accomplished, and Great
Head said to his companion: "I am going home to
my rock.  When I pass overhead in a great storm I
will bid these bones arise, and they will get up and
return with you."

The youth stood alone for a little while till he heard
the sound of a fierce tempest.  Out of the hurricane
Great Head called to the brothers to arise.  In a
moment they were all on their feet, receiving the
congratulations of their younger brother and each
other, and filled with joy at their reunion.


{236}

The Seneca's Revenge

A striking story is told of a Seneca youth who for
many years and through a wearisome captivity nourished
the hope of vengeance so dear to the Indian soul.  A
certain tribe of the Senecas had settled on the shores
of Lake Erie, when they were surprised by their ancient
enemies the Illinois, and in spite of a stout resistance
many of them were slain, and a woman and a boy
taken prisoner.  When the victors halted for the night
they built a great fire, and proceeded to celebrate their
success by singing triumphant songs, in which they
commanded the boy to join them.  The lad pretended
that he did not know their language, but said that he
would sing their song in his own tongue, to which
they assented; but instead of a pæan in their praise
he sang a song of vengeance, in which he vowed that
if he were spared all of them would lose their scalps.
A few days afterward the woman became so exhausted
that she could walk no farther, so the Illinois slew her.
But before she died she extracted a promise from the
boy that he would avenge her, and would never cease
to be a Seneca.

In a few days they arrived at the Illinois camp,
where a council was held to consider the fate of the
captive lad.  Some were for instantly putting him to
death, but their chief ruled that should he be able to
live through their tortures he would be worthy of
becoming an Illinois.  They seized the wretched lad
and held his bare feet to the glowing council-fire, then
after piercing them they told him to run a race.  He
bounded forward, and ran so swiftly that he soon
gained the Great House of the tribe, where he seated
himself upon a wild-cat skin.

Another council was held, and the Illinois braves
{237}
agreed that the lad possessed high courage and would
make a great warrior; but others argued that he knew
their war-path and might betray them, and it was finally
decided that he should be burnt at the stake.  As he
was about to perish in this manner an aged warrior
suggested that if he were able to withstand their last
torture he should be permitted to live.  Accordingly
he held the unfortunate lad under water in a pool until
only a spark of life remained in him, but he survived,
and became an Illinois warrior.

Years passed, and the boy reached manhood and
married a chief's daughter.  His strength and endurance
became proverbial, but the warriors of the tribe of his
adoption would never permit him to take part in their
warlike expeditions.  At length a raid against the Senecas
was mooted, and he begged so hard to be allowed to
accompany the braves that at last they consented.
Indeed, so great was their admiration of the skill with
which he outlined a plan of campaign that they made
him chief of the expedition.  For many days the party
marched toward the Seneca country; but when at last
they neared it their scouts reported that there were no
signs of the tribe, and that the Senecas must have quitted
their territory.  Their leader, however, proposed to go in
search of the enemy himself, along with another warrior
of the tribe, and this was agreed to.

When the pair had gone five or six miles the leader
said to his companion that it would be better if they
separated, as they would then be able to cover more
ground.  Passing on to where he knew he would find
the Senecas, he warned them of their danger, and
arranged that an ambush of his kinsfolk should lie in
wait for the Illinois.

Returning to the Illinois camp, he reported that he
had seen nothing, but that he well remembered the
{238}
Seneca hiding-place.  He asked to be given the bravest
warriors, and assured the council that he would soon
bring them the scalps of their foes.  Suspecting nothing,
they assented to his proposal, and he was followed by
the flower of the Illinois tribe, all unaware that five
hundred Senecas awaited them in the valley.  The
youth led his men right into the heart of the ambush;
then, pretending to miss his footing, he fell.  This
was the signal for the Senecas to rise on every side.
Yelling their war-cry, they rushed from their shelter
and fell on the dismayed Illinois, who gave way on
every side.  The slaughter was immense.  Vengeance
nerved the arms of the Seneca braves, and of three
hundred Illinois but two escaped.  The leader of the
expedition was borne in triumph to the Seneca village,
where to listening hundreds he told the story of his
capture and long-meditated revenge.  He became a
great chief among his people, and even to this day his
name is uttered by them with honour and reverence.


The Boy Magician

In the heart of the wilderness there lived an old
woman and her little grandson.  The two found no
lack of occupation from day to day, the woman busying
herself with cooking and cleaning and the boy with
shooting and hunting.  The grandmother frequently
spoke of the time when the child would grow up and
go out into the world.

"Always go to the east," she would say.  "Never
go to the west, for there lies danger."

But what the danger was she would not tell him,
in spite of his importunate questioning.  Other boys
went west, he thought to himself, and why should not
he?  Nevertheless his grandmother made him promise
that he would not go west.

{239}

Years passed by, and the child grew to be a man,
though he still retained the curiosity and high spirits
of his boyhood.  His persistent inquiries drew from
the old grandmother a reluctant explanation of her
warning.

"In the west," said she, "there dwells a being who
is anxious to do us harm.  If he sees you it will mean
death for both of us."

This statement, instead of frightening the young
Indian, only strengthened in him a secret resolution he
had formed to go west on the first opportunity.  Not
that he wished to bring any misfortune on his poor
old grandmother, any more than on himself, but he
trusted to his strong arm and clear head to deliver
them from their enemy.  So with a laugh on his lips
he set off to the west.

Toward evening he came to a lake, where he rested.
He had not been there long when he heard a voice
saying: "Aha, my fine fellow, I see you!"

The youth looked all round him, and up into the
sky above, but he saw no one.

"I am going to send a hurricane," the mysterious
voice continued, "to break your grandmother's hut to
pieces.  How will you like that?"

"Oh, very well," answered the young man gaily.
"We are always in need of firewood, and now we shall
have plenty."

"Go home and see," the voice said mockingly.
"I daresay you will not like it so well."

Nothing daunted, the young adventurer retraced
his steps.  As he neared home a great wind sprang up,
seeming to tear the very trees out by the roots.

"Make haste!" cried the grandmother from the
doorway.  "We shall both be killed!"

When she had drawn him inside and shut the door
{240}
she scolded him heartily for his disobedience, and
bewailed the fate before them.  The young man soothed
her fears, saying: "Don't cry, grandmother.  We
shall turn the lodge into a rock, and so we shall be
saved."

Having some skill in magic, he did as he had said,
and the hurricane passed harmlessly over their heads.
When it had ceased they emerged from their retreat,
and found an abundance of firewood all round them.


The Hailstorm

Next day the youth was on the point of setting off
toward the west once more, but the urgent entreaties
of his grandmother moved him to proceed eastward--for
a time.  Directly he was out of sight of the lodge
he turned his face once more to the west.  Arrived at
the lake, he heard the voice once more, though its
owner was still invisible.

"I am going to send a great hailstorm on your
grandmother's hut," it said.  "What do you think of
that?"

"Oh," was the response, "I think I should like it.
I have always wanted a bundle of spears."

"Go home and see," said the voice.

Away the youth went through the woods.  The sky
became darker and darker as he neared his home, and
just as he was within a bowshot of the little hut a
fierce hailstorm broke, and he thought he would be
killed before he reached shelter.

"Alas!" cried the old woman when he was safely
indoors, "we shall be destroyed this time.  How can
we save ourselves?"

Again the young man exercised his magic powers,
and transformed the frail hut into a hollow rock, upon
which the shafts of the hailstorm spent themselves in
{241}
vain.  At last the sky cleared, the lodge resumed its
former shape, and the young man saw a multitude of
sharp, beautiful spear-heads on the ground.

"I will get poles," said he, "to fit to them for
fishing."

When he returned in a few minutes with the poles
he found that the spears had vanished.

"Where are my beautiful spears?" he asked his
grandmother.

"They were only ice-spears," she replied.  "They
have all melted away."

The young Indian was greatly disappointed, and
wondered how he could avenge himself on the being
who had played him this malicious trick.

"Be warned in time," said the aged grandmother,
shaking her head at him.  "Take my advice and leave
him alone."


The Charmed Stone

But the youth's adventurous spirit impelled him to
see the end of the matter, so he took a stone and tied
it round his neck for a charm, and sought the lake
once again.  Carefully observing the direction from
which the voice proceeded, he saw in the middle of the
lake a huge head with a face on every side of it.

"Aha! uncle," he exclaimed, "I see you!  How
would you like it if the lake dried up?"

"Nonsense!" said the voice angrily, "that will
never happen."

"Go home and see," shouted the youth, mimicking
the mocking tone the other had adopted on the
previous occasions.  As he spoke he swung his charmed
stone round his head and threw it into the air.  As it
descended it grew larger and larger, and the moment
it entered the lake the water began to boil.

{242}
The lad returned home and told his grandmother
what he had done.

"It is of no use," said she.  "Many have tried to
slay him, but all have perished in the attempt."

Next morning our hero went westward again, and
found the lake quite dry, and the animals in it dead,
with the exception of a large green frog, who was in
reality the malicious being who had tormented the
Indian and his grandmother.  A quick blow with a
stick put an end to the creature, and the triumphant
youth bore the good news to his old grandmother, who
from that time was left in peace and quietness.


The Friendly Skeleton

A little boy living in the woods with his old uncle was
warned by him not to go eastward, but to play close to
the lodge or walk toward the west.  The child felt a
natural curiosity to know what lay in the forbidden
direction, and one day took advantage of his uncle's
absence on a hunting expedition to wander away to the
east.  At length he came to a large lake, on the shores of
which he stopped to rest.  Here he was accosted by a
man, who asked him his name and where he lived.

"Come," said the stranger, when he had finished
questioning the boy, "let us see who can shoot an
arrow the highest."

This they did, and the boy's arrow went much higher
than that of his companion.

The stranger then suggested a swimming match.

"Let us see," he said, "who can swim farthest under
water without taking a breath."

Again the boy beat his rival, who next proposed
that they should sail out to an island in the middle of
the lake, to see the beautiful birds that were to be
found there.  The child consented readily, and they
{243}
embarked in a curious canoe, which was propelled by
three swans harnessed to either side of it.  Directly they
had taken their seats the man began to sing, and the
canoe moved off.  In a very short time they had reached
the island.  Here the little Indian realized that his
confidence in his new-found friend was misplaced.  The
stranger took all his clothes from him, put them in the
canoe, and jumped in himself, saying:

"Come, swans, let us go home."

The obedient swans set off at a good pace, and
soon left the island far behind.  The boy was very
angry at having been so badly used, but when it
grew dark his resentment changed to fear, and he sat
down and cried with cold and misery.  Suddenly he
heard a husky voice close at hand, and, looking round,
he saw a skeleton on the ground.

"I am very sorry for you," said the skeleton in
hoarse tones.  "I will do what I can to help you.
But first you must do something for me.  Go and
dig by that tree, and you shall find a tobacco-pouch
with some tobacco in it, a pipe, and a flint."

The boy did as he was asked, and when he had
filled the pipe he lit it and placed it in the mouth of
the skeleton.  He saw that the latter's body was full
of mice, and that the smoke frightened them away.


"There is a man coming to-night with three dogs,"
said the skeleton.  "He is coming to look for you.
You must make tracks all over the island, so that they
may not find you, and then hide in a hollow tree."

Again the boy obeyed his gaunt instructor, and when
he was safely hidden he saw a man come ashore with
three dogs.  All night they hunted him, but he had made
so many tracks that the dogs were confused, and at last
the man departed in anger.  Next day the trembling
boy emerged and went to the skeleton.

{244}

"To-night," said the latter, "the man who brought
you here is coming to drink your blood.  You must
dig a hole in the sand and hide.  When he comes out of
the canoe you must enter it.  Say, 'Come, swans, let us
go home,' and if the man calls you do not look back."


The Lost Sister

Everything fell out as the skeleton had foretold.
The boy hid in the sand, and directly he saw his
tormentor step ashore he jumped into the canoe,
saying hastily, "Come, swans, let us go home."  Then
he began to sing as he had heard the man do when
they first embarked.  In vain the man called him back;
he refused to look round.  The swans carried the
canoe to a cave in a high rock, where the boy found
his clothes, as well as a fire and food.  When he
had donned his garments and satisfied his hunger
he lay down and slept.  In the morning he returned
to the island, where he found the tyrant quite dead.
The skeleton now commanded him to sail eastward to
seek for his sister, whom a fierce man had carried
away.  He set out eagerly on his new quest, and a
three days' journey brought him to the place where his
sister was.  He lost no time in finding her.

"Come, my sister," said he, "let us flee away
together."

"Alas!  I cannot," answered the young woman.  "A
wicked man keeps me here.  It is time for him to
return home, and he would be sure to catch us.  But
let me hide you now, and in the morning we shall go
away."

So she dug a pit and hid her brother, though not a
moment too soon, for the footsteps of her husband
were heard approaching the hut.  The woman had
cooked a child, and this she placed before the man.

{245}

"You have had visitors," he said, seeing his dogs
snuffing around uneasily.

"No," was the reply, "I have seen no one but you."

"I shall wait till to-morrow," said the man to himself.
"Then I shall kill and eat him."  He had already
guessed that his wife had not spoken the truth.
However, he said nothing more, but waited till morning,
when, instead of going to a distant swamp to seek for
food, as he pretended to do, he concealed himself
at a short distance from the hut, and at length saw
the brother and sister making for a canoe.  They were
hardly seated when they saw him running toward them.
In his hand he bore a large hook, with which he
caught the frail vessel; but the lad broke the hook
with a stone, and the canoe darted out on to the lake.
The man was at a loss for a moment, and could only
shout incoherent threats after the pair.  Then an idea
occurred to him, and, lying down on the shore, he
began to drink the water.  This caused the canoe to
rush back again, but once more the boy was equal to
the occasion.  Seizing the large stone with which he
had broken the hook, he threw it at the man and slew
him, the water at the same time rushing back into the
lake.  Thus the brother and sister escaped, and in
three days they had arrived at the island, where they
heartily thanked their benefactor, the skeleton.  He,
however, had still another task for the young Indian
to perform.

"Take your sister home to your uncle's lodge," said
he; "then return here yourself, and say to the many
bones which you will find on the island, 'Arise,' and
they shall come to life again."

When the brother and sister reached their home
they found that their old uncle had been grievously
{246}
lamenting the loss of his nephew, and he was quite
overjoyed at seeing them.  On his recommendation
they built a large lodge to accommodate the people they
were to bring back with them.  When it was completed,
the youth revisited the island, bade the bones arise,
and was delighted to see them obey his bidding and
become men and women.  He led them to the lodge
he had built, where they all dwelt happily for a long
time.


The Pigmies

When the Cherokees were dwelling in the swamps
of Florida the Iroquois made a practice of swooping
down on them and raiding their camps.  On one
occasion the raiding party was absent from home for
close on two years.  On the eve of their return one
of their number, a chieftain, fell ill, and the rest of
the party were at a loss to know what to do with him.
Obviously, if they carried him home with them he
would considerably impede their progress.  Besides,
there was the possibility that he might not recover,
and all their labour would be to no purpose.  Thus
they debated far into the night, and finally decided to
abandon him to his fate and return by themselves.
The sick man, unable to stir hand or foot, overheard
their decision, but he bore it stoically, like an Indian
warrior.  Nevertheless, when he heard the last swish
of their paddles as they crossed the river he could not
help thinking of the friends and kindred he would
probably never see again.

When the raiders reached home they were closely
questioned as to the whereabouts of the missing chief,
and the inquiries were all the more anxious because
the sick man had been a great favourite among his
people.  The guilty warriors answered evasively.  They
{247}
did not know what had become of their comrade,
they said.  Possibly he had been lost or killed in
Florida.

Meanwhile the sick man lay dying on the banks of
the river.  Suddenly he heard, quite close at hand, the
gentle sound of a canoe.  The vessel drew in close to
the bank, and, full in view of the warrior, three pigmy
men disembarked.  They regarded the stranger with
some surprise.  At length one who seemed to be
the leader advanced and spoke to him, bidding him
await their return, and promising to look after him.
They were going, he said, to a certain 'salt-lick,' where
many curious animals watered, in order to kill some
for food.


The Salt-Lick

When the pigmies arrived at the place they found
that no animals were as yet to be seen, but very soon
a large buffalo bull came to drink.  Immediately a
buffalo cow arose from the lick, and when they had
satisfied their thirst the two animals lay down on the
bank.  The pigmies concluded that the time was ripe
for killing them, and, drawing their bows, they
succeeded in dispatching the buffaloes.  Returning to
the sick man, they amply fulfilled their promise to take
care of him, skilfully tending him until he had made a
complete recovery.  They then conveyed him to his
friends, who now learnt that the story told them by
the raiders was false.  Bitterly indignant at the
deception and heartless cruelty of these men, they fell upon
them and punished them according to their deserts.

Later the chief headed a band of people who were
curious to see the lick, which they found surrounded
by the bones of numberless large animals which had
been killed by the pigmies.

{248}

This story is interesting as a record of what were
perhaps the last vestiges of a pigmy folk who at one
time inhabited the eastern portion of North America,
before the coming of the Red Man.  We have already
alluded to this people, in the pages dealing with the
discoveries of the Norsemen in the continent.


The Magical Serpent

In the seventeenth century a strange legend
concerning a huge serpent was found among the Hurons,
who probably got it from the neighbouring Algonquins.
This monster had on its head a horn which would
pierce anything, even the hardest rock.  Any one
possessing a piece of it was supposed to have very
good fortune.  The Hurons did not know where the
creature was to be found, but said that the Algonquins
were in the habit of selling them small pieces of the
magic horn.

It is possible that the mercenary Shawnees had
borrowed this myth from the Cherokees for their own
purposes.  At all events a similar legend existed among
both tribes which told of a monster snake, the King
of Rattlesnakes, who dwelt up among the mountain-passes,
attended by a retinue of his kind.  Instead of
a crown, he wore on his head a beautiful jewel which
possessed magic properties.  Many a brave tried to
obtain possession of this desirable gem, but all fell
victims to the venomous reptiles.  At length a more
ingenious warrior clothed himself entirely in leather,
and so rendered himself impervious to their attack.
Making his way to the haunt of the serpents, he slew
their monster chief.  Then, triumphantly taking
possession of the wonderful jewel, he bore it to his tribe,
by whom it was regarded with profound veneration and
jealously preserved.


{249}

The Origin of Medicine

An interesting Cherokee myth is that which recounts
the origin of disease, and the consequent institution of
curative medicine.  In the old days, we are told, the
members of the brute creation were gifted with speech
and dwelt in amity with the human race, but mankind
multiplied so quickly that the animals were crowded
into the forests and desert places of the earth, so that
the old friendship between them was soon forgotten.
The breach was farther widened by the invention of
lethal weapons, by the aid of which man commenced
the wholesale slaughter of the beasts for the sake of
their flesh and skins.  The animals, at first surprised,
soon grew angry, and resolved upon measures of
retaliation.  The bear tribe met in council, presided
over by the Old White Bear, their chief.  After several
speakers had denounced mankind for their bloodthirsty
tendencies, war was unanimously decided upon, but
the lack of weapons was regarded as a serious drawback.
However, it was suggested that man's instruments
should be turned against himself, and as the bow and
arrow were considered to be the principal human agency
of destruction, it was resolved to fashion a specimen.
A suitable piece of wood was procured, and one of the
bears sacrificed himself to provide gut for a bowstring.
When the weapon was completed it was discovered
that the claws of the bears spoiled their shooting.  One
of the bears, however, cut his claws, and succeeded in
hitting the mark, but the Old White Bear very wisely
remarked that without claws they could not climb trees
or bring down game, and that were they to cut them
off they must all starve.

The deer also met in council, under their chief, the
Little Deer, when it was decided that those hunters who
{250}
slew one of their number without asking pardon in
a suitable manner should be afflicted with rheumatism.
They gave notice of this decision to the nearest
settlement of Indians, and instructed them how to
make propitiation when forced by necessity to kill one
of the deer-folk.  So when a deer is slain by the
hunter the Little Deer runs to the spot, and, bending
over the blood-stains, asks the spirit of the deer if it
has heard the prayer of the hunter for pardon.  If the
reply be 'Yes,' all is well, and the Little Deer departs;
but if the answer be in the negative, he tracks the
hunter to his cabin, and strikes him with rheumatism,
so that he becomes a helpless cripple.  Sometimes
hunters who have not learned the proper formula for
pardon attempt to turn aside the Little Deer from his
pursuit by building a fire behind them in the trail.


The Council of the Fishes

The fishes and reptiles then held a joint council, and
arranged to haunt those human beings who tormented
them with hideous dreams of serpents twining round
them and of eating fish which had become decayed.
These snake and fish dreams seem to be of common
occurrence among the Cherokees, and the services of
the _shamans_ to banish them are in constant demand.

Lastly, the birds and the insects, with the smaller
animals, gathered together for a similar purpose, the
grub-worm presiding over the meeting.  Each in turn
expressed an opinion, and the consensus was against
mankind.  They devised and named various diseases.

When the plants, which were friendly to man, heard
what had been arranged by the animals, they determined
to frustrate their evil designs.  Each tree, shrub, and
herb, down even to the grasses and mosses, agreed to
furnish a remedy for some one of the diseases named.
{251}
Thus did medicine come into being.  When the _shaman_
is in doubt as to what treatment to apply for the relief
of a patient the spirit of the plant suggests a fitting
remedy.


The Wonderful Kettle

A story is told among the Iroquois of two brothers
who lived in the wilderness far from all human
habitation.  The elder brother went into the forest to hunt
game, while the younger stayed at home and tended
the hut, cooked the food, and gathered firewood.

One evening the tired hunter returned from the
chase, and the younger brother took the game from
him as usual and dressed it for supper.  "I will smoke
awhile before I eat," said the hunter, and he smoked
in silence for a time.  When he was tired of smoking
he lay down and went to sleep.

"Strange," said the boy; "I should have thought
he would want to eat first."

When the hunter awoke he found that his brother
had prepared the supper and was waiting for him.

"Go to bed," said he; "I wish to be alone."

Wondering much, the boy did as he was bidden,
but he could not help asking himself how his brother
could possibly live if he did not eat.  In the
morning he observed that the hunter went away without
tasting any food, and on many succeeding mornings
and evenings the same thing happened.

"I must watch him at night," said the boy to himself,
"for he must eat at night, since he eats at no other
time."

That same evening, when the lad was told as usual
to go to bed, he lay down and pretended to be sound
asleep, but all the time one of his eyes was open.  In
this cautious fashion he watched his brother, and saw
{252}
him rise from his couch and pass through a trap-door
in the floor, from which he shortly emerged bearing
a rusty kettle, the bottom of which he scraped
industriously.  Filling it with water, he set it on the
blazing fire.  As he did so he struck it with a whip,
saying at every blow: "Grow larger, my kettle!"

The obedient kettle became of gigantic proportions,
and after setting it aside to cool the man ate its contents
with evident relish.

His watchful younger brother, well content with
the result of his observation, turned over and went to
sleep.

When the elder had set off next morning, the boy,
filled with curiosity, opened the trap-door and
discovered the kettle.  "I wonder what he eats," he said,
and there within the vessel was half a chestnut!  He
was rather surprised at this discovery, but he thought
to himself how pleased his brother would be if on his
return he found a meal to his taste awaiting him.
When evening drew near he put the kettle on the
fire, took a whip, and, hitting it repeatedly, exclaimed:
"Grow larger, my kettle!"


The kettle grew larger, but to the boy's alarm it
kept on growing until it filled the room, and he was
obliged to get on the roof and stir it through the
chimney.

"What are you doing up there?" shouted the hunter,
when he came within hail.

"I took your kettle to get your supper ready,"
answered the boy.

"Alas!" cried the other, "now I must die!"

He quickly reduced the kettle to its original proportions
and put it in its place.  But he still wore such
a sad and serious air that his brother was filled with
dismay, and prayed that he might be permitted to
{253}
undo the mischief he had wrought.  When the days
went past and he found that his brother no longer
went out to hunt or displayed any interest in life, but
grew gradually thinner and more melancholy, his distress
knew no bounds.

"Let me fetch you some chestnuts," he begged
earnestly.  "Tell me where they may be found."


The White Heron

"You must travel a full day's journey," said the hunter
in response to his entreaties.  "You will then reach
a river which is most difficult to ford.  On the opposite
bank there stands a lodge, and near by a chestnut-tree.
Even then your difficulties will only be begun.
The tree is guarded by a white heron, which never
loses sight of it for a moment.  He is employed for
that purpose by the six women who live in the lodge,
and with their war-clubs they slay any one who has the
temerity to approach.  I beg of you, do not think of
going on such a hopeless errand."

But the boy felt that were the chance of success even
more slender he must make the attempt for the sake of
his brother, whom his thoughtlessness had brought low.

He made a little canoe about three inches long, and
set off on his journey, in the direction indicated by his
brother.  At the end of a day he came to the river,
whose size had not been underestimated.  Taking his
little canoe from his pocket, he drew it out till it was of
a suitable length, and launched it in the great stream.
A few minutes sufficed to carry him to the opposite
bank, and there he beheld the lodge and the chestnut-tree.
On his way he had managed to procure some
seeds of a sort greatly liked by herons, and these he
scattered before the beautiful white bird strutting round
the tree.  While the heron was busily engaged in
{254}
picking them up the young man seized his opportunity
and gathered quantities of the chestnuts, which were
lying thickly on the ground.  Ere his task was finished,
however, the heron perceived the intruder, and called a
loud warning to the women in the lodge, who were not
slow to respond.  They rushed out with their fishing-lines
in their hands, and gave chase to the thief.  But
fear, for his brother as well as for himself, lent the
youth wings, and he was well out on the river in his
canoe when the shrieking women reached the bank.
The eldest threw her line and caught him, but with a
sharp pull he broke it.  Another line met with the
same fate, and so on, until all the women had thrown
their lines.  They could do nothing further, and were
obliged to watch the retreating canoe in impotent rage.

At length the youth, having come safely through
the perils of the journey, arrived home with his
precious burden of chestnuts.  He found his brother
still alive, but so weak that he could hardly speak.  A
meal of the chestnuts, however, helped to revive him,
and he quickly recovered.


The Stone Giantess

In bygone times it was customary for a hunter's wife
to accompany her husband when he sought the chase.
A dutiful wife on these occasions would carry home
the game killed by the hunter and dress and cook it
for him.

There was once a chief among the Iroquois who was
a very skilful hunter.  In all his expeditions his wife
was his companion and helper.  On one excursion he
found such large quantities of game that he built a
wigwam at the place, and settled there for a time with
his wife and child.  One day he struck out on a new
{255}
track, while his wife followed the path they had taken
on the previous day, in order to gather the game
killed then.  As the woman turned her steps
homeward after a hard day's work she heard the sound of
another woman's voice inside the hut.  Filled with
surprise, she entered, but found to her consternation
that her visitor was no other than a Stone Giantess.  To
add to her alarm, she saw that the creature had in her
arms the chief's baby.  While the mother stood in the
doorway, wondering how she could rescue her child
from the clutches of the giantess, the latter said in a
gentle and soothing voice: "Do not be afraid: come
inside."

The hunter's wife hesitated no longer, but boldly
entered the wigwam.  Once inside, her fear changed
to pity, for the giantess was evidently much worn with
trouble and fatigue.  She told the hunter's wife, who
was kindly and sympathetic, how she had travelled from
the land of the Stone Giants, fleeing from her cruel
husband, who had sought to kill her, and how she had
finally taken shelter in the solitary wigwam.  She
besought the young woman to let her remain for a while,
promising to assist her in her daily tasks.  She also
said she was very hungry, but warned her hostess that
she must be exceedingly careful about the food she
gave her.  It must not be raw or at all underdone, for
if once she tasted blood she might wish to kill the
hunter and his wife and child.

So the wife prepared some food for her, taking care
that it was thoroughly cooked, and the two sat down
to dine together.  The Stone Giantess knew that the
woman was in the habit of carrying home the game, and
she now declared that she would do it in her stead.
Moreover, she said she already knew where it was to be
found, and insisted on setting out for it at once.  She
{256}
very shortly returned, bearing in one hand a load of
game which four men could scarcely have carried, and
the woman recognized in her a very valuable assistant.

The time of the hunter's return drew near, and the
Stone Giantess bade the wife go out and meet her
husband and tell him of her visitor.  The man was
very well pleased to learn how the new-comer had
helped his wife, and he gave her a hearty welcome.  In
the morning he went out hunting as usual.  When he
had disappeared from sight in the forest the giantess
turned quickly to the woman and said:

"I have a secret to tell you.  My cruel husband is
after me, and in three days he will arrive here.  On
the third day your husband must remain at home and
help me to slay him."

When the third day came round the hunter remained
at home, obedient to the instructions of his guest.

"Now," said the giantess at last, "I hear him
coming.  You must both help me to hold him.  Strike
him where I bid you, and we shall certainly kill him."

The hunter and his wife were seized with terror
when a great commotion outside announced the arrival
of the Stone Giant, but the firmness and courage of
the giantess reassured them, and with something like
calmness they awaited the monster's approach.  Directly
he came in sight the giantess rushed forward, grappled
with him and threw him to the ground.

"Strike him on the arms!" she cried to the others.
"Now on the nape of the neck!"

The trembling couple obeyed, and very shortly they
had succeeded in killing the huge creature.

"I will go and bury him," said the giantess.  And
that was the end of the Stone Giant.

The strange guest stayed on in the wigwam till the
time came for the hunter and his family to go back to
{257}
the settlement, when she announced her intention of
returning to her own people.

"My husband is dead," said she; "I have no
longer anything to fear."  Thus, having bade them
farewell, she departed.


The Healing Waters