The third tale of the trilogy tells how Blue Jay and Ioi went to visit
their friends.  The Magpie was the first to receive the visitors, and
by means of magic he provided food for them.  Putting a salmon egg into
a kettle of boiling water, he placed the kettle on the fire, and
immediately it was full of salmon eggs, so that when they had eaten
enough Blue Jay and Ioi were able to carry a number away.

On the following day the Magpie called for the kettle they had
borrowed.  Blue Jay tried to entertain his visitor in the same magical
fashion as the latter had entertained him.  But his attempt was so
ludicrous that the Magpie could not help laughing at him.

The pair's next visit was to the Duck, who obtained food for them by
making her children dive for trout.  Again there was twice as much as
they could eat, and Blue Jay and Ioi carried away the remainder on a
mat.  During the return visit of the Duck Blue Jay tried to emulate
this feat also, using Ioi's children instead of the ducklings.  His
attempt was again unsuccessful.

The two visited in turn the Black Bear, the Beaver, and the Seal, all
of whom similarly supplied refreshment for them in a magical manner.
But Blue Jay's attempts at imitating these creatures were futile.

{327}

A visit to the Shadows concluded the round, and the adventurers
returned home.


The Heaven-sought Bride

A brother and sister left destitute by the death of their father, a
chief of the Chinooks, were forced to go hunting sea-otters every day
to obtain a livelihood.  As they hunted the mists came down, and with
them the Supernatural People, one of whom became enamoured of the girl.
The ghostly husband sent his wife gifts of stranded timber and
whale-meat, so that when her son was born she might want for nothing.
The mischievous Blue Jay, hearing of the abundance of meat in the young
chief's house, apprised his own chief of the circumstance and brought
all the village to share it.  The Supernatural People, annoyed that
their bounty should be thus misused, abducted the young chief's sister,
along with her child.

The woman's aunt, the Crow, gathered many potentilla and other roots,
placed them in her canoe, and put out to sea.  She came to the country
of the Supernatural Folk, and when they saw her approaching they all
ran down to the beach to greet her.  They greedily snatched at the
roots she had brought with her and devoured them, eating the most
succulent and throwing away those that were not so much to their taste.
The Crow soon found her niece, who laughed at her for bringing such
fare to such a land.

"Do you think they are men that you bring them potentilla roots?" she
cried.  "They only eat certain of the roots you have fetched hither
because they have magical properties.  The next time you come bring the
sort of roots they seized upon--and you can also bring a basket of
potentilla roots for me."


{328}

The Whale-catcher

She then called upon a dog which was gambolling close at hand.

"Take this dog," she said to the Crow.  "It belongs to your
grand-nephew.  When you come near the shore say, 'Catch a whale, dog,'
and see what happens."

The Crow bade farewell to her niece, and, re-entering her canoe,
steered for the world of mortals again.  The dog lay quietly in the
stern.  When about half-way across the Crow recollected her niece's
advice.

"Catch a whale, good dog," she cried encouragingly.

The dog arose, and at that moment a whale crossed the path of the
canoe.  The dog sank his teeth in the great fish, and the frail bark
rocked violently.

"Hold him fast, good fellow!" cried the Crow excitedly.  "Hold him
fast!"  But the canoe tossed so dangerously and shipped so much water
that in a great fright she bade the dog let go.  He did so, and lay
down in the stern again.

The Crow arrived at the world of men once more, and after landing
turned round to call her wonderful dog ashore.  But no trace of him was
visible.  He had disappeared.


Once more the Crow gathered many roots and plants, taking especial care
to collect a good supply of the sort the Supernatural People were fond
of, and gathering only a small basket of potentilla.  For the second
time she crossed over to the land of the Divine Beings, who, on espying
her succulent cargo, devoured it at once.  She carried the potentilla
roots to her niece, and when in her house noticed the dog she had
received and lost.  Her niece informed her that she should not have
ordered the animal to seize {329} the whale in mid-ocean, but should
have waited until she was nearer the land.  The Crow departed once
more, taking the dog with her.

When they approached the land of men the Crow called to the animal to
catch a whale, but it stirred not.  Then the Crow poured some water
over him, and he started up and killed a large whale, the carcass of
which drifted on to the beach, when the people came down and cut it up
for food.


The Chinooks Visit the Supernaturals

Some time after this the young chief expressed a desire to go to see
his sister, so his people manned a large canoe and set forth.  The
chief of the Supernatural People, observing their approach, warned his
subjects that the mortals might do something to their disadvantage, and
by means of magic he covered the sea with ice.  The air became
exceedingly cold, so cold, indeed, that Blue Jay, who had accompanied
the young chief, leapt into the water.  At this one of the Supernatural
People on shore laughed and cried out: "Ha, ha!  Blue Jay has drowned
himself!"  At this taunt the young chief in the canoe arose, and,
taking the ice which covered the surface of the sea, cast it away.  At
sight of such power the Supernatural Folk became much alarmed.

The chief and his followers now came to land, and, walking up the
beach, found it deserted.  Not a single Supernatural Person was to be
seen.  Espying the chief's house, however, the Chinooks approached it.
It was guarded by sea-lions, one at each side of the door.  The chief
cautiously warned his people against attempting an entrance.  But the
irrepressible Blue Jay tried to leap past the sea-lions, and got
severely bitten for his pains.  Howling dismally, he rushed seaward.
{330} The young chief, annoyed that the Divine Beings should have cause
for laughter against any of his people, now darted forward, seized the
monsters one in each hand, and hurled them far away.

At this second feat the Supernatural Folk set up a hubbub of rage and
dismay, which was turned to loud laughter when Blue Jay claimed the
deed as his, loudly chanting his own praises.  The Chinooks, taking
heart, entered the lodge.  But the Supernatural Folk vanished, leaving
only the chief's sister behind.

The Chinooks had had nothing to eat since leaving their own country,
and Blue Jay, who, like most worthless folk, was always hungry,
complained loudly that he was famished.  His brother Robin sullenly
ordered him to be silent.  Suddenly a Supernatural Being with a long
beak emerged from under the bed, and, splitting wood with his beak,
kindled a large fire.

"Robin," said Blue Jay, "that is the spirit of our great-grandfather's
slave."

Soon the house was full of smoke, and a voice was heard calling out for
the Smoke-eater.  An individual with an enormous belly made his
appearance, and swallowed all the smoke, so that the house became
light.  A small dish was brought, containing only one piece of meat.
But the mysterious voice called for the Whale-meat-cutter, who
appeared, and sliced the fragment so with his beak that the plate was
full to overflowing.  Then he blew upon it, and it became a large canoe
full of meat, which the Chinooks finished, much to the amazement of the
Supernatural People.


The Four Tests

After a while a messenger from the Divine People approached and asked
to be told whether the Indians would accept a challenge to a diving
contest, the {331} defeated to lose their lives.  This was agreed to,
and Blue Jay was selected to dive for the Chinooks.  He had taken the
precaution of placing some bushes in his canoe, which he threw into the
water before diving with his opponent, a woman.  When his breath gave
out he came to the surface, concealing his head under the floating
bushes.  Then he sank into the water again, and cried to his opponent:
"Where are you?"  "Here I am," she replied.  Four times did Blue Jay
cunningly come up for breath, hidden beneath the bushes, and on diving
for the last time he found the woman against whom he was pitted lying
at the bottom of the sea, almost unconscious.  He took his club, which
he had concealed beneath his blanket, and struck her on the nape of the
neck.  Then he rose and claimed the victory.

The Supernatural People, much chagrined, suggested a climbing contest,
to which Blue Jay readily agreed, but he was warned that if he was
beaten he would be dashed to pieces.  He placed upright a piece of ice
which was so high that it reached the clouds.  The Supernaturals
matched a chipmunk against him.  When the competitors had reached a
certain height Blue Jay grew tired, so he used his wings and flew
upward.  The chipmunk kept her eyes closed and did not notice the
deception.  Blue Jay hit her on the neck with his club, so that she
fell, and Blue Jay was adjudged the winner.

A shooting match was next proposed by the exasperated Supernaturals, in
which the persons engaged were to shoot at one another.  This the
Chinooks won by taking a beaver as their champion and tying a millstone
in front of him.  A sweating match was also won by the Chinooks taking
ice with them into the superheated caves where the contest took place.

As a last effort to shame the Chinooks the Divine {332} People
suggested that the two chiefs should engage in a whale-catching
contest.  This was agreed to, and the Supernatural chief's wife, after
warning them, placed Blue Jay and Robin under her armpits to keep them
quiet.  As they descended to the beach, she said to her brother: "Four
whales will pass you, but do not harpoon any until the fifth appears."

Robin did as he was bid, but the woman had a hard time in keeping the
curious Blue Jay hidden.  The four whales passed, but the young chief
took no heed.  Then the fifth slid by.  He thrust his harpoon deep into
its blubber, and cast it ashore.  The Supernatural chief was
unsuccessful in his attempts, and so the Chinooks won again.  On the
result being known Blue Jay could no longer be restrained, and, falling
from under the woman's arm, he was drowned.

On setting out for home the chief was advised to tie Robin's blanket to
a magical rope with which his sister provided him.  When the Chinooks
were in the middle of the ocean the Supernatural People raised a great
storm to encompass their destruction.  But the charm the chief's sister
had given them proved efficacious, and they reached their own land in
safety.

Blue Jay's death may be regarded as merely figurative, for he appears
in many subsequent Chinook tales.

This myth is undoubtedly one of the class which relates to the
'harrying of Hades.'  See the remarks at the conclusion of the myth of
"The Thunderer's Son-in-law."


The Thunderer's Son-in-Law

There were five brothers who lived together.  Four of them were
accustomed to spend their days in hunting elk, while the fifth, who was
the youngest, was always compelled to remain at the camp.  They lived
amicably {333} enough, save that the youngest grumbled at never being
able to go to the hunting.  One day as the youth sat brooding over his
grievance the silence was suddenly broken by a hideous din which
appeared to come from the region of the doorway.  He was at a loss to
understand the cause of it, and anxiously wished for the return of his
brothers.  Suddenly there appeared before him a man of gigantic size,
strangely apparelled.  He demanded food, and the frightened boy,
remembering that they were well provided, hastily arose to satisfy the
stranger's desires.  He brought out an ample supply of meat and tallow,
but was astonished to find that the strange being lustily called for
more.  The youth, thoroughly terrified, hastened to gratify the
monster's craving, and the giant ate steadily on, hour after hour,
until the brothers returned at the end of the day to discover the
glutton devouring the fruits of their hunting.  The monster appeared
not to heed the brothers, but, anxious to satisfy his enormous
appetite, he still ate.  A fresh supply of meat had been secured, and
this the brothers placed before him.  He continued to gorge himself
throughout the night and well into the next day.  At last the meat was
at an end, and the brothers became alarmed.  What next would the
insatiable creature demand?  They approached him and told him that only
skins remained, but he replied: "What shall I eat, grandchildren, now
that there are only skins and you?"  They did not appear to understand
him until they had questioned him several times.  On realizing that the
glutton meant to devour them, they determined to escape, so, boiling
the skins, which they set before him, they fled through a hole in the
hut.  Outside they placed a dog, and told him to send the giant in the
direction opposite to that which they had taken.  Night fell, and the
monster {334} slept, while the dog kept a weary vigil over the exit by
which his masters had escaped.  Day dawned as the giant crept through
the gap.  He asked the dog: "Which way went your masters?"  The animal
replied by setting his head in the direction opposite to the true one.
The giant observed the sign, and went on the road the dog indicated.
After proceeding for some distance he found that the young men could
not have gone that way, so he returned to the hut, to find the dog
still there.  Again he questioned the animal, who merely repeated his
previous movement.  The monster once more set out, but, unable to
discover the fugitives, he again returned.  Three times he repeated
these fruitless journeys.  At last he succeeded in getting on to the
right path, and shortly came within sight of the brothers.


The Thunderer

Immediately they saw their pursuer they endeavoured to outrun him, but
without avail.  The giant gained ground, and soon overtook the eldest,
whom he slew.  He then made for the others, and slew three more.  The
youngest only was left.  The lad hurried on until he came to a river,
on the bank of which was a man fishing, whose name was the Thunderer.
This person he implored to convey him to the opposite side.  After much
hesitation the Thunderer agreed, and, rowing him over the stream, he
commanded the fugitive to go to his hut, and returned to his nets.  By
this time the monster had gained the river, and on seeing the fisherman
he asked to be ferried over also.  The Thunderer at first refused, but
was eventually persuaded by the offer of a piece of twine.  Afraid that
the boat might capsize, the Thunderer stretched himself across the
river, and commanded the giant to walk over his body.  {335} The
monster, unaware of treachery, readily responded, but no sooner had he
reached the Thunderer's legs than the latter set them apart, thus
precipitating him into the water.  His hat also fell in after him.  The
Thunderer now gained his feet, and watched the giant drifting
helplessly down the stream.  He did not wish to save the monster, for
he believed him to be an evil spirit.  "Okulam [Noise of Surge] will be
your name," he said.  "Only when the storm is raging will you be heard.
When the weather is very bad your hat will also be heard."  As he
concluded this prophecy the giant disappeared from sight.  The
Thunderer then gathered his nets together and went to his hut.  The
youth whom he had saved married his daughter, and continued to remain
with him.  One day the youth desired to watch his father-in-law fishing
for whales.  His wife warned him against doing so.  He paid no heed to
her warning, however, but went to the sea, where he saw the Thunderer
struggling with a whale.  His father-in-law flew into a great rage, and
a furious storm arose.  The Thunderer looked toward the land, and
immediately the storm increased in fury, with thunder and lightning, so
he threw down his dip-net and departed for home, followed by his
son-in-law.


Storm-Raising

On reaching the house the young man gathered some pieces of coal and
climbed a mountain.  There he blackened his face, and a high wind arose
which carried everything before it.  His father-in-law's house was
blown away, and the Thunderer, seeing that it was hopeless to attempt
to save anything from the wreck, commanded his daughter to seek for her
husband.  She hurried up the mountain-side, where she found him, and
told him he was the cause of all the destruction, {336} but concluded:
"Father says you may look at him to-morrow when he catches whales."  He
followed his wife back to the valley and washed his face.  Immediately
he had done so the storm abated.  Going up to his father-in-law, he
said: "To-morrow I shall go down to the beach, and you shall see me
catching whales."  Then the Thunderer and he rebuilt their hut.  On the
following morning they went down to the sea-shore together.  The young
man cast his net into the sea.  After a little while a whale entered
the net.  The youth quickly pulled the net toward him, reached for the
whale, and flung it at the feet of his father-in-law.  Thunderer was
amazed, and called to him: "Ho, ho, my son-in-law, you are just as I
was when I was a young man."


The Beast Comrades

Soon after this the Thunderer's daughter gave birth to two sons.  The
Thunderer sent the young man into the woods to capture two wolves with
which he used to play when a boy.  The son-in-law soon returned with
the animals, and threw them at the feet of the Thunderer.  But they
severely mauled the old man, who, seeing that they had forgotten him,
cried piteously to his son-in-law to carry them back to the forest.
Shortly after this he again despatched his son-in-law in search of two
bears with which he had also been friendly.  The young man obeyed.  But
the bears treated the old man as the wolves had done, so he likewise
returned them to their native haunts.  For the third time the
son-in-law went into the forest, for two grizzly bears, and when he saw
them he called: "I come to carry you away."  The bears instantly came
toward him and suffered themselves to be carried before the Thunderer.
But they also had forgotten their former {337} playmate, and
immediately set upon him, so that the young man was compelled to return
with them to the forest.  Thunderer had scarcely recovered from this
last attack when he sent his son-in-law into the same forest after two
panthers, which in his younger days had also been his companions.
Without the slightest hesitation the young man arose and went into the
wood, where he met the panthers.  He called to them in the same gentle
manner: "I come to take you away."  The animals seemed to understand,
and followed him.  But Thunderer was dismayed when he saw how wild they
had grown.  They would not allow him to tame them, and after suffering
their attack he sent them back to the forest.  This ended the
Thunderer's exciting pastime.


The Tests

The Thunderer then sent his son-in-law to split a log of wood.  When
this had been done he put the young man's strength to the test by
placing him within the hollow trunk and closing the wood around him.
But the young man succeeded in freeing himself, and set off for the hut
carrying the log with him.  On reaching his home he dropped the wood
before the door, and caused the earth to quake.  The Thunderer jumped
up in alarm and ran to the door rejoicing in the might of his
son-in-law.  "Oh, my son-in-law," he cried, "you are just as I was when
I was young!"  The two continued to live together and the young man's
sons grew into manhood.  One day the Thunderer approached his
son-in-law and said: "Go to the Supernatural Folk and bring me their
hoops."


The Spirit-land

The son-in-law obeyed.  He travelled for a long distance, and
eventually reached the land of the spirits.  {338} They stood in a
circle, and he saw that they played with a large hoop.  He then
remembered that he must secure the hoop.  But he was afraid to approach
them, as the light of the place dazzled him.  He waited until darkness
had set in, and, leaving his hiding-place, dashed through the circle
and secured the hoop.  The Supernatural People pursued him with
torches.  Just as this was taking place his wife remembered him.  She
called to her children: "Now whip your grandfather."  This they did,
while the old man wept.  This chastisement brought rain upon the
Supernatural People and extinguished their torches.  They dared not
pursue the young man farther, so they returned to their country.  The
adventurer was now left in peace to continue his homeward journey.  He
handed over the hoop to Thunderer, who now sent him to capture the
targets of the Spirit Folk.  The son-in-law gladly undertook the
journey, and again entered the bright region of Spirit-land.  He found
the Supernaturals shooting at the targets, and when night had fallen he
picked them up and ran away.  The spirits lit their torches and
followed him.  His wife once more was reminded of her absent husband,
and commanded her sons to repeat the punishment upon their grandfather.
The rain recommenced and the torches of the pursuers were destroyed.
The young man returned in peace to his dwelling and placed the targets
before his father-in-law.  He had not been long home before a restless
spirit took possession of him.  He longed for further adventure, and at
last decided to set out in quest of it.  Arraying himself in his fine
necklaces of teeth and strapping around his waist two quivers of
arrows, he bade farewell to his wife and sons.  He journeyed until he
reached a large village, which consisted of five rows of houses.  These
{339} he carefully inspected.  The last house was very small, but he
entered it.  He was met by two old women, who were known as the Mice.
Immediately they saw him they muttered to each other: "Oh, now Blue Jay
will make another chief unhappy."  On the young man's arrival in the
village Blue Jay became conscious of a stranger in the midst of the
people.  He straightway betook himself to the house of the Mice.  He
then returned to his chief, saying that a strange chief wished to hold
a shooting match.  Blue Jay's chief seemed quite willing to enter into
the contest with the stranger, so he sent Blue Jay back to the house to
inform the young chief of his willingness.  Blue Jay led the stranger
down to the beach where the targets stood.  Soon the old chief arrived
and the shooting match began.  But the adventurer's skill could not
compare with the old chief's, who finally defeated him.  Blue Jay now
saw his opportunity.  He sprang upon the stranger, tore out his hair,
cut off his head, and severed the limbs from his body.  He carried the
pieces to the house and hung up the head.  At nightfall the Mice fed
the head and managed to keep it alive.  This process of feeding went on
for many months, the old women never tiring of their task.  A full year
had passed, and the unfortunate adventurer's sons began to fear for his
safety.  They decided to search for him.  Arming themselves, they made
their way to the large village in which their father was imprisoned.
They entered the house of the Mice, and there saw the two old women,
who asked: "Oh, chiefs, where did you come from?"

"We search for our father," they replied.  But the old women warned
them of Blue Jay's treachery, and advised them to depart.  The young
men would not heed the advice, and succeeded in drawing from the {340}
women the story of their father's fate.  When they heard that Blue Jay
had used their father so badly they were very angry.  Blue Jay,
meanwhile, had become aware of the arrival of two strangers, and he
went to the small house to smell them out.  There he espied the youths,
and immediately returned to inform his chief of their presence in the
village.  The chief then sent him back to invite the strangers to a
shooting match, but they ignored the invitation.  Three times Blue Jay
made the journey, and at last the youths looked upon him, whereupon his
hair immediately took fire.  He ran back to his chief and said: "Oh,
these strangers are more powerful than we are.  They looked at me and
my hair caught fire."  The chief was amazed, and went down to the beach
to await the arrival of the strangers.  When the young men saw the
targets they would not shoot, and declared that they were bad.  They
immediately drew them out of the ground and replaced them by their own,
the brilliance of which dazzled the sight of their opponent.  The chief
was defeated.  He lost his life and the people were subdued.  The
youths then cast Blue Jay into the river, saying as they did so: "Green
Sturgeon shall be your name.  Henceforth you shall not make chiefs
miserable.  You shall sing 'Watsetsetsetsetse,' and it shall be a bad
omen."  This performance over, they restored their father from his
death-slumber, and spoke kindly to the Mice, saying: "Oh, you pitiful
ones, you shall eat everything that is good.  You shall eat berries."
Then, after establishing order in this strange land, they returned to
their home, accompanied by their father.

This curious story is an example of what is known in mythology as the
'harrying of Hades.'  The land of the supernatural or subterranean
beings always {341} exercises a profound fascination over the minds of
barbarians, and such tales are invented by their story-tellers for the
purpose of minimizing the terrors which await them when they themselves
must enter the strange country by death.  The incident of the glutton
would seem to show that two tales have been amalgamated, a not uncommon
circumstance in primitive story-telling.  In these stories the evil or
supernatural power is invariably defeated, and it is touching to
observe the child-like attempts of the savage to quench the dread of
death, common to all mankind, by creating amusement at the ludicrous
appearance of the dreadful beings whom he fears.  The sons of the
Thunderer are, of course, hero-gods whose effulgence confounds the
powers of darkness, and to some extent they resemble the Hun-Apu and
Xbalanque of the Central American _Popol Vuh_, who travel to the dark
kingdom of Xibalba to rescue their father and uncle, and succeed in
overthrowing its hideous denizens.[3]


[3] See the author's _Myths of Mexico and Peru_, in this series, p. 220.