The Story of Blue Jay and Ioi

The Chinooks tell many stories of Blue Jay, the tricky, mischievous
totem-bird, and among these tales there are three which are concerned
with his sister Ioi.  Blue Jay, whose disposition resembled that of the
bird he symbolized, delighted in tormenting Ioi by deliberately
misinterpreting her commands, and by repeating at every opportunity his
favourite phrase, "Ioi is always telling lies."

In the first of the trilogy Ioi requested her brother to take a wife
from among the dead, to help her with her work in house and field.  To
this Blue Jay readily assented, and he took for his spouse a
chieftain's daughter who had been recently buried.  But Ioi's request
that his wife should be an old one he disregarded.

"Take her to the Land of the Supernatural People," said Ioi, when she
had seen her brother's bride, "and they will restore her to life."

Blue Jay set out on his errand, and after a day's journey arrived with
his wife at a town inhabited by the Supernatural Folk.

"How long has she been dead?" they asked him, when he stated his
purpose in visiting them.

"A day," he replied.

The Supernatural People shook their heads.

"We cannot help you," said they.  "You must travel to the town where
people are restored who have been dead for a day."

Blue Jay obediently resumed his journey, and at the end of another day
he reached the town to which he had been directed, and told its
inhabitants why he had come.

"How long has she been dead?" they asked.

{324}

"Two days," said he.

"Then we can do nothing," replied the Supernatural Folk, "for we can
only restore people who have been dead one day.  However, you can go to
the town where those are brought to life who have been dead two days."

Another day's journey brought Blue Jay and his wife to the third town.
Again he found himself a day late, and was directed to a fourth town,
and from that one to yet another.  At the fifth town, however, the
Supernatural People took pity on him, and recovered his wife from
death.  Blue Jay they made a chieftain among them, and conferred many
honours upon him.

After a time he got tired of living in state among the Supernatural
People, and returned home.

When he was once more among his kindred his young brother-in-law, the
chief's son, learnt that his sister was alive and married to Blue Jay.

Hastily the boy carried the news to his father, the old chief, who sent
a message to Blue Jay demanding his hair in payment for his wife.  The
messenger received no reply, and the angry chief gathered his people
round him and led them to Blue Jay's lodge.  On their approach Blue Jay
turned himself into a bird and flew away, while his wife swooned.  All
the efforts of her kindred could not bring the woman round, and they
called on her husband to return.  It was in vain, however: Blue Jay
would not come back, and his wife journeyed finally to the Land of
Souls.


The Marriage of Ioi

The second portion of the trilogy relates how the Ghost-people, setting
out one night from the Shadowland to buy a wife, took Ioi, the sister
of Blue Jay, who disappeared before morning.  After a year had elapsed
{325} her brother decided to go in search of her.  But though he
inquired the way to the Ghost-country from all manner of birds and
beasts, he got a satisfactory answer from none of them, and would never
have arrived at his destination at all had he not been carried thither
at last by supernatural means.

In the Ghost-country he found his sister, surrounded by heaps of bones,
which she introduced to him as his relatives by marriage.  At certain
times these relics would attain a semblance of humanity, but instantly
became bones again at the sound of a loud voice.


A Fishing Expedition in Shadow-land

At his sister's request Blue Jay went fishing with his young
brother-in-law.  Finding that when he spoke in a loud tone he caused
the boy to become a heap of bones in the canoe, Blue Jay took a
malicious pleasure in reducing him to that condition.  It was just the
sort of trick he loved to play.


The fish they caught were nothing more than leaves and branches, and
Blue Jay, in disgust, threw them back into the water.  But, to his
chagrin, when he returned his sister told him that they were really
fish, and that he ought not to have flung them away.  However, he
consoled himself with the reflection, "Ioi is always telling lies."

Besides teasing Ioi, he played many pranks on the inoffensive Ghosts.
Sometimes he would put the skull of a child on the shoulders of a man,
and vice versa, and take a mischievous delight in the ludicrous result
when they came 'alive.'

On one occasion, when the prairies were on fire, Ioi bade her brother
extinguish the flames.  For this purpose she gave him five buckets of
water, warning him that he must not pour it on the burning prairies
{326} until he came to the fourth of them.  Blue Jay disobeyed her, as
he was wont to do, and with dire results, for when he reached the fifth
prairie he found he had no water to pour on it.  While endeavouring to
beat out the flames he was so seriously burned that he died, and
returned to the Ghosts as one of themselves, but without losing his
mischievous propensities.


Blue Jay and Ioi Go Visiting