CHAPTER VII: MYTHS AND LEGENDS OF THE NORTHERN AND NORTH-WESTERN INDIANS


Haida Demi-Gods

There is a curious Haida story told of the origin of certain
supernatural people, who are supposed to speak through the _shamans_,
or medicine-men, and of how they got their names.

Ten brothers went out to hunt with their dogs.  While they were
climbing a steep rocky mountain a thick mist enveloped them, and they
were compelled to remain on the heights.  By and by they made a fire,
and the youngest, who was full of mischief, cast his bow in it.  When
the bow was burnt the hunters were astonished to see it on the level
ground below.  The mischievous brother thereupon announced his
intention of following his weapon, and by the same means.  Though the
others tried hard to dissuade him, he threw himself on the blazing
fire, and was quickly consumed.  His brothers then beheld him on the
plain vigorously exhorting them to follow his example.  One by one they
did so, some boldly, some timorously, but all found themselves at last
on the level ground.

As the brothers travelled on they heard a wren chirping, and they saw
that one of their number had a blue hole in his heart.  Farther on they
found a hawk's feather, which they tied in the hair of the youngest.
They came at length to a deserted village on the shores of an inlet,
and took possession of one of the huts.  For food they ate some
mussels, and having satisfied their hunger they set out to explore the
settlement.  Nothing rewarded their search but an old canoe, moss-grown
and covered with nettles.  When they had removed the weeds and scraped
off the moss they {313} repaired it, and the mischievous one who had
led them into the fire made a bark bailer for it, on which he carved
the representation of a bird.  Another, who had in his hair a bunch of
feathers, took a pole and jumped into the canoe.  The rest followed,
and the canoe slid away from the shore.  Soon they came in sight of a
village where a _shaman_ was performing.

Attracted by the noise and the glow of the fire, the warrior at the bow
stepped ashore and advanced to see what was going on.  "Now," he heard
the _shaman_ say, "the chief Supernatural-being-who-keeps-the-bow-off
is coming ashore."  The Indian was ashamed to hear himself thus
mistakenly, as he thought, referred to as a supernatural being, and
returned to the canoe.  The next one advanced to the village.  "Chief
Hawk-hole is coming ashore," said the _shaman_.  The Indian saw the
blue hole at his heart, and he also was ashamed, and returned to his
brothers.  The third was named
Supernatural-being-on-whom-the-daylight-rests, the fourth
Supernatural-being-on-the-water-on-whom-is-sunshine, the fifth
Supernatural-puffin-on-the-water, the sixth
Hawk-with-one-feather-sticking-out-of-the-water, the seventh
Wearing-clouds-around-his-neck, the eighth
Supernatural-being-with-the-big-eyes, the ninth
Supernatural-being-lying-on-his-back-in-the-canoe, and the eldest, and
last, Supernatural-being-half-of-whose-words-are-raven.  Each as he
heard his name pronounced returned to the canoe.  When they had all
heard the _shaman_, and were assembled once more, the eldest brother
said, "We have indeed become supernatural people," which was quite
true, for by burning themselves in the fire they had reached the Land
of Souls.[1]


[1] This myth would appear to explain the fancied resemblance between
smoke and the shadowy or vaporous substance of which spirits or ghosts
are supposed to be composed.


{314}

The Supernatural Sister

The ten brothers floated round the coast till they reached another
village.  Here they took on board a woman whose arms had been
accidentally burned by her husband, who mistook them for the arms of
some one embracing his wife.  The woman was severely burned and was in
great distress.  The supernatural brothers made a crack in the bottom
of the canoe and told the woman to place her hands in it.  Her wounds
were immediately healed.  They called her their sister, and seated her
in the canoe to bail out the water.  When they came to the Dj[=u], the
stream near which dwelt Fine-weather-woman,[2] the latter came and
talked to them, repeating the names which the _shaman_ had given them,
and calling their sister Supernatural-woman-who-does-the-bailing.


[2] See page 316.


"Paddle to the island you see in the distance," she added.  "The wizard
who lives there is he who paints those who are to become supernatural
beings.  Go to him and he will paint you.  Dance four nights in your
canoe and you will be finished."

They did as she bade them, and the wizard dressed them in a manner
becoming to their position as supernatural beings.  He gave them
dancing hats, dancing skirts, and puffin-beak rattles, and drew a cloud
over the outside of their canoe.


The Birth of Sîñ

The Haida of British Columbia and the Queen Charlotte Islands possess a
striking myth relating to the incarnation of the Sky-god, their
principal deity.  The daughter of a certain chief went one day to dig
in the beach.  After she had worked some time she dug {315} up a
cockle-shell.  She was about to throw it to one side when she thought
she heard a sound coming from it like that of a child crying.
Examining the shell, she found a small baby inside.  She carried it
home and wrapped it in a warm covering, and tended it so carefully that
it grew rapidly and soon began to walk.

She was sitting beside the child one day when he made a movement with
his hand as if imitating the drawing of a bowstring, so to please him
she took a copper bracelet from her arm and hammered it into the shape
of a bow, which she strung and gave him along with two arrows.  He was
delighted with the tiny weapon, and immediately set out to hunt small
game with it.  Every day he returned to his foster-mother with some
trophy of his skill.  One day it was a goose, another a woodpecker, and
another a blue jay.

One morning he awoke to find himself and his mother in a fine new
house, with gorgeous door-posts splendidly carved and illuminated in
rich reds, blues, and greens.  The carpenter who had raised this fine
building married his mother, and was very kind to him.  He took the boy
down to the sea-shore, and caused him to sit with his face looking
toward the expanse of the Pacific.  And so long as the lad looked
across the boundless blue there was fair weather.

His father used to go fishing, and one day Sîñ--for such was the boy's
name--expressed a wish to accompany him.  They obtained devil-fish for
bait, and proceeded to the fishing-ground, where the lad instructed his
father to pronounce certain magical formulæ, the result of which was
that their fishing-line was violently agitated and their canoe pulled
round an adjacent island three times.  When the disturbance stopped at
last they pulled in the line and dragged out a monster covered with
piles of halibut.

{316}

One day Sîñ went out wearing a wren-skin.  His mother beheld him rise
in stature until he soared above her and brooded like a bank of shining
clouds over the ocean.  Then he descended and donned the skin of a blue
jay.  Again he rose over the sea, and shone resplendently.  Once more
he soared upward, wearing the skin of a woodpecker, and the waves
reflected a colour as of fire.

Then he said: "Mother, I shall see you no more.  I am going away from
you.  When the sky looks like my face painted by my father there will
be no wind.  Then the fishing will be good."

His mother bade him farewell, sadly, yet with the proud knowledge that
she had nurtured a divinity.  But her sorrow increased when her husband
intimated that it was time for him to depart as well.  Her supernatural
son and husband, however, left her a portion of their power.  For when
she sits by the inlet and loosens her robe the wind scurries down
between the banks and the waves are ruffled with tempest; and the more
she loosens the garment the greater is the storm.  They call her in the
Indian tongue Fine-weather-woman.  But she dwells mostly in the winds,
and when the cold morning airs draw up from the sea landward she makes
an offering of feathers to her glorious son.  The feathers are flakes
of snow, and they serve to remind him that the world is weary for a
glimpse of his golden face.


Master-Carpenter and Southeast

A Haida myth relates how Master-carpenter, a supernatural being, went
to war with South-east (the south-east wind) at Sqa-i, the town lying
farthest south on the Queen Charlotte Islands.  The south-east wind is
particularly rude and boisterous on that coast, and it {317} was with
the intention of punishing him for his violence that Master-carpenter
challenged him.  First of all, however, he set about building a canoe
for himself.  The first one he made split, and he was obliged to throw
it away.  The second also split, notwithstanding the fact that he had
made it stouter than the other.  Another and another he built, making
each one stronger than the last, but every attempt ended in failure,
and at last, exceedingly vexed at his unskilfulness, he was on the
point of giving the task up.  He would have done so, indeed, but for
the intervention of Greatest Fool.  Hitherto Master-carpenter had been
trying to form two canoes from one log by means of wedges.  Greatest
Fool stood watching him for a time, amused at his clumsiness, and
finally showed him that he ought to use bent wedges.  And though he was
perhaps the last person from whom Master-carpenter might expect to
learn anything, the unsuccessful builder of canoes adopted the
suggestion, with the happiest results.  When at length he was satisfied
that he had made a good canoe he let it down into the water, and sailed
off in search of South-east.


By and by he floated right down to his enemy's abode, and when he
judged himself to be above it he rose in the canoe and flung out a
challenge.  There was no reply.  Again he called, and this time a rapid
current began to float past him, bearing on its surface a quantity of
seaweed.  The shrewd Master-carpenter fancied he saw the matted hair of
his enemy floating among the seaweed.  He seized hold of it, and after
it came South-east.  The latter in a great passion began to call on his
nephews to help him.  The first to be summoned was Red-storm-cloud.
Immediately a deep red suffused the sky.  Then the stormy tints died
away, and the wind rose with a harsh murmur.  {318} When this wind had
reached its full strength another was summoned,
Taker-off-of-the-tree-tops.  The blast increased to a hurricane, and
the tree-tops were blown off and carried away and fell thickly about
the canoe, where Master-carpenter was making use of his magic arts to
protect himself.  Again another wind was called up, Pebble-rattler, who
set the stones and sand flying about as he shrieked in answer to the
summons.  Maker-of-the-thick-sea-mist came next, the spirit of the fog
which strikes terror into the hearts of those at sea, and he was
followed by a numerous band of other nephews, each more to be dreaded
than the last.  Finally Tidal-wave came and covered Master-carpenter
with water, so that he was obliged to give in.  Relinquishing his hold
on South-east, he managed to struggle to the shore.  It was said by
some that South-east died, but the _shamans_, who ought to know, say
that he returned to his own place.

South-east's mother was named To-morrow, and the Indians say that if
they utter that word they will have bad weather, for South-east does
not like to hear his mother's name used by any one else.


The Beaver and the Porcupine

This is the tale of a feud between the beavers and the porcupines.
Beaver had laid in a plentiful store of food, but Porcupine had failed
to do so, and one day when the former was out hunting the latter went
to his lodge and stole his provision.  When Beaver returned he found
that his food was gone, and he questioned Porcupine about the matter.

"Did you steal my food?" he asked.

"No," answered Porcupine.  "One cannot steal food from supernatural
beings, and you and I both possess supernatural powers."

{319}

Of course this was mere bluff on the part of Porcupine, and it in
nowise deceived his companion.

"You stole my food!" said Beaver angrily, and he tried to seize
Porcupine with his teeth.  But the sharp spines of the latter
disconcerted him, though he was not easily repulsed.  For a time he
fought furiously, but at length he was forced to retreat, with his face
covered with quills from his spiny adversary.  His friends and
relatives greeted him sympathetically.  His father summoned all the
Beaver People, told them of the injuries his son had received, and bade
them avenge the honour of their clan.  The people at once repaired to
the abode of Porcupine, who, from the fancied security of his lodge,
heaped insults and abuse on them.  The indignant Beaver People pulled
his house down about his ears, seized him, and carried him, in spite of
his threats and protests, to a desolate island, where they left him to
starve.

It seemed to Porcupine that he had not long to live.  Nothing grew on
the island save two trees, neither of which was edible, and there was
no other food within reach.  He called loudly to his friends to come to
his assistance, but there was no answer.  In vain he summoned all the
animals who were related to him.  His cries never reached them.

When he had quite given up hope he fancied he heard something whisper
to him: "Call upon Cold-weather, call upon North-wind."  At first he
did not understand, but thought his imagination must be playing tricks
with him.  Again the voice whispered to him: "Sing North songs, and you
will be saved."  Wondering much, but with hope rising in his breast,
Porcupine did as he was bidden, and raised his voice in the North
songs.  "Let the cold weather come," he sang, "let the water be smooth."


{320}

The Finding of Porcupine

After a time the weather became very cold, a strong wind blew from the
north, and the water became smooth with a layer of ice.  When it was
sufficiently frozen to bear the weight of the Porcupine People they
crossed over to the island in search of their brother.  They were
greatly rejoiced to see him, but found him so weak that he could hardly
walk, and he had to be carried to his father's lodge.

When they wanted to know why Beaver had treated him so cruelly he
replied that it was because he had eaten Beaver's food.  The Porcupine
People, thinking this a small excuse, were greatly incensed against the
beavers, and immediately declared war on them.  But the latter were
generally victorious, and the war by and by came to an inglorious end
for the porcupines.  The spiny tribe still, however, imagined that they
had a grievance against Beaver, and plotted to take his life.  They
carried him to the top of a tall tree, thinking that as the beavers
could not climb he would be in the same plight as their brother had
been on the island.  But by the simple expedient of eating the tree
downward from the top Beaver was enabled to return to his home.


The Devil-Fish's Daughter

A Haida Indian was sailing in his canoe with his two children and his
wife at low tide.  They had been paddling for some time, when they came
to a place where some devil-fish stones lay, and they could discern the
devil-fish's tracks and see where its food was lying piled up.  The
man, who was a _shaman_, landed upon the rocks with the intention of
finding and killing the devil-fish, but while he was searching {321}
for it the monster suddenly emerged from its hole and dragged him
through the aperture into its den.  His wife and children, believing
him to be dead, paddled away.

The monster which had seized the man was a female devil-fish, and she
dragged him far below into the precincts of the town where dwelt her
father, the devil-fish chief, and there he married the devil-fish which
had captured him.  Many years passed, and at length the man became
home-sick and greatly desired to see his wife and family once more.  He
begged the chief to let him go, and after some demur his request was
granted.

The _shaman_ departed in one canoe, and his wife, the devil-fish's
daughter, in another.  The canoes were magical, and sped along of
themselves.  Soon they reached his father's town by the aid of the
enchanted craft.  He had brought much wealth with him from the
devil-fish kingdom, and with this he traded and became a great chief.
Then his children found him and came to him.  They were grown up, and
to celebrate his home-coming he held a great feast.  Five great feasts
he held, one after another, and at each of them his children and his
human wife were present.

But the devil-fish wife began to pine for the sea-life.  One day while
her husband and she sat in his father's house he began to melt.  At the
same time the devil-fish wife disappeared betwixt the planks of the
flooring.  Her husband then assumed the devil-fish form, and a second
soft, slimy body followed the first through the planks.  The devil-fish
wife and her husband had returned to her father's realm.

This myth, of course, approximates to those of the seal-wives who
escape from their mortal husbands, and the swan- and other bird-brides
who, pining for their {322} natural environment, take wing one fine day
and leave their earth-mates.


Chinook Tales

The Chinooks formerly dwelt on Columbia River, from the Dalles to its
mouth, and on the Lower Willamette.  With the exception of a few
individuals, they are now extinct, but their myths have been
successfully collected and preserved.  They were the natives of the
north-west coast, cunning in bargaining, yet dwelling on a communal
plan.  Their chief physical characteristic was a high and narrow
forehead artificially flattened.  Concerning this people Professor
Daniel Wilson says:

"The Chinooks are among the most remarkable of the flat-headed Indians,
and carry the process of cranial distortion to the greatest excess.
They are in some respects a superior race, making slaves of other
tribes, and evincing considerable skill in such arts as are required in
their wild forest and coast life.  Their chief war-implements are bows
and arrows, the former made from the yew-tree, and the latter feathered
and pointed with bone.  Their canoes are hollowed out of the trunk of
the cedar-tree, which attains to a great size in that region, and are
frequently ornamented with much taste and skill.  In such a canoe the
dead Chinook chief is deposited, surrounded with all the requisites for
war, or the favourite occupations of life: presenting a correspondence
in his sepulchral rites to the ancient pagan viking, who, as appears
alike from the contents of the Scandinavian _Skibssaetninger_ and from
the narratives of the sagas, was interred or consumed in his
war-galley, and the form of that favourite scene of ocean triumphs
perpetuated in the earth-work that covered his ashes."


{323}