CHAPTER V: SIOUX MYTHS AND LEGENDS


The Sioux or Dakota Indians

The Sioux or Dakota Indians dwell north of the Arkansas River on the
right bank of the Mississippi, stretching over to Lake Michigan and up
the valley of the Missouri.  One of their principal tribes is the Iowa.


The Adventures of Ictinike

Many tales are told by the Iowa Indians regarding Ictinike, the son of
the sun-god, who had offended his father, and was consequently expelled
from the celestial regions.  He possesses a very bad reputation among
the Indians for deceit and trickery.  They say that he taught them all
the evil things they know, and they seem to regard him as a Father of
Lies.  The Omahas state that he gave them their war-customs, and for
one reason or another they appear to look upon him as a species of
war-god.  A series of myths recount his adventures with several
inhabitants of the wild.  The first of these is as follows.

One day Ictinike encountered the Rabbit, and hailed him in a friendly
manner, calling him 'grandchild,' and requesting him to do him a
service.  The Rabbit expressed his willingness to assist the god to the
best of his ability, and inquired what he wished him to do.

"Oh, grandchild," said the crafty one, pointing upward to where a bird
circled in the blue vault above them, "take your bow and arrow and
bring down yonder bird."

The Rabbit fitted an arrow to his bow, and the shaft transfixed the
bird, which fell like a stone and lodged in the branches of a great
tree.

{267}

"Now, grandchild," said Ictinike, "go into the tree and fetch me the
game."

This, however, the Rabbit at first refused to do, but at length he took
off his clothes and climbed into the tree, where he stuck fast among
the tortuous branches.

Ictinike, seeing that he could not make his way down, donned the
unfortunate Rabbit's garments, and, highly amused at the animal's
predicament, betook himself to the nearest village.  There he
encountered a chief who had two beautiful daughters, the elder of whom
he married.  The younger daughter, regarding this as an affront to her
personal attractions, wandered off into the forest in a fit of the
sulks.  As she paced angrily up and down she heard some one calling to
her from above, and, looking upward, she beheld the unfortunate Rabbit,
whose fur was adhering to the natural gum which exuded from the bark of
the tree.  The girl cut down the tree and lit a fire near it, which
melted the gum and freed the Rabbit.  The Rabbit and the chief's
daughter compared notes, and discovered that the being who had tricked
the one and affronted the other was the same.  Together they proceeded
to the chief's lodge, where the girl was laughed at because of the
strange companion she had brought back with her.  Suddenly an eagle
appeared in the air above them.  Ictinike shot at and missed it, but
the Rabbit loosed an arrow with great force and brought it to earth.
Each morning a feather of the bird became another eagle, and each
morning Ictinike shot at and missed this newly created bird, which the
Rabbit invariably succeeded in killing.  This went on until Ictinike
had quite worn out the Rabbit's clothing and was wearing a very old
piece of tent skin; but the Rabbit returned to him the garments he had
been forced to don when Ictinike had stolen his.  Then {268} the Rabbit
commanded the Indians to beat the drums, and each time they were beaten
Ictinike jumped so high that every bone in his body was shaken.  At
length, after a more than usually loud series of beats, he leapt to
such a height that when he came down it was found that the fall had
broken his neck.  The Rabbit was avenged.


Ictinike and the Buzzard

One day Ictinike, footsore and weary, encountered a buzzard, which he
asked to oblige him by carrying him on its back part of the way.  The
crafty bird immediately consented, and, seating Ictinike between its
wings, flew off with him.

They had not gone far when they passed above a hollow tree, and
Ictinike began to shift uneasily in his seat as he observed the buzzard
hovering over it.  He requested the bird to fly onward, but for answer
it cast him headlong into the tree-trunk, where he found himself a
prisoner.  For a long time he lay there in want and wretchedness, until
at last a large hunting-party struck camp at the spot.  Ictinike
chanced to be wearing some racoon skins, and he thrust the tails of
these through the cracks in the tree.  Three women who were standing
near imagined that a number of racoons had become imprisoned in the
hollow trunk, and they made a large hole in it for the purpose of
capturing them.  Ictinike at once emerged, whereupon the women fled.
Ictinike lay on the ground pretending to be dead, and as he was covered
with the racoon-skins the birds of prey, the eagle, the rook, and the
magpie, came to devour him.  While they pecked at him the buzzard made
his appearance for the purpose of joining in the feast, but Ictinike,
rising quickly, tore the feathers from its scalp.  That is why the
buzzard has no feathers on its head.


{269}

Ictinike and the Creators

In course of time Ictinike married and dwelt in a lodge of his own.
One day he intimated to his wife that it was his intention to visit her
grandfather the Beaver.  On arriving at the Beaver's lodge he found
that his grandfather-in-law and his family had been without food for a
long time, and were slowly dying of starvation.  Ashamed at having no
food to place before their guest, one of the young beavers offered
himself up to provide a meal for Ictinike, and was duly cooked and
served to the visitor.  Before Ictinike partook of the dish, however,
he was earnestly requested by the Beaver not to break any of the bones
of his son, but unwittingly he split one of the toe-bones.  Having
finished his repast, he lay down to rest, and the Beaver gathered the
bones and put them in a skin.  This he plunged into the river that
flowed beside his lodge, and in a moment the young beaver emerged from
the water alive.

"How do you feel, my son?" asked the Beaver.

"Alas! father," replied the young beaver, "one of my toes is broken."

From that time every beaver has had one toe--that next to the little
one--which looks as if it had been split by biting.

Ictinike shortly after took his leave of the Beavers, and pretended to
forget his tobacco-pouch, which he left behind.  The Beaver told one of
his young ones to run after him with the pouch, but, being aware of
Ictinike's treacherous character, he advised his offspring to throw it
to the god when at some distance away.  The young beaver accordingly
took the pouch and hurried after Ictinike, and, obeying his father's
instruction, was about to throw it to him from a {270} considerable
distance when Ictinike called to him: "Come closer, come closer."

The young beaver obeyed, and as Ictinike took the pouch from him he
said: "Tell your father that he must visit me."

When the young beaver arrived home he acquainted his father with what
had passed, and the Beaver showed signs of great annoyance.

"I knew he would say that," he growled, "and that is why I did not want
you to go near him."

But the Beaver could not refuse the invitation, and in due course
returned the visit.  Ictinike, wishing to pay him a compliment, was
about to kill one of his own children wherewith to regale the Beaver,
and was slapping it to make it cry in order that he might work himself
into a passion sufficiently murderous to enable him to take its life,
when the Beaver spoke to him sharply and told him that such a sacrifice
was unnecessary.  Going down to the stream hard by, the Beaver found a
young beaver by the water, which was brought up to the lodge, killed
and cooked, and duly eaten.

On another occasion Ictinike announced to his wife his intention of
calling upon her grandfather the Musk-rat.  At the Musk-rat's lodge he
met with the same tale of starvation as at the home of the Beaver, but
the Musk-rat told his wife to fetch some water, put it in the kettle,
and hang the kettle over the fire.  When the water was boiling the
Musk-rat upset the kettle, which was found to be full of wild rice,
upon which Ictinike feasted.  As before, he left his tobacco-pouch with
his host, and the Musk-rat sent one of his children after him with the
article.  An invitation for the Musk-rat to visit him resulted, and the
call was duly paid.  Ictinike, wishing to display his magical {271}
powers, requested his wife to hang a kettle of water over the fire,
but, to his chagrin, when the water was boiled and the kettle upset
instead of wild rice only water poured out.  Thereupon the Musk-rat had
the kettle refilled, and produced an abundance of rice, much to
Ictinike's annoyance.

Ictinike then called upon his wife's grandfather the Kingfisher, who,
to provide him with food, dived into the river and brought up fish.
Ictinike extended a similar invitation to him, and the visit was duly
paid.  Desiring to be even with his late host, the god dived into the
river in search of fish.  He soon found himself in difficulties,
however, and if it had not been for the Kingfisher he would most
assuredly have been drowned.

Lastly, Ictinike went to visit his wife's grandfather the Flying
Squirrel.  The Squirrel climbed to the top of his lodge and brought
down a quantity of excellent black walnuts, which Ictinike ate.  When
he departed from the Squirrel's house he purposely left one of his
gloves, which a small squirrel brought after him, and he sent an
invitation by this messenger for the Squirrel to visit him in turn.
Wishing to show his cleverness, Ictinike scrambled to the top of his
lodge, but instead of finding any black walnuts there he fell and
severely injured himself.  Thus his presumption was punished for the
fourth time.

The four beings alluded to in this story as the Beaver, Musk-rat,
Kingfisher, and Flying Squirrel are four of the creative gods of the
Sioux, whom Ictinike evidently could not equal so far as reproductive
magic was concerned.