The Iroquois have a touching story of how a brave
of their race once saved his wife and his people from
extinction.

It was winter, the snow lay thickly on the ground,
and there was sorrow in the encampment, for with the
cold weather a dreadful plague had visited the people.
There was not one but had lost some relative, and
in some cases whole families had been swept away.
Among those who had been most sorely bereaved was
Nekumonta, a handsome young brave, whose parents,
brothers, sisters, and children had died one by one
before his eyes, the while he was powerless to help
them.  And now his wife, the beautiful Shanewis, was
weak and ill.  The dreaded disease had laid its awful
finger on her brow, and she knew that she must shortly
bid her husband farewell and take her departure for the
place of the dead.  Already she saw her dead friends
beckoning to her and inviting her to join them, but it
grieved her terribly to think that she must leave her
young husband in sorrow and loneliness.  His despair
was piteous to behold when she broke the sad news
to him, but after the first outburst of grief he bore up
bravely, and determined to fight the plague with all
his strength.

"I must find the healing herbs which the Great
Manitou has planted," said he.  "Wherever they may
be, I must find them."

So he made his wife comfortable on her couch,
{258}
covering her with warm furs, and then, embracing her
gently, he set out on his difficult mission.

All day he sought eagerly in the forest for the
healing herbs, but everywhere the snow lay deep,
and not so much as a blade of grass was visible.
When night came he crept along the frozen ground,
thinking that his sense of smell might aid him in his
search.  Thus for three days and nights he wandered
through the forest, over hills and across rivers, in a
vain attempt to discover the means of curing the malady
of Shanewis.

When he met a little scurrying rabbit in the path he
cried eagerly: "Tell me, where shall I find the herbs
which Manitou has planted?"

But the rabbit hurried away without reply, for he
knew that the herbs had not yet risen above the ground,
and he was very sorry for the brave.

Nekumonta came by and by to the den of a big
bear, and of this animal also he asked the same
question.  But the bear could give him no reply, and he
was obliged to resume his weary journey.  He
consulted all the beasts of the forest in turn, but from
none could he get any help.  How could they tell him,
indeed, that his search was hopeless?


The Pity of the Trees

On the third night he was very weak and ill, for he
had tasted no food since he had first set out, and he was
numbed with cold and despair.  He stumbled over a
withered branch hidden under the snow, and so tired
was he that he lay where he fell, and immediately went
to sleep.  All the birds and the beasts, all the multitude
of creatures that inhabit the forest, came to watch over
his slumbers.  They remembered his kindness to them
in former days, how he had never slain an animal unless
{259}
he really needed it for food or clothing, how he had
loved and protected the trees and the flowers.  Their
hearts were touched by his courageous fight for Shanewis,
and they pitied his misfortunes.  All that they could do
to aid him they did.  They cried to the Great Manitou
to save his wife from the plague which held her, and
the Great Spirit heard the manifold whispering and
responded to their prayers.


While Nekumonta lay asleep there came to him the
messenger of Manitou, and he dreamed.  In his dream
he saw his beautiful Shanewis, pale and thin, but as
lovely as ever, and as he looked she smiled at him,
and sang a strange, sweet song, like the murmuring of
a distant waterfall.  Then the scene changed, and it
really was a waterfall he heard.  In musical language
it called him by name, saying: "Seek us, O Nekumonta,
and when you find us Shanewis shall live.  We
are the Healing Waters of the Great Manitou."

Nekumonta awoke with the words of the song still
ringing in his ears.  Starting to his feet, he looked in
every direction; but there was no water to be seen,
though the murmuring sound of a waterfall was
distinctly audible.  He fancied he could even distinguish
words in it.


The Finding of the Waters

"Release us!" it seemed to say.  "Set us free, and
Shanewis shall be saved!"

Nekumonta searched in vain for the waters.  Then
it suddenly occurred to him that they must be
underground, directly under his feet.  Seizing branches,
stones, flints, he dug feverishly into the earth.  So
arduous was the task that before it was finished he was
completely exhausted.  But at last the hidden spring
was disclosed, and the waters were rippling merrily
{260}
down the vale, carrying life and happiness wherever
they went.  The young man bathed his aching limbs
in the healing stream, and in a moment he was well
and strong.

Raising his hands, he gave thanks to Manitou.  With
eager fingers he made a jar of clay, and baked it in the
fire, so that he might carry life to Shanewis.  As he
pursued his way homeward with his treasure his despair
was changed to rejoicing and he sped like the wind.

When he reached his village his companions ran to
greet him.  Their faces were sad and hopeless, for the
plague still raged.  However, Nekumonta directed
them to the Healing Waters and inspired them with
new hope.  Shanewis he found on the verge of the
Shadow-land, and scarcely able to murmur a farewell
to her husband.  But Nekumonta did not listen to her
broken adieux.  He forced some of the Healing Water
between her parched lips, and bathed her hands and
her brow till she fell into a gentle slumber.  When
she awoke the fever had left her, she was serene and
smiling, and Nekumonta's heart was filled with a great
happiness.

The tribe was for ever rid of the dreaded plague,
and the people gave to Nekumonta the title of 'Chief
of the Healing Waters,' so that all might know that it
was he who had brought them the gift of Manitou.


Sayadio in Spirit-land

A legend of the Wyandot tribe of the Iroquois
relates how Sayadio, a young Indian, mourned greatly
for a beautiful sister who had died young.  So deeply
did he grieve for her that at length he resolved to seek
her in the Land of Spirits.  Long he sought the maiden,
and many adventures did he meet with.  Years passed
in the search, which he was about to abandon as wholly
{261}
in vain, when he encountered an old man, who gave
him some good advice.  This venerable person also
bestowed upon him a magic calabash in which he
might catch and retain the spirit of his sister should
he succeed in finding her.  He afterward discovered
that this old man was the keeper of that part of the
Spirit-land which he sought.

Delighted to have achieved so much, Sayadio
pursued his way, and in due time reached the Land of
Souls.  But to his dismay he perceived that the spirits,
instead of advancing to meet him as he had expected,
fled from him in terror.  Greatly dejected, he
approached Tarenyawago, the spirit master of ceremonies,
who took compassion upon him and informed him that
the dead had gathered together for a great dance
festival, just such as the Indians themselves celebrate at
certain seasons of the year.  Soon the dancing
commenced, and Sayadio saw the spirits floating round in
a mazy measure like wreaths of mist.  Among them
he perceived his sister, and sprang forward to embrace
her, but she eluded his grasp and dissolved into air.


Much cast down, the youth once more appealed to
the sympathetic master of ceremonies, who gave him a
magic rattle of great power, by the sound of which he
might bring her back.  Again the spirit-music sounded
for the dance, and the dead folk thronged into the circle.
Once more Sayadio saw his sister, and observed that she
was so wholly entranced with the music that she took
no heed of his presence.  Quick as thought the young
Indian dipped up the ghost with his calabash as one
nets a fish, and secured the cover, in spite of all the
efforts of the captured soul to regain its liberty.

Retracing his steps earthward, he had no difficulty
in making his way back to his native village, where he
summoned his friends to come and behold his sister's
{262}
resuscitation.  The girl's corpse was brought from its
resting-place to be reanimated with its spirit, and all
was prepared for the ceremony, when a witless Indian
maiden must needs peep into the calabash in her
curiosity to see how a disembodied spirit looked.
Instantly, as a bird rises when its cage bars are opened
and flies forth to freedom, the spirit of Sayadio's sister
flew from the calabash before the startled youth could
dash forward and shut down the cover.  For a while
Sayadio could not realize his loss, but at length his
straining eyes revealed to him that the spirit of his
sister was not within sight.  In a flash he saw the ruin
of his hopes, and with a broken heart he sank senseless
to the earth.


The Peace Queen

A brave of the Oneida tribe of the Iroquois hunted
in the forest.  The red buck flashed past him, but not
swifter than his arrow, for as the deer leaped he loosed
his shaft and it pierced the dappled hide.

The young man strode toward the carcass, knife in
hand, but as he seized the horns the branches parted,
and the angry face of an Onondaga warrior lowered
between them.

"Leave the buck, Oneida," he commanded fiercely.
"It is the spoil of my bow.  I wounded the beast ere
you saw it."

The Oneida laughed.  "My brother may have shot
at the buck," he said, "but what avails that if he did
not slay it?"

"The carcass is mine by right of forest law," cried
the other in a rage.  "Will you quit it or will you
fight?"

The Oneida drew himself up and regarded the
Onondaga scornfully.

{263}

"As my brother pleases," he replied.  Next moment
the two were locked in a life-and-death struggle.

Tall was the Onondaga and strong as a great tree
of the forest.  The Oneida, lithe as a panther, fought
with all the courage of youth.  To and fro they swayed,
till their breathing came thick and fast and the falling
sweat blinded their eyes.  At length they could struggle
no longer, and by a mutual impulse they sprang apart.


The Quarrel

"Ho!  Onondaga," cried the younger man, "what
profits it thus to strive for a buck?  Is there no meat
in the lodges of your people that they must fight for
it like the mountain lion?"

"Peace, young man!" retorted the grave Onondaga.
"I had not fought for the buck had not your evil
tongue roused me.  But I am older than you, and, I
trust, wiser.  Let us seek the lodge of the Peace
Queen hard by, and she will award the buck to him
who has the best right to it."

"It is well," said the Oneida, and side by side they
sought the lodge of the Peace Queen.

Now the Five Nations in their wisdom had set apart
a Seneca maiden dwelling alone in the forest as arbiter
of quarrels between braves.  This maiden the men of
all tribes regarded as sacred and as apart from other
women.  Like the ancient Vestals, she could not become
the bride of any man.

As the Peace Queen heard the wrathful clamour of
the braves outside her lodge she stepped forth, little
pleased that they should thus profane the vicinity of
her dwelling.

"Peace!" she cried.  "If you have a grievance
enter and state it.  It is not fitting that braves should
quarrel where the Peace Queen dwells."

{264}

At her words the men stood abashed.  They entered