The Story of Scar-face

Scar-face was brave but poor.  His parents had died while he was yet a
boy, and he had no near relations.  But his heart was high, and he was
a mighty hunter.  The old men said that Scar-face had a future before
him, but the young braves twitted him because of a mark across his
face, left by the rending claw of a great grizzly which he had slain in
close fight.

The chief of his tribe possessed a beautiful daughter, whom all the
young men desired in marriage.  Scar-face also had fallen in love with
her, but he felt ashamed to declare his passion because of his poverty.
The maiden had already repulsed half the braves of his tribe.  Why, he
argued, should she accept him, poor and disfigured as he was?

One day he passed her as she sat outside her lodge.  He cast a
penetrating glance at her--a glance which was observed by one of her
unsuccessful suitors, who sneeringly remarked:

"Scar-face would marry our chiefs daughter!  She does not desire a man
without a blemish.  Ha, Scar-face, now is your chance!"

{197}

Scar-face turned upon the jeerer, and in his quiet yet dignified manner
remarked that it was his intention to ask the chief's daughter to be
his wife.  His announcement met with ridicule, but he took no notice of
it and sought the girl.

He found her by the river, pulling rushes to make baskets.
Approaching, he respectfully addressed her.

"I am poor," he said, "but my heart is rich in love for you.  I have no
wealth of furs or pemmican.  I live by my bow and spear.  I love you.
Will you dwell with me in my lodge and be my wife?"


The Sun-God's Decree

The girl regarded him with bright, shy eyes peering up through lashes
as the morning sun peers through the branches.

"My husband would not be poor," she faltered, "for my father, the
chief, is wealthy and has abundance in his lodge.  But it has been laid
upon me by the Sun-god that I may not marry."

"These are heavy words," said Scar-face sadly.  "May they not be
recalled?"

"On one condition only," replied the girl.  "Seek the Sun-god and ask
him to release me from my promise.  If he consents to do so, request
him to remove the scar from your face as a sign that I may know that he
gives me to you."

Scar-face was sad at heart, for he could not believe that the Sun-god,
having chosen such a beautiful maiden for himself, would renounce her.
But he gave the chief's daughter his promise that he would seek out the
god in his own bright country and ask him to grant his request.

For many moons Scar-face sought the home of the Sun-god.  He traversed
wide plains and dense forests, {198} crossed rivers and lofty
mountains, yet never a trace of the golden gates of the dwelling of the
God of Light could he see.

Many inquiries did he make from the wild denizens of the forest--the
wolf, the bear, the badger.  But none was aware of the way to the home
of the Sun-god.  He asked the birds, but though they flew far they were
likewise in ignorance of the road thither.  At last he met a wolverine
who told him that he had been there himself, and promised to set him on
the way.  For a long and weary season they marched onward, until at
length they came to a great water, too broad and too deep to cross.

As Scar-face sat despondent on the bank bemoaning his case two
beautiful swans advanced from the water, and, requesting him to sit on
their backs, bore him across in safety.  Landing him on the other side,
they showed him which way to take and left him.  He had not walked far
when he saw a bow and arrows lying before him.  But Scar-face was
punctilious and would not pick them up because they did not belong to
him.  Not long afterward he encountered a beautiful youth of handsome
form and smiling aspect.

"I have lost a bow and arrows," he said to Scar-face.  "Have you seen
them?"

Scar-face told him that he had seen them a little way back, and the
handsome youth praised him for his honesty in not appropriating them.
He further asked him where he was bound for.

"I am seeking the Sun in his home," replied the Indian, "and I believe
that I am not far from my destination."

"You are right," replied the youth.  "I am the son of the Sun,
Apisirahts, the Morning Star, and I will lead you to the presence of my
august father."

{199}

They walked onward for a little space, and then Apisirahts pointed out
a great lodge, glorious with golden light and decorated with an art
more curious than any that Scar-face had ever beheld.  At the entrance
stood a beautiful woman, the mother of Morning Star, Kokomikis, the
Moon-goddess, who welcomed the footsore Indian kindly and joyously.


The Chase of the Savage Birds

Then the great Sun-god appeared, wondrous in his strength and beauty as
the mighty planet over which he ruled.  He too greeted Scar-face
kindly, and requested him to be his guest and to hunt with his son.
Scar-face and the youth gladly set out for the chase.  But on departing
the Sun-god warned them not to venture near the Great Water, as there
dwelt savage birds which might slay Morning Star.

Scar-face tarried with the Sun, his wife and child, fearful of asking
his boon too speedily, and desiring to make as sure as possible of its
being granted.

One day he and Morning Star hunted as usual, and the youth stole away,
for he wished to slay the savage birds of which his father had spoken.
But Scar-face followed, rescued the lad in imminent peril, and killed
the monsters.  The Sun was grateful to him for having saved his son
from a terrible death, and asked him for what reason he had sought his
lodge.  Scar-face acquainted him with the circumstances of his love for
the chief's daughter and of his quest.  At once the Sun-god granted his
desire.

"Return to the woman you love so much," he said, "return and make her
yours.  And as a sign that it is my will that she should be your wife,
I make you whole."

With a motion of his bright hand the deity removed {200} the unsightly
scar.  On quitting the Sun-country the god, his wife and son presented
Scar-face with many good gifts, and showed him a short route by which
to return to Earth-land once more.

Scar-face soon reached his home.  When he sought his chief's daughter
she did not know him at first, so rich was the gleaming attire he had
obtained in the Sun-country.  But when she at last recognized him she
fell upon his breast with a glad cry.  That same day she was made his
wife.  The happy pair raised a 'medicine' lodge to the Sun-god, and
henceforth Scar-face was called Smooth-face.