The Story of the Salmon

A certain chief who had a very beautiful daughter was unwilling to part
with her, but knowing that the time must come when she would marry he
arranged a contest for her suitors, in which the feat was to break a
pair of elk's antlers hung in the centre of the lodge.

"Whoever shall break these antlers," the old chief declared, "shall
have the hand of my daughter."

The quadrupeds came first--the Snail, Squirrel, Otter, Beaver, Wolf,
Bear, and Panther; but all their strength and skill would not suffice
to break the antlers.  Next came the Birds, but their efforts also
{283} were unavailing.  The only creature left who had not attempted
the feat was a feeble thing covered with sores, whom the mischievous
Blue Jay derisively summoned to perform the task.  After repeated
taunts from the tricky bird, the creature rose, shook itself, and
became whole and clean and very good to look upon, and the assembled
company saw that it was the Salmon.  He grasped the elk's antlers and
easily broke them in five pieces.  Then, claiming his prize, the
chief's daughter, he led her away.

Before they had gone very far the people said: "Let us go and take the
chief's daughter back," and they set off in pursuit of the pair along
the sea-shore.

When Salmon saw what was happening he created a bay between himself and
his pursuers.  The people at length reached the point of the bay on
which Salmon stood, but he made another bay, and when they looked they
could see him on the far-off point of that one.  So the chase went on,
till Salmon grew tired of exercising his magic powers.

Coyote and Badger, who were in advance of the others, decided to shoot
at Salmon.  The arrow hit him in the neck and killed him instantly.
When the rest of the band came up they gave the chief's daughter to the
Wolves, and she became the wife of one of them.

In due time the people returned to their village, and the Crow, who was
Salmon's aunt, learnt of his death.  She hastened away to the spot
where he had been killed, to seek for his remains, but all she could
find was one salmon's egg, which she hid in a hole in the river-bank.
Next day she found that the egg was much larger, on the third day it
was a small trout, and so it grew till it became a full-grown salmon,
and at length a handsome youth.


{284}

Salmon's Magic Bath

Leading young Salmon to a mountain pool, his grand-aunt said: "Bathe
there, that you may see spirits."

One day Salmon said: "I am tired of seeing spirits.  Let me go away."

The old Crow thereupon told him of his father's death at the hands of
Badger and Coyote.

"They have taken your father's bow," she said.

The Salmon shot an arrow toward the forest, and the forest went on
fire.  He shot an arrow toward the prairie, and it also caught fire.

"Truly," muttered the old Crow, "you have seen spirits."

Having made up his mind to get his father's bow, Salmon journeyed to
the lodge where Coyote and Badger dwelt.  He found the door shut, and
the creatures with their faces blackened, pretending to lament the
death of old Salmon.  However, he was not deceived by their tricks, but
boldly entered and demanded his father's bow.  Four times they gave him
other bows, which broke when he drew them.  The fifth time it was
really his father's bow he received.  Taking Coyote and Badger outside,
he knocked them together and killed them.


The Wolf Lodge

As he travelled across the prairie he stumbled on the habitation of the
Wolves, and on entering the lodge he encountered his father's wife, who
bade him hide before the monsters returned.  By means of strategy he
got the better of them, shot them all, and sailed away in a little boat
with the woman.  Here he fell into a deep sleep, and slept so long that
at last his companion {285} ventured to wake him.  Very angry at being
roused, he turned her into a pigeon and cast her out of the boat, while
he himself, as a salmon, swam to the shore.  Near the edge of the water
was a lodge, where dwelt five beautiful sisters.  Salmon sat on the
shore at a little distance, and took the form of an aged man covered
with sores.  When the eldest sister came down to speak to him he bade
her carry him on her back to the lodge, but so loathsome a creature was
he that she beat a hasty retreat.  The second sister did likewise, and
the third, and the fourth.  But the youngest sister proceeded to carry
him to the lodge, where he became again a young and handsome brave.  He
married all the sisters, but the youngest was his head-wife and his
favourite.


The Drowned Child

On the banks of a river there dwelt a worthy couple with their only
son, a little child whom they loved dearly.  One day the boy wandered
away from the lodge and fell into the water, and no one was near enough
to rescue him.  Great was the distress of the parents when the news
reached them, and all his kindred were loud in their lamentations, for
the child had been a favourite with everybody.  The father especially
showed signs of the deepest grief, and refused to enter his lodge till
he should recover the boy.  All night he lay outside on the bare
ground, his cheek pillowed on his hand.  Suddenly he heard a faint
sound, far under the earth.  He listened intently: it was the crying of
his lost child!  Hastily he gathered all his relatives round him, told
them what he had heard, and besought them piteously to dig into the
earth and bring back his son.  This task they hesitated to undertake,
but they willingly collected {286} horses and goods in abundance, to be
given to any one who would venture.

Two men came forward who claimed to possess supernatural powers, and to
them was entrusted the work of finding the child.  The grateful father
gave them a pipe filled with tobacco, and promised them all his
possessions if their mission should succeed.  The two gifted men
painted their bodies, one making himself quite black, the other yellow.
Going to the neighbouring river, they plunged into its depths, and so
arrived at the abode of the Water-god.  This being and his wife, having
no children of their own, had adopted the Indian's little son who was
supposed to have been drowned, and the two men, seeing him alive and
well, were pleased to think that their task was as good as accomplished.


"The father has sent for his son," they said.  "He has commanded us to
bring him back.  We dare not return without him."

"You are too late," responded the Water-god.  "Had you come before he
had eaten of my food he might safely have returned with you.  But he
wished to eat, and he has eaten, and now, alas!  he would die if he
were taken out of the water."[1]


[1] See p. 129, "The Soul's Journey."


Sorrowfully the men rose to the surface and carried the tidings to the
father.

"Alas!" they said, "he has eaten in the palace of the Water-god.  He
will die if we bring him home."

Nevertheless the father persisted in his desire to see the child.

"I must see him," he said, and the two men prepared for a second
journey, saying: "If you get him back, the Water-god will require a
white dog in payment."

The Indian promised to supply the dog.  The two {287} men painted
themselves again, the one black, the other yellow.  Once more they
dived through the limpid water to the palace of the god.

"The father must have his child," they said.  "This time we dare not
return without him."

So the deity gave up the little boy, who was placed in his father's
arms, dead.  At the sight the grief of his kindred burst out afresh.
However, they did not omit to cast a white dog into the river, nor to
pay the men lavishly, as they had promised.

Later the parents lost a daughter in the same manner, but as she had
eaten nothing of the food offered her under the water she was brought
back alive, on payment by her relatives of a tribute to the Water-god
of four white-haired dogs.


The Snake-Wife

A certain chief advised his son to travel.  Idling, he pointed out, was
not the way to qualify for chieftainship.

"When I was your age," said he, "I did not sit still.  There was hard
work to be done.  And now look at me: I have become a great chief."

"I will go hunting, father," said the youth.  So his father furnished
him with good clothing, and had a horse saddled for him.

The young man went off on his expedition, and by and by fell in with
some elk.  Shooting at the largest beast, he wounded it but slightly,
and as it dashed away he spurred his horse after it.  In this manner
they covered a considerable distance, till at length the hunter, worn
out with thirst and fatigue, reined in his steed and dismounted.  He
wandered about in search of water till he was well-nigh spent, but
after a time he came upon a spring, and immediately improvised a song
of thanksgiving to the deity, {288} Wakanda, who had permitted him to
find it.  His rejoicing was somewhat premature, however, for when he
approached the spring a snake started up from it.  The youth was badly
scared, and retreated to a safe distance without drinking.  It seemed
as though he must die of thirst after all.  Venturing to look back
after a time, he saw that the snake had disappeared, and very
cautiously he returned.  Again the snake darted from the water, and the
thirsty hunter was forced to flee.  A third return to the spring had no
happier results, but when his thirst drove him to a fourth attempt the
youth found, instead of a snake, a very beautiful woman.  She offered
him a drink in a small cup, which she replenished as often as he
emptied it.  So struck was he by her grace and beauty that he promptly
fell in love with her.  When it was time for him to return home she
gave him a ring, saying: "When you sit down to eat, place this ring on
a seat and say, 'Come, let us eat,' and I will come to you."

Having bidden her farewell, the young man turned his steps homeward,
and when he was once more among his kindred he asked that food might be
placed before him.  "Make haste," said he, "for I am very hungry."

Quickly they obeyed him, and set down a variety of dishes.  When he was
alone the youth drew the ring from his finger and laid it on a seat.
"Come," he said, "let us eat."

Immediately the Snake-woman appeared and joined him at his meal.  When
she had eaten she vanished as mysteriously as she had come, and the
disconsolate husband (for the youth had married her) went out of the
lodge to seek her.  Thinking she might be among the women of the
village, he said to his father: "Let the women dance before me."

{289}

An old man was deputed to gather the women together, but not one of
them so much as resembled the Snake-woman.

Again the youth sat down to eat, and repeated the formula which his
wife had described to him.  She ate with him as before, and vanished
when the meal was over.

"Father," said the young man, "let the very young women dance before
me."

But the Snake-woman was not found among them either.

Another fleeting visit from his wife induced the chief's son to make
yet another attempt to find her in the community.

"Let the young girls dance," he said.  Still the mysterious Snake-woman
was not found.

One day a girl overheard voices in the youth's lodge, and, peering in,
saw a beautiful woman sharing his meal.  She told the news to the
chief, and it soon became known that the chief's son was married to a
beautiful stranger.

The youth, however, wished to marry a woman of his own tribe; but the
maiden's father, having heard that the young man was already married,
told his daughter that she was only being made fun of.

So the girl had nothing more to do with her wooer, who turned for
consolation to his ring.  He caused food to be brought, and placed the
ring on a seat.


The Ring Unavailing

"Come," he said, "let us eat."

There was no response; the Snake-woman would not appear.

The youth was greatly disappointed, and made up his mind to go in
search of his wife.

{290}

"I am going a-hunting," said he, and again his father gave him good
clothes and saddled a horse for him.

When he reached the spot where the Snake-woman had first met him, he
found her trail leading up to the spring, and beyond it on the other
side.  Still following the trail, he saw before him a very dilapidated
lodge, at the door of which sat an old man in rags.  The youth felt
very sorry for the tattered old fellow, and gave him his fine clothes,
in exchange for which he received the other's rags.

"You think you are doing me a good turn," said the old man, "but it is
I who am going to do you one.  The woman you seek has gone over the
Great Water.  When you get to the other shore talk with the people you
shall meet there, and if they do not obey you send them away."

In addition to the tattered garments, the old man gave him a hat, a
sword, and a lame old horse.

At the edge of the Great Water the youth prepared to cross, while his
companion seated himself on the shore, closed his eyes, and recited a
spell.  In a moment the young man found himself on the opposite shore.
Here he found a lodge inhabited by two aged Thunder-men, who were
apparently given to eating human beings.  The young stranger made the
discovery that his hat rendered him invisible, and he was able to move
unseen among the creatures.  Taking off his hat for a moment, he took
the pipe from the lips of a Thunder-man and pressed it against the
latter's hand.

"Oh," cried the Thunder-man, "I am burnt!"

But the youth had clapped on his hat and disappeared.

"It is not well," said the Thunder-man gravely.  "A stranger has been
here and we have let him escape.  {291} When our brother returns he
will not believe us if we tell him the man has vanished."

Shortly after this another Thunder-man entered with the body of a man
he had killed.  When the brothers told him their story he was quite
sceptical.

"If I had been here," said he, "I would not have let him escape."

As he spoke the youth snatched his pipe from him and pressed it against
the back of his hand.

"Oh," said the Thunder-man, "I am burnt!"

"It was not I," said one brother.

"It was not I," said the other.

"It was I," said the youth, pulling off his hat and appearing among
them.  "What were you talking about among yourselves?  Here I am.  Do
as you said."

But the Thunder-men were afraid.

"We were not speaking," they said, and the youth put on his hat and
vanished.

"What will our brother say," cried the three in dismay, "when he hears
that a man has been here and we have not killed him?  Our brother will
surely hate us."

In a few minutes another Thunder-man came into the lodge, carrying the
body of a child.  He was very angry when he heard that they had let a
man escape.

The youth repeated his trick on the new-comer--appeared for a moment,
then vanished again.  The fifth and last of the brothers was also
deceived in the same manner.

Seeing that the monsters were now thoroughly frightened, the young man
took off his magic hat and talked with them.


The Finding of the Snake-Wife

"You do wrong," said he, "to eat men like this.  You should eat
buffaloes, not men.  I am going away.  {292} When I come back I will
visit you, and if you are eating buffaloes you shall remain, but if you
are eating men I shall send you away."

The Thunder-men promised they would eat only buffaloes in future, and
the young man went on his way to seek for the Snake-woman.  When at
last he came to the village where she dwelt he found she had married a
man of another tribe, and in a great rage he swung the sword the
magician had given him and slew her, and her husband, and the whole
village, after which he returned the way he had come.  When he reached
the lodge of the Thunder-men he saw that they had not kept their
promise to eat only buffaloes.

"I am going to send you above," he said.  "Hitherto you have destroyed
men, but when I have sent you away you shall give them cooling rain to
keep them alive."

So he sent them above, where they became the thunder-clouds.

Proceeding on his journey, he again crossed the Great Water with a
single stride, and related to the old wizard all that had happened.

"I have sent the Thunder-men above, because they would not stop eating
men.  Have I done well?"

"Very well."

"I have killed the whole village where the Snake-woman was, because she
had taken another husband.  Have I done well?"

"Very well.  It was for that I gave you the sword."

The youth returned to his father, and married a very beautiful woman of
his own village.


A Subterranean Adventure

There lived in a populous village a chief who had two sons and one
daughter, all of them unmarried.  {293} Both the sons were in the habit
of joining the hunters when they went to shoot buffaloes, and on one
such occasion a large animal became separated from the herd.  One of
the chief's sons followed it, and when the pursuit had taken him some
distance from the rest of the party the buffalo suddenly disappeared
into a large pit.  Before they could check themselves man and horse had
plunged in after him.  When the hunters returned the chief was greatly
disturbed to learn that his son was missing.  He sent the criers in all
directions, and spared no pains to get news of the youth.

"If any person knows the whereabouts of the chiefs son," shouted the
criers, "let him come and tell."

This they repeated again and again, till at length a young man came
forward who had witnessed the accident.

"I was standing on a hill," he said, "and I saw the hunters, and I saw
the son of the chief.  And when he was on level ground he disappeared,
and I saw him no more."

He led the men of the tribe to the spot, and they scattered to look for
signs of the youth.  They found his trail; they followed it to the pit,
and there it stopped.

They pitched their tents round the chasm, and the chief begged his
people to descend into it to search for his son.

"If any man among you is brave and stout-hearted," he said, "let him
enter."

There was no response.

"If any one will go I will make him rich."

Still no one ventured to speak.

"If any one will go I will give him my daughter in marriage."

There was a stir among the braves and a youth came forward.

{294}

"I will go," he said simply.

Ropes of hide were made by willing hands, and secured to a skin shaped
to form a sort of bucket.

After arranging signals with the party at the mouth of the pit, the
adventurous searcher allowed himself to be lowered.  Once fairly
launched in the Cimmerian depths his eyes became accustomed to the
darkness, and he saw first the buffalo, then the horse, then the young
brave, quite dead.  He put the body of the chief's son into the skin
bucket, and gave the signal for it to be drawn up to the surface.  But
so great was the excitement that when his comrades had drawn up the
dead man they forgot about the living one still in the pit, and hurried
away.


Lost Underground

By and by the hero got tired of shouting, and wandered off into the
darkness.

He had not gone very far when he met an old woman.  Respectfully
addressing her, he told her his story and begged her to aid his return
to his own country.

"Indeed I cannot help you," she said, "but if you will go to the house
of the wise man who lives round the corner you may get what you want."

Having followed the direction she had indicated with a withered finger,
the youth shortly arrived at a lodge.  Hungry and weary, he knocked
somewhat impatiently.  Receiving no answer, he knocked again, still
more loudly.  This time there was a movement inside the lodge, and a
woman came to the door.  She led him inside, where her husband sat
dejectedly, not even rising to greet the visitor.  Sadly the woman told
him that they were mourning the death of their only son.  At a word
from his wife the husband looked at the youth.  Eagerly he rose and
embraced him.

{295}

"You are like our lost child," said he.  "Come and we will make you our
son."

The young brave then told him his story.

"We shall treat you as our child," said the Wise Man.  "Whatever you
shall ask we will give you, even should you desire to leave us and to
return to your own people."

Though he was touched by the kindness of the good folk, there was yet
nothing the youth desired so much as to return to his kindred.

"Give me," said he, "a white horse and a white mule."


The Return to Earth

The old man bade him go to where the horses were hobbled, and there he
found what he had asked for.  He also received from his host a magic
piece of iron, which would enable him to obtain whatever he desired.
The rocks even melted away at a touch of this talisman.  Thus equipped,
the adventurer rode off.


Shortly afterward he emerged in his own country, where the first
persons he met were the chief and his wife, to whom he disclosed his
identity, as he was by this time very much changed.  They were
sceptical at first, but soon they came to recognize him, and gave him a
very cordial reception.

He married the chief's daughter, and was made head chieftain by his
father-in-law.  The people built a lodge for him in the centre of the
encampment, and brought him many valuable presents of clothing and
horses.  On his marriage-day the criers were sent out to tell the
people that on the following day no one must leave the village or do
any work.

On the morrow all the men of the tribe went out to hunt buffaloes, and
the young chieftain accompanied {296} them.  By means of his magic
piece of iron he charmed many buffaloes, and slew more than did the
others.

Now it so happened that the chief's remaining son was very jealous of
his brother-in-law.  He thought his father should have given him the
chieftainship, and the honours accorded by the people to his young
relative were exceedingly galling to him.  So he made up his mind to
kill the youth and destroy his beautiful white horse.  But the
sagacious beast told its master that some one was plotting against his
life, and, duly warned, he watched in the stable every night.

On the occasion of a second great buffalo hunt the wicked schemer found
his opportunity.  By waving his robe he scared the buffaloes and caused
them to close in on the youth and trample him to death.  But when the
herd had scattered and moved away there was no trace of the young brave
or of his milk-white steed.  They had returned to the Underworld.


White Feather the Giant-Killer

There once dwelt in the heart of a great forest an old man and his
grandchild.  So far as he could remember, the boy had never seen any
human being but his grandfather, and though he frequently questioned
the latter on the subject of his relatives he could elicit no
information from him.  The truth was that they had perished at the
hands of six great giants.  The nation to which the boy belonged had
wagered their children against those of the giants that they would beat
the latter in a race.  Unfortunately the giants won, the children of
the rash Indians were forfeited, and all were slain with the exception
of little Chácopee, whose grandfather had taken charge of him.  The
child learned to hunt and fish, and seemed quite contented and happy.

{297}

One day the boy wandered away to the edge of a prairie, where he found
traces of an encampment.  Returning, he told his grandfather of the
ashes and tent-poles he had seen, and asked for an explanation.  Had
his grandfather set them there?  The old man responded brusquely that
there were no ashes or tent-poles: he had merely imagined them.  The
boy was sorely puzzled, but he let the matter drop, and next day he
followed a different path.  Quite suddenly he heard a voice addressing
him as "Wearer of the White Feather."  Now there had been a tradition
in his tribe that a mighty man would arise among them wearing a white
feather and performing prodigies of valour.  But of this Chácopee as
yet knew nothing, so he could only look about him in a startled way.
Close by him stood a man, which fact was in itself sufficiently
astonishing to the boy, who had never seen any one but his grandfather;
but to his further bewilderment he perceived that the man was made of
wood from the breast downward, only the head being of flesh.

"You do not wear the white feather yet," the curious stranger resumed,
"but you will by and by.  Go home and sleep.  You will dream of a pipe,
a sack, and a large white feather.  When you wake you will see these
things by your side.  Put the feather on your head and you will become
a very great warrior.  If you want proof, smoke the pipe and you will
see the smoke turn into pigeons."

He then proceeded to tell him who his parents were, and of the manner
in which they had perished, and bade him avenge their death on the
giants.  To aid him in the accomplishment of this feat he gave him a
magic vine which would be invisible to the giants, and with which he
must trip them up when they ran a race with him.

{298}

Chácopee returned home, and everything happened as the Man of Wood had
predicted.  The old grandfather was greatly surprised to see a flock of
pigeons issuing from the lodge, from which Chácopee also shortly
emerged, wearing on his head a white feather.  Remembering the
prophecy, the old man wept to think that he might lose his grandchild.


In Search of the Giants

Next morning Chácopee set off in search of the giants, whom he found in
a very large lodge in the centre of the forest.  The giants had learned
of his approach from the 'little spirits who carry the news.'  Among
themselves they mocked and scoffed at him, but outwardly they greeted
him with much civility, which, however, in nowise deceived him as to
their true feelings.  Without loss of time they arranged a race between
Chácopee and the youngest giant, the winner of which was to cut off the
head of the other.  Chdcopee won, with the help of his magic vine, and
killed his opponent.  Next morning he appeared again, and decapitated
another of his foes.  This happened on five mornings.  On the sixth he
set out as usual, but was met by the Man of Wood, who informed him that
on his way to the giants' lodge he would encounter the most beautiful
woman in the world.


Chácopee's Downfall

"Pay no attention to her," he said earnestly.  "She is there for your
destruction.  When you see her turn yourself into an elk, and you will
be safe from her wiles."

Chácopee proceeded on his way, and sure enough before long he met the
most beautiful woman in the world.  Mindful of the advice he had
received, he {299} turned himself into an elk, but, instead of passing
by, the woman, who was really the sixth giant, came up to him and
reproached him with tears for taking the form of an elk when she had
travelled so far to become his wife.  Chácopee was so touched by her
grief and beauty that he resumed his own shape and endeavoured to
console her with gentle words and caresses.  At last he fell asleep
with his head in her lap.  The beautiful woman once more became the
cruel giant, and, seizing his axe, the monster broke Chácopee's back;
then, turning him into a dog, he bade him rise and follow him.  The
white feather he stuck in his own head, fancying that magic powers
accompanied the wearing of it.


In the path of the travellers there lay a certain village in which
dwelt two young girls, the daughters of a chief.  Having heard the
prophecy concerning the wearer of the white feather, each made up her
mind that she would marry him when he should appear.  Therefore, when
they saw a man approaching with a white feather in his hair the elder
ran to meet him, invited him into her lodge, and soon after married
him.  The younger, who was gentle and timid, took the dog into her home
and treated him with great kindness.

One day while the giant was out hunting he saw the dog casting a stone
into the water.  Immediately the stone became a beaver, which the dog
caught and killed.  The giant strove to emulate this feat, and was
successful, but when he went home and ordered his wife to go outside
and fetch the beaver only a stone lay by the door.  Next day he saw the
dog plucking a withered branch and throwing it on the ground, where it
became a deer, which the dog slew.  The Giant performed this magic feat
also, but when his wife went to the door of the lodge to fetch the deer
she saw only {300} a piece of rotten wood.  Nevertheless the giant had
some success in the chase, and his wife repaired to the home of her
father to tell him what a skilful hunter her husband was.  She also
spoke of the dog that lived with her sister, and his skill in the chase.


The Transformation

The old chief suspected magic, and sent a deputation of youths and
maidens to invite his younger daughter and her dog to visit him.  To
the surprise of the deputation, no dog was there, but an exceedingly
handsome warrior.  But alas!  Chácopee could not speak.  The party set
off for the home of the old chief, where they were warmly welcomed.

It was arranged to hold a general meeting, so that the wearer of the
white feather might show his prowess and magical powers.  First of all
they took the giant's pipe (which had belonged to Chácopee), and the
warriors smoked it one after the other.  When it came to Chácopee's
turn he signified that the giant should precede him.  The giant smoked,
but to the disappointment of the assembly nothing unusual happened.
Then Chácopee took the pipe, and as the smoke ascended it became a
flock of pigeons.  At the same moment he recovered his speech, and
recounted his strange adventures to the astounded listeners.  Their
indignation against the giant was unbounded, and the chief ordered that
he should be given the form of a dog and stoned to death by the people.

Chácopee gave a further proof of his right to wear the white feather.
Calling for a buffalo-hide, he cut it into little pieces and strewed it
on the prairie.  Next day he summoned the braves of the tribe to a
buffalo-hunt, and at no great distance they found a magnificent herd.
The pieces of hide had become buffaloes.  The {301} people greeted this
exhibition of magic art with loud acclamations, and Chácopee's
reputation was firmly established with the tribe.

Chácopee begged the chief's permission to take his wife on a visit to
his grandfather, which was readily granted, and the old man's gratitude
and delight more than repaid them for the perils of their journey.


How the Rabbit Caught the Sun

Once upon a time the Rabbit dwelt in a lodge with no one but his
grandmother to keep him company.  Every morning he went hunting very
early, but no matter how early he was he always noticed that some one
with a very long foot had been before him and had left a trail.  The
Rabbit resolved to discover the identity of the hunter who forestalled
him, so one fine morning he rose even earlier than usual, in the hope
of encountering the stranger.  But all to no purpose, for the
mysterious one had gone, leaving behind him, as was his wont, the trail
of the long foot.

This irritated the Rabbit profoundly, and he returned to the lodge to
consult with his grandmother.

"Grandmother," he grumbled, "although I rise early every morning and
set my traps in the hope of snaring game, some one is always before me
and frightens the game away.  I shall make a snare and catch him."

"Why should you do so?" replied his grandmother.  "In what way has he
harmed you?"

"It is sufficient that I hate him," replied the querulous Rabbit, and
departed.  He secreted himself among the bushes and waited for
nightfall.  He had provided himself with a stout bowstring, which he
arranged as a trap in the place where the footprints were usually to be
found.  Then he went home, but returned very early to examine his snare.

{302}

When he arrived at the spot he discovered that he had caught the
intruder, who was, indeed, no less a personage than the Sun.  He ran
home at the top of his speed to acquaint his grandmother with the news.
He did not know what he had caught, so his grandmother bade him seek
the forest once more and find out.  On returning he saw that the Sun
was in a violent passion.

"How dare you snare me!" he cried angrily.  "Come hither and untie me
at once!"

The Rabbit advanced cautiously, and circled round him in abject terror.
At last he clucked his head and, running in, cut the bowstring which
secured the Sun with his knife.  The Sun immediately soared upward, and
was quickly lost to sight.  And the reason why the hair between the
Rabbit's shoulders is yellow is that he was scorched there by the great
heat which came from the Sun-god when he loosed him.


How the Rabbit Slew the Devouring Hill

In the long ago there existed a hill of ogre-like propensities which
drew people into its mouth and devoured them.  The Rabbit's grandmother
warned him not to approach it upon any account.

But the Rabbit was rash, and the very fact that he had been warned
against the vicinity made him all the more anxious to visit it.  So he
went to the hill, and cried mockingly: "Pahe-Wathahuni, draw me into
your mouth!  Come, devour me!"

But Pahe-Wathahuni knew the Rabbit, so he took no notice of him.

Shortly afterward a hunting-party came that way, and Pahe-Wathahuni
opened his mouth, so that they took it to be a great cavern, and
entered.  The Rabbit, waiting his chance, pressed in behind them.  But
when {303} he reached Pahe-Wathahuni's stomach the monster felt that
something disagreed with him, and he vomited the Rabbit up.


Later in the day another hunting-party appeared, and Pahe-Wathahuni
again opened his capacious gullet.  The hunters entered unwittingly,
and were devoured.  And once more the Rabbit entered, disguised as a
man by magic art.  This time the cannibal hill did not eject him.
Imprisoned in the monster's entrails, he saw in the distance the
whitened bones of folk who had been devoured, the still undigested
bodies of others, and some who were yet alive.

Mocking Pahe-Wathahuni, the Rabbit said: "Why do you not eat?  You
should have eaten that very fat heart."  And, seizing his knife, he
made as if to devour it.  At this Pahe-Wathahuni set up a dismal
howling; but the Rabbit merely mocked him, and slit the heart in twain.
At this the hill split asunder, and all the folk who had been
imprisoned within it went out again, stretched their arms to the blue
sky, and hailed the Rabbit as their deliverer; for it was
Pahe-Wathahuni's heart that had been sundered.

The people gathered together and said: "Let us make the Rabbit chief."
But he mocked them and told them to be gone, that all he desired was
the heap of fat the hill had concealed within its entrails, which would
serve him and his old grandmother for food for many a day.  With that
the Rabbit went homeward, carrying the fat on his back, and he and his
grandmother rejoiced exceedingly and were never in want again.


{304}