The Story of Kutoyis

There once lived on the banks of the Missouri an old couple who had one
daughter, their only child.  When she grew to be a woman she had a
suitor who was cruel and overbearing, but as she loved him her parents
offered no opposition to their marriage.  Indeed, they gave the bride
the best part of their possessions for a dowry, so that she and her
husband were rich, while her father and mother lived in a poor lodge
and had very little to eat.  The wicked son-in-law took advantage of
their kindness in every way.  He forced the old man to accompany him on
his hunting expeditions, and then refused to share the game with him.
Sometimes one would kill a buffalo and sometimes the other, but always
it was the younger man who got the best of the meat and who made
himself robes and moccasins from the hide.

Thus the aged couple were nearly perishing from cold and hunger.  Only
when her husband was out hunting would the daughter venture to carry a
morsel of meat to her parents.

On one occasion the younger man called in his overbearing way to his
father-in-law, bidding him help in a buffalo-hunt.  The old man,
reduced by want almost to a skeleton, was too much afraid of the tyrant
to venture to disobey him, so he accompanied him in the chase.  Ere
long they encountered a fine buffalo, {213} whereupon both drew their
bows and fired.  But it was the arrow of the elder man which pierced
the animal and brought it to the ground.  The old man set himself to
skin the buffalo, for his son-in-law never shared in these tasks, but
left them to his companion.  While he was thus engaged the latter
observed a drop of blood on one of his arrows which had fallen to the
ground.

Thinking that even a drop of blood was better than nothing, he replaced
the arrow in its quiver and set off home.  As it happened, no more of
the buffalo than that fell to his share, the rest being appropriated by
his son-in-law.

On his return the old man called to his wife to heap fuel on the fire
and put on the kettle.  She, thinking he had brought home some
buffalo-meat, hastened to do his bidding.  She waited curiously till
the water in the kettle had boiled; then to her surprise she saw him
place in it an arrow with a drop of blood on it.


How Kutoyis was Born

"Why do you do that?" she asked.

"Something will come of it," he replied.  "My spirit tells me so."

They waited in silence.

Then a strange sound was heard in their lonely little lodge--the crying
of a child.  Half fearfully, half curiously, the old couple lifted the
lid of the kettle, and there within was a little baby boy.

"He shall bring us good luck," said the old Indian.

They called the child Kutoyis--that is, 'Drop of Blood'--and wrapped
him up as is customary with Indian babies.

"Let us tell our son-in-law," said the old man, "that it is a little
girl, and he will let it live.  If we say it is a boy he will surely
kill it."

{214}

Kutoyis became a great favourite in the little lodge to which he had
come.  He was always laughing, and his merriment won the hearts of the
old people.  One day, while they thought him much too young to speak,
they were astonished to hear his voice.

"Lash me up and hang me from the lodge pole," said he, "and I shall
become a man."

When they had recovered from their astonishment they lashed him to the
lodge pole.  In a moment he had burst the lashings and grown before
their eyes into a tall, strong man.  Looking round the lodge, which
seemed scarcely large enough to hold him, Kutoyis perceived that there
was no food about.

"Give me some arrows," said he, "and I will bring you food."

"We have no arrows," replied the old man, "only four arrow-heads."

Kutoyis fetched some wood, from which he cut a fine bow, and shafts to
fit the flint arrow-heads.  He begged the old Indian to lead him to a
good hunting-ground, and when he had done so they quickly killed a
magnificent buffalo.

Meanwhile the old Indian had told Kutoyis how badly his son-in-law had
treated him, and as they were skinning the buffalo who should pass by
but the subject of their conversation.  Kutoyis hid behind the dead
animal to see what would happen, and a moment later the angry voice of
the son-in-law was heard.

Getting no reply, the cowardly hunter fitted an arrow to his bow and
shot it at his father-in-law.  Enraged at the cruel act, Kutoyis rose
from his hiding-place behind the dead buffalo and fired all his arrows
at the young man, whom he slew.  He afterward gave food in plenty to
the old man and his wife, and bade them return to their home.  They
were delighted to find {215} themselves once more free from
persecution, but their daughter wept so much that finally Kutoyis asked
her whether she would have another husband or whether she wished to
follow her first spouse to the Land of Shadows, as she must do if she
persisted in lamenting him.

The lady chose the former alternative as the lesser evil, and Kutoyis
found her an excellent husband, with whom she lived happily for a long
time.


Kutoyis on his Travels

At length Kutoyis tired of his monotonous life, and desired to see more
of the world.  So his host directed him to a distant village, where he
was welcomed by two old women.  They set before their handsome guest
the best fare at their disposal, which was buffalo-meat of a rather
unattractive appearance.

"Is there no good meat?" queried Kutoyis.

The old women explained that one of the lodges was occupied by a fierce
bear, who seized upon all the good meat and left only the dry, poor
sort for his neighbours.  Without hesitation Kutoyis went out and
killed a buffalo calf, which he presented to the women, desiring them
to place the best parts of the meat in a prominent position outside the
lodge, where the big bear could not fail to see it.

This they did, and sure enough one of the bear-cubs shortly passed by
and seized the meat.  Kutoyis, who had been lying in wait, rushed out
and hit the animal as hard as he could.  The cub carried his tale of
woe to his father, and the big bear, growling threats of vengeance,
gathered his whole family round him and rushed to the lodge of the old
women, intending to kill the bold hunter.

However, Kutoyis was more than a match for all of {216} them, and very
soon the bears were slain.  Still he was unsatisfied, and longed for
further adventures.

"Tell me," said he, "where shall I find another village?"


The Wrestling Woman

"There is a village by the Big River," said the old women, "but you
must not go there, for a wicked woman dwells in it who wrestles with
and slays all who approach."

No sooner did Kutoyis hear this than he determined to seek the village,
for his mission was to destroy evil beings who were a danger to his
fellow-men.  So in spite of the dissuasions of the old women he
departed.

As he had been warned, the woman came out of her lodge on the approach
of the stranger and invited him to wrestle with her.

"I cannot," said he, pretending to be frightened.

The woman mocked and jeered at him, while he made various excuses, but
all the time he was observing how the land lay.  When he drew nearer he
saw that she had covered the ground with sharp flints, over which she
had strewn grass.  At last he said: "Very well, I will wrestle with
you."

It was no wonder that she had killed many braves, for she was very
strong.  But Kutoyis was still stronger.  With all her skill she could
not throw him, and at last she grew tired, and was herself thrown on
the sharp flints, on which she bled to death.  The people rejoiced
greatly when they heard of her death, and Kutoyis was universally
acclaimed as a hero.

Kutoyis did many other high deeds before he departed to the Shadowland,
and when he went he left sorrow in many lodges.


{217}