[Frontispiece: Sîñ takes the Form of a Woodpecker  [_Page_ 316]]


  THE MYTHS OF THE
  NORTH AMERICAN
  INDIANS

  BY

  LEWIS SPENCE F.R.A.I.


  AUTHOR OF "THE MYTHS OF MEXICO AND PERU" "THE
  CIVILIZATION OF ANCIENT MEXICO" "A DICTIONARY
  OF MYTHOLOGY" ETC. ETC.


  WITH THIRTY-TWO PLATES IN COLOUR BY
  JAMES JACK AND OTHER ILLUSTRATIONS


  LONDON
  GEORGE G. HARRAP & COMPANY
  2 & 3 PORTSMOUTH STREET KINGSWAY W.C.
  MCMXIV


PRINTED AT THE BALLANTYNE PRESS LONDON ENGLAND


UNIFORM WITH THIS VOLUME

_The illustrations, which are a feature of this series, are reproduced
for the most part from the finest works of past and living artists_


The Myths of Greece and Rome

By H. A. GUERBER.  With 64 Full-page Illustrations.  A classic volume.
At once a fascinating story-book and a valuable work of reference.


Myths of the Norsemen

From the Eddas and Sagas.  By H. A. GUERBER.  With 64 Full-page
Illustrations.


Myths and Legends of the Middle Ages

By H. A. GUERBER.  With 64 Full-page Illustrations.


Hero Myths and Legends of the British Race

By M. I. EBBUTT, M.A.  With 64 Original Full-page Illustrations.


Myths and Legends of the Celtic Race

By T. W. ROLLESTON.  With 64 Original Full-page Illustrations.


The Myths and Legends of Japan

By F. HADLAND DAVIS.  With 32 Plates in Colour by EVELYN PAUL.


The Myths of Mexico and Peru

By LEWIS SPENCE, F.R.A.I.  With 60 Full-page Plates and other
Illustrations.


{v}

PREFACE

The North American Indian has so long been an object of the deepest
interest that the neglect of his picturesque and original mythologies
and the tales to which they have given rise is difficult of
comprehension.  In boyhood we are wont to regard him as an instrument
specially designed for the execution of tumultuous incident, wherewith
heart-stirring fiction may be manufactured.  In manhood we are too apt
to consider him as only fit to be put aside with the matter of Faery
and such evanescent stuff and relegated to the limbo of imagination.
Satiated with his constant recurrence in the tales of our youth, we are
perhaps but too ready to hearken credulously to accounts which picture
him as a disreputable vagabond, getting a precarious living by petty
theft or the manufacture of bead ornaments.

It is, indeed, surprising how vague a picture the North American Indian
presents to the minds of most people in Europe when all that recent
anthropological research has done on the subject is taken into account.
As a matter of fact, few books have been published in England which
furnish more than the scantiest details concerning the Red Race, and
these are in general scarce, and, when obtained, of doubtful scientific
value.

The primary object of this volume is to furnish the reader with a
general view of the mythologies of the Red Man of North America,
accompanied by such historical and ethnological information as will
assist him in gauging the real conditions under which this most
interesting section of humanity existed.  The basic difference between
the Indian and European mental outlook is insisted upon, because it is
felt that no proper comprehension of American Indian myth or {vi}
conditions of life can be attained when such a distinction is not
recognized and allowed for.  The difference between the view-point,
mundane and spiritual, of the Red Man and that of the European is as
vast as that which separates the conceptions and philosophies of the
East and West.  Nevertheless we shall find in the North American
mythologies much that enters into the composition of the immortal tales
of the older religions of the Eastern Hemisphere.  All myth, Asiatic,
European, or American, springs from similar natural conceptions, and if
we discover in American mythology peculiarities which we do not observe
in the systems of Greece, Rome, or Egypt, we may be certain that these
arise from circumstances of environment and racial habit as modified by
climate and kindred conditions alone.

In the last thirty years much has been accomplished in placing the
study of the American aborigines on a sounder basis.  The older school
of ethnologists were for the most part obsessed with the wildest ideas
concerning the origin of the Indians, and many of them believed the Red
Man to be the degenerate descendant of the lost Ten Tribes of Israel or
of early Phoenician adventurers.  But these 'antiquaries' had perforce
to give way to a new school of students well equipped with scientific
knowledge, whose labours, under the admirable direction of the United
States Bureau of Ethnology, have borne rich fruit.  Many treatises of
the utmost value on the ethnology, mythology, and tribal customs of the
North American Indians have been issued by this conscientious and
enterprising State department.  These are written by men who possess
first-hand knowledge of Indian life and languages, many of whom have
faced great privations and hardships in order to collect the material
they have published.  The series is, indeed, a monument to that nobler
type of heroism which science {vii} can kindle in the breast of the
student, and the direct, unembellished verbiage of these volumes
conceals many a life-story which for quiet, unassuming bravery and
contempt for danger will match anything in the records of research and
human endurance.

LEWIS SPENCE

EDINBURGH: _March_ 1914


{ix}

CONTENTS


  CHAPTER

  I.  Divisions, Customs, and History of the Race
  II.  The Mythologies of the North American Indians
  III.  Algonquian Myths and Legends
  IV.  Iroquois Myths and Legends
  V.  Sioux Myths and Legends
  VI.  Myths and Legends of the Pawnees
  VII.  Myths And Legends of the Northern and North-western Indians
  Bibliography
  Glossary and Index


{xi}

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


Sîñ takes the Form of a Woodpecker  . . . . . . _Frontispiece_

On the Lakes

An Elderly Omaha Beau

An Earth-lodge

Omaha Woman's Costume

Adventure with a Totem

Indian Picture-writing: A Petroglyph in Nebraska

The Lenâpé come to the Place of Caves

"Glooskap brought all his magical resources to his aid"

"He descried a great _tepee_"

Algon carries the Captured Maiden Home to his Lodge

Moowis has melted in the Sun

"He rode down the wind"

"'Will you carry us over the river?' she asked"

"He poised his spear and struck the girdle"

"Gazing downward, she saw the camp of the Blackfeet"

The Pursuing Head

"He suddenly assumed the shape of a gigantic porcupine"

"'I see thee!  I see thee!  Thou shalt die'"

"He lit the pipe and placed it in the mouth of the skeleton"

"'Grow larger, my kettle!'"

"She sang a strange, sweet song"

"Soon the dancing commenced"

"He jumped so high that every bone in his body was shaken"

The War-chief kills the Monster Rattlesnake

"He leaned his shoulder against the rock"

"With one great step he reached the distant headland"

{xii}

"They arrived at the abode of the Water-god"

"He emerged in his own country"

"Everything happened as the Man of Wood had predicted"

"Once more the Rabbit entered, disguised as a man"

"He seized hold of the hair"

A Fishing Expedition in Shadowland

"The mists came down, and with them the Supernatural People"


MAP SHOWING THE LINGUISTIC STOCKS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS


{1}