The Chippeways tell a charming story concerning the origin of the zea
maize, which runs as follows:

A lad of fourteen or fifteen dwelt with his parents, brothers, and
sisters in a beautifully situated little lodge.  The family, though
poor, were very happy and contented.  The father was a hunter who was
not lacking in courage and skill, but there were times when he could
scarcely supply the wants of his family, and as none of his children
was old enough to help him things went hardly with them then.  The lad
was of a cheerful and contented disposition, like his father, and his
great desire was to benefit his people.  The time had come for him to
observe the initial fast prescribed for all Indian boys of his age, and
his mother made him a little fasting-lodge in a remote spot where he
might not suffer interruption during his ordeal.

Thither the boy repaired, meditating on the goodness of the Great
Spirit, who had made all things beautiful in the fields and forests for
the enjoyment of man.  The desire to help his fellows was strong upon
him, and he prayed that some means to that end might be revealed to him
in a dream.

On the third day of his fast he was too weak to ramble through the
forest, and as he lay in a state between sleeping and waking there came
toward him a beautiful youth, richly dressed in green robes, and
wearing on his head wonderful green plumes.

"The Great Spirit has heard your prayers," said the youth, and his
voice was like the sound of the wind sighing through the grass.
"Hearken to me and you {181} shall have your desire fulfilled.  Arise
and wrestle with me."


The Struggle

The lad obeyed.  Though his limbs were weak his brain was clear and
active, and he felt he could not but obey the soft-voiced stranger.
After a long, silent struggle the latter said:

"That will do for to-day.  To-morrow I shall come again."

The lad lay back exhausted, but on the morrow the green-clad stranger
reappeared, and the conflict was renewed.  As the struggle went on the
youth felt himself grow stronger and more confident, and before leaving
him for the second time the supernatural visitor offered him some words
of praise and encouragement.

On the third day the youth, pale and feeble, was again summoned to the
contest.  As he grasped his opponent the very contact seemed to give
him new strength, and he fought more and more bravely, till his lithe
companion was forced to cry out that he had had enough.  Ere he took
his departure the visitor told the lad that the following day would put
an end to his trials.

"To-morrow," said he, "your father will bring you food, and that will
help you.  In the evening I shall come and wrestle with you.  I know
that you are destined to succeed and to obtain your heart's desire.
When you have thrown me, strip off my garments and plumes, bury me
where I fall, and keep the earth above me moist and clean.  Once a
month let my remains be covered with fresh earth, and you shall see me
again, clothed in my green garments and plumes."  So saying, he
vanished.


{182}

The Final Contest

Next day the lad's father brought him food; the youth, however, begged
that it might be set aside till evening.  Once again the stranger
appeared.  Though he had eaten nothing, the hero's strength, as before,
seemed to increase as he struggled, and at length he threw his
opponent.  Then he stripped off his garments and plumes, and buried him
in the earth, not without sorrow in his heart for the slaying of such a
beautiful youth.

His task done, he returned to his parents, and soon recovered his full
strength.  But he never forgot the grave of his friend.  Not a weed was
allowed to grow on it, and finally he was rewarded by seeing the green
plumes rise above the earth and broaden out into graceful leaves.  When
the autumn came he requested his father to accompany him to the place.
By this time the plant was at its full height, tall and beautiful, with
waving leaves and golden tassels.  The elder man was filled with
surprise and admiration.

"It is my friend," murmured the youth, "the friend of my dreams."

"It is Mon-da-min," said his father, "the spirit's grain, the gift of
the Great Spirit."

And in this manner was maize given to the Indians.


The Seven Brothers

The Blackfeet have a curious legend in explanation of the constellation
known as the Plough or Great Bear.  Once there dwelt together nine
children, seven boys and two girls.  While the six older brothers were
away on the war-path the elder daughter, whose name was Bearskin-woman,
married a grizzly bear.  Her father was so enraged that he collected
his friends and {183} ordered them to surround the grizzly's cave and
slay him.  When the girl heard that her spouse had been killed she took
a piece of his skin and wore it as an amulet.  Through the agency of
her husband's supernatural power, one dark night she was changed into a
grizzly bear, and rushed through the camp, killing and rending the
people, even her own father and mother, sparing only her youngest
brother and her sister, Okinai and Sinopa.  She then took her former
shape, and returned to the lodge occupied by the two orphans, who were
greatly terrified when they heard her muttering to herself, planning
their deaths.

Sinopa had gone to the river one day, when she met her six brothers
returning from the war-path.  She told them what had happened in their
absence.  They reassured her, and bade her gather a large number of
prickly pears.  These she was to strew in front of the lodge, leaving
only a small path uncovered by them.  In the dead of night Okinai and
Sinopa crept out of the lodge, picking their way down the little path
that was free from the prickly pears, and meeting their six brothers,
who were awaiting them.  The Bearskin-woman heard them leaving the
lodge, and rushed out into the open, only to tread on the prickly
pears.  Roaring with pain and anger, she immediately assumed her bear
shape and rushed furiously at her brothers.  But Okinai rose to the
occasion.  He shot an arrow into the air, and so far as it flew the
brothers and sister found themselves just that distance in front of the
savage animal behind them.


The Chase

The beast gained on them, however; but Okinai waved a magic feather,
and thick underbrush rose in its path.  Again Bearskin-woman made
headway.  {184} Okinai caused a lake to spring up before her.  Yet
again she neared the brothers and sister, and this time Okinai raised a
great tree, into which the refugees climbed.  The Grizzly-woman,
however, succeeded in dragging four of the brothers from the tree, when
Okinai shot an arrow into the air.  Immediately his little sister
sailed into the sky.  Six times more he shot an arrow, and each time a
brother went up, Okinai himself following them as the last arrow soared
into the blue.  Thus the orphans became stars; and one can see that
they took the same position in the sky as they had occupied in the
tree, for the small star at one side of the bunch is Sinopa, while the
four who huddle together at the bottom are those who had been dragged
from the branches by Bearskin-woman.


The Beaver Medicine Legend[2]

Two brothers dwelt together in the old time.  The elder, who was named
Nopatsis, was married to a woman who was wholly evil, and who hated his
younger brother, Akaiyan.  Daily the wife pestered her husband to be
rid of Akaiyan, but he would not agree to part with his only brother,
for they had been together through long years of privation--indeed,
since their parents had left them together as little helpless
orphans--and they were all in all to each other.  So the wife of
Nopatsis had resort to a ruse well known to women whose hearts are
evil.  One day when her husband returned from the chase he found her
lamenting with torn clothes and disordered appearance.  She told him
that Akaiyan had treated her brutally.  The lie entered into the heart
of Nopatsis and made it heavy, so that in time he conceived a hatred of
his innocent brother, and {185} debated with himself how he should rid
himself of Akaiyan.


[2] The first portion of this legend has its exact counterpart in
Egyptian story.  See Wiedemann, _Popular Literature of Ancient Egypt_,
p. 45.


Summer arrived, and with it the moulting season when the wild
water-fowl shed their feathers, with which the Indians fledge their
arrows.  Near Nopatsis's lodge there was a great lake, to which these
birds resorted in large numbers, and to this place the brothers went to
collect feathers with which to plume their darts.  They built a raft to
enable them to reach an island in the middle of the lake, making it of
logs bound securely with buffalo-hide.  Embarking, they sailed to the
little island, along the shores of which they walked, looking for
suitable feathers.  They parted in the quest, and after some time
Akaiyan, who had wandered far along the strand, suddenly looked up to
see his brother on the raft sailing toward the mainland.  He called
loudly to him to return, but Nopatsis replied that he deserved to
perish there because of the brutal manner in which he had treated his
sister-in-law.  Akaiyan solemnly swore that he had not injured her in
any way, but Nopatsis only jeered at him, and rowed away.  Soon he was
lost to sight, and Akaiyan sat down and wept bitterly.  He prayed
earnestly to the nature spirits and to the sun and moon, after which he
felt greatly uplifted.  Then he improvised a shelter of branches, and
made a bed of feathers of the most comfortable description.  He lived
well on the ducks and geese which frequented the island, and made a
warm robe against the winter season from their skins.  He was careful
also to preserve many of the tame birds for his winter food.

One day he encountered the lodge of a beaver, and while he looked at it
curiously he became aware of the presence of a little beaver.

"My father desires that you will enter his dwelling," said the animal.
So Akaiyan accepted the invitation {186} and entered the lodge, where
the Great Beaver, attended by his wife and family, received him.  He
was, indeed, the chief of all the beavers, and white with the snows of
countless winters.  Akaiyan told the Beaver how cruelly he had been
treated, and the wise animal condoled with him, and invited him to
spend the winter in his lodge, when he would learn many wonderful and
useful things.  Akaiyan gratefully accepted the invitation, and when
the beavers closed up their lodge for the winter he remained with them.
They kept him warm by placing their thick, soft tails on his body, and
taught him the secret of the healing art, the use of tobacco, and
various ceremonial dances, songs, and prayers belonging to the great
mystery of 'medicine.'

The summer returned, and on parting the Beaver asked Akaiyan to choose
a gift.  He chose the Beaver's youngest child, with whom he had
contracted a strong friendship; but the father prized his little one
greatly, and would not at first permit him to go.  At length, however,
Great Beaver gave way to Akaiyan's entreaties and allowed him to take
Little Beaver with him, counselling him to construct a sacred Beaver
Bundle when he arrived at his native village.

In due time Nopatsis came to the island on his raft, and, making sure
that his brother was dead, began to search for his remains.  But while
he searched, Akaiyan caught up Little Beaver in his arms and, embarking
on the raft, made for the mainland, espied by Nopatsis.  When Akaiyan
arrived at his native village he told his story to the chief, gathered
a Beaver Bundle, and commenced to teach the people the mystery of
'medicine,' with its accompanying songs and dances.  Then he invited
the chiefs of the animal tribes to contribute their knowledge to the
Beaver Medicine, which many of them did.

{187}

Having accomplished his task of instruction, which occupied him all the
winter, Akaiyan returned to the island with Little Beaver, who had been
of immense service to him in teaching the Indians the 'medicine' songs
and dances.  He returned Little Beaver to his parents, and received in
exchange for him a sacred pipe, being also instructed in its
accompanying songs and ceremonial dances.  On the island he found the
bones of his credulous and vengeful brother, who had met with the fate
he had purposed for the innocent Akaiyan.  Every spring Akaiyan visited
the beavers, and as regularly he received something to add to the
Beaver Medicine Bundle, until it reached the great size it now has.
And he married and founded a race of medicine-men who have handed down
the traditions and ceremonials of the Beaver Medicine to the present
day.


The Sacred Bear-Spear

An interesting Blackfoot myth relates how that tribe obtained its
sacred Bear-spear.  Many generations ago, even before the Blackfeet
used horses as beasts of burden, the tribe was undertaking its autumn
migration, when one evening before striking camp for the night it was
reported that a dog-sledge or cart belonging to the chief was missing.
To make matters worse, the chief's ermine robe and his wife's buckskin
dress, with her sacred elk-skin robe, had been packed in the little
cart.  Strangely enough, no one could recollect having noticed the dog
during the march.  Messengers were dispatched to the camping-site of
the night before, but to no avail.  At last the chief's son, Sokumapi,
a boy about twelve years of age, begged to be allowed to search for the
missing dog, a proposal to which his father, after some demur,
consented.  Sokumapi set out alone for the last camping-ground, which
was under {188} the shadows of the Rocky Mountains, and carefully
examined the site.  Soon he found a single dog-sledge track leading
into a deep gulch, near the entrance to which he discovered a large
cave.  A heap of freshly turned earth stood in front of the cave,
beside which was the missing cart.  As he stood looking at it,
wondering what had become of the dog which had drawn it, an immense
grizzly-bear suddenly dashed out.  So rapid was its attack that
Sokumapi had no chance either to defend himself or to take refuge in
flight.  The bear, giving vent to the most terrific roars, dragged him
into the cave, hugging him with such force that he fainted.  When he
regained consciousness it was to find the bear's great head within a
foot of his own, and he thought that he saw a kindly and almost human
expression in its big brown eyes.  For a long time he lay still, until
at last, to his intense surprise, the Bear broke the silence by
addressing him in human speech.

"Have no fear," said the grizzly.  "I am the Great Bear, and my power
is extensive.  I know the circumstances of your search, and I have
drawn you to this cavern because I desired to assist you.  Winter is
upon us, and you had better remain with me during the cold season, in
the course of which I will reveal to you the secret of my supernatural
power."


Bear Magic

It will be observed that the circumstances of this tale are almost
identical with those which relate to the manner in which the Beaver
Medicine was revealed to mankind.  The hero of both stories remains
during the winter with the animal, the chief of its species, who in the
period of hibernation instructs him in certain potent mysteries.

{189}

The Bear, having reassured Sokumapi, showed him how to transform
various substances into food.  His strange host slept during most of
the winter; but when the warm winds of spring returned and the snows
melted from the hills the grizzly became restless, and told Sokumapi
that it was time to leave the cave.  Before they quitted it, however,
he taught the lad the secret of his supernatural power.  Among other
things, he showed him how to make a Bear-spear.  He instructed him to
take a long stick, to one end of which he must secure a sharp point, to
symbolize the bear's tusks.  To the staff must be attached a bear's
nose and teeth, while the rest of the spear was to be covered with
bear's skin, painted the sacred colour, red.  The Bear also told him to
decorate the handle with eagle's feathers and grizzly claws, and in
war-time to wear a grizzly claw in his hair, so that the strength of
the Great Bear might go with him in battle, and to imitate the noise a
grizzly makes when it charges.  The Bear furthermore instructed him
what songs should be used in order to heal the sick, and how to paint
his face and body so that he would be invulnerable in battle, and,
lastly, told him of the sacred nature of the spear, which was only to
be employed in warfare and for curing disease.  Thus if a person was
sick unto death, and a relative purchased the Bear-spear, its
supernatural power would restore the ailing man to health.  Equipped
with this knowledge, Sokumapi returned to his people, who had long
mourned him as dead.  After a feast had been given to celebrate his
home-coming he began to manufacture the Bear-spear as directed by his
friend.


How the Magic Worked

Shortly after his return the Crows made war upon the Blackfeet, and on
the meeting of the two tribes in {190} battle Sokumapi appeared in
front of his people carrying the Bear-spear on his back.  His face and
body were painted as the Great Bear had instructed him, and he sang the
battle-songs that the grizzly had taught him.  After these ceremonies
he impetuously charged the enemy, followed by all his braves in a solid
phalanx, and such was the efficacy of the Bear magic that the Crows
immediately took to flight.  The victorious Blackfeet brought back
Sokumapi to their camp in triumph, to the accompaniment of the Bear
songs.  He was made a war-chief, and ever afterward the spear which he
had used was regarded as the palladium of the Blackfoot Indians.  In
the spring the Bear-spear is unrolled from its covering and produced
when the first thunder is heard, and when the Bear begins to quit his
winter quarters; but when the Bear returns to his den to hibernate the
spear is once more rolled up and put away.  The greatest care is taken
to protect it against injury.  It has a special guardian, and no woman
is permitted to touch it.


The Young Dog Dance

A dance resembling the Sun Dance was formerly known to the Pawnee
Indians, who called it the Young Dog Dance.  It was, they said,
borrowed from the Crees, who produced the following myth to account for
it.

One day a young brave of the Cree tribe had gone out from his village
to catch eagles, in order to provide himself with feathers for a
war-bonnet, or to tie in his hair.  Now the Crees caught eagles in this
fashion.  On the top of a hill frequented by these birds they would dig
a pit and cover it over with a roof of poles, cunningly concealing the
structure with grass.  A piece of meat was fastened to the poles, so
that the eagles {191} could not carry it off.  Then the Indian, taking
off his clothes, would descend into the pit, and remain there for
hours, or days, as the case might be, until an eagle was attracted by
the bait, when he would put his hand between the poles, seize the bird
by the feet, and quickly dispatch it.

The young brave whose fortune it was to discover the Young Dog Dance
had prepared the trap in this wise, and was lying in the pit praying
that an eagle might come and bring his uncomfortable vigil to an end.
Suddenly he heard a sound of drumming, distant but quite distinct,
though he could not tell from what direction it proceeded.  All night
the mysterious noise continued.  Next night as he lay in the same
position he heard it again, and resolved to find out its origin, so he
clambered out of his pit and went off in the direction from which the
drum-beating seemed to proceed.  At last, when dawn was near, he
reached the shores of a great lake.  Here he stopped, for the sounds
quite evidently came from the lake.  All that day he sat by the water
bemoaning his ill-luck and praying for better fortune.  When night fell
the drumming began anew, and the young man saw countless animals and
birds swimming in the lake.  Four days he remained on the lake-shore,
till at length, worn out by fatigue and hunger (for many days had
elapsed since he had eaten), he fell asleep.


The Lodge of Animals

When he awoke he found himself in a large lodge, surrounded by many
people, some of whom were dancing, while others sat round the walls.
All these people wore robes made from the skins of various animals or
birds.  They were, in fact, the animals the young Indian had seen
swimming in the water, who {192} had changed themselves into human
shape.  A chief at the back of the lodge stood up and addressed him
thus:

"My friend, we have heard your prayers, and our desire is to help you.
You see these people?  They represent the animals.  I am the Dog.  The
Great Spirit is very fond of dogs.  I have much power, and my power I
shall give to you, so that you may be like me, and my spirit will
always protect you.  Take this dance home to your people, and it will
make them lucky in war."  And he imparted the nature of the rite to the
Indian by action.

The Dog turned from the Cree brave and his eye swept the company.


The Gift

"Brothers," he said, "I have given him my power.  Will you not pity him
and give him the power you have?"

For a time there was silence.  No one seemed disposed to respond to the
chief's appeal.  At last the Owl rose.

"I will help you," he said to the young man.  "I have power to see in
the dark wherever I may go.  When you go out at night I will be near
you, and you shall see as well as I do.  Take these feathers and tie
them in your hair."  And, giving him a bunch of feathers, the Owl sat
down.

There was a pause, and the next to rise was the Buffalo Bull, who gave
to the young Indian his strength and endurance and the power to trample
his enemies underfoot.  As a token he gave him a shoulder-belt of
tanned buffalo-hide, bidding him wear it when he went on the war-path.

By and by the Porcupine stood up and addressed {193} the guest.  Giving
him some of his quills with which to ornament the leather belt, he said:

"I also will help you.  I can make my enemies as weak as women, so that
they fly before me.  When you fight your foes shall flee and you shall
overcome them."

Another long silence ensued, and when at last the Eagle rose every one
listened to hear what he had to say.

"I also," he said majestically, "will be with you wherever you go, and
will give you my prowess in war, so that you may kill your foes as I
do."  As he spoke he handed to the brave some eagle feathers to tie in
his hair.

The Whooping Crane followed, and gave him a bone from its wing for a
war-whistle to frighten his enemies away.

The Deer and the Bear came next, the one giving him swiftness, with a
rattle as token, and the other hardiness, and a strip of fur for his
belt.

After he had received these gifts from the animals the brave lay down
and fell asleep again.  When he awoke he found himself on the shores of
the lake once more.

Returning home, he taught the Crees the Young Dog Dance, which was to
make them skilful in war, and showed them the articles he had received.
So the young men formed a Society of Young Dogs, which practised the
dance and obtained the benefits.


The Medicine Wolf

A quaint story of a 'medicine' wolf is told among the Blackfoot
Indians.  On one occasion when the Blackfeet were moving camp they were
attacked by a number of Crow Indians who had been lying in wait for
them.  The Blackfeet were travelling slowly in a {194} long, straggling
line, with the old men and the women and children in the middle, and a
band of warriors in front and in the rear.  The Crows, as has been
said, made an ambush for their enemies, and rushed out on the middle
portion of the line.  Before either party of the Blackfoot warriors
could reach the scene of the struggle many of the women and children
had perished, and others were taken captive by the attacking force.
Among the prisoners was a young woman called Sits-by-the-door.  Many
weary miles lay between them and the Crow camp on the Yellowstone
River, but at length the tired captives, mounted with their captors on
jaded horses, arrived at their destination.  The warrior who had taken
Sits-by-the-door prisoner now presented her to a friend of his, who in
turn gave her into the keeping of his wife, who was somewhat older than
her charge.  The young Blackfoot woman was cruelly treated by the Crow
into whose possession she had passed.  Every night he tied her feet
together so that she might not escape, and also tied a rope round her
waist, the other end of which he fastened to his wife.  The Crow woman,
however, was not unmoved by the wretchedness of her prisoner.  While
her husband was out she managed to converse with her and to show her
that she pitied her misfortunes.  One day she informed Sits-by-the-door
that she had overheard her husband and his companions plotting to kill
her, but she added that when darkness fell she would help her to
escape.  When night came the Crow woman waited until the deep breathing
of her husband told her that he was sound asleep; then, rising
cautiously, she loosened the ropes that bound her captive, and, giving
her a pair of moccasins, a flint, and a small sack of pemmican, bade
her make haste and escape from the fate that would surely befall her
{195} if she remained where she was.  The trembling woman obeyed, and
travelled at a good pace all night.  At dawn she hid in the dense
undergrowth, hoping to escape observation should her captors pursue
her.  They, meanwhile, had discovered her absence, and were searching
high and low, but no tracks were visible, and at last, wearied with
their unprofitable search, they gave up the chase and returned to their
homes.


The Friendly Wolf

When the woman had journeyed on for four nights she stopped concealing
herself in the daytime and travelled straight on.  She was not yet out
of danger, however, for her supply of pemmican was soon exhausted, and
she found herself face to face with the miseries of starvation.  Her
moccasins, besides, were worn to holes and her feet were cut and
bleeding, while, to add to her misfortunes, a huge wolf dogged her
every movement.  In vain she tried to run away; her strength was
exhausted and she sank to the ground.  Nearer and nearer came the great
wolf, and at last he lay down at her feet.  Whenever the woman walked
on her way the wolf followed, and when she lay down to rest he lay down
also.

At length she begged her strange companion to help her, for she knew
that unless she obtained food very soon she must die.  The animal
trotted away, and returned shortly with a buffalo calf which it had
killed, and laid it at the woman's feet.  With the aid of the
flint--one of the gifts with which the Crow woman had sped her unhappy
guest--she built a fire and cooked some of the buffalo meat.  Thus
refreshed, she proceeded on her way.  Again and again the wolf provided
food in a similar manner, until at length they reached the Blackfoot
camp.  The woman led the animal {196} into her lodge, and related to
her friends all that had befallen her in the Crow camp, and the manner
of her escape.  She also told them how the wolf had befriended her, and
begged them to treat it kindly.  But soon afterward she fell ill, and
the poor wolf was driven out of the village by the Indian dogs.  Every
evening he would come to the top of a hill overlooking the camp and
watch the lodge where Sits-by-the-door dwelt.  Though he was still fed
by her friends, after a time he disappeared and was seen no more.[3]


[3] The reader cannot fail to discern the striking resemblance between
this episode and that of Una and the lion in Spenser's _Faerie Queene_.