the lodge and told the story of their meeting and the
circumstances of their quarrel.

When they had finished the Peace Queen smiled
scornfully.  "So two such braves as you can quarrel
about a buck?" she said.  "Go, Onondaga, as the
elder, and take one half of the spoil, and bear it back
to your wife and children."

But the Onondaga stood his ground.


The Offers

"O Queen," he said, "my wife is in the Land of
Spirits, snatched from me by the Plague Demon.  But
my lodge does not lack food.  I would wive again,
and thine eyes have looked into my heart as the sun
pierces the darkness of the forest.  Will you come to
my lodge and cook my venison?"

But the Peace Queen shook her head.

"You know that the Five Nations have placed
Genetaska apart to be Peace Queen," she replied
firmly, "and that her vows may not be broken.  Go
in peace."

The Onondaga was silent.

Then spoke the Oneida.  "O Peace Queen," he
said, gazing steadfastly at Genetaska, whose eyes
dropped before his glance, "I know that you are set
apart by the Five Nations.  But it is in my mind to
ask you to go with me to my lodge, for I love you.
What says Genetaska?"

The Peace Queen blushed and answered: "To you
also I say, go in peace," but her voice was a whisper
which ended in a stifled sob.

The two warriors departed, good friends now that
they possessed a common sorrow.  But the Peace
Maiden had for ever lost her peace.  For she could
{265}
not forget the young Oneida brave, so tall, so strong,
and so gentle.

Summer darkened into autumn, and autumn whitened
into winter.  Warriors innumerable came to the Peace
Lodge for the settlement of disputes.  Outwardly
Genetaska was calm and untroubled, but though she gave
solace to others her own breast could find none.

One day she sat by the lodge fire, which had burned
down to a heap of cinders.  She was thinking, dreaming
of the young Oneida.  Her thoughts went out to him
as birds fly southward to seek the sun.  Suddenly a
crackling of twigs under a firm step roused her from
her reverie.  Quickly she glanced upward.  Before
her stood the youth of her dreams, pale and worn.

"Peace Queen," he said sadly, "you have brought
darkness to the soul of the Oneida.  No longer may
he follow the hunt.  The deer may sport in quiet for
him.  No longer may he bend the bow or throw the
tomahawk in contest, or listen to the tale during the
long nights round the camp-fire.  You have his heart
in your keeping.  Say, will you not give him yours?"

Softly the Peace Queen murmured: "I will."

Hand in hand like two joyous children they sought
his canoe, which bore them swiftly westward.  No
longer was Genetaska Peace Queen, for her vows were
broken by the power of love.

The two were happy.  But not so the men of the
Five Nations.  They were wroth because the Peace
Queen had broken her vows, and knew how foolish
they had been to trust to the word of a young and
beautiful woman.  So with one voice they abolished
the office of Peace Queen, and war and tumult returned
once more to their own.


{266}