VII.
ILYA OF MUROM AND KING KALIN.
N the palace of the gracious Prince Vladimir, in
I royal Kiev town, a great feast of honour was
spread for many princes and nobles and for the
strong and mighty heroes and their bold followers,
men of the plains, and for the stranger merchants and
traders.
The Fair Sun, Prince Vladimir himself, took his
pleasure there, and gave rich gifts to his guests. To
some he gave towns, and to others he gave small
towns, to some he gave villages, and to others he gave
hamlets, and to Ily&4 of Mutrom he gave a coat of
marten fur with a collar of sable.
But Ilya received not the fur coat as an honour;
he received it without respect and praised it not. He
took the fur coat into the kitchen and dragged the
fur coat about the kitchen floor. Yes, and thus he
talked to the fur coat:
“Just as I drag about this fur coat, so will I drag
about that serpent, King Kalin, by his yellow curls.
And just as I pour strong drink upon this fur coat,
his heart shall pour forth his hot blood.”
And there was a dark-haired maid there, and she
reported the matter to Fair Sun, Prince Vladimir, and
said :
50


Hy fff =
E= SS!
i\ —
i _—— EE —— ee ee a fa He
SS & cat
CES
-& } "> S
Ceith
\ a A
o- y
A ee \ ee
Fh \ \ {
\ \
\
~~ tt tt tt LA ———
ee = go gee On os
im = ee
2
BA COBPANB - TO EbIAS
NOYECTHOH MHZ.


ae
mee Ig ‘ sated in
Mi a } Kui ie
‘ AKU
Unt TMAH LC Heat (i
Wie aa
Diparimant


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
“OQ Fair Sun, Prince Vladimir! When Iya of
Murom was in my kitchen, he dragged about the coat
of marten fur; yes, and he said to the fur coat:
“Just as I drag this fur coat about, so will I drag
Prince Vladimir about by his yellow curly hair, and,
just as I pour strong drink upon the fur coat—yes, he
himself said it to the fur coat—the Fair Sun, Prince
Vladimir’s hot blood shall be poured out by my white
hands.”
And the Fair Sun, Prince Vladimir, grew angry, and
he cried out in a loud voice:
“Come, my strong and mighty heroes, take Ilya
away to the dungeon, and put an iron grating there
and cover it over with logs of oak; yes, and bury him
with yellow sand.”
And the heroes came to [Ilya and said:
“Now, old Cossack, Tlya of Murom! Fair Sun
Vladimir, the Prince, has ordered us to put thee in a
deep dungeon, and to put an iron grating there, and
to cover it all over with oak logs, yes, and to bury
thee with yellow sand.”
And Ilya spoke to them and said:
“Now, what will ye do with me?”
And the heroes said:
“There is no sun in the heavens. Not one hero
in Holy Russia. Old Cossack, Lly4 of Mutrom! O
that we might take thee out of this bitter captivity!
Fair Sun, Prince Vladimir, makes us turn pale.”
Then Ily& mounted his good horse and rode to
53


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
Kiev town. He rode not into Kiev town, but he rode
to the deep dungeon.
He got down from his good horse, took off the
Circassian saddle, took off the braided bridle and let
his brown horse go where God willed.
Then Ily4 was let down into the deep dungeon,
and they put a grating over; they put it above him
and placed oak logs all over it, and buried him with
yellow sand.
Now the glorious Prince Vladimir had an only
daughter, and she saw that this was no small matter
that Prince Vladimir of royal Kiev town had put the
old Cossack, Ily4 of Murom, into that cold dungeon.
For it might be that he alone would be able to defend
the Faith and Country; that he alone might defend
Kiev town; that he alone might defend the Minster
Church, might protect Vladimir the Prince and the
Princess Apraxia.
So the Princess caused a deep trench to be dug to
reach the dungeon of the old Cossack, Ilya of Murom.
And she commanded that false keys should be made;
and she sent people secretly to take to the cold
dungeon pillows of down and feather beds, and ordered
them to take warm coverlets too, and changes of
clothing, and to provide delicate food for the old
Cossack, Ilya of Murom. But of this had Vladimir the
Prince no knowledge.
Now that dog, the Tartar King Kalin, burned to
54


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
be at Kiev town. Even royal Kiev town would he
destroy, and all the peasants he would cut to pieces,
and would burn down the churches of God, and also
cut off the heads of Vladimir the Prince and the
Princess Apraxia.
And King Kalin, the dog, sent an envoy to royal
Kiev town and gave him a letter to deliver, and he
said to the envoy:
“When thou goest to royal Kiev town thou wilt
be an ambassador in Kiev town to the glorious Prince
Vladimir. Therefore go to the broad courtyard of the
Prince’s palace, and dismount not, but ride in on thy
good steed. After thou hast ridden through the court-
yard, then get down off thy steed and go to the palace
of white stone, and into the great hall of white stone
and into the dining hall. Go not humbly, but walk in
with a flourish through the five doors and take not
thy cap from thy head; but go up to the oaken table
and stand opposite Prince Vladimir and place the
letter upon the golden table before him, and speak to
Prince Vladimir and say:
“QO Prince Vladimir of royal Kiev town! Take
this letter which is sent to thee, and look at what is
written in the letter and see what is impressed upon
it. Clean all thy arrow-straight streets and the Courts
of the Prince in all the town of Kiev, and in all the
broad streets and alleys of the princedom place sweet
strong drinks, cask by cask standing close together,
for those who stand by the dog, King Kalin, with his
mighty warriors, in thy town of Kiev.”
55


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
Prince Vladimir of royal Kiev took the letter sent
to him, broke the seal and looked at what was written
therein, and he saw what was in the letter: that he
was commanded to clean the arrow-straight streets
and the great Courts of the Prince, and to place
sweet strong drinks in all the broad streets and all
the alleys of the princedom.
Then Vladimir, the Prince of royal Kiev, saw that
this was no small matter, but a great one, and he sat
down in his writing-chair and a humble letter wrote he.
“Thou dog, King Kalin! Give me the space of
three years, give me three years and three months,
three months and also three days, that 1 may clean
the arrow-straight streets and the great Courts of the
Prince, and make sweet strong drinks and place them
in the town of Kiev and in all the broad streets and
in in all the alleys of the glorious princedom.”
The Prince sent off this humble letter to that dog,
King Kalin. And the dog, King Kalin gave him the
space of three years, three years and three months,
three months and three days. And day after day the
rain it rained, and week after week it ran like a river,
and the time went by—the three years and three
months and three days; and then came the dog, King
Kalin. Came beneath the town of Kiev with his great
army.
Then Prince Vladimir of royal Kiev began to walk
up and down, and tears of grief flowed from his bright
56


Mey | i Ny, 4 pit wo Syn a /; a
ey 1 Bayt
2 ie Ty SPE | Up Gy \\
{} Mg
Ad 4
YY : Yj) Vy Vif
LUM Udistigt ICL TT PEG “a NN]; athe Lm fy —
————
=
os
ae
Sete
_— *,.
i, PL ai Mh
nee, if eae we
| Y
A, 4/4 j | H ‘
. { A e . LZ con =>
| / (eC 5 : ,
y - \-/ “hk ™
‘ ?. Pa . i\ ny a ; 4 HH] sak | : : VL =
/ a \ i | F) 4 = | |
JJ] jy V a la) \}] LE | t +
| | > Lad f, \ | ORS oy IX
~d "4 iN //; ‘T/T &
; ; f 9 Why 4 | OA) f Lape yy) / i | ak J PX PS LAYS ///
i — UN a Sag Je AULA,
| AG ay 4 ny G ss? y sy | yf bs | | | nA /
Stee . A) » S/f | 2 o aA NW /
' ? 4 1p a fh) // | | hE neha
t i ay ex // we , 4 et
||} Palin, Paiiet) y // ae | Foouidle ore
{ { - jet ip 14 {- bs Aw ‘
' J a, \
| th —— Ahhh Wy Zz
rs => wa : oS \.—
heel 2 UDG, : if —< LZ A) Mee 4
‘ 3 > < yp f
ee ) oe oy = IY
KX) < =
SI . :
TIO SS > att 6 27 * Pe
Ps - KL r Z e - % = a "4
\ 77 : Cae parr ey ady we WH) Z ——s aR Km “SE
Ze =" ‘
° = mi ents a= _
ns S = = \ \ . gor / y
ly —~ ¥
a - 4
7 — 7
—_ = 7 ’
= aa a - a > — ~ - Lg
—e— aS —— a a +1 - : os ON "4 :
Jen : y‘e ' " ou
/ Hay A
‘ fv. ~ woe Abs a 4a
~ — a
fe PH
= & - : Be aa) | ——_—— a Oy Dh eh S ‘
: - te
= ;
—— : = 4
p > =a , ly
‘ “ oo ‘
- — a's rn i Reems en ee Lt | I =
or |||




HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
eyes. With a kerchief of silk the Prince wiped his
eyes, and he spoke these words:
“The old Cossack, Iya of Murom, lives no longer,
none is there to defend the Faith and Country; none
to defend the Church of God and Kiev town; none to
protect Vladimir the Prince and the Princess Apraxia!”
Then came to him his dear daughter, and spoke to
him these words:
“Q my dear father, Prince Vladimir of royal
Kiev, the old Cossack, Ilya of Murom, is yet alive, he
is alive in the cold dungeon.”
Then Prince Vladimir quickly brought the golden
keys and went to the cold dungeon, and soon unlocked
the doors and opened the iron grating. And there was
the old Cossack, Ilya of Murom, sitting there in the
dungeon, reading the Holy Gospels.
And there were down pillows and feather beds, and
warm coverlets had been brought there, and changes
of apparel and delicate food provided.
And the Prince took Ilya by his white hands and
by his golden ring, and led him from the cold dungeon,
brought him to his white stone palace, and placed him
near himself. He kissed Ily4 and welcomed him, and
invited him to the oaken table, and gave him sugar
sweetmeats to eat and drink made from honey. Then
spoke the Prince to Ilya these words:
“Old Cossack, Ilya of Mtirom! ‘Taken is our town
of Kiev. The dog, King Kalin, has surrounded Kiev
59


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
town with his great army. Do thou defend our Faith
and Country and glorious Kiev town, and defend the
Church of the Mother of God, and Vladimir thy Prince
and the Princess Apraxia.”
Then the old Cossack, Ilya of Murom, went out
from the palace of white stone, and walked through
the town of Kiev to his dwelling of white stone. He
asked for his beloved steed, and went to the broad
yard and into the stable, and looked at his good war
horse. And Ilya said:
“My beloved steed! My trusty and unchanging ser-
vant! Well hast thou been looked to, my hero horse.”
He kissed him on his sweet mouth, led the
good horse from the stable stall and into the fine
broad courtyard; and then the old Cossack began to
saddle his good horse there. Upon the horse he put a
saddle-cloth, and upon the saddle-cloth he laid a cloth
of felt; now the saddle-cloth was of silk, and upon
the saddle-cloth he laid another cloth, and then the
Circassian saddle. But the Circassian saddle did not
hold firmly, and [Ilya fastened it by twelve girths of
silk, and he drew them up with steel pins. And he
fixed on stirrups of steel and buckles of red gold—not
for show, but for heroic strength. Drawn up are the
girths of silk, and they break not; steel and iron bend,
but break not; and the buckles of red gold may get
wet, but they rust not.
Ilya’ then got upon his good steed, and took with
60


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
him his hero’s weapons. His club of steel took he,
and his grooved spear, his sharp sabre also, and his
whip for the journey. And Ilya set out from the town
of Kiev and rode through the open plain, and up to the
Tartar army. And when he came near and saw that
great host, and heard the shouting of the men and
the neighing of the horses, he began to lose heart.
And when the old Cossack, Ily’ of Mirom rode through
the free and open plain, he could not find out where
the army ended. He leapt up a high hill, looked round
on all sides and looked down upon the Tartar army;
he could see no end or limit to it.
He came down from that high hill and rode on
through the free and open plain, and he leapt up
another high hill and looked towards the western side
and saw some white tents standing, and by the tents
stood heroes’ horses. He hastened down from that
high hill and rode through the freedom of the open
plain, and he came to the white tents. And when
Ilya got down from his good horse near the white tents,
there stood the heroes’ horses. They were standing by a
white linen cloth, and on the cloth millet and spring
corn were scattered.
Ilya let the silken bridle hang loose on _ the
neck of his good hero horse and urged on his horse
to the white linen, saying:
“Pleasant indeed would it be to taste it, if the
heroes’ horses will allow him upon the white linen
cloth to share the millet and spring corn.”
61


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
His good horse stood by the linen cloth and began
to eat the millet and spring corn, and the old Cossack,
Ily&4 of Murom went to the white tent. In the tent
were twelve heroes, and the heroes were all Russian,
and they sat there eating bread and salt, and they
were about to dine.
And Ily4 went into the tent and said:
“A good appetite to you, Heroes‘ of Holy Russia,
and to thee, Samson, my dear godfather!”
“Come here, my dear godson!” said his godfather.
“Come, old Cossack, Ily4 of Murom. Sit down and eat
with us.”
And he stood up on his nimble feet to greet
Ilya of Murom. And they greeted each other and
kissed each other, and he made Ilyd sit at their
table to eat bread and salt with them. Twelve heroes
were they, and Ily&4 was the thirteenth. They all ate
and drank, and when they had dined they came away
from the oaken table and made their prayer to God.
Then the old Cossack, Ilya of Murom, spoke and
said :
“My dear godfather, Samson, and you, O mighty
Russian heroes! I pray you saddle your good horses
and ride out through the free and open plain
to glorious, royal Kiev town. For before our town of
Kiev stands that dog, King Kalin with his great army.
He will lay waste royal Kiev town and cut the peasants
to pieces. He will send the churches of God up in
smoke; and as for Prince Vladimir and Apraxia the
Princess, he would cut off their turbulent heads, Now,
62


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
come ye and defend the Faith and country, and defend
our glorious, royal Kiev town, and protect Prince
Vladimir and Apraxia the Princess.”
And Samson, his godfather, answered him:
“Q my beloved godson, old Cossack, [ya of
Mtrom! We will not saddle our horses and ride
through the free and open plain to defend our Faith
and country, and defend royal Kiev town. We will
not defend the churches of God or protect Prince
Vladimir and Apraxia the Princess. For the Prince
in truth has many princes and nobles, and he gives
them food and drink and rewards them. Nothing
have we from Prince Vladimir.”
“OQ Samson, my dear god-father,’ said the old
Cossack, Ily4 of Mutrom, “this would be no good thing
on our part, to stand apart when King Kalin lays
waste Kiev town, and cuts the peasants to pieces, and
sends the churches of God up in smoke, and cuts off
the turbulent heads of Vladimir the Prince and the
Princess Apraxia. Come, saddle your good horses and
ride through the open plain to Kiey town, to defend
the Faith and country and glorious, royal Kiev, and to
protect the churches of God, and Vladimir the Prince
with the Princess Apraxia.”
But unavailing were Ilyd’s entreaties; not one
hero would join him for the defence of Kiev town
against the Tartar King and his hosts. Nothing
had they from Prince Vladimir, so they would not help
him.
63


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
When Ilya saw that he could not persuade them,
he went out from the white tent to his good hero-
horse, took him by his silken bridle and led him away
from the white linen cloth, and from the millet and
spring corn. And Ilya got upon his good steed and
rode through the free and open plain, and up to the
great Tartar army.
No bright falcon is this attacking geese and swans
and flights of grey ducks, but a Hero of Holy Russia,
advancing to attack that great host of Tartars.
He urged on his heroic steed, and rode on through
the Tartar army. He began to ride over the Tartar
soldiers and to trample them under his horse’s feet, to
tread them under foot and slay them with his spear.
He fought with that great army, and beat down men
as if he were mowing grass.
His good heroic horse spoke to him in human
tongue:
“Come, thou glorious hero of Holy Russia! If thou
dost trample down the Tartars, thou canst not by
thyself conquer this great army. Ride thou up to that
dog, King Kalin, and to that great host of soldiers.
With him are mighty heroes and bold warrior-women
of the plains. That dog, King Kalin has had three
deep trenches made in the glorious open plain. When
thou ridest on the free and open plain, thou wilt beat
down many men of the forces, and when we come to
the deep trenches I shall leap out of the first trench
and will bear thee thence. When we come to the next
64


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
trench, I shall leap out and bear thee thence. But at
the third deep trench I shall leap out, but I shall not
bear thee out of it; in the deep trench wilt thou
remain.”
Now the old Cossack, Ilya of Murom, liked not this
thing. In his white hand he took his whip with the
lash of silk, and beat his horse upon the ribs, and thus
he spoke to his steed:
“Q thou faithless dog! I feed and water thee
and provide for thee, and thou wouldst leave me in
the open plain, even in those deep trenches!”
And Ilya rode on through the free and open plain
to that great army. And he trampled men under foot
and speared them with his spear, and beat them down
like mowing grass.
And Ilya’s strength grew no less, and when he
came to the deep trench his good horse leapt out
again and bore Ily4 thence, and he urged on his hero-
horse through the free and open plain to that great
army; and again he trampled the Tartars under foot,
and speared them and beat them down like mowing
grass. And Ilyd’s strength grew no less; he sat his
good horse and grew no older. And he cut his way
through with his hero-horse and fell into the second
trench. His good steed leapt out and bore Ilya thence;
and Ily4 again urged on his steed through the free
and open plain, and again he trampled men under foot
and speared them, and beat down Tartars like mowing
grass. And Ilyd’s strength became no less; he sat his
good steed and grew no older; but he fell into the
65


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
third trench. He cut his way through the deep trench,
and also out of the third trench leapt his good heroic
steed, but Ilya he bore not out thence, for Ilya slipped
off his good horse, and in the deep trench he remained.
And there came the Tartars running to catch the
good horse, but the heroic steed would not allow
himself to be taken, but galloped away through the
open plain.
Then came the pagan Tartars and fell upon the
old Cossack, Ily&4 of Murom, and they chained together
his nimble feet, and bound his white hands, and the
Tartars said:
“Cut off his turbulent head.”
But some of the Tartars said:
“There is no need to cut off his turbulent head;
we will lead Ilya to the dog, King Kalin, and what he
commands that must we do.”
And they took Ilya through the open plain to that
pavilion of white linen, and led him in to the dog,
King Kalin, and placed him before the King, and spoke
thus to King Kalin:
“Now, O King Kalin, we have taken the old
Cossack, Ilya of Murom, and have brought him to thee,
O King. Do to him as thou wilt.”
Then the dog, King Kalin spoke to Ilya, and said:
“Now, thou old Cossack, Ily4 of Murom! A young
puppy have they let loose against my great army! How
couldst thou alone overcome my great host? Unchain
Ilya’s nimble feet and unloose his white hands.”
66


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
So the Tartars removed the bonds from his feet
and hands, and the dog, King Kalin said:
“Now old Cossack, Ilya4 of Mtrom! Sit down with
me at my table, and eat of my sugar sweetmeats and
drink of my honey drink. Wear my costly garments,
and take from my chest of gold what thou needest.
Serve no longer the Prince Vladimir, but serve the dog,
King Kalin.”
And Ilya answered the King:
“T will not sit at the same table with thee, nor
eat thy sugar sweetmeats, nor drink of thy honey
drinks. JI will not wear thy costly garments, nor take
gold from thy chest. I will not serve thee, thou dog,
King Kalin, but will serve my Faith and country, and
defend the churches of God and Vladimir the Prince
and the Princess Apraxia.”
Then went forth the old Cossack, Ilya’ of Murom,
from that tent of white linen, into the free and open
plain. And the pagan Tartars began to press upon
him and tried to surround him, hoping to gain
possession of the old Cossack’s gear. Ilya saw that he
must bestir himself, and he seized a Tartar by his feet
and began to swing him round, began to strike the
Tartars with the Tartar, till they began to flee from
him. And the old Cossack went thus through the
whole Tartar army, and came forth into the free and
open plain, and cast the Tartar on one side.
Then Ily& walked on through the open plain, and
67 —


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
he had neither horse nor weapons, but he whistled a
mighty whistle, and his good steed heard him on the
open plain, and galloped to the old Cossack his master.
The old Cossack, Ilya got upon his good steed and
rode on through the plain till he came to a high hill,
and he leapt up the hill and looked down towards the
west. And in the west near the white tents stood
the good horses of the heroes. Ilyd4 turned that way
with his good war-horse. He took his strong bow and
bent it with his white hands. He tightened the bow-
string of silk, placed the sharp arrow, and into the
white tent shot he that arrow, saying:
“Fly, O sharp arrow, fly to the white tent. Take
the roof off the white tent, and go, thou arrow, to the
white breast of my godfather. Creep thou into his
breast and make a scratch, only a small scratch, a
small scratch, not a large one. He sleeps there and
takes his ease, and little can I do here alone.”
And he let go the silken bowstring and sent off
that sharp arrow, and that sharp arrow whistled into
that hero’s white tent. It took the roof off the white
tent and fell upon the white breast of Samson. It
crept into his white breast and made but a small
prick, and Samson, the renowned hero of Holy Russia,
woke up from his deep sleep and opened his bright
eyes. Quickly he stood upon his nimble feet and cried :
“Ho! my renowned heroes of Holy Russia! Quickly
saddle your good horses and mount them. From my
beloved godson has flown a sharp arrow through my
glorious white tent. From my tent it took the roof,
68


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
and the arrow crept into my white breast, made a
small prick, not a large one. The cross at my neck
preserved me, Samson, the cross at my neck weighing
forty stone. Had that cross not been upon my breast,
my tempestuous head would have been torn off.”
Then all those heroes of Holy Russia quickly
saddled their good horses and rode through the open
plain, towards Kiev town, to the Tartar army.
And from the high hill the old Cossack, Llya of
Mtrom, saw them, as they rode their good horses. He
came down from the high hill and rode to meet the
Russian heroes. Twelve in number were the heroes
and Ilya was the thirteenth.
They rode up to the Tartar host and pushed on
their heroic steeds and began to fight the Tartar
army. And they were trampling on the great army,
and they came to the linen tent.
And in the tent that dog, King Kalin was sitting,
and the heroes said:
“We will cut off the turbulent head of that
dog, King Kalin.”
“Why should we cut off his turbulent head?”
said the old Cossack, Ily4 of Mirom. “We will take
him to royal Kiev town, to the glorious Prince
Vladimir.”
So to the glorious Prince Vladimir at the royal
town of Kiev they took the dog, King Kilin. To the
white stone palace they took him, and Vladimir, Prince
of royal Kiev, took that dog by his white hands and
Mees
( O Gs S.


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
made him sit at the oaken table, gave him sugar
sweetmeats to eat and honey drink to drink.
And to Vladimir the Prince spoke King Kalin
these words:
“Come now, Vladimir, Prince of royal Kiev, do not
cut off my warlike head. We will write between us a
great writing, and I, King Kalin, will pay thee tribute
for ever and ever—I to thee, Prince Vladimir!”
And then in those good old times they all sang
Glory!
And so they had peace for a time, but fresh hordes
of Tartars still came, and the Russian heroes fought
them, and sometimes the Russians could not overcome
the Tartars, and in one of these great fights Ilya, they
say, was caught away from the fighting, and he was
turned into stone, and his good horse with him.
70












Sees
SS
Sa a =
Sat
a,
Se— ee
2
.
-
eos —
i
So, ee 2
See
Se
eee ESAS
ein te
gina
eee,
3
x
=
:
=
eta
se
Ss
Se - —< bn i Pet aa > ae
gat
See
ae,
tp = et