IV.
SVYATOGOR AND ILYA OF MUROM.
EAR the town of Mutrom in Russia there lived
long ago a farmer called Ivan, with his wife
and family. He and his wife and his sons and
daughters worked hard in the fields, all but one son,
Ilya, who was always sitting at home. For thirty
years Ilyd had been sitting at home because he could
use neither hands nor feet.
One day he was sitting by the window as usual,
when two wandering pilgrims came passing by. They
were both too lame and old to work, but they had
made the pilgrimage to the Holy Land and now walked
about the country singing psalms and living upon the
food and money that kind folk gave them. They saw
Ilya at his window and called out:
“Tlyi! Ilya of Muirom, open wide the gate for the
pilgrims; let us into thy house.”
Ilya of Mtirom answered :
“Well now, good pilgrims, I cannot open the gate,
for I have been sitting here these thirty years. I can
use neither hands nor feet.”
Again the pilgrims called to him:
“QO Ilya, rise up upon thy nimble feet. Open
wide the gates and let the pilgrims in to visit thee in
thy house.”
17


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
Ily& stood up upon his feet, as though nothing ailed
him. He opened wide the gates and let the pilgrims
into the house. They came in, crossing themselves like
good Russians, and bowed low when they were in the
room.
“Pray give us a drink, Ily4,” they said.
Ily4 brought them a large bowl of honey drink;
it held about a pailful and a half, and he offered it to
the pilgrims. They took it and drank, and then offered
it to Ily4. He drank the bowlful and felt a rush of
warmth throughout his body, his hero’s heart burned
within him.
“What dost thou feel, O Ilya?” asked the pilgrims.
Ilya bowed to the ground before the pilgrims and
answered :
“T feel great strength within me.”
“Bring another drink, Ily4,” said the pilgrims.
And Ilya brought another cupful, and offered it to
the pilgrims. They offered it to Ilydé, and Iya
emptied the cup without drawing breath.
“How dost thou feel now, Ilya4?” asked the
pilgrims.
“TI feel great strength, but only half as much as
before,” answered he.
Then the wandering pilgrims said:
“O Ilya, thou wilt be a great hero, and it is not
written that thou shouldst die in battle. Fight thou
with all the heroes and the bold warrior women of the
plain, and defend thyself against them; only go not
out to fight with the hero Svyatogor, for with his
18
a


WAS — eS —————— = Re
—_—_———_—_— SS
TMi le
{
i
ieeeheg,
Cae }
sq Wey
ee ‘fy
mn)
WIPE ’ i FF F Zz G ¥
tis, 472) . 4 La A
ZO PN UMTS gz Lh




HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
strength he could carry the earth; and fight not with
the hero Samson, for he has upon his head seven hairs
of angels; also fight not with the race of Mikula, for
damp Mother Earth loves him. Neither go after Volga,
son of Svyatoslav; he will overcome thee, not by force,
but by craft and wisdom. Now rise up, O Ilyd, mount
thy horse, and ride out into the free and open plain.
Buy the first foal thou seest with its dam, and in
three months’ time thou mayst put on the saddle.
Feed him on millet and maize; walk him about for
three months, then keep him for three nights in the
garden, and roll the foal three mornings in the dew.
Lead him to a high fence, and when he will readily
leap the fence both from this side and the other, then
ride him where thou wilt, he will carry thee.”
Then the pilgrims vanished, and presently Ilya’s
father and mother came in from their work in the
fields. His brother and sisters came in also from their
work, and his father and mother were glad indeed to
see that Ilya could walk as if nothing had ever ailed him.
Then from joy they became sad again, and said:
“Thirty years has Ily4 been sitting on the bench
as if he had neither hands nor feet!”
And Ilyé said to his father:
“Where have you been working to-day, father?”
But his parents only said:
“Glory to Thee, O Lord! Thirty years has Ilya
been sitting by the stove, and was he not without
hands or feet?”


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
And Ilya asked again:
“But you, father and mother, where have you
been working on the farm?”
“Well, Ilya,” answered his father, “we are working
in the field by the stream; we are clearing it for
ploughing. It is the field three fields from home.”
After they had dined Ilyd said to his parents:
“Now, dear father and mother, take me to the
water meadow. Show me my bit of work.”
And his parents took him down to the water
meadow, and Ilya said:
“Show me how far you will plough here,” and
they showed him the boundary and sat down to rest.
But Ily& seized the brushwood by handfuls and
cut it down by the roots and threw it all on to a
pile on the edge of the field. And he worked so
hard and so fast that the field was cleared in a
quarter of the time that it would have taken his
father to finish the work. The father and mother were
asleep, for they were tired by the long morning’s work,
but they awoke when Ilya came towards them, saying:
“Come, father and mother, is not your field well
cleared for the ploughing? Now I must say good-bye
to home!”
Then Ily& saddled his good horse and put on the
bridle, and his father and mother gave him their
farewell blessing.
He rode away through the open plain till at last
22


5 . prays
cua ia I oi Soa aa Ullage
N A
E i) Styne = nchanter's if
Palace. , cual al
=e
SO ee Oe bak Ke t
Loo
a River Desna er. -
LY Nightingale's
WHET Nest.
4 4A Oi fis hiccse
| The JOURNEYS of ena ae
ILYA of MUROM.
Black Sea. Qe stip
Sens


i Pie Ue ta)
ia


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
he came to a high mountain. When he reached the
high mountain he climbed up it and then lay down to
rest, and he slept for twelve days the sleep of a hero.
When he awoke he saw at a distance a white tent
standing beneath a tree. He mounted his horse again
and rode a long way through the plain towards the
white tent. This tent stood beneath the shade of a
great green oak tree upon another hill. In the tent
was a great bed seventy feet long and forty-two feet
wide. Ilya tied up his horse to the oak tree and lay
down upon that hero’s bed, and went to sleep. Now
the sleep of a hero is sound, and Ilya slept for three
days and three nights.
On the third day his good horse heard a terrible
noise from the north. Mother Earth rocked, the dark
forest shook, the rivers overflowed their steep banks.
Ilya’s good horse struck the ground with his hoofs, but
could not waken Ilya of Murom. At last the horse
spoke to him in a human voice:
“O Ilya of Muirom! thou knowest not that danger
is near thee. The hero Svyatogér is coming to his
tent. Let me loose that I may flee across the open
plain, and thou mayest climb up into the green oak
tree.”
Ily4 untied his horse’s bridle and set the good horse
free to gallop across the plain; and then he climbed
up into the oak tree. From the oak tree he saw the
hero Svyatogoér coming on his great horse. The hero
was taller than a standing forest, and his head nearly
touched a moving cloud. On his shoulder he carried
25


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
a great chest of glass. He came down from his horse
and placed the chest on the ground and opened it
with a golden key. Out of the chest came the hero’s
wife. So lovely was she that no such beauty had ever
been seen or heard of in the whole white world.
Very tall she was and elegant, and delicately did
she walk. She had eyes like the eyes of a bright
falcon, eyebrows of black sable, and waving black hair.
As soon as she came out of the great chest she set to
work to lay the table for her husband’s dinner. She
spread a bright chequered table-cloth and took from
the chest a bottle of honey drink and a cup and
sweetmeats full many, and placed them upon the
chequered cloth.
After he had eaten and drunk, Svyatogér lay down
to sleep on his great bed in the tent, but his wife
went to walk on the open plain. She caught sight of
Ilya in the oak tree and would have him to come down
and talk to her. When her husband suddenly woke
up she put Ilya into her husband’s pocket to hide
him. Svyatogor stood up and put his wife back into
the glass chest and lifted it on to his shoulder again.
He called up his horse and got upon his back and set
off to ride, but soon the horse stumbled, and Svyatogor
was vexed and asked why he was stumbling.
“This morning,” said the horse in a human voice,
“T was carrying a hero and a hero’s wife, but
now I am carrying two heroes as well as the hero’s
wife.”
26


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
Svyatogor looked round and saw no one, but putting
his hand into his pocket there he found LIlyd. The
hero asked Ilya’ whence he came. Ilya told him the
truth, and Svyatogor was exceeding angry and killed
his wife for trying to deceive him.
That Llya had dealt straightly pleased the hero
Svyatogor, and there arose a great friendship between
them. Svyatogoér exchanged crosses with Ilydé in token
of friendship, and called Ily4 his younger brother. He
taught Llya all the handling of weapons, how to use
his mace and his bow and arrows and spear in
fighting, and also all the ways of travel of the heroes.
Ilya had called up his good horse from the plain by a
loud whistle, and the two heroes, the old Svyatogér
and the younger Ilya of Murom, rode on _ together
through the open plain till they came to a great tomb
built of stone. Upon the tomb was written these
words :—
“He who is fated to lie in this tomb will exactly
fit it.”
Ilya lay down in the tomb, but it was too long and
too wide for him, and at once he sprang out of it.
The giant hero Svyatogér lay down there, and the
tomb just fitted him.
“The tomb is just made for me,” said the hero.
“Take the lid of the tomb, ya, and cover me.”
Ily4 answered:
) 4


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
“T will not take up the lid of the tomb, O, my
big brother. I will not cover thee. This is a foolish
jest of thine—thou wilt bury thyself.”
And Svyatogér took the lid and covered himself up
in the tomb, but when he tried to lift the lid off again
he could not move it. He struggled and strove to lift
it, but could do nothing. Then he called to Ilya:
“O, my young brother! It seems that my fate
has found me. I cannot raise the lid. Try thou to lift
iii,
Tly&4 of Mutrom tried hard to raise the cover, but
what could he do?
Then said Svyatogor the hero:
“Take my sword of steel and strike across the lid
of the tomb.”
Ilya tried to lift Svyatogor’s great sword, but could
not—it was too heavy for him—and he had to say:
“T cannot lift thy sword, O, my brother!”
Svyatogor then called to him:
“My little brother, bend down to this small chink
in the tomb, and I will breathe upon thee the spirit of
a hero.”
Ily&4 bent down to the chink and Svyatogér the
hero breathed upon him his hero’s spirit. Llya felt
that his former strength had become three times as
great as before. He took the sword of steel and struck
a blow across the lid of the tomb. By this blow
sparks were struck, but on the place where he struck
the lid there grew a band of iron.
The hero Svyatogér called to him again, saying:
28


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
“My young brother, I am suffocating; try again
to strike the lid lengthwise.”
Ilya struck the cover lengthwise with the great
sword, but again where he struck there grew a band
of iron.
Then the hero Svyatogér spoke to him, saying:
“My young brother, I am suffocating. Stoop down to
the chink and I will breathe upon thee and will give
thee all my great strength.”
But Llya answered :
“Tf I had all thy strength, O, my big brother,
Earth would not bear me.”
Then said the hero Svyatogor:
“Thou hast done well, little brother, in that thou
didst not do my last bidding. I should have breathed
upon thee with the breath of the dead, and thou wouldst
have lain dead by me. Now, farewell; take my sword
of steel, but lead my good horse to my tomb; none
but I must own that horse.”
Then came from the chink the last breath of the
hero. Ilyd said farewell to his friend, girded on his
sword of steel, but left the hero’s horse by his master’s
tomb, and he rode away into the free and open plain.
29


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.