x.
ILYA OF MUROM AND NIGHTINGALE
THE ROBBER.
The green oak bows not down to the earth,
Leaves of paper do not grow.
LYA had made up his mind to go to Kiev town
to seek service with the gracious Prince Vladimir,
but before setting out on that long journey
he wished to see his father again and ask for his
blessing, so he rode back to Murom and to his old
home. He found his old father there and greeted him,
saying :
“Come thou, my own dear Father! I am here
to ask for thy blessing. I go to glorious, royal Kiev
town to pray at the sanctuary of Kiev and to pledge
myself to Vladimir the Prince, to serve him in faith
and in truth, and to uphold the Christian faith.”
The old farmer Ivan blessed Ilya and said:
“TI give thee my blessing for the good work, but for
evil work no blessing I give. Go thou on the right
road, and do no harm to any woman whether she be
Christian or Tartar.”
Ilya of Murom bowed to the earth before his father,
and said farewell to his mother and his sisters and
brothers, and then he mounted his good horse and rode
30


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
through the open plain. With his whip he struck his
horse on the curved hind quarter and his restive steed
was wroth and suddenly sprang from the earth and
bounded higher than an upright tree, almost as high as
a moving cloud. At the first bound he passed twelve
miles, at the second bound he came to a well. By the
well Ilya cut down a green oak tree, and beside the
well he built a small chapel, and upon the chapel he
wrote his name,
ILYA OF MUROM, SON OF IVAN,
so that if some strong and mighty hero should ride
that way, he should know the name of the builder of
that chapel.
At the third bound Ilyd’s horse brought him to the
town of Chérnigov. Near Chérnigov there stood a
countless host of Tartars, and at their head were three
Princes, each with the strength of forty thousand. On
seeing this vast horde the hero’s heart grew hot within
him, and he could not control his longing to fight.
His heart was filled with fires, and it burned too as
if scorched by frost. Then he spoke and said:
“T desire not to go against my father’s wish, or
knowingly to disregard his command.”
Then he took in his hand his battle-sword and
taught it to take a walk through the army. Where
he turned, it opened out a street, and when he turned
round there was a great open space. Ilyd4 made his
way to the three princes, and spoke thus to them:
31


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
“Come, my three king’s sons! Shall I take you away
as prisoners, or shall I cut off your warlike heads?
If I take you away as prisoners, I must travel over
roads that I know not and must carry bread, but if
I take off your heads the kingly race will be destroyed.
If you will go home to your own country, you will
spread such report of me that it will be known all
over Russia, and you will tell it everywhere that in
Holy Russia there are strong and mighty heroes.”
The Governor of Chérnigov saw Ilya and said:
“This Lord has vanquished our tyrant and cleansed
our glorious city of Chérnigov,”’ and he spoke to his
princes and nobles and said:
“Go ye and call in this goodly hero to eat bread
and salt with me.”
And the princes and nobles came forth to greet
Ilya of Murom and said:
“Come now, thou stalwart and goodly hero, and
tell us by what honoured name thou art called, and
what is thy renowned father’s name?”
“They call me by the name of Ilya, but I am
honoured as the son of Ivan,” said Ilya.
“Come, Ily4 of Mutrom,” said the princes and nobles,
“come to our Governor, he sends us to invite thee to
eat bread and salt with him.”
But Ily&4 wished to be on the way to Kiev and
answered with little ceremony:
“T will not come to your Governor; I wish not to
eat bread and salt with him. Show me the straight
road to glorious, royal Kiev town.”
32


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
So they had to let him go on his way, and they
showed him the straight road to Kiev across the open
plain.
Farther, farther upon on the open plain waves the
feather grass in the breeze, and there upon the open
plain, among old folk, mothers and men, rode the Old
Cossack, Ily’ of Mtrom, and the horse he rode was
like a fierce wild beast and he himself like a bright
falcon.
Now the old hero carried no money, only seven
thousand golden ducats had he with him, and of small
money, forty thousand pieces. And the horse the hero
rode was priceless. Why was the hero’s horse priceless?
Because these was no price for the horse.
When he came to a river he looked for no ford.
Now the river was a full mile wide, but the good
steed leapt from bank to bank. Then Ilya saw a village
near by and the villagers—brigands, as we say in our
Russian tongue—rode out after the hero. They swept
round him and tried to rob him, tried to part him
from his life and soul.
Then said Ilya of Murom, son of Ivan:
“Oh come, brother villagers, no reason have ye to
kill an old man like me. And ye shall take nothing
from the old man.”
He took from his saddle his tough bow and
brought out from his quiver a sharp arrow. He bent
his bow and fitted the arrow to the silken string, and
33
D


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
shot—not at the village folk—brigands though they
were—for he would have been loth to slay them, but
he shot at the green oak tree; and the bow-string
sang in the tough bow, the villagers fell from their
horses, the arrow struck the crackling green oak tree
and shattered the oak into chips and shavings. By
this heroic deed of thunder the brigand villagers were
filled with fear, and for five hours they lay without
sense, and Ilya made sport of them.
“Come, come, good youths, you village brigands!
Why do you lie half the night there upon the damp
earth? Why go off to sleep and sleep half the night?
On my way here I passed many people both on
horseback and on foot; you have let many a good
chance escape you.”
The goodly youths stood up upon their nimble feet
and threw themselves at Ilya’s feet and said:
“OQ thou brave hero! come and join our band and
be thou our chieftain.”
The good hero, Ilya of Murom, answered them:
“T desire not to join your band; I am on my way
to Kiey town, to Vladimir the Prince, to help him,
and to fight and defend him.”
The bold hero rode on through the open plain till
he came to a pillar of white oak. On the pillar this
writing was written:
“To ride straight on—only five hundred miles,
But making a round—seven hundred miles.”
34


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
Ily4 looked at this writing and said:
“Tf I ride straight, I shall cease to live; this way
I can neither ride nor walk nor fly. Nightingale the
Robber sits in his nest upon the seven oaks, and the
robber-dog will seize me at the seventh mile.”
Ilya stood still to think what he should do.
“The straight horse-road is broken up, the little
bridge of white hazel is broken down. It would be no
honour to me, or glory to my knighthood to ride by
that roundabout way. It is better, to ride by the
straight road.”
At once he got down from his good steed; with
one hand he led his horse, while with the other he
put planks across the stream for a bridge—that bridge
of white hazel.
The straight road he mended, and he rode on till
he came near the clump of seven oak trees upon which
Nightingale the Robber had built his great nest.
Nightingale the Robber was sitting upon his nest
of twisted boughs upon the seven oak trees, and Ilya
rode up to the oak trees. The robber-dog tried to
seize him just as he had come to the seventh mile,
and Nightingale the Robber roared like a wild aurochs,
and the villain whistled like a nightingale, and the
robber-dog howled like a dog.
And at these sounds Ilya’s good steed fell upon
his knees with terror at the roar of the aurochs,
35


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
and the whistle of the nightingale, and the dog-like
howling of the robber-dog. Ilya struck his horse
between the ears and also struck him upon the flank,
saying :
“Oh thou food for wolves, thou grass-bag! Hast
thou never heard the roar of an aurochs? and hast
thou never heard the whistle of a nightingale, and
the howling of a robber-dog ?”
The hero did not sit still but quickly bent his
strong bow, took a sharp arrow from his quiver and
shot the arrow at Nightingale the Robber as he sat
there in his nest on the seven oak trees. The arrow
hit Nightingale the Robber in the right eye and came
out at the left ear, and Nightingale the Robber fell
from his nest down upon the damp earth.
Then Ilya took Nightingale the Robber and tied
him to his Circassian stirrup and made him walk
beside the horse towards Kiev town. Presently they
came to the house of Nightingale the Robber. It was
a big house in a large yard, and round the yard was
a high iron fence with spikes on the railings, and upon
every spike was set the head of a hero; for Nightingale
the Robber killed all that passed that way.
Nightingale’s children caught sight of their father
and called out:
“Look! father is bringing a man.”
And Nightingale’s young wife looked from the
window and said:
36


tal HF SS =) |
mm ip Bs we
a tit x S=—— z = i a
a . | | B}
( ) i PE ZZ
aN tts | es her pg
HEA a \ vA oe Ley
: i Mt eit aed VA
Lf) ti HY "eiacraps Sy
seaeustlesunts at { GA
ti
PATE hibit ray VICE ae
Cr : PBANAS TO vent A past BONNHKA




HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
“A strange man is carrying off your dear father.”
And she called to some men who were idling about
the yard and said:
“Will you not take him from this wanderer on
the road? Is your dear father nothing to you? He
has fallen into the power of this horseman. It would
be better to take a cup full of red gold, and another
of pure silver, and a third cup full of round pearls.
Go now and offer them as a ransom. Speak to this
horseman and persuade him. Coax him and talk him
over so that he may release Nightingale.”
And they rushed into the house, and Nightingale’s
wife took the keys and went down to the deep vaults
where all Nightingale’s treasure was stored, and they
filled a cup full of red gold, and another with pure
silver, and a third with round pearls, and they went
out to Ily4 with flattering words and tried to coax
him and talk him over, saying:
“O thou bold hero, good youth, give us back our
dear father and we will give thee gold and silver!”
Ily& received these messengers and talked to them
thus :
“Look here, brothers, you who work for gain,
I will not give you your dear father; he would only
turn brigand again and rob the travellers passing this
”
way.
And Ilya rode on to Kiev town with Nightingale
the Robber by his side, still tied to the stirrup so that
39


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
he could not run away. LTlyé hurried on, for he would
fain be at Kiev in time for the service on Haster
morning; but he could not get there in time. When
he reached Kiev he rode into the wide courtyard of
the Prince’s palace. He tied up his good horse to the
gold ring on a carven pillar, but did not take off
either the saddle or the bridle, and he left Nightingale
the Robber still tied to the stirrup.
Then Ily&4 walked quickly through the new
entrance, through the guard room and into the hall.
There he crossed himself like a good Russian, and
made his bow as he came into the hall. The steward
of Vladimir the Prince he greeted, and asked him:
“Where is the Prince Vladimir of royal Kiev?”
“Prince Vladimir has gone to Mass,’ was the
answer.
Ilya sat down on the plain wooden bench to wait,
and in a short time Prince Vladimir came in with his
nobles and attendants from the Haster service.
Then they all gave greetings one to the other, and
each hero greeted the other, and Vladimir spoke to
Ilya and said:
“All hail to thee, brave youth, I know not thy
name or thy father’s name. Art thou a Tsar or
a Tsar’s son? Art thou a king or a king’s son?”
Ilya answered and said:
“T am from the town of Murom. I am the old
Cossack, Ilya of Murom.”
And they all sat down at the table to eat bread,
40


i ie ee
‘ii wu ‘is H| ie R A fs y Y: :
ak 2 ATT | Nani ahi
i t on, fue ; ANT mie ye 0 - AN
ne yin Lt iW oe vn — | uid SE ey ie 7
Slam, Cal nae A HI
Mokyaas HAGA My)
i ls)
N | ; "g } KO TOPOAY ls i h i ee RieBY: = ===




HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
and they carved and ate white swans, and Ily4 began
to talk and to boast of what he had done.
“TY am a brave hero, I have been riding through the
eve of Easter Day. I would fain have been in time for
the Easter Mass, but I could not get here in time for
Kaster morning, for the hour was past. I rode here by
the straight road, and when I reached the green oaks,
Nightingale the Robber was sitting upon the seven
oaks. That ill-doer used to seize upon every one for
seven miles round. When I came near the oaks
Nightingale roared like a wild aurochs, and the villain
whistled like a nightingale, and the robber-dog howled
like a dog. Then my good horse fell upon his knees
with fear, but I took out my tough bow, set the sharp
arrow, and shot Nightingale the Robber. I shot the
villain through the right eye, and the arrow came out
by the left ear. Then Nightingale fell upon the damp
earth, and [ took the robber and fastened him
to my Circassian stirrup and brought the villain with
me.”
Vladimir the Prince looked at Ilya and said:
“Tt seems to me, my bold youth, that there must be a
big tavern in this country! Hast thou been drinking
strong drink? Art thou not making empty boasts,
good hero?”
Ilya’s wrath grew hot within him, and angrily he
said:
“Thou it is who art the fool, O Prince of royal
Kiev! I have Nightingale the Robber here, tied to my
Circassian stirrup.”


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
Then all sprang up and rushed out, hurried and
stumbled against each other as they ran out to see
Nightingale the Robber. They all spoke and shouted
together and called out to him:
“QO thou Nightingale the Robber! Roar, O
Nightingale, like an aurochs! Thou evil doer, whistle
like a nightingale! O thou robber-dog, howl like a
dog!”
Nightingale the Robber looked up and said:
“With you I neither eat nor drink, and I will not
obey you.”
At once the crowd of courtiers turned back to the
hall and came to Ilya4 of Murom, bowed low to him
and craved their boon:
“OQ tIly4 of Mutrom, we beg thee to make
Nightingale the Robber roar lke an aurochs, and
make the villain whistle like a nightingale, and make
the robber-dog howl like a dog.”
And Ilya spoke to the Prince and said:
“O Vladimir, Prince of royal Kiev! Nightingale’s
lips are now sealed together and his mouth is filled with
dried blood, for my arrow went through his right eye
and it came out by the left ear. Pray let a bowl of
strong drink be poured out for him—a bowl weighing half
a hundredweight, a bowl holding four gallons, and let
it be given to Nightingale.”
And they poured him out a bowl of strong drink—
a bowl weighing half a hundredweight, a bowl holding
four gallons; and they took it to Nightingale the
44


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
Robber. He took the bowl in one hand, drank off
the bowl of strong drink at one draught, and spoke
these words:
“Pour out another bowl of strong beer—a bowl
weighing half a hundredweight, a bowl holding four
gallons, and pour out a third bowl of sweet mead—
a bowl weighing half a hundredweight, a bowl holding
four gallons.”
And they poured out a bowlful of strong beer, and
they poured out a bowlful of sweet mead and brought
both to Nightingale the Robber. He took the bowl
with one hand and drank off the bowlful at one
draught. And then Nightingale the Robber was
drunken, and Ilya of Murom said to him:
“Now, Nightingale! Roar, thou robber, hke an
aurochs; whistle, O villain, like a nightingale; and
howl, O dog, like a dog.”
And Nightingale the Robber roared like an aurochs
the villain whistled like a nightingale, and the robber-
dog howled like a dog.
Princes and nobles all lay for dead, but Vladimir
the Prince of royal Kiev stood up straight and went
up to Ilya, for the Prince had a boon to ask:
“Silence Nightingale the Robber, lest he whistle
again like a nightingale, and my nobles leave me
here alone.”


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
ie
THE THREE WAYS.
NE day Ilya set off on his good horse for a ride.
He rode a long way through the open plain
till he came to the Burning Stone. Three
lengths beyond the stone there were three paths
leading this way and that from the Burning Stone,
and upon the stone was written:
“Who goes by the first path will be killed.
Who goes by the second path will find marriage.
Who goes by the third path will become rich.”
He stopped to consider:
“By which path shall I go? Why should a bold
hero want to be rich? Why should I want to marry ?
I will take the way to be killed.”
So he took that way and rode on for three hours,
and he rode three hundred miles, and then he came
to a hill, and at that hill, that high hill, brigands
began to come up, and there came up forty thousand
brigands. They began to defy our bold hero, and the
brave Cossack spoke and hailed them:
“Come, you forty thousand robbers! What will
you take from me, the bold hero? I have not many
46


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
chests of uncounted gold, I have no beautiful young
wives, I have no fine clothes, I have nothing but a
good horse, a good horse which cost three hundred ;
on the horse are trappings worth five hundred; on
myself a hero’s gear worth a cool thousand.”
When he drew his iron mace of three tons weight,
he began to defy the robbers, and he killed the forty
thousand robbers.
Then the bold hero turned back, and when he
reached the Burning Stone he altered the writing
thus:
“Tf thou goest by this road thou wilt not be
killed.”
And he said:
“T shall go by the road to marriage.”
So Lly4 took the second path and rode on for just
three hundred miles. He rode on always through the
plain, that open plain, through the open plain, the green
meadow, through those open plains and through green
meadows till he came to a wonderful and a strange
thing. If we called it a town it would be too small;
if we called it a village it would seem too large, but
there stood a palace built of white stone. When Ilya
reached the broad palace yard there came a most
beautiful young princess from the palace of white
stone. She came to meet the brave hero and took him
by his white hands, kissed him with her sweet lips,
47


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
led him into the white stone palace, and made him
sit down at the oaken table, where a feast was spread.
Ily4 ate and drank in plenty, and stuffed himself the
whole day long till evening, when he rose up from
the oaken table and spoke to the princess and said:
“OQ thou enchanting and beautiful lady, where
are thy warm sleeping chambers? Where are the
beds of carved wood? Where are the soft feather
beds? I am an old man and weary, and I would fain
sleep.”
And the princess led him to a warm chamber, but
the old man stood by the bed and shook his head and
sald :
“Much have I travelled through Holy Russia, but
so strange a thing have I never seen. It seems to me
that that bed is a trap.”
Suddenly he seized the princess by her white
hands and threw her against the brick wall against
which the bed stood. The bed of carved wood turned over
and the princess fell down into a deep dungeon below.
The old Cossack walked out of the palace, and out-
side he found the door of the deep dungeon. Then he
took the golden keys, went on and unlocked the deep
dungeon and set free many goodly youths and brave,
and many strong and mighty heroes, but the beautiful
and wicked enchantress was killed. And all the rich
treasure which Ilydé found there in that white stone
palace he bestowed on the good youths and brave, and
on the strong and mighty heroes. But that white
stone palace he gave to the flames.
48


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
And then our bold hero rode back again, and
when he came to the Burning Stone he again altered
the graven letters and wrote:
“By that way I went—I was not married.”
“T go,” said he, “by the third path, where one will
become rich.”
And on he rode for three hours, three hundred
miles he rode, and again he rode through the
plain, the open plain, the meadow, the green meadow,
to a place where there were sunk deep pits in the
ground, all piled up with red gold—red gold, pure
silver, and fine round pearls.
Ilya looked at the gold and said:
“What has a bold hero to do with these riches,
with this treasure of much uncounted gold?”
He began to consider: and then he took enough of
this treasure in this plain, this open plain, to build
an abbey for prayers to God. He built a church, a
minster church, ordered the singing of psalms and the
ringing of bells, and then L[lya said:
“Let him whose treasure it was go and look for it!”
And then the bold hero turned back again;
again he rode to that Burning Stone; again he wrote
beneath that inscription :
“Though I rode by that path, I became not rich.”
49


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.