THE STORY OF VOLGA.
HE red sun was going down behind the high hills,
behind the blue sea. The countless stars
showed themselves in the clear sky, and the
bright moon was shining in the heavens when
Volga the Hero was born in Holy Russia. Damp
Mother Earth was his cradle. The earth rocked, and
there was a great storm upon the blue sea, and the
fish went down into the deep sea, the birds flew up
into the sky, the great aurochs and the deer fled over
the hills, the hares and rabbits ran into the thick
forest, and the wolves and bears fled away among the
fir trees, sables and martens escaped to the islands,
because they knew that a hero was born in Russia.
When Volga was an hour and a half old he spoke
with a voice like thunder, and said:
“Come then, O Lady, my mother, young Marfa,
put no baby-clothes upon me, nor a sash of silk, but
give me strong steel armour, and on my head put a
helmet of gold. In my right hand a club, a club made
heavy with lead of the weight of a hundred pounds.”
1


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
When Volga was seven years old his mother had
him taught to read, and she made him write with a
pen. And from all the birds and beasts he learnt
their skill and wisdom and the different tongues of
all, and he understood the speech of all the beasts of
the field and forest, and of all the birds and fishes.
When he was ten years old he learned much
magic. First he learned to turn himself into a bright
falcon, and next he learned to turn himself into a grey
wolf, and the third thing he learned was to turn him-
self into a brown aurochs, a brown aurochs with
golden hoofs.
When Volga was seventeen he called his friends
and companions together and formed a bodyguard of
thirty youths save one, and Volga himself was the
thirtieth. He was their Chief, and took them with him
on his journeys. He provided for them all and gave
them abundance of food and drink, and of sugar sweet-
meats many kinds. And warm clothes, too, he gave
them, fur coats made of the skins of marten and sable
and of panther. When his comrades slept Volga slept
not. Sometimes he turned himself into a grey wolf
and ran and leaped in the dark forest and killed
moose-deer and bears and wolves. Martens and panthers
were his favourite prey, and he spared neither hares
nor foxes. And at other times he turned himself into
a bright falcon, flew far away over the blue sea and
killed geese and white swans, and the little grey ducks
he spared not.


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
One day when he was at Kiev he called his body-
guard :
“My good brave comrades,” said he, “listen to
your big brother, your Chief. Bring a rope of silk
and make a snare. Put it into the dark forest and
set the snare upon the damp earth so as to catch
beasts of the forest, and catch martens and foxes,
black sables and other wild beasts, and go on snaring
them for three days and three nights.”
They listened to their big brother, their Chief, and
they did the thing he had ordered. They took a rope of
silk to the dark forest and set a snare upon the damp
earth, but they could not catch a single beast. Then
Volgi their Chief turned himself into a lion-beast.
He leapt and bounded on the damp earth, through
the dark forest, and drove out martens and foxes,
black sables and other wild beasts, big bounding
hares and little ermines. And Volga took his own
form again, and became a goodly youth.
And again when he was at the town of Kiev with
his body-guard of brave youths he said:
“My good comrades, my brave lads, listen to your
big brother your Chief. Take a snare of silk and set it in
the dark forest at the very tops of the trees, and
with it catch geese, swans and bright falcons, and little
singing birds, and go on snaring them for three days
and three nights.”
And they listened to their big brother their Chief.
They did the thing he ordered. They took a snare
of silk, set the snare in the dark forest, at the very
3


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
tops of the trees, but they could not catch a single
bird.
Volga the Chief turned himself into an eagle. He
flew up beneath the clouds and struck down geese,
swans, bright hawks, and little singing birds.
Again when they were at the town of Kiev, Volga
the Chief said:
“Good comrades, my brave body-guard, listen to
your big brother, your Chief. Take sharp axes, good
for cutting wood, and build a ship of oak; take
fishing nets of silk and go forth upon the blue sea,
and fish for all kinds of fish—salmon and white fish,
pike and dace, and the most precious fish—sturgeon,
and go on fishing for three days and three nights.”
They listened to their big brother their Chief, and
they did the thing he ordered. They took sharp axes,
good for cutting wood, and built a ship of oak. They
took fishing nets of silk, but they could not catch a
single fish.
Volga the Chief turned himself into a big pike
and swam in the blue sea. He sent up salmon and
white sturgeon, pike and dace, and the costly fish—
sturgeon, and drove them into the nets of his men.
And again, when he was at Kiev with his body-
guard of good comrades, Volga the Chief said:
“My good brave comrades, why should we not send to
the country of the Tartars to find out what the Cham is
thinking of? For the Cham may be thinking of
something. And what if he were thinking of riding
4


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
into Holy Russia? Now, whom shall we send? If we
send an old man he will go slowly, and we shall have
long to wait. If we send a middle-aged man he will
tarry and drink by the way; and if we send a boy he
will stop and play. It seems as if Volga will have to
go himself!”
Then Volgaé the Chief turned himself into a little
bird and flew up beneath the clouds. He flew on and
soon came to the country of the Tartars. He came to
the house of the Tartar Cham and perched at the
Cham’s own window and listened to his secret talk.
The Cham said to his wife:
“Now I tell you, my Queen, I know what I know.
In Russia the grass grows not as it used to grow.
The flowers bloom not as before. Volgi must be dead
and gone.”
The Queen said:
“Come now, Santal, Cham of Tartary, the grass
grows in Russia just as before. The flowers bloom
in Russia just as before. I dreamed in the night—
in dreams one sees all things. It seemed that from
the East, that dear country, a bird was flying—a
small singing bird—and from the West-—the old
country—after the little bird there flew a black crow.
They flew together over the open plain, and they were
pecking at each other, and the little singing bird was
pecking the black crow, and she pulled out his feathers,
and all were carried away on the wind.”
5


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
And the Cham Santal of Tartary answered her:
“Oh, my Queen! I am thinking of riding soon to
Holy Russia with my army, and I shall take nine
cities and give them to my nine sons, and for myself
I shall bring back a costly fur coat.”
But the Queen said:
“You will not take nine cities or give them to your
nine sons, and you will not bring back for yourself a
costly fur coat!”
The Cham of Tartary answered in a rage:
“Oh, you old devil! You were dreaming and saw
yourself in your dream!”
And he struck her on her white face, and again
he struck her on the other cheek. He threw the
Queen down upon the brick floor, and threw her
down a second time, and said:
“T shall ride to Holy Russia; I shall take nine
cities, and give them to my nine sons; and for myself
I shall bring back a costly fur coat.”
Volga the Chief flew down from the window-ledge
to the ground and turned himself into a grey wolf and
jumped into the stable yard. He picked out all the
good horses and tore out the throat of every one.
Then Volga turned himself into a little ermine and
slipped into the armoury, where the Cham kept a great
stock of weapons for his men. Volga broke all the
tough bows, tore out the silken bow strings, destroyed
the sharp arrows, bit notches in the sharp swords, and
bent the steel maces into a bow. Then he turned
6


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
himself again into a little bird and soon flew back to
Kiev town, where he turned himself back into his own
shape, and was once more a goodly youth.
Volga came to his body-guard of good comrades.
“My brave comrades,” said he, “let us go to the
land of the Tartars!”
And they went to the land of the Tartars, and
they took all the Tartar army prisoners.


HERO PALES OF RUSSIA.
TT.
MIKULA THE VILLAGER’S SON.
EXT we come to the story of Mikula, the
N villager’s son, and how he meets with Volga
and joins his band of heroes. Young Volga
had an uncle who was a prince in the land, and the
prince gave Volg4 for his own three towns, and the
towns were to pay him a yearly tribute, and so he set
out with his body-guard of brave youths to collect this
tribute.
Volga set out, and as he rode through the free and
open plain he heard a ploughman in the open field.
The ploughman’s plough could be heard scraping over
the ground and scrunching over the stones, but the
ploughman and his plough were out of sight on the
boundless plain. Volgi rode towards the ploughman
all day from morning till evening with his brave body-
guard, but he could not come up with the ploughman.
And Volga rode on the whole of another day, another
day from morning till evening, but he could not come
up with the ploughman. The ploughman was ploughing
the field and still drove on. The ploughman’s plough
scraped on and the ploughshare creaked over the
stones, but still Volg& could not come within sight of
him, and on the third day Volga and his comrades
8


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
rode from morning till midday, and at midday they
came up with the ploughman in the open field. The
ploughman was ploughing in the field, and on he
drove. From edge to edge he swept the long furrows.
When he reached the edge of the field he could
not see the other edge. He cast out the stumps
and stones, and all the large stones he piled up in
a trench.
The ploughman had a light bay mare, and the
stock of his plough was of maple wood. His mare was
harnessed with ropes of silk.
When Volga came up with the ploughman he
spoke to him and said:
“God help thee, good ploughman, to plough the
field and till the ground, and to do thy labour, to
sweep the furrows from edge to edge of the field,
and to turn out the stumps and stones from the
ground.”
The ploughman looked at Volgaé and said:
“Here comes Volga with his brave body-guard! Yes,
I need the help of God to do my peasant’s work! Is
it far thou goest, Volgd4, and whither dost thou go
with thy brave body-guard?”
“Well, good ploughman, I am going to town to
collect the tribute. First I go to Gurchevitz town, and
next I am going to Orechovitz, and then to a third
town, Krestyanovitz.”
“Well, my Lord Volga,” said the ploughman, “I
was in town not long since on my bay mare, and I
brought away with me from the town two bags of
9


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
salt, only two bags of salt, each of fourteen hundred
pounds weight, and the peasants there are all thieves;
they asked me for threepence for toll. But I had my whip
for the journey, and I paid them their toll with my whip.”
“Now come with me, good ploughman,” said Volga,
“come and join my body-guard!”
And the good ploughman straightway unfastened
his ropes of silk, took his mare from the plough, and
got on her back.
Volga’s body-guard were all mounted on their good
horses and were setting off, but the ploughman stopped
Volga and said:
“Now, Volga, I left the plough in the furrow;
would it not be better to pull the plough out of the
ground and shake the earth from the ploughshare,
and throw the plough behind the broom bush? Not for
fear of any passing travellers who might take it, but
on account of the good-for-nothings in the village
who might meddle with my plough.”
Young Volga ordered five strong young men out
of his brave body-guard to pull the plough out of the
ground, to shake the earth from the ploughshare, and
throw the plough behind the broom bush. The five
strong young men rode up to the plough of maple
wood, they turned the plough about by the shaft, but
could not pull the plough out of the ground, or shake
the earth from the ploughshare, and throw the plough
behind the broom bush.
Young Volga then sent from his brave body-guard
a whole half-score to pull the plough out of the ground,
10


ZW Me Oe
OS sa OPS WE <
Moaoson Mii yaa GoAANHNOBHYS.




HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
to shake the earth from the ploughshare, and throw
the plough behind the broom bush. They turned the
plough round by the shaft, but could not pull the
plough out of the ground, or shake the earth from the
ploughshare, or throw the plough behind the broom
bush.
Young Volgi then sent his whole brave body-
guard to pull the plough out of the ground, shake the
earth from the ploughshare, and throw the plough
behind the broom bush, but, though they tried their
hardest, they could not pull the plough out of the
ground, or shake the earth from the ploughshare, and
throw the plough behind the broom bush. Then the
good ploughman came riding up upon his light bay
mare to this plough of maple wood. He took hold of
the plough with one hand, pulled the plough out of
the ground, shook the earth from the ploughshare, and
threw the plough into the broom bush.
Again they all mounted their good steeds and rode
on. The ploughman’s mare went on at a trot, but
Volga’s horse had to gallop to try to get up to the
ploughman’s mare, and Volgd’s horse was left behind.
Volga began to wave his cap, and he shouted:
“Stop, good ploughman. If that mare of yours were
a horse, I would give five hundred for that mare.”
The ploughman answered him:
“Stupid is Volga, the son of Svyatoslav. I took the
mare as a foal from the dam, and I paid five hundred
for that mare when she was a foal. If the mare were
a horse, she would be priceless!”
13


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.
Said Volga, the son of Svyatoslav:
“ Here, good ploughman-farmer, by what name art
thou called? What is thy father’s name, and whence
comest thou?”
And the ploughman answered him:
“Well now, Volgd, son of Svyatoslav, I plough the
fields for rye, I build my ricks, I stack my corn, I lead it
home; when I’ve brought it home, I grind the corn, I
split wood, and I brew beer. When I have brewed
beer I give it to the peasants to drink. And the peasants
call me Young Mikula, the villager’s son!”
14


HERO TALES OF RUSSIA.