story of Sringabhuja, in chap. xxxix. of book vii. of
      the "Kathasaritsagara." In it the elder sons of a
      certain king wish to get rid of their younger
      half-brother. One day a Rakshasa appears in the form
      of a gigantic crane. The other princes shoot at it in
      vain, but the youngest wounds it, and then sets off in
      pursuit of it, and of the valuable arrow which is
      fixed in it. After long wandering he comes to a castle
      in a forest. There he finds a maiden who tells him she
      is the daughter of the Rakshasa whom, in the form of a
      crane, he has wounded. She at once takes his part
      against her demon father, and eventually flies with
      him to his own country. The perils which the fugitives
      have to encounter will be mentioned in the remarks on
      Skazka XIX. See Professor Brockhaus's summary of the
      story in the "Berichte der phil. hist. Classe der K.
      Saechs. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften," 1861, pp.
      223-6. Also Professor Wilson's version in his "Essays
      on Sanskrit Literature," vol. ii. pp. 134-5.

      In two other stories in the same collection the hero
      gives chase to a boar of gigantic size. It takes
      refuge in a cavern into which he follows it. Presently
      he finds himself in a different world, wherein he
      meets a beauteous maiden who explains everything to
      him. In the first of these two stories the lady is the
      daughter of a Rakshasa, who is invulnerable except in
      the palm of the left hand, for which reason, our hero,
      Chandasena has been unable to wound him when in his
      boar disguise. She instructs Chandasena how to kill
      her father, who accordingly falls a victim to a
      well-aimed shaft. (Brockhaus's "Maehrchensammlung des
      Somadeva Bhatta," 1843, vol. i. pp. 110-13). In the
      other story, the lady turns out to be a princess whom
      "a demon with fiery eyes" had carried off and
      imprisoned. She tells the hero, Saktideva, that the
      demon has just died from a wound inflicted upon him,
      while transformed into a boar, by a bold archer.
      Saktideva informs her that he is that archer.
      Whereupon she immediately requests him to marry her
      (ibid. vol. ii. p. 175). In both stories the boar is
      described as committing great ravages in the upper
      world until the hero attacks it.]

The Adventures of a prince, the youngest of three brothers, who has
been lowered into the underground world or who has ascended into an
enchanted upper realm, form the theme of numerous skazkas, several of
which are variants of the story of Norka. The prince's elder brothers
almost always attempt to kill him, when he is about to ascend from the
gulf or descend from the steeps which separate him from them. In one
instance, the following excuse is offered for their conduct. The hero
has killed a Snake in the underground world, and is carrying its head
on a lance, when his brothers begin to hoist him up. "His brothers
were frightened at the sight of that head and thinking the Snake
itself was coming, they let Ivan fall back into the pit."[90] But this
apology for their behavior seems to be due to the story-teller's
imagination. In some instances their unfraternal conduct may be
explained in the following manner. In oriental tales the hero is often
the son of a king's youngest wife, and he is not unnaturally hated by
his half-brothers, the sons of an older queen, whom the hero's mother
has supplanted in their royal father's affections. Accordingly they do
their best to get rid of him. Thus, in one of the Indian stories which
correspond to that of Norka, the hero's success at court "excited the
envy and jealousy of his brothers [doubtless half-brothers], and they
were not satisfied until they had devised a plan to effect his
removal, and, as they hoped, accomplish his destruction."[91] We know
also that "Israel loved Joseph more than all his children," because he
was the son "of his old age," and the result was that "when his
brethren [who were only his half-brothers] saw that their father loved
him more than all his brethren, they hated him."[92] When such tales
as these came west in Christian times, their references to polygamy
were constantly suppressed, and their distinctions between brothers
and half-brothers disappeared. In the same way the elder and jealous
wife, who had behaved with cruelty in the original stories to the
offspring of her rival, often became turned, under Christian
influences, into a stepmother who hated her husband's children by a
previous marriage.

There may, however, be a mythological explanation of the behavior of
the two elder brothers. Professor de Gubernatis is of opinion that "in
the Vedic hymns, Tritas, the third brother, and the ablest as well as
best, is persecuted by his brothers," who, "in a fit of jealousy, on
account of his wife, the aurora, and the riches she brings with her
from the realm of darkness, the cistern or well [into which he has
been lowered], detain their brother in the well,"[93] and he compares
this form of the myth with that which it assumes in the following
Hindoo tradition. "Three brothers, _Ekata_ (_i.e._ the first), _Dwita_
(_i.e._ the second) and _Trita_ (_i.e._ the third) were travelling in
a desert, and being distressed with thirst, came to a well, from which
the youngest, Trita, drew water and gave it to his brothers; in
requital, they drew him into the well, in order to appropriate his
property and having covered the top with a cart-wheel, left him in the
well. In this extremity he prayed to the gods to extricate him, and by
their favor he made his escape."[94] This myth may, perhaps, be the
germ from which have sprung the numerous folk-tales about the
desertion of a younger brother in some pit or chasm, into which his
brothers have lowered him.[95]

It may seem more difficult to account for the willingness of Norka's
three sisters to aid in his destruction--unless, indeed, the whole
story be considered to be mythological, as its Indian equivalents
undoubtedly are. But in many versions of the same tale the difficulty
does not arise. The princesses of the copper, silver, and golden
realms, are usually represented as united by no ties of consanguinity
with the snake or other monster whom the hero comes to kill. In the