The second story will serve as an illustration of one of the Russian
customs with respect to the dead, and also of the ideas about
witchcraft, still prevalent in Russia. We may create for it the title
of--


  THE DEAD WITCH.[26]

  There was once an old woman who was a terrible witch, and
  she had a daughter and a granddaughter. The time came for
  the old crone to die, so she summoned her daughter and gave
  her these instructions:

  "Mind, daughter! when I'm dead, don't you wash my body
  with lukewarm water; but fill a cauldron, make it boil its very
  hottest, and then with that boiling water regularly scald me all
  over."

  After saying this, the witch lay ill two or three days, and
  then died. The daughter ran round to all her neighbors, begging
  them to come and help her to wash the old woman, and
  meantime the little granddaughter was left all alone in the cottage.
  And this is what she saw there. All of a sudden there
  crept out from beneath the stove two demons--a big one and
  a tiny one--and they ran up to the dead witch. The old demon
  seized her by the feet, and tore away at her so that he stripped
  off all her skin at one pull. Then he said to the little demon:

  "Take the flesh for yourself, and lug it under the stove."

  So the little demon flung his arms round the carcase, and
  dragged it under the stove. Nothing was left of the old woman
  but her skin. Into it the old demon inserted himself, and then
  he lay down just where the witch had been lying.

  Presently the daughter came back, bringing a dozen other
  women with her, and they all set to work laying out the corpse.

  "Mammy," says the child, "they've pulled granny's skin off
  while you were away."

  "What do you mean by telling such lies?"

  "It's quite true, Mammy! There was ever such a blackie
  came from under the stove, and he pulled the skin off, and got
  into it himself."

  "Hold your tongue, naughty child! you're talking nonsense!"
  cried the old crone's daughter; then she fetched a big cauldron,
  filled it with cold water, put it on the stove, and heated it till it
  boiled furiously. Then the women lifted up the old crone, laid
  her in a trough, took hold of the cauldron, and poured the whole
  of the boiling water over her at once. The demon couldn't
  stand it. He leaped out of the trough, dashed through the
  doorway, and disappeared, skin and all. The women stared:

  "What marvel is this?" they cried. "Here was the dead
  woman, and now she isn't here. There's nobody left to lay out
  or to bury. The demons have carried her off before our very
  eyes!"[27]

A Russian peasant funeral is preceded or accompanied by a
considerable amount of wailing, which answers in some respect to the
Irish "keening." To the _zaplachki_,[28] or laments, which are uttered
on such occasions--frequently by hired wailers, who closely resemble
the Corsican "vociferators," the modern Greek "myrologists"--allusions
are sometimes made in the Skazkas. In the "Fox-wailer,"[29] for
example--one of the variants of the well-known "Jack and the
Beanstalk" story--an old man puts his wife in a bag and attempts to
carry her up the beanstalk to heaven. Becoming tired on the way, he
drops the bag, and the old woman is killed. After weeping over her
dead body he sets out in search of a Wailer. Meeting a bear, he cries,
"Wail a bit, Bear, for my old woman! I'll give you a pair of nice
white fowls." The bear growls out "Oh, dear granny of mine! how I
grieve for thee!" "No, no!" says the old man, "you can't wail." Going
a little further he tries a wolf, but the wolf succeeds no better than
the bear. At last a fox comes by, and on being appealed to, begins to
cry aloud "Turu-Turu, grandmother! grandfather has killed thee!"--a
wail which pleases the widower so much that he hands over the fowls to
the fox at once, and asks, enraptured, for "that strain again!"[30]

One of the most curious of the stories which relate to a village
burial,--one in which also the feeling with which the Russian
villagers sometimes regard their clergy finds expression--is that
called--


  THE TREASURE.[31]

  In a certain kingdom there lived an old couple in great poverty.
  Sooner or later the old woman died. It was in winter, in severe
  and frosty weather. The old man went round to his friends and
  neighbors, begging them to help him to dig a grave for the old
  woman; but his friends and neighbors, knowing his great poverty,
  all flatly refused. The old man went to the pope,[32] (but in that
  village they had an awfully grasping pope, one without any
  conscience), and says he:--

  "Lend a hand, reverend father, to get my old woman buried."

  "But have you got any money to pay for the funeral? if
  so, friend, pay up beforehand!"

  "It's no use hiding anything from you. Not a single copeck
  have I at home. But if you'll wait a little, I'll earn some, and
  then I'll pay you with interest--on my word I'll pay you!"

  The pope wouldn't so much as listen to the old man.

  "If you haven't any money, don't you dare to come here,"
  says he.

  "What's to be done?" thinks the old man. "I'll go to the
  graveyard, dig a grave as I best can, and bury the old woman
  myself." So he took an axe and a shovel, and went to the graveyard.
  When he got there he began to prepare a grave. He
  chopped away the frozen ground on the top with the axe, and
  then he took to the shovel. He dug and dug, and at last he dug
  out a metal pot. Looking into it he saw that it was stuffed full
  of ducats that shone like fire. The old man was immensely delighted,
  and cried, "Glory be to Thee, O Lord! I shall have
  wherewithal both to bury my old woman, and to perform the
  rites of remembrance."

  He did not go on digging the grave any longer, but took the
  pot of gold and carried it home. Well, we all know what money
  will do--everything went as smooth as oil! In a trice there
  were found good folks to dig the grave and fashion the coffin.
  The old man sent his daughter-in-law to purchase meat and
  drink and different kind of relishes--everything there ought to
  be at memorial feasts--and he himself took a ducat in his hand
  and hobbled back again to the pope's. The moment he reached
  the door, out flew the pope at him.

  "You were distinctly told, you old lout, that you were not to
  come here without money; and now you've slunk back again."

  "Don't be angry, batyushka,"[33] said the old man imploringly.
  "Here's gold for you. If you'll only bury my old woman, I'll
  never forget your kindness."

  The pope took the money, and didn't know how best to
  receive the old man, where to seat him, with what words to
  smooth him down. "Well now, old friend! Be of good cheer;
  everything shall be done," said he.

  The old man made his bow, and went home, and the pope
  and his wife began talking about him.

  "There now, the old hunks!" they say. "So poor, forsooth,
  so poor! And yet he's paid a gold piece. Many a defunct
  person of quality have I buried in my time, but I never got so
  from anyone before."

  The pope got under weigh with all his retinue, and buried
  the old crone in proper style. After the funeral the old man
  invited him to his house, to take part in the feast in memory of
  the dead. Well, they entered the cottage, and sat down to table--and
  there appeared from somewhere or other meat and drink
  and all sorts of snacks, everything in profusion. The (reverend)
  guest sat down, ate for three people, looked greedily at what
  was not his. The (other) guests finished their meal, and separated
  to go to their homes; then the pope also rose from the
  table. The old man went to speed him on his way. As soon
  as they got into the farmyard, and the pope saw they were alone
  at last, he began questioning the old man: "Listen, friend!
  confess to me, don't leave so much as a single sin on your soul--it's
  just the same before me as before God! How have you
  managed to get on at such a pace? You used to be a poor
  moujik, and now--marry! where did it come from? Confess,
  friend, whose breath have you stopped? whom have you
  pillaged?"

  "What are you talking about, batyushka? I will tell you the
  exact truth. I have not robbed, nor plundered, nor killed anyone.
  A treasure tumbled into my hands of its own accord."

  And he told him how it all happened. When the pope
  heard these words he actually shook all over with greediness.
  Going home, he did nothing by night and by day but think,
  "That such a wretched lout of a moujik should have come in
  for such a lump of money! Is there any way of tricking him
  now, and getting this pot of money out of him?" He told his
  wife about it, and he and she discussed the matter together, and
  held counsel over it.

  "Listen, mother," says he; "we've a goat, haven't we?"

  "Yes."

  "All right, then; we'll wait until it's night, and then we'll do
  the job properly."

  Late in the evening the pope dragged the goat indoors, killed
  it, and took off its skin--horns, beard, and all complete. Then
  he pulled the goat's skin over himself and said to his wife:

  "Bring a needle and thread, mother, and fasten up the skin
  all round, so that it mayn't slip off."

  So she took a strong needle, and some tough thread, and
  sewed him up in the goatskin. Well, at the dead of night, the
  pope went straight to the old man's cottage, got under the window,
  and began knocking and scratching. The old man hearing
  the noise, jumped up and asked:

  "Who's there?"

  "The Devil!"

  "Ours is a holy spot![34]" shrieked the moujik, and began
  crossing himself and uttering prayers.

  "Listen, old man," says the pope, "From me thou will not
  escape, although thou may'st pray, although thou may'st cross
  thyself; much better give me back my pot of money, otherwise I
  will make thee pay for it. See now, I pitied thee in thy misfortune,
  and I showed thee the treasure, thinking thou wouldst
  take a little of it to pay for the funeral, but thou hast pillaged it
  utterly."

  The old man looked out of window--the goat's horns and
  beard caught his eye--it was the Devil himself, no doubt of it.

  "Let's get rid of him, money and all," thinks the old man;
  "I've lived before now without money, and now I'll go on living
  without it."

  So he took the pot of gold, carried it outside, flung it on the
  ground, and bolted indoors again as quickly as possible.

  The pope seized the pot of money, and hastened home.
  When he got back, "Come," says he, "the money is in our
  hands now. Here, mother, put it well out of sight, and take a
  sharp knife, cut the thread, and pull the goatskin off me before
  anyone sees it."

  She took a knife, and was beginning to cut the thread at the
  seam, when forth flowed blood, and the pope began to howl:

  "Oh! it hurts, mother, it hurts! don't cut mother, don't
  cut!"

  She began ripping the skin open in another place, but with
  just the same result. The goatskin had united with his body all
  round. And all that they tried, and all that they did, even to taking
  the money back to the old man, was of no avail. The goatskin
  remained clinging tight to the pope all the same. God evidently
  did it to punish him for his great greediness.

A somewhat less heathenish story with regard to money is the
following, which may be taken as a specimen of the Skazkas which bear
the impress of the genuine reverence which the peasants feel for their
religion, whatever may be the feelings they entertain towards its
ministers. While alluding to this subject, by the way, it may be as
well to remark that no great reliance can be placed upon the evidence
contained in the folk-tales of any land, with respect to the relations
between its clergy and their flocks. The local parson of folk-lore is,
as a general rule, merely the innocent inheritor of the bad reputation
acquired by some ecclesiastic of another age and clime.


  THE CROSS-SURETY.[35]

  Once upon a time two merchants lived in a certain town just on
  the verge of a stream. One of them was a Russian, the other a
  Tartar; both were rich. But the Russian got so utterly ruined
  by some business or other that he hadn't a single bit of property
  left. Everything he had was confiscated or stolen. The Russian
  merchant had nothing to turn to--he was left as poor as a
  rat.[36] So he went to his friend the Tartar, and besought him to
  lend him some money.

  "Get me a surety," says the Tartar.

  "But whom can I get for you, seeing that I haven't a soul
  belonging to me? Stay, though! there's a surety for you, the
  life-giving cross on the church!"

  "Very good, my friend!" says the Tartar. "I'll trust your
  cross. Your faith or ours, it's all one to me."

  And he gave the Russian merchant fifty thousand roubles.
  The Russian took the money, bade the Tartar farewell, and
  went back to trade in divers places.

  By the end of two years he had gained a hundred and fifty
  thousand roubles by the fifty thousand he had borrowed. Now
  he happened to be sailing one day along the Danube, going with
  wares from one place to another, when all of a sudden a storm
  arose, and was on the point of sinking the ship he was in. Then
  the merchant remembered how he had borrowed money, and
  given the life-giving cross as a surety, but had not paid his debt.
  That was doubtless the cause of the storm arising! No sooner
  had he said this to himself than the storm began to subside.
  The merchant took a barrel, counted out fifty thousand roubles,
  wrote the Tartar a note, placed it, together with the money, in
  the barrel, and then flung the barrel into the water, saying to
  himself: "As I gave the cross as my surety to the Tartar, the
  money will be certain to reach him."

  The barrel straightway sank to the bottom; everyone supposed
  the money was lost. But what happened? In the Tartar's
  house there lived a Russian kitchen-maid. One day she
  happened to go to the river for water, and when she got there
  she saw a barrel floating along. So she went a little way into
  the water and began trying to get hold of it. But it wasn't to be
  done! When she made at the barrel, it retreated from her:
  when she turned from the barrel to the shore, it floated after
  her. She went on trying and trying for some time, then she
  went home and told her master all that had happened. At first
  he wouldn't believe her, but at last he determined to go to the
  river and see for himself what sort of barrel it was that was
  floating there. When he got there--sure enough there was the
  barrel floating, and not far from the shore. The Tartar took off
  his clothes and went into the water; before he had gone any
  distance the barrel came floating up to him of its own accord.
  He laid hold of it, carried it home, opened it, and looked inside.
  There he saw a quantity of money, and on top of the money a
  note. He took out the note and read it, and this is what was
  said in it:--

  "Dear friend! I return to you the fifty thousand roubles for
  which, when I borrowed them from you, I gave the life-giving
  cross as a surety."

  The Tartar read these words and was astounded at the power
  of the life-giving cross. He counted the money over to see
  whether the full sum was really there. It was there exactly.

  Meanwhile, the Russian merchant, after trading some five
  years, made a tolerable fortune. Well, he returned to his old
  home, and, thinking that his barrel had been lost, he considered
  it his first duty to settle with the Tartar. So he went to his
  house and offered him the money he had borrowed. Then the
  Tartar told him all that had happened and how he had found
  the barrel in the river, with the money and the note inside it.
  Then he showed him the note, saying:

  "Is that really your hand?"

  "It certainly is," replied the other.

  Every one was astounded at this wondrous manifestation,
  and the Tartar said:

  "Then I've no more money to receive from you, brother;
  take that back again."

  The Russian merchant had a service performed as a thank-offering
  to God, and next day the Tartar was baptized with all
  his household. The Russian merchant was his godfather, and
  the kitchen-maid his godmother. After that they both lived
  long and happily, survived to a great age, and then died peacefully.[37]

There is one marked feature in the Russian peasant's character to
which the Skazkas frequently refer--his passion for drink. To him
strong liquor is a friend, a comforter, a solace amid the ills of
life. Intoxication is not so much an evil to be dreaded or remembered
with shame, as a joy to be fondly anticipated, or classed with the
happy memories of the past. By him drunkenness is regarded, like
sleep, as the friend of woe--and a friend whose services can be even
more readily commanded. On certain occasions he almost believes that
to get drunk is a duty he owes either to the Church, or to the memory
of the Dead; at times without the slightest apparent cause, he is
seized by a sudden and irresistible craving for ardent spirits, and he
commences a drinking-bout which lasts--with intervals of coma--for
days, or even weeks, after which he resumes his everyday life and his
usual sobriety as calmly as if no interruption had taken place. All
these ideas and habits of his find expression in his popular tales,
giving rise to incidents which are often singularly out of keeping
with the rest of the narrative in which they occur. In one of the many
variants,[38] for instance, of a widespread and well known story--that
of the three princesses who are rescued from captivity by a hero from
whom they are afterwards carried away, and who refuse to get married
until certain clothes or shoes or other things impossible for ordinary
workmen to make are supplied to them--an unfortunate shoemaker is told
that if he does not next day produce the necessary shoes (of perfect
fit, although no measure has been taken, and all set thick with
precious stones) he shall be hanged. Away he goes at once to a
_traktir_, or tavern, and sets to work to drown his grief in drink.
After awhile he begins to totter. "Now then," he says, "I'll take home
a bicker of spirits with me, and go to bed. And to-morrow morning, as
soon as they come to fetch me to be hanged, I'll toss off half the
bickerful. They may hang me then without my knowing anything about
it."[39]

In the story of the "Purchased Wife," the Princess Anastasia, the
Beautiful, enables the youth Ivan, who ransoms her, to win a large sum
of money in the following manner. Having worked a piece of embroidery,
she tells him to take it to market. "But if any one purchases it,"
says she, "don't take any money from him, but ask him to give you
liquor enough to make you drunk." Ivan obeys, and this is the result.
He drank till he was intoxicated, and when he left the kabak (or
pot-house) he tumbled into a muddy pool. A crowd collected and folks
looked at him and said scoffingly, "Oh, the fair youth! now'd be the
time for him to go to church to get married!"

"Fair or foul!" says he, "if I bid her, Anastasia the Beautiful will
kiss the crown of my head."

"Don't go bragging like that!" says a rich merchant--"why she wouldn't
even so much as look at you," and offers to stake all that he is worth
on the truth of his assertion. Ivan accepts the wager. The Princess
appears, takes him by the hand, kisses him on the crown of his head,
wipes the dirt off him, and leads him home, still inebriated but no
longer impecunious.[40]

Sometimes even greater people than the peasants get drunk. The story
of "Semiletka"[41]--a variant of the well known tale of how a woman's
wit enables her to guess all riddles, to detect all deceits, and to
conquer all difficulties--relates how the heroine was chosen by a
Voyvode[42] as his wife, with the stipulation that if she meddled in
the affairs of his Voyvodeship she was to be sent back to her father,
but allowed to take with her whatever thing belonging to her she
prized most. The marriage takes place, but one day the well known case
comes before him for decision, of the foal of the borrowed mare--does
it belong to the owner of the mare, or to the borrower in whose
possession it was at the time of foaling? The Voyvode adjudges it to
the borrower, and this is how the story ends:--

"Semiletka heard of this and could not restrain herself, but said that
he had decided unfairly. The Voyvode waxed wroth, and demanded a
divorce. After dinner Semiletka was obliged to go back to her father's
house. But during the dinner she made the Voyvode drink till he was
intoxicated. He drank his fill and went to sleep. While he was
sleeping she had him placed in a carriage, and then she drove away
with him to her father's. When they had arrived there the Voyvode
awoke and said--

"'Who brought me here?'

"'I brought you,' said Semiletka; 'there was an agreement between us
that I might take away with me whatever I prized most. And so I have
taken you!'

"The Voyvode marvelled at her wisdom, and made peace with her. He and
she then returned home and went on living prosperously."

But although drunkenness is very tenderly treated in the Skazkas, as
well as in the folk-songs, it forms the subject of many a moral
lesson, couched in terms of the utmost severity, in the _stikhi_ (or
poems of a religious character, sung by the blind beggars and other
wandering minstrels who sing in front of churches), and also in the
"Legends," which are tales of a semi-religious (or rather
demi-semi-religious) nature. No better specimen of the stories of this
class referring to drunkenness can be offered than the history of--


  THE AWFUL DRUNKARD.[43]

  Once there was an old man who was such an awful drunkard
  as passes all description. Well, one day he went to a kabak,
  intoxicated himself with liquor, and then went staggering home
  blind drunk. Now his way happened to lie across a river.
  When he came to the river, he didn't stop long to consider, but
  kicked off his boots, hung them round his neck, and walked
  into the water. Scarcely had he got half-way across when he
  tripped over a stone, tumbled into the water--and there was an
  end of him.

  Now, he left a son called Petrusha.[44] When Peter saw that
  his father had disappeared and left no trace behind, he took the
  matter greatly to heart for a time, he wept for awhile, he had a
  service performed for the repose of his father's soul, and he
  began to act as head of the family. One Sunday he went to
  church to pray to God. As he passed along the road a woman
  was pounding away in front of him. She walked and walked,
  stumbled over a stone, and began swearing at it, saying, "What
  devil shoved you under my feet?"

  Hearing these words, Petrusha said:

  "Good day, aunt! whither away?"

  "To church, my dear, to pray to God."

  "But isn't this sinful conduct of yours? You're going to
  church, to pray to God, and yet you think about the Evil One;
  your foot stumbles and you throw the fault on the Devil!"

  Well, he went to church and then returned home. He
  walked and walked, and suddenly, goodness knows whence,
  there appeared before him a fine-looking man, who saluted him
  and said:

  "Thanks, Petrusha, for your good word!"

  "Who are you, and why do you thank me?" asks Petrusha.

  "I am the Devil.[45] I thank you because, when that woman
  stumbled, and scolded me without a cause, you said a good
  word for me." Then he began to entreat him, saying, "Come
  and pay me a visit, Petrusha. How I will reward you to be
  sure! With silver and with gold, with everything will I endow
  you."

  "Very good," says Petrusha, "I'll come."

  Having told him all about the road he was to take, the Devil
  straightway disappeared, and Petrusha returned home.

  Next day Petrusha set off on his visit to the Devil. He
  walked and walked, for three whole days did he walk, and then he
  reached a great forest, dark and dense--impossible even to see
  the sky from within it! And in that forest there stood a rich
  palace. Well, he entered the palace, and a fair maiden caught
  sight of him. She had been stolen from a certain village by the
  evil spirit. And when she caught sight of him she cried:

  "Whatever have you come here for, good youth? here
  devils abide, they will tear you to pieces."

  Petrusha told her how and why he had made his appearance
  in that palace.

  "Well now, mind this," says the fair maiden; "the Devil will
  begin giving you silver and gold. Don't take any of it, but ask
  him to give you the very wretched horse which the evil spirits
  use for fetching wood and water. That horse is your father.
  When he came out of the kabak drunk, and fell into the water,
  the devils immediately seized him and made him their hack, and
  now they use him for fetching wood and water."

  Presently there appeared the gallant who had invited
  Petrusha, and began to regale him with all kinds of meat and
  drink. And when the time came for Petrusha to be going homewards,
  "Come," said the Devil, "I will provide you with
  money and with a capital horse, so that you will speedily get
  home."

  "I don't want anything," replied Petrusha. "Only, if you
  wish to make me a present, give me that sorry jade which you
  use for carrying wood and water."

  "What good will that be to you? If you ride it home
  quickly, I expect it will die!"

  "No matter, let me have it. I won't take any other."

  So the Devil gave him that sorry jade. Petrusha took it by
  the bridle and led it away. As soon as he reached the gates
  there appeared the fair maiden, and asked:

  "Have you got the horse?"

  "I have."

  "Well then, good youth, when you get nigh to your village,
  take off your cross, trace a circle three times about this horse,
  and hang the cross round its neck."

  Petrusha took leave of her and went his way. When he
  came nigh to his village he did everything exactly as the maiden
  had instructed him. He took off his copper cross, traced a
  circle three times about the horse, and hung the cross round its
  neck. And immediately the horse was no longer there, but in
  its place there stood before Petrusha his own father. The son
  looked upon the father, burst into tears, and led him to his cottage;
  and for three days the old man remained without speaking,
  unable to make use of his tongue. And after that they
  lived happily and in all prosperity. The old man entirely gave
  up drinking, and to his very last day never took so much as a
  single drop of spirits.[46]

The Russian peasant is by no means deficient in humor, a fact of
which the Skazkas offer abundant evidence. But it is not easy to find
stories which can be quoted at full length as illustrations of that
humor. The jokes which form the themes of the Russian facetious tales
are for the most part common to all Europe. And a similar assertion
may be made with regard to the stories of most lands. An unfamiliar
joke is but rarely to be discovered in the lower strata of fiction. He
who has read the folk-tales of one country only, is apt to attribute
to its inhabitants a comic originality to which they can lay no claim.
And so a Russian who knows the stories of his own land, but has not
studied those of other countries, is very liable to credit the Skazkas
with the undivided possession of a number of "merry jests" in which
they can claim but a very small share--jests which in reality form the
stock-in-trade of rustic wags among the vineyards of France or
Germany, or on the hills of Greece, or beside the fiords of Norway, or
along the coasts of Brittany or Argyleshire--which for centuries have
set beards wagging in Cairo and Ispahan, and in the cool of the
evening hour have cheered the heart of the villager weary with his
day's toil under the burning sun of India.

It is only when the joke hinges upon something which is peculiar to a
people that it is likely to be found among that people only. But most
of the Russian jests turn upon pivots which are familiar to all the
world, and have for their themes such common-place topics as the
incorrigible folly of man, the inflexible obstinacy of woman. And in
their treatments of these subjects they offer very few novel features.
It is strange how far a story of this kind may travel, and yet how
little alteration it may undergo. Take, for instance, the skits
against women which are so universally popular. Far away in outlying
districts of Russia we find the same time-honored quips which have so
long figured in collections of English facetiae. There is the good old
story, for instance, of the dispute between a husband and wife as to
whether a certain rope has been cut with a knife or with scissors,
resulting in the murder of the scissors-upholding wife, who is pitched
into the river by her knife-advocating husband; but not before she
has, in her very death agony, testified to her belief in the scissors
hypothesis by a movement of her fingers above the surface of the
stream.[47] In a Russian form of the story, told in the government of
Astrakhan, the quarrel is about the husband's beard. He says he has
shaved it, his wife declares he has only cut it off. He flings her
into a deep pool, and calls to her to say "shaved." Utterance is
impossible to her, but "she lifts one hand above the water and by
means of two fingers makes signs to show that it was cut."[48] The
story has even settled into a proverb. Of a contradictory woman the
Russian peasants affirm that, "If you say 'shaved' she'll say 'cut.'"

In the same way another story shows us in Russian garb our old friend
the widower who, when looking for his drowned wife--a woman of a very
antagonistic disposition--went up the river instead of down, saying to
his astonished companions, "She always did everything contrary-wise,
so now, no doubt, she's gone against the stream."[49] A common story
again is that of the husband who, having confided a secret to his wife
which he justly fears she will reveal, throws discredit on her
evidence about things in general by making her believe various absurd
stories which she hastens to repeat.[49] The final paragraph of one of
the variants of this time-honored jest is quaint, concluding as it
does, by way of sting, with a highly popular Russian saw. The wife has
gone to the seigneur of the village and accused her husband of having
found a treasure and kept it for his own use. The charge is true, but
the wife is induced to talk such nonsense, and the husband complains
so bitterly of her, that "the seigneur pitied the moujik for being so
unfortunate, so he set him at liberty; and he had him divorced from
his wife and married to another, a young and good-looking one. Then
the moujik immediately dug up his treasure and began living in the
best manner possible." Sure enough the proverb doesn't say without
reason: "Women have long hair and short wits."[50]

There is another story of this class which is worthy of being
mentioned, as it illustrates a custom in which the Russians differ
from some other peoples.

A certain man had married a wife who was so capricious that there was
no living with her. After trying all sorts of devices her dejected
husband at last asked her how she had been brought up, and learnt that
she had received an education almost entirely German and French, with
scarcely any Russian in it; she had not even been wrapped in
swaddling-clothes when a baby, nor swung in a _liulka_.[51] Thereupon
her husband determined to remedy the short-comings of her early
education, and "whenever she showed herself capricious, or took to
squalling, he immediately had her swaddled and placed in a _liulka_,
and began swinging her to and fro." By the end of a half year she
became "quite silky"--all her caprices had been swung out of her.

But instead of giving mere extracts from any more of the numerous
stories to which the fruitful subject of woman's caprice has given
rise, we will quote a couple of such tales at length. The first is the
Russian variant of a story which has a long family tree, with
ramifications extending over a great part of the world. Dr. Benfey has
devoted to it no less than sixteen pages of his introduction to the
Panchatantra,[52] tracing it from its original Indian home, and its
subsequent abode in Persia, into almost every European land.


  THE BAD WIFE.[53]

  A bad wife lived on the worst of terms with her husband, and
  never paid any attention to what he said. If her husband told
  her to get up early, she would lie in bed three days at a stretch;
  if he wanted her to go to sleep, she couldn't think of sleeping.
  When her husband asked her to make pancakes, she would say:
  "You thief, you don't deserve a pancake!"

  If he said:

  "Don't make any pancakes, wife, if I don't deserve them,"
  she would cook a two-gallon pot full, and say,

  "Eat away, you thief, till they're all gone!"

  "Now then, wife," perhaps he would say, "I feel quite sorry
  for you; don't go toiling and moiling, and don't go out to the
  hay cutting."

  "No, no, you thief!" she would reply, "I shall go, and do
  you follow after me!"

  One day, after having had his trouble and bother with her
  he went into the forest to look for berries and distract his grief,
  and he came to where there was a currant bush, and in the middle
  of that bush he saw a bottomless pit. He looked at it for
  some time and considered, "Why should I live in torment with
  a bad wife? can't I put her into that pit? can't I teach her a
  good lesson?"

  So when he came home, he said:

  "Wife, don't go into the woods for berries."

  "Yes, you bugbear, I shall go!"

  "I've found a currant bush; don't pick it."

  "Yes I will; I shall go and pick it clean; but I won't give
  you a single currant!"

  The husband went out, his wife with him. He came to the
  currant bush, and his wife jumped into it, crying out at the top
  her voice:

  "Don't you come into the bush, you thief, or I'll kill you!"

  And so she got into the middle of the bush, and went flop
  into the bottomless pit.

  The husband returned home joyfully, and remained there
  three days; on the fourth day he went to see how things were
  going on. Taking a long cord, he let it down into the pit, and
  out from thence he pulled a little demon. Frightened out of his
  wits, he was going to throw the imp back again into the pit,
  but it shrieked aloud, and earnestly entreated him, saying:

  "Don't send me back again, O peasant! let me go out into
  the world! A bad wife has come, and absolutely devoured us
  all, pinching us, and biting us--we're utterly worn out with it.
  I'll do you a good turn, if you will."

  So the peasant let him go free--at large in Holy Russia.
  Then the imp said:

  "Now then, peasant, come along with me to the town of
  Vologda. I'll take to tormenting people, and you shall cure
  them."

  Well, the imp went to where there were merchant's wives
  and merchant's daughters; and when they were possessed by
  him, they fell ill and went crazy. Then the peasant would go to
  a house where there was illness of this kind, and, as soon as he
  entered, out would go the enemy; then there would be blessing
  in the house, and everyone would suppose that the peasant was
  a doctor indeed, and would give him money, and treat him to
  pies. And so the peasant gained an incalculable sum of money.
  At last the demon said:

  "You've plenty now, peasant; arn't you content? I'm going
  now to enter into the Boyar's daughter. Mind you don't go
  curing her. If you do, I shall eat you."

  The Boyar's daughter fell ill, and went so crazy that she
  wanted to eat people. The Boyar ordered his people to find out
  the peasant--(that is to say) to look for such and such a physician.
  The peasant came, entered the house, and told Boyar to
  make all the townspeople, and the carriages with coachmen, stand
  in the street outside. Moreover, he gave orders that all the
  coachmen should crack their whips and cry at the top of their
  voices: "The Bad Wife has come! the Bad Wife has come!"
  and then he went into the inner room. As soon as he entered
  it, the demon rushed at him crying, "What do you mean, Russian?
  what have you come here for? I'll eat you!"

  "What do _you_ mean?" said the peasant, "why I didn't
  come here to turn you out. I came, out of pity to you, to say
  that the Bad Wife has come here."

  The Demon rushed to the window, stared with all his eyes,
  and heard everyone shouting at the top of his voice the words,
  "The Bad Wife!"

  "Peasant," cries the Demon, "wherever can I take refuge?"

  "Run back into the pit. She won't go there any more."

  The Demon went back to the pit--and to the Bad Wife too.

  In return for his services, the Boyar conferred a rich guerdon
  on the peasant, giving him his daughter to wife, and presenting
  him with half his property.

  But the Bad Wife sits to this day in the pit--in Tartarus.[54]

Our final illustration of the Skazkas which satirize women is the