The story of Immortal Koshchei is one of very frequent occurrence,
the different versions maintaining a unity of idea, but varying
considerably in detail. In one of them,[108] in which Koshchei's part
is played by a Snake, the hero's sisters are carried off by their
feathered admirers without his leave being asked--an omission for
which a full apology is afterwards made; in another, the history of
"Fedor Tugarin and Anastasia the Fair,"[109] the hero's three sisters
are wooed and won, not by the Falcon, the Eagle, and the Raven, but by
the Wind, the Hail, and the Thunder. He himself marries the terrible
heroine Anastasia the Fair, in the forbidden chamber of whose palace
he finds a snake "hung up by one of its ribs." He gives it a lift and
it gets free from its hook and flies away, carrying off Anastasia the
Fair. Fedor eventually finds her, escapes with her on a magic foal
which he obtains, thanks to the aid of grateful wolves, bees, and
crayfish, and destroys the snake by striking it "on the forehead" with
the stone which was destined to be its death. In a third version of
the story,[110] the hero finds in the forbidden chamber "Koshchei the
Deathless, in a cauldron amid flames, boiling in pitch." There he has
been, he declares, for fifteen years, having been lured there by the
beauty of Anastasia the Fair. In a fourth,[111] in which the hero's
three sisters marry three beggars, who turn out to be snakes with
twenty, thirty, and forty heads apiece, Koshchei is found in the
forbidden chamber, seated on a horse which is chained to a cauldron.
He begs the hero to unloose the horse, promising, in return, to save
him from three deaths.

      [Into the mystery of the forbidden chamber I will not
      enter fully at present. Suffice to say that there can
      be little doubt as to its being the same as that in
      which Bluebeard kept the corpses of his dead wives. In
      the Russian, as well as in the Oriental stories, it is
      generally the curiosity of a man, not of a woman,
      which leads to the opening of the prohibited room. In
      the West of Europe the fatal inquisitiveness is more
      frequently ascribed to a woman. For parallels see the
      German stories of "Marienkind," and "Fitchers Vogel."
      (Grimm, _KM._, Nos. 3 and 46, also the notes in Bd.
      iii. pp. 8, 76, 324.) Less familiar than these is,
      probably, the story of "Die eisernen Stiefel" (Wolf's
      "Deutsche Hausmaerchen," 1851, No. 19), in which the
      hero opens a forbidden door--that of a
      summer-house--and sees "deep down below him the earth,
      and on the earth his father's palace," and is seized
      by a sudden longing after his former home. The
      Wallachian story of "The Immured Mother" (Schott, No.
      2) resembles Grimm's "Marienkind" in many points. But
      its forbidden chamber differs from that of the German
      tale. In the latter the rash intruder sees "die
      Dreieinigkeit im Feuer und Glanz sitzen;" in the
      former, "the Holy Mother of God healing the wounds of
      her Son, the Lord Christ." In the Neapolitan story of
      "Le tre Corune" (Pentamerone, No. 36), the forbidden
      chamber contains "three maidens, clothed all in gold,
      sitting and seeming to slumber upon as many thrones"
      (Liebrecht's translation, ii. 76). The Esthonian tale
      of the "Wife-murderer" (Loewe's "Ehstnische Maerchen,"
      No. 20) is remarkably--not to say suspiciously--like
      that French story of Blue Beard which has so often
      made our young blood run cold. Sister Anne is
      represented, and so are the rescuing brothers, the
      latter in the person of the heroine's old friend and
      playmate, Toennis the goose-herd. Several very curious
      Gaelic versions of the story are given by Mr. Campbell
      ("Tales of the West Highlands," No. 41, ii. 265-275).
      Two of the three daughters of a poor widow look into a
      forbidden chamber, find it "full of dead gentlewomen,"
      get stained knee-deep in blood, and refuse to give a
      drop of milk to a cat which offers its services. So
      their heads are chopped off. The third daughter makes
      friends with the cat, which licks off the tell-tale
      blood, so she escapes detection. In a Greek story
      (Hahn, ii. p. 197) the hero discovers in the
      one-and-fortieth room of a castle belonging to a
      Drakos, who had given him leave to enter forty only, a
      magic horse, and before the door of the room he finds
      a pool of gold in which he becomes gilded. In another
      (Hahn, No. 15) a prince finds in the forbidden
      fortieth a lake in which fairies of the swan-maiden
      species are bathing. In a third (No. 45) the fortieth
      room contains a golden horse and a golden dog which
      assist their bold releaser. In a fourth (No. 68) it
      imprisons "a fair maiden, shining like the sun," whom
      the demon proprietor of the castle has hung up within
      it by her hair.

      As usual, all these stories are hard to understand.
      But one of the most important of their Oriental
      equivalents is perfectly intelligible. When Saktideva,
      in the fifth book of the "Kathasaritsagara," comes
      after long travel to the Golden City, and is welcomed
      as her destined husband by its princess, she warns him
      not to ascend the central terrace of her palace. Of
      course he does so, and finds three chambers, in each
      of which lies the lifeless form of a fair maiden.
      After gazing at these seeming corpses, in one of which
      he recognizes his first love, he approaches a horse
      which is grazing beside a lake. The horse kicks him
      into the water; he sinks deep--and comes up again in
      his native land. The whole of the story is, towards
      its termination, fully explained by one of its
      principal characters--one of the four maidens whom
      Saktideva simultaneously marries. With the version of
      this romance in the "Arabian Nights" ("History of the
      Third Royal Mendicant," Lane, i. 160-173), everyone is
      doubtless acquainted. A less familiar story is that of
      Kandarpaketu, in the second book of the "Hitopadesa,"
      who lives happily for a time as the husband of the
      beautiful semi-divine queen of the Golden City. At
      last, contrary to her express commands, he ventures to
      touch a picture of a Vidyadhari. In an instant the
      pictured demigoddess gives him a kick which sends him
      flying back into his own country.

      For an explanation of the myth which lies at the root
      of all these stories, see Cox's "Mythology of the
      Aryan Nations," ii. 36, 330. See also Professor de
      Gubernatis's "Zoological Mythology," i. 168.]

We will now take one of those versions of the story which describe how
Koshchei's death is brought about by the destruction of that
extraneous object on which his existence depends. The incident is one
which occupies a prominent place in the stories of this class current
in all parts of Europe and Asia, and its result is almost always the
same. But the means by which that result is brought about differ
considerably in different lands. In the Russian tales the "death" of
the Evil Being with whom the hero contends--the substance, namely, the
destruction of which involves his death--is usually the last of a
sequence of objects either identical with, or closely resembling,
those mentioned in the following story of--


  KOSHCHEI THE DEATHLESS.[112]

  In a certain country there once lived a king, and he had three
  sons, all of them grown up. All of a sudden Koshchei the
  Deathless carried off their mother. Then the eldest son craved
  his father's blessing, that he might go and look for his mother.
  His father gave him his blessing, and he went off and disappeared,
  leaving no trace behind. The second son waited and waited,
  then he too obtained his father's blessing--and he also disappeared.
  Then the youngest son, Prince Ivan, said to his father,
  "Father, give me your blessing, and let me go and look for my
  mother."

  But his father would not let him go, saying, "Your brothers
  are no more; if you likewise go away, I shall die of grief."

  "Not so, father. But if you bless me I shall go; and if you
  do not bless me I shall go."

  So his father gave him his blessing.

  Prince Ivan went to choose a steed, but every one that he
  laid his hand upon gave way under it. He could not find a steed
  to suit him, so he wandered with drooping brow along the road
  and about the town. Suddenly there appeared an old woman,
  who asked:

  "Why hangs your brow so low, Prince Ivan?"

  "Be off, old crone," he replied. "If I put you on one of my
  hands, and give it a slap with the other, there'll be a little wet
  left, that's all."[113]

  The old woman ran down a by-street, came to meet him a
  second time, and said:

  "Good day, Prince Ivan! why hangs your brow so low?"

  Then he thought:

  "Why does this old woman ask me? Mightn't she be of
  use to me?"--and he replied:

  "Well, mother! because I cannot get myself a good steed."

  "Silly fellow!" she cried, "to suffer, and not to ask the old
  woman's help! Come along with me."

  She took him to a hill, showed him a certain spot, and said:

  "Dig up that piece of ground."

  Prince Ivan dug it up and saw an iron plate with twelve padlocks
  on it. He immediately broke off the padlocks, tore open
  a door, and followed a path leading underground. There,
  fastened with twelve chains, stood a heroic steed which evidently
  heard the approaching steps of a rider worthy to mount it, and
  so began to neigh and to struggle, until it broke all twelve of its
  chains. Then Prince Ivan put on armor fit for a hero, and
  bridled the horse, and saddled it with a Circassian saddle. And
  he gave the old woman money, and said to her:

  "Forgive me, mother, and bless me!" then he mounted his
  steed and rode away.

  Long time did he ride; at last he came to a mountain--a
  tremendously high mountain, and so steep that it was utterly
  impossible to get up it. Presently his brothers came that way.
  They all greeted each other, and rode on together, till they came
  to an iron rock[114] a hundred and fifty poods in weight, and on it
  was this inscription, "Whosoever will fling this rock against
  the mountain, to him will a way be opened." The two elder
  brothers were unable to lift the rock, but Prince Ivan at the
  first try flung it against the mountain--and immediately there
  appeared a ladder leading up the mountain side.

  Prince Ivan dismounted, let some drops of blood run from
  his little finger into a glass, gave it to his brothers, and said:

  "If the blood in this glass turns black, tarry here no longer:
  that will mean that I am about to die." Then he took leave of
  them and went his way.

  He mounted the hill. What did not he see there? All
  sorts of trees were there, all sorts of fruits, all sorts of birds!
  Long did Prince Ivan walk on; at last he came to a house, a
  huge house! In it lived a king's daughter who had been carried
  off by Koshchei the Deathless. Prince Ivan walked round the
  enclosure, but could not see any doors. The king's daughter
  saw there was some one there, came on to the balcony, and
  called out to him, "See, there is a chink in the enclosure; touch
  it with your little finger, and it will become a door."

  What she said turned out to be true. Prince Ivan went into
  the house, and the maiden received him kindly, gave him to eat
  and to drink, and then began to question him. He told her how
  he had come to rescue his mother from Koshchei the Deathless.
  Then the maiden said:

  "It will be difficult for you to get at your mother, Prince
  Ivan. You see, Koshchei is not mortal: he will kill you. He
  often comes here to see me. There is his sword, fifty poods in
  weight. Can you lift it? If so, you may venture to go."

  Not only did Prince Ivan lift the sword, but he tossed it
  high in the air. So he went on his way again.

  By-and-by he came to a second house. He knew now where
  to look for the door, and he entered in. There was his mother.
  With tears did they embrace each other.

  Here also did he try his strength, heaving aloft a ball which
  weighed some fifteen hundred poods. The time came for
  Koshchei the Deathless to arrive. The mother hid away her
  son. Suddenly Koshchei the Deathless entered the house and
  cried out, "Phou, Phou! A Russian bone[115] one usen't to hear
  with one's ears, or see with one's eyes, but now a Russian bone
  has come to the house! Who has been with you? Wasn't it
  your son?"

  "What are you talking about, God bless you! You've been
  flying through Russia, and got the air up your nostrils, that's
  why you fancy it's here," answered Prince Ivan's mother, and
  then she drew nigh to Koshchei, addressed him in terms of
  affection, asked him about one thing and another, and at last
  said:

  "Whereabouts is your death, O Koshchei?"

  "My death," he replied, "is in such a place. There stands
  an oak, and under the oak is a casket, and in the casket is a
  hare, and in the hare is a duck, and in the duck is an egg, and
  in the egg is my death."

  Having thus spoken, Koshchei the Deathless tarried there a
  little longer, and then flew away.

  The time came--Prince Ivan received his mother's blessing,
  and went to look for Koshchei's death. He went on his way a
  long time without eating or drinking; at last he felt mortally
  hungry, and thought, "If only something would come my way!"
  Suddenly there appeared a young wolf; he determined to kill
  it. But out from a hole sprang the she wolf, and said, "Don't
  hurt my little one; I'll do you a good turn." Very good! Prince
  Ivan let the young wolf go. On he went and saw a crow.
  "Stop a bit," he thought, "here I shall get a mouthful." He
  loaded his gun and was going to shoot, but the crow exclaimed,
  "Don't hurt me; I'll do you a good turn."

  Prince Ivan thought the matter over and spared the crow.
  Then he went farther, and came to a sea and stood still on the
  shore. At that moment a young pike suddenly jumped out of
  the water and fell on the strand. He caught hold of it, and
  thought--for he was half dead with hunger--"Now I shall have
  something to eat." All of a sudden appeared a pike and said,
  "Don't hurt my little one, Prince Ivan; I'll do you a good turn."
  And so he spared the little pike also.

  But how was he to cross the sea? He sat down on the shore
  and meditated. But the pike knew quite well what he was
  thinking about, and laid herself right across the sea. Prince
  Ivan walked along her back, as if he were going over a bridge,
  and came to the oak where Koshchei's death was. There he
  found the casket and opened it--out jumped the hare and ran
  away. How was the hare to be stopped?

  Prince Ivan was terribly frightened at having let the hare
  escape, and gave himself up to gloomy thoughts; but a wolf,
  the one he had refrained from killing, rushed after the hare,
  caught it, and brought it to Prince Ivan. With great delight
  he seized the hare, cut it open--and had such a fright! Out
  popped the duck and flew away. He fired after it, but shot
  all on one side, so again he gave himself up to his thoughts.
  Suddenly there appeared the crow with her little crows, and set
  off after the duck, and caught it, and brought it to Prince Ivan.
  The Prince was greatly pleased and got hold of the egg. Then
  he went on his way. But when he came to the sea, he began
  washing the egg, and let it drop into the water. However was
  he to get it out of the water? an immeasurable depth! Again
  the Prince gave himself up to dejection.

  Suddenly the sea became violently agitated, and the pike
  brought him the egg. Moreover it stretched itself across the
  sea. Prince Ivan walked along it to the other side, and then
  he set out again for his mother's. When he got there, they
  greeted each other lovingly, and then she hid him again as before.
  Presently in flew Koshchei the Deathless and said:

  "Phoo, Phoo! No Russian bone can the ear hear nor the
  eye see, but there's a smell of Russia here!"

  "What are you talking about, Koshchei? There's no one
  with me," replied Prince Ivan's mother.

  A second time spake Koshchei and said, "I feel rather unwell."

  Then Prince Ivan began squeezing the egg, and thereupon
  Koshchei the Deathless bent double. At last Prince Ivan came
  out from his hiding-place, held up the egg and said, "There is
  your death, O Koshchei the Deathless!"

  Then Koshchei fell on his knees before him, saying, "Don't
  kill me, Prince Ivan! Let's be friends! All the world will lie
  at our feet."

  But these words had no weight with Prince Ivan. He
  smashed the egg, and Koshchei the Deathless died.

  Ivan and his mother took all they wanted and started homewards.
  On their way they came to where the King's daughter
  was whom Ivan had seen on his way, and they took her with
  them too. They went further, and came to the hill where Ivan's
  brothers were still waiting for him. Then the maiden said,
  "Prince Ivan! do go back to my house. I have forgotten a
  marriage robe, a diamond ring, and a pair of seamless shoes."

  He consented to do so, but in the mean time he let his mother
  go down the ladder, as well as the Princess--whom it had been
  settled he was to marry when they got home. They were received
  by his brothers, who then set to work and cut away the ladder,
  so that he himself would not be able to get down. And they
  used such threats to his mother and the Princess, that they
  made them promise not to tell about Prince Ivan when they
  got home. And after a time they reached their native country.
  Their father was delighted at seeing his wife and his two sons,
  but still he was grieved about the other one, Prince Ivan.

  But Prince Ivan returned to the home of his betrothed, and
  got the wedding dress, and the ring, and the seamless shoes.
  Then he came back to the mountain and tossed the ring from
  one hand to the other. Immediately there appeared twelve
  strong youths, who said:

  "What are your commands?"

  "Carry me down from this hill."

  The youths immediately carried him down. Prince Ivan put
  the ring on his finger--they disappeared.

  Then he went on to his own country, and arrived at the city
  in which his father and brothers lived.

  There he took up his quarters in the house of an old woman,
  and asked her:

  "What news is there, mother, in your country?"

  "What news, lad? You see our queen was kept in prison
  by Koshchei the Deathless. Her three sons went to look for
  her, and two of them found her and came back, but the third,
  Prince Ivan, has disappeared, and no one knows where he is.
  The King is very unhappy about him. And those two Princes
  and their mother brought a certain Princess back with them;
  and the eldest son wants to marry her, but she declares he must
  fetch her her betrothal ring first, or get one made just as she
  wants it. But although they have made a public proclamation
  about it, no one has been found to do it yet."

  "Well, mother, go and tell the King that you will make one.
  I'll manage it for you," said Prince Ivan.

  So the old woman immediately dressed herself, and hastened
  to the King, and said:

  "Please, your Majesty, I will make the wedding ring."

  "Make it, then, make it, mother! Such people as you are
  welcome," said the king. "But if you don't make it, off goes
  your head!"

  The old woman was dreadfully frightened; she ran home,
  and told Prince Ivan to set to work at the ring. But Ivan lay
  down to sleep, troubling himself very little about it. The ring
  was there all the time. So he only laughed at the old woman,
  but she was trembling all over, and crying, and scolding him.

  "As for you," she said, "you're out of the scrape; but you've
  done for me, fool that I was!"

  The old woman cried and cried until she fell asleep. Early in
  the morning Prince Ivan got up and awakened her, saying:

  "Get up, mother, and go out! take them the ring, and mind,
  don't accept more than one ducat for it. If anyone asks who
  made the ring, say you made it yourself; don't say a word about
  me."

  The old woman was overjoyed and carried off the ring. The
  bride was delighted with it.

  "Just what I wanted," she said. So they gave the old woman
  a dish full of gold, but she took only one ducat.

  "Why do you take so little?" said the king.

  "What good would a lot do me, your Majesty? if I want some
  more afterwards, you'll give it me."

  Having said this the old woman went away.

  Time passed, and the news spread abroad that the bride had
  told her lover to fetch her her wedding-dress or else to get one
  made, just such a one as she wanted. Well, the old woman,
  thanks to Prince Ivan's aid, succeeded in this matter too, and
  took her the wedding-dress. And afterwards she took her the
  seamless shoes also, and would only accept one ducat each time
  and always said that she had made the things herself.

  Well, the people heard that there would be a wedding at the
  palace on such-and-such a day. And the day they all anxiously
  awaited came at last. Then Prince Ivan said to the old woman:

  "Look here, mother! when the bride is just going to be
  married, let me know."

  The old woman didn't let the time go by unheeded.

  Then Ivan immediately put on his princely raiment, and went
  out of the house.

  "See, mother, this is what I'm really like!" says he.

  The old woman fell at his feet.

  "Pray forgive me for scolding you," said she.

  "God be with you," said he.[116]

  So he went into the church and, finding his brothers had not
  yet arrived, he stood up alongside of the bride and got married
  to her. Then he and she were escorted back to the palace, and
  as they went along, the proper bridegroom, his eldest brother,
  met them. But when he saw that his bride and Prince Ivan were
  being escorted home together, he turned back again ignominiously.

  As to the king, he was delighted to see Prince Ivan again,
  and when he had learnt all about the treachery of his brothers,
  after the wedding feast had been solemnized, he banished the
  two elder princes, but he made Ivan heir to the throne.

In the story of "Prince Arikad,"[117] the Queen-Mother is carried off
by the Whirlwind,[118] instead of by Koshchei. Her youngest son climbs
the hill by the aid of iron hooks, kills Vikhor, and lowers his mother
and three other ladies whom he has rescued, by means of a rope made of
strips of hide. This his brothers cut to prevent him from
descending.[119] They then oblige the ladies to swear not to betray
them, the taking of the oath being accompanied by the eating of
earth.[120] The same formality is observed in another story in which
an oath of a like kind is exacted.[121]

The sacred nature of such an obligation may account for the singular
reticence so often maintained, under similar circumstances, in stories
of this class.

In one of the descriptions of Koshchei's death, he is said to be
killed by a blow on the forehead inflicted by the mysterious egg--that
last link in the magic chain by which his life is darkly bound.[122]
In another version of the same story, but told of a Snake, the fatal
blow is struck by a small stone found in the yolk of an egg, which is
inside a duck, which is inside a hare, which is inside a stone, which
is on an island [_i.e._, the fabulous island Buyan].[123] In another
variant[124] Koshchei attempts to deceive his fair captive, pretending
that his "death" resides in a besom, or in a fence, both of which she
adorns with gold in token of her love. Then he confesses that his
"death" really lies in an egg, inside a duck, inside a log which is
floating on the sea. Prince Ivan gets hold of the egg and shifts it
from one hand to the other. Koshchei rushes wildly from side to side
of the room. At last the prince breaks the egg. Koshchei falls on the
floor and dies.

This heart-breaking episode occurs in the folk-tales of many
lands.[125] It may not be amiss to trace it through some of its forms.
In a Norse story[126] a Giant's heart lies in an egg, inside a duck,
which swims in a well, in a church, on an island. With this may be
compared another Norse tale,[127] in which a _Haugebasse_, or Troll,
who has carried off a princess, informs her that he and all his
companions will burst asunder when above them passes "the grain of
sand that lies under the ninth tongue in the ninth head" of a certain
dead dragon. The grain of sand is found and brought, and the result is
that the whole of the monstrous brood of Trolls or _Haugebasser_ is
instantaneously destroyed. In a Transylvanian-Saxon story[128] a
Witch's "life" is a light which burns in an egg, inside a duck, which
swims on a pond, inside a mountain, and she dies when it is put out.
In the Bohemian story of "The Sun-horse"[129] a Warlock's "strength"
lies in an egg, which is within a duck, which is within a stag, which
is under a tree. A Seer finds the egg and sucks it. Then the Warlock
becomes as weak as a child, "for all his strength had passed into the
Seer." In the Gaelic story of "The Sea-Maiden,"[130] the "great beast
with three heads" which haunts the loch cannot be killed until an egg
is broken, which is in the mouth of a trout, which springs out of a
crow, which flies out of a hind, which lives on an island in the
middle of the loch. In a Modern Greek tale the life of a dragon or
other baleful being comes to an end simultaneously with the lives of
three pigeons which are shut up in an all but inaccessible
chamber,[131] or inclosed within a wild boar.[132] Closely connected
with the Greek tale is the Servian story of the dragon[133] whose
"strength" (_snaga_) lies in a sparrow, which is inside a dove, inside
a hare, inside a boar, inside a dragon (_ajdaya_) which is in a lake,
near a royal city. The hero of the story fights the dragon of the
lake, and after a long struggle, being invigorated at the critical
moment by a kiss which the heroine imprints on his forehead--he flings
it high in the air. When it falls to the ground it breaks in pieces,
and out comes the boar. Eventually the hero seizes the sparrow and
wrings its neck, but not before he has obtained from it the charm
necessary for the recovery of his missing brothers and a number of
other victims of the dragon's cruelty.

To these European tales a very interesting parallel is afforded by