part is played by the Baba Yaga, a female fiend whose name has given
rise to much philological discussion of a somewhat unsatisfactory
nature.[160] Her appearance is that of a tall, gaunt hag, with
dishevelled hair. Sometimes she is seen lying stretched out from one
corner to the other of a miserable hut, through the ceiling of which
passes her long iron nose; the hut is supported "by fowl's legs," and
stands at the edge of a forest towards which its entrance looks. When
the proper words are addressed to it, the hut revolves upon its
slender supports, so as to turn its back instead of its front to the
forest. Sometimes, as in the next story, the Baba Yaga appears as the
mistress of a mansion, which stands in a courtyard enclosed by a fence
made of dead men's bones. When she goes abroad she rides in a mortar,
which she urges on with a pestle, while she sweeps away the traces of
her flight with a broom. She is closely connected with the Snake in
different forms; in many stories, indeed, the leading part has been
ascribed by one narrator to a Snake and by another to a Baba Yaga. She
possesses the usual magic apparatus by which enchantresses work their
wonders; the Day and the Night (according to the following story) are
among her servants, the entire animal world lies at her disposal. On
the whole she is the most prominent among the strange figures with
which the Skazkas make us acquainted. Of the stories which especially
relate to her the following may be taken as a fair specimen.


  THE BABA YAGA.[161]

  Once upon a time there was an old couple. The husband lost
  his wife and married again. But he had a daughter by the first
  marriage, a young girl, and she found no favor in the eyes of
  her evil stepmother, who used to beat her, and consider how she
  could get her killed outright. One day the father went away
  somewhere or other, so the stepmother said to the girl, "Go to
  your aunt, my sister, and ask her for a needle and thread to make
  you a shift."

  Now that aunt was a Baba Yaga. Well, the girl was no fool,
  so she went to a real aunt of hers first, and says she:

  "Good morning, auntie!"

  "Good morning, my dear! what have you come for?"

  "Mother has sent me to her sister, to ask for a needle and
  thread to make me a shift."

  Then her aunt instructed her what to do. "There is a birch-tree
  there, niece, which would hit you in the eye--you must tie
  a ribbon round it; there are doors which would creak and bang--you
  must pour oil on their hinges; there are dogs which would
  tear you in pieces--you must throw them these rolls; there is a
  cat which would scratch your eyes out--you must give it a piece
  of bacon."

  So the girl went away, and walked and walked, till she came
  to the place. There stood a hut, and in it sat weaving the Baba
  Yaga, the Bony-shanks.

  "Good morning, auntie," says the girl.

  "Good morning, my dear," replies the Baba Yaga.

  "Mother has sent me to ask you for a needle and thread to
  make me a shift."

  "Very well; sit down and weave a little in the meantime."

  So the girl sat down behind the loom, and the Baba Yaga
  went outside, and said to her servant-maid:

  "Go and heat the bath, and get my niece washed; and mind
  you look sharp after her. I want to breakfast off her."

  Well, the girl sat there in such a fright that she was as much
  dead as alive. Presently she spoke imploringly to the servant-maid,
  saying:

  "Kinswoman dear, do please wet the firewood instead of
  making it burn; and fetch the water for the bath in a sieve."
  And she made her a present of a handkerchief.

  The Baba Yaga waited awhile; then she came to the window
  and asked:

  "Are you weaving, niece? are you weaving, my dear?"

  "Oh yes, dear aunt, I'm weaving." So the Baba Yaga went
  away again, and the girl gave the Cat a piece of bacon, and
  asked:

  "Is there no way of escaping from here?"

  "Here's a comb for you and a towel," said the Cat; "take
  them, and be off. The Baba Yaga will pursue you, but you must
  lay your ear on the ground, and when you hear that she is close
  at hand, first of all throw down the towel. It will become a wide,
  wide river. And if the Baba Yaga gets across the river, and
  tries to catch you, then you must lay your ear on the ground
  again, and when you hear that she is close at hand, throw down
  the comb. It will become a dense, dense forest; through that
  she won't be able to force her way anyhow."

  The girl took the towel and the comb and fled. The dogs
  would have rent her, but she threw them the rolls, and they let
  her go by; the doors would have begun to bang, but she poured
  oil on their hinges, and they let her pass through; the birch-tree
  would have poked her eyes out, but she tied the ribbon around
  it, and it let her pass on. And the Cat sat down to the loom,
  and worked away; muddled everything about, if it didn't do
  much weaving. Up came the Baba Yaga to the window, and
  asked:

  "Are you weaving, niece? are you weaving, my dear?"

  "I'm weaving, dear aunt, I'm weaving," gruffly replied the
  Cat.

  The Baba Yaga rushed into the hut, saw that the girl was
  gone, and took to beating the Cat, and abusing it for not having
  scratched the girl's eyes out. "Long as I've served you," said
  the Cat, "you've never given me so much as a bone; but she
  gave me bacon." Then the Baba Yaga pounced upon the dogs,
  on the doors, on the birch-tree, and on the servant-maid, and set
  to work to abuse them all, and to knock them about. Then the
  dogs said to her, "Long as we've served you, you've never so
  much as pitched us a burnt crust; but she gave us rolls to eat."
  And the doors said, "Long as we've served you, you've never
  poured even a drop of water on our hinges; but she poured oil
  on us." The birch-tree said, "Long as I've served you, you've
  never tied a single thread round me; but she fastened a ribbon
  around me." And the servant-maid said, "Long as I've served
  you, you've never given me so much as a rag; but she gave me
  a handkerchief."

  The Baba Yaga, bony of limb, quickly jumped into her
  mortar, sent it flying along with the pestle, sweeping away the
  while all traces of its flight with a broom, and set off in pursuit
  of the girl. Then the girl put her ear to the ground, and when
  she heard that the Baba Yaga was chasing her, and was now
  close at hand, she flung down the towel. And it became a wide,
  such a wide river! Up came the Baba Yaga to the river, and
  gnashed her teeth with spite; then she went home for her oxen,
  and drove them to the river. The oxen drank up every drop of
  the river, and then the Baba Yaga began the pursuit anew.
  But the girl put her ear to the ground again, and when she heard
  that the Baba Yaga was near, she flung down the comb, and
  instantly a forest sprang up, such an awfully thick one! The
  Baba Yaga began gnawing away at it, but however hard she
  worked, she couldn't gnaw her way through it, so she had to go
  back again.

  But by this time the girl's father had returned home, and he
  asked:

  "Where's my daughter?"

  "She's gone to her aunt's," replied her stepmother.

  Soon afterwards the girl herself came running home.

  "Where have you been?" asked her father.

  "Ah, father!" she said, "mother sent me to aunt's to ask
  for a needle and thread to make me a shift. But aunt's a Baba
  Yaga, and she wanted to eat me!"

  "And how did you get away, daughter?"

  "Why like this," said the girl, and explained the whole
  matter. As soon as her father had heard all about it, he became
  wroth with his wife, and shot her. But he and his daughter
  lived on and flourished, and everything went well with them.

In one of the numerous variants of this story[162] the heroine is sent
by her husband's mother to the Baba Yaga's, and the advice which saves
her comes from her husband. The Baba Yaga goes into another room "in
order to sharpen her teeth," and while she is engaged in that
operation the girl escapes, having previously--by the advice of the
Cat, to which she had given a lump of butter--spat under the
threshold. The spittle answers for her in her absence, behaving as do,
in other folk-tales, drops of blood, or rags dipped in blood, or
apples, or eggs, or beans, or stone images, or wooden puppets.[163]

The magic comb and towel, by the aid of which the girl effects her
escape, constantly figure in Skazkas of this class, and always produce
the required effect. A brush, also, is frequently introduced, from
each bristle of which springs up a wood. In one story, however, the
brush gives rise to mountains, and a _golik_, or bath-room whisk,
turns into a forest. The towel is used, also, for the purpose of
constructing or annihilating a bridge. Similar instruments are found
in the folk-tales of every land, whether they appear as the brush,
comb, and mirror of the German water-sprite;[164] or the rod, stone,
and pitcher of water of the Norse Troll;[165] or the knife, comb, and
handful of salt which, in the Modern Greek story, save Asterinos and
Pulja from their fiendish mother;[166] or the twig, the stone, and the
bladder of water, found in the ear of the filly, which saves her
master from the Gaelic giant;[167] or the brush, comb, and egg, the
last of which produces a frozen lake with "mirror-smooth" surface,
whereon the pursuing Old Prussian witch slips and breaks her
neck;[168] or the wand which causes a river to flow and a mountain to
rise between the youth who waves it and the "wicked old Rakshasa" who
chases him in the Deccan story;[169] or the handful of earth, cup of
water, and dry sticks and match, which impede and finally destroy the
Rakshasa in the almost identical episode of Somadeva's tale of "The
Prince of Varddhamana."[170]

In each instance they appear to typify the influence which the
supernatural beings to whom they belonged were supposed to exercise
over the elements. It has been thought strange that such stress should
be laid on the employment of certain toilet-articles, to the use of
which the heroes of folk-tales do not appear to have been greatly
addicted. But it is evident that like produces like in the
transformation in question. In the oldest form of the story, the
Sanskrit, a handful of earth turns into a mountain, a cup of water
into a river. Now, metaphorically speaking, a brush may be taken as a
miniature wood; the common use of the term brushwood is a proof of the
general acceptance of the metaphor. A comb does not at first sight
appear to resemble a mountain, but its indented outline may have
struck the fancy of many primitive peoples as being a likeness to a
serrated mountain range. Thence comes it that in German _Kamm_ means
not only a comb but also (like the Spanish _Sierra_) a mountain ridge
or crest.[171]

In one of the numerous stories[172] about the Baba Yaga, four heroes
are wandering about the world together; when they come to a dense
forest in which a small izba, or hut, is twirling round on "a fowl's
leg." Ivan, the youngest of the party, utters the magical formula
"Izbushka, Izbushka! stand with back to the forest and front towards
us," and "the hut faces towards them, its doors and windows open of
their own accord." The heroes enter and find it empty. One of the
party then remains indoors, while the rest go out to the chase. The
hero who is left alone prepares a meal, and then, "after washing his
head, sits down by the window to comb his hair." Suddenly a stone is
lifted, and from under it appears a Baba Yaga, driving in her mortar,
with a dog yelping at her heels. She enters the hut and, after some
short parley, seizes her pestle, and begins beating the hero with it
until he falls prostrate. Then she cuts a strip out of his back, eats
up the whole of the viands he has prepared for his companions, and
disappears. After a time the beaten hero recovers his senses, "ties up
his head with a handkerchief," and sits groaning until his comrades
return. Then he makes some excuse for not having got any supper ready
for them, but says nothing about what has really happened to him.

On the next day the second hero is treated in the same manner by the
Baba Yaga, and on the day after that the third undergoes a similar
humiliation. But on the fourth day it falls to the lot of the young
Ivan to stay in the hut alone. The Baba Yaga appears as usual, and
begins thumping him with her pestle; but he snatches it from her,
beats her almost to death with it, cuts three strips out of her back,
and then locks her up in a closet. When his comrades return, they are
surprised to find him unhurt, and a meal prepared for them, but they
ask no questions. After supper they all take a bath, and then Ivan
remarks that each of his companions has had a strip cut out of his
back. This leads to a full confession, on hearing which Ivan "runs to
the closet, takes those strips out of the Baba Yaga, and applies them
to their backs," which immediately become cured. He then hangs up the
Baba Yaga by a cord tied to one foot, at which cord all the party
shoot. At length it is severed, and she drops. As soon as she touches
the ground, she runs to the stone from under which she had appeared,
lifts it, and disappears.[173]