story of the _Golovikha_. It is all the more valuable, inasmuch as it
is one of the few folk-tales which throw any light on the working of
Russian communal institutions. The word _Golovikha_ means, in its
strict sense, the wife of a _Golova_, or elected chief [_Golova_ =
head] of a _Volost_, or association of village communities; but here
it is used for a "female _Golova_," a species of "mayoress."


  THE GOLOVIKHA.[55]

  A certain woman was very bumptious. Her husband came
  from a village council one day, and she asked him:

  "What have you been deciding over there?"

  "What have we been deciding? why choosing a Golova."

  "Whom have you chosen?"

  "No one as yet."

  "Choose me," says the woman.

  So as soon as her husband went back to the council (she was
  a bad sort; he wanted to give her a lesson) he told the elders
  what she had said. They immediately chose her as Golova.

  Well the woman got along, settled all questions, took bribes,
  and drank spirits at the peasant's expense. But the time came
  to collect the poll-tax. The Golova couldn't do it, wasn't able
  to collect it in time. There came a Cossack, and asked for the
  Golova; but the woman had hidden herself. As soon as she
  learnt that the Cossack had come, off she ran home.

  "Where, oh where can I hide myself?" she cries to her
  husband. "Husband dear! tie me up in a bag, and put me out
  there where the corn-sacks are."

  Now there were five sacks of seed-corn outside, so her husband
  tied up the Golova, and set her in the midst of them. Up
  came the Cossack and said:

  "Ho! so the Golova's in hiding."

  Then he took to slashing at the sacks one after another with
  his whip, and the woman to howling at the pitch of her voice:

  "Oh, my father! I won't be a Golova, I won't be a Golova."

  At last the Cossack left off beating the sacks, and rode away.
  But the woman had had enough of Golova-ing; from that time
  forward she took to obeying her husband.

Before passing on to another subject, it may be advisable to quote one
of the stories in which the value of a good and wise wife is fully
acknowledged. I have chosen for that purpose one of the variants of a
tale from which, in all probability, our own story of "Whittington and
his Cat" has been derived. With respect to its origin, there can be
very little doubt, such a feature as that of the incense-burning
pointing directly to a Buddhist source. It is called--


  THE THREE COPECKS.[56]

  There once was a poor little orphan-lad who had nothing at all
  to live on; so he went to a rich moujik and hired himself out to
  him, agreeing to work for one copeck a year. And when he had
  worked for a whole year, and had received his copeck, he went to
  a well and threw it into the water, saying, "If it don't sink, I'll
  keep it. It will be plain enough I've served my master faithfully."

  But the copeck sank. Well, he remained in service a second
  year, and received a second copeck. Again he flung it into the
  well, and again it sank to the bottom. He remained a third year;
  worked and worked, till the time came for payment. Then his
  master gave him a rouble. "No," says the orphan, "I don't
  want your money; give me my copeck." He got his copeck and
  flung it into the well. Lo and behold! there were all three copecks
  floating on the surface of the water. So he took them and
  went into the town.

  Now as he went along the street, it happened that some small
  boys had got hold of a kitten and were tormenting it. And he
  felt sorry for it, and said:

  "Let me have that kitten, my boys?"

  "Yes, we'll sell it you."

  "What do you want for it?"

  "Three copecks."

  Well the orphan bought the kitten, and afterwards hired
  himself to a merchant, to sit in his shop.

  That merchant's business began to prosper wonderfully. He
  couldn't supply goods fast enough; purchasers carried off everything
  in a twinkling. The merchant got ready to go to sea,
  freighted a ship, and said to the orphan:

  "Give me your cat; maybe it will catch mice on board, and
  amuse me."

  "Pray take it, master! only if you lose it, I shan't let you off
  cheap."

  The merchant arrived in a far off land, and put up at an inn.
  The landlord saw that he had a great deal of money, so he gave
  him a bedroom which was infested by countless swarms of rats
  and mice, saying to himself, "If they should happen to eat him
  up, his money will belong to me." For in that country they knew
  nothing about cats, and the rats and mice had completely got the
  upper hand. Well the merchant took the cat with him to his
  room and went to bed. Next morning the landlord came into
  the room. There was the merchant alive and well, holding the
  cat in his arms, and stroking its fur; the cat was purring away,
  singing its song, and on the floor lay a perfect heap of dead rats
  and mice!

  "Master merchant, sell me that beastie," says the landlord.

  "Certainly."

  "What do you want for it?"

  "A mere trifle. I'll make the beastie stand on his hind legs
  while I hold him up by his forelegs, and you shall pile gold
  pieces around him, so as just to hide him--I shall be content
  with that!"

  The landlord agreed to the bargain. The merchant gave him
  the cat, received a sackful of gold, and as soon as he had settled
  his affairs, started on his way back. As he sailed across the
  seas, he thought:

  "Why should I give the gold to that orphan? Such a lot of
  money in return for a mere cat! that would be too much of a
  good thing. No, much better keep it myself."

  The moment he had made up his mind to the sin, all of a sudden
  there arose a storm--such a tremendous one! the ship was
  on the point of sinking.

  "Ah, accursed one that I am! I've been longing for what
  doesn't belong to me; O Lord, forgive me a sinner! I won't
  keep back a single copeck."

  The moment the merchant began praying the winds were
  stilled, the sea became calm, and the ship went sailing on prosperously
  to the quay.

  "Hail, master!" says the orphan. "But where's my cat?"

  "I've sold it," answers the merchant; "There's your money,
  take it in full."

  The orphan received the sack of gold, took leave of the
  merchant, and went to the strand, where the shipmen were.
  From them he obtained a shipload of incense in exchange for
  his gold, and he strewed the incense along the strand, and burnt
  it in honor of God. The sweet savor spread through all that
  land, and suddenly an old man appeared, and he said to the
  orphan:

  "Which desirest thou--riches, or a good wife?"

  "I know not, old man."

  "Well then, go afield. Three brothers are ploughing over
  there. Ask them to tell thee."

  The orphan went afield. He looked, and saw peasants tilling
  the soil.

  "God lend you aid!" says he.

  "Thanks, good man!" say they. "What dost thou want?"

  "An old man has sent me here, and told me to ask you which
  of the two I shall wish for--riches or a good wife?"

  "Ask our elder brother; he's sitting in that cart there."

  The orphan went to the cart and saw a little boy--one that
  seemed about three years old.

  "Can this be their elder brother?" thought he--however he
  asked him:

  "Which dost thou tell me to choose--riches, or a good wife?"

  "Choose the good wife."

  So the orphan returned to the old man.

  "I'm told to ask for the wife," says he.

  "That's all right!" said the old man, and disappeared from
  sight. The orphan looked round; by his side stood a beautiful
  woman.

  "Hail, good youth!" says she. "I am thy wife; let us go
  and seek a place where we may live."[57]

One of the sins to which the Popular Tale shows itself most hostile is
that of avarice. The folk-tales of all lands delight to gird at misers
and skinflints, to place them in unpleasant positions, and to gloat
over the sufferings which attend their death and embitter their
ghostly existence. As a specimen of the manner in which the humor of
the Russian peasant has manipulated the stories of this class, most of
which probably reached him from the East, we may take the following
tale of--


  THE MISER.[58]

  There once was a rich merchant named Marko--a stingier fellow
  never lived! One day he went out for a stroll. As he went
  along the road he saw a beggar--an old man, who sat there asking
  for alms--"Please to give, O ye Orthodox, for Christ's
  sake!"

  Marko the Rich passed by. Just at that time there came up
  behind him a poor moujik, who felt sorry for the beggar, and gave
  him a copeck. The rich man seemed to feel ashamed, for he
  stopped and said to the moujik:

  "Harkye, neighbor, lend me a copeck. I want to give that
  poor man something, but I've no small change."

  The moujik gave him one, and asked when he should come
  for his money. "Come to-morrow," was the reply. Well next
  day the poor man went to the rich man's to get his copeck. He
  entered his spacious courtyard and asked:

  "Is Marko the Rich at home?"

  "Yes. What do you want?" replied Marko.

  "I've come for my copeck."

  "Ah, brother! come again. Really I've no change just now."

  The poor man made his bow and went away.

  "I'll come to-morrow," said he.

  On the morrow he came again, but it was just the same story
  as before.

  "I haven't a single copper. If you like to change me a note
  for a hundred--No? well then come again in a fortnight."

  At the end of the fortnight the poor man came again, but
  Marko the Rich saw him from the window, and said to his wife:

  "Harkye, wife! I'll strip myself naked and lie down under
  the holy pictures. Cover me up with a cloth, and sit down and
  cry, just as you would over a corpse. When the moujik comes
  for his money, tell him I died this morning."

  Well the wife did everything exactly as her husband directed
  her. While she was sitting there drowned in bitter tears, the
  moujik came into the room.

  "What do you want?" says she.

  "The money Marko the Rich owes me," answers the poor
  man.

  "Ah, moujik, Marko the Rich has wished us farewell;[59] he's
  only just dead."

  "The kingdom of heaven be his! If you'll allow me, mistress,
  in return for my copeck I'll do him a last service--just
  give his mortal remains a wash."

  So saying he laid hold of a pot full of boiling water and began
  pouring its scalding contents over Marko the Rich. Marko, his
  brows knit, his legs contorted, was scarcely able to hold out.[60]

  "Writhe away or not as you please," thought the poor man,
  "but pay me my copeck!"

  When he had washed the body, and laid it out properly, he
  said:

  "Now then, mistress, buy a coffin and have it taken into the
  church; I'll go and read psalms over it."

  So Marko the Rich was put in a coffin and taken into the
  church, and the moujik began reading psalms over him. The
  darkness of night came on. All of a sudden a window opened,
  and a party of robbers crept through it into the church. The
  moujik hid himself behind the altar. As soon as the robbers had
  come in they began dividing their booty, and after everything
  else was shared there remained over and above a golden sabre--each
  one laid hold of it for himself, no one would give up his
  claim to it. Out jumped the poor man, crying:

  "What's the good of disputing that way? Let the sabre
  belong to him who will cut this corpse's head off!"

  Up jumped Marko the Rich like a madman. The robbers
  were frightened out of their wits, flung away their spoil and
  scampered off.

  "Here, Moujik," says Marko, "let's divide the money."

  They divided it equally between them: each of the shares
  was a large one.

  "But how about the copeck?" asks the poor man.

  "Ah, brother!" replies Marko, "surely you can see I've got
  no change!"

  And so Marko the Rich never paid the copeck after all.

We may take next the large class of stories about simpletons, so dear
to the public in all parts of the world. In the Skazkas a simpleton is
known as a _durak_, a word which admits of a variety of explanations.
Sometimes it means an idiot, sometimes a fool in the sense of a
jester. In the stories of village life its signification is generally
that of a "ninny;" in the "fairy stories" it is frequently applied to
the youngest of the well-known "Three Brothers," the "Boots" of the
family as Dr. Dasent has called him. In the latter case, of course,
the hero's _durachestvo_, or foolishness, is purely subjective. It
exists only in the false conceptions of his character which his family
or his neighbors have formed.[61] But the _durak_ of the following
tale is represented as being really "daft." The story begins with one
of the conventional openings of the Skazka--"In a certain _tsarstvo_,
in a certain _gosudarstvo_,"--but the two synonyms for "kingdom" or
"state" are used only because they rhyme.


  THE FOOL AND THE BIRCH-TREE.[62]

  In a certain country there once lived an old man who had three
  sons. Two of them had their wits about them, but the third was
  a fool. The old man died and his sons divided his property
  among themselves by lot. The sharp-witted ones got plenty of
  all sorts of good things, but nothing fell to the share of the Simpleton
  but one ox--and that such a skinny one!

  Well, fair-time came round, and the clever brothers got ready
  to go and transact business. The Simpleton saw this, and said:

  "I'll go, too, brothers, and take my ox for sale."

  So he fastened a cord to the horn of the ox and drove it to
  the town. On his way he happened to pass through a forest, and
  in the forest there stood an old withered Birch-tree. Whenever
  the wind blew the Birch-tree creaked.

  "What is the Birch creaking about?" thinks the Simpleton.
  "Surely it must be bargaining for my ox? Well," says he, "if
  you want to buy it, why buy it. I'm not against selling it. The
  price of the ox is twenty roubles. I can't take less. Out with
  the money!"

  The Birch made no reply, only went on creaking. But the
  Simpleton fancied that it was asking for the ox on credit. "Very
  good," says he, "I'll wait till to-morrow!" He tied the ox to the
  Birch, took leave of the tree, and went home. Presently in came
  the clever brothers, and began questioning him:

  "Well, Simpleton! sold your ox?"

  "I've sold it."

  "For how much?"

  "For twenty roubles."

  "Where's the money?"

  "I haven't received the money yet. It was settled I should
  go for it to-morrow."

  "There's simplicity for you!" say they.

  Early next morning the Simpleton got up, dressed himself,
  and went to the Birch-tree for his money. He reached the wood;
  there stood the Birch, waving in the wind, but the ox was not to
  be seen. During the night the wolves had eaten it.

  "Now, then, neighbor!" he exclaimed, "pay me my money.
  You promised you'd pay me to-day."

  The wind blew, the Birch creaked, and the Simpleton cried:

  "What a liar you are! Yesterday you kept saying, 'I'll pay
  you to-morrow,' and now you make just the same promise.
  Well, so be it, I'll wait one day more, but not a bit longer. I want
  the money myself."

  When he returned home, his brothers again questioned him
  closely:

  "Have you got your money?"

  "No, brothers; I've got to wait for my money again."

  "Whom have you sold it to?"

  "To the withered Birch-tree in the forest."

  "Oh, what an idiot!"

  On the third day the Simpleton took his hatchet and went to
  the forest. Arriving there, he demanded his money; but the
  Birch-tree only creaked and creaked. "No, no, neighbor!"
  says he. "If you're always going to treat me to promises,[63]
  there'll be no getting anything out of you. I don't like such
  joking; I'll pay you out well for it!"

  With that he pitched into it with his hatchet, so that its chips
  flew about in all directions. Now, in that Birch-tree there was
  a hollow, and in that hollow some robbers had hidden a pot full
  of gold. The tree split asunder, and the Simpleton caught sight
  of the gold. He took as much of it as the skirts of his caftan
  would hold, and toiled home with it. There he showed his
  brothers what he had brought.

  "Where did you get such a lot, Simpleton?" said they.

  "A neighbor gave it me for my ox. But this isn't anything
  like the whole of it; a good half of it I didn't bring home with
  me! Come along, brothers, let's get the rest!"

  Well, they went into the forest, secured the money, and carried
  it home.

  "Now mind, Simpleton," say the sensible brothers, "don't
  tell anyone that we've such a lot of gold."

  "Never fear, I won't tell a soul!"

  All of a sudden they run up against a Diachok,[64] and says
  he:--

  "What's that, brothers, you're bringing from the forest?"

  The sharp ones replied, "Mushrooms." But the Simpleton
  contradicted them, saying:

  "They're telling lies! we're carrying money; here, just take
  a look at it."

  The Diachok uttered such an "Oh!"--then he flung himself
  on the gold, and began seizing handfuls of it and stuffing them
  into his pocket. The Simpleton grew angry, dealt him a blow
  with his hatchet, and struck him dead.

  "Heigh, Simpleton! what have you been and done!" cried
  his brothers. "You're a lost man, and you'll be the cause of our
  destruction, too! Wherever shall we put the dead body?"

  They thought and thought, and at last they dragged it to an
  empty cellar and flung it in there. But later on in the evening
  the eldest brother said to the second one:--

  "This piece of work is sure to turn out badly. When they
  begin looking for the Diachok, you'll see that Simpleton will tell
  them everything. Let's kill a goat and bury it in the cellar, and
  hide the body of the dead man in some other place."

  Well, they waited till the dead of night; then they killed a
  goat and flung it into the cellar, but they carried the Diachok to
  another place and there hid him in the ground. Several days
  passed, and then people began looking everywhere for the Diachok,
  asking everyone about him.

  "What do you want him for?" said the Simpleton, when he
  was asked. "I killed him some time ago with my hatchet, and
  my brothers carried him into the cellar."

  Straightway they laid hands on the Simpleton, crying, "Take
  us there and show him to us."

  The Simpleton went down into the cellar, got hold of the
  goat's head, and asked:--

  "Was your Diachok dark-haired?"

  "He was."

  "And had he a beard?"

  "Yes, he'd a beard."

  "And horns?"

  "What horns are you talking about, Simpleton?"

  "Well, see for yourselves," said he, tossing up the head to
  them. They looked, saw it was a goat's, spat in the Simpleton's
  face, and went their ways home.

One of the most popular simpleton-tales in the world is that of the
fond parents who harrow their feelings by conjuring up the misfortunes
which may possibly await their as yet unborn grandchildren. In
Scotland it is told, in a slightly different form, of two old maids
who were once found bathed in tears, and who were obliged to confess
that they had been day-dreaming and supposing--if they had been
married, and one had had a boy and the other a girl; and if the
children, when they grew up, had married, and had had a little child;
and if it had tumbled out of the window and been killed--what a
dreadful thing it would have been. At which terrible idea they both
gave way to not unnatural tears. In one of its Russian forms, it is
told of the old parents of a boy named Lutonya, who weep over the
hypothetical death of an imaginary grandchild, thinking how sad it
would have been if a log which the old woman has dropped had killed
that as yet merely potential infant. The parent's grief appears to
Lutonya so uncalled for that he leaves home, declaring that he will
not return until he has found people more foolish than they. He
travels long and far, and witnesses several foolish doings, most of
which are familiar to us. In one place, a cow is being hoisted on to a
roof in order that it may eat the grass growing thereon; in another a
horse is being inserted into its collar by sheer force; in a third, a
woman is fetching milk from the cellar, a spoonful at a time. But the
story comes to an end before its hero has discovered the surpassing
stupidity of which he is in quest. In another Russian story of a
similar nature Lutonya goes from home in search of some one more
foolish than his mother, who has been tricked by a cunning sharper.
First he finds carpenters attempting to stretch a beam which is not
long enough, and earns their gratitude by showing them how to add a
piece to it. Then he comes to a place where sickles are unknown, and
harvesters are in the habit of biting off the ears of corn, so he
makes a sickle for them, thrusts it into a sheaf and leaves it there.
They take it for a monstrous worm, tie a cord to it, and drag it away
to the bank of the river. There they fasten one of their number to a
log and set him afloat, giving him the end of the cord, in order that
he may drag the "worm" after him into the water. The log turns over,
and the moujik with it, so that his head is under water while his legs
appear above it. "Why, brother!" they call to him from the bank, "why
are you so particular about your leggings? If they do get wet, you can
dry them at the fire." But he makes no reply, only drowns. Finally
Lutonya meets the counterpart of the well-known Irishman who, when
counting the party to which he belongs, always forgets to count
himself, and so gets into numerical difficulties. After which he
returns home.[65]

It would be easy to multiply examples of this style of humor--to
find in the folk-tales current all over Russia the equivalents of
our own facetious narratives about the wise men of Gotham, the old
woman whose petticoats were cut short by the pedlar whose name was
Stout, and a number of other inhabitants of Fool-land, to whom the
heart of childhood is still closely attached, and also of the
exaggeration-stories, the German _Luegenmaehrchen_, on which was founded
the narrative of Baron Munchausen's surprising adventures. But instead
of doing this, before passing on to the more important groups of the
Skazkas, I will quote, as this chapter's final illustrations of the
Russian story-teller's art, an "animal story" and a "legend." Here is
the former:--


  THE MIZGIR.[66]

  In the olden years, long long ago, with the spring-tide fair and
  the summer's heat there came on the world distress and shame.
  For gnats and flies began to swarm, biting folks and letting
  their warm blood flow.

  Then the Spider[67] appeared, the hero bold, who, with waving
  arms, weaved webs around the highways and byways in
  which the gnats and flies were most to be found.

  A ghastly Gadfly, coming that way, stumbled straight into
  the Spider's snare. The Spider, tightly squeezing her throat,
  prepared to put her out of the world. From the Spider the
  Gadfly mercy sought.

  "Good father Spider! please not to kill me. I've ever so
  many little ones. Without me they'll be orphans left, and from
  door to door have to beg their bread and squabble with dogs."

  Well, the Spider released her. Away she flew, and everywhere
  humming and buzzing about, told the flies and gnats of
  what had occurred.

  "Ho, ye gnats and flies! Meet here beneath this ash-tree's
  roots. A spider has come, and, with waving of arms and weaving
  of nets, has set his snares in all the ways to which the flies
  and gnats resort. He'll catch them, every single one!"

  They flew to the spot; beneath the ash-tree's roots they hid,
  and lay there as though they were dead. The Spider came,
  and there he found a cricket, a beetle, and a bug.

  "O Cricket!" he cried, "upon this mound sit and take
  snuff! Beetle, do thou beat a drum. And do thou crawl, O
  Bug, the bun-like, beneath the ash, and spread abroad this news
  of me, the Spider, the wrestler, the hero bold--that the Spider,
  the wrestler, the hero bold, no longer in the world exists; that
  they have sent him to Kazan; that in Kazan, upon a block,
  they've chopped his head off, and the block destroyed."

  On the mound sat the Cricket and took snuff. The Beetle
  smote upon the drum. The Bug crawled in among the ash-tree's
  roots, and cried:--

  "Why have ye fallen? Wherefore as in death do ye lie
  here? Truly no longer lives the Spider, the wrestler, the hero
  bold. They've sent him to Kazan and in Kazan they've chopped
  his head off on a block, and afterwards destroyed the block."

  The gnats and flies grew blithe and merry. Thrice they
  crossed themselves, then out they flew--and straight into the
  Spider's snares. Said he:--

  "But seldom do ye come! I would that ye would far more
  often come to visit me! to quaff my wine and beer, and pay me
  tribute!"[68]

This story is specially interesting in the original, inasmuch as it
is rhymed throughout, although printed as prose. A kind of lilt is
perceptible in many of the Skazkas, and traces of rhyme are often to
be detected in them, but "The Mizgir's" mould is different from
theirs. Many stories also exist in an artificially versified form, but
their movement differs entirely from that of the naturally cadenced
periods of the ordinary Skazka, or of such rhymed prose as that of
"The Mizgir."

The following legend is not altogether new in "motive," but a certain
freshness is lent to it by its simple style, its unstrained humor, and
its genial tone.


  THE SMITH AND THE DEMON.[69]

  Once upon a time there was a Smith, and he had one son, a
  sharp, smart, six-year-old boy. One day the old man went to
  church, and as he stood before a picture of the Last Judgment
  he saw a Demon painted there--such a terrible one!--black, with
  horns and a tail.

  "O my!" says he to himself. "Suppose I get just such
  another painted for the smithy." So he hired an artist, and
  ordered him to paint on the door of the smithy exactly such
  another demon as he had seen in the church. The artist painted
  it. Thenceforward the old man, every time he entered the
  smithy, always looked at the Demon and said, "Good morning,
  fellow-countryman!" And then he would lay the fire in the
  furnace and begin his work.

  Well, the Smith lived in good accord with the Demon for
  some ten years. Then he fell ill and died. His son succeeded
  to his place as head of the household, and took the smithy into
  his own hands. But he was not disposed to show attention to
  the Demon as the old man had done. When he went into the
  smithy in the morning, he never said "Good morrow" to him;
  instead of offering him a kindly word, he took the biggest hammer
  he had handy, and thumped the Demon with it three times
  right on the forehead, and then he would go to his work. And
  when one of God's holy days came round, he would go to church
  and offer each saint a taper; but he would go up to the Demon
  and spit in his face. Thus three years went by, he all the
  while favoring the Evil One every morning either with a spitting
  or with a hammering. The Demon endured it and endured it,
  and at last found it past all endurance. It was too much for
  him.

  "I've had quite enough of this insolence from him!" thinks
  he. "Suppose I make use of a little diplomacy, and play him
  some sort of a trick!"

  So the Demon took the form of a youth, and went to the
  smithy.

  "Good day, uncle!" says he.

  "Good day!"

  "What should you say, uncle, to taking me as an apprentice?
  At all events, I could carry fuel for you, and blow the
  bellows."

  The Smith liked the idea. "Why shouldn't I?" he replied.
  "Two are better than one."

  The Demon began to learn his trade; at the end of a month
  he knew more about smith's work than his master did himself,
  was able to do everything that his master couldn't do. It was
  a real pleasure to look at him! There's no describing how
  satisfied his master was with him, how fond he got of him.
  Sometimes the master didn't go into the smithy at all himself,
  but trusted entirely to his journeyman, who had complete charge
  of everything.

  Well, it happened one day that the master was not at home,
  and the journeyman was left all by himself in the smithy.
  Presently he saw an old lady[70] driving along the street in her
  carriage, whereupon he popped his head out of doors and began
  shouting:--

  "Heigh, sirs! Be so good as to step in here! We've
  opened a new business here; we turn old folks into young
  ones."

  Out of her carriage jumped the lady in a trice, and ran into
  the smithy.

  "What's that you're bragging about? Do you mean to say
  it's true? Can you really do it?" she asked the youth.

  "We haven't got to learn our business!" answered the
  Demon. "If I hadn't been able to do it, I wouldn't have invited
  people to try."

  "And how much does it cost?" asked the lady.

  "Five hundred roubles altogether."

  "Well, then, there's your money; make a young woman of
  me."

  The Demon took the money; then he sent the lady's coachman
  into the village.

  "Go," says he, "and bring me here two buckets full of
  milk."

  After that he took a pair of tongs, caught hold of the lady
  by the feet, flung her into the furnace, and burnt her up; nothing
  was left of her but her bare bones.

  When the buckets of milk were brought, he emptied them
  into a large tub, then he collected all the bones and flung them
  into the milk. Just fancy! at the end of about three minutes
  the lady emerged from the milk--alive, and young, and beautiful!

  Well, she got into her carriage and drove home. There she
  went straight to her husband, and he stared hard at her, but
  didn't know she was his wife.

  "What are you staring at?" says the lady. "I'm young and
  elegant, you see, and I don't want to have an old husband! Be
  off at once to the smithy, and get them to make you young; if
  you don't, I won't so much as acknowledge you!"

  There was no help for it; off set the seigneur. But by that
  time the Smith had returned home, and had gone into the
  smithy. He looked about; the journeyman wasn't to be seen.
  He searched and searched, he enquired and enquired, never a
  thing came of it; not even a trace of the youth could be found.
  He took to his work by himself, and was hammering away,
  when at that moment up drove the seigneur, and walked straight
  into the smithy.

  "Make a young man of me," says he.

  "Are you in your right mind, Barin? How can one make a
  young man of you?"

  "Come, now! you know all about that."

  "I know nothing of the kind."

  "You lie, you scoundrel! Since you made my old woman
  young, make me young too; otherwise, there will be no living
  with her for me."

  "Why I haven't so much as seen your good lady."

  "Your journeyman saw her, and that's just the same thing.
  If he knew how to do the job, surely you, an old hand, must
  have learnt how to do it long ago. Come, now, set to work at
  once. If you don't, it will be the worse for you. I'll have you
  rubbed down with a birch-tree towel."

  The Smith was compelled to try his hand at transforming
  the seigneur. He held a private conversation with the coachman
  as to how his journeyman had set to work with the lady,
  and what he had done to her, and then he thought:--

  "So be it! I'll do the same. If I fall on my feet, good; if
  I don't, well, I must suffer all the same!"

  So he set to work at once, stripped the seigneur naked, laid
  hold of him by the legs with the tongs, popped him into the
  furnace, and began blowing the bellows. After he had burnt
  him to a cinder, he collected his remains, flung them into the
  milk, and then waited to see how soon a youthful seigneur
  would jump out of it. He waited one hour, two hours. But
  nothing came of it. He made a search in the tub. There was
  nothing in it but bones, and those charred ones.

  Just then the lady sent messengers to the smithy, to ask
  whether the seigneur would soon be ready. The poor Smith
  had to reply that the seigneur was no more.

  When the lady heard that the Smith had only turned her
  husband into a cinder, instead of making him young, she was
  tremendously angry, and she called together her trusty servants,
  and ordered them to drag him to the gallows. No sooner said
  than done. Her servants ran to the Smith's house, laid hold of
  him, tied his hands together, and dragged him off to the gallows.
  All of a sudden there came up with them the youngster
  who used to live with the Smith as his journeyman, who asked
  him:--

  "Where are they taking you, master?"

  "They're going to hang me," replied the Smith, and straightway
  related all that had happened to him.

  "Well, uncle!" said the Demon, "swear that you will never
  strike me with your hammer, but that you will pay me the same
  respect your father always paid, and the seigneur shall be alive,
  and young, too, in a trice."

  The Smith began promising and swearing that he would
  never again lift his hammer against the Demon, but would
  always pay him every attention. Thereupon the journeyman
  hastened to the smithy, and shortly afterwards came back again,
  bringing the seigneur with him, and crying to the servants:

  "Hold! hold! Don't hang him! Here's your master!"

  Then they immediately untied the cords, and let the Smith
  go free.

  From that time forward the Smith gave up spitting at the
  Demon and striking him with his hammer. The journeyman
  disappeared, and was never seen again. But the seigneur and
  his lady entered upon a prosperous course of life, and if they
  haven't died, they're living still.[71]

FOOTNOTES:

[11] Dasent's "Popular Tales from the Norse," p. xl.

[12] Max Mueller, "Chips," vol. ii. p. 226.

[13] Take as an illustration of these remarks the close of the story
of "Helena the Fair" (No. 34, Chap. IV.). See how light and bright it
is (or at least was, before it was translated).

[14] I speak only of what I have seen. In some districts of Russia, if
one may judge from pictures, the peasants occupy ornamented and
ornamental dwellings.

[15] Khudyakof, vol. ii. p. 65.

[16] Khudyakof, vol. ii. p. 115.

[17] For a description of such social gatherings see the "Songs of the
Russian People," pp. 32-38.

[18] Afanasief, vi. No. 66.

[19] Cakes of unleavened flour flavored with garlic.

[20] The _Nechistol_, or unclean. (_Chisty_ = clean, pure, &c.)

[21] Literally, "on thee no face is to be seen."

[22] I do not propose to comment at any length upon the stories quoted
in the present chapter. Some of them will be referred to farther on.
Marusia's demon lover will be recognized as akin to Arabian Ghouls, or
the Rakshasas of Indian mythology. (See the story of Sidi Norman in
the "Thousand and One Nights," also Lane's translation, vol. i., p.
32; and the story of Asokadatta and Vijayadatta in the fifth book of
the "Kathasaritsagara," Brockhaus's translation, 1843, vol. ii. pp.
142-159.) For transformations of a maiden into a flower or tree, see
Grimm, No. 76, "Die Nelke," and the notes to that story in vol. iii.,
p. 125--Hahn, No. 21, "Das Lorbeerkind," etc. "The Water of Life,"
will meet with due consideration in the fourth chapter. The Holy Water
which destroys the Fiend is merely a Christian form of the "Water of
Death," viewed in its negative aspect.

[23] Chudinsky, No. 3.

[24] Afanasief, vi. p. 325. Wolfs "Niederlandische Sagen," No. 326,
quoted in Thorpe's "Northern Mythology," i. 292. Note 4.

[25] A number of ghost stories, and some remarks about the ideas of
the Russian peasants with respect to the dead, will be found in Chap.
V. Scott mentions a story in "The Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border,"
vol. ii. p. 223, of a widower who believed he was haunted by his dead
wife. On one occasion the ghost, to prove her identity, gave suck to
her surviving infant.

[26] Afanasief, viii. p. 165.

[27] In West-European stories the devil frequently carries off a
witch's soul after death. Here the fiend enters the corpse, or rather
its skin, probably intending to reappear as a vampire. Compare Bleek's
"Reynard the Fox in South Africa," No. 24, in which a lion squeezes
itself into the skin of a girl it has killed. I have generally
rendered by "demon," instead of "devil," the word _chort_ when it
occurs in stories of this class, as the spirits to which they refer
are manifestly akin to those of oriental demonology.

[28] For an account of which, see the "Songs of the Russian People,"
pp. 333-334. The best Russian work on the subject is Barsof's
"Prichitaniya Syevernago Kraya," Moscow, 1872.

[29] Afanasief, iv. No. 9.

[30] Professor de Gubernatis justly remarks that this "howling" is
more in keeping with the nature of the eastern jackal than with that
of its western counterpart, the fox. "Zoological Mythology," ii. 130.

[31] Afanasief, vii. No. 45.

[32] _Pope_ is the ordinary but disrespectful term for a priest
(_Svyashchennik_), as _popovich_ is for a priest's son.

[33] "Father dear," or "reverend father."

[34] A phrase often used by the peasants, when frightened by anything
of supernatural appearance.

[35] Afanasief, Skazki, vii. No. 49.

[36] The Russian expression is _gol kak sokol_, "bare as a hawk."

[37] In another story St. Nicolas's picture is the surety.

[38] Another variant of this story, under the title of "Norka," will
be quoted in full in the next chapter.

[39] Afanasief, vii. p. 107.

[40] Afanasief, vii. p. 146.

[41] Or "The Seven-year-old." Khudyakof, No. 6. See Grimm, No. 94,
"Die kluge Bauerntochter," and iii. 170-2.

[42] _Voevoda_, now a general, formerly meant a civil governor, etc.

[43] Afanasief. "Legendui," No. 29.

[44] Diminutive of Peter.

[45] The word employed here is not _chort_, but _diavol_.

[46] Some remarks on the stories of this class, will be found in Chap.
VI. The Russian peasants still believe that all people who drink
themselves to death are used as carriers of wood and water in the
infernal regions.

[47] In the sixty-fourth story of Asbjoernsen's "Norske Folke-Eventyr,"
(Ny Samling, 1871) the dispute between the husband and wife is about a
cornfield--as to whether it should be reaped or shorn--and she tumbles
into a pool while she is making clipping gestures "under her husband's
nose." In the old fabliau of "Le Pre Tondu" (Le Grand d'Aussy,
Fabliaux, 1829, iii. 185), the husband cuts out the tongue of his
wife, to prevent her from repeating that his meadow has been clipped,
whereupon she makes a clipping sign with her fingers. In Poggio's
"Facetiae," the wife is doubly aggravating. For copious information
with respect to the use made of this story by the romance-writers, see
Liebrecht's translations of Basile's "Pentamerone," ii. 264, and of
Dunlop's "History of Literature," p. 516.

[48] Afanasief, v. p. 16.

[49] Ibid., iii. p. 87.

[50] Chudinsky, No. 8. The proverb is dear to the Tartars also.

[51] Ibid. No. 23. The _liulka_, or Russian cradle, is suspended and
swung, instead of being placed on the floor and rocked. Russian babies
are usually swaddled tightly, like American papooses.

[52] "Panchatantra," 1859, vol. i. Sec. 212, pp. 519-524. I gladly avail
myself of this opportunity of gratefully acknowledging my obligations
to Dr. Benfey's invaluable work.

[53] Afanasief, i. No. 9. Written down in the Novgorod Government. Its
dialect renders it somewhat difficult to read.

[54] This story is known to the Finns, but with them the Russian
Demon, (_chortenok_ = a little _chort_ or devil), has become the
Plague. In the original Indian story the demon is one which had
formerly lived in a Brahman's house, but had been frightened away by
his cantankerous wife. In the Servian version (Karajich, No. 37), the
opening consists of the "Scissors-story," to which allusion has
already been made. The vixen falls into a hole which she does not see,
so bent is she on controverting her husband.

[55] Afanasief, ii. No. 12. Written down by a "Crown Serf," in the
government of Perm.

[56] Afanasief, viii. No. 20. A copeck is worth about a third of a
penny.

[57] The story is continued very little further by Afanasief, its
conclusion being the same as that of "The Wise Wife," in Book vii. No.
22, a tale of magic. For a Servian version of the tale see Vuk
Karajich, No. 7.

[58] Afanasief, v. No. 3. From the Novgorod Government.

[59] Literally, "has bid to live long," a conventional euphemism for
"has died." "Remember what his name was," is sometimes added.

[60] It will be observed that the miser holds out against the pain
which the scalded demon was unable to bear. See above, p. 21.

[61] Professor de Gubernatis remarks that he may sometimes be called
"the first Brutus of popular tradition." "Zoological Mythology," vol.
i. p. 199.

[62] Afanasief, v. No. 53.

[63] _Zavtrakami podchivat_ = to dupe; _zavtra_ = to-morrow; _zavtrak_
= breakfast.

[64] One of the inferior members of the Russian clerical body, though
not of the clergy. But in one of the variants of the story it is a
"pope" or priest, who appears, and he immediately claims a share in
the spoil. Whereupon the Simpleton makes use of his hatchet. Priests
are often nicknamed goats by the Russian peasantry, perhaps on account
of their long beards.

[65] Afanasief, ii. No. 8, v. No. 5. See also Khudyakof, No. 76. Cf.
Grimm, No. 34, "Die kluge Else." Haltrich, No. 66. Asbjoernsen and Moe,
No. 10. (Dasent No. 24, "Not a Pin to choose between them.")

[66] Afanasief, ii. No. 5. Written down by a crown-peasant in the
government of Perm.

[67] _Mizgir_, a venomous spider, like the Tarantula, found in the
Kirghiz Steppes.

[68] In another story bearing the same title (v. 39) the spider lies
on its back awaiting its prey. Up comes "the honorable widow," the
wasp, and falls straight into the trap. The spider beheads her. Then
the gnats and flies assemble, perform a funeral service over her
remains, and carry them off on their shoulders to the village of
Komarovo (_komar_ = gnat). For specimens of the Russian "Beast-Epos"
the reader is referred (as I have stated in the preface) to Professor
de Gubernatis's "Zoological Mythology."

[69] Afanasief, "Legendui," No. 31. Taken from Dahl's collection. Some
remarks on the Russian "legends" are given in Chap. VI.

[70] _Baruinya_, the wife of a _barin_ or seigneur.

[71] The _chort_ of this legend is evidently akin to the devil
himself, whom traditions frequently connect with blacksmiths; but his
prototype, in the original form of this story, was doubtless a demigod
or demon. His part is played by St. Nicholas in the legend of "The
Priest with the Greedy Eyes," for which, and for further comment on
the story, see Chap. VI.