CHAPTER V.

GHOST STORIES.


The Russian peasants have very confused ideas about the local
habitation of the disembodied spirit, after its former tenement has
been laid in the grave. They seem, from the language of their funeral
songs, sometimes to regard the departed spirit as residing in the
coffin which holds the body from which it has been severed, sometimes
to imagine that it hovers around the building which used to be its
home, or flies abroad on the wings of the winds. In the food and money
and other necessaries of existence still placed in the coffin with the
corpse, may be seen traces of an old belief in a journey which the
soul was forced to undertake after the death of the body; in the
_pomniki_ or feasts in memory of the dead, celebrated at certain short
intervals after a death, and also on its anniversary, may be clearly
recognized the remains of a faith in the continued residence of the
dead in the spot where they had been buried, and in their subjection
to some physical sufferings, their capacity for certain animal
enjoyments. The two beliefs run side by side with each other,
sometimes clashing and producing strange results--all the more strange
when they show signs of an attempt having been made to reconcile them
with Christian ideas.[379]

Of a heavenly or upper-world home of departed spirits, neither the
songs nor the stories of the people, so far as I am aware, make
mention. But that there is a country beyond the sky, inhabited by
supernatural beings of magic power and unbounded wealth, is stated in
a number of tales of the well-known "Jack and the Beanstalk" type. Of
these the following may be taken as a specimen.


  THE FOX-PHYSICIAN.[380]

  There once was an old couple. The old man planted a cabbage-head
  in the cellar under the floor of his cottage; the old
  woman planted one in the ash-hole. The old woman's cabbage,
  in the ash-hole, withered away entirely; but the old man's grew
  and grew, grew up to the floor. The old man took his hatchet and
  cut a hole in the floor above the cabbage. The cabbage went on
  growing again; grew, grew right up to the ceiling. Again the old
  man took his hatchet and cut a hole in the ceiling above the cabbage.
  The cabbage grew and grew, grew right up to the sky.
  How was the old man to get a look at the head of the cabbage?
  He began climbing up the cabbage-stalk, climbed and climbed,
  climbed and climbed, climbed right up to the sky, cut a hole in
  the sky, and crept through. There he sees a mill[381] standing.
  The mill gives a turn--out come a pie and a cake with a pot of
  stewed grain on top.

  The old man ate his fill, drank his fill, and then lay down to
  sleep. When he had slept enough he slid down to earth again,
  and cried:

  "Old woman! why, old woman! how one does live up in
  heaven! There's a mill there--every time it turns, out come a
  pie and a cake, with a pot of _kasha_ on top!"

  "How can I get there, old man?"

  "Slip into this sack, old woman. I'll carry you up."

  The old woman thought a bit, and then got into the sack.
  The old man took the sack in his teeth, and began climbing up
  to heaven. He climbed and climbed, long did he climb. The
  old woman got tired of waiting and asked:

  "Is it much farther, old man?"

  "We've half the way to go still."

  Again he climbed and climbed, climbed and climbed. A
  second time the old woman asked:

  "Is it much farther, old man?"

  The old man was just beginning to say: "Not much farther--" when
  the sack slipped from between his teeth, and the old
  woman fell to the ground and was smashed all to pieces. The
  old man slid down the cabbage-stalk and picked up the sack.
  But it had nothing in it but bones, and those broken very small.
  The old man went out of his house and wept bitterly.

  Presently a fox met him.

  "What are you crying about, old man?"

  "How can I help crying? My old woman is smashed to
  pieces."

  "Hold your noise! I'll cure her."

  The old man fell at the fox's feet.

  "Only cure her! I'll pay whatever is wanted."

  "Well, then, heat the bath-room, carry the old woman there
  along with a bag of oatmeal and a pot of butter, and then stand
  outside the door; but don't look inside."

  The old man heated the bath-room, carried in what was
  wanted, and stood outside at the door. But the fox went into
  the bath-room, shut the door, and began washing the old
  woman's remains; washed and washed, and kept looking about
  her all the time.

  "How's my old woman getting on?" asked the old man.

  "Beginning to stir!" replied the fox, who then ate up the
  old woman, collected her bones and piled them up in a corner,
  and set to work to knead a hasty pudding.

  The old man waited and waited. Presently he asked;

  "How's my old woman getting on?"

  "Resting a bit!" cried the fox, as she gobbled up the hasty
  pudding.

  When she had finished it she cried:

  "Old man! open the door wide."

  He opened it, and the fox sprang out of the bath-room and
  ran off home. The old man went into the bath-room and looked
  about him. Nothing was to be seen but the old woman's bones
  under the bench--and those picked so clean! As for the oatmeal
  and the butter, they had all been eaten up. So the old man was
  left alone and in poverty.

This story is evidently a combination of two widely differing tales.
The catastrophe we may for the present pass over, but about the
opening some few words may be said. The Beanstalk myth is one which is
found among so many peoples in such widely distant regions, and it
deals with ideas of such importance, that no contribution to its
history can be considered valueless. Most remarkable among its
numerous forms are those American and Malayo-Polynesian versions of
the "heaven-tree" story which Mr. Tylor has brought together in his
"Early History of mankind."[382] In Europe it is usually found in a
very crude and fragmentary form, having been preserved, for the most
part, as the introduction to some other story which has proved more
attractive to the popular fancy. The Russian versions are all, as far
as I am aware, of this nature. I have already[383] mentioned one of
them, in which, also, the Fox plays a prominent part. Its opening
words are, "There once lived an old man and an old woman, and they had
a little daughter. One day she was eating beans, and she let one fall
on the ground. The bean grew and grew, and grew right up to heaven.
The old man climbed up to heaven, slipped in there, walked and walked,
admired and admired, and said to himself, 'I'll go and fetch the old
woman; won't she just be delighted!'" So he tries to carry his wife up
the bean stalk, but grows faint and lets her fall; she is killed, and
he calls in the Fox as Wailer.[384]

In a variant of the "Fox Physician" from the Vologda Government, it is
a pea which gives birth to the wondrous tree. "There lived an old man
and an old woman; the old man was rolling a pea about, and it fell on
the ground. They searched and searched a whole week, but they couldn't
find it. The week passed by, and the old people saw that the pea had
begun to sprout. They watered it regularly, and the pea set to work
and grew higher than the izba. When the peas ripened, the old man
climbed up to where they were, plucked a great bundle of them, and
began sliding down the stalk again. But the bundle fell out of the old
man's hands and killed the old woman."[385]

According to another variant, "There once lived a grandfather and a
grandmother, and they had a hut. The grandfather sowed a bean under
the table, and the grandmother a pea. A hen gobbled up the pea, but
the bean grew up as high as the table. They moved the table, and the
bean grew still higher. They cut away the ceiling and the roof; it
went on growing until it grew right up to the heavens (_nebo_). The
grandfather climbed up to heaven, climbed and climbed--there stood a
hut (_khatka_), its walls of pancakes, its benches of white bread, the
stove of buttered curds. He began to eat, ate his fill, and lay down
above the stove to sleep. In came twelve sister-goats. The first had
one eye, the second two eyes, the third three, and so on with the
rest, the last having twelve eyes. They saw that some one had been
meddling with their hut, so they put it to rights, and when they went
out they left the one-eyed to keep watch. Next day the grandfather
again climbed up there, saw One-Eye and began to mutter[386] 'Sleep,
eye, sleep!' The goat went to sleep. The man ate his fill and went
away. Next day the two-eyed kept watch, and after it the three-eyed
and so on. The grandfather always muttered his charm 'Sleep, eye!
Sleep, second eye! Sleep, third eye!' and so on. But with the twelfth
goat he failed, for he charmed only eleven of her eyes. The goat saw
him with the twelfth and caught him,"--and there the story ends.[387]

In another instance the myth has been turned into one of those tales
of the Munchausen class, the title of which is the "saw" _Ne lyubo, ne
slushai_, _i.e._, "If you don't like, don't listen"--the final words
being understood; "but let me tell you a story." A cock finds a pea in
the part of a cottage under the floor, and begins calling to the hens;
the cottager hears the call, drives away the cock, and pours water
over the pea. It grows up to the floor, up to the ceiling, up to the
roof; each time way is made for it, and finally it grows right up to
heaven (_do nebushka_). Says the moujik to his wife:

"Wife! wife, I say! shall I climb up into heaven and see what's going
on there? May be there's sugar there, and mead--lots of everything!"

"Climb away, if you've a mind to," replies his wife.

So he climbs up, and there he finds a large wooden house. He enters
in and sees a stove, garnished with sucking pigs and geese and pies
"and everything which the soul could desire." But the stove is guarded
by a seven-eyed goat; the moujik charms six of the eyes to sleep, but
overlooks the seventh. With it the goat sees him eat and drink and
then go to sleep. The house-master comes in, is informed by the goat
of all that has occurred, flies into a passion, calls his servants,
and has the intruder turned out of the house. When the moujik comes to
the place where the pea-stalk had been, "he looks around--no pea-stalk
is there." He collects the cobwebs "which float on the summer air,"
and of them he makes a cord; this he fastens "to the edge of heaven"
and begins to descend. Long before he reaches the earth he comes to
the end of his cord, so he crosses himself, and lets go. Falling into
a swamp, he remains there some time. At last a duck builds her nest on
his head, and lays an egg in it. He catches hold of the duck's tail,
and the bird pulls him out of the swamp; whereupon he goes home
rejoicing, taking with him the duck and her egg, and tells his wife
all that has happened.[388]

In another variant it is an acorn which is sown under the floor. From
it springs an oak which grows to the skies. The old man of the story
climbs up it in search of acorns, and reaches heaven. There he finds a
hand-mill and a cock with a golden comb, both of which he carries off.
The mill grinds pies and pancakes, and the old man and his wife live
in plenty. But after a time a Barin or Seigneur steals the mill. The
old people are in despair, but the golden-combed cock flies after the
mill, perches on the Barin's gates, and cries--

"Kukureku! Boyarin, Boyarin! Give us back our golden, sky-blue mill!"

The cock is flung into the well, but it drinks all the water, flies
up to the Barin's house, and there reiterates its demand. Then it is
thrown into the fire, but it extinguishes the flames, flies right into
the Barin's guest-chamber, and crows as before. The guests disperse,
the Barin runs after them, and the golden-combed cock seizes the mill
and flies away with it.[389]

In a variant from the Smolensk Government, it is the wife who climbs
up the pea-stalk, while the husband remains down below. When she
reaches the top, she finds an _izbushka_ or cottage there, its walls
made of pies, its tables of cheese, its stove of pancakes, and so
forth. After she has feasted and gone to sleep in a corner, in come
three goats, of which the first has two eyes and two ears, the second
has three of each of these organs, and the third has four. The old
woman sends to sleep the ears and the eyes of the first and the second
goat; but when the third watches it retains the use of its fourth eye
and fourth ear, in spite of the incantations uttered by the intruder,
and so finds her out. On being questioned, she explains that she has
come "from the earthly realm into the heavenly," and promises not to
repeat her visit if she is dismissed in peace. So the goats let her
go, and give her a bag of nuts, apples, and other good things to take
with her. She slides down the pea-stalk and tells her husband all that
has happened. He persuades her to undertake a second ascent together
with him, so off they set in company, their young granddaughter
climbing after them. Suddenly the pea-stalk breaks, they fall headlong
and are never heard of again. "Since that time," says the story, "no
one has ever set foot in that heavenly izbushka--so no one knows
anything more about it."[390]

Clearer and fuller than these vague and fragmentary sketches of a
"heavenly realm," are the pictures contained in the Russian folk-tales
of the underground world. But it is very doubtful how far the stories
in which they figure represent ancient Slavonic ideas. In the name, if
not in the nature, of the _Ad_, or subterranean abode of evil spirits
and sinful souls, we recognize the influence of the Byzantine Hades;
but most of the tales in which it occurs are supposed to draw their
original inspiration from Indian sources, while they owe to Christian,
Brahmanic, Buddhistic, and Mohammedan influences the form in which
they now appear. To these "legends," as the folk-tales are styled in
which the saints or their ghostly enemies occur, belongs the following
narrative of--


  THE FIDDLER IN HELL.[391]

  There was a certain moujik who had three sons. His life was
  a prosperous one, and he laid by money enough to fill two pots.
  The one he buried in his corn-kiln, the other under the gate of
  his farmyard. Well, the moujik died, and never said a word
  about the money to any one. One day there was a festival in
  the village. A fiddler was on his way to the revel when, all of
  a sudden, he sank into the earth--sank right through and
  tumbled into hell, lighting exactly there where the rich moujik
  was being tormented.

  "Hail, friend!" says the Fiddler.

  "It's an ill wind that's brought you hither!"[392] answers the
  moujik; "this is hell, and in hell here I sit."

  "What was it brought you here, uncle?"

  "It was money! I had much money: I gave none to the
  poor, two pots of it did I bury underground. See now, they
  are going to torment me, to beat me with sticks, to tear me with
  nails."

  "Whatever shall I do?" cried the Fiddler. "Perhaps
  they'll take to torturing me too!"

  "If you go and sit on the stove behind the chimney-pipe,
  and don't eat anything for three years--then you will remain
  safe."

  The Fiddler hid behind the stove-pipe. Then came fiends,[393]
  and they began to beat the rich moujik, reviling him the while,
  and saying:

  "There's for thee, O rich man. Pots of money didst thou
  bury but thou couldst not hide them. There didst thou bury
  them that we might not be able to keep watch over them. At
  the gate people are always riding about, the horses crush our
  heads with their hoofs, and in the corn-kiln we get beaten with
  flails."

  As soon as the fiends had gone away the moujik said to the
  Fiddler:

  "If you get out of here, tell my children to dig up the money--one
  pot is buried at the gate, and the other in the corn-kiln--and
  to distribute it among the poor."

  Afterwards there came a whole roomful of evil ones, and
  they asked the rich moujik:

  "What have you got here that smells so Russian?"

  "You have been in Russia and brought away a Russian
  smell with you," replied the moujik.

  "How could that be?" they said. Then they began looking,
  they found the Fiddler, and they shouted:

  "Ha, ha, ha! Here's a Fiddler."

  They pulled him off the stove, and set him to work fiddling.
  He played three years, though it seemed to him only three
  days. Then he got tired and said:

  "Here's a wonder! After playing a whole evening I used
  always to find all my fiddle-strings snapped. But now, though
  I've been playing for three whole days, they are all sound. May
  the Lord grant us his blessing!"[394]

  No sooner had he uttered these words than every one of the
  strings snapped.

  "There now, brothers!" says the Fiddler, "you can see
  for yourselves. The strings are snapped; I've nothing to
  play on!"

  "Wait a bit!" said one of the fiends. "I've got two hanks
  of catgut; I'll fetch them for you."

  He ran off and fetched them. The Fiddler took the strings,
  screwed them up, and again uttered the words:

  "May the Lord grant us his blessing!"

  In a moment snap went both hanks.

  "No, brothers!" said the Fiddler, "your strings don't suit
  me. I've got some of my own at home; by your leave I'll go
  for them."

  The fiends wouldn't let him go. "You wouldn't come back,"
  they say.

  "Well, if you won't trust me, send some one with me as an
  escort."

  The fiends chose one of their number, and sent him with the
  Fiddler. The Fiddler got back to the village. There he could
  hear that, in the farthest cottage, a wedding was being celebrated.

  "Let's go to the wedding!" he cried.

  "Come along!" said the fiend.

  They entered the cottage. Everyone there recognized the
  Fiddler and cried:

  "Where have you been hiding these three years?"

  "I have been in the other world!" he replied.

  They sat there and enjoyed themselves for some time.
  Then the fiend beckoned to the Fiddler, saying, "It's time to
  be off!" But the Fiddler replied: "Wait a little longer! Let
  me fiddle away a bit and cheer up the young people." And so
  they remained sitting there till the cocks began to crow. Then
  the fiend disappeared.

  After that, the Fiddler began to talk to the sons of the rich
  moujik, and said:

  "Your father bids you dig up the money--one potful is
  buried at the gate and the other in the corn-kiln--and distribute
  the whole of it among the poor."

  Well, they dug up both the pots, and began to distribute
  the money among the poor. But the more they gave away the
  money, the more did it increase. Then they carried out the
  pots to a crossway. Every one who passed by took out of
  them as much money as his hand could grasp, and yet the
  money wouldn't come to an end. Then they presented a petition
  to the Emperor, and he ordained as follows. There was a
  certain town, the road to which was a very roundabout one.
  It was some fifty versts long, whereas if it had been made in a
  straight line it would not have been more than five. And so
  the Emperor ordained that a bridge should be made the whole
  way. Well, they built a bridge five versts long, and this piece
  of work cleared out both the pots.

  About that time a certain maid bore a son and deserted him
  in his infancy. The child neither ate nor drank for three years
  and an angel of God always went about with him. Well, this
  child came to the bridge, and cried:

  "Ah! what a glorious bridge! God grant the kingdom of
  heaven to him at whose cost it was built!"

  The Lord heard this prayer, and ordered his angels to
  release the rich moujik from the depths of hell.[395]

With the bridge-building episode in this "legend" may be compared the
opening of another Russian story. In it a merchant is described as
having much money but no children. So he and his wife "began to pray
to God, entreating him to give them a child--for solace in their
youth, for support in their old age, for soul-remembrance[396] after
death. And they took to feeding the poor and distributing alms.
Besides all this, they resolved to build, for the use of all the
faithful, a long bridge across swamps and where no man could find a
footing. Much wealth did the merchant expend, but he built the bridge,
and when the work was completed he sent his manager Fedor, saying--

"'Go and sit under the bridge, and listen to what folks say about
me--whether they bless me or revile me.'

"Fedor set off, sat under the bridge, and listened. Presently three
Holy Elders went over the bridge, and said one to another--

"'How ought the man who built this bridge to be rewarded?' 'Let there
be born to him a fortunate son. Whatsoever that son says--it shall be
done: whatsoever he desires--that will the Lord bestow!'"[397]