CHAPTER III.

MYTHOLOGICAL.

_Miscellaneous Impersonifications._


Somewhat resembling the picture usually drawn of the supernatural
Witch in the Skazkas, is that which some of them offer of a
personification of evil called Likho.[224] The following story,
belonging to the familiar Polyphemus-cycle, will serve to convey an
idea of this baleful being, who in it takes a female form.


  ONE-EYED LIKHO.[224]

  Once upon a time there was a smith. "Well now," says
  he, "I've never set eyes on any harm. They say there's evil
  (_likho_)[225] in the world. I'll go and seek me out evil." So he
  went and had a goodish drink, and then started in search of
  evil. On the way he met a tailor.

  "Good day," says the Tailor.

  "Good day."

  "Where are you going?" asks the Tailor.

  "Well, brother, everybody says there is evil on earth. But
  I've never seen any, so I'm going to look for it."

  "Let's go together. I'm a thriving man, too, and have seen
  no evil; let's go and have a hunt for some."

  Well, they walked and walked till they reached a dark, dense
  forest. In it they found a small path, and along it they went--along
  the narrow path. They walked and walked along the path,
  and at last they saw a large cottage standing before them. It
  was night; there was nowhere else to go to. "Look here,"
  they say, "let's go into that cottage." In they went. There
  was nobody there. All looked bare and squalid. They sat
  down, and remained sitting there some time. Presently in
  came a tall woman, lank, crooked, with only one eye.

  "Ah!" says she, "I've visitors. Good day to you."

  "Good day, grandmother. We've come to pass the night
  under your roof."

  "Very good: I shall have something to sup on."

  Thereupon they were greatly terrified. As for her, she went
  and fetched a great heap of firewood. She brought in the heap
  of firewood, flung it into the stove, and set it alight. Then she
  went up to the two men, took one of them--the Tailor--cut his
  throat, trussed him, and put him in the oven.

  Meantime the Smith sat there, thinking, "What's to be done?
  how's one to save one's life?" When she had finished her
  supper, the Smith looked at the oven and said:

  "Granny, I'm a smith."

  "What can you forge?"

  "Anything."

  "Make me an eye."

  "Good," says he; "but have you got any cord? I must
  tie you up, or you won't keep still. I shall have to hammer
  your eye in."

  She went and fetched two cords, one rather thin, the other
  thicker. Well, he bound her with the one which was thinnest.

  "Now then, granny," says he, "just turn over." She turned
  over, and broke the cord.

  "That won't do, granny," says he; "that cord doesn't suit."

  He took the thick cord, and tied her up with it famously.

  "Now then, turn away, granny!" says he. She turned and
  twisted, but didn't break the cord. Then he took an awl, heated
  it red-hot, and applied it to her eye--her sound one. At
  the same moment he caught up a hatchet, and hammered away
  vigorously with the back of it at the awl. She struggled like
  anything, and broke the cord; then she went and sat down at
  the threshold.

  "Ah, villain!" she cried. "You sha'n't get away from me
  now!"

  He saw that he was in an evil plight again. There he sat,
  thinking, "What's to be done?"

  By-and-by the sheep came home from afield, and she drove
  them into her cottage for the night. Well, the Smith spent the
  night there, too. In the morning she got up to let the sheep
  out. He took his sheep-skin pelisse and turned it inside out
  so that the wool was outside, passed his arms through its
  sleeves, and pulled it well over him, and crept up to her as
  he had been a sheep. She let the flock go out one at a time,
  catching hold of each by the wool on its back, and shoving it
  out. Well, he came creeping up like the rest. She caught
  hold of the wool on his back and shoved him out. But as
  soon as she had shoved him out, he stood up and cried:

  "Farewell, Likho! I have suffered much evil (_likha_) at your
  hands. Now you can do nothing to me."

  "Wait a bit!" she replied; "you shall endure still more.
  You haven't escaped yet!"

  The Smith went back through the forest along the narrow
  path. Presently he saw a golden-handled hatchet sticking in a
  tree, and he felt a strong desire to seize it. Well, he did seize
  that hatchet, and his hand stuck fast to it. What was to be
  done? There was no freeing it anyhow. He gave a look behind
  him. There was Likho coming after him, and crying:

  "There you are, villain! you've not got off yet!"

  The Smith pulled out a small knife which he had in his
  pocket, and began hacking away at his hand--cut it clean off
  and ran away. When he reached his village, he immediately
  began to show his arm as a proof that he had seen Likho at last.

  "Look," says he, "that's the state of things. Here am I,"
  says he, "without my hand. And as for my comrade, she's
  eaten him up entirely."

In a Little-Russian variant of this story, quoted by Afanasief,[226]
(III. p. 137) a man, who often hears evil or misfortune (_likho_)
spoken of, sets out in search of it. One day he sees an iron castle
beside a wood, surrounded by a palisade of human bones tipped with
skulls. He knocks at the door, and a voice cries "What do you want?"
"I want evil," he replies. "That's what I'm looking for." "Evil is
here," cries the voice. So in he goes, and finds a huge, blind giant
lying within, stretched on a couch of human bones. "This was Likho
(Evil)," says the story, "and around him were seated Zluidni (Woes)
and Zhurba (Care)." Finding that Likho intends to eat him, the
misfortune-seeker takes to flight. Likho hears the iron doors creak,
and cries to them to stop the fugitive. "But he had already passed out
of doors. Only he lost his right hand, on which the door slammed:
whereupon he exclaimed 'Here's misfortune, sure enough!'"