the solitary story in which he is mentioned. There were two old folks
with whom lived two orphan grandchildren, charming little girls. One
day the youngest child was sent to drive the sparrows away from her
grandfather's pease. While she was thus engaged the forest began to
roar, and out from it came Verlioka, "of vast stature, one-eyed,
crook-nosed, bristly-headed, with tangled beard and moustaches half an
ell long, and with a wooden boot on his one foot, supporting himself
on a crutch, and giving vent to a terrible laughter." And Verlioka
caught sight of the little girl and immediately killed her with his
crutch. And afterwards he killed her sister also, and then the old
grandmother. The grandfather, however, managed to escape with his
life, and afterwards, with the help of a drake and other aiders, he
wreaked his vengeance on the murderous Verlioka.[204]

We will now turn to another female embodiment of evil, frequently
mentioned in the Skazkas--the Witch.[205] She so closely resembles the
Baba Yaga both in disposition and in behavior, that most of the
remarks which have been made about that wild being apply to her also.
In many cases, indeed, we find that one version of a story will allot
to a Baba Yaga the part which in another version is played by a Witch.
The name which she bears--that of _Vyed'ma_--is a misnomer; it
properly belongs either to the "wise woman," or prophetess, of old
times, or to her modern representative, the woman to whom Russian
superstition attributes the faculties and functions ascribed in olden
days by most of our jurisprudents, in more recent times by a few of
our rustics, to our own witch. The supernatural being who, in
folk-tales, sways the elements and preys upon mankind, is most
inadequately designated by such names as _Vyed'ma_, _Hexe_, or
_Witch_, suggestive as those now homely terms are of merely human,
though diabolically intensified malevolence. Far more in keeping with
the vastness of her powers, and the vagueness of her outline, are the
titles of Baba Yaga, Lamia, Striga, Troll-Wife, Ogress, or Dragoness,
under which she figures in various lands. And therefore it is in her
capacity of Baba Yaga, rather than in that of _Vyed'ma_, that we
desire to study the behavior of the Russian equivalent for the
terrible female form which figures in the Anglo-Saxon poem as the
Mother of Grendel.

From among the numerous stories relating to the _Vyed'ma_ we may
select the following, which bears her name.


  THE WITCH.[206]

  There once lived an old couple who had one son called
  Ivashko;[207] no one can tell how fond they were of him!

  Well, one day, Ivashko said to his father and mother:

  "I'll go out fishing if you'll let me."

  "What are you thinking about! you're still very small; suppose
  you get drowned, what good will there be in that?"

  "No, no, I shan't get drowned. I'll catch you some fish;
  do let me go!"

  So his mother put a white shirt on him, tied a red girdle round
  him, and let him go. Out in a boat he sat and said:

    Canoe, canoe, float a little farther,
    Canoe, canoe, float a little farther!

  Then the canoe floated on farther and farther, and Ivashko began to
  fish. When some little time had passed by, the old woman hobbled down
  to the river side and called to her son:

    Ivashechko, Ivashechko, my boy,
    Float up, float up, unto the waterside;
    I bring thee food and drink.

  And Ivashko said:

    Canoe, canoe, float to the waterside;
    That is my mother calling me.

  The boat floated to the shore: the woman took the fish, gave her boy
  food and drink, changed his shirt for him and his girdle, and sent him
  back to his fishing. Again he sat in his boat and said:

    Canoe, canoe, float a little farther,
    Canoe, canoe, float a little farther.

  Then the canoe floated on farther and farther, and Ivashko began to
  fish. After a little time had passed by, the old man also hobbled down
  to the bank and called to his son:

    Ivashechko, Ivashechko, my boy,
    Float up, float up, unto the waterside;
    I bring thee food and drink.

  And Ivashko replied:

    Canoe, canoe, float to the waterside;
    That is my father calling me.

  The canoe floated to the shore. The old man took the fish, gave his
  boy food and drink, changed his shirt for him and his girdle, and sent
  him back to his fishing.

  Now a certain witch[208] had heard what Ivashko's parents had cried
  aloud to him, and she longed to get hold of the boy. So she went down
  to the bank and cried with a hoarse voice:

    Ivashechko, Ivashechko, my boy,
    Float up, float up, unto the waterside;
    I bring thee food and drink.

  Ivashko perceived that the voice was not his mother's, but was that of
  a witch, and he sang:

    Canoe, canoe, float a little farther,
    Canoe, canoe, float a little farther;
    That is not my mother, but a witch who calls me.

  The witch saw that she must call Ivashko with just such a voice as
  his mother had.

  So she hastened to a smith and said to him:

  "Smith, smith! make me just such a thin little voice as Ivashko's
  mother has: if you don't, I'll eat you." So the smith forged her a
  little voice just like Ivashko's mother's. Then the witch went down by
  night to the shore and sang:

    Ivashechko, Ivashechko, my boy,
    Float up, float up, unto the waterside;
    I bring thee food and drink.

  Ivashko came, and she took the fish, and seized the boy and carried
  him home with her. When she arrived she said to her daughter
  Alenka,[209] "Heat the stove as hot as you can, and bake Ivashko well,
  while I go and collect my friends for the feast." So Alenka heated the
  stove hot, ever so hot, and said to Ivashko,

  "Come here and sit on this shovel!"

  "I'm still very young and foolish," answered Ivashko: "I haven't yet
  quite got my wits about me. Please teach me how one ought to sit on a
  shovel."

  "Very good," said Alenka; "it won't take long to teach you."

  But the moment she sat down on the shovel, Ivashko instantly pitched
  her into the oven, slammed to the iron plate in front of it, ran out
  of the hut, shut the door, and hurriedly climbed up ever so high an
  oak-tree [which stood close by].

  Presently the witch arrived with her guests and knocked at the door of
  the hut. But nobody opened it for her.

  "Ah! that cursed Alenka!" she cried. "No doubt she's gone off
  somewhere to amuse herself." Then she slipped in through the window,
  opened the door, and let in her guests. They all sat down to table,
  and the witch opened the oven, took out Alenka's baked body, and
  served it up. They all ate their fill and drank their fill, and then
  they went out into the courtyard and began rolling about on the grass.

  "I turn about, I roll about, having fed on Ivashko's flesh," cried
  the witch. "I turn about, I roll about, having fed on Ivashko's
  flesh."

  But Ivashko called out to her from the top of the oak:

  "Turn about, roll about, having fed on Alenka's flesh!"

  "Did I hear something?" said the witch. "No it was only the noise of
  the leaves." Again the witch began:

  "I turn about, I roll about, having fed on Ivashko's flesh!"

  And Ivashko repeated:

  "Turn about, roll about, having fed on Alenka's flesh!"

  Then the witch looked up and saw Ivashko, and immediately rushed at
  the oak on which Ivashko was seated, and began to gnaw away at it. And
  she gnawed, and gnawed, and gnawed, until at last she smashed two
  front teeth. Then she ran to a forge, and when she reached it she
  cried, "Smith, smith! make me some iron teeth; if you don't I'll eat
  you!"

  So the smith forged her two iron teeth.

  The witch returned and began gnawing the oak again.

  She gnawed, and gnawed, and was just on the point of gnawing it
  through, when Ivashko jumped out of it into another tree which stood
  beside it. The oak that the witch had gnawed through fell down to the
  ground; but then she saw that Ivashko was sitting up in another tree,
  so she gnashed her teeth with spite and set to work afresh, to gnaw
  that tree also. She gnawed, and gnawed, and gnawed--broke two lower
  teeth, and ran off to the forge.

  "Smith, smith!" she cried when she got there, "make me some iron
  teeth; if you don't I'll eat you!"

  The smith forged two more iron teeth for her. She went back again, and
  once more began to gnaw the oak.

  Ivashko didn't know what he was to do now. He looked out, and saw that
  swans and geese[210] were flying by, so he called to them imploringly:

    Oh, my swans and geese,
    Take me on your pinions,
    Bear me to my father and my mother,
    To the cottage of my father and my mother,
    There to eat, and drink, and live in comfort.

  "Let those in the centre carry you," said the birds.

  Ivashko waited; a second flock flew past, and he again cried
  imploringly:

    Oh, my swans and geese!
    Take me on your pinions,
    Bear me to my father and my mother,
    To the cottage of my father and my mother,
    There to eat, and drink, and live in comfort.

  "Let those in the rear carry you!" said the birds.

  Again Ivashko waited. A third flock came flying up, and he cried:

    Oh, my swans and geese!
    Take me on your pinions,
    Bear me to my father and my mother,
    To the cottage of my father and my mother,
    There to eat, and drink, and live in comfort.

  And those swans and geese took hold of him and carried him back, flew
  up to the cottage, and dropped him in the upper room.

  Early the next morning his mother set to work to bake pancakes, baked
  them, and all of a sudden fell to thinking about her boy. "Where is my
  Ivashko?" she cried; "would that I could see him, were it only in a
  dream!"

  Then his father said, "I dreamed that swans and geese had brought our
  Ivashko home on their wings."

  And when she had finished baking the pancakes, she said, "Now, then,
  old man, let's divide the cakes: there's for you, father! there's for
  me! There's for you, father! there's for me."

  "And none for me?" called out Ivashko.

  "There's for you, father!" went on the old woman, "there's for me."

  "And none for me!" [repeated the boy.]

  "Why, old man," said the wife, "go and see whatever that is up there."

  The father climbed into the upper room and there he found Ivashko.
  The old people were delighted, and asked their boy about everything
  that had happened. And after that he and they lived on happily
  together.

      [That part of this story which relates to the baking
      and eating of the witch's daughter is well known in
      many lands. It is found in the German "Haensel und
      Grethel" (Grimm. _KM._ No. 15, and iii. p. 25, where a
      number of parallels are mentioned); in the Norse
      "Askelad" (Asbjoernsen and Moe, No. 1. Dasent, "Boots
      and the Troll," No. 32), where a Troll's daughter is
      baked; and "Smoerbuk" (Asb. and Moe, No. 52. Dasent,
      "Buttercup," No. 18), in which the victim is daughter
      of a "Haugkjoerring," another name for a Troll-wife;
      in the Servian story of "The Stepmother," &c. (Vuk
      Karajich, No. 35, pp. 174-5) in which two _Chivuti_,
      or Jews, are tricked into eating their baked mother;
      in the Modern Greek stories (Hahn, No. 3 and ii. p.
      181), in which the hero bakes (1) a _Drakaena_, while
      her husband, the _Drakos_, is at church, (2) a
      _Lamiopula_, during the absence of the _Lamia_, her
      mother; and in the Albanian story of "Augenhuendin"
      (Hahn, No. 95), in which the heroine gets rid in a
      similar manner of Maro, the daughter of that four eyed
      +sykieneza+. (See note, ii, 309.) Afanasief also refers
      (i. p. 121) to Haltrich, No. 37, and Haupt and
      Schmaler, ii. pp. 172-4. He also mentions a similar
      tale about a giantess existing among the Baltic
      Kashoubes. See also the end of the song of Tardanak,
      showing how he killed "the Seven Headed Jelbegen,"
      Radloff, i. p. 31.]

A variant of this story (from the Chernigof Government)[211] begins by
telling how two old people were childless for a long time. At last the
husband went into the forest, felled wood, and made a cradle. Into
this his wife laid one of the logs he had cut, and began swinging it,
crooning the while a rune beginning

    Swing, blockie dear, swing.

After a little time "behold! the block already had legs. The old
woman rejoiced greatly and began singing anew, and went on singing
until the block became a babe." In this variant the boy rows a silver
boat with a golden oar; in another South Russian variant[212] the boat
is golden, the oar of silver. In a White-Russian variant quoted by
Afanasief (i. p. 118), the place of the witch's daughter is filled by
her son, who had been in the habit of alluring to her den by gifts of
toys, and there devouring, the children from the adjacent villages.
Buslaef's "Historical Essays," (i. pp. 313-321) contain a valuable
investigation of Kulish's version of this story, which he compares
with the romance of "The Knight of the Swan."

In another of the variants of this story[213] Ivanushka is the son of
a Baruinya or Lady, and he is carried off in a whirlwind by a Baba
Yaga. His three sisters go to look for him, and each of them in turn
finds out where he is and attempts to carry him off, after sending the
Baba Yaga to sleep and smearing her eyelids with pitch. But the two
elder sisters are caught on their way home by the Baba Yaga, and
terribly scratched and torn. The youngest sister, however, succeeds in
rescuing her brother, having taken the precaution of propitiating with
butter the cat Jeremiah, "who was telling the boy stories and singing
him songs." When the Baba Yaga awakes, she tells Jeremiah to scratch
her eyes open, but he refuses, reminding her that, long as he has
lived under her roof, she has never in any way regaled him, whereas
the "fair maiden" had no sooner arrived than she treated him to
butter. In another variant[214] the bereaved mother sends three
servant-maids in search of her boy. Two of them get torn to pieces;
the third succeeds in saving Ivanushka from the Baba Yaga, who is so
vexed that she pinches her butter-bribed cat to death for not having
awakened her when the rescue took place. A comparison of these three
stories is sufficient to show how closely connected are the Witch and
the Baba Yaga, how readily the name of either of the two may be
transferred to the other.

But there is one class of stories in which the _Vyed'ma_ is
represented as differing from the Baba Yaga, in so far as she is the
offspring of parents who are not in any way supernatural or inhuman.
Without any apparent cause for her abnormal conduct, the daughter of
an ordinary royal house will suddenly begin to destroy and devour all
living things which fall in her way--her strength developing as
rapidly as her appetite. Of such a nature--to be accounted for only on
the supposition that an evil spirit has taken up its abode in a human
body[215]--is the witch who appears in the somewhat incomprehensible
story that follows.


  THE WITCH AND THE SUN'S SISTER.[216]

  In a certain far-off country there once lived a king and queen.
  And they had an only son, Prince Ivan, who was dumb from
  his birth. One day, when he was twelve years old, he went into
  the stable to see a groom who was a great friend of his.

  That groom always used to tell him tales [_skazki_], and on
  this occasion Prince Ivan went to him expecting to hear some
  stories [_skazochki_], but that wasn't what he heard.

  "Prince Ivan!" said the groom, "your mother will soon
  have a daughter, and you a sister. She will be a terrible witch,
  and she will eat up her father, and her mother, and all their subjects.
  So go and ask your father for the best horse he has--as
  if you wanted a gallop--and then, if you want to be out of harm's
  way, ride away whithersoever your eyes guide you."

  Prince Ivan ran off to his father and, for the first time in his
  life, began speaking to him.

  At that the king was so delighted that he never thought of
  asking what he wanted a good steed for, but immediately ordered
  the very best horse he had in his stud to be saddled for the
  prince.

  Prince Ivan mounted, and rode off without caring where he
  went.[217] Long, long did he ride.

  At length he came to where two old women were sewing
  and he begged them to let him live with them. But they said:

  "Gladly would we do so, Prince Ivan, only we have now
  but a short time to live. As soon as we have broken that trunkful
  of needles, and used up that trunkful of thread, that instant
  will death arrive!"

  Prince Ivan burst into tears and rode on. Long, long did
  he ride. At length he came to where the giant Vertodub was,[218]
  and he besought him, saying:

  "Take me to live with you."

  "Gladly would I have taken you, Prince Ivan!" replied the
  giant, "but now I have very little longer to live. As soon as I
  have pulled up all these trees by the roots, instantly will come
  my death!"

  More bitterly still did the prince weep as he rode farther and
  farther on. By-and-by he came to where the giant Vertogor
  was, and made the same request to him, but he replied:

  "Gladly would I have taken you, Prince Ivan! but I myself
  have very little longer to live. I am set here, you know, to
  level mountains. The moment I have settled matters with these
  you see remaining, then will my death come!"

  Prince Ivan burst into a flood of bitter tears, and rode on
  still farther. Long, long did he ride. At last he came to the
  dwelling of the Sun's Sister. She received him into her house,
  gave him food and drink, and treated him just as if he had been
  her own son.

  The prince now led an easy life. But it was all no use; he
  couldn't help being miserable. He longed so to know what was
  going on at home.

  He often went to the top of a high mountain, and thence
  gazed at the palace in which he used to live, and he could see
  that it was all eaten away; nothing but the bare walls remained!
  Then he would sigh and weep. Once when he returned after
  he had been thus looking and crying, the Sun's Sister asked
  him:

  "What makes your eyes so red to-day, Prince Ivan?"[219]

  "The wind has been blowing in them," said he.

  The same thing happened a second time. Then the Sun's
  Sister ordered the wind to stop blowing. Again a third time
  did Prince Ivan come back with a blubbered face. This time
  there was no help for it; he had to confess everything, and then
  he took to entreating the Sun's Sister to let him go, that he
  might satisfy himself about his old home. She would not let
  him go, but he went on urgently entreating.

  So at last he persuaded her, and she let him go away to
  find out about his home. But first she provided him for the
  journey with a brush, a comb, and two youth-giving apples.
  However old any one might be, let him eat one of these apples,
  he would grow young again in an instant.

  Well, Prince Ivan came to where Vertogor was. There was
  only just one mountain left! He took his brush and cast it
  down on the open plain. Immediately there rose out of the
  earth, goodness knows whence,[220] high, ever so high mountains,
  their peaks touching the sky. And the number of them was
  such that there were more than the eye could see![221] Vertogor
  rejoiced greatly and blithely recommenced his work.

  After a time Prince Ivan came to where Vertodub was, and
  found that there were only three trees remaining there. So he
  took the comb and flung it on the open plain. Immediately from
  somewhere or other there came a sound of trees,[222] and forth from
  the ground arose dense oak forests! each stem more huge than
  the other! Vertodub was delighted, thanked the Prince, and
  set to work uprooting the ancient oaks.

  By-and-by Prince Ivan reached the old women, and gave
  each of them an apple. They ate them, and straightway became
  young again. So they gave him a handkerchief; you only had
  to wave it, and behind you lay a whole lake! At last Prince
  Ivan arrived at home. Out came running his sister to meet him,
  caressed him fondly.

  "Sit thee down, my brother!" she said, "play a tune on the
  lute while I go and get dinner ready."

  The Prince sat down and strummed away on the lute [_gusli_].

  Then there crept a mouse out of a hole, and said to him in a
  human voice:

  "Save yourself, Prince. Run away quick! your sister has
  gone to sharpen her teeth."

  Prince Ivan fled from the room, jumped on his horse, and
  galloped away back. Meantime the mouse kept running over
  the strings of the lute. They twanged, and the sister never
  guessed that her brother was off. When she had sharpened
  her teeth she burst into the room. Lo and behold! not a soul
  was there, nothing but the mouse bolting into its hole! The
  witch waxed wroth, ground her teeth like anything, and set off
  in pursuit.

  Prince Ivan heard a loud noise and looked back. There was
  his sister chasing him. So he waved his handkerchief, and a
  deep lake lay behind him. While the witch was swimming across
  the water, Prince Ivan got a long way ahead. But on she came
  faster than ever; and now she was close at hand! Vertodub
  guessed that the Prince was trying to escape from his sister.
  So he began tearing up oaks and strewing them across the road.
  A regular mountain did he pile up! there was no passing by for
  the witch! So she set to work to clear the way. She gnawed,
  and gnawed, and at length contrived by hard work to bore her
  way through; but by this time Prince Ivan was far ahead.

  On she dashed in pursuit, chased and chased. Just a little
  more, and it would be impossible for him to escape! But Vertogor
  spied the witch, laid hold of the very highest of all the mountains,
  pitched it down all of a heap on the road, and flung
  another mountain right on top of it. While the witch was
  climbing and clambering, Prince Ivan rode and rode, and found
  himself a long way ahead. At last the witch got across the
  mountain, and once more set off in pursuit of her brother. By-and-by
  she caught sight of him, and exclaimed:

  "You sha'n't get away from me this time!" And now she is
  close, now she is just going to catch him!

  At that very moment Prince Ivan dashed up to the abode of
  the Sun's Sister and cried:

  "Sun, Sun! open the window!"

  The Sun's Sister opened the window, and the Prince bounded
  through it, horse and all.

  Then the witch began to ask that her brother might be given
  up to her for punishment. The Sun's Sister would not listen
  to her, nor would she give him up. Then the witch said:

  "Let Prince Ivan be weighed against me, to see which is the
  heavier. If I am, then I will eat him; but if he is, then let him
  kill me!"

  This was done. Prince Ivan was the first to get into one of
  the scales; then the witch began to get into the other. But no
  sooner had she set foot in it than up shot Prince Ivan in the air,
  and that with such force that he flew right up into the sky, and
  into the chamber of the Sun's Sister.

  But as for the Witch-Snake, she remained down below on
  earth.

      [The word _terem_ (plural _terema_) which occurs twice
      in this story (rendered the second time by "chamber")
      deserves a special notice. It is defined by Dahl, in
      its antique sense, as "a raised, lofty habitation, or
      part of one--a Boyar's castle--a Seigneur's house--the
      dwelling-place of a ruler within a fortress," &c. The
      "terem of the women," sometimes styled "of the girls,"
      used to comprise the part of a Seigneur's house, on
      the upper floor, set aside for the female members of
      his family. Dahl compares it with the Russian
      _tyurma_, a prison, and the German _Thurm_. But it
      seems really to be derived from the Greek +teremnon+,
      "anything closely shut fast or closely covered, a
      room, chamber," &c.

      That part of the story which refers to the Cannibal
      Princess is familiar to the Modern Greeks. In the
      Syriote tale of "The Strigla" (Hahn, No. 65) a
      princess devours her father and all his subjects. Her
      brother, who had escaped while she was still a babe,
      visits her and is kindly received. But while she is
      sharpening her teeth with a view towards eating him, a
      mouse gives him a warning which saves his life. As in