the Indian story of "Punchkin,"[134] whose life depends on that of a
parrot, which is in a cage placed beneath the lowest of six jars of
water, piled one on the other, and standing in the midst of a desolate
country covered with thick jungle. When the parrot's legs and wings
are pulled off, Punchkin loses his legs and arms; and when its neck is
wrung, his head twists round and he dies.

One of the strangest of the stories which turn on this idea of an
external heart is the Samoyed tale,[135] in which seven brothers are
in the habit, every night, of taking out their hearts and sleeping
without them. A captive damsel whose mother they have killed, receives
the extracted hearts and hangs them on the tent-pole, where they
remain till the following morning. One night her brother contrives to
get the hearts into his possession. Next morning he takes them into
the tent, where he finds the brothers at the point of death. In vain
do they beg for their hearts, which he flings on the floor. "And as he
flings down the hearts the brothers die."

The legend to which I am now about to refer will serve as a proof of
the venerable antiquity of the myth from which the folk-tales, which
have just been quoted, appear to have sprung. A papyrus, which is
supposed to be "of the age of the nineteenth dynasty, about B.C.
1300," has preserved an Egyptian tale about two brothers. The younger
of these, Satou, leaves the elder, Anepou (Anubis) and retires to the
Valley of the Acacia. But, before setting off, Satou states that he
shall take his heart and place it "in the flowers of the acacia-tree,"
so that, if the tree is cut down, his heart will fall to the ground
and he will die. Having given Anepou instructions what to do in such a
case, he seeks the valley. There he hunts wild animals by day, and at
night he sleeps under the acacia-tree on which his heart rests. But at
length Noum, the Creator, forms a wife for him, and all the other gods
endow her with gifts. To this Egyptian Pandora Satou confides the
secret of his heart. One day a tress of her perfumed hair floats down
the river, and is taken to the King of Egypt. He determines to make
its owner his queen, and she, like Rhodope or Cinderella, is sought
for far and wide. When she has been found and brought to the king, she
recommends him to have the acacia cut down, so as to get rid of her
lawful husband. Accordingly the tree is cut down, the heart falls, and
Satou dies.

About this time Anepou sets out to pay his long-lost brother a visit.
Finding him dead, he searches for his heart, but searches in vain for
three years. In the fourth year, however, it suddenly becomes desirous
of returning to Egypt, and says, "I will leave this celestial sphere."
Next day Anepou finds it under the acacia, and places it in a vase
which contains some mystic fluid. When the heart has become saturated
with the moisture, the corpse shudders and opens its eyes. Anepou
pours the rest of the fluid down its throat, the heart returns to its
proper place, and Satou is restored to life.[136]

In one of the Skazkas, a _volshebnitsa_ or enchantress is introduced,
whose "death," like that of Koshchei, is spoken of as something
definite and localized. A prince has loved and lost a princess, who is
so beautiful that no man can look at her without fainting. Going in
search of her, he comes to the home of an enchantress, who invites him
to tea and gives him leave to inspect her house. As he wanders about
he comes to a cellar in which "he sees that beautiful one whom he
loves, in fire." She tells him her love for him has brought her there;
and he learns that there is no hope of freeing her unless he can find
out "where lies the death of the enchantress." So that evening he asks
his hostess about it, and she replies:

"In a certain lake stands a blue rose-tree. It is in a deep place, and
no man can reach unto it. My death is there."

He sets out in search of it, and, aided by a magic ring, reaches the
lake, "and sees there the blue rose-tree, and around it a blue
forest." After several failures, he succeeds in plucking up the
rose-tree by the roots, whereupon the enchantress straightway sickens.
He returns to her house, finds her at the point of death, and throws
the rose-bush into the cellar where his love is crying, "Behold her
death!" and immediately the whole building shakes to its
foundations--"and becomes an island, on which are people who had been
sitting in Hell, and who offer up thanks to Prince Ivan."[137]

In another Russian story,[138] a prince is grievously tormented by a
witch who has got hold of his heart, and keeps it perpetually seething
in a magic cauldron. In a third,[139] a "Queen-Maiden" falls in love
with the young Ivan, and, after being betrothed to him, would fain
take him away to her own land and marry him. But his stepmother throws
him into a magic slumber, and the Queen-Maiden has to return home
without him. When he awakes, and learns that she has gone, he sorrows
greatly, and sets out in search of her. At last he learns from a
friendly witch that his betrothed no longer cares for him, "her love
is hidden far away." It seems "that on the other side of the ocean
stands an oak, and on the oak a coffer, and in the coffer a hare, and
in the hare a duck, and in the duck an egg, and in the egg the love of
the Queen-Maiden." Ivan gets possession of the egg, and the friendly
witch contrives to have it placed before the Queen-Maiden at dinner.
She eats it, and immediately her love for Ivan returns in all its
pristine force. He appears, and she, overjoyed, carries him off to her
own land and there marries him.

       *       *       *       *       *

After this digression we will now return to our Snakes. All the
monstrous forms which figure in the stories we have just been
considering appear to be merely different species of the great serpent
family. Such names as Koshchei, Chudo Yudo, Usuinya, and the like,
seem to admit of exchange at the will of the story-teller with that of
Zmei Goruinuich, the many-headed Snake, who in Russian storyland is
represented as the type of all that is evil. But in the actual Russia
of to-day, snakes bear by no means so bad a character. Their presence
in a cottage is considered a good omen by the peasants, who leave out
milk for them to drink, and who think that to kill such visitors would
be a terrible sin.[140] This is probably a result of some remembrance
of a religious cultus paid to the household gods under the form of
snakes, such as existed of old, according to Kromer, in Poland and
Lithuania. The following story is more in keeping with such ideas as
these, than with those which are expressed in the tales about Koshchei
and his kin.


  THE WATER SNAKE.[141]

  There was once an old woman who had a daughter; and her
  daughter went down to the pond one day to bathe with the
  other girls. They all stripped off their shifts, and went into the
  water. Then there came a snake out of the water, and glided on
  to the daughter's shift. After a time the girls all came out, and
  began to put on their shifts, and the old woman's daughter wanted
  to put on hers, but there was the snake lying on it. She tried
  to drive him away, but there he stuck and would not move. Then
  the snake said:

  "If you'll marry me, I'll give you back your shift."

  Now she wasn't at all inclined to marry him, but the other
  girls said:

  "As if it were possible for you to be married to him! Say
  you will!" So she said, "Very well, I will." Then the snake
  glided off from the shift, and went straight into the water. The
  girl dressed and went home. And as soon as she got there,
  she said to her mother,

  "Mammie, mammie, thus and thus, a snake got upon my
  shift, and says he, 'Marry me or I won't let you have your shift;'
  and I said, 'I will.'"

  "What nonsense are you talking, you little fool! as if one
  could marry a snake!"

  And so they remained just as they were, and forgot all about
  the matter.

  A week passed by, and one day they saw ever so many snakes,
  a huge troop of them, wriggling up to their cottage. "Ah,
  mammie, save me, save me!" cried the girl, and her mother
  slammed the door and barred the entrance as quickly as possible.
  The snakes would have rushed in at the door, but the door was
  shut; they would have rushed into the passage, but the passage
  was closed. Then in a moment they rolled themselves into a
  ball, flung themselves at the window, smashed it to pieces, and
  glided in a body into the room. The girl got upon the stove, but
  they followed her, pulled her down, and bore her out of the room
  and out of doors. Her mother accompanied her, crying like
  anything.

  They took the girl down to the pond, and dived right into the
  water with her. And there they all turned into men and women.
  The mother remained for some time on the dike, wailed a little,
  and then went home.

  Three years went by. The girl lived down there, and had
  two children, a son and a daughter. Now she often entreated
  her husband to let her go to see her mother. So at last one day
  he took her up to the surface of the water, and brought her
  ashore. But she asked him before leaving him,

  "What am I to call out when I want you?"

  "Call out to me, 'Osip, [Joseph] Osip, come here!' and I
  will come," he replied.

  Then he dived under water again, and she went to her
  mother's, carrying her little girl on one arm, and leading her boy
  by the hand. Out came her mother to meet her--was so
  delighted to see her!

  "Good day, mother!" said the daughter.

  "Have you been doing well while you were living down
  there?" asked her mother.

  "Very well indeed, mother. My life there is better than
  yours here."

  They sat down for a bit and chatted. Her mother got
  dinner ready for her, and she dined.

  "What's your husband's name?" asked her mother.

  "Osip," she replied.

  "And how are you to get home?"

  "I shall go to the dike, and call out, 'Osip, Osip, come
  here!' and he'll come."

  "Lie down, daughter, and rest a bit," said the mother.

  So the daughter lay down and went to sleep. The mother
  immediately took an axe and sharpened it, and went down to the
  dike with it. And when she came to the dike, she began calling
  out,

  "Osip, Osip, come here!"

  No sooner had Osip shown his head than the old woman
  lifted her axe and chopped it off. And the water in the pond
  became dark with blood.

  The old woman went home. And when she got home her
  daughter awoke.

  "Ah! mother," says she, "I'm getting tired of being here; I'll
  go home."

  "Do sleep here to-night, daughter; perhaps you won't have
  another chance of being with me."

  So the daughter stayed and spent the night there. In the
  morning she got up and her mother got breakfast ready for her;
  she breakfasted, and then she said good-bye to her mother and
  went away, carrying her little girl in her arms, while her boy
  followed behind her. She came to the dike, and called out:

  "Osip, Osip, come here!"

  She called and called, but he did not come.

  Then she looked into the water, and there she saw a head
  floating about. Then she guessed what had happened.

  "Alas! my mother has killed him!" she cried.

  There on the bank she wept and wailed. And then to her
  girl she cried:

  "Fly about as a wren, henceforth and evermore!"

  And to her boy she cried:

  "Fly about as a nightingale, my boy, henceforth and evermore!"

  "But I," she said, "will fly about as a cuckoo, crying
  'Cuckoo!' henceforth and evermore!"

      [Stories about serpent-spouses are by no means
      uncommon, but I can find no parallel to the above so
      far as the termination is concerned. Benfey quotes or
      refers to a great number of the transformation tales
      in which a husband or a wife appears at times in the
      form of a snake (Panchatantra, i. pp. 254-7 266-7).
      Sometimes, when a husband of this kind has doffed his
      serpent's skin, his wife seizes it, and throws it into
      the fire. Her act generally proves to be to her
      advantage, as well as to his, but not always. On a