II.

_About Demons._

From the stories which have already been quoted some idea may be
gained of the part which evil spirits play in Russian popular fiction.
In one of them (No. 1) figures the ghoul which feeds on the dead, in
several (Nos. 37, 38, 45-48) we see the fiend-haunted corpse hungering
after human flesh and blood; the history of _The Bad Wife_ (No. 7)
proves how a demon may suffer at a woman's hands, that of _The Dead
Witch_ (No. 3) shows to what indignities the remains of a wicked woman
may be subjected by the fiends with whom she has chosen to associate.
In the _Awful Drunkard_ (No. 6), and the _Fiddler in Hell_ (No. 41),
the abode of evil spirits is portrayed, and some light is thrown on
their manners and customs; and in the _Smith and the Demon_ (No. 13),
the portrait of one of their number is drawn in no unkindly spirit.
The difference which exists between the sketches of fiends contained
in these stories is clearly marked, so much so that it would of itself
be sufficient to prove that there is no slight confusion of ideas in
the minds of the Russian peasants with regard to the demoniacal beings
whom they generally call _chorti_ or devils. Still more clearly is the
contrast between those ideas brought out by the other stories, many in
number, into which those powers of darkness enter. It is evident that
the traditions from which the popular conception of the ghostly enemy
has been evolved must have been of a complex and even conflicting
character.

Of very heterogeneous elements must have been composed the form under
which the popular fancy, in Russia as well as in other lands, has
embodied the abstract idea of evil. The diabolical characters in the
Russian tales and legends are constantly changing the proportions of
their figures, the nature of their attributes. In one story they seem
to belong to the great and widely subdivided family of Indian demons;
in another they appear to be akin to certain fiends of Turanian
extraction; in a third they display features which may have been
inherited from the forgotten deities of old Slavonic mythology; in all
the stories which belong to the "legendary class" they bear manifest
signs of having been subjected to Christian influences, the effect of
which has been insufficient to do more than slightly to disguise their
heathenism.

The old gods of the Slavonians have passed away and left behind but
scanty traces of their existence; but still, in the traditions and
proverbial expressions of the peasants in various Slavonic lands,
there may be recognized some relics of the older faith. Among these
are a few referring to a White and to a Black God. Thus, among the
peasants of White Russia some vague memory still exists of a white or
bright being, now called Byelun,[458] who leads belated travellers out
of forests, and bestows gold on men who do him good service. "Dark is
it in the forest without Byelun" is one phrase; and another, spoken of
a man on whom fortune has smiled, is, "He must have made friends with
Byelun." On the other hand the memory of the black or evil god is
preserved in such imprecations as the Ukraine "May the black god smite
thee!"[459] To ancient pagan traditions, also, into which a Christian
element has entered, may be assigned the popular belief that infants
which have been cursed by their mothers before their birth, or which
are suffocated during their sleep, or which die from any causes
unchristened or christened by a drunken priest, become the prey of
demons. This idea has given rise in Russia, as well as elsewhere, to a
large group of stories. The Russian peasants believe, it is said, that
in order to rescue from the fiends the soul of a babe which has been
suffocated in its sleep, its mother must spend three nights in a
church, standing within a circle traced by the hand of a priest. When
the cocks crow on the third morning, the demons will give her back her
dead child.[460]

Great stress is laid in the skazkas and legends upon the terrible
power of a parent's curse. The "hasty word" of a father or a mother
will condemn even an innocent child to slavery among devils, and when
it has once been uttered, it is irrevocable. It might have been
supposed that the fearful efficacy of such an imprecation would have
silenced bad language, as that of the _Vril_ rendered war impossible
among the Vril-ya of "The Coming Race;" but that such was not the case
is proved by the number of narratives which turn on uncalled-for
parental cursing. Here is an abridgment of one of these stories.

There was an old man who lived near Lake Onega, and who supported
himself and his wife by hunting. One day when he was engaged in the
pursuit of game, a well-dressed man met him and said,

"Sell me that dog of yours, and come for your money to the Mian
mountain to-morrow evening."

The old man sold him the dog, and went next day to the top of the
mountain, where he found a great city inhabited by devils.[461] There
he soon found the house of his debtor, who provided him with a banquet
and a bath. And in the bath-room he was served by a young man who,
when the bath was over, fell at his feet, saying,

"Don't accept money for your dog, grandfather, but ask for me!"

The old man consented. "Give me that good youth," said he. "He shall
serve instead of a son to me."

There was no help for it; they had to give him the youth. And when the
old man had returned home, the youth told him to go to Novgorod, there
to enquire for a merchant, and ask him whether he had any children.

He did so, and the merchant replied,

"I had an only son, but his mother cursed him in a passion, crying,
'The devil take thee!'[462] And so the devil carried him off."

It turned out that the youth whom the old man had saved from the
devils was that merchant's son. Thereupon the merchant rejoiced
greatly, and took the old man and his wife to live with him in his
house.[463]

And here is another tale of the same kind, from the Vladimir
Government.

Once upon a time there was an old couple, and they had an only son.
His mother had cursed him before he was born, but he grew up and
married. Soon afterwards he suddenly disappeared. His parents did all
they could to trace him, but their attempts were in vain.

Now there was a hut in the forest not far off, and thither it chanced
that an old beggar came one night, and lay down to rest on the stove.
Before he had been there long, some one rode up to the door of the
hut, got off his horse, entered the hut, and remained there all night,
muttering incessantly:

"May the Lord judge my mother, in that she cursed me while a babe
unborn!"

Next morning the beggar went to the house of the old couple, and told
them all that had occurred. So towards evening the old man went to the
hut in the forest, and hid himself behind the stove. Presently the
horseman arrived, entered the hut, and began to repeat the words which
the beggar had overheard. The old man recognized his son, and came
forth to greet him, crying:

"O my dear son! at last I have found thee! never again will I let thee
go!"

"Follow me!" replied his son, who mounted his horse and rode away, his
father following him on foot. Presently they came to a river which was
frozen over, and in the ice was a hole.[464] And the youth rode
straight into that hole, and in it both he and his horse disappeared.
The old man lingered long beside the ice-hole, then he returned home
and said to his wife:

"I have found our son, but it will be hard to get him back. Why, he
lives in the water!"

Next night the youth's mother went to the hut, but she succeeded no
better than her husband had done.

So on the third night his young wife went to the hut and hid behind
the stove. And when she heard the horseman enter she sprang forth,
exclaiming:

"My darling dear, my life-long spouse! now will I never part from
thee!"

"Follow me!" replied her husband.

And when they came to the edge of the ice-hole--

"If thou goest into the water, then will I follow after thee!" cried
she.

"If so, take off thy cross," he replied.

She took off her cross, leaped into the ice-hole--and found herself in
a vast hall. In it Satan[465] was seated. And when he saw her arrive,
he asked her husband whom he had brought with him.

"This is my wife," replied the youth.

"Well then, if she is thy wife, get thee gone hence with her! married
folks must not be sundered."[466]

So the wife rescued her husband, and brought him back from the devils
into the free light.[467]

Sometimes it is a victim's own imprudence, and not a parent's "hasty
word," which has placed him in the power of the Evil One. There is a
well-known story, which has spread far and wide over Europe, of a
soldier who abstains for a term of years from washing, shaving, and
hair-combing, and who serves, or at least obeys, the devil during that
time, at the end of which he is rewarded by the fiend with great
wealth. His appearance being against him, he has some difficulty in
finding a wife, rich as he is. But after the elder sisters of a family
have refused him, the youngest accepts him; whereupon he allows
himself to be cleansed, combed, and dressed in bright apparel, and
leads a cleanly and a happy life ever afterwards.[468]

In one of the German versions of this story, a king's elder daughter,
when asked to marry her rich but slovenly suitor, replies, "I would
sooner go into the deepest water than do that." In a Russian
version,[469] the unwashed soldier lends a large sum of money to an
impoverished monarch, who cannot pay his troops, and asks his royal
creditor to give him one of his daughters in marriage by way of
recompense. The king reflects. He is sorry for his daughters, but at
the same time he cannot do without the money. At last, he tells the
soldier to get his portrait painted, and promises to show it to the
princesses, and see if one of them will accept him. The soldier has
his likeness taken, "touch for touch, just exactly as he is," and the
king shows it to his daughters. The eldest princess sees that "the
picture is that of a monster, with dishevelled hair, and uncut nails,
and unwiped nose," and cries:

"I won't have him! I'd sooner have the devil!"

Now the devil "was standing behind her, pen and paper in hand. He
heard what she said, and booked her soul."

When the second princess is asked whether she will marry the soldier,
she exclaims:

"No indeed! I'd rather die an old maid, I'd sooner be linked with the
devil, than marry that man!"

When the devil heard that, "he booked her soul too."

But the youngest princess, the Cordelia of the family, when she is
asked whether she will marry the man who has helped her father in his
need, replies:

"It's fated I must, it seems! I'll marry him, and then--God's will be
done!"

While the preparations are being made for the marriage, the soldier
arrives at the end of his term of service to "the little devil" who
had hired him, and from whom he had received his wealth in return for
his abstinence and cleanliness. So he calls the "little devil," and
says, "Now turn me into a nice young man."

Accordingly "the little devil cut him up into small pieces, threw them
into a cauldron and set them on to boil. When they were done enough,
he took them out and put them together again properly--bone to bone,
joint to joint, vein to vein. Then he sprinkled them with the Waters
of Life and Death--and up jumped the soldier, a finer lad than stories
can describe, or pens portray!"

The story does not end here. When the "little devil" returns to the
lake from which he came, "the grandfather" of the demons asks him--

"How about the soldier?"

"He has served his time honestly and honorably," is the reply. "Never
once did he shave, have his hair cut, wipe his nose, or change his
clothes." The "grandfather" flies into a passion.

"What! in fifteen whole years you couldn't entrap a soldier! What, all
that money wasted for nothing! What sort of a devil do you call
yourself after that?"--and ordered him to be flung "into boiling
pitch."

"Stop, grandfather!" replies his grandchild. "I've booked two souls
instead of the soldier's one."

"How's that?"

"Why, this way. The soldier wanted to marry one of three princesses,
but the elder one and the second one told their father that they'd
sooner marry the devil than the soldier. So you see both of them are
ours."

After he had heard this explanation, "the grandfather acknowledged
that the little devil was in the right, and ordered him to be set
free. The imp, you see, understood his business."

      [For two German versions of this story, see the tales
      of "Des Teufels russiger Bruder," and "Der
      Baerenhaeuter" (Grimm, Nos. 100, 101, and Bd. iii. pp.
      181, 182). More than twelve centuries ago,
      Hiouen-Thsang transferred the following story from
      India to China. A certain Rishi passed many times ten
      thousand years in a religious ecstasy. His body became
      like a withered tree. At last he emerged from his
      ecstasy, and felt inclined to marry, so he went to a
      neighboring palace, and asked the king to bestow upon
      him one of his daughters. The king, exceedingly
      embarrassed, called the princesses together, and asked
      which of them would consent to accept the dreaded
      suitor (who, of course, had not paid the slightest
      attention to his toilette for hundreds of centuries).
      Ninety-nine of those ladies flatly refused to have
      anything to do with him, but the hundredth, the last
      and youngest of the party, agreed to sacrifice herself
      for her father's sake. But when the Rishi saw his
      bride he was discontented, and when he heard that her
      elder and fairer sisters had all refused him, he
      pronounced a curse which made all ninety-nine of them
      humpbacks, and so destroyed their chance of marrying
      at all. Stanislas Julien's "Memoires sur les contrees
      occidentales," 1857, i. pp. 244-7.]

As the idea that "a hasty word" can place its utterer or its victim
in the power of the Evil One (not only after death, but also during
this life) has given rise to numerous Russian legends, and as it still
exists, to some extent, as a living faith in the minds of the Russian
peasantry, it may be as well to quote at length one of the stories in
which it is embodied. It will be recognized as a variant of the
stories about the youth who visits the "Water King" and elopes with
one of that monarch's daughters. The main difference between the
"legend" we are about to quote, and the skazkas which have already
been quoted, is that a devil of the Satanic type is substituted in it
for the mythical personage--whether Slavonic Neptune or Indian
Rakshasa--who played a similar part in them.


  THE HASTY WORD.[470]

  In a certain village there lived an old couple in great poverty,
  and they had one son. The son grew up,[471] and the old woman
  began to say to the old man:

  "It's time for us to get our son married."

  "Well then, go and ask for a wife for him," said he.

  So she went to a neighbor to ask for his daughter for her
  son: the neighbor refused. She went to a second peasant's,
  but the second refused too--to a third, but he showed her the
  door. She went round the whole village; not a soul would
  grant her request. So she returned home and cried--

  "Well, old man! our lad's an unlucky fellow!"

  "How so?"

  "I've trudged round to every house, but no one will give
  him his daughter."

  "That's a bad business!" says the old man; "the summer
  will soon be coming, but we have no one to work for us here.
  Go to another village, old woman, perhaps you will get a bride
  for him there."

  The old woman went to another village, visited every house
  from one end to the other, but there wasn't an atom of good to
  be got out of it. Wherever she thrusts herself, they always
  refuse. With what she left home, with that she returned
  home.

  "No," she says, "no one wants to become related to us
  poor beggars."

  "If that's the case," answers the old man, "there's no use
  in wearing out your legs. Jump up on to the _polati_."[472]

  The son was sorely afflicted, and began to entreat his parents,
  saying:

  "My born father and my born mother! give me your blessing.
  I will go and seek my fate myself."

  "But where will you go?"

  "Where my eyes lead me."

  So they gave him their blessing, and let him go whithersoever
  it pleased him.[473]

  Well, the youth went out upon the highway, began to weep
  very bitterly, and said to himself as he walked:

  "Was I born into the world worse than all other men, that
  not a single girl is willing to marry me? Methinks if the devil
  himself would give me a bride, I'd take even her!"

  Suddenly, as if rising from the earth, there appeared before
  him a very old man.

  "Good-day, good youth!"

  "Good-day, old man!"

  "What was that you were saying just now?"

  The youth was frightened and did not know what reply to
  make.

  "Don't be afraid of me! I sha'n't do you any harm, and
  moreover, perhaps I may get you out of your trouble. Speak
  boldly!"

  The youth told him everything precisely.

  "Poor creature that I am! There isn't a single girl who
  will marry me. Well, as I went along I became exceedingly
  wretched, and in my misery I said: 'If the devil offered me a
  bride, I'd take even her!'"

  The old man laughed and said:

  "Follow me, I'll let you choose a lovely bride for yourself."

  By-and-by they reached a lake.

  "Turn your back to the lake and walk backwards," said the
  old man. Scarcely had the youth had time to turn round and
  take a couple of steps, when he found himself under the water
  and in a white-stone palace--all its rooms splendidly furnished,
  cunningly decorated. The old man gave him to eat and to
  drink. Afterwards he introduced twelve maidens, each one
  more beautiful than the other.

  "Choose whichever you like! whichever you choose, her
  will I bestow upon you."

  "That's a puzzling job!" said the youth; "give me till to-morrow
  morning to think about it, grandfather!"

  "Well, think away!" said the old man, and led his guest to
  a private chamber. The youth lay down to sleep and thought:

  "Which one shall I choose?"

  Suddenly the door opened; a beautiful maiden entered.

  "Are you asleep, or not, good youth?" says she.

  "No, fair maiden! I can't get to sleep, for I'm always thinking
  which bride to choose."

  "That's the very reason I have come to give you counsel.
  You see, good youth, you've managed to become the devil's
  guest. Now listen. If you want to go on living in the white
  world, then do what I tell you. But if you don't follow my
  instructions, you'll never get out of here alive!"

  "Tell me what to do, fair maiden. I won't forget it all
  my life."

  "To-morrow the fiend will bring you twelve maidens, each one
  exactly like the others. But you take a good look and choose
  me. A fly will be sitting above my right eye--that will be a
  certain guide for you." And then the fair maiden proceeded to
  tell him about herself, who she was.

  "Do you know the priest of such and such a village?" she
  says. "I'm his daughter, the one who disappeared from home
  when nine years old. One day my father was angry with me,
  and in his wrath he said, 'May devils fly away with you!' I
  went out on the steps and began to cry. All of a sudden the
  fiends seized me and brought me here; and here I am living
  with them!"

  Next morning the old man brought in the twelve fair
  maidens--one just like another--and ordered the youth to
  choose his bride. He looked at them and took her above whose
  right eye sat a fly. The old man was loth to give her up, so he
  shifted the maidens about, and told him to make a fresh choice.
  The youth pointed out the same one as before. The fiend
  obliged him to choose yet a third time. He again guessed
  his bride aright.

  "Well, you're in luck! take her home with you," said the
  fiend.

  Immediately the youth and the fair maiden found themselves
  on the shore of the lake, and until they reached the high road
  they kept on walking backwards. Presently the devils came
  rushing after them in hot pursuit:

  "Let us recover our maiden!" they cry.

  They look: there are no footsteps going away from the
  lake; all the footsteps lead into the water! They ran to and
  fro, they searched everywhere, but they had to go back empty
  handed.

  Well, the good youth brought his bride to her village, and
  stopped opposite the priest's house. The priest saw him and
  sent out his laborer, saying:

  "Go and ask who those people are."

  "We? we're travellers; please let us spend the night in
  your house," they replied.

  "I have merchants paying me a visit," says the priest,
  "and even without them there's but little room in the house."

  "What are you thinking of, father?" says one of the
  merchants. "It's always one's duty to accommodate a traveller,
  they won't interfere with us."

  "Very well, let them come in."

  So they came in, exchanged greetings, and sat down on a
  bench in the back corner.

  "Don't you know me, father?" presently asks the fair
  maiden. "Of a surety I am your own daughter."

  Then she told him everything that had happened. They
  began to kiss and embrace each other, to pour forth tears of
  joy.

  "And who is this man?" says the priest.

  "That is my betrothed. He brought me back into the white
  world; if it hadn't been for him I should have remained down
  there for ever!"

  After this the fair maiden untied her bundle, and in it were
  gold and silver dishes: she had carried them off from the devils.
  The merchant looked at them and said:

  "Ah! those are my dishes. One day I was feasting with my
  guests, and when I got drunk I became angry with my wife. 'To
  the devil with you!' I exclaimed, and began flinging from the
  table, and beyond the threshold, whatever I could lay my hands
  upon. At that moment my dishes disappeared!"

  And in reality so had it happened. When the merchant
  mentioned the devil's name, the fiend immediately appeared at
  the threshold, began seizing the gold and silver wares, and
  flinging in their place bits of pottery.

  Well, by this accident the youth got himself a capital bride.
  And after he had married her he went back to his parents.
  They had long ago counted him as lost to them for ever.
  And indeed it was no subject for jesting; he had been away
  from home three whole years, and yet it seemed to him that
  he had not in all spent more than twenty-four hours with the
  devils.

      [A quaint version of the legend on which this story is
      founded is given by Gervase of Tilbury in his "Otia
      Imperialia," whence the story passed into the "Gesta
      Romanorum" (cap. clxii.) and spread widely over
      mediaeval Europe. A certain Catalonian was so much
      annoyed one day "by the continued and inappeasable
      crying of his little daughter, that he commended her
      to the demons." Whereupon she was immediately carried
      off. Seven years after this, he learnt (from a man
      placed by a similar imprecation in the power of the
      demons, who used him as a vehicle) that his daughter
      was in the interior of a neighboring mountain, and
      might be recovered if he would demand her. So he
      ascended to the summit of the mountain, and there
      claimed his child. She straightway appeared in
      miserable plight, "arida, tetra, oculis vagis, ossibus
      et nervis et pellibus vix haerentibus," etc. By the
      judicious care, however, of her now cautious parent
      she was restored to physical and moral respectability.
      For some valuable observations on this story see
      Liebrecht's edition of the "Otia Imperialia," pp.
      137-9. In the German story of "Die sieben Raben"
      (Grimm, No. 25) a father's "hasty word" turns his six
      sons into ravens.]

When devils are introduced into a story of this class, it always
assumes a grotesque, if not an absolutely comic air. The evil spirits
are almost always duped and defeated, and that result is generally due
to their remarkable want of intelligence. For they display in their
dealings with their human antagonists a deficiency of intellectual
power which almost amounts to imbecility. The explanation of this
appears to be that the devils of European folk-lore have nothing in
common with the rebellious angels of Miltonic theology beyond their
vague denomination; nor can any but a nominal resemblance be traced
between their chiefs or "grandfathers" and the thunder-smitten but
still majestic "Lucifer, Son of the Morning." The demon rabble of
"Popular Tales" are merely the lubber fiends of heathen mythology,
beings endowed with supernatural might, but scantily provided with
mental power; all of terrific manual clutch, but of weak intellectual
grasp. And so the hardy mortal who measures his powers against theirs,
even in those cases in which his strength has not been intensified by
miraculous agencies, easily overcomes or deludes the slow-witted
monsters with whom he strives--whether his antagonist be a Celtic or
Teutonic Giant, or a French Ogre, or a Norse Troll, or a Greek Drakos
or Lamia, or a Lithuanian Laume, or a Russian Snake or Koshchei or
Baba Yaga, or an Indian Rakshasa or Pisacha, or any other member of
the many species of fiends for which, in Christian parlance, the
generic name is that of "devils."

There is no great richness of invention manifested in the stories
which deal with the outwitting of evil spirits. The same devices are
in almost all cases resorted to, and their effect is invariable. The
leading characters undergo certain transmutations as the scene of the
story is shifted, but their mutual relations remain constant. Thus, in
a German story[474] we find a schoolmaster deceiving the devil; in one
of its Slavonic counterparts[475] a gypsy deludes a snake; in another,
current among the Baltic Kashoubes, in place of the snake figures a
giant so huge that the thumb of his glove serves as a shelter for the
hero of the tale--one which is closely connected with that which tells
of Thor and the giant Skrymir.

The Russian stories in which devils are tricked by mortals closely
resemble, for the most part, those which are current in so many parts
of Europe. The hero of the tale squeezes whey out of a piece of cheese
or curd which he passes off as a stone; he induces the fleet demon to
compete with his "Hop o' my Thumb" the hare; he sets the strong demon
to wrestle with his "greybeard" the bear; he frightens the
"grandfather" of the fiends by proposing to fling that potentate's
magic staff so high in the air that it will never come down; and he
persuades his diabolical opponents to keep pouring gold into a
perforated hat or sack. Sometimes, however, a less familiar incident
occurs. Thus in a story from the Tambof Government, Zachary the
Unlucky is sent by the tailor, his master, to fetch a fiddle from a
wolf-fiend. The demon agrees to let him have it on condition that he
spends three years in continually weaving nets without ever going to
sleep. Zachary sets to work, but at the end of a month he grows
drowsy. The wolf asks if he is asleep. "No, I'm not asleep," he
replies; "but I'm thinking which fish there are most of in the
river--big ones or little ones." The wolf offers to go and enquire,
and spends three or four months in solving the problem. Meanwhile
Zachary sleeps, taking care, however, to be up and at work when the
wolf returns to say that the big fishes are in the majority.

Time passes, and again Zachary begins to nod. The wolf enquires if he
has gone to sleep, but is told that he is awake, but engrossed by the
question as to "which folks are there most of in the world--the living
or the dead." The wolf goes out to count them, and Zachary sleeps in
comfort, till just before it comes back to say that the living are
more numerous than the dead. By the time the wolf-fiend has made a
third journey in order to settle a doubt which Zachary describes as
weighing on his mind--as to the numerical relation of the large beasts
to the small--the three years have passed away. So the wolf-fiend is
obliged to part with his fiddle, and Zachary carries it back to the
tailor in triumph.[476]

The demons not unfrequently show themselves capable of being actuated
by gratitude. Thus, as we have already seen, the story of the Awful
Drunkard[477] represents the devil himself as being grateful to a man
who has rebuked an irascible old woman for unjustly blaming the Prince
of Darkness. In a skazka from the Orenburg Government, a lad named
Vanka [Jack] is set to watch his father's turnip-field by night.
Presently comes a boy who fills two huge sacks with turnips, and
vainly tries to carry them off. While he is tugging away at them he
catches sight of Vanka, and immediately asks him to help him home with
his load. Vanka consents, and carries the turnips to a cottage,
wherein is seated "an old greybeard with horns on his head," who
receives him kindly and offers him a quantity of gold as a recompense
for his trouble. But, acting on the instructions he has received from
the boy, Vanka will take nothing but the greybeard's lute, the sounds
of which exercise a magic power over all living creatures.[478]

One of the most interesting of the stories of this class is that of
the man who unwittingly blesses the devil. As a specimen of its
numerous variants we may take the opening of a skazka respecting the
origin of brandy.

"There was a moujik who had a wife and seven children, and one day he
got ready to go afield, to plough. When his horse was harnessed, and
everything ready, he ran indoors to get some bread; but when he got
there, and looked in the cupboard, there was nothing there but a
single crust. This he carried off bodily and drove away.

"He reached his field and began ploughing. When he had ploughed up
half of it, he unharnessed his horse and turned it out to graze. After
that he was just going to eat the bread, when he said to himself,

"'Why didn't I leave this crust for my children?'

"So after thinking about it for awhile, he set it aside.

"Presently a little demon came sidling up and carried off the bread.
The moujik returned and looked about everywhere, but no bread was to
be seen. However, all he said was, 'God be with him who took it!'

"The little demon[479] ran off to the devil,[480] and cried:

"'Grandfather! I've stolen Uncle Sidor's[481] bread!'

"'Well, what did he say?'

"'He said, "God be with him!"'

"'Be off with you!' says the devil. 'Hire yourself to him for three
years.'

"So the little demon ran back to the moujik."