the Russian story disappears. For a solar explanation
      of the Indian story see A. de Gubernatis, "Zool.
      Mythology," i. 85.]

Of this story there are many variants. In one of them[325] a king
promises to reward with vast wealth anyone who will find him "a bride
fairer than the sun, brighter than the moon, and whiter than snow." A
certain moujik, named Nikita Koltoma, offers to show him where a
princess lives who answers to this description, and goes forth with
him in search of her. On the way, Nikita enters several forges,
desiring to have a war mace cast for him, and in one of them he finds
fifty smiths tormenting an old man. Ten of them are holding him by the
beard with pincers, the others are thundering away at his ribs with
their hammers. Finding that the cause of this punishment is an unpaid
debt of fifty roubles, Nikita ransoms the greybeard, who straightway
disappears. Nikita obtains the mace he wants, which weighs fifty
poods, or nearly a ton, and leaves the forge. Presently the old man
whom he has ransomed comes running up to him, thanks him for having
rescued him from a punishment which had already lasted thirty years,
and bestows on him, as a token of gratitude, a Cap of Invisibility.

Soon after this Nikita, attended by the king and his followers,
reaches the palace of the royal heroine, Helena the Fair. She at first
sends her warriors to capture or slay the unwelcome visitors, but
Nikita attacks them with his mace, and leaves scarce one alive. Then
she invites the king and his suite to the palace, having prepared in
the mean time a gigantic bow fitted with a fiery arrow, wherewith to
annihilate her guests. Guessing this, Nikita puts on his Cap of
Invisibility, bends the bow, and shoots the arrow into the queen's
_terema_ [the women's chambers], and in a moment the whole upper story
is in a blaze. After that the queen submits, and is married to the
king.

But Nikita warns him that for three nights running his bride will
make trial of his strength by laying her hand on his breast and
pressing it hard--so hard that he will not be able to bear the
pressure. When that happens, he must slip out of the room, and let
Nikita take his place. All this comes to pass; the bride lays her hand
on the bridegroom's breast, and says--

"Is my hand heavy?"

"As a feather on water!" replies the king, who can scarcely draw his
breath beneath the crushing weight of the hand he has won. Then he
leaves the room, under the pretext of giving an order, and Nikita
takes his place. The queen renews the experiment, presses with one
hand, presses with both, and with all her might. Nikita catches her
up, and then flings her down on the floor. The room shakes beneath the
blow, the bride "arises, lies down quietly, and goes to sleep," and
Nikita is replaced by the king. By the end of the third night the
queen gives up all hope of squeezing her husband to death, and makes
up her mind to conjugal submission.[326]

But before long, she, like Brynhild, finds out that she has been
tricked, and resolves on revenge. Throwing Nikita into a slumber which
lasts for twenty-four hours, she has his feet cut off, and sets him
adrift in a boat; then she degrades her husband, turning him into a
swineherd, and she puts out the eyes of Nikita's brother Timofei. In
the course of time the brothers obtain from a Baba Yaga the healing
and vivifying waters, and so recover the eyes and feet they had lost.
The Witch-Queen is put to death, and Nikita lives happily as the
King's Prime Minister. The specific actions of the two waters are
described with great precision in this story. When the lame man
sprinkles his legs with the Healing Water, they become whole at once;
"his legs are quite sound, only they don't move." Then he applies the
Vivifying Water, and the use of his legs returns to him. Similarly
when the blind man applies the Healing Water to his empty orbits, he
obtains new eyes--"perfectly faultless eyes, only he cannot see with
them;" he applies the Vivifying Water, "and begins to see even better
than before."

In a Ryazan variant of the story,[327] Ivan Dearly-Bought, after his
legs have been cut off at the knees, and he has been left in a forest,
is found by a giant who has no arms, but who is so fleet that "no post
could catch him up." The two maimed heroes form an alliance. After a
time, they carry off a princess who is suffering from some mysterious
disease, and take her to their forest home. She tells them that her
illness is due to a Snake, which comes to her every night, entering by
the chimney, and sucks away her strength. The heroes seizes the Snake,
which takes them to the healing lake, and they are cured. Then they
restore the princess, also cured, to her father. Ivan returns to the
palace of the Enchantress Queen who had maimed him, and beats her with
red-hot iron bars until he has driven out of her all her magic
strength, "leaving her only one woman's strength, and that a very poor
one."

In a Tula variant[328] the wicked wife, who has set her confiding
husband to tend her pigs, is killed by the hero. She had put out his
eyes, and had cut off the feet of another companion of her husband; in
this variant also the Healing Waters are found by the aid of a snake.

The supernatural steed which Katoma tamed belongs to an equine race
which often figures in the Skazkas. A good account of one of these
horses is given in the following story of--


  PRINCESS HELENA THE FAIR.[329]

  _We say that we are wise folks, but our old people dispute
  the fact, saying: "No, no, we were wiser than you are." But
  skazkas tell that, before our grandfathers had learnt anything,
  before their grandfathers[330] were born_--[331]

  There lived in a certain land an old man of this kind who instructed
  his three sons in reading and writing[332] and all book
  learning. Then said he to them:

  "Now, my children! When I die, mind you come and read
  prayers over my grave."

  "Very good, father, very good," they replied.

  The two elder brothers were such fine strapping fellows! so
  tall and stout! But as for the youngest one, Ivan, he was like
  a half-grown lad or a half-fledged duckling, terribly inferior to
  the others. Well, their old father died. At that very time
  there came tidings from the King, that his daughter, the Princess
  Helena the Fair, had ordered a shrine to be built for her
  with twelve columns, with twelve rows of beams. In that shrine
  she was sitting upon a high throne, and awaiting her bridegroom,
  the bold youth who, with a single bound of his swift steed,
  should reach high enough to kiss her on the lips. A stir ran
  through the whole youth of the nation. They took to licking
  their lips, and scratching their heads, and wondering to whose
  share so great an honor would fall.

  "Brothers!" said Vanyusha,[333] "our father is dead; which
  of us is to read prayers over his grave?"

  "Whoever feels inclined, let him go!" answered the
  brothers.

  So Vanya went. But as for his elder brothers they did
  nothing but exercise their horses, and curl their hair, and dye
  their mustaches.

  The second night came.

  "Brothers!" said Vanya, "I've done my share of reading.
  It's your turn now; which of you will go?"

  "Whoever likes can go and read. We've business to look
  after; don't you meddle."

  And they cocked their caps, and shouted, and whooped, and
  flew this way, and shot that way, and roved about the open
  country.

  So Vanyusha read prayers this time also--and on the third
  night, too.

  Well, his brothers got ready their horses, combed out their
  mustaches, and prepared to go next morning to test their
  mettle before the eyes of Helena the Fair.

  "Shall we take the youngster?" they thought. "No, no.
  What would be the good of him? He'd make folks laugh and
  put us to confusion; let's go by ourselves."

  So away they went. But Vanyusha wanted very much to
  have a look at the Princess Helena the Fair. He cried, cried
  bitterly; and went out to his father's grave. And his father
  heard him in his coffin, and came out to him, shook the damp
  earth off his body, and said:

  "Don't grieve, Vanya. I'll help you in your trouble."

  And immediately the old man drew himself up and straightened
  himself, and called aloud and whistled with a ringing
  voice, with a shrill[334] whistle.

  From goodness knows whence appeared a horse, the earth
  quaking beneath it, a flame rushing from its ears and nostrils.
  To and fro it flew, and then stood still before the old man, as if
  rooted in the ground, and cried,

  "What are thy commands?"

  Vanya crept into one of the horse's ears and out of the
  other, and turned into such a hero as no skazka can tell of, no
  pen describe! He mounted the horse, set his arms akimbo,
  and flew, just like a falcon, straight to the home of the Princess
  Helena. With a wave of his hand, with a bound aloft, he only
  failed by the breadth of two rows of beams. Back again he
  turned, galloped up, leapt aloft, and got within one beam-row's
  breadth. Once more he turned, once more he wheeled, then
  shot past the eye like a streak of fire, took an accurate aim, and
  kissed[335] the fair Helena right on the lips!

  "Who is he? Who is he? Stop him! Stop him!" was
  the cry. Not a trace of him was to be found!

  Away he galloped to his father's grave, let the horse go free,
  prostrated himself on the earth, and besought his father's counsel.
  And the old man held counsel with him.

  When he got home he behaved as if he hadn't been anywhere.
  His brothers talked away, describing where they had
  been, what they had seen, and he listened to them as of old.

  The next day there was a gathering again. In the princely
  halls there were more boyars and nobles than a single glance
  could take in. The elder brothers rode there. Their younger
  brother went there too, but on foot, meekly and modestly, just
  as if he hadn't kissed the Princess, and seated himself in a
  distant corner. The Princess Helena asked for her bridegroom,
  wanted to show him to the world at large, wanted to give him
  half her kingdom; but the bridegroom did not put in an appearance!
  Search was made for him among the boyars, among
  the generals; everyone was examined in his turn--but with no
  result! Meanwhile, Vanya looked on, smiling and chuckling,
  and waiting till the bride should come to him herself.

  "I pleased her then," says he, "when I appeared as a gay
  gallant; now let her fall in love with me in my plain caftan."

  Then up she rose, looked around with bright eyes that shed
  a radiance on all who stood there, and saw and knew her bridegroom,
  and made him take his seat by her side, and speedily was
  wedded to him. And he--good heavens! how clever he turned
  out, and how brave, and what a handsome fellow! Only see
  him mount his flying steed, give his cap a cock, and stick his
  elbows akimbo! why, you'd say he was a king, a born king!
  you'd never suspect he once was only Vanyusha.

The incident of the midnight watch by a father's grave, kept by a son
to whom the dead man appears and gives a magic horse, often occurs in
the Skazkas. It is thoroughly in accordance with Slavonic ideas about
the residence of the dead in their tombs, and their ability to assist
their descendants in time of trouble. Appeals for aid to a dead parent
are of frequent occurrence in the songs still sung by the Russian
peasantry at funerals or over graves; especially in those in which
orphans express their grief, calling upon the grave to open, and the
dead to appear and listen and help.[336] So in the Indian story of
Punchkin, the seven hungry stepmother-persecuted princesses go out
every day and sit by their dead mother's tomb, and cry, and say, "Oh,
mother, mother, cannot you see your poor children, how unhappy we
are," etc., until a tree grows up out of the grave laden with fruits
for their relief.[337] So in the German tale,[338] Cinderella is aided
by the white bird, which dwells in the hazel tree growing out of her
mother's grave.

In one of the Skazkas[339] a stepdaughter is assisted by her cow. The
girl, following its instructions, gets in at one ear and out of the
other, and finds all her tasks performed, all her difficulties
removed. When it is killed, there springs from its bones a tree which
befriends the girl, and gains her a lordly husband. In a Servian
variant of the story, it is distinctly stated that the protecting cow
had been the girl's mother--manifestly in a previous state of
existence, a purely Buddhistic idea.[340]

In several of the Skazkas we find an account of a princess who is won
in a similar manner to that described in the story of Helena the Fair.
In one case,[341] a king promises to give his daughter to anyone "who
can pluck her portrait from the house, from the other side of ever so
many beams." The youngest brother, Ivan the Simpleton, carries away
the portrait and its cover at the third trial. In another, a king
offers his daughter and half his kingdom to him "who can kiss the
princess through twelve sheets of glass."[342] The usual youngest
brother is carried towards her so forcibly by his magic steed that, at
the first trial, he breaks through six of the sheets of glass; at the
second, says the story, "he smashed all twelve of the sheets of glass,
and he kissed the Princess Priceless-Beauty, and she immediately
stamped a mark upon his forehead." By this mark, after he has
disappeared for some time, he is eventually recognized, and the
princess is obliged to marry him.[343] In a third story,[344] the
conditions of winning the princely bride are easier, for "he who takes
a leap on horseback, and kisses the king's daughter on the balcony, to
him will they give her to wife." In a fourth, the princess is to marry
the man "who, on horseback, bounds up to her on the third floor." At
the first trial, the _Durak_, or Fool, reaches the first floor, at the
next, the second; and the third time, "he bounds right up to the
princess, and carries off from her a ring."[345]

In the Norse story of "Dapplegrim,"[346] a younger brother saves a
princess who had been stolen by a Troll, and hidden in a cave above a
steep wall of rock as smooth as glass. Twice his magic horse tries in
vain to surmount it, but the third time it succeeds, and the youth
carries off the princess, who ultimately becomes his wife. Another
Norse story still more closely resembles the Russian tales. In "The
Princess on the Glass Hill"[347] the hero gains a Princess as his wife
by riding up a hill of glass, on the top of which she sits with three
golden apples in her lap, and by carrying off these precious fruits.
He is enabled to perform this feat by a magic horse, which he obtains
by watching his father's crops on three successive St. John's Nights.

In a Celtic story,[348] a king promises his daughter, and two-thirds
of his kingdom, to anyone who can get her out of a turret which "was
aloft, on the top of four carraghan towers." The hero Conall kicks
"one of the posts that was keeping the turret aloft," the post breaks,
and the turret falls, but Conall catches it in his hands before it
reaches the ground, a door opens, and out comes the Princess Sunbeam,
and throws her arms about Conall's neck.

In most of these stories the wife-gaining leap is so vaguely described
that it is allowable to suppose that the original idea has been
greatly obscured in the course of travel. In some Eastern stories it
is set in a much plainer light; in one modern collection for
instance,[349] it occurs four times. A princess is so fond of her
marble bath, which is "like a little sea," with high spiked walls all
around it, that she vows she will marry no one who cannot jump across
it on horseback. Another princess determines to marry him only who can
leap into the glass palace in which she dwells, surrounded by a wide
river; and many kings and princes perish miserably in attempting to
perform the feat. A third king's daughter lives in a garden "hedged
round with seven hedges made of bayonets," by which her suitors are
generally transfixed. A fourth "has vowed to marry no man who cannot
jump on foot over the seven hedges made of spears, and across the
seven great ditches that surround her house;" and "hundreds of
thousands of Rajahs have tried to do it, and died in the attempt."

The secluded princess of these stories may have been primarily akin
to the heroine of the "Sleeping Beauty" tales, but no special
significance appears now to be attributable to her isolation. The
original idea seems to have been best preserved in the two legends of
the wooing of Brynhild by Sigurd, in the first of which he awakens her
from her magic sleep, while in the second he gains her hand (for
Gunnar) by a daring and difficult ride--for "him only would she have
who should ride through the flaming fire that was drawn about her
hall." Gunnar fails to do so, but Sigurd succeeds; his horse leaps
into the fire, "and a mighty roar arose as the fire burned ever
madder, and the earth trembled, and the flames went up even unto the
heavens, nor had any dared to ride as he rode, even as it were through
the deep murk."[350]

We will take next a story which is a great favorite in Russia, and
which will serve as another illustration of the use made of magical
"properties" in the Skazkas.


  EMILIAN THE FOOL.[351]

  There were once three brothers, of whom two were sharp-witted,
  but the third was a fool. The elder brothers set off to
  sell their goods in the towns down the river,[352] and said to the
  fool:

  "Now mind, fool! obey our wives, and pay them respect as
  if they were your own mothers. We'll buy you red boots, and
  a red caftan, and a red shirt."

  The fool said to them:

  "Very good; I will pay them respect."

  They gave the fool their orders and went away to the downstream
  towns; but the fool stretched himself on top of the stove
  and remained lying there. His brothers' wives say to him--

  "What are you about, fool! your brothers ordered you to
  pay us respect, and in return for that each of them was going to
  bring you a present, but there you lie on the stove and don't do
  a bit of work. Go and fetch some water, at all events."

  The fool took a couple of pails and went to fetch the water.
  As he scooped it up, a pike happened to get into his pail. Says
  the fool:

  "Glory to God! now I will cook this pike, and will eat it all
  myself; I won't give a bit of it to my sisters-in-law. I'm savage
  with them!"

  The pike says to him with a human voice:

  "Don't eat me, fool! if you'll put me back again into the
  water you shall have good luck!"

  Says the fool, "What sort of good luck shall I get from
  you?"

  "Why, this sort of good luck: whatever you say, that shall
  be done. Say, for instance, 'By the Pike's command, at my
  request, go home, ye pails, and be set in your places.'"

  As soon as the fool had said this, the pails immediately
  went home of their own accord and became set in their places.
  The sisters-in-law looked and wondered.

  "What sort of a fool is this!" they say. "Why, he's so
  knowing, you see, that his pails have come home and gone to
  their places of their own accord!"

  The fool came back and lay down on the stove. Again did
  his brothers' wives begin saying to him--

  "What are you lying on the stove for, fool? there's no wood
  for the fire; go and fetch some."

  The fool took two axes and got into a sledge, but without
  harnessing a horse to it.

  "By the Pike's command," he says, "at my request, drive,
  into the forest, O sledge!"

  Away went the sledge at a rattling pace, as if urged on by
  some one. The fool had to pass by a town, and the people he
  met were jammed into corners by his horseless sledge in a way
  that was perfectly awful. They all began crying out:

  "Stop him! Catch him!"

  But they couldn't lay hands on him. The fool drove into
  the forest, got out of the sledge, sat down on a log, and said--

  "One of you axes fell the trees, while the other cuts them
  up into billets."

  Well, the firewood was cut up and piled on the sledge. Then
  says the fool:

  "Now then, one of you axes! go and cut me a cudgel,[353] as
  heavy a one as I can lift."

  The axe went and cut him a cudgel, and the cudgel came
  and lay on top of the load.

  The fool took his seat and drove off. He drove by the
  town, but the townspeople had met together and had been looking
  out for him for ever so long. So they stopped the fool, laid
  hands upon him, and began pulling him about. Says the fool--

  "By the Pike's command, at my request, go, O cudgel, and
  bestir thyself."

  Out jumped the cudgel, and took to thumping and smashing,
  and knocked over ever such a lot of people. There they lay on
  the ground, strewed about like so many sheaves of corn. The
  fool got clear of them and drove home, heaped up the wood,
  and then lay down on the stove.

  Meanwhile, the townspeople got up a petition against him,
  and denounced him to the King, saying:

  "Folks say there's no getting hold of him the way we tried;[354]
  we must entice him by cunning, and the best way of all will be
  to promise him a red shirt, and a red caftan, and red boots."

  So the King's runners came for the fool.

  "Go to the King," they say, "he will give you red boots, a
  red caftan, and a red shirt."

  Well, the fool said:

  "By the Pike's command, at my request, do thou, O stove,
  go to the King!"

  He was seated on the stove at the time. The stove went;
  the fool arrived at the King's.

  The King was going to put him to death, but he had a
  daughter, and she took a tremendous liking to the fool. So
  she began begging her father to give her in marriage to the fool.
  Her father flew into a passion. He had them married, and
  then ordered them both to be placed in a tub, and the tub to be
  tarred over and thrown into the water; all which was done.

  Long did the tub float about on the sea. His wife began to
  beseech the fool:

  "Do something to get us cast on shore!"

  "By the Pike's command, at my request," said the fool,
  "cast this tub ashore and tear it open!"

  He and his wife stepped out of the tub. Then she again
  began imploring him to build some sort of a house. The fool
  said:

  "By the Pike's command, at my request, let a marble palace
  be built, and let it stand immediately opposite the King's
  palace!"

  This was all done in an instant. In the morning the King
  saw the new palace, and sent to enquire who it was that lived
  in it. As soon as he learnt that his daughter lived there, that
  very minute he summoned her and her husband. They came.
  The King pardoned them, and they all began living together
  and flourishing.[355]

"The Pike," observes Afanasief, "is a fish of great repute in
northern mythology." One of the old Russian songs still sung at
Christmas, tells how a Pike comes from Novgorod, its scales of silver
and gold, its back woven with pearls, a costly diamond gleaming in its
head instead of eyes. And this song is one which promises wealth, a
fact connecting the Russian fish with that Scandinavian pike which was
a shape assumed by Andvari--the dwarf-guardian of the famous treasure,
from which sprang the woes recounted in the _Voelsunga Saga_ and the
_Nibelungenlied_. According to a Lithuanian tradition,[356] there is a
certain lake which is ruled by the monstrous pike Strukis. It sleeps
only once a year, and then only for a single hour. It used always to
sleep on St. John's Night, but a fisherman once took advantage of its
slumber to catch a quantity of its scaly subjects. Strukis awoke in
time to upset the fisherman's boat; but fearing a repetition of the
attempt, it now changes each year the hour of its annual sleep. A
gigantic pike figures also in the _Kalevala_.

It would be easy to fill with similar stories, not only a section of
a chapter, but a whole volume; but instead of quoting any more of
them, I will take a few specimens from a different, though a somewhat
kindred group of tales--those which relate to the magic powers
supposed to be wielded in modern times by dealers in the Black Art.
Such narratives as these are to be found in every land, but Russia is
specially rich in them, the faith of the peasantry in the existence of
Witches and Wizards, Turnskins and Vampires, not having been as yet
seriously shaken. Some of the stories relating to the supernatural
Witch, who evidently belongs to the demon world, have already been
given. In those which I am about to quote, the wizard or witch who is
mentioned is a human being, but one who has made a compact with evil
spirits, and has thereby become endowed with strange powers. Such
monsters as these are, throughout their lives, a terror to the
district they inhabit; nor does their evil influence die with them,
for after they have been laid in the earth, they assume their direst
aspect, and as Vampires bent on blood, night after night, they go
forth from their graves to destroy. As I have elsewhere given some
account of Slavonic beliefs in witchcraft,[357] I will do little more
at present than allow the stories to speak for themselves. They will
be recognized as being akin to the tales about sorcery current farther
west, but they are of a more savage nature. The rustic warlocks and
witches of whom we are accustomed to hear have little, if any, of that
thirst for blood which so unfavorably characterizes their Slavonic
counterparts. Here is a story, by way of example, of a most gloomy
nature.


  THE WITCH GIRL.[358]

  Late one evening, a Cossack rode into a village, pulled up at
  its last cottage, and cried--

  "Heigh, master! will you let me spend the night here?"

  "Come in, if you don't fear death!"

  "What sort of a reply is that?" thought the Cossack, as he
  put his horse up in the stable. After he had given it its food
  he went into the cottage. There he saw its inmates, men and
  women and little children, all sobbing and crying and praying to
  God; and when they had done praying, they began putting on
  clean shirts.

  "What are you crying about?" asked the Cossack.

  "Why you see," replied the master of the house, "in our
  village Death goes about at night. Into whatsoever cottage she
  looks, there, next morning, one has to put all the people who
  lived in it into coffins, and carry them off to the graveyard. To-night
  it's our turn."

  "Never fear, master! 'Without God's will, no pig gets its
  fill!'"

  The people of the house lay down to sleep; but the Cossack
  was on the look-out and never closed an eye. Exactly at midnight
  the window opened. At the window appeared a witch all
  in white. She took a sprinkler, passed her arm into the cottage,
  and was just on the point of sprinkling--when the Cossack
  suddenly gave his sabre a sweep, and cut her arm off close to
  the shoulder. The witch howled, squealed, yelped like a dog,
  and fled away. But the Cossack picked up the severed arm,
  hid it under his cloak, washed away the stains of blood, and lay
  down to sleep.

  Next morning the master and mistress awoke, and saw that
  everyone, without a single exception, was alive and well, and
  they were delighted beyond expression.

  "If you like," says the Cossack, "I'll show you Death!
  Call together all the Sotniks and Desyatniks[359] as quickly as
  possible, and let's go through the village and look for her."

  Straightway all the Sotniks and Desyatniks came together
  and went from house to house. In this one there's nothing, in
  that one there's nothing, until at last they come to the Ponomar's[360]
  cottage.

  "Is all your family present?" asks the Cossack.

  "No, my own! one of my daughters is ill. She's lying on
  the stove there."

  The Cossack looked towards the stove--one of the girl's arms
  had evidently been cut off. Thereupon he told the whole story
  of what had taken place, and he brought out and showed the
  arm which had been cut off. The commune rewarded the
  Cossack with a sum of money, and ordered that witch to be
  drowned.

Stories of this kind are common in all lands, but the witches about
whom they are told generally assume the forms of beasts of prey,
especially of wolves, or of cats. A long string of similar tales will
be found in Dr. Wilhelm Hertz's excellent and exhaustive monograph on
werwolves.[361] Very important also is the Polish story told by
Wojcicki[362] of the village which is attacked by the Plague, embodied
in the form of a woman, who roams from house to house in search of
victims. One night, as she goes her rounds, all doors and windows have
been barred against her except one casement. This has been left open
by a nobleman who is ready to sacrifice himself for the sake of
others. The Pest Maiden arrives, and thrusts her arm in at his window.
The nobleman cuts it off, and so rids the village of its fatal
visitor. In an Indian story,[363] a hero undertakes to watch beside
the couch of a haunted princess. When all is still a Rakshasa appears
on the threshold, opens the door, and thrusts into the room an
arm--which the hero cuts off. The fiend disappears howling, and leaves
his arm behind.