story of this kind was doubtless founded the legend
      handed down to us by Appuleius of Cupid and Psyche.
      Among its wildest versions are the Albanian
      "Schlangenkind" (Hahn, No. 100), a very similar
      Roumanian tale (Ausland 1857, No. 43, quoted by
      Benfey), the Wallachian Trandafiru (Schott, No. 23, in
      which the husband is a pumpkin (_Kuerbiss_) by day),
      and the second of the Servian tales of the
      Snake-Husband (Vuk Karajich, No. 10).]

The snakes which figure in this weird story, the termination of which
is so unusually tragic, bear a strong resemblance to the Indian Nagas,
the inhabitants of Patala or the underground world, serpents which
take at will the human shape and often mix with mortals. They may,
also, be related to the mermen and mermaids of the sea-coasts, and to
the similar beings with which, under various names, tradition peoples
the lakes, and streams, and fountains of Europe. The South-Russian
peasantry have from immemorial times maintained a firm belief in the
existence of water-nymphs, called Rusalkas, closely resembling the
Nereids of Modern Greece, the female Nixies of the North of Europe,
and throughout the whole of Russia, at least in outlying districts,
there still lingers a sort of cultus of certain male water-sprites who
bear the name of Vodyanies, and who are almost identical with the
beings who haunt the waters of various countries--such as the German
_Nix_, the Swedish _Nek_, the Finnish _Naekke_, etc.[142]

In the Skazkas we find frequent mention of beauteous maidens who
usually live beneath the wave, but who can transform themselves into
birds and fly wherever they please. We may perhaps be allowed to
designate them by the well-known name of Swan-Maidens, though they do
not always assume, together with their plumage-robes, the form of
swans, but sometimes appear as geese, ducks, spoonbills, or aquatic
birds of some other species. They are, for the most part, the
daughters of the Morskoi Tsar, or Water King--a being who plays an
important part in Slavonic popular fiction. He is of a somewhat
shadowy form, and his functions are not very clearly defined, for the
part he usually fills is sometimes allotted to Koshchei or to the
Snake, but the stories generally represent him as a patriarchal
monarch, living in subaqueous halls of light and splendor, whence he
emerges at times to seize a human victim. It is generally a boy whom
he gets into his power, and who eventually obtains the hand of one of
his daughters, and escapes with her to the upper world, though not
without considerable difficulty. Such are, for instance, the leading
incidents in the following skazka, many features of which closely
resemble those of various well-known West-European folk-tales.


  THE WATER KING AND VASILISSA THE WISE.[143]

  Once upon a time there lived a King and Queen, and the King
  was very fond of hunting and shooting. Well one day he went
  out hunting, and he saw an Eaglet sitting on an oak. But just
  as he was going to shoot at it the Eaglet began to entreat him,
  crying:--

  "Don't shoot me, my lord King! better take me home with
  you; some time or other I shall be of service to you."

  The King reflected awhile and said, "How can you be of use
  to me?" and again he was going to shoot.

  Then the Eaglet said to him a second time:--

  "Don't shoot me, my lord King! better take me home with
  you; some time or other I shall be of use to you."

  The King thought and thought, but couldn't imagine a bit the
  more what use the Eaglet could be to him, and so he determined
  to shoot it. Then a third time the Eaglet exclaimed:--

  "Don't shoot me, my lord King! better take me home with
  you and feed me for three years. Some time or other I shall be
  of service to you!"

  The King relented, took the Eaglet home with him, and fed
  it for a year, for two years. But it ate so much that it devoured
  all his cattle. The King had neither a cow nor a sheep left. At
  length the Eagle said:--

  "Now let me go free!"

  The King set it at liberty; the Eagle began trying its wings.
  But no, it could not fly yet! So it said:--

  "Well, my lord King! you have fed me two years; now,
  whether you like it or no, feed me for one year more. Even if
  you have to borrow, at all events feed me; you won't lose by it!"

  Well, this is what the King did. He borrowed cattle from
  everywhere round about, and he fed the Eagle for the space of a
  whole year, and afterwards he set it at liberty. The Eagle rose
  ever so high, flew and flew, then dropt down again to the earth
  and said:--

  "Now then, my lord King! Take a seat on my back! we'll
  have a fly together?"

  The King got on the Eagle's back. Away they went flying.
  Before very long they reached the blue sea. Then the Eagle
  shook off the King, who fell into the sea, and sank up to his
  knees. But the Eagle didn't let him drown! it jerked him on to
  its wing, and asked:--

  "How now, my lord King! were you frightened, perchance?"

  "I was," said the King; "I thought I was going to be drowned
  outright!"

  Again they flew and flew till they reached another sea. The
  Eagle shook off the King right in the middle of the sea; the King
  sank up to his girdle. The Eagle jerked him on to its wing
  again, and asked:--

  "Well, my lord King, were you frightened, perchance?"

  "I was," he replied, "but all the time I thought, 'Perhaps,
  please God, the creature will pull me out.'"

  Away they flew again, flew, and arrived at a third sea. The
  Eagle dropped the King into a great gulf, so that he sank right
  up to his neck. And the third time the Eagle jerked him on to
  its wing, and asked:--

  "Well, my lord King! Were you frightened, perchance?"

  "I was," says the King, "but still I said to myself, 'Perhaps
  it will pull me out.'"

  "Well, my lord King! now you have felt what the fear of
  death is like! What I have done was in payment of an old score.
  Do you remember my sitting on an oak, and your wanting to
  shoot me? Three times you were going to let fly, but I kept on
  entreating you not to shoot, saying to myself all the time, 'Perhaps
  he won't kill me; perhaps he'll relent and take me home
  with him!'"

  Afterwards they flew beyond thrice nine lands: long, long
  did they fly. Says the Eagle, "Look, my lord King! what is
  above us and what below us?"

  The King looked.

  "Above us," he says, "is the sky, below us the earth."

  "Look again; what is on the right hand and on the left?"

  "On the right hand is an open plain, on the left stands a
  house."

  "We will fly thither," said the Eagle; "my youngest sister
  lives there."

  They went straight into the courtyard. The sister came out
  to meet them, received her brother cordially, and seated him at
  the oaken table. But on the King she would not so much as
  look, but left him outside, loosed greyhounds, and set them at
  him. The Eagle was exceedingly wroth, jumped up from table,
  seized the King, and flew away with him again.

  Well, they flew and flew. Presently the Eagle said to the
  King, "Look round; what is behind us?"

  The King turned his head, looked, and said, "Behind us is a
  red house."

  "That is the house of my youngest sister--on fire, because
  she did not receive you, but set greyhounds at you."

  They flew and flew. Again the Eagle asked:

  "Look again, my lord King; what is above us, and what
  below us?"

  "Above us is the sky, below us the earth."

  "Look and see what is on the right hand and on the left."

  "On the right is the open plain, on the left there stands a
  house."

  "There lives my second sister; we'll go and pay her a visit."

  They stopped in a wide courtyard. The second sister received
  her brother cordially, and seated him at the oaken table; but the
  King was left outside, and she loosed greyhounds, and set them
  at him. The Eagle flew into a rage, jumped up from table,
  caught up the King, and flew away farther with him. They flew
  and flew. Says the Eagle:

  "My lord King! look round! what is behind us?"

  The King looked back.

  "There stands behind us a red house."

  "That's my second sister's house burning!" said the Eagle.
  "Now we'll fly to where my mother and my eldest sister live."

  Well, they flew there. The Eagle's mother and eldest sister
  were delighted to see them, and received the King with cordiality
  and respect.

  "Now, my lord King," said the Eagle, "tarry awhile with
  us, and afterwards I will give you a ship, and will repay you for
  all I ate in your house, and then--God speed you home again!"

  So the Eagle gave the King a ship and two coffers--the one
  red, the other green--and said:

  "Mind now! don't open the coffers until you get home.
  Then open the red coffer in the back court, and the green coffer
  in the front court."

  The King took the coffers, parted with the Eagle, and sailed
  along the blue sea. Presently he came to a certain island, and
  there his ship stopped. He landed on the shore, and began
  thinking about the coffers, and wondering whatever there could
  be in them, and why the Eagle had told him not to open them.
  He thought and thought, and at last couldn't hold out any more--he
  longed so awfully to know all about it. So he took the red
  coffer, set it on the ground, and opened it--and out of it came
  such a quantity of different kinds of cattle that there was no
  counting them: the island had barely room enough for them.

  When the King saw that, he became exceedingly sorrowful,
  and began to weep and therewithal to say:

  "What is there now left for me to do? how shall I get all
  this cattle back into so little a coffer?"

  Lo! there came out of the water a man--came up to him, and
  asked:

  "Wherefore are you weeping so bitterly, O lord King?"

  "How can I help weeping!" answers the King. "How
  shall I be able to get all this great herd into so small a coffer?"

  "If you like, I will set your mind at rest. I will pack up all
  your cattle for you. But on one condition only. You must give
  me whatever you have at home that you don't know of."

  The King reflected.

  "Whatever is there at home that I don't know of?" says he.
  "I fancy I know about everything that's there."

  He reflected, and consented. "Pack them up," says he. "I
  will give you whatever I have at home that I know nothing
  about."

  So that man packed away all his cattle for him in the coffer.
  The King went on board ship and sailed away homewards.

  When he reached home, then only did he learn that a son
  had been born to him. And he began kissing the child, caressing
  it, and at the same time bursting into such floods of tears!

  "My lord King!" says the Queen, "tell me wherefore thou
  droppest bitter tears?"

  "For joy!" he replies.

  He was afraid to tell her the truth, that the Prince would
  have to be given up. Afterwards he went into the back court,
  opened the red coffer, and thence issued oxen and cows, sheep
  and rams; there were multitudes of all sorts of cattle, so that
  all the sheds and pastures were crammed full. He went into
  the front court, opened the green coffer, and there appeared a
  great and glorious garden. What trees there were in it to be
  sure! The King was so delighted that he forgot all about
  giving up his son.

  Many years went by. One day the King took it into his
  head to go for a stroll, and he came to a river. At that moment
  the same man he had seen before came out of the water, and
  said:

  "You've pretty soon become forgetful, lord King! Think a
  little! surely you're in my debt!"

  The King returned home full of grief, and told all the truth to
  the Queen and the Prince. They all mourned and wept together,
  but they decided that there was no help for it, the Prince must
  be given up. So they took him to the mouth of the river and
  there they left him alone.

  The Prince looked around, saw a footpath, and followed
  trusting God would lead him somewhere. He walked and walked,
  and came to a dense forest: in the forest stood a hut, in the
  hut lived a Baba Yaga.

  "Suppose I go in," thought the Prince, and went in.

  "Good day, Prince!" said the Baba Yaga. "Are you seeking
  work or shunning work?"

  "Eh, granny! First give me to eat and to drink, and then ask
  me questions."

  So she gave him food and drink, and the Prince told her
  everything as to whither he was going and with what purpose.

  Then the Baba Yaga said: "Go, my child, to the sea-shore;
  there will fly thither twelve spoonbills, which will turn into fair
  maidens, and begin bathing; do you steal quietly up and lay
  your hands on the eldest maiden's shift. When you have come
  to terms with her, go to the Water King, and there will meet
  you on the way Obedalo and Opivalo, and also Moroz Treskum[144]--take
  all of them with you; they will do you good service."

  The Prince bid the Yaga farewell, went to the appointed spot
  on the sea-shore, and hid behind the bushes. Presently twelve
  spoonbills came flying thither, struck the moist earth, turned
  into fair maidens, and began to bathe. The Prince stole the
  eldest one's shift, and sat down behind a bush--didn't budge
  an inch. The girls finished bathing and came out on the shore:
  eleven of them put on their shifts, turned into birds, and
  flew away home. There remained only the eldest, Vasilissa the
  Wise. She began praying and begging the good youth:

  "Do give me my shift!" she says. "You are on your way
  to the house of my father, the Water King. When you come
  I will do you good service."

  So the Prince gave her back her shift, and she immediately
  turned into a spoonbill and flew away after her companions.
  The Prince went further on; there met him by the way three
  heroes--Obedalo, Opivalo, and Moroz Treskum; he took them
  with him and went on to the Water King's.

  The Water King saw him, and said:

  "Hail, friend! why have you been so long in coming to me?
  I have grown weary of waiting for you. Now set to work.
  Here is your first task. Build me in one night a great crystal
  bridge, so that it shall be ready for use to-morrow. If you don't
  build it--off goes your head!"

  The Prince went away from the Water King, and burst into a
  flood of tears. Vasilissa the Wise opened the window of her
  upper chamber, and asked:

  "What are you crying about, Prince?"

  "Ah! Vasilissa the Wise! how can I help crying? Your
  father has ordered me to build a crystal bridge in a single night,
  and I don't even know how to handle an axe."

  "No matter! lie down and sleep; the morning is wiser than
  the evening."

  She ordered him to sleep, but she herself went out on the
  steps, and called aloud with a mighty whistling cry. Then from
  all sides there ran together carpenters and workmen; one
  levelled the ground, another carried bricks. Soon had they
  built a crystal bridge, and traced cunning devices on it; and then
  they dispersed to their homes.

  Early next morning Vasilissa the Wise awoke the Prince:

  "Get up, Prince! the bridge is ready: my father will be
  coming to inspect it directly."

  Up jumped the Prince, seized a broom, took his place on the
  bridge, and began sweeping here, clearing up there.

  The Water King bestowed praise upon him:

  "Thanks!" says he. "You've done me one service: now
  do another. Here is your task. Plant me by to-morrow a
  garden green--a big and shady one; and there must be birds
  singing in the garden, and flowers blossoming on the trees, and
  ripe apples and pears hanging from the boughs."

  Away went the Prince from the Water King, all dissolved in
  tears. Vasilissa the Wise opened her window and asked:

  "What are you crying for, Prince?"

  "How can I help crying? Your father has ordered me to
  plant a garden in one night!"

  "That's nothing! lie down and sleep: the morning is wiser
  than the evening."

  She made him go to sleep, but she herself went out on the
  steps, called and whistled with a mighty whistle. From every
  side there ran together gardeners of all sorts, and they planted
  a garden green, and in the garden birds sang, on the trees
  flowers blossomed, from the boughs hung ripe apples and pears.

  Early in the morning Vasilissa the Wise awoke the Prince:

  "Get up, Prince! the garden is ready: Papa is coming to
  see it."

  The Prince immediately snatched up a broom, and was off to
  the garden. Here he swept a path, there he trained a twig.
  The Water King praised him and said:

  "Thanks, Prince! You've done me right trusty service. So
  choose yourself a bride from among my twelve daughters. They
  are all exactly alike in face, in hair, and in dress. If you can
  pick out the same one three times running, she shall be your
  wife; if you fail to do so, I shall have you put to death."

  Vasilissa the Wise knew all about that, so she found time to
  say to the Prince:

  "The first time I will wave my handkerchief, the second I
  will be arranging my dress, the third time you will see a fly
  above my head."

  And so the Prince guessed which was Vasilissa the Wise
  three times running. And he and she were married, and a wedding
  feast was got ready.

  Now the Water King had prepared much food of all sorts
  more than a hundred men could get through. And he ordered
  his son-in-law to see that everything was eaten. "If anything
  remains over, the worse for you!" says he.

  "My Father," begs the Prince, "there's an old fellow of
  mine here; please let him take a snack with us."

  "Let him come!"

  Immediately appeared Obedalo--ate up everything, and
  wasn't content then! The Water King next set out two score
  tubs of all kinds of strong drinks, and ordered his son-in-law to
  see that they were all drained dry.

  "My Father!" begs the Prince again, "there's another old
  man of mine here, let him, too, drink your health."

  "Let him come!"

  Opivalo appeared, emptied all the forty tubs in a twinkling,
  and then asked for a drop more by way of stirrup-cup.[145]

  The Water King saw that there was nothing to be gained that
  way, so he gave orders to prepare a bath-room for the young
  couple--an iron bath-room--and to heat it as hot as possible.
  So the iron bath-room was made hot. Twelve loads of firewood
  were set alight, and the stove and the walls were made
  red-hot--impossible to come within five versts of it.

  "My Father!" says the Prince; "let an old fellow of ours
  have a scrub first, just to try the bath-room."

  "Let him do so!"

  Moroz Treskum went into the bath room, blew into one corner,
  blew in another--in a moment icicles were hanging there.
  After him the young couple also went into the bath-room, were
  lathered and scrubbed,[146] and then went home.

  After a time Vasilissa said to the Prince, "Let us get out of
  my father's power. He's tremendously angry with you; perhaps
  he'll be doing you some hurt."

  "Let us go," says the Prince.

  Straightway they saddled their horses and galloped off into
  the open plain. They rode and rode; many an hour went by.

  "Jump down from your horse, Prince, and lay your ear close
  to the earth," said Vasilissa. "Cannot you hear a sound as of
  pursuers?"

  The prince bent his ear to the ground, but he could hear nothing.
  Then Vasilissa herself lighted down from her good
  steed, laid herself flat on the earth, and said: "Ah Prince! I hear
  a great noise as of chasing after us." Then she turned the
  horses into a well, and herself into a bowl, and the Prince into
  an old, very old man. Up came the pursuers.

  "Heigh, old man!" say they, "haven't you seen a youth and
  a maiden pass by?"

  "I saw them, my friends! only it was a long while ago. I was
  a youngster at the time when they rode by."

  The pursuers returned to the Water King.

  "There is no trace of them," they said, "no news: all we
  saw was an old man beside a well, and a bowl floating on the
  water."

  "Why did not ye seize them?" cried the Water King, who
  thereupon put the pursuers to a cruel death, and sent another
  troop after the Prince and Vasilissa the Wise.

  The fugitives in the mean time had ridden far, far away.
  Vasilissa the Wise heard the noise made by the fresh set of
  pursuers, so she turned the Prince into an old priest, and she
  herself became an ancient church. Scarcely did its walls hold
  together, covered all over with moss. Presently up came the
  pursuers.

  "Heigh, old man! haven't you seen a youth and a maiden
  pass by?"

  "I saw them, my own! only it was long, ever so long ago. I
  was a young man when they rode by. It was just while I was
  building this church."

  So the second set of pursuers returned to the Water King,
  saying:

  "There is neither trace nor news of them, your Royal Majesty.
  All that we saw was an old priest and an ancient church."

  "Why did not ye seize them?" cried the Water King louder
  than before, and having put the pursuers to a cruel death, he
  galloped off himself in pursuit of the Prince and Vasilissa the
  Wise. This time Vasilissa turned the horses into a river of
  honey with _kissel_[147] banks, and changed the Prince into a Drake
  and herself into a grey duck. The Water King flung himself
  on the _kissel_ and honey-water, and ate and ate, and drank and
  drank until he burst! And so he gave up the ghost.

  The Prince and Vasilissa rode on, and at length they drew
  nigh to the home of the Prince's parents. Then said Vasilissa,

  "Go on in front, Prince, and report your arrival to your
  father and mother. But I will wait for you here by the wayside.
  Only remember these words of mine: kiss everyone
  else, only don't kiss your sister; if you do, you will forget me."

  The Prince reached home, began saluting every one, kissed
  his sister too--and no sooner had he kissed her than from that
  very moment he forgot all about his wife, just as if she had
  never entered into his mind.

  Three days did Vasilissa the Wise await him. On the fourth
  day she clad herself like a beggar, went into the capital, and
  took up her quarters in an old woman's house. But the Prince
  was preparing to marry a rich Princess, and orders were given
  to proclaim throughout the kingdom, that all Christian people
  were to come to congratulate the bride and bridegroom, each
  one bringing a wheaten pie as a present. Well, the old woman
  with whom Vasilissa lodged, prepared, like everyone else, to
  sift flour and make a pie.

  "Why are you making a pie, granny?" asked Vasilissa.

  "Is it why? you evidently don't know then. Our King is
  giving his son in marriage to a rich princess: one must go to
  the palace to serve up the dinner to the young couple."

  "Come now! I, too, will bake a pie and take it to the
  palace; may be the King will make me some present."

  "Bake away in God's name!" said the old woman.

  Vasilissa took flour, kneaded dough, and made a pie. And
  inside it she put some curds and a pair of live doves.

  Well, the old woman and Vasilissa the Wise reached the
  palace just at dinner-time. There a feast was in progress, one
  fit for all the world to see. Vasilissa's pie was set on the table,
  but no sooner was it cut in two than out of it flew the two
  doves. The hen bird seized a piece of curd, and her mate said
  to her:

  "Give me some curds, too, Dovey!"

  "No I won't," replied the other dove: "else you'd forget
  me, as the Prince has forgotten his Vasilissa the Wise."

  Then the Prince remembered about his wife. He jumped
  up from table, caught her by her white hands, and seated her
  close by his side. From that time forward they lived together
  in all happiness and prosperity.

      [With this story may be compared a multitude of tales
      in very many languages. In German for instance, "Der
      Koenig vom goldenen Berg," (Grimm, _KM._ No. 92. See
      also Nos. 51, 56, 113, 181, and the opening of No.
      31), "Der Koenigssohn und die Teufelstochter,"
      (Haltrich, No. 26), and "Gruenus Kravalle" (Wolf's
      "Deutsche Hausmaerchen," No. 29)--the Norse
      "Mastermaid," (Asbjoernsen and Moe, No. 46, Dasent, No.
      11) and "The Three Princesses of Whiteland," (A. and
      M. No. 9, Dasent, No. 26)--the Lithuanian story
      (Schleicher, No. 26, p. 75) in which a "field-devil"
      exacts from a farmer the promise of a child--the
      Wallachian stories (Schott, Nos. 2 and 15) in which a
      devil obtains a like promise from a woodcutter and a
      fisherman--the Modern Greek (Hahn, Nos. 4, 5, 54, and
      68) in which a child is promised to a Dervish, a
      _Drakos_, the Devil, and a Demon--and the Gaelic tales
      of "The Battle of the Birds" and "The Sea-maiden,"
      (Campbell, Nos. 2 and 4) in the former of which the
      child is promised to a Giant, in the latter to a
      Mermaid. The likeness between the Russian story and
      the "Battle of the Birds" is very striking. References
      to a great many other similar tales will be found in
      Grimm (_KM._ iii. pp. 96-7, and 168-9). The group to
      which all these stories belong is linked with a set of
      tales about a father who apprentices his son to a
      wizard, sometimes to the Devil, from whom the youth
      escapes with great difficulty. The principal Russian
      representative of the second set is called "Eerie
      Art," "Khitraya Nauka," (Afanasief, v. No. 22, vi. No.
      45, viii. p. 339).

      To the hero's adventures while with the Water King,
      and while escaping from him, an important parallel is
      offered by the end of the already mentioned (at p. 92)
      Indian story of Sringabhuja. That prince asks
      Agnisikha, the Rakshasa whom, in his crane-form, he
      has wounded, to bestow upon him the hand of his
      daughter--the maiden who had met him on his arrival at
      the Rakshasa's palace. The demon pretends to consent,
      but only on condition that the prince is able to pick
      out his love from among her numerous sisters. This
      Sringabhuja is able to do in spite of all the demon's
      daughters being exactly alike, as she has told him
      beforehand she will wear her pearls on her brow
      instead of round her neck. Her father will not remark
      the change, she says, for being of the demon race, he
      is not very sharp witted. The Rakshasa next sets the
      prince two of the usual tasks. He is to plough a great
      field, and sow a hundred bushels of corn. When this,
      by the daughter's help, is done, he is told to gather
      up the seed again. This also the demon's daughter does
      for him, sending to his aid a countless swarm of ants.
      Lastly he is commanded to visit the demon's brother
      and invite him to the wedding. He does so, and is
      pursued by the invited guest, from whom he escapes
      only by throwing behind him earth, water, thorns, and
      lastly fire, with all of which he has been provided by
      his love. They produce corresponding obstacles which
      enable him to get away from the uncle of his bride.
      The demon now believes that his proposed son-in-law
      must be a god in disguise, so he gives his consent to
      the marriage. All goes well for a time, but at last
      the prince wants to go home, so he and his wife fly
      from her father's palace. Agnisikha pursues them. She
      makes her husband invisible, while she assumes the
      form of a woodman. Up comes her angry sire, and asks
      for news of the fugitives. She replies she has seen
      none, her eyes being full of tears caused by the death
      of the Rakshasa prince Agnisikha. The slow-witted
      demon immediately flies home to find out whether he is
      really dead. Discovering that he is not, he renews the
      pursuit. Again his daughter renders her husband
      invisible, and assumes the form of a messenger
      carrying a letter. When her father arrives and repeats
      his question, she says she has seen no one: she is
      going with a letter to his brother from Agnisikha, who
      has just been mortally wounded. Back again home flies
      the demon in great distress, anxious to find out
      whether he has really been wounded to death or not.
      After settling this question, he leaves his daughter
      and her husband in peace. See Professor Brockhaus in
      the "Berichte der phil. hist. Classe der K. Saechs.
      Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften," 1861, pp. 226-9, and
      Professor Wilson, "Essays, &c.," ii. p. 136-8. Cf. R.
      Koehler in "Orient und Occident," ii. pp. 107-14.]

In another story a king is out hunting and becomes thirsty. Seeing a
spring near at hand, he bends down and is just going to lap up its
water, when the Tsar-Medved, a King-Bear, seizes him by the beard. The
king is unable to free himself from his grasp, and is obliged to
promise as his ransom "that which he knows not of at home," which
turns out to be a couple of children--a boy and a girl--who have been
born during his absence. In vain does he attempt to save the twins
from their impending fate, by concealing them in a secret abode
constructed for that purpose underground. In the course of time the
King-Bear arrives to claim them, finds out their hiding-place, digs
them up, and carries them off on his back to a distant region where no
man lives. During his absence they attempt to escape being carried
through the air on the back of a friendly falcon, but the King-Bear
sees them, "strikes his head against the earth, and burns the falcon's
wings." The twins fall to the ground, and are carried by the King-Bear
to his home amid inaccessible mountains. There they make a second
attempt at escape, trusting this time to an eagle's aid; but it meets
with exactly the same fate as their first trial. At last they are
rescued by a bull-calf, which succeeds in baffling all the King-Bear's
efforts to recover them. At the end of their perilous journey the
bull-calf tells the young prince to cut its throat, and burn its
carcase. He unwillingly consents, and from its ashes spring a horse, a
dog, and an apple-tree, all of which play important parts in the next
act of the drama.[148]

In one of the variants of the Water King story,[149] the seizer of
the drinking kings' beard is not called the _Morskoi Tsar_ but _Chudo
Morskoe_, a Water Chudo, whose name recalls to mind the Chudo Yudo we
have already met with.[150] The Prince who is obliged, in consequence
of his father's promise, to surrender himself to the Water Giant,
falls in love with a maiden whom he finds in that potentate's palace,
and who is an enchantress whom the Chudo has stolen. She turns herself
into a ring, which he carries about with him, and eventually, after
his escape from the Chudo, she becomes his bride.

In another story,[151] the being who obtains a child from one of the
incautious fathers of the Jephthah type who abound in popular fiction,
is of a very singular nature. A merchant is flying across a river on
the back of an eagle, when he drops a magic "snuff-box," which had
been entrusted to his charge by that bird, and it disappears beneath
the waters. At the eagle's command, the crayfish search for it, and
bring back word that it is lying "on the knees of an Idol." The eagle
summons the Idol, and demands the snuff box. Thereupon the Idol says
to the merchant--"Give me what you do not know of at home?" The
merchant agrees and the Idol gives him back his snuff-box.

In some of the variants of the story, the influence of ideas
connected with Christianity makes itself apparent in the names given
to the actors. Thus in the "Moujik and Anastasia Adovna,"[152] it is
no longer a king of the waters, but a devil's imp,[153] who bargains
with the thirsting father for his child, and the swan-maiden whose
shift the devoted youth steals bears the name of Adovna, the daughter
of Ad or Hades. In "The Youth,"[154] a moujik, who has lost his way in
a forest makes the rash promise to a man who enables him to cross a
great river; "and that man (says the story) was a devil."[155] We
shall meet with other instances further on of parents whose "hasty
words" condemn their children to captivity among evil spirits. In one
of the stories of this class,[156] the father is a hunter who is
perishing with cold one night, and who makes the usual promise as the
condition of his being allowed to warm himself at a fire guarded by a
devil. Being in consequence of this deprived of a son, he becomes very
sad, and drinks himself to death. "The priest will not bury his sinful
body, so it is thrust into a hole at a crossway," and he falls into
the power of "that very same devil," who turns him into a horse, and
uses him as a beast of burden. At last he is released by his son, who
has forced the devil to free him after several adventures--one of them
being a fight with the evil spirit in the shape of a three-headed
snake.

In the Hindoo story of "Brave Seventee Bai,"[157] that heroine kills
"a very large Cobra" which comes out of a lake. Touching the waters
with a magic diamond taken from the snake, she sees them roll back "in
a wall on either hand," between which she passes into a splendid
garden. In it she finds a lovely girl who proves to be the Cobra's
daughter and who is delighted to hear of her serpent-father's death.

Demon haunted waters, which prove fatal to mortals who bathe in or
drink of them, often occur in oriental fiction. In one of the Indian
stories, for instance,[158] a king is induced to order his escort to
bathe in a lake which is the abode of a Rakshasa or demon. They leap
into the water simultaneously, and are all devoured by the terrible
man-eater. From the assaults of such a Rakshasa as this it was that
Buddha, who was at the time a monkey, preserved himself and 80,000 of
his brother monkeys, by suggesting that they should drink from the
tank in which the demon lay in wait for them, "through reeds
previously made completely hollow by their breath."[159]

       *       *       *       *       *

From these male personifications of evil--from the Snake, Koshchei,
and the Water King--we will now turn to their corresponding female
forms. By far the most important beings of the latter class are those
malevolent enchantresses who form two closely related branches of the
same family. Like their sisters all over the world, they are, as a
general rule, old, hideous, and hateful. They possess all kinds of
supernatural powers, but their wits are often dull. They wage constant
war with mankind, but the heroes of storyland find them as easily
overcome as the males of their family. In their general character they
bear a strong resemblance to the Giantesses, Lamias, female Trolls,
Ogresses, Dragonesses, &c., of Europe, but in some of their traits
they differ from those well-known beings, and therefore they are
worthy of a detailed notice.

In several of the stories which have already been quoted, a prominent