The rest of the story is very similar to that of "Norka," which has
already been given, only instead of the beast of that name we have the
Baba Yaga, whom Ivan finds asleep, with a magic sword at her head.
Following the advice of her daughters, three fair maidens whom he
meets in her palace, Ivan does not attempt to touch the magic sword
while she sleeps. But he awakes her gently, and offers her two golden
apples on a silver dish. She lifts her head and opens her mouth,
whereupon he seizes the sword and cuts her head off. As is usual in
the stories of this class, his comrades, after hoisting the maidens
aloft, cut the cord and let him fall back into the abyss. But he
escapes, and eventually "he slays all the three heroes, and flings
their bodies on the plain for wild beasts to devour." This Skazka is
one of the many versions of a widespread tale, which tells how the
youngest of a party, usually consisting of three persons, overcomes
some supernatural foe, generally a dwarf, who had been more than a
match for his companions. The most important of these versions is the
Lithuanian story of the carpenter who overcomes a Laume--a being in
many respects akin to the Baba Yaga--who has proved too strong for his
comrades, Perkun and the Devil.[174]

The practice of cutting strips from an enemy's back is frequently
referred to in the Skazkas--much more frequently than in the German
and Norse stories. It is not often that such strips are turned to good
account, but in the Skazka with which we have just been dealing, Ivan
finding the rope by which he is being lowered into the abyss too
short, ties to the end of it the three strips he has cut from the Baba
Yaga's back, and so makes it sufficiently long. They are often exacted
as the penalty of losing a wager, as well in the Skazkas as
elsewhere.[175] In a West-Slavonian story about a wager of this kind,
the winner cuts off the loser's nose.[176] In the Gaelic stories it is
not an uncommon incident for a man to have "a strip of skin cut off
him from his crown to his sole."[177]

The Baba Yaga generally kills people in order to eat them. Her house
is fenced about with the bones of the men whose flesh she has
devoured; in one story she offers a human arm, by way of a meal, to a
girl who visits her. But she is also represented in one of the
stories[178] as petrifying her victims. This trait connects her with
Medusa, and the three sister Baba Yagas with the three Gorgones. The
Russian Gorgo's method of petrifaction is singular. In the story
referred to, Ivan Devich (Ivan the servant-maid's son) meets a Baba
Yaga, who plucks one of her hairs, gives it to him, and says, "Tie
three knots and then blow." He does so, and both he and his horse turn
into stone. The Baba Yaga places them in her mortar, pounds them to
bits, and buries their remains under a stone. A little later comes
Ivan Devich's comrade, Prince Ivan. Him also the Yaga attempts to
destroy, but he feigns ignorance, and persuades her to show him how to
tie knots and to blow. The result is that she becomes petrified
herself. Prince Ivan puts her in her own mortar, and proceeds to pound
her therein, until she tells him where the fragments of his comrade
are, and what he must do to restore them to life.

The Baba Yaga usually lives by herself, but sometimes she appears in
the character of the house-mother. One of the Skazkas[179] relates how
a certain old couple, who had no children, were advised to get a
number of eggs from the village--one from each house--and to place
them under a sitting hen. From the forty-one eggs thus obtained and
treated are born as many boys, all but one of whom develop into strong
men, but the forty-first long remains a poor weak creature, a kind of
"Hop-o'-my-thumb." They all set forth to seek brides, and eventually
marry the forty-one daughters of a Baba Yaga. On the wedding night she
intends to kill her sons-in-law; but they, acting on the advice of him
who had been the weakling of their party, but who has become a mighty
hero, exchange clothes with their brides before "lying down to sleep."
Accordingly the Baba Yaga's "trusty servants" cut off the heads of her
daughters instead of those of her sons-in-law. Those youths arise,
stick the heads of their brides on iron spikes all round the house,
and gallop away. When the Baba Yaga awakes in the morning, looks out
of the window, and sees her daughters' heads on their spikes, she
flies into a passion, calls for "her burning shield," sets off in
pursuit of her sons-in-law, and "begins burning up everything on all
four sides with her shield." A magic, bridge-creating kerchief,
however, enables the fugitives to escape from their irritated
mother-in-law.

In one story[180] the heroine is ordered to swing the cradle in which
reposes a Baba Yaga's infant son, whom she is ordered to address in
terms of respect when she sings him lullabies; in others she is told
to wash a Baba Yaga's many children, whose appearance is usually
unprepossessing. One girl, for instance, is ordered by a Baba Yaga to
heat the bath, but the fuel given her for the purpose turns out to be
dead men's bones. Having got over this difficulty, thanks to the
advice of a sparrow which tells her where to look for wood, she is
sent to fetch water in a sieve. Again the sparrow comes to her rescue
telling her to line the sieve with clay. Then she is told to wait upon
the Baba Yaga's children in the bath-room. She enters it, and
presently in come "worms, frogs, rats, and all sorts of insects."
These, which are the Baba Yaga's children, she soaps over and
otherwise treats in the approved Russian-bath style, and afterwards
she does as much for their mother. The Baba Yaga is highly pleased,
calls for a "samovar" (or urn), and invites her young bath-woman to
drink tea with her. And finally she sends her home with a blue coffer,
which turns out to be full of money. This present excites the cupidity
of her stepmother, who sends her own daughter to the Baba Yaga's,
hoping that she will bring back a similar treasure. The Baba Yaga
gives the same orders as before to the new-comer, but that conceited
young person fails to carry them out. She cannot make the bones burn,
nor the sieve hold water, but when the sparrow offers its advice she
only boxes its ears. And when the "rats, frogs, and all manner of
vermin," enter the bath-room, "she crushed half of them to death,"
says the story; "the rest ran home, and complained about her to their
mother." And so the Baba Yaga, when she dismisses her, gives her a red
coffer instead of a blue one. Out of it, when it is opened, issues
fire, which consumes both her and her mother.[181]

Similar to this story in many of its features as well as in its
catastrophe is one of the most spirited and dramatic of all the
Skazkas, that of--


  VASILISSA THE FAIR.[182]

  In a certain kingdom there lived a merchant. Twelve years
  did he live as a married man, but he had only one child, Vasilissa
  the Fair. When her mother died, the girl was eight years
  old. And on her deathbed the merchant's wife called her little
  daughter to her, took out from under the bed-clothes a doll,
  gave it to her, and said, "Listen, Vasilissa, dear; remember
  and obey these last words of mine. I am going to die. And
  now, together with my parental blessing, I bequeath to you this
  doll. Keep it always by you, and never show it to anybody; and
  whenever any misfortune comes upon you, give the doll food,
  and ask its advice. When it has fed, it will tell you a cure for
  your troubles." Then the mother kissed her child and died.

  After his wife's death, the merchant mourned for her a befitting
  time, and then began to consider about marrying again. He
  was a man of means. It wasn't a question with him of girls (with
  dowries); more than all others, a certain widow took his fancy.
  She was middle-aged, and had a couple of daughters of her own
  just about the same age as Vasilissa. She must needs be both
  a good housekeeper and an experienced mother.

  Well, the merchant married the widow, but he had deceived
  himself, for he did not find in her a kind mother for his
  Vasilissa. Vasilissa was the prettiest girl[183] in all the
  village; but her stepmother and stepsisters were jealous of her
  beauty, and tormented her with every possible sort of toil, in
  order that she might grow thin from over-work, and be tanned by
  the sun and the wind. Her life was made a burden to her! Vasilissa
  bore everything with resignation, and every day grew plumper and
  prettier, while the stepmother and her daughters lost flesh and
  fell off in appearance from the effects of their own spite,
  notwithstanding that they always sat with folded hands like fine
  ladies.

  But how did that come about? Why, it was her doll that
  helped Vasilissa. If it hadn't been for it, however could the
  girl have got through all her work? And therefore it was that
  Vasilissa would never eat all her share of a meal, but always
  kept the most delicate morsel for her doll; and at night, when
  all were at rest, she would shut herself up in the narrow chamber[184]
  in which she slept, and feast her doll, saying[185] the while:

  "There, dolly, feed; help me in my need! I live in my
  father's house, but never know what pleasure is; my evil stepmother
  tries to drive me out of the white world; teach me how
  to keep alive, and what I ought to do."

  Then the doll would eat, and afterwards give her advice, and
  comfort her in her sorrow, and next day it would do all Vasilissa's
  work for her. She had only to take her ease in a shady place
  and pluck flowers, and yet all her work was done in good time;
  the beds were weeded, and the pails were filled, and the cabbages
  were watered, and the stove was heated. Moreover, the
  doll showed Vasilissa herbs which prevented her from getting
  sunburnt. Happily did she and her doll live together.

  Several years went by. Vasilissa grew up and became old
  enough to be married.[186] All the marriageable young men in the
  town sent to make an offer to Vasilissa; at her stepmother's
  daughters not a soul would so much as look. Her stepmother
  grew even more savage than before, and replied to every
  suitor--

  "We won't let the younger marry before her elders."

  And after the suitors had been packed off, she used to beat
  Vasilissa by way of wreaking her spite.

  Well, it happened one day that the merchant had to go
  away from home on business for a long time. Thereupon the
  stepmother went to live in another house; and near that house
  was a dense forest, and in a clearing in that forest there stood
  a hut,[187] and in the hut there lived a Baba Yaga. She never let
  any one come near her dwelling, and she ate up people like so
  many chickens.

  Having moved into the new abode, the merchant's wife kept
  sending her hated Vasilissa into the forest on one pretence or
  another. But the girl always got home safe and sound; the
  doll used to show her the way, and never let her go near the
  Baba Yaga's dwelling.

  The autumn season arrived. One evening the stepmother
  gave out their work to the three girls; one she set to lace-making,
  another to knitting socks, and the third, Vasilissa, to weaving;
  and each of them had her allotted amount to do. By-and-by
  she put out the lights in the house, leaving only one candle
  alight where the girls were working, and then she went to bed.
  The girls worked and worked. Presently the candle wanted
  snuffing; one of the stepdaughters took the snuffers, as if she
  were going to clear the wick, but instead of doing so, in obedience
  to her mother's orders, she snuffed the candle out, pretending
  to do so by accident.

  "What shall we do now?" said the girls. "There isn't a
  spark of fire in the house, and our tasks are not yet done. We
  must go to the Baba Yaga's for a light!"

  "My pins give me light enough," said the one who was making
  lace. "I shan't go."

  "And I shan't go, either," said the one who was knitting
  socks. "My knitting-needles give me light enough."

  "Vasilissa, you must go for the light," they both cried out
  together; "be off to the Baba Yaga's!"

  And they pushed Vasilissa out of the room.

  Vasilissa went into her little closet, set before the doll a supper
  which she had provided beforehand, and said:

  "Now, dolly, feed, and listen to my need! I'm sent to the
  Baba Yaga's for a light. The Baba Yaga will eat me!"

  The doll fed, and its eyes began to glow just like a couple of
  candles.

  "Never fear, Vasilissa dear!" it said. "Go where you're
  sent. Only take care to keep me always by you. As long as I'm
  with you, no harm will come to you at the Baba Yaga's."

  So Vasilissa got ready, put her doll in her pocket, crossed
  herself, and went out into the thick forest.

  As she walks she trembles. Suddenly a horseman gallops
  by. He is white, and he is dressed in white, under him is a white
  horse, and the trappings of the horse are white--and the day
  begins to break.

  She goes a little further, and a second rider gallops by. He
  is red, dressed in red, and sitting on a red horse--and the sun
  rises.

  Vasilissa went on walking all night and all next day. It was
  only towards the evening that she reached the clearing on which
  stood the dwelling of the Baba Yaga. The fence around it was
  made of dead men's bones; on the top of the fence were stuck
  human skulls with eyes in them; instead of uprights at the gates
  were men's legs; instead of bolts were arms; instead of a lock
  was a mouth with sharp teeth.

  Vasilissa was frightened out of her wits, and stood still as if
  rooted to the ground.

  Suddenly there rode past another horseman. He was black,
  dressed all in black, and on a black horse. He galloped up to
  the Baba Yaga's gate and disappeared, just as if he had sunk
  through the ground--and night fell. But the darkness did not
  last long. The eyes of all the skulls on the fence began to shine
  and the whole clearing became as bright as if it had been midday.
  Vasilissa shuddered with fear, but stopped where she was,
  not knowing which way to run.

  Soon there was heard in the forest a terrible roar. The trees
  cracked, the dry leaves rustled; out of the forest came the Baba
  Yaga, riding in a mortar, urging it on with a pestle, sweeping
  away her traces with a broom. Up she drove to the gate, stopped
  short, and, snuffing the air around her, cried:--

  "Faugh! Faugh! I smell Russian flesh![188] Who's there?"

  Vasilissa went up to the hag in a terrible fright, bowed low
  before her, and said:--

  "It's me, granny. My stepsisters have sent me to you for a
  light."

  "Very good," said the Baba Yaga; "I know them. If you'll
  stop awhile with me first, and do some work for me, I'll give you
  a light. But if you won't, I'll eat you!"

  Then she turned to the gates, and cried:--

  "Ho, thou firm fence of mine, be thou divided! And ye, wide
  gates of mine, do ye fly open!"

  The gates opened, and the Baba Yaga drove in, whistling as
  she went, and after her followed Vasilissa; and then everything
  shut to again. When they entered the sitting-room, the Baba
  Yaga stretched herself out at full length, and said to Vasilissa:

  "Fetch out what there is in the oven; I'm hungry."

  Vasilissa lighted a splinter[189] at one of the skulls which were
  on the fence, and began fetching meat from the oven and setting
  it before the Baba Yaga; and meat enough had been provided
  for a dozen people. Then she fetched from the cellar kvass,
  mead, beer, and wine. The hag ate up everything, drank up
  everything. All she left for Vasilissa was a few scraps--a crust
  of bread and a morsel of sucking-pig. Then the Baba Yaga lay
  down to sleep, saying:--

  "When I go out to-morrow morning, mind you cleanse the
  courtyard, sweep the room, cook the dinner, and get the linen
  ready. Then go to the corn-bin, take out four quarters of wheat,
  and clear it of other seed.[190] And mind you have it all done--if
  you don't, I shall eat you!"

  After giving these orders the Baba Yaga began to snore. But
  Vasilissa set the remnants of the hag's supper before her doll,
  burst into tears, and said:--

  "Now, dolly, feed, listen to my need! The Baba Yaga has
  set me a heavy task, and threatens to eat me if I don't do it all.
  Do help me!"

  The doll replied:

  "Never fear, Vasilissa the Fair! Sup, say your prayers, and
  go to bed. The morning is wiser than the evening!"

  Vasilissa awoke very early, but the Baba Yaga was already up.
  She looked out of the window. The light in the skull's eyes was
  going out. All of a sudden there appeared the white horseman,
  and all was light. The Baba Yaga went out into the courtyard and
  whistled--before her appeared a mortar with a pestle and a broom.
  The red horseman appeared--the sun rose. The Baba Yaga
  seated herself in the mortar, and drove out of the courtyard,
  shooting herself along with the pestle, sweeping away her traces
  with the broom.

  Vasilissa was left alone, so she examined the Baba Yaga's
  house, wondered at the abundance there was in everything, and
  remained lost in thought as to which work she ought to take to
  first. She looked up; all her work was done already. The doll
  had cleared the wheat to the very last grain.

  "Ah, my preserver!" cried Vasilissa, "you've saved me
  from danger!"

  "All you've got to do now is to cook the dinner," answered
  the doll, slipping into Vasilissa's pocket. "Cook away, in God's
  name, and then take some rest for your health's sake!"

  Towards evening Vasilissa got the table ready, and awaited
  the Baba Yaga. It began to grow dusky; the black rider appeared
  for a moment at the gate, and all grew dark. Only the
  eyes of the skulls sent forth their light. The trees began to
  crack, the leaves began to rustle, up drove the Baba Yaga.
  Vasilissa went out to meet her.

  "Is everything done?" asks the Yaga.

  "Please to look for yourself, granny!" says Vasilissa.

  The Baba Yaga examined everything, was vexed that there
  was nothing to be angry about, and said:

  "Well, well! very good!"

  Afterwards she cried:

  "My trusty servants, zealous friends, grind this my wheat!"

  There appeared three pairs of hands, which gathered up the
  wheat, and carried it out of sight. The Baba Yaga supped, went
  to bed, and again gave her orders to Vasilissa:

  "Do just the same to-morrow as to-day; only besides that take
  out of the bin the poppy seed that is there, and clean the earth
  off it grain by grain. Some one or other, you see, has mixed a
  lot of earth with it out of spite." Having said this, the hag turned
  to the wall and began to snore, and Vasilissa took to feeding her
  doll. The doll fed, and then said to her what it had said the
  day before:

  "Pray to God, and go to sleep. The morning is wiser than the
  evening. All shall be done, Vasilissa dear!"

  The next morning the Baba Yaga again drove out of the courtyard
  in her mortar, and Vasilissa and her doll immediately did
  all the work. The hag returned, looked at everything, and cried,
  "My trusty servants, zealous friends, press forth oil from the
  poppy seed!"

  Three pairs of hands appeared, gathered up the poppy seed,
  and bore it out of sight. The Baba Yaga sat down to dinner.
  She ate, but Vasilissa stood silently by.

  "Why don't you speak to me?" said the Baba Yaga; "there
  you stand like a dumb creature!"

  "I didn't dare," answered Vasilissa; "but if you give me
  leave, I should like to ask you about something."

  "Ask away; only it isn't every question that brings good.
  'Get much to know, and old soon you'll grow.'"

  "I only want to ask you, granny, about something I saw. As
  I was coming here, I was passed by one riding on a white horse;
  he was white himself, and dressed in white. Who was he?"

  "That was my bright Day!" answered the Baba Yaga.

  "Afterwards there passed me another rider, on a red horse;
  red himself, and all in red clothes. Who was he?"

  "That was my red Sun!"[191] answered the Baba Yaga.

  "And who may be the black rider, granny, who passed by
  me just at your gate?"

  "That was my dark Night; they are all trusty servants of
  mine."

  Vasilissa thought of the three pairs of hands, but held her
  peace.

  "Why don't you go on asking?" said the Baba Yaga.

  "That's enough for me, granny. You said yourself, 'Get
  too much to know, old you'll grow!'"

  "It's just as well," said the Baba Yaga, "that you've only
  asked about what you saw out of doors, not indoors! In my house
  I hate having dirt carried out of doors;[192] and as to over-inquisitive
  people--well, I eat them. Now I'll ask you something.
  How is it you manage to do the work I set you to do?"

  "My mother's blessing assists me," replied Vasilissa.

  "Eh! eh! what's that? Get along out of my house, you
  bless'd daughter. I don't want bless'd people."

  She dragged Vasilissa out of the room, pushed her outside
  the gates, took one of the skulls with blazing eyes from the
  fence, stuck it on a stick, gave it to her and said:

  "Lay hold of that. It's a light you can take to your stepsisters.
  That's what they sent you here for, I believe."

  Home went Vasilissa at a run, lit by the skull, which went out
  only at the approach of the dawn; and at last, on the evening
  of the second day, she reached home. When she came to the
  gate, she was going to throw away the skull.

  "Surely," thinks she, "they can't be still in want of a light
  at home." But suddenly a hollow voice issued from the skull,
  saying:

  "Throw me not away. Carry me to your stepmother!"

  She looked at her stepmother's house, and not seeing a light
  in a single window, she determined to take the skull in there
  with her. For the first time in her life she was cordially received
  by her stepmother and stepsisters, who told her that from the
  moment she went away they hadn't had a spark of fire in the
  house. They couldn't strike a light themselves anyhow, and
  whenever they brought one in from a neighbor's, it went out as
  soon as it came into the room.

  "Perhaps your light will keep in!" said the stepmother. So
  they carried the skull into the sitting-room. But the eyes of the
  skull so glared at the stepmother and her daughters--shot forth
  such flames! They would fain have hidden themselves, but run
  where they would, everywhere did the eyes follow after them.
  By the morning they were utterly burnt to cinders. Only Vasilissa
  was none the worse.[193]

      [Next morning Vasilissa "buried the skull," locked up
      the house and took up her quarters in a neighboring
      town. After a time she began to work. Her doll made
      her a glorious loom, and by the end of the winter she
      had weaved a quantity of linen so fine that it might
      be passed like thread through the eye of a needle. In
      the spring, after it had been bleached, Vasilissa made
      a present of it to the old woman with whom she lodged.
      The crone presented it to the king, who ordered it to
      be made into shirts. But no seamstress could be found
      to make them up, until the linen was entrusted to
      Vasilissa. When a dozen shirts were ready, Vasilissa
      sent them to the king, and as soon as her carrier had
      started, "she washed herself, and combed her hair, and
      dressed herself, and sat down at the window." Before
      long there arrived a messenger demanding her instant
      appearance at court. And "when she appeared before the
      royal eyes," the king fell desperately in love with
      her.

      "No; my beauty!" said he, "never will I part with
      thee; thou shalt be my wife." So he married her; and
      by-and-by her father returned, and took up his abode
      with her. "And Vasilissa took the old woman into her
      service, and as for the doll--to the end of her life
      she always carried it in her pocket."]

The puppet which plays so important a part in this story is worthy of
a special examination. It is called in the original a _Kukla_ (dim.
_Kukolka_), a word designating any sort of puppet or other figure
representing either man or beast. In a Little-Russian variant[194] of
one of those numerous stories, current in all lands, which commence
with the escape of the heroine from an incestuous union, a priest
insists on marrying his daughter. She goes to her mother's grave and
weeps there. Her dead mother "comes out from her grave," and tells her
what to do. The girl obtains from her father a rough dress of pig's
skin, and two sets of gorgeous apparel; the former she herself
assumes, in the latter she dresses up three _Kuklui_, which in this
instance were probably mere blocks of wood. Then she takes her place
in the midst of the dressed-up forms, which cry, one after the other,
"Open, O moist earth, that the fair maiden may enter within thee!" The
earth opens, and all four sink into it.

This introduction is almost identical with that prefixed to the German