20.  DINEWAN THE EMU, AND WAHN THE CROWS

Dinewan and his two wives, the Wahn, were camping out. Seeing some
clouds gathering, they made a bark humpy. It came on to rain, and they
all took shelter under it. Dinewan, when his wives were not looking,
gave a kick against a piece of bark at one side of the humpy, knocked
it down, then told his wives to go and put it up again. When they were
outside putting it up, he gave a kick, and knocked down a piece on the
other side; so no sooner were they in again than out they had to go.
This he did time after time, until at last they su spected him, and
decided that one of them would watch. The one who was watching saw
Dinewan laugh to himself and go and knock down the bark they had just
put up, chuckling at the thought of his wives having to go out in the
wet and cold to put it up, while he had his supper dry and comfortably
inside. The one who saw him told the other, and they decided to teach
him a lesson. So in they came, each with a piece of bark filled with
hot coals. They went straight up to Dinewan, who was lying down
laughing.

"Now," they said, "you shall feel as hot we did cold." And they threw
the coals over him. Dinewan jumped up, crying aloud with the pain, for
he was badly burnt. He rolled himself over, and ran into the rain; and
his wives stayed inside, and laughed aloud at him.

21.  GOOLAHWILLEEL THE TOPKNOT PIGEONS

Young Goolahwilleeel used to go out hunting every day. His mother and
sisters always expected that he would bring home kangaroo and emu for
them. But each day he came home without any meat at all. They asked him
what he did in the bush, as he evidently did not hunt. He said that he
did hunt.

"Then why," said they, "do you bring us nothing home?"

"I cannot catch and kill what I follow," he said. "You hear me cry out
when I find kangaroo or emu; is it not so?"

"Yes; each day we hear you call when you find something, and each day
we get ready the fire, expecting you to bring home the spoils of the
chase, but you bring nothing."

"To-morrow," he said, "you shall not be disappointed. I will bring you
a kangaroo."

Every day, instead of hunting, Goolahwilleel had been gathering
wattle-gum, and with this he had been modelling a kangaroo--a perfect
model of one, tail, ears, and all complete. So the next day he came
towards the camp carrying this kangaroo made of gum. Seeing him coming,
and also seeing that he was carrying the promised kangaroo, his mother
and sisters said: "Ah, Goolahwilleel spoke truly. He has kept his word,
and now brings us a kangaroo. Pile up the fire. To-night we shall eat
meat."

About a hundred yards away from the camp Goolahwilleel put down his
model, and came on without it. His mother called out: "Where is the
kangaroo you brought home?"

"Oh, over there." And he pointed towards where he had left it.

The sisters ran to get it, but came back saying: "Where is it? We
cannot see it."

"Over there," he said, pointing again.

"But there is only a great figure of gum there."

"Well, did I say it was anything else? Did I not say it was gum?"

"No, you did not. You said it was a kangaroo."

"And so it is a kangaroo. A beautiful kangaroo that I made all by
myself." And he smiled quite proudly to think what a fine kangaroo he
had made.

But his mother and sisters did not smile. They seized him and gave him
a good beating for deceiving them. They told him he should never go out
alone again, for he only played instead of hunting, though he knew they
starved for meat. They would always in the future go with him.

And so for ever the Goolahwilleels went in flocks, never more singly,
in search of food.