_The Moral_

    _From this short story easy we discern
    What conduct all young people ought to learn.
    But above all, young, growing misses fair,
    Whose orient rosy blooms begin t'appear:
    Who, beauties in the fragrant spring of age,
    With pretty airs young hearts are apt t'engage.
    Ill do they listen to all sorts of tongues,
    Since some inchant and lure like Syrens' songs.
    No wonder therefore 'tis, if over-power'd,
    So many of them has the Wolf devour'd.
    The Wolf, I say, for Wolves too sure there are
    Of every sort, and every character.
    Some of them mild and gentle-humour'd be,
    Of noise and gall, and rancour wholly free;
    Who tame, familiar, full of complaisance
    Ogle and leer, languish, cajole and glance;
    With luring tongues, and language wond'rous sweet,
    Follow young ladies as they walk the street,
    Ev'n to their very houses, nay, bedside,
    And, artful, tho' their true designs they hide;
    Yet ah! these simpering Wolves! Who does not see
    Most dangerous of Wolves indeed they be?_

_The Fairy_

The Fairy

There was, once upon a time, a widow, who had two daughters. The
eldest was so much like her in the face and humour, that whoever
looked upon the daughter saw the mother. They were both so
disagreeable, and so proud, that there was no living with them. The
youngest, who was the very picture of her father, for courtesy and
sweetness of temper, was withal one of the most beautiful girls ever
seen. As people naturally love their own likeness, this mother even
doated on her eldest daughter, and at the same time had a horrible
aversion for the youngest. She made her eat in the kitchen, and work
continually.

Among other things, this poor child was forced twice a day to draw
water above a mile and a half off the house, and bring home a pitcher
full of it. One day, as she was at this fountain, there came to her a
poor woman, who begged of her to let her drink.

"O ay, with all my heart, Goody," said this pretty maid; and rinsing
immediately the pitcher, she took up some water from the clearest
place of the fountain, and gave it to her, holding up the pitcher all
the while, that she might drink the easier.

The good woman having drank, said to her:

"You are so very pretty, my dear, so good and so mannerly, that I
cannot help giving you a gift" (for this was a Fairy, who had taken
the form of a poor country-woman, to see how far the civility and
good manners of this pretty girl would go). "I will give you for
gift," continued the Fairy, "that at every word you speak, there shall
come out of your mouth either a flower, or a jewel."

When this pretty girl came home, her mother scolded at her for staying
so long at the fountain.

"I beg your pardon, mamma," said the poor girl, "for not making more
haste," and, in speaking these words, there came out of her mouth two
roses, two pearls, and two diamonds.

"What is this I see?" said her mother quite astonished, "I think I see
pearls and diamonds come out of the girl's mouth! How happens this,
child?" (This was the first time she ever called her child.)

The poor creature told her frankly all the matter, not without
dropping out infinite numbers of diamonds.

"In good faith," cried the mother, "I must send my child thither. Come
hither, Fanny, look what comes out of thy sister's mouth when she
speaks! Would'st not thou be glad, my dear, to have the same gift
given to thee? Thou hast nothing else to do but go and draw water out
of the fountain, and when a certain poor woman asks thee to let her
drink, to give it her very civilly."

"It would be a very fine sight indeed," said this ill-bred minx, "to
see me go draw water!"

"You shall go, hussey," said the mother, "and this minute."