When the two sisters returned from the ball, Cinderilla asked them if
they had been well diverted, and if the fine lady had been there. They
told her, Yes, but that she hurried away immediately when it struck
twelve, and with so much haste, that she dropped one of her little
glass slippers, the prettiest in the world, and which the King's son
had taken up; that he had done nothing but look at it during all the
latter part of the ball, and that most certainly he was very much in
love with the beautiful person who owned the little slipper.

What they said was very true; for a few days after, the King's son
caused it to be proclaimed by sound of trumpet, that he would marry
her whose foot this slipper would just fit. They whom he employed
began to try it on upon the Princesses, then the duchesses, and all
the Court, but in vain. It was brought to the two sisters, who did all
they possibly could to thrust their feet into the slipper, but they
could not effect it.

Cinderilla, who saw all this, and knew her slipper, said to them
laughing:

"Let me see if it will not fit me?"

Her sisters burst out a-laughing, and began to banter her. The
gentleman who was sent to try the slipper, looked earnestly at
Cinderilla, and finding her very handsome, said it was but just that
she should try, and that he had orders to let every one make tryal. He
invited Cinderilla to sit down, and putting the slipper to her foot,
he found it went on very easily, and fitted her, as if it had been
made of wax. The astonishment her two sisters were in was excessively
great, but still abundantly greater, when Cinderilla pulled out of her
pocket the other slipper, and put it on her foot. Thereupon, in came
her godmother, who having touched, with her wand, Cinderilla's
cloaths, made them richer and more magnificent than any of those she
had before.

And now her two sisters found her to be that fine beautiful lady whom
they had seen at the ball. They threw themselves at her feet, to beg
pardon for all the ill treatment they had made her undergo. Cinderilla
took them up, and as she embraced them, cried that she forgave them
with all her heart, and desired them always to love her.

She was conducted to the young Prince, dressed as she was; he thought
her more charming than ever, and, a few days after, married her.

Cinderilla, who was no less good than beautiful, gave her two sisters
lodgings in the palace, and that very same day matched them with two
great lords of the court.

_The Moral_

    _Beauty's to the sex a treasure,
    Still admir'd beyond all measure,
    And never yet was any known,
    By still admiring, weary grown.
    But that rare quality call'd grace,
    Exceeds, by far, a handsome face;
    Its lasting charms surpass the other,
    And this rich gift her kind godmother
    Bestow'd on Cinderilla fair,
    Whom she instructed with such care.
    She gave to her such graceful mien,
    That she, thereby, became a queen.
    For thus (may ever truth prevail)
    We draw our moral from this tale.
    This quality, fair ladies, know
    Prevails much more (you'll find it so)
    T'ingage and captivate a heart,
    Than a fine head dress'd up with art.
    The fairies' gift of greatest worth
    Is grace of bearing, not high birth;
    Without this gift we'll miss the prize;
    Possession gives us wings to rise._