the story of his wanderings all over Molokai, seeking for some power
strong enough to overcome Kupa. At last he had come to the shark-god--as
the final possibility of aid. If Kauhuhu failed him, he was ready to
die; indeed he had no wish to live. The mo-o assured him of their
kindly feelings, and told him that it was a very good thing that Kauhuhu
was away fishing, for if he had been home there would have been no way
for him to go before the god without suffering immediate death. There
would have been not even an instant for explanations. Yet they ran a
very great risk in aiding him, for they must conceal him until the way
was opened by the favors of the great gods. If he should be discovered
and eaten before gaining the aid of the shark-god, they, too, must die
with him. They decided that they would hide him in the rubbish pile of
taro peelings which had been thrown on one side when they had pounded
taro. Here he must lie in perfect silence until the way was made plain
for him to act. They told him to watch for the coming of eight great
surf waves rolling in from the sea, and then wait from his place of
concealment for some opportunity to speak to the god because he would
come in the last great wave. Soon the surf began to roll in and break
against the cliffs.

Higher and higher rose the waves until the eighth reared far above the
waters and met the winds from the shore which whipped the curling crest
into a shower of spray. It raced along the water and beat far up into
the cave, breaking into foam, out of which the shark-god emerged. At
once he took his human form and walked around the cave. As he passed
the rubbish heap he cried out: "A man is here. I smell him." The dragons
earnestly denied that any one was there, but the shark-god said, "There
is surely a man in this cave. If I find him, dead men you are. If I find
him not, you shall live." Then Kauhuhu looked along the walls of the
cave and into all the hiding-places, but could not find him. He called
with a loud voice, but only the echoes answered, like the voices of
ghosts. After a thorough search he was turning away to attend to other
matters when Kamalo's pig squealed. Then the giant shark-god leaped to
the pile of taro leavings and thrust them apart. There lay Kamalo and
the black pig which had been brought for sacrifice.

Oh, the anger of the god!

Oh, the blazing eyes!

Kauhuhu instantly caught Kamalo and lifted him from the rubbish up
toward his great mouth. Now the head and shoulders are in Kauhuhu's
mouth. So quickly has this been done that Kamalo has had no time to
think. Kamalo speaks quickly as the teeth are coming down upon him. "E
Kauhuhu, listen to me. Hear my prayer. Then perhaps eat me." The
shark-god is astonished and does not bite. He takes Kamalo from his
mouth and says: "Well for you that you spoke quickly. Perhaps you have
a good thought. Speak." Then Kamalo told about his sons and their death
at the hands of the executioners of the great chief, and that no one
dared avenge him, but that all the prophets of the different gods had
sent him from one place to another but could give him no aid. Sure now
was he that Kauhuhu alone could give him aid. Pity came to the shark-god
as it had come to his dragon watchers when they saw the sad condition of
Kamalo. All this time Kamalo had held the hog which he had carried with
him for sacrifice. This he now offered to the shark-god. Kauhuhu,
pleased and compassionate, accepted the offering, and said: "E Kamalo.
If you had come for any other purpose I would eat you, but your cause is
sacred. I will stand as your kahu, your guardian, and sorely punish the
high chief Kupa."

Then he told Kamalo to go to the heiau of the priest who told him to see
the shark-god, take this priest on his shoulders, carry him over the
steep precipices to his own heiau at Kaluaaha, and there live with him
as a fellow-priest. They were to build a tabu fence around the heiau and
put up the sacred tabu staffs of white tapa cloth. They must collect
black pigs by the four hundred, red fish by the four hundred, and white
chickens by the four hundred. Then they were to wait patiently for the
coming of Kauhuhu. It was to be a strange coming. On the island Lanai,
far to the west of the Maui channel, they should see a small cloud,
white as snow, increasing until it covers the little island. Then that
cloud shall cross the channel against the wind and climb the mountains
of Molokai until it rests on the highest peaks over the valley where
Kupa has his temple. "At that time," said Kauhuhu, "a great rainbow will
span the valley. I shall be in the care of that rainbow, and you may
clearly understand that I am there and will speedily punish the man who
has injured you. Remember that because you came to me for this sacred
cause, therefore I have spared you, the only man who has ever stood in
the presence of the shark-god and escaped alive." Gladly did Kamalo go
up and down precipices and along the rough hard ways to the heiau of the
priest of the shark-god. Gladly did he carry him up from Kalaupapa to
the mountain-ridge above. Gladly did he carry him to his home and there
provide for him while he gathered together the black pigs, the red fish,
and the white chickens within the sacred enclosure he had built. Here he
brought his family, those who had the nearest and strongest claims upon
him. When his work was done, his eyes burned with watching the clouds of
the little western island Lanai. Ah, the days passed by so slowly! The
weeks and the months came, so the legends say, and still Kamalo waited
in patience. At last one day a white cloud appeared. It was unlike all
the other white clouds he had anxiously watched during the dreary
months. Over the channel it came. It spread over the hillsides and
climbed the mountains and rested at the head of the valley belonging to
Kupa. Then the watchers saw the glorious rainbow and knew that Kauhuhu
had come according to his word.

The storm arose at the head of the valley. The winds struggled into a
furious gale. The clouds gathered in heavy black masses, dark as
midnight, and were pierced through with terrific flashes of lightning.
The rain fell in floods, sweeping the hillside down into the valley, and
rolling all that was below onward in a resistless mass toward the ocean.
Down came the torrent upon the heiau belonging to Kupa, tearing its
walls into fragments and washing Kupa and his people into the harbor at
the mouth of the valley. Here the shark-god had gathered his people.
Sharks filled the bay and feasted upon Kupa and his followers until the
waters ran red and all were destroyed. Hence came the legendary name for
that little harbor--Aikanaka, the place for man-eaters.

It is said in the legends that "when great clouds gather on the
mountains and a rainbow spans the valley, look out for furious storms of
wind and rain which come suddenly, sweeping down the valley." It also
said in the legends that this strange storm which came in such awful
power upon Kupa also spread out over the adjoining lowlands, carrying
great destruction everywhere, but it paused at the tabu staff of Kamalo,
and rushed on either side of the sacred fence, not daring to touch any
one who dwelt therein. Therefore Kamalo and his people were spared. The
legend has been called "Aikanaka" because of the feast of the sharks on
the human flesh swept down into that harbor by the storm, but it seems
more fitting to name the story after the shark-god Kauhuhu, who sent
mighty storms and wrought great destruction.


                               VIII

                    THE SHARK-MAN OF WAIPIO VALLEY


This is a story of Waipio Valley, the most beautiful of all the valleys
of the Hawaiian Islands, and one of the most secluded. It is now, as it
has always been, very difficult of access. The walls are a sheer descent
of over a thousand feet. In ancient times a narrow path slanted along
the face of the bluffs wherever foothold could be found. In these later
days the path has been enlarged, and horse and rider can descend into
the valley's depths. In the upper end of the valley is a long silver
ribbon of water falling fifteen hundred feet from the brow of a
precipice over which a mountain torrent swiftly hurls itself to the
fertile valley below. Other falls show the convergence of other mountain
streams to the ocean outlet offered by the broad plains of Waipio.

Here in the long ago high chiefs dwelt and sacred temples were built.
From Waipio Valley Moikeha and Laa-Mai-Kahiki sailed away on their
famous voyages to distant foreign lands. In this valley dwelt the priest
who in the times of Maui was said to have the winds of heaven concealed
in his calabash. Raising the cover a little, he sent gentle breezes in
the direction of the opening. Severe storms and hurricanes were granted
by swiftly opening the cover widely and letting a chaotic mass of fierce
winds escape. The stories of magical powers of bird and fish as well as
of the strange deeds of powerful men are almost innumerable. Not the
least of the history-myths of Waipio Valley is the story of Nanaue, the
shark-man, who was one of the cannibals of the ancient time.

Ka-moho-alii was the king of all the sharks which frequent Hawaiian
waters. When he chose to appear as a man he was always a chief of
dignified, majestic appearance. One day, while swimming back and forth
just beneath the surface of the waters at the mouth of the valley, he
saw an exceedingly beautiful woman coming to bathe in the white surf.

That night Ka-moho-alii came to the beach black with lava sand, crawled
out of the water, and put on the form of a man. As a mighty chief he
walked through the valley and mingled with the people. For days he
entered into their sports and pastimes and partook of their bounty,
always looking for the beautiful woman whom he had seen bathing in the
surf. When he found her he came to her and won her to be his wife.

Kalei was the name of the woman who married the strange chief. When the
time came for a child to be born to them, Ka-moho-alii charged Kalei to
keep careful watch of it and guard its body continually from being seen
of men, and never allow the child to eat the flesh of any animal. Then
he disappeared, never permitting Kalei to have the least suspicion that
he was the king of the sharks.

When the child was born, Kalei gave to him the name "Nanaue." She was
exceedingly surprised to find an opening in his back. As the child grew
to manhood the opening developed into a large shark-mouth in rows of
fierce sharp teeth.

From infancy to manhood Kalei protected Nanaue by keeping his back
covered with a fine kapa cloak. She was full of fear as she saw Nanaue
plunge into the water and become a shark. The mouth on his back opened
for any kind of prey. But she kept the terrible birthmark of her son a
secret hidden in the depths of her own heart.

For years she prepared for him the common articles of food, always
shielding him from the temptation to eat meat. But when he became a man
his grandfather took him to the men's eating-house, where his mother
could no longer protect him. Meats of all varieties were given to him in
great abundance, yet he always wanted more. His appetite was
insatiable.

While under his mother's care he had been taken to the pool of water
into which the great Waipio Falls poured its cascade of water. There he
bathed, and, changing himself into a shark, caught the small fish which
were playing around him. His mother was always watching him to give an
alarm if any of the people came near to the bathing-place.

As he became a man he avoided his companions in all bathing and fishing.
He went away by himself. When the people were out in the deep sea
bathing or fishing, suddenly a fierce shark would appear in their midst,
biting and tearing their limbs and dragging them down in the deep water.
Many of the people disappeared secretly, and great terror filled the
homes of Waipio.

Nanaue's mother alone was certain that he was the cause of the trouble.
He was becoming very bold in his depredations. Sometimes he would ask
when his friends were going out in the sea; then he would go to a place
at some distance, leap into the sea, and swiftly dash to intercept the
return of his friends to the shore. Perhaps he would allay suspicion by
appearing as a man and challenge to a swimming-race. Diving suddenly, he
would in an instant become a shark and destroy his fellow-swimmer.

The people felt that he had some peculiar power, and feared him. One
day, when their high chief had called all the men of the valley to
prepare the taro patches for their future supply of food, a
fellow-workman standing by the side of Nanaue tore his kapa cape from
his shoulders. The men behind cried out, "See the great shark-mouth!"
All the people came running together, shouting, "A shark-man!" "A
shark-man!"

Nanaue became very angry and snapped his shark-teeth together. Then with
bitter rage he attacked those standing near him. He seized one by the
arm and bit it in two. He tore the flesh of another in ragged gashes.
Biting and snapping from side to side he ran toward the sea.

The crowd of natives surrounded him and blocked his way. He was thrown
down and tied. The mystery had now passed from the valley. The people
knew the cause of the troubles through which they had been passing, and
all crowded around to see this wonderful thing, part man and part shark.

The high chief ordered their largest oven to be prepared, that Nanaue
might be placed therein and burned alive. The deep pit was quickly
cleaned out by many willing hands, and, with much noise and rejoicing,
fire was placed within and the stones for heating were put in above the
fire. "We are ready for the shark-man," was the cry.

During the confusion Nanaue quietly made his plans to escape. Suddenly
changing himself to a shark, the cords which bound him fell off and he
rolled into one of the rivers which flowed from the falls in the upper
part of the valley.

None of the people dared to spring into the water for a hand-to-hand
fight with the monster. They ran along the bank, throwing stones at
Nanaue and bruising him. They called for spears that they might kill
him, but he made a swift rush to the sea and swam away, never again to
return to Waipio Valley.

Apparently Nanaue could not live long in the ocean. The story says that
he swam over to the island of Maui and landed near the village Hana.
There he dwelt for some time, and married a chiefess. Meanwhile he
secretly killed and ate some of the people. At last his appetite for
human flesh made him so bold that he caught a beautiful young girl and
carried her out into the deep waters. There he changed himself into a
shark and ate her body in the sight of the people.

The Hawaiians became very angry. They launched their canoes, and,
throwing in all kinds of weapons, pushed out to kill their enemy. But he
swam swiftly away, passing around the island until at last he landed on
Molokai.


Again he joined himself to the people, and again one by one those who
went bathing and fishing disappeared. The priests (kahunas) of the
people at last heard from their fellow-priests of the island of Maui
that there was a dangerous shark-man roaming through the islands. They
sent warning to the people, urging all trusty fishermen to keep strict
watch. At last they saw Nanaue change himself into a great fish. The
fishermen waged a fierce battle against him. They entangled him in their
nets, they pierced him with spears and struck him with clubs until the
waters were red with his blood. They called on the gods of the sea to
aid them. They uttered prayers and incantations. Soon Nanaue lost
strength and could not throw off the ropes which were tied around him,
nor could he break the nets in which he was entangled.

The fishermen drew him to the shore, and the people dragged the great
shark body up the hill Puu-mano. Then they cut the body into small
pieces and burned them in a great oven.

Thus died Nanaue, whose cannibal life was best explained by giving to
him in mythology the awful appetite of an insatiable man-eating shark.


                                IX

                     THE STRANGE BANANA SKIN


Kukali, according to the folk-lore of Hawaii, was born at Kalapana, the
most southerly point of the largest island of the Hawaiian group. Kukali
lived hundreds of years ago in the days of the migrations of Polynesians
from one group of islands to another throughout the length and breadth
of the great Pacific Ocean. He visited strange lands, now known under
the general name, Kahiki, or Tahiti. Here he killed the great bird
Halulu, found the deep bottomless pit in which was a pool of the fabled
water of life, married the sister of Halulu, and returned to his old
home. All this he accomplished through the wonderful power of a banana
skin.

Kukali's father was a priest, or kahuna, of great wisdom and ability,
who taught his children how to exercise strange and magical powers. To
Kukali he gave a banana with the impressive charge to preserve the skin
whenever he ate the fruit, and be careful that it was always under his
control. He taught Kukali the wisdom of the makers of canoes and also
how to select the fine-grained lava for stone knives and hatchets, and
fashion the blade to the best shape. He instructed the young man in the
prayers and incantations of greatest efficacy and showed him charms
which would be more powerful than any charms his enemies might use in
attempting to destroy him, and taught him those omens which were too
powerful to be overcome. Thus Kukali became a wizard, having great
confidence in his ability to meet the craft of the wise men of distant
islands.

Kukali went inland through the forests and up the mountains, carrying no
food save the banana which his father had given him. Hunger came, and he
carefully stripped back the skin and ate the banana, folding the skin
once more together. In a little while the skin was filled with fruit.
Again and again he ate, and as his hunger was satisfied the fruit always
again filled the skin, which he was careful never to throw away or lose.

The fever of sea-roving was in the blood of the Hawaiian people in those
days, and Kukali's heart burned within him with the desire to visit the
far-away lands about which other men told marvelous tales and from which
came strangers like to the Hawaiians in many ways.

After a while he went to the forests and selected trees approved by the
omens, and with many prayers fashioned a great canoe in which to embark
upon his journey. The story is not told of the days passed on the great
stretches of water as he sailed on and on, guided by the sun in the day
and the stars in the night, until he came to the strange lands about
which he had dreamed for years.

His canoe was drawn up on the shore and he lay down for rest. Before
falling asleep he secreted his magic banana in his malo, or loin-cloth,
and then gave himself to deep slumber. His rest was troubled with
strange dreams, but his weariness was great and his eyes heavy, and he
could not arouse himself to meet the dangers which were swiftly
surrounding him.

A great bird which lived on human flesh was the god of the land to which
he had come. The name of the bird was Halulu. Each feather of its wings
was provided with talons and seemed to be endowed with human powers.
Nothing like this bird was ever known or seen in the beautiful Hawaiian
Islands. But here in the mysterious foreign land it had its deep valley,
walled in like the valley of the Arabian Nights, over which the great
bird hovered looking into the depths for food. A strong wind always
attended the coming of Halulu when he sought the valley for his victims.

Kukali was lifted on the wings of the bird-god and carried to this hole
and quietly laid on the ground to finish his hour of deep sleep.

When Kukali awoke he found himself in the shut-in valley with many
companions who had been captured by the great bird and placed in this
prison hole. They had been without food and were very weak. Now and then
one of the number would lie down to die. Halulu, the bird-god, would
perch on a tree which grew on the edge of the precipice and let down its
wing to sweep across the floor of the valley and pick up the victims
lying on the ground. Those who were strong could escape the feathers as
they brushed over the bottom and hide in the crevices in the walls, but
day by day the weakest of the prisoners were lifted out and prepared for
Halulu's feast.

Kukali pitied the helpless state of his fellow-prisoners and prepared
his best incantations and prayers to help him overcome the great bird.
He took his wonderful banana and fed all the people until they were very
strong. He taught them how to seek stones best fitted for the
manufacture of knives and hatchets. Then for days they worked until they
were all well armed with sharp stone weapons.

While Kukali and his fellow-prisoners were making preparation for the
final struggle, the bird-god had often come to his perch and put his
wing down into the valley, brushing the feathers back and forth to catch
his prey.

Frequently the search was fruitless. At last he became very impatient,
and sent his strongest feathers along the precipitous walls, seeking for
victims.

Kukali and his companions then ran out from their hiding-places and
fought the strong feathers, cutting them off and chopping them into
small pieces.

Halulu cried out with pain and anger, and sent feather after feather
into the prison. Soon one wing was entirely destroyed. Then the other
wing was broken to pieces and the bird-god in his insane wrath put down
a strong leg armed with great talons. Kukali uttered mighty invocations
and prepared sacred charms for the protection of his friends.

After a fierce battle they cut off the leg and destroyed the talons.
Then came the struggle with the remaining leg and claws, but Kukali's
friends had become very bold. They fearlessly gathered around this
enemy, hacking and pulling until the bird-god, screaming with pain, fell
into the pit among the prisoners, who quickly cut the body into
fragments.

The prisoners made steps in the walls, and by the aid of vines climbed
out of their prison. When they had fully escaped, they gathered great
piles of branches and trunks of trees and threw them into the prison
until the body of the bird-god was covered. Fire was thrown down and
Halulu was burned to ashes. Thus Kukali taught by his charms that Halulu
could be completely destroyed.

But two of the breast feathers of the burning Halulu flew away to his
sister, who lived in a great hole which had no bottom. The name of this
sister was Namakaeha. She belonged to the family of Pele, the goddess of
volcanic fires, who had journeyed to Hawaii and taken up her home in the
crater of the volcano Kilauea.

Namakaeha smelled smoke on the feathers which came to her, and knew that
her brother was dead. She also knew that he could have been conquered
only by one possessing great magical powers. So she called to his
people: "Who is the great kupua [wizard] who has killed my brother? Oh,
my people, keep careful watch."

Kukali was exploring all parts of the strange land in which he had
already found marvelous adventures. By and by he came to the great pit
in which Namakaeha lived. He could not see the bottom, so he told his
companions he was going down to see what mysteries were concealed in
this hole without a bottom. They made a rope of the hau tree bark.
Fastening one end around his body he ordered his friends to let him
down. Uttering prayers and incantations he went down and down until,
owing to counter incantations of Namakaeha's priests, who had been
watching, the rope broke and he fell.

Down he went swiftly, but, remembering the prayer which a falling man
must use to keep him from injury, he cried, "O Ku! guard my life!"

In the ancient Hawaiian mythology there was frequent mention of "the
water of life." Sometimes the sick bathed in it and were healed.
Sometimes it was sprinkled upon the unconscious, bringing them back to
life. Kukali's incantation was of great power, for it threw him into a
pool of the water of life and he was saved.

One of the kahunas (priests) caring for Namakaeha was a very great
wizard. He saw the wonderful preservation of Kukali and became his
friend. He warned Kukali against eating anything that was ripe, because
it would be poison, and even the most powerful charms could not save
him.

Kukali thanked him and went out among the people. He had carefully
preserved his wonderful banana skin, and was able to eat apparently ripe
fruit and yet be perfectly safe.

The kahunas of Namakaeha tried to overcome him and destroy him, but he
conquered them, killed those who were bad, and entered into friendship
with those who were good.

At last he came to the place where the great chiefess dwelt. Here he was
tested in many ways. He accepted the fruits offered him, but always ate
the food in his magic banana. Thus he preserved his strength and
conquered even the chiefess and married her. After living with her for a
time he began to long for his old home in Hawaii. Then he persuaded her
to do as her relative Pele had already done, and the family, taking
their large canoe, sailed away to Hawaii, their future home.


                              X

                THE OLD MAN OF THE MOUNTAIN

     This is not a Hawaiian legend. It was written to show the
     superstitions of the Hawaiians, and in that respect it is accurate
     and worthy of preservation.


Far away in New England one of the rugged mountain-sides has for many
years been marked with the profile of a grand face. A noble brow,
deep-set eyes, close-shut lips, Roman nose, and chin standing in full
relief against a clear sky, made a landmark renowned throughout the
country. The story is told of a boy who lived in the valley from which
the face of the Old Man of the Mountain could be most clearly seen. As
the years passed, the boy grew into a man of sterling character. When at
last death came and the casket opened to receive the body of an old man,
universally revered, the friends saw the likeness to the stone features
of the Old Man of the Mountain, and recognized the source of the
inspiration which had made one life useful and honored.

Near Honolulu, just beyond one of the great sugar plantations, is a
ledge of lava deposited centuries ago. The lava was piled up into
mountains, now dissolved into slopes of the richest sugar-land in the
world. And yet sometimes the hard lava, refusing to disintegrate,
thrusts itself out from the hillsides in ledges of grotesque form.


On one of these ancient lava ridges was the outline of an old man's
face, to which the Hawaiians have given the name, "The Old Man of the
Mountain." The laborers on the sugar-plantations, the passengers on the
railroad trains, and the natives who still cling to their scattered
homes sometimes have looked with superstitious awe upon the face made
without hands. In the days gone by they have called it the "Akuapohaku"
(the stone god). Shall we hear the story of Kamakau, who at some time in
the indefinite past dwelt in the shadow of the stone face?

Kamakau means "the afraid." His name came to him as a child. He was a
shrinking, sensitive, imaginative little fellow. He was surrounded by
influences which turned his imagination into the paths of most
unwholesome superstition. But beyond the beliefs of most of his fellows,
in his own nature he was keenly appreciative of mysterious things. There
was a spirit voice in every wind rustling the tops of the trees. Spirit
faces appeared in unnumbered caricatures of human outline whenever he lay
on the grass and watched the sunlight sift between the leaves. Everything
he looked upon or heard assumed some curious form of life. The clouds
were most mysterious of all, for they so frequently piled up mass upon
mass of grandeur, in such luxurious magnificence and such prodigal
display of color, that his power of thought lost itself in his almost
daily dream of some time-wandering in the shadow valleys of the
precipitous mountains of heaven. Here he saw also strangely symmetrical
forms of man and bird and fish. Sometimes cloud forests outlined
themselves against the blue sky, and then again at times separated by
months and even years, the lights of the volcano-goddess, Pele,
glorified her path as she wandered in the spirit land, flashing from
cloud-peak to cloud-peak, while the thunder voices of the great gods
rolled in mighty volumes of terrific impressiveness. Even in the night
Kamakau felt that the innumerable stars were the eyes of the aumakuas
(the spirits of the ancestors). It was not strange that such a child
should continually think that he saw spirit forms which were invisible
to his companions. It is no wonder that he fancied he heard voices of
the menehunes (fairies), which his companions could never understand. As
he shrunk from places where it seemed to him the spirits dwelt, his
companions called him "Kamakau," "the afraid." When he grew older he
necessarily became keenly alive to all objects of Hawaiian superstition.
He never could escape the overwhelming presence of the thousand and more
gods which were supposed to inhabit the Hawaiian land and sea. The omens
drawn from sacrifices, the voices from the bamboo dwelling-places of the
oracles, the chants of the prophets, and powers of praying to death he
accepted with unquestioning faith.

Two men were hunting in the forests of the mountains of Oahu. Tired with
the long chase after the oo, the bird with the rare yellow feathers from
which the feather cloaks of the highest chiefs were made, they laid
aside spears and snares and lay down for a rest. "I want the valley of
the stone god," said one: "its fertile fields would make just the
increase needed for my retainers, and the 'moi,' the king, would give me
the land if Kamakau were out of the way."

"Are there any other members of his family, O Inaina, who could resist
your claim?"

"No, my friend Kokua. He is the only important chief in the valley."

"Pray him to death," was Kokua's sententious advice.

"Good; I'll do it," said Inaina: "he is one who can easily be prayed to
death. 'The Afraid' will soon die."

"If you will give me the small fish-pond nearest my own coral fish-walls
I will be your messenger," said Kokua.

"Ah, that also is good," replied Inaina, after a moment's thought. "I
will give you the small pond, and you must give the small thoughts, the
hints, to his friends that powerful priests are praying Kamakau to
death. All this must be very mysterious. No name can be mentioned, and
you and I must be Kamakau's good friends."

It must be remembered that land tenure in ancient Hawaii was almost the
same as that of the European feudal system. Occupancy depended upon the
will of the high chief. He gave or took away at his own pleasure. The
under-chiefs held the land as if it belonged to them, and were seldom
troubled as long as the wishes of the high chief, or king, were carried
out. Inaina felt secure in the use of his present property, and believed
that he could easily find favor and obtain the land held by the Kamakau
family if Kamakau himself could be removed. Without much further
conference the two hunters returned to their homes. Inaina at once
sought his family priest and stated his wish to have Kamakau prayed to
death. They decided that the first step should be taken that night. It
was absolutely necessary that something which had been a part of the
body of Kamakau should be obtained. The priest appointed his
confidential hunter of sacrifices to undertake this task. This servant
of the temple was usually sent out to find human sacrifices to be slain
and offered before the great gods on special occasions. As the darkness
came on he crept near the grass house of Kamakau and watched for an
opportunity of seizing what he wanted. The two most desired things in
the art of praying to death were either a lock of hair from the head of
the victim or a part of the spittle, usually well guarded by the trusted
retainers who had charge of the spittoon.

It chanced to be "Awa night" for Kamakau, and the chief, having drunk
heavily of the drug, had thrown himself on a mat and rolled near the
grass walls. With great ingenuity the hunter of sacrifices located the
chief and worked a hole through the thatch. Then with his sharp bone
knife he sawed off a large lock of Kamakau's hair. When this was done he
was about to creep away, but a native came near. Instantly grunting like
a hog, he worked his way into the darkness. He saw outlined against the
sky in the hands of the native the chief's spittoon. In a moment the
hunter of sacrifices saw his opportunity. His past training in lying in
wait and capturing men for sacrifice stood him in good stead at this
time. The unsuspecting spittoon-carrier was seized by the throat and
quickly strangled. The spittoon in falling from the retainer's hand had
not been overturned. Exultant at his success, the hunter of sacrifices
sped away in the darkness and placed his trophies in the hands of the
priest. The next morning there was a great outcry in Kamakau's village.
The dead body was found as soon as dawn crept over the valley, and the
hand-polished family calabash was completely lost. When the people went
to Kamakau's house with the report of the death of his retainer, they
soon saw that the head of their chief had been dishonored. A great
feeling of fear took possession of the village. Kamakau's priest hurried
to the village temple to utter prayers and incantations against the
enemy who had committed such an outrage.

Kokua soon heard the news and came to comfort his neighbor. After the
greeting, "Auwe! auwe!" (Alas! alas!) Kokua said: "This is surely
praying to death, and the gods have already given you over into the
hands of your enemy. You will die. Very soon you will die." Soon Inaina
and other chiefs came with their retainers. Among high and low the
terrible statement was whispered: "Kamakau is being prayed to death, and
no man knows his enemy." Many a strong man has gone to a bed of
continued illness, and some have crossed the dark valley into the land
of death, even in these days of enlightened civilization, simply
frightened into the illness or death by the strong statements of friends
and acquaintances. Such is the make-up of the minds of men that they are
easily affected by the mysterious suggestions of others. It is purely a
matter of mind-murder.

It is no wonder that in the days of the long ago Kamakau, moved by the
terror of his friends and horrible suggestions of his two enemies, soon
felt a great weakness conquering him. His natural disposition, his habit
of seeing and hearing gods and spirits in everything around him, made it
easy for him to yield to the belief that he was being prayed to death.
His strength left him. He could take no food. A strange paralysis seemed
to take possession of him. Mind and body were almost benumbed. He was
really in the hands of unconscious mesmerists, who were putting him into
a magnetic sleep, from which he was never expected to awake. It is a
question to be answered only when all earthly problems have been solved.
How many of the people prayed to death have really been dissected and
prepared for burial while at first under mesmeric influences! The people
gathered around Kamakau's thatched house. They thought that he would
surely die before the next morning dawned. Inaina and Kokua were lying
on the grass under the shade of a great candlenut-tree, quietly talking
about the speedy success of their undertaking. A little girl was playing
near them. It was Kamakau's little Aloha. This was all the name so far
given to her. She was "My Aloha," "my dear one," to both father and
mother. She heard a word uttered incautiously. Inaina had spoken with
the accent of success and his voice was louder than he thought. He said,
"We have great strength if we kill Kamakau." The child fled to her
father. She found him in the half-unconscious state already described.
She shook him. She called to him. She pulled his hands, and covered his
face with kisses. Her tears poured over his hot, dry skin. Kamakau was
aroused by the shock. He sat up, forgetting all the expectation of
death.

Out through the doorway he glanced toward the west. The sinking sun was
sending its most glorious beams into the grand clouds, while just
beneath, reflecting the glory, lay the Old Man of the Mountain. The
stone face was magnificent in its setting. The unruffled brow, the
never-closing eyes, the firm lips, stood out in bold relief against the
glory which was over and beyond them. Kamakau caught the inspiration. It
seemed to his vivid imagination as if ten thousand good spirits were
gathered in the heavens to fight for him. He leaped to his feet,
strength came back into the wearied muscles, a new will-power took
possession of him, and he cried: "I will not die! I will not die! The
stone god is more powerful than the priests who pray to death!" His will
had broken away from its chains, and, unfettered from all fear, Kamakau
went forth to greet the wondering people and take up again the position
of influence held among the chiefs of Oahu. The lesson is still needed
in these beautiful ocean-bound islands that praying to death means
either the use of poison or the attempt to terrify the victim by strong
mental forces enslaving the will. In either case the aroused will is
powerful in both resistance and watchfulness.


                               XI

                    HAWAIIAN GHOST TESTING


Manoa Valley for centuries has been to the Hawaiians the royal palace of
rainbows. The mountains at the head of the valley were gods whose
children were the divine wind and rain from whom was born the beautiful
rainbow-maiden who plays in and around the valley day and night whenever
misty showers are touched by sunlight or moonlight.

The natives of the valley usually give her the name of Kahalaopuna, or
The Hala of Puna. Sometimes, however, they call her Kaikawahine Anuenue,
or The Rainbow Maiden. The rainbow, the anuenue, marks the continuation
of the legendary life of Kahala.