The story of the shark-god Kauhuhu has been told under the legend of
"Aikanaka (Man-eater)," which was the ancient name of the little harbor
Pukoo, which lies at the entrance to one of the beautiful valleys of the
island of Molokai. The better way is to take the legend as revealing the
great man-eater in one of his most kindly aspects. The shark-god appears
as the friend of a priest who is seeking revenge for the destruction of
his children. Kamalo was the name of the priest. His heiau, or temple,
was at Kaluaaha, a village which faced the channel between the islands
of Molokai and Maui. Across the channel the rugged red-brown slopes of
the mountain Eeke were lost in the masses of clouds which continually
hung around its sharp peaks. The two boys of the priest delighted in the
glorious revelations of sunrise and sunset tossed in shattered fragments
of cloud color, and revelled in the reflected tints which danced to them
over the swift channel-currents. It is no wonder that the courage of sky
and sea entered into the hearts of the boys, and that many deeds of
daring were done by them. They were taught many of the secrets of the
temple by their father, but were warned that certain things were sacred
to the gods and must not be touched. The high chief, or alii, of that
part of the island had a temple a short distance from Kaluaaha, in the
valley of the harbor which was called Aikanaka. The name of this chief
was Kupa. The chiefs always had a house built within the temple walls as
their own residence, to which they could retire at certain seasons of
the year. Kupa had two remarkable drums which he kept in his house at
the heiau. His skill in beating his drums was so great that they could
reveal his thoughts to the waiting priests.

One day Kupa sailed far away over the sea to his favorite
fishing-grounds. Meanwhile the boys were tempted to go to Kupa's heiau
and try the wonderful drums. The valley of the little harbor Aikanaka
bore the musical name Mapulehu. Along the beach and over the ridge
hastened the two sons of Kamalo. Quickly they entered the heiau, found
the high chief's house, took out his drums and began to beat upon them.
Some of the people heard the familiar tones of the drums. They dared not
enter the sacred doors of the heiau, but watched until the boys became
weary of their sport and returned home.


When Kupa returned they told him how the boys had beaten upon his
sacred drums. Kupa was very angry, and ordered his mu, or temple
sacrifice seekers, to kill the boys and bring their bodies to the heiau
to be placed on the altar. When the priest Kamalo heard of the death of
his sons, in bitterness of heart he sought revenge. His own power was
not great enough to cope with his high chief; therefore he sought the
aid of the seers and prophets of highest repute throughout Molokai. But
they feared Kupa the chief, and could not aid him, and therefore sent
him on to another kaula, or prophet, or sent him back to consult some
one the other side of his home. All this time he carried with him
fitting presents and sacrifices, by which he hoped to gain the
assistance of the gods through their priests. At last he came to the
steep precipice which overlooks Kalaupapa and Kalawao, the present home
of the lepers. At the foot of this precipice was a heiau, in which the
great shark-god was worshipped. Down the sides of the precipice he
climbed and at last found the priest of the shark-god. The priest
refused to give assistance, but directed him to go to a great cave in
the bold cliffs south of Kalawao. The name of the cave was Anao-puhi,
the cave of the eel. Here dwelt the great shark-god Kauhuhu and his
guardians or watchers, Waka and Mo-o, the great dragons or reptiles of
Polynesian legends. These dragons were mighty warriors in the defence of
the shark-god, and were his kahus, or caretakers, while he slept, or
when his cave needed watching during his absence.

Kamalo, tired and discouraged, plodded along through the rough lava
fragments piled around the entrance to the cave. He bore across his
shoulders a black pig, which he had carried many miles as an offering to
whatever power he could find to aid him. As he came near to the cave the
watchmen saw him and said:----

"E, here comes a man, food for the great [shark] Mano. Fish for
Kauhuhu." But Kamalo came nearer and for some reason aroused sympathy in
the dragons. "E hele! E hele!" they cried to him. "Away, away! It is
death to you. Here's the tabu place." "Death it may be--life it may be.
Give me revenge for my sons--and I have no care for myself." Then the
watchmen asked about his trouble and he told them how the chief Kupa had
slain his sons as a punishment for beating the drums. Then he narrated