The story of Kahala and her connection with the rainbows and waterfalls
of Manoa Valley has been told from time to time in the homes of the
nature-loving native residents of the valley.


                                 XII

                   HOW MILU BECAME THE KING OF GHOSTS


Lono was a chief living on the western side of the island Hawaii. He had
a very red skin and strange-looking eyes. His choice of occupation was
farming. This man had never been sick. One time he was digging with the
oo, a long sharp-pointed stick or spade. A man passed and admired him.
The people said, "Lono has never been sick." The man said, "He will be
sick."

Lono was talking about that man and at the same time struck his oo down
with force and cut his foot. He shed much blood, and fainted, falling to
the ground. A man took a pig, went after the stranger, and let the pig
go, which ran to this man. The stranger was Kamaka, a god of healing. He
turned and went back at the call of the messenger, taking some popolo
fruit and leaves in his cloak. When he came to the injured man he asked
for salt, which he pounded into the fruit and leaves and placed in coco
cloth and bound it on the wound, leaving it a long time. Then he went
away.

As he journeyed on he heard heavy breathing, and turning saw Lono, who
said, "You have helped me, and so I have left my lands in the care of my
friends, directing them what to do, and have hastened after you to learn
how to heal other people."

The god said, "Lono, open your mouth!" This Lono did, and the god spat
in his mouth, so that the saliva could be taken into every part of
Lono's body. Thus a part of the god became a part of Lono, and he became
very skilful in the use of all healing remedies. He learned about the
various diseases and the medicines needed for each. The god and Lono
walked together, Lono receiving new lessons along the way, passing
through the districts of Kau, Puna, Hilo, and then to Hamakua.

The god said, "It is not right for us to stay together. You can never
accomplish anything by staying with me. You must go to a separate place
and give yourself up to healing people."

Lono turned aside to dwell in Waimanu and Waipio Valleys and there began
to practise healing, becoming very noted, while the god Kamaka made his
home at Ku-kui-haele.

This god did not tell the other gods of the medicines that he had taught
Lono. One of the other gods, Kalae, was trying to find some way to kill
Milu, and was always making him sick. Milu, chief of Waipio, heard of
the skill of Lono. Some had been sick even to death, and Lono had healed
them. Therefore Milu sent a messenger to Lono who responded at once,
came and slapped Milu all over the body, and said: "You are not ill.
Obey me and you shall be well."

Then he healed him from all the sickness inside the body caused by
Kalae. But there was danger from outside, so he said: "You must build a
ti-leaf house and dwell there quietly for some time, letting your
disease rest. If a company should come by the house making sport, with a
great noise, do not go out, because when you go they will come up and
get you for your death. Do not open the ti leaves and look out. The day
you do this you shall die."

Some time passed and the chief remained in the house, but one day there
was the confused noise of many people talking and shouting around his
house. He did not forget the command of Lono. Two birds were sporting in
a wonderful way in the sky above the forest. This continued all day
until it was dark.

Then another long time passed and again Waipio was full of resounding
noises. A great bird appeared in the sky resplendent in all kinds of
feathers, swaying from side to side over the valley, from the top of one
precipice across to the top of another, in grand flights passing over
the heads of the people, who shouted until the valley re-echoed with the
sound.

Milu became tired of that great noise and could not patiently obey his
physician, so he pushed aside some of the ti leaves of his house and
looked out upon the bird. That was the time when the bird swept down
upon the house, thrusting a claw under Milu's arm, tearing out his
liver. Lono saw this and ran after the bird, but it flew swiftly to a
deep pit in the lava on one side of the valley and dashed inside,
leaving blood spread on the stones. Lono came, saw the blood, took it
and wrapped it in a piece of tapa cloth and returned to the place where
the chief lay almost dead. He poured some medicine into the wound and
pushed the tapa and blood inside. Milu was soon healed.

The place where the bird hid with the liver of Milu is called to this
day Ke-ake-o-Milu ("The liver of Milu"). When this death had passed away
he felt very well, even as before his trouble.

Then Lono told him that another death threatened him and would soon
appear. He must dwell in quietness.

For some time Milu was living in peace and quiet after this trouble.
Then one day the surf of Waipio became very high, rushing from far out
even to the sand, and the people entered into the sport of surf-riding
with great joy and loud shouts. This noise continued day by day, and
Milu was impatient of the restraint and forgot the words of Lono. He
went out to bathe in the surf.

When he came to the place of the wonderful surf he let the first and
second waves go by, and as the third came near he launched himself upon
it while the people along the beach shouted uproariously. He went out
again into deeper water, and again came in, letting the first and second
waves go first. As he came to the shore the first and second waves were
hurled back from the shore in a great mass against the wave upon which
he was riding. The two great masses of water struck and pounded Milu,
whirling and crowding him down, while the surf-board was caught in the
raging, struggling waters and thrown out toward the shore. Milu was
completely lost in the deep water.

The people cried: "Milu is dead! The chief is dead!" The god Kalae
thought he had killed Milu, so he with the other poison-gods went on a
journey to Mauna Loa. Kapo and Pua, the poison-gods, or gods of death,
of the island Maui, found them as they passed, and joined the company.
They discovered a forest on Molokai, and there as kupua spirits, or
ghost bodies, entered into the trees of that forest, so the trees
became the kupua bodies. They were the medicinal or poison qualities in
the trees.

Lono remained in Waipio Valley, becoming the ancestor and teacher of all
the good healing priests of Hawaii, but Milu became the ruler of the
Under-world, the place where the spirits of the dead had their home
after they were driven away from the land of the living. Many people
came to him from time to time.

He established ghostly sports like those which his subjects had enjoyed
before death. They played the game kilu with polished cocoanut shells,
spinning them over a smooth surface to strike a post set up in the
centre. He taught konane, a game commonly called "Hawaiian checkers,"
but more like the Japanese game of "Go." He permitted them to gamble,
betting all the kinds of property found in ghost-land. They boxed and
wrestled; they leaped from precipices into ghostly swimming-pools; they
feasted and fought, sometimes attempting to slay each other. Thus they
lived the ghost life as they had lived on earth. Sometimes the ruler was
forgotten and the ancient Hawaiians called the Under-world by his
name--Milu. The New Zealanders frequently gave their Under-world the
name "Miru." They also supposed that the ghosts feasted and sported as
they had done while living.


                               XIII

                    A VISIT TO THE KING OF GHOSTS


When any person lay in an unconscious state, it was supposed by the
ancient Hawaiians that death had taken possession of the body and opened
the door for the spirit to depart. Sometimes if the body lay like one
asleep the spirit was supposed to return to its old home. One of the
Hawaiian legends weaves their deep-rooted faith in the spirit-world into
the expressions of one who seemed to be permitted to visit that
ghost-land and its king. This legend belonged to the island of Maui and
the region near the village Lahaina. Thus was the story told:

Ka-ilio-hae (the wild dog) had been sick for days and at last sank into
a state of unconsciousness. The spirit of life crept out of the body and
finally departed from the left eye into a corner of the house, buzzing
like an insect. Then he stopped and looked back over the body he had
left. It appeared to him like a massive mountain. The eyes were deep
caves, into which the ghost looked. Then the spirit became afraid and
went outside and rested on the roof of the house. The people began to
wail loudly and the ghost fled from the noise to a cocoanut-tree and
perched like a bird in the branches. Soon he felt the impulse of the
spirit-land moving him away from his old home. So he leaped from tree to
tree and flew from place to place wandering toward Kekaa, the place from
which the ghosts leave the island of Maui for their home in the
permanent spirit-land--the Under-world.

As he came near this doorway to the spirit-world he met the ghost of a
sister who had died long before, and to whom was given the power of
sometimes turning a ghost back to its body again. She was an
aumakua-ho-ola (a spirit making alive). She called to Ka-ilio-hae and
told him to come to her house and dwell for a time. But she warned him
that when her husband was at home he must not yield to any invitation
from him to enter their house, nor could he partake of any of the food
which her husband might urge him to eat. The home and the food would be
only the shadows of real things, and would destroy his power of becoming
alive again.

The sister said, "When my husband comes to eat the food of the spirits
and to sleep the sleep of ghosts, then I will go with you and you shall
see all the spirit-land of our island and see the king of ghosts."

The ghost-sister led Ka-ilio-hae into the place of whirlwinds, a hill
where he heard the voices of many spirits planning to enjoy all the
sports of their former life. He listened with delight and drew near to
the multitude of happy spirits. Some were making ready to go down to the
sea for the hee-nalu (surf-riding). Others were already rolling the
ulu-maika (the round stone discs for rolling along the ground). Some
were engaged in the mokomoko, or umauma (boxing), and the kulakulai
(wrestling), and the honuhonu (pulling with hands), and the loulou
(pulling with hooked fingers), and other athletic sports.

Some of the spirits were already grouped in the shade of trees, playing
the gambling games in which they had delighted when alive. There was the
stone konane-board (somewhat like checkers), and the puepue-one (a small
sand mound in which was concealed some object), and the puhenehene (the
hidden stone under piles of kapa), and the many other trials of skill
which permitted betting.

Then in another place crowds were gathered around the hulas (the many
forms of dancing). These sports were all in the open air and seemed to
be full of interest.

There was a strange quality which fettered every new-born ghost: he
could only go in the direction into which he was pushed by the hand of
some stronger power. If the guardian of a ghost struck it on one side,
it would move off in the direction indicated by the blow or the push
until spirit strength and experience came and he could go alone. The
newcomer desired to join in these games and started to go, but the
sister slapped him on the breast and drove him away. These were shadow
games into which those who entered could never go back to the
substantial things of life.

Then there was a large grass house inside which many ghosts were making
merry. The visitor wanted to join this great company, but the sister
knew that, if he once was engulfed by this crowd of spirits in this
shadow-land, her brother could never escape. The crowds of players would
seize him like a whirlwind and he would be unable to know the way he
came in or the way out. Ka-ilio-hae tried to slip away from his sister,
but he could not turn readily. He was still a very awkward ghost, and
his sister slapped him back in the way in which she wanted him to go.

An island which was supposed to float on the ocean as one of the homes
of the aumakuas (the ghosts of the ancestors) had the same
characteristics. The ghosts (aumakuas) lived on the shadows of all that
belonged to the earth-life. It was said that a canoe with a party of
young people landed on this island of dreams and for some time enjoyed
the food and fruits and sports, but after returning to their homes could
not receive the nourishment of the food of their former lives, and soon
died. The legends taught that no ghost passing out of the body could
return unless it made the life of the aumakuas tabu to itself.

Soon the sister led her brother to a great field, stone walled, in which
were such fine grass houses as were built only for chiefs of the highest
rank. There she pointed to a narrow passage-way into which she told her
brother he must enter by himself.

"This," she said, "is the home of Walia, the high chief of the ghosts
living in this place. You must go to him. Listen to all he says to you.
Say little. Return quickly. There will be three watchmen guarding this
passage. The first will ask you, 'What is the fruit [desire] of your
heart?' You will answer, 'Walia.' Then he will let you enter the
passage.

"Inside the walls of the narrow way will be the second watchman. He will
ask why you come; again answer, 'Walia,' and pass by him.

"At the end of the entrance the third guardian stands holding a raised
spear ready to strike. Call to him, 'Ka-make-loa' [The Great Death].
This is the name of his spear. Then he will ask what you want, and you
must reply, 'To see the chief,' and he will let you pass.

"Then again when you stand at the door of the great house you will see
two heads bending together in the way so that you cannot enter or see
the king and his queen. If these heads can catch a spirit coming to see
the king without knowing the proper incantations, they will throw that
ghost into the Po-Milu [The Dark Spirit-world]. Watch therefore and
remember all that is told you.

"When you see these heads, point your hands straight before you between
them and open your arms, pushing these guards off on each side, then the
ala-nui [the great way] will be open for you--and you can enter.

"You will see kahilis [soft long feather fans] moving over the chiefs.
The king will awake and call, 'Why does this traveller come?' You will
reply quickly, 'He comes to see the Divine One.' When this is said no
injury will come to you. Listen and remember and you will be alive
again."

Ka-ilio-hae did as he was told with the three watchmen, and each one
stepped back, saying, "Noa" (the tabu is lifted), and he pushed by. At
the door he shoved the two heads to the side and entered the chief's
house to the Ka-ikuwai (the middle), falling on his hands and knees. The
servants were waving the kahilis this way and that. There was motion,
but no noise.

The chief awoke, looked at Ka-ilio-hae, and said: "Aloha, stranger, come
near. Who is the high chief of your land?"

Then Ka-ilio-hae gave the name of his king, and the genealogy from
ancient times of the chiefs dead and in the spirit-world.

The queen of ghosts arose, and the kneeling spirit saw one more
beautiful than any woman in all the island, and he fell on his face
before her.

The king told him to go back and enter his body and tell his people
about troubles near at hand.

While he was before the king twice he heard messengers call to the
people that the sports were all over; any one not heeding would be
thrown into the darkest place of the home of the ghosts when the third
call had been sounded.

The sister was troubled, for she knew that at the third call the stone
walls around the king's houses would close and her brother would be held
fast forever in the spirit-land, so she uttered her incantations and
passed the guard. Softly she called. Her brother reluctantly came. She
seized him and pushed him outside. Then they heard the third call, and
met the multitude of ghosts coming inland from their sports in the sea,
and other multitudes hastening homeward from their work and sports on
the land.

They met a beautiful young woman who called to them to come to her home,
and pointed to a point of rock where many birds were resting. The sister
struck her brother and forced him down to the seaside where she had her
home and her responsibility, for she was one of the guardians of the
entrance to the spirit-world.

She knew well what must be done to restore the spirit to the body, so
she told her brother they must at once obey the command of the king; but
the brother had seen the delights of the life of the aumakuas and wanted
to stay. He tried to slip away and hide, but his sister held him fast
and compelled him to go along the beach to his old home and his waiting
body.

When they came to the place where the body lay she found a hole in the
corner of the house and pushed the spirit through. When he saw the body
he was very much afraid and tried to escape, but the sister caught him
and pushed him inside the foot up to the knee. He did not like the smell
of the body and tried to rush back, but she pushed him inside again and
held the foot fast and shook him and made him go to the head.

The family heard a little sound in the mouth and saw breath moving the
breast, then they knew that he was alive again. They warmed the body and
gave a little food. When strength returned he told his family all about
his wonderful journey into the land of ghosts.

     NOTE.--A student should read next the articles "Homeless and
     Desolate Ghosts" and "Ancestor Ghost-Gods" in the Appendix.


                               XIV

                     KALAI-PAHOA, THE POISON-GOD


The Bishop Museum of Honolulu has one of the best as well as one of the
most scientifically arranged collections of Hawaiian curios in the
world. In it are images of many of the gods of long ago. One of these is
a helmeted head made of wicker-work, over which has been woven a thick
covering of beautiful red feathers bordered with yellow feathers. This
was the mighty war-god of the great Kamehameha. Another is a squat rough
image, crudely carved out of wood. This was Kamehameha's poison-god.

The ancient Hawaiians were acquainted with poisons of various kinds.
They understood the medicinal qualities of plants and found some of
these strong enough to cause sickness and even death. One of the
Hawaiian writers said: "The opihi-awa is a poison shell-fish. These are
bitter and deadly and can be used in putting enemies to death.
Kalai-pahoa is also a tree in which there is the power to kill."

Kamehameha's poison-god was called Kalai-pahoa, because it was cut from
that tree which grew in the upland forest on the island of Molokai.

A native writer says there was an antidote for the poison from
Kalai-pahoa, and he thus describes it: "The war-god and the poison-god
were not left standing in the temples like the images of other gods, but
after being worshipped were wrapped in kapa and laid away.

"When the priest wanted Kalai-pahoa he was taken down and anointed with
cocoanut-oil and wrapped in a fresh kapa cloth. Then he was set up above
the altar and a feast prepared before him, awa to drink, and pig, fish,
and poi to eat.

"Then the priest who had special care of this god would scrape off a
little from the wood, and put it in an awa cup, and hold the cup before
the god, chanting a prayer for the life of the king, the government, and
the people. One of the priests would then take the awa cup, drink the
contents, and quickly take food.

"Those who were watching would presently see a red flush creep over his
cheeks, growing stronger and stronger, while the eyes would become
glassy and the breath short like that of a dying man. Then the priest
would touch his lips to the stick, Mai-ola, and have his life restored.
Mai-ola was a god who had another tree. When Kalai-pahoa entered his
tree on Molokai, Mai-ola entered another tree and became the enemy of
the poison-god."

The priests of the poison-god were very powerful in the curious rite
called pule-ana-ana, or praying to death. The Hawaiians said: "Perhaps
the priests of Kalai-pahoa put poison in bananas or in taro. It was
believed that they scraped the body of the image and put the pieces in
the food of the one they wished to pray to death. There was one chief
who was very skilful in waving kahilis, or feather fans, over any one
and shaking the powder of death into the food from the moving feathers.
Another would have scrapings in his cloak and would drop them into
whatever food his enemy was eating." The spirit of death was supposed to
reside in the wood of the poison-god.

A very interesting legend was told by the old people to their children
to explain the coming of medicinal and poisonous properties into the
various kinds of trees and plants. These stories all go back to the time
when Milu died and became the king of ghosts. They say that after the
death of Milu the gods left Waipio Valley on the island of Hawaii and
crossed the channel to the island Maui.

These gods had all kinds of power for evil, such as stopping the breath,
chilling or burning the body, making headaches or pains in the stomach,
or causing palsy or lameness or other injuries, even inflicting death.

Pua and Kapo, who from ancient times have been worshipped as goddesses
having medicinal power, joined the party when they came to Maui. Then
all the gods went up Mauna Loa, a place where there was a large and
magnificent forest with fine trees, graceful vines and ferns, and
beautiful flowers. They all loved this place, therefore they became gods
of the forest.

Near this forest lived Kane-ia-kama, a high chief, who was a very great
gambler. He had gambled away all his possessions. While he was sleeping,
the night of his final losses, he heard some one call, "O Kane-ia-kama,
begin your play again." He shouted out into the darkness: "I have bet
everything. I have nothing left."

Then the voice again said, "Bet your bones, bet your bones, and see what
will happen."

When he went to the gambling-place the next day the people all laughed
at him, for they knew his goods were all gone. He sat down among them,
however, and said: "I truly have nothing left. My treasures are all
gone; but I have my bones. If you wish, I will bet my body, then I will
play with you."

The other chiefs scornfully placed some property on one side and said,
"That will be of the same value as your bones."

They gambled and he won. The chiefs were angry at their loss and bet
again and again. He always won until he had more wealth than any one on
the island.

After the gambling days were over he heard again the same voice saying:
"O Kane-ia-kama, you have done all that I told you and have become very
rich in property and servants. Will you obey once more?"

The chief gratefully thanked the god for the aid that he had received,
and said he would obey. The voice then said: "Perhaps we can help you to
one thing. You are now wealthy, but there is a last gift for you. You
must listen carefully and note all I show you."

Then this god of the night pointed out the trees into which the gods had
entered when they decided to remain for a time in the forest, and
explained to him all their different characteristics. He showed him
where gods and goddesses dwelt and gave their names. Then he ordered
Kane-ia-kama to take offerings of pigs, fish, cocoanuts, bananas,
chickens, kapas, and all other things used for sacrifice, and place them
at the roots of these trees into which the gods had entered, the proper
offerings for each.

The next morning he went into the forest and saw that he had received a
very careful description of each tree. He observed carefully the tree
shown as the home of the spirit who had become his strange helper.

Before night fell he placed offerings as commanded. As a worshipper he
took each one of these trees for his god, so he had many gods of plants
and trees.

For some reason not mentioned in the legends he sent woodcutters to cut
down these trees, or at least to cut gods out of them with their stone
axes.

They began to cut. The koko (blood) of the trees, as the natives termed
the flowing sap, and the chips flying out struck some of the woodcutters
and they fell dead.

Kane-ia-kama made cloaks of the long leaves of the ieie vine and tied
them around his men, so that their bodies could not be touched, then the
work was easily accomplished.

The chief kept these images of gods cut from the medicinal trees and
could use them as he desired. The most powerful of all these gods was
that one whose voice he had heard in the night. To this god he gave the
name Kalai-pahoa (The-one-cut-by-the-pahoa-or-stone-axe).

One account relates that the pahoa (stone) from which the axe was made
came from Kalakoi, a celebrated place for finding a very hard lava of
fine grain, the very best for making stone implements.

The god who had spoken to the chief in his dream was sometimes called
Kane-kulana-ula (noted red Kane).

The gods were caught by the sacrifices of the chief while they were in
their tree bodies before they could change back into their spirit
bodies, therefore their power was supposed to remain in the trees.

It was said that when Kane-kulana-ula changed into his tree form he
leaped into it with a tremendous flash of lightning, thus the great
mana, or miraculous power, went into that tree.

The strange death which came from the god Kalai-pahoa made that god and
his priest greatly feared. One of the pieces of this tree fell into a
spring at Kaakee near the maika, or disc-rolling field, on Molokai. All
the people who drank at that spring died. They filled it up and the
chiefs ruled that the people should not keep branches or pieces of the
tree for the injury of others. If such pieces were found in the
possession of any one he should die. Only the carved gods were to be
preserved.

Kahekili, king of Maui at the time of the accession of Kamehameha to the
sovereignty of the island Hawaii, had these images in his possession as
a part of his household gods.

Kamehameha sent a prophet to ask him for one of these gods. Kahekili
refused to send one, but told him to wait and he should have the
poison-god and the government over all the islands.

One account records that a small part from the poison one was then
given.

So, after the death of Kahekili, Kamehameha did conquer all the islands
with their hosts of gods, and Kalai-pahoa, the poison-god, came into his
possession.

The overthrow of idolatry and the destruction of the system of tabus
came in 1819, when most of the wooden gods were burned or thrown into
ponds and rivers, but a few were concealed by their caretakers. Among
these were the two gods now to be seen in the Bishop Museum in Honolulu.

     NOTE.--See Appendix, page 259, Chas. R. Bishop.


                                XV

            KE-AO-MELE-MELE, THE MAID OF THE GOLDEN CLOUD


The Hawaiians never found gold in their islands. The mountains being of
recent volcanic origin do not show traces of the precious metals; but
hovering over the mountain-tops clustered the glorious golden clouds
built up by damp winds from the seas. The Maiden of the Golden Cloud
belonged to the cloud mountains and was named after their golden glow.

Her name in the Hawaiian tongue was Ke-ao-mele-mele (The Golden Cloud).
She was said to be one of the first persons brought by the gods to find
a home in the Paradise of the Pacific.

In the ancient times, the ancestors of the Hawaiians came from far-off
ocean lands, for which they had different names, such as The Shining
Heaven, The Floating Land of Kane, The Far-off White Land of Kahiki, and
Kuai-he-lani (purchased is heaven). It was from Kuai-he-lani that the
Maiden of the Golden Cloud was called to live in Hawaii.

In this legendary land lived Mo-o-inanea (self-reliant dragon). She
cared for the first children of the gods, one of whom was named Hina,
later known in Polynesian mythology as Moon Goddess.

Mo-o-inanea took her to Ku, one of the gods. They lived together many
years and a family of children came to them.

Two of the great gods of Polynesia, Kane and Kanaloa, had found a
beautiful place above Honolulu on Oahu, one of the Hawaiian Islands.
Here they determined to build a home for the first-born child of Hina.

Thousands of eepa (gnome) people lived around this place, which was
called Waolani. The gods had them build a temple which was also called
Waolani (divine forest).

When the time came for the birth of the child, clouds and fogs crept
over the land, thunder rolled and lightning flashed, red torrents poured
down the hillsides, strong winds hurled the rain through bending trees,
earthquakes shook the land, huge waves rolled inland from the sea. Then
a beautiful boy was born. All these signs taken together signified the
birth of a chief of the highest degree--even of the family of the gods.

Kane and Kanaloa sent their sister Anuenue (rainbow) to get the child of
Ku and Hina that they might care for it. All three should be the
caretakers.

Anuenue went first to the place where Mo-o-inanea dwelt, to ask her if
it would be right. Mo-o-inanea said she might go, but if they brought up
that child he must not have a wife from any of the women of
Hawaii-nui-akea (great wide Hawaii).

Anuenue asked, "Suppose I get that child; who is to give it the proper
name?"

Mo-o-inanea said: "You bring the child to our brothers and they will
name this child. They have sent you, and the responsibility of the name
rests on them."

Anuenue said good-by, and in the twinkling of an eye stood at the door
of the house where Ku dwelt.

Ku looked outside and saw the bright glow of the rainbow, but no cloud
or rain, so he called Hina. "Here is a strange thing. You must come and
look at it. There is no rain and there are no clouds or mist, but there
is a rainbow at our door."

They went out, but Anuenue had changed her rainbow body and stood before
them as a very beautiful woman, wrapped only in the colors of the
rainbow.

Ku and Hina began to shiver with a nameless terror as they looked at
this strange maiden. They faltered out a welcome, asking her to enter
their house.

As she came near to them Ku said, "From what place do you come?"

Anuenue said: "I am from the sky, a messenger sent by my brothers to get
your child that they may bring it up. When grown, if the child wants its
parents, we will bring it back. If it loves us it shall stay with us."

Hina bowed her head and Ku wailed, both thinking seriously for a little
while. Then Ku said: "If Mo-o-inanea has sent you she shall have the
child. You may take this word to her."

Anuenue replied: "I have just come from her and the word I brought you
is her word. If I go away I shall not come again."

Hina said to Ku: "We must give this child according to her word. It is
not right to disobey Mo-o-inanea."

Anuenue took the child and studied the omens for its future, then she
said, "This child is of the very highest, the flower on the top of the
tree."

She prepared to take the child away, and bade the parents farewell. She
changed her body into the old rainbow colors shining out of a mist, then
she wrapped the child in the rainbow, bearing it away.

Ku and Hina went out looking up and watching the cloud of rainbow colors
floating in the sky. Strong, easy winds blew and carried this cloud out
over the ocean. The navel-string had not been cut off, so Anuenue broke
off part and threw it into the ocean, where it became the Hee-makoko, a
blood-red squid. This is the legendary origin of that kind of squid.

Anuenue passed over many islands, coming at last to Waolani to the
temple built by the gnomes under Kane and Kanaloa. They consecrated the
child, and cut off another part of the navel-cord. Kanaloa took it to
the Nuuanu pali back of Honolulu, to the place called Ka-ipu-o-Lono.
Kane and Kanaloa consulted about servants to live with the boy, and
decided that they must have only ugly ones, who would not be desired as
wives by their boy. Therefore they gathered together the lame, crooked,
deformed, and blind among the gnome people. There were hundreds of these
living in different homes, and performing different tasks. Anuenue was
the ruler over all of them. This child was named Kahanai-a-ke-Akua (the
one adopted by the gods). He was given a very high tabu by Kane and
Kanaloa. No one was allowed to stand before him and no person's shadow
could fall upon him.

Hina again conceived. The signs of this child appeared in the heavens
and were seen on Oahu. Kane wanted to send Lanihuli and Waipuhia, their
daughters, living near the pali of Waolani and Nuuanu. The girls asked
where they should go.


Kane said: "We send you to the land Kuai-he-lani, a land far distant
from Hawaii, to get the child of Hina. If the parents ask you about your
journey, tell them you have come for the child. Tell our names and refer
to Mo-o-inanea. You must now look at the way by which to go to
Kuai-he-lani."

They looked and saw a great bird--Iwa. They got on this bird and were
carried far up in the heavens. By and by the bird called two or three
times. The girls were frightened and looking down saw the bright shining
land Kuai-he-lani below them. The bird took them to the door of Ku's
dwelling-place.

Ku and Hina were caring for a beautiful girl-baby. They looked up and
saw two fine women at their door. They invited them in and asked whence
they came and why they travelled.

The girls told them they were sent by the gods Kane and Kanaloa.
Suddenly a new voice was heard. Mo-o-inanea was by the house. She called
to Ku and to Hina, telling them to give the child into the hands of the
strangers, that they might take her to Waka, a great priestess, to be
brought up by her in the ohia forests of the island of Hawaii. She named
that girl Paliula, and explained to the parents that when Paliula
should grow up, to be married, the boy of Waolani should be her husband.
The girls then took the babe. They were all carried by the bird, Iwa,
far away in the sky to Waolani, where they told Kane and Kanaloa the
message or prophecy of Mo-o-inanea.

The gods sent Iwa with the child to Waka, on Hawaii, to her
dwelling-place in the districts of Hilo and Puna where she was caring
for all kinds of birds in the branches of the trees and among the
flowers.

Waka commanded the birds to build a house for Paliula. This was quickly
done. She commanded the bird Iwa to go to Nuumea-lani, a far-off land
above Kuai-he-lani, the place where Mo-o-inanea was now living.

It was said that Waka, by her magic power, saw in that land two trees,
well cared for by multitudes of servants; the name of one was "Makalei."
This was a tree for fish. All kinds of fish would go to it. The second
was "Kalala-ika-wai." This was the tree used for getting all kinds of
food. Call this tree and food would appear.

Waka wanted Mo-o-inanea to send these trees to Hawaii.

Mo-o-inanea gave these trees to Iwa, who brought them to Hawaii and gave
them to Waka. Waka rejoiced and took care of them. The bird went back
to Waolani, telling Kane and Kanaloa all the journey from first to last.

The gods gave the girls resting-places in the fruitful lands under the
shadow of the beautiful Nuuanu precipices.

Waka watched over Paliula until she grew up, beautiful like the moon of
Mahea-lani (full moon).

The fish tree, Makalei, which made the fish of all that region tame, was
planted by the side of running water, in very restful places spreading
all along the river-sides to the seashore. Fish came to every stream
where the trees grew, and filled the waters.

The other tree was planted and brought prepared food for Paliula. The
hidden land where this place was has always been called Paliula, a
beautiful green spot--a home for fruits and flowers and birds in a
forest wilderness.

When Paliula had grown up, Waka went to Waolani to meet Kane, Kanaloa,
and Anuenue. There she saw Kahanai-a-ke-Akua (the boy brought up by the
gods) and desired him for Paliula's husband. There was no man so
splendid and no woman so beautiful as these two. The caretakers decided
that they must be husband and wife.

Waka returned to the island Hawaii to prepare for the coming of the
people from Waolani.

Waka built new houses finer and better than the first, and covered them
with the yellow feathers of the Mamo bird with the colors of the rainbow
resting over. Anuenue had sent some of her own garments of rainbows.

Then Waka went again to Waolani to talk with Kane and Kanaloa and their
sister Anuenue.

They said to her: "You return, and Anuenue will take Kahanai and follow.
When the night of their arrival comes, lightning will play over all the
mountains above Waolani and through the atmosphere all around the
temple, even to Hawaii. After a while, around your home the leaves of
the trees will dance and sing and the ohia-trees themselves bend back
and forth shaking their beautiful blossoms. Then you may know that the
Rainbow Maiden and the boy are by your home on the island of Hawaii."

Waka returned to her home in the tangled forest above Hilo. There she
met her adopted daughter and told her about the coming of her husband.

Soon the night of rolling thunder and flashing lightning came. The
people of all the region around Hilo were filled with fear. Kane-hekili
(flashing lightning) was a miraculous body which Kane had assumed. He
had gone before the boy and the rainbow, flashing his way through the
heavens.

The gods had commanded Kane-hekili to dwell in the heavens in all places
wherever the gods desired him to be, so that he could go wherever
commanded. He always obeyed without questioning.

The thunder and lightning played over ocean and land while the sun was
setting beyond the islands in the west.

After a time the trees bent over, the leaves danced and chanted their
songs. The flowers made a glorious halo as they swayed back and forth in
their dances.

Kane told the Rainbow Maiden to take their adopted child to
Hawaii-nui-akea.

When she was ready, she heard her brothers calling the names of trees
which were to go with her on her journey. Some of the legends say that
Laka, the hula-god, was dancing before the two. The tree people stood
before the Rainbow Maiden and the boy, ready to dance all the way to
Hawaii. The tree people are always restless and in ceaseless motion. The
gods told them to sing together and dance. Two of the tree people were
women, Ohia and Lamakea. Lamakea is a native whitewood tree. There are
large trees at Waialae in the mountains of the island Oahu. Ohia is a
tree always full of fringed red blossoms. They were very beautiful in
their wind bodies. They were kupuas, or wizards, and could be moving
trees or dancing women as they chose.

The Rainbow Maiden took the boy in her arms up into the sky, and with
the tree people went on her journey. She crossed over the islands to the
mountains of the island Hawaii, then went down to find Paliula.

She placed the tree people around the house to dance and sing with soft
rustling noises.

Waka heard the chants of the tree people and opened the door of the
glorious house, calling for Kahanai to come in. When Paliula saw him,
her heart fluttered with trembling delight, for she knew this splendid
youth was the husband selected by Waka, the prophetess. Waka called the
two trees belonging to Paliula to bring plenty of fish and food.

Then Waka and Anuenue left their adopted children in the wonderful
yellow feather house.

The two young people, when left together, talked about their birthplaces
and their parents. Paliula first asked Kahanai about his land and his
father and mother. He told her that he was they child of Ku and Hina
from Kuai-he-lani, brought up by Kane and the other gods at Waolani.

The girl went out and asked Waka about her parents, and learned that
this was her first-born brother, who was to be her husband because they
had very high divine blood. Their descendants would be the chiefs of the
people. This marriage was a command from parents and ancestors and
Mo-o-inanea.

She went into the house, telling the brother who she was, and the wish
of the gods.

After ten days they were married and lived together a long time.

At last, Kahanai desired to travel all around Hawaii. In this journey he
met Poliahu, the white-mantle girl of Mauna Kea, the snow-covered
mountain of the island Hawaii.

Meanwhile, in Kuai-he-lani, Ku and Hina were living together. One day
Mo-o-inanea called to Hina, telling her that she would be the mother of
a more beautiful and wonderful child than her other two children. This
child should live in the highest places of the heavens and should have a
multitude of bodies which could be seen at night as well as in the day.

Mo-o-inanea went away to Nuumea-lani and built a very wonderful house in
Ke-alohi-lani (shining land), a house always turning around by day and
by night like the ever moving clouds; indeed, it was built of all kinds
of clouds and covered with fogs. There she made a spring of flowing
water and put it outside for the coming child to have as a bath. There
she planted the seeds of magic flowers, Kanikawi and Kanikawa,
legendary plants of old Hawaii. Then she went to Kuai-he-lani and found
Ku and Hina asleep. She took a child out of the top of the head of Hina
and carried it away to the new home, naming it Ke-ao-mele-mele (the
yellow cloud), the Maiden of the Golden Cloud, a wonderfully beautiful
girl.

No one with a human body was permitted to come to this land of
Nuumea-lani. No kupuas were allowed to make trouble for the child.

The ao-opua (narrow-pointed clouds) were appointed watchmen serving
Ke-ao-mele-mele, the Maiden of the Golden Cloud.

All the other clouds were servants: the ao-opua-ka-kohiaka (morning
clouds), ao-opua-ahiahi (evening clouds), ao-opua-aumoe (night clouds),
ao-opua-kiei (peeking clouds), ao-opua-aha-lo (down-looking clouds),
ao-opua-ku (image-shaped clouds rising at top of sea), opua-hele
(morning-flower clouds), opua-noho-mai (resting clouds), opua-mele-mele
(gold-colored clouds), opua-lani (clouds high up), ka-pae-opua (at
surface of sea or clouds along the horizon), ka-lani-opua (clouds up
above horizon), ka-ma-kao-ka-lani (clouds in the eye of the sun),
ka-wele-lau-opua (clouds highest in the sky).

All these clouds were caretakers watching for the welfare of that girl.
Mo-o-inanea gave them their laws for service.

She took Ku-ke-ao-loa (the long cloud of Ku) and put him at the door of
the house of clouds, with great magic power. He was to be the messenger
to all the cloud-lands of the parents and ancestors of this girl.

"The Eye of the Sun" was the cloud with magic power to see all things
passing underneath near or far.

Then there was the opua-alii, cloud-chief with the name Ka-ao-opua-ola
(the sharp-pointed living cloud). This was the sorcerer and astronomer,
never weary, never tired, knowing and watching over all things.

Mo-o-inanea gave her mana-nui, or great magic power, to
Ke-ao-mele-mele--with divine tabus. She made this child the heir of all
the divine islands, therefore she was able to know what was being done
everywhere. She understood how the Kahanai had forsaken his sister to
live with Poliahu. So she went to Hawaii to aid her sister Paliula.

When Mo-o-inanea had taken the child from the head of Hina, Ku and Hina
were aroused. Ku went out and saw wonderful cloud images standing near
the house, like men. Ku and Hina watched these clouds shining and
changing colors in the light of the dawn, as the sun appeared. The light
of the sun streamed over the skies. For three days these changing
clouds were around them. Then in the midst of these clouds appeared a
strange land of the skies surrounded by the ao-opua (the narrow-pointed
clouds). In the night of the full moon, the aka (ghost) shadow of that
land leaped up into the moon and became fixed there. This was the
Alii-wahine-o-ka-malu (the queen of shadows), dwelling in the moon.

Ku and Hina did not understand the meaning of these signs or shadows, so
they went back into the house, falling into deep sleep.

Mo-o-inanea spoke to Hina in her dreams, saying that these clouds were
signs of her daughter born from the head--a girl having great knowledge
and miraculous power in sorcery, who would take care of them in their
last days. They must learn all the customs of kilo-kilo, or sorcery.

Mo-o-inanea again sent Ku-ke-ao-loa to the house of Ku, that cloud
appearing as a man at their door.

They asked who he was. He replied: "I am a messenger sent to teach you
the sorcery or witcheries of cloud-land. You must have this knowledge
that you may know your cloud-daughter. Let us begin our work at this
time."

They all went outside the house and sat down on a stone at the side of
the door.

Ku-ke-ao-loa looked up and called Mo-o-inanea by name. His voice went to
Ke-alohilani, and Mo-o-inanea called for all the clouds to come with
their ruler Ke-ao-mele-mele.

    "Arise, O yellow cloud,
    Arise, O cloud--the eye of the sun,
    Arise, O beautiful daughters of the skies,
    Shine in the eyes of the sun, arise!"

Ke-ao-mele-mele arose and put on her glorious white kapas like the snow
on Mauna Kea. At this time the cloud watchmen over Kuai-he-lani were
revealing their cloud forms to Hina and Ku. The Long Cloud told Hina and
Ku to look sharply into the sky to see the meaning of all the cloud
forms which were servants of the divine chiefess, their habits of
meeting, moving, separating, their forms, their number, the stars
appearing through them, the fixed stars and moving clouds, the moving
stars and moving clouds, the course of the winds among the different
clouds.

When he had taught Ku and Hina the sorcery of cloud-land, he disappeared
and returned to Ke-alohi-lani.

Some time afterward, Ku went out to the side of their land. He saw a
cloud of very beautiful form, appearing like a woman. This was resting
in the sky above his head. Hina woke up, missed Ku, looked out and saw
Ku sitting on the beach watching the clouds above him. She went to him
and by her power told him that he had the desire to travel and that he
might go on his journey and find the woman of his vision.

A beautiful chiefess, Hiilei, was at that time living in one of the
large islands of the heavens. Ku and Hina went to this place. Ku married
Hiilei, and Hina found a chief named Olopana and married him. Ku and
Hiilei had a redskin child, a boy, whom they named Kau-mai-liula
(twilight resting in the sky). This child was taken by Mo-o-inanea to
Ke-alohi-lani to live with Ke-ao-mele-mele. Olopana and Hina had a
daughter whom they called Kau-lana-iki-pokii (beautiful daughter of
sunset), who was taken by Ku and Hiilei.

Hina then called to the messenger cloud to come and carry a request to
Mo-o-inanea that Kau-mai-liula be given to her and Olopana. This was
done. So they were all separated from each other, but in the end the
children were taken to Hawaii.

Meanwhile Paliula was living above Hilo with her husband
Kahanai-a-ke-Akua (adopted son of the gods). Kahanai became restless and
determined to see other parts of the land, so he started on a journey
around the islands. He soon met a fine young man Waiola (water of life).

Waiola had never seen any one so glorious in appearance as the child of
the gods, so he fell down before him, saying: "I have never seen any
one so divine as you. You must have come from the skies. I will belong
to you through the coming years."

The chief said, "I take you as my aikane [bosom friend] to the last
days."

They went down to Waiakea, a village by Hilo, and met a number of girls
covered with wreaths of flowers and leaves. Kahanai sent Waiola to sport
with them. He himself was of too high rank. One girl told her brother
Kanuku to urge the chief to come down, and sent him leis. He said he
could not receive their gift, but must wear his own lei. He called for
his divine caretaker to send his garlands, and immediately the most
beautiful rainbows wrapped themselves around his neck and shoulders,
falling down around his body.

Then he came down to Waiakea. The chief took Kanuku also as a follower
and went on up the coast to Hamakua.

The chief looked up Mauna Kea and there saw the mountain women, who
lived in the white land above the trees. Poliahu stood above the
precipices in her kupua-ano (wizard character), revealing herself as a
very beautiful woman wearing a white mantle.

When the chief and his friends came near the cold place where she was
sitting, she invited them to her home, inland and mountainward. The
chief asked his friends to go with him to the mountain house of the
beauty of Mauna Kea.

They were well entertained. Poliahu called her sisters, Lilinoe and
Ka-lau-a-kolea, beautiful girls, and gave them sweet-sounding shells to
blow. All through the night they made music and chanted the stirring
songs of the grand mountains. The chief delighted in Poliahu and lived
many months on the mountain.

One morning Paliula in her home above Hilo awoke from a dream in which
she saw Poliahu and the chief living together, so she told Waka, asking
if the dream were true. Waka, by her magic power, looked over the island
and saw the three young men living with the three maidens of the snow
mantle. She called with a penetrating voice for the chief to return to
his own home. She went in the form of a great bird and brought him back.

But Poliahu followed, met the chief secretly and took him up to Mauna
Kea again, covering the mountain with snow so that Waka could not go to
find them.

Waka and the bird friends of Paliula could not reach the mountain-top
because of the cold. Waka went to Waolani and told Anuenue about
Paliula's trouble.

Anuenue was afraid that Kane and Kanaloa might hear that the chief had
forsaken his sister, and was much troubled, so she asked Waka to go
with her to see Mo-o-inanea at Ke-alohi-lani, but the gods Kane and
Kanaloa could not be deceived. They understood that there was trouble,
and came to meet them.

Kane told Waka to return and tell the girl to be patient; the chief
should be punished for deserting her.

Waka returned and found that Paliula had gone away wandering in the
forest, picking lehua flowers on the way up toward the Lua Pele, the
volcano pit of Pele, the goddess of fire. There she had found a
beautiful girl and took her as an aikane (friend) to journey around
Hawaii. They travelled by way of the districts of Puna, Kau, and Kona to
Waipio, where she saw a fine-looking man standing above a precipice over
which leaped the wonderful mist-falls of Hiilawe. This young chief
married the beautiful girl friend of Paliula.

Poliahu by her kupua power recognized Paliula, and told the chief that
she saw her with a new husband.

Paliula went on to her old home and rested many days. Waka then took her
from island to island until they were near Oahu. When they came to the
beach, Paliula leaped ashore and went up to Manoa Valley. There she
rushed into the forest and climbed the ridges and precipices. She
wandered through the rough places, her clothes torn and ragged.

Kane and Kanaloa saw her sitting on the mountain-side. Kane sent
servants to find her and bring her to live with them at Waolani. When
she came to the home of the gods in Nuuanu Valley she thought longingly
of her husband and sang this mele:

    "Lo, at Waolani is my lei of the blood-red rain,
    The lei of the misty rain gathered and put together,
    Put together in my thought with tears.
    Spoiled is the body by love,
    Dear in the eyes of the lover.
    My brother, the first-born,
    Return, oh, return, my brother."

Paliula, chanting this, turned away from Waolani to Waianae and dwelt
for a time with the chiefess Kalena.

While Paliula was living with the people of the cold winds of Waianae
she wore leis of mokihana berries and fragrant grass, and was greatly
loved by the family. She went up the mountain to a great gulch. She lay
down to sleep, but heard a sweet voice saying, "You cannot sleep on the
edge of that gulch." She was frequently awakened by that voice. She went
on up the mountain-ridges above Waianae. At night when she rested she
heard the voices again and again. This was the voice of Hii-lani-wai,
who was teaching the hula dance to the girls of Waianae. Paliula wanted
to see the one who had such a sweet voice, so went along the pali and
came to a hula house, but the house was closed tight and she could not
look in.

She sat down outside. Soon Hii-lani-wai opened the door and saw Paliula
and asked her to come in. It was the first time Paliula had seen this
kind of dancing. Her delight in the dance took control of her mind, and
she forgot her husband and took Hii-lani-wai as her aikane, dwelling
with her for a time.

One day they went out into the forest. Kane had sent the dancing trees
from Waolani to meet them. While in the forest they heard the trees
singing and dancing like human beings. Hii-lani-wai called this a very
wonderful thing. Paliula told her that she had seen the trees do this
before. The trees made her glad.

They went down to the seaside and visited some days. Paliula desired a
boat to go to the island of Kauai. The people told them of the dangerous
waters, but the girls were stubborn, so they were given a very small
boat. Hii-lani-wai was steering, and Paliula was paddling and bailing
out the water. The anger of the seas did not arise. On the way Paliula
fell asleep, but the boat swiftly crossed the channel. Their boat was
covered with all the colors of the rainbow. Some women on land at last
saw them and beckoned with their hands for them to come ashore.

Malu-aka (shadow of peace) was the most beautiful of all the women on
Kauai. She was kind and hospitable and took them to her house. The
people came to see these wonderful strangers. Paliula told Malu-aka her
story. She rested, with the Kauai girls, then went with Malu-aka over
the island and learned the dances of Kauai, becoming noted throughout
the island for her wonderful grace and skill, dancing like the wind,
feet not touching the ground. Her songs and the sound of the whirling
dance were lifted by the winds and carried into the dreams of
Ke-ao-mele-mele.

Meanwhile, Ke-ao-mele-mele was living with her cloud-watchmen and
Mo-o-inanea at Ke-alohi-lani. She began to have dreams, hearing a sweet
voice singing and seeing a glorious woman dancing, while winds were
whispering in the forests. For five nights she heard the song and the
sound of the dance. Then she told Mo-o-inanea, who explained her dream,
saying: "That is the voice of Paliula, your sister, who is dancing and
singing near the steep places of Kauai. Her brother-husband has forsaken
her and she has had much trouble. He is living with Poliahu on Hawaii."

When Ke-ao-mele-mele heard this, she thought she would go and live with
her sister. Mo-o-inanea approved of the thought and gave her all kinds
of kupua power. She told her to go and see the god Kane, who would tell
her what to do.

At last she started on her journey with her watching clouds. She went to
see Hina and Olopana, and Ku and Hiilei. She saw Kau-mai-liula (twilight
resting in the sky), who was very beautiful, like the fair red flowers
of the ohia in the shadows of the leaves of the tree. She determined to
come back and marry him after her journey to Oahu.

When she left Kuai-he-lani with her followers she flew like a bird over
the waves of the sea. Soon she passed Niihau and came to Kauai to the
place where Paliula was dancing, and as a cloud with her cloud friends
spied out the land. The soft mists of her native land were scattered
over the people by these clouds above them. Paliula was reminded of her
birth-land and the loved people of her home.

Ke-ao-mele-mele saw the beauty of the dance and understood the love
expressed in the chant. She flew away from Kauai, crossed the channel,
came to Waolani, met Kane and Kanaloa and told them she had come to
learn from them what was the right thing to do for the sister and the
husband who had deserted her. Kane suggested a visit to Hawaii to see
Paliula and the chief, so she flew over the islands to Hawaii. Then she
went up the mountain with the ao-pii-kai (a cloud rising from the sea
and climbing the mountain) until she saw Poliahu and her beautiful
sisters.

Poliahu looked down the mountain-side and saw a woman coming, but she
looked again and the woman had disappeared. In a little while a golden
cloud rested on the summit of the mountain. It was the maid in her cloud
body watching her brother and the girl of the white mountains. For more
than twenty days she remained in that place. Then she returned to
Waolani on Oahu.

Ke-ao-mele-mele determined to learn the hulas and the accompanying
songs. Kane told her she ought to learn these things. There was a fine
field for dancing at the foot of the mountain near Waolani, and Kane had
planted a large kukui-tree by its side to give it shade.

Kane and his sister Anuenue went to this field and sat down in their
place. The daughters of Nuuanu Pali were there. Kane sent
Ke-ao-mele-mele after the dancing-goddess, Kapo, who lived at Mauna Loa.
She was the sister of the poison-gods and knew the art of sorcery.
Ke-ao-mele-mele took gifts, went to Kapo, made offerings, and thus for
the first time secured a goddess for the hula.


Kapo taught Ke-ao-mele-mele the chants and the movements of the
different hulas until she was very skilful. She flew over the seas to
Oahu and showed the gods her skill. Then, she went to Kauai, danced on
the surf and in the clouds and above the forests and in the whirlwinds.
Each night she went to one of the other islands, danced in the skies and
over the waters, and returned home. At last she went to Hawaii to Mauna
Kea, where she saw Kahanai, her brother. She persuaded him to leave the
maiden of the snow mantle and return to Waolani. Paliula and her friends
had returned to the home with Waka, where she taught the leaves of
clinging vines and the flowers and leaves on the tender swinging
branches of the forest trees new motions in their dances with the many
kinds of winds.

One day Kahanai saw signs among the stars and in the clouds which made
him anxious to travel, so he asked Kane for a canoe. Kane called the
eepa and the menehune people and told them to make canoes to carry
Kahanai to his parents.

These boats were made in the forests of Waolani. When the menehunes
finished their boat they carried it down Nuuanu Valley to Puunui. There
they rested and many of the little folk came to help, taking the canoe
down, step by step, to the mouth of the Nuuanu stream, where they had
the aid of the river to the ocean.

The menehunes left the boat floating in the water and went back to
Waolani. Of the fairy people it was said: "No task is difficult. It is
the work of one hand."

On the way down Nuuanu Valley the menehunes came to Ka-opua-ua (storm
cloud). They heard the shouting of other people and hurried along until
they met the Namunawa people, the eepas, carrying a boat, pushing it
down. When they told the eepas that the chief had already started on his
journey with double canoes, the eepas left their boat there to slowly
decay, but it is said that it lasted many centuries.

The people who made this boat were the second class of the little people
living at Waolani, having the characters of human beings, yet having
also the power of the fairy people. These were the men of the time of
Kane and the gods.

Kahanai and his friends were in their boat when a strong wind swept down
Nuuanu, carrying the dry leaves of the mountains and sweeping them into
the sea. The waves were white as the boat was blown out into the ocean.
Kahanai steered by magic power, and the boat like lightning swept away
from the islands to the homes of Ku and Hina. The strong wind and the
swift current were with the boat, and the voyage was through the waves
like swift lightning flashing through clouds.

Ku and Hiilei saw the boat coming. Its signs were in the heavens. Ku
came and asked the travellers, "What boat is this, and from what place
has it come?"

Kahanai said, "This boat has come from Waolani, the home of the gods
Kane and Kanaloa and of Ke-ao-mele-mele."

Then Ku asked again, "Whose child are you?"

He replied, "The son of Ku and Hina."

"How many other children in your family?"

He said: "There are three of us. I am the boy and there are two sisters,
Paliula and Ke-ao-mele-mele. I have been sent by Ke-ao-mele-mele to get
Kau-mai-liula and Kau-lana-iki-pokii to go to Oahu."

Ku and his wife agreed to the call of the messenger for their boy
Kau-mai-liula.

When Kahanai saw him he knew that there was no other one so fine as this
young man who quickly consented to go to Oahu with his servants.

Ku called for some beautiful red boats with red sails, red
paddles,--everything red. Four good boatmen were provided for each boat,
men who came from the land of Ulu-nui--the land of the yellow sea and
the black sea of Kane--and obeyed the call of Mo-o-inanea. They had
kupua power. They were relatives of Kane and Kanaloa.

The daughter of Hina and Olopana, Kau-lana-iki-pokii, cried to go with
her brother, but Mo-o-inanea called for her dragon family to make a boat
for her and ordered one of the sorcerer dragons to go with her and guard
her. They called the most beautiful shells of the sea to become the
boats for the girl and her attendants. They followed the boats of
Kahanai. With one stroke of the paddles the boats passed through the
seas around the home of the gods. With the second stroke they broke
through all the boundaries of the great ocean and with the third dashed
into the harbor of old Honolulu, then known as Kou.

When the boats of Kahanai and Kau-mai-liula came to the surf of Mamala,
there was great shouting inland of Kou, the voices of the eepas of
Waolani. Mists and rainbows rested over Waolani. The menehunes gathered
in great multitudes at the call of Kane, who had seen the boats
approaching.

The menehune people ran down to lift up the boats belonging to the young
chief. They made a line from Waolani to the sea. They lifted up the
boats and passed them from hand to hand without any effort, shouting
with joy.

While these chiefs were going up to Waolani, Ke-ao-mele-mele came from
Hawaii in her cloud boats.

Kane had told the menehunes to prepare houses quickly for her. It was
done like the motion of the eye.

Ke-ao-mele-mele entered her house, rested, and after a time practised
the hula.

The chiefs also had houses prepared, which they entered.

The shell boats found difficulty in entering the bay because the other
boats were in the way. So they turned off to the eastern side of the
harbor. Thus the ancient name of that side was given Ke-awa-lua (the
second harbor, or the second landing-place in the harbor). Here they
landed very quietly. The shell boats became very small and Kau-lana and
her companions took them and hid them in their clothes. They went along
the beach, saw some fish. The attendants took them for the girl. This
gave the name Kau-lana-iki-pokii to that place to this day. As they went
along, the dragon friend made the signs of a high chief appear over the
girl. The red rain and arching bow were over her, so the name was given
to that place, Ka-ua-koko-ula (blood rain), which is the name to this
day.

The dragon changed her body and carried the girl up Nuuanu Valley very
swiftly to the house of Ke-ao-mele-mele (the maiden of the golden
cloud) without the knowledge of Kane and the others. They heard the hula
of Ke-ao-mele-mele. Soon she felt that some one was outside, and looking
saw the girl and her friend, with the signs of a chief over her.

So she called:

    "Is that you, O eye of the day?
    O lightning-like eye from Kahiki,
    The remembered one coming to me.
    The strong winds have been blowing,
    Trembling comes into my breast,
    A stranger perhaps is outside,
    A woman whose sign is the fog,
    A stranger and yet my young sister,
    The flower of the divine home-land,
    The wonderful land of the setting sun
    Going down into the deep blue sea.
    You belong to the white ocean of Kane,
    You are Kau-lana-iki-pokii,
    The daughter of the sunset,
    The woman coming in the mist,
    In the thunder and the flash of lightning
    Quivering in the sky above.
    Light falls on the earth below.
    The sign of the chiefess,
    The woman high up in the heavens,
    Kau-lana-iki-pokii,
    Enter, enter, here am I."

Those outside heard the call and understood that Ke-ao-mele-mele knew
who they were. They entered and saw her in all the beauty of her high
divine blood.

They kissed. Kau-lana told how she had come. Ke-ao-mele-mele told the
dragon to go and stay on the mountain by the broken pali at the head of
Nuuanu Valley. So she went to the precipice and became the watchman of
that place. She was the first dragon on the islands. She watched with
magic power. Later, Mo-o-inanea came with many dragons to watch over the
islands. Ke-ao-mele-mele taught her young sister the different hulas and
meles, so that they were both alike in their power.

When the young men heard hula voices in the other houses they thought
they would go and see the dancers. At the hour of twilight Waolani shook
as if in an earthquake, and there was thunder and lightning.

The young men and Anuenue went to the house and saw the girls dancing,
and wondered how Kau-lana had come from the far-off land.

Ke-ao-mele-mele foretold the future for the young people. She told
Kau-lana that she would never marry, but should have magic medicine
power for all coming days, and Kahanai should have the power over all
customs of priests and sorcerers and knowledge of sacrifices, and should
be the bosom friend of the medicine-goddess. She said that they would
all go to Waipio, Hawaii. Kane, Kanaloa, and Anuenue approved of her
commands.

Ke-ao-mele-mele sent Kau-lana to Hawaii to tell Paliula to come and live
with them at Waipio and find Kahanai once more. Kau-lana hastened to
Hawaii in her shell boat. She called, "O my red shell boat of the deep
blue sea and the black sea, come up to me."

The shell boat appeared on the surface of the sea, floating. The girl
was carried swiftly to Hawaii. There she found Waka and Paliula and took
them to Waipio. They lived for a time there, then all went to Waolani to
complete the marriage of Ke-ao-mele-mele to Kau-mai-liula.

Kane sent Waka and Anuenue for Ku and Hiilei, Hina and Olopana with
Mo-o-inanea to come to Oahu.

Mo-o-inanea prepared large ocean-going canoes for the two families, but
she and her people went in their magic boats.

Mo-o-inanea told them they would never return to these lands, but should
find their future home in Hawaii.

Waka went on Ku's boat, Anuenue was with Hina. Ku and his friends looked
back, the land was almost lost; they soon saw nothing until the
mountains of Oahu appeared before them.

They landed at Heeia on the northern side of the Nuuanu precipice, went
over to Waolani, and met all the family who had come before.

Before Mo-o-inanea left her land she changed it, shutting up all the
places where her family had lived. She told all her kupua dragon family
to come with her to the place where the gods had gone. Thus she made the
old lands entirely different from any other lands, so that no other
persons but gods or ghosts could live in them.

Then she rose up to come away. The land was covered with rainclouds,
heavy and black. The land disappeared and is now known as "The Hidden
Land of Kane."

She landed on Western Oahu, at Waialua, so that place became the home of
the dragons, and it was filled with the dragons from Waialua to Ewa.

This was the coming of dragons to the Hawaiian Islands.

At the time of the marriage of Ke-ao-mele-mele and Kau-mai-liula, the
Beautiful Daughter of Sunset came from the island Hawaii bringing the
two trees Makalei and Makuukao, which prepared cooked food and fish.
When she heard the call to the marriage she came with the trees. Makalei
brought great multitudes of fish from all the ocean to the Koo-lau-poko
side of the island Oahu. The ocean was red with the fish.

Makuukao came to Nuuanu Valley with Kau-lana, entered Waolani, and
provided plenty of food.

Then Makalei started to come up from the sea.

Kau-lana-iki-pokii told the gods and people that there must not be any
noise when that great tree came up from the sea. They must hear and
remain silent.

When the tree began to come to the foot of the pali, the menehunes and
eepas were astonished and began to shout with a great voice, for they
thought this was a mighty kupua from Kahiki coming to destroy them.

When they had shouted, Makalei fell down at the foot of the pali near
Ka-wai-nui, and lies there to this day. So this tree never came to
Waolani and the fish were scattered around the island.

Kau-lana's wrath was very great, and he told Kane and the others to
punish these noisy ones, to take them away from this wonderful valley of
the gods. He said, "No family of these must dwell on Waolani." Thus the
fairies and the gnomes were driven away and scattered over the islands.

For a long time the Maiden of the Golden Cloud and her husband, Twilight
Resting in the Sky, ruled over all the islands even to the mysterious
lands of the ocean. When death came they laid aside their human bodies
and never made use of them again--but as aumakuas, or ghost-gods, they
assumed their divine forms, and in the skies, over the mountains and
valleys, they have appeared for hundreds of years watching over and
cheering their descendants.

     NOTE.--See now article on "Dragon Ghost-gods" in the Appendix.


                                 XVI

                         PUNA AND THE DRAGON


Two images of goddesses were clothed in yellow kapa cloth and worshipped
in the temples. One was Kiha-wahine, a noted dragon-goddess, and the
other was Haumea, who was also known as Papa, the wife of Wakea, a great
ancestor-god among the Polynesians.

Haumea is said to have taken as her husband, Puna, a chief of Oahu. He
and his people were going around the island. The surf was not very good,
and they wanted to find a better place. At last they found a fine
surf-place where a beautiful woman was floating on the sea.

She called to Puna, "This is not a good place for surf." He asked,
"Where is there a place?" She answered, "I know where there is one, far
outside." She desired to get Puna. So they swam way out in the sea until
they were out of sight nor could they see the sharp peaks of the
mountains. They forgot everything else but each other. This woman was
Kiha-wahine.

The people on the beach wailed, but did not take canoes to help them.
They swam over to Molokai. Here they left their surf-boards on the
beach and went inland. They came to the cave house of the woman. He saw
no man inside nor did he hear any voice, all was quiet.

Puna stayed there as a kind of prisoner and obeyed the commands of the
woman. She took care of him and prepared his food. They lived as husband
and wife for a long time, and at last his real body began to change.

Once he went out of the cave. While standing there he heard voices, loud
and confused. He wanted to see what was going on, but he could not go,
because the woman had laid her law on him, that if he went away he would
be killed.

He returned to the cave and asked the woman, "What is that noise I heard
from the sea?" She said: "Surf-riding, perhaps, or rolling the maika
stone. Some one is winning and you heard the shouts." He said, "It would
be fine for me to see the things you have mentioned." She said,
"To-morrow will be a good time for you to go and see."

In the morning he went down to the sea to the place where the people
were gathered together and saw many sports.

While he was watching, one of the men, Hinole, the brother of his wife,
saw him and was pleased. When the sports were through he invited Puna to
go to their house and eat and talk.

Hinole asked him, "Whence do you come, and what house do you live in?"
He said, "I am from the mountains, and my house is a cave." Hinole
meditated, for he had heard of the loss of Puna at Oahu. He loved his
brother-in-law, and asked, "How did you come to this place?" Puna told
him all the story. Then Hinole told him his wife was a goddess. "When
you return and come near to the place, go very easily and softly, and
you will see her in her real nature, as a mo-o, or dragon; but she knows
all that you are doing and what we are saying. Now listen to a parable.
Your first wife, Haumea, is the first born of all the other women. Think
of the time when she was angry with you. She had been sporting with you
and then she said in a tired way, 'I want the water.' You asked, 'What
water do you want?' She said, 'The water from Poliahu of Mauna Kea.' You
took a water-jar and made a hole so that the water always leaked out,
and then you went to the pit of Pele. That woman Pele was very old and
blear-eyed, so that she could not see you well, and you returned to
Haumea. She was that wife of yours. If you escape this mo-o wife she
will seek my life. It is my thought to save your life, so that you can
look into the eyes of your first wife."

The beautiful dragon-woman had told him to cry with a loud voice when he
went back to the cave. But when Puna was going back he went slowly and
softly, and saw his wife as a dragon, and understood the words of
Hinole. He tried to hide, but was trembling and breathing hard.


His wife heard and quickly changed to a human body, and cursed him,
saying: "You are an evil man coming quietly and hiding, but I heard your
breath when you thought I would not know you. Perhaps I will eat your
eyes. When you were talking with Hinole you learned how to come and see
me."

The dragon-goddess was very angry, but Puna did not say anything. She
was so angry that the hair on her neck rose up, but it was like a
whirlwind, soon quiet and the anger over. They dwelt together, and the
woman trusted Puna, and they had peace.

One day Puna was breathing hard, for he was thirsty and wanted the water
of the gods.

The woman heard his breathing, and asked, "Why do you breathe like
this?" He said: "I want water. We have dwelt together a long time and
now I need the water." "What water is this you want?" He said, "I must
have the water of Poliahu of Mauna Kea, the snow covered mountain of
Hawaii."

She said, "Why do you want that water?" He said: "The water of that
place is cold and heavy with ice. In my youth my good grandparents
always brought water from that place for me. Wherever I went I carried
that water with me, and when it was gone more would be brought to me,
and so it has been up to the time that I came to dwell with you. You
have water and I have been drinking it, but it is not the same as the
water mixed with ice, and heavy. But I would not send you after it,
because I know it is far away and attended with toil unfit for you, a
woman."

The woman bent her head down, then lifted her eyes, and said: "Your
desire for water is not a hard thing to satisfy. I will go and get the
water."

Before he had spoken of his desire he had made a little hole in the
water-jar, as Hinole had told him, that the woman might spend a long
time and let him escape.

She arose and went away. He also arose and followed. He found a canoe
and crossed to Maui. Then he found another boat going to Hawaii and at
last landed at Kau.

He went up and stood on the edge of the pit of Pele. Those who were
living in the crater saw him, and cried out, "Here is a man, a husband
for our sister." He quickly went down into the crater and dwelt with
them. He told all about his journey. Pele heard these words, and said:
"Not very long and your wife will be here coming after you, and there
will be a great battle, but we will not let you go or you will be
killed, because she is very angry against you. She has held you, the
husband of our sister Haumea. She should find her own husband and not
take what belongs to another. You stay with us and at the right time you
can go back to your wife."

Kiha-wahine went to Poliahu, but could not fill the water-jar. She
poured the water in and filled the jar, but when the jar was lifted it
became light. She looked back and saw the water lying on the ground, and
her husband far beyond at the pit of Pele. Then she became angry and
called all the dragons of Molokai, Lanai, Maui, Kahoolawe, and Hawaii.

When she had gathered all the dragons she went up to Kilauea and stood
on the edge of the crater and called all the people below, telling them
to give her the husband. They refused to give Puna up, crying out:
"Where is your husband? This is the husband of our sister; he does not
belong to you, O mischief-maker."

Then the dragon-goddess said, "If you do not give up this man, of a
truth I will send quickly all my people and fill up this crater and
capture all your fires." The dragons threw their drooling saliva in the
pit, and almost destroyed the fire of the pit where Pele lived, leaving
Ka-moho-alii's place untouched.

Then the fire moved and began to rise with great strength, burning off
all the saliva of the dragons. Kiha-wahine and the rest of the dragons
could not stand the heat even a little while, for the fire caught them
and killed a large part of them in that place. They tried to hide in the
clefts of the rocks. The earthquakes opened the rocks and some of the
dragons hid, but fire followed the earthquakes and the fleeing dragons.
Kiha-wahine ran and leaped down the precipice into a fish-pond called by
the name of the shadow, or aka, of the dragon, Loko-aka (the shadow
lake).

So she was imprisoned in the pond, husbandless, scarcely escaping with
her life. When she went back to Molokai she meant to kill Hinole,
because she was very angry for his act in aiding Puna to escape. She
wanted to punish him, but Hinole saw the trouble coming from his sister,
so arose and leaped into the sea, becoming a fish in the ocean.

When he dove into the sea Kiha-wahine went down after him and tried to
find him in the small and large coral caves, but could not catch him. He
became the Hinalea, a fish dearly loved by the fishermen of the islands.
The dragon-goddess continued seeking, swimming swiftly from place to
place.

Ounauna saw her passing back and forth, and said, "What are you
seeking, O Kiha-wahine?" She said, "I want Hinole." Ounauna said:
"Unless you listen to me you cannot get him, just as when you went to
Hawaii you could not get your husband from Pele. You go and get the vine
inalua and come back and make a basket and put it down in the sea. After
a while dive down and you will find that man has come inside. Then catch
him."

The woman took the vine, made the basket, came down and put it in the
sea. She left it there a little while, then dove down. There was no
Hinole in the basket, but she saw him swimming along outside of the
basket. She went up, waited awhile, came down again and saw him still
swimming outside. This she did again and again, until her eyes were red
because she could not catch him. Then she was angry, and went to Ounauna
and said: "O slave, I will kill you to-day. Perhaps you told the truth,
but I have been deceived, and will chase you until you die."

Ounauna said: "Perhaps we should talk before I die. I want you to tell
me just what you have done, then I will know whether you followed
directions. Tell me in a few words. Perhaps I forgot something."

The dragon said, "I am tired of your words and I will kill you." Then
Ounauna said, "Suppose I die, what will you do to correct any mistakes
you have made?"

Then she told how she had taken vines and made a basket and used it.
Ounauna said: "I forgot to tell you that you must get some sea eggs and
crabs, pound and mix them together and put them inside the basket. Put
the mouth of the basket down. Leave it for a little while, then dive
down and find your brother inside. He will not come out, and you can
catch him." This is the way the Hinalea is caught to this day.

After she had caught her brother she took him to the shore to kill him,
but he persuaded her to set him free. This she did, compelling him ever
after to retain the form of the fish Hinalea.

Kiha-wahine then went to the island Maui and dwelt in a deep pool near
the old royal town of Lahaina.

After Pele had her battle with the dragons, and Puna had escaped
according to the directions of Hinole, he returned to Oahu and saw his
wife, Haumea, a woman with many names, as if she were the embodiment of
many goddesses.

After Puna disappeared, Kou became the new chief of Oahu. Puna went to
live in the mountains above Kalihi-uka. One day Haumea went out fishing
for crabs at Heeia, below the precipice of Koolau, where she was
accustomed to go.


Puna came to a banana plantation, ate, and lay down to rest. He fell
fast asleep and the watchmen of the new chief found him. They took his
loin-cloth, and tied his hands behind his back, bringing him thus to
Kou, who killed him and hung the body in the branches of a
breadfruit-tree. It is said that this was at Wai-kaha-lulu just below
the steep diving rocks of the Nuuanu stream.

When Haumea returned from gathering moss and fish to her home in
Kalihi-uka, she heard of the death of her husband. She had taken an
akala vine, made a pa-u, or skirt, of it, and tied it around her when
she went fishing, but she forgot all about it, and as she hurried down
to see the body of her husband, all the people turned to look at her,
and shouted out, "This is the wife of the dead man."

She found Puna hanging on the branches. Then she made that
breadfruit-tree open. Leaving her pa-u on the ground where she stood,
she stepped inside the tree and bade it close about her and appear the
same as before. The akala of which the pa-u had been made lay where it
was left, took root and grew into a large vine.

The fat of the body of Puna fell down through the branches and the dogs
ate below the tree. One of these dogs belonged to the chief Kou. It
came back to the house, played with the chief, then leaped, caught him
by the throat and killed him.

     NOTE.--This is the same legend as "The Wonderful Breadfruit Tree"
     published in the "Legends of Old Honolulu," but the names are
     changed and the time is altered from the earliest days of Hawaiian
     lore to the almost historic period of King Kakuhihewa, whose
     under-chief mentioned in this legend gave the name to Old Honolulu,
     as for centuries it bore the name "Kou." The legend is new,
     however, in so far as it gives the account of the infatuation of
     Puna for Kiha-wahine, the dragon-goddess, and his final escape from
     her.


                              XVII

                           KE-AU-NINI


Ku-aha-ilo was a demon who had no parents. His great effort was to find
something to eat--men or any other kind of food. He was a kupua--one who
was sometimes an animal and sometimes a man. He was said to be the
father of Pele, the goddess of volcanic fires.

Nakula-uka and Nakula-kai were the parents of Hiilei, who was the mother
of Ke-au-nini. Nakula-kai told her husband that she was with child. He
told her that he was glad, and if it were a boy he would name him, but
if a girl she should name the child.

The husband went out fishing, and Nakula-kai went to see her parents,
Kahuli and Kakela. The hot sun was rising, so she put leaves over her
head and came to the house. Her father was asleep. She told her mother
about her condition. Kahuli awoke and turning over shook the land by his
motion, _i.e._, the far-away divine land of Nuu-mea-lani. He asked his
daughter why she had come, and when she told him he studied the signs
and foretold the birth of a girl who should be named Hina.

Kahuli's wife questioned his knowledge. He said: "I will prepare awa in
a cup, cover it with white kapa, and chant a prayer. I will lift the
cover, and if the awa is still there I am at fault. If the awa has
disappeared I am correct. It will be proved by the awa disappearing that
a girl will be born.

    "I was up above Niihau.
    O Ku! O Kane! O Lono!
    I have dug a hole,
    Planted the bamboo;
    The bamboo has grown;
    Find that bamboo!
    It has grown old.
    The green-barked bamboo has a green bark;
    The white-barked bamboo has a white bark.
    Fragments of rain are stinging the skin--
    Rain fell that day in storms,
    Water pouring in streams.
    Mohoalii is by the island,
    Island cut off at birth from the mainland;
    Many islands as children were born."

A girl was born, and the grandparents kept the child, calling her Hina.
She cried, and the grandmother took her in her arms and sang:

    "Fishing, fishing, your father is fishing,
    Catching the opoa-pea."

Nakula-kai went down to her home. Her husband returned from fishing. He
said he thought another child was born. He had heard the thunder, but no
storm. She told him that a boy was born. Nakula-uka named that boy
Ke-au-miki (stormy or choppy current). Ten days afterward another boy
was born. He was named Ke-au-kai (current toward the beach).

These children had no food but awa. Their hair was not cut. They were
taken inside a tabu temple and brought up. Nakula-uka and his wife after
a long time had another girl named Hiilei (lifted like a lei on the
head). The grandparents took the child. She was very beautiful and was
kept tabu. Her husband should be either a king or a male kupua of very
high birth. When she had grown up she heard noises below her woodland
home several times, and she was very curious. She was told, "That comes
from the surf-riding."

Hiilei wanted to go down and see. The grandmother said, "Do not go, for
it would mean your death." Once more came the noise, and she was told it
was "spear-throwing." The girl wanted to know how that was done. The
grandparents warned her that there was great danger, saying: "The path
is full of trouble. Dragons lie beside the way. Ku-aha-ilo, the mo-o
[dragon], is travelling through the sky, the clouds, the earth, and the
forest. His tongue is thrusting every way to find food. He is almost
starved, and now plans to assume his human form and come to
Nuu-mea-lani, seeking to find some one for food. You should not go down
to the beach of Honua-lewa [the field of sports]."

But Hiilei was very persistent, so the grandmother at last gave
permission, saying: "I will let you go, but here are my commands. You
are quite determined to go down, but listen to me. Ku-aha-ilo is very
hungry, and is seeking food these days. When you go down to the grove of
kukui-trees, there Ku-aha-ilo will await you and you will be afraid that
he will catch you. Do not be afraid. Pass that place bravely. Go on the
lower side--the valley-side--and you cannot be touched. When that one
sees you he will change into his god-body and stand as a mo-o. Do not
show that you are afraid. He cannot touch you unless you are afraid and
flee. Keep your fear inside and give 'Aloha' and say, 'You are a
strangely beautiful one.' The dragon will think you are not afraid. Then
that mo-o will take another body. He will become a great caterpillar.
Caterpillars will surround you. You must give 'Aloha' and praise. Thus
you must do with all the mysterious bodies of Ku-aha-ilo without showing
any fear. Then Ku-aha-ilo will become a man and will be your husband."

So the girl went down, dressed gorgeously by the grandmother in a skirt
of rainbow colors, flowers of abundant perfumes--nothing about her at
fault.

She came to the kukui grove and looked all around, seeing nothing, but
passing further along she saw a mist rising. A strong wind was coming.
The sun was hot in the sky, making her cheeks red like lehua flowers.
She went up some high places looking down on the sea. Then she heard
footsteps behind her. She looked back and saw a strange body following.
She became afraid and trembled, but she remembered the words of her
grandmother, and turned and said, "Aloha," and the strange thing went
away. She went on and again heard a noise and looked back. A whirlwind
was coming swiftly after her. Then there was thunder and lightning.

Hiilei said: "Aloha. Why do you try to make me afraid? Come in your
right body, for I know that you are a real man."

Everything passed away. She went on again, but after a few steps she
felt an earthquake. Afraid, she sat down. She saw a great thing rising
like a cloud twisting and shutting out the sun, moving and writhing--a
great white piece of earth in front of a whirlwind.

She was terribly frightened and fell flat on the ground as if dead. Then
she heard the spirit of her grandmother calling to her to send away her
fear, saying: "This is the one of whom I told you. Don't be afraid." She
looked at the cloud, and the white thing became omaomao (green).
Resolutely she stood up, shook her rainbow skirt and flowers. The
perfumes were scattered in the air and she started on. Then the
dragons, a multitude, surrounded her, climbing upon her to throw her
down. Her skin was creeping, but she remembered her grandmother and
said: "Alas, O most beautiful ones, this is the first time I have ever
seen you. If my grandmother were here we would take you back to our home
and entertain you, and you should be my playmates. But I cannot return,
so I must say 'Farewell.'"

Then the dragons disappeared and the caterpillars came into view after
she had gone on a little way. The caterpillars' eyes were protruding as
they rose up and came against her, but she said, "Aloha."

Then she saw another form of Ku-aha-ilo--a stream of blood flowing like
running water. She was more frightened than at any other time, and cried
to her grandfather: "E Kahuli, I am afraid! Save my life, O my
grandfather!" He did not know she had gone down. He told his wife that
he saw Ku-aha-ilo surrounding someone on the path. He went into his
temple and prayed:

    "Born is the night,
    Born is the morning,
    Born is the thunder,
    Born is the lightning,
    Born is the heavy rain,
    Born is the rain which calls us;
    The clouds of the sky gather."

Then Kahuli twisted his kapa clothes full of lightning and threw them
into the sky. A fierce and heavy rain began to fall. Streams of water
rushed toward the place where Hiilei stood fighting with that stream of
blood in which the dragon was floating. The blood was all washed away
and the dragon became powerless.

Ku-aha-ilo saw that he had failed in all these attempts to terrify
Hiilei. His eyes flashed and he opened his mouth. His tongue was
thrusting viciously from side to side. His red mouth was like the pit of
Pele. His teeth were gnashing, his tail lashing.

Hiilei stood almost paralyzed by fear, but remembered her grandmother.
She felt that death was near when she faced this awful body of
Ku-aha-ilo. But she hid her fear and called a welcome to this dragon.
Then the dragon fell into pieces, which all became nothing. The
fragments flew in all directions.

While Hiilei was watching this, all the evil disappeared and a handsome
man stood before her. Hiilei asked him gently, "Who are you, and from
what place do you come?" He said, "I am a man of this place." "No," said
Hiilei, "you are not of this land. My grandparents and I are the only
ones. This is our land. From what place do you come?" He replied: "I am
truly from the land above the earth, and I have come to find a wife for
myself. Perhaps you will be my wife." She said that she did not want a
husband at that time. She wanted to go down to the sea.

He persuaded her to marry him and then go down and tell her brothers
that she had married Ku-aha-ilo. If a boy was born he must be called
Ke-au-nini-ula-o-ka-lani (the red, restful current of the heavens). This
would be their only child. He gave her signs for the boy, saying, "When
the boy says to you, 'Where is my father?' you can tell him, 'Here is
the stick or club Kaaona and this malo or girdle Ku-ke-anuenue.' He must
take these things and start out to find me." He slowly disappeared,
leaving Hiilei alone. She went down to the sea. The people saw her
coming, a very beautiful woman, and they shouted a glad welcome.

She went out surf-riding, sported awhile, and then her grandfather came
and took her home. After a time came the signs of the birth of a chief.
Her son was born and named Ke-au-nini. This was in the land
Kuai-he-lani. Kahuli almost turned over. The land was shaken and tossed.
This was one of the divine lands from which the ancestors of the
Hawaiians came. Pii-moi, a god of the sun, asked Akoa-koa, the coral,
"What is the matter with the land?" Akoa-koa replied, "There is a
kupua--a being with divine powers--being born, with the gifts of
Ku-aha-ilo." Pii-moi was said to be below Papaku-lolo, taking care of
the foundation of the earth. The brothers were in their temple.
Ke-au-kai heard the signs in the leaves and knew that his sister had a
child, and proposed to his brother to go over and get the child. The
mother had left it on a pile of sugar-cane leaves. They met their sister
and asked for the child. Then they took it, wrapped it in a soft kapa
and went back to the temple. The temple drum sounded as they came in,
beaten by invisible hands.

The boy grew up. The mother after a time wanted to see the child, and
went to the temple. She had to wait a little, then the boy came out and
said he would soon come to her. She rejoiced to see such a beautiful boy
as her Ke-au-nini-ula-o-ka-lani. They talked and rejoiced in their
mutual affection. An uncle came and sent her away for a time. The boy
returned to the temple, and his uncle told him he could soon go to be
with his mother. Then came an evil night and the beating of the spirit
drum. A mist covered the land. There was wailing among the menehunes
(fairy folk). Ke-au-nini went away covered by the mist, and no one saw
him go.

He came to his grandfather's house, saw an old man sleeping and a
war-club by the door. He took this club and lifted it to strike the old
man, but the old man caught the club. The boy dropped it and tried to
catch the old man. The old man held him and asked who he was and to what
family he belonged. The boy said: "I belong to Kahuli and Kakela, to
Nakula-uka and Nakula-kai. I am the son of Ku-aha-ilo and Hiilei. I have
been brought up by Ke-au-miki and Ke-au-kai. I seek my mother."

The old man arose, took his drum and beat it. Hiilei and her mother came
out to meet the boy. They put sacrifices in their temple for him and
chanted to their ancestor-gods:

    "O Keke-hoa-lani, dwell here;
    Here are wind and rain."

By and by Ke-au-nini asked his mother, "Where is my father?" She told
him: "You have no father in the lands of the earth. He belongs to the
atmosphere above. You cannot go to find him. He never told me the
pathway to his home. You had better stay with me." He replied: "No I
cannot stay here. I must go to find my father." He was very earnest in
his purpose.

His mother said: "If you make a mistake, your father will kill you and
then eat you and take all your lands. He will destroy the forests and
the food plants, and all will be devoured by your father. His kingdom is
tabu. If you go, take great care of the gifts, for with these things
you succeed, but without them you die." She showed him the war-club and
the rainbow-girdle, and gave them into his care. The boy took the gifts,
kissed his mother, went outside and looked up into the sky.

He saw wonderful things. A long object passed before him, part of which
was on the earth, but the top was lost in the clouds. This was
Niu-loa-hiki, one of the ancestor-gods of the night. This was a very
tall cocoanut-tree, from which the bark of cocoanuts fell in the shape
of boats. He took one of these boats in his hands, saying, "How can I
ride in this small canoe?"

He went down to the sea, put the bark boat in the water, got in and
sailed away until the land of Nuu-mea-lani was lost. His uncle,
Ke-au-kai, saw him going away, and prayed to the aumakuas (ancestral
ghost-gods) to guard the boy. The boy heard the soft voice of the
far-off surf, and as he listened he saw a girl floating in the surf. He
turned his boat and joined her. She told him to go back, or he would be
killed. She was Moho-nana, the first-born child of Ku-aha-ilo.

When she learned that this was her half-brother, she told him that her
father was sleeping. If he awoke, the boy would be killed.

The boy went to the shore of this strange land. Ku-aha-ilo saw him
coming, and breathed out the wind of his home against the boy. It was
like a black whirlwind rushing to the sea.

The boy went on toward his father's tabu place, up to Kalewa, in the
face of the storm. He saw the tail of Ku-aha-ilo sweep around against
him to kill him. He began his chants and incantations and struck his
war-club on the ground. Lava came out and fire was burning all around
him. He could not strike the tail, nor could the tail strike him.
Ku-aha-ilo sent many other enemies, but the war-club turned them aside.
The earth was shaking, almost turning upside down as it was struck by
the war-club. Great openings let lava fires out. Ku-aha-ilo came out of
his cave to fight. His mouth was open, his tongue outstretching, his
eyes glaring, but the boy was not afraid. He took his club, whirled it
in his hand, thinking his father would see it, but his father did not
see it. The boy leaped almost inside the mouth and struck with the club
up and down, every stroke making an opening for fire.

The father tried to shut his mouth, but the boy leaped to one side and
struck the father's head. The blow glanced aside and made a great hole
in the earth, which let out fire. The dragon body disappeared and came
back in another form, as a torrent of blood. Ke-au-nini thrust it aside.

Then a handsome man stood before him with wild eyes, demanding who he
was. Ku-aha-ilo had forgotten his son, and the miraculous war-club which
he had given to Hiilei, so he began to fight with his hands. Ke-au-nini
laid his club down. The father was near the end of his strength, and
said, "Let our anger cease, that we may know each other." The boy was
very angry and said: "You have treated me cruelly, when I only came to
see you and to love you. You would have taken my young life for
sacrifice. Now you tell me you belong to the temple of my ancestors in
Nuu-mea-lani." Then he caught his father and lifted him up. He tossed
him, dizzy and worn out, into the air, and catching the body broke it
over his knee. Ku-aha-ilo had killed and eaten all his people, so that
no one was left in his land. The boy's sister saw the battle and went
away to Ka-lewa-lani (the divine far-away cloud-land).

Ke-au-nini returned on his ocean journey to Nuu-mea-lani. The uncle saw
a mist covering the sea and saw the sign of a chief in it, and knew that
the boy was not dead, but had killed Ku-aha-ilo. The boy came and
greeted them and told the story. He remained some time in the temple and
dreamed of a beautiful woman.

The brothers talked about the power of Ke-au-nini who had killed his
father, a man without parents, part god and part man. They thought he
would now kill them. Ke-au-nini became pale and thin and sick, desiring
the woman of his dream. Finally he told the brothers to find that woman
or he would kill them.

Ke-au-kai told him that he would consult the gods. Then he made a red
boat with a red mast and a red sail and told Ke-au-miki to go after
Hiilei, their sister.

Hiilei came down to stay with her son while the brothers went away to
find the girl. Ke-au-kai (broad sea-current) said to Ke-au-miki
(chopped-up current): "You sit in front, I behind. Let this be our law.
You must not turn back to look at me. You must not speak to me. I must
not speak to you, or watch you."

Ke-au-miki went to his place in the boat. The other stood with one foot
in the boat and one on the land. He told the boy they would go. If they
found a proper girl they would return; if not, they would not come back.
They pushed the boat far out to sea by one paddle-stroke. Another stroke
and land was out of sight. Swiftly leaped the boat over the ocean.

They saw birds on the island Kaula. One bird flew up. Heavy winds almost
upset the boat and filled it with water up to their chins. They caught
the paddles, bailing-cups, and loose boards for seats, and held them
safe.

The wind increased like a cyclone over them. Thus in the storm they
floated on the sea. Ke-au-nini by his sorcery saw the swamped canoe. He
ran and told his mother. She sent him to the temple to utter
incantations:

    "O wind, wini-wini [sharp-pointed];
    O wind full of stinging points;
    O wind rising at Vavau,
    At Hii-ka-lani;
    Stamped upon, trodden upon by the wind.
    Niihau is the island;
    Ka-pali-kala-hale is the chief."

This chant of Ke-au-nini reached Ke-au-kai, and the wind laid aside its
anger. Its strength was made captive and the sea became calm.

The boat came to the surface, and they bailed it out and took their
places. Ke-au-kai said to his brother: "What a wonderful one is that boy
of ours! We must go to Niihau." They saw birds, met a boat and
fisherman, and found Niihau. When the Niihau people saw them coming on a
wonderful surf wave, they shouted about the arrival of the strangers.
The chief Ka-pali-kala-hale came down as the surf swept the boat inland.
He took the visitors to his house and gave gifts of food, kapas, and
many other things. Then they went on their way. When they were between
Niihau and Kauai, the wind drove the boat back. A whirlwind threw water
into the boat, swamping it. It was sinking and all the goods were
floating away.

Ke-au-nini again saw the signs of trouble and chanted:

    "The wind of Kauai comes; it touches; it strikes;
    Rising, whirling; boat filled with water;
    The boat slipping down in the sea;
    The outrigger sticks in the sand.
    Kauai is the island;
    Ka-pali-o-ka-la-lau is chief."

The sea became calm. The boat was righted and the floating goods were
put in. They met canoes and went on a mighty surf wave up the sands of
the beach.

The people shouted, "Aloha!" The chiefess of that part of Kauai was
surf-riding and heard the people shouting welcome, so she came to land
and found the visitors sitting on the sand, resting. She took them to
the royal home. All the people of Kauai came together to meet the
strangers, making many presents.

The brothers found no maids sufficiently perfect, so they crossed over
to Oahu, meeting other trials. At last they went to Hawaii to the place
where Haina-kolo lived, a chiefess and a kua (goddess).

This was above Kawaihae. They went to Kohala, seeking the dream-land of
Ke-au-nini, and then around to Waipio Valley. There they saw a rainbow
resting over the home of a tabu chief, Ka-lua-hine. They landed near the
door of the Under-world. This entrance is through a cave under water.
There they saw the shadow of Milu, the ruler of the dead. Milu's people
called out, "Here are men breaking the tabu of the chief." Olopana, a
very high chief, heard the shouts while he was in the temple in the
valley. He saw the visitors chased by the people, running here and
there. Haina-kolo, his sister, was tabu. Watchmen were on the outside of
her house. They also saw the two men and the people pursuing, and told
Haina-kolo, and she ordered one of the watchmen to go out and say to the
strangers, "Oh, run swiftly; run, run, and come inside this temple!"
They heard and ran in. The people stopped on the outside of the wall
around the house. This was a tabu drum place, and not a temple of
safety.

Olopana was in the heiau (temple) Pakaalana. Haina-kolo asked who they
were. They said they were from Hawaii. She said, "No, you have come from
the sea." Hoo-lei-palaoa, one of her watchmen, called, and men came and
caught the two strangers, taking them to Olopana, who was very angry
because they had come into the temple of his sister. So he ordered his
men to take them at once and carry them to a prison house to die on the
morrow. He said if the prisoners escaped, the watchmen should die and
their bodies be burned in the fire. Toward morning the two prisoners
talked together and uttered incantations. Ke-au-nini saw by the signs
that they were in some trouble and chanted in the ears of the watchmen:
"They shall not die. They shall not die."

The watchmen reported to Olopana what they had heard, then returned to
watch. The moon was rising and the two prisoners were talking. Ke-au-kai
told his brother to look at the moon, saying: "This means life. The
cloud passes, morning comes." Ke-au-kai prayed and chanted. The watchmen
again reported to Olopana, giving the words of the chant. In this chant
the family names were given. Olopana said: "These are the names of my
mother's people. My mother is Hina. Her sister is Hiilei. Her brothers
are Ke-au-kai and Ke-au-miki. They were all living at Kuai-he-lani. Hina
and her husband Ku went away to Waipio. There she had her child,
Haina-kolo."

Olopana sent messengers for Hina, who was like the rising moon, giving
life, and for her husband Ku, who was at Napoopoo, asking them to come
and look at these prisoners. They ran swiftly and arrived by daylight.
Hina had been troubled all night. Messengers called: "Awake! Listen to
the chant of the prisoners, captured yesterday." And they reported the
prayers of Ke-au-kai. Hina arose and went to the heiau (temple) and
heard the story of her brothers, who came also with the warriors.
Olopana heard Hina wailing with her brothers, and was afraid that his
mother would kill him because he had treated his visitors so badly. The
strangers told her they had come to find a wife for Ke-au-nini. They had
looked at the beautiful women of all the islands and had found none
except the woman at Waipio. Then they told about the anger of the
people, the pursuit, and their entrance into the tabu temple.

Hina commanded Olopana to come before them. He took warriors and chiefs
and came over to the temple and stood before his parents. Hina
pronounced judgment, saying: "This chief shall live because he sent for
me. The chiefs and people who pursued shall die and be cooked in the
oven in which they thought to place the strangers."

Ku's warriors captured Olopana's men and took them away prisoners, but
Olopana was spared and made welcome by his uncle. And they all feasted
together for days. Then the brothers prepared to go after Ke-au-nini.

One man who heard the wailing of the brothers and knew of the coming of
Hina went to his house, took his wife and children and ran by way of
Hilo to Puna-luu. It was said this man took his calabash to get water at
the spring Kauwila, and an owl picked a hole in it and let the water
out. For this the owl was injured by a stone which was thrown at him,
and he told the other birds. They said he was rightly punished for his
fault.

The brothers found their red boat, launched it, and bade farewell to the
chief's people and lands. They returned to Kuai-he-lani, like a flash of
lightning speeding along the coast from south to west. The boy in the
temple saw them in their swift boat. He told Hiilei and prepared for
their coming. They landed, feasted, and told their story. Then they
prepared for their journey to Waipio. Their boat was pulled by fish in
place of boatmen, and these disappeared upon arrival at Hawaii.
Ke-au-kai went first to meet Olopana, who ran down to see Ke-au-nini and
asked how he came. Ke-au-nini said, "There was no wandering, no
murmuring, no hunger, no pinched faces."

Then they feasted while over them thunder and lightning played and mist
covered the house. Awa was thrown before the spirit of the thunder and
they established tabus.

Olopana had trouble with his priests and became angry and wanted to
punish them because they did not know how to do their work so well as
Ke-au-nini. They could make thunder and lightnings and earthquakes, but
Ke-au-nini blew toward the east and something like a man appeared in a
cloud of dust; he put his right hand in the dust and began to make land.
Olopana saw this and thought it was done by the kahunas (priests) and so
he forgave them, thinking they had more power than Ke-au-nini. Later he
ordered them to be killed and cooked. Olopana asked Ke-au-nini, "Which
of the tabu houses do you wish to take as your residence?" Ke-au-nini
replied: "My house is the lightning, the bloody sky, or the dark cloud
hanging over Kuai-he-lani, down the ridge or extending cape Ke-au-oku,
where Ku of Kauhika is, where multitudes of eyes bend low before the
gods. The house of my parents--there is where I dwell. You have heard of
that place."

Olopana was greatly astonished, bowed his head and thought for a long
time, then said: "We will set apart our tabu days for worship, and I
will see your tabu place--you in your place and I outside. When you are
through your days of tabu you must return and we will live together."

Ke-au-nini raised his eyes and spoke softly to the clouds above him: "O
my parents, this my brother-in-law wishes to see our dwelling-place,
therefore call Ke-au-kai to send down our tabu dwelling-place."

Ke-au-kai was near him, and said: "We had very many troubles on the
ocean in coming after the one whom you want for your wife. You aided us
to escape; perhaps the old man in the skies will hear you if you call."
Then Ke-au-nini turned toward the east:

    "Ke-au-nini has his home,
    His home with his mother.
    Hiilei, the wife,
    She was the child of Nakula-uka,
    The first-born Kakela.
    The cheeks grow red;
    And the eyes flash fire.
    In the Lewa-lani (heavens),
    The very heart of the lightning,
    A double rainbow is high arched.
    The voice of the Kana-mu are heard.
    Calling and crying are the Kana-wa.
    [The Kana-mu and the Kana-wa were companies of little people,
    _i.e._, fairies.]
    I continually call to you, O little ones,
    Come here with the white feathers,
    Let feathers come here together;
    Let all the colors of the tortoise-back
    Gather and descend;
    Let all the posts stand strong;
    Braced shall be the house;
    Fasten in also the smoke-colored feathers;
    Work swiftly and complete our tabu house."

Then the darkness of evening came, and in the shadows the little people
labored in the moonless night. Soon their work was done, the house
finished, and a sacred drum placed inside. When the clear sky of the
morning rested over, and the sun made visible the fairy home in the
early dawn, the people cried out with wonder at the beautiful thing
before them. There stood a house of glowing feathers of all colors.
Posts and rafters of polished bones shone like the ivory teeth of the
whale, tinted in the smoke of a fire. Softly swayed the feathered thatch
in a gentle breeze, rustling through the surrounding cocoa-trees. Most
beautiful it was, as in the chant of Lilinoe:

    "Hulei Lilinoe me Kuka-hua-ula;
    Hele Hoaheo i kai o Mokuleia."

    "Lifted up, blown by the wind are
    The falls down to the sea of Mokuleia."

Ke-au-nini told his brother-in-law, "Oh, my brother, look upon my tabu
dwelling-place as you wished."

Olopana was very curious, and asked, "How many people are needed to make
a house like this so quickly?" Ke-au-nini laughed and said, "You have
seen my people: there are three of us who built this house--I, the
chief, and my two friends."

He did not give the names of the little people, Kana-mu and Kana-wa, who
were really great multitudes, like the menehunes who made the ditch at
Waimea, Kauai. They were the one-night people. All this work was
finished while they alone could see clearly to use their magic powers.

Inside the house lay soft mats made from feathers of many birds, and
sleeping-couches better than had ever been seen before. Ke-au-nini said
to his brother-in-law: "We are now ready to have the tabu of our house.
My parents will enter with me."

Olopana asked his kahunas if it were right for the parents to stay with
the chief during a tabu, under the law of their land. The priests
consulted and told Olopana that this was all right. They had no power to
forbid. The parents had divine power, so also the boy, both alike, and
could dwell together without breaking tabu. Then they said, "If you
forbid, you will be landless."

Ke-au-kai and Ke-au-miki entered the house with their young chief.
Ke-au-miki beat the sacred drum, announcing the tabu. They poured and
drank awa, ate sugar-cane and chanted softly to the rhythm of the drum.
Olopana was filled with jealousy because all was hidden from him. He did
not know what a drum was. He had only known a time of tabu, but not the
secret drum, and the soft chant.

During the ten days' tabu Ke-au-nini did not see his wife, but remained
shut in his place. Olopana called for all the people to bring presents.
When the tabu was over and the temple door opened, Ke-au-nini and
Haina-kolo prepared for the marriage.

All the people came bringing feather mats, food, fish, and awa, which
had been growing on a tree. Hamakua sent food and fish; Hilo sent olona
and feathers; Puna sent mats and awa from the trees; Kau sent kapa; Kona
sent red kapas; Kohala sent its wonderful noted sweet potatoes. The
young chiefess appeared before all the people, coming from her tabu
place, and she saw all the fine presents, and a great cocoanut-leaf
lanai (porch) prepared by her brother. She came there before her parents
and brother. They were waiting for Ke-au-nini, who delayed coming.
Olopana asked his priests: "Why does the young chief fail to appear? We
are all ready for the marriage feast." The priest said to Olopana: "Do
you think that you can treat this man as one of us? He is a god on his
father's side and also on his mother's. He is very high. It is on his
mother's side that you are related. You should go to him with a
sacrifice. Take a black pig, a cup of awa, a black chicken, and a
cocoanut. If we do not do these things we shall not know where he is
staying, for he is under the care of the gods. Now is the right time to
go with the offering. Go quickly. The sun is rising high in the sky."

Olopana quickly gathered the offerings and went away to sacrifice before
Ke-au-nini. He called him thus:

    "Rise up! Let your strength look inland;
    Let your might look toward the sea;
    Let your face look upward;
    Look up to the sun over your head;
    The strange night has passed. Awake!
    Here are the offerings,--
    Food for the gods:
    Let life come!"

He set the pig free and it ran to the feet of Ke-au-nini. The chicken
did the same, and the other offerings were laid before the door. Olopana
went back. Ke-au-nini and his uncles awoke. He said to them: "Now the
tabu is lifted. Now the hour of the marriage has come. We must prepare
to go down to the sea. We shall see the sports of this land. Soon we
shall meet the priests and the people."

They arose and opened their bundles of kapa, very fine and soft for red
malos (girdles) for the uncles. Ke-au-nini put on his malo, called
Ke-kea-awe-awe-ula (the red girdle with long ends, shaded in the tints
of the rainbow) and his red feather cloak and his red feather helmet,
nodding like a bird. His skin, polished and perfumed, shone
resplendently. He was most gorgeous in his appearance.

When he went out of his house, thatched with bird feathers and built of
polished bones, darkness spread over the sky. The voices of the little
fairies, the Kana-mu and Kana-wa were heard. The people in the great
cocoanut lanai were filled with wonder, for they had never seen darkness
come in this way. It was like the sun eclipsed. When Ke-au-nini and his
companions entered the lanai, the darkness passed away and all the
people saw them in their splendor. The chiefs opened a way for the
three. Ke-au-miki came in first and the people thought he was the
husband, but when Ke-au-kai came they said, "This one is more
beautiful," and when Ke-au-nini passed before them they fell on their
faces, although he had a gauze kapa thrown over him. He passed on
between rows of chiefs to the place of marriage. His uncles stepped
aside, and then he threw off his thin kapa and the people shouted again
and again until the echoes shook the precipices around the valley.


Then Haina-kolo came out of her house near by and was guided to the side
of her husband. As she saw him her heart melted and flowed to him like
the mingling of floating sea-mosses. Olopana arose and said: "O chiefs
and people, I have been asked to come here to the marriage of my sister
with one whom she has met in dreams and loved. I agree to this wedding.
Our parents approve, and the gods have given their signs. Our chiefess
shall belong to the stranger. You shall obey him. I will do as he may
direct. They shall now become husband and wife."

The people shouted again and again, saying, "This is the husband of our
chiefess." Then began the hookupu. Six districts brought six piles of
offerings. There were treasures and treasures of all kinds. Then came
the wonderful feast of all the people.

The fish companions of Ke-au-nini, who had drawn his boat from
Kuai-he-lani, wanted Haina-kolo for themselves. While they were at the
feast they found they could not get her, and they grew cold and ashamed
and angry. Soon they broke away from the feast. Moi and Uhu ran away to
the sea and returned to their homes. Niu-loa-hiki (a great eel) looked
at Ke-au-nini and said: "You are very strange. I thought I should have
my reward this day, but the winning has come to you. I am angry, because
you are my servant. It is a shame for the chiefs of Hawaii to let you
become their ruler." His angry eyes flashed fire, he opened his mouth
and started to cry out again, but the people saw him and shouted: "Look,
look, there is an eel that comes to the land. He runs and dives into the
sea. This eel, Niu-loa-hiki, is more evil than any other of all the
family of eels."

Then all the fish ran off angry at this failure and gathered in the sea
for consultation. Uhu said he would return at once to Makapuu. He was
the Uhu who had the great battle with Kawelo when he was caught in a
net. Moi went to the rough water outside the harbor. Kumunuiaiake went
to Hilo. He was the huge fish with which Limaloa had a great battle when
he came to visit Hawaii. He was killed by Limaloa. Hou and Awela went
wherever they could find a ditch to swim in.

The people feasted on the mullet of Lolakea and the baked dogs of Hilo
and the humpbacked mullet of Waiakea and all the sweet things of Hawaii.
Then the sports commenced and there was surf-riding, dancing, wrestling,
and boxing.

Kawelo-hea, the surf-rider of Kawa in Oahu, was the best surf-rider.
Hina-kahua, the child of the battling-places of Kohala, was the
best boxer. Pilau-hulu, the noted boy of Olaa, was the best
puhenehene-player. Lilinoe was the best konane-player. Luu-kia was the
best kilu-player. She was a relative of Haina-kolo.

When the sports were over they returned to the chief's house and slept.
Haina-kolo was one who did not closely adhere to the tabu. She ate the
tabu things, which were sacred, belonging to the gods, such as bananas
and luau. Ke-au-nini had always carefully, from his birth to
marriage-day, observed the tabu, but, following the example of his wife,
soon laid aside his carefulness, and lived in full disregard of all
restraint for a time.

Then Ke-au-nini left Haina-kolo and returned to Kuai-he-lani because
dissensions arose between them on account of their wrong-doing.

He did not tell his wife or friends, or even his uncles, but he took his
cocoanut-boat to go back to his home secretly. When he was far out in
the ocean his sister saw him from her home in Lewa-lani (the blue sky).
She sent Kana-ula, her watchman, to go out and guard him and bring him
to her. Kana-ula was a strong wind blowing with the black clouds which
rise before a storm.

In a little while the watchman saw Ke-au-nini off Kohala, and by his
great strength lifted Ke-au-nini and placed him on Kuai-he-lani, where
he saw his mother and relatives. Then he went up to Lewa-lani to his
sister and dwelt with her to forget his love for Haina-kolo.

Haina-kolo had a great love for her husband, never making any trouble
before they separated. Her love for him was burning and full of passion,
while she grieved over his disappearance. She soon had a child. The
priests living in the heiau (temple), Pakaalana, beat their drums, and
all Waipio knew that a chief was born.

Haina-kolo began to go about like one crazed, longing to see the eyes of
her husband. She took her child and launched out in the ocean. The boat
in which she placed the child was the long husk of a cocoanut. She held
fast to this and swam and floated by its side. When they had gone far
out in the sea a great wind swept over them and upon them, driving them
far out of sight of all land. She looked only for death. This wind was
Kana-ula, and had been sent by Moho, who was very angry at the girl for
violating the tabu of the gods and eating the things set apart for the
gods. This wind was to blow her far away on the ocean until death came.

When Haina-kolo had been blown a little way she prayed and moved her
feet, turning toward the place where she had rejoiced with her husband.
Then she offered another prayer and began to swim, but was driven out of
sight of land. The wind ceased, its anger passed away, and a new land
appeared. She swam toward this new land. Lei-makani, the child, saw this
land, which was the high place of Ke-ao-lewa, and chanted:

    "Destroy the first kou grove;
    Destroy the second kou grove;
    Open a wonderful door in the evening;
    Offer your worship.
    Return, return, O bird!"

The mother said: "No, my child, that is not a bird. Oh, my child, that
is Ke-ao-lewa, the land where we shall find a shore."

But she went on patiently, swimming by the capes of Kohala, and came
near to the places of noted surf and was almost on the land. Moho saw
her still swimming and sent another wind servant, Makani-kona, the south
wind, to drive her again out in the ocean. This south wind came like a
whirlwind, sweeping and twisting over the waves, sending Haina-kolo far
out in the tossing sea. He thought he had killed her, so he went back
to Moho.

Moho asked him about his journey over the seas. He replied, "You sent me
to kill, and that I did." She was satisfied and ceased her vigilance.
Tired and suffering, Haina-kolo and her child floated far out in the
ocean, too weary to swim. Then Lei-makani saw Ke-ao-lewa again lifted up
and spread out like the wings of a floating bird. Help came to her in a
great shark, Kau-naha-ili-pakapaka (Kau-naha, with a rough skin),
belonging to the family of Pii-moi, one of the relatives of Ku, who swam
up to her and carried her and the child until he was tired. Haina-kolo
was rested and warmed by the sun. She saw that her shark friend was
growing weak, so she called to the sun, "O sun, go on your way to the
land of Ka-lewa-nuu, and tell Ke-au-nini that we are here at the cape of
Ka-ia."

The sun did not hear the cry from the sea. She called again, using the
same words. The sun heard this call of Haina-kolo and went on to the
place where Ke-au-nini was staying and called to him, "O Ke-au-nini,
your wife is near the cape of Ka-ia."

Moho heard the call. She was playing konane with her brother. She made a
noise to confuse the words of the sun, and said to her brother, "O ke ku
kela, o ka holo keia. Niole ka luna, kopala ka ele, na ke kea ka ai."
"Take this one up. Let that one move. Take that up slowly. The black is
blotted out, the white wins."

Then the sun called again, saying the same words, and Ke-au-nini heard,
leaped up and left his sister, and went down to Kuai-he-lani and entered
the temple, where he was accustomed to sleep, and fell as one dead.
While he was reclining, his spirit left his body and went down to Milu
and stayed there a long time.

Haina-kolo was very near the land in the afternoon. Soon they came to
the beach. There she dug a little hole for her child and laid him in his
little boat in it and went up the path like a crazy person to the top of
the high precipices of Ka-hula-anu (the cold dancing) and began to eat
fruit growing on the trees. She clothed herself in leaves, then rushed
into the forest.

Lei-makani was still floating where his mother had left him, near a
place where the servants of Luu-kia went fishing every morning to get
the food loved by the chiefs. Two men, Ka-holo-holo-uka and
Ka-holo-holo-kai, had come down for Luu-kia, carrying a net. They threw
their net over the water and the child floated into it. They thought
they had a great fish. They carried the net up on the beach and found
the boy. It was a little dark, and hard to see what they were catching.
One called to the other, "What have we caught this morning?" The other
said: "I thought we had a great fish, but this is a child. I will take
this child to my home." The other said, "No--This is a fish." So they
had a quarrel until the sun rose. Then they went up to the village.

Ka-holo-holo-uka told his wife, "We have a child." Then he told her how
they had caught Lei-makani. They talked loudly. This chiefess heard
their noisy clamor and asked her servant, "What's the trouble with these
noisy ones?" They told her and she wanted that child brought to her, and
commanded Maile-lau-lii (small leaf maile) to go and get it. He took it
to Luu-kia, who marked its wonderful beauty. She sent for the fishermen
to tell her how they got the child. They told her about the fishing.

She wanted to know who were the parents. They said: "We do not know.
This may be the child of Haina-kolo, for we know she has disappeared
with her child. She may be dead and this may be her boy."

Luu-kia said, "You two take the child, and I will give the name,
Lopa-iki-hele-wale [going without anything]. Then you care for it until
it grows up."

They took the child to the land of Opaeloa, as a good place to bring it
up. The fishermen said to Luu-kia, "Will you provide food, fish, and
clothing?" She said, "Yes." They thought the child would not understand,
but it knew all these words. The fisherman and his wife took the child
away. Waipio Valley people were surrounded by precipices, but the gods
of Waipio watched all the troubles by sending messengers to go over to
the upland and follow Haina-kolo.

Ku and Hina and Olopana were burdened by the loss of Haina-kolo and
Lei-makani, so they went to the temple at Pakaalana, where the uncles of
Ke-au-nini were staying. There they consulted the gods with signs and
sorceries.

They sent Ke-au-miki to get some little stones at Kea-au, a place near
Haena. His brother said: "Get thirteen stones--seven white and six
black. Make them fast in a bundle, so they cannot be lost, then come
back by Pana-ewa and get awa (_piper methysticum_) which man did not
plant, but which was carried by the birds to the trees and planted
there. Then return this evening and we will study the signs." Ke-au-miki
went up the pali (precipice) and hastened along the top running and
leaping and flying over Hamakua to Hilo.

The Hilo palis were nothing to this man as he sped swiftly over the
gulches until he came to the Wailuku River guarded by the kupua
Pili-a-mo-o, who concealed the path so that none could find it until a
price was paid. The dragon covered the path with its rough skin.

Ke-au-miki stood looking for a path, but could only see what seemed to
be pahoehoe lava. The tail of the dragon was like a kukui-tree-trunk
lying in the water. He saw the tail switching and rising up to strike
him. Then he knew that this was a kupua. The tail almost struck him on
the head. He called to Kahuli in Kuai-he-lani, who sent a mighty wind
and hurled aside the waters, caught up the body of the dragon and let it
fall, smashing it on the rocks, breaking the beds of lava.

Then Ke-au-miki rushed over the river and up the precipices, speeding
along to Pa-ai-ie, where the long ohia point of Pana-ewa is found, then
turned toward the sea and went to Haena, to the place where the little
stones aala-manu are found. He picked up the stones and ran to Pana-ewa
and got the awa hanging on the tree, tied up the awa and stones and
hurried back. He crossed the gulch at Konolii and met a man,
Lolo-ka-eha, who tried to take the awa away from him. He was a robber.
When they came face to face, Ke-au-miki caught the man with his hand,
hurled him over the precipice and killed him. When he saw that this man
was dead, he ran as swiftly as the wind until he met a very beautiful
woman, Wai-puna-lei. She saw him and asked him to be her husband, but
he would not stop. He crossed Hilo boundaries to Hamakua, to the place
where the kapa-trees were growing, as the sun was going down over the
palis. He came to the temple door and laid down his burden.


Then Ke-au-kai said: "This is my word to all the people: Prepare the awa
while I take the little stones, pour awa into a cup: I will cover it up
and we will watch the signs. If, while I chant, the bubbles on the awa
come to the left side, we will find Haina-kolo. If they go to the right,
she is fully lost. Let all the people keep silence; no noise, no running
about, no sleeping. Watch all the signs and the clouds in the heavens."

Then he chanted:

    "O Ku and Kane and Kanaloa,
    Let the magic power come.
    Amama ua noa.
    Tabu is lifted from
    My bird-catching place for food.
    You are a stranger, I am a resident.
    Let the friend be taken care of.
    United is the earth of the tabu woman. Amama."

The bubbles stood on the right side, and the priest said, "We shall
never find Haina-kolo; the gods have gone away." Olopana said: "I am
much troubled for my brother and sister, and that child I wanted for the
chief of this land. I do not understand why these things have come to
us."

All the people were silent, weeping softly, but Ke-au-kai and his
brother were not troubled, for they knew their chief and wife were in
the care of the aumakuas.

When Lei-makani had grown up, Luu-kia took him as her husband. He went
surf-riding daily. She was very jealous of Maile, who would often go
surf-riding with him. Lei-makani did not care for her, for he knew she
was a sister of his mother although she had a child by him. One day,
when he went with Maile, Luu-kia was angry and caught that child and
killed it by dashing it against a stone.

The servants went down to the beach, waiting for Lei-makani to come to
land. Then they told him about the death of his child and their fear for
him if he went up to the house with Maile. Lei-makani left his
surf-board and went to the house weeping, and found the child's body by
the stone. He took a piece of kapa and wrapped it up, carrying the
broken body down to a fountain, where he cleansed it and offered chants
and incantations until the child became alive. His mother, Haina-kolo,
heard the following chants and came to her son, for the voice was
carried to her by kupuas who had magic powers. The child's name was
Lono-kai. He wrapped it again in soft warm kapas and chanted while he
washed the child, naming the fountain Kama-ahala (a child has passed
away):

    "Kama-ahala smells of the blood;
    The sick smell of the blood rises.
    Washed away in the earth is the blood;
    Hard is the red blood
    Warmed by the heat of the heavens,
    Laid out under the shining sky.
    Lono-kai-o-lohia is dead."

Then the voice of the child was heard in a low moan from the bundle,
saying, "Lono-kai-o-lohia [Lono possessed of the Ala spirit] is alive."
The father heard the voice and softly uttered another chant:

    "In the silence
    Has been heard the gods of the night;
    What is this wailing over us?
    Wailing for the death of
    Lono, the spirit of the sea--dead!"

The voice came again from the kapas, "Lono, the spirit of the sea, is
alive." Lei-makani's love for his child was overflowing, and again he
uttered an incantation to his own parents:

    "O Ku, the father!
    O Hina, the mother!
    Olopana was the first-born;
    Haina-kolo, the sister, was born:
    Haina-kolo and Ke-au-nini were the parents:
    Lei-makani was the child:
    I am Lei-makani, the child of Haina-kolo,
    The sacred woman of Waipio's precipices;
    My mother is living among the ripe halas;
    For us was the fruit of the ulii;
    I was found by the fisherman;
    I am the child of the pali hula-anu;
    I was cared for by one of my family
    Inland at Opaeloa;
    They gave me the name Lopa-iki-hele-wale
    [Little lazy fellow having nothing];
    But I am Lei-makani--you shall hear it."

His heart was heavy with longing for his mother, and the gods of the
wind, the wind brothers, took his plaintive love-chant to the ears of
Haina-kolo, who had wandered in her insanity, but was now free from her
craze and had become herself. She followed that voice over the
precipices and valleys to the top of a precipice. Standing there and
looking down she saw her child and grandchild below, and she chanted:

    "Thy voice I have heard
    Softly echoed by the pali,
    Wailing against the pali;
    Thy voice, my child beloved;
    My child, indeed;
    My child, when the cloud hung over
    And the rainbow light was above us,
    That day when we floated together
    When the sea was breaking my heart;
    My child of the cape of Ka-ia,
    When the sun was hanging above us.
    Where have I been?
    Tell Ke-au-nini-ula-o-ka-lani;
    I was in the midst of the sea
    With the child of our love;
    My child, my little child,
    Where are you? Oh, come back!"

Then she went down the precipice and met her son holding his child in
his arms, and wailed:

    "My lord from the fogs of the inland,
    From the precipices fighting the wind,
    Striking down along the ridges;
    My child, with the voice of a bird,
    Echoed by the precipice of Pakohi,
    Shaking and dancing on inaccessible places,
    Laughing out on the broken waters
    Where we were floating in danger;
    There I loved dearly your voice
    Fighting with waves
    While the fierce storm was above us
    Seen by your many gods
    Who dwell in the shining sky--
    Auwe for us both!"

They waited a little while, until the time when Lono-kai became strong
again. Then they went up to the village.

Haina-kolo had run into the forest, her wet pa-u torn off, no clothing
left. Her long hair was her cloak, clothing her from head to foot. She
wandered until cold, then dressed herself with leaves. As her right
senses returned she made warm garments of leaves and ate fruits of the
forest. When they came to the village they met the people who knew
Haina-kolo. She dwelt there until Lono-kai grew up. He and his father
looked like twins, having great resemblance, people told them, to
Ke-au-nini. The boy asked, "Where is my grandfather, Ke-au-nini?"
Lei-makani said: "I never saw your grandfather. He was very tabu and
sacred. He killed his own father, Ku-aha-ilo, god of the heavens. I
know by my mana [spirit power] that he is with the daughters of Milu."
The boy said: "I must go and find him. I will go in my spirit body,
leaving this human body. You must not forbid the journey." Ke-au-kai,
the priest, said: "You cannot find him unless you learn what to do
before you go. Those chiefs of Milu have many sports and games. I tell
you these things must be learned before you go into that land. If you
are able to win against the spirits of that place you can get your
grandfather."

All the chiefs aided the boy to acquire skill in all sports. They went
to the fields of Paaohau. Nuanua, the most skilful teacher of hula,
taught him to dance. The highest chiefs and chiefesses went with him to
help, taking their retinues with them. Lei-makani said: "The knowledge
of sports is the means by which you will catch your grandfather. Now be
careful. Do not be stingy with food. Give to others and take care of the
people."

They went up in a great company, and Haina-kolo wondered at the beauty
of the boy, and asked why they were travelling. Lono-kai told them the
reason for his journey and desire to see the field of sports.

Nuanua, the hula teacher, sent his assistants to get all kinds of leaves
and flowers used in the hula, then sent for a black pig to be used as
an omen. If it ran to Lono-kai, he would become a good dancer; if not,
he would fail. The pig went to him. The priest offered this prayer:

    "Laka is living where the forest leaves are trembling,
    The ghost-god of dancers above and below,
    From the boundary of the North to the place most southern;
    O Laka, your altar is covered with leaves,
    The dancing leaves of the ieie vine;
    This offering of leaves is the labor of the gods,
    The gods of your family, Pele and Hiiaka;
    The women living in warm winds come here for the toil,
    And this labor of ours is learning your dance.
    Tabu laid down; tabu lifted. Amama ua noa [We are through]!"

The priest lifted his eyes, and the pig was seen lying at the foot of
the boy. Then he commenced teaching the boy the kilu and the first
dance. They were thirty days learning the dances, and the boy learned
all those his teachers knew.

Then they went around Hawaii, studying the dances. He was told to go
back and get all the new ideas and seek the gods to learn their newest
dance, for theirs differed from those of his teachers. He was to seek
this knowledge in dreams. Lei-makani said: "Your teachers have shown you
the slow way; if that is all you know, you will win fame, but not
victory. You must learn from the gods." Lono-kai again went to Hamakua
with his companions and learned how to play konane, the favorite game of
Ke-au-nini. The teacher said, "I have taught you all I know inside and
outside, as I would not teach the other young chiefs." The boy said to
him, "There is one thing more,--give offerings to the gods that they may
teach us in our dreams newer and better ways."

So they waited quietly, offering sacrifices. The priests told him to set
apart a pig while he made a prayer. If the pig died during the prayer,
he would not forget anything learned. The boy laid his right hand on the
pig and began to pray:

    "Here is a pig, an offering to the gods.
    O Lono in the Under-world, Lono in the sky:
    O Kane, who makes not-to-be-broken laws,
    Kane in the darkness, Kane in the hot wind,
    Kane of the generations, Kane of the thunder,
    Kane in the whirlwind and the storm:
    Here is labor--labor of the gods.
    My body is alive for you!
    Filled up is the Nuu-pule.
    My prayer is for those you hold dear.
    O Laka, come with knowledge and magic power!
    Laka, dancing in the moving forest leaves
    Of the mountain ridges and the valleys,
    Return and bestow the knowledge
    Of Pele and Hiiaka, the guardians of the wind,
    Knowing the multitude of the gods of the night,
    Knowing Aukele-nui-aku in the Under-world.
    O people of the night,
    Here is the pig, the offering!
    Come with knowledge, magic power, and safety.
    Amama ua noa."

Then the boy lifted his hand and the pig lay silent in death. Then came
thunder shaking the earth, and lightning flashing in flames, and a storm
breaking in red rain. Mists came and the shadows of the thousands of
gods of Ke-au-nini fell upon the boy. The teachers and friends sat in
perfect silence for a long time. The storm was beating outside, and the
boy was overcome with weariness and wondered at the silence of his
friends.

Rainbow colors were about him, and the people were awed by their fears
and sat still until evening came. Then the teacher asked the boy if he
saw what had been done in the darkness resting over him, and if he could
explain to them. The boy said, "I do not understand you; perhaps my
teacher can explain."

Nuanua said: "I am growing old and have never seen such things above any
one learning the dance. You have come to me modestly, like one of the
common people, when I should have gone to you, and now the gods show
your worth and power and their favor."

Then he took a piece of wood from the hula altar which was covered with
leaves and flowers, and, putting it in a cup of awa, shook it, and
looked, and said to the boy: "This is the best I can do for you. Now the
gods will take you in their care." Then he poured awa into cups, passing
them to all the people as he chanted incantations, all the company
clapping their hands. Then they drank. But the boy's cup was drunk by
the eepas of Po (gnomes of the night). So the company feasted and the
night became calm. Lono-kai that night left his friends with Nuanua and
journeyed on. He waited some days and then told Lei-makani he thought he
was ready. He said: "Yes, I have heard about your success, but I will
see what you can do. We will wait another ten days before you go." Then
for two days all the people of Waipio brought their offerings. They
built a great lanai, and feasted. Lei-makani told the people that he had
called them together to see the wonderful power in the sports of the
boy. So the boy stood up and chanted:

    "O Kuamu-amu [the little people of the clouds of the sky],
    The alii thronging in crowds from Kuai-he-lani,
    On the shoulders of Moana-liha, divided at the waters,
    Divided at the waters of the heavy mist,
    And the rain coming from the skies,
    And the storm rushing inland.
    Broken into mists are the falls of the mountains,--
    Mists that bathe the buds of the flowers,
    Opening the buds below the precipices.
    Arise, O beloved one!"


Ke-au-nini heard this chant, even down in Po, while he was sporting
with the eepas of Milu, while his spirit body was with his friend
Popo-alaea. He repeated the same chant, and the ghosts all rejoiced and
laughed, and Laka leaped to his side and danced before him. They had the
same sports as the noted ones on Hawaii. Lono-kai danced in magic power
before all the people until the time came for him to go along the path
of his visions of the night. All omens and signs had been noted and were
found to be favorable. One of the old priests told the people to make
known their thought about the best path for the young chief, but they
were silent. Then Moli-lele, an old priest who had the spirit of the
unihipilis resting upon him, said: "I know that there will be many
troubles. Cold and fierce winds come over the sea. Low tides come in the
morning. The land of Kane-huna-moku rises in the coral surf." He
chanted:

    "Dead is this chief of ours,
    Caught as a bird strikes a fish;
    The foam of surf waves rises up,
    Smiting and driving below.
    No sorcerer of the land is there,
    Where the coral reef labors,
    And the rock-eating Hina of the far-off sea."

The chiefs began to wail, but lightning was in the eyes of the boy and
his face was filled with anger at this word of the old priest. Then
another priest arose and said: "O chiefs and people, I have seen the
path to the Under-world, and it is not right for this young man to go.
His body is human and easily captured by the ghosts. He might be safe if
he could get the body of the one he seeks. There are fierce guardians of
the path who will make war on whoever comes in the flesh."

Then Kalei, another priest, said: "I know their world. I saw the stars
this morning, and they told me that the path was stopped against this
chief by broken coral and the bones of the dead. The tabu-children of
Hina are swimming in the sea. I will prove the danger by this awa cup.
If the bubbles of the awa poured in go to the right, he can go. If to
the left, he must stay." This he did uttering incantations, but bubbles
covered all the surface.

Then the priests advised the young chief to stay and eat the fat of the
land. Then Hae-hae, the great chief, said, "We have come to point out a
path, if we can, and to make quiet and peaceful that way into Po." He
instituted new omens, and showed that the young chief would be
successful, but he would have many difficulties to overcome.

Lono-kai arose and said: "The words of these chiefs were twisted. I will
go after the spirit-body of my grandfather, as I have sworn to do. My
word is fast. I will go to the land where my grandfather stays."

The priests who had tried to terrify Lono-kai were his enemies, and
would oppose his journey, and he wanted them killed, but Lei-makani
would not permit it. Ku also quieted him with patient words, and he
ceased from anger and told them he must prepare at once to go.

Lei-makani had a double canoe made ready, and selected a number of
strong men to accompany the young chief. Lono-kai would not have any of
these men, but went out early in the morning, took a cup of awa to the
temple nearby and chanted his genealogical mele.

Thunder and lightning and heavy wind and rain attended his visit to the
temple. He returned to his parents and told them to wait for him thirty
days. If a mist was over all the land they might wait and watch ten days
more, and if the mist continued, another ten, when he would return with
thunder and lightning to meet his friends. But if the voices of the sea
were strong at Kumukahi, with mist resting on Opaelolo and rain on
Puu-o-ka-polei, then he would be dead.

He took his feather cloak and war weapons from his grandparents, and
feather helmet, and went out. He bade his parents farewell, took a
cocoanut-husk canoe and went down to the sea. The waves rose high,
pounding the face of the coast precipices. Lei-makani ran down to bring
Lono-kai back, but according to the proverb he caught the hand of the
chiefess who lives in the land of Nowhere. The boy had disappeared.

Out in the sea Lono-kai was tossing in the high waves, passing all the
islands, even to the land Niihau. There he met the great watchman of
Kuai-he-lani called Honu (the turtle). He came quietly near the head.
Honu asked, "Where are you going?" Lono-kai said: "You speak as if you
alone had the right to the sea. You are a humpbacked turtle; you shall
become a great round stone." Then the turtle began to slap its fins on
the sea, raising waves high as precipices. Five times forty he struck
the sea with mighty force, looking for the destruction of the chief as
the waves passed over him. But Lono-kai waited until the turtle became
tired, thinking the chief dead. As the waters became calm the chief
raised his club and struck the right flapper of the turtle, destroying
its power.

Then the left fin beat the sea into foam, but Lono-kai waited and broke
that fin also; then he broke the back of the turtle into little pieces
and went on his way. Soon the ocean grew fierce again. Huge waves came,
and whirlwinds. He saw something red in the great sea--a kupua of the
ocean. The name of this enemy was Ea, a great red turtle, who crawled
out and asked where he was going. Lono-kai said: "What right have you to
question me? Have I questioned your right to go on the sea?"

Ea said: "This is not your place. I will kill you. You shall be food for
me to eat. When you are dead I will go and kill the watchman who let you
come into this tabu-sea of my chief." "Who is your chief?" asked
Lono-kai. Ea replied: "Hina-kekai [the calabash for boiling water], the
daughter of Pii-moi. Now I will kill you."


Then Ea began to strike the water with his right fin, throwing the water
up on all sides in mighty waves, expecting to overthrow Lono-kai and his
boat. When he rested to see the result of this battle his fin was on the
surface, and the chief struck it and broke it.

Then in another fight, when head and fin were lifted to destroy the
boat, Lono-kai struck the neck and broke it, so killing his enemy.

Now he thought all his troubles were over and he could go safely on his
way.

But soon there lay before him a new enemy, floating on the sea, a very
long thing, like a long stick. He approached and saw that it was like
the fin of a shark, but as he came nearer he observed the smooth skin of
a long eel. Lifting its head and looking right at him, the eel said: "O,
proud man, you are here where you have no business to be. I will mix you
with my awa and eat you now." Then he struck at Lono-kai with his tail
and hit his eyes and knocked him down, then, thinking Lono-kai was dead,
he turned his head to the boat to catch the body, but Lono-kai, leaping
up on the head of the eel, holding his boat with one hand and his club
with the other, struck the head with the magic club, breaking the
bones. Fire came out of the broken head, the eel falling into pieces
which became islands of fire in the midst of which appeared a very
beautiful woman who asked him whence he came, and why.

He told her he was from Hawaii and was going to Kuai-he-lani and would
kill her, for he thought she was a mo-o, or dragon-woman. He said, "You
tried to kill me, O woman, and now you must stay and become the fire
oven of the ocean." He asked her name. She said to him: "This kupua was
Waka, the dragon of the rough head, and I have escaped from his body. I
want you now for my husband, and I will accompany you on your journey."

Lono-kai told her, "This would not be right, but when I return, if I
come this way, you shall be mine." She said, "My ruler will kill me, for
I have been sent to guard this place." Lono-kai asked, "Who is your
ruler?" "Hina-kekai, she will kill me. You belong to the Ku-aha-ilo
family, which is a very strong family. Therefore we have been watching
for you for our chiefess."

Lono-kai told her to go to his land and wait for him. He would be her
husband. She must wait there without fault until his return. Then he
went away. Waka did not know whence this chief came, so she went to Oahu
and landed at Laiewai. There she awaited her husband.

Lono-kai went on to the land of Kuai-he-lani, where he landed and hid
his boat among the vines on the beach. He went to the temple where the
body of his grandfather lay, clean and beautiful in death. He could not
see any door or break in the body for the escape of the spirit.

Then he struck the earth with his magic war-club until a great hole
opened. He looked down and saw a large house and many people moving
around below. He knew that the spirit of his grandfather was there. He
went down and looked about, but the people had disappeared. The remains
of a great feast were there. He stood at the door looking in, when two
men appeared and welcomed him with an "Aloha," and told him he must have
come from the land above, for there was no man like him in that place.
They advised him to make his path back into that land from whence he had
come, for if the king of the Under-world saw him he would be killed.
Lono-kai asked, "Who is your king?" They told him, "Milu." "What does he
do?" "Our king dances for Popo-alaea and Ke-au-nini." Lono-kai went with
the men to see the sports. They tried to persuade him not to go, but he
was very obstinate and asked them to hide him. They said, "If we do this
and you are discovered we shall be destroyed."

He told them the reason of his coming and asked their help, and said
when he had his grandfather they could follow him into the Upper-world.
They went to a house which was large and beautiful. They entered and saw
the chiefs playing kilu. After a long time Lono-kai began to make his
presence known. Popo-alaea was winning. Then Ke-au-nini chanted:

    "The multitude of those below give greeting
    To the friends of the inland forest of Puna;
    We praise the restfulness of our home;
    The leaves and divine flowers of that place."

Lono-kai chanted the same words as an echo of Ke-au-nini. Silence fell
on the group, and Milu cried out: "Who is the disturber of our sport? We
must find him and kill him." They began the search, but could not find
any one and at last resumed their games. Popo-alaea chanted:

    "I welcome back my friend,
    The great shadow of Waimea,
    Where stands the milo-tree in the gentle breeze,
    And the ohia-tree. You know the place."

Ke-au-nini sang the same chant. Then Lono-kai echoed it very softly and
sweetly. All said this last voice was the best. Milu again caused a
search to be made, but found nothing. The two men hid Lono-kai by a post
of the house.

The group returned to the sports. Soon Milu changed the game to hula.
Ke-au-nini stood up to dance and began his chant:

    "Aloha to our houses without friends.
    The path goes inland to Papalakamo;
    Come now and enter!
    Outside is the trouble, the storm,
    And there you meet the cold."

The people around were striking the spirit drums. Then Lono-kai chanted:

    "Established is the honor of Ke-au-nini
    (Noteworthy is the name).
    Lifted up to the high heaven;
    I am the child of Lei-makani,
    I am Lono from the sunrise place, Hae-o-hae:
    I have come after thee, my father;
    We must return. Where are you?"

Ke-au-nini could not stand up to dance when he heard the voice of his
grandchild, for his love overpowered him. He looked up and saw the form
of the young chief leaping into the place prepared for the hula and
standing there before the chief. The people rose up in great confusion.
Lono-kai caught the spirit of Ke-au-nini and put it in a cocoanut-shell.
He leaped past the ghosts, and ran very swiftly out of the house.

Some of the people saw him lay hands on Ke-au-nini, and cried out: "Oh,
the husband of our chiefess! Oh, the husband of our chiefess! He has
taken the husband of our chiefess!" But they did not see Lono-kai go
out. The two men who had aided Lono-kai went out as soon as he leaped
into the hula place. They hurried along the path toward freedom, but
Lono-kai soon overtook them. Milu called to his people to hasten and
capture and kill the one who had stolen Ke-au-nini. They saw the two men
with Lono-kai, and pursued rapidly, but could not overtake them. The
fugitives were very near the opening to the world above. When Lono-kai
saw that the pursuers were almost upon him he whirled his magic war-club
and struck the ground, making a great hole into which the spirits fell
one over the other.

Lono-kai and the two watchmen went up the cave opening by which he had
gone down into the land of Milu. Dawn was breaking as they ran into the
temple at Kuai-he-lani, where the body of Ke-au-nini was lying. Lono-kai
pushed the spirit into the hollow of the foot and held the foot fast,
shaking it until the spirit had gone to the very ends of the body and
life had returned.

When Ke-au-nini was fully restored, Lono-kai asked him if he could help
restore to their bodies the two spirits who had aided him in escaping.
Ke-au-nini evidently did not remember anything of his life in the
Under-world, for he did not know these ghosts and thought he had been
asleep from the time he entered the temple and fell down in weariness.
Lono-kai thought they could not find the bodies, but Ke-au-nini put the
ghosts in cocoanuts and carried them up into the forest to one of his
ancestors who knew the bodies from which these ghosts had come. Thus
they were restored and had a long and happy life in their former home.

Lono-kai told his grandfather they must return to Hawaii to meet all the
friends.

For thirty days mists covered Hawaii and there was thunder and lightning
and earthquakes. Then Lono-kai said to Ke-au-nini: "To-morrow we must go
to Hawaii. We must have the appropriate ceremonies for cleansing and
taking food." Ke-au-nini said: "Yes, I have been a long time in the
adopted land of Milu, and my eyes are dimmed and my thought is dazed
with the dance of the restless spirits of the night. We must wait until
I have performed all the cleansing ceremonies, made offerings and
incantations. Prayers must be said for my return to life. Then we will
go."

They attended to all the temple rites, and the marks of death were
washed away. The body was cleansed, the eyes made clear, so strength and
joy returned into the body. Then Ke-au-nini said: "I am ready. I see a
multitude of birds circling around Kaula. There is evil toward Hawaii."

They again went into the temple and slept until very early the next
morning. Then they took their cocoanut-husk canoes, each holding his own
in his hand, and went down to the edge of the sea and stood there, each
pointing the nose of his boat toward Waipio.

None of the people awoke until they landed. They pulled the boats upon
the beach and went to their temple. As they came to the door of the
temple, drums beat like rolling thunder. Then the sun arose, the mists
all vanished from Hawaii. The people awoke and understood that their
chiefs had returned. They ran out of their houses shouting and
rejoicing. Olopana commanded the chiefs and the people to prepare all
kinds of sweet food and gifts and things for a very great luau. When
this was done they feasted sixty days and returned to their homes.

Lei-makani became the ruler of Hawaii. Lono-kai-o-lohia was honored by
his father. All of the chiefs in that generation were noted throughout
the islands.

                  *       *       *       *       *

It was said that there was a beautiful chiefess of Molokai who wanted to
find a young chief of Hawaii for her husband, so she sent her kahu, or
guardian, and servants to make the journey while she went back to her
sleeping-place and dreamed of a very fine young chief shining like the
sun and surrounded by all the colors of the rainbow. Then she awoke and
found no one, but she loved that spirit-body which she had seen in her
dreams, so she arose and went down to the beach and told her guardian to
make haste and reach Hawaii that day.

When the kahu heard her call, he put forth all his power and uttered the
proper incantations. He sped through the waters like a skimming bird,
passed the great precipices near Waipio, and soon after dawn landed on
the beautiful beach.

The people had not yet come from their homes for the work of the day. He
went up to the village and came near the house of Lei-makani. A watchman
asked where he was from and the purpose of his journey. He said: "I am a
stranger from Molokai, a messenger from my chiefess, who seeks a husband
of high rank equal to her own. She has no one worthy to be her husband."

The Waipio chief said: "We have a splendid young chief, but there is no
one his equal in rank and beauty. You could not ask for him."

Then Lei-makani heard the noise and came out and asked about this
conversation. His watchman told him that this man was from Molokai.

Lei-makani asked the man to approach. The Molokai chief thought that
Lei-makani was the handsomest man he had ever seen. Ke-au-kai came out
of the temple and looked upon the stranger and asked why he had come.

When he learned that the man sought a husband for his chiefess, he
advised him to return lest he should meet death at the hands of the
watchman, but the man would not go away.

After a time the chiefs of Waipio came before Lei-makani. The Molokai
chief explained his errand, and praised his chiefess, and said that he
was willing to be killed and cooked in an oven if she were not as
beautiful and of as high rank as he had told them. Lono-kai at that
moment entered the assembly, and the stranger cried out: "This man is
the husband for my chiefess. Her tabu rank is the same as the tabu rank
of this fine young chief. No others in all the islands are like these
two. It would be glorious for them to meet." Lono-kai said, "You return
at once and make preparation, and I will come in the evening."

The kahu returned to Molokai, but the chiefess saw him coming back alone
and became very angry, her eyes flashing with wrath because he had not
brought the young chief with him. She screamed out, "Where is the value
of your journey, if you return without my husband?"

"Wait a little," the guardian said gently, "until you hear about what I
have seen upon Hawaii. I have found the one you wanted. We must get
ready to meet your husband, for the young chief is coming here this
evening. When you meet, the love of each of you will be great toward the
other."


She ordered all Molokai to prepare for a great feast commencing that
evening. Messengers ran swiftly, people and chiefs hastened their
labors, and by evening vast quantities of food had been prepared.

Lono-kai took his cocoanut-husk boat and came over the sea like a bird
skimming the water.

As the sun sank and the evening shadows fell, the two young people met
and delighted in each other's beauty. Then they were married in the
midst of all the people of Molokai.


                               XVIII

                   THE BRIDE FROM THE UNDER-WORLD

                  A LEGEND OF THE KALAKAUA FAMILY


Ku, one of the most widely known gods of the Pacific Ocean, was thought
by the Hawaiians to have dwelt as a mortal for some time on the western
side of the island Hawaii. Here he chose a chiefess by the name of Hina
as his wife, and to them were born two children. When he withdrew from
his residence among men he left a son on the uplands of the district of
North Kona, and a daughter on the seashore of the same district. The
son, Hiku-i-kana-hele (Hiku of the forest), lived with his mother. The
daughter, Kewalu, dwelt under the care of guardian chiefs and priests by
a temple, the ruined walls of which are standing even to the present
day. Here she was carefully protected and perfected in all arts
pertaining to the very high chiefs. Hiku-of-the-Forest was not
accustomed to go to the sea. His life was developed among the forests
along the western slopes of the great mountains of Hawaii. Here he
learned the wisdom of his mother and of the chiefs and priests under
whose care he was placed. To him were given many of the supernatural
powers of his father. His mother guarded him from the knowledge that he
had a sister and kept him from going to the temple by the side of which
she had her home.

Hiku was proficient in all the feats of manly strength and skill upon
which chiefs of the highest rank prided themselves. None of the chiefs
of the inland districts could compare with him in symmetry of form,
beauty of countenance, and skill in manly sports.

The young chief noted the sounds of the forest and the rushing winds
along the sides of the mountains. Sometimes, like storm voices, he heard
from far off the beat of the surf along the coral reef. One day he heard
a noise like the flapping of the wings of many birds. He looked toward
the mountain, but no multitude of his feathered friends could be found.
Again the same sound awakened his curiosity. He now learned that it came
from the distant seashore far below his home on the mountain-side.

Hiku-of-the-Forest called his mother and together they listened as again
the strange sound from the beach rose along the mountain gulches and was
echoed among the cliffs.

"E Hiku," said the mother, "that is the clapping of the hands of a large
number of men and women. The people who live by the sea are very much
pleased and are expressing their great delight in some wonderful deed of
a great chief."

Day after day the rejoicing of the people was heard by the young chief.
At last he sent a trusty retainer to learn the cause of the tumult. The
messenger reported that he had found certain tabu surf waters of the
Kona beach and had seen a very high chiefess who alone played with her
surf-board on the incoming waves. Her beauty surpassed that of any other
among all the people, and her skill in riding the surf was wonderful,
exceeding that of any one whom the people had ever seen, therefore the
multitude gathered from near and far to watch the marvelous deeds of the
beautiful woman. Their pleasure was so great that when they clapped
their hands the sound was like the voices of many thunder-storms.

The young chief said he must go down and see this beautiful maiden. The
mother knew that this chiefess of such great beauty must be Kewalu, the
sister of Hiku. She feared that trouble would come to Kewalu if her more
powerful brother should find her and take her in marriage, as was the
custom among the people. The omens which had been watched concerning the
children in their infancy had predicted many serious troubles. But the
young man could not be restrained. He was determined to see the
wonderful woman.

He sent his people to gather the nuts of the kukui, or candlenut-tree,
and crush out the oil and prepare it for anointing his body. He had
never used a surf-board, but he commanded his servants to prepare the
best one that could be made. Down to the seashore Hiku went with his
retainers, down to the tabu place of the beautiful Kewalu.

He anointed his body with the kukui oil until it glistened like the
polished leaves of trees; then taking his surf-board he went boldly to
the tabu surf waters of his sister. The people stood in amazed silence,
expecting to see speedy punishment meted out to the daring stranger. But
the gods of the sea favored Hiku. Hiku had never been to the seaside and
had never learned the arts of those who were skilful in the waters.
Nevertheless as he entered the water he carried the surf-board more
royally than any chief the people had ever known. The sunlight shone in
splendor upon his polished body when he stood on the board and rode to
the shore on the crests of the highest surf waves, performing wonderful
feats by his magic power. The joy of the multitude was unbounded, and a
mighty storm of noise was made by the clapping of their hands.

Kewalu and her maidens had left the beach before the coming of Hiku and
were resting in their grass houses in a grove of cocoanut-trees near the
heiau. When the great noise made by the people aroused her she sent one
of her friends to learn the cause of such rejoicing. When she learned
that an exceedingly handsome chief of the highest rank was sporting
among her tabu waters she determined to see him.

So, calling her maidens, she went down to the seashore and first saw
Hiku on the highest crest of the rolling surf. She decided at once that
she had never seen a man so comely, and Hiku, surf-riding to the shore,
felt that he had never dreamed of such grace and beauty as marked the
maiden who was coming to welcome him.

When Kewalu came near she took the wreath of rare and fragrant flowers
which she wore and coming close to him threw it around his shoulders as
a token to all the people that she had taken him to be her husband.

Then the joy of the people surpassed all the pleasure of all the days
before, for they looked upon the two most beautiful beings they had ever
seen and believed that these two would make glad each other's lives.

Thus Hiku married his sister, Kewalu, according to the custom of that
time, because she was the only one of all the people equal to him in
rank and beauty, and he alone was fitted to stand in her presence.

For a long time they lived together, sometimes sporting among the
highest white crests of storm-tossed surf waves, sometimes enjoying the
guessing and gambling games in which the Hawaiians of all times have
been very expert, sometimes chanting meles and genealogies and telling
marvelous stories of sea and forest, and sometimes feasting and resting
under the trees surrounding their grass houses.

Hiku at last grew weary of the life by the sea. He wanted the forest on
the mountain and the cold, stimulating air of the uplands. But he did
not wish to take his sister-wife with him. Perhaps the omens of their
childhood had revealed danger to Kewalu if she left her home by the sea.
Whenever he tried to steal away from her she would rush to him and cling
to him, persuading him to wait for new sports and joys.

One night Hiku rose up very quietly and passed out into the darkness. As
he began to climb toward the uplands the leaves of the trees rustled
loudly in welcome. The night birds circled around him and hastened him
on his way, but Kewalu was awakened. She called for Hiku. Again and
again she called, but Hiku had gone. She heard his footsteps as his
eager tread shook the ground. She heard the branches breaking as he
forced his way through the forests. Then she hastened after him and her
plaintive cry was louder and clearer than the voices of the night birds.

    "E Hiku, return! E Hiku, return!
    O my love, wait for Kewalu!
    Hiku goes up the hills;
    Very hard is this hill, O Hiku!
    O Hiku, my beloved!"

But Hiku by his magic power sent thick fogs and mists around her. She
was blinded and chilled, but she heard the crashing of the branches and
ferns as Hiku forced his way through them, and she pressed on, still
calling:

"E Hiku, beloved, return to Kewalu."

Then the young chief threw the long flexible vines of the ieie down into
the path. They twined around her feet and made her stumble as she tried
to follow him. The rain was falling all around her, and the way was very
rough and hard. She slipped and fell again and again.

The ancient chant connected with the legend says:

    "Hiku is climbing up the hill.
    Branches and vines are in the way,
    And Kewalu is begging him to stop.
    Rain-drops are walking on the leaves.
    The flowers are beaten to the ground.
    Hopeless the quest, but Kewalu is calling:
    'E Hiku, beloved! Let us go back together.'"


Her tears, mingled with the rain, streamed down her cheeks. The storm
wet and destroyed the kapa mantle which she had thrown around her as
she hurried from her home after Hiku. In rags she tried to force her way
through the tangled undergrowth of the uplands, but as she crept forward
step by step she stumbled and fell again into the cold wet arms of the
ferns and grasses. Then the vines crept up around her legs and her arms
and held her, but she tore them loose and forced her way upward, still
calling. She was bleeding where the rough hands of the forest had torn
her delicate flesh. She was so bruised and sore from the blows which the
branches had showered upon her that she could scarcely creep under them.

At last she could no longer hear the retreating footsteps of Hiku. Then,
chilled and desolate and deserted, she gave up in despair and crept back
to the village. There she crawled into the grass house where she had
been so happy with her brother Hiku, intending to put an end to her
life.

The ieie vines held her arms and legs, but she partially disentangled
herself and wound them around her head and neck. Soon the tendrils grew
tight and slowly but surely choked the beautiful chiefess to death. This
was the first suicide in the records of Hawaiian mythology. As the body
gradually became lifeless the spirit crept upward to the lua-uhane, the
door by which it passed out of the body into the spirit world. This
"spirit-door" is the little hole in the corner of the eye. Out of it the
spirit is thought to creep slowly as the body becomes cold in death. The
spirit left the cold body a prisoner to the tangled vines, and slowly
and sadly journeyed to Milu, the Under-world home of the ghosts of the
departed.

The lust of the forest had taken possession of Hiku. He felt the freedom
of the swift birds who had been his companions in many an excursion into
the heavily shaded depths of the forest jungles. He plunged with abandon
into the whirl and rush of the storm winds which he had called to his
aid to check Kewalu. He was drunken with the atmosphere which he had
breathed throughout his childhood and young manhood. When he thought of
Kewalu he was sure that he had driven her back to her home by the
temple, where he could find her when once more he should seek the
seashore.

He had only purposed to stay a while on the uplands, and then return to
his sister-wife.

His father, the god Ku, had been watching him and had also seen the
suicide of the beautiful Kewalu. He saw the spirit pass down to the
kingdom of Milu, the home of the ghosts. Then he called Hiku and told
him how heedless and thoughtless he had been in his treatment of
Kewalu, and how in despair she had taken her life, the spirit going to
the Under-world.

Hiku, the child of the forest, was overcome with grief. He was ready to
do anything to atone for the suffering he had caused Kewalu, and repair
the injury.

Ku told him that only by the most daring effort could he hope to regain
his loved bride. He could go to the Under-world, meet the ghosts and
bring his sister back, but this could only be done at very great risk to
himself, for if the ghosts discovered and captured him they would punish
him with severest torments and destroy all hope of returning to the
Upper-world.

Hiku was determined to search the land of Milu and find his bride and
bring her back to his Kona home by the sea. Ku agreed to aid him with
the mighty power which he had as a god, nevertheless it was absolutely
necessary that Hiku should descend alone and by his own wit and skill
secure the ghost of Kewalu.

Hiku prepared a cocoanut-shell full of oil made from decayed kukui nuts.
This was very vile and foul smelling. Then he made a long stout rope of
ieie vines.

Ku knew where the door to the Under-world was, through which human
beings could go down. This was a hole near the seashore in the valley of
Waipio on the eastern coast of the island.

Ku and Hiku went to Waipio, descended the precipitous walls of the
valley and found the door to the pit of Milu. Milu was the ruler of the
Under-world.

Hiku rubbed his body all over with the rancid kukui oil and then gave
the ieie vine into the keeping of his father to hold fast while he made
his descent into the world of the spirits of the dead. Slowly Ku let the
vine down until at last Hiku stood in the strange land of Milu.

No one noticed his coming and so for a little while he watched the
ghosts, studying his best method of finding Kewalu. Some of the ghosts
were sleeping; some were gambling and playing the same games they had
loved so well while living in the Upper-world; others were feasting and
visiting around the poi bowl as they had formerly been accustomed to do.

Hiku knew that the strong odor of the rotten oil would be his best
protection, for none of the spirits would want to touch him and so would
not discover that he was flesh and blood. Therefore he rubbed his body
once more thoroughly with the oil and disfigured himself with dirt. As
he passed from place to place searching for Kewalu, the ghosts said,
"What a bad-smelling spirit!" So they turned away from him as if he was
one of the most unworthy ghosts dwelling in Milu. In the realm of Milu
he saw the people in the game of rolling cocoanut-shells to hit a post.
Kulioe, one of the spirits, had been playing the kilu and had lost all
his property to the daughter of Milu and one of her friends. He saw Hiku
and said, "If you are a skilful man perhaps you should play with these
two girls." Hiku said: "I have nothing. I have only come this day and am
alone." Kulioe bet his bones against some of the property he had lost.
The first girl threw her cup at the kilu post. Hiku chanted:

    "Are you known by Papa and Wakea,
    O eyelashes or rays of the sun?
    Mine is the cup of kilu."

Her cup did not touch the kilu post before Hiku. She threw again, but
did not touch, while Hiku chanted the same words. They took a new cup,
but failed.

Hiku commenced swinging the cup and threw. It glided and twisted around
on the floor and struck the post. This counted five and won the first
bet. Then he threw the cup numbered twenty, won all the property and
gave it back to Kulioe.

At last he found Kewalu, but she was by the side of the high chief,
Milu, who had seen the beautiful princess as she came into the
Under-world. More glorious was Kewalu than any other of all those of
noble blood who had ever descended to Milu. The ghosts had welcomed the
spirit of the princess with great rejoicing, and the king had called her
at once to the highest place in his court.

She had not been long with the chiefs of Milu before they asked her to
sing or chant her mele. The mele was the family song by which any chief
made known his rank and the family with which he was connected, whenever
he visited chiefs far away from his own home.

Hiku heard the chant and mingled with the multitude of ghosts gathered
around the place where the high chiefs were welcoming the spirit of
Kewalu.

While Hiku and Kewalu had been living together one of their pleasures
was composing and learning to intone a chant which no other among either
mortals or spirits should know besides themselves.

While Kewalu was singing she introduced her part of this chant. Suddenly
from among the throng of ghosts arose the sound of a clear voice
chanting the response which was known by no other person but Hiku.

Kewalu was overcome by the thought that perhaps Hiku was dead and was
now among the ghosts, but did not dare to incur the hatred of King Milu
by making himself known; or perhaps Hiku had endured many dangers of
the lower world by coming even in human form to find her and therefore
must remain concealed.

The people around the king, seeing her grief, were not surprised when
she threw a mantle around herself and left them to go away alone into
the shadows.

She wandered from place to place among the groups of ghosts, looking for
Hiku. Sometimes she softly chanted her part of the mele. At last she was
again answered and was sure that Hiku was near, but the only one very
close was a foul-smelling, dirt-covered ghost from whom she was turning
away in despair.

Hiku in a low tone warned her to be very careful and not recognize him,
but assured her that he had come in person to rescue her and take her
back to her old home where her body was then lying. He told her to
wander around and yet to follow him until they came to the ieie vine
which he had left hanging from the hole which opened to the Upper-world.

When Hiku came to the place where the vine was hanging he took hold to
see if Ku, his father, was still carefully guarding the other end to
pull him up when the right signal should be given. Having made himself
sure of the aid of the god, he tied the end of the vine into a strong
loop and seated himself in it. Then he began to swing back and forth,
back and forth, sometimes rising high and sometimes checking himself
and resting with his feet on the ground.

Kewalu came near and begged to be allowed to swing, but Hiku would only
consent on the condition that she would sit in his lap.

The ghosts thought that this would be an excellent arrangement and
shouted their approval of the new sport. Then Hiku took the spirit of
Kewalu in his strong arms and began to swing slowly back and forth, then
more and more rapidly, higher and higher until the people marvelled at
the wonderful skill. Meanwhile he gave the signal to Ku to pull them up.
Almost imperceptibly the swing receded from the spirit world.

All this time Hiku had been gently and lovingly rubbing the spirit of
Kewalu and softly uttering charm after charm so that while they were
swaying in the air she was growing smaller and smaller. Even the chiefs
of Milu had been attracted to this unusual sport, and had drawn near to
watch the wonderful skill of the strange foul-smelling ghost.

Suddenly it dawned upon some of the beholders that the vine was being
drawn up to the Upper-world. Then the cry arose: "He is stealing the
woman!" "He is stealing the woman!"

The Under-world was in a great uproar of noise. Some of the ghosts were
leaping as high as they could, others were calling for Hiku to return,
and others were uttering charms to cause his downfall.

No one could leap high enough to touch Hiku, and the power of all the
charms was defeated by the god Ku, who rapidly drew the vine upward.

Hiku succeeded in charming the ghost of Kewalu into the cocoanut-shell
which he still carried. Then stopping the opening tight with his fingers
so that the spirit could not escape he brought Kewalu back to the land
of mortals.

With the aid of Ku the steep precipices surrounding Waipio Valley were
quickly scaled and the journey made to the temple by the tabu surf
waters of Kona. Here the body of Kewalu had been lying in state. Here
the auwe, or mourning chant, of the retinue of the dead princess could
be heard from afar.

Hiku passed through the throngs of mourners, carefully guarding his
precious cocoanut until he came to the feet, cold and stiff in death.
Kneeling down he placed the small hole in the end of the shell against
the tender spot in the bottom of one of the cold feet.

The spirits of the dead must find their way back little by little
through the body from the feet to the eyes, from which they must depart
when they bid final farewell to the world. To try to send the spirit
back into the body by placing it in the lua-uhane, or "door of the
soul," would be to have it where it had to depart from the body rather
than enter it.

Hiku removed his finger from the hole in the cocoanut and uttered the
incantations which would allure the ghost into the body. Little by
little the soul of Kewalu came back, and the body grew warm from the
feet upward, until at last the eyes opened and the soul looked out upon
the blessed life restored to it by the skill and bravery of Hiku.

No more troubles arose to darken the lives of the children of Ku.
Whether in the forest or by the sea they made the days pleasant for each
other until at the appointed time together they entered the shades of
Milu as chief and chiefess who could not be separated. It is said that
the generations of their children gave many rulers to the Hawaiians, and
that the present royal family, the "House of Kalakaua," is the last of
the descendants.

     NOTE.--A lover of legends should now read "The Deceiving of Kewa"
     in the Appendix, a legend which shows conclusively the connection
     some centuries ago between the Hawaiians and the Maoris of New
     Zealand.


                           APPENDIX

              *       *       *       *       *

                     THE DECEIVING OF KEWA

A poem, or mourning chant, of the Maoris of New Zealand has many
references to the deeds of their ancestors in Hawaiki, which in this
case surely has reference to the Hawaiian Islands. Among the first lines
of this poem is the expression, "Kewa was deceived." An explanatory note
is given which covers almost two pages of the Journal of the Polynesian
Society in which the poem is published. In this note the outline of the