story of the deceiving of Kewa is quite fully translated, and is
substantially the same as "The Bride from the Under-world."

"The Deceiving of Kewa," as the New Zealand story is called, has this
record among the Maoris. "This narrative is of old, of ancient times,
very, very old. 'The Deceiving of Kewa' is an old, old story." Milu in
some parts of the Pacific is the name of the place where the spirits of
the dead dwell. Sometimes it is the name of the ruler of that place. In
this ancient New Zealand legend it takes the place of Hiku, and is the
name of the person who goes down into the depths after his bride, while
the spirit-king is called Kewa, a part of the name Kewalu, which was the
name of the Hawaiian bride whose ghost was brought back from the grave.

This, then, is the New Zealand legend, "The Deceiving of Kewa." There
once lived in Hawaiki a chief and his wife. They had a child, a girl,
born to them; then the mother died. The chief took another wife, who was
not pleasing to the people. His anger was so great that the chief went
away to the great forest of Tane (the god Kane in Hawaiian), and there
built a house for himself and his wife.

After a time a son was born to them and the father named him Miru. This
father was a great tohunga (kahuna), or priest, as well as a chief. He
taught Miru all the supreme kinds of knowledge, all the invocations and
incantations, those for the stars, for the winds, for foods, for the
sea, and for the land. He taught him the peculiar incantations which
would enable him to meet all cunning tricks and enmities of man. He
learned also all the great powers of witchcraft. It is said that on one
occasion Miru and his father went to a river, a great river. Here the
child experimented with his powerful charms. He was a child of the
forest and knew the charm which could conquer the trees. Now there was a
tall tree growing by the side of the river. When Miru saw it he recited
his incantations. As he came to the end the tree fell, the head reaching
right across the river. They left the tree lying in this way that it
might be used as a bridge by the people who came to the river. Thus he
was conscious of his power to correctly use the mighty invocations which
his father had taught him.

The years passed and the boy became a young man. His was a lonely life,
and he often wondered if there were not those who could be his
companions. At last he asked his parents: "Are we here, all of us? Have
I no other relative in the world?"

His parents answered, "You have a sister, but she dwells at a distant
place."

When Miru heard this he arose and proceeded to search for his sister,
and he happily came to the very place where she dwelt. There the young
people were gathered in their customary place for playing teka (Hawaiian
keha). The teka was a dart which was thrown along the ground, usually
the hard beach of the seashore. Miru watched the game for some time and
then returned to his home in the forest. He told his father about the
teka and the way it was played. Then the chief prepared a teka for Miru,
selected from the best tree and fashioned while appropriate charms were
repeated.

Miru threw his dart along the slopes covered by the forest and its
underbrush, but the ground was uneven and the undergrowth retarded the
dart. Then Miru found a plain and practised until he was very expert.

After a while he came to the place where his sister lived. When the
young people threw their darts he threw his. Aha! it flew indeed and was
lost in the distance. When the sister beheld him she at once felt a
great desire toward him.

The people tried to keep Miru with them, pleading with him to stay, and
even following him as he returned to his forest home, but they caught
him not. Frequently he repeated his visits, but never stayed long.

The sister, whose name is not given in the New Zealand legends, was
disheartened, and hanged herself until she was dead. The body was laid
in its place for the time of wailing. Miru and his father came to the
uhunga, or place of mourning. The people had not known that Miru was the
brother of the one who was dead. They welcomed the father and son
according to their custom. Then the young man said, "After I leave, do
not bury my sister." So the body was left in its place when the young
man arose.

He went on his way till he saw a canoe floating. He then gave the
command to his companions and they all paddled away in the canoe. They
paddled on for a long distance, in fact to Rerenga-wai-rua, the point of
land in New Zealand from which the spirits of the dead take their last
leap as they go down to the Under-world. When they reached this place
they rested, and Miru let go the anchor. He then said to his companions,
"When you see the anchor rope shaking, pull it up, but wait here for
me."

The young man then leaped into the water and went down, down near the
bottom, and then entered a cave. This cave was the road by which the
departed spirits went to spirit-land. Miru soon saw a house standing
there. It was the home of Kewa, the chief of the Under-world. Within the
house was his sister in spirit form.

Miru carried with him his nets which were given magic power, with which
he hoped to catch the spirit of his sister. In many ways he endeavored
to induce her ghost to come forth from the house of Kewa, but she would
not come. He commenced whipping his top in the yard outside, but could
not attract her attention. At last he set up a swing and many of the
ghosts joined in the pastime. For a long time the sister remained
within, but eventually came forth induced by the attraction of the swing
and by the appearance of Miru. Miru then took the spirit in his arms and
began to swing.

Higher and higher they rose whilst he incited the ghosts to increase to
the utmost the flight of the moari, or swing. On reaching the highest
point he gathered the spirit of the sister into his net, then letting go
the swing away they flew and alighted quite outside the spirit-land.

Thence he went to the place where the anchor of the floating canoe was.
Shaking the rope his friends understood the signal. He was drawn up
with the ghost in his net. He entered the canoe and returned home. On
arrival at the settlement the people were still lamenting. What was that
to him? Taking the spirit he laid it on the dead body, at the same time
reciting his incantations. The spirit gradually entered the body and the
sister was alive again. This is the end of the narrative, but it is of
old, of ancient times, very, very old. "The Deceiving of Kewa" is an
old, old story.

In the Maori poem in which the reference to Kewa is made which brought
out the above translation of one of the old New Zealand stories are also
many other references to semi-historical characters and events. At the
close of the poem is the following note: "The lament is so full of
references to the ancient history of the Maoris that it would take a
volume to explain them all. Most of the incidents referred to occurred
in Hawaiki before the migration of the Maoris to New Zealand or at least
five hundred to six hundred years ago."

Another New Zealand legend ought to be noticed in connection with the
Hawaiian story of Hiku (Miru, New Zealand) seeking his sister in the
Under-world. In what is probably the more complete Hawaiian story Hiku
had a magic arrow which flew long distances and led him to the place
where his sister-wife could be found.

In a New Zealand legend a magic dart leads a chief by the name of Tama
in his search for his wife, who had been carried away to spirit-land. He
threw the dart and followed it from place to place until he found a
wrecked canoe, near which lay the body of his wife and her companions.
He tried to bring her back to life, but his incantations were not strong
enough to release the spirit.

Evidently the Hawaiian legend became a little fragmentary while being
transplanted from the Hawaiian Islands to New Zealand. Hiku, the young
chief who overcomes Miru of the spirit-world, loses his name entirely.
Kewalu, the sister, also loses her name, a part of which, Kewa, is given
to the ruler of the Under-world, and the magic dart is placed in the
hands of Tama in an entirely distinct legend which still keeps the
thought of the wife-seeker. There can scarcely be any question but that
the original legend belongs to the Hawaiian Islands, and was carried to
New Zealand in the days of the sea-rovers.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                    HOMELESS AND DESOLATE GHOSTS

The spirits of the dead, according to a summary of ancient Hawaiian
statements, were divided into three classes, each class bearing the
prefix "ao," which meant either the enlightened or instructed class, or
simply a crowd or number of spirits grouped together.

The first class, the Ao-Kuewa, were the desolate and the homeless
spirits who during their residence in the body had no friends and no
property.

The second class was called the Ao-Aumakuas. These were the groups of
ghost-gods or spirit-ancestors of the Hawaiians. They usually remained
near their old home as helpful protectors of the family to which they
belonged, and were worshipped by the family.

The third class was the Ao-o-Milu. Milu was the chief god of the
Under-world throughout the greater part of Polynesia. Many times the
Under-world itself bore the name of Milu. The Ao-o-Milu were the souls
of the departed of both the preceding classes who had performed all
tasks, passed all barriers, and found their proper place in the land of
the king of ghosts.

The Old Hawaiians never intelligently classified these departed spirits
and sometimes mixed them together in inextricable confusion, but in the
legends and remarks of early Hawaiian writers these three classes are
roughly sketched. The desolate ghost had no right to call any place its
home, to which it could come, over which it could watch, and around
which it could hover. It had to go to the desolate parts of the islands
or into a wilderness or forest.

The homeless ghost had no one to provide even the shadow of food for it.
It had to go into the dark places and search for butterflies, spiders,
and other insects. These were the ordinary food for all ghosts unless
there were worshippers to place offerings on secret altars, which were
often dedicated to gain a special power of praying other people to
death. Such ghosts were well cared for, but, on the other hand, the
desolate ones must wander and search until they could go down into the
land of Milu.

There were several ways which the gods had prepared for ghosts to use in
this journey to the Under-world. It is interesting to note that all
through Polynesia as well as in the Hawaiian Islands the path for ghosts
led westward.

The students of New Zealand folk-lore will say that this signified the
desire of those about to die to return to the land of their ancestors
beyond the western ocean.

The paths were called Leina-a-ka-uhane
(paths-for-leaping-by-the-spirit). They were almost always on bold
bluffs looking westward over the ocean. The spirit unless driven back
could come to the headland and leap down into the land of the dead, but
when this was done that spirit could never return to the body it had
left. Frequently connected with these Leina-a-ka-uhane was a
breadfruit-tree which would be a gathering-place for ghosts.

At these places there were often friendly ghosts who would help and
sometimes return the spirit to the body or send it to join the
Ao-Aumakuas (ancestor ghosts). At the place of descent it was said there
was an owawa (ditch) through which the ghosts one by one were carried
down to Po, and Lei-lono was the gate where the ghosts were killed as
they went down. Near this gateway was the Ulu-o-lei-walo, or
breadfruit-tree of the spirits. This tree had two branches, one toward
the east and one toward the west, both of which were used by the ghosts.
One was for leaping into eternal darkness into Po-pau-ole, the other as
a meeting-place with the helpful gods.

This tree always bore the name Ulu-o-lei-walo
(the-quietly-calling-breadfruit-tree). On the island of Oahu, one of
these was said to have been at Kaena Point; another was in Nuuanu
Valley.

The desolate ghost would come to this meeting-place of the dead and try
to find a ghost of the second class, the aumakuas, who had been one of
his ancestors and who still had some family to watch over. Perhaps this
one might entertain or help him.

If the ghost could find no one to take him, then he would try to wander
around the tree and leap into the branches. The rotten, dead branches of
the tree belonged to the spirits. When they broke and fell, the spirits
on them dropped into the land of Milu--the under-world home of ghosts.
Often the spirit could leap from these dead branches into the
Under-world.

Sometimes the desolate spirit would be blown, as by the wind, back and
forth, here and there, until no possible place of rest could be found
on the island where death had come; then the ghost would leap into the
sea, hoping to find the way to Milu through some sea-cave. Perhaps the
waves would carry the ghost, or it might be able to swim to one of the
other islands, where a new search would be made for some ancestor-ghost
from which to obtain help. Not finding aid, it would be pushed and
driven over rough, rocky places and through the wilderness until it
again went into the sea. At last perhaps a way would be found into the
home of the dead, and the ghost would have a place in which to live, or
it might make the round through the wilderness again and again, until it
could leap from a bluff, or fall from a rotten branch of the
breadfruit-tree.

A great caterpillar was the watchman on the eastern side of the
leaping-off place. Napaha was the western boundary. A mo-o (dragon) was
the watchman on that side. If the ghost was afraid of them it went back
to secure the help of the ghost-gods in order to get by. The Hawaiians
were afraid that these watchmen would kill ghosts if possible.

If a caterpillar obstructed the way it would raise its head over the
edge of the bluff, and then the frightened ghost would go far out of its
way, and wandering around be destroyed or compelled to leap off some
dead branch into eternal darkness. But if that frightened ghost, while
wandering, could find a helpful ghost god, it would be kept alive,
although still a wanderer over the islands.

At the field of kaupea (coral) near Barbers Point, in the desert of
Puuloa, the ghost would go around among the lehua flowers, catching
spiders, butterflies, and insects for food, where the ghost-gods might
find them and give them aid in escaping the watchmen.

There are many places for the Leina-a-ka-uhane (leaping-off-places) and
the Ulu-o-lei-walo (breadfruit-trees) on all the islands. To these
places the wandering desolate ghosts went to find a way to the
Under-world.

Another name for the wandering ghosts was lapu, also sometimes called
Akua-hele-loa (great travellers). These ghosts were frequently those who
enjoyed foolish, silly pranks. They would sweep over the old byways in
troops, dancing and playing. They would gather around the old mats where
the living had been feasting, and sit and feast on imaginary food.

The Hawaiians say: "On one side of the island Oahu, even to this day
the lapu come at night. Their ghost drums and sacred chants can be heard
and their misty forms seen as they hover about the ruins of the old
heiaus (temples)."

The fine mists or fogs of Manoa Valley were supposed to conceal a large
company of priests and their attendants while roaming among the great
stones which still lie where there was a puu-honua (refuge-temple) in
the early days. If any one saw these roving ghosts he was called
lapu-ia, or one to whom spirits had appeared.

The Hawaiians said: "The lapu ghosts were not supposed to watch over the
welfare of the persons they met. They never went into the heavens to
become black clouds, bringing rain for the benefit of their households.
They did not go out after winds to blow with destructive force against
their enemies. This was the earnest work of the ancestor-ghosts, and was
not done by the lapu."

Another name for ghosts was wai-lua, which referred especially to the
spirit leaving the body and supposed to have been seen by some one. This
wai-lua spirit could be driven back into the body by other ghosts, or
persuaded to come back through offerings or incantations given by living
friends, so that a dead person could become alive again.

It was firmly believed that a person could endure many deaths, and that
if any one lost consciousness he was dead, and that when life stopped it
was because the spirit left the body. When life was renewed it was
because the spirit had returned to its former home.

The kino-wai-lua was a ghost leaving the body of a living person and
returning after a time, as when any one fainted.

Besides the ghosts of the dead, the Hawaiians gave spirit power to all
natural objects. Large stones were supposed to have dragon power
sometimes.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                    AUMAKUAS, OR ANCESTOR-GHOSTS

There are two meanings to the first part of this word, for "au" means a
multitude, as in "auwaa" (many canoes), but it may mean time and place,
as in the following: "Our ancestors thought that if there was a desolate
place where no man could be found, it was the aumakua (place of many
gods)." "Makua" was the name given to the ancestors of a chief and of
the people as well as to parents.

The aumakuas were the ghosts who did not go down into Po, the land of
King Milu. They were in the land of the living, hovering around the
families from which they had been separated by death. They were the
guardians of these families.

When any one died, many devices were employed in disposing of the body.
The fact that an enemy of the family might endeavor to secure the bones
of the dead for the purpose of making them into fish-hooks, arrow-heads,
or spear-heads led the surviving members of a family either to destroy
or to conceal the body of the dead. For if the bones were so used it
meant great dishonor, and the spirit was supposed to suffer on account
of this indignity.

Sometimes the flesh was stripped from the bones and cast into the ocean
or into the fires of the volcanoes, that the ghost might be made a part
of the family ghosts who lived in such places, and the bones were buried
in some secret cave or pit, or folded together in a bundle which was
thought to resemble a grasshopper, so these were called unihipili
(grasshopper). The unihipili bones were used in connection with a
strange belief called pule-ana-ana (praying to death).

When the body of a dead person was to be hidden, only two or three men
were employed in the task. Sometimes the one highest in rank would slay
his helpers so that no one except himself would know the burial-place.

The tools, the clothing, and the calabashes of the dead were unclean
until certain ceremonies of purification had been faithfully performed.
Many times these possessions were either placed in the burial-cave
beside the body or burned so that they might be the property of the
spirit in ghost-land.

The people who cared for the body had to bathe in salt water and
separate themselves from the family for a time. They must sprinkle the
house and all things inside with salt water. After a few days the family
would return and occupy the house once more.

Usually the caretakers of a dead body would make a hole in the side of
the house and push it through rather than take it through the old
doorway, probably having the idea that the ghost would only know the
door through which the body had gone out when alive and so could not
find the new way back when the opening was dosed.

After death came, the ghost crept out of the body, coming up from the
feet until it rested in the eyes, and then it came out from the corner
of one eye, and had a kind of wind body. It could pass around the room
and out of doors through any opening it could find. It could perch like
a bird on the roof of a house or in the branches of trees, or it could
seat itself on logs or stones near the house. It might have to go back
into the body and make it live again. Possibly the ghost might meet some
old ancestor-ghosts and be led so far away that it could not return;
then it must become a member of the aumakua, or ancestor-ghost, family,
or wander off to join the homeless desolate ghost vagabonds.

Sometimes dead bodies were thrown into the sea with the hope that the
ghost body would become a shark or an eel, or perhaps a mo-o, or
dragon-god, to be worshipped with other ancestor-gods of the same class.

Sometimes the body or the bones would be cast into the crater of
Kilauea, the people thinking the spirit would become a flame of fire
like Pele, the goddess of volcanoes; other spirits went into the air
concealed in the dark depths of the sky, perhaps in the clouds.

Here they carried on the work needed to help their families. They would
become fog or mist or the fine misty rain colored by light. With these
the Rainbow Maiden, Anuenue, delighted to dwell. They often lived in the
great rolling white clouds, or in the gray clouds which let fall the
quiet rain needed for farming. They also lived in the fierce black
thunder-clouds which sent down floods of a devastating character upon
the enemies of the family to which they belonged.

There were ghost ancestors who made their homes near the places where
the members of their families toiled; there were ancestor-ghosts to take
care of the tapa, or kapa, makers, or the calabash or house or canoe
makers. There were special ancestor-ghosts called upon by name by the
farmers, the fishermen, and the bird-hunters. These ghosts had their own
kuleanas, or places to which they belonged, and in which they had their
own peculiar duties and privileges. They became ancestor ghost-gods and
dwelt on the islands near the homes of their worshippers, or in the air
above, or in the trees around the houses, or in the ocean or in the
glowing fires of volcanoes. They even dwelt in human beings, making them
shake or sneeze as with cold, and then a person was said to become an
ipu, or calabash containing a ghost.

Sometimes it was thought that a ghost god could be seen sitting on the
head or shoulder of the person to whom it belonged. Even in this
twentieth century a native woman told the writer that she saw a
ghost-god whispering in his ear while he was making an address. She
said, "That ghost was like a fire or a colored light." Many times the
Hawaiians have testified that they believed in the presence of their
ancestor ghost-gods.

This is the way the presence of a ghost was detected: Some sound would
be heard, such as a sibilant noise, a soft whistle, or something like
murmurs, or some sensation in a part of the body might be felt. If an
eyelid trembled, a ghost was sitting on that spot. A quivering or creepy
feeling in any part of the body meant that a ghost was touching that
place. If any of these things happened, a person would cry out, "I have
seen or felt a spirit of the gods."

Sometimes people thought they saw the spirits of their ghost friends.
They believed that the spirits of these friends appeared in the night,
sometimes to kill any one who was in the way. The high chiefs and
warriors are supposed to march and go in crowds, carrying their spears
and piercing those they met unless some ghost recognized that one and
called to the others, "Alia [wait]," but if the word was "O-i-o [throw
the spear]!" then that spirit's spear would strike death to the
passer-by.

There were night noises which the natives attributed to sounds or
rustling motions made by such night gods as the following:

    Akua-hokio (whistling gods).
      " -kiei  (peeping gods).
      " -nalo  (prying gods).
      " -loa   (long gods).
      " -poko  (short gods).
      " -muki  (sibilant gods).

A prayer to these read thus:

    "O Akua-loa! [long god]
    O Akua-poko! [short god]
    O Akua-muki! [god breathing in short, sibilant breaths]
    O Akua-hokio! [god blowing like whistling winds]
    O Akua-kiei! [god watching, peeping at one]
    O Akua-nalo! [god hiding, slipping out of sight]
    O All ye Gods, who travel on the dark night paths!
    Come and eat.
    Give life to me,
    And my parents,
    And my children,
    To us who are living in this place. Amama [Amen]."

This prayer was offered every night as a protection against the ghosts.

The aumakuas were very laka (tame and helpful). It was said that an
aumakua living in a shark would be very laka, and would come to be
rubbed on the head, opening his mouth for a sacrifice. Perhaps some awa,
or meat, would be placed in his mouth, and then he would go away. So
also if the aumakua were a bird, it would become tame. If it were the
alae (a small duck), it would come to the hand of its worshipper; if the
pueo (owl), it would come and scratch the earth away from the grave of
one of its worshippers, throwing the sand away with its wings, and would
bring the body back to life. An owl ancestor-god would come and set a
worshipper free were he a prisoner with hands and feet bound by ropes.

It made no difference whether the dead person were male or female, child
or aged one, the spirit could become a ghost-god and watch over the
family.

There were altars for the ancestor-gods in almost every land. These were
frequently only little piles of white coral, but sometimes chiefs would
build a small house for their ancestor-gods, thus making homes that the
ghosts might have a kuleana, or place of their own, where offerings
could be placed, and prayers offered, and rest enjoyed.

The Hawaiians have this to say about sacrifices for the aumakuas: If a
mo-o, or dragon-god, was angry with its caretaker or his family and they
became weak and sick, they would sacrifice a spotted dog with awa, red
fish, red sugar-cane, and some of the grass growing in taro patches
wrapped in yellow kapa. This they would take to the lua, or hole, where
the mo-o dwelt, and fasten the bundle there. Then the mo-o would become
pleasant and take away the sickness. If it were a shark-god, the
sacrifice was a black pig, a dark red chicken, and some awa wrapped in
new white kapa made by a virgin. This bundle would be carried to the
beach, where a prayer would be offered:

    "O aumakuas from sunrise to sunset,
    From North to South, from above and below,
    O spirits of the precipice and spirits of the sea,
    All who dwell in flowing waters,
    Here is a sacrifice--our gifts are to you.
    Bring life to us, to all the family,
    To the old people with wrinkled skin,
    To the young also.
    This is our life,
    From the gods."

Then the farmer would throw the bundle into the sea, bury the chicken
alive, take the pig to the temple, then go back to his house looking for
rain. If there was rain, it showed that the aumakua had seen the gifts
and washed away the wrong. If the clouds became black with heavy rain,
that was well.

The offerings for Pele and Hiiaka were awa to drink and food to eat, in
fact all things which could be taken to the crater.

This applies to the four great gods, Kane, Ku, Lono, and Kanaloa. They
are called the first of the ancestors. Each one of these was supposed to
be able to appear in a number of different forms, therefore each had a
number of names expressive of the work he intended or was desired to do.
An explanatory adjective or phrase was added to the god's own name,
defining certain acts or characteristics, thus: Kane-puaa (Kane, the
pig) was Kane who would aid in stirring up the ground like a pig.

This is one of the prayers used when presenting offerings to aumakuas,
"O Aumakuas of the rising of the sun, guarded by every tabu staff, here
are offerings and sacrifices--the black pig, the white chicken, the
black cocoanut, the red fish--sacrifices for the gods and all the
aumakuas; those of the ancestors, those of the night, and of the dawn,
here am I. Let life come."

The ancestor-gods were supposed to use whatever object they lived with.
If ghosts went up into the clouds, they moved the clouds from place to
place and made them assume such shape as might be fancied. Thus they
would reveal themselves over their old homes.

All the aumakuas were supposed to be gentle and ready to help their own
families. The old Hawaiians say that the power of the ancestor-gods was
very great. "Here is the magic power. Suppose a man would call his
shark, 'O Kuhai-moana [the shark-god]! O, the One who lives in the
Ocean! Take me to the land!' Then perhaps a shark would appear, and the
man would get on the back of the shark, hold fast to the fin, and say:
'You look ahead. Go on very swiftly without waiting.' Then the shark
would swim swiftly to the shore."

The old Hawaiians had the sport called "lua." This sometimes meant
wrestling, but usually was the game of catching a man, lifting him up,
and breaking his body so that he was killed. A wrestler of the lua class
would go out to a plain where no people were dwelling and call his god
Kuialua. The aumakua ghost-god would give this man strength and skill,
and help him to kill his adversaries.

There were many priests of different classes who prayed to the
ancestor-gods. Those of the farmers prayed like this:

    "O great black cloud in the far-off sky,
    O shadow watching shadow,
    Watch over our land.
    Overshadow our land
    From corner to corner
    From side to side.
    Do not cast your shadow on other lands
    Nor let the waters fall on the other lands
    [_i.e._, keep the rains over my place]."

Also they prayed to Kane-puaa (Kane, the pig), the great aumakua of
farmers:

    "O Kane-puaa, root!
    Dig inland, dig toward the sea;
    Dig from corner to corner,
    From side to side;
    Let the food grow in the middle,
    Potatoes on the side roots,
    Fruit in the centre.
    Do not root in another place!
    The people may strike you with the spade [o-o]
    Or hit you with a stone
    And hurt you. Amama [Amen]."

So also they prayed to Kukea-olo-walu (a taro aumakua god):

    "O Kukea-olo-walu!
    Make the taro grow,
    Let the leaf spread like a banana.
    Taro for us, O Kukea!
    The banana and the taro for us.
    Pull up the taro for us, O Kukea!
    Pound the taro,
    Make the fire for cooking the pig.
    Give life to us--
    To the farmers--
    From sunrise to sunset
    From one fastened place to the other fastened place
    [_i.e._, one side of the sky to the other fastened on each side
    of the earth]. Amama [Amen]."

Trees with their branches and fruit were frequently endowed with spirit
power. All the different kinds of birds and even insects, and also the
clouds and winds and the fish in the seas were given a place among the
spirits around the Hawaiians.

The people believed in life and its many forms of power. They would pray
to the unseen forces for life for themselves and their friends, and for
death to come on the families of their enemies. They had special priests
and incantations for the pule-ana-ana, or praying to death, and even to
the present time the supposed power to pray to death is one of the most
formidable terrors to their imagination.

Menehunes, eepas, and kupuas were classes of fairies or gnomes which did
not belong to the ancestor-gods, or aumakuas.

The menehunes were fairy servants. Some of the Polynesian Islands called
the lowest class of servants "manahune." The Hawaiians separated them
almost entirely from the spirits of ancestors. They worked at night
performing prodigious tasks which they were never supposed to touch
again after the coming of dawn.

The eepas were usually deformed and defective gnomes. They suffered from
all kinds of weakness, sometimes having no bones and no more power to
stand than a large leaf. They were sometimes set apart as spirit
caretakers of little children. Nuuanu Valley was the home of a multitude
of eepas who had their temple on the western side of the valley.

Kupuas were the demons of ghost-land. They were very powerful and very
destructive. No human being could withstand their attacks unless
specially endowed with power from the gods. They had animal as well as
human bodies and could use whichever body seemed to be most available.
The dragons, or mo-os, were the most terrible kupuas in the islands.

               *       *       *       *       *

                     THE DRAGON GHOST-GODS

Dragons were among the ghost-gods of the ancient Hawaiians. These
dragons were called mo-o. The New Zealanders used the same names for
some of their large reptile gods. They, however, spelled the word with a
"k," calling it mo-ko, and it was almost identical in pronunciation as
in meaning with the Hawaiian name. Both the Hawaiians and New Zealanders
called all kinds of lizards mo-o or mo-ko; and their use of this word in
traditions showed that they often had in mind animals like crocodiles
and alligators, and sometimes they referred the name to any monster of
great mythical powers belonging to a man-destroying class.

Mighty eels, immense sea-turtles, large fish of the ocean, fierce
sharks, were all called mo-o. The most ancient dragons of the Hawaiians
are spoken of as living in pools or lakes. These dragons were known also
as kupuas, or mysterious characters who could appear as animals or human
beings according to their wish. The saying was: "Kupuas have a strange
double body."

There were many other kupuas besides those of the dragon family. It was
sometimes thought that at birth another natural form was added, such as
an egg of a fowl or a bird, or the seed of a plant, or the embryo of
some animal, which when fully developed made a form which could be used
as readily as the human body. These kupuas were always given some great
magic power. They were wonderfully strong and wise and skilful.

Usually the birth of a kupua, like the birth of a high chief, was
attended with strange disturbances in the heavens, such as reverberating
thunder, flashing lightning, and severe storms which sent the abundant
red soil of the islands down the mountain-sides in blood-red torrents
known as ka-ua-koko (the blood rain). This name was also given to misty
fine rain when shot through by the red waves of the sun.

By far the largest class of kupuas was that of the dragons. These all
belonged to one family. Their ancestor was Mo-o-inanea (The Self-reliant
Dragon), who figured very prominently in the Hawaiian legends of the
most ancient times, such as "The Maiden of the Golden Cloud."

Mo-o-inanea (The Self-reliant Dragon) brought the dragons, the kupua
dragons, from the "Hidden Land of Kane" to the Hawaiian Islands.
Mo-o-inanea was apparently a demi-goddess of higher power even than the
gods Ku, Kane, or Kanaloa. She was the great dragon-goddess of the
Hawaiians, coming to the islands in the migration of the gods from
Nuu-mea-lani and Kuai-he-lani to settle. The dragons and other kupuas
came as spirit servants of the gods.

For a while this Mo-o-inanea lived with her brothers, the gods, at
Waolani, but after a long time there were so many dragons that it was
necessary to distribute them over the islands, and Mo-o-inanea decided
to leave her brothers and find homes for her numerous family. So she
went down to Puunui in the lower part of Nuuanu Valley and there made
her home, and it is said received worship from the men of the ancient
days. Here she dwelt in her dual nature--sometimes appearing as a
dragon, sometimes as a woman.

Very rich clayey soil was found in this place, forced out of the earth
as if by geyser action. It was greatly sought in later years by the
chiefs who worshipped this goddess. They made the place tabu, and used
the clay, sometimes eating it, but generally plastering the hair with
it. This place was made very tabu by the late Queen Kaahumanu during her
lifetime.

Mo-o-inanea lived in the pit from which this clay was procured, a place
called Lua-palolo, meaning pit-of-sticky-clay. After she had come to
this dwelling-place the dragons were sent out to find homes. Some became
chiefs and others servants, and when by themselves were known as the
evil ones. She distributed her family over all the islands from Hawaii
to Niihau. Two of these dragon-women, according to the legends, lived as
guardians of the pali (precipice) at the end of Nuuanu Valley, above
Honolulu. After many years it was supposed that they both assumed the
permanent forms of large stones which have never lost their associations
with mysterious, miraculous power.

Even as late as 1825, Mr. Bloxam, the chaplain of the English
man-of-war, recorded in "The Voyage of the Blonde" the following
statement:

"At the bottom of the Parre (pali) there are two large stones on which
even now offerings of fruits and flowers are laid to propitiate the
Aku-wahines, or goddesses, who are supposed to have the power of
granting a safe passage."

Mr. Bloxam says that these were a kind of mo-o, or reptile, goddesses,
and adds that it was difficult to explain the meaning of the name given
to them, probably because the Hawaiians had nothing in the shape of
serpents or large reptiles in their islands.

A native account of these stones says: "There is a large grove of
hau-trees in Nuuanu Valley, and above these lie the two forest women,
Hau-ola and Ha-puu. These are now two large stones, one being about
three feet long with a fine smooth back, the other round with some
little rough places. The long stone is on the seaward side, and this is
the Mo-o woman, Hau-ola; and the other, Ha-puu. The leaves of ferns
cover Hau-ola, being laid on that stone. On the other stone, Ha-puu, are
lehua flowers. These are kupuas."

Again the old people said that their ancestors had been accustomed to
bring the navel cords of their children and bury them under these stones
to insure protection of the little ones from evil, and that these were
the stone women of Nuuanu.

Ala-muki lived in the deep pools of the Waialua River near the place
Ka-mo-o-loa, which received its name from the long journeys that dragon
made over the plains of Waialua. She and her descendants guarded the
paths and sometimes destroyed those who travelled that way.

One dragon lived in the Ewa lagoon, now known as Pearl Harbor. This was
Kane-kua-ana, who was said to have brought the pipi (oysters) to Ewa.
She was worshipped by those who gathered the shell-fish. When the
oysters began to disappear about 1850, the natives said that the dragon
had become angry and was sending the oysters to Kahiki, or some far-away
foreign land.

Kilioe, Koe, and Milolii were noted dragons on the island of Kauai. They
were the dragons of the precipices of the northern coast of this island,
who took the body of the high chief Lohiau and concealed it in a cave
far up the steep side of the mountain. There is a very long interesting