story of a princess whose continual death and resurrection were invented
to harmonize with the formation of a series of exquisite rainbows which
are born on the mountain-sides in the upper end of the valley and die
when the mist clouds reach the plain into which the valley opens. Then
there were the fish of the Hawaiian Islands which vie with the
butterflies of South America in their multitudinous combinations of
colors. These imaginative people wondered how the fish were painted, so
for a story a battle between two chiefs was either invented or taken as
a basis. The chiefs fought on the mountain-sides until finally one was
driven into the sea and compelled to make the deep waters his continual
abiding-place. Here he found a unique and pleasant occupation in calling
the various kinds of fish to his submarine home and then painting them
in varied hues according to the dictates of his fancy. Thus we have a
pure nature-myth developed from the love of the beautiful, one of the
highest emotions dwelling in the hearts of the Hawaiians of the long
ago.

So, again, Maui, a wonder-working hero like the Hercules of Grecian
mythology, heard the birds sing, and noted their beautiful forms as they
flitted from tree to tree and mingled their bright plumage with the
leaves of the fragrant blossoms.

No other one of those who lived in the long ago could see what Maui saw.
They heard the mysterious music, but the songsters were invisible. Many
were the fancies concerning these strange creatures whom they could hear
but could not see. Maui finally pitied his friends and made the birds
visible. Ever since, man has been able to both hear the music and see
the beauty of his forest neighbors.

Such nature-myths as these are well worthy of preservation by the side
of any European fairy-tale. In purity of thought, vividness of
imagination, and delicacy of coloring the Hawaiian myths are to be given
a high place in literature among the stories of nature vivified by the
imagination.

Another side of Hawaiian folk-lore is just as worthy of comparison.
Lovers of "Jack-the-Giant-Killer," and of the other wonder-workers
dwelling in the mist-lands of other nations, would enjoy reading the
marvelous record of Maui, the skilful demi-god of Hawaii, who went
fishing with a magic hook, and pulled up from the depths of the ocean
groups of islands. This story is told in a matter-of-fact way, as if it
were a fishing-excursion only a little out of the ordinary course. Maui
lived in a land where volcanic fires were always burning in the
mountains. Nevertheless it was a little inconvenient to walk thirty or
forty miles for a live coal after the cold winds of the night had put
out the fire which had been carefully protected the day before. Thus,
when he saw that some intelligent birds knew the art of making a fire,
he captured the leader and forced him to tell the secret of rubbing
certain sticks together until fire came.

Maui also made snares, captured the sun and compelled it to journey
regularly and slowly across the heavens. Thus the day was regulated to
meet the wants of mankind. He lifted the heavens after they had rested
so long upon all the plants that their leaves were flat.

There was a ledge of rock in one of the rivers, so Maui uprooted a tree
and pushed it through, making an easy passage for both water and man. He
invented many helpful articles for the use of mankind, but meanwhile
frequently filled the days of his friends with trouble on account of the
mischievous pranks which he played on them.

Fairies and gnomes dwelt in the woodland, coming forth at night to build
temples, massive walls, to fashion canoes, or whisper warnings. The
birds and the fishes were capable and intelligent guardians over the
households which had adopted them as protecting deities. Birds of
brilliant plumage and sweet song were always faithful attendants on the
chiefs, and able to converse with those over whom they kept watch.
Sharks and other mighty fish of the deep waters were reliable messengers
for those who rendered them sacrifices, often carrying their devotees
from island to island and protecting them from many dangers.

Sometimes the gruesome and horrible creeps into Hawaiian folk-lore. A
poison tree figures in the legends and finally becomes one of the most
feared of all the gods of Hawaii. A cannibal dog, cannibal ghosts, and
even a cannibal chief are prominent among the noted characters of the
past.

Then the power of praying a person to death with the aid of departed
spirits was believed in, and is at the present time.

Almost every valley of the island has its peculiar and interesting myth.
Often there is a historical foundation which has been dealt with
fancifully and enlarged into miraculous proportions. There are hidden
caves, which can be entered only by diving under the great breakers or
into the deep waters of inland pools, around which cluster tales of love
and adventure.

There are many mythological characters whose journeys extend to all the
islands of the group. The Maui stories are not limited to the large
island Hawaii and a part of the adjoining island which bears the name of
Maui, but these stories are told in a garbled form on all the islands.
So Pele, the fire-goddess, who dwelt in the hottest regions of the most
active volcanoes, belongs to all, and also Kamapuaa, who is sometimes
her husband, but more frequently her enemy. The conflicts between the
two are often suggested by destructive lava flows checked by storms or
ocean waves. It cannot be suspected that the ancient Hawaiian had the
least idea of deifying fire and water--and yet the continual conflict
between man and woman is like the eternal enmity between the two
antagonistic elements of nature.

When the borders of mist-land are crossed, a rich store of folk-lore
with a historical foundation is discovered. Chiefs and gods mingle
together as in the days of the Nibelungen Lied. Voyages are made to many
distant islands of the Pacific Ocean, whose names are frequently
mentioned in the songs and tales of the wandering heroes. A chief from
Samoa establishes a royal family on the largest of the Hawaiian Islands,
and a chief from the Hawaiian group becomes a ruler in Tahiti.

Indeed the rovers of the Pacific have tales of seafaring which equal the
accounts of the voyages of the Vikings.

The legends of the Hawaiian Islands are valuable in themselves, in that
they reveal an understanding of the phenomena of nature and unveil their
early history with its mythological setting. They are also valuable for
comparison with the legends of the other Pacific islands, and they are
exceedingly interesting when contrasted with the folk-lore of other
nations.


                                I

                    THE GHOST OF WAHAULA TEMPLE


Hawaiian temples were never works of art. Broken lava was always near
the site upon which a temple was to be built. Rough unhewn stones were
easily piled into massive walls and laid in terraces for altar and
floors. Water-worn pebbles were carried from the nearest beach and
strewn over the uneven floor, making a comparatively smooth place over
which the naked feet of the temple dwellers passed without the injuries
which would otherwise frequently come from the sharp-edged lava. Rude
grass huts built on terraces were the abodes of the priests and of the
high chiefs who sometimes visited the places of sacrifice. Elevated,
flat-topped piles of stones were usually built at one end of the temple
for the chief idols and the sacrifices placed before them. Simplicity of
detail marked every step of temple erection.

No hewn pillars or arched gateways of even the most primitive designs
can be found in any of the temples whether of recent date or belonging
to remote antiquity. There was no attempt at ornamentation even in the
images of the great gods which they worshipped. Crude, uncouth, and
hideous were the images before which they offered sacrifice and prayer.

In themselves the heiaus, or temples, of the Hawaiian Islands have but
little attraction. To-day they seem more like massive walled cattle-pens
than places which had ever been used for sacred worship.

On the southeast coast of the island of Hawaii near Kalapana is one of
the largest, oldest, and best preserved heiaus, or temples, in the
Hawaiian Islands. It is no exception to the architectural rule for
Hawaiian temples, and is worthy the name of temple only as it is
intimately associated with the religious customs of the Hawaiians. Its
walls are several feet thick and in places ten to twelve feet high. It
is divided into rooms or pens, in one of which still lies the huge
sacrificial stone upon which victims--sometimes human--were slain before
the bodies were placed as offerings in front of the hideous idols
leaning against the stone walls.

This heiau now bears the name Wahaula, or "red-mouth." In ancient times
it was known as Ahaula, or "the red assembly," possibly denoting that at
times the priests and their attendants wore red mantles in their
processions or during some part of their sacred ceremonies.

This temple is said to be the oldest of all the Hawaiian heiaus--except
possibly the heiau at Kohala on the northern coast of the same island.
These two heiaus date back in tradition to the time of Paao, the priest
from Upolu, Samoa, who was said to have built them. He was the
traditional father of the priestly line which ran parallel to the royal
genealogy of the Kamehamehas during several centuries until the last
high priest, Hewahewa, became a follower of Jesus Christ--the Saviour of
the world. This was the last heiau destroyed when the ancient tabus and
ceremonial rites were overthrown by the chiefs just before the coming of
Christian missionaries. At that time the grass houses of the priests
were burned and in these raging flames were thrown the wooden idols back
of the altars and the bamboo huts of the soothsayers and the rude images
on the walls, with everything combustible which belonged to the ancient
order of worship. Only the walls and rough stone floors were left in the
temple.

In the outer temple court was the most noted sacred grave in all the
islands. Earth had been carried from the mountain-sides inland. Leaves
and decaying trees added to the permanency of the soil. Here in a most
unlikely place it was said that all the varieties of trees then found in
the islands had been gathered by the priests--the descendants of Paao. To
this day the grave stands by the temple walls, an object of
superstitious awe among the natives. Many of the varieties of trees
there planted have died, leaving only those which were more hardy and
needed less priestly care than they received a hundred years or more
ago.

The temple is built near the coast on the rough, sharp, broken rocks of
an ancient lava flow. In many places in and around the temple the lava
was dug out, making holes three or four feet across and from one to two
feet deep. These in the days of the priesthood had been filled with
earth brought in baskets from the mountains. Here they raised sweet
potatoes and taro and bananas. Now the rains have washed the soil away
and to the unknowing there is no sign of previous agriculture. Near
these depressions and along the paths leading to Wahaula other holes
were sometimes cut out of the hard fine-grained lava. When heavy rains
fell, little grooves carried the drops of water to these holes and they
became small cisterns. Here the thirsty messengers running from one
priestly clan to another, or the traveller or worshippers coming to the
sacred place, could almost always find a few drops of water to quench
their thirst.

Usually these water-holes were covered with a large flat stone under
which the water ran into the cistern. To this day these small water
places border the path across the pahoehoe lava field which lies
adjacent to the broken a-a lava upon which the Wahaula heiau is built.
Many of them are still covered as in the days of the long ago.

It is not strange that legends have developed through the mists of the
centuries around this rude old temple.

Wahaula was a tabu temple of the very highest rank. The native chants
said,

"No keia heiau oia ke kapu enaena."

("Concerning this heiau is the burning tabu.")

"Enaena" means "burning with a red hot rage." The heiau was so
thoroughly "tabu," or "kapu," that the smoke of its fires falling upon
any of the people or even upon any one of the chiefs was sufficient
cause for punishment by death, with the body as a sacrifice to the gods
of the temple.

These gods were of the very highest rank among the Hawaiian deities.
Certain days were tabu to Lono--or Rongo, as he was known in other
island groups of the Pacific Ocean. Other days belonged to Ku--who was
also worshipped from New Zealand to Tahiti. At other times Kane, known
as Tane by many Polynesians, was held supreme. Then again Kanaloa--or
Tanaroa, sometimes worshipped in Samoa and other island groups as the
greatest of all their gods--had his days especially set apart for
sacrifice and chant.

The Mu, or "body-catcher," of this heiau with his assistants seems to
have been continually on the watch for human victims, and woe to the
unfortunate man who carelessly or ignorantly walked where the winds blew
the smoke from the temple fires. No one dared rescue him from the hands
of the hunter of men--for then the wrath of all the gods was sure to
follow him all the days of his life.

The people of the districts around Wahaula always watched the course of
the winds with great anxiety, carefully noting the direction taken by
the smoke. This smoke was the shadow cast by the deity worshipped, and
was far more sacred than the shadow of the highest chief or king in all
the islands.

It was always sufficient cause for death if a common man allowed his
shadow to fall upon any tabu chief, _i.e._, a chief of especially high
rank; but in this "burning tabu," if any man permitted the smoke or
shadow of the god who was being worshipped in this temple to come near
to him or overshadow him, it was a mark of such great disrespect that
the god was supposed to be enaena, or red hot with rage.

Many ages ago a young chief whom we shall know by the name Kahele
determined to take an especial journey around the island visiting all
the noted and sacred places and becoming acquainted with the alii, or
chiefs, of the other districts.

He passed from place to place, taking part with the chiefs
who entertained him sometimes in the use of the papa-hee, or
surf-board, riding the white-capped surf as it majestically swept
shoreward--sometimes spending night after night in the innumerable
gambling contests which passed under the name pili waiwai--and sometimes
riding the narrow sled, or holua, with which Hawaiian chiefs raced down
the steep grassed lanes. Then again, with a deep sense of the solemnity
of sacred things, he visited the most noted of the heiaus and made
contributions to the offerings before the gods. Thus the days passed,
and the slow journey was very pleasant to Kahele.

In time he came to Puna, the district in which was located the temple
Wahaula.

But alas! in the midst of the many stories of the past which he had
heard, and the many pleasures he had enjoyed while on his journey,
Kahele forgot the peculiar power of the tabu of the smoke of Wahaula.
The fierce winds of the south were blowing and changing from point to
point. The young man saw the sacred grove in the edge of which the
temple walls could be discerned. Thin wreaths of smoke were tossed here
and there from the temple fires.

Kahele hastened toward the temple. The Mu was watching his coming and
joyfully marking him as a victim. The altars of the gods were desolate,
and if but a particle of smoke fell upon the young man no one could keep
him from the hands of the executioner.

The perilous moment came. The warm breath of one of the fires touched
the young chief's cheek. Soon a blow from the club of the Mu laid him
senseless on the rough stones of the outer court of the temple. The
smoke of the wrath of the gods had fallen upon him, and it was well that
he should lie as a sacrifice upon their altars.

Soon the body with the life still in it was thrown across the
sacrificial stone. Sharp knives made from the strong wood of the bamboo
let his life-blood flow down the depressions across the face of the
stone. Quickly the body was dismembered and offered as a sacrifice.

For some reason the priests, after the flesh had decayed, set apart the
bones for some special purpose. The legends imply that the bones were to
be treated dishonorably. It may have been that the bones were folded
together in the shape known as unihipili, or "grasshopper" bones,
_i.e._, folded and laid away for purposes of incantation. Such bundles
of bones were put through a process of prayers and charms until at last
it was thought a new spirit was created which dwelt in that bundle and
gave the possessor a peculiar power in deeds of witchcraft.

The spirit of Kahele rebelled against this disposition of all that
remained of his body. He wanted to be back in his native district, that
he might enjoy the pleasures of the Under-world with his own chosen
companions. Restlessly the spirit haunted the dark corners of the
temple, watching the priests as they handled his bones.

Helplessly the ghost fumed and fretted against its condition. It did all
that a disembodied spirit could do to attract the attention of the
priests.

At last the spirit fled by night from this place of torment to the home
which he had so joyfully left a short time before.

Kahele's father was the high chief of Kau. Surrounded by retainers, he
passed his days in quietness and peace waiting for the return of his
son.

One night a strange dream came to him. He heard a voice calling from the
mysterious confines of the spirit-land. As he listened, a spirit form
stood by his side. The ghost was that of his son Kahele.

By means of the dream the ghost revealed to the father that he had been
put to death and that his bones were in great danger of dishonorable
treatment.

The father awoke benumbed with fear, realizing that his son was calling
upon him for immediate help. At once he left his people and journeyed
from place to place secretly, not knowing where or when Kahele had died,
but fully sure that the spirit of his vision was that of his son. It was
not difficult to trace the young man. He had left his footprints openly
all along the way. There was nothing of shame or dishonor--and the
father's heart filled with pride as he hastened on.

From time to time, however, he heard the spirit voice calling him to
save the bones of the body of his dead son. At last he felt that his
journey was nearly done. He had followed the footsteps of Kahele almost
entirely around the island, and had come to Puna--the last district
before his own land of Kau would welcome his return.

The spirit voice could be heard now in the dream which nightly came to
him. Warnings and directions were frequently given.

Then the chief came to the lava fields of Wahaula and lay down to rest.
The ghost came to him again in a dream, telling him that great personal
danger was near at hand. The chief was a very strong man, excelling in
athletic and brave deeds, but in obedience to the spirit voice he rose
early in the morning, secured oily nuts from a kukui-tree, beat out the
oil, and anointed himself thoroughly.

Walking along carelessly as if to avoid suspicion, he drew near to the
lands of the temple Wahaula. Soon a man came out to meet him. This man
was an Olohe, a beardless man belonging to a lawless robber clan which
infested the district, possibly assisting the man-hunters of the temple
in securing victims for the temple altars. This Olohe was very strong
and self-confident, and thought he would have but little difficulty in
destroying this stranger who journeyed alone through Puna.

Almost all day the battle raged between the two men. Back and forth they
forced each other over the lava beds. The chief's well-oiled body was
very difficult for the Olohe to grasp. Bruised and bleeding from
repeated falls on the rough lava, both of the combatants were becoming
very weary. Then the chief made a new attack, forcing the Olohe into a
narrow place from which there was no escape, and at last seizing him,
breaking his bones, and then killing him.

As the shadows of night rested over the temple and its sacred grave the
chief crept closer to the dreaded tabu walls. Concealing himself he
waited for the ghost to reveal to him the best plan for action. The
ghost came, but was compelled to bid the father wait patiently for a fit
time when the secret place in which the bones were hidden could be
safely visited.

For several days and nights the chief hid himself near the temple. He
secretly uttered the prayers and incantations needed to secure the
protection of his family gods.

One night the darkness was very great, and the priests and watchmen of
the temple felt sure that no one would attempt to enter the sacred
precincts. Deep sleep rested upon all the temple-dwellers.

Then the ghost of Kahele hastened to the place where the father was
sleeping and aroused him for the dangerous task before him.

As the father arose he saw this ghost outlined in the darkness,
beckoning him to follow. Step by step he felt his way cautiously over
the rough path and along the temple walls until he saw the ghost
standing near a great rock pointing at a part of the wall.

The father seized a stone which seemed to be the one most directly in
the line of the ghost's pointing. To his surprise it very easily was
removed from the wall. Back of it was a hollow place in which lay a
bundle of folded bones. The ghost urged the chief to take these bones
and depart quickly.


The father obeyed, and followed the spirit guide until safely away from
the temple of the burning wrath of the gods. He carried the bones to Kau
and placed them in his own secret family burial cave.

The ghost of Wahaula went down to the spirit world in great joy. Death
had come. The life of the young chief had been taken for temple service
and yet there had at last been nothing dishonorable connected with the
destruction of the body and the passing away of the spirit.


                             II

                 MALUAE AND THE UNDER-WORLD


This is a story from Manoa Valley, back of Honolulu. In the upper end of
the valley, at the foot of the highest mountains on the island Oahu,
lived Maluae. He was a farmer, and had chosen this land because rain
fell abundantly on the mountains, and the streams brought down fine soil
from the decaying forests and disintegrating rocks, fertilizing his
plants.

Here he cultivated bananas and taro and sweet potatoes. His bananas grew
rapidly by the sides of the brooks, and yielded large bunches of fruit
from their tree-like stems; his taro filled small walled-in pools,
growing in the water like water-lilies, until the roots were matured,
when the plants were pulled up and the roots boiled and prepared for
food; his sweet potatoes--a vegetable known among the ancient New
Zealanders as ku-maru, and supposed to have come from Hawaii--were
planted on the drier uplands.

Thus he had plenty of food continually growing, and ripening from time
to time. Whenever he gathered any of his food products he brought a part
to his family temple and placed it on an altar before the gods Kane and
Kanaloa, then he took the rest to his home for his family to eat.

He had a boy whom he dearly loved, whose name was Kaa-lii (rolling
chief). This boy was a careless, rollicking child.

One day the boy was tired and hungry. He passed by the temple of the
gods and saw bananas, ripe and sweet, on the little platform before the
gods. He took these bananas and ate them all.

The gods looked down on the altar expecting to find food, but it was all
gone and there was nothing for them. They were very angry, and ran out
after the boy. They caught him eating the bananas, and killed him. The
body they left lying under the trees, and taking out his ghost threw it
into the Under-world.

The father toiled hour after hour cultivating his food plants, and when
wearied returned to his home. On the way he met the two gods. They told
him how his boy had robbed them of their sacrifices and how they had
punished him. They said, "We have sent his ghost body to the lowest
regions of the Under-world."

The father was very sorrowful and heavy hearted as he went on his way to
his desolate home. He searched for the body of his boy, and at last
found it. He saw too that the story of the gods was true, for partly
eaten bananas filled the mouth, which was set in death.

He wrapped the body very carefully in kapa cloth made from the bark of
trees. He carried it into his rest-house and laid it on the
sleeping-mat. After a time he lay down beside the body, refusing all
food, and planning to die with his boy. He thought if he could escape
from his own body he would be able to go down where the ghost of his boy
had been sent. If he could find that ghost he hoped to take it to the
other part of the Under-world, where they could be happy together.

He placed no offerings on the altar of the gods. No prayers were
chanted. The afternoon and evening passed slowly. The gods waited for
their worshipper, but he came not. They looked down on the altar of
sacrifice, but there was nothing for them.

The night passed and the following day. The father lay by the side of
his son, neither eating nor drinking, and longing only for death. The
house was tightly closed.

Then the gods talked together, and Kane said: "Maluae eats no food, he
prepares no awa to drink, and there is no water by him. He is near the
door of the Under-world. If he should die, we would be to blame."

Kanaloa said: "He has been a good man, but now we do not hear any
prayers. We are losing our worshipper. We in quick anger killed his
son. Was this the right reward? He has called us morning and evening in
his worship. He has provided fish and fruits and vegetables for our
altars. He has always prepared awa from the juice of the yellow awa root
for us to drink. We have not paid him well for his care."

Then they decided to go and give life to the father, and permit him to
take his ghost body and go down into Po, the dark land, to bring back
the ghost of the boy. So they went to Maluae and told him they were
sorry for what they had done.

The father was very weak from hunger, and longing for death, and could
scarcely listen to them.

When Kane said, "Have you love for your child?" the father whispered:
"Yes. My love is without end." "Can you go down into the dark land and
get that spirit and put it back in the body which lies here?"

"No," the father said, "no, I can only die and go to live with him and
make him happier by taking him to a better place."

Then the gods said, "We will give you the power to go after your boy and
we will help you to escape the dangers of the land of ghosts."

Then the father, stirred by hope, rose up and took food and drink. Soon
he was strong enough to go on his journey.

The gods gave him a ghost body and also prepared a hollow stick like
bamboo, in which they put food, battle-weapons, and a piece of burning
lava for fire.

Not far from Honolulu is a beautiful modern estate with fine roads,
lakes, running brooks, and interesting valleys extending back into the
mountain range. This is called by the very ancient name Moanalua (two
lakes). Near the seacoast of this estate was one of the most noted ghost
localities of the islands. The ghosts after wandering over the island
Oahu would come to this place to find a way into their real home, the
Under-world, or, as the Hawaiians usually called it, Po.

Here was a ghostly breadfruit-tree named Lei-walo, possibly meaning "the
eight wreaths" or "the eighth wreath"--the last wreath of leaves from
the land of the living which would meet the eyes of the dying.

The ghosts would leap or fly or climb into the branches of this tree,
trying to find a rotten branch upon which they could sit until it broke
and threw them into the dark sea below.

Maluae climbed up the breadfruit-tree. He found a branch upon which some
ghosts were sitting waiting for it to fall. His weight was so much
greater than theirs that the branch broke at once, and down they all
fell into the land of Po.

He needed merely to taste the food in his hollow cane to have new life
and strength. This he had done when he climbed the tree; thus he had
been able to push past the fabled guardians of the pathway of the ghosts
in the Upper-world. As he entered the Under-world he again tasted the
food of the gods and he felt himself growing stronger and stronger.

He took a magic war-club and a spear out of the cane given by the gods.
Ghostly warriors tried to hinder his entrance into the different
districts of the dark land. The spirits of dead chiefs challenged him
when he passed their homes. Battle after battle was fought. His magic
club struck the warriors down, and his spear tossed them aside.

Sometimes he was warmly greeted and aided by ghosts of kindly spirit.
Thus he went from place to place, searching for his boy, finding him at
last, as the Hawaiians quaintly expressed it, "down in the papa-ku" (the
established foundation of Po), choking and suffocating from the bananas
of ghost-land which he was compelled to continually force into his
mouth.

The father caught the spirit of the boy and started back toward the
Upper-world, but the ghosts surrounded him. They tried to catch him and
take the spirit away from him. Again the father partook of the food of
the gods. Once more he wielded his war-club, but the hosts of enemies
were too great. Multitudes arose on all sides, crushing him by their
overwhelming numbers.

At last he raised his magic hollow cane and took the last portion of
food. Then he poured out the portion of burning lava which the gods had
placed inside. It fell upon the dry floor of the Under-world. The flames
dashed into the trees and the shrubs of ghost-land. Fire-holes opened in
the floor and streams of lava burst out.

Backward fled the multitudes of spirits. The father thrust the spirit of
the boy quickly into the empty magic cane and rushed swiftly up to his
home-land. He brought the spirit to the body lying in the rest-house and
forced it to find again its living home.

Afterward the father and the boy took food to the altars of the gods,
and chanted the accustomed prayers heartily and loyally all the rest of
their lives.


                              III

                   A GIANT'S ROCK-THROWING


A point of land on the northwestern coast of the island Oahu is called
Ka-lae-o-Kaena which means "The Cape of Kaena."

Out in the ocean a short distance from this cape lies a large rock which
bears the name Pohaku-o-Kauai, or rock of Kauai, a large island
northwest of Oahu. This rock is as large as a small house.

There is an interesting legend told on the island of Oahu which explains
why these names have for generations been fastened to the cape and to
the rock. A long, long time ago there lived on the island Kauai a man of
wonderful power, by the name of Hau-pu. When he was born, the signs of a
demi-god were over and around the house of his birth. Lightning flashed
through the skies, and thunder reverberated, rolling along the
mountain-sides.

Thunder and lightning were very rare in the Hawaiian Islands, and were
supposed to be connected with the birth or death or some very unusual
occurrence in the life of a chief.

Mighty floods of rain fell and poured in torrents down the
mountain-sides, carrying the red iron soil into the valleys in such
quantities that the rapids and the waterfalls became the color of blood,
and the natives called this a blood-rain.

During the storm, and even after sunshine filled the valley, a beautiful
rainbow rested over the house in which the young chief was born. This
rainbow was thought to come from the miraculous powers of the new-born
child shining out from him instead of from the sunlight around him. Many
chiefs throughout the centuries of Hawaiian legends were said to have
had this rainbow around them all their lives.

Hau-pu while a child was very powerful, and after he grew up was widely
known as a great warrior. He would attack and defeat armies of his
enemies without aid from any person. His spear was like a mighty weapon,
sometimes piercing a host of enemies, and sometimes putting aside all
opposition when he thrust it into the ranks of his opponents.

If he had thrown his spear and if fighting with his bare hands did not
vanquish his foes, he would leap to the hillside, tear up a great tree,
and with it sweep away all before him as if he were wielding a huge
broom. He was known and feared throughout all the Hawaiian Islands. He
became angry quickly and used his great powers very rashly.

One night he lay sleeping in his royal rest-house on the side of a
mountain which faced the neighboring island of Oahu. Between the two
islands lay a broad channel about thirty miles wide. When clouds were on
the face of the sea, these islands were hidden from each other; but when
they lifted, the rugged valleys of the mountains on one island could be
clearly seen from the other. Even by moonlight the shadowy lines would
appear.

This night the strong man stirred in his sleep. Indistinct noises seemed
to surround his house. He turned over and dropped off into slumber
again.

Soon he was aroused a second time, and he was awake enough to hear
shouts of men far, far away. Louder rose the noise mixed with the roar
of the great surf waves, so he realized that it came from the sea, and
he then forced himself to rise and stumble to the door.

He looked out toward Oahu. A multitude of lights were flashing on the
sea before his sleepy eyes. A low murmur of many voices came from the
place where the dancing lights seemed to be. His confused thoughts made
it appear to him that a great fleet of warriors was coming from Oahu to
attack his people.

He blindly rushed out to the edge of a high precipice which overlooked
the channel. Evidently many boats and many people were out in the sea
below.

He laughed, and stooped down and tore a huge rock from its place. This
he swung back and forth, back and forth, back and forth, until he gave
it great impetus which added to his own miraculous power sent it far out
over the sea. Like a great cloud it rose in the heavens and, as if blown
by swift winds, sped on its way.

Over on the shores of Oahu a chief whose name was Kaena had called his
people out for a night's fishing. Canoes large and small came from all
along the coast. Torches without number had been made and placed in the
canoes. The largest fish-nets had been brought.

There was no need of silence. Nets had been set in the best places. Fish
of all kinds were to be aroused and frightened into the nets. Flashing
lights, splashing paddles, and clamor from hundreds of voices resounded
all around the nets.

Gradually the canoes came nearer and nearer the centre. The shouting
increased. Great joy ruled the noise which drowned the roar of the
waves.

Across the channel and up the mountain-sides of Kauai swept the shouts
of the fishing-party. Into the ears of drowsy Hau-pu the noise forced
itself. Little dreamed the excited fishermen of the effect of this on
far-away Kauai.

Suddenly something like a bird as large as a mountain seemed to be
above, and then with a mighty sound like the roar of winds it descended
upon them.

Smashed and submerged were the canoes when the huge boulder thrown by
Hau-pu hurled itself upon them.

The chief Kaena and his canoe were in the centre of this terrible mass
of wreckage, and he and many of his people lost their lives.

The waves swept sand upon the shore until in time a long point of land
was formed. The remaining followers of the dead chief named this cape
"Kaena."

The rock thrown by Hau-pu embedded itself deeply in the bed of the
ocean, but its head rose far above the water, even when raging storms
dashed turbulent waves against it. To this death-dealing rock the
natives gave the name "Rock of Kauai."

Thus for generations has the deed of the man of giant force been
remembered on Oahu, and so have a cape and a rock received their names.


                               IV

                   KALO-EKE-EKE, THE TIMID TARO


A myth is a purely imaginative story. A legend is a story with some
foundation in fact. A fable tacks on a moral. A tradition is a myth or
legend or fact handed down from generation to generation.

The old Hawaiians were frequently myth makers. They imagined many a
fairy-story for the different localities of the islands, and these are
very interesting. The myth of the two taro plants belongs to South Kona,
Hawaii, and affords an excellent illustration of Hawaiian imagination.
The story is told in different ways, and came to the writer in the
present form:

A chief lived on the mountain-side above Hookena. There his people
cultivated taro, made kapa cloth, and prepared the trunks of koa-trees
for canoes. He had a very fine taro patch. The plants prided themselves
upon their rapid and perfect growth.

In one part of the taro pond, side by side, grew two taro plants--finer,
stronger, and more beautiful than the others. The leaf stalks bent over
in more perfect curves: the leaves developed in graceful proportions.
Mutual admiration filled the hearts of the two taro plants and resulted
in pledges of undying affection.

One day the chief was talking to his servants about the food to be made
ready for a feast. He ordered the two especially fine taro plants to be
pulled up. One of the servants came to the home of the two lovers and
told them that they were to be taken by the chief.

Because of their great affection for each other they determined to cling
to life as long as possible, and therefore moved to another part of the
taro patch, leaving their neighbors to be pulled up instead of
themselves.

But the chief soon saw them in their new home and again ordered their
destruction. Again they fled. This happened from time to time until the
angry chief determined that they should be taken, no matter what part of
the pond they might be in.

The two taro plants thought best to flee, therefore took to themselves
wings and made a short flight to a neighboring taro patch. Here again
their enemy found them. A second flight was made to another part of
South Kona, and then to still another, until all Kona was interested in
the perpetual pursuit and the perpetual escape. At last there was no
part of Kona in which they could be concealed. A friend of the angry
chief would reveal their hiding-place, while one of their own friends
would give warning of the coming of their pursuer. At last they leaped
into the air and flew on and on until they were utterly weary and fell
into a taro patch near Waiohinu. But their chief had ordered the imu
(cooking-place) to be made ready for them, and had hastened along the
way on foot, trying to capture them if at any time they should try to
light. However, their wings moved more swiftly than his feet, so they
had a little rest before he came near to their new home. Then again they
lifted themselves into the sky. Favoring winds carried them along and
they flew a great distance away from South Kona into the neighboring
district of Kau. Here they found a new home under a kindly chief. Here
they settled down and lived many years under the name of Kalo-eke-eke,
or "The Timid Taro." A large family grew up about them and a happy old
age blessed their declining days.

It is possible that this beautiful little story may have grown out of
the ancient Hawaiian unwritten law which sometimes permitted the
subjects of a chief to move away from their home and transfer their
allegiance to some neighboring ruler.


                                V

                      LEGENDARY CANOE-MAKING


Some of the Hawaiian trees have beautifully grained wood, and at the
present time are very valuable for furniture and interior decoration.
The koa is probably the best of the trees of this class. It is known as
the Hawaiian mahogany. The grain is very fine and curly and wavy, and is
capable of a very high polish. The koa still grows luxuriantly on the
steep sides and along the ridges of the high mountains of all the
islands of the Hawaiian group. It has great powers of endurance. It is
not easily worn by the pebbles and sand of the beach, nor is it readily
split or broken by the tempestuous waves of the ocean, therefore from
time immemorial the koa has been the tree for the canoe and surf-board
of the Hawaiians. Long and large have been the canoes hewn from the
massive tree trunks by the aid of the kohi-pohaku, the cutting stone, or
adze, of ancient Hawaii. Some times these canoes were given miraculous
powers of motion so that they swept through the seas more rapidly than
the swiftest shark. Often the god of the winds, who had especial care
over some one of the high chiefs, would carry him from island to island
in a canoe which never rested when calms prevailed or stopped when
fierce waves wrenched, but bore the chief swiftly and unfailingly to the
desired haven.

There is a delightful little story about a chief who visited the most
northerly island, Kauai. He found the natives of that island feasting
and revelling in all the abandon of savage life. Sports and games
innumerable were enjoyed. Thus day and night passed until, as the
morning of a new day dawned, an unwonted stir along the beach made
manifest some event of very great importance. The new chief apparently
cared but little for all the excitement. The king of the island had sent
one of his royal ornaments to a small island some miles distant from the
Kauai shores. He was blessed with a daughter so beautiful that all the
available chiefs desired her for wife. The father, hoping to avoid the
complications which threatened to involve his household with the
households of the jealous suitors, announced that he would give his
daughter to the man who secured the ornament from the far-away island.
It was to be a canoe race with a wife for the prize.

The young chiefs waited for the hour appointed. Their well-polished koa
canoes lined the beach. The stranger chief made no preparation. Quietly
he enjoyed the gibes and taunts hurled from one to another by the young
chiefs. Laughingly he requested permission to join in the contest,
receiving as the reward for his request a look of approbation from the
handsome chiefess.

The word was given. The well-manned canoes were pushed from the shore
and forced out through the inrolling surf. In the rush some of the boats
were interlocked with others, some filled with water, while others
safely broke away from the rest and passed out of sight toward the
coveted island. Still the stranger seemed to be in no haste to win the
prize. The face of the chiefess grew dark with disappointment.

At last the stranger launched his finely polished canoe and called one
of his followers to sail with him. It seemed to be utterly impossible
for him to even dream of securing the prize, but the canoe began to move
as if it had the wings of a swift bird or the fins of fleetest fish. He
had taken for his companion in his magic canoe one of the gods
controlling the ocean winds. He was first to reach the island. Then he
came swiftly back for his bride. He made his home among his new friends.

The Hawaiians had many interesting ceremonies in connection with the
process of securing the tree and fashioning it into a canoe.

David Malo, a Hawaiian writer of about the year 1840, says, "The
building of a canoe was a religious matter." When a man found a fine koa
tree he went to the priest whose province was canoe-making and said, "I
have found a koa-tree, a fine large tree." On receiving this information
the priest went at night to sleep before his shrine. If in his sleep he
had a vision of some one standing naked before him, he knew that the
koa-tree was rotten, and would not go up into the woods to cut that
tree. If another tree was found and he dreamed of a handsome
well-dressed man or woman standing before him, when he awoke he felt
sure that the tree would make a good canoe. Preparations were made
accordingly to go into the mountains and hew the koa into a canoe. They
took with them as offerings a pig, cocoanuts, red fish, and awa. Having
come to the place they rested for the night, sacrificing these things to
the gods.

Sometimes, when a royal canoe was to be prepared, it seems as if human
beings were also brought and slain at the root of the tree. There is no
record of cannibalism connected with these sacrifices, and yet when the
pig and fish had been offered before the tree, usually a hole was dug
close to the tree and an oven prepared in which the meat and vegetables
were cooked for the morning feast of the canoe-makers. The tree was
carefully examined and the signs and portents noted. The song of a
little bird would frequently cause an entire change in the enterprise.

When the time came to cut down the tree the priest would take his stone
axe and offer prayer to the male and female deities who were supposed to
be the special patrons of canoe building, showing them the axe, and
saying: "Listen now to the axe. This is the axe which is to cut down the
tree for the canoe."

David Malo says: "When the tree began to crack, ready to fall, they
lowered their voices and allowed no one to make a disturbance. When the
tree had fallen, the head priest mounted the trunk and called out,
'Smite with the axe, and hollow the canoe.' This was repeated again and
again as he walked along the fallen tree, marking the full length of the
desired canoe."

Dr. Emerson gives the following as one of the prayers sometimes used by
the priest when passing a long the trunk of the tree:

    "Grant a canoe which shall be swift as a fish
    To sail in stormy seas
    When the storm tosses on all sides."

After the canoe had been roughly shaped, the ends pointed, the bottom
rounded, and perhaps a portion of the inside of the log removed, the
people fastened lines to the canoe to haul it down to the beach. When
they were ready for the work the priest again prayed: "Oh, canoe gods,
look you after this canoe. Guard it from stem to stern, until it is
placed in the canoe-house."

Then the canoe was hauled by the people in front, or held back by those
who were in the rear, until it had passed all the hard and steep places
along the mountain-side and been put in place for the finishing touches.
When completed, pig and fish and fruits were again offered to the gods.
Sometimes human beings were again a part of the sacrifice.

Prayers and incantations were part of the ceremony. There was to be no
disturbance or noise, or else it would be dangerous for its owner to go
out in his new canoe. If all the people except the priest had been
quiet, the canoe was pronounced safe.

It is said that the ceremony of lashing the outrigger to the canoe was
of very great solemnity, probably because the ability to pass through
the high surf waves depended so much upon the out rigger as a balance
which kept the canoe from being overturned.