story of the man and woman who escape the universal deluge in a
cunningly contrived boat or chest in Greece, Assyria, Palestine,
Mexico, and other countries. In such stories we have good examples of
myths apparently disseminated from one original tale or event; but
that resemblances between myths are no criterion of a common origin
is proved by widespread examples in which circumstances of time and
geography forbid all possibility of borrowing. The belief that once the
soul had partaken of the food of the Underworld it might not return to
earth is common to ancient Greeks, Finns, and Red Indians, and if any
original conception gave rise to the notion in these widely separated
countries it must be sought in an altogether archaic and prehistoric
era.

SOPHISTICATED MYTHS

Myths generally become altered or 'sophisticated' by contact with a
higher civilization than that of the people which originally developed
them. The myth of Joskeha and Tawiscara given on p. 191 is a notable
instance in this connexion. Some barbarous mythic systems have become
coloured by Biblical narrative, but it is not safe to conclude so
because of a surface resemblance. The rule holds good, generally
speaking, that myths found current among primitive people and having
marked ethical characteristics in which 'good' and 'evil' are sharply
contrasted almost certainly show sophistication by the agents of a
superior civilization. But if the rule were to be ruthlessly adhered to
it would not admit the evolution of religious belief or the heightening
of the ethical standard among the lower races, who must pass through
such phases of development as those through which our fathers passed,
with this exception, of course, that the process is quickened in their
case by contact with races possessing a much higher standard of general
culture.

By a process of interaction all mythic systems of uncivilized peoples
are probably at the present day highly sophisticated, so that to
encounter a truly spontaneous myth uncoloured by alien belief or
priestly conception is probably impossible. At the same time it is
a characteristic of myth and folk-tale that no matter how greatly
cultural surroundings alter them they tend to keep the basic elements
of which they were originally compounded. We all know that matters
of fact as they pass from one individual to another become greatly
distorted. Strangely enough, this is not the case with myth and
folk-tale. The reason is hard to discover, but the fact is certain.
The writer has observed among children a prompt indignation at the
'mis-telling' of a traditional tale. Once the terms of a story become
fixed he will be bold who will attempt to alter them when recounting
them to children or savages. In short, where the circumstances of a
story are well authenticated a barrier exists against the tendency,
shown in gossip, to adorn the original plot, to add or subtract from
it. This appears to be due to a strong conservative instinct in the
childish and savage mind.

"To generalize," said Blake, "is to be an idiot," but to generalize is
one of the functions of science. In a general sense, then, the more
simple and archaic the characteristics of a myth, and the more it
reflects an early state of society, the greater the antiquity it is
naturally likely to possess. The more 'literary,' the more embellished
it is by the graces of art, and the more cunning it displays in the
business of story-telling, the later it will be. Many myths have, of
course, been built up by slow degrees only, the myth of Osiris being
an admirable example. It grew with the importance of the god himself,
who perhaps from a mere local spirit came to be the great deity of the
dead.

Proof of the authenticity of myth--that is, the proof by which it
is known as the genuine aboriginal product of a primitive folk--is
obtained by what Tylor has called "the test of recurrence." That is, if
we discover a tale possessing the same elements in several different
parts of the world "we cannot set down the coincidence to chance or
fraud." This is practically a 'law,' and is one of the most valuable
conclusions which has as yet enriched mythological science.

An outline--and merely an outline--of the principal questions with
which students of myth are at present chiefly concerned has now been
furnished. These, as has been said, will be amplified in succeeding
chapters, the purpose of this introduction having been served if the
reader is enabled by its perusal to follow intelligently the subsequent
examination, on a more extensive scale, of the subjects indicated.


[1] In order that the beginner in mythic science may be enabled to
comprehend its scope with some degree of precision, the writer has
framed definitions as closely approaching accuracy as the present state
of knowledge and research will permit, and has obtained the advice and
assistance of most of the leading authorities. The method adopted was
as follows. A table of definitions was placed before each authority,
and he was invited to comment upon it. Such comments and criticisms
on certain portions of the definitions either displaced the original
material or were incorporated with it, first of all being reduced to a
brevity suitable to explanatory phraseology. The result was the above
list of definitions.

In the _Handbook of Folklore_, Appendix A, a number of definitions
bearing upon mythology are provided, drawn up at a conference
representing the editors of the _Handbook_ and others. Several of them
bear the sign of over-caution. For example, we read on p. 300; "Myth, a
story told to account for something." Although sufficiently wide, the
phrase is sadly lacking in definiteness, and might equally apply to an
effort of mendacity!

[2] "Definitions and rules are needed. No student can attack so immense
a subject without the aid of such necessary machinery, and it is
because the attempt has been so often made ill-equipped in this respect
that the science of folklore has suffered so much and has remained so
long unrecognized." (Gomme, _Folklore as an Historical Science_, p.
127.) Some high authorities with whom the writer communicated appear
to consider the formulation of definitions as a 'waste of time'! This
attitude in the case of the leaders of any other science would surely
be considered as retrograde.

[3] In truth, 'folklore' is a most unfortunate denomination, as the
science it designates has greatly outgrown the name. Neither 'folklore'
nor 'mythology' is capable of defining the study of the religion,
fiction, usages, laws, and general mental equipment of savages and
primitive people. By far the best term is 'tradition,' and the one
barrier to its use seems to be its simplicity.

[4] _Religion of the Semites_ pp. 18 sqq.

[5] Gomme, quoting and following Robertson Smith, believes that
"mythology was no essential part of ancient religion, for it had no
sacred sanction and no binding force on the worshippers." Why then
the insistence by most priesthoods on the absorption of myths by
their neophytes? Why their 'renovation' of myths? Myths were early
efforts at a reconciliation of the tales of gods with the religious
sentiment; ritual, as Gomme admits, was merely the outward expression
of tradition. On p. 141 of the same work (_Folklore as an Historical
Science_) he speaks of "those who believe in the truth of the myth,"
of its "sacred character," of "traditions which have become sacred."
On p. 149 he speaks of myth as "revered," and told in "the hushed
sanctity of a great wonder." Yet he believes that it had "no binding
force"! On p. 150 he writes of the preservation of primitive myth "for
_religious_ purposes." Robertson Smith's reasoning was, of course,
based on pure theory and upon limited as opposed to universal examples
of the connexion of myth with religion, of which it is an integral
part. The wonder is that this circumstance was not patently visible to
the distinguished folklorist who comments upon and accepts his dictum.

[6] _The Golden Bough_(2nd ed.), vol. i, p. 63.

[7] My own 'minimum' definition of religion is, "The result of man's
attitude to the unknown."

[8] Dr Marett, in a letter to the author dated November 30, 1914,
states that he "thinks it a mistake to state by way of definition
that myths are ætiological" (explanatory), on the ground that
explanation is not a fundamental of myth and that a theory is thereby
involved. Says Gomme: "Every tradition ... myth or story contains two
perfectly independent elements--the fact upon which it is founded and
the interpretation of the fact which its founders have attempted."
(_Folklore as an Historical Science_, p. 10.)

[9] As regards the relation of myth to history, Gomme has happily said
that myth "must not be identified with history. This claim is based
upon two facts, the presence of myth in the shape of the folk-tale
[which he believes to be a late form of myth] and the preservation of
much mythic tradition beyond the stage of thought to which it properly
belongs by becoming attached to an historical event or series of
events, or to an historical personage, and in this way carrying on
its life into historic periods and among historic peoples. The first
position has resulted in a wholesale appropriation of the folk-tale
to the cause of the mythologists; the second position has hitherto
resulted either in a disastrous appropriation of the entire tradition
to mythology or in a still more disastrous rejection both of the
tradition and the historical event round which it clusters." (_Folklore
as an Historical Science_, p. 128.)

[10] "The myth is not dependent upon the text in which it appears
for the first time. That text as we have it was not written down by
contemporary or nearly contemporary authority. Before it had become a
written document it had lived long as oral tradition." (Gomme, _op.
cit_., p. 125.)

[11] When myth is 'renovated,' cleansed, cast into literary form, or in
any way subjected to alteration, it is known as 'secondary' myth--that
is, it exists in a secondary state.

[12] "In this class of tradition we are in touch with the struggles of
the earliest ancestors of man to learn about the unknown." (Gomme, _op.
cit.,_ p. 130.)

[13] "All the knowledge they possess is that based upon their own
material senses, and therefore when they apply that knowledge to
subjects outside their own personality they deal with them in terms of
their own personality." (Gomme, _op. cit.,_ p. 132.)

[14] Some modern writers believe animism to be a relatively late
manifestation in the religious history of mankind. It seems to me
to occur spontaneously wherever and whenever the mind of man is
discovered in a condition sufficiently primitive to receive it, and
as it is the original mental characteristic of all children, whether
savage or civilized, I fail to recognize its significance as a later
demonstration of human thought.

[15] Lang, _Myth, Ritual, and Religion_ (4th ed.), vol. i, p. 295.

[16] See remarks on totemism, p. 28.

[17] Gill, _Myths and Songs from the South Pacific_, p. 60.

[18] "Primitive science was also primitive belief." (Gomme, _op.
cit.,_ p. 140.) Again (p. 132): "Where savages ask themselves, as they
certainly do ask themselves, whence the sky, whence the winds, the sun,
moon, stars, sea, rivers, mountains, and other natural objects, they
reply in terms of good logic applied to deficient knowledge." Again (p.
130): "Our own research in the realms of the unknown we dignify by the
name and glories of science. The research of our remote ancestors was
of like kind.... It was primitive science."

[19] Tylor, _Primitive Culture_, vol. i, p. 369.

[20] Animism has been defined by Dr Tylor as "the doctrine of spiritual
beings, including human souls"; but the term is often extended to
include _animatism_, "the doctrine that the great part if not the whole
of the inanimate kingdom as well as all animated beings are endowed
with reason, intelligence, and volition, identical with that of man."

[21] "We have no opportunity of observing historically man's
development from blank unbelief into even the minimum or most
rudimentary form of belief. We can only theorise and make more or less
plausible conjectures as to the first rudiments of human faith in God
and in spiritual beings. We find no race whose mind as to faith is a
_tabula rasa_." (Lang, _The Making of Religion_, p. 53.)

[22] Tylor supposes animism to have arisen from "two groups of
biological problems present to the mind of early man:

"(1) What is it makes the difference between a living body and a dead
one, what causes waking, sleep, trance, disease, and death?

"(2) What are those human shapes which appear in dreams and visions?"
(_Primitive Culture_, vol. i, p. 428.)

[23] See p. 19.

[24] The term 'fetishism' has been objected to upon the ground that "it
has been used in so many different and contradictory senses that it
is very likely to be misunderstood.... Even the word _fetish_ should
only be used in its historic sense, to describe a limited class of
magical objects in West Africa." (_Handbook of Folklore,_ p. 298.) This
objection is scarcely a practical one, and to eliminate a word which
has rendered excellent service to anthropology and has been adopted
by students in all parts of the world to designate a definite class
of religious objects and the especial description of the cult which
clusters round them savours of pedantic caprice, while no equivalent is
tendered for the word it is proposed to abolish.

[25] The _jinn_ inhabiting Aladdin's lamp and ring appear to have been
fetishistic spirits of this type.

[26] Well-known instances of assault upon gods are: the overthrow of
the discredited Russian god, Peroun, by his disillusioned worshippers;
the profanation of Balder's grove by Frithjof (_Frithjof Saga_); the
destruction of the idols of the Mexican gods, Uitzilopochtli and
Tlaloc, by the Spanish conquerors. Other instances could be cited,
nearly all acts of insanity, rashness, or hostility, rarely of
disappointment.

[27] See Gomme, _Ethnology in Folklore_, for several notable instances
of stone-worship of this description.

[28] The author has shown that Uitzilopochtli was originally the agave
plant, and that the humming-bird, which nests therein, was regarded as
the spirit animating that plant (see _Discovery_ for June 1920).

[29] As will be shown farther on, the author believes that the majority
of mythic plots possess an animistic basis.

[30] The school originated by Professor Elliot Smith has much to
recommend it; but its hypotheses need further elucidation, a greater
amount of evidence to buttress them, and--it is spoken in all
friendliness--it lacks a spirit of tolerant and serious consideration
for the views of its opponents; all of which it will gain in good time.

[31] Channing Arnold in article "Australia," _Ency. Brit._, (11th ed.)

[32] It would be very unjust to Professor Elliot Smith and his school,
however, if it were not stated that they possess many good arguments
against this, for which see the publications issued by the University
of Manchester.