the bird as tale-hero; (3) the bird as vanquisher of death and Hell.
Further elaborations of the myth, had social and tribal circumstances
permitted of its growth, might well have shown us Blue Jay as the
winged god, the principle of 'evil,' or perhaps in an even more exalted
mythic capacity. Had the Chinooks remained undiscovered in their own
environment and been capable of the evolution of a literature, who
shall say to what heights of sanctity the conception of Blue Jay might
not have risen?

FROM BIRD-TO MAN-GOD

Lest the reader unaccustomed to the developments of mythic law think
such a statement exaggerated, he shall be shown the valuable 'test of
recurrence,' frequently employed by the rational experimentalist in
myth, a test which, conversely, is his undoing if his conclusions are
ill founded. The myth of the Aztec war-god Uitzilopochtli is similar
to that of Blue Jay. It recounts how Uitzilopochtli, guided by a bird,
led the Aztecs from the Underworld (?) country of Aztlan to the valley
of Mexico by means of a peculiar call. Later he appears in Mexican myth
in the full panoply of the national god of war, the most important
figure, save one, in the Aztec pantheon. To him human sacrifice was
rendered, and the greatest temple in the land was erected. His cult
boasted an exclusive high priest, and in all respects he was regarded
as the national god of the Aztec race. Yet he never resigned certain
of his bird-like characteristics--a circumstance from which he derived
his name, signifying 'Humming-bird Wizard,' and denoting that he was a
bird before he took human shape.[28] Paste images of him were eaten at
certain festivals by way of a communion rite.

The personalized bird is to be met with not only in American myth, but
in European and Asiatic story as well. The Romano-Greek winged Mercury
was originally almost certainly such a figure as Blue Jay. Like the
Chinook god, he was sprightly, vivid, fond of practical joking, and
a notorious thief. Picus, the Latin war-god, was a woodpecker, whose
picture adorned the banners of his devotees. The god, in human form,
wore a woodpecker on his head. Instead of becoming a national deity
like Uitzilopochtli, Blue Jay might, in the hands of a people of equal
imaginative capacity to the Greeks, have evolved into a mere messenger
of the gods, or under the more sober influences of Judaism have become
a cherub or an archangel--such are the diversities of racial character
and its effect upon religious development.

Myth is hedged round and protected from change by the spirit of
sanctity, but it may fall a prey to the religious spirit when more
fully evolved, for what is sanctity to one age is often blasphemy
to its successor, and that which appears worthy of retention to
religious conservatives and priests at one period may well be regarded
as an abomination by their official descendants. Thus we find the
philosophers of Greece almost to a man attempting to purge the myths
of their race from the grossness of barbaric ideas; we note, too, the
strivings of the Egyptian and Babylonian priests to combine rival
myths and to bring older religious story into line with more modern
theological ideas--in a word, to modify the traditional myths of the
race so that the old scientific and religious explanations of the
universe--the myths--took quite a new shape.

THE CAUSES OF MYTHIC CHANGE

The question then arises, What are the true causes of mythic change? If
the conclusions previously presented be correct, these are:

(1) The evolution, growth, and advance of theological ideas. Thus
a myth acceptable in 'animistic' times might not prove so under a
monotheistic or even polytheistic _régime_. The myth which would apply
to a bird- or animal- or tree-god might not be applicable to a man-like
deity.

(2) The growth and development of the idea of the sacred and of
ethical ideas. The barbarities and abominations of early totemic and
other animistic myth, apart altogether from shocking the religious
sensibilities of people in later ages shocked their moral feelings
as well, and this resulted in more or less drastic changes, which,
however, do not altogether disguise the original story.

(3) Adventitious circumstances, such as racial feeling and
idiosyncrasy, the deliberate or accidental fusion of two or more myths
by a priesthood or by force of popular belief or acquiescence.

(4) The circumstances in which myth survives the religion or living
faith with which it was originally connected. Thus on the official
demise of a religion it may continue to be celebrated secretly, and
this secret celebration may degenerate into magic and its myths change
into folk-tale.

It follows from these premises that practically all myth is of extreme
antiquity,[29] and once a myth becomes established it may, for many
reasons, undergo considerable alteration by successive generations.
Its character of an early human 'explanation' of the universe is lost
in the passage of generations, and it comes to require explanation.
Thus it is understood, more or less correctly, in later times to
refer to a genuine historical occurrence, or as an allegory upon
natural phenomena, as it is unlikely that the upholders of a religion
with fixed tenets would deliberately manufacture myths, however they
might purify or combine those with which their theological system
was connected. The difficulty in popular acceptance of a newly
forged religious story, the manifest impiety of the proceeding and
its necessary character, are all too apparent. Apparent, too, is the
sufficiency of the mere alteration or 'editing' of myths to account for
such minor theological differences as arose, even under a polytheistic
_régime_ of the least advanced type. With very few exceptions, the
polytheistic systems of antiquity contained so many added and alien
deities that slight alteration would suffice for the full adoption of
the new-comer into the pantheon. This process must not be mistaken for
religious laxity, as the alien god was almost invariably identified
with one or other of the national deities, and the myth would merely be
altered so far as necessary.

THE 'EDITING' OF MYTH

Instances occur in which myths of exceedingly ancient origin have
received a wholesale 'editing' at the hands of later scribes. One of
the most striking instances of such a process is that of the Babylonian
creation myth, which recounts the famous combat between the god
Bel-Merodach and Tiawath, the terrible dragon of the abyss. In the myth
in question the ancient Accadian concept of the fathomless deep and the
Babylonian idea of the abyss, respectively entitled Apsu and Tiawath,
are represented as husband and wife, an example of mythic amalgamation
common enough. But from an attribute of Tiawath is formed a third god,
named Mummu, who is described as the son of the two original deities.
In such an innovation we can assuredly trace the hand of the later
mythographer, who, with less skill and greater levity than is usual,
has ventured to evolve an entire trinity from one concept--that of
the primeval abyss. Thus from the Babylonian and Accadian concept of
'the deep,' essentially one, has arisen an entire trinity of evil. A
further addition is made to this infernal band in the shape of Kingu,
whom Tiawath calls her 'only husband'; but as he enters the mythic
field Apsu and Mummu leave it, and are heard of no more in the course
of the tale. It may be that at this point the story was taken up by
a new scribe, who did not approve of the action of his predecessor
in describing the hostile trinity, originally one conception, as
three separate deities--but that is merely conjecture. The Babylonian
cosmogony as we possess it is presented in purely epical form, and it
is practically certain that in this shape it differed greatly from the
originally accepted myth upon the same subject. Indeed, the inclusion
in it of later gods proves it to be a good example of myth which has
undergone transformation more than once.

THE CLASSIFICATION OF MYTH

It has been said that the chief divisions of myth correspond to
the chief problems which the universe presents to the curiosity of
untutored man. Thus we find that most myths will fall under such
heads as the origin of the world, the origin of man, the origin of
the arts of life, star myths, sun and moon myths, myths of death,
myths of fire-stealing, hero myths (including tales of the adventures
of demigods), myths regarding taboo, beast myths, myths of journeys
through the Underworld or Otherworld, myths to account for customs or
rites, and other less important varieties.

THE DISTRIBUTION OF MYTH

This is a good place to discuss the vexed question whether all myths
have sprung from one common centre, or whether each one is the
spontaneous creation of man's brain in separate parts of the world.

Both theories possess a measure of truth, for certain tales have
undoubtedly been widely disseminated, some of them being altered by
foreign influence, while certain others are obviously of spontaneous
growth. Examples of widely disseminated stories are readily
encountered. The solar hero, who as son of the sun comes to earth to
instruct men in the arts of life, and after a strenuous mundane career
returns to his father's bright kingdom, is common to Greeks, Celts,
Teutons, and Red Indians. Flood myths, again, are as widely spread as
any variety of tale.

Those who uphold the theory of the origin of myth in one centre and
its wide dissemination have not so far explained fully how myths
became so widespread. Of course the purchase or capture of slaves,
intermarriage with alien women, intercourse with alien peoples, trade
and commerce, may account for many similarities,[30] but the question
yet awaits reply, "Can myths 'drift' across many thousands of miles of
sea-water?" The complete isolation of Australia throughout the ages,
and the similar situation of America, two continents which possess, as
a late distinguished student of myth was wont to say, "the whole bag
of tricks" of mythology as found elsewhere, show that the answer is
not a simple one. In any case, if there be any genealogical connexion
between the myths of the Old World and the New, the myths of Asia and
Australia, it must be of extreme antiquity, dating from before the
remote geological period when all communication was cut off between
America, Australia, and the rest of the globe. That may not have
been so very long ago, comparatively speaking, for America, but for
Australia it must have been "at a time so remote as to permit of no
traditions. No record, no folk-tales, as in the case of the Maoris of
New Zealand, are preserved by the Australians ... nothing, as A. W.
Howitt points out, that can be twisted into referring even indirectly
to their first arrival."[31]

Dr Klaatsch of Heidelberg says that the Australians are "a generalized,
not a specialized, type of humanity--that is to say, they are a very
primitive people, with more of the common undeveloped characteristics
of man, and less of the qualities of the specialized races of
civilization." It is likely, however, that they are closely related to
the Dravidians of the Indian Deccan, and that they are not so low in
the scale as Klaatsch believes. Even so, the very distant date at which
they arrived in the Australian continent precludes the likelihood of
their carrying with them any form of religious belief that was not of
an even more archaic character than those we are studying.[32]

Flood myths possess an almost world-wide similarity. We find the