CHAPTER VI

THE MAKING OF THE WORLD AND OF MAN (COSMOGONY)


The efforts of man to account for his existence and that of the
world in which he lives--in a word, for the origin of Heaven and
earth and all that is in them--are among the most deeply interesting
manifestations of human mental activity and progress. To his
speculations the science of comparative mythology has given the name
cosmogony (Greek _cosmos_, 'world,' and _gignesthai,_ 'to be born'), of
which the best literal translation is 'world-birth.'

Before speculating upon the reason for the similarity between
cosmogonic myths in all parts of the globe, or how far they have been
coloured one by another or sophisticated by modern culture, we shall
find it profitable to study the chief creation tales themselves, so
that when we come to discuss their likeness or unlikeness we shall be
well furnished with examples in support of the views we adopt. This
course is wise in the study of tradition; for unless the student is
well furnished and abundantly fortified with 'instances,' he will never
thoroughly apprehend the greater issues of traditional science, never
fully grasp its spirit.

Some one has said that quotations are "ready armour, offensive and
defensive," and the simile might well be employed of 'instances' in
folklore and mythology, where the ability to cite copious parallels is
of the highest assistance in argument.

With this in view, then, we shall look at the most important of
those tales which relate to the creation of the world and man before
analysing them.

INDIAN CREATION STORIES

India furnishes manifold ideas concerning the origin of the universe
and man. At the first, says the _Rig-Veda_, there was neither
non-entity nor entity, and all was water wrapped in gloom. "Then
desire (Karma) arose in it, which was the primal germ of mind ...
the bond between entity and non-entity." The following hymn from the
_Rig-Veda_,[1] the vigorous translation of which is by the late Dr
Muir, gives some account of the process:

    There was neither aught nor naught, nor air, nor sky beyond.
    What covered all? Where rested all? In watery gulf profound?
    Nor death was then, nor deathlessness, nor change of night and day.
    The One breathed calmly, self-sustained; naught else beyond it lay.

    Gloom, hid in gloom, existed first--one sea, eluding view.
    That One, a void in chaos wrapt, by inward fervour grew.
    Within it first arose desire, the primal germ of mind,
    Which nothing with existence links, as sages searching find.

    The kindling ray that shot across the dark and drear abyss--
    Was it beneath? or high aloft? What bard can answer this?
    There fecundating powers were found, and mighty forces strove--
    A self-supporting mass beneath, and energy above.

    Who knows, who ever told, from whence this vast creation rose?
    No gods had then been born--who then can e'er the truth disclose?
    Whence sprang this world, and whether framed by hand divine or no--
    Its lord in heaven alone can tell, if even he can show.

This hymn is among the earliest speculations of the Hindus regarding
cosmogonic phenomena, and its pious conclusion did not satisfy the
cravings of future still more inquisitive generations. In the _Purusha
Sakta_ of the _Rig-Veda_, admittedly of considerably later origin than
the above composition, the following creation myth is found:

"Purusha has a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet. On
every side enveloping the earth, he overpassed (it) by a space of
ten fingers. Purusha himself is this whole (universe), whatever has
been and whatever shall be. He is also lord of immortality, since
(or when) by food he expands. All existences are a quarter of him,
and three-fourths of him are that which is immortal in the sky. With
three-quarters Purusha mounted upward. A quarter of him was again
produced here. From him was born Viraj; and from Viraj, Purusha.
When the gods performed a sacrifice, with Purusha as the oblation,
the spring was its butter, the summer its fuel, and the autumn its
(accompanying) offering. From that universal sacrifice sprang the Rich
and Saman verses, the metres and the Yajush; from it sprang horses
and all animals with two rows of teeth, kine, goats, and sheep. When
(the gods) divided Purusha, into how many parts did they cut him up?
The Brahman was his mouth, the Rajanya was made his arms, the being
(called) Vaisya was his thighs, and the Sudra sprang from his feet. The
morn sprang from his soul (manas), the sun from his eye, Indra and Agni
from his mouth, and Vaya from his breath. From his navel arose the air,
from his head the sky, from his feet the earth, from his ear the (four)
quarters; in this manner (the gods) formed the worlds."

Now follows an extract from the _Satapatha Brahmana,_ which gives the
words used at the creation: "(Uttering) 'bhuh', Prajapati generated
this earth. (Uttering) 'bhuvah,' he generated the air; and (uttering)
'svah,' he generated the sky. This universe is co-extensive with
these worlds. Saying bhuh,' Prajapati generated the Brahman; (saying)
'bhuvah,' he generated the Kshattra; (and saying) 'svah,' he generated
the Vis. All this world is as much as the Brahman, Kshattra, and Vis.
(Saying) 'bhuh,' Prajapati generated himself; (saying) 'bhuvah,' he
generated offspring: (saying) 'svah,' he generated animals. This world
is so much as self, offspring, and animals."

The _Taittiriya Brahmana_ says, "This entire (universe) has been
created by Brahma," and gives an account of the creation of the Asuras,
Pitris (or fathers), and gods. "Prajapati desired 'May I propagate.' He
practised austerity. His breath became alive. With that breath (asu)
he created Asuras. Having created the Asuras, he regarded himself as a
father. After that he created the fathers (pitris). That constitutes
the fatherhood of the fathers. Having created the fathers, he
reflected. After that he created men. That constitutes the manhood of
men. He who knows the manhood of men becomes intelligent. To him, when
he was creating men, day appeared in the heavens. After that he created
the gods."

The _Satapatha Brahmana_ relates the creation of men and animals.
"Prajapati was formerly this (universe) only. He desired: 'Let me
create food, and be propagated.' He formed animals from his breaths,
a man from his soul, a horse from his eye, a bull from his breath, a
sheep from his ear, a goat from his voice. Since he formed animals from
his breaths, therefore men say: 'The breaths are animals,' The soul is
the first of breaths. Since he formed a man from his soul, therefore
they say: 'Man is the first of the animals and the strongest.' The soul
is all the breaths; for all the breaths depend upon the soul. Since he
formed man from his soul, therefore they say: 'Man is all the animals';
for all these are man's."

In another passage this Brahmana gives quite a different account.
Purusha, as the soul of the universe, was alone. Hence "he did not
enjoy happiness. He desired a second. He caused this same self to fall
asunder into two parts. Thence arose a husband and wife. From them men
were born. She reflected: 'How does he, after having produced me from
himself, cohabit with me? Ah! let me disappear!' She became a cow, and
the other a bull; from them kine were produced. The one became a mare,
the other a stallion; the one a she-ass, the other a male-ass. From
them the class of animals with undivided hoofs was produced. The one
became a she-goat, the other a he-goat; the one an ewe, the other a
ram. From them goats and sheep were produced. In this manner pairs of
all creatures whatsoever, down to ants, were created."

The Puranas are very minute and specific as regards the facts of
creation. Indeed the first book of the _Vishnu Purana_ is largely taken
up with accounts of the cosmogonic process. According to this venerable
script Brahma first existed in the form of Purusha (spirit) and Kalu
(time). "Next proceeded two other forms, the discreet and indiscreet;
and Kala (time) was the last. These four--Pradhana (primary or crude
matter), Purusha (spirit), Vyakta (visible substance), and Kala
(time)--in their due proportions, are the causes of the production of
the phenomena of creation, preservation, and destruction. The supreme
Brahma, the supreme soul, the substance of the world, the lord of all
creatures, the universal soul, the supreme ruler Hari (Vishnu), of his
own will having entered into matter and spirit, agitated the mutable
and immutable principles, the season of creation having arrived, in the
same manner as fragrance affects the mind from its proximity merely,
and not from any immediate operation upon mind itself; so the supreme
influenced the elements of creation."

After giving an account of the creation, or rather the evolution
of the elements, the _Vishnu Purana_ goes on to say: "Then (the
elements) ether, air, light, water, and earth, severally united with
the properties of sound, and the rest existed as distinguishable
according to their qualities as soothing, terrific, or stupefying; but
possessing various energies, and being unconnected, they could not
without combination create living beings, not having blended with each
other. Having combined, therefore, with one another, they assumed,
through their mutual association, the character of one mass of entire
unity; and from the direction of spirit, with the acquiescence of the
indiscrete principle, intellect, and the rest, to the gross elements
inclusive, formed an egg, which gradually expanded like a bubble of
water. This vast egg, compounded of the elements, and resting on the
waters, was the excellent natural abode of Vishnu in the form of
Brahma; and there Vishnu, the lord of the universe, whose essence is
inscrutable, assumed a perceptible form, and even he himself abided in
it in the character of Brahma. Its womb, vast as the mountain Meru,
was composed of the mountains; and the mighty oceans were the waters
that filled its cavity. In that egg were the continents and seas and
mountains, the planets and divisions of the universe, the gods, the
demons, and mankind.

"Affecting then the quality of activity, Hari the lord of all, himself
becoming Brahma, engaged in the creation of the universe. Vishnu,
with the quality of goodness and of immeasurable power, preserves
created things through successive ages, until the close of the period
termed a Kalpa; when the same mighty deity, invested with the quality
of darkness, assumes the awful form of Rudra, and swallows up the
universe. Having thus devoured all things, and converted the world
into one vast ocean, the supreme reposes upon his mighty serpent couch
amidst the deep: he awakes after a season, and again, as Brahma,
becomes the author of creation."

EGYPTIAN CREATION MYTHS

Turning to ancient Egypt, that dark ocean of myth and mystery, we find
in papyrus 10,188, housed in the British Museum, an account of the
origin of things written for a priest of Panopolis, called Nes-Amsu,
about the year 312 B.C. This papyrus contains many things, chiefly
of magical import, but its interest for us is that it introduces two
varying accounts of the Egyptian idea of the creation, both of which
are a little vague and obscure. In the first, the god Neb-er-tcher,
a form of Ra the sun-god, tells how, through his godlike might, all
things came into being. Taking upon himself the shape of Khepera, the
deity symbolizing creation, he made himself and other "new things," in
fact, a whole world, "out of his mouth." The place where he performed
this feat was the watery abyss of Nu, from which certain considerations
lead us to suppose he took his _materials_. Says Khepera:

"I found no place there (in Nu) whereon I could stand. I worked a charm
upon my own heart. I laid a foundation in Maa. I made every form. I was
one by myself, I had not emitted from myself the god Shu, I had not
spit out from myself the goddess Tefnut. There was no other being who
worked with me."

Thus Khepera alone was creator; nor did he have any solid surface to
stand upon during the performance of his creative act. To remove the
difficulty he worked a charm upon, or made a foundation in, his own
heart--that is, by some magical act he found a foothold in the abyss
while he produced all things. "There came into being multitudes of
things from the things of what was produced"--that is, the objects
which had emanated from Khepera continued the work of creation of their
own accord. Khepera then produced the god and goddess Shu and Tefnut.
Men and women then appeared from his tears. The sun was manufactured
from an eye of the god, as was the moon. Plants and creeping things
began to grow and move on the surface of the earth, so that they cannot
have been included in the original 'things' created by the god. Finally
Shu and Tefnut produced the pantheon of the elder gods, and these
deities multiplied offspring in the earth.

OSIRIS AS CREATOR

The second version of the creation myth which the papyrus contains
makes Osiris take the place of Khepera, or Neb-er-tcher. He is
described as the _pautet pautti_, or the very essence of primeval
matter, and the source of all created things. Osiris utters his own
name as a word of power, and "forthwith came into being under the form
of things which were created." Like Neb-er-tcher, he took the form of
Khepera as proper to the act of creation. "I came into being," he says,
"from primeval matter, and I appeared under the form of multitudes of
things from the beginning. Nothing existed at that time, and it was I
who made whatsoever was made. I was alone, and there was no other being
who worked with me in that place. I made all the forms under which I
appeared by means of the god-soul which I raised up out of Nu, out of
a state of inertness." Thus we here have the 'god-soul' existent in a
quiescent condition in the watery abyss of Nu, awaiting the magic call
of Osiris. The next point in which the second account differs from the
first is the making of man, made, it states, after the reptiles and
creeping things.

Thus in these Egyptian creation myths we have a primeval watery mass
peopled by a self-begotten and self-existent god who, uttering his own
name as a spell, straightway came into existence, then awakened the
slumbering soul of the abyss into activity, and by the utterance of
magic words created a place or foundation upon which he could stand.
Having done this, he proceeded to the creation of other gods, the
light, human beings, vegetation, and creeping things. Of birds, beasts,
and stars we find nothing in the myth, which is one of the earliest
Egyptian conceptions of the creation of the world and of mankind.[2]

But as new races entered Egypt as immigrants or conquerors, other myths
descriptive of the creation process arose and flourished side by side.
There was, for example, that of Ptah, a potter, pictured in the ancient
drawings as shaping the world-egg, the 'cosmic egg,' upon his wheel. He
is said, in connexion with Khnemu, to have carried out the active work
of creation at the command of Thoth. Khnemu was also regarded as the
personification of creative force, who formed the cosmic egg from the
Nile mud and shaped man on his potter's wheel; and there were others,
all more or less akin.

EGYPTIAN IDEAS REGARDING THE SKY

The earlier Egyptians regarded the sky as a flat metal plate or slab,
each end of which rested upon a mountain, the mountain of sunrise,
Bakhau, and the mountain of sunset, Manu. In the late Pyramid texts the
sky is rectangular, each corner resting upon a pillar. In still later
times those four pillars were looked upon as the sceptres of the gods
who presided over the four quarters of heaven. At a comparatively late
date the idea arose that the sky required support in the centre as well
as at its angles, and the god who acted as central prop was called Heh.
In another myth the heavens were shaped like a man's head, with the sun
and moon for eyes, and hair supporting the sky.

Another Egyptian idea of the sky is that the goddess Nut, who
personified the upper regions, formed the vault of the heavens by
arching her body over the earth and resting her weight upon her hands
and feet. Sometimes the god Shu stands beneath, as if to support her.
Over her body are scattered the stars. She was alluded to as 'the Lady
of Heaven,' and is uniformly painted blue in imitation of the sky she
represented.

THE BABYLONIAN ACCOUNTS OF CREATION

The principal version of the Babylonian account of creation is
preserved in the 'Seven Tablets of Creation' now in the British
Museum, and originally part of the library of Assurbanipal at
Nineveh. In this epic we find two primeval deities, Apsu and Tiawath,
personifications of the great abyss, and their son, Mummu. The gods are
created, Anu, En-lil, and Ea, but their 'ways' are displeasing to Apsu
and Tiawath, who rebel. The original male deities speedily succumb to
the power of the new gods. Tiawath creates a host of grisly monsters
and carries on unrelenting war against the enemy, but in terrific
combat with Marduk or Merodach she is annihilated. She is cut in twain,
and from one half of her body Merodach forms the heavens. He divides
the upper waters from the lower, makes dwellings for the gods, creates
the sun, moon, and stars, and ordains their courses. At this juncture
a portion of the account (Tablet V) is missing, but in the next slab
Merodach is said to have been decapitated, and with his own blood and
bone to have made man. Berosus, a priest of Merodach, who lived in
the third century B.C., wrote a Greek history of Babylonia, which has
been lost, but is known in part from quotations by classical writers.
In this work he recounted the above myth, with some variation in the
names, and the additional statement that half of Tiawath's body formed
the earth.[3]

Tiawath, like the Egyptian Nut, personified the primeval abyss; in
fact, the name signifies the sea, Apsu, the name of her spouse, meaning
the deep. The sea was to the Semitic mind symbolical of chaos and
trouble, as witness the Scriptural promise, "and there shall be no more
sea." The strange monsters framed by the goddess of the abyss to combat
the gods of light are perhaps associated with the teeming gigantic life
the Semites believed the sea capable of propagating, one well-known
example of which is the 'whale' or 'great fish' of Jonah.

CHINESE WORLD-MAKING

Chinese myth furnishes a fairly clear account of creation. During
countless scores of ages "nothing" condensed into unity, and the
Mighty Atom was formed. In the course of further ages the atom became
divided into the male and female principles, and the universe came into
being. But a more simple explanation was necessary for the uninitiated,
who were told that the two original elements became four, from the
co-operation of which sprang a deity called P'an Ku, whose function
it was to supply the constituents of the universe, His eyes became
the sun and moon, his breath the wind, his hair trees and vegetation,
his flesh the earth, his sweat rain, and the worms which sprang from
his decomposing body were men. The god Tien or Shang-ti is generally
regarded as the First Cause in Chinese myth; but although he may have
inspired the creation of the universe, he does not appear to have taken
any hand in its actual manufacture.