CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTORY


The function of mythology is the investigation and explanation of myths
or tales relating to the early religious and scientific experiences
of mankind. It throws light upon the material, methods, and progress
of primitive religion and science, for many myths are an attempt to
explain physical as well as religious phenomena.

Myth is one of the great objects of the science of 'tradition' (Lat.
'that which is handed down'), the others, with which myth is only too
frequently confounded, being folklore and legend. It is hoped that
the following list of definitions will prove of value to students of
the subject, as it is certainly the most precise and embracive yet
advanced.[1]

DEFINITIONS

Myth, folk-tale, and legend may be generally defined as traditional
forms of narrative. That is, all are embraced within the term
'tradition.'

_Myth_. A myth is an account of the deeds of a god or supernatural
being, usually expressed in terms of primitive thought. It is an
attempt to explain the relations of man to the universe, and it has
for those who recount it a predominantly religious value; or it may
have arisen to 'explain' the existence of some social organization, a
custom, or the peculiarities of an environment.

_Mythology_. Mythology as a term implies (_a_) the mythic system of any
race; (_b_) the investigation of myth.

_Folklore_. Folklore means the study of survivals of early custom,
belief, narrative, and art.

_Folk-tale_. A primitive tale (_a_) of mythical origin; (_b_) of purely
narrative or æsthetic value.

_Legend_. A story, generally of real places, often (though not
necessarily) of real persons, handed down by 'tradition.'

MYTHOLOGY AND FOLKLORE CONTRASTED

Mythology is the study of a primitive or early form of religion while
it was a living faith.

Folklore is the study of primitive religion and customs still
practised.[2]

Some authorities regard folklore and mythology as almost
interchangeable words; others look upon myth as the groundwork of
folklore; but for purposes of study we shall be wise if we regard as
fundamental myth any tale in which a god or demigod figures which
explains the making of the world, or the origin of some primitive
custom among the peoples of antiquity or the backward races to-day,
while folklore may denote the study of _fragments_ or _survivals_ of
old belief or custom found among uneducated or semi-educated people
in civilized countries. Thus it is correct to speak of the folklore
of England, Germany, or Italy, applying the word to the surviving
superstitions and fragments of older faiths to be found in these modern
countries among the uncultured classes; but to speak of the folklore
of African, Australian, or American savages when we are dealing with
the living religious beliefs of these people is highly incorrect. True,
fragments of older belief are frequently discovered among primitive
people, but the expression should not be used to designate their living
religious beliefs.[3]

It will now be clear that in the present volume our concern is with the
science of myth alone--that is, with religious beliefs and conjectures
as to the nature of things of primitive, ancient, or barbarous peoples,
and _not_ with modern religious science, philosophy, or theology.

The questions touched upon in this introductory chapter will be more
fully outlined later on, and are here presented in order to familiarize
the reader with the general subject-matter of the science before
entering upon more detailed discussion.

MYTH AND RELIGION

The sciences of mythology and comparative religion overlap at many
points, but comparative religion is a branch of religious science or
philosophy, whereas mythology deals with mere myths, or, under the
more antiquated designation of 'comparative mythology,' compares the
myths of different races. In myths too, however, we hear of the birth
and nature of gods, the creation of the earth, and the primitive
'reason' for certain ritual acts. As these matters are also discussed
by comparative religion or religious science, mythology and comparative
religion often contemplate the same phenomenon at the same time.
Mythology is therefore a part of religious science. This leads us to
our next heading:

WHAT IS RELIGION?

The attempt to define religion has exercised the philosophic mind
through centuries, and never more so than at the present time, although
it is now generally recognized that all purely scientific attempts to
determine it are doomed to failure, as its origin and nature must be
sought conjecturally through psychology. Dr E.B. Tylor proposed as a
'minimum definition' for religion "the belief in spiritual beings"; but
this does not embrace ritual, which Robertson Smith thought[4] of first
consequence in primitive religion, dogma and myth being secondary.[5]
Sir J.G. Frazer considers religion "a propitiation or conciliation
of powers superior to man,"[6] a definition not always appropriate.
Crawley (in his _Tree of Life_, p. 209) defines the religious object
as "the sacred," a very obscure definition. Herbert Spencer derived
all religion from the worship of the dead. Max Müller considered
that "Religion consists in the perception of the infinite under such
manifestations as are able to influence the moral character of man."
The fact is that our present knowledge of the human mind does not
permit us to make any final definition of the word 'religion,'[7]

The study of myths, then, is assisted by comparative religion, while
myths in their turn often explain gods,[8] men, and the universe, and
customs and organizations of society. Many of them, indeed, are early
efforts at a reconciliation of the tales of gods and heroes with the
religious sentiment, which recognized in these beings objects for
worship and respect.[9]

THE 'SAVAGE' ELEMENT IN MYTH

But these tales remained full of irrational and savage notions, a
legacy from primitive ancestors. They chimed ill with later religious
sentiment, which was shocked and puzzled by them, and priests and poets
attempted to explain them away. Thus, among the Greeks, Theagenes of
Rhegium (_c_.520 B.C.) considered the tale of the battle of the gods
'unbecoming,' and represented it as an allegorical account of the war
of the elements. The Egyptians, according to Plutarch, puzzled by the
circumstance that so many of their gods were pictured in animal form,
invented as an explanation the tale that in a moment of danger the gods
concealed themselves in the bodies of animals. As peoples grew more
civilized they attempted to cleanse their national or tribal myths
from the coarse and barbarous tone which savage predecessors had given
them, and many of the myths of the higher civilizations of antiquity,
as they have come down to us to-day, have obviously passed through one
or more stages of refinement and revision at the hands of some priest,
poet, or philosopher anxious to free his race from its supposed coarse
and savage pristine history.[10]

A PERUVIAN PRIEST-MYTH

A good example of how older myths are accounted for by a modern
priesthood[11] is the story of Pacari Tampu, the 'House of the Dawn,'
a legend of the Collas, a Peruvian tribe. From the caverns of Pacari
Tampu issued four brothers and a sister. The eldest ascended a mountain
and cast stones to all the cardinal points of the compass to signify
that he had taken possession of the land. The other three were envious
of him, and the youngest succeeded in inducing him to enter a cave,
whereupon the youngest brother closed the mouth of the cave with a
great stone and imprisoned the eldest there for ever. On pretence of
seeking his lost brother he then persuaded the second to ascend a high
mountain, from which he cast him, and, as he fell, by dint of magic
art changed him into a stone. The third brother, scenting treachery,
fled. The first brother would appear to symbolize the oldest known
Peruvian religion, that of the thunder-god Pachacamac, the second that
of an intermediate fetishism or stone-worship, the third the cult of
Viracocha, the water-god, while the fourth seems to be the more modern
sun-worship, which in the end triumphed officially over all, as is
proved by the name of the youngest brother, 'Pirrhua Manca' ('Son of
the Sun ').

MADNESS OR MENTAL CHILDHOOD?

Max Müller seriously suggested that the "savage and irrational" element
in myth arose out of a "period of temporary madness through which the
human mind had to pass." "Was it," he asks, "a madness identically
the same in the south of India and the north of Iceland?" The state
of mind, the mental attitude, was and is, of course, very much the
same among savages or barbarians from Cape Horn to Novaia Zemlia; but
no 'madness' is mingled with the mental equipment of primitive man,
although he is irrational. What Professor Müller mistook for 'madness'
was the child-like propensity of the savage or barbarian, or even the
uncultured person, to delusion, ignorance, and distortion of facts and
experiences. The imbecility of savage theories and stones is due to a
scanty stock of acquired ideas and lack of experience in wielding the
higher powers of reason. In short, savage or primitive man, although
highly observant, explains such facts as come within his range of view
by employing imagination rather than reason.[12] He is in a condition
of mental childhood, when imagination is very much more powerful than
reason. Thus he imagines that all other physical entities in nature
are, like himself, gifted with powers of speech, volition, and thought.
This is called 'animism'--_i.e._ the bestowal of a soul (Lat _anima_)
upon all objects.[13] The winds and the waters speak and obviously
travel; the trees are articulate; the lower animals he regards as his
equals. He does not bring reason, as we understand it, to bear upon his
experience. The 'wonders' in these tales are no marvels to him; the
brutalities of savage life recounted in them, the barbarian atmosphere
and colour, are his everyday experiences.[14] He hands the tale on; but
his descendants fail to comprehend its meaning and aim; its almost
animal savagery repels them, and at length more advanced generations,
shocked at what seems to them blasphemous nonsense, discard it
altogether, or so cleanse and refine it as not infrequently to render
its original meaning entirely undiscoverable.

SAVAGERY IN GREEK MYTH

As an example of how the savage element displays itself in the mythic
tales of such a refined and poetically gifted people as the Greeks, the
myth of the birth of Zeus may be instanced. When Cronus had displaced
Uranus, the first monarch of Olympus, he took to wife Rhea, one of
the Titan race. Gæa, his mother, however, prophesied that as he had
overthrown Uranus, he himself would be overthrown by one of his own
children. So uneasy did he become in consequence of this prediction
that whenever a child was born to him he tore it from its mother's arms
and swallowed it whole. Five children did he swallow in this manner,
greatly to the grief of Rhea, who, lamenting to Gæa the loss of her
offspring, was advised by her next time she had a child to take a stone
and wrap it in swaddling-clothes and give it to Cronus to swallow as
if it were the infant, at the same time carefully concealing the real
child in some secluded place until it reached maturity. This Rhea did,
and Cronus duly swallowed the stone she gave him, imagining it to be
one of his own children and therefore his possible future destroyer.
But Rhea hid the child in a cave in the island of Crete, where the goat
Amalthea nourished him with her milk. There were placed in the infant's
vicinity armed men, who, whenever he cried, performed a war-dance,
clashing their spears and shields to drown his wailing; and so within a
year the boy grew to full manhood. At length Gæa gave Cronus a draught
which made him vomit up the stone he had swallowed, together with the
five children previously devoured--two gods and three goddesses. These
young gods made war upon the elder deities, and after a ten years'
struggle were victorious over them, banishing them to the dismal region
of Tartarus.

In this myth the savage element is strikingly apparent. Through the
mists of allegory we seem to discern (1) the replacement of one tribal
head by another; (2) the prediction of the tribal prophetess or crone;
(3) a condition of cannibalism; (4) a reminiscence of fetishistic
stone-worship in a stone being mistaken for a young god; (5) the
nurture of a child by a goat, perhaps a primitive form of nursing;
(6) a war-dance by armed savages; (7) the younger men of the tribe
banishing the older men to a less desirable spot; (8) the primitive
right of the youngest son to succeed the father.

Now we find numerous myths similar to this in all quarters of the
world. "Bushmen tell of _Kwai Hemm_, the devourer, who swallows
that great god, the mantis insect, and disgorges him alive with all
the other persons and animals engulphed in the course of a long and
voracious career. The moon in Australia, while he lived on earth, was
very greedy, and swallowed the eagle-god, whom he had to disgorge.
Mr Im Thurn found similar tales among the Indians of Guiana. The
swallowing and disgorging of Heracles by the monster that was to
slay Hesione is well known. Scotch peasants tell of the same feats,
but localize the myth on the banks of the Ken in Galloway. Basutos',
Eskimos', Zulus', and European fairy-tales all possess this incident,
the swallowing of many persons by a being from whose maw they return
alive and in good case."[15]

Many circumstances of myth go to illustrate its primitive and barbaric
origin. The tales of gods who masquerade as animals are probably
reminiscent of a time when they were worshipped in animal form.[16]
The Greek mysteries, which were merely acted myths, conserved the
savage rite of daubing the initiate with clay, a practice common among
African, Australian, South American, and Papuan uncivilized peoples.
They also retained from primitive times the use of the 'bull-roarer,'
two flattened pieces of wood attached to a string, which on being swung
produces a mysterious humming noise, a device employed by many savage
folk to keep away women and the profane from the performance of their
rites and ceremonies. Early man, engaged in ceaseless strife, regarded
his gods as in constant conflict with giants or with each other. They
abduct each other's wives, they are cowardly, gluttonous, immoral, and
given to magic, just as is savage man himself.

SAVAGERY IN THE VEDAS AND BRAHMANAS

Although the Vedas of India are 'sacred' works, principally
repositories of devotional hymns, they bear traces of this barbarism
which permeates all mythology. We find the deities in their pages
comporting themselves as one might expect the lowest savages to do,
although the whole religious sentiment of the work is opposed to these
acts. The later Brahmanas, treatises on the intricacies of ritual
compiled by a priestly caste of fairly exalted character, also teem
with myths in which barbaric thought is encountered. Their pages,
indeed, are the meeting-place of savagery and semi-civilization. In
one myth the mother of Indra is a cow, Indra being represented as a
drunkard who intoxicates himself with _soma_, and as a murderer who
actually kills a priest. These circumstances in his myth are relics
of an age when he was, although a god, regarded as man-like, and a
savage man at that. This is due to the religious instinct called
'anthropomorphism.'

Nearly all the Greek peoples worshipped stones, some named after the
gods[17]--a relic of fetishism--and their later religion kept much of
savage practice. Homer speaks of Athene as 'owl-eyed.' Was she once
worshipped as an owl? The deities in the _Iliad_ are extraordinarily
human, not to say barbarous, in their propensities, and have a knack of
transforming themselves into animal shapes when pursued or pursuing,
loving or hating. They reflect the Greek idea of Homer's day, yet they
are even older.

MYTH AND EARLY SCIENCE

Enough has been said to illustrate the existence of the savage element
in primitive myth. Not only do later myths account for the religious
element in the more primitive examples, but they explain, or attempt
to explain, primitive scientific notions as well.[18]

The desire to know the 'reason why' early creates a thirst for
knowledge, an intellectual appetite. "When the attention of a man
in the myth-making stage of intellect is drawn to any phenomenon or
custom which has to him no obvious reason, he invents and tells a story
to account for it."[19] The character of most primitive myths amply
justifies this statement. They are mostly explanations of intellectual
difficulties, answers to such questions as, What is the origin of or
reason for this or that phenomenon or custom? How came the world and
man to be formed as they are? In what manner were the heavenly bodies
so placed and directed in their courses? Why is the lily white, the
robin's breast splashed with red? How came into force this sacrificial
custom, this especial ritualistic attitude, the detail of this rite?
The early replies to these questions partake not only of the nature of
myth, but of science--primitive science, but science nevertheless--for
one of the first functions of science is to enlighten man concerning
the nature of the objects and forces by which he finds himself
surrounded, and their causes and effects. These replies are none the
less scientific because they take the shape of stones. Their very
existence proves that the above questions, to clear up which they were
invented, were asked. They cannot be accounted for without the previous
existence of these questions. Mythology is the savage's science,
his manner of explaining the universe in which he lives and moves.
Says Lang: "They frame their stories generally in harmony with their
general theory of things, by what may be called 'savage metaphysics.'"
Of course they did not think on the lines of a well-informed modern
scholar. Müller remarks in an illuminating passage:

"Early man not only did not think as we think, but did not think as we
suppose he ought to have thought."

One of the chief differences between the outlook of the primitive
savage and that of civilized man is the great extension in the mind of
the former of the theory of personality, an outlook we have already
called 'animism,' Everything possesses a 'soul,' or at any rate
will-power, in the judgment of the savage. But not only are sun, sky,
river, lightning, beast, tree, persons among primitive or backward
peoples; they are savage persons.

ANIMISM: A FOSSIL FAITH

Research and travel combine to prove that earliest man and the lowest
savages cannot be found without myths, which, as we have seen, are
both religion and science. The first recognized stage in man's mental
experience is animism, so that the earliest myths must have been
'animistic.'[20] Roughly, animism is the belief that everything has a
soul or at least a personality, but no race has yet been discovered
possessing purely animistic beliefs. Even the lowest races we know
have developed these considerably, and so we are only acquainted with
animism in its pure form theoretically,[21] as a phase of religious
experience through which man must at one time have passed. It is, in
fact, a fossil faith. But just as fossil animals and plants have their
living representatives to-day, so do ideas and conceptions representing
this petrified form of religion and science still flourish in our
present-day superstitions and our present-day faiths.

Animistic myths naturally show primitive ideas regarding the soul.
Animism will be dealt with more fully hereafter, but in this
introductory sketch we will cite one or two examples of animistic myth
to illustrate what was, so far as we know, the earliest type of myth.
Stories are found telling of journeys to the spirit land, of talking
animals, of men metamorphosed into animals and trees, and these are
all animistic or originate in animistic belief.[22] Modern folk-tales
containing such stories possess a very great antiquity, or are merely
very old myths partly obscured by a veneer of modernity. Spirit stories
which have obviously a primitive setting or atmosphere are almost
certainly animistic. Thus tales which describe the soul as a bird
or a bee, flitting about when the body is asleep, are either direct
relics of an animistic age, or have been inspired by earlier animistic
stories handed down from that age. The tales of spirit journeys to the
Otherworld, the provision of implements, weapons, shoes, and so forth,
placed in the grave to assist the soul in its progress to the Land of
Shadows, invariably point to an animistic stage of belief--the belief
in a separable 'soul,' in an entity entirely different and apart from
the 'tenement of clay' that has perished.

PRE-ANIMISTIC RELIGION

There are not wanting authorities of discernment who believe that
even this early phase was not the primitive phase in the religious
experience of man. Of these the most clear-sighted and perspicuous in
argument is Dr Marett, reader in anthropology at Oxford University.
In a pregnant chapter-preface in his highly suggestive book, _The
Threshold of Religion,_ Dr Marett says: "Psychologically, religion
requires more than thought, namely, feeling and will as well; and
may manifest itself on its emotional side, even when ideation is
vague. The question, then, is, whether apart from ideas of spirit,
ghost, soul, and the like, and before such ideas have become dominant
factors in the constituent experience, a rudimentary religion can
exist. It will suffice to prove that supernaturalism, the attitude
of mind dictated by awe of the mysterious, which provides religion
with its raw material, may exist apart from animism, and, further,
may provide a basis on which an animistic doctrine is subsequently
constructed. Objects towards which awe is felt may be termed powers."
He proceeds to say that startling manifestations of nature may be
treated as 'powers' without any assumption of spiritual intervention,
that certain Australian supreme beings appear to have evolved from
the bull-roarer,[23] and that the dead inspire awe. This he calls
'supernaturalism,' and regards it as a phase preceding animism.

FETISHISM

Very closely allied to and coexistent with animism, and not to be very
clearly distinguished from it, is fetishism. This word is derived from
the Portuguese _feitiço_, a charm, 'something made by art,' and is
applied to any object, large or small, natural or artificial, regarded
as possessing consciousness, volition, and supernatural qualities,
especially magic power.[24]

Briefly and roughly, the fetish is an object which the savage all over
the world, in Africa, Asia, America, Australia, and, anciently, in
Europe, believes to be inhabited by a spirit or supernatural being.
Trees, water, stones, are in the 'animistic' phase considered as the
homes of such spirits, which, the savage thinks, are often forced
to quit their dwelling-places because they are under the spell or
potent enchantment of a more powerful being. The fetish may be a
bone, a stone, a bundle of feathers, a fossil, a necklace of shells,
or any object of peculiar shape or appearance. Into this object
the medicine-man may lure the wandering or banished spirit, which
henceforth becomes his servant; or, again, the spirit may of its own
will take up its residence there. It is not clear whether, once in
residence or imprisonment, the spirit can quit the fetish, but specific
instances would point to the belief that it could do so if permitted by
its 'master'[25]

We must discriminate sharply between a fetish-spirit and a god,
although the fetish may develop into a godling or god. The basic
difference between the fetish and the god is that whereas the god is
the patron and is invoked by prayer, the fetish is a spirit subservient
to an individual owner or tribe, and if it would gain the state of
godhead it must do so by long or marvellous service as a luck-bringer.
Offerings may be made to a fetish; it may even be invoked by prayer or
spell; but on the other hand it may be severely castigated if it fail
to respond to its owner's desires. Instances of the castigation of gods
proper are of rare occurrence, and could scarcely happen when a deity
was in the full flush of godhead, unless, indeed, the assault were
directed by an alien hand.[26]

We have seen that the ancient Greeks had in their temples stones
representing 'nameless gods' who seem to have been of fetish origin.
Thus a fetish may almost seem an idol, and the line of demarcation
between the great fetish and the idol is slender, the great fetish
being a link between the smaller fetish and the complete god.

Myths showing fetishistic belief are few and obscure, but the writer
recently unearthed, in the fishing village of Newhaven, near Edinburgh,
one which is a good example of the survival of a fetish myth and of the
rise of a fetish to godhead.


FROM FETISH TO THUNDER-GOD

Perusing an old book entitled _Tales and Traditions of Leith,_ the
writer read of one Brounger, "an old fisherman who at one time resided
at Newhaven, and who, when unable to go to sea himself, used to ask his
neighbours for a few oysters or fish on their return from fishing,"
and curse those churlish enough to refuse. The curse was invariably
effective, so that in the end the fishing community became anxious to
propitiate an individual whose spoken word carried such weight, and
regarded his demands in the light of an established claim. According
to tradition, Brounger passed away, but his name remained a 'thing
to conjure with'--literally. For a Newhaven fisherman to be told
"Brounger's in your head-sheets" meant that the speaker cast on his
vessel and all who sailed therein an evil spell, only to be broken by
making the boat describe a circle in the water three separate times.

The student of myth will regard this 'old fisherman' with an eye of
professional suspicion. Why should the mariners of Newhaven fear and
mistrust the mere mention of one who in days more or less distant
levied a petty toll of oysters or flounders from their fathers? He will
find the scent grow hot when he is informed (and this is the point)
that Brounger was 'a flint, and the son of a flint.' For the flint is
the fetishistic emblem of the thunder-god, and Brounger was a deity of
the storm.

Among many peoples the flint-stone symbolizes thunder, for from the
flint comes fire. In America, for example, Tohil, who gave the Kiches
of Central America fire, was represented by a flint-stone. Such a
stone in the beginning of things fell from Heaven to earth, and broke
into a myriad pieces, from each of which sprang a god--an ancient
Mexican legend which shadows forth the subjection of all things to him
who gathers the clouds together in thunder. This is the germ of the
adoration of fetish stones as emblems of the fertilizing rains. The
rain-charms of the Navaho Indians are hung round stones supposed to
fall from the clouds when it thunders. With the Algonquin Indians a
certain rain-god has a body of flint which, broken, is changed into
fruitful vines. The blood of Tawiscara, another Indian deity, turns to
flint as it falls from his wounds. Hathor, the sky-goddess of Egypt,
was the 'Lady of Turquoise,' as was the Mexican water-goddess. Is not
the 'elf-arrow' (the flint arrow-head) a 'thunderbolt' to peasants of
all countries, Britain not excepted? So we begin to see why Brounger
was a 'flint,' and the 'son of a flint.' In days when the first
Teutonic fishermen settled on the coast of Midlothian they brought with
them a thunder-god, the root of whose name may perhaps be found in the
old Gothic word _brinnan_, to burn; hence Brünger, 'the burner,' 'the
devastator,' 'the wielder of lightnings,' worshipped in the flint and
placated by gifts from that sea-harvest which he had power to give or
to withhold.

From the Hebridean Isle of Fladdahuan comes a similar story. On the
altar of the chapel of that isle, says Martin in his _Western Isles_,
lay a round bluish stone, always moist. Wind-bound fishermen walked
sunways round the chapel and then poured water on the stone, whereupon
a powerful breeze was sure to spring up. Solemn oaths were also sworn
upon the stone. A similar stone was possessed by the Isle of Arran,
kept in the custody of a woman (the hereditary priestess of its cult?),
and "wrapped up in fair linen cloth." In Inniskea, an island off the
Irish coast, a stone wrapped up in flannel is brought out at certain
periods to be adored by the inhabitants. It is kept in a private
dwelling, and is called in the Irish Neevougi. It is prayed to in
times of sickness and is requested to send wrecks upon the coast.[27]
All this is within the ritual of rain-making, but Brounger, though
a thunder- and rain-god, was requested _not_ to visit his folk with
tempest for the reason that their business lay in the furrows made by
the keel and not in those of the plough.

One certain proof that Brounger was a supernatural being exists in a
folk-poem to be found in the above-mentioned work on Leith traditions.
A wedding ceremony is in progress, when Brounger glares through the
window at the merrymakers. At once a cry arises that he must be
placated. Sings one fisherman:

     "Let ilka body gie 'm a corse [copper piece],
     And Jock may gie him twa,
     An' the chiel will sune hae in his maut [drink],
     Syne he'll forget it a'.
     And when he's at the land o' Nod,
     To make the matter tight,
     I'll score the loon aboon the breath,
     An' syne we'll be a' richt."

To "score" a wizard (or witch) "aboon the breath," and thus procure
some of his blood, rendered the possessors of it immune from the
malice of the sorcerer. So we see that Brounger was at least no mere
'Longshoreman Billy,' earning a livelihood by terrorizing his brother
salts, but ranked in some measure with the supernatural host. It is
just possible, indeed, that he may possess a common origin with the
Russian Perunu or Peroun, whose name also signified 'striker' or
'lightning-wielder.'

TOTEMISM

Totemism is a phase of religion frequently encountered in myth. Briefly
and crudely defined (and any brief definition of it must essentially be
crude), the totem is an animal, plant, or inanimate object connected
traditionally with a certain social group which takes its name from
the totem or uses it as a symbol. The persons composing this 'group'
suppose themselves to be descended from the totem animal or plant, or
to be related to it. There is a magico-religious bond between the totem
animal and themselves, and the totem may not be eaten by the members of
the community of which it is the patron unless in a ceremonial manner
and at stated seasons.

Examples of the totem in myth are, as has been said, frequent. In the
Roman myth of Jupiter and Leda, for instance, we encounter Jupiter
in the form of a swan; many of the Egyptian animal-headed gods are
totemic; certain swine-gods of the ancient Britons were of the same
class; and we know that some of our ancestors would not eat geese, just
as certain Red Indians will not eat beaver or racoon, because these
animals represented, or represent, the beast-patron of their tribe.

About the beginning of the eighteenth century certain French
missionaries--among them the Jesuit Lafitau--were struck with the
importance of totemism in the religious and social life of the North
American Indians. Lafitau saw more clearly than any of his colleagues
the nature of this peculiar socio-religious condition, and was even led
to apply what he saw among the Iroquois Indians to the interpretation
of the Greek Chimæra! During the first part of the nineteenth century
the facts concerning totemism began to reach Great Britain from
missionaries and travellers in every part of the globe. Moreover,
allusions to what were undoubtedly totemic conceptions could be traced
in the authors of antiquity--Diodorus, Herodotus, Pausanias, Ælian,
etc. In 1869 McLennan pointed out that many totemic customs and beliefs
survived in various civilizations, ancient and modern. About 1885
Frazer and Robertson Smith approached the subject with a larger body of
facts. Later, Tylor, Spencer, Lubbock, Lang, Jevons, Cook, and Grant
Allen threw themselves into the study of this remarkable phase of
socio-religious life.

POLYTHEISM

In this introduction we are dealing with the various divisions, more
or less arbitrary, made by students of myth and comparative religion,
and will not here attempt any description of the processes by which
spirits of the animistic, fetishistic, and totemic types evolve into
perfected deities. In a condition of polytheism we encounter the gods
fully evolved, and often arranged in a hierarchy closely resembling the
social polity of the tribe or people from whose religious imagination
it has sprung.

Polytheism--a multiplicity of gods--is a condition arrived at by more
than one route. Several great and powerful deities may shed a number
of attributes and variants which themselves become personalized into
gods. Egyptian mythology teems with examples of this, as almost all its
principal gods absorbed or gave birth to several others in this manner.
For example, from Horus was evolved Horus the Elder, Horus the Younger,
Heru-an-Mut (a local god worshipped at Edfu), Heru-Khenti-Khat (a
god with a crocodile's head), the Horus of Khnemu ('Horus of the Two
Horizons,' or the Harmachis of the Greeks, a form of Ra, the sun-god),
Heru-Behudeti (who prevailed in the southern heavens at midday), and
so forth. Gods belonging to certain towns or religious centres were
collected and grouped, perhaps by priestly influence, into a pantheon
in order of their importance.

Among semi-civilized people, then, the activities of the greater
gods are constantly being enriched by new functions. Dialectical
misunderstandings led to descriptive terms which brought about a change
in divine names. The fortunes of kingdoms or royal races, migration
and conquest, the contact of race with race through trade and travel,
the adoption of foreign deities, all served to modify and expand the
pantheons of the ancient world.

MONOTHEISM

Monotheism--the worship of one god--may emerge from polytheism in
more ways than one. A certain god by dint of a miracle, because he
is the deity of a conquering race, because of the enterprise of his
priests, or by absorbing lesser gods, becomes the most powerful and
popular deity in a state or neighbourhood. Or he may be the god of
the reigning dynasty, a circumstance sufficient to secure for him at
least a fashionable recognition so long as that dynasty survives. We
usually find that such gods have vested in them the right to pardon
sin, and they are indeed the founts of righteousness in virtue of their
all-sufficing nature. But, apart from all the above considerations, the
rise of moral feeling and a higher standard of conduct, order, and life
were connected with the communal rise of monotheistic worship and the
more exalted religious outlook it brings.

THE NATURE OF MYTHIC LAW

Tylor has stated that myth displays a regularity of development which
cannot be accounted for by motiveless fancy and must be attributed
to laws of growth. These laws, as has been seen, are practically
universal in their application. But besides those forces which bring
the myth into being--those demands of primitive man for explanation and
intellectual satisfaction--there are other factors which begin to work
upon myth at birth, and do not cease to act upon it, in succession,
until perhaps it loses its earlier characteristics.

Thus we first find, going to work by analogy with certain contemporary
savage examples and by induction, the purely animistic myth. As we have
seen, this bestows personality and will-power upon inanimate objects,
glorifies animals, and is practically without religious significance.
Such a myth is found among the Chinook Indians of the north-west coast
of America in the adventures of Blue Jay, a bird with human attributes
who travels to the country of the Supernatural People and succeeds in
defeating them in climbing, diving, whale-spearing, and archery. As
we possess it, the myth has undoubtedly been influenced by successive
waves of advancing native thought, but no sophistication by European
influence is discernible. The impudence and effrontery of the Blue Jay
bird led to its adoption as the central figure in many a tale, and,
later, as the hero of the universal story of the 'Harrying of Hell,'
in which a supernatural being traverses the country of the dead and
brings defeat and disgrace upon its inhabitants in order to show the
savage mind that it was possible to conquer death and Hell. Thus we
have emanating from an animistic idea (1) the bird as person (in the
myth a 'person' is spoken of as splitting wood with his beak); (2)