CHAPTER XI

THE GREAT MYTHIC SYSTEMS OF THE WORLD


It is now time to review briefly the great mythic systems of the
world and to examine and analyse as far as practicable their nature
and outstanding figures. This _résumé_ is added here merely for
completeness, because exhaustive works dealing with the several
mythological systems alluded to in these pages are included in this
series, and to these the student can refer.

GRÆCO-ROMAN MYTH

Starting with the mythic system practically common to Greece and Rome
as that with which our readers are likely to be most familiar, we find
a mythology a good deal more human than divine; although it would be
untrue to say that it possessed no divine characteristics. However, we
are not in this chapter dealing with the cults or religions underlying
the mythologies we treat of, but _with the mythologies themselves_,
or, as we have elsewhere named it, the theobiography, the gods, their
lives and histories. What status did the gods of Greece occupy in the
minds of those who believed in them? This, of course, differed with
the centuries, but there is pretty good evidence that as they grew
more enlightened the Hellenic people paid less and less reverence to
Olympus, until at last it became almost a byword among them.

In Greece more than in any other country religion and mythology were
two things separate and distinct. In Homer, the Greek gods, headed by
Zeus, dwelt in a condition of society very much akin to that of mortals
in the Homeric Age. Their government appears to have been modelled upon
the social polities of the various Hellenic city-states; and when
republics became the fashion, the gods, partaking of the older order of
affairs, fell somewhat into disrepute, just as the elder dynasties of
Cronus and Uranus, who represented the tribal system of government, had
given place to Zeus when a monarchical system came into vogue.

ZEUS--JUPITER

Zeus, the head of the Greek pantheon, was supposed to dwell on the
summit of Mount Olympus, where he disposed of the affairs both of the
gods and of men. He was probably originally a sky-god, symbolizing the
bright, clear expanse of the heavens, being later, like many other
sky-gods, anthropomorphized. The many stories told of his amorous
adventures in animal form are obviously totemic and fetishistic
legacies which as a great mythical figure he would undoubtedly attract
to himself. As a sky-god he wields the thunder and lightning, conquers
the Titans, and overcomes Gæa, probably the original Earth-Mother--just
as in Babylonian myth Merodach conquered Tiawath. He had several
spouses, the chief of whom was Hera. He was by no means a creative
deity, but he won a wide popularity, and through this and other causes
he came to be head of the pantheon, composed of other gods as well as
of his parents, children, brothers, sisters, or wives. Lang points out
that he may well have begun as a kindly supreme being, and his mythic
character may have been ultimately swamped by the accumulation around
his name of myths concerning older deities. The corresponding Roman god
is Jupiter.

APOLLO

Apollo in tradition is usually a solar deity, but also a civilizer
or culture-hero, and his functions and attributes are manifold. He
superintends the measurement of time, protects herds and flocks, and
is a patron of music and poetry. He has a very active solar connexion
when, for example, he slays with his golden arrows the Python, the
serpent of night or winter. His oracle at Delphi was the most famous in
Greece, and his priestesses were famed as prophetesses. He was usually
portrayed as a young and handsome man crowned with laurel and holding a
lyre in his hand. There is little doubt that many different and perhaps
contradictory myths went to the making of the personality and character
of Apollo, and he has decidedly totemic connexions, as, for example,
the dolphin, the wolf, and the mouse; and perhaps with lizards, hawks,
swans, ravens, and crows. Like Zeus, he attracted to himself the
legends of a great many lesser divinities of the same type.

HERMES--MERCURY

Hermes, called by the Romans Mercury, was the son of Zeus and the
messenger of the gods. Quick-witted, ready-tongued, and thievish, he is
the traditional patron of lightfingered, sharp people, who can charm
the senses of others as well as the money out of their pockets.

HEPHÆSTUS--VULCAN

Hephæstus or Vulcan was the god of fire, and the great artist among
the gods. It was he who constructed the shining palaces of Olympus,
the marvellous armour of Achilles, and the necklace of Harmonia. He
also invented the thunderbolt. As a later type of deity, he is the
smith or artificer deified, probably evolved from an older fire-god or
thunder-god.

HERA--JUNO

Among the goddesses of the Greek pantheon Hera, the Juno of the Romans,
was paramount because of her status as wife and sister of Zeus. She is
the divine prototype of the wife and mother and the special patroness
of marriage.

ATHENE--MINERVA

Pallas Athene, the Minerva of the Romans, is another composite
deity. She seems to have been a queen of the air or a storm-goddess,
and probably became a war-goddess through her possession of the
lightning-spear. In peace she was looked upon as a patroness of useful
crafts and even of abstract wisdom. She is often depicted with the owl
and the serpent, both emblems of wisdom. It is unusual to discover
a war-or storm-deity posing as the patron of learning, and the exact
manner in which Athene attained to the latter position is extremely
obscure.

APHRODITE--VENUS

Aphrodite or Venus, the goddess of love and beauty, was probably a
deity of Asiatic origin, and her birth from the sea-foam and home in
Cyprus, where her cult was very strong, confirm the identification of
her myth with that of Ashtaroth or Astarte.


EGYPTIAN MYTH

A good deal has been said in this volume about the mythology of Egypt,
and in especial Osiris, Thoth, and Ptah have already been considered,
so that we may say more here of some other important gods of the Nile
country. The reader is reminded that no definite Egyptian pantheon ever
existed, for as dynasties rose and fell, and as the various priestly
colleges throughout the land came into favour in turn, the deities
whose cults they represented rose and fell in popularity--that is, at
no time was there a fixed divine hierarchy like that of Greece.

RA

Ra, the great god of the sun, figured as the head of a hawk, voyaged
daily across the heavenly expanse in his bark. For many dynasties he
was regarded as the greatest of all the gods of Egypt. He is by no
means an intricate mythological figure, and it is plain that he is
neither more nor less than a personification of the sun.

ANUBIS

Anubis, the jackal, or dog-headed protector of the dead, presides over
the process of embalming. He seems to have evolved from the dog who
among many primitive people accompanies the deceased in the journey to
the Otherworld.

HORUS

Horus, the son of Osiris and Isis, was a sun-god with many shapes, some
perhaps local, but most of which typified the various stages of the
sun's journey--its rising, its midday strength, its evening decline. He
was the eternal enemy of Set, the night-god, a deity of darkness with
whom he waged constant combat. From being a god of night and darkness
pure and simple, Set came to be regarded as a deity of evil, and was
placed in dualistic opposition to Horus, Ra, or Osiris, who thus
symbolize moral good, the emblem of which is light.

ISIS

Among the most important Egyptian goddesses is Isis, sister and wife
of Osiris, probably, like her husband, connected with the corn-plant,
although there are also indications that she is a wind-goddess.
She is the great corn-mother of Egypt, perhaps only because of her
connexion with Osiris, and she has the wings of a wind deity, restoring
Osiris to life by fanning him with them. She is a great traveller,
and unceasingly moans and sobs. At times she shrieks so loudly as to
frighten children to death. She typifies not only the dreaded blast,
but the revivifying power of the spring wind wailing and sobbing over
the grave of the sleeping grain.

Nephthys, her sister, is the female counterpart of Set and the
personification of darkness. As such she is also a funerary goddess.


BABYLONIAN MYTH

As with Egyptian religion, the faith of the Babylonians and Assyrians
varied with dynasties, for it depended upon the rise to power of a
certain city or province, whose god then became temporarily supreme.
Thus we find Merodach regarded as the chief god in Babylonia, while
farther north in Assyria Asshur held sway, and Merodach had a fairly
long line of predecessors whose powers and dignities he had taken
over. Indeed, we find that he actually appropriated their myths. For
example, in the creation myth cited in our chapter on cosmogony,
Merodach is the hero-god who succeeded in slaying Tiawath, the monster
of the abyss; but in an older version of the story her slayer is the
god En-lil, whose place Merodach usurped later. Round the figure of
Merodach, alluded to as the Bel, the Babylonian title for the highest
divinity, are grouped the other deities in descending degrees of
importance, for, as in the worldly State, the king of the gods was
surrounded by officials of diverse rank.

MERODACH

Merodach, chief god of Babylon, possessed a solar significance; but
it may be improper to connect him in any manner with the sun in its
seasonal stages. He is, in fact, more the lord of light than of the sun
in any special aspect. Although there is evidence that he was regarded
as the spring sun, this was probably a secondary or derived conception
of him, like that which made him a god of battle.

EA

Ea was the Babylonian Neptune. He was figured as half man, half
fish, and was a great culture-hero and the lord of wisdom, probably
because of the depths whence he emanated, symbolic of the profundity
of knowledge. He came every day to the city of Eridu to instruct its
inhabitants in the arts of life, and he was the inventor of writing,
geometry, and law.

BEL

Bel, called the 'older Bel' to distinguish him from Bel-Merodach, was
also called Mul-lil or En-lil. He was a god of the Underworld and may
have been relegated thence, like many other deities, on the coming to
power of Merodach.

    Better to reign in Hell than serve in Heaven

seems to have been the thought of other ancient divinities than
Milton's Satan.

The Babylonians themselves seemed rather doubtful as to the exact
status of this god.

Nirig was a favourite deity in Assyria, and is called in inscriptions
'god of war.'

Anu was the father of the great gods. He may at one time have been the
supreme being of the Babylonian religion, and his cult is of extreme
antiquity.

Nusku was the messenger of the gods and without him the King of Heaven
could not pass judgment upon anything. He seems to have personified
flame or light.

Shamash was the sun in a different sense from Merodach, and he seems
also to have been looked upon as the great judge of the universe,
probably because the sun is able to direct his beams into the darkest
places. He it was who gave the famous code of laws into the hands of
King Hammurabi--according to the 'sun-god tablet' in the British Museum.

ISHTAR

Ishtar, the Queen of Heaven, was the great mother-goddess and sexual
goddess of Babylon, and among the Assyrians appears to have been looked
upon as a goddess of battle. She was identified with the planet Venus,
and her cult was associated with that of Tammuz. Her descent into
the Underworld stamps her as a corn-mother, like the Greek Demeter,
the reappearance of whose daughter Persephone clothes the earth with
fertility.

Allatu was the goddess of the Babylonian Otherworld. Nergal assisted
her, and he was also a god of conflict, disease, and pestilence,
symbolizing the misery and destruction which accompanies warfare.

Sin was the moon-god, and, probably from his connexion with the
calendar, was called 'lord of wisdom.' His worship was surrounded by
much mystery, and a beautiful and touching prayer in the library of
Assurbanipal describes him as being "full of love like the far-off
heaven and the broad ocean."

ASSHUR

Asshur, the head of the Assyrian pantheon, had attained to the position
of chief god in it because his city of Asshur was the capital of
Assyria. At the same time his worship was even more strongly national
than that of Merodach in Babylonia. He was the sun personalized, and
he was probably identical in most respects with Merodach. He was, in
fact, the national god of Assyria grafted on to a Babylonian myth.


HINDU MYTH

According to one of the oldest commentators on the Vedas, three
principal deities were known to the Hindus in Vedic times--Agni,
Vayu or Indra, and Surya. Agni appears to personify three forms of
fire--sun, lightning, and sacrificial fire, Indra was a god of the sky
or firmament, twin brother of Agni and king of the gods. Surya was
the sun himself. These three formed a triad. In later Vedic times the
number of the gods was increased to thirty-three, but behind all these
are two more ancient gods of the father and mother type--Dyaus (equated
with the Greek Zeus and an abstract deity of the sky), and Prithivi,
the Earth-Mother. Mitra was perhaps identical with the Persian Mithra
and seems to have ruled over day, while Varuna his companion, also
a sky-god, combined the divine attributes of the other gods. He was
the possessor of law and wisdom and ordered all earthly and heavenly
phenomena. Indra also appears to have been a god of the firmament, but,
in another sense, he was a god of storm and battle; while Soma has been
well described as "the Indian Bacchus."

The gods of the later ages of Hinduism naturally differ considerably
from those of the Vedic period, as might well be expected, considering
the time between the two epochs. It is true that the _Ramayana_ and the
_Mahabharata_ still keep the _personnel_ the old pantheon, but whatever
was animistic in the gods in Vedic times became in the later Puranic
period (named after the written Puranas or traditional myths) wholly
anthropomorphic. Moreover, a definite attempt to arrange a pantheon is
discernible. Eight of the principal gods are revealed as guardians of
the universe, each having rule over a definite domain. Some of them
have even changed their character entirely. For example, we now find
Varuna a god of water; Indra has all the characteristics of a great
earthly chief who has dealings with terrestrial monarchs and who may
be defeated by them in battle. In Hanuman, the monkey king, we perhaps
find a representative of the aboriginal tribes of Southern India.

BRAHMA

More important than all these is Brahma. Only a few hymns of the
Vedas appear to deal with him as the one divine, self-existent, and
omnipresent being, but in the later Puranic literature we find him
described as an abstract supreme spirit. With Brahma Hinduism reached
its greatest heights of mystical and metaphysical thought. Such
questions are asked in the _Vishnu Purana_, for example, as: How can a
creative agency be attributed to Brahma, who, as an abstract spirit,
is without qualities, illimitable, and free from imperfection? The
answer is that the essential properties of existent things are objects
of observation, of which no fore-knowledge is attainable, and the
innumerable phenomena are manifestations of Brahma, as inseparable
parts of his essence as heat from fire. Again, this Purana says:
"There are two states of this Brahma--one with, and one without shape;
one perishable, one imperishable; which are inherent in all beings.
The imperishable is the supreme being; the perishable is all the
world. The blaze of fire burning in one spot diffuses light and heat
around; so the world is nothing more than the manifested energy of the
supreme Brahma; and inasmuch as the light and heat are stronger or
feebler as we are near to the fire or far off from it, so the energy
of the supreme is more or less intense in the beings that are less or
more remote from him. Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva are the most powerful
energies of God; next to them are the inferior deities; then the
attendant spirits; then men; then animals, birds, insects, vegetables;
each becoming more and more feeble as they are farther from their
primitive source."

The _Vishnu Purana_ gives the following derivation of the word Brahma:
It "is derived from the root _vriha_ (to increase) because it is
infinite (spirit), and because it is the cause by which the Vedas (and
all things) are developed." Then follows this hymn to Brahma: "Glory
to Brahma, who is addressed by that mystic word (_Om_) associated
eternally with the triple universe (earth, sky, and heaven), and who is
one with the four Vedas. Glory to Brahma, who alike in the destruction
and renovation of the world is called the great and mysterious
cause of the intellectual principle; who is without limit in time or
space, and exempt from diminution and decay.... He is the invisible,
imperishable Brahma; varying in form, invariable in substance; the
chief principle, self-engendered; who is said to illuminate the caverns
of the heart, who is indivisible, radiant, undecaying, multiform. To
that supreme Brahma be for ever adoration."

Brahma had his mythological side as Brahmā, apparently a development
specially intended for his employment in myth. There he appears as
the Creator of the world, born from a golden egg which floated on
the waters at the beginning. He went through many avatars or bodily
changes, and is thus the active manifestation of the First Cause,
Brahma. He was connected with two other gods, Vishnu and Siva.

Vishnu is the preserver, as Brahmā is the creator, and he is closely
associated with Indra, whom he assisted to combat the powers of evil.
He it was who rendered the universe habitable for man, "made the
atmosphere wide and stretched out the world." He is a sort of demiurge
patrolling the earth and may have evolved from the idea that the
sun was a great watchful eye ever looking down to inspect what was
occurring on the world below, as do several other deities.

Siva, a development of a Vedic storm-god Rudra, was regarded as a
destroyer or regenerator. He is a god of reproduction and restoration,
but he has a dark side to his character, and has given rise to one of
the most revolting cults of any religion. Durga is a goddess of war and
destruction and the wife of Siva. She is also known as Kali, and, like
her husband, is placated by dreadful rites. Ganesa, the son of Siva, is
an elephant-headed god of wisdom and of good luck. He is also a patron
of learning and literature. He rather resembles the Egyptian Thoth.

A host of lesser deities follow these, notably the Gandharvas, who in
Vedic times constituted the body-guard of Soma, but in Puranic days
became heavenly minstrels, plying their art at the Court of Indra. The
Apsaras are the houris of Indra's court. Indian epics contain many
notices of numerous demigods, and the planets are also deified.

It may be said that in later times the fervour of Hindu worship has
concentrated itself round the two figures of Vishnu and Siva, who from
unimportant Vedic beginnings have evolved into deities of the first
importance. There is a certain rivalry between them, but they are also
complementary, being the beneficent and evil aspects of the divine
spirit. It would seem as if dualism and monotheism had almost met here
to form a third condition of godhead.

New gods of inferior kind have arisen in India and a small pantheon has
been apportioned to each of them, but they do not require description
here.


TEUTONIC MYTH

The mythology of the Teutonic peoples has a strong likeness to those of
the other Aryan races, notably the Greeks, Romans, and Celts. At the
head is Odin or Wotan, who in many respects resembles Zeus or Jupiter.
He is a divine legislator, cunning in Runic lore, and the creator of
mankind. His worshippers pictured him as a one-eyed man of venerable
aspect clad in a wide-brimmed hat and voluminous cloak, and travelling
through the world to observe the doings of men. With his brothers
Vili and Ve he raised the earth out of the waters of chaos. His name
of 'All-Father' shows the exact position he held in the minds of
Scandinavian and Germanic folk. His wife, Freya, is much akin to Juno
or Hera. She was the matron and housewife deified and the patroness of
marriage.

LOKI

The malevolent deity was represented by Loki, perhaps originally a
fire-god, and ever at the elbow of Odin offering him evil counsel. Loki
is one of the most interesting figures in any mythology. He is both
friend and foe to the Æsir or divine beings and seems to have reduced
to a fine art the policy of running with the hare and hunting with the
hounds. We find him assisting at the making of humanity and we also
discover him acting as steersman to the ship that brings the forces of
evil to combat with the gods on the last great day of reckoning. At
times he would employ his natural cunning on behalf of the gods, at
other times use it for their ignominious defeat. Protean in character,
he could assume any shape he chose at will. He has been alluded to as
the great riddle of Teutonic mythology, but it may be that this riddle
represents fire in its beneficent and maleficent aspects. Indeed, the
name Logi is given elsewhere to a certain fire-demon, and this almost
clinches the matter. His many evil deeds were at last punished by his
being chained to a rock like Prometheus, while over his head hung a
serpent whose venom fell upon his face. The fact that Prometheus, also
a fire-god, met the same fate is one of those baffling resemblances
which occasionally confront the student of myth, and set him on a
lifetime's search for the connexion between the stories. The great
danger is that such a seeker may become enamoured of some fantastic
solution. Frequently a possible solution leaps into consciousness
with all the rapidity of an inspiration; but there are true and false
inspirations, and the difficulty is to distinguish between them. They
should be ruthlessly subjected to a melting and remelting process in
the crucible of comparison until only the pure gold remains. Had this
scientific process been rigorously adopted by all mythologists, the
scientific value of the study would have been enormously enhanced and
it would possess greater uniformity; for although magnificent work
has been achieved, far too much loose thinking has been indulged in,
and at the present time we are reduced to groping for standards and
definitions in a manner quite extraordinary.

THOR

Thor, the god of thunder and lightning, possesses a hammer which
symbolizes the thunder, as the spear or arrow of some other gods
typifies the lightning. The hammer sometimes symbolizes the
world-shaping god, the creative divinity, but perhaps not in regard to
Thor. His red beard is probably symptomatic of the lightning, like the
red limbs of some American thunder-gods. He is the foe of the Jötunn
or giants, and he bulked very largely indeed in the myths of the
Norsemen. At the same time, like most thunder-gods who bring in their
train the fructifying winds and rains, Thor presided over the crops
and was thus the friend of peasants. Indeed his wife, Sif, is usually
portrayed as a peasant woman of the Scandinavian type. He is the patron
of countrymen, slow of speech and wit, if quick to strike with his
hammer Mjolnir.


CELTIC MYTH

The mythology of the Celts shows an early connexion with that of
the Teutons on the one hand and the Græco-Roman races on the other.
Perhaps originally all possessed a common mythology, which altered
upon their geographical separation. The priestly caste placed many of
the old myths upon a definite literary footing, but these again were
manufactured into pseudo-history by Geoffrey of Monmouth and kindred
writers, so that it is often impossible to discover their original
significance except by analogy. Animistic myths, however, survived the
establishment of anthropomorphic gods among the Celts. Agricultural
and seasonal deities were in the ascendant, as became an agricultural
people, but not to the exclusion of totemic influences. Later,
culture-gods of music, poetry, and the manual arts sprang up or were
developed from existing deities. In the Gaulish pantheon, concerning
which we have little information, we find Cæsar equating no less than
sixteen local gods with the Roman Mercury, many with Apollo (among chem
Borvo, Belenos, and Grannos), while with Mars other writers equate
Camulos, Teutates, Albiorix, and Caturix, probably tribal war-gods.
With Minerva was compared the horse-goddess Epona, while Berecyntia, a
goddess of Autun, is compared by Gregory of Tours with the Italian Bona
Dea. Inscriptions make Aeracura the equivalent of Dispater. Turning to
Ireland, we possess later and therefore more satisfactory data, based
on mythic tales of a far earlier date. These stories speak of immigrant
races named the Tuatha de Danann (children of the goddess Danu), the
Fomorians, the Firbolgs, and Milesians, of whom the first two classes
are divine. Among these warring elements the Fomorians are a race of
Titans. Balor, one of their leaders, is a personification of the evil
eye; nothing could live beneath his glance. Bres seems to have been
a deity of growth--a vegetation-god. Dea Domnann was a species of
Celtic Tiawath (Babylonian goddess of the abyss). Tethra was lord of
the Underworld. _Nét_ was a war-god. These were all gods of an early
aboriginal race, and in later Irish myth are regarded as uncouth giant
monsters.

THE CHILDREN OF DANU

Danu, mother of the race, was considered as a daughter of Dagda. She
seems to have been an Earth-Mother.

The Tuatha de Danann, or Tribe of the Goddess Danu, have many congeners
in British myth, and their worship appears to have been brought from
Gaul or Britain. They were conquered by the Milesians and, retiring to
the Underworld, appear to have taken the place of fairies, for they
are later called _sidhe_ or 'fairy folk.' Dagda (the 'good hand' or
'good god'), father of Danu, played the spring season into being with
his harp. He fed the whole earth out of an immense pot or cauldron
called Undry, the symbol of plenty. His was the perfection of knowledge
and understanding. He is undoubtedly the great Celtic god of growth,
and was probably originally a sun-deity, as his harp and his wisdom
show, Ængus, his son, who supplanted him, resembled him. Nuada of the
Silver Hand is a culture-hero and a cunning craftsman. He has a British
equivalent, Llud Llaw Ereint, the 'silver-handed,' and both, like all
culture-heroes, were connected with the sun and with growth. Manannan
is a sea-god, and the Isle of Man may perhaps have taken its name from
him when it was regarded as an Elysium. He is the same as the British
Manawyddan. Lug (Welsh _Lieu_) is a craftsman and inventor of many
arts, and is frequently alluded to as 'Lug of the Long Arm'; whence
some authorities have seen in him a solar god, as the beams or arms of
the sun reach from heaven to earth.

Ogma is master of poetry and the supposed inventor of the 'ogham'
script, which is said to be called after him. His eloquence excited the
gods to valour in battle. Diancecht ('swift in power') was a god of the
healing art. Goibniu, a god of smith-craft and magic, manufactured
arms for the gods and brewed ale for them. Brigit was a goddess of
poetry and wisdom, and, like the Greek Pallas Athene, may have been at
one time the goddess of a cult especially female. The Morrigan, Naman,
and Macha are war-goddesses of sanguinary character.


BRITISH GODS

Among purely British gods, Bran, son of Llyr, the sea-god, presided
over minstrelsy, and may have been a god of the fertile Underworld or
the realm of the dead, the Celtic Elysium. Gwydion, also a bard, is a
diviner as well, and, like the Greek Proteus, is expert at changing
his form. Amaethon appears to have been an agricultural deity, and the
name seems to be connected with _amaeth_, the Welsh for 'plough-man.'
He is credited with bringing certain domestic animals from the Land of
the Gods to the World of Men, and this suggests totemism. Arianrhod,
wife and sister of Gwydion, is perhaps an earth-goddess, but her
significance is obscure. Bilé is probably a sun-god, and is equated
with Apollo. Keridwen is a goddess dwelling in an under-water Elysium.
She is described as a goddess of inspiration and poetry, and possesses
a cauldron which is the source of all inspiration. Her son Avaggdu was
cursed with hideousness, so his mother resolved to boil the cauldron of
inspiration to compensate him for his ugliness. Gwion Bach, requested
to watch it until it boils, steals the gift of inspiration for himself.
He flees, and is pursued by Keridwen, but changes into various shapes.
She follows his example, and at length in the form of a hen she
swallows him as a grain of wheat. She later gives birth to him, throws
him into the sea, and he becomes the bard Taliesin, famous for his
poetic fire, the gift of the cauldron of inspiration.


MEXICAN MYTHOLOGY

The mythologies of America are chiefly of interest because they
illustrate and supplement the faiths of the Old World, and this is
especially the case with the mythology of Mexico, which represents
a phase of religious evolution considerably more advanced than the
beliefs of the red man of the North American plains or the barbarians
of the South American continent. In ancient Mexico we have one of
the only three American mythological systems which attained anything
like religious cohesion, or exemplified the higher reaches of
ethical religious thought. The religion of ancient Mexico has been
classified as a religion of the lower cultus, but the folly of such a
classification is extreme, and it has, of course, emanated from persons
who have made no especial study of the mythology of Mexico. To range it
with such religions as those of the aborigines of Australia or those of
some African tribes is incorrect, as a brief account of it will prove
to the reader.

When the Spaniards finally conquered Mexico the more intelligent among
them, although for the most part military men and priests, began to
interest themselves in the antiquities and religion of the people they
had conquered. The accounts they have left of the Aztec faith are,
of course, unscientific, but we can gather a great deal from them by
analogy and comparison with Old World faiths. We find that the Aztec
population of Mexico worshipped gods who, if they did not form a
pantheon or hierarchy, had each a more or less distinct sphere of his
own. One of these, Tezcatlipoca, has been called the Jupiter of the
Aztec pantheon, and seems to deserve this name.

Bernal Diaz, one of the Spanish conquerors, describes this god as
having the face of a bear, and this error has been handed down from
generation to generation of writers on Mexican mythology, is repeated
in books of reference, and is generally accepted because of its
antiquity. As I have shown elsewhere (_Edinburgh Review_ for October
1920), Tezcatlipoca was probably a development of the obsidian stone,
which was employed for the purpose of making both sacrificial knives
and polished mirrors in which future events were supposed to be viewed.
This stone, too, was regarded as capable of raising wind or tempests.
Tezcatlipoca was supposed to rush through the highways at night, and
in this connexion he probably symbolized the night wind, but from
analogy with other North American Indian gods of a like character it
is most probable that in later times he came to be thought of as a
personification of the breath of life. The wind is usually regarded
as the giver of breath and the source of immediate life. One of
Tezcatlipoca's names was Yoalli Ehecatl, or Night Wind, and this leads
us to suspect that he was the giver of all life. In many mythologies
the name of the chief deity is derived from the same root as the word
'wind,' and in others the words 'soul' and 'breath' have a common
origin. Thus the Hebrew word _ruah_ is equivalent to both wind and
spirit, as is the name of the Egyptian god Kneph. Strangely enough,
however, Tezcatlipoca was also regarded as a death-dealer, and some of
the prayers addressed to him are pitiful in their tone of entreaty that
he will refrain from slaying his devotees. The probable reason for this
is that his worship, however it became so, was so extremely popular
as almost to eclipse most other Mexican deities, and owing to this
popularity his idea achieved such an enormous significance in the Aztec
mind that he began to be regarded as a god of fate and fortune with
power to ban or bless as he saw fit, and therefore to be sedulously
placated by prayer and sacrifice.

THE AZTEC WAR-GOD[1]

Next to him in importance, but scarcely less in the popular estimation,
was Uitzilopochtli, tutelar deity of the Aztec people and god of war.
Legends told how he led the Aztec tribes from their home of origin into
the valley of Mexico in the shape of a humming-bird. He was represented
as wearing a garment of humming-bird's feathers, and his face and limbs
were painted black and yellow. Enormous sacrifices of human beings were
made at stated intervals to this god, whose great _teocalli_ or pyramid
temple in the city of Mexico was literally a human shambles, where
prisoners of war were immolated on his altar; but he also appears,
like some other war-gods, to have an agricultural significance. His
mother was the goddess of flowers, and he himself was associated with
the summer and its abundance of crops and fruit. This was because of
his possession of the war-spear or dart, which with the Aztecs as
with many another people symbolized the lightning and therefore the
thunder-cloud with its fructifying rain.

But the real rain-god, or rather the god of moisture, of the Aztecs
was Tlaloc, upon whose co-operation the success of the crops depended.
He dwelt in the mountains which surround the Mexican valley, and he is
represented in sculpture in a semi-recumbent position, with the upper
part of the body raised upon the elbows and the knees half drawn up,
to enable him to hold the vase in which the sacred grain was kept.
The _tlaloque_ or rain-spirits were regarded as his progeny, and he
manifested himself in three ways, by the flash, the thunder, and the
thunderbolt. His dwelling, Tlalocan, was a fruitful and abounding
Paradise where those who were drowned, struck by lightning, or who had
died of dropsy were certain to go. In the native paintings part of his
face is of a dark colour, probably to represent the thunder-cloud,
Numerous children were sacrificed to him annually, and if they wept it
was regarded as a happy omen for a rainy season.

One of the most important and picturesque Aztec deities was
Quetzalcoatl, probably a god of the pre-Aztec inhabitants of Mexico,
the Toltecs. The name signifies 'feathered serpent', and the myths tell
how he played the part of culture-hero in Mexico, teaching the people
the arts and sciences; but by the cunning of Tezcatlipoca he was driven
from the land, and, embarked upon a raft of serpents, he floated away
to the East, the land of sunrise, where dwelt his father, the sun. A
number of authorities have seen in Quetzalcoatl a god of the air, and
even a moon-deity. He is obviously the trade wind, which carries the
rain, and is driven from the country by Tezcatlipoca, the anti-trade
wind.

A regular group of gods presided over the food supply and agriculture
of Mexico: Xilonen and Chicomecohuatl were maize-goddesses, and
Centeotl, a god, also presided to some extent over the maize. The
earth-goddess Toci or Teteoinnan was regarded as the progenitrix or
mother of the gods. Sun-worship was extremely popular in Mexico, and
the sun was regarded as the god _par excellence_. Moreover, he was the
deity of warriors to whom he granted victory in battle that they might
supply him with food.


CHINOOK MYTH

The Chinook Indians of the north-west coast of America possess a
religious system of great interest to the student of myth, and we
must deal with it at some length. The Chinooks were divided into two
linguistic groups with numerous dialectic differences--Lower Chinook
(comprising Chinook proper and the Clatsop), and Upper Chinook
(comprising the rest of the tribe). The Lower Chinook dialects are
now practically extinct; of persons of pure Chinook blood only about
three hundred now exist. Upper Chinook is still spoken by considerable
numbers, but the mixture of blood on the Indian Reservation, where they
dwell, has been so great that the majority using the dialect are not
really Chinooks.


ZOOTHEISM

The stage of religious evolution to which the beliefs of the Chinooks
belong is 'zootheism,' where no line of demarcation exists between man
and beast, and all phenomena are explained in the mythic history of
zoomorphic personages who can hardly be described as gods. The original
totemic nature of these beings it would be difficult to gainsay, but
they occupy a position between the totem and the god proper--a rank
which has been the lot of many evolving deities.

Allied with these beliefs we find shamanistic medico-religious
practices invoking assistance for the sick.

Their mythological figures fall into four classes: (1) supernatural
beings of a zoomorphic type, with many of the attributes of deity; (2)
guardian spirits; (3) evil spirits; (4) culture-heroes.

The first class includes the Coyote, Blue Jay, Robin, Skunk, and
Panther, etc. As has been said, there is little doubt that such beings
were originally totems of various Chinookan clans, although these clans
are without special tribal names, being simply designated as 'those
dwelling at such and such a place.' They may, however, have lost their
tribal names--a common occurrence when tribes become sedentary--while
retaining their totemistic concepts.

Italapas, the Coyote, is one of the Chinook gods of the first class,
and may be regarded as the head of the pantheon. Nearly equal to him
in importance is Blue Jay, who figures in nearly every myth of Chinook
origin; but whereas Italapas the Coyote assisted Ikanam, the Creator,
in the making of men, and taught them various arts, Blue Jay's mission
is obviously dissension; and he well typifies the bird from which he
takes his name, and probably his totem derivation. He figures as a
mischievous tale-bearer, braggart, and cunning schemer, and resembles
Loki of Scandinavian mythology.

His origin is touched upon in a myth of the journey of the Thunderer
through the country of the Supernatural People, where, with Blue Jay's
help, the Thunderer and his son-in-law obtain possession of the bows
and targets of the inhabitants. They engage in a shooting-match and win
at first by using their own targets, but when the Supernatural People
suspect craft, they agree to the substitution of shining Supernatural
targets for their own, and lose; and, as they had staked their own
persons in the match, they fall into the power of the Supernatural
beings, who wreak vengeance upon Blue Jay by metamorphosing him into
the bird whose name he bears. "Blue Jay shall be your name and you
shall sing 'Watsetsetset-setse,' and it shall be a bad omen."

There is a trilogy of myths concerning Blue Jay and his sister Ioi.
Ioi begs him to take a wife to share her labour, and Blue Jay takes
the corpse of a chief's daughter from her grave and carries her to the
land of the Supernatural People, who restore her to life. The chief,
her father, discovers the circumstance, and demands Blue Jay's hair in
payment for his daughter, but Blue Jay changes himself into his bird
shape and flies away--an incident which suggests his frequent adoption
of human as well as bird form. When he flees, his wife expires again.
The ghosts then buy Ioi, Blue Jay's sister, for a wife, and Blue Jay
goes in search of her. Arriving in the country of the ghosts, he finds
his sister surrounded by heaps of bones, to which she alludes as her
relations by marriage. The ghosts take human shape occasionally, but
upon being spoken to by Blue Jay become mere heaps of bones again. He
takes a mischievous delight in reducing them to this condition, and
in tormenting them in every possible manner, especially by mixing the
various heaps of bones, so that, upon materializing, the ghosts find
themselves with the wrong heads, legs, and arms, In fact the whole myth
is obviously one which recounts the 'Harrying of Hell,' so common in
savage and barbarian myth, and probably invented to reassure the savage
as to the terrors of the next world, and to instruct him in the best
methods of foiling its evil inhabitants. We find the same atmosphere
in the myth of the descent into Xibalba of Hun-Apu and Xbalanque in
the _Popol Vuh_ of the Kiche of Guatemala, hero-gods who outwit and
ridicule the lords of Hell.

Skasa-it (Robin) is Blue Jay's elder brother, and his principal
occupation is making sententious comments on the mischievous acts of
his relative. The Skunk, Panther, Raven, and Crow are similar figures.
That most of these were anthropomorphic in shape--probably having
animals' or birds' heads upon men's bodies--is proved not only by the
protean facility with which they change their shapes, but by a passage
in the myth of Anektcxolemix, mentioning "a person who came to the fire
with a very sharp beak, and began to cut meat"; and another 'person'
splits logs for firewood with his beak. Such ideas are notoriously
incomprehensible to those unfamiliar with the distorted appearance of
Nature--due to an intense familiarity with and nearness to her--in the
savage mind.

Evil spirits are many and various. The most terrible appears to be
the insatiable Glutton, who devours everything in a house, and when
the meat supply comes to an end kills and eats the occupants. In the
myth of Okulam he pursues five brothers, after eating all their meat,
and devours them one by one, except the youngest, who escapes by the
good offices of the Thunderer, Ikenuwakcom, a being of the nature of a
thunder-god, and marries his daughter.

Besides being reckoned as deities of zoomorphic or sometimes
anthropomorphic type, Blue Jay, Italapas, and the others may be
regarded as hero-gods or culture-heroes, although not always prompted
by the highest motives in their activities. They are markedly
egotistical, every action being dictated by a desire to prove superior
in force and cunning to the foe. To overcome difficulties by craft is
the delight of the savage, and those gods who are most skilled in such
methods he honours most. In the myths of Blue Jay and his sister Ioi,
Blue Jay repeatedly scores against his adversaries, but in the end he
is punished himself, and it is difficult to say whether or not the
world was any the wiser or better for his efforts. The idea of good
accomplished is a purely relative one in the savage mind, and cannot be
appreciated to any extent by uncivilized persons.

The shamans of the Chinooks were a medico-religious fraternity,
the members of which worked individually, as a general rule, but
sometimes in concert. Their methods were much the same as those of the
medicine-men of other Indian tribes in a similar state of belief, but
were differentiated from them by various thaumaturgical practices which
they made use of in their medical duties. These were usually undertaken
by three shamans acting in concert for the purpose of rescuing the
'astral body' of a sick patient from the Land of Spirits. The three
shamans who undertook the search for the sick man's spiritual body
threw themselves into a state of clairvoyance; their souls, temporarily
detached from their bodies, then followed the spiritual track of the
sick man's soul. The soul of the shaman with a strong guardian spirit
was placed first, the next in degree last, and that of the priest with
the weakest guardian spirit in the middle. When the trail of the sick
man's soul foreshadowed danger or the proximity of any supernatural
evil, the soul of the foremost shaman sang a magical chant to ward it
off; and if a danger approached from behind, the shaman in the rear did
likewise. The soul was usually thought to be reached about the time
of the rising of the morning star. If possible, it was laid hands on
and brought back, after a sojourn of one or perhaps two nights in the
regions of the supernatural. The shamans next replaced the soul in the
body of their patient, who forthwith recovered. Should the soul of a
sick person take the trail to the left, the pursuing shamans would say,
"He will die"; whereas, if it took a trail toward the right, they would
say, "We shall cure him."

When the spirits of the shamans reached the well in the Land of the
Ghosts where the shades of the departed drink, their first care was to
ascertain if the soul of him they sought had drunk of these waters;
had it done so, all hope of cure was past. If they laid hold of a soul
that had drunk of the water, it shrank as they neared home, so that it
would not fill the sick man's body, and he died. The same superstition
applied to the spirit eating ghostly food. Did the sick man's soul
eat on the astral plain, then was he doomed indeed. In this belief
we have a Greek parallel: Persephone, the daughter of Demeter, the
corn-mother, might not return to earth permanently, because Pluto had
given her to eat of the seed of a pomegranate. The taboo regarding the
eating of the food of the dead is almost universal. We find it in the
Finnish _Kalevala_, where Waïnamoïmen, visiting Tuonela, the place of
the dead, refuses to drink, and in Japanese and Melanesian myth-cycles.
Likewise, if the spirit enters the house of the ghosts, it cannot
return to earth. These beliefs apply not only to human beings, but also
to animals, and even to inanimate objects. For example, if the astral
counterpart of a horse or a canoe be seen in ghost-land, unless they
are rescued from thence by the shaman they are doomed.


CHOCTAW MYTH

Another interesting North American mythology is that of the Choctaw
Indians, formerly occupying Middle and South Mississippi from Tombigbee
River to the borders of Dallas County, Georgia. The Choctaw religion
is almost unique among the North American Indian religions, as it is
a union of animism and sun-worship, or, more correctly speaking, the
two systems may be observed side by side among this and allied peoples
of the Muskhogean stock. They have a supreme being whom they designate
Yuba Paik, 'Our Father Above'; but whether this conception arose from
contact with missionaries or is genuinely aboriginal it is impossible
to say. The term may be collective, like the Hebrew _Elohim_ or the
Latin _Superi,_ and may include all the powers of the air. It is
perhaps more likely that it evolved from the word for sky, as did Zeus,
the Nottoway Qui-oki, the Iroquois Garonhia, and the ancient Powhatan
Oki. This supposition is strengthened by the cognate Greek expression,
signifying 'He who lives in the sky.' As usual among North American
Indian tribes, the Choctaws confound the sun with fire; at least they
refer to fire as Shahli miko,'the greater chief,' and speak of it as
Hashe ittiapa, 'He who accompanies the sun and the sun him.' On going
to war they call for assistance from both sun and fire, but, except
as fire, they do not address the sun, nor does he stand in any other
relation to their religious thought. He is not personified, as, for
example, among the Peruvians, or worshipped as the supreme symbol of
fire. In American religions, generally speaking, what appears on the
surface to be sun-worship pure and simple usually resolves itself, upon
closer examination, into the worship of light and fire. Indeed the
cognate Natchez word for 'sun' is derived from that for 'fire,' and the
sun is referred to as 'the great fire.' The expression 'sun-worship'
must, then, be understood to imply an adoration of all fire, symbolized
by the sun.

The Muskhogean tribes, according to tradition, were originally banded
in one common confederacy, and unanimously located their earliest
ancestry near an artificial eminence in the Valley of the Big Black
River in the Natchez country, whence they believed they had emerged.
Gregg states[2] that they described this to him and another traveller,
and calls it "an elevation of earth, about half a mile square, and
fifteen or twenty feet high. From its north-east corner a wall of
equal height extends for nearly half a mile to the high land."[3] This
eminence they designated Nunne Chaha, or Nunne Hamgeh, 'the High Hill,'
or 'the Bending Hill,' known to the Muskhogees as Rvne em mekko, or
'King of Mountains.' This looks as if the Choctaws alluded to some of
those immense artificial mounds so common in the Mississippi valley.
When De Soto passed through the Gulf State country in 1540-41, the
tribes inhabiting it--Creeks, Choctaws, etc.--were still using, and
probably constructing, mounds; and from this it is inferred that
they and no others were the famous 'Mound-builders' of American
archæology--a theory now adopted by the officials of the U.S. Bureau
of Ethnology and the majority of modern Americanists. Wilson, writing
in 1875, considerably before the modern theory of the 'Mound-builders'
gained general credence, states that "analogies to these structures
have been traced in the works of Indian tribes formerly in occupation
of Carolina and Georgia. They were accustomed to erect a circular
terrace or platform on which their council-house stood. In front
of this a quadrangular area was enclosed with earthen embankments,
within which public games were played and captives tortured.... Upon
the circular platform it is also affirmed that the sacred fire was
maintained by the Creek Indians as part of their most cherished rites
as worshippers of the sun."[4] He adds that, although the evidence does
not seem very clear, analogies point "to the possibility of some of
the Indian tribes having perpetuated on a greatly inferior scale some
maimed rites borrowed from their civilized precursors."

Several proved analogies between the worship of the 'Mound-builders'
and the Indians exist: for example, there is unmistakable evidence
that one of the sacred altars of 'Mound City' was specially devoted to
nicotian rites and offerings. The discarded stones, also, found in the
mound country are the same as those used by the Muskhogean people in
the name of _chunkey_, which has probably a solar significance.

Like the other Muskhogean tribes, the Choctaws believed that before
the Creation a great body of water alone was visible. Two pigeons flew
to and fro over its waves, and at last espied a blade of grass rising
above the surface. Dry land gradually followed, and the islands and
mainland took their present shapes. In the centre of the hill Nunne
Chaha, already mentioned, was a cave, the house of the Master of Breath
(Esaugetuh Emissee). There he took clay, and fashioned the first men;
and, as at that period the waters covered the earth, he raised a great
wall to dry them on. When the soft mud had hardened into flesh and
bone, he directed the waters to their present places, and gave the dry
land to the men he had made. The fact that the Choctaws were divided
into eight clans has been cited by Brinton[5] in confirmation of the
view that the myth of their origin was akin to those American legends
which give to the majority of the Indian tribes a descent from four
or eight brothers who emanated from a cave. Such a myth was in vogue
among the Tupi-Guarani of Brazil, the Muyscas of Bogota, the Nahua of
Mexico, and many other tribes. They possessed an ancient tradition
that the present world will be consumed by a general conflagration,
after which it will be made a much more pleasant place than it now
is, and that then the spirits of the dead will return to the bones in
the bone-mound, become covered with flesh, and once more occupy their
ancient territory.

The Choctaws believe that after death those "who have behaved well" are
taken under the care of Esaugetuh Emissee ('Master of Breath') and well
looked after; that those who have behaved ill are left "to shift for
themselves"; and that there is no further punishment. They also believe
that when they die the spirit flies westward "as the sun goes," and
there joins its family and friends "who went before it." They do not
believe in a place of punishment, or in any infernal power.

Although the sun appears to have been their chief deity, the Choctaws
conceived Esaugetuh Emissee, or the 'Master of Breath,' as the creative
agency, at least where man was concerned, so that he may have acted as
a demiurge. This deity has many counterparts in American mythologies,
and appears to be the personification of the wind, the name being
onomatopoetic. The deification of the wind as soul or breath is common
to many mythologies.

We see a totemic significance in the fact that the alligator was
worshipped, or at least venerated, by the coast and river tribes of the
Muskhogeans, and never by any chance destroyed by them. The myth of
the horned serpent was also in vogue among them, and was practically
identical with that told by the Cherokees to Lieutenant Timberlake; and
the charm which they presented to their young men when they set out on
the war-path was composed of the bones of the panther and the horn of
the fabulous horned snake.

This snake dwelt in the waters, and the old people went to the shore
and sang sacred songs to it. It rose a little out of the water; the
magic chant was repeated, and it then showed its horns. They cut off
the horns, and, when occasion necessitated, placed a fragment of them
in their 'war-physic,' to ward off the arrows of enemies.

The priests of the Choctaws, as is usual among Indian tribes, were
medicine-men and diviners. The office of high priest, or 'Great Beloved
Man,' as he was called, was kept in one family, passing from father
to eldest son. The junior priests are described as dressed in white
robes and carrying on their head or arm a great owl-skin stuffed
very ingeniously, as a symbol of wisdom and divination. They were
distinguished from the rest of the tribe by their taciturnity, grave
and solemn countenance, and dignified carriage, and went about the
settlements singing to themselves in a low, almost inaudible voice.
They possessed an apparently esoteric language, which examination
by competent scholars has proved to be merely a modification of the
ordinary speech. It contains some words unknown in the idiom of daily
life, but they are archaisms, or borrowed from other peoples, along
with the ceremonies or myths to which they refer.


ARAUCANIAN MYTH

One of the best examples of a South American religion is that of the
Araucanian Indians of Chile. Early accounts credit them with a fairly
exalted theogony, with a supreme being, the author of all things,
called Pillan--a name derived from _pulli_ or _pilli_, 'the soul,'
and signifying Supreme Essence. Pillan is, according to the Austrian
missionary Dobrizhoffer,[6] their word for thunder. They also called
him Guenu-pillan, 'the Spirit of Heaven,' and Annolu, 'the Infinite,'
besides many other lesser names. The native tribal life was but a
microcosm of his celestial existence; everything was modelled upon the
heavenly polity of Pillan, who was called, in his aspect of Supreme
Ruler, Toquichen, or 'the Great Chief' of the invisible world. He had
his _apo-ulmenes_ and his _ulmenes_, or greater and lesser sub-chiefs,
like the chief of any prairie confederacy; and to them he entrusted the
administration of his affairs of lesser importance.

In Pillan it is easy to trace a mythological conception widely
prevalent among the indigenous American peoples. He is unquestionably
a thunder-god, similar to such deities as the Hurakan of the Kiches
of Guatemala, the Tlaloc of the Mexicans, and the Con or Cun, the
thunder-god of the Collao of Peru. The gathering of clouds round great
mountain peaks like those of the Andes, and the resultant phenomena
of thunder and lightning, kindle in the savage mind the idea that the
summits of these mountains are the dwelling-place of some powerful
supernatural being, who manifests his presence by the agencies of fire
and terrifying sound. Supernatural beings of this kind are usually
described by the Indians as red in colour, having neither arms nor
legs, but moving with incredible swiftness, difficult of approach
because of their irascibility, but generous to those who succeed in
gaining their favour. They are in general placated by libations of
native spirit poured into the pools below the snow-line, and in case
of drought are roused from inactivity by the sympathetic magic of
'rain-making,' in which the magician or priest sprinkles water from a
gourd over the thirsty soil.

The _apo-ulmenes_, or greater deities, subservient to Pillan are
several in number. The chief is Epunamun, or god of war, whose name
is apparently of Peruvian origin. He may have been a type adopted
from the Incan sun-idol Punchau Inca, or the 'Sun-Inca,' depicted
as a warrior armed with darts. There can be little doubt that the
mythology of the Araucanians, as opposed to their mere demon-worship,
was highly coloured by, if not altogether adopted from, that of their
Peruvian neighbours, the Aymara. And when we find that this Peruvian
sun-idol was originally brought to the Incan court by a chief of the
Collao who worshipped Cun (adored by the Araucanians under the name
of Pillan), it would seem as though Epunamun, with his Peruvian name
and probable likeness to Punchau, was also of northern origin, or
had been adopted by the Araucanians from the Aymara. Other inferior
deities were Meulen, a benevolent protector of the human race; and the
Guecubu, a malignant being, author of all evil, also known as Algue
or Aka-Kanet--at least, the similarity between him and the deities or
demons bearing these names is strong, although Aka-Kanet, throned in
the Pleiades, sends fruits and flowers to the earth, and is called
'Grandfather.' As Müller remarks: "Dualism is not very striking among
these tribes"; and again: "The good gods do more evil than good."[7]
Molina, who lived among the Araucanians for many years, says, speaking
of Guecubu: "From hence it appears that the doctrine of two adverse
principles, improperly called Manicheism, is very extensive, or, in
other words, is found to be established among almost all the barbarous
natives of both continents."[8] He goes on to compare the Guecubu
with the Persian Ahriman, and states that, according to the general
opinion of the Araucanians, he is the cause of all the misfortunes
that occur. If a horse tires, it is because the Guecubu has ridden
him. If the earth trembles, it is because the Guecubu has given it a
shock; nor does anyone die who is not suffocated by the Guecubu. The
name is spelt 'Huecuvu' by Falkner in his _Description of Patagonia_,
and is translated as 'the wanderer without,' an evil demon, hostile
to humanity, who lurks outside the encampment or on the outskirts of
any human habitation for the express purpose of working malignant
mischief upon unwary tribesmen--a very familiar figure to the student
of anthropology and folklore.

It is not clear to which of their gods the Araucanians gave the credit
for the creation of all things, and it is probable that they imagined
that one or other of the totemic beings from whom they were supposed
to be descended had fashioned the universe. They had, however, a very
clear tradition of a deluge, from which they were saved by a great hill
called Theg-Theg, 'the Thunderer,' with three peaks, and possessing
the property of moving upon the waters. Whenever an earthquake
threatens they fly to any hill shaped like the traditional Theg-Theg,
believing that it will save them in this cataclysm as it did in the
last, and that its only inconvenience is that it approaches too near
the sun. To avoid being scorched, says Molina, they always kept ready
wooden bowls to act as parasols.

The _ulmenes_ or lesser spirits of the celestial hierarchy of the
Araucanians, are the _gen_ ('lords'), who have the charge of created
things, and who, with the benevolent Meulen, attempt to stem the power
of the Guecubu. They are of both sexes, the females being designated
_amei-malghen_, or spiritual nymphs, who are pure and lead an existence
of chastity, propagation being unknown in the Araucanian spiritual
world. These beings, especially the females, perform for men the
offices of familiar spirits, and all Araucanians believe that they
have one of these minor deities or angels in their service. "_Nien cat
gni amehi-malghen_" ("I still keep my guardian spirit") is a common
expression when they succeed in any undertaking. These minor deities
remind us forcibly of the totemic familiars who are adopted by the
members of many North American Indian tribes at puberty, and appear
to them in dreams and hypnotic trances to warn them concerning future
events; and it is probable that the _gen_ and _amei-malghen_ are the
remnants of a totemic system.

The likeness between things spiritual and things material is carried
still further by the Araucanians; for, as their earthly _ulmenes_
have no right to impose any contribution or service upon the common
people, so they deny to supernatural beings worship or gifts. Thus
no outward homage is ordinarily paid to them. There is probably no
parallel to this lack of worship in the case of a people possessing
clearly defined religious ideas and conceptions of supernatural beings.
"They possess neither temples nor idols, nor are they in the habit of
offering any sacrifice except in some severe calamity, or on concluding
a peace."[9] Upon such occasions the offerings were usually animals
and tobacco, the latter being burned as incense and supposed to be
peculiarly agreeable to their gods. This custom recalls that of the
North American Indian peoples, with whom the Araucanians exhibit some
points of resemblance in the ceremonial use of tobacco, such as blowing
the smoke to the four cardinal points, as a sacrifice to the god of
the elements, probably Pillan. On urgent occasions only were these
sacrificial rites employed, omen Pillan and Meulen chiefly were adored
and implored to assist their people. The absolute indifference of the
Araucanians to mere ritual was well exemplified by the manner in which
they ignored the elaborate ritualistic practices of the early Roman
Catholic missionaries, although they displayed no hostility to the new
creed, but tolerated its institution throughout their territories.

Although the Araucanians did not practise any rites, they were not
behind other American aboriginal peoples in superstition. They were
firm believers in divination, and paid marked attention to favourable
or unfavourable omens. Appearances in dreams, the songs and flight of
birds, and all the usual machinery of augury were pressed into the
service of their priests or diviners; and the savage who dreaded naught
on the field of battle would tremble violently at the mere sight of an
owl.

The priests, or rather diviners, were called by the Araucanians
_gligua_ or _dugol_, and were subdivided into _guenguenu, genpugnu_,
and _genpiru_, meaning respectively 'masters of the heavens,' 'of
epidemics,' and 'of insects or worms.' There was also a sect called
_calcu_, or 'sorcerers,' who dwelt in caves and were served by
_ivunches_, or 'man-animals,' to whom they taught their terrible arts.
The Araucanians believed that these wizards had the power to transform
themselves at night into nocturnal birds, to fly through the air, and
to shoot invisible arrows at their enemies, besides indulging in the
malicious mischief with which folklore credits the wizards of all
countries. Their priests proper they believed to possess numerous
familiars who were attached to them after death. Thus they resemble the
'magicians' of the Middle Ages. These priests were celibate, and led an
existence apart from the tribe, in some communities being garbed as
women. The tales told of their magical prowess lead us to believe that
they were either natural epileptics or ecstatics, or excited themselves
by drugs. The Araucanians also held that the knowledge of their real
personal names gave dangerous magic power over them.

They firmly believed in the immortality of the soul. They held that the
composition of man was twofold--the _anca_, or corruptible body, and
the _am_ or _pulli_, the soul, which they believed to be _ancanolu_
('incorporeal'), and _mugcalu_ ('eternal' or 'existing for ever'). So
thoroughly a matter of everyday allusion had these distinctions become
that they frequently made use of the word _anca_ in a metaphorical
sense, to denote a part, the half, or the subject of anything. They
differed about details of life after death. All held that after death
they would go west, beyond the sea--a conception of the soul's flight
held by many other American tribes. The west, the 'grave' of the sun,
was supposed also to be the goal of man in the evening of his days--a
place where the tired soul might find rest.

"The old notion among us," said an old chief, "is that, when we die,
the spirit goes the way the sun goes, to the west, and there joins
its family and friends who went before it."[10] The country to which
the Araucanians believed their dead went was called Gulcheman, 'the
dwelling of the men beyond the mountains.' The general conception
of this Otherworld was that it was divided into two parts, one
pleasant, and filled with everything that is delightful, the abode
of the good; and the other desolate and in want of everything, the
habitation of the wicked. Some of the Araucanians held, however,
that all indiscriminately enjoyed eternal pleasures, saying that
earthly behaviour had no effect upon the immortal state. The amount of
spirituality in their belief is shown by their funerary practices.

The relatives of the deceased person seated themselves round his
body and wept for a long time, afterward exposing it for a space
upon a raised bier, called _pilluay_, where it remained during the
night. During this time they watched over and 'waked' it, eating and
drinking with those who came to console them. This meeting was called
_curicahuin_, or the 'black entertainment,' as black was the symbolical
colour of mourning with them. About the second or third day the body
was laid to rest in the _eltum_, or family burying-ground. The _eltum_
was usually situated in a wood or on a hill, and the procession to it
was preceded by two young men on horseback, riding full speed. The bier
was carried by the nearest relatives of the deceased, and surrounded by
women who mourned and wept during the entire ceremony. On arrival at
the _eltum_ the corpse was laid on the ground and surrounded by arms
in the case of a man, or by feminine implements in that of a woman.
Provisions, _chica_ (native spirit), wine, and sometimes even a dead
horse were placed beside the deceased to serve him in the Otherworld.
The Pehuenches believed that the Otherworld was cold, and so sought to
warm the corpse with fire, after which they bound it to a horse, placed
the bridle in its hand, killed the steed, and buried both together in
the grave. The relatives and friends of the dead man then wished him
a prosperous journey, and covered the body with a pyramid or cairn of
stones, over which they poured large quantities of _chica_.

After they had departed, an old woman called Tempuleague came to the
grave in the shape of a whale, and transported the soul of the deceased
to the Otherworld. Probably the Araucanians of the Chilean coast were
acquainted with the spermaceti, or southern variety of whale, and
regarded it as the only method of locomotion for a spirit across the
great waters, or it is probable that they borrowed the conception from
the Peruvians of the coast, who regarded the sea as the most powerful
among the gods, and called it Mama-cocha or 'Mother Sea.' The whale was
a general object of worship all along the Peruvian coast, while each
of the Peruvian coastal districts worshipped the particular species of
fish that was taken there in the greatest abundance. This fish-worship
was not mere superstition, and it was very elaborate, the fish-ancestor
of each variety or 'tribe' of fish holding a special place in the
heavens in the form of a constellation. The Collao tribes to the south,
on the shores of Lake Titicaca, some fifty miles or so from the
Chilean frontier, also worshipped a fish-god; so that in all likelihood
the fish-goddess of the Araucanians was originally borrowed from
the Collao, who were probably ethnologically akin to the Araucanian
tribes. This theory is confirmed by the nature of the fish-deity
worshipped by the Collao; its name was Copacahuana, 'valuable stone to
be looked upon,' the idol being carved from a bluish-green stone, with
the body of a fish surmounted by a rude human head. This deity, like
Tempuleague, was female.

The deceased, however, must pay a toll to another old woman, of
malicious character, for permission to pass a narrow strait on the
road; otherwise she would deprive him of an eye.

The life after death was very similar to earthly existence, but without
fatigue or satiety. Husbands had the same wives as on earth, but had no
children, as the Otherworld was inhabited by the spirits of the dead
alone.

Certain vestiges of sun- and moon-worship were known among some tribes,
who called the sun Anti, and the moon Kayan; but recognition of these
luminaries as deities was intermittent and probably seasonal.


[1] See p. 32.

[2] _Commerce of the Prairies_, vol. ii, p. 235.

[3] Heart, _Trans. Am. Phil. Soc._, vol. iii, p. 216.

[4] _Prehistoric Man_, vol. i, p. 276 (London, 1876).

[5] _Myths of the New World_, p. 101 (1896).

[6] _Abipones_, vol. ii, p. 101 (London, 1822).

[7] _Amer. Urreligionen_, pp. 265, 272 (Basel, 1855).

[8] _History of Chile_, vol. ii, p. 85 (1809).

[9] Molina, _op. cit._, vol. ii, p. 87.

[10] Hawkins, _Sketch of the Creek Country_, p. 80 (Savannah, 1848).


    INDEX

    A

    ABALL, Celtic term for apple, 95
    Abella, city of Campania, 95
    Accadian concept of the abyss, 34-35; sun myth, 155
    Adjacent method in mythology, the, 83
    Adonis represents revival of vegetation, 135
    Aeracura, Celtic deity, 294
    Æacus, son of Zeus and Ægina, 206
    _Æneid_, Servius's commentary on the, 78
    Ængus, Irish deity, 295
    Æolus, Greek wind-god, 133
    Ætiological (explanatory) myth, 15 _n_.; story of Orestes an, 79;
       Jevons on, 86-87; Marett on, 89
    African myth, Lang on, 71; ideas of future life, 216
    After-life, ideas of, 195 _et seq._
    Agamedes, builder of Apollo's palace, 121
    Agave, mother of Pentheus, 243
    Agni, Hindu fire-god, 52, 130, 131, 256, 259; birth of, 160
    Agricultural gods, 113, 128-129
    Ahriman, Persian evil principle, 169; Molina on, 310
    Ahts Indians, beast myth of, 145; creation myth of, 147;
       fire-stealing myth of, 149; flood myth of, 153
    Ai and Edda, dwarfs in Norse myth, 262
    Aimon Kondi, deity of Arawak Indians, 139, 179
    Ainu (Japan), soul myth of, 152
    A-Kikuyus, myth to account for customs and rites of, 157
    Alatnir, Slavonic magical instrument, 208
    Albiorix, Celtic (Gaulish) deity, 204
    Algonquin Indians, belief in destruction by fire, 139; myth of birth
       of gods of, 144; dualistic myths of, 145; dismemberment myth of, 146;
       creation myth of, 147, 177; culture myth of, 150; fire myth of, 152;
       belief in after-life of, 212
    _Algonquin Legends of New England_, Leland's, 271
    Allatu, Queen of Assyrian Hades, 201-202, 288
    'All-Father,' gods and sky-gods; 74 _n_.; Lang's theory
       of the, 67-71, 73-74
    Alligator as totem of Muskhogean Indians, 307
    Ama-terasu, Japanese sun-goddess, 120, 168, 260
    Amaethon, British deity, 296
    _Amei-malghen_, guardian spirits of Araucanian Indians, 311
    Amen, Egyptian god, 114
    America, anthropological theories applied to myth of, by Payne, 84;
       mound-building in, 305-306; sun-worship in, 305. _See also_
       Brazil, Mexico, South America, _etc._
    American Indians, North, myths of, 31; flint-gods of, 26 _et seq._;
       fire myths of, 139; myth of origin of man of, 143; place of reward of,
       153; star myth of, 156; creation myths of, 174-186; ideas of
       after-life among, 211-215; mythic writings of, 270
    Ancestor-worship, 104, 110-112
    Andaman Islanders, fire-stealing myth of, 149
    Andes, thunder-gods of, 122-123
    Animal worship in Egypt, 45
    Animatism, definition of, 22 _n._
    Animism, definitions, 17, 22, 52; Tylor on origin of, 23 _n_.; place
       in mythic development, 31; Tylor's theory regarding, 58-59; causes of,
       according to Spencer, 59-60; Lang's criticism upon theory of, 72-73;
       universal nature of early, 82; and the supernatural idea of water, 97;
       definite form of, developed in Egypt, 97; origin of, Elliot Smith's
       theory of the, 97; distinction between, and polytheism, 109; animistic
       conception of thunder, 122; and corn myth, 129-130
    Animistic myth, classes of, 23
    Anthropological school of mythology 51; its criticism of Müller's
       theories, 52-53; recognizes gender-termination as survival
       from animistic stage, 53; its position, 54-55; Tiele on, 65-66;
       'ignorant camp-followers' of, 66
    Anthropomorphism, 20, 110, 119, 125 _et seq._
    Anti, Araucanian sun-deity, 315
    _Antike Wald- und Feldkulte_, Mannhardt's, 53
    Antis Indians, dismemberment myth of, 146; culture myth of, 150;
       flood myth of, 153
    Anu, Babylonian deity, 166, 251, 288
    Anubis, Egyptian god, 285
    Apep, night-serpent in Egyptian myth, 99
    Aphrodite, mandrake cult of, 93; description of, 285
    Apollo, as fire, 41; apple cult of, 93, 94-95; as mistletoe, 95;
       origin of, 95; as sun-god, 119; solar myth of, 121; as wielder
       of lightning spear, 124, 127; as guardian of crops, 129; Homer
       on, 258; described, 283-284; Celtic gods equated with, 294;
       Bilé equated with, 296
    _Apo-ulmenes_, 309-310
    Apple-trees, cult of, 95
    Apsaras, Hindu nymphs, 291
    Apsu, Babylonian monster, 34, 166, 296
    Aqas Xenas Xena, American Indian myth of, 214
    _Aradia, the Gospel of the Witches of Italy_, Leland's, 236
    Araucanian (Chilean) Indians, 308 _et seq._; Peruvian
       influence upon myth of, 309-310; deluge myth of, 310-311;
       lack of worship among, 311; castes of priests among, 312;
       beliefs regarding the soul among, 313; place of the dead
       according to, 313; funeral practices of, 313-314
    Arawaks of Guiana, fire myth of, 139, 152; legend of world-tree
       among, 141; culture myth of, 150; flood myth of, 153; creation
       myth of, 177-179
    Arianrhod, British deity, 296
    Arician grove, cult of, 76; priest of, as incarnation of
       tree-spirit, 77. See also _Golden Bough_
    Aricoute, Tupi-Guarani hero, 183
    Arran, sacred stone of, 27
    Artemis, as moon, 41; mugwort cult of, 93; as moon-goddess, 127;
       Homer on, 258
    Arthur, King, as sun-hero, 122; his Round Table as the sun, 122
    Aruru, creatrix of Eabani in the Gilgamesh epic, 250
    _Ascent of Olympus, The_, Harris's, 93
    Aschochimi Indians, beast myth of, 145; flood myth of, 153
    Ashtaroth, or Astarte, compared with Venus, 285
    Askr and Embla, Norse Adam and Eve, 170
    Asshur, Assyrian god, 286; described, 288
    Assyrian Hades, 201-203
    Astrology and myth, 202
    Athapascan Indians, creation myth of, 147, 179;
       fire-stealing myth of, 149
    Athene, Homer on, 20, 258; the name, 47 _n._; as owl, 94;
       described, 284-285
    Atius Tirawa, Caddoan creative deity, 181
    Attys, vegetation god, 135
    Augustine, St, on myth, 43
    Aurora, Greek divinity, 50
    Australia, early isolation of, 36-37
    Australians (aboriginal), myth of moon of, 19; Lang on, 68; beast
       myth of, 145; dualistic myth, of, 146; myth of origin of man of,
       148; culture myth of, 150; taboo myth of, 150; death myth of,
       151; star myth of, 156
    Avaggdu, British deity, 296
    Aztecs, war-god of, 32, 298; fire myth of, 152; myth of place of
       reward of, 154; sun myth of, 155; moon myth of, 156; abode
       of dead of, 211; deities of, 299.
    _See also_ Mexicans

    B

    BAAL, Bealltainn sacrifice believed to be to, 240
    Babylonians, creation myth of, 34-35, 146, 165-166, 173; dualistic
       myth of, 145; culture myth of, 149; deluge myth of, 153;
       place of punishment of, 154; myth of journey through
       Underworld of, 154; food of the dead myth of, 155;
       sun myth of, 155; moon myth of, 155; star myth of, 156,
       252-253; general description of myths of, 286
    Bacchus, connected with the earth, 134; Leland on invocation to, 237
    Bacon, Francis, his interpretation of myth, 45
    Bakairi Indians, star myth of, 140; and Orion, 141; creation-myth of, 182
    Balder, his journey to Hel, 196
    Balor, Celtic god, 294-295
    Banier, Abbé, historical treatment of myth, 45
    Bast, Egyptian goddess, 110
    Bat-god of Kakchiquel steals seeds of fire, 268
    Bealltainn, Scottish festival of, 240 _et seq._
    Beast myths, table of, 144
    Beelzebub, Syrian deity, 44
    Beetle as creative agency in Egypt and South America, 181, 183
    Bel in Gilgamesh epic, 253
    Belenos, Celtic (Gaulish) deity, 294
    Belial, 44
    Bellerophon, Hellenic sun-hero, 122
    Bel-Merodach, Babylonian god, 34; description of, 287-288
    Belus, supposititious connexion of, with Bealltainn festival, 241-242
    Beowulf, myth of, 121-122
    Berecyntia, goddess of Autun, 294
    Bhaga, Indian deity, 256
    Biblical narrative, how it colours myth, 37
    Biblical creation story, 167
    Bilé, British god, 242, 296
    Bird myths, 31-32
    Birth of gods myths, table of, 144
    Blood, natural food of spirits, 106
    Blue Jay, god of Chinook Indians, myths of, 31-32, 68, 301-302
    Boag, Johnny, legend of, 234
    Boat-language of Scottish fishers, 235
    Bohemian festival, return of summer, 136
    _Book of the Dead_, 246
    Boreas, Harris on, 95; as wind in Greek myth, 133
    Bornean ideas of after-life, 216-217
    Bororo Indians and Milky Way, 141
    Borvo, Celtic (Gaulish) god, 294
    "Bragaræthur," the, a portion of the Edda, 260
    Brahma, Hindu deity, 115, 256, 290-291; as creator, 160, 162;
       his mythological side, 291
    Brahmanas, savagery in, 20
    Bran, British deity, 296
    Brasseur de Bourbourg, Abbé, French translator of _Popol Vuh,_
    187-188, 290
    Brazilian Indians, earth myth of, 134; fire myth of, 139; moon
       myth of, 156
    Bres, Celtic god, 295
    Bretons, fire-stealing myth of, 149
    "Brewing of _Ægir_, The," Norse myth, 262
    Brigit, Irish goddess, 296
    Brinton, Professor D. G., his _Myths of the New World_, 190-191;
       mentioned by Leland, 270
    Britain, totems in, 28
    British gods, 296 _et seq._
    Brounger, myth of, 26; folk-song on, 27 _et seq._
    Browny, a goblin, 44
    Bryant, Jacob, his _Analysis of Ancient Mythology_, 46
    Buddhists, place of reward of, 153
    Bull-roarer, 19; gods evolved from, 24
    Buri, Norse primeval deity, 170
    Burnt-offerings to spirits, 106-107
    Burry Man, the, 135-137
    Bushmen, myth of Kwai Hemm among, 19; dismemberment myth
       among, 146; creation myth of, 147; myth of origin of man of,
       148; culture myth of, 150; death myth of, 151; star myth
       of, 156; moon myth of, 156
    Buyán, isle of, 208

    C

    CABRAKAN, earth-giant in Kiche myth, 265 _et seq._
    Cadmus, Greek solar hero, 122
    Cahrocs, fire-stealing myth of, 149
    Californian Indian creation myths, 180
    Camulos, Celtic (Gaulish) tribal god, 294
    Carayas Indians, culture myth of, 150
    Caribs (Bakairi), their name for Earth-Mother, 134; name for
       Milky Way, 141; (of Guiana) star myth of, 142; (Antillean)
       beast myth of, 145; dismemberment myth of, 146; culture myth
       of, 150; flood myth of, 153; place of reward of, 154; place
       of punishment of, 154; creation myths of, 182
    Castor and Pollux, their human form, 156
    Caturix, Gaulish war-god, 294
    Celtic myth of origin of heroes, 149; culture myth, 150; place
       of reward, 153; place of punishment, 154; adventures in
       Underworld, 155; sun myth, 155; creation myth, 169, 194;
       Otherworld, 209-210; mythic system described generally, 294
       _et seq._
    Centeotl, Mexican maize-god, 134
    Central Africans, death myth of, 151
    Centzon Mimizcoa, Mexican name for the star-spirits, 211
    Cephalus as sun, 50
    Cerberus, dog guardian of Latin Hades, 44
    Ceremonies representing details of myths, 87
    Cherokee Indians, culture myth of, 150
    Chiapas Indians, culture myth of, 150
    Chicomecohuatl, Mexican maize-goddess, 299
    Childhood, conservatism of, 64
    _Childhood of Fiction_, Macculloch's, 222
    Chinese creation myth, 166-167, 193
    Chinook Indians, myths of, 31, 300-304; beast myth of, 145; myth of
       journey through Underworld of, 155; food of the dead myth of, 155;
       idea of after-life among, 213-214; mythic system of, 300-304
    Chippeway Indian belief in after-life, 212
    Choctaw Indians, myths of, 304; creation myth of, 306-307;
      Paradise of, 307; priests of, 308
    Cingalese, soul myth of, 152
    Cipactli animal in Mexican myth, 98
    Classification of myth, 138 _et seq._
    Codex Regius, MS. of the Edda, 261-262
    Coem, hero of Tupi-Guarani Indians, 183
    Comes, Natalis, his interpretation of myth, 45
    Compact with gods, 112-113, 117-118
    Comparative mythology, 47
    Comparative religion, 13
    Comparative tables of myths, 144-157
    Complementary process in folklore, 233
    Con or Cun, thunder-god of the Collao of Peru, 309, 310
    Conservatism of childhood, 64
    Cook, Professor A. B., 89
    Copacahuana, fish-goddess of Peruvians, 125-126, 315
    Corn-sheaf, rites connected with, 128
    Corn-spirit, 113-114; distinction between, and god, 128;
       abode of, 129-130; as ruler of Underworld, 218
    Cosmic egg in Japanese myth, 168
    Cosmogony generally, _see_ Chapter VI, pp. 158 _et seq.; also_
       Creation myths
    Cosmogonies, relationship of, 187-193
    'Covent Garden' school of mythology, 75
    Cox, Rev. Sir G. W., advocates universality of the sun myth, 50;
       on relationship of mythology to folklore, 223
    Coyote, evil principle in Maidu
    Indian creation myth, 180
    Creation myths generally, _see_ Chapter VI, pp. 158 _et seq_.;
       Babylonian, 34-35, 165-166; table of, 146-147; Egyptian, 163-165;
       Chinese, 166-167; Jewish, 167; Japanese, 168; Iranian, 169;
       Celtic, 169;  Norse, 170; Mexican, 171-172; Peruvian, 173; American
       Indian, 174-186;  South American, 177-179; relationship of, 187-193;
       conclusions on, 192-194; of the Choctaw Indians, 306-307
    _Creation Myths of Primitive America_, Curtin's, 174
    Creuzer, on religious nature of myth, 46
    Cronus, and savage element in Greek myth, 18; as principle of time, 41;
       deposed by his sons, 206; shares sovereignty of Elysium with
       Rhadamanthus, 207
    _Cult of Othin_, Chadwick's, 198
    _Cultes, mythes, et religions_, Reinach's, 85, 109
    Culture-heroes, 119
    Culture myths, 149-150
    Çupay, Peruvian lord of the dead, 212, 218
    Cupid and Psyche, myth of, 143
    Curtin, Jeremiah, his _Creation Myths of Primitive America_
       quoted, 174-177
    Custom, reasons for its adoption inspired by tradition, 96
    Customs or rites, myths of, classified, 157
    Cythrawl, Celtic evil principle, 169-170

    D

    DAGDA, Irish deity, 295
    Dakota Indians, soul myth of, 212
    Dancing and myth, 238-239
    Danu, Celtic goddess, 295
    Darmesteter and meteorological myths, 51
    Dea Domnann, Celtic goddess, 295
    Dead, the, as gods, 42
    Death, myths of, 142, 150-151
    De Brosses, his explanation of myth, 45
    Delphi, Apolline garden at, 95
    Deluge myth, 36-37; classified, 153; Babylonian, 252-253;
       Araucanian, 310-311
    Demeter, myth of, 129-130, 288, 304
    Déné Indians--_see_ Tinneh
    Departmental gods, 116, 117, 118
    _De præstigiis dæmonum_, Wierus's, 232
    Deucalion, 178
    _Deutsche Mythologie_, 90
    _Deutsche Sagen_, Brothers Grimm's, 90
    Devetinus, a devil, 44
    Dharma, Indian god of duty, 256
    Diana, temple of, 78, 79; as moon-goddess, 127; Leland on, as
       goddess of old religion, 237
    Diana Nemorensis, priest of, 75
    Diancecht, Irish deity, 295
    _Dictionary of Mythology_, Spence's, 226
    Dindje Indians, dismemberment myth of, 146
    Dionysus, ivy cult of, 93, 94-95; and dismemberment myth, 143;
       the rites of, 242 _et seq._; Homer on, 258
    Dismemberment myths, 143; table of, 146
    Distribution of myths, 70
    Dragon, earth-, Great Mother evolved from, 98
    Dragon legend, Elliot Smith on, 97-98
    Dualism, 143-144
    Dualistic myths, table of, 145-146; in Tupi mythology, 184
    Duat, Egyptian Hades, 200-201
    _Du culte des dieux fétiches, ou parallèle de l'ancienne religion de
       l'Égypte avec la religion actuelle de Nigritie_, De Brosses's, 45
    Durga, Hindu goddess, 291
    Dyaus, Hindu Vedic deity, 289

    E

    EA, Babylonian deity, 126, 287; creation of, 166; in myth of
       Ut-Napishtim, 253, 254
    Eabani, type of primitive man in Gilgamesh epic, 250 _et seq._
    Earth-gods, 133-135
    Earth-Mother, 133; evolved from earth-dragon, 98
    Eclectic system in mythology, rationality of, 115
    Eddas, the, 260-262; the Younger or Prose, 260; the Elder or Poetic, 261
    Editing of myth, Peruvian example of, 16; Babylonian instance of, 34-35
    Egg, cosmic, in Indian myth, 162; in Egyptian myth, 165
    Egyptians, Plutarch on gods of, 15; animal-worship of, 45; dualistic
       myth of, 145; dismemberment myth among, 146; culture myth of, 149;
       soul myth of, 152; flood myth of, 153; place of reward of, 153;
       place of punishment of, 154, 200-201; myth of journey through
       Underworld of, 154; sun myth of, 155; moon myth of, 155; star myth
       of, 156; creation myths of, 163-165, 193; Paradise of, 198-200;
       mythic writings of, 245-248; general description of myths of, 285-286
    Elf-arrow, 27
    Elixir of life, and dragon, 97; as human blood, 97
    Elysium, 206-207
    Enigohatgea (Bad Mind), in Iroquois myth, 191
    Enigorio (Good Mind), in Iroquois myth, 191
    En-lil, Babylonian thunder-god, 124; creation of, 166, 287
    Eos, as dawn, 50
    Epona, Celtic (Gaulish) horse-goddess, 294
    Eponymous animals, 125
    Epunamun, Araucanian deity, 309-310
    Esaugetuh Emissee, Choctaw creative deity, 306-307
    Eskimos, soul myth of, 152; star myth of, 156
    Ethical influences upon myth, 217-218
    Euhemerus, his system, 42
    Evolution of gods, 102 _et seq._; associated with conception of
       spirit, 102-104
    _Evolution of the Dragon, The_, Elliot Smith's, 96
    "Execration upon Vulcan," Jonson's, 280

    F

    _Faerie Queene_, mythological references in Spenser's, 278
    Farnell, Lewis, his criticism of _The Golden Bough_, 81-83
    Father May, May Day character in Brie, 136
    Fauna, Latin rural deity, 135
    Faunus, Latin rural deity, 135
    Faust, Scottish, 228-233
    Fetish, definition of, 24 _et seq._; difference between god
       and, 25; development of, 104-108; air the element of, 106-107;
       work of, 108; sale of, 108; religious ideas connected with,
       lack force and permanence, 108; hunting, 116-117; sacrifice to, 116
    Fetishism, in Greece, 20; nature of, 24 _et seq._; and evolution
       of idea of god, 104, 107
    Fiji Islanders, death myth of, 151
    Finns, forest-god of, 76; dismemberment myth among, 146; creation myth
       of, 147; food of the dead myth of, 155
    Fire-gods, 130-131
    Fire myths, 139; preponderance of American examples in, 139;
       classification of, 152; myths of fire-stealing, 140, 149
    Fire-stick, 94
    Fisher beliefs of Scotland, 234
    Fish-gods of America, 314-315
    Fladdahuan (Hebrides), sacred stone in, 27
    Flint-gods, 26
    Flood myths, 36, 37; classified, 153; Babylonian, 252-253;
       Araucanian, 310-311
    Folklore, definition of, _12 et seq_.; and myth, 221 _et
       seq._; complementary process in, 233
    _Folklore as an Historical Science,_ Gomme's, 14 _n_.,
       15 _n_., 90, 221, 233
    Folk-tale, definition of, 12; appropriated by mythologists, 92;
       and history, 92; dependence of, upon custom and superstition, 93
    Fomorians, mythical Irish race of Titans, 294
    Food of the dead, 37; myths of, classified, 155; the eating of, 304
    Frazer, Sir J. G., definition of religion, 14; his _Golden Bough_,75;
       his method founded on that of Mannhardt, 75; his thesis, 75-77;
       criticism of, by Lang, 77-81
    Freya, Teutonic goddess, 262, 292
    Funeral practices of the Araucanian Indians, 313-314; of Pehuenche
       Indians, 314

    G

    _GÆA_, Greek earth-goddess, 18, 134, 283
    Gallinomero (Californian) Indians, place of punishment of, 154
    Gandharvas, Hindu deities, 291
    Ganesa, Hindu god, 291
    Garnega, St, in _Sir John Rowll's Cursing_, 44
    Garog, in _Sir John Rowll's Cursing,_ 44
    Garonhia, Iroquois Indian deity, 305
    Garuda, Hindu deity, 256
    Gaul, gods of, 294
    Gayatri, Hindu deity, 256
    Gayomart, Persian Adam, 169
    Gehenna, Hebrew Hell, 203-206
    Gelfion, in Scandinavian myth, 260
    Gender-terminations, effect of, in beliefs regarding natural
       phenomena, 52; anthropological school regards, as early survivals, 53
    _German Myths_, Mannhardt's, 53
    Germany, myths of, 90
    _Ghastly Priest, The_, Lang's essay on, 75-81
    Gilgamesh epic, 248-255; astrological aspect of, 254-255
    Glooskap, central figure of New England Indian legends, 270 _et seq._
    God, idea of, not animistic, 72; conception of soul not essential to
       idea of, 72; original idea of, as 'magnified non-natural man,' 73-74;
       idea of, developed from deified king, 97
    Gods, in animal shape, 19; dialectical misunderstandings alter
       nomenclature of, 30; grouping of, into a pantheon, 30; alien,
       identified with national, 34; as elements, 41-42; developed
       from the dead, 42; graves of, 42; names of, no guide to their
       nature, 52; of vegetation, 75; totems attached to, 109; compact
       with the, 112-113; of the chase, later secondary position of, 113;
       agricultural, 113, 129; departmental, 116, 117, 118; of the sea, 125;
       idea of, as dwelling in the sky, 219
    _Gods of Egypt, The_, Budge's, 165 _n._
    Gog, in _Sir John Rowll's Cursing_, 44
    Goibnin, Celtic smith-god, 263, 295-296
    Golden bough of myth situated in the Arician grove, 76; Virgil
       on, 77-78; Servius on, 77-78;
    Virgil's idea of, equated by Lang with mystic sword of romance, 77, 81;
       human sacrifice and, 78, Proserpine and, 78; temple of, 78; what is
       the? 80-81
    _Golden Bough, The_, Frazer's, 75 _et seq._; criticism of,
       by Lewis Farnell, 81
    Gomme, Sir G. Laurence, on traditional narrative, 91; his standpoint,
       90-92; on folklore and myth, 221-222; on restoration of myth, 233-234
    Gorgon's head, Shelley's poem on, 279
    Govannon, Celtic smith-god, 263.
       _See also_ Goibniu
    Græco-Roman myth, 282-285
    Grannos, Celtic (Gaulish) god, 294
    Great Mother, cowrie-shell as, 99
    Greeks, mysteries of, 19; early religion of, 93; myth of birth _of_
       gods of, 144; beast myth among, 144-145; dualistic myth of, 145;
       dismemberment myth of, 146; creation myth of, 146; origin of man myth
       among, 148; myth of origin of heroes among, 149; fire-stealing myth
       of, 149; culture myth of, 150; taboo myth of, 150; death myth of, 151;
       soul myth of, 152; flood myth of, 153; place of reward of, 153; place
       of punishment of, 154, 206-207; myth of journey through Underworld
       of, 154; food of the dead myth among, 155; sun myth of, 155; moon
       myth of, 156; star myth of, 156; myth to account for rites among, 157;
       ideas of Elysian fields among, 207
    Green George, St George's Day character in Carinthia, 136
    Grimm, J. L. K., 90
    Grimm, W. K., 90
    Grubb, W. Barbrook, on Lengua Indian creation myth, 180-181
    Guaracy, Tupi Indian sun-god, 184
    Guatemalans, place of punishment of, 154
    Gucumatz in Kiche _Popol Vuh_, 265
    Guecubu, demon of Araucanians of Chile, 310
    Gulcheman, Araucanian Indian place of the dead, 313
    Gwion Bach, British god, 296
    Gwydion, British deity, 296
    Gylfi in Scandinavian myth, 260

    H

    HADES, Greek, 206-207
    _Hahe_, Samoyede fetish, 105
    Haida, American Indian thunder-god, 123
    Hanuman, monkey king in Hindu myth, 289
    Hare or Hare-skin Indians--_see_ Tinneh
    Harog, Teutonic god or spirit, 45
    Harris, Dr Rendel, his view on myth, 93-95; Elliot Smith on views of, 96
    'Harrying of Hell,' myth of, 31
    Hartland, Sidney, his theories, 92-93
    Hathor, Egyptian goddess, 27
    "Hávamál" Norse mythological hook, 261
    Heaven, idea of, 195 _et seq._; localized in the sky, 218-219
    Hebrews, myth of origin of heroes of, 149; taboo myth of, 150;
       soul myth of, 152; fire myth of, 152; flood myth of, 153; creation
       myth of, 167; place of punishment of, 203-206
    Hecatæus of Miletus, his interpretation of myth, 42
    Hecate, infernal goddess, 278
    Heh, Egyptian sky-god, 165
    Hel, the Teutonic Hades, 196-197
    Hel, Teutonic goddess of death, 196, 197, 218
    Hell, idea of, 195 _et seq._; localized as beneath the
       earth, 219-220. _See also_ Places of punishment
    Hephæstus, as fire, 41, 130-131, 284
    Hera, Greek deity, as air, 41; mother of Hephæstus, 130;
    Homer on, 258; wife of Zeus, 283; described, 284
    Herman, G., explains myth by etymology, 48
    Hermes, Greek deity, 284
    Hermitten, Brazilian Indian hero-god, 183
    Hero myths, classified, 149. _See also_ Culture myths
    Herse, Greek deity, as the dew, 50
    Hindus, dualistic myths of, 145; creation myths of, 147; myth of
       origin of man among, 148; myths of origin of heroes among, 149;
       death myth of, 151; flood myth of, 153; sun myth of, 155; star
       myth of, 156, 159-160; gods of, 20, 289 _et seq._; mythical
       literature of 255 _et seq._
    History, its relation to myth, 15 _n._, 42, 58, 92
    _History of the Affairs of New Spain_, Sahagun's, 210, 264
    _History of the New World called America_, Payne's, 83, 84, 105
    Hiyeda No Ra Rae, reciter of Japanese myth and history, 259
    Homeric period, religion of, 258
    Horus, Egyptian god, 29-30, 122, 198-199; confused with Great
       Mother, 98; described, 286
    Hottentot beliefs, 71; dualistic myths, 145; death myth, 151
    Hun-Apu, Kiche god, adventures of, in _Popol Vuh_,265 _et seq._;
       overcomes giants, 266, 302
    Hunhun-Apu and Vukub-Hunapu, adventures of, in _Popol Vuh_, 266
       _et seq._
    Hunting gods, 116-117
    Hurakan, Kiche creative god, 172, 309; in _Popol Vuh_, 265
    Huron Indians, myth of the birth of gods among, 144; dualistic
       myth of, 145; myth of the origin of man of, 148; culture myth
       of, 150; death myth of, 151; moon myth of, 156; belief in
       after-life of, 212
    "Hymn to Proserpine," Swinburne's, mythical references in, 280

    I

    IKANAM, Chinook creator, 301
    Ikenuwakcom, Indian thunder-god, 302
    _Iliad_, the, 20, 257-259
    Imagination, theory of the universal resemblance of human, 93
    Incas (Peru), dualistic myth of, 145; creation myth of, 147
    Indians of Nicaragua, their mode of sacrifice, 107
    Indra, Hindu god, myth of, 20; as a quail, 123; birth of, 160;
       mentioned, 130, 256, 289, 291
    Inniskea, Irish island, sacred stone of, 27
    Inspiration, value of, in mythic elucidation, 293
    _Introduction to Mythology and Folklore,_ Cox's, 50, 133
    _Introduction to the History of Religion,_ Jevons', 86
    Ioi, sister of Blue Jay, in Chinook myth, 301
    Ipurina Indians, their belief about Orion, 141
    Iranian creation myth, 169
    Irin Magé deity of Tupi-Guarani Indians, 139, 183
    Iris, Xenophanes on, 41
    Irish gods, 294 _et seq._; myths, 295 _et seq._
    Iron, spirits' dread of, 234-235
    Iroquois Indians, dualistic myth of, 146; creation myth
       of, 147, 179-180; myth of the Two Brothers of, 191;
       belief in after-life of, 212
    Ishtar and Tammuz, myth of, 251; described, 288
    Isis, Egyptian goddess, 129-130, 246, 286
    Italapas, coyote-god of the Chinook Indians, 301, 303
    Italy, modern magic in, 236-237
    Ivy, as sacred plant, 94-95
    Izanagi, Japanese creative god, 168
    Izanami, Japanese creative goddess, 168

    J

    JACK-IN-THE-GREEN, 137
    Jacy, Tupi Indian moon-god, 184
    Japanese, creation myth of, 147, 168, 194; culture myth of, 150;
       place of punishment of, 154; adventures in Underworld of, 155;
       mythic literature, 259-260
    Jevons, Dr F. B., on myths, 86; his _Introduction to the History of_
       _Religion_, 86
    Joskeha (White One), Huron Indian deity, 37, 191
    Jötunn, Norse giants alluded to in the "Völuspá," 261, 293
    "Journey of Skirnir, The," Norse mythic book, 261
    Juno, 80; as mother of Vulcan, 279
    Jupiter, myth of, as swan, 28; equated with Zeus and Tyr, 48;
       as thunder-deity, 124; Leland on invocation to, 237; in Shelley's
       _Prometheus Unbound_, 276; in Milton's _Paradise Lost_, 277;
       Spenser on, 278
    Jurupari, Brazilian Indian deity, 192

    K

    KALI, Hindu goddess, variant of Durga, 291
    Kame, Carib Indian hero-god, 182
    Karaya Indians, star myth of, 140; their myth about Milky Way, 141;
       their myth about Orion, 141
    Karma, Hindu deity, 159
    Kartikeya, Hindu god, 256
    Karu, hero-god of the Mundruku Indians, 183
    Keri, hero-god of Bakairi (Carib) Indians, 182
    Keridwen, British goddess, 227, 296
    Khepera, Egyptian creative deity, 163; Osiris takes form of, 164
    Khnemu, creative acts of, 165
    Kiche Indians (Guatemala), creation myth of, 147, 172, 264-265; their
       myth of origin of man, 148; their myth of origin of heroes, 149,
       265-268; Underworld of, 212; mythical history of, 268 _et seq._
    _Kinder- und Hausmärchen_, Brothers Grimm's, 90
    King, as tree-spirit, 76
    _King of Tars, The_, English romance, mythical references in, 43
    Kingu, Babylonian monster, 35
    Klaatsch, Dr, on Australians, 37
    Kneph, Egyptian god, 298
    Kodoyanpe, Maidu Indian creation myth of, 180
    _Kojiki_, Japanese mythic book, 259
    Krimen, Tupi-Guarai Indian hero, 183
    Krishna, Hindu deity, cult of, 257
    Kuhn, and meteorological myths, 51
    Kuni-toko-tachi, Japanese god, 168
    Kuvera, Hindu deity, 256

    L

    LADAKS of Tibet, place of punishment of, 154
    Laestrin, his interpretation of myths from nebular phenomena, 51
    Lafitau, his interpretation of Indian totems, 29; indicates savage
       element in myth, 45
    Lang, Andrew, on solar myth, 54; on Spencer's theories, 60; works
       of, 66 _et seq._; his position, 66; distrust of Müller's
       conclusions, 66; on 'disease of language,' 67; on the sacred and
       frivolous in religion, 67; his conception of myth, arguments
       against, 69; his general thesis, 69; his theory attached to
       evolutionary systems, 70; his three stages of myth, 70; his
       _Modern Mythology_,71-72; his anti-animistic hypothesis, 72-73;
       his _Making of Religion_, 72-74; his 'All-Father' theory and
       sky-gods, 74 _n_.; his criticism of Frazer's _Golden
       Bough_, 75-77
    Language and formation of myth, 56
    Lares, the, 237
    Latin earth-gods, 134
    Laurel as sacred plant, 94
    "Lay of Hoarbeard," Norse mythic book, 261-262
    Leda, Roman goddess, 28
    Legend, definition of, 12; Gomme's definition of, 90
    _Legend of Perseus, The_, Hartland's, 93
    Leland, C. G., his _Aradia_, 236-237; his _Kuloshap the
       Master_, 270-271
    Lengua Indians of South America, creation myth of, 180-181; ideas
       of the after-life among, 214-215
    Leto, mother of Apollo, as darkness, 121
    Life-index, the, 247 _n._
    Lightning spear, the, 124
    Lithuanian May Day festival, 136
    Little May Rose, Alsatian May Day character, 136
    Little Leaf Man, Thuringian May Day character, 136
    Llud Llaw Ereint, British deity, 295
    Loki, Scandinavian deity, 131, 292-293; as fire-god, 293
    Lox, Algonquin deity, 143
    Lug, Irish god, 295
    Lunar gods, 126-127; their qualities, 127; connexion with water, 127

    M

    _Mabinogion_, Welsh mythical book, 262
    Macculloch, Dean, on folk-tale and myth, 222-223
    Macha, Irish war-goddess, 296
    McLennan, J. F., his writings on totemism, 59
    Madagascar, dismemberment myth of natives of, 146
    _Magic and Religion_, Lang's, 75
    Magic, in modern Italy, 236-237
    _Mahabharata_, the, 257
    Maire, Tupi-Guarani deity, 183
    Maize-gods of Mexico, 299
    _Making of Religion, The_, Lang's, 66, 71, 72
    Makonaima, Arawak creative god, 177-178
    Malays, soul myth of, 152
    Malsum the Wolf in North American Indian legend, 271-272
    Mama Allpa, Peruvian earth-goddess, 134
    Mama-cocha ('Mother Sea'), Peruvian goddess, 125, 314
    Mama Nono, Carib Earth-Mother, 134, 182
    Man, primitive, irrationality of, 17; his thirst for knowledge, 21;
       'magnified non-natural,' regarded as earliest type of god by
       Lang, 73-74; imagination of, 93; not an inventive animal, 96;
       myths of origin of, classified, 148; creation of, _see_