CHAPTER VIII

FOLKLORE AND MYTH


Folk-tale, and indeed folklore of every description, is worthy of
study by the student of myth; for not only will he often find that
the principles which govern it are identical with those of myth, but
he will glean much knowledge of methods from those who work this
neighbouring row in the vineyard of tradition.

Some people regard mythology as merely a branch of wider study of
folklore, but in the definitions in the first the chapter of this
work we called the former "the study of a primitive or early form of
religion while it was a living faith," and folklore "the study of
primitive religion and customs still practised." Let us now examine the
writings of the great authorities on folklore and see what they have to
say upon this interesting subject.

Sir George Gomme, in his _Folklore as an Historical Science_ (p. 148),
says: "The folk-tale is secondary to the myth. It is the primitive
myth dislodged from its primitive place. It has become a part of the
life of the people independently of its primary form and object and
in a different sense. The mythic or historic fact has been obscured,
or has been displaced from the life of the people. But the myth lives
on through the affections of the people for the traditions of their
older life. They love to tell the story which their ancestors revered
as myth, even though it has lost its oldest and most impressive
significance. The artistic setting of it, born of the years through
which it has lived, fashioned by the minds which have handed it down
and embellished it through the generations, has helped its life. It
has become the fairy tale or the nursery tale. It is told to grown-up
people, not as belief, but as what was once believed; it is told to
children, not to men; to lovers of romance, not to worshippers of the
unknown; it is told by mothers and nurses, not by philosophers or
priestesses; in the gathering ground of home life, or in the nursery,
not in the hushed sanctity of a great wonder."

Coming down to hard-and-fast definition, Sir George Gomme says: "The
myth belongs to the most primitive stages of human thought, and is the
recognisable explanation of some natural phenomenon, some forgotten or
unknown object of human origin, or some event of lasting influence; the
folk-tale is a survival preserved amidst culture-surroundings of a more
advanced stage, and deals with events and ideas of primitive times in
terms of the experience or of episodes in the lives of unnamed human
beings; the legend belongs to an historical personage, locality, or
event. These are new definitions, and are suggested in order to give
some sort of exactness to the terms in use. All these terms--myth,
folk-tale, and legend--are now used indiscriminately with no particular
definiteness. The possession of three such distinct terms forms an
asset which should be put to its full use, and this cannot be done
until we agree upon a definite meaning for each."

Dean Macculloch in his valuable _Childhood of Fiction_ (p. 432) says:
"The mythological school represented by the writings of De Gubernatis,
Cox, Max Müller, and others, have found the origin of folk-tales in
the myths of the Aryan race. Folk-tales are the detritus of such Aryan
myths, when the meaning of the myths themselves was long forgotten. The
whole theory falls to the ground when it is discovered that exactly
similar stories are told by non-Aryan races, and that the incidents
of such stories are easily explainable by actual customs and ideas
of savages and primitive folk everywhere. On the other hand, many
folk-tales have originated as myths explanatory of existing customs,
or by way of explaining phenomena which seemed to depend on these
customs, and when the customs fell into desuetude the myths remained
as folk-tales. The incidents of existing folk-tales, again, have
frequently been embodied in mythologies--Greek, Celtic, Japanese.
Thus there is throughout an intimate connection between mythology and
folk-tales, though not of the kind which De Gubernatis and others
imagined." Again: "Folk-tales have a vital connection with myth and
saga, though the connection is far from that insisted on by Max Müller
and the mythological school. Still another link of connection may be
perceived in many European _Märchen_, where the gods and mythic figures
of an earlier faith have been metamorphosed into ogres, witches,
and fairies, and where the dimly-remembered customs of that earlier
religion have supplied incidents for the story inventor of a later age."

In a note to his _Mythology and Folklore_ (p. 7) Sir George Cox
furnishes the philological view of the relation of mythology to
folklore: "It is, perhaps, open to doubt whether the terms mythology
and folklore are likely to retain permanently their present relative
meanings. Neither term is altogether satisfactory; but the distinction
between tales susceptible of philological analysis and those which are
not must nevertheless be carefully maintained, as indispensable to
any scientific treatment of the subject. In his introduction to _The
Science of Language_ Mr Sayce admits 'that it is often difficult to
draw the line between folklore and mythology, to define exactly where
the one ends and the other begins, and there are many instances in
which the two terms overlap one another.'"

It is demonstrable that the author of the term folklore, the late Mr
W. J. Thorns (1803-1885), deputy librarian of the House of Lords and
founder and editor of _Notes and Queries,_ did not intend it to include
mythology. He said that he intended it to designate "that department
of the study of antiquities and archæology which embraces everything
relating to ancient observances and customs, to the notions, beliefs,
traditions, superstitions, and prejudices of the common people." It
will be remarked that this definition does not include "the study of a
primitive or early religion _while it was a living faith_."

But the study of folklore is, as has been said, greatly capable of
assisting the student of myth. A Roman sword or a Saxon cup exhumed
after many centuries are no less the blade once wielded by a Roman,
or the vessel from which the Saxon imbibed, solely because centuries
have elapsed since they were in use by their original owners, nor do
they fail to yield us information concerning the lives and habits of
those to whom they belonged. In the same manner a story or custom long
embedded in the earth of superstition is no less capable of throwing
light upon ancient religion and thus upon ancient myth. Many folk-tales
are merely 'broken-down' myths, but by no means _all_ folk-tales are
so, as numbers were invented for purposes of amusement and partake of
the character of fiction.

As an instance of the manner in which folk-belief can influence true
myth we have only to look at the tales of the Knights of the Round
Table. Arthur, Merlin, and many of the lesser figures of the galaxy
of Camelot are in reality British Celtic deities metamorphosed into
medieval knights. A similar instance, perhaps of added interest because
of its novelty, has recently come under the notice of the writer.