the Welsh and Irish tales. One asserts that the _mabinogi_ tales were
learned by the Welsh Celts from the earlier Gaelic population of Wales,
while another, equally well supported, suggests that the Irish were
the borrowers. This last theory is rendered untenable by the fact that
the _Mabinogion_ has no affinities with the predominant Ulster cycle
of the ninth century (in which the tales are alleged to have been
borrowed), but rather with the older cycle of the Tuatha de Danann,
regarded even in the tenth century as of old mythological origin. A
third and more probable explanation is that both Welsh and Irish tales
belong to a period when those branches of the Celtic family were as yet
unseparated. Similarities of detail may of course result from later
borrowings, but these belong to a different category.

As literature the tales of the _Mabinogion_ far surpass any
contemporary productions, whether English, French, or German. Their
imaginative glamour leaves them without a rival in the literary annals
of any period.

SOURCES OF MEXICAN MYTH

The principal sources of Mexican myth are the writings and observations
of the Spanish _Conquistadores_ in the train of the conquering Cortéz
and his immediate successors in the country. The most important
document for the study of Mexican mythology is the work of Father
Bernardino Sahagun, a monk who flourished in Mexico in the sixteenth
century.

His great work, the _History of the Affairs of New Spain_ (as Mexico
was then called), is the result of years of close study of the people
and their folklore. Not content to take at second-hand mythological or
other details reported to him, he submitted them to a committee of old
and experienced Mexicans, thoroughly acquainted with the antiquities
of their country. After this committee had approved of the inclusion
of the item in his manuscript, Sahagun consulted still other native
authorities, so that his book remains our chief and most reliable
source of information upon Mexican myth. Even so, the account he gives
us of the various deities, their characteristics and attributes, is
very brief and not a little disappointing in its lack of detail,
occupying as it does only about forty pages of print. The second book
deals with calendars and festivals, and in this he supplements in some
degree the information regarding the divine beings treated of in the
first book. The third book is the most valuable to us, for it provides
us with a number of myths relating to the Mexican gods. It acquaints us
with the circumstances of the birth of Uitzilopochtli, of the manner
in which Ouetzalcoatl, god of the Toltecs, was half lured, half driven
from the land by Tezcatlipoca, of how the inhabitants of Tollan, the
city of the Toltecs, were decimated by the malign necromancy of the
same deity working on behalf of less civilized tribes. The remaining
books are occupied with the astrology and customs of the Mexicans.

Torquemada, a later priest, wrote a similar work which, however,
was based upon the matter contained in Sahagun's treatise, still in
manuscript when the former wrote.

A magnificent example of an aboriginal work teeming with mythical
allusions is the _Popol Vuh_, or "Collection of Written Leaves," of
the Kiche Indians of Guatemala, already alluded to in the chapter on
cosmogony. The history of the discovery of the _Popol Vuh_ has already
been related, and it only remains to furnish some account of its
contents. It embraces the creation story of that people, the tale of
the downfall of the earth-giants, the wanderings of the Kiche race, the
adventures of certain hero-gods in the Underworld, and Kiche history
up to a fairly late date. It is divided into four books, the first of
which is the story of the creation and what occurred shortly after.
The universe was dark and in a chaotic condition when the god Hurakan,
the 'Heart of Heaven,' passed over the abyss, and called out "Earth!"
At the word the solid land appeared. Hurakan then summoned the other
gods to consultation regarding their future course of action, among
them Gucumatz and the mother- and father-gods, primeval deities who are
also called 'the Serpents covered with Green Feathers.' The council
of deities agreed that animals should be created, and this was done.
They next resolved to make man, and fashioned certain mannikins out of
wood; but these failed to pay them reverence, and in great wrath the
gods sent a mighty flood accompanied by a resinous rain upon them. The
wretched mannikins, taken unawares, were overwhelmed and nearly all
destroyed; only a few succeeded in getting away, and their descendants
to-day, we are told, are the little monkeys which infest the forests.

After this unlucky experiment the gods turned their attention to
another denizen of the earth, called Vukub-Cakix, a name to be
translated 'the great Macaw.' He seems to have been a primitive sun-
or moon-god, but he offended the pantheon of Heaven by his overweening
pride, which at last became so offensive to the gods that they resolved
to destroy him. He had indeed a person to be proud of, for his teeth
were of emerald and he shone resplendent with gold and silver. He had
two sons, Zipacna and Cabrakan, who were earth-giants like the Titans
of Greek myth. Like their father, they aroused the enmity of the gods,
who dispatched to earth the heavenly brothers Hun-Apu and Xbalanque to
bring about the downfall of these blasphemous boasters.

Vukub-Cakix noticed them alight in the tapal-tree, which he regarded as
his own especial property. They began to pluck its fruit, and this so
irritated him that he was about to attack them when Hun-Apu discharged
a dart from a blowpipe at him, striking him in the mouth and causing
him to topple to the earth from the tree into which he had climbed. He
succeeded, however, in tearing off Hun-Apu's arm, which he hung over
his fire at home. This use of 'sympathetic magic,' of course, caused
the hero-god great pain, so in order to recover the arm he begged the
assistance of two magicians, probably the father- and mother-gods.
These disguised themselves as physicians, and pretending that they
desired to cure Vukub-Cakix, extracted his teeth. With the teeth his
power departed from him and he died. The giant's wife had been basting
Hun-Apu's arm at the fire, but seizing it the hero-god gave it to the
magicians, who replaced it upon his shoulder. Zipacna and Cabrakan, who
personified the earthquake, were next reduced. Four hundred young men
(the stars) requested Zipacna to dig the foundations of a new house for
them, intending to bury him alive while occupied in the task; but when
they had erected their dwelling above him he reared his mighty bulk
beneath it and shot them into Heaven, where they have since remained.
Zipacna, however, tumbling down a ravine, was killed by Hun-Apu and
Xbalanque by having a mountain thrown upon him. Cabrakan was next
destroyed, partly by poison and partly by overstraining himself by
throwing mountains at the instigation of the heavenly brothers.

The father- and mother-gods had two sons, Hunhun-Apu and Vukub-Hunapu,
who were much devoted to the game of ball, the national pastime of
the peoples of Mexico and Central America. The noise they made while
playing attracted the attention of the lords of the Underworld, who
sent them a challenge to a game. The challenge was accepted, and
Hunhun-Apu and his brother took their way to the grim territory
of Xibalba, where they were received by its rulers Hun-Came and
Vukub-Came. It would seem from what follows that the condition of
affairs in Xibalba closely resembled those of some of the secret
societies still in vogue among the Indians all over North America.
The brothers were subjected to numerous tests, at all of which they
failed, and they were then sacrificed by having their hearts torn out.
Hunhun-Apu's head was placed among the branches of a tree from which
calabashes sprouted in such a manner that the gory trophy could not
be distinguished from the fruit. Although the inhabitants of Xibalba
were forbidden to approach the tree, Xquiq, daughter of one of its
high officials, did so. By magical influence Hunhun-Apu became the
father of her children, and when her father discovered her disgrace she
was given up to the owls, the messengers of Xibalba, to be slain. She
bribed them, and succeeded in escaping to the earth, where she sought
out the dwelling of Xmucane, mother of Hunhun-Apu, and gave birth to
Hun-Apu and Xbalanque, who overthrew Vukub-Cakix. These children were
persecuted by two other sons of Hunhun-Apu, also living with their
grandmother, but by magic they turned their tormentors into monkeys,
and thus rid themselves of them. By the aid of a rat they discovered a
set of implements for the ball game which had belonged to their father
and uncle, and they engaged in the pastime. The lords of Xibalba,
hearing them at play, once more sent a challenge, which was again
accepted. But, more astute than their forbears, ere they reached the
confines of Xibalba, Hun-Apu created from a hair on his leg a small
insect called Xan. This, preceding the brothers, found the lords of
Xibalba sitting among a number of wooden figures. It bit them, and
when they spoke to one another concerning the insect's onslaught, the
brothers discovered their names. When Hun-Apu and Xbalanque arrived
they were thus enabled to salute each of the Xibalbans by his name, and
they passed all the other tests successfully. They were shut up for
the night in the House of Gloom with certain torches which they must
keep alight all night, but they affixed red feathers to the torches,
and thus cheated the Xibalbans. In the House of Bats, Camazotz, the
chief of the bats, cut off the head of Hun-Apu, but a friendly tortoise
passing by affixed itself to the body in place of the head. Xbalanque
then played ball with the Xibalbans, and hit the ball close to the
ring, whereupon a rabbit concealed near it leaped out and ran away. The
Xibalbans, taking it for the ball, pursued it, and Xbalanque, observing
Hun-Apu's head suspended in the ball court, hung up the tortoise in its
place, and affixed Hun-Apu's head to his body and resuscitated him.
The hero-gods then sacrificed themselves, but returned after a space
of five days. Disguised as magicians, they performed many miracles,
resurrecting people, burning houses and restoring them again, and so
forth. Hun-Came and Vukub-Came considered the resurrection trick so
clever that they desired to have it performed upon themselves. The
heroes sacrificed them, but did not revive them. This completed the
subjugation of Xibalba, the people being reduced to a subservient
condition. The aristocratic privilege of the ball game was withdrawn
from them, and they were doomed to keep bees and make pots and perform
suchlike ignoble work. _Post-mortem_ honours were paid to Hunhun-Apu
and Vukub-Hunapu, who became the sun and moon respectively, while the
four hundred youths slain by Zipacna remained in Heaven as the stars.

The _Popol Vuh_ further relates the mythical history of the Kiche
tribes. Four men, Balam-quitze, Balam-agab, Mahucutah, and Iqibalam,
were created by the gods, and the first three were the ancestors of
the three Kiche divisions, Cavek-, Nihaib-, and Ahau-Kiches, the
fourth being without descendants. These were not alone in the world,
as the Yaqui, or Mexicans, also existed, and other cognate tribes
dwelt to the east. The ancestors of the Kiches had been formed too
perfectly by the gods, who, alarmed at their omniscience, cast a veil
over their intellects. Wives were created for them, but they dwelt
in darkness, without sunlight or the comforts of religion. Setting
out on a wandering life, they came to Tulan-Zuiva, where each tribe
received a special god to itself. The want of fire was felt, and the
god Tohil, a thunder-deity, struck his flint-shod feet together and
produced it as required. The other tribes requested the Kiches to
give them fire, but a bat messenger from Xibalba advised them against
acquiescence unless the recipients should consent to be united with
their god "beneath their girdles and beneath their armpits." All agreed
except the Kakchiquel, whose bat-god purloined the seeds of fire. The
riddle-like condition portended that the tribes which consented should
give up their hearts for sacrifice. A general migration followed, the
Kiches as well as other tribes journeying to Guatemala, where on a
mountain-side they sat down to await the dawn. The morning star swam
into view, followed by the great luminary of day, and at sight of it
the tribal gods were turned into stone. The original Kiche ancestors
too withdrew in hermit-like seclusion from mankind, being seen only at
intervals in the wild places in converse with the gods. Human sacrifice
was instituted, and wars with neighbouring peoples began to be waged.
A great attack was made upon the Kiches, who dwelt in a settlement on
the mountains surrounded by a stockade, the object evidently being to
capture the Kiche gods; but the attack was repulsed with great loss to
the invaders. The death day of the first Kiche men was now at hand,
and calling the people together they sang the song with which they had
first greeted the rising of the new-found sun. They then vanished,
leaving behind them a bundle which was afterward known as the 'majesty
enveloped,' and was probably of the same type as the medicine bundles
of the North American Indians.

From this point the _Popol Vuh_ begins to shade into history. The sons
of the first men, desirous of wielding the power possessed by their
fathers, set out on a pilgrimage to the east, to obtain the insignia
of royalty. The Kiches became more civilized, stone-built cities were
raised, and a definite political existence arose. A policy of conquest
was embarked upon, and many of the neighbouring tribes were conquered
and subjected to Kiche rule. What follows probably contains but little
of the matter of myth, and we may conclude that for the most part it is
traditional history.

As has been said, it would be difficult to over-estimate the importance
to mythology in general, and to American myth in particular, of such
a document as the _Popol Vuh_. When we can be sure of its aboriginal
character, and that is not seldom, American myth has the greatest
importance because of its isolated nature. When we first encounter it,
it is untouched by European or Asiatic myth, and this makes it of the
greatest value for comparison. If we can parallel an old-world myth
with a well-authenticated American example, then we have proved the
universal nature of the principles of mythic evolution. Everything
relating to the _Popol Vuh_ proves to the hilt its genuine aboriginal
character; and this being so, it is of the greatest assistance to
mythologists. Unfortunately, no adequate translation exists. The Kiche
language in which it was written is most difficult, and for the
present we have to rely on the Spanish version of Ximenez and the
French translation of the original by the Abbé Brasseur de Bourbourg.
However, more than one translation is either meditated or in course
of completion; and there is an abridgement in English by the present
writer. An English translation of the whole appeared in an American
magazine entitled _The Word_ during 1906 and 1907, from the pen of
Dr Kenneth Sylvan Guthrie, but whether from the Spanish or original
Kiche, I do not know. It is, moreover, couched in Scriptural language,
and such a treatment assists the vulgar error that the _Popol Vuh_ is
merely a native travesty of portions of the Old Testament.

AMERICAN INDIAN MYTHIC WRITINGS

The red man of North America also has his epics. Charles Godfrey
Leland, in the introduction to his book _Kuloskap_ [or Glooscap] _the
Master_, says: "Very few persons are aware that there has perished
or is rapidly perishing among the Red Indians of North America far
more poetry than was ever written by all the white inhabitants, and
that this native verse is often of a very high order, for the Indian
sagas, or legends, or traditions, were in fact all songs.... After I
had published my legends, however, I was made aware by Louis Mitchell,
a Passamaquoddy Indian, who had been in the Legislature of Maine, and
had collected and written out for me, with strictest literalness, a
great number of manuscripts, that there were in existence certain
narratives and poems quite different in kind from anything which I
possessed. Among the former was a history of the Passamaquoddy tribe,
illustrated with numerous designs of the Birch-bark school of art,
which I transferred to my friend the late Dr D. G. Brinton as its
most appropriate possessor. Three of the poems Mitchell wrote out for
me in exact, though often quite ungrammatical language, which was so
close to the original that the metres betrayed themselves throughout.
I regret that, though I had certainly acquired some knowledge of
'Indian,' it was, as a Passamaquoddy friend one day amiably observed,
'only baby Injun now, grow bigger some day like Mikumwess s'posin'
you want to,' in reference to a small goblin who is believed to have
the power of increasing his stature at will. However, I with great
care put the Mitchell Anglo-Algonkin into English metre, having been
impressed, while at the work, with the exquisitely naive and fresh
character of the original, which, while it often reminded me of Norse
poetry, in many passages had strictly a life and beauty of its own."
Leland tells how he began to correspond on the subject with Professor
J. Dyneley Prince of Columbia University, translator of the celebrated
Algonquin _Wampum Record_, recited annually in bygone days at the
council of the tribes. He continues: "Few indeed and far between are
those who ever suspected till of late years that every hill and dale
in New England had its romantic legend, its beautiful poem, or its
marvellous myth--the latter equal in conception and form to those of
the Edda--or that a vast collection of these traditions still survives
in perfect preservation among the few remaining Indians of New England
and the North-east Coast, or the _Wabano_. This assertion is, I trust,
verified by what is given in the Micmac tales by the late Rev. S.
Rand, the collection made by Miss Abbey Alger, of Boston, and my own
_Algonquin Legends of New England_, which I, _sit venia_, may mention
was the first to appear of the series. And I venture to say from the
deepest conviction that it will be no small occasion of astonishment
and chagrin, a hundred years hence, when the last Algonkin Indian of
the _Wabano_ shall have passed away, that so few among our literary
or cultured folk cared enough to collect this connected aboriginal
literature."

The lore of the New England Indians centres chiefly round the figure
of Kuloskap, or Glooscap, as good an example of Matthew Arnold's
'magnified non-natural man,' so beloved of Lang, as can well be
imagined. A detailed account of this being and his adventures will be
found in the volume of this series which deals with the North American
Indians. His brother Malsum the Wolf probably typifies the power of
evil. In the myths collected by Messrs Leland and Prince we first
read of the birth of Glooscap and the death of Malsum the Wolf, his
twin brother. Malsum, having slain his mother, desired also to slay
Glooscap, but a supernatural power guarded him, and Malsum's attempts
were frustrated. He asked Glooscap several times what would slay him,
but Glooscap invariably told him a falsehood, until at length, sitting
by a stream, Glooscap muttered that a rush would cause his death.
The beaver, hearing this, acquainted Malsum of the fact and asked as
a reward to be provided with wings; but the Evil One, amused at his
request, insulted him so outrageously that at last he betook himself
to Glooscap, who, plucking a fern, sought Malsum, and having found him
smote him with it so that he fell dead.

The creation of man and the animals is then sung of. First were born
the fairies of the forest, the elves, the little men who dwelt in rocks
(the red man's equivalent for elves and gnomes), the small animistic
spirits which swarm through nature, lending her life and animation and
filling up her crevices. Then Glooscap took his bow and arrows and
shot at an ash-tree. From the hole made by the arrow men came forth,
the first of the human kind. Then Glooscap created animals. At first
he made them of colossal size, but seeing that they were too strong he
made them smaller and weaker in order that man might be able to hunt
them. In the beginning the beaver was the enemy of Glooscap, having on
one occasion disobeyed the Master by drinking from a stream which was
taboo. The god tore up a rock and hurled it at him from a distance of
many leagues, but the beaver dodged it and ran into a mountain, where
he has remained unto this day.

The third part of the epic of Glooscap tells how at one time the
rattlesnakes were Indians. When the great flood was coming Glooscap
gave them fair warning of it, but they answered that they did not care,
and mocked him, shaking their rattles, which were made of turtle-shell
containing small pebbles. The rain began to fall, the thunder roared,
and the lightning flashed, but still the rattlesnakes jeered. Glooscap
had not the heart to drown them, but he changed them all to serpent
form. Glooscap then named the animals and found that man was the lord
of all. He was extremely kind to the creatures he had made. To begin
with all was in darkness, so that men could not even see to slay their
enemies. But Glooscap brought light into the world, and taught mankind
the arts of life, the noble art of hunting, how to build huts and
canoes, how to net the salmon and to make weapons. He showed to men the
hidden virtues of plants and roots and blossoms, taught them the names
of the stars, and acted throughout as a beneficent father to them.

By and by Glooscap withdrew himself from the haunts of men, yet he did
not quit the earth for many years, but dwelt in a remote and almost
inaccessible place. And he made it known to men that whoever should
find him might have one wish granted, whatever that wish might be. For
this reason many Indians sought his abode, though the way was long and
arduous, and not all who set out reached their destination. Some of the
wishers were wise and some foolish. The foolish wishers, or those who
disobeyed the Master, found that the fulfilment of their wishes brought
them no good, but the gifts which the wise ones received were generous
in the extreme. This befell three Indians who visited the abode of
Glooscap. One was a simple, honest Indian, who desired to excel in
the chase. Another was a vain youth who wished to win the hearts of
many maidens. The third was a buffoon whose only care was to create
laughter; he therefore desired the power to utter an unusual cry, known
to sorcerers in old time, which gladdened the hearts of all who heard
it. The first received a magic pipe which would attract all animals
to his nets, and the fulfilment of his wish brought him wealth and
content. The second received a bag, tightly tied, which he was warned
not to open till he reached home. Curiosity overcame him, however, and
on the homeward journey he opened the bag, wherefrom issued a host of
witches in the form of beautiful women, who strangled him with their
embraces. The third received a magic root, and Glooscap warned him
not to eat it till he reached his dwelling. He likewise disobeyed the
command, and found himself gifted with the power to utter the magic
cry; but, to his discomfiture, he could not always restrain it. The
people of the town, at first delighted with the sound, soon tired of
it, and avoided him who uttered it. This so preyed upon his mind that
he betook himself to the woods and committed suicide.

The fourth portion of the epic contains Glooscap's adventures with
the beasts--the loons, beaver, serpent, turtle, frog, and eagle.
Very curious are the tales which describe the origin of the turtle,
Glooscap's uncle, or relate how that crafty being endeavoured to
overthrow the Master and make himself lord over beasts and men; and
those that paint in picturesque language the binding of the Great
Eagle, the Bird-who-blows-the-winds. Many of these stories are
legendary, and purport to explain the existence of certain islands,
streams, and other geographical features, as well as the physical
structure and peculiarities of various animals. Thus the blowing of a
whale is ingeniously explained by the fact that Glooscap at one time
gave the animal a pipe and tobacco; it is smoking!

The fifth part of the epic treats mainly of the god's encounter with
witches and sorcerers, and of his final departure from the earth.
Toward the close of the poem a beautiful nature myth recounts how
Glooscap found the Summer. Long years ago the deity travelled northward
till he came to the lodge of the giant Winter. He entered and sat
down, and his host told him tales of enchantment which cast him into
a death-like sleep. Six months elapsed ere he awoke and proceeded
homeward. With every step the air grew warmer, the earth greener and
more beautiful. At length he came to a shady dell, where fairies were
dancing joyfully, and, seizing their queen, whose name was Summer,
he hid her in his bosom. Then he retraced his steps northward. The
giant Winter still sat in his lodge, and at the coming of Glooscap he
determined to throw the deity into a sleep that would last for ever;
but this time the hidden presence of Summer spoiled the enchantments;
tears of melting ice ran down the cheeks of the giant, and soon both he
and his dwelling were changed to water, while signs of returning life
and vegetation were everywhere apparent. Once more Glooscap turned his
face southward, but the summer-elf he left behind him in the northern
country.

Finally Glooscap abandoned the world, because of the evil that was in
it. For long years he bore with the sinful ways of man, for whom he
had cleared the land of evil demons and monsters, but at length his
patience was exhausted. He made a great farewell feast, and afterward
sailed away in his great canoe. And now he dwells in a splendid
wigwam, continually making arrows. When the lodge is full of them he
will make war on all mankind, and the world will pass away.

MYTH IN ENGLISH POETRY

How have the written myths we have just reviewed reflected upon the
literature of our own race? Poetry and mythology are connected by an
indissoluble bond. By mythology phenomena are endowed by the barbarian
mind with all the attributes of life and reason. The process is clearly
a poetical one, and by it the savage intelligence is brought very near
to nature. Poetry, in some of its earliest and perhaps purest forms,
is the direct outcome of a series of natural impressions on the mind;
and both poetry and mythology are thus emanations from nature. In a
barbarian state of society the one great theme of poetry is the story
of the divine beings who sway the destinies of humankind. Thus the
odes of Pindar, the epics of the _Iliad_ and _Odyssey_ of Homer, the
sagas of the early Norsemen, the _Nihongi_ of Japan, the tribal lays
of the American Indians, all celebrate the triumphs, loves, wars, and
destinies of the gods of these several peoples.

It has often been thought peculiar that mythology should have continued
to be the theme of poetry many centuries after the faiths of Greece
and Rome had become extinct. This was because at the period of the
Renaissance, or rebirth of learning and art, in the later Middle Ages,
it became the fashion for literary men to model their writings upon the
classical authors of antiquity. This custom was nowhere more powerful
than in France, whence it was borrowed by English authors, who began to
make large use of classical and mythological allusions in the wondrous
era of letters known as the Elizabethan. Thus we find the works of
Marlowe, Fletcher, Shakespeare, Massinger, Ford, full of allusions to
the principal figures of Latin and Greek mythology. From that period,
indeed, down to our own day the beautiful and heroic myths of Greece
have been the subject upon which many English poets have exercised
their art; and those of them who have not woven tales around these
exquisite fables have made plenteous use of them in the illustration
and ornamentation of more homely themes. The works of all our great
poets abound in allusions co the central figures of Greek mythology.
Spenser, Milton, Dryden, Shelley, Byron, Keats have all embodied in
their verse, or frequently allude to, the immortal tales of Hellas;
and, advancing more nearly to our own time, Tennyson, Morris, and
Swinburne, as well as many minor singers, have written of the deeds and
loves and deaths of the mighty heroes around whom the ancient epics ebb
and flow.

The following paragraphs describe the manner in which the myths of
ancient Greece and Rome have been made use of by English poets, so that
the reader may be enabled to regard the myth in the light of poetry and
the poem in the light of mythology. Thus a double and mutual light may
be cast upon both myth and song. Let us take as an example Shelley's
_Prometheus Unbound_. Whoso knows the poem but not the myth from which
it took its origin is robbed of much pleasure in reading the sublime
verse, the ecstatic measures and magical lyrics with their constant
allusions to the greater mythological characters. Who, for example,
are lone and Panthea? What is the nature of Demogorgon? For what crime
against Jupiter is Prometheus, the Titan,

    Nailed to this wall of eagle-baffling mountain,
    Black, wintry, dead, unmeasured?

Unless these allusions are understood, much of the beauty of such a
work is absolutely lost. Let us see, then, how some of our greatest
singers have regarded the denizens of Olympus and the mortals whose
destinies they swayed.

Ere yet Jupiter seized on the lordship of Heaven and earth, Ophion and
Eurynome ruled in Olympus. They were dethroned by Saturn and Rhea, who
in turn were hurled from power by Zeus, or Jupiter, and Juno. Keats
draws a touching picture of the old, forsaken god Saturn, left to
meditations of a lost empire:

    Deep in the shady sadness of a vale
    Far sunken from the healthy breath of morn,
    Far from the fiery noon, and eve's one star,
    Sat grey-haired Saturn, quiet as a stone,
    Still as the silence round about his lair;
    Forest on forest hung about his head,
    Like cloud on cloud. No stir of air was there,
    Not so much life as on a summer's day
    Robs not one light seed from the feather'd grass,
    But where the dead leaf fell, there did it rest.
    A stream went voiceless by, still deaden'd move
    By reason of his fallen divinity,
    Spreading a shade.

A marvellous picture of shattered power! The grey quiet of the
soundless vale, the unnatural stillness of leaf, and the noiseless
stream, symbolize the inertia of the divinity who was once creative.

In the catalogue of gods in the first book of _Paradise Lost,_ Milton
summarizes the usurpation of the heavenly sceptre first by Saturn and
then by Jupiter in four telling lines:

                      Titan, Heaven's first born,
    With his enormous brood, and birthright seized
    By younger Saturn, he from mightier Jove,
    His own and Rhea's son like measure found;
    So Jove usurping reigned.

An effective picture of the vanquished and fallen Titans is also drawn
by Keats, who says of them:

    Scarce images of life, one here, one there,
    Lay vast and edgeways; like a dismal cirque
    Of Druid stones, upon a forlorn moor.

The simile of the giant and fallen forms to the lightning-shattered
monoliths of some deserted Druid circle is magnificent. Such passages
show how great are the themes which bring forth those stupendous
images, the mightiest offspring of imagination. A great poet might sing
of the things of to-day throughout a lifetime, and yet never so thrill
the imagination as with the dead things which have the glamour of ages
upon them.

Jupiter, as we know, was in the habit of abducting mortals from the
earth, and transferring those who were very beautiful to the bright
clime of Olympus. For this reason he seized upon the shepherd lad
Ganymede, whom he made cup-bearer to the gods, and Asteria, the mother
of Hecate, one of the infernal deities. To effect these captures he
usually took the shape of an eagle. Spenser in _The Faerie Queene_ says
of him:

    Twice was he seen in soaring Eagle's shape,
    And with wide wings to beat the buxom air:
    Once, when he with Asterie did scape;
    Again, when as the Trojan boy so fair
    He snatched from Ida bill, and with him bare:
    Wondrous delight it was there to behold
    How the rude Shepherds after him did stare.
    Trembling through fear lest down he fallen should,
    And often to him calling to take surer hold.[4]

Spenser has another beautiful passage upon one of the captures made by
Jupiter:

    Behold how goodly my fair love does lie,
    In proud humility!
    Like unto Maia, when as Jove her took
    In Tempe, lying on the flowery grass,
    'Twixt sleep and wake, after she weary was
    With bathing in the Acidalian brook.

In the second book of _Paradise Lost_ Milton makes Sin spring from the
head of Satan, and it is reasonably conjectured that when he composed
it he must have had in mind the myth of the marvellous birth of the
goddess of wisdom, Pallas Athene. It is Sin who addresses the fallen
archangel:

    All on a sudden miserable pain
    Surprised thee, dim thine eyes and dizzy swum
    In darkness, while thy head flames thick and fast
    Threw forth, till on the left side opening wide,
    Likest to thee in shape and countenance bright,
    Then shining heavenly fair, a goddess armed
    Out of thy head I sprung.

in times of peace Minerva assisted mankind in the manual crafts, and
she also presided over the fortunes of war. She possessed a shield
called the _ægis_, bearing the severed head of a monster named the
Gorgon, which possessed the magical property of changing into stone
anyone who beheld it. Milton renders her more spiritually formidable
by conceiving that her purity and chastity, not the horrid head of the
Gorgon, froze the hearts of evil-doers into terror:

    What was that snaky-headed Gorgon shield
    That wise Minerva wore, unconquered virgin,
    Wherewith she freez'd her foes to congeal'd stone,
    But rigid looks of chaste austerity,
    And noble grace that dash'd brute violence
    With sudden adoration and blank awe?[5]

Shelley has a wonderful and not often quoted poem on this Gorgon head,
torn from the body of the monster Medusa to front the _ægis_ of the
goddess of divine wisdom:

    It lieth, gazing on the midnight sky,
    Upon the cloudy mountain peak supine;
    Below, far lands are seen tremblingly;
    Its horror and its beauty are divine.
    Upon its lips and eyelids seem to lit
    Loveliness like a shadow, from which shine,
    Fiery and lurid, struggling underneath,
    The agonies of anguish and of death.

    Yet it is less the horror than the grace
    Which turns the gazer's spirit into stone,
    Whereon the lineaments of that dead face
    Are graven, till the characters be grown
    Into itself, and thought no more can trace;
    'Tis the melodious hues of beauty thrown
    Athwart the darkness and the glare of pain,
    Which humanise and harmonise the strain.

Vulcan, or Hephæstus, was the god of fire, both in its forms of lurid
conflagration and the more kindly glow of the domestic hearth, and his
story is occasionally sung by our British poets. He was a craftsman
of marvellous excellence in all the arts, and made the thunderbolts
wielded by Jupiter. He was also the husband of Venus. His mother Juno
having quarrelled with the King of Heaven, Vulcan took her part and
was cast from Olympus by his enraged sire. He took an entire day to
fall to earth, and at last alighted in the island of Lemnos:

                                 From morn
    To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve,
    A summer's day, and with the setting sun
    Dropped from the zenith like a falling star
    On Lemnos, th' Ægean isle.[6]

In his amusing "Execration upon Vulcan," which was occasioned by the
fire which destroyed his library and manuscripts, Ben Jonson alludes to
Vulcan as the "lame lord of fire," and continues:

    'Twas Jupiter that hurled thee headlong down,
    And Mars that gave thee a lanthorn for a crown.
    Was it because thou wert of old denied,
    By Jove, to have Minerva for thy bride;
    That since, thou tak'st all envious care and pain
    To ruin every issue of the brain?

Venus, goddess of love, has ever been a theme of delight to poets. She
was the daughter of Jupiter, but is sometimes referred to as springing
from the foam of the sea, as, for example, in the enchanting lines of
Swinburne's "Hymn to Proserpine":

    White rose of the rose-white water, a silver splendour, a flame.

Lord de Tabley also refers to the foam-birth of Venus in the following
stanza:

    Uranian Aphrodite, fair,
    From ripples of the ocean spray;
    Sweet as the sea-blooms in thy hair
    Rosed with the blush of early day,
    O hear us from thy temple steep
    Where Eryx crowns the Dorian deep.

The attributes and symbols of Venus are neatly described by Ben Jonson
in his masque of _Loves Triumph through Callipolis_. Venus is supposed
to say:

    Here, here I present am,
    Both in my girdle and my flame;
    Wherein are woven all the powers
    The Graces gave me, or the Hours,
    My nurses once, with all the arts
    Of gaining and of holding hearts.


[1] The title of which has also been translated _The Book of the Coming
Forth in Day._

[2] This movable 'life' or heart is known to students of tradition as
the 'life-index.' This is a common incident in medieval romance.

[3] These were translated into English by Lady Charlotte Guest, and
published in 1849. Eleven of them are taken from the _Red Book of
Hergest_, a fourteenth-century manuscript in the library of Jesus
College, Oxford. The tale of Taliesin is included with these, but is
taken from a much later manuscript.

[4] Book III, canto xi, 34.

[5] _Comus_.

[6] Milton, _Paradise Lost_, Book I.