CHAPTER IV

THE VARIOUS TYPES OF DEITY


There are certain objections against giving 'departmental' names, such
as 'god of fire,' 'god of wine,' to deities, but in certain stages of
religious evolution these 'departmental deities' are found--gods of
fire, water, earth, and air, hunting, thunder-deities connected with
various crafts and even with certain qualities. It is, however, only in
the higher stages of polytheism that such deities are finally stamped
with the 'departmental' character.[1]

As has already been pointed out, there is more than one explanation
of such gods. Fault has been found with the division of deities into
agricultural and non-agricultural, but there is no doubt whatever
that the change from nomadic to agricultural life and the consequent
altered conditions gave birth to a completely new set of religious
ideas. In the nomadic or hunting stage of existence, when man depends
for subsistence upon the flesh of animals and such wild fruits as
he can procure, he regards with veneration the supernatural beings
he thinks help or hinder him in the chase. Thus among certain North
American Indian tribes the barbarian hunter has a fetish shaped like
a mountain-lion. After making it an offering, he places its carven
nostrils to his own, believing that by so doing he inhales its courage.
He then breathes out deeply, in order to spread the breath of the
animal over a wide area and paralyse all the game in the neighbourhood.
On slaying a deer he cuts out the liver and smears the blood thereof
on the mouth of the fetish as a reward. Finally he prays to the Great
Deer, the mythical or magnified ancestor of the animal killed, not to
seek vengeance against him for having taken the life of one of his
children.

This is a picture of the utilitarian side of a savage hunter's
religion, and it is a representative one. Thus we see with what simple
religious elements the hunter has to do, and yet what an involved
ritual these primitive ideas may bring in their train. He recognizes
other supernatural beings than his own personal and tribal fetishes,
the eponymous heads of the beast clans. For example, he fears and
attempts to placate the being whom he deems to cause the thunder and
lightning. Later he sees in this god a great hunter, the patron of his
own craft of the chase, launching the fiery shaft from heaven.

The wind and the sun may appear to him to possess personality and
even deity, as they symbolize the breath and heat of life; but he can
scarcely adore them with the same fervour as that of the husbandman,
who depends entirely for his sustenance on the good will of sun and
wind.

The transition from the nomadic or hunting state to the agricultural
may or may not be abrupt. It may depend on slow evolution or on the
union of a hunting with an agricultural people, but whatever the cause
of the adoption of more settled habits of existence, the gods of the
chase do not all at once disappear into the background. Many of them
hold their own until a later stage of polytheism is reached, and not
a few supernatural forms of a primitive 'departmental' or 'animistic'
type have achieved high rank in more than one later pantheon. Thus, as
has already been shown, the Mexican Uitzilopochtli and the Latin Picus
were evolved from bird totems which had led their respective tribesmen
to battle in the days of old.

But the great measure of difference between the religions of nomadic
and agricultural peoples is the compact which each makes with its gods.
Adoration in the animistic stage is caused either by a sense of fear,
by the indefinable feeling for the sacred, or because something is
hoped for from the deity placated or worshipped. The contract between
the hunter and the fetish which guides his actions with its advice or
magic is of a low material type. He can scarcely have an agreement
with a thunder-god or any such being, but with the gods which preside
over vegetable growths the husbandman makes a very definite contract.
An unpropitious season brings home to him the risk attending an
agricultural existence, famine staring him in the face. Remembering the
manner in which he placated the deities of his nomadic existence--by
sacrifice--he proceeds by a like process[2] to placate the new deities
upon whose good-will the growth of his crops depends. The earth may be
weary after bearing so much grain; therefore it must be drenched with
blood in order that it may recover from the strain. The clouds may be
absent, so that the corn becomes scorched and withered; therefore a
tithe of human life must be given to the water--in other words, victims
must be drowned. The ever-present sun must be kept in good humour, for
without his light and heat the grain would not germinate and human life
would be destroyed; therefore the steam of blood must arise to fill his
nostrils. The contract is clear though unwritten: "Continue to feed us,
O gods, and we shall feed you."

Thus the strictly departmental type of deity arises. At first he is
a mere corn-spirit, maize-spirit, earth-spirit, water-, thunder-,
sun-spirit, or what not--sun, water, grain, or earth personified--but
as generations pass his fame grows and attracts wider reverence. His
attributes become numerous, his ritual more involved; and the wondrous
sentiment of the sacred surrounds him with a mystic veil. Ethical
ideas become attached to his worship; he is regarded as a fount of
righteousness; and, from being non-moral and non-human, he comes to
possess a sanctified human character as well as more than human powers.
Let us examine a few 'departmental' types of godhead with the object of
tracing them back to their original forms, if possible.

THE SUN-GOD

It will be well if we commence our inquiry with deities which are
obviously of elemental origin.

One of the first to attract our attention is naturally the sun
himself. In all times and in most climates the great luminary has been
regarded as the source of life. In nearly all the higher mythologies
he occupies a distinguished place, if not the principal seat, in the
pantheon. In the later stages of his godhead, also, his attributes
themselves are deified; but it is in his early career as a god that we
must first deal with him here.

In the earliest animistic conception of the sun he is regarded as
having life and volition at least equal, if not superior, to man. His
character among a primitive people may be gauged from the utterance
of the Peruvian monarch who cast doubts upon his godhead and told the
solar priesthood that so far from possessing the attributes of deity,
the sun was compelled by some force superior to himself to make the
same journey daily over a fixed path. That this had not occurred to the
solar worshippers of Peru shows that they gave no scientific interest,
but merely a devout observation, to the luminary, and that, without
bestowing any theological thought on the matter, they had merely
adopted the old animistic idea of the sun as a living thing, little
more or less.

When we come to examine later phases of sun-worship (and these cast
light upon early solar religious ideas) we may discern that the
original animistic idea of the sun as a living thing has evolved into,
or given way before, a more purely anthropomorphic idea. This is a
point of the first importance. Many writers on mythology appear to
be under the impression that in later polytheistic times the sun was
regarded itself as a personified god, and in some cases it may be so,
but the idea was by no means universal, and it would seem that the
sun-god was regarded more as a dweller in the house of the sun than as
the sun himself.

Similarly the supernatural beings known as culture-heroes come to earth
for a season, introduce the arts of civilization to men, and return
once more to their bright abode, usually in a westerly direction.
Such is the Greek Apollo, whereas another Greek god, Helios, is the
sun himself. Apollo represents the dusk-dispelling, civilizing agency
of the orb of day, and with his golden arrows slays the Python, the
serpent of night. In Egyptian mythology the sun is a boat in which
several deities daily take ship to cross the heavens. Behind these
anthropomorphic conceptions, however, lurked the older animistic idea,
for we find that the Egyptians speak of the sun, the luminary itself,
as _the_ god, and that the Mexicans call it _the_ teotl, the deity _par
excellence_. Thus the animistic and anthropomorphic systems were in
certain mythologies kept distinct. In others the animistic idea of the
sun--that is, the sun itself, personified--remained to the end, as in
the case of the Babylonian Merodach or the Japanese Ama-terasu. It is
necessary, however, that the mythologist should distinguish between the
anthropomorphic 'man of the sun' and the merely animistic concept of
the sun-god.

Having thus distinguished between earlier and later types of the sun as
deity, let us attempt to discover first his attributes as a god, and
secondly if any definite and universal type of myth attaches to him. A
generation ago mythologists were prone to "see sun-gods everywhere,"
as Mannhardt expressed it; but since that time the pendulum has swung
too far in the other direction. Abundant criticism has been launched
against the 'solar' theory, but it is not always pertinent and in many
cases it is merely futile. The theory suffered from the philological
school with which it was unfortunately bound up, and neither critics
nor readers seem to be able to judge it on its mythological merits
alone. In our inquiries as to the attributes and mythical character of
the sun-god we shall find that the one will cast light on the other,
for as his almost universal myth becomes revealed to us his attributes
will gradually unfold themselves. In disentangling solar myths, too, we
must be careful to lift the veil of allegory often cast over them later.

A rough synopsis of the groundwork of solar myth might be given as
follows. After the sun has risen from the mysterious darkness, and
after he has forsaken his first love, the dawn, he pursues his course,
gaining access of strength as he proceeds in his bark or fiery chariot
until, having passed the zenith, he gradually declines in strength, and
on the verge o the western heavens encounters the monster night, who
fights with and devours him. He must then traverse the Underworld, with
all its dangers and horrors, until he succeeds in emerging once more at
the gates of morning.

Let us take a typical myth of this description, from which we may
be able to gauge the universality of the sun legend. Apollo was the
offspring of Zeus and Leto, the sky and the darkness. The name of
his mother, denoting the oblivion of night, reappears in 'Lethe,'
the gloomy river of the Underworld, and in 'Latmos,' the 'Land of
Shadows.' In the Ionian hymn which recounts the circumstances of his
birth we read that Leto, when about to become his mother, could find
no resting-place until she came to Delos. In that little stony island
alone could she find repose, and so poor was it that she dreaded that
her son, the great being about to be born, would spurn it into the
sea. When Apollo was born the earth rejoiced and Delos became covered
with flowers; but he was weak and helpless until Thetis touched his
lips with the drink and food of the gods, when his swaddling-clothes,
the white mists, fell off, and, seizing his lyre, he sang the praises
of Zeus. His sojourn in Delos was short, and a second hymn tells us
of his westward wanderings, of how he journeyed from land to land,
always, however, returning to his native Delos. As soon as he cast from
himself his swaddling-clothes, the white mists, he seized his quiver,
the universal symbol of the sun-god, and, thus armed, went forth on his
westward journey, until he came to the fountain of Telphussa, where he
desired to remain, but Telphussa urged him to seek the more favoured
land of Krisa. He then betook himself to Parnassus, where the two
supernatural builders, Trophonius and Agamedes, raised a palace for
him. It is at this point that he is confronted with the dragon which
all sun-heroes meet and overcome.

Thus we see that Apollo is born of a mother whose name is darkness,
that he casts from him the mists which enshroud him, and soars in the
height of his glory over Parnassus, latterly overcoming the Python.[3]

A story with a similar groundwork is that of Beowulf in our earliest
English saga. Betaking himself to the court of King Hrothgar of
Jutland, whose realm was being devastated by the monster Grendel, he
succeeded in slaying him, but later had to dive to the bottom of the
sea to encounter Grendel's mother. Years afterward he fights with and
conquers a dragon who guards a treasure, but in the combat is poisoned
by its fangs. Beowulf came to land in the traditional sun-boat as a
child. The Saxons called their harvest month _Beo_ or _Bewod,_ and
Grendel is, of course, the water-provider. The later dragon typifies
the continued contest between the sun-god and darkness, and the
treasure it guards is, of course, the gold of the setting sun, or
perhaps the elixir of life.

Similar stories are told regarding Indra, Cadmus, Horus, and lesser
sun heroes, such as Hercules, Perseus, Bellerophon, Sigurd, Siegfried,
and Rustem. The sun myth too has found its way into folklore. A good
example is the folk-tale of King Arthur, which shows how in all ages