did.

11:8 Therefore shall ye keep all the commandments which I command you
this day, that ye may be strong, and go in and possess the land,
whither ye go to possess it; 11:9 And that ye may prolong your days in
the land, which the LORD sware unto your fathers to give unto them and
to their seed, a land that floweth with milk and honey.

11:10 For the land, whither thou goest in to possess it, is not as the
land of Egypt, from whence ye came out, where thou sowedst thy seed,
and wateredst it with thy foot, as a garden of herbs: 11:11 But the
land, whither ye go to possess it, is a land of hills and valleys, and
drinketh water of the rain of heaven: 11:12 A land which the LORD thy
God careth for: the eyes of the LORD thy God are always upon it, from
the beginning of the year even unto the end of the year.

11:13 And it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently unto
my commandments which I command you this day, to love the LORD your
God, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul,
11:14 That I will give you the rain of your land in his due season,
the first rain and the latter rain, that thou mayest gather in thy
corn, and thy wine, and thine oil.

11:15 And I will send grass in thy fields for thy cattle, that thou
mayest eat and be full.

11:16 Take heed to yourselves, that your heart be not deceived, and ye
turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them; 11:17 And then the
LORD’s wrath be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven, that
there be no rain, and that the land yield not her fruit; and lest ye
perish quickly from off the good land which the LORD giveth you.

11:18 Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in
your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand, that they may be
as frontlets between your eyes.

11:19 And ye shall teach them your children, speaking of them when
thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, when
thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

11:20 And thou shalt write them upon the door posts of thine house,
and upon thy gates: 11:21 That your days may be multiplied, and the
days of your children, in the land which the LORD sware unto your
fathers to give them, as the days of heaven upon the earth.

11:22 For if ye shall diligently keep all these commandments which I
command you, to do them, to love the LORD your God, to walk in all his
ways, and to cleave unto him; 11:23 Then will the LORD drive out all
these nations from before you, and ye shall possess greater nations
and mightier than yourselves.

11:24 Every place whereon the soles of your feet shall tread shall be
yours: from the wilderness and Lebanon, from the river, the river
Euphrates, even unto the uttermost sea shall your coast be.

11:25 There shall no man be able to stand before you: for the LORD
your God shall lay the fear of you and the dread of you upon all the
land that ye shall tread upon, as he hath said unto you.

11:26 Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse; 11:27
A blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the LORD your God, which I
command you this day: 11:28 And a curse, if ye will not obey the
commandments of the LORD your God, but turn aside out of the way which
I command you this day, to go after other gods, which ye have not
known.

11:29 And it shall come to pass, when the LORD thy God hath brought
thee in unto the land whither thou goest to possess it, that thou
shalt put the blessing upon mount Gerizim, and the curse upon mount
Ebal.

11:30 Are they not on the other side Jordan, by the way where the sun
goeth down, in the land of the Canaanites, which dwell in the
champaign over against Gilgal, beside the plains of Moreh? 11:31 For
ye shall pass over Jordan to go in to possess the land which the LORD
your God giveth you, and ye shall possess it, and dwell therein.

11:32 And ye shall observe to do all the statutes and judgments which
I set before you this day.

12:1 These are the statutes and judgments, which ye shall observe to
do in the land, which the LORD God of thy fathers giveth thee to
possess it, all the days that ye live upon the earth.

12:2 Ye shall utterly destroy all the places, wherein the nations
which ye shall possess served their gods, upon the high mountains, and
upon the hills, and under every green tree: 12:3 And ye shall
overthrow their altars, and break their pillars, and burn their groves
with fire; and ye shall hew down the graven images of their gods, and
destroy the names of them out of that place.

12:4 Ye shall not do so unto the LORD your God.

12:5 But unto the place which the LORD your God shall choose out of
all your tribes to put his name there, even unto his habitation shall
ye seek, and thither thou shalt come: 12:6 And thither ye shall bring
your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and heave
offerings of your hand, and your vows, and your freewill offerings,
and the firstlings of your herds and of your flocks: 12:7 And there ye
shall eat before the LORD your God, and ye shall rejoice in all that
ye put your hand unto, ye and your households, wherein the LORD thy
God hath blessed thee.

12:8 Ye shall not do after all the things that we do here this day,
every man whatsoever is right in his own eyes.

12:9 For ye are not as yet come to the rest and to the inheritance,
which the LORD your God giveth you.

12:10 But when ye go over Jordan, and dwell in the land which the LORD
your God giveth you to inherit, and when he giveth you rest from all
your enemies round about, so that ye dwell in safety; 12:11 Then there
shall be a place which the LORD your God shall choose to cause his
name to dwell there; thither shall ye bring all that I command you;
your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, your tithes, and the heave
offering of your hand, and all your choice vows which ye vow unto the
LORD: 12:12 And ye shall rejoice before the LORD your God, ye, and
your sons, and your daughters, and your menservants, and your
maidservants, and the Levite that is within your gates; forasmuch as
he hath no part nor inheritance with you.

12:13 Take heed to thyself that thou offer not thy burnt offerings in
every place that thou seest: 12:14 But in the place which the LORD
shall choose in one of thy tribes, there thou shalt offer thy burnt
offerings, and there thou shalt do all that I command thee.

12:15 Notwithstanding thou mayest kill and eat flesh in all thy gates,
whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, according to the blessing of the
LORD thy God which he hath given thee: the unclean and the clean may
eat thereof, as of the roebuck, and as of the hart.

12:16 Only ye shall not eat the blood; ye shall pour it upon the earth
as water.

12:17 Thou mayest not eat within thy gates the tithe of thy corn, or
of thy wine, or of thy oil, or the firstlings of thy herds or of thy
flock, nor any of thy vows which thou vowest, nor thy freewill
offerings, or heave offering of thine hand: 12:18 But thou must eat
them before the LORD thy God in the place which the LORD thy God shall
choose, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and
thy maidservant, and the Levite that is within thy gates: and thou
shalt rejoice before the LORD thy God in all that thou puttest thine
hands unto.

12:19 Take heed to thyself that thou forsake not the Levite as long as
thou livest upon the earth.

12:20 When the LORD thy God shall enlarge thy border, as he hath
promised thee, and thou shalt say, I will eat flesh, because thy soul
longeth to eat flesh; thou mayest eat flesh, whatsoever thy soul
lusteth after.

12:21 If the place which the LORD thy God hath chosen to put his name
there be too far from thee, then thou shalt kill of thy herd and of
thy flock, which the LORD hath given thee, as I have commanded thee,
and thou shalt eat in thy gates whatsoever thy soul lusteth after.

12:22 Even as the roebuck and the hart is eaten, so thou shalt eat
them: the unclean and the clean shall eat of them alike.

12:23 Only be sure that thou eat not the blood: for the blood is the
life; and thou mayest not eat the life with the flesh.

12:24 Thou shalt not eat it; thou shalt pour it upon the earth as
water.

12:25 Thou shalt not eat it; that it may go well with thee, and with
thy children after thee, when thou shalt do that which is right in the
sight of the LORD.

12:26 Only thy holy things which thou hast, and thy vows, thou shalt
take, and go unto the place which the LORD shall choose: 12:27 And
thou shalt offer thy burnt offerings, the flesh and the blood, upon
the altar of the LORD thy God: and the blood of thy sacrifices shall
be poured out upon the altar of the LORD thy God, and thou shalt eat
the flesh.

12:28 Observe and hear all these words which I command thee, that it
may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee for ever, when
thou doest that which is good and right in the sight of the LORD thy
God.

12:29 When the LORD thy God shall cut off the nations from before
thee, whither thou goest to possess them, and thou succeedest them,
and dwellest in their land; 12:30 Take heed to thyself that thou be
not snared by following them, after that they be destroyed from before
thee; and that thou enquire not after their gods, saying, How did
these nations serve their gods? even so will I do likewise.

12:31 Thou shalt not do so unto the LORD thy God: for every
abomination to the LORD, which he hateth, have they done unto their
gods; for even their sons and their daughters they have burnt in the
fire to their gods.

12:32 What thing soever I command you, observe to do it: thou shalt
not add thereto, nor diminish from it.

13:1 If there arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and
giveth thee a sign or a wonder, 13:2 And the sign or the wonder come
to pass, whereof he spake unto thee, saying, Let us go after other
gods, which thou hast not known, and let us serve them; 13:3 Thou
shalt not hearken unto the words of that prophet, or that dreamer of
dreams: for the LORD your God proveth you, to know whether ye love the
LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul.

13:4 Ye shall walk after the LORD your God, and fear him, and keep his
commandments, and obey his voice, and ye shall serve him, and cleave
unto him.

13:5 And that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, shall be put to
death; because he hath spoken to turn you away from the LORD your God,
which brought you out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed you out of
the house of bondage, to thrust thee out of the way which the LORD thy
God commanded thee to walk in. So shalt thou put the evil away from
the midst of thee.

13:6 If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy
daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine
own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other
gods, which thou hast not known, thou, nor thy fathers; 13:7 Namely,
of the gods of the people which are round about you, nigh unto thee,
or far off from thee, from the one end of the earth even unto the
other end of the earth; 13:8 Thou shalt not consent unto him, nor
hearken unto him; neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou
spare, neither shalt thou conceal him: 13:9 But thou shalt surely kill
him; thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and
afterwards the hand of all the people.

13:10 And thou shalt stone him with stones, that he die; because he
hath sought to thrust thee away from the LORD thy God, which brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.

13:11 And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any
such wickedness as this is among you.

13:12 If thou shalt hear say in one of thy cities, which the LORD thy
God hath given thee to dwell there, saying, 13:13 Certain men, the
children of Belial, are gone out from among you, and have withdrawn
the inhabitants of their city, saying, Let us go and serve other gods,
which ye have not known; 13:14 Then shalt thou enquire, and make
search, and ask diligently; and, behold, if it be truth, and the thing
certain, that such abomination is wrought among you; 13:15 Thou shalt
surely smite the inhabitants of that city with the edge of the sword,
destroying it utterly, and all that is therein, and the cattle
thereof, with the edge of the sword.

13:16 And thou shalt gather all the spoil of it into the midst of the
street thereof, and shalt burn with fire the city, and all the spoil
thereof every whit, for the LORD thy God: and it shall be an heap for
ever; it shall not be built again.

13:17 And there shall cleave nought of the cursed thing to thine hand:
that the LORD may turn from the fierceness of his anger, and shew thee
mercy, and have compassion upon thee, and multiply thee, as he hath
sworn unto thy fathers; 13:18 When thou shalt hearken to the voice of
the LORD thy God, to keep all his commandments which I command thee
this day, to do that which is right in the eyes of the LORD thy God.

14:1 Ye are the children of the LORD your God: ye shall not cut
yourselves, nor make any baldness between your eyes for the dead.

14:2 For thou art an holy people unto the LORD thy God, and the LORD
hath chosen thee to be a peculiar people unto himself, above all the
nations that are upon the earth.

14:3 Thou shalt not eat any abominable thing.

14:4 These are the beasts which ye shall eat: the ox, the sheep, and
the goat, 14:5 The hart, and the roebuck, and the fallow deer, and the
wild goat, and the pygarg, and the wild ox, and the chamois.

14:6 And every beast that parteth the hoof, and cleaveth the cleft
into two claws, and cheweth the cud among the beasts, that ye shall
eat.

14:7 Nevertheless these ye shall not eat of them that chew the cud, or
of them that divide the cloven hoof; as the camel, and the hare, and
the coney: for they chew the cud, but divide not the hoof; therefore
they are unclean unto you.

14:8 And the swine, because it divideth the hoof, yet cheweth not the
cud, it is unclean unto you: ye shall not eat of their flesh, nor
touch their dead carcase.

14:9 These ye shall eat of all that are in the waters: all that have
fins and scales shall ye eat: 14:10 And whatsoever hath not fins and
scales ye may not eat; it is unclean unto you.

14:11 Of all clean birds ye shall eat.

14:12 But these are they of which ye shall not eat: the eagle, and the
ossifrage, and the ospray, 14:13 And the glede, and the kite, and the
vulture after his kind, 14:14 And every raven after his kind, 14:15
And the owl, and the night hawk, and the cuckow, and the hawk after
his kind, 14:16 The little owl, and the great owl, and the swan, 14:17
And the pelican, and the gier eagle, and the cormorant, 14:18 And the
stork, and the heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and the bat.

14:19 And every creeping thing that flieth is unclean unto you: they
shall not be eaten.

14:20 But of all clean fowls ye may eat.

14:21 Ye shall not eat of anything that dieth of itself: thou shalt
give it unto the stranger that is in thy gates, that he may eat it; or
thou mayest sell it unto an alien: for thou art an holy people unto
the LORD thy God.

Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother’s milk.

14:22 Thou shalt truly tithe all the increase of thy seed, that the
field bringeth forth year by year.

14:23 And thou shalt eat before the LORD thy God, in the place which
he shall choose to place his name there, the tithe of thy corn, of thy
wine, and of thine oil, and the firstlings of thy herds and of thy
flocks; that thou mayest learn to fear the LORD thy God always.

14:24 And if the way be too long for thee, so that thou art not able
to carry it; or if the place be too far from thee, which the LORD thy
God shall choose to set his name there, when the LORD thy God hath
blessed thee: 14:25 Then shalt thou turn it into money, and bind up
the money in thine hand, and shalt go unto the place which the LORD
thy God shall choose: 14:26 And thou shalt bestow that money for
whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, for oxen, or for sheep, or for
wine, or for strong drink, or for whatsoever thy soul desireth: and
thou shalt eat there before the LORD thy God, and thou shalt rejoice,
thou, and thine household, 14:27 And the Levite that is within thy
gates; thou shalt not forsake him; for he hath no part nor inheritance
with thee.

14:28 At the end of three years thou shalt bring forth all the tithe
of thine increase the same year, and shalt lay it up within thy gates:
14:29 And the Levite, (because he hath no part nor inheritance with
thee,) and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, which are
within thy gates, shall come, and shall eat and be satisfied; that the
LORD thy God may bless thee in all the work of thine hand which thou
doest.

15:1 At the end of every seven years thou shalt make a release.

15:2 And this is the manner of the release: Every creditor that
lendeth ought unto his neighbour shall release it; he shall not exact
it of his neighbour, or of his brother; because it is called the
LORD’s release.

15:3 Of a foreigner thou mayest exact it again: but that which is
thine with thy brother thine hand shall release; 15:4 Save when there
shall be no poor among you; for the LORD shall greatly bless thee in
the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance to
possess it: 15:5 Only if thou carefully hearken unto the voice of the
LORD thy God, to observe to do all these commandments which I command
thee this day.

15:6 For the LORD thy God blesseth thee, as he promised thee: and thou
shalt lend unto many nations, but thou shalt not borrow; and thou
shalt reign over many nations, but they shall not reign over thee.

15:7 If there be among you a poor man of one of thy brethren within
any of thy gates in thy land which the LORD thy God giveth thee, thou
shalt not harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor
brother: 15:8 But thou shalt open thine hand wide unto him, and shalt
surely lend him sufficient for his need, in that which he wanteth.

15:9 Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, saying,
The seventh year, the year of release, is at hand; and thine eye be
evil against thy poor brother, and thou givest him nought; and he cry
unto the LORD against thee, and it be sin unto thee.

15:10 Thou shalt surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved
when thou givest unto him: because that for this thing the LORD thy
God shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou puttest
thine hand unto.

15:11 For the poor shall never cease out of the land: therefore I
command thee, saying, Thou shalt open thine hand wide unto thy
brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy, in thy land.

15:12 And if thy brother, an Hebrew man, or an Hebrew woman, be sold
unto thee, and serve thee six years; then in the seventh year thou
shalt let him go free from thee.

15:13 And when thou sendest him out free from thee, thou shalt not let
him go away empty: 15:14 Thou shalt furnish him liberally out of thy
flock, and out of thy floor, and out of thy winepress: of that
wherewith the LORD thy God hath blessed thee thou shalt give unto him.

15:15 And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of
Egypt, and the LORD thy God redeemed thee: therefore I command thee
this thing to day.

15:16 And it shall be, if he say unto thee, I will not go away from
thee; because he loveth thee and thine house, because he is well with
thee; 15:17 Then thou shalt take an aul, and thrust it through his ear
unto the door, and he shall be thy servant for ever. And also unto thy
maidservant thou shalt do likewise.

15:18 It shall not seem hard unto thee, when thou sendest him away
free from thee; for he hath been worth a double hired servant to thee,
in serving thee six years: and the LORD thy God shall bless thee in
all that thou doest.

15:19 All the firstling males that come of thy herd and of thy flock
thou shalt sanctify unto the LORD thy God: thou shalt do no work with
the firstling of thy bullock, nor shear the firstling of thy sheep.

15:20 Thou shalt eat it before the LORD thy God year by year in the
place which the LORD shall choose, thou and thy household.

15:21 And if there be any blemish therein, as if it be lame, or blind,
or have any ill blemish, thou shalt not sacrifice it unto the LORD thy
God.

15:22 Thou shalt eat it within thy gates: the unclean and the clean
person shall eat it alike, as the roebuck, and as the hart.

15:23 Only thou shalt not eat the blood thereof; thou shalt pour it
upon the ground as water.

16:1 Observe the month of Abib, and keep the passover unto the LORD
thy God: for in the month of Abib the LORD thy God brought thee forth
out of Egypt by night.

16:2 Thou shalt therefore sacrifice the passover unto the LORD thy
God, of the flock and the herd, in the place which the LORD shall
choose to place his name there.

16:3 Thou shalt eat no leavened bread with it; seven days shalt thou
eat unleavened bread therewith, even the bread of affliction; for thou
camest forth out of the land of Egypt in haste: that thou mayest
remember the day when thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt all
the days of thy life.

16:4 And there shall be no leavened bread seen with thee in all thy
coast seven days; neither shall there any thing of the flesh, which
thou sacrificedst the first day at even, remain all night until the
morning.

16:5 Thou mayest not sacrifice the passover within any of thy gates,
which the LORD thy God giveth thee: 16:6 But at the place which the
LORD thy God shall choose to place his name in, there thou shalt
sacrifice the passover at even, at the going down of the sun, at the
season that thou camest forth out of Egypt.

16:7 And thou shalt roast and eat it in the place which the LORD thy
God shall choose: and thou shalt turn in the morning, and go unto thy
tents.

16:8 Six days thou shalt eat unleavened bread: and on the seventh day
shall be a solemn assembly to the LORD thy God: thou shalt do no work
therein.

16:9 Seven weeks shalt thou number unto thee: begin to number the
seven weeks from such time as thou beginnest to put the sickle to the
corn.

16:10 And thou shalt keep the feast of weeks unto the LORD thy God
with a tribute of a freewill offering of thine hand, which thou shalt
give unto the LORD thy God, according as the LORD thy God hath blessed
thee: 16:11 And thou shalt rejoice before the LORD thy God, thou, and
thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant,
and the Levite that is within thy gates, and the stranger, and the
fatherless, and the widow, that are among you, in the place which the
LORD thy God hath chosen to place his name there.

16:12 And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt: and
thou shalt observe and do these statutes.

16:13 Thou shalt observe the feast of tabernacles seven days, after
that thou hast gathered in thy corn and thy wine: 16:14 And thou shalt
rejoice in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy
manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite, the stranger, and the
fatherless, and the widow, that are within thy gates.

16:15 Seven days shalt thou keep a solemn feast unto the LORD thy God
in the place which the LORD shall choose: because the LORD thy God
shall bless thee in all thine increase, and in all the works of thine
hands, therefore thou shalt surely rejoice.

16:16 Three times in a year shall all thy males appear before the LORD
thy God in the place which he shall choose; in the feast of unleavened
bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles: and
they shall not appear before the LORD empty: 16:17 Every man shall
give as he is able, according to the blessing of the LORD thy God
which he hath given thee.

16:18 Judges and officers shalt thou make thee in all thy gates, which
the LORD thy God giveth thee, throughout thy tribes: and they shall
judge the people with just judgment.

16:19 Thou shalt not wrest judgment; thou shalt not respect persons,
neither take a gift: for a gift doth blind the eyes of the wise, and
pervert the words of the righteous.

16:20 That which is altogether just shalt thou follow, that thou
mayest live, and inherit the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.

16:21 Thou shalt not plant thee a grove of any trees near unto the
altar of the LORD thy God, which thou shalt make thee.

16:22 Neither shalt thou set thee up any image; which the LORD thy God
hateth.

17:1 Thou shalt not sacrifice unto the LORD thy God any bullock, or
sheep, wherein is blemish, or any evilfavouredness: for that is an
abomination unto the LORD thy God.

17:2 If there be found among you, within any of thy gates which the
LORD thy God giveth thee, man or woman, that hath wrought wickedness
in the sight of the LORD thy God, in transgressing his covenant, 17:3
And hath gone and served other gods, and worshipped them, either the
sun, or moon, or any of the host of heaven, which I have not
commanded; 17:4 And it be told thee, and thou hast heard of it, and
enquired diligently, and, behold, it be true, and the thing certain,
that such abomination is wrought in Israel: 17:5 Then shalt thou bring
forth that man or that woman, which have committed that wicked thing,
unto thy gates, even that man or that woman, and shalt stone them with
stones, till they die.

17:6 At the mouth of two witnesses, or three witnesses, shall he that
is worthy of death be put to death; but at the mouth of one witness he
shall not be put to death.

17:7 The hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him to put him to
death, and afterward the hands of all the people. So thou shalt put
the evil away from among you.

17:8 If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between
blood and blood, between plea and plea, and between stroke and stroke,
being matters of controversy within thy gates: then shalt thou arise,
and get thee up into the place which the LORD thy God shall choose;
17:9 And thou shalt come unto the priests the Levites, and unto the
judge that shall be in those days, and enquire; and they shall shew
thee the sentence of judgment: 17:10 And thou shalt do according to
the sentence, which they of that place which the LORD shall choose
shall shew thee; and thou shalt observe to do according to all that
they inform thee: 17:11 According to the sentence of the law which
they shall teach thee, and according to the judgment which they shall
tell thee, thou shalt do: thou shalt not decline from the sentence
which they shall shew thee, to the right hand, nor to the left.

17:12 And the man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken
unto the priest that standeth to minister there before the LORD thy
God, or unto the judge, even that man shall die: and thou shalt put
away the evil from Israel.

17:13 And all the people shall hear, and fear, and do no more
presumptuously.

17:14 When thou art come unto the land which the LORD thy God giveth
thee, and shalt possess it, and shalt dwell therein, and shalt say, I
will set a king over me, like as all the nations that are about me;
17:15 Thou shalt in any wise set him king over thee, whom the LORD thy
God shall choose: one from among thy brethren shalt thou set king over
thee: thou mayest not set a stranger over thee, which is not thy
brother.

17:16 But he shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the
people to return to Egypt, to the end that he should multiply horses:
forasmuch as the LORD hath said unto you, Ye shall henceforth return
no more that way.

17:17 Neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn
not away: neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and
gold.

17:18 And it shall be, when he sitteth upon the throne of his kingdom,
that he shall write him a copy of this law in a book out of that which
is before the priests the Levites: 17:19 And it shall be with him, and
he shall read therein all the days of his life: that he may learn to
fear the LORD his God, to keep all the words of this law and these
statutes, to do them: 17:20 That his heart be not lifted up above his
brethren, and that he turn not aside from the commandment, to the
right hand, or to the left: to the end that he may prolong his days in
his kingdom, he, and his children, in the midst of Israel.

18:1 The priests the Levites, and all the tribe of Levi, shall have no
part nor inheritance with Israel: they shall eat the offerings of the
LORD made by fire, and his inheritance.

18:2 Therefore shall they have no inheritance among their brethren:
the LORD is their inheritance, as he hath said unto them.

18:3 And this shall be the priest’s due from the people, from them
that offer a sacrifice, whether it be ox or sheep; and they shall give
unto the priest the shoulder, and the two cheeks, and the maw.

18:4 The firstfruit also of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil,
and the first of the fleece of thy sheep, shalt thou give him.

18:5 For the LORD thy God hath chosen him out of all thy tribes, to
stand to minister in the name of the LORD, him and his sons for ever.

18:6 And if a Levite come from any of thy gates out of all Israel,
where he sojourned, and come with all the desire of his mind unto the
place which the LORD shall choose; 18:7 Then he shall minister in the
name of the LORD his God, as all his brethren the Levites do, which
stand there before the LORD.

18:8 They shall have like portions to eat, beside that which cometh of
the sale of his patrimony.

18:9 When thou art come into the land which the LORD thy God giveth
thee, thou shalt not learn to do after the abominations of those
nations.

18:10 There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son
or his daughter to pass through the fire, or that useth divination, or
an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch.

18:11 Or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard,
or a necromancer.

18:12 For all that do these things are an abomination unto the LORD:
and because of these abominations the LORD thy God doth drive them out
from before thee.

18:13 Thou shalt be perfect with the LORD thy God.

18:14 For these nations, which thou shalt possess, hearkened unto
observers of times, and unto diviners: but as for thee, the LORD thy
God hath not suffered thee so to do.

18:15 The LORD thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the
midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall
hearken; 18:16 According to all that thou desiredst of the LORD thy
God in Horeb in the day of the assembly, saying, Let me not hear again
the voice of the LORD my God, neither let me see this great fire any
more, that I die not.

18:17 And the LORD said unto me, They have well spoken that which they
have spoken.

18:18 I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like
unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto
them all that I shall command him.

18:19 And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto
my words which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him.

18:20 But the prophet, which shall presume to speak a word in my name,
which I have not commanded him to speak, or that shall speak in the
name of other gods, even that prophet shall die.

18:21 And if thou say in thine heart, How shall we know the word which
the LORD hath not spoken? 18:22 When a prophet speaketh in the name
of the LORD, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the
thing which the LORD hath not spoken, but the prophet hath spoken it
presumptuously: thou shalt not be afraid of him.

19:1 When the LORD thy God hath cut off the nations, whose land the
LORD thy God giveth thee, and thou succeedest them, and dwellest in
their cities, and in their houses; 19:2 Thou shalt separate three
cities for thee in the midst of thy land, which the LORD thy God
giveth thee to possess it.

19:3 Thou shalt prepare thee a way, and divide the coasts of thy land,
which the LORD thy God giveth thee to inherit, into three parts, that
every slayer may flee thither.

19:4 And this is the case of the slayer, which shall flee thither,
that he may live: Whoso killeth his neighbour ignorantly, whom he
hated not in time past; 19:5 As when a man goeth into the wood with
his neighbour to hew wood, and his hand fetcheth a stroke with the axe
to cut down the tree, and the head slippeth from the helve, and
lighteth upon his neighbour, that he die; he shall flee unto one of
those cities, and live: 19:6 Lest the avenger of the blood pursue the
slayer, while his heart is hot, and overtake him, because the way is
long, and slay him; whereas he was not worthy of death, inasmuch as he
hated him not in time past.

19:7 Wherefore I command thee, saying, Thou shalt separate three
cities for thee.

19:8 And if the LORD thy God enlarge thy coast, as he hath sworn unto
thy fathers, and give thee all the land which he promised to give unto
thy fathers; 19:9 If thou shalt keep all these commandments to do
them, which I command thee this day, to love the LORD thy God, and to
walk ever in his ways; then shalt thou add three cities more for thee,
beside these three: 19:10 That innocent blood be not shed in thy land,
which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, and so blood be
upon thee.

19:11 But if any man hate his neighbour, and lie in wait for him, and
rise up against him, and smite him mortally that he die, and fleeth
into one of these cities: 19:12 Then the elders of his city shall send
and fetch him thence, and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of
blood, that he may die.

19:13 Thine eye shall not pity him, but thou shalt put away the guilt
of innocent blood from Israel, that it may go well with thee.

19:14 Thou shalt not remove thy neighbour’s landmark, which they of
old time have set in thine inheritance, which thou shalt inherit in
the land that the LORD thy God giveth thee to possess it.

19:15 One witness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or
for any sin, in any sin that he sinneth: at the mouth of two
witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the matter be
established.

19:16 If a false witness rise up against any man to testify against
him that which is wrong; 19:17 Then both the men, between whom the
controversy is, shall stand before the LORD, before the priests and
the judges, which shall be in those days; 19:18 And the judges shall
make diligent inquisition: and, behold, if the witness be a false
witness, and hath testified falsely against his brother; 19:19 Then
shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto his brother:
so shalt thou put the evil away from among you.

19:20 And those which remain shall hear, and fear, and shall
henceforth commit no more any such evil among you.

19:21 And thine eye shall not pity; but life shall go for life, eye
for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.

20:1 When thou goest out to battle against thine enemies, and seest
horses, and chariots, and a people more than thou, be not afraid of
them: for the LORD thy God is with thee, which brought thee up out of
the land of Egypt.

20:2 And it shall be, when ye are come nigh unto the battle, that the
priest shall approach and speak unto the people, 20:3 And shall say
unto them, Hear, O Israel, ye approach this day unto battle against
your enemies: let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble,
neither be ye terrified because of them; 20:4 For the LORD your God is
he that goeth with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save
you.

20:5 And the officers shall speak unto the people, saying, What man is
there that hath built a new house, and hath not dedicated it? let him
go and return to his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man
dedicate it.

20:6 And what man is he that hath planted a vineyard, and hath not yet
eaten of it? let him also go and return unto his house, lest he die in
the battle, and another man eat of it.

20:7 And what man is there that hath betrothed a wife, and hath not
taken her? let him go and return unto his house, lest he die in the
battle, and another man take her.

20:8 And the officers shall speak further unto the people, and they
shall say, What man is there that is fearful and fainthearted? let him
go and return unto his house, lest his brethren’s heart faint as well
as his heart.

20:9 And it shall be, when the officers have made an end of speaking
unto the people that they shall make captains of the armies to lead
the people.

20:10 When thou comest nigh unto a city to fight against it, then
proclaim peace unto it.

20:11 And it shall be, if it make thee answer of peace, and open unto
thee, then it shall be, that all the people that is found therein
shall be tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve thee.

20:12 And if it will make no peace with thee, but will make war
against thee, then thou shalt besiege it: 20:13 And when the LORD thy
God hath delivered it into thine hands, thou shalt smite every male
thereof with the edge of the sword: 20:14 But the women, and the
little ones, and the cattle, and all that is in the city, even all the
spoil thereof, shalt thou take unto thyself; and thou shalt eat the
spoil of thine enemies, which the LORD thy God hath given thee.

20:15 Thus shalt thou do unto all the cities which are very far off
from thee, which are not of the cities of these nations.

20:16 But of the cities of these people, which the LORD thy God doth
give thee for an inheritance, thou shalt save alive nothing that
breatheth: 20:17 But thou shalt utterly destroy them; namely, the
Hittites, and the Amorites, the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, the
Hivites, and the Jebusites; as the LORD thy God hath commanded thee:
20:18 That they teach you not to do after all their abominations,
which they have done unto their gods; so should ye sin against the
LORD your God.

20:19 When thou shalt besiege a city a long time, in making war
against it to take it, thou shalt not destroy the trees thereof by
forcing an axe against them: for thou mayest eat of them, and thou
shalt not cut them down (for the tree of the field is man’s life) to
employ them in the siege: 20:20 Only the trees which thou knowest that
they be not trees for meat, thou shalt destroy and cut them down; and
thou shalt build bulwarks against the city that maketh war with thee,
until it be subdued.

21:1 If one be found slain in the land which the LORD thy God giveth
thee to possess it, lying in the field, and it be not known who hath
slain him: 21:2 Then thy elders and thy judges shall come forth, and
they shall measure unto the cities which are round about him that is
slain: 21:3 And it shall be, that the city which is next unto the
slain man, even the elders of that city shall take an heifer, which
hath not been wrought with, and which hath not drawn in the yoke; 21:4
And the elders of that city shall bring down the heifer unto a rough
valley, which is neither eared nor sown, and shall strike off the
heifer’s neck there in the valley: 21:5 And the priests the sons of
Levi shall come near; for them the LORD thy God hath chosen to
minister unto him, and to bless in the name of the LORD; and by their
word shall every controversy and every stroke be tried: 21:6 And all
the elders of that city, that are next unto the slain man, shall wash
their hands over the heifer that is beheaded in the valley: 21:7 And
they shall answer and say, Our hands have not shed this blood, neither
have our eyes seen it.

21:8 Be merciful, O LORD, unto thy people Israel, whom thou hast
redeemed, and lay not innocent blood unto thy people of Israel’s
charge. And the blood shall be forgiven them.

21:9 So shalt thou put away the guilt of innocent blood from among
you, when thou shalt do that which is right in the sight of the LORD.

21:10 When thou goest forth to war against thine enemies, and the LORD
thy God hath delivered them into thine hands, and thou hast taken them
captive, 21:11 And seest among the captives a beautiful woman, and
hast a desire unto her, that thou wouldest have her to thy wife; 21:12
Then thou shalt bring her home to thine house, and she shall shave her
head, and pare her nails; 21:13 And she shall put the raiment of her
captivity from off her, and shall remain in thine house, and bewail
her father and her mother a full month: and after that thou shalt go
in unto her, and be her husband, and she shall be thy wife.

21:14 And it shall be, if thou have no delight in her, then thou shalt
let her go whither she will; but thou shalt not sell her at all for
money, thou shalt not make merchandise of her, because thou hast
humbled her.

21:15 If a man have two wives, one beloved, and another hated, and
they have born him children, both the beloved and the hated; and if
the firstborn son be hers that was hated: 21:16 Then it shall be, when
he maketh his sons to inherit that which he hath, that he may not make
the son of the beloved firstborn before the son of the hated, which is
indeed the firstborn: 21:17 But he shall acknowledge the son of the
hated for the firstborn, by giving him a double portion of all that he
hath: for he is the beginning of his strength; the right of the
firstborn is his.

21:18 If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not obey
the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and that, when
they have chastened him, will not hearken unto them: 21:19 Then shall
his father and his mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the
elders of his city, and unto the gate of his place; 21:20 And they
shall say unto the elders of his city, This our son is stubborn and
rebellious, he will not obey our voice; he is a glutton, and a
drunkard.

21:21 And all the men of his city shall stone him with stones, that he
die: so shalt thou put evil away from among you; and all Israel shall
hear, and fear.

21:22 And if a man have committed a sin worthy of death, and he be to
be put to death, and thou hang him on a tree: 21:23 His body shall not
remain all night upon the tree, but thou shalt in any wise bury him
that day; (for he that is hanged is accursed of God;) that thy land be
not defiled, which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.

22:1 Thou shalt not see thy brother’s ox or his sheep go astray, and
hide thyself from them: thou shalt in any case bring them again unto
thy brother.

22:2 And if thy brother be not nigh unto thee, or if thou know him
not, then thou shalt bring it unto thine own house, and it shall be
with thee until thy brother seek after it, and thou shalt restore it
to him again.

22:3 In like manner shalt thou do with his ass; and so shalt thou do
with his raiment; and with all lost thing of thy brother’s, which he
hath lost, and thou hast found, shalt thou do likewise: thou mayest
not hide thyself.

22:4 Thou shalt not see thy brother’s ass or his ox fall down by the
way, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt surely help him to lift
them up again.

22:5 The woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto a man,
neither shall a man put on a woman’s garment: for all that do so are
abomination unto the LORD thy God.

22:6 If a bird’s nest chance to be before thee in the way in any tree,
or on the ground, whether they be young ones, or eggs, and the dam
sitting upon the young, or upon the eggs, thou shalt not take the dam
with the young: 22:7 But thou shalt in any wise let the dam go, and
take the young to thee; that it may be well with thee, and that thou
mayest prolong thy days.

22:8 When thou buildest a new house, then thou shalt make a battlement
for thy roof, that thou bring not blood upon thine house, if any man
fall from thence.

22:9 Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with divers seeds: lest the fruit
of thy seed which thou hast sown, and the fruit of thy vineyard, be
defiled.

22:10 Thou shalt not plow with an ox and an ass together.

22:11 Thou shalt not wear a garment of divers sorts, as of woollen and
linen together.

22:12 Thou shalt make thee fringes upon the four quarters of thy
vesture, wherewith thou coverest thyself.

22:13 If any man take a wife, and go in unto her, and hate her, 22:14
And give occasions of speech against her, and bring up an evil name
upon her, and say, I took this woman, and when I came to her, I found
her not a maid: 22:15 Then shall the father of the damsel, and her
mother, take and bring forth the tokens of the damsel’s virginity unto
the elders of the city in the gate: 22:16 And the damsel’s father
shall say unto the elders, I gave my daughter unto this man to wife,
and he hateth her; 22:17 And, lo, he hath given occasions of speech
against her, saying, I found not thy daughter a maid; and yet these
are the tokens of my daughter’s virginity. And they shall spread the
cloth before the elders of the city.

22:18 And the elders of that city shall take that man and chastise
him; 22:19 And they shall amerce him in an hundred shekels of silver,
and give them unto the father of the damsel, because he hath brought
up an evil name upon a virgin of Israel: and she shall be his wife; he
may not put her away all his days.

22:20 But if this thing be true, and the tokens of virginity be not
found for the damsel: 22:21 Then they shall bring out the damsel to
the door of her father’s house, and the men of her city shall stone
her with stones that she die: because she hath wrought folly in
Israel, to play the whore in her father’s house: so shalt thou put
evil away from among you.

22:22 If a man be found lying with a woman married to an husband, then
they shall both of them die, both the man that lay with the woman, and
the woman: so shalt thou put away evil from Israel.

22:23 If a damsel that is a virgin be betrothed unto an husband, and a
man find her in the city, and lie with her; 22:24 Then ye shall bring
them both out unto the gate of that city, and ye shall stone them with
stones that they die; the damsel, because she cried not, being in the
city; and the man, because he hath humbled his neighbour’s wife: so
thou shalt put away evil from among you.

22:25 But if a man find a betrothed damsel in the field, and the man
force her, and lie with her: then the man only that lay with her shall
die.

22:26 But unto the damsel thou shalt do nothing; there is in the
damsel no sin worthy of death: for as when a man riseth against his
neighbour, and slayeth him, even so is this matter: 22:27 For he found
her in the field, and the betrothed damsel cried, and there was none
to save her.

22:28 If a man find a damsel that is a virgin, which is not betrothed,
and lay hold on her, and lie with her, and they be found; 22:29 Then
the man that lay with her shall give unto the damsel’s father fifty
shekels of silver, and she shall be his wife; because he hath humbled
her, he may not put her away all his days.

22:30 A man shall not take his father’s wife, nor discover his
father’s skirt.

23:1 He that is wounded in the stones, or hath his privy member cut
off, shall not enter into the congregation of the LORD.

23:2 A bastard shall not enter into the congregation of the LORD; even
to his tenth generation shall he not enter into the congregation of
the LORD.

23:3 An Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into the congregation of
the LORD; even to their tenth generation shall they not enter into the
congregation of the LORD for ever: 23:4 Because they met you not with
bread and with water in the way, when ye came forth out of Egypt; and
because they hired against thee Balaam the son of Beor of Pethor of
Mesopotamia, to curse thee.

23:5 Nevertheless the LORD thy God would not hearken unto Balaam; but
the LORD thy God turned the curse into a blessing unto thee, because
the LORD thy God loved thee.

23:6 Thou shalt not seek their peace nor their prosperity all thy days
for ever.

23:7 Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite; for he is thy brother: thou
shalt not abhor an Egyptian; because thou wast a stranger in his land.

23:8 The children that are begotten of them shall enter into the
congregation of the LORD in their third generation.

23:9 When the host goeth forth against thine enemies, then keep thee
from every wicked thing.

23:10 If there be among you any man, that is not clean by reason of
uncleanness that chanceth him by night, then shall he go abroad out of
the camp, he shall not come within the camp: 23:11 But it shall be,
when evening cometh on, he shall wash himself with water: and when the
sun is down, he shall come into the camp again.

23:12 Thou shalt have a place also without the camp, whither thou
shalt go forth abroad: 23:13 And thou shalt have a paddle upon thy
weapon; and it shall be, when thou wilt ease thyself abroad, thou
shalt dig therewith, and shalt turn back and cover that which cometh
from thee: 23:14 For the LORD thy God walketh in the midst of thy
camp, to deliver thee, and to give up thine enemies before thee;
therefore shall thy camp be holy: that he see no unclean thing in
thee, and turn away from thee.

23:15 Thou shalt not deliver unto his master the servant which is
escaped from his master unto thee: 23:16 He shall dwell with thee,
even among you, in that place which he shall choose in one of thy
gates, where it liketh him best: thou shalt not oppress him.

23:17 There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a
sodomite of the sons of Israel.

23:18 Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog,
into the house of the LORD thy God for any vow: for even both these
are abomination unto the LORD thy God.

23:19 Thou shalt not lend upon usury to thy brother; usury of money,
usury of victuals, usury of any thing that is lent upon usury: 23:20
Unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury; but unto thy brother thou
shalt not lend upon usury: that the LORD thy God may bless thee in all
that thou settest thine hand to in the land whither thou goest to
possess it.

23:21 When thou shalt vow a vow unto the LORD thy God, thou shalt not
slack to pay it: for the LORD thy God will surely require it of thee;
and it would be sin in thee.

23:22 But if thou shalt forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee.

23:23 That which is gone out of thy lips thou shalt keep and perform;
even a freewill offering, according as thou hast vowed unto the LORD
thy God, which thou hast promised with thy mouth.

23:24 When thou comest into thy neighbour’s vineyard, then thou mayest
eat grapes thy fill at thine own pleasure; but thou shalt not put any
in thy vessel.

23:25 When thou comest into the standing corn of thy neighbour, then
thou mayest pluck the ears with thine hand; but thou shalt not move a
sickle unto thy neighbour’s standing corn.

24:1 When a man hath taken a wife, and married her, and it come to
pass that she find no favour in his eyes, because he hath found some
uncleanness in her: then let him write her a bill of divorcement, and
give it in her hand, and send her out of his house.

24:2 And when she is departed out of his house, she may go and be
another man’s wife.

24:3 And if the latter husband hate her, and write her a bill of
divorcement, and giveth it in her hand, and sendeth her out of his
house; or if the latter husband die, which took her to be his wife;
24:4 Her former husband, which sent her away, may not take her again
to be his wife, after that she is defiled; for that is abomination
before the LORD: and thou shalt not cause the land to sin, which the
LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.

24:5 When a man hath taken a new wife, he shall not go out to war,
neither shall he be charged with any business: but he shall be free at
home one year, and shall cheer up his wife which he hath taken.

24:6 No man shall take the nether or the upper millstone to pledge:
for he taketh a man’s life to pledge.

24:7 If a man be found stealing any of his brethren of the children of
Israel, and maketh merchandise of him, or selleth him; then that thief
shall die; and thou shalt put evil away from among you.

24:8 Take heed in the plague of leprosy, that thou observe diligently,
and do according to all that the priests the Levites shall teach you:
as I commanded them, so ye shall observe to do.

24:9 Remember what the LORD thy God did unto Miriam by the way, after
that ye were come forth out of Egypt.

24:10 When thou dost lend thy brother any thing, thou shalt not go
into his house to fetch his pledge.

24:11 Thou shalt stand abroad, and the man to whom thou dost lend
shall bring out the pledge abroad unto thee.

24:12 And if the man be poor, thou shalt not sleep with his pledge:
24:13 In any case thou shalt deliver him the pledge again when the sun
goeth down, that he may sleep in his own raiment, and bless thee: and
it shall be righteousness unto thee before the LORD thy God.

24:14 Thou shalt not oppress an hired servant that is poor and needy,
whether he be of thy brethren, or of thy strangers that are in thy
land within thy gates: 24:15 At his day thou shalt give him his hire,
neither shall the sun go down upon it; for he is poor, and setteth his
heart upon it: lest he cry against thee unto the LORD, and it be sin
unto thee.

24:16 The fathers shall not be put to death for the children, neither
shall the children be put to death for the fathers: every man shall be
put to death for his own sin.

24:17 Thou shalt not pervert the judgment of the stranger, nor of the
fatherless; nor take a widow’s raiment to pledge: 24:18 But thou shalt
remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt, and the LORD thy God
redeemed thee thence: therefore I command thee to do this thing.

24:19 When thou cuttest down thine harvest in thy field, and hast
forgot a sheaf in the field, thou shalt not go again to fetch it: it
shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow: that
the LORD thy God may bless thee in all the work of thine hands.

24:20 When thou beatest thine olive tree, thou shalt not go over the
boughs again: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and
for the widow.

24:21 When thou gatherest the grapes of thy vineyard, thou shalt not
glean it afterward: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless,
and for the widow.

24:22 And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of
Egypt: therefore I command thee to do this thing.

25:1 If there be a controversy between men, and they come unto
judgment, that the judges may judge them; then they shall justify the
righteous, and condemn the wicked.

25:2 And it shall be, if the wicked man be worthy to be beaten, that
the judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his
face, according to his fault, by a certain number.

25:3 Forty stripes he may give him, and not exceed: lest, if he should
exceed, and beat him above these with many stripes, then thy brother
should seem vile unto thee.

25:4 Thou shalt not muzzle the ox when he treadeth out the corn.

25:5 If brethren dwell together, and one of them die, and have no
child, the wife of the dead shall not marry without unto a stranger:
her husband’s brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him to
wife, and perform the duty of an husband’s brother unto her.

25:6 And it shall be, that the firstborn which she beareth shall
succeed in the name of his brother which is dead, that his name be not
put out of Israel.

25:7 And if the man like not to take his brother’s wife, then let his
brother’s wife go up to the gate unto the elders, and say, My
husband’s brother refuseth to raise up unto his brother a name in
Israel, he will not perform the duty of my husband’s brother.

25:8 Then the elders of his city shall call him, and speak unto him:
and if he stand to it, and say, I like not to take her; 25:9 Then
shall his brother’s wife come unto him in the presence of the elders,
and loose his shoe from off his foot, and spit in his face, and shall
answer and say, So shall it be done unto that man that will not build
up his brother’s house.

25:10 And his name shall be called in Israel, The house of him that
hath his shoe loosed.

25:11 When men strive together one with another, and the wife of the
one draweth near for to deliver her husband out of the hand of him
that smiteth him, and putteth forth her hand, and taketh him by the
secrets: 25:12 Then thou shalt cut off her hand, thine eye shall not
pity her.

25:13 Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers weights, a great and a
small.

25:14 Thou shalt not have in thine house divers measures, a great and
a small.

25:15 But thou shalt have a perfect and just weight, a perfect and
just measure shalt thou have: that thy days may be lengthened in the
land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.

25:16 For all that do such things, and all that do unrighteously, are
an abomination unto the LORD thy God.

25:17 Remember what Amalek did unto thee by the way, when ye were come
forth out of Egypt; 25:18 How he met thee by the way, and smote the
hindmost of thee, even all that were feeble behind thee, when thou
wast faint and weary; and he feared not God.

25:19 Therefore it shall be, when the LORD thy God hath given thee
rest from all thine enemies round about, in the land which the LORD
thy God giveth thee for an inheritance to possess it, that thou shalt
blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven; thou shalt not
forget it.

26:1 And it shall be, when thou art come in unto the land which the
LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, and possessest it, and
dwellest therein; 26:2 That thou shalt take of the first of all the
fruit of the earth, which thou shalt bring of thy land that the LORD
thy God giveth thee, and shalt put it in a basket, and shalt go unto
the place which the LORD thy God shall choose to place his name there.

26:3 And thou shalt go unto the priest that shall be in those days,
and say unto him, I profess this day unto the LORD thy God, that I am
come unto the country which the LORD sware unto our fathers for to
give us.

26:4 And the priest shall take the basket out of thine hand, and set
it down before the altar of the LORD thy God.

26:5 And thou shalt speak and say before the LORD thy God, A Syrian
ready to perish was my father, and he went down into Egypt, and
sojourned there with a few, and became there a nation, great, mighty,
and populous: 26:6 And the Egyptians evil entreated us, and afflicted
us, and laid upon us hard bondage: 26:7 And when we cried unto the
LORD God of our fathers, the LORD heard our voice, and looked on our
affliction, and our labour, and our oppression: 26:8 And the LORD
brought us forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand, and with an
outstretched arm, and with great terribleness, and with signs, and
with wonders: 26:9 And he hath brought us into this place, and hath
given us this land, even a land that floweth with milk and honey.

26:10 And now, behold, I have brought the firstfruits of the land,
which thou, O LORD, hast given me. And thou shalt set it before the
LORD thy God, and worship before the LORD thy God: 26:11 And thou
shalt rejoice in every good thing which the LORD thy God hath given
unto thee, and unto thine house, thou, and the Levite, and the
stranger that is among you.

26:12 When thou hast made an end of tithing all the tithes of thine
increase the third year, which is the year of tithing, and hast given
it unto the Levite, the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, that
they may eat within thy gates, and be filled; 26:13 Then thou shalt
say before the LORD thy God, I have brought away the hallowed things
out of mine house, and also have given them unto the Levite, and unto
the stranger, to the fatherless, and to the widow, according to all
thy commandments which thou hast commanded me: I have not transgressed
thy commandments, neither have I forgotten them.

26:14 I have not eaten thereof in my mourning, neither have I taken
away ought thereof for any unclean use, nor given ought thereof for
the dead: but I have hearkened to the voice of the LORD my God, and
have done according to all that thou hast commanded me.

26:15 Look down from thy holy habitation, from heaven, and bless thy
people Israel, and the land which thou hast given us, as thou swarest
unto our fathers, a land that floweth with milk and honey.

26:16 This day the LORD thy God hath commanded thee to do these
statutes and judgments: thou shalt therefore keep and do them with all
thine heart, and with all thy soul.

26:17 Thou hast avouched the LORD this day to be thy God, and to walk
in his ways, and to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his
judgments, and to hearken unto his voice: 26:18 And the LORD hath
avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as he hath promised
thee, and that thou shouldest keep all his commandments; 26:19 And to
make thee high above all nations which he hath made, in praise, and in
name, and in honour; and that thou mayest be an holy people unto the
LORD thy God, as he hath spoken.

27:1 And Moses with the elders of Israel commanded the people, saying,
Keep all the commandments which I command you this day.

27:2 And it shall be on the day when ye shall pass over Jordan unto
the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee, that thou shalt set thee
up great stones, and plaister them with plaister: 27:3 And thou shalt
write upon them all the words of this law, when thou art passed over,
that thou mayest go in unto the land which the LORD thy God giveth
thee, a land that floweth with milk and honey; as the LORD God of thy
fathers hath promised thee.

27:4 Therefore it shall be when ye be gone over Jordan, that ye shall
set up these stones, which I command you this day, in mount Ebal, and
thou shalt plaister them with plaister.

27:5 And there shalt thou build an altar unto the LORD thy God, an
altar of stones: thou shalt not lift up any iron tool upon them.

27:6 Thou shalt build the altar of the LORD thy God of whole stones:
and thou shalt offer burnt offerings thereon unto the LORD thy God:
27:7 And thou shalt offer peace offerings, and shalt eat there, and
rejoice before the LORD thy God.

27:8 And thou shalt write upon the stones all the words of this law
very plainly.

27:9 And Moses and the priests the Levites spake unto all Israel,
saying, Take heed, and hearken, O Israel; this day thou art become the
people of the LORD thy God.

27:10 Thou shalt therefore obey the voice of the LORD thy God, and do
his commandments and his statutes, which I command thee this day.

27:11 And Moses charged the people the same day, saying, 27:12 These
shall stand upon mount Gerizim to bless the people, when ye are come
over Jordan; Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Joseph,
and Benjamin: 27:13 And these shall stand upon mount Ebal to curse;
Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.

27:14 And the Levites shall speak, and say unto all the men of Israel
with a loud voice, 27:15 Cursed be the man that maketh any graven or
molten image, an abomination unto the LORD, the work of the hands of
the craftsman, and putteth it in a secret place. And all the people
shall answer and say, Amen.

27:16 Cursed be he that setteth light by his father or his mother. And
all the people shall say, Amen.

27:17 Cursed be he that removeth his neighbour’s landmark. And all the
people shall say, Amen.

27:18 Cursed be he that maketh the blind to wander out of the way. And
all the people shall say, Amen.

27:19 Cursed be he that perverteth the judgment of the stranger,
fatherless, and widow. And all the people shall say, Amen.

27:20 Cursed be he that lieth with his father’s wife; because he
uncovereth his father’s skirt. And all the people shall say, Amen.

27:21 Cursed be he that lieth with any manner of beast. And all the
people shall say, Amen.

27:22 Cursed be he that lieth with his sister, the daughter of his
father, or the daughter of his mother. And all the people shall say,
Amen.

27:23 Cursed be he that lieth with his mother in law. And all the
people shall say, Amen.

27:24 Cursed be he that smiteth his neighbour secretly. And all the
people shall say, Amen.

27:25 Cursed be he that taketh reward to slay an innocent person. And
all the people shall say, Amen.

27:26 Cursed be he that confirmeth not all the words of this law to do
them. And all the people shall say, Amen.

28:1 And it shall come to pass, if thou shalt hearken diligently unto
the voice of the LORD thy God, to observe and to do all his
commandments which I command thee this day, that the LORD thy God will
set thee on high above all nations of the earth: 28:2 And all these
blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, if thou shalt hearken
unto the voice of the LORD thy God.

28:3 Blessed shalt thou be in the city, and blessed shalt thou be in
the field.

28:4 Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy
ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy kine, and the
flocks of thy sheep.

28:5 Blessed shall be thy basket and thy store.

28:6 Blessed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and blessed shalt thou
be when thou goest out.

28:7 The LORD shall cause thine enemies that rise up against thee to
be smitten before thy face: they shall come out against thee one way,
and flee before thee seven ways.

28:8 The LORD shall command the blessing upon thee in thy storehouses,
and in all that thou settest thine hand unto; and he shall bless thee
in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.

28:9 The LORD shall establish thee an holy people unto himself, as he
hath sworn unto thee, if thou shalt keep the commandments of the LORD
thy God, and walk in his ways.

28:10 And all people of the earth shall see that thou art called by
the name of the LORD; and they shall be afraid of thee.

28:11 And the LORD shall make thee plenteous in goods, in the fruit of
thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy
ground, in the land which the LORD sware unto thy fathers to give
thee.

28:12 The LORD shall open unto thee his good treasure, the heaven to
give the rain unto thy land in his season, and to bless all the work
of thine hand: and thou shalt lend unto many nations, and thou shalt
not borrow.

28:13 And the LORD shall make thee the head, and not the tail; and
thou shalt be above only, and thou shalt not be beneath; if that thou
hearken unto the commandments of the LORD thy God, which I command
thee this day, to observe and to do them: 28:14 And thou shalt not go
aside from any of the words which I command thee this day, to the
right hand, or to the left, to go after other gods to serve them.

28:15 But it shall come to pass, if thou wilt not hearken unto the
voice of the LORD thy God, to observe to do all his commandments and
his statutes which I command thee this day; that all these curses
shall come upon thee, and overtake thee: 28:16 Cursed shalt thou be in
the city, and cursed shalt thou be in the field.

28:17 Cursed shall be thy basket and thy store.

28:18 Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy
land, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep.

28:19 Cursed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and cursed shalt thou
be when thou goest out.

28:20 The LORD shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke, in
all that thou settest thine hand unto for to do, until thou be
destroyed, and until thou perish quickly; because of the wickedness of
thy doings, whereby thou hast forsaken me.

28:21 The LORD shall make the pestilence cleave unto thee, until he
have consumed thee from off the land, whither thou goest to possess
it.

28:22 The LORD shall smite thee with a consumption, and with a fever,
and with an inflammation, and with an extreme burning, and with the
sword, and with blasting, and with mildew; and they shall pursue thee
until thou perish.

28:23 And thy heaven that is over thy head shall be brass, and the
earth that is under thee shall be iron.

28:24 The LORD shall make the rain of thy land powder and dust: from
heaven shall it come down upon thee, until thou be destroyed.

28:25 The LORD shall cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies:
thou shalt go out one way against them, and flee seven ways before
them: and shalt be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth.

28:26 And thy carcase shall be meat unto all fowls of the air, and
unto the beasts of the earth, and no man shall fray them away.

28:27 The LORD will smite thee with the botch of Egypt, and with the
emerods, and with the scab, and with the itch, whereof thou canst not
be healed.

28:28 The LORD shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and
astonishment of heart: 28:29 And thou shalt grope at noonday, as the
blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shalt not prosper in thy ways: and
thou shalt be only oppressed and spoiled evermore, and no man shall
save thee.

28:30 Thou shalt betroth a wife, and another man shall lie with her:
thou shalt build an house, and thou shalt not dwell therein: thou
shalt plant a vineyard, and shalt not gather the grapes thereof.

28:31 Thine ox shall be slain before thine eyes, and thou shalt not
eat thereof: thine ass shall be violently taken away from before thy
face, and shall not be restored to thee: thy sheep shall be given unto
thine enemies, and thou shalt have none to rescue them.

28:32 Thy sons and thy daughters shall be given unto another people,
and thine eyes shall look, and fail with longing for them all the day
long; and there shall be no might in thine hand.

28:33 The fruit of thy land, and all thy labours, shall a nation which
thou knowest not eat up; and thou shalt be only oppressed and crushed
alway: 28:34 So that thou shalt be mad for the sight of thine eyes
which thou shalt see.

28:35 The LORD shall smite thee in the knees, and in the legs, with a
sore botch that cannot be healed, from the sole of thy foot unto the
top of thy head.

28:36 The LORD shall bring thee, and thy king which thou shalt set
over thee, unto a nation which neither thou nor thy fathers have
known; and there shalt thou serve other gods, wood and stone.

28:37 And thou shalt become an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword,
among all nations whither the LORD shall lead thee.

28:38 Thou shalt carry much seed out into the field, and shalt gather
but little in; for the locust shall consume it.

28:39 Thou shalt plant vineyards, and dress them, but shalt neither
drink of the wine, nor gather the grapes; for the worms shall eat
them.

28:40 Thou shalt have olive trees throughout all thy coasts, but thou
shalt not anoint thyself with the oil; for thine olive shall cast his
fruit.

28:41 Thou shalt beget sons and daughters, but thou shalt not enjoy
them; for they shall go into captivity.

28:42 All thy trees and fruit of thy land shall the locust consume.

28:43 The stranger that is within thee shall get up above thee very
high; and thou shalt come down very low.

28:44 He shall lend to thee, and thou shalt not lend to him: he shall
be the head, and thou shalt be the tail.

28:45 Moreover all these curses shall come upon thee, and shall pursue
thee, and overtake thee, till thou be destroyed; because thou
hearkenedst not unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to keep his
commandments and his statutes which he commanded thee: 28:46 And they
shall be upon thee for a sign and for a wonder, and upon thy seed for
ever.

28:47 Because thou servedst not the LORD thy God with joyfulness, and
with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things; 28:48
Therefore shalt thou serve thine enemies which the LORD shall send
against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want
of all things: and he shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck, until he
have destroyed thee.

28:49 The LORD shall bring a nation against thee from far, from the
end of the earth, as swift as the eagle flieth; a nation whose tongue
thou shalt not understand; 28:50 A nation of fierce countenance, which
shall not regard the person of the old, nor shew favour to the young:
28:51 And he shall eat the fruit of thy cattle, and the fruit of thy
land, until thou be destroyed: which also shall not leave thee either
corn, wine, or oil, or the increase of thy kine, or flocks of thy
sheep, until he have destroyed thee.

28:52 And he shall besiege thee in all thy gates, until thy high and
fenced walls come down, wherein thou trustedst, throughout all thy
land: and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates throughout all thy
land, which the LORD thy God hath given thee.

28:53 And thou shalt eat the fruit of thine own body, the flesh of thy
sons and of thy daughters, which the LORD thy God hath given thee, in
the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall
distress thee: 28:54 So that the man that is tender among you, and
very delicate, his eye shall be evil toward his brother, and toward
the wife of his bosom, and toward the remnant of his children which he
shall leave: 28:55 So that he will not give to any of them of the
flesh of his children whom he shall eat: because he hath nothing left
him in the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall
distress thee in all thy gates.

28:56 The tender and delicate woman among you, which would not
adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness
and tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the husband of her bosom,
and toward her son, and toward her daughter, 28:57 And toward her
young one that cometh out from between her feet, and toward her
children which she shall bear: for she shall eat them for want of all
things secretly in the siege and straitness, wherewith thine enemy
shall distress thee in thy gates.

28:58 If thou wilt not observe to do all the words of this law that
are written in this book, that thou mayest fear this glorious and
fearful name, THE LORD THY GOD; 28:59 Then the LORD will make thy
plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, even great plagues,
and of long continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of long continuance.

28:60 Moreover he will bring upon thee all the diseases of Egypt,
which thou wast afraid of; and they shall cleave unto thee.

28:61 Also every sickness, and every plague, which is not written in
the book of this law, them will the LORD bring upon thee, until thou
be destroyed.

28:62 And ye shall be left few in number, whereas ye were as the stars
of heaven for multitude; because thou wouldest not obey the voice of
the LORD thy God.

28:63 And it shall come to pass, that as the LORD rejoiced over you to
do you good, and to multiply you; so the LORD will rejoice over you to
destroy you, and to bring you to nought; and ye shall be plucked from
off the land whither thou goest to possess it.

28:64 And the LORD shall scatter thee among all people, from the one
end of the earth even unto the other; and there thou shalt serve other
gods, which neither thou nor thy fathers have known, even wood and
stone.

28:65 And among these nations shalt thou find no ease, neither shall
the sole of thy foot have rest: but the LORD shall give thee there a
trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind: 28:66 And
thy life shall hang in doubt before thee; and thou shalt fear day and
night, and shalt have none assurance of thy life: 28:67 In the morning
thou shalt say, Would God it were even! and at even thou shalt say,
Would God it were morning! for the fear of thine heart wherewith thou
shalt fear, and for the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see.

28:68 And the LORD shall bring thee into Egypt again with ships, by
the way whereof I spake unto thee, Thou shalt see it no more again:
and there ye shall be sold unto your enemies for bondmen and
bondwomen, and no man shall buy you.

29:1 These are the words of the covenant, which the LORD commanded
Moses to make with the children of Israel in the land of Moab, beside
the covenant which he made with them in Horeb.

29:2 And Moses called unto all Israel, and said unto them, Ye have
seen all that the LORD did before your eyes in the land of Egypt unto
Pharaoh, and unto all his servants, and unto all his land; 29:3 The
great temptations which thine eyes have seen, the signs, and those
great miracles: 29:4 Yet the LORD hath not given you an heart to
perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto this day.

29:5 And I have led you forty years in the wilderness: your clothes
are not waxen old upon you, and thy shoe is not waxen old upon thy
foot.

29:6 Ye have not eaten bread, neither have ye drunk wine or strong
drink: that ye might know that I am the LORD your God.

29:7 And when ye came unto this place, Sihon the king of Heshbon, and
Og the king of Bashan, came out against us unto battle, and we smote
them: 29:8 And we took their land, and gave it for an inheritance unto
the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to the half tribe of Manasseh.

29:9 Keep therefore the words of this covenant, and do them, that ye
may prosper in all that ye do.

29:10 Ye stand this day all of you before the LORD your God; your
captains of your tribes, your elders, and your officers, with all the
men of Israel, 29:11 Your little ones, your wives, and thy stranger
that is in thy camp, from the hewer of thy wood unto the drawer of thy
water: 29:12 That thou shouldest enter into covenant with the LORD thy
God, and into his oath, which the LORD thy God maketh with thee this
day: 29:13 That he may establish thee to day for a people unto
himself, and that he may be unto thee a God, as he hath said unto
thee, and as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and
to Jacob.

29:14 Neither with you only do I make this covenant and this oath;
29:15 But with him that standeth here with us this day before the LORD
our God, and also with him that is not here with us this day: 29:16
(For ye know how we have dwelt in the land of Egypt; and how we came
through the nations which ye passed by; 29:17 And ye have seen their
abominations, and their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which
were among them:) 29:18 Lest there should be among you man, or woman,
or family, or tribe, whose heart turneth away this day from the LORD
our God, to go and serve the gods of these nations; lest there should
be among you a root that beareth gall and wormwood; 29:19 And it come
to pass, when he heareth the words of this curse, that he bless
himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst: 29:20 The
LORD will not spare him, but then the anger of the LORD and his
jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are
written in this book shall lie upon him, and the LORD shall blot out
his name from under heaven.

29:21 And the LORD shall separate him unto evil out of all the tribes
of Israel, according to all the curses of the covenant that are
written in this book of the law: 29:22 So that the generation to come
of your children that shall rise up after you, and the stranger that
shall come from a far land, shall say, when they see the plagues of
that land, and the sicknesses which the LORD hath laid upon it; 29:23
And that the whole land thereof is brimstone, and salt, and burning,
that it is not sown, nor beareth, nor any grass groweth therein, like
the overthrow of Sodom, and Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim, which the
LORD overthrew in his anger, and in his wrath: 29:24 Even all nations
shall say, Wherefore hath the LORD done thus unto this land? what
meaneth the heat of this great anger? 29:25 Then men shall say,
Because they have forsaken the covenant of the LORD God of their
fathers, which he made with them when he brought them forth out of the
land of Egypt: 29:26 For they went and served other gods, and
worshipped them, gods whom they knew not, and whom he had not given
unto them: 29:27 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against this
land, to bring upon it all the curses that are written in this book:
29:28 And the LORD rooted them out of their land in anger, and in
wrath, and in great indignation, and cast them into another land, as
it is this day.

29:29 The secret things belong unto the LORD our God: but those things
which are revealed belong unto us and to our children for ever, that
we may do all the words of this law.

30:1 And it shall come to pass, when all these things are come upon
thee, the blessing and the curse, which I have set before thee, and
thou shalt call them to mind among all the nations, whither the LORD
thy God hath driven thee, 30:2 And shalt return unto the LORD thy God,
and shalt obey his voice according to all that I command thee this
day, thou and thy children, with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul; 30:3 That then the LORD thy God will turn thy captivity, and
have compassion upon thee, and will return and gather thee from all
the nations, whither the LORD thy God hath scattered thee.

30:4 If any of thine be driven out unto the outmost parts of heaven,
from thence will the LORD thy God gather thee, and from thence will he
fetch thee: 30:5 And the LORD thy God will bring thee into the land
which thy fathers possessed, and thou shalt possess it; and he will do
thee good, and multiply thee above thy fathers.

30:6 And the LORD thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart
of thy seed, to love the LORD thy God with all thine heart, and with
all thy soul, that thou mayest live.

30:7 And the LORD thy God will put all these curses upon thine
enemies, and on them that hate thee, which persecuted thee.

30:8 And thou shalt return and obey the voice of the LORD, and do all
his commandments which I command thee this day.

30:9 And the LORD thy God will make thee plenteous in every work of
thine hand, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle,
and in the fruit of thy land, for good: for the LORD will again
rejoice over thee for good, as he rejoiced over thy fathers: 30:10 If
thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to keep his
commandments and his statutes which are written in this book of the
law, and if thou turn unto the LORD thy God with all thine heart, and
with all thy soul.

30:11 For this commandment which I command thee this day, it is not
hidden from thee, neither is it far off.

30:12 It is not in heaven, that thou shouldest say, Who shall go up
for us to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do
it? 30:13 Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou shouldest say, Who
shall go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear
it, and do it? 30:14 But the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy
mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it.

30:15 See, I have set before thee this day life and good, and death
and evil; 30:16 In that I command thee this day to love the LORD thy
God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his commandments and his
statutes and his judgments, that thou mayest live and multiply: and
the LORD thy God shall bless thee in the land whither thou goest to
possess it.

30:17 But if thine heart turn away, so that thou wilt not hear, but
shalt be drawn away, and worship other gods, and serve them; 30:18 I
denounce unto you this day, that ye shall surely perish, and that ye
shall not prolong your days upon the land, whither thou passest over
Jordan to go to possess it.

30:19 I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I
have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore
choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live: 30:20 That thou
mayest love the LORD thy God, and that thou mayest obey his voice, and
that thou mayest cleave unto him: for he is thy life, and the length
of thy days: that thou mayest dwell in the land which the LORD sware
unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give them.

31:1 And Moses went and spake these words unto all Israel.

31:2 And he said unto them, I am an hundred and twenty years old this
day; I can no more go out and come in: also the LORD hath said unto
me, Thou shalt not go over this Jordan.

31:3 The LORD thy God, he will go over before thee, and he will
destroy these nations from before thee, and thou shalt possess them:
and Joshua, he shall go over before thee, as the LORD hath said.

31:4 And the LORD shall do unto them as he did to Sihon and to Og,
kings of the Amorites, and unto the land of them, whom he destroyed.

31:5 And the LORD shall give them up before your face, that ye may do
unto them according unto all the commandments which I have commanded
you.

31:6 Be strong and of a good courage, fear not, nor be afraid of them:
for the LORD thy God, he it is that doth go with thee; he will not
fail thee, nor forsake thee.

31:7 And Moses called unto Joshua, and said unto him in the sight of
all Israel, Be strong and of a good courage: for thou must go with
this people unto the land which the LORD hath sworn unto their fathers
to give them; and thou shalt cause them to inherit it.

31:8 And the LORD, he it is that doth go before thee; he will be with
thee, he will not fail thee, neither forsake thee: fear not, neither
be dismayed.

31:9 And Moses wrote this law, and delivered it unto the priests the
sons of Levi, which bare the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and unto
all the elders of Israel.

31:10 And Moses commanded them, saying, At the end of every seven
years, in the solemnity of the year of release, in the feast of
tabernacles, 31:11 When all Israel is come to appear before the LORD
thy God in the place which he shall choose, thou shalt read this law
before all Israel in their hearing.

31:12 Gather the people together, men and women, and children, and thy
stranger that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they
may learn, and fear the LORD your God, and observe to do all the words
of this law: 31:13 And that their children, which have not known any
thing, may hear, and learn to fear the LORD your God, as long as ye
live in the land whither ye go over Jordan to possess it.

31:14 And the LORD said unto Moses, Behold, thy days approach that
thou must die: call Joshua, and present yourselves in the tabernacle
of the congregation, that I may give him a charge. And Moses and
Joshua went, and presented themselves in the tabernacle of the
congregation.

31:15 And the LORD appeared in the tabernacle in a pillar of a cloud:
and the pillar of the cloud stood over the door of the tabernacle.

31:16 And the LORD said unto Moses, Behold, thou shalt sleep with thy
fathers; and this people will rise up, and go a whoring after the gods
of the strangers of the land, whither they go to be among them, and
will forsake me, and break my covenant which I have made with them.

31:17 Then my anger shall be kindled against them in that day, and I
will forsake them, and I will hide my face from them, and they shall
be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall befall them; so that
they will say in that day, Are not these evils come upon us, because
our God is not among us? 31:18 And I will surely hide my face in that
day for all the evils which they shall have wrought, in that they are
turned unto other gods.

31:19 Now therefore write ye this song for you, and teach it the
children of Israel: put it in their mouths, that this song may be a
witness for me against the children of Israel.

31:20 For when I shall have brought them into the land which I sware
unto their fathers, that floweth with milk and honey; and they shall
have eaten and filled themselves, and waxen fat; then will they turn
unto other gods, and serve them, and provoke me, and break my
covenant.

31:21 And it shall come to pass, when many evils and troubles are
befallen them, that this song shall testify against them as a witness;
for it shall not be forgotten out of the mouths of their seed: for I
know their imagination which they go about, even now, before I have
brought them into the land which I sware.

31:22 Moses therefore wrote this song the same day, and taught it the
children of Israel.

31:23 And he gave Joshua the son of Nun a charge, and said, Be strong
and of a good courage: for thou shalt bring the children of Israel
into the land which I sware unto them: and I will be with thee.

31:24 And it came to pass, when Moses had made an end of writing the
words of this law in a book, until they were finished, 31:25 That
Moses commanded the Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the
LORD, saying, 31:26 Take this book of the law, and put it in the side
of the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, that it may be there
for a witness against thee.

31:27 For I know thy rebellion, and thy stiff neck: behold, while I am
yet alive with you this day, ye have been rebellious against the LORD;
and how much more after my death? 31:28 Gather unto me all the elders
of your tribes, and your officers, that I may speak these words in
their ears, and call heaven and earth to record against them.

31:29 For I know that after my death ye will utterly corrupt
yourselves, and turn aside from the way which I have commanded you;
and evil will befall you in the latter days; because ye will do evil
in the sight of the LORD, to provoke him to anger through the work of
your hands.

31:30 And Moses spake in the ears of all the congregation of Israel
the words of this song, until they were ended.

32:1 Give ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak; and hear, O earth, the
words of my mouth.

32:2 My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distil as the
dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon
the grass: 32:3 Because I will publish the name of the LORD: ascribe
ye greatness unto our God.

32:4 He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for all his ways are
judgment: a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he.

32:5 They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his
children: they are a perverse and crooked generation.

32:6 Do ye thus requite the LORD, O foolish people and unwise? is not
he thy father that hath bought thee? hath he not made thee, and
established thee? 32:7 Remember the days of old, consider the years
of many generations: ask thy father, and he will shew thee; thy
elders, and they will tell thee.

32:8 When the Most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when
he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people
according to the number of the children of Israel.

32:9 For the LORD’s portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his
inheritance.

32:10 He found him in a desert land, and in the waste howling
wilderness; he led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the
apple of his eye.

32:11 As an eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young,
spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings:
32:12 So the LORD alone did lead him, and there was no strange god
with him.

32:13 He made him ride on the high places of the earth, that he might
eat the increase of the fields; and he made him to suck honey out of
the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock; 32:14 Butter of kine, and
milk of sheep, with fat of lambs, and rams of the breed of Bashan, and
goats, with the fat of kidneys of wheat; and thou didst drink the pure
blood of the grape.

32:15 But Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked: thou art waxen fat, thou art
grown thick, thou art covered with fatness; then he forsook God which
made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation.

32:16 They provoked him to jealousy with strange gods, with
abominations provoked they him to anger.

32:17 They sacrificed unto devils, not to God; to gods whom they knew
not, to new gods that came newly up, whom your fathers feared not.

32:18 Of the Rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, and hast
forgotten God that formed thee.

32:19 And when the LORD saw it, he abhorred them, because of the
provoking of his sons, and of his daughters.

32:20 And he said, I will hide my face from them, I will see what
their end shall be: for they are a very froward generation, children
in whom is no faith.

32:21 They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God; they
have provoked me to anger with their vanities: and I will move them to
jealousy with those which are not a people; I will provoke them to
anger with a foolish nation.

32:22 For a fire is kindled in mine anger, and shall burn unto the
lowest hell, and shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on
fire the foundations of the mountains.

32:23 I will heap mischiefs upon them; I will spend mine arrows upon
them.

32:24 They shall be burnt with hunger, and devoured with burning heat,
and with bitter destruction: I will also send the teeth of beasts upon
them, with the poison of serpents of the dust.

32:25 The sword without, and terror within, shall destroy both the
young man and the virgin, the suckling also with the man of gray
hairs.

32:26 I said, I would scatter them into corners, I would make the
remembrance of them to cease from among men: 32:27 Were it not that I
feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversaries should behave
themselves strangely, and lest they should say, Our hand is high, and
the LORD hath not done all this.

32:28 For they are a nation void of counsel, neither is there any
understanding in them.

32:29 O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they
would consider their latter end! 32:30 How should one chase a
thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except their Rock had
sold them, and the LORD had shut them up? 32:31 For their rock is not
as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being judges.

32:32 For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of
Gomorrah: their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter:
32:33 Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of
asps.

32:34 Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my
treasures? 32:35 To me belongeth vengeance and recompence; their foot
shall slide in due time: for the day of their calamity is at hand, and
the things that shall come upon them make haste.

32:36 For the LORD shall judge his people, and repent himself for his
servants, when he seeth that their power is gone, and there is none
shut up, or left.

32:37 And he shall say, Where are their gods, their rock in whom they
trusted, 32:38 Which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank
the wine of their drink offerings? let them rise up and help you, and
be your protection.

32:39 See now that I, even I, am he, and there is no god with me: I
kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that
can deliver out of my hand.

32:40 For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever.

32:41 If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on
judgment; I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward
them that hate me.

32:42 I will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall
devour flesh; and that with the blood of the slain and of the
captives, from the beginning of revenges upon the enemy.

32:43 Rejoice, O ye nations, with his people: for he will avenge the
blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries,
and will be merciful unto his land, and to his people.

32:44 And Moses came and spake all the words of this song in the ears
of the people, he, and Hoshea the son of Nun.

32:45 And Moses made an end of speaking all these words to all Israel:
32:46 And he said unto them, Set your hearts unto all the words which
I testify among you this day, which ye shall command your children to
observe to do, all the words of this law.

32:47 For it is not a vain thing for you; because it is your life: and
through this thing ye shall prolong your days in the land, whither ye
go over Jordan to possess it.

32:48 And the LORD spake unto Moses that selfsame day, saying, 32:49
Get thee up into this mountain Abarim, unto mount Nebo, which is in
the land of Moab, that is over against Jericho; and behold the land of
Canaan, which I give unto the children of Israel for a possession:
32:50 And die in the mount whither thou goest up, and be gathered unto
thy people; as Aaron thy brother died in mount Hor, and was gathered
unto his people: 32:51 Because ye trespassed against me among the
children of Israel at the waters of MeribahKadesh, in the wilderness
of Zin; because ye sanctified me not in the midst of the children of
Israel.

32:52 Yet thou shalt see the land before thee; but thou shalt not go
thither unto the land which I give the children of Israel.

33:1 And this is the blessing, wherewith Moses the man of God blessed
the children of Israel before his death.

33:2 And he said, The LORD came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto
them; he shined forth from mount Paran, and he came with ten thousands
of saints: from his right hand went a fiery law for them.

33:3 Yea, he loved the people; all his saints are in thy hand: and
they sat down at thy feet; every one shall receive of thy words.

33:4 Moses commanded us a law, even the inheritance of the
congregation of Jacob.

33:5 And he was king in Jeshurun, when the heads of the people and the
tribes of Israel were gathered together.

33:6 Let Reuben live, and not die; and let not his men be few.

33:7 And this is the blessing of Judah: and he said, Hear, LORD, the
voice of Judah, and bring him unto his people: let his hands be
sufficient for him; and be thou an help to him from his enemies.

33:8 And of Levi he said, Let thy Thummim and thy Urim be with thy
holy one, whom thou didst prove at Massah, and with whom thou didst
strive at the waters of Meribah; 33:9 Who said unto his father and to
his mother, I have not seen him; neither did he acknowledge his
brethren, nor knew his own children: for they have observed thy word,
and kept thy covenant.

33:10 They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law: they
shall put incense before thee, and whole burnt sacrifice upon thine
altar.

33:11 Bless, LORD, his substance, and accept the work of his hands;
smite through the loins of them that rise against him, and of them
that hate him, that they rise not again.

33:12 And of Benjamin he said, The beloved of the LORD shall dwell in
safety by him; and the Lord shall cover him all the day long, and he
shall dwell between his shoulders.

33:13 And of Joseph he said, Blessed of the LORD be his land, for the
precious things of heaven, for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth
beneath, 33:14 And for the precious fruits brought forth by the sun,
and for the precious things put forth by the moon, 33:15 And for the
chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of
the lasting hills, 33:16 And for the precious things of the earth and
fulness thereof, and for the good will of him that dwelt in the bush:
let the blessing come upon the head of Joseph, and upon the top of the
head of him that was separated from his brethren.

33:17 His glory is like the firstling of his bullock, and his horns
are like the horns of unicorns: with them he shall push the people
together to the ends of the earth: and they are the ten thousands of
Ephraim, and they are the thousands of Manasseh.

33:18 And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice, Zebulun, in thy going out; and,
Issachar, in thy tents.

33:19 They shall call the people unto the mountain; there they shall
offer sacrifices of righteousness: for they shall suck of the
abundance of the seas, and of treasures hid in the sand.

33:20 And of Gad he said, Blessed be he that enlargeth Gad: he
dwelleth as a lion, and teareth the arm with the crown of the head.

33:21 And he provided the first part for himself, because there, in a
portion of the lawgiver, was he seated; and he came with the heads of
the people, he executed the justice of the LORD, and his judgments
with Israel.

33:22 And of Dan he said, Dan is a lion’s whelp: he shall leap from
Bashan.

33:23 And of Naphtali he said, O Naphtali, satisfied with favour, and
full with the blessing of the LORD: possess thou the west and the
south.

33:24 And of Asher he said, Let Asher be blessed with children; let
him be acceptable to his brethren, and let him dip his foot in oil.

33:25 Thy shoes shall be iron and brass; and as thy days, so shall thy
strength be.

33:26 There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rideth upon the
heaven in thy help, and in his excellency on the sky.

33:27 The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the
everlasting arms: and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee;
and shall say, Destroy them.

33:28 Israel then shall dwell in safety alone: the fountain of Jacob
shall be upon a land of corn and wine; also his heavens shall drop
down dew.

33:29 Happy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people saved
by the LORD, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy
excellency! and thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee; and thou
shalt tread upon their high places.

34:1 And Moses went up from the plains of Moab unto the mountain of
Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, that is over against Jericho. And the LORD
shewed him all the land of Gilead, unto Dan, 34:2 And all Naphtali,
and the land of Ephraim, and Manasseh, and all the land of Judah, unto
the utmost sea, 34:3 And the south, and the plain of the valley of
Jericho, the city of palm trees, unto Zoar.

34:4 And the LORD said unto him, This is the land which I sware unto
Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, saying, I will give it unto thy
seed: I have caused thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not
go over thither.

34:5 So Moses the servant of the LORD died there in the land of Moab,
according to the word of the LORD.

34:6 And he buried him in a valley in the land of Moab, over against
Bethpeor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day.

34:7 And Moses was an hundred and twenty years old when he died: his
eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated.

34:8 And the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab
thirty days: so the days of weeping and mourning for Moses were ended.

34:9 And Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom; for
Moses had laid his hands upon him: and the children of Israel
hearkened unto him, and did as the LORD commanded Moses.

34:10 And there arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses,
whom the LORD knew face to face, 34:11 In all the signs and the
wonders, which the LORD sent him to do in the land of Egypt to
Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land, 34:12 And in
all that mighty hand, and in all the great terror which Moses shewed
in the sight of all Israel.


The Book of Joshua


1:1 Now after the death of Moses the servant of the LORD it came to
pass, that the LORD spake unto Joshua the son of Nun, Moses’ minister,
saying, 1:2 Moses my servant is dead; now therefore arise, go over
this Jordan, thou, and all this people, unto the land which I do give
to them, even to the children of Israel.

1:3 Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have
I given unto you, as I said unto Moses.

1:4 From the wilderness and this Lebanon even unto the great river,
the river Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, and unto the great
sea toward the going down of the sun, shall be your coast.

1:5 There shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the days
of thy life: as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee: I will not
fail thee, nor forsake thee.

1:6 Be strong and of a good courage: for unto this people shalt thou
divide for an inheritance the land, which I sware unto their fathers
to give them.

1:7 Only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou mayest observe
to do according to all the law, which Moses my servant commanded thee:
turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest
prosper whithersoever thou goest.

1:8 This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou
shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do
according to all that is written therein: for then thou shalt make thy
way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success.

1:9 Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not
afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the LORD thy God is with thee
whithersoever thou goest.

1:10 Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people, saying, 1:11
Pass through the host, and command the people, saying, Prepare you
victuals; for within three days ye shall pass over this Jordan, to go
in to possess the land, which the LORD your God giveth you to possess
it.

1:12 And to the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to half the tribe
of Manasseh, spake Joshua, saying, 1:13 Remember the word which Moses
the servant of the LORD commanded you, saying, The LORD your God hath
given you rest, and hath given you this land.

1:14 Your wives, your little ones, and your cattle, shall remain in
the land which Moses gave you on this side Jordan; but ye shall pass
before your brethren armed, all the mighty men of valour, and help
them; 1:15 Until the LORD have given your brethren rest, as he hath
given you, and they also have possessed the land which the LORD your
God giveth them: then ye shall return unto the land of your
possession, and enjoy it, which Moses the LORD’s servant gave you on
this side Jordan toward the sunrising.

1:16 And they answered Joshua, saying, All that thou commandest us we
will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go.

1:17 According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we
hearken unto thee: only the LORD thy God be with thee, as he was with
Moses.

1:18 Whosoever he be that doth rebel against thy commandment, and will
not hearken unto thy words in all that thou commandest him, he shall
be put to death: only be strong and of a good courage.

2:1 And Joshua the son of Nun sent out of Shittim two men to spy
secretly, saying, Go view the land, even Jericho. And they went, and
came into an harlot’s house, named Rahab, and lodged there.

2:2 And it was told the king of Jericho, saying, Behold, there came
men in hither to night of the children of Israel to search out the
country.

2:3 And the king of Jericho sent unto Rahab, saying, Bring forth the
men that are come to thee, which are entered into thine house: for
they be come to search out all the country.

2:4 And the woman took the two men, and hid them, and said thus, There
came men unto me, but I wist not whence they were: 2:5 And it came to
pass about the time of shutting of the gate, when it was dark, that
the men went out: whither the men went I wot not: pursue after them
quickly; for ye shall overtake them.

2:6 But she had brought them up to the roof of the house, and hid them
with the stalks of flax, which she had laid in order upon the roof.

2:7 And the men pursued after them the way to Jordan unto the fords:
and as soon as they which pursued after them were gone out, they shut
the gate.

2:8 And before they were laid down, she came up unto them upon the
roof; 2:9 And she said unto the men, I know that the LORD hath given
you the land, and that your terror is fallen upon us, and that all the
inhabitants of the land faint because of you.

2:10 For we have heard how the LORD dried up the water of the Red sea
for you, when ye came out of Egypt; and what ye did unto the two kings
of the Amorites, that were on the other side Jordan, Sihon and Og,
whom ye utterly destroyed.

2:11 And as soon as we had heard these things, our hearts did melt,
neither did there remain any more courage in any man, because of you:
for the LORD your God, he is God in heaven above, and in earth
beneath.

2:12 Now therefore, I pray you, swear unto me by the LORD, since I
have shewed you kindness, that ye will also shew kindness unto my
father’s house, and give me a true token: 2:13 And that ye will save
alive my father, and my mother, and my brethren, and my sisters, and
all that they have, and deliver our lives from death.

2:14 And the men answered her, Our life for yours, if ye utter not
this our business. And it shall be, when the LORD hath given us the
land, that we will deal kindly and truly with thee.

2:15 Then she let them down by a cord through the window: for her
house was upon the town wall, and she dwelt upon the wall.

2:16 And she said unto them, Get you to the mountain, lest the
pursuers meet you; and hide yourselves there three days, until the
pursuers be returned: and afterward may ye go your way.

2:17 And the men said unto her, We will be blameless of this thine
oath which thou hast made us swear.

2:18 Behold, when we come into the land, thou shalt bind this line of
scarlet thread in the window which thou didst let us down by: and thou
shalt bring thy father, and thy mother, and thy brethren, and all thy
father’s household, home unto thee.

2:19 And it shall be, that whosoever shall go out of the doors of thy
house into the street, his blood shall be upon his head, and we will
be guiltless: and whosoever shall be with thee in the house, his blood
shall be on our head, if any hand be upon him.

2:20 And if thou utter this our business, then we will be quit of
thine oath which thou hast made us to swear.

2:21 And she said, According unto your words, so be it. And she sent
them away, and they departed: and she bound the scarlet line in the
window.

2:22 And they went, and came unto the mountain, and abode there three
days, until the pursuers were returned: and the pursuers sought them
throughout all the way, but found them not.

2:23 So the two men returned, and descended from the mountain, and
passed over, and came to Joshua the son of Nun, and told him all
things that befell them: 2:24 And they said unto Joshua, Truly the
LORD hath delivered into our hands all the land; for even all the
inhabitants of the country do faint because of us.

3:1 And Joshua rose early in the morning; and they removed from
Shittim, and came to Jordan, he and all the children of Israel, and
lodged there before they passed over.

3:2 And it came to pass after three days, that the officers went
through the host; 3:3 And they commanded the people, saying, When ye
see the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, and the priests the
Levites bearing it, then ye shall remove from your place, and go after
it.

3:4 Yet there shall be a space between you and it, about two thousand
cubits by measure: come not near unto it, that ye may know the way by
which ye must go: for ye have not passed this way heretofore.

3:5 And Joshua said unto the people, Sanctify yourselves: for to
morrow the LORD will do wonders among you.

3:6 And Joshua spake unto the priests, saying, Take up the ark of the
covenant, and pass over before the people. And they took up the ark of
the covenant, and went before the people.

3:7 And the LORD said unto Joshua, This day will I begin to magnify
thee in the sight of all Israel, that they may know that, as I was
with Moses, so I will be with thee.

3:8 And thou shalt command the priests that bear the ark of the
covenant, saying, When ye are come to the brink of the water of
Jordan, ye shall stand still in Jordan.

3:9 And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, Come hither, and hear
the words of the LORD your God.

3:10 And Joshua said, Hereby ye shall know that the living God is
among you, and that he will without fail drive out from before you the
Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Hivites, and the Perizzites, and
the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Jebusites.

3:11 Behold, the ark of the covenant of the LORD of all the earth
passeth over before you into Jordan.

3:12 Now therefore take you twelve men out of the tribes of Israel,
out of every tribe a man.

3:13 And it shall come to pass, as soon as the soles of the feet of
the priests that bear the ark of the LORD, the LORD of all the earth,
shall rest in the waters of Jordan, that the waters of Jordan shall be
cut off from the waters that come down from above; and they shall
stand upon an heap.

3:14 And it came to pass, when the people removed from their tents, to
pass over Jordan, and the priests bearing the ark of the covenant
before the people; 3:15 And as they that bare the ark were come unto
Jordan, and the feet of the priests that bare the ark were dipped in
the brim of the water, (for Jordan overfloweth all his banks all the
time of harvest,) 3:16 That the waters which came down from above
stood and rose up upon an heap very far from the city Adam, that is
beside Zaretan: and those that came down toward the sea of the plain,
even the salt sea, failed, and were cut off: and the people passed
over right against Jericho.

3:17 And the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the LORD
stood firm on dry ground in the midst of Jordan, and all the
Israelites passed over on dry ground, until all the people were passed
clean over Jordan.

4:1 And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over
Jordan, that the LORD spake unto Joshua, saying, 4:2 Take you twelve
men out of the people, out of every tribe a man, 4:3 And command ye
them, saying, Take you hence out of the midst of Jordan, out of the
place where the priests’ feet stood firm, twelve stones, and ye shall
carry them over with you, and leave them in the lodging place, where
ye shall lodge this night.

4:4 Then Joshua called the twelve men, whom he had prepared of the
children of Israel, out of every tribe a man: 4:5 And Joshua said unto
them, Pass over before the ark of the LORD your God into the midst of
Jordan, and take you up every man of you a stone upon his shoulder,
according unto the number of the tribes of the children of Israel: 4:6
That this may be a sign among you, that when your children ask their
fathers in time to come, saying, What mean ye by these stones? 4:7
Then ye shall answer them, That the waters of Jordan were cut off
before the ark of the covenant of the LORD; when it passed over
Jordan, the waters of Jordan were cut off: and these stones shall be
for a memorial unto the children of Israel for ever.

4:8 And the children of Israel did so as Joshua commanded, and took up
twelve stones out of the midst of Jordan, as the LORD spake unto
Joshua, according to the number of the tribes of the children of
Israel, and carried them over with them unto the place where they
lodged, and laid them down there.

4:9 And Joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of Jordan, in the
place where the feet of the priests which bare the ark of the covenant
stood: and they are there unto this day.

4:10 For the priests which bare the ark stood in the midst of Jordan,
until everything was finished that the LORD commanded Joshua to speak
unto the people, according to all that Moses commanded Joshua: and the
people hasted and passed over.

4:11 And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over,
that the ark of the LORD passed over, and the priests, in the presence
of the people.

4:12 And the children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, and half the
tribe of Manasseh, passed over armed before the children of Israel, as
Moses spake unto them: 4:13 About forty thousand prepared for war
passed over before the LORD unto battle, to the plains of Jericho.

4:14 On that day the LORD magnified Joshua in the sight of all Israel;
and they feared him, as they feared Moses, all the days of his life.

4:15 And the LORD spake unto Joshua, saying, 4:16 Command the priests
that bear the ark of the testimony, that they come up out of Jordan.

4:17 Joshua therefore commanded the priests, saying, Come ye up out of
Jordan.

4:18 And it came to pass, when the priests that bare the ark of the
covenant of the LORD were come up out of the midst of Jordan, and the
soles of the priests’ feet were lifted up unto the dry land, that the
waters of Jordan returned unto their place, and flowed over all his
banks, as they did before.

4:19 And the people came up out of Jordan on the tenth day of the
first month, and encamped in Gilgal, in the east border of Jericho.

4:20 And those twelve stones, which they took out of Jordan, did
Joshua pitch in Gilgal.

4:21 And he spake unto the children of Israel, saying, When your
children shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying, What mean
these stones? 4:22 Then ye shall let your children know, saying,
Israel came over this Jordan on dry land.

4:23 For the LORD your God dried up the waters of Jordan from before
you, until ye were passed over, as the LORD your God did to the Red
sea, which he dried up from before us, until we were gone over: 4:24
That all the people of the earth might know the hand of the LORD, that
it is mighty: that ye might fear the LORD your God for ever.

5:1 And it came to pass, when all the kings of the Amorites, which
were on the side of Jordan westward, and all the kings of the
Canaanites, which were by the sea, heard that the LORD had dried up
the waters of Jordan from before the children of Israel, until we were
passed over, that their heart melted, neither was there spirit in them
any more, because of the children of Israel.

5:2 At that time the LORD said unto Joshua, Make thee sharp knives,
and circumcise again the children of Israel the second time.

5:3 And Joshua made him sharp knives, and circumcised the children of
Israel at the hill of the foreskins.

5:4 And this is the cause why Joshua did circumcise: All the people
that came out of Egypt, that were males, even all the men of war, died
in the wilderness by the way, after they came out of Egypt.

5:5 Now all the people that came out were circumcised: but all the
people that were born in the wilderness by the way as they came forth
out of Egypt, them they had not circumcised.

5:6 For the children of Israel walked forty years in the wilderness,
till all the people that were men of war, which came out of Egypt,
were consumed, because they obeyed not the voice of the LORD: unto
whom the LORD sware that he would not shew them the land, which the
LORD sware unto their fathers that he would give us, a land that
floweth with milk and honey.

5:7 And their children, whom he raised up in their stead, them Joshua
circumcised: for they were uncircumcised, because they had not
circumcised them by the way.

5:8 And it came to pass, when they had done circumcising all the
people, that they abode in their places in the camp, till they were
whole.

5:9 And the LORD said unto Joshua, This day have I rolled away the
reproach of Egypt from off you. Wherefore the name of the place is
called Gilgal unto this day.

5:10 And the children of Israel encamped in Gilgal, and kept the
passover on the fourteenth day of the month at even in the plains of
Jericho.

5:11 And they did eat of the old corn of the land on the morrow after
the passover, unleavened cakes, and parched corn in the selfsame day.

5:12 And the manna ceased on the morrow after they had eaten of the
old corn of the land; neither had the children of Israel manna any
more; but they did eat of the fruit of the land of Canaan that year.

5:13 And it came to pass, when Joshua was by Jericho, that he lifted
up his eyes and looked, and, behold, there stood a man over against
him with his sword drawn in his hand: and Joshua went unto him, and
said unto him, Art thou for us, or for our adversaries? 5:14 And he
said, Nay; but as captain of the host of the LORD am I now come. And
Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, and said unto
him, What saith my Lord unto his servant? 5:15 And the captain of the
LORD’s host said unto Joshua, Loose thy shoe from off thy foot; for
the place whereon thou standest is holy. And Joshua did so.

6:1 Now Jericho was straitly shut up because of the children of
Israel: none went out, and none came in.

6:2 And the LORD said unto Joshua, See, I have given into thine hand
Jericho, and the king thereof, and the mighty men of valour.

6:3 And ye shall compass the city, all ye men of war, and go round
about the city once. Thus shalt thou do six days.

6:4 And seven priests shall bear before the ark seven trumpets of
rams’ horns: and the seventh day ye shall compass the city seven
times, and the priests shall blow with the trumpets.

6:5 And it shall come to pass, that when they make a long blast with
the ram’s horn, and when ye hear the sound of the trumpet, all the
people shall shout with a great shout; and the wall of the city shall
fall down flat, and the people shall ascend up every man straight
before him.

6:6 And Joshua the son of Nun called the priests, and said unto them,
Take up the ark of the covenant, and let seven priests bear seven
trumpets of rams’ horns before the ark of the LORD.

6:7 And he said unto the people, Pass on, and compass the city, and
let him that is armed pass on before the ark of the LORD.

6:8 And it came to pass, when Joshua had spoken unto the people, that
the seven priests bearing the seven trumpets of rams’ horns passed on
before the LORD, and blew with the trumpets: and the ark of the
covenant of the LORD followed them.

6:9 And the armed men went before the priests that blew with the
trumpets, and the rereward came after the ark, the priests going on,
and blowing with the trumpets.

6:10 And Joshua had commanded the people, saying, Ye shall not shout,
nor make any noise with your voice, neither shall any word proceed out
of your mouth, until the day I bid you shout; then shall ye shout.

6:11 So the ark of the LORD compassed the city, going about it once:
and they came into the camp, and lodged in the camp.

6:12 And Joshua rose early in the morning, and the priests took up the
ark of the LORD.

6:13 And seven priests bearing seven trumpets of rams’ horns before
the ark of the LORD went on continually, and blew with the trumpets:
and the armed men went before them; but the rereward came after the
ark of the LORD, the priests going on, and blowing with the trumpets.

6:14 And the second day they compassed the city once, and returned
into the camp: so they did six days.

6:15 And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they rose early
about the dawning of the day, and compassed the city after the same
manner seven times: only on that day they compassed the city seven
times.

6:16 And it came to pass at the seventh time, when the priests blew
with the trumpets, Joshua said unto the people, Shout; for the LORD
hath given you the city.

6:17 And the city shall be accursed, even it, and all that are
therein, to the LORD: only Rahab the harlot shall live, she and all
that are with her in the house, because she hid the messengers that we
sent.

6:18 And ye, in any wise keep yourselves from the accursed thing, lest
ye make yourselves accursed, when ye take of the accursed thing, and
make the camp of Israel a curse, and trouble it.

6:19 But all the silver, and gold, and vessels of brass and iron, are
consecrated unto the LORD: they shall come into the treasury of the
LORD.

6:20 So the people shouted when the priests blew with the trumpets:
and it came to pass, when the people heard the sound of the trumpet,
and the people shouted with a great shout, that the wall fell down
flat, so that the people went up into the city, every man straight
before him, and they took the city.

6:21 And they utterly destroyed all that was in the city, both man and
woman, young and old, and ox, and sheep, and ass, with the edge of the
sword.

6:22 But Joshua had said unto the two men that had spied out the
country, Go into the harlot’s house, and bring out thence the woman,
and all that she hath, as ye sware unto her.

6:23 And the young men that were spies went in, and brought out Rahab,
and her father, and her mother, and her brethren, and all that she
had; and they brought out all her kindred, and left them without the
camp of Israel.

6:24 And they burnt the city with fire, and all that was therein: only
the silver, and the gold, and the vessels of brass and of iron, they
put into the treasury of the house of the LORD.

6:25 And Joshua saved Rahab the harlot alive, and her father’s
household, and all that she had; and she dwelleth in Israel even unto
this day; because she hid the messengers, which Joshua sent to spy out
Jericho.

6:26 And Joshua adjured them at that time, saying, Cursed be the man
before the LORD, that riseth up and buildeth this city Jericho: he
shall lay the foundation thereof in his firstborn, and in his youngest
son shall he set up the gates of it.

6:27 So the LORD was with Joshua; and his fame was noised throughout
all the country.

7:1 But the children of Israel committed a trespass in the accursed
thing: for Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of
Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, took of the accursed thing: and the
anger of the LORD was kindled against the children of Israel.

7:2 And Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which is beside Bethaven,
on the east of Bethel, and spake unto them, saying, Go up and view the
country.

And the men went up and viewed Ai.

7:3 And they returned to Joshua, and said unto him, Let not all the
people go up; but let about two or three thousand men go up and smite
Ai; and make not all the people to labour thither; for they are but
few.

7:4 So there went up thither of the people about three thousand men:
and they fled before the men of Ai.

7:5 And the men of Ai smote of them about thirty and six men: for they
chased them from before the gate even unto Shebarim, and smote them in
the going down: wherefore the hearts of the people melted, and became
as water.

7:6 And Joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face
before the ark of the LORD until the eventide, he and the elders of
Israel, and put dust upon their heads.

7:7 And Joshua said, Alas, O LORD God, wherefore hast thou at all
brought this people over Jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the
Amorites, to destroy us? would to God we had been content, and dwelt
on the other side Jordan! 7:8 O LORD, what shall I say, when Israel
turneth their backs before their enemies! 7:9 For the Canaanites and
all the inhabitants of the land shall hear of it, and shall environ us
round, and cut off our name from the earth: and what wilt thou do unto
thy great name? 7:10 And the LORD said unto Joshua, Get thee up;
wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face? 7:11 Israel hath sinned, and
they have also transgressed my covenant which I commanded them: for
they have even taken of the accursed thing, and have also stolen, and
dissembled also, and they have put it even among their own stuff.

7:12 Therefore the children of Israel could not stand before their
enemies, but turned their backs before their enemies, because they
were accursed: neither will I be with you any more, except ye destroy
the accursed from among you.

7:13 Up, sanctify the people, and say, Sanctify yourselves against to
morrow: for thus saith the LORD God of Israel, There is an accursed
thing in the midst of thee, O Israel: thou canst not stand before
thine enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing from among you.

7:14 In the morning therefore ye shall be brought according to your
tribes: and it shall be, that the tribe which the LORD taketh shall
come according to the families thereof; and the family which the LORD
shall take shall come by households; and the household which the LORD
shall take shall come man by man.

7:15 And it shall be, that he that is taken with the accursed thing
shall be burnt with fire, he and all that he hath: because he hath
transgressed the covenant of the LORD, and because he hath wrought
folly in Israel.

7:16 So Joshua rose up early in the morning, and brought Israel by
their tribes; and the tribe of Judah was taken: 7:17 And he brought
the family of Judah; and he took the family of the Zarhites: and he
brought the family of the Zarhites man by man; and Zabdi was taken:
7:18 And he brought his household man by man; and Achan, the son of
Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was
taken.

7:19 And Joshua said unto Achan, My son, give, I pray thee, glory to
the LORD God of Israel, and make confession unto him; and tell me now
what thou hast done; hide it not from me.

7:20 And Achan answered Joshua, and said, Indeed I have sinned against
the LORD God of Israel, and thus and thus have I done: 7:21 When I saw
among the spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred shekels
of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, then I coveted
them, and took them; and, behold, they are hid in the earth in the
midst of my tent, and the silver under it.

7:22 So Joshua sent messengers, and they ran unto the tent; and,
behold, it was hid in his tent, and the silver under it.

7:23 And they took them out of the midst of the tent, and brought them
unto Joshua, and unto all the children of Israel, and laid them out
before the LORD.

7:24 And Joshua, and all Israel with him, took Achan the son of Zerah,
and the silver, and the garment, and the wedge of gold, and his sons,
and his daughters, and his oxen, and his asses, and his sheep, and his
tent, and all that he had: and they brought them unto the valley of
Achor.

7:25 And Joshua said, Why hast thou troubled us? the LORD shall
trouble thee this day. And all Israel stoned him with stones, and
burned them with fire, after they had stoned them with stones.

7:26 And they raised over him a great heap of stones unto this day. So
the LORD turned from the fierceness of his anger. Wherefore the name
of that place was called, The valley of Achor, unto this day.

8:1 And the LORD said unto Joshua, Fear not, neither be thou dismayed:
take all the people of war with thee, and arise, go up to Ai: see, I
have given into thy hand the king of Ai, and his people, and his city,
and his land: 8:2 And thou shalt do to Ai and her king as thou didst
unto Jericho and her king: only the spoil thereof, and the cattle
thereof, shall ye take for a prey unto yourselves: lay thee an ambush
for the city behind it.

8:3 So Joshua arose, and all the people of war, to go up against Ai:
and Joshua chose out thirty thousand mighty men of valour, and sent
them away by night.

8:4 And he commanded them, saying, Behold, ye shall lie in wait
against the city, even behind the city: go not very far from the city,
but be ye all ready: 8:5 And I, and all the people that are with me,
will approach unto the city: and it shall come to pass, when they come
out against us, as at the first, that we will flee before them, 8:6
(For they will come out after us) till we have drawn them from the
city; for they will say, They flee before us, as at the first:
therefore we will flee before them.

8:7 Then ye shall rise up from the ambush, and seize upon the city:
for the LORD your God will deliver it into your hand.

8:8 And it shall be, when ye have taken the city, that ye shall set
the city on fire: according to the commandment of the LORD shall ye
do. See, I have commanded you.

8:9 Joshua therefore sent them forth: and they went to lie in ambush,
and abode between Bethel and Ai, on the west side of Ai: but Joshua
lodged that night among the people.

8:10 And Joshua rose up early in the morning, and numbered the people,
and went up, he and the elders of Israel, before the people to Ai.

8:11 And all the people, even the people of war that were with him,
went up, and drew nigh, and came before the city, and pitched on the
north side of Ai: now there was a valley between them and Ai.

8:12 And he took about five thousand men, and set them to lie in
ambush between Bethel and Ai, on the west side of the city.

8:13 And when they had set the people, even all the host that was on
the north of the city, and their liers in wait on the west of the
city, Joshua went that night into the midst of the valley.

8:14 And it came to pass, when the king of Ai saw it, that they hasted
and rose up early, and the men of the city went out against Israel to
battle, he and all his people, at a time appointed, before the plain;
but he wist not that there were liers in ambush against him behind the
city.

8:15 And Joshua and all Israel made as if they were beaten before
them, and fled by the way of the wilderness.

8:16 And all the people that were in Ai were called together to pursue
after them: and they pursued after Joshua, and were drawn away from
the city.

8:17 And there was not a man left in Ai or Bethel, that went not out
after Israel: and they left the city open, and pursued after Israel.

8:18 And the LORD said unto Joshua, Stretch out the spear that is in
thy hand toward Ai; for I will give it into thine hand. And Joshua
stretched out the spear that he had in his hand toward the city.

8:19 And the ambush arose quickly out of their place, and they ran as
soon as he had stretched out his hand: and they entered into the city,
and took it, and hasted and set the city on fire.

8:20 And when the men of Ai looked behind them, they saw, and, behold,
the smoke of the city ascended up to heaven, and they had no power to
flee this way or that way: and the people that fled to the wilderness
turned back upon the pursuers.

8:21 And when Joshua and all Israel saw that the ambush had taken the
city, and that the smoke of the city ascended, then they turned again,
and slew the men of Ai.

8:22 And the other issued out of the city against them; so they were
in the midst of Israel, some on this side, and some on that side: and
they smote them, so that they let none of them remain or escape.

8:23 And the king of Ai they took alive, and brought him to Joshua.

8:24 And it came to pass, when Israel had made an end of slaying all
the inhabitants of Ai in the field, in the wilderness wherein they
chased them, and when they were all fallen on the edge of the sword,
until they were consumed, that all the Israelites returned unto Ai,
and smote it with the edge of the sword.

8:25 And so it was, that all that fell that day, both of men and
women, were twelve thousand, even all the men of Ai.

8:26 For Joshua drew not his hand back, wherewith he stretched out the
spear, until he had utterly destroyed all the inhabitants of Ai.

8:27 Only the cattle and the spoil of that city Israel took for a prey
unto themselves, according unto the word of the LORD which he
commanded Joshua.

8:28 And Joshua burnt Ai, and made it an heap for ever, even a
desolation unto this day.

8:29 And the king of Ai he hanged on a tree until eventide: and as
soon as the sun was down, Joshua commanded that they should take his
carcase down from the tree, and cast it at the entering of the gate of
the city, and raise thereon a great heap of stones, that remaineth
unto this day.

8:30 Then Joshua built an altar unto the LORD God of Israel in mount
Ebal, 8:31 As Moses the servant of the LORD commanded the children of
Israel, as it is written in the book of the law of Moses, an altar of
whole stones, over which no man hath lift up any iron: and they
offered thereon burnt offerings unto the LORD, and sacrificed peace
offerings.

8:32 And he wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of Moses,
which he wrote in the presence of the children of Israel.

8:33 And all Israel, and their elders, and officers, and their judges,
stood on this side the ark and on that side before the priests the
Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the LORD, as well the
stranger, as he that was born among them; half of them over against
mount Gerizim, and half of them over against mount Ebal; as Moses the
servant of the LORD had commanded before, that they should bless the
people of Israel.

8:34 And afterward he read all the words of the law, the blessings and
cursings, according to all that is written in the book of the law.

8:35 There was not a word of all that Moses commanded, which Joshua
read not before all the congregation of Israel, with the women, and
the little ones, and the strangers that were conversant among them.

9:1 And it came to pass, when all the kings which were on this side
Jordan, in the hills, and in the valleys, and in all the coasts of the
great sea over against Lebanon, the Hittite, and the Amorite, the
Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, heard thereof;
9:2 That they gathered themselves together, to fight with Joshua and
with Israel, with one accord.

9:3 And when the inhabitants of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done unto
Jericho and to Ai, 9:4 They did work wilily, and went and made as if
they had been ambassadors, and took old sacks upon their asses, and
wine bottles, old, and rent, and bound up; 9:5 And old shoes and
clouted upon their feet, and old garments upon them; and all the bread
of their provision was dry and mouldy.

9:6 And they went to Joshua unto the camp at Gilgal, and said unto
him, and to the men of Israel, We be come from a far country: now
therefore make ye a league with us.

9:7 And the men of Israel said unto the Hivites, Peradventure ye dwell
among us; and how shall we make a league with you? 9:8 And they said
unto Joshua, We are thy servants. And Joshua said unto them, Who are
ye? and from whence come ye? 9:9 And they said unto him, From a very
far country thy servants are come because of the name of the LORD thy
God: for we have heard the fame of him, and all that he did in Egypt,
9:10 And all that he did to the two kings of the Amorites, that were
beyond Jordan, to Sihon king of Heshbon, and to Og king of Bashan,
which was at Ashtaroth.

9:11 Wherefore our elders and all the inhabitants of our country spake
to us, saying, Take victuals with you for the journey, and go to meet
them, and say unto them, We are your servants: therefore now make ye a
league with us.

9:12 This our bread we took hot for our provision out of our houses on
the day we came forth to go unto you; but now, behold, it is dry, and
it is mouldy: 9:13 And these bottles of wine, which we filled, were
new; and, behold, they be rent: and these our garments and our shoes
are become old by reason of the very long journey.

9:14 And the men took of their victuals, and asked not counsel at the
mouth of the LORD.

9:15 And Joshua made peace with them, and made a league with them, to
let them live: and the princes of the congregation sware unto them.

9:16 And it came to pass at the end of three days after they had made
a league with them, that they heard that they were their neighbours,
and that they dwelt among them.

9:17 And the children of Israel journeyed, and came unto their cities
on the third day. Now their cities were Gibeon, and Chephirah, and
Beeroth, and Kirjathjearim.

9:18 And the children of Israel smote them not, because the princes of
the congregation had sworn unto them by the LORD God of Israel. And
all the congregation murmured against the princes.

9:19 But all the princes said unto all the congregation, We have sworn
unto them by the LORD God of Israel: now therefore we may not touch
them.

9:20 This we will do to them; we will even let them live, lest wrath
be upon us, because of the oath which we sware unto them.

9:21 And the princes said unto them, Let them live; but let them be
hewers of wood and drawers of water unto all the congregation; as the
princes had promised them.

9:22 And Joshua called for them, and he spake unto them, saying,
Wherefore have ye beguiled us, saying, We are very far from you; when
ye dwell among us? 9:23 Now therefore ye are cursed, and there shall
none of you be freed from being bondmen, and hewers of wood and
drawers of water for the house of my God.

9:24 And they answered Joshua, and said, Because it was certainly told
thy servants, how that the LORD thy God commanded his servant Moses to
give you all the land, and to destroy all the inhabitants of the land
from before you, therefore we were sore afraid of our lives because of
you, and have done this thing.

9:25 And now, behold, we are in thine hand: as it seemeth good and
right unto thee to do unto us, do.

9:26 And so did he unto them, and delivered them out of the hand of
the children of Israel, that they slew them not.

9:27 And Joshua made them that day hewers of wood and drawers of water
for the congregation, and for the altar of the LORD, even unto this
day, in the place which he should choose.

10:1 Now it came to pass, when Adonizedec king of Jerusalem had heard
how Joshua had taken Ai, and had utterly destroyed it; as he had done
to Jericho and her king, so he had done to Ai and her king; and how
the inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with Israel, and were among
them; 10:2 That they feared greatly, because Gibeon was a great city,
as one of the royal cities, and because it was greater than Ai, and
all the men thereof were mighty.

10:3 Wherefore Adonizedec king of Jerusalem, sent unto Hoham king of
Hebron, and unto Piram king of Jarmuth, and unto Japhia king of
Lachish, and unto Debir king of Eglon, saying, 10:4 Come up unto me,
and help me, that we may smite Gibeon: for it hath made peace with
Joshua and with the children of Israel.

10:5 Therefore the five kings of the Amorites, the king of Jerusalem,
the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, the king
of Eglon, gathered themselves together, and went up, they and all
their hosts, and encamped before Gibeon, and made war against it.

10:6 And the men of Gibeon sent unto Joshua to the camp to Gilgal,
saying, Slack not thy hand from thy servants; come up to us quickly,
and save us, and help us: for all the kings of the Amorites that dwell
in the mountains are gathered together against us.

10:7 So Joshua ascended from Gilgal, he, and all the people of war
with him, and all the mighty men of valour.

10:8 And the LORD said unto Joshua, Fear them not: for I have
delivered them into thine hand; there shall not a man of them stand
before thee.

10:9 Joshua therefore came unto them suddenly, and went up from Gilgal
all night.

10:10 And the LORD discomfited them before Israel, and slew them with
a great slaughter at Gibeon, and chased them along the way that goeth
up to Bethhoron, and smote them to Azekah, and unto Makkedah.

10:11 And it came to pass, as they fled from before Israel, and were
in the going down to Bethhoron, that the LORD cast down great stones
from heaven upon them unto Azekah, and they died: they were more which
died with hailstones than they whom the children of Israel slew with
the sword.

10:12 Then spake Joshua to the LORD in the day when the LORD delivered
up the Amorites before the children of Israel, and he said in the
sight of Israel, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in
the valley of Ajalon.

10:13 And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed, until the people
had avenged themselves upon their enemies. Is not this written in the
book of Jasher? So the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and
hasted not to go down about a whole day.

10:14 And there was no day like that before it or after it, that the
LORD hearkened unto the voice of a man: for the LORD fought for
Israel.

10:15 And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to
Gilgal.

10:16 But these five kings fled, and hid themselves in a cave at
Makkedah.

10:17 And it was told Joshua, saying, The five kings are found hid in
a cave at Makkedah.

10:18 And Joshua said, Roll great stones upon the mouth of the cave,
and set men by it for to keep them: 10:19 And stay ye not, but pursue
after your enemies, and smite the hindmost of them; suffer them not to
enter into their cities: for the LORD your God hath delivered them
into your hand.

10:20 And it came to pass, when Joshua and the children of Israel had
made an end of slaying them with a very great slaughter, till they
were consumed, that the rest which remained of them entered into
fenced cities.

10:21 And all the people returned to the camp to Joshua at Makkedah in
peace: none moved his tongue against any of the children of Israel.

10:22 Then said Joshua, Open the mouth of the cave, and bring out
those five kings unto me out of the cave.

10:23 And they did so, and brought forth those five kings unto him out
of the cave, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of
Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of Eglon.

10:24 And it came to pass, when they brought out those kings unto
Joshua, that Joshua called for all the men of Israel, and said unto
the captains of the men of war which went with him, Come near, put
your feet upon the necks of these kings. And they came near, and put
their feet upon the necks of them.

10:25 And Joshua said unto them, Fear not, nor be dismayed, be strong
and of good courage: for thus shall the LORD do to all your enemies
against whom ye fight.

10:26 And afterward Joshua smote them, and slew them, and hanged them
on five trees: and they were hanging upon the trees until the evening.

10:27 And it came to pass at the time of the going down of the sun,
that Joshua commanded, and they took them down off the trees, and cast
them into the cave wherein they had been hid, and laid great stones in
the cave’s mouth, which remain until this very day.

10:28 And that day Joshua took Makkedah, and smote it with the edge of
the sword, and the king thereof he utterly destroyed, them, and all
the souls that were therein; he let none remain: and he did to the
king of Makkedah as he did unto the king of Jericho.

10:29 Then Joshua passed from Makkedah, and all Israel with him, unto
Libnah, and fought against Libnah: 10:30 And the LORD delivered it
also, and the king thereof, into the hand of Israel; and he smote it
with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein; he
let none remain in it; but did unto the king thereof as he did unto
the king of Jericho.

10:31 And Joshua passed from Libnah, and all Israel with him, unto
Lachish, and encamped against it, and fought against it: 10:32 And the
LORD delivered Lachish into the hand of Israel, which took it on the
second day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls
that were therein, according to all that he had done to Libnah.

10:33 Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish; and Joshua
smote him and his people, until he had left him none remaining.

10:34 And from Lachish Joshua passed unto Eglon, and all Israel with
him; and they encamped against it, and fought against it: 10:35 And
they took it on that day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and
all the souls that were therein he utterly destroyed that day,
according to all that he had done to Lachish.

10:36 And Joshua went up from Eglon, and all Israel with him, unto
Hebron; and they fought against it: 10:37 And they took it, and smote
it with the edge of the sword, and the king thereof, and all the
cities thereof, and all the souls that were therein; he left none
remaining, according to all that he had done to Eglon; but destroyed
it utterly, and all the souls that were therein.

10:38 And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, to Debir; and
fought against it: 10:39 And he took it, and the king thereof, and all
the cities thereof; and they smote them with the edge of the sword,
and utterly destroyed all the souls that were therein; he left none
remaining: as he had done to Hebron, so he did to Debir, and to the
king thereof; as he had done also to Libnah, and to her king.

10:40 So Joshua smote all the country of the hills, and of the south,
and of the vale, and of the springs, and all their kings: he left none
remaining, but utterly destroyed all that breathed, as the LORD God of
Israel commanded.

10:41 And Joshua smote them from Kadeshbarnea even unto Gaza, and all
the country of Goshen, even unto Gibeon.

10:42 And all these kings and their land did Joshua take at one time,
because the LORD God of Israel fought for Israel.

10:43 And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to
Gilgal.

11:1 And it came to pass, when Jabin king of Hazor had heard those
things, that he sent to Jobab king of Madon, and to the king of
Shimron, and to the king of Achshaph, 11:2 And to the kings that were
on the north of the mountains, and of the plains south of Chinneroth,
and in the valley, and in the borders of Dor on the west, 11:3 And to
the Canaanite on the east and on the west, and to the Amorite, and the
Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite in the mountains, and to
the Hivite under Hermon in the land of Mizpeh.

11:4 And they went out, they and all their hosts with them, much
people, even as the sand that is upon the sea shore in multitude, with
horses and chariots very many.

11:5 And when all these kings were met together, they came and pitched
together at the waters of Merom, to fight against Israel.

11:6 And the LORD said unto Joshua, Be not afraid because of them: for
to morrow about this time will I deliver them up all slain before
Israel: thou shalt hough their horses, and burn their chariots with
fire.

11:7 So Joshua came, and all the people of war with him, against them
by the waters of Merom suddenly; and they fell upon them.

11:8 And the LORD delivered them into the hand of Israel, who smote
them, and chased them unto great Zidon, and unto Misrephothmaim, and
unto the valley of Mizpeh eastward; and they smote them, until they
left them none remaining.

11:9 And Joshua did unto them as the LORD bade him: he houghed their
horses, and burnt their chariots with fire.

11:10 And Joshua at that time turned back, and took Hazor, and smote
the king thereof with the sword: for Hazor beforetime was the head of
all those kingdoms.

11:11 And they smote all the souls that were therein with the edge of
the sword, utterly destroying them: there was not any left to breathe:
and he burnt Hazor with fire.

11:12 And all the cities of those kings, and all the kings of them,
did Joshua take, and smote them with the edge of the sword, and he
utterly destroyed them, as Moses the servant of the LORD commanded.

11:13 But as for the cities that stood still in their strength, Israel
burned none of them, save Hazor only; that did Joshua burn.

11:14 And all the spoil of these cities, and the cattle, the children
of Israel took for a prey unto themselves; but every man they smote
with the edge of the sword, until they had destroyed them, neither
left they any to breathe.

11:15 As the LORD commanded Moses his servant, so did Moses command
Joshua, and so did Joshua; he left nothing undone of all that the LORD
commanded Moses.

11:16 So Joshua took all that land, the hills, and all the south
country, and all the land of Goshen, and the valley, and the plain,
and the mountain of Israel, and the valley of the same; 11:17 Even
from the mount Halak, that goeth up to Seir, even unto Baalgad in the
valley of Lebanon under mount Hermon: and all their kings he took, and
smote them, and slew them.

11:18 Joshua made war a long time with all those kings.

11:19 There was not a city that made peace with the children of
Israel, save the Hivites the inhabitants of Gibeon: all other they
took in battle.

11:20 For it was of the LORD to harden their hearts, that they should
come against Israel in battle, that he might destroy them utterly, and
that they might have no favour, but that he might destroy them, as the
LORD commanded Moses.

11:21 And at that time came Joshua, and cut off the Anakims from the
mountains, from Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, and from all the
mountains of Judah, and from all the mountains of Israel: Joshua
destroyed them utterly with their cities.

11:22 There was none of the Anakims left in the land of the children
of Israel: only in Gaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod, there remained.

11:23 So Joshua took the whole land, according to all that the LORD
said unto Moses; and Joshua gave it for an inheritance unto Israel
according to their divisions by their tribes. And the land rested from
war.

12:1 Now these are the kings of the land, which the children of Israel
smote, and possessed their land on the other side Jordan toward the
rising of the sun, from the river Arnon unto mount Hermon, and all the
plain on the east: 12:2 Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt in
Heshbon, and ruled from Aroer, which is upon the bank of the river
Arnon, and from the middle of the river, and from half Gilead, even
unto the river Jabbok, which is the border of the children of Ammon;
12:3 And from the plain to the sea of Chinneroth on the east, and unto
the sea of the plain, even the salt sea on the east, the way to
Bethjeshimoth; and from the south, under Ashdothpisgah: 12:4 And the
coast of Og king of Bashan, which was of the remnant of the giants,
that dwelt at Ashtaroth and at Edrei, 12:5 And reigned in mount
Hermon, and in Salcah, and in all Bashan, unto the border of the
Geshurites and the Maachathites, and half Gilead, the border of Sihon
king of Heshbon.

12:6 Them did Moses the servant of the LORD and the children of Israel
smite: and Moses the servant of the LORD gave it for a possession unto
the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh.

12:7 And these are the kings of the country which Joshua and the
children of Israel smote on this side Jordan on the west, from Baalgad
in the valley of Lebanon even unto the mount Halak, that goeth up to
Seir; which Joshua gave unto the tribes of Israel for a possession
according to their divisions; 12:8 In the mountains, and in the
valleys, and in the plains, and in the springs, and in the wilderness,
and in the south country; the Hittites, the Amorites, and the
Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites: 12:9 The
king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai, which is beside Bethel, one;
12:10 The king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one; 12:11 The
king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one; 12:12 The king of
Eglon, one; the king of Gezer, one; 12:13 The king of Debir, one; the
king of Geder, one; 12:14 The king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad,
one; 12:15 The king of Libnah, one; the king of Adullam, one; 12:16
The king of Makkedah, one; the king of Bethel, one; 12:17 The king of
Tappuah, one; the king of Hepher, one; 12:18 The king of Aphek, one;
the king of Lasharon, one; 12:19 The king of Madon, one; the king of
Hazor, one; 12:20 The king of Shimronmeron, one; the king of Achshaph,
one; 12:21 The king of Taanach, one; the king of Megiddo, one; 12:22
The king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam of Carmel, one; 12:23 The
king of Dor in the coast of Dor, one; the king of the nations of
Gilgal, one; 12:24 The king of Tirzah, one: all the kings thirty and
one.

13:1 Now Joshua was old and stricken in years; and the LORD said unto
him, Thou art old and stricken in years, and there remaineth yet very
much land to be possessed.

13:2 This is the land that yet remaineth: all the borders of the
Philistines, and all Geshuri, 13:3 From Sihor, which is before Egypt,
even unto the borders of Ekron northward, which is counted to the
Canaanite: five lords of the Philistines; the Gazathites, and the
Ashdothites, the Eshkalonites, the Gittites, and the Ekronites; also
the Avites: 13:4 From the south, all the land of the Canaanites, and
Mearah that is beside the Sidonians unto Aphek, to the borders of the
Amorites: 13:5 And the land of the Giblites, and all Lebanon, toward
the sunrising, from Baalgad under mount Hermon unto the entering into
Hamath.

13:6 All the inhabitants of the hill country from Lebanon unto
Misrephothmaim, and all the Sidonians, them will I drive out from
before the children of Israel: only divide thou it by lot unto the
Israelites for an inheritance, as I have commanded thee.

13:7 Now therefore divide this land for an inheritance unto the nine
tribes, and the half tribe of Manasseh, 13:8 With whom the Reubenites
and the Gadites have received their inheritance, which Moses gave
them, beyond Jordan eastward, even as Moses the servant of the LORD
gave them; 13:9 From Aroer, that is upon the bank of the river Arnon,
and the city that is in the midst of the river, and all the plain of
Medeba unto Dibon; 13:10 And all the cities of Sihon king of the
Amorites, which reigned in Heshbon, unto the border of the children of
Ammon; 13:11 And Gilead, and the border of the Geshurites and
Maachathites, and all mount Hermon, and all Bashan unto Salcah; 13:12
All the kingdom of Og in Bashan, which reigned in Ashtaroth and in
Edrei, who remained of the remnant of the giants: for these did Moses
smite, and cast them out.

13:13 Nevertheless the children of Israel expelled not the Geshurites,
nor the Maachathites: but the Geshurites and the Maachathites dwell
among the Israelites until this day.

13:14 Only unto the tribes of Levi he gave none inheritance; the
sacrifices of the LORD God of Israel made by fire are their
inheritance, as he said unto them.

13:15 And Moses gave unto the tribe of the children of Reuben
inheritance according to their families.

13:16 And their coast was from Aroer, that is on the bank of the river
Arnon, and the city that is in the midst of the river, and all the
plain by Medeba; 13:17 Heshbon, and all her cities that are in the
plain; Dibon, and Bamothbaal, and Bethbaalmeon, 13:18 And Jahaza, and
Kedemoth, and Mephaath, 13:19 And Kirjathaim, and Sibmah, and
Zarethshahar in the mount of the valley, 13:20 And Bethpeor, and
Ashdothpisgah, and Bethjeshimoth, 13:21 And all the cities of the
plain, and all the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, which
reigned in Heshbon, whom Moses smote with the princes of Midian, Evi,
and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, which were dukes of Sihon,
dwelling in the country.

13:22 Balaam also the son of Beor, the soothsayer, did the children of
Israel slay with the sword among them that were slain by them.

13:23 And the border of the children of Reuben was Jordan, and the
border thereof. This was the inheritance of the children of Reuben
after their families, the cities and the villages thereof.

13:24 And Moses gave inheritance unto the tribe of Gad, even unto the
children of Gad according to their families.

13:25 And their coast was Jazer, and all the cities of Gilead, and
half the land of the children of Ammon, unto Aroer that is before
Rabbah; 13:26 And from Heshbon unto Ramathmizpeh, and Betonim; and
from Mahanaim unto the border of Debir; 13:27 And in the valley,
Betharam, and Bethnimrah, and Succoth, and Zaphon, the rest of the
kingdom of Sihon king of Heshbon, Jordan and his border, even unto the
edge of the sea of Chinnereth on the other side Jordan eastward.

13:28 This is the inheritance of the children of Gad after their
families, the cities, and their villages.

13:29 And Moses gave inheritance unto the half tribe of Manasseh: and
this was the possession of the half tribe of the children of Manasseh
by their families.

13:30 And their coast was from Mahanaim, all Bashan, all the kingdom
of Og king of Bashan, and all the towns of Jair, which are in Bashan,
threescore cities: 13:31 And half Gilead, and Ashtaroth, and Edrei,
cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan, were pertaining unto the
children of Machir the son of Manasseh, even to the one half of the
children of Machir by their families.

13:32 These are the countries which Moses did distribute for
inheritance in the plains of Moab, on the other side Jordan, by
Jericho, eastward.

13:33 But unto the tribe of Levi Moses gave not any inheritance: the
LORD God of Israel was their inheritance, as he said unto them.

14:1 And these are the countries which the children of Israel
inherited in the land of Canaan, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua
the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the
children of Israel, distributed for inheritance to them.

14:2 By lot was their inheritance, as the LORD commanded by the hand
of Moses, for the nine tribes, and for the half tribe.

14:3 For Moses had given the inheritance of two tribes and an half
tribe on the other side Jordan: but unto the Levites he gave none
inheritance among them.

14:4 For the children of Joseph were two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim:
therefore they gave no part unto the Levites in the land, save cities
to dwell in, with their suburbs for their cattle and for their
substance.

14:5 As the LORD commanded Moses, so the children of Israel did, and
they divided the land.

14:6 Then the children of Judah came unto Joshua in Gilgal: and Caleb
the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite said unto him, Thou knowest the
thing that the LORD said unto Moses the man of God concerning me and
thee in Kadeshbarnea.

14:7 Forty years old was I when Moses the servant of the LORD sent me
from Kadeshbarnea to espy out the land; and I brought him word again
as it was in mine heart.

14:8 Nevertheless my brethren that went up with me made the heart of
the people melt: but I wholly followed the LORD my God.

14:9 And Moses sware on that day, saying, Surely the land whereon thy
feet have trodden shall be thine inheritance, and thy children’s for
ever, because thou hast wholly followed the LORD my God.

14:10 And now, behold, the LORD hath kept me alive, as he said, these
forty and five years, even since the LORD spake this word unto Moses,
while the children of Israel wandered in the wilderness: and now, lo,
I am this day fourscore and five years old.

14:11 As yet I am as strong this day as I was in the day that Moses
sent me: as my strength was then, even so is my strength now, for war,
both to go out, and to come in.

14:12 Now therefore give me this mountain, whereof the LORD spake in
that day; for thou heardest in that day how the Anakims were there,
and that the cities were great and fenced: if so be the LORD will be
with me, then I shall be able to drive them out, as the LORD said.

14:13 And Joshua blessed him, and gave unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh
Hebron for an inheritance.

14:14 Hebron therefore became the inheritance of Caleb the son of
Jephunneh the Kenezite unto this day, because that he wholly followed
the LORD God of Israel.

14:15 And the name of Hebron before was Kirjatharba; which Arba was a
great man among the Anakims. And the land had rest from war.

15:1 This then was the lot of the tribe of the children of Judah by
their families; even to the border of Edom the wilderness of Zin
southward was the uttermost part of the south coast.

15:2 And their south border was from the shore of the salt sea, from
the bay that looketh southward: 15:3 And it went out to the south side
to Maalehacrabbim, and passed along to Zin, and ascended up on the
south side unto Kadeshbarnea, and passed along to Hezron, and went up
to Adar, and fetched a compass to Karkaa: 15:4 From thence it passed
toward Azmon, and went out unto the river of Egypt; and the goings out
of that coast were at the sea: this shall be your south coast.

15:5 And the east border was the salt sea, even unto the end of
Jordan.

And their border in the north quarter was from the bay of the sea at
the uttermost part of Jordan: 15:6 And the border went up to
Bethhogla, and passed along by the north of Betharabah; and the border
went up to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben: 15:7 And the border
went up toward Debir from the valley of Achor, and so northward,
looking toward Gilgal, that is before the going up to Adummim, which
is on the south side of the river: and the border passed toward the
waters of Enshemesh, and the goings out thereof were at Enrogel: 15:8
And the border went up by the valley of the son of Hinnom unto the
south side of the Jebusite; the same is Jerusalem: and the border went
up to the top of the mountain that lieth before the valley of Hinnom
westward, which is at the end of the valley of the giants northward:
15:9 And the border was drawn from the top of the hill unto the
fountain of the water of Nephtoah, and went out to the cities of mount
Ephron; and the border was drawn to Baalah, which is Kirjathjearim:
15:10 And the border compassed from Baalah westward unto mount Seir,
and passed along unto the side of mount Jearim, which is Chesalon, on
the north side, and went down to Bethshemesh, and passed on to Timnah:
15:11 And the border went out unto the side of Ekron northward: and
the border was drawn to Shicron, and passed along to mount Baalah, and
went out unto Jabneel; and the goings out of the border were at the
sea.

15:12 And the west border was to the great sea, and the coast thereof.

This is the coast of the children of Judah round about according to
their families.

15:13 And unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh he gave a part among the
children of Judah, according to the commandment of the LORD to Joshua,
even the city of Arba the father of Anak, which city is Hebron.

15:14 And Caleb drove thence the three sons of Anak, Sheshai, and
Ahiman, and Talmai, the children of Anak.

15:15 And he went up thence to the inhabitants of Debir: and the name
of Debir before was Kirjathsepher.

15:16 And Caleb said, He that smiteth Kirjathsepher, and taketh it, to
him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife.

15:17 And Othniel the son of Kenaz, the brother of Caleb, took it: and
he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.

15:18 And it came to pass, as she came unto him, that she moved him to
ask of her father a field: and she lighted off her ass; and Caleb said
unto her, What wouldest thou? 15:19 Who answered, Give me a blessing;
for thou hast given me a south land; give me also springs of water.
And he gave her the upper springs, and the nether springs.

15:20 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Judah
according to their families.

15:21 And the uttermost cities of the tribe of the children of Judah
toward the coast of Edom southward were Kabzeel, and Eder, and Jagur,
15:22 And Kinah, and Dimonah, and Adadah, 15:23 And Kedesh, and Hazor,
and Ithnan, 15:24 Ziph, and Telem, and Bealoth, 15:25 And Hazor,
Hadattah, and Kerioth, and Hezron, which is Hazor, 15:26 Amam, and
Shema, and Moladah, 15:27 And Hazargaddah, and Heshmon, and Bethpalet,
15:28 And Hazarshual, and Beersheba, and Bizjothjah, 15:29 Baalah, and
Iim, and Azem, 15:30 And Eltolad, and Chesil, and Hormah, 15:31 And
Ziklag, and Madmannah, and Sansannah, 15:32 And Lebaoth, and Shilhim,
and Ain, and Rimmon: all the cities are twenty and nine, with their
villages: 15:33 And in the valley, Eshtaol, and Zoreah, and Ashnah,
15:34 And Zanoah, and Engannim, Tappuah, and Enam, 15:35 Jarmuth, and
Adullam, Socoh, and Azekah, 15:36 And Sharaim, and Adithaim, and
Gederah, and Gederothaim; fourteen cities with their villages: 15:37
Zenan, and Hadashah, and Migdalgad, 15:38 And Dilean, and Mizpeh, and
Joktheel, 15:39 Lachish, and Bozkath, and Eglon, 15:40 And Cabbon, and
Lahmam, and Kithlish, 15:41 And Gederoth, Bethdagon, and Naamah, and
Makkedah; sixteen cities with their villages: 15:42 Libnah, and Ether,
and Ashan, 15:43 And Jiphtah, and Ashnah, and Nezib, 15:44 And Keilah,
and Achzib, and Mareshah; nine cities with their villages: 15:45
Ekron, with her towns and her villages: 15:46 From Ekron even unto the
sea, all that lay near Ashdod, with their villages: 15:47 Ashdod with
her towns and her villages, Gaza with her towns and her villages, unto
the river of Egypt, and the great sea, and the border thereof: 15:48
And in the mountains, Shamir, and Jattir, and Socoh, 15:49 And Dannah,
and Kirjathsannah, which is Debir, 15:50 And Anab, and Eshtemoh, and
Anim, 15:51 And Goshen, and Holon, and Giloh; eleven cities with their
villages: 15:52 Arab, and Dumah, and Eshean, 15:53 And Janum, and
Bethtappuah, and Aphekah, 15:54 And Humtah, and Kirjatharba, which is
Hebron, and Zior; nine cities with their villages: 15:55 Maon, Carmel,
and Ziph, and Juttah, 15:56 And Jezreel, and Jokdeam, and Zanoah,
15:57 Cain, Gibeah, and Timnah; ten cities with their villages: 15:58
Halhul, Bethzur, and Gedor, 15:59 And Maarath, and Bethanoth, and
Eltekon; six cities with their villages: 15:60 Kirjathbaal, which is
Kirjathjearim, and Rabbah; two cities with their villages: 15:61 In
the wilderness, Betharabah, Middin, and Secacah, 15:62 And Nibshan,
and the city of Salt, and Engedi; six cities with their villages.

15:63 As for the Jebusites the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the children
of Judah could not drive them out; but the Jebusites dwell with the
children of Judah at Jerusalem unto this day.

16:1 And the lot of the children of Joseph fell from Jordan by
Jericho, unto the water of Jericho on the east, to the wilderness that
goeth up from Jericho throughout mount Bethel, 16:2 And goeth out from
Bethel to Luz, and passeth along unto the borders of Archi to Ataroth,
16:3 And goeth down westward to the coast of Japhleti, unto the coast
of Bethhoron the nether, and to Gezer; and the goings out thereof are
at the sea.

16:4 So the children of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim, took their
inheritance.

16:5 And the border of the children of Ephraim according to their
families was thus: even the border of their inheritance on the east
side was Atarothaddar, unto Bethhoron the upper; 16:6 And the border
went out toward the sea to Michmethah on the north side; and the
border went about eastward unto Taanathshiloh, and passed by it on the
east to Janohah; 16:7 And it went down from Janohah to Ataroth, and to
Naarath, and came to Jericho, and went out at Jordan.

16:8 The border went out from Tappuah westward unto the river Kanah;
and the goings out thereof were at the sea. This is the inheritance of
the tribe of the children of Ephraim by their families.

16:9 And the separate cities for the children of Ephraim were among
the inheritance of the children of Manasseh, all the cities with their
villages.

16:10 And they drave not out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer: but
the Canaanites dwell among the Ephraimites unto this day, and serve
under tribute.

17:1 There was also a lot for the tribe of Manasseh; for he was the
firstborn of Joseph; to wit, for Machir the firstborn of Manasseh, the
father of Gilead: because he was a man of war, therefore he had Gilead
and Bashan.

17:2 There was also a lot for the rest of the children of Manasseh by
their families; for the children of Abiezer, and for the children of
Helek, and for the children of Asriel, and for the children of
Shechem, and for the children of Hepher, and for the children of
Shemida: these were the male children of Manasseh the son of Joseph by
their families.

17:3 But Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of
Machir, the son of Manasseh, had no sons, but daughters: and these are
the names of his daughters, Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and
Tirzah.

17:4 And they came near before Eleazar the priest, and before Joshua
the son of Nun, and before the princes, saying, The LORD commanded
Moses to give us an inheritance among our brethren. Therefore
according to the commandment of the LORD he gave them an inheritance
among the brethren of their father.

17:5 And there fell ten portions to Manasseh, beside the land of
Gilead and Bashan, which were on the other side Jordan; 17:6 Because
the daughters of Manasseh had an inheritance among his sons: and the
rest of Manasseh’s sons had the land of Gilead.

17:7 And the coast of Manasseh was from Asher to Michmethah, that
lieth before Shechem; and the border went along on the right hand unto
the inhabitants of Entappuah.

17:8 Now Manasseh had the land of Tappuah: but Tappuah on the border
of Manasseh belonged to the children of Ephraim; 17:9 And the coast
descended unto the river Kanah, southward of the river: these cities
of Ephraim are among the cities of Manasseh: the coast of Manasseh
also was on the north side of the river, and the outgoings of it were
at the sea: 17:10 Southward it was Ephraim’s, and northward it was
Manasseh’s, and the sea is his border; and they met together in Asher
on the north, and in Issachar on the east.

17:11 And Manasseh had in Issachar and in Asher Bethshean and her
towns, and Ibleam and her towns, and the inhabitants of Dor and her
towns, and the inhabitants of Endor and her towns, and the inhabitants
of Taanach and her towns, and the inhabitants of Megiddo and her
towns, even three countries.

17:12 Yet the children of Manasseh could not drive out the inhabitants
of those cities; but the Canaanites would dwell in that land.

17:13 Yet it came to pass, when the children of Israel were waxen
strong, that they put the Canaanites to tribute, but did not utterly
drive them out.

17:14 And the children of Joseph spake unto Joshua, saying, Why hast
thou given me but one lot and one portion to inherit, seeing I am a
great people, forasmuch as the LORD hath blessed me hitherto? 17:15
And Joshua answered them, If thou be a great people, then get thee up
to the wood country, and cut down for thyself there in the land of the
Perizzites and of the giants, if mount Ephraim be too narrow for thee.

17:16 And the children of Joseph said, The hill is not enough for us:
and all the Canaanites that dwell in the land of the valley have
chariots of iron, both they who are of Bethshean and her towns, and
they who are of the valley of Jezreel.

17:17 And Joshua spake unto the house of Joseph, even to Ephraim and
to Manasseh, saying, Thou art a great people, and hast great power:
thou shalt not have one lot only: 17:18 But the mountain shall be
thine; for it is a wood, and thou shalt cut it down: and the outgoings
of it shall be thine: for thou shalt drive out the Canaanites, though
they have iron chariots, and though they be strong.

18:1 And the whole congregation of the children of Israel assembled
together at Shiloh, and set up the tabernacle of the congregation
there. And the land was subdued before them.

18:2 And there remained among the children of Israel seven tribes,
which had not yet received their inheritance.

18:3 And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, How long are ye
slack to go to possess the land, which the LORD God of your fathers
hath given you? 18:4 Give out from among you three men for each
tribe: and I will send them, and they shall rise, and go through the
land, and describe it according to the inheritance of them; and they
shall come again to me.

18:5 And they shall divide it into seven parts: Judah shall abide in
their coast on the south, and the house of Joseph shall abide in their
coasts on the north.

18:6 Ye shall therefore describe the land into seven parts, and bring
the description hither to me, that I may cast lots for you here before
the LORD our God.

18:7 But the Levites have no part among you; for the priesthood of the
LORD is their inheritance: and Gad, and Reuben, and half the tribe of
Manasseh, have received their inheritance beyond Jordan on the east,
which Moses the servant of the LORD gave them.

18:8 And the men arose, and went away: and Joshua charged them that
went to describe the land, saying, Go and walk through the land, and
describe it, and come again to me, that I may here cast lots for you
before the LORD in Shiloh.

18:9 And the men went and passed through the land, and described it by
cities into seven parts in a book, and came again to Joshua to the
host at Shiloh.

18:10 And Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before the LORD: and
there Joshua divided the land unto the children of Israel according to
their divisions.

18:11 And the lot of the tribe of the children of Benjamin came up
according to their families: and the coast of their lot came forth
between the children of Judah and the children of Joseph.

18:12 And their border on the north side was from Jordan; and the
border went up to the side of Jericho on the north side, and went up
through the mountains westward; and the goings out thereof were at the
wilderness of Bethaven.

18:13 And the border went over from thence toward Luz, to the side of
Luz, which is Bethel, southward; and the border descended to
Atarothadar, near the hill that lieth on the south side of the nether
Bethhoron.

18:14 And the border was drawn thence, and compassed the corner of the
sea southward, from the hill that lieth before Bethhoron southward;
and the goings out thereof were at Kirjathbaal, which is
Kirjathjearim, a city of the children of Judah: this was the west
quarter.

18:15 And the south quarter was from the end of Kirjathjearim, and the
border went out on the west, and went out to the well of waters of
Nephtoah: 18:16 And the border came down to the end of the mountain
that lieth before the valley of the son of Hinnom, and which is in the
valley of the giants on the north, and descended to the valley of
Hinnom, to the side of Jebusi on the south, and descended to Enrogel,
18:17 And was drawn from the north, and went forth to Enshemesh, and
went forth toward Geliloth, which is over against the going up of
Adummim, and descended to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben, 18:18
And passed along toward the side over against Arabah northward, and
went down unto Arabah: 18:19 And the border passed along to the side
of Bethhoglah northward: and the outgoings of the border were at the
north bay of the salt sea at the south end of Jordan: this was the
south coast.

18:20 And Jordan was the border of it on the east side. This was the
inheritance of the children of Benjamin, by the coasts thereof round
about, according to their families.

18:21 Now the cities of the tribe of the children of Benjamin
according to their families were Jericho, and Bethhoglah, and the
valley of Keziz, 18:22 And Betharabah, and Zemaraim, and Bethel, 18:23
And Avim, and Pharah, and Ophrah, 18:24 And Chepharhaammonai, and
Ophni, and Gaba; twelve cities with their villages: 18:25 Gibeon, and
Ramah, and Beeroth, 18:26 And Mizpeh, and Chephirah, and Mozah, 18:27
And Rekem, and Irpeel, and Taralah, 18:28 And Zelah, Eleph, and
Jebusi, which is Jerusalem, Gibeath, and Kirjath; fourteen cities with
their villages. This is the inheritance of the children of Benjamin
according to their families.

19:1 And the second lot came forth to Simeon, even for the tribe of
the children of Simeon according to their families: and their
inheritance was within the inheritance of the children of Judah.

19:2 And they had in their inheritance Beersheba, and Sheba, and
Moladah, 19:3 And Hazarshual, and Balah, and Azem, 19:4 And Eltolad,
and Bethul, and Hormah, 19:5 And Ziklag, and Bethmarcaboth, and
Hazarsusah, 19:6 And Bethlebaoth, and Sharuhen; thirteen cities and
their villages: 19:7 Ain, Remmon, and Ether, and Ashan; four cities
and their villages: 19:8 And all the villages that were round about
these cities to Baalathbeer, Ramath of the south. This is the
inheritance of the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their
families.

19:9 Out of the portion of the children of Judah was the inheritance
of the children of Simeon: for the part of the children of Judah was
too much for them: therefore the children of Simeon had their
inheritance within the inheritance of them.

19:10 And the third lot came up for the children of Zebulun according
to their families: and the border of their inheritance was unto Sarid:
19:11 And their border went up toward the sea, and Maralah, and
reached to Dabbasheth, and reached to the river that is before
Jokneam; 19:12 And turned from Sarid eastward toward the sunrising
unto the border of Chislothtabor, and then goeth out to Daberath, and
goeth up to Japhia, 19:13 And from thence passeth on along on the east
to Gittahhepher, to Ittahkazin, and goeth out to Remmonmethoar to
Neah; 19:14 And the border compasseth it on the north side to
Hannathon: and the outgoings thereof are in the valley of Jiphthahel:
19:15 And Kattath, and Nahallal, and Shimron, and Idalah, and
Bethlehem: twelve cities with their villages.

19:16 This is the inheritance of the children of Zebulun according to
their families, these cities with their villages.

19:17 And the fourth lot came out to Issachar, for the children of
Issachar according to their families.

19:18 And their border was toward Jezreel, and Chesulloth, and Shunem,
19:19 And Haphraim, and Shihon, and Anaharath, 19:20 And Rabbith, and
Kishion, and Abez, 19:21 And Remeth, and Engannim, and Enhaddah, and
Bethpazzez; 19:22 And the coast reacheth to Tabor, and Shahazimah, and
Bethshemesh; and the outgoings of their border were at Jordan: sixteen
cities with their villages.

19:23 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Issachar
according to their families, the cities and their villages.

19:24 And the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the children of
Asher according to their families.

19:25 And their border was Helkath, and Hali, and Beten, and Achshaph,
19:26 And Alammelech, and Amad, and Misheal; and reacheth to Carmel
westward, and to Shihorlibnath; 19:27 And turneth toward the sunrising
to Bethdagon, and reacheth to Zebulun, and to the valley of Jiphthahel
toward the north side of Bethemek, and Neiel, and goeth out to Cabul
on the left hand, 19:28 And Hebron, and Rehob, and Hammon, and Kanah,
even unto great Zidon; 19:29 And then the coast turneth to Ramah, and
to the strong city Tyre; and the coast turneth to Hosah; and the
outgoings thereof are at the sea from the coast to Achzib: 19:30 Ummah
also, and Aphek, and Rehob: twenty and two cities with their villages.

19:31 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Asher
according to their families, these cities with their villages.

19:32 The sixth lot came out to the children of Naphtali, even for the
children of Naphtali according to their families.

19:33 And their coast was from Heleph, from Allon to Zaanannim, and
Adami, Nekeb, and Jabneel, unto Lakum; and the outgoings thereof were
at Jordan: 19:34 And then the coast turneth westward to Aznothtabor,
and goeth out from thence to Hukkok, and reacheth to Zebulun on the
south side, and reacheth to Asher on the west side, and to Judah upon
Jordan toward the sunrising.

19:35 And the fenced cities are Ziddim, Zer, and Hammath, Rakkath, and
Chinnereth, 19:36 And Adamah, and Ramah, and Hazor, 19:37 And Kedesh,
and Edrei, and Enhazor, 19:38 And Iron, and Migdalel, Horem, and
Bethanath, and Bethshemesh; nineteen cities with their villages.

19:39 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Naphtali
according to their families, the cities and their villages.

19:40 And the seventh lot came out for the tribe of the children of
Dan according to their families.

19:41 And the coast of their inheritance was Zorah, and Eshtaol, and
Irshemesh, 19:42 And Shaalabbin, and Ajalon, and Jethlah, 19:43 And
Elon, and Thimnathah, and Ekron, 19:44 And Eltekeh, and Gibbethon, and
Baalath, 19:45 And Jehud, and Beneberak, and Gathrimmon, 19:46 And
Mejarkon, and Rakkon, with the border before Japho.

19:47 And the coast of the children of Dan went out too little for
them: therefore the children of Dan went up to fight against Leshem,
and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and possessed
it, and dwelt therein, and called Leshem, Dan, after the name of Dan
their father.

19:48 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Dan
according to their families, these cities with their villages.

19:49 When they had made an end of dividing the land for inheritance
by their coasts, the children of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua
the son of Nun among them: 19:50 According to the word of the LORD
they gave him the city which he asked, even Timnathserah in mount
Ephraim: and he built the city, and dwelt therein.

19:51 These are the inheritances, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua
the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the
children of Israel, divided for an inheritance by lot in Shiloh before
the LORD, at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. So they
made an end of dividing the country.

20:1 The LORD also spake unto Joshua, saying, 20:2 Speak to the
children of Israel, saying, Appoint out for you cities of refuge,
whereof I spake unto you by the hand of Moses: 20:3 That the slayer
that killeth any person unawares and unwittingly may flee thither: and
they shall be your refuge from the avenger of blood.

20:4 And when he that doth flee unto one of those cities shall stand
at the entering of the gate of the city, and shall declare his cause
in the ears of the elders of that city, they shall take him into the
city unto them, and give him a place, that he may dwell among them.

20:5 And if the avenger of blood pursue after him, then they shall not
deliver the slayer up into his hand; because he smote his neighbour
unwittingly, and hated him not beforetime.

20:6 And he shall dwell in that city, until he stand before the
congregation for judgment, and until the death of the high priest that
shall be in those days: then shall the slayer return, and come unto
his own city, and unto his own house, unto the city from whence he
fled.

20:7 And they appointed Kedesh in Galilee in mount Naphtali, and
Shechem in mount Ephraim, and Kirjatharba, which is Hebron, in the
mountain of Judah.

20:8 And on the other side Jordan by Jericho eastward, they assigned
Bezer in the wilderness upon the plain out of the tribe of Reuben, and
Ramoth in Gilead out of the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan out of
the tribe of Manasseh.

20:9 These were the cities appointed for all the children of Israel,
and for the stranger that sojourneth among them, that whosoever
killeth any person at unawares might flee thither, and not die by the
hand of the avenger of blood, until he stood before the congregation.

21:1 Then came near the heads of the fathers of the Levites unto
Eleazar the priest, and unto Joshua the son of Nun, and unto the heads
of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel; 21:2 And they
spake unto them at Shiloh in the land of Canaan, saying, The LORD
commanded by the hand of Moses to give us cities to dwell in, with the
suburbs thereof for our cattle.

21:3 And the children of Israel gave unto the Levites out of their
inheritance, at the commandment of the LORD, these cities and their
suburbs.

21:4 And the lot came out for the families of the Kohathites: and the
children of Aaron the priest, which were of the Levites, had by lot
out of the tribe of Judah, and out of the tribe of Simeon, and out of
the tribe of Benjamin, thirteen cities.

21:5 And the rest of the children of Kohath had by lot out of the
families of the tribe of Ephraim, and out of the tribe of Dan, and out
of the half tribe of Manasseh, ten cities.

21:6 And the children of Gershon had by lot out of the families of the
tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe
of Naphtali, and out of the half tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen
cities.

21:7 The children of Merari by their families had out of the tribe of
Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun,
twelve cities.

21:8 And the children of Israel gave by lot unto the Levites these
cities with their suburbs, as the LORD commanded by the hand of Moses.

21:9 And they gave out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out
of the tribe of the children of Simeon, these cities which are here
mentioned by name.

21:10 Which the children of Aaron, being of the families of the
Kohathites, who were of the children of Levi, had: for theirs was the
first lot.

21:11 And they gave them the city of Arba the father of Anak, which
city is Hebron, in the hill country of Judah, with the suburbs thereof
round about it.

21:12 But the fields of the city, and the villages thereof, gave they
to Caleb the son of Jephunneh for his possession.

21:13 Thus they gave to the children of Aaron the priest Hebron with
her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Libnah with
her suburbs, 21:14 And Jattir with her suburbs, and Eshtemoa with her
suburbs, 21:15 And Holon with her suburbs, and Debir with her suburbs,
21:16 And Ain with her suburbs, and Juttah with her suburbs, and
Bethshemesh with her suburbs; nine cities out of those two tribes.

21:17 And out of the tribe of Benjamin, Gibeon with her suburbs, Geba
with her suburbs, 21:18 Anathoth with her suburbs, and Almon with her
suburbs; four cities.

21:19 All the cities of the children of Aaron, the priests, were
thirteen cities with their suburbs.

21:20 And the families of the children of Kohath, the Levites which
remained of the children of Kohath, even they had the cities of their
lot out of the tribe of Ephraim.

21:21 For they gave them Shechem with her suburbs in mount Ephraim, to
be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Gezer with her suburbs, 21:22
And Kibzaim with her suburbs, and Bethhoron with her suburbs; four
cities.

21:23 And out of the tribe of Dan, Eltekeh with her suburbs, Gibbethon
with her suburbs, 21:24 Aijalon with her suburbs, Gathrimmon with her
suburbs; four cities.

21:25 And out of the half tribe of Manasseh, Tanach with her suburbs,
and Gathrimmon with her suburbs; two cities.

21:26 All the cities were ten with their suburbs for the families of
the children of Kohath that remained.

21:27 And unto the children of Gershon, of the families of the
Levites, out of the other half tribe of Manasseh they gave Golan in
Bashan with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and
Beeshterah with her suburbs; two cities.

21:28 And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kishon with her suburbs,
Dabareh with her suburbs, 21:29 Jarmuth with her suburbs, Engannim
with her suburbs; four cities.

21:30 And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal with her suburbs, Abdon
with her suburbs, 21:31 Helkath with her suburbs, and Rehob with her
suburbs; four cities.

21:32 And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with her
suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Hammothdor with
her suburbs, and Kartan with her suburbs; three cities.

21:33 All the cities of the Gershonites according to their families
were thirteen cities with their suburbs.

21:34 And unto the families of the children of Merari, the rest of the
Levites, out of the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with her suburbs, and
Kartah with her suburbs, 21:35 Dimnah with her suburbs, Nahalal with
her suburbs; four cities.

21:36 And out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer with her suburbs, and
Jahazah with her suburbs, 21:37 Kedemoth with her suburbs, and
Mephaath with her suburbs; four cities.

21:38 And out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs,
to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Mahanaim with her suburbs,
21:39 Heshbon with her suburbs, Jazer with her suburbs; four cities in
all.

21:40 So all the cities for the children of Merari by their families,
which were remaining of the families of the Levites, were by their lot
twelve cities.

21:41 All the cities of the Levites within the possession of the
children of Israel were forty and eight cities with their suburbs.

21:42 These cities were every one with their suburbs round about them:
thus were all these cities.

21:43 And the LORD gave unto Israel all the land which he sware to
give unto their fathers; and they possessed it, and dwelt therein.

21:44 And the LORD gave them rest round about, according to all that
he sware unto their fathers: and there stood not a man of all their
enemies before them; the LORD delivered all their enemies into their
hand.

21:45 There failed not ought of any good thing which the LORD had
spoken unto the house of Israel; all came to pass.

22:1 Then Joshua called the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half
tribe of Manasseh, 22:2 And said unto them, Ye have kept all that
Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you, and have obeyed my voice
in all that I commanded you: 22:3 Ye have not left your brethren these
many days unto this day, but have kept the charge of the commandment
of the LORD your God.

22:4 And now the LORD your God hath given rest unto your brethren, as
he promised them: therefore now return ye, and get you unto your
tents, and unto the land of your possession, which Moses the servant
of the LORD gave you on the other side Jordan.

22:5 But take diligent heed to do the commandment and the law, which
Moses the servant of the LORD charged you, to love the LORD your God,
and to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and to
cleave unto him, and to serve him with all your heart and with all
your soul.

22:6 So Joshua blessed them, and sent them away: and they went unto
their tents.

22:7 Now to the one half of the tribe of Manasseh Moses had given
possession in Bashan: but unto the other half thereof gave Joshua
among their brethren on this side Jordan westward. And when Joshua
sent them away also unto their tents, then he blessed them, 22:8 And
he spake unto them, saying, Return with much riches unto your tents,
and with very much cattle, with silver, and with gold, and with brass,
and with iron, and with very much raiment: divide the spoil of your
enemies with your brethren.

22:9 And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half
tribe of Manasseh returned, and departed from the children of Israel
out of Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan, to go unto the country
of Gilead, to the land of their possession, whereof they were
possessed, according to the word of the LORD by the hand of Moses.

22:10 And when they came unto the borders of Jordan, that are in the
land of Canaan, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the
half tribe of Manasseh built there an altar by Jordan, a great altar
to see to.

22:11 And the children of Israel heard say, Behold, the children of
Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh have
built an altar over against the land of Canaan, in the borders of
Jordan, at the passage of the children of Israel.

22:12 And when the children of Israel heard of it, the whole
congregation of the children of Israel gathered themselves together at
Shiloh, to go up to war against them.

22:13 And the children of Israel sent unto the children of Reuben, and
to the children of Gad, and to the half tribe of Manasseh, into the
land of Gilead, Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, 22:14 And with
him ten princes, of each chief house a prince throughout all the
tribes of Israel; and each one was an head of the house of their
fathers among the thousands of Israel.

22:15 And they came unto the children of Reuben, and to the children
of Gad, and to the half tribe of Manasseh, unto the land of Gilead,
and they spake with them, saying, 22:16 Thus saith the whole
congregation of the LORD, What trespass is this that ye have committed
against the God of Israel, to turn away this day from following the
LORD, in that ye have builded you an altar, that ye might rebel this
day against the LORD? 22:17 Is the iniquity of Peor too little for
us, from which we are not cleansed until this day, although there was
a plague in the congregation of the LORD, 22:18 But that ye must turn
away this day from following the LORD? and it will be, seeing ye rebel
to day against the LORD, that to morrow he will be wroth with the
whole congregation of Israel.

22:19 Notwithstanding, if the land of your possession be unclean, then
pass ye over unto the land of the possession of the LORD, wherein the
LORD’s tabernacle dwelleth, and take possession among us: but rebel
not against the LORD, nor rebel against us, in building you an altar
beside the altar of the LORD our God.

22:20 Did not Achan the son of Zerah commit a trespass in the accursed
thing, and wrath fell on all the congregation of Israel? and that man
perished not alone in his iniquity.

22:21 Then the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half
tribe of Manasseh answered, and said unto the heads of the thousands
of Israel, 22:22 The LORD God of gods, the LORD God of gods, he
knoweth, and Israel he shall know; if it be in rebellion, or if in
transgression against the LORD, (save us not this day,) 22:23 That we
have built us an altar to turn from following the LORD, or if to offer
thereon burnt offering or meat offering, or if to offer peace
offerings thereon, let the LORD himself require it; 22:24 And if we
have not rather done it for fear of this thing, saying, In time to
come your children might speak unto our children, saying, What have ye
to do with the LORD God of Israel? 22:25 For the LORD hath made
Jordan a border between us and you, ye children of Reuben and children
of Gad; ye have no part in the LORD: so shall your children make our
children cease from fearing the LORD.

22:26 Therefore we said, Let us now prepare to build us an altar, not
for burnt offering, nor for sacrifice: 22:27 But that it may be a
witness between us, and you, and our generations after us, that we
might do the service of the LORD before him with our burnt offerings,
and with our sacrifices, and with our peace offerings; that your
children may not say to our children in time to come, Ye have no part
in the LORD.

22:28 Therefore said we, that it shall be, when they should so say to
us or to our generations in time to come, that we may say again,
Behold the pattern of the altar of the LORD, which our fathers made,
not for burnt offerings, nor for sacrifices; but it is a witness
between us and you.

22:29 God forbid that we should rebel against the LORD, and turn this
day from following the LORD, to build an altar for burnt offerings,
for meat offerings, or for sacrifices, beside the altar of the LORD
our God that is before his tabernacle.

22:30 And when Phinehas the priest, and the princes of the
congregation and heads of the thousands of Israel which were with him,
heard the words that the children of Reuben and the children of Gad
and the children of Manasseh spake, it pleased them.

22:31 And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest said unto the
children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the children of
Manasseh, This day we perceive that the LORD is among us, because ye
have not committed this trespass against the LORD: now ye have
delivered the children of Israel out of the hand of the LORD.

22:32 And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, and the princes,
returned from the children of Reuben, and from the children of Gad,
out of the land of Gilead, unto the land of Canaan, to the children of
Israel, and brought them word again.

22:33 And the thing pleased the children of Israel; and the children
of Israel blessed God, and did not intend to go up against them in
battle, to destroy the land wherein the children of Reuben and Gad
dwelt.

22:34 And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad called the
altar Ed: for it shall be a witness between us that the LORD is God.

23:1 And it came to pass a long time after that the LORD had given
rest unto Israel from all their enemies round about, that Joshua waxed
old and stricken in age.

23:2 And Joshua called for all Israel, and for their elders, and for
their heads, and for their judges, and for their officers, and said
unto them, I am old and stricken in age: 23:3 And ye have seen all
that the LORD your God hath done unto all these nations because of
you; for the LORD your God is he that hath fought for you.

23:4 Behold, I have divided unto you by lot these nations that remain,
to be an inheritance for your tribes, from Jordan, with all the
nations that I have cut off, even unto the great sea westward.

23:5 And the LORD your God, he shall expel them from before you, and
drive them from out of your sight; and ye shall possess their land, as
the LORD your God hath promised unto you.

23:6 Be ye therefore very courageous to keep and to do all that is
written in the book of the law of Moses, that ye turn not aside
therefrom to the right hand or to the left; 23:7 That ye come not
among these nations, these that remain among you; neither make mention
of the name of their gods, nor cause to swear by them, neither serve
them, nor bow yourselves unto them: 23:8 But cleave unto the LORD your
God, as ye have done unto this day.

23:9 For the LORD hath driven out from before you great nations and
strong: but as for you, no man hath been able to stand before you unto
this day.

23:10 One man of you shall chase a thousand: for the LORD your God, he
it is that fighteth for you, as he hath promised you.

23:11 Take good heed therefore unto yourselves, that ye love the LORD
your God.

23:12 Else if ye do in any wise go back, and cleave unto the remnant
of these nations, even these that remain among you, and shall make
marriages with them, and go in unto them, and they to you: 23:13 Know
for a certainty that the LORD your God will no more drive out any of
these nations from before you; but they shall be snares and traps unto
you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until ye
perish from off this good land which the LORD your God hath given you.

23:14 And, behold, this day I am going the way of all the earth: and
ye know in all your hearts and in all your souls, that not one thing
hath failed of all the good things which the LORD your God spake
concerning you; all are come to pass unto you, and not one thing hath
failed thereof.

23:15 Therefore it shall come to pass, that as all good things are
come upon you, which the LORD your God promised you; so shall the LORD
bring upon you all evil things, until he have destroyed you from off
this good land which the LORD your God hath given you.

23:16 When ye have transgressed the covenant of the LORD your God,
which he commanded you, and have gone and served other gods, and bowed
yourselves to them; then shall the anger of the LORD be kindled
against you, and ye shall perish quickly from off the good land which
he hath given unto you.

24:1 And Joshua gathered all the tribes of Israel to Shechem, and
called for the elders of Israel, and for their heads, and for their
judges, and for their officers; and they presented themselves before
God.

24:2 And Joshua said unto all the people, Thus saith the LORD God of
Israel, Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time,
even Terah, the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor: and they
served other gods.

24:3 And I took your father Abraham from the other side of the flood,
and led him throughout all the land of Canaan, and multiplied his
seed, and gave him Isaac.

24:4 And I gave unto Isaac Jacob and Esau: and I gave unto Esau mount
Seir, to possess it; but Jacob and his children went down into Egypt.

24:5 I sent Moses also and Aaron, and I plagued Egypt, according to
that which I did among them: and afterward I brought you out.

24:6 And I brought your fathers out of Egypt: and ye came unto the
sea; and the Egyptians pursued after your fathers with chariots and
horsemen unto the Red sea.

24:7 And when they cried unto the LORD, he put darkness between you
and the Egyptians, and brought the sea upon them, and covered them;
and your eyes have seen what I have done in Egypt: and ye dwelt in the
wilderness a long season.

24:8 And I brought you into the land of the Amorites, which dwelt on
the other side Jordan; and they fought with you: and I gave them into
your hand, that ye might possess their land; and I destroyed them from
before you.

24:9 Then Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, arose and warred
against Israel, and sent and called Balaam the son of Beor to curse
you: 24:10 But I would not hearken unto Balaam; therefore he blessed
you still: so I delivered you out of his hand.

24:11 And you went over Jordan, and came unto Jericho: and the men of
Jericho fought against you, the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the
Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Girgashites, the Hivites, and
the Jebusites; and I delivered them into your hand.

24:12 And I sent the hornet before you, which drave them out from
before you, even the two kings of the Amorites; but not with thy
sword, nor with thy bow.

24:13 And I have given you a land for which ye did not labour, and
cities which ye built not, and ye dwell in them; of the vineyards and
oliveyards which ye planted not do ye eat.

24:14 Now therefore fear the LORD, and serve him in sincerity and in
truth: and put away the gods which your fathers served on the other
side of the flood, and in Egypt; and serve ye the LORD.

24:15 And if it seem evil unto you to serve the LORD, choose you this
day whom ye will serve; whether the gods which your fathers served
that were on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the Amorites,
in whose land ye dwell: but as for me and my house, we will serve the
LORD.

24:16 And the people answered and said, God forbid that we should
forsake the LORD, to serve other gods; 24:17 For the LORD our God, he
it is that brought us up and our fathers out of the land of Egypt,
from the house of bondage, and which did those great signs in our
sight, and preserved us in all the way wherein we went, and among all
the people through whom we passed: 24:18 And the LORD drave out from
before us all the people, even the Amorites which dwelt in the land:
therefore will we also serve the LORD; for he is our God.

24:19 And Joshua said unto the people, Ye cannot serve the LORD: for
he is an holy God; he is a jealous God; he will not forgive your
transgressions nor your sins.

24:20 If ye forsake the LORD, and serve strange gods, then he will
turn and do you hurt, and consume you, after that he hath done you
good.

24:21 And the people said unto Joshua, Nay; but we will serve the
LORD.

24:22 And Joshua said unto the people, Ye are witnesses against
yourselves that ye have chosen you the LORD, to serve him. And they
said, We are witnesses.

24:23 Now therefore put away, said he, the strange gods which are
among you, and incline your heart unto the LORD God of Israel.

24:24 And the people said unto Joshua, The LORD our God will we serve,
and his voice will we obey.

24:25 So Joshua made a covenant with the people that day, and set them
a statute and an ordinance in Shechem.

24:26 And Joshua wrote these words in the book of the law of God, and
took a great stone, and set it up there under an oak, that was by the
sanctuary of the LORD.

24:27 And Joshua said unto all the people, Behold, this stone shall be
a witness unto us; for it hath heard all the words of the LORD which
he spake unto us: it shall be therefore a witness unto you, lest ye
deny your God.

24:28 So Joshua let the people depart, every man unto his inheritance.

24:29 And it came to pass after these things, that Joshua the son of
Nun, the servant of the LORD, died, being an hundred and ten years
old.

24:30 And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in
Timnathserah, which is in mount Ephraim, on the north side of the hill
of Gaash.

24:31 And Israel served the LORD all the days of Joshua, and all the
days of the elders that overlived Joshua, and which had known all the
works of the LORD, that he had done for Israel.

24:32 And the bones of Joseph, which the children of Israel brought up
out of Egypt, buried they in Shechem, in a parcel of ground which
Jacob bought of the sons of Hamor the father of Shechem for an hundred
pieces of silver: and it became the inheritance of the children of
Joseph.

24:33 And Eleazar the son of Aaron died; and they buried him in a hill
that pertained to Phinehas his son, which was given him in mount
Ephraim.


The Book of Judges


1:1 Now after the death of Joshua it came to pass, that the children
of Israel asked the LORD, saying, Who shall go up for us against the
Canaanites first, to fight against them? 1:2 And the LORD said, Judah
shall go up: behold, I have delivered the land into his hand.

1:3 And Judah said unto Simeon his brother, Come up with me into my
lot, that we may fight against the Canaanites; and I likewise will go
with thee into thy lot. So Simeon went with him.

1:4 And Judah went up; and the LORD delivered the Canaanites and the
Perizzites into their hand: and they slew of them in Bezek ten
thousand men.

1:5 And they found Adonibezek in Bezek: and they fought against him,
and they slew the Canaanites and the Perizzites.

1:6 But Adonibezek fled; and they pursued after him, and caught him,
and cut off his thumbs and his great toes.

1:7 And Adonibezek said, Threescore and ten kings, having their thumbs
and their great toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table: as I
have done, so God hath requited me. And they brought him to Jerusalem,
and there he died.

1:8 Now the children of Judah had fought against Jerusalem, and had
taken it, and smitten it with the edge of the sword, and set the city
on fire.

1:9 And afterward the children of Judah went down to fight against the
Canaanites, that dwelt in the mountain, and in the south, and in the
valley.

1:10 And Judah went against the Canaanites that dwelt in Hebron: (now
the name of Hebron before was Kirjatharba:) and they slew Sheshai, and
Ahiman, and Talmai.

1:11 And from thence he went against the inhabitants of Debir: and the
name of Debir before was Kirjathsepher: 1:12 And Caleb said, He that
smiteth Kirjathsepher, and taketh it, to him will I give Achsah my
daughter to wife.

1:13 And Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb’s younger brother, took it:
and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.

1:14 And it came to pass, when she came to him, that she moved him to
ask of her father a field: and she lighted from off her ass; and Caleb
said unto her, What wilt thou? 1:15 And she said unto him, Give me a
blessing: for thou hast given me a south land; give me also springs of
water. And Caleb gave her the upper springs and the nether springs.

1:16 And the children of the Kenite, Moses’ father in law, went up out
of the city of palm trees with the children of Judah into the
wilderness of Judah, which lieth in the south of Arad; and they went
and dwelt among the people.

1:17 And Judah went with Simeon his brother, and they slew the
Canaanites that inhabited Zephath, and utterly destroyed it. And the
name of the city was called Hormah.

1:18 Also Judah took Gaza with the coast thereof, and Askelon with the
coast thereof, and Ekron with the coast thereof.

1:19 And the LORD was with Judah; and he drave out the inhabitants of
the mountain; but could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley,
because they had chariots of iron.

1:20 And they gave Hebron unto Caleb, as Moses said: and he expelled
thence the three sons of Anak.

1:21 And the children of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites that
inhabited Jerusalem; but the Jebusites dwell with the children of
Benjamin in Jerusalem unto this day.

1:22 And the house of Joseph, they also went up against Bethel: and
the LORD was with them.

1:23 And the house of Joseph sent to descry Bethel. (Now the name of
the city before was Luz.) 1:24 And the spies saw a man come forth out
of the city, and they said unto him, Shew us, we pray thee, the
entrance into the city, and we will shew thee mercy.

1:25 And when he shewed them the entrance into the city, they smote
the city with the edge of the sword; but they let go the man and all
his family.

1:26 And the man went into the land of the Hittites, and built a city,
and called the name thereof Luz: which is the name thereof unto this
day.

1:27 Neither did Manasseh drive out the inhabitants of Bethshean and
her towns, nor Taanach and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Dor and
her towns, nor the inhabitants of Ibleam and her towns, nor the
inhabitants of Megiddo and her towns: but the Canaanites would dwell
in that land.

1:28 And it came to pass, when Israel was strong, that they put the
Canaanites to tribute, and did not utterly drive them out.

1:29 Neither did Ephraim drive out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer;
but the Canaanites dwelt in Gezer among them.

1:30 Neither did Zebulun drive out the inhabitants of Kitron, nor the
inhabitants of Nahalol; but the Canaanites dwelt among them, and
became tributaries.

1:31 Neither did Asher drive out the inhabitants of Accho, nor the
inhabitants of Zidon, nor of Ahlab, nor of Achzib, nor of Helbah, nor
of Aphik, nor of Rehob: 1:32 But the Asherites dwelt among the
Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land: for they did not drive them
out.

1:33 Neither did Naphtali drive out the inhabitants of Bethshemesh,
nor the inhabitants of Bethanath; but he dwelt among the Canaanites,
the inhabitants of the land: nevertheless the inhabitants of
Bethshemesh and of Bethanath became tributaries unto them.

1:34 And the Amorites forced the children of Dan into the mountain:
for they would not suffer them to come down to the valley: 1:35 But
the Amorites would dwell in mount Heres in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim:
yet the hand of the house of Joseph prevailed, so that they became
tributaries.

1:36 And the coast of the Amorites was from the going up to Akrabbim,
from the rock, and upward.

2:1 And an angel of the LORD came up from Gilgal to Bochim, and said,
I made you to go up out of Egypt, and have brought you unto the land
which I sware unto your fathers; and I said, I will never break my
covenant with you.

2:2 And ye shall make no league with the inhabitants of this land; ye
shall throw down their altars: but ye have not obeyed my voice: why
have ye done this? 2:3 Wherefore I also said, I will not drive them
out from before you; but they shall be as thorns in your sides, and
their gods shall be a snare unto you.

2:4 And it came to pass, when the angel of the LORD spake these words
unto all the children of Israel, that the people lifted up their
voice, and wept.

2:5 And they called the name of that place Bochim: and they sacrificed
there unto the LORD.

2:6 And when Joshua had let the people go, the children of Israel went
every man unto his inheritance to possess the land.

2:7 And the people served the LORD all the days of Joshua, and all the
days of the elders that outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great
works of the LORD, that he did for Israel.

2:8 And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the LORD, died, being an
hundred and ten years old.

2:9 And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in
Timnathheres, in the mount of Ephraim, on the north side of the hill
Gaash.

2:10 And also all that generation were gathered unto their fathers:
and there arose another generation after them, which knew not the
LORD, nor yet the works which he had done for Israel.

2:11 And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the LORD, and
served Baalim: 2:12 And they forsook the LORD God of their fathers,
which brought them out of the land of Egypt, and followed other gods,
of the gods of the people that were round about them, and bowed
themselves unto them, and provoked the LORD to anger.

2:13 And they forsook the LORD, and served Baal and Ashtaroth.

2:14 And the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel, and he
delivered them into the hands of spoilers that spoiled them, and he
sold them into the hands of their enemies round about, so that they
could not any longer stand before their enemies.

2:15 Whithersoever they went out, the hand of the LORD was against
them for evil, as the LORD had said, and as the LORD had sworn unto
them: and they were greatly distressed.

2:16 Nevertheless the LORD raised up judges, which delivered them out
of the hand of those that spoiled them.

2:17 And yet they would not hearken unto their judges, but they went a
whoring after other gods, and bowed themselves unto them: they turned
quickly out of the way which their fathers walked in, obeying the
commandments of the LORD; but they did not so.

2:18 And when the LORD raised them up judges, then the LORD was with
the judge, and delivered them out of the hand of their enemies all the
days of the judge: for it repented the LORD because of their groanings
by reason of them that oppressed them and vexed them.

2:19 And it came to pass, when the judge was dead, that they returned,
and corrupted themselves more than their fathers, in following other
gods to serve them, and to bow down unto them; they ceased not from
their own doings, nor from their stubborn way.

2:20 And the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel; and he said,
Because that this people hath transgressed my covenant which I
commanded their fathers, and have not hearkened unto my voice; 2:21 I
also will not henceforth drive out any from before them of the nations
which Joshua left when he died: 2:22 That through them I may prove
Israel, whether they will keep the way of the LORD to walk therein, as
their fathers did keep it, or not.

2:23 Therefore the LORD left those nations, without driving them out
hastily; neither delivered he them into the hand of Joshua.

3:1 Now these are the nations which the LORD left, to prove Israel by
them, even as many of Israel as had not known all the wars of Canaan;
3:2 Only that the generations of the children of Israel might know, to
teach them war, at the least such as before knew nothing thereof; 3:3
Namely, five lords of the Philistines, and all the Canaanites, and the
Sidonians, and the Hivites that dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount
Baalhermon unto the entering in of Hamath.

3:4 And they were to prove Israel by them, to know whether they would
hearken unto the commandments of the LORD, which he commanded their
fathers by the hand of Moses.

3:5 And the children of Israel dwelt among the Canaanites, Hittites,
and Amorites, and Perizzites, and Hivites, and Jebusites: 3:6 And they
took their daughters to be their wives, and gave their daughters to
their sons, and served their gods.

3:7 And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the LORD, and
forgat the LORD their God, and served Baalim and the groves.

3:8 Therefore the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel, and he
sold them into the hand of Chushanrishathaim king of Mesopotamia: and
the children of Israel served Chushanrishathaim eight years.

3:9 And when the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, the LORD
raised up a deliverer to the children of Israel, who delivered them,
even Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb’s younger brother.

3:10 And the Spirit of the LORD came upon him, and he judged Israel,
and went out to war: and the LORD delivered Chushanrishathaim king of
Mesopotamia into his hand; and his hand prevailed against
Chushanrishathaim.

3:11 And the land had rest forty years. And Othniel the son of Kenaz
died.

3:12 And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the
LORD: and the LORD strengthened Eglon the king of Moab against Israel,
because they had done evil in the sight of the LORD.

3:13 And he gathered unto him the children of Ammon and Amalek, and
went and smote Israel, and possessed the city of palm trees.

3:14 So the children of Israel served Eglon the king of Moab eighteen
years.

3:15 But when the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, the LORD
raised them up a deliverer, Ehud the son of Gera, a Benjamite, a man
lefthanded: and by him the children of Israel sent a present unto
Eglon the king of Moab.

3:16 But Ehud made him a dagger which had two edges, of a cubit
length; and he did gird it under his raiment upon his right thigh.

3:17 And he brought the present unto Eglon king of Moab: and Eglon was
a very fat man.

3:18 And when he had made an end to offer the present, he sent away
the people that bare the present.

3:19 But he himself turned again from the quarries that were by
Gilgal, and said, I have a secret errand unto thee, O king: who said,
Keep silence. And all that stood by him went out from him.

3:20 And Ehud came unto him; and he was sitting in a summer parlour,
which he had for himself alone. And Ehud said, I have a message from
God unto thee.

And he arose out of his seat.

3:21 And Ehud put forth his left hand, and took the dagger from his
right thigh, and thrust it into his belly: 3:22 And the haft also went
in after the blade; and the fat closed upon the blade, so that he
could not draw the dagger out of his belly; and the dirt came out.

3:23 Then Ehud went forth through the porch, and shut the doors of the
parlour upon him, and locked them.

3:24 When he was gone out, his servants came; and when they saw that,
behold, the doors of the parlour were locked, they said, Surely he
covereth his feet in his summer chamber.

3:25 And they tarried till they were ashamed: and, behold, he opened
not the doors of the parlour; therefore they took a key, and opened
them: and, behold, their lord was fallen down dead on the earth.

3:26 And Ehud escaped while they tarried, and passed beyond the
quarries, and escaped unto Seirath.

3:27 And it came to pass, when he was come, that he blew a trumpet in
the mountain of Ephraim, and the children of Israel went down with him
from the mount, and he before them.

3:28 And he said unto them, Follow after me: for the LORD hath
delivered your enemies the Moabites into your hand. And they went down
after him, and took the fords of Jordan toward Moab, and suffered not
a man to pass over.

3:29 And they slew of Moab at that time about ten thousand men, all
lusty, and all men of valour; and there escaped not a man.

3:30 So Moab was subdued that day under the hand of Israel. And the
land had rest fourscore years.

3:31 And after him was Shamgar the son of Anath, which slew of the
Philistines six hundred men with an ox goad: and he also delivered
Israel.

4:1 And the children of Israel again did evil in the sight of the
LORD, when Ehud was dead.

4:2 And the LORD sold them into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan, that
reigned in Hazor; the captain of whose host was Sisera, which dwelt in
Harosheth of the Gentiles.

4:3 And the children of Israel cried unto the LORD: for he had nine
hundred chariots of iron; and twenty years he mightily oppressed the
children of Israel.

4:4 And Deborah, a prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth, she judged Israel
at that time.

4:5 And she dwelt under the palm tree of Deborah between Ramah and
Bethel in mount Ephraim: and the children of Israel came up to her for
judgment.

4:6 And she sent and called Barak the son of Abinoam out of
Kedeshnaphtali, and said unto him, Hath not the LORD God of Israel
commanded, saying, Go and draw toward mount Tabor, and take with thee
ten thousand men of the children of Naphtali and of the children of
Zebulun? 4:7 And I will draw unto thee to the river Kishon Sisera,
the captain of Jabin’s army, with his chariots and his multitude; and
I will deliver him into thine hand.

4:8 And Barak said unto her, If thou wilt go with me, then I will go:
but if thou wilt not go with me, then I will not go.

4:9 And she said, I will surely go with thee: notwithstanding the
journey that thou takest shall not be for thine honour; for the LORD
shall sell Sisera into the hand of a woman. And Deborah arose, and
went with Barak to Kedesh.

4:10 And Barak called Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh; and he went up
with ten thousand men at his feet: and Deborah went up with him.

4:11 Now Heber the Kenite, which was of the children of Hobab the
father in law of Moses, had severed himself from the Kenites, and
pitched his tent unto the plain of Zaanaim, which is by Kedesh.

4:12 And they shewed Sisera that Barak the son of Abinoam was gone up
to mount Tabor.

4:13 And Sisera gathered together all his chariots, even nine hundred
chariots of iron, and all the people that were with him, from
Harosheth of the Gentiles unto the river of Kishon.

4:14 And Deborah said unto Barak, Up; for this is the day in which the
LORD hath delivered Sisera into thine hand: is not the LORD gone out
before thee? So Barak went down from mount Tabor, and ten thousand men
after him.

4:15 And the LORD discomfited Sisera, and all his chariots, and all
his host, with the edge of the sword before Barak; so that Sisera
lighted down off his chariot, and fled away on his feet.

4:16 But Barak pursued after the chariots, and after the host, unto
Harosheth of the Gentiles: and all the host of Sisera fell upon the
edge of the sword; and there was not a man left.

4:17 Howbeit Sisera fled away on his feet to the tent of Jael the wife
of Heber the Kenite: for there was peace between Jabin the king of
Hazor and the house of Heber the Kenite.

4:18 And Jael went out to meet Sisera, and said unto him, Turn in, my
lord, turn in to me; fear not. And when he had turned in unto her into
the tent, she covered him with a mantle.

4:19 And he said unto her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water to
drink; for I am thirsty. And she opened a bottle of milk, and gave him
drink, and covered him.

4:20 Again he said unto her, Stand in the door of the tent, and it
shall be, when any man doth come and enquire of thee, and say, Is
there any man here? that thou shalt say, No.

4:21 Then Jael Heber’s wife took a nail of the tent, and took an
hammer in her hand, and went softly unto him, and smote the nail into
his temples, and fastened it into the ground: for he was fast asleep
and weary. So he died.

4:22 And, behold, as Barak pursued Sisera, Jael came out to meet him,
and said unto him, Come, and I will shew thee the man whom thou
seekest. And when he came into her tent, behold, Sisera lay dead, and
the nail was in his temples.

4:23 So God subdued on that day Jabin the king of Canaan before the
children of Israel.

4:24 And the hand of the children of Israel prospered, and prevailed
against Jabin the king of Canaan, until they had destroyed Jabin king
of Canaan.

5:1 Then sang Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoam on that day,
saying, 5:2 Praise ye the LORD for the avenging of Israel, when the
people willingly offered themselves.

5:3 Hear, O ye kings; give ear, O ye princes; I, even I, will sing
unto the LORD; I will sing praise to the LORD God of Israel.

5:4 LORD, when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of
the field of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the
clouds also dropped water.

5:5 The mountains melted from before the LORD, even that Sinai from
before the LORD God of Israel.

5:6 In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the
highways were unoccupied, and the travellers walked through byways.

5:7 The inhabitants of the villages ceased, they ceased in Israel,
until that I Deborah arose, that I arose a mother in Israel.

5:8 They chose new gods; then was war in the gates: was there a shield
or spear seen among forty thousand in Israel? 5:9 My heart is toward
the governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly among the
people. Bless ye the LORD.

5:10 Speak, ye that ride on white asses, ye that sit in judgment, and
walk by the way.

5:11 They that are delivered from the noise of archers in the places
of drawing water, there shall they rehearse the righteous acts of the
LORD, even the righteous acts toward the inhabitants of his villages
in Israel: then shall the people of the LORD go down to the gates.

5:12 Awake, awake, Deborah: awake, awake, utter a song: arise, Barak,
and lead thy captivity captive, thou son of Abinoam.

5:13 Then he made him that remaineth have dominion over the nobles
among the people: the LORD made me have dominion over the mighty.

5:14 Out of Ephraim was there a root of them against Amalek; after
thee, Benjamin, among thy people; out of Machir came down governors,
and out of Zebulun they that handle the pen of the writer.

5:15 And the princes of Issachar were with Deborah; even Issachar, and
also Barak: he was sent on foot into the valley. For the divisions of
Reuben there were great thoughts of heart.

5:16 Why abodest thou among the sheepfolds, to hear the bleatings of
the flocks? For the divisions of Reuben there were great searchings of
heart.

5:17 Gilead abode beyond Jordan: and why did Dan remain in ships?
Asher continued on the sea shore, and abode in his breaches.

5:18 Zebulun and Naphtali were a people that jeoparded their lives
unto the death in the high places of the field.

5:19 The kings came and fought, then fought the kings of Canaan in
Taanach by the waters of Megiddo; they took no gain of money.

5:20 They fought from heaven; the stars in their courses fought
against Sisera.

5:21 The river of Kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the
river Kishon. O my soul, thou hast trodden down strength.

5:22 Then were the horsehoofs broken by the means of the pransings,
the pransings of their mighty ones.

5:23 Curse ye Meroz, said the angel of the LORD, curse ye bitterly the
inhabitants thereof; because they came not to the help of the LORD, to
the help of the LORD against the mighty.

5:24 Blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be,
blessed shall she be above women in the tent.

5:25 He asked water, and she gave him milk; she brought forth butter
in a lordly dish.

5:26 She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmen’s
hammer; and with the hammer she smote Sisera, she smote off his head,
when she had pierced and stricken through his temples.

5:27 At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down: at her feet he bowed,
he fell: where he bowed, there he fell down dead.

5:28 The mother of Sisera looked out at a window, and cried through
the lattice, Why is his chariot so long in coming? why tarry the
wheels of his chariots? 5:29 Her wise ladies answered her, yea, she
returned answer to herself, 5:30 Have they not sped? have they not
divided the prey; to every man a damsel or two; to Sisera a prey of
divers colours, a prey of divers colours of needlework, of divers
colours of needlework on both sides, meet for the necks of them that
take the spoil? 5:31 So let all thine enemies perish, O LORD: but let
them that love him be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might. And
the land had rest forty years.

6:1 And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the LORD: and
the LORD delivered them into the hand of Midian seven years.

6:2 And the hand of Midian prevailed against Israel: and because of
the Midianites the children of Israel made them the dens which are in
the mountains, and caves, and strong holds.

6:3 And so it was, when Israel had sown, that the Midianites came up,
and the Amalekites, and the children of the east, even they came up
against them; 6:4 And they encamped against them, and destroyed the
increase of the earth, till thou come unto Gaza, and left no
sustenance for Israel, neither sheep, nor ox, nor ass.

6:5 For they came up with their cattle and their tents, and they came
as grasshoppers for multitude; for both they and their camels were
without number: and they entered into the land to destroy it.

6:6 And Israel was greatly impoverished because of the Midianites; and
the children of Israel cried unto the LORD.

6:7 And it came to pass, when the children of Israel cried unto the
LORD because of the Midianites, 6:8 That the LORD sent a prophet unto
the children of Israel, which said unto them, Thus saith the LORD God
of Israel, I brought you up from Egypt, and brought you forth out of
the house of bondage; 6:9 And I delivered you out of the hand of the
Egyptians, and out of the hand of all that oppressed you, and drave
them out from before you, and gave you their land; 6:10 And I said
unto you, I am the LORD your God; fear not the gods of the Amorites,
in whose land ye dwell: but ye have not obeyed my voice.

6:11 And there came an angel of the LORD, and sat under an oak which
was in Ophrah, that pertained unto Joash the Abiezrite: and his son
Gideon threshed wheat by the winepress, to hide it from the
Midianites.

6:12 And the angel of the LORD appeared unto him, and said unto him,
The LORD is with thee, thou mighty man of valour.

6:13 And Gideon said unto him, Oh my Lord, if the LORD be with us, why
then is all this befallen us? and where be all his miracles which our
fathers told us of, saying, Did not the LORD bring us up from Egypt?
but now the LORD hath forsaken us, and delivered us into the hands of
the Midianites.

6:14 And the LORD looked upon him, and said, Go in this thy might, and
thou shalt save Israel from the hand of the Midianites: have not I
sent thee? 6:15 And he said unto him, Oh my Lord, wherewith shall I
save Israel? behold, my family is poor in Manasseh, and I am the
least in my father’s house.

6:16 And the LORD said unto him, Surely I will be with thee, and thou
shalt smite the Midianites as one man.

6:17 And he said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight,
then shew me a sign that thou talkest with me.

6:18 Depart not hence, I pray thee, until I come unto thee, and bring
forth my present, and set it before thee. And he said, I will tarry
until thou come again.

6:19 And Gideon went in, and made ready a kid, and unleavened cakes of
an ephah of flour: the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the broth
in a pot, and brought it out unto him under the oak, and presented it.

6:20 And the angel of God said unto him, Take the flesh and the
unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this rock, and pour out the broth.
And he did so.

6:21 Then the angel of the LORD put forth the end of the staff that
was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and
there rose up fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the
unleavened cakes. Then the angel of the LORD departed out of his
sight.

6:22 And when Gideon perceived that he was an angel of the LORD,
Gideon said, Alas, O LORD God! for because I have seen an angel of the
LORD face to face.

6:23 And the LORD said unto him, Peace be unto thee; fear not: thou
shalt not die.

6:24 Then Gideon built an altar there unto the LORD, and called it
Jehovahshalom: unto this day it is yet in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.

6:25 And it came to pass the same night, that the LORD said unto him,
Take thy father’s young bullock, even the second bullock of seven
years old, and throw down the altar of Baal that thy father hath, and
cut down the grove that is by it: 6:26 And build an altar unto the
LORD thy God upon the top of this rock, in the ordered place, and take
the second bullock, and offer a burnt sacrifice with the wood of the
grove which thou shalt cut down.

6:27 Then Gideon took ten men of his servants, and did as the LORD had
said unto him: and so it was, because he feared his father’s
household, and the men of the city, that he could not do it by day,
that he did it by night.

6:28 And when the men of the city arose early in the morning, behold,
the altar of Baal was cast down, and the grove was cut down that was
by it, and the second bullock was offered upon the altar that was
built.

6:29 And they said one to another, Who hath done this thing? And when
they enquired and asked, they said, Gideon the son of Joash hath done
this thing.

6:30 Then the men of the city said unto Joash, Bring out thy son, that
he may die: because he hath cast down the altar of Baal, and because
he hath cut down the grove that was by it.

6:31 And Joash said unto all that stood against him, Will ye plead for
Baal? will ye save him? he that will plead for him, let him be put to
death whilst it is yet morning: if he be a god, let him plead for
himself, because one hath cast down his altar.

6:32 Therefore on that day he called him Jerubbaal, saying, Let Baal
plead against him, because he hath thrown down his altar.

6:33 Then all the Midianites and the Amalekites and the children of
the east were gathered together, and went over, and pitched in the
valley of Jezreel.

6:34 But the Spirit of the LORD came upon Gideon, and he blew a
trumpet; and Abiezer was gathered after him.

6:35 And he sent messengers throughout all Manasseh; who also was
gathered after him: and he sent messengers unto Asher, and unto
Zebulun, and unto Naphtali; and they came up to meet them.

6:36 And Gideon said unto God, If thou wilt save Israel by mine hand,
as thou hast said, 6:37 Behold, I will put a fleece of wool in the
floor; and if the dew be on the fleece only, and it be dry upon all
the earth beside, then shall I know that thou wilt save Israel by mine
hand, as thou hast said.

6:38 And it was so: for he rose up early on the morrow, and thrust the
fleece together, and wringed the dew out of the fleece, a bowl full of
water.

6:39 And Gideon said unto God, Let not thine anger be hot against me,
and I will speak but this once: let me prove, I pray thee, but this
once with the fleece; let it now be dry only upon the fleece, and upon
all the ground let there be dew.

6:40 And God did so that night: for it was dry upon the fleece only,
and there was dew on all the ground.

7:1 Then Jerubbaal, who is Gideon, and all the people that were with
him, rose up early, and pitched beside the well of Harod: so that the
host of the Midianites were on the north side of them, by the hill of
Moreh, in the valley.

7:2 And the LORD said unto Gideon, The people that are with thee are
too many for me to give the Midianites into their hands, lest Israel
vaunt themselves against me, saying, Mine own hand hath saved me.

7:3 Now therefore go to, proclaim in the ears of the people, saying,
Whosoever is fearful and afraid, let him return and depart early from
mount Gilead. And there returned of the people twenty and two
thousand; and there remained ten thousand.

7:4 And the LORD said unto Gideon, The people are yet too many; bring
them down unto the water, and I will try them for thee there: and it
shall be, that of whom I say unto thee, This shall go with thee, the
same shall go with thee; and of whomsoever I say unto thee, This shall
not go with thee, the same shall not go.

7:5 So he brought down the people unto the water: and the LORD said
unto Gideon, Every one that lappeth of the water with his tongue, as a
dog lappeth, him shalt thou set by himself; likewise every one that
boweth down upon his knees to drink.

7:6 And the number of them that lapped, putting their hand to their
mouth, were three hundred men: but all the rest of the people bowed
down upon their knees to drink water.

7:7 And the LORD said unto Gideon, By the three hundred men that
lapped will I save you, and deliver the Midianites into thine hand:
and let all the other people go every man unto his place.

7:8 So the people took victuals in their hand, and their trumpets: and
he sent all the rest of Israel every man unto his tent, and retained
those three hundred men: and the host of Midian was beneath him in the
valley.

7:9 And it came to pass the same night, that the LORD said unto him,
Arise, get thee down unto the host; for I have delivered it into thine
hand.

7:10 But if thou fear to go down, go thou with Phurah thy servant down
to the host: 7:11 And thou shalt hear what they say; and afterward
shall thine hands be strengthened to go down unto the host. Then went
he down with Phurah his servant unto the outside of the armed men that
were in the host.

7:12 And the Midianites and the Amalekites and all the children of the
east lay along in the valley like grasshoppers for multitude; and
their camels were without number, as the sand by the sea side for
multitude.

7:13 And when Gideon was come, behold, there was a man that told a
dream unto his fellow, and said, Behold, I dreamed a dream, and, lo, a
cake of barley bread tumbled into the host of Midian, and came unto a
tent, and smote it that it fell, and overturned it, that the tent lay
along.

7:14 And his fellow answered and said, This is nothing else save the
sword of Gideon the son of Joash, a man of Israel: for into his hand
hath God delivered Midian, and all the host.

7:15 And it was so, when Gideon heard the telling of the dream, and
the interpretation thereof, that he worshipped, and returned into the
host of Israel, and said, Arise; for the LORD hath delivered into your
hand the host of Midian.

7:16 And he divided the three hundred men into three companies, and he
put a trumpet in every man’s hand, with empty pitchers, and lamps
within the pitchers.

7:17 And he said unto them, Look on me, and do likewise: and, behold,
when I come to the outside of the camp, it shall be that, as I do, so
shall ye do.

7:18 When I blow with a trumpet, I and all that are with me, then blow
ye the trumpets also on every side of all the camp, and say, The sword
of the LORD, and of Gideon.

7:19 So Gideon, and the hundred men that were with him, came unto the
outside of the camp in the beginning of the middle watch; and they had
but newly set the watch: and they blew the trumpets, and brake the
pitchers that were in their hands.

7:20 And the three companies blew the trumpets, and brake the
pitchers, and held the lamps in their left hands, and the trumpets in
their right hands to blow withal: and they cried, The sword of the
LORD, and of Gideon.

7:21 And they stood every man in his place round about the camp; and
all the host ran, and cried, and fled.

7:22 And the three hundred blew the trumpets, and the LORD set every
man’s sword against his fellow, even throughout all the host: and the
host fled to Bethshittah in Zererath, and to the border of
Abelmeholah, unto Tabbath.

7:23 And the men of Israel gathered themselves together out of
Naphtali, and out of Asher, and out of all Manasseh, and pursued after
the Midianites.

7:24 And Gideon sent messengers throughout all mount Ephraim, saying,
come down against the Midianites, and take before them the waters unto
Bethbarah and Jordan. Then all the men of Ephraim gathered themselves
together, and took the waters unto Bethbarah and Jordan.

7:25 And they took two princes of the Midianites, Oreb and Zeeb; and
they slew Oreb upon the rock Oreb, and Zeeb they slew at the winepress
of Zeeb, and pursued Midian, and brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to
Gideon on the other side Jordan.

8:1 And the men of Ephraim said unto him, Why hast thou served us
thus, that thou calledst us not, when thou wentest to fight with the
Midianites? And they did chide with him sharply.

8:2 And he said unto them, What have I done now in comparison of you?
Is not the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim better than the vintage
of Abiezer? 8:3 God hath delivered into your hands the princes of
Midian, Oreb and Zeeb: and what was I able to do in comparison of you?
Then their anger was abated toward him, when he had said that.

8:4 And Gideon came to Jordan, and passed over, he, and the three
hundred men that were with him, faint, yet pursuing them.

8:5 And he said unto the men of Succoth, Give, I pray you, loaves of
bread unto the people that follow me; for they be faint, and I am
pursuing after Zebah and Zalmunna, kings of Midian.

8:6 And the princes of Succoth said, Are the hands of Zebah and
Zalmunna now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thine army?
8:7 And Gideon said, Therefore when the LORD hath delivered Zebah and
Zalmunna into mine hand, then I will tear your flesh with the thorns
of the wilderness and with briers.

8:8 And he went up thence to Penuel, and spake unto them likewise: and
the men of Penuel answered him as the men of Succoth had answered him.

8:9 And he spake also unto the men of Penuel, saying, When I come
again in peace, I will break down this tower.

8:10 Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor, and their hosts with them,
about fifteen thousand men, all that were left of all the hosts of the
children of the east: for there fell an hundred and twenty thousand
men that drew sword.

8:11 And Gideon went up by the way of them that dwelt in tents on the
east of Nobah and Jogbehah, and smote the host; for the host was
secure.

8:12 And when Zebah and Zalmunna fled, he pursued after them, and took
the two kings of Midian, Zebah and Zalmunna, and discomfited all the
host.

8:13 And Gideon the son of Joash returned from battle before the sun
was up, 8:14 And caught a young man of the men of Succoth, and
enquired of him: and he described unto him the princes of Succoth, and
the elders thereof, even threescore and seventeen men.

8:15 And he came unto the men of Succoth, and said, Behold Zebah and
Zalmunna, with whom ye did upbraid me, saying, Are the hands of Zebah
and Zalmunna now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thy men
that are weary? 8:16 And he took the elders of the city, and thorns
of the wilderness and briers, and with them he taught the men of
Succoth.

8:17 And he beat down the tower of Penuel, and slew the men of the
city.

8:18 Then said he unto Zebah and Zalmunna, What manner of men were
they whom ye slew at Tabor? And they answered, As thou art, so were
they; each one resembled the children of a king.

8:19 And he said, They were my brethren, even the sons of my mother:
as the LORD liveth, if ye had saved them alive, I would not slay you.

8:20 And he said unto Jether his firstborn, Up, and slay them. But the
youth drew not his sword: for he feared, because he was yet a youth.

8:21 Then Zebah and Zalmunna said, Rise thou, and fall upon us: for as
the man is, so is his strength. And Gideon arose, and slew Zebah and
Zalmunna, and took away the ornaments that were on their camels’
necks.

8:22 Then the men of Israel said unto Gideon, Rule thou over us, both
thou, and thy son, and thy son’s son also: for thou hast delivered us
from the hand of Midian.

8:23 And Gideon said unto them, I will not rule over you, neither
shall my son rule over you: the LORD shall rule over you.

8:24 And Gideon said unto them, I would desire a request of you, that
ye would give me every man the earrings of his prey. (For they had
golden earrings, because they were Ishmaelites.) 8:25 And they
answered, We will willingly give them. And they spread a garment, and
did cast therein every man the earrings of his prey.

8:26 And the weight of the golden earrings that he requested was a
thousand and seven hundred shekels of gold; beside ornaments, and
collars, and purple raiment that was on the kings of Midian, and
beside the chains that were about their camels’ necks.

8:27 And Gideon made an ephod thereof, and put it in his city, even in
Ophrah: and all Israel went thither a whoring after it: which thing
became a snare unto Gideon, and to his house.

8:28 Thus was Midian subdued before the children of Israel, so that
they lifted up their heads no more. And the country was in quietness
forty years in the days of Gideon.

8:29 And Jerubbaal the son of Joash went and dwelt in his own house.

8:30 And Gideon had threescore and ten sons of his body begotten: for
he had many wives.

8:31 And his concubine that was in Shechem, she also bare him a son,
whose name he called Abimelech.

8:32 And Gideon the son of Joash died in a good old age, and was
buried in the sepulchre of Joash his father, in Ophrah of the
Abiezrites.

8:33 And it came to pass, as soon as Gideon was dead, that the
children of Israel turned again, and went a whoring after Baalim, and
made Baalberith their god.

8:34 And the children of Israel remembered not the LORD their God, who
had delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies on every
side: 8:35 Neither shewed they kindness to the house of Jerubbaal,
namely, Gideon, according to all the goodness which he had shewed unto
Israel.

9:1 And Abimelech the son of Jerubbaal went to Shechem unto his
mother’s brethren, and communed with them, and with all the family of
the house of his mother’s father, saying, 9:2 Speak, I pray you, in
the ears of all the men of Shechem, Whether is better for you, either
that all the sons of Jerubbaal, which are threescore and ten persons,
reign over you, or that one reign over you? remember also that I am
your bone and your flesh.

9:3 And his mother’s brethren spake of him in the ears of all the men
of Shechem all these words: and their hearts inclined to follow
Abimelech; for they said, He is our brother.

9:4 And they gave him threescore and ten pieces of silver out of the
house of Baalberith, wherewith Abimelech hired vain and light persons,
which followed him.

9:5 And he went unto his father’s house at Ophrah, and slew his
brethren the sons of Jerubbaal, being threescore and ten persons, upon
one stone: notwithstanding yet Jotham the youngest son of Jerubbaal
was left; for he hid himself.

9:6 And all the men of Shechem gathered together, and all the house of
Millo, and went, and made Abimelech king, by the plain of the pillar
that was in Shechem.

9:7 And when they told it to Jotham, he went and stood in the top of
mount Gerizim, and lifted up his voice, and cried, and said unto them,
Hearken unto me, ye men of Shechem, that God may hearken unto you.

9:8 The trees went forth on a time to anoint a king over them; and
they said unto the olive tree, Reign thou over us.

9:9 But the olive tree said unto them, Should I leave my fatness,
wherewith by me they honour God and man, and go to be promoted over
the trees? 9:10 And the trees said to the fig tree, Come thou, and
reign over us.

9:11 But the fig tree said unto them, Should I forsake my sweetness,
and my good fruit, and go to be promoted over the trees? 9:12 Then
said the trees unto the vine, Come thou, and reign over us.

9:13 And the vine said unto them, Should I leave my wine, which
cheereth God and man, and go to be promoted over the trees? 9:14 Then
said all the trees unto the bramble, Come thou, and reign over us.

9:15 And the bramble said unto the trees, If in truth ye anoint me
king over you, then come and put your trust in my shadow: and if not,
let fire come out of the bramble, and devour the cedars of Lebanon.

9:16 Now therefore, if ye have done truly and sincerely, in that ye
have made Abimelech king, and if ye have dealt well with Jerubbaal and
his house, and have done unto him according to the deserving of his
hands; 9:17 (For my father fought for you, and adventured his life
far, and delivered you out of the hand of Midian: 9:18 And ye are
risen up against my father’s house this day, and have slain his sons,
threescore and ten persons, upon one stone, and have made Abimelech,
the son of his maidservant, king over the men of Shechem, because he
is your brother;) 9:19 If ye then have dealt truly and sincerely with
Jerubbaal and with his house this day, then rejoice ye in Abimelech,
and let him also rejoice in you: 9:20 But if not, let fire come out
from Abimelech, and devour the men of Shechem, and the house of Millo;
and let fire come out from the men of Shechem, and from the house of
Millo, and devour Abimelech.

9:21 And Jotham ran away, and fled, and went to Beer, and dwelt there,
for fear of Abimelech his brother.

9:22 When Abimelech had reigned three years over Israel, 9:23 Then God
sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of Shechem; and the
men of Shechem dealt treacherously with Abimelech: 9:24 That the
cruelty done to the threescore and ten sons of Jerubbaal might come,
and their blood be laid upon Abimelech their brother, which slew them;
and upon the men of Shechem, which aided him in the killing of his
brethren.

9:25 And the men of Shechem set liers in wait for him in the top of
the mountains, and they robbed all that came along that way by them:
and it was told Abimelech.

9:26 And Gaal the son of Ebed came with his brethren, and went over to
Shechem: and the men of Shechem put their confidence in him.

9:27 And they went out into the fields, and gathered their vineyards,
and trode the grapes, and made merry, and went into the house of their
god, and did eat and drink, and cursed Abimelech.

9:28 And Gaal the son of Ebed said, Who is Abimelech, and who is
Shechem, that we should serve him? is not he the son of Jerubbaal? and
Zebul his officer? serve the men of Hamor the father of Shechem: for
why should we serve him? 9:29 And would to God this people were under
my hand! then would I remove Abimelech. And he said to Abimelech,
Increase thine army, and come out.

9:30 And when Zebul the ruler of the city heard the words of Gaal the
son of Ebed, his anger was kindled.

9:31 And he sent messengers unto Abimelech privily, saying, Behold,
Gaal the son of Ebed and his brethren be come to Shechem; and, behold,
they fortify the city against thee.

9:32 Now therefore up by night, thou and the people that is with thee,
and lie in wait in the field: 9:33 And it shall be, that in the
morning, as soon as the sun is up, thou shalt rise early, and set upon
the city: and, behold, when he and the people that is with him come
out against thee, then mayest thou do to them as thou shalt find
occasion.

9:34 And Abimelech rose up, and all the people that were with him, by
night, and they laid wait against Shechem in four companies.

9:35 And Gaal the son of Ebed went out, and stood in the entering of
the gate of the city: and Abimelech rose up, and the people that were
with him, from lying in wait.

9:36 And when Gaal saw the people, he said to Zebul, Behold, there
come people down from the top of the mountains. And Zebul said unto
him, Thou seest the shadow of the mountains as if they were men.

9:37 And Gaal spake again, and said, See there come people down by the
middle of the land, and another company come along by the plain of
Meonenim.

9:38 Then said Zebul unto him, Where is now thy mouth, wherewith thou
saidst, Who is Abimelech, that we should serve him? is not this the
people that thou hast despised? go out, I pray now, and fight with
them.

9:39 And Gaal went out before the men of Shechem, and fought with
Abimelech.

9:40 And Abimelech chased him, and he fled before him, and many were
overthrown and wounded, even unto the entering of the gate.

9:41 And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah: and Zebul thrust out Gaal and his
brethren, that they should not dwell in Shechem.

9:42 And it came to pass on the morrow, that the people went out into
the field; and they told Abimelech.

9:43 And he took the people, and divided them into three companies,
and laid wait in the field, and looked, and, behold, the people were
come forth out of the city; and he rose up against them, and smote
them.

9:44 And Abimelech, and the company that was with him, rushed forward,
and stood in the entering of the gate of the city: and the two other
companies ran upon all the people that were in the fields, and slew
them.

9:45 And Abimelech fought against the city all that day; and he took
the city, and slew the people that was therein, and beat down the
city, and sowed it with salt.

9:46 And when all the men of the tower of Shechem heard that, they
entered into an hold of the house of the god Berith.

9:47 And it was told Abimelech, that all the men of the tower of
Shechem were gathered together.

9:48 And Abimelech gat him up to mount Zalmon, he and all the people
that were with him; and Abimelech took an axe in his hand, and cut
down a bough from the trees, and took it, and laid it on his shoulder,
and said unto the people that were with him, What ye have seen me do,
make haste, and do as I have done.

9:49 And all the people likewise cut down every man his bough, and
followed Abimelech, and put them to the hold, and set the hold on fire
upon them; so that all the men of the tower of Shechem died also,
about a thousand men and women.

9:50 Then went Abimelech to Thebez, and encamped against Thebez, and
took it.

9:51 But there was a strong tower within the city, and thither fled
all the men and women, and all they of the city, and shut it to them,
and gat them up to the top of the tower.

9:52 And Abimelech came unto the tower, and fought against it, and
went hard unto the door of the tower to burn it with fire.

9:53 And a certain woman cast a piece of a millstone upon Abimelech’s
head, and all to brake his skull.

9:54 Then he called hastily unto the young man his armourbearer, and
said unto him, Draw thy sword, and slay me, that men say not of me, A
women slew him. And his young man thrust him through, and he died.

9:55 And when the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead, they
departed every man unto his place.

9:56 Thus God rendered the wickedness of Abimelech, which he did unto
his father, in slaying his seventy brethren: 9:57 And all the evil of
the men of Shechem did God render upon their heads: and upon them came
the curse of Jotham the son of Jerubbaal.

10:1 And after Abimelech there arose to defend Israel Tola the son of
Puah, the son of Dodo, a man of Issachar; and he dwelt in Shamir in
mount Ephraim.

10:2 And he judged Israel twenty and three years, and died, and was
buried in Shamir.

10:3 And after him arose Jair, a Gileadite, and judged Israel twenty
and two years.

10:4 And he had thirty sons that rode on thirty ass colts, and they
had thirty cities, which are called Havothjair unto this day, which
are in the land of Gilead.

10:5 And Jair died, and was buried in Camon.

10:6 And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the
LORD, and served Baalim, and Ashtaroth, and the gods of Syria, and the
gods of Zidon, and the gods of Moab, and the gods of the children of
Ammon, and the gods of the Philistines, and forsook the LORD, and
served not him.

10:7 And the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel, and he sold
them into the hands of the Philistines, and into the hands of the
children of Ammon.

10:8 And that year they vexed and oppressed the children of Israel:
eighteen years, all the children of Israel that were on the other side
Jordan in the land of the Amorites, which is in Gilead.

10:9 Moreover the children of Ammon passed over Jordan to fight also
against Judah, and against Benjamin, and against the house of Ephraim;
so that Israel was sore distressed.

10:10 And the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, saying, We have
sinned against thee, both because we have forsaken our God, and also
served Baalim.

10:11 And the LORD said unto the children of Israel, Did not I deliver
you from the Egyptians, and from the Amorites, from the children of
Ammon, and from the Philistines? 10:12 The Zidonians also, and the
Amalekites, and the Maonites, did oppress you; and ye cried to me, and
I delivered you out of their hand.

10:13 Yet ye have forsaken me, and served other gods: wherefore I will
deliver you no more.

10:14 Go and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen; let them deliver
you in the time of your tribulation.

10:15 And the children of Israel said unto the LORD, We have sinned:
do thou unto us whatsoever seemeth good unto thee; deliver us only, we
pray thee, this day.

10:16 And they put away the strange gods from among them, and served
the LORD: and his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel.

10:17 Then the children of Ammon were gathered together, and encamped
in Gilead. And the children of Israel assembled themselves together,
and encamped in Mizpeh.

10:18 And the people and princes of Gilead said one to another, What
man is he that will begin to fight against the children of Ammon? he
shall be head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.

11:1 Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty man of valour, and he was
the son of an harlot: and Gilead begat Jephthah.

11:2 And Gilead’s wife bare him sons; and his wife’s sons grew up, and
they thrust out Jephthah, and said unto him, Thou shalt not inherit in
our father’s house; for thou art the son of a strange woman.

11:3 Then Jephthah fled from his brethren, and dwelt in the land of
Tob: and there were gathered vain men to Jephthah, and went out with
him.

11:4 And it came to pass in process of time, that the children of
Ammon made war against Israel.

11:5 And it was so, that when the children of Ammon made war against
Israel, the elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthah out of the land of
Tob: 11:6 And they said unto Jephthah, Come, and be our captain, that
we may fight with the children of Ammon.

11:7 And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, Did not ye hate me,
and expel me out of my father’s house? and why are ye come unto me now
when ye are in distress? 11:8 And the elders of Gilead said unto
Jephthah, Therefore we turn again to thee now, that thou mayest go
with us, and fight against the children of Ammon, and be our head over
all the inhabitants of Gilead.

11:9 And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, If ye bring me home
again to fight against the children of Ammon, and the LORD deliver
them before me, shall I be your head? 11:10 And the elders of Gilead
said unto Jephthah, The LORD be witness between us, if we do not so
according to thy words.

11:11 Then Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead, and the people
made him head and captain over them: and Jephthah uttered all his
words before the LORD in Mizpeh.

11:12 And Jephthah sent messengers unto the king of the children of
Ammon, saying, What hast thou to do with me, that thou art come
against me to fight in my land? 11:13 And the king of the children of
Ammon answered unto the messengers of Jephthah, Because Israel took
away my land, when they came up out of Egypt, from Arnon even unto
Jabbok, and unto Jordan: now therefore restore those lands again
peaceably.

11:14 And Jephthah sent messengers again unto the king of the children
of Ammon: 11:15 And said unto him, Thus saith Jephthah, Israel took
not away the land of Moab, nor the land of the children of Ammon:
11:16 But when Israel came up from Egypt, and walked through the
wilderness unto the Red sea, and came to Kadesh; 11:17 Then Israel
sent messengers unto the king of Edom, saying, Let me, I pray thee,
pass through thy land: but the king of Edom would not hearken thereto.
And in like manner they sent unto the king of Moab: but he would not
consent: and Israel abode in Kadesh.

11:18 Then they went along through the wilderness, and compassed the
land of Edom, and the land of Moab, and came by the east side of the
land of Moab, and pitched on the other side of Arnon, but came not
within the border of Moab: for Arnon was the border of Moab.

11:19 And Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites, the
king of Heshbon; and Israel said unto him, Let us pass, we pray thee,
through thy land into my place.

11:20 But Sihon trusted not Israel to pass through his coast: but
Sihon gathered all his people together, and pitched in Jahaz, and
fought against Israel.

11:21 And the LORD God of Israel delivered Sihon and all his people
into the hand of Israel, and they smote them: so Israel possessed all
the land of the Amorites, the inhabitants of that country.

11:22 And they possessed all the coasts of the Amorites, from Arnon
even unto Jabbok, and from the wilderness even unto Jordan.

11:23 So now the LORD God of Israel hath dispossessed the Amorites
from before his people Israel, and shouldest thou possess it? 11:24
Wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy god giveth thee to
possess? So whomsoever the LORD our God shall drive out from before
us, them will we possess.

11:25 And now art thou any thing better than Balak the son of Zippor,
king of Moab? did he ever strive against Israel, or did he ever fight
against them, 11:26 While Israel dwelt in Heshbon and her towns, and
in Aroer and her towns, and in all the cities that be along by the
coasts of Arnon, three hundred years? why therefore did ye not recover
them within that time? 11:27 Wherefore I have not sinned against
thee, but thou doest me wrong to war against me: the LORD the Judge be
judge this day between the children of Israel and the children of
Ammon.

11:28 Howbeit the king of the children of Ammon hearkened not unto the
words of Jephthah which he sent him.

11:29 Then the Spirit of the LORD came upon Jephthah, and he passed
over Gilead, and Manasseh, and passed over Mizpeh of Gilead, and from
Mizpeh of Gilead he passed over unto the children of Ammon.

11:30 And Jephthah vowed a vow unto the LORD, and said, If thou shalt
without fail deliver the children of Ammon into mine hands, 11:31 Then
it shall be, that whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my house to
meet me, when I return in peace from the children of Ammon, shall
surely be the LORD’s, and I will offer it up for a burnt offering.

11:32 So Jephthah passed over unto the children of Ammon to fight
against them; and the LORD delivered them into his hands.

11:33 And he smote them from Aroer, even till thou come to Minnith,
even twenty cities, and unto the plain of the vineyards, with a very
great slaughter. Thus the children of Ammon were subdued before the
children of Israel.

11:34 And Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his house, and, behold, his
daughter came out to meet him with timbrels and with dances: and she
was his only child; beside her he had neither son nor daughter.

11:35 And it came to pass, when he saw her, that he rent his clothes,
and said, Alas, my daughter! thou hast brought me very low, and thou
art one of them that trouble me: for I have opened my mouth unto the
LORD, and I cannot go back.

11:36 And she said unto him, My father, if thou hast opened thy mouth
unto the LORD, do to me according to that which hath proceeded out of
thy mouth; forasmuch as the LORD hath taken vengeance for thee of
thine enemies, even of the children of Ammon.

11:37 And she said unto her father, Let this thing be done for me: let
me alone two months, that I may go up and down upon the mountains, and
bewail my virginity, I and my fellows.

11:38 And he said, Go. And he sent her away for two months: and she
went with her companions, and bewailed her virginity upon the
mountains.

11:39 And it came to pass at the end of two months, that she returned
unto her father, who did with her according to his vow which he had
vowed: and she knew no man. And it was a custom in Israel, 11:40 That
the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of Jephthah
the Gileadite four days in a year.

12:1 And the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and went
northward, and said unto Jephthah, Wherefore passedst thou over to
fight against the children of Ammon, and didst not call us to go with
thee? we will burn thine house upon thee with fire.

12:2 And Jephthah said unto them, I and my people were at great strife
with the children of Ammon; and when I called you, ye delivered me not
out of their hands.

12:3 And when I saw that ye delivered me not, I put my life in my
hands, and passed over against the children of Ammon, and the LORD
delivered them into my hand: wherefore then are ye come up unto me
this day, to fight against me? 12:4 Then Jephthah gathered together
all the men of Gilead, and fought with Ephraim: and the men of Gilead
smote Ephraim, because they said, Ye Gileadites are fugitives of
Ephraim among the Ephraimites, and among the Manassites.

12:5 And the Gileadites took the passages of Jordan before the
Ephraimites: and it was so, that when those Ephraimites which were
escaped said, Let me go over; that the men of Gilead said unto him,
Art thou an Ephraimite? If he said, Nay; 12:6 Then said they unto him,
Say now Shibboleth: and he said Sibboleth: for he could not frame to
pronounce it right. Then they took him, and slew him at the passages
of Jordan: and there fell at that time of the Ephraimites forty and
two thousand.

12:7 And Jephthah judged Israel six years. Then died Jephthah the
Gileadite, and was buried in one of the cities of Gilead.

12:8 And after him Ibzan of Bethlehem judged Israel.

12:9 And he had thirty sons, and thirty daughters, whom he sent
abroad, and took in thirty daughters from abroad for his sons. And he
judged Israel seven years.

12:10 Then died Ibzan, and was buried at Bethlehem.

12:11 And after him Elon, a Zebulonite, judged Israel; and he judged
Israel ten years.

12:12 And Elon the Zebulonite died, and was buried in Aijalon in the
country of Zebulun.

12:13 And after him Abdon the son of Hillel, a Pirathonite, judged
Israel.

12:14 And he had forty sons and thirty nephews, that rode on
threescore and ten ass colts: and he judged Israel eight years.

12:15 And Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite died, and was buried
in Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the mount of the Amalekites.

13:1 And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the
LORD; and the LORD delivered them into the hand of the Philistines
forty years.

13:2 And there was a certain man of Zorah, of the family of the
Danites, whose name was Manoah; and his wife was barren, and bare not.

13:3 And the angel of the LORD appeared unto the woman, and said unto
her, Behold now, thou art barren, and bearest not: but thou shalt
conceive, and bear a son.

13:4 Now therefore beware, I pray thee, and drink not wine nor strong
drink, and eat not any unclean thing: 13:5 For, lo, thou shalt
conceive, and bear a son; and no razor shall come on his head: for the
child shall be a Nazarite unto God from the womb: and he shall begin
to deliver Israel out of the hand of the Philistines.

13:6 Then the woman came and told her husband, saying, A man of God
came unto me, and his countenance was like the countenance of an angel
of God, very terrible: but I asked him not whence he was, neither told
he me his name: 13:7 But he said unto me, Behold, thou shalt conceive,
and bear a son; and now drink no wine nor strong drink, neither eat
any unclean thing: for the child shall be a Nazarite to God from the
womb to the day of his death.

13:8 Then Manoah intreated the LORD, and said, O my Lord, let the man
of God which thou didst send come again unto us, and teach us what we
shall do unto the child that shall be born.

13:9 And God hearkened to the voice of Manoah; and the angel of God
came again unto the woman as she sat in the field: but Manoah her
husband was not with her.

13:10 And the woman made haste, and ran, and shewed her husband, and
said unto him, Behold, the man hath appeared unto me, that came unto
me the other day.

13:11 And Manoah arose, and went after his wife, and came to the man,
and said unto him, Art thou the man that spakest unto the woman? And
he said, I am.

13:12 And Manoah said, Now let thy words come to pass. How shall we
order the child, and how shall we do unto him? 13:13 And the angel of
the LORD said unto Manoah, Of all that I said unto the woman let her
beware.

13:14 She may not eat of any thing that cometh of the vine, neither
let her drink wine or strong drink, nor eat any unclean thing: all
that I commanded her let her observe.

13:15 And Manoah said unto the angel of the LORD, I pray thee, let us
detain thee, until we shall have made ready a kid for thee.

13:16 And the angel of the LORD said unto Manoah, Though thou detain
me, I will not eat of thy bread: and if thou wilt offer a burnt
offering, thou must offer it unto the LORD. For Manoah knew not that
he was an angel of the LORD.

13:17 And Manoah said unto the angel of the LORD, What is thy name,
that when thy sayings come to pass we may do thee honour? 13:18 And
the angel of the LORD said unto him, Why askest thou thus after my
name, seeing it is secret? 13:19 So Manoah took a kid with a meat
offering, and offered it upon a rock unto the LORD: and the angel did
wonderously; and Manoah and his wife looked on.

13:20 For it came to pass, when the flame went up toward heaven from
off the altar, that the angel of the LORD ascended in the flame of the
altar. And Manoah and his wife looked on it, and fell on their faces
to the ground.

13:21 But the angel of the LORD did no more appear to Manoah and to
his wife. Then Manoah knew that he was an angel of the LORD.

13:22 And Manoah said unto his wife, We shall surely die, because we
have seen God.

13:23 But his wife said unto him, If the LORD were pleased to kill us,
he would not have received a burnt offering and a meat offering at our
hands, neither would he have shewed us all these things, nor would as
at this time have told us such things as these.

13:24 And the woman bare a son, and called his name Samson: and the
child grew, and the LORD blessed him.

13:25 And the Spirit of the LORD began to move him at times in the
camp of Dan between Zorah and Eshtaol.

14:1 And Samson went down to Timnath, and saw a woman in Timnath of
the daughters of the Philistines.

14:2 And he came up, and told his father and his mother, and said, I
have seen a woman in Timnath of the daughters of the Philistines: now
therefore get her for me to wife.

14:3 Then his father and his mother said unto him, Is there never a
woman among the daughters of thy brethren, or among all my people,
that thou goest to take a wife of the uncircumcised Philistines? And
Samson said unto his father, Get her for me; for she pleaseth me well.

14:4 But his father and his mother knew not that it was of the LORD,
that he sought an occasion against the Philistines: for at that time
the Philistines had dominion over Israel.

14:5 Then went Samson down, and his father and his mother, to Timnath,
and came to the vineyards of Timnath: and, behold, a young lion roared
against him.

14:6 And the Spirit of the LORD came mightily upon him, and he rent
him as he would have rent a kid, and he had nothing in his hand: but
he told not his father or his mother what he had done.

14:7 And he went down, and talked with the woman; and she pleased
Samson well.

14:8 And after a time he returned to take her, and he turned aside to
see the carcase of the lion: and, behold, there was a swarm of bees
and honey in the carcase of the lion.

14:9 And he took thereof in his hands, and went on eating, and came to
his father and mother, and he gave them, and they did eat: but he told
not them that he had taken the honey out of the carcase of the lion.

14:10 So his father went down unto the woman: and Samson made there a
feast; for so used the young men to do.

14:11 And it came to pass, when they saw him, that they brought thirty
companions to be with him.

14:12 And Samson said unto them, I will now put forth a riddle unto
you: if ye can certainly declare it me within the seven days of the
feast, and find it out, then I will give you thirty sheets and thirty
change of garments: 14:13 But if ye cannot declare it me, then shall
ye give me thirty sheets and thirty change of garments. And they said
unto him, Put forth thy riddle, that we may hear it.

14:14 And he said unto them, Out of the eater came forth meat, and out
of the strong came forth sweetness. And they could not in three days
expound the riddle.

14:15 And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they said unto
Samson’s wife, Entice thy husband, that he may declare unto us the
riddle, lest we burn thee and thy father’s house with fire: have ye
called us to take that we have? is it not so? 14:16 And Samson’s wife
wept before him, and said, Thou dost but hate me, and lovest me not:
thou hast put forth a riddle unto the children of my people, and hast
not told it me. And he said unto her, Behold, I have not told it my
father nor my mother, and shall I tell it thee? 14:17 And she wept
before him the seven days, while their feast lasted: and it came to
pass on the seventh day, that he told her, because she lay sore upon
him: and she told the riddle to the children of her people.

14:18 And the men of the city said unto him on the seventh day before
the sun went down, What is sweeter than honey? And what is stronger
than a lion? and he said unto them, If ye had not plowed with my
heifer, ye had not found out my riddle.

14:19 And the Spirit of the LORD came upon him, and he went down to
Ashkelon, and slew thirty men of them, and took their spoil, and gave
change of garments unto them which expounded the riddle. And his anger
was kindled, and he went up to his father’s house.

14:20 But Samson’s wife was given to his companion, whom he had used
as his friend.

15:1 But it came to pass within a while after, in the time of wheat
harvest, that Samson visited his wife with a kid; and he said, I will
go in to my wife into the chamber. But her father would not suffer him
to go in.

15:2 And her father said, I verily thought that thou hadst utterly
hated her; therefore I gave her to thy companion: is not her younger
sister fairer than she? take her, I pray thee, instead of her.

15:3 And Samson said concerning them, Now shall I be more blameless
than the Philistines, though I do them a displeasure.

15:4 And Samson went and caught three hundred foxes, and took
firebrands, and turned tail to tail, and put a firebrand in the midst
between two tails.

15:5 And when he had set the brands on fire, he let them go into the
standing corn of the Philistines, and burnt up both the shocks, and
also the standing corn, with the vineyards and olives.

15:6 Then the Philistines said, Who hath done this? And they answered,
Samson, the son in law of the Timnite, because he had taken his wife,
and given her to his companion. And the Philistines came up, and burnt
her and her father with fire.

15:7 And Samson said unto them, Though ye have done this, yet will I
be avenged of you, and after that I will cease.

15:8 And he smote them hip and thigh with a great slaughter: and he
went down and dwelt in the top of the rock Etam.

15:9 Then the Philistines went up, and pitched in Judah, and spread
themselves in Lehi.

15:10 And the men of Judah said, Why are ye come up against us? And
they answered, To bind Samson are we come up, to do to him as he hath
done to us.

15:11 Then three thousand men of Judah went to the top of the rock
Etam, and said to Samson, Knowest thou not that the Philistines are
rulers over us? what is this that thou hast done unto us? And he said
unto them, As they did unto me, so have I done unto them.

15:12 And they said unto him, We are come down to bind thee, that we
may deliver thee into the hand of the Philistines. And Samson said
unto them, Swear unto me, that ye will not fall upon me yourselves.

15:13 And they spake unto him, saying, No; but we will bind thee fast,
and deliver thee into their hand: but surely we will not kill thee.
And they bound him with two new cords, and brought him up from the
rock.

15:14 And when he came unto Lehi, the Philistines shouted against him:
and the Spirit of the LORD came mightily upon him, and the cords that
were upon his arms became as flax that was burnt with fire, and his
bands loosed from off his hands.

15:15 And he found a new jawbone of an ass, and put forth his hand,
and took it, and slew a thousand men therewith.

15:16 And Samson said, With the jawbone of an ass, heaps upon heaps,
with the jaw of an ass have I slain a thousand men.

15:17 And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking, that
he cast away the jawbone out of his hand, and called that place
Ramathlehi.

15:18 And he was sore athirst, and called on the LORD, and said, Thou
hast given this great deliverance into the hand of thy servant: and
now shall I die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the
uncircumcised? 15:19 But God clave an hollow place that was in the
jaw, and there came water thereout; and when he had drunk, his spirit
came again, and he revived: wherefore he called the name thereof
Enhakkore, which is in Lehi unto this day.

15:20 And he judged Israel in the days of the Philistines twenty
years.

16:1 Then went Samson to Gaza, and saw there an harlot, and went in
unto her.

16:2 And it was told the Gazites, saying, Samson is come hither. And
they compassed him in, and laid wait for him all night in the gate of
the city, and were quiet all the night, saying, In the morning, when
it is day, we shall kill him.

16:3 And Samson lay till midnight, and arose at midnight, and took the
doors of the gate of the city, and the two posts, and went away with
them, bar and all, and put them upon his shoulders, and carried them
up to the top of an hill that is before Hebron.

16:4 And it came to pass afterward, that he loved a woman in the
valley of Sorek, whose name was Delilah.

16:5 And the lords of the Philistines came up unto her, and said unto
her, Entice him, and see wherein his great strength lieth, and by what
means we may prevail against him, that we may bind him to afflict him;
and we will give thee every one of us eleven hundred pieces of silver.

16:6 And Delilah said to Samson, Tell me, I pray thee, wherein thy
great strength lieth, and wherewith thou mightest be bound to afflict
thee.

16:7 And Samson said unto her, If they bind me with seven green withs
that were never dried, then shall I be weak, and be as another man.

16:8 Then the lords of the Philistines brought up to her seven green
withs which had not been dried, and she bound him with them.

16:9 Now there were men lying in wait, abiding with her in the
chamber.

And she said unto him, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he
brake the withs, as a thread of tow is broken when it toucheth the
fire. So his strength was not known.

16:10 And Delilah said unto Samson, Behold, thou hast mocked me, and
told me lies: now tell me, I pray thee, wherewith thou mightest be
bound.

16:11 And he said unto her, If they bind me fast with new ropes that
never were occupied, then shall I be weak, and be as another man.

16:12 Delilah therefore took new ropes, and bound him therewith, and
said unto him, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And there were
liers in wait abiding in the chamber. And he brake them from off his
arms like a thread.

16:13 And Delilah said unto Samson, Hitherto thou hast mocked me, and
told me lies: tell me wherewith thou mightest be bound. And he said
unto her, If thou weavest the seven locks of my head with the web.

16:14 And she fastened it with the pin, and said unto him, The
Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he awaked out of his sleep, and
went away with the pin of the beam, and with the web.

16:15 And she said unto him, How canst thou say, I love thee, when
thine heart is not with me? thou hast mocked me these three times, and
hast not told me wherein thy great strength lieth.

16:16 And it came to pass, when she pressed him daily with her words,
and urged him, so that his soul was vexed unto death; 16:17 That he
told her all his heart, and said unto her, There hath not come a razor
upon mine head; for I have been a Nazarite unto God from my mother’s
womb: if I be shaven, then my strength will go from me, and I shall
become weak, and be like any other man.

16:18 And when Delilah saw that he had told her all his heart, she
sent and called for the lords of the Philistines, saying, Come up this
once, for he hath shewed me all his heart. Then the lords of the
Philistines came up unto her, and brought money in their hand.

16:19 And she made him sleep upon her knees; and she called for a man,
and she caused him to shave off the seven locks of his head; and she
began to afflict him, and his strength went from him.

16:20 And she said, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he awoke
out of his sleep, and said, I will go out as at other times before,
and shake myself. And he wist not that the LORD was departed from him.

16:21 But the Philistines took him, and put out his eyes, and brought
him down to Gaza, and bound him with fetters of brass; and he did
grind in the prison house.

16:22 Howbeit the hair of his head began to grow again after he was
shaven.

16:23 Then the lords of the Philistines gathered them together for to
offer a great sacrifice unto Dagon their god, and to rejoice: for they
said, Our god hath delivered Samson our enemy into our hand.

16:24 And when the people saw him, they praised their god: for they
said, Our god hath delivered into our hands our enemy, and the
destroyer of our country, which slew many of us.

16:25 And it came to pass, when their hearts were merry, that they
said, Call for Samson, that he may make us sport. And they called for
Samson out of the prison house; and he made them sport: and they set
him between the pillars.

16:26 And Samson said unto the lad that held him by the hand, Suffer
me that I may feel the pillars whereupon the house standeth, that I
may lean upon them.

16:27 Now the house was full of men and women; and all the lords of
the Philistines were there; and there were upon the roof about three
thousand men and women, that beheld while Samson made sport.

16:28 And Samson called unto the LORD, and said, O Lord God, remember
me, I pray thee, and strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O
God, that I may be at once avenged of the Philistines for my two eyes.

16:29 And Samson took hold of the two middle pillars upon which the
house stood, and on which it was borne up, of the one with his right
hand, and of the other with his left.

16:30 And Samson said, Let me die with the Philistines. And he bowed
himself with all his might; and the house fell upon the lords, and
upon all the people that were therein. So the dead which he slew at
his death were more than they which he slew in his life.

16:31 Then his brethren and all the house of his father came down, and
took him, and brought him up, and buried him between Zorah and Eshtaol
in the buryingplace of Manoah his father. And he judged Israel twenty
years.

17:1 And there was a man of mount Ephraim, whose name was Micah.

17:2 And he said unto his mother, The eleven hundred shekels of silver
that were taken from thee, about which thou cursedst, and spakest of
also in mine ears, behold, the silver is with me; I took it. And his
mother said, Blessed be thou of the LORD, my son.

17:3 And when he had restored the eleven hundred shekels of silver to
his mother, his mother said, I had wholly dedicated the silver unto
the LORD from my hand for my son, to make a graven image and a molten
image: now therefore I will restore it unto thee.

17:4 Yet he restored the money unto his mother; and his mother took
two hundred shekels of silver, and gave them to the founder, who made
thereof a graven image and a molten image: and they were in the house
of Micah.

17:5 And the man Micah had an house of gods, and made an ephod, and
teraphim, and consecrated one of his sons, who became his priest.

17:6 In those days there was no king in Israel, but every man did that
which was right in his own eyes.

17:7 And there was a young man out of Bethlehemjudah of the family of
Judah, who was a Levite, and he sojourned there.

17:8 And the man departed out of the city from Bethlehemjudah to
sojourn where he could find a place: and he came to mount Ephraim to
the house of Micah, as he journeyed.

17:9 And Micah said unto him, Whence comest thou? And he said unto
him, I am a Levite of Bethlehemjudah, and I go to sojourn where I may
find a place.

17:10 And Micah said unto him, Dwell with me, and be unto me a father
and a priest, and I will give thee ten shekels of silver by the year,
and a suit of apparel, and thy victuals. So the Levite went in.

17:11 And the Levite was content to dwell with the man; and the young
man was unto him as one of his sons.

17:12 And Micah consecrated the Levite; and the young man became his
priest, and was in the house of Micah.

17:13 Then said Micah, Now know I that the LORD will do me good,
seeing I have a Levite to my priest.

18:1 In those days there was no king in Israel: and in those days the
tribe of the Danites sought them an inheritance to dwell in; for unto
that day all their inheritance had not fallen unto them among the
tribes of Israel.

18:2 And the children of Dan sent of their family five men from their
coasts, men of valour, from Zorah, and from Eshtaol, to spy out the
land, and to search it; and they said unto them, Go, search the land:
who when they came to mount Ephraim, to the house of Micah, they
lodged there.

18:3 When they were by the house of Micah, they knew the voice of the
young man the Levite: and they turned in thither, and said unto him,
Who brought thee hither? and what makest thou in this place? and what
hast thou here? 18:4 And he said unto them, Thus and thus dealeth
Micah with me, and hath hired me, and I am his priest.

18:5 And they said unto him, Ask counsel, we pray thee, of God, that
we may know whether our way which we go shall be prosperous.

18:6 And the priest said unto them, Go in peace: before the LORD is
your way wherein ye go.

18:7 Then the five men departed, and came to Laish, and saw the people
that were therein, how they dwelt careless, after the manner of the
Zidonians, quiet and secure; and there was no magistrate in the land,
that might put them to shame in any thing; and they were far from the
Zidonians, and had no business with any man.

18:8 And they came unto their brethren to Zorah and Eshtaol: and their
brethren said unto them, What say ye? 18:9 And they said, Arise, that
we may go up against them: for we have seen the land, and, behold, it
is very good: and are ye still? be not slothful to go, and to enter to
possess the land.

18:10 When ye go, ye shall come unto a people secure, and to a large
land: for God hath given it into your hands; a place where there is no
want of any thing that is in the earth.

18:11 And there went from thence of the family of the Danites, out of
Zorah and out of Eshtaol, six hundred men appointed with weapons of
war.

18:12 And they went up, and pitched in Kirjathjearim, in Judah:
wherefore they called that place Mahanehdan unto this day: behold, it
is behind Kirjathjearim.

18:13 And they passed thence unto mount Ephraim, and came unto the
house of Micah.

18:14 Then answered the five men that went to spy out the country of
Laish, and said unto their brethren, Do ye know that there is in these
houses an ephod, and teraphim, and a graven image, and a molten image?
now therefore consider what ye have to do.

18:15 And they turned thitherward, and came to the house of the young
man the Levite, even unto the house of Micah, and saluted him.

18:16 And the six hundred men appointed with their weapons of war,
which were of the children of Dan, stood by the entering of the gate.

18:17 And the five men that went to spy out the land went up, and came
in thither, and took the graven image, and the ephod, and the
teraphim, and the molten image: and the priest stood in the entering
of the gate with the six hundred men that were appointed with weapons
of war.

18:18 And these went into Micah’s house, and fetched the carved image,
the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image. Then said the
priest unto them, What do ye? 18:19 And they said unto him, Hold thy
peace, lay thine hand upon thy mouth, and go with us, and be to us a
father and a priest: is it better for thee to be a priest unto the
house of one man, or that thou be a priest unto a tribe and a family
in Israel? 18:20 And the priest’s heart was glad, and he took the
ephod, and the teraphim, and the graven image, and went in the midst
of the people.

18:21 So they turned and departed, and put the little ones and the
cattle and the carriage before them.

18:22 And when they were a good way from the house of Micah, the men
that were in the houses near to Micah’s house were gathered together,
and overtook the children of Dan.

18:23 And they cried unto the children of Dan. And they turned their
faces, and said unto Micah, What aileth thee, that thou comest with
such a company? 18:24 And he said, Ye have taken away my gods which I
made, and the priest, and ye are gone away: and what have I more? and
what is this that ye say unto me, What aileth thee? 18:25 And the
children of Dan said unto him, Let not thy voice be heard among us,
lest angry fellows run upon thee, and thou lose thy life, with the
lives of thy household.

18:26 And the children of Dan went their way: and when Micah saw that
they were too strong for him, he turned and went back unto his house.

18:27 And they took the things which Micah had made, and the priest
which he had, and came unto Laish, unto a people that were at quiet
and secure: and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and burnt
the city with fire.

18:28 And there was no deliverer, because it was far from Zidon, and
they had no business with any man; and it was in the valley that lieth
by Bethrehob. And they built a city, and dwelt therein.

18:29 And they called the name of the city Dan, after the name of Dan
their father, who was born unto Israel: howbeit the name of the city
was Laish at the first.

18:30 And the children of Dan set up the graven image: and Jonathan,
the son of Gershom, the son of Manasseh, he and his sons were priests
to the tribe of Dan until the day of the captivity of the land.

18:31 And they set them up Micah’s graven image, which he made, all
the time that the house of God was in Shiloh.

19:1 And it came to pass in those days, when there was no king in
Israel, that there was a certain Levite sojourning on the side of
mount Ephraim, who took to him a concubine out of Bethlehemjudah.

19:2 And his concubine played the whore against him, and went away
from him unto her father’s house to Bethlehemjudah, and was there four
whole months.

19:3 And her husband arose, and went after her, to speak friendly unto
her, and to bring her again, having his servant with him, and a couple
of asses: and she brought him into her father’s house: and when the
father of the damsel saw him, he rejoiced to meet him.

19:4 And his father in law, the damsel’s father, retained him; and he
abode with him three days: so they did eat and drink, and lodged
there.

19:5 And it came to pass on the fourth day, when they arose early in
the morning, that he rose up to depart: and the damsel’s father said
unto his son in law, Comfort thine heart with a morsel of bread, and
afterward go your way.

19:6 And they sat down, and did eat and drink both of them together:
for the damsel’s father had said unto the man, Be content, I pray
thee, and tarry all night, and let thine heart be merry.

19:7 And when the man rose up to depart, his father in law urged him:
therefore he lodged there again.

19:8 And he arose early in the morning on the fifth day to depart; and
the damsel’s father said, Comfort thine heart, I pray thee. And they
tarried until afternoon, and they did eat both of them.

19:9 And when the man rose up to depart, he, and his concubine, and
his servant, his father in law, the damsel’s father, said unto him,
Behold, now the day draweth toward evening, I pray you tarry all
night: behold, the day groweth to an end, lodge here, that thine heart
may be merry; and to morrow get you early on your way, that thou
mayest go home.

19:10 But the man would not tarry that night, but he rose up and
departed, and came over against Jebus, which is Jerusalem; and there
were with him two asses saddled, his concubine also was with him.

19:11 And when they were by Jebus, the day was far spent; and the
servant said unto his master, Come, I pray thee, and let us turn in
into this city of the Jebusites, and lodge in it.

19:12 And his master said unto him, We will not turn aside hither into
the city of a stranger, that is not of the children of Israel; we will
pass over to Gibeah.

19:13 And he said unto his servant, Come, and let us draw near to one
of these places to lodge all night, in Gibeah, or in Ramah.

19:14 And they passed on and went their way; and the sun went down
upon them when they were by Gibeah, which belongeth to Benjamin.

19:15 And they turned aside thither, to go in and to lodge in Gibeah:
and when he went in, he sat him down in a street of the city: for
there was no man that took them into his house to lodging.

19:16 And, behold, there came an old man from his work out of the
field at even, which was also of mount Ephraim; and he sojourned in
Gibeah: but the men of the place were Benjamites.

19:17 And when he had lifted up his eyes, he saw a wayfaring man in
the street of the city: and the old man said, Whither goest thou? and
whence comest thou? 19:18 And he said unto him, We are passing from
Bethlehemjudah toward the side of mount Ephraim; from thence am I: and
I went to Bethlehemjudah, but I am now going to the house of the LORD;
and there is no man that receiveth me to house.

19:19 Yet there is both straw and provender for our asses; and there
is bread and wine also for me, and for thy handmaid, and for the young
man which is with thy servants: there is no want of any thing.

19:20 And the old man said, Peace be with thee; howsoever let all thy
wants lie upon me; only lodge not in the street.

19:21 So he brought him into his house, and gave provender unto the
asses: and they washed their feet, and did eat and drink.

19:22 Now as they were making their hearts merry, behold, the men of
the city, certain sons of Belial, beset the house round about, and
beat at the door, and spake to the master of the house, the old man,
saying, Bring forth the man that came into thine house, that we may
know him.

19:23 And the man, the master of the house, went out unto them, and
said unto them, Nay, my brethren, nay, I pray you, do not so wickedly;
seeing that this man is come into mine house, do not this folly.

19:24 Behold, here is my daughter a maiden, and his concubine; them I
will bring out now, and humble ye them, and do with them what seemeth
good unto you: but unto this man do not so vile a thing.

19:25 But the men would not hearken to him: so the man took his
concubine, and brought her forth unto them; and they knew her, and
abused her all the night until the morning: and when the day began to
spring, they let her go.

19:26 Then came the woman in the dawning of the day, and fell down at
the door of the man’s house where her lord was, till it was light.

19:27 And her lord rose up in the morning, and opened the doors of the
house, and went out to go his way: and, behold, the woman his
concubine was fallen down at the door of the house, and her hands were
upon the threshold.

19:28 And he said unto her, Up, and let us be going. But none
answered.

Then the man took her up upon an ass, and the man rose up, and gat him
unto his place.

19:29 And when he was come into his house, he took a knife, and laid
hold on his concubine, and divided her, together with her bones, into
twelve pieces, and sent her into all the coasts of Israel.

19:30 And it was so, that all that saw it said, There was no such deed
done nor seen from the day that the children of Israel came up out of
the land of Egypt unto this day: consider of it, take advice, and
speak your minds.

20:1 Then all the children of Israel went out, and the congregation
was gathered together as one man, from Dan even to Beersheba, with the
land of Gilead, unto the LORD in Mizpeh.

20:2 And the chief of all the people, even of all the tribes of
Israel, presented themselves in the assembly of the people of God,
four hundred thousand footmen that drew sword.

20:3 (Now the children of Benjamin heard that the children of Israel
were gone up to Mizpeh.) Then said the children of Israel, Tell us,
how was this wickedness? 20:4 And the Levite, the husband of the
woman that was slain, answered and said, I came into Gibeah that
belongeth to Benjamin, I and my concubine, to lodge.

20:5 And the men of Gibeah rose against me, and beset the house round
about upon me by night, and thought to have slain me: and my concubine
have they forced, that she is dead.

20:6 And I took my concubine, and cut her in pieces, and sent her
throughout all the country of the inheritance of Israel: for they have
committed lewdness and folly in Israel.

20:7 Behold, ye are all children of Israel; give here your advice and
counsel.

20:8 And all the people arose as one man, saying, We will not any of
us go to his tent, neither will we any of us turn into his house.

20:9 But now this shall be the thing which we will do to Gibeah; we
will go up by lot against it; 20:10 And we will take ten men of an
hundred throughout all the tribes of Israel, and an hundred of a
thousand, and a thousand out of ten thousand, to fetch victual for the
people, that they may do, when they come to Gibeah of Benjamin,
according to all the folly that they have wrought in Israel.

20:11 So all the men of Israel were gathered against the city, knit
together as one man.

20:12 And the tribes of Israel sent men through all the tribe of
Benjamin, saying, What wickedness is this that is done among you?
20:13 Now therefore deliver us the men, the children of Belial, which
are in Gibeah, that we may put them to death, and put away evil from
Israel. But the children of Benjamin would not hearken to the voice of
their brethren the children of Israel.

20:14 But the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together out of
the cities unto Gibeah, to go out to battle against the children of
Israel.

20:15 And the children of Benjamin were numbered at that time out of
the cities twenty and six thousand men that drew sword, beside the
inhabitants of Gibeah, which were numbered seven hundred chosen men.

20:16 Among all this people there were seven hundred chosen men
lefthanded; every one could sling stones at an hair breadth, and not
miss.

20:17 And the men of Israel, beside Benjamin, were numbered four
hundred thousand men that drew sword: all these were men of war.

20:18 And the children of Israel arose, and went up to the house of
God, and asked counsel of God, and said, Which of us shall go up first
to the battle against the children of Benjamin? And the LORD said,
Judah shall go up first.

20:19 And the children of Israel rose up in the morning, and encamped
against Gibeah.

20:20 And the men of Israel went out to battle against Benjamin; and
the men of Israel put themselves in array to fight against them at
Gibeah.

20:21 And the children of Benjamin came forth out of Gibeah, and
destroyed down to the ground of the Israelites that day twenty and two
thousand men.

20:22 And the people the men of Israel encouraged themselves, and set
their battle again in array in the place where they put themselves in
array the first day.

20:23 (And the children of Israel went up and wept before the LORD
until even, and asked counsel of the LORD, saying, Shall I go up again
to battle against the children of Benjamin my brother? And the LORD
said, Go up against him.) 20:24 And the children of Israel came near
against the children of Benjamin the second day.

20:25 And Benjamin went forth against them out of Gibeah the second
day, and destroyed down to the ground of the children of Israel again
eighteen thousand men; all these drew the sword.

20:26 Then all the children of Israel, and all the people, went up,
and came unto the house of God, and wept, and sat there before the
LORD, and fasted that day until even, and offered burnt offerings and
peace offerings before the LORD.

20:27 And the children of Israel enquired of the LORD, (for the ark of
the covenant of God was there in those days, 20:28 And Phinehas, the
son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, stood before it in those days,)
saying, Shall I yet again go out to battle against the children of
Benjamin my brother, or shall I cease? And the LORD said, Go up; for
to morrow I will deliver them into thine hand.

20:29 And Israel set liers in wait round about Gibeah.

20:30 And the children of Israel went up against the children of
Benjamin on the third day, and put themselves in array against Gibeah,
as at other times.

20:31 And the children of Benjamin went out against the people, and
were drawn away from the city; and they began to smite of the people,
and kill, as at other times, in the highways, of which one goeth up to
the house of God, and the other to Gibeah in the field, about thirty
men of Israel.

20:32 And the children of Benjamin said, They are smitten down before
us, as at the first. But the children of Israel said, Let us flee, and
draw them from the city unto the highways.

20:33 And all the men of Israel rose up out of their place, and put
themselves in array at Baaltamar: and the liers in wait of Israel came
forth out of their places, even out of the meadows of Gibeah.

20:34 And there came against Gibeah ten thousand chosen men out of all
Israel, and the battle was sore: but they knew not that evil was near
them.

20:35 And the LORD smote Benjamin before Israel: and the children of
Israel destroyed of the Benjamites that day twenty and five thousand
and an hundred men: all these drew the sword.

20:36 So the children of Benjamin saw that they were smitten: for the
men of Israel gave place to the Benjamites, because they trusted unto
the liers in wait which they had set beside Gibeah.

20:37 And the liers in wait hasted, and rushed upon Gibeah; and the
liers in wait drew themselves along, and smote all the city with the
edge of the sword.

20:38 Now there was an appointed sign between the men of Israel and
the liers in wait, that they should make a great flame with smoke rise
up out of the city.

20:39 And when the men of Israel retired in the battle, Benjamin began
to smite and kill of the men of Israel about thirty persons: for they
said, Surely they are smitten down before us, as in the first battle.

20:40 But when the flame began to arise up out of the city with a
pillar of smoke, the Benjamites looked behind them, and, behold, the
flame of the city ascended up to heaven.

20:41 And when the men of Israel turned again, the men of Benjamin
were amazed: for they saw that evil was come upon them.

20:42 Therefore they turned their backs before the men of Israel unto
the way of the wilderness; but the battle overtook them; and them
which came out of the cities they destroyed in the midst of them.

20:43 Thus they inclosed the Benjamites round about, and chased them,
and trode them down with ease over against Gibeah toward the
sunrising.

20:44 And there fell of Benjamin eighteen thousand men; all these were
men of valour.

20:45 And they turned and fled toward the wilderness unto the rock of
Rimmon: and they gleaned of them in the highways five thousand men;
and pursued hard after them unto Gidom, and slew two thousand men of
them.

20:46 So that all which fell that day of Benjamin were twenty and five
thousand men that drew the sword; all these were men of valour.

20:47 But six hundred men turned and fled to the wilderness unto the
rock Rimmon, and abode in the rock Rimmon four months.

20:48 And the men of Israel turned again upon the children of
Benjamin, and smote them with the edge of the sword, as well the men
of every city, as the beast, and all that came to hand: also they set
on fire all the cities that they came to.

21:1 Now the men of Israel had sworn in Mizpeh, saying, There shall
not any of us give his daughter unto Benjamin to wife.

21:2 And the people came to the house of God, and abode there till
even before God, and lifted up their voices, and wept sore; 21:3 And
said, O LORD God of Israel, why is this come to pass in Israel, that
there should be to day one tribe lacking in Israel? 21:4 And it came
to pass on the morrow, that the people rose early, and built there an
altar, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings.

21:5 And the children of Israel said, Who is there among all the
tribes of Israel that came not up with the congregation unto the LORD?
For they had made a great oath concerning him that came not up to the
LORD to Mizpeh, saying, He shall surely be put to death.

21:6 And the children of Israel repented them for Benjamin their
brother, and said, There is one tribe cut off from Israel this day.

21:7 How shall we do for wives for them that remain, seeing we have
sworn by the LORD that we will not give them of our daughters to
wives? 21:8 And they said, What one is there of the tribes of Israel
that came not up to Mizpeh to the LORD? And, behold, there came none
to the camp from Jabeshgilead to the assembly.

21:9 For the people were numbered, and, behold, there were none of the
inhabitants of Jabeshgilead there.

21:10 And the congregation sent thither twelve thousand men of the
valiantest, and commanded them, saying, Go and smite the inhabitants
of Jabeshgilead with the edge of the sword, with the women and the
children.

21:11 And this is the thing that ye shall do, Ye shall utterly destroy
every male, and every woman that hath lain by man.

21:12 And they found among the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead four
hundred young virgins, that had known no man by lying with any male:
and they brought them unto the camp to Shiloh, which is in the land of
Canaan.

21:13 And the whole congregation sent some to speak to the children of
Benjamin that were in the rock Rimmon, and to call peaceably unto
them.

21:14 And Benjamin came again at that time; and they gave them wives
which they had saved alive of the women of Jabeshgilead: and yet so
they sufficed them not.

21:15 And the people repented them for Benjamin, because that the LORD
had made a breach in the tribes of Israel.

21:16 Then the elders of the congregation said, How shall we do for
wives for them that remain, seeing the women are destroyed out of
Benjamin? 21:17 And they said, There must be an inheritance for them
that be escaped of Benjamin, that a tribe be not destroyed out of
Israel.

21:18 Howbeit we may not give them wives of our daughters: for the
children of Israel have sworn, saying, Cursed be he that giveth a wife
to Benjamin.

21:19 Then they said, Behold, there is a feast of the LORD in Shiloh
yearly in a place which is on the north side of Bethel, on the east
side of the highway that goeth up from Bethel to Shechem, and on the
south of Lebonah.

21:20 Therefore they commanded the children of Benjamin, saying, Go
and lie in wait in the vineyards; 21:21 And see, and, behold, if the
daughters of Shiloh come out to dance in dances, then come ye out of
the vineyards, and catch you every man his wife of the daughters of
Shiloh, and go to the land of Benjamin.

21:22 And it shall be, when their fathers or their brethren come unto
us to complain, that we will say unto them, Be favourable unto them
for our sakes: because we reserved not to each man his wife in the
war: for ye did not give unto them at this time, that ye should be
guilty.

21:23 And the children of Benjamin did so, and took them wives,
according to their number, of them that danced, whom they caught: and
they went and returned unto their inheritance, and repaired the
cities, and dwelt in them.

21:24 And the children of Israel departed thence at that time, every
man to his tribe and to his family, and they went out from thence
every man to his inheritance.

21:25 In those days there was no king in Israel: every man did that
which was right in his own eyes.


The Book of Ruth


1:1 Now it came to pass in the days when the judges ruled, that there
was a famine in the land. And a certain man of Bethlehemjudah went to
sojourn in the country of Moab, he, and his wife, and his two sons.

1:2 And the name of the man was Elimelech, and the name of his wife
Naomi, and the name of his two sons Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites of
Bethlehemjudah. And they came into the country of Moab, and continued
there.

1:3 And Elimelech Naomi’s husband died; and she was left, and her two
sons.

1:4 And they took them wives of the women of Moab; the name of the one
was Orpah, and the name of the other Ruth: and they dwelled there
about ten years.

1:5 And Mahlon and Chilion died also both of them; and the woman was
left of her two sons and her husband.

1:6 Then she arose with her daughters in law, that she might return
from the country of Moab: for she had heard in the country of Moab how
that the LORD had visited his people in giving them bread.

1:7 Wherefore she went forth out of the place where she was, and her
two daughters in law with her; and they went on the way to return unto
the land of Judah.

1:8 And Naomi said unto her two daughters in law, Go, return each to
her mother’s house: the LORD deal kindly with you, as ye have dealt
with the dead, and with me.

1:9 The LORD grant you that ye may find rest, each of you in the house
of her husband. Then she kissed them; and they lifted up their voice,
and wept.

1:10 And they said unto her, Surely we will return with thee unto thy
people.

1:11 And Naomi said, Turn again, my daughters: why will ye go with me?
are there yet any more sons in my womb, that they may be your
husbands? 1:12 Turn again, my daughters, go your way; for I am too
old to have an husband. If I should say, I have hope, if I should have
an husband also to night, and should also bear sons; 1:13 Would ye
tarry for them till they were grown? would ye stay for them from
having husbands? nay, my daughters; for it grieveth me much for your
sakes that the hand of the LORD is gone out against me.

1:14 And they lifted up their voice, and wept again: and Orpah kissed
her mother in law; but Ruth clave unto her.

1:15 And she said, Behold, thy sister in law is gone back unto her
people, and unto her gods: return thou after thy sister in law.

1:16 And Ruth said, Intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from
following after thee: for whither thou goest, I will go; and where
thou lodgest, I will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God
my God: 1:17 Where thou diest, will I die, and there will I be buried:
the LORD do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and
me.

1:18 When she saw that she was stedfastly minded to go with her, then
she left speaking unto her.

1:19 So they two went until they came to Bethlehem. And it came to
pass, when they were come to Bethlehem, that all the city was moved
about them, and they said, Is this Naomi? 1:20 And she said unto
them, Call me not Naomi, call me Mara: for the Almighty hath dealt
very bitterly with me.

1:21 I went out full and the LORD hath brought me home again empty:
why then call ye me Naomi, seeing the LORD hath testified against me,
and the Almighty hath afflicted me? 1:22 So Naomi returned, and Ruth
the Moabitess, her daughter in law, with her, which returned out of
the country of Moab: and they came to Bethlehem in the beginning of
barley harvest.

2:1 And Naomi had a kinsman of her husband’s, a mighty man of wealth,
of the family of Elimelech; and his name was Boaz.

2:2 And Ruth the Moabitess said unto Naomi, Let me now go to the
field, and glean ears of corn after him in whose sight I shall find
grace.

And she said unto her, Go, my daughter.

2:3 And she went, and came, and gleaned in the field after the
reapers: and her hap was to light on a part of the field belonging
unto Boaz, who was of the kindred of Elimelech.

2:4 And, behold, Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said unto the reapers,
The LORD be with you. And they answered him, The LORD bless thee.

2:5 Then said Boaz unto his servant that was set over the reapers,
Whose damsel is this? 2:6 And the servant that was set over the
reapers answered and said, It is the Moabitish damsel that came back
with Naomi out of the country of Moab: 2:7 And she said, I pray you,
let me glean and gather after the reapers among the sheaves: so she
came, and hath continued even from the morning until now, that she
tarried a little in the house.

2:8 Then said Boaz unto Ruth, Hearest thou not, my daughter? Go not to
glean in another field, neither go from hence, but abide here fast by
my maidens: 2:9 Let thine eyes be on the field that they do reap, and
go thou after them: have I not charged the young men that they shall
not touch thee? and when thou art athirst, go unto the vessels, and
drink of that which the young men have drawn.

2:10 Then she fell on her face, and bowed herself to the ground, and
said unto him, Why have I found grace in thine eyes, that thou
shouldest take knowledge of me, seeing I am a stranger? 2:11 And Boaz
answered and said unto her, It hath fully been shewed me, all that
thou hast done unto thy mother in law since the death of thine
husband: and how thou hast left thy father and thy mother, and the
land of thy nativity, and art come unto a people which thou knewest
not heretofore.

2:12 The LORD recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thee of
the LORD God of Israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust.

2:13 Then she said, Let me find favour in thy sight, my lord; for that
thou hast comforted me, and for that thou hast spoken friendly unto
thine handmaid, though I be not like unto one of thine handmaidens.

2:14 And Boaz said unto her, At mealtime come thou hither, and eat of
the bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar. And she sat beside the
reapers: and he reached her parched corn, and she did eat, and was
sufficed, and left.

2:15 And when she was risen up to glean, Boaz commanded his young men,
saying, Let her glean even among the sheaves, and reproach her not:
2:16 And let fall also some of the handfuls of purpose for her, and
leave them, that she may glean them, and rebuke her not.

2:17 So she gleaned in the field until even, and beat out that she had
gleaned: and it was about an ephah of barley.

2:18 And she took it up, and went into the city: and her mother in law
saw what she had gleaned: and she brought forth, and gave to her that
she had reserved after she was sufficed.

2:19 And her mother in law said unto her, Where hast thou gleaned to
day? and where wroughtest thou? blessed be he that did take knowledge
of thee. And she shewed her mother in law with whom she had wrought,
and said, The man’s name with whom I wrought to day is Boaz.

2:20 And Naomi said unto her daughter in law, Blessed be he of the
LORD, who hath not left off his kindness to the living and to the
dead. And Naomi said unto her, The man is near of kin unto us, one of
our next kinsmen.

2:21 And Ruth the Moabitess said, He said unto me also, Thou shalt
keep fast by my young men, until they have ended all my harvest.

2:22 And Naomi said unto Ruth her daughter in law, It is good, my
daughter, that thou go out with his maidens, that they meet thee not
in any other field.

2:23 So she kept fast by the maidens of Boaz to glean unto the end of
barley harvest and of wheat harvest; and dwelt with her mother in law.

3:1 Then Naomi her mother in law said unto her, My daughter, shall I
not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee? 3:2 And now is
not Boaz of our kindred, with whose maidens thou wast? Behold, he
winnoweth barley to night in the threshingfloor.

3:3 Wash thyself therefore, and anoint thee, and put thy raiment upon
thee, and get thee down to the floor: but make not thyself known unto
the man, until he shall have done eating and drinking.

3:4 And it shall be, when he lieth down, that thou shalt mark the
place where he shall lie, and thou shalt go in, and uncover his feet,
and lay thee down; and he will tell thee what thou shalt do.

3:5 And she said unto her, All that thou sayest unto me I will do.

3:6 And she went down unto the floor, and did according to all that
her mother in law bade her.

3:7 And when Boaz had eaten and drunk, and his heart was merry, he
went to lie down at the end of the heap of corn: and she came softly,
and uncovered his feet, and laid her down.

3:8 And it came to pass at midnight, that the man was afraid, and
turned himself: and, behold, a woman lay at his feet.

3:9 And he said, Who art thou? And she answered, I am Ruth thine
handmaid: spread therefore thy skirt over thine handmaid; for thou art
a near kinsman.

3:10 And he said, Blessed be thou of the LORD, my daughter: for thou
hast shewed more kindness in the latter end than at the beginning,
inasmuch as thou followedst not young men, whether poor or rich.

3:11 And now, my daughter, fear not; I will do to thee all that thou
requirest: for all the city of my people doth know that thou art a
virtuous woman.

3:12 And now it is true that I am thy near kinsman: howbeit there is a
kinsman nearer than I.

3:13 Tarry this night, and it shall be in the morning, that if he will
perform unto thee the part of a kinsman, well; let him do the
kinsman’s part: but if he will not do the part of a kinsman to thee,
then will I do the part of a kinsman to thee, as the LORD liveth: lie
down until the morning.

3:14 And she lay at his feet until the morning: and she rose up before
one could know another. And he said, Let it not be known that a woman
came into the floor.

3:15 Also he said, Bring the vail that thou hast upon thee, and hold
it.

And when she held it, he measured six measures of barley, and laid it
on her: and she went into the city.

3:16 And when she came to her mother in law, she said, Who art thou,
my daughter? And she told her all that the man had done to her.

3:17 And she said, These six measures of barley gave he me; for he
said to me, Go not empty unto thy mother in law.

3:18 Then said she, Sit still, my daughter, until thou know how the
matter will fall: for the man will not be in rest, until he have
finished the thing this day.

4:1 Then went Boaz up to the gate, and sat him down there: and,
behold, the kinsman of whom Boaz spake came by; unto whom he said, Ho,
such a one! turn aside, sit down here. And he turned aside, and sat
down.

4:2 And he took ten men of the elders of the city, and said, Sit ye
down here. And they sat down.

4:3 And he said unto the kinsman, Naomi, that is come again out of the
country of Moab, selleth a parcel of land, which was our brother
Elimelech’s: 4:4 And I thought to advertise thee, saying, Buy it
before the inhabitants, and before the elders of my people. If thou
wilt redeem it, redeem it: but if thou wilt not redeem it, then tell
me, that I may know: for there is none to redeem it beside thee; and I
am after thee. And he said, I will redeem it.

4:5 Then said Boaz, What day thou buyest the field of the hand of
Naomi, thou must buy it also of Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of the
dead, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance.

4:6 And the kinsman said, I cannot redeem it for myself, lest I mar
mine own inheritance: redeem thou my right to thyself; for I cannot
redeem it.

4:7 Now this was the manner in former time in Israel concerning
redeeming and concerning changing, for to confirm all things; a man
plucked off his shoe, and gave it to his neighbour: and this was a
testimony in Israel.

4:8 Therefore the kinsman said unto Boaz, Buy it for thee. So he drew
off his shoe.

4:9 And Boaz said unto the elders, and unto all the people, Ye are
witnesses this day, that I have bought all that was Elimelech’s, and
all that was Chilion’s and Mahlon’s, of the hand of Naomi.

4:10 Moreover Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of Mahlon, have I purchased
to be my wife, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance,
that the name of the dead be not cut off from among his brethren, and
from the gate of his place: ye are witnesses this day.

4:11 And all the people that were in the gate, and the elders, said,
We are witnesses. The LORD make the woman that is come into thine
house like Rachel and like Leah, which two did build the house of
Israel: and do thou worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in Bethlehem:
4:12 And let thy house be like the house of Pharez, whom Tamar bare
unto Judah, of the seed which the LORD shall give thee of this young
woman.

4:13 So Boaz took Ruth, and she was his wife: and when he went in unto
her, the LORD gave her conception, and she bare a son.

4:14 And the women said unto Naomi, Blessed be the LORD, which hath
not left thee this day without a kinsman, that his name may be famous
in Israel.

4:15 And he shall be unto thee a restorer of thy life, and a nourisher
of thine old age: for thy daughter in law, which loveth thee, which is
better to thee than seven sons, hath born him.

4:16 And Naomi took the child, and laid it in her bosom, and became
nurse unto it.

4:17 And the women her neighbours gave it a name, saying, There is a
son born to Naomi; and they called his name Obed: he is the father of
Jesse, the father of David.

4:18 Now these are the generations of Pharez: Pharez begat Hezron,
4:19 And Hezron begat Ram, and Ram begat Amminadab, 4:20 And Amminadab
begat Nahshon, and Nahshon begat Salmon, 4:21 And Salmon begat Boaz,
and Boaz begat Obed, 4:22 And Obed begat Jesse, and Jesse begat David.


The First Book of Samuel

Otherwise Called:

The First Book of the Kings


1:1 Now there was a certain man of Ramathaimzophim, of mount Ephraim,
and his name was Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the
son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephrathite: 1:2 And he had two wives;
the name of the one was Hannah, and the name of the other Peninnah:
and Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no children.

1:3 And this man went up out of his city yearly to worship and to
sacrifice unto the LORD of hosts in Shiloh. And the two sons of Eli,
Hophni and Phinehas, the priests of the LORD, were there.

1:4 And when the time was that Elkanah offered, he gave to Peninnah
his wife, and to all her sons and her daughters, portions: 1:5 But
unto Hannah he gave a worthy portion; for he loved Hannah: but the
LORD had shut up her womb.

1:6 And her adversary also provoked her sore, for to make her fret,
because the LORD had shut up her womb.

1:7 And as he did so year by year, when she went up to the house of
the LORD, so she provoked her; therefore she wept, and did not eat.

1:8 Then said Elkanah her husband to her, Hannah, why weepest thou?
and why eatest thou not? and why is thy heart grieved? am not I better
to thee than ten sons? 1:9 So Hannah rose up after they had eaten in
Shiloh, and after they had drunk. Now Eli the priest sat upon a seat
by a post of the temple of the LORD.

1:10 And she was in bitterness of soul, and prayed unto the LORD, and
wept sore.

1:11 And she vowed a vow, and said, O LORD of hosts, if thou wilt
indeed look on the affliction of thine handmaid, and remember me, and
not forget thine handmaid, but wilt give unto thine handmaid a man
child, then I will give him unto the LORD all the days of his life,
and there shall no razor come upon his head.

1:12 And it came to pass, as she continued praying before the LORD,
that Eli marked her mouth.

1:13 Now Hannah, she spake in her heart; only her lips moved, but her
voice was not heard: therefore Eli thought she had been drunken.

1:14 And Eli said unto her, How long wilt thou be drunken? put away
thy wine from thee.

1:15 And Hannah answered and said, No, my lord, I am a woman of a
sorrowful spirit: I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but have
poured out my soul before the LORD.

1:16 Count not thine handmaid for a daughter of Belial: for out of the
abundance of my complaint and grief have I spoken hitherto.

1:17 Then Eli answered and said, Go in peace: and the God of Israel
grant thee thy petition that thou hast asked of him.

1:18 And she said, Let thine handmaid find grace in thy sight. So the
woman went her way, and did eat, and her countenance was no more sad.

1:19 And they rose up in the morning early, and worshipped before the
LORD, and returned, and came to their house to Ramah: and Elkanah knew
Hannah his wife; and the LORD remembered her.

1:20 Wherefore it came to pass, when the time was come about after
Hannah had conceived, that she bare a son, and called his name Samuel,
saying, Because I have asked him of the LORD.

1:21 And the man Elkanah, and all his house, went up to offer unto the
LORD the yearly sacrifice, and his vow.

1:22 But Hannah went not up; for she said unto her husband, I will not
go up until the child be weaned, and then I will bring him, that he
may appear before the LORD, and there abide for ever.

1:23 And Elkanah her husband said unto her, Do what seemeth thee good;
tarry until thou have weaned him; only the LORD establish his word. So
the woman abode, and gave her son suck until she weaned him.

1:24 And when she had weaned him, she took him up with her, with three
bullocks, and one ephah of flour, and a bottle of wine, and brought
him unto the house of the LORD in Shiloh: and the child was young.

1:25 And they slew a bullock, and brought the child to Eli.

1:26 And she said, Oh my lord, as thy soul liveth, my lord, I am the
woman that stood by thee here, praying unto the LORD.

1:27 For this child I prayed; and the LORD hath given me my petition
which I asked of him: 1:28 Therefore also I have lent him to the LORD;
as long as he liveth he shall be lent to the LORD. And he worshipped
the LORD there.

2:1 And Hannah prayed, and said, My heart rejoiceth in the LORD, mine
horn is exalted in the LORD: my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies;
because I rejoice in thy salvation.

2:2 There is none holy as the LORD: for there is none beside thee:
neither is there any rock like our God.

2:3 Talk no more so exceeding proudly; let not arrogancy come out of
your mouth: for the LORD is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are
weighed.

2:4 The bows of the mighty men are broken, and they that stumbled are
girded with strength.

2:5 They that were full have hired out themselves for bread; and they
that were hungry ceased: so that the barren hath born seven; and she
that hath many children is waxed feeble.

2:6 The LORD killeth, and maketh alive: he bringeth down to the grave,
and bringeth up.

2:7 The LORD maketh poor, and maketh rich: he bringeth low, and
lifteth up.

2:8 He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth up the beggar
from the dunghill, to set them among princes, and to make them inherit
the throne of glory: for the pillars of the earth are the LORD’s, and
he hath set the world upon them.

2:9 He will keep the feet of his saints, and the wicked shall be
silent in darkness; for by strength shall no man prevail.

2:10 The adversaries of the LORD shall be broken to pieces; out of
heaven shall he thunder upon them: the LORD shall judge the ends of
the earth; and he shall give strength unto his king, and exalt the
horn of his anointed.

2:11 And Elkanah went to Ramah to his house. And the child did
minister unto the LORD before Eli the priest.

2:12 Now the sons of Eli were sons of Belial; they knew not the LORD.

2:13 And the priest’s custom with the people was, that, when any man
offered sacrifice, the priest’s servant came, while the flesh was in
seething, with a fleshhook of three teeth in his hand; 2:14 And he
struck it into the pan, or kettle, or caldron, or pot; all that the
fleshhook brought up the priest took for himself. So they did in
Shiloh unto all the Israelites that came thither.

2:15 Also before they burnt the fat, the priest’s servant came, and
said to the man that sacrificed, Give flesh to roast for the priest;
for he will not have sodden flesh of thee, but raw.

2:16 And if any man said unto him, Let them not fail to burn the fat
presently, and then take as much as thy soul desireth; then he would
answer him, Nay; but thou shalt give it me now: and if not, I will
take it by force.

2:17 Wherefore the sin of the young men was very great before the
LORD: for men abhorred the offering of the LORD.

2:18 But Samuel ministered before the LORD, being a child, girded with
a linen ephod.

2:19 Moreover his mother made him a little coat, and brought it to him
from year to year, when she came up with her husband to offer the
yearly sacrifice.

2:20 And Eli blessed Elkanah and his wife, and said, The LORD give
thee seed of this woman for the loan which is lent to the LORD. And
they went unto their own home.

2:21 And the LORD visited Hannah, so that she conceived, and bare
three sons and two daughters. And the child Samuel grew before the
LORD.

2:22 Now Eli was very old, and heard all that his sons did unto all
Israel; and how they lay with the women that assembled at the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation.

2:23 And he said unto them, Why do ye such things? for I hear of your
evil dealings by all this people.

2:24 Nay, my sons; for it is no good report that I hear: ye make the
LORD’s people to transgress.

2:25 If one man sin against another, the judge shall judge him: but if
a man sin against the LORD, who shall intreat for him? Notwithstanding
they hearkened not unto the voice of their father, because the LORD
would slay them.

2:26 And the child Samuel grew on, and was in favour both with the
LORD, and also with men.

2:27 And there came a man of God unto Eli, and said unto him, Thus
saith the LORD, Did I plainly appear unto the house of thy father,
when they were in Egypt in Pharaoh’s house? 2:28 And did I choose him
out of all the tribes of Israel to be my priest, to offer upon mine
altar, to burn incense, to wear an ephod before me? and did I give
unto the house of thy father all the offerings made by fire of the
children of Israel? 2:29 Wherefore kick ye at my sacrifice and at
mine offering, which I have commanded in my habitation; and honourest
thy sons above me, to make yourselves fat with the chiefest of all the
offerings of Israel my people? 2:30 Wherefore the LORD God of Israel
saith, I said indeed that thy house, and the house of thy father,
should walk before me for ever: but now the LORD saith, Be it far from
me; for them that honour me I will honour, and they that despise me
shall be lightly esteemed.

2:31 Behold, the days come, that I will cut off thine arm, and the arm
of thy father’s house, that there shall not be an old man in thine
house.

2:32 And thou shalt see an enemy in my habitation, in all the wealth
which God shall give Israel: and there shall not be an old man in
thine house for ever.

2:33 And the man of thine, whom I shall not cut off from mine altar,
shall be to consume thine eyes, and to grieve thine heart: and all the
increase of thine house shall die in the flower of their age.

2:34 And this shall be a sign unto thee, that shall come upon thy two
sons, on Hophni and Phinehas; in one day they shall die both of them.

2:35 And I will raise me up a faithful priest, that shall do according
to that which is in mine heart and in my mind: and I will build him a
sure house; and he shall walk before mine anointed for ever.

2:36 And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left in thine
house shall come and crouch to him for a piece of silver and a morsel
of bread, and shall say, Put me, I pray thee, into one of the priests’
offices, that I may eat a piece of bread.

3:1 And the child Samuel ministered unto the LORD before Eli. And the
word of the LORD was precious in those days; there was no open vision.

3:2 And it came to pass at that time, when Eli was laid down in his
place, and his eyes began to wax dim, that he could not see; 3:3 And
ere the lamp of God went out in the temple of the LORD, where the ark
of God was, and Samuel was laid down to sleep; 3:4 That the LORD
called Samuel: and he answered, Here am I.

3:5 And he ran unto Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou calledst me.
And he said, I called not; lie down again. And he went and lay down.

3:6 And the LORD called yet again, Samuel. And Samuel arose and went
to Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou didst call me. And he answered,
I called not, my son; lie down again.

3:7 Now Samuel did not yet know the LORD, neither was the word of the
LORD yet revealed unto him.

3:8 And the LORD called Samuel again the third time. And he arose and
went to Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou didst call me. And Eli
perceived that the LORD had called the child.

3:9 Therefore Eli said unto Samuel, Go, lie down: and it shall be, if
he call thee, that thou shalt say, Speak, LORD; for thy servant
heareth. So Samuel went and lay down in his place.

3:10 And the LORD came, and stood, and called as at other times,
Samuel, Samuel. Then Samuel answered, Speak; for thy servant heareth.

3:11 And the LORD said to Samuel, Behold, I will do a thing in Israel,
at which both the ears of every one that heareth it shall tingle.

3:12 In that day I will perform against Eli all things which I have
spoken concerning his house: when I begin, I will also make an end.

3:13 For I have told him that I will judge his house for ever for the
iniquity which he knoweth; because his sons made themselves vile, and
he restrained them not.

3:14 And therefore I have sworn unto the house of Eli, that the
iniquity of Eli’s house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor
offering for ever.

3:15 And Samuel lay until the morning, and opened the doors of the
house of the LORD. And Samuel feared to shew Eli the vision.

3:16 Then Eli called Samuel, and said, Samuel, my son. And he
answered, Here am I.

3:17 And he said, What is the thing that the LORD hath said unto thee?
I pray thee hide it not from me: God do so to thee, and more also, if
thou hide any thing from me of all the things that he said unto thee.

3:18 And Samuel told him every whit, and hid nothing from him. And he
said, It is the LORD: let him do what seemeth him good.

3:19 And Samuel grew, and the LORD was with him, and did let none of
his words fall to the ground.

3:20 And all Israel from Dan even to Beersheba knew that Samuel was
established to be a prophet of the LORD.

3:21 And the LORD appeared again in Shiloh: for the LORD revealed
himself to Samuel in Shiloh by the word of the LORD.

4:1 And the word of Samuel came to all Israel. Now Israel went out
against the Philistines to battle, and pitched beside Ebenezer: and
the Philistines pitched in Aphek.

4:2 And the Philistines put themselves in array against Israel: and
when they joined battle, Israel was smitten before the Philistines:
and they slew of the army in the field about four thousand men.

4:3 And when the people were come into the camp, the elders of Israel
said, Wherefore hath the LORD smitten us to day before the
Philistines? Let us fetch the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of
Shiloh unto us, that, when it cometh among us, it may save us out of
the hand of our enemies.

4:4 So the people sent to Shiloh, that they might bring from thence
the ark of the covenant of the LORD of hosts, which dwelleth between
the cherubims: and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were
there with the ark of the covenant of God.

4:5 And when the ark of the covenant of the LORD came into the camp,
all Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth rang again.

4:6 And when the Philistines heard the noise of the shout, they said,
What meaneth the noise of this great shout in the camp of the Hebrews?
And they understood that the ark of the LORD was come into the camp.

4:7 And the Philistines were afraid, for they said, God is come into
the camp. And they said, Woe unto us! for there hath not been such a
thing heretofore.

4:8 Woe unto us! who shall deliver us out of the hand of these mighty
Gods? these are the Gods that smote the Egyptians with all the plagues
in the wilderness.

4:9 Be strong and quit yourselves like men, O ye Philistines, that ye
be not servants unto the Hebrews, as they have been to you: quit
yourselves like men, and fight.

4:10 And the Philistines fought, and Israel was smitten, and they fled
every man into his tent: and there was a very great slaughter; for
there fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen.

4:11 And the ark of God was taken; and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and
Phinehas, were slain.

4:12 And there ran a man of Benjamin out of the army, and came to
Shiloh the same day with his clothes rent, and with earth upon his
head.

4:13 And when he came, lo, Eli sat upon a seat by the wayside
watching: for his heart trembled for the ark of God. And when the man
came into the city, and told it, all the city cried out.

4:14 And when Eli heard the noise of the crying, he said, What meaneth
the noise of this tumult? And the man came in hastily, and told Eli.

4:15 Now Eli was ninety and eight years old; and his eyes were dim,
that he could not see.

4:16 And the man said unto Eli, I am he that came out of the army, and
I fled to day out of the army. And he said, What is there done, my
son? 4:17 And the messenger answered and said, Israel is fled before
the Philistines, and there hath been also a great slaughter among the
people, and thy two sons also, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the
ark of God is taken.

4:18 And it came to pass, when he made mention of the ark of God, that
he fell from off the seat backward by the side of the gate, and his
neck brake, and he died: for he was an old man, and heavy. And he had
judged Israel forty years.

4:19 And his daughter in law, Phinehas’ wife, was with child, near to
be delivered: and when she heard the tidings that the ark of God was
taken, and that her father in law and her husband were dead, she bowed
herself and travailed; for her pains came upon her.

4:20 And about the time of her death the women that stood by her said
unto her, Fear not; for thou hast born a son. But she answered not,
neither did she regard it.

4:21 And she named the child Ichabod, saying, The glory is departed
from Israel: because the ark of God was taken, and because of her
father in law and her husband.

4:22 And she said, The glory is departed from Israel: for the ark of
God is taken.

5:1 And the Philistines took the ark of God, and brought it from
Ebenezer unto Ashdod.

5:2 When the Philistines took the ark of God, they brought it into the
house of Dagon, and set it by Dagon.

5:3 And when they of Ashdod arose early on the morrow, behold, Dagon
was fallen upon his face to the earth before the ark of the LORD. And
they took Dagon, and set him in his place again.

5:4 And when they arose early on the morrow morning, behold, Dagon was
fallen upon his face to the ground before the ark of the LORD; and the
head of Dagon and both the palms of his hands were cut off upon the
threshold; only the stump of Dagon was left to him.

5:5 Therefore neither the priests of Dagon, nor any that come into
Dagon’s house, tread on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod unto this
day.

5:6 But the hand of the LORD was heavy upon them of Ashdod, and he
destroyed them, and smote them with emerods, even Ashdod and the
coasts thereof.

5:7 And when the men of Ashdod saw that it was so, they said, The ark
of the God of Israel shall not abide with us: for his hand is sore
upon us, and upon Dagon our god.

5:8 They sent therefore and gathered all the lords of the Philistines
unto them, and said, What shall we do with the ark of the God of
Israel? And they answered, Let the ark of the God of Israel be carried
about unto Gath. And they carried the ark of the God of Israel about
thither.

5:9 And it was so, that, after they had carried it about, the hand of
the LORD was against the city with a very great destruction: and he
smote the men of the city, both small and great, and they had emerods
in their secret parts.

5:10 Therefore they sent the ark of God to Ekron. And it came to pass,
as the ark of God came to Ekron, that the Ekronites cried out, saying,
They have brought about the ark of the God of Israel to us, to slay us
and our people.

5:11 So they sent and gathered together all the lords of the
Philistines, and said, Send away the ark of the God of Israel, and let
it go again to his own place, that it slay us not, and our people: for
there was a deadly destruction throughout all the city; the hand of
God was very heavy there.

5:12 And the men that died not were smitten with the emerods: and the
cry of the city went up to heaven.

6:1 And the ark of the LORD was in the country of the Philistines
seven months.

6:2 And the Philistines called for the priests and the diviners,
saying, What shall we do to the ark of the LORD? tell us wherewith we
shall send it to his place.

6:3 And they said, If ye send away the ark of the God of Israel, send
it not empty; but in any wise return him a trespass offering: then ye
shall be healed, and it shall be known to you why his hand is not
removed from you.

6:4 Then said they, What shall be the trespass offering which we shall
return to him? They answered, Five golden emerods, and five golden
mice, according to the number of the lords of the Philistines: for one
plague was on you all, and on your lords.

6:5 Wherefore ye shall make images of your emerods, and images of your
mice that mar the land; and ye shall give glory unto the God of
Israel: peradventure he will lighten his hand from off you, and from
off your gods, and from off your land.

6:6 Wherefore then do ye harden your hearts, as the Egyptians and
Pharaoh hardened their hearts? when he had wrought wonderfully among
them, did they not let the people go, and they departed? 6:7 Now
therefore make a new cart, and take two milch kine, on which there
hath come no yoke, and tie the kine to the cart, and bring their
calves home from them: 6:8 And take the ark of the LORD, and lay it
upon the cart; and put the jewels of gold, which ye return him for a
trespass offering, in a coffer by the side thereof; and send it away,
that it may go.

6:9 And see, if it goeth up by the way of his own coast to
Bethshemesh, then he hath done us this great evil: but if not, then we
shall know that it is not his hand that smote us: it was a chance that
happened to us.

6:10 And the men did so; and took two milch kine, and tied them to the
cart, and shut up their calves at home: 6:11 And they laid the ark of
the LORD upon the cart, and the coffer with the mice of gold and the
images of their emerods.

6:12 And the kine took the straight way to the way of Bethshemesh, and
went along the highway, lowing as they went, and turned not aside to
the right hand or to the left; and the lords of the Philistines went
after them unto the border of Bethshemesh.

6:13 And they of Bethshemesh were reaping their wheat harvest in the
valley: and they lifted up their eyes, and saw the ark, and rejoiced
to see it.

6:14 And the cart came into the field of Joshua, a Bethshemite, and
stood there, where there was a great stone: and they clave the wood of
the cart, and offered the kine a burnt offering unto the LORD.

6:15 And the Levites took down the ark of the LORD, and the coffer
that was with it, wherein the jewels of gold were, and put them on the
great stone: and the men of Bethshemesh offered burnt offerings and
sacrificed sacrifices the same day unto the LORD.

6:16 And when the five lords of the Philistines had seen it, they
returned to Ekron the same day.

6:17 And these are the golden emerods which the Philistines returned
for a trespass offering unto the LORD; for Ashdod one, for Gaza one,
for Askelon one, for Gath one, for Ekron one; 6:18 And the golden
mice, according to the number of all the cities of the Philistines
belonging to the five lords, both of fenced cities, and of country
villages, even unto the great stone of Abel, whereon they set down the
ark of the LORD: which stone remaineth unto this day in the field of
Joshua, the Bethshemite.

6:19 And he smote the men of Bethshemesh, because they had looked into
the ark of the LORD, even he smote of the people fifty thousand and
threescore and ten men: and the people lamented, because the LORD had
smitten many of the people with a great slaughter.

6:20 And the men of Bethshemesh said, Who is able to stand before this
holy LORD God? and to whom shall he go up from us? 6:21 And they sent
messengers to the inhabitants of Kirjathjearim, saying, The
Philistines have brought again the ark of the LORD; come ye down, and
fetch it up to you.

7:1 And the men of Kirjathjearim came, and fetched up the ark of the
LORD, and brought it into the house of Abinadab in the hill, and
sanctified Eleazar his son to keep the ark of the LORD.

7:2 And it came to pass, while the ark abode in Kirjathjearim, that
the time was long; for it was twenty years: and all the house of
Israel lamented after the LORD.

7:3 And Samuel spake unto all the house of Israel, saying, If ye do
return unto the LORD with all your hearts, then put away the strange
gods and Ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your hearts unto the
LORD, and serve him only: and he will deliver you out of the hand of
the Philistines.

7:4 Then the children of Israel did put away Baalim and Ashtaroth, and
served the LORD only.

7:5 And Samuel said, Gather all Israel to Mizpeh, and I will pray for
you unto the LORD.

7:6 And they gathered together to Mizpeh, and drew water, and poured
it out before the LORD, and fasted on that day, and said there, We
have sinned against the LORD. And Samuel judged the children of Israel
in Mizpeh.

7:7 And when the Philistines heard that the children of Israel were
gathered together to Mizpeh, the lords of the Philistines went up
against Israel. And when the children of Israel heard it, they were
afraid of the Philistines.

7:8 And the children of Israel said to Samuel, Cease not to cry unto
the LORD our God for us, that he will save us out of the hand of the
Philistines.

7:9 And Samuel took a sucking lamb, and offered it for a burnt
offering wholly unto the LORD: and Samuel cried unto the LORD for
Israel; and the LORD heard him.

7:10 And as Samuel was offering up the burnt offering, the Philistines
drew near to battle against Israel: but the LORD thundered with a
great thunder on that day upon the Philistines, and discomfited them;
and they were smitten before Israel.

7:11 And the men of Israel went out of Mizpeh, and pursued the
Philistines, and smote them, until they came under Bethcar.

7:12 Then Samuel took a stone, and set it between Mizpeh and Shen, and
called the name of it Ebenezer, saying, Hitherto hath the LORD helped
us.

7:13 So the Philistines were subdued, and they came no more into the
coast of Israel: and the hand of the LORD was against the Philistines
all the days of Samuel.

7:14 And the cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel were
restored to Israel, from Ekron even unto Gath; and the coasts thereof
did Israel deliver out of the hands of the Philistines. And there was
peace between Israel and the Amorites.

7:15 And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life.

7:16 And he went from year to year in circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal,
and Mizpeh, and judged Israel in all those places.

7:17 And his return was to Ramah; for there was his house; and there
he judged Israel; and there he built an altar unto the LORD.

8:1 And it came to pass, when Samuel was old, that he made his sons
judges over Israel.

8:2 Now the name of his firstborn was Joel; and the name of his
second, Abiah: they were judges in Beersheba.

8:3 And his sons walked not in his ways, but turned aside after lucre,
and took bribes, and perverted judgment.

8:4 Then all the elders of Israel gathered themselves together, and
came to Samuel unto Ramah, 8:5 And said unto him, Behold, thou art
old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways: now make us a king to judge us
like all the nations.

8:6 But the thing displeased Samuel, when they said, Give us a king to
judge us. And Samuel prayed unto the LORD.

8:7 And the LORD said unto Samuel, Hearken unto the voice of the
people in all that they say unto thee: for they have not rejected
thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them.

8:8 According to all the works which they have done since the day that
I brought them up out of Egypt even unto this day, wherewith they have
forsaken me, and served other gods, so do they also unto thee.

8:9 Now therefore hearken unto their voice: howbeit yet protest
solemnly unto them, and shew them the manner of the king that shall
reign over them.

8:10 And Samuel told all the words of the LORD unto the people that
asked of him a king.

8:11 And he said, This will be the manner of the king that shall reign
over you: He will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for
his chariots, and to be his horsemen; and some shall run before his
chariots.

8:12 And he will appoint him captains over thousands, and captains
over fifties; and will set them to ear his ground, and to reap his
harvest, and to make his instruments of war, and instruments of his
chariots.

8:13 And he will take your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be
cooks, and to be bakers.

8:14 And he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your
oliveyards, even the best of them, and give them to his servants.

8:15 And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards,
and give to his officers, and to his servants.

8:16 And he will take your menservants, and your maidservants, and
your goodliest young men, and your asses, and put them to his work.

8:17 He will take the tenth of your sheep: and ye shall be his
servants.

8:18 And ye shall cry out in that day because of your king which ye
shall have chosen you; and the LORD will not hear you in that day.

8:19 Nevertheless the people refused to obey the voice of Samuel; and
they said, Nay; but we will have a king over us; 8:20 That we also may
be like all the nations; and that our king may judge us, and go out
before us, and fight our battles.

8:21 And Samuel heard all the words of the people, and he rehearsed
them in the ears of the LORD.

8:22 And the LORD said to Samuel, Hearken unto their voice, and make
them a king. And Samuel said unto the men of Israel, Go ye every man
unto his city.

9:1 Now there was a man of Benjamin, whose name was Kish, the son of
Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Bechorath, the son of Aphiah, a
Benjamite, a mighty man of power.

9:2 And he had a son, whose name was Saul, a choice young man, and a
goodly: and there was not among the children of Israel a goodlier
person than he: from his shoulders and upward he was higher than any
of the people.

9:3 And the asses of Kish Saul’s father were lost. And Kish said to
Saul his son, Take now one of the servants with thee, and arise, go
seek the asses.

9:4 And he passed through mount Ephraim, and passed through the land
of Shalisha, but they found them not: then they passed through the
land of Shalim, and there they were not: and he passed through the
land of the Benjamites, but they found them not.

9:5 And when they were come to the land of Zuph, Saul said to his
servant that was with him, Come, and let us return; lest my father
leave caring for the asses, and take thought for us.

9:6 And he said unto him, Behold now, there is in this city a man of
God, and he is an honourable man; all that he saith cometh surely to
pass: now let us go thither; peradventure he can shew us our way that
we should go.

9:7 Then said Saul to his servant, But, behold, if we go, what shall
we bring the man? for the bread is spent in our vessels, and there is
not a present to bring to the man of God: what have we? 9:8 And the
servant answered Saul again, and said, Behold, I have here at hand the
fourth part of a shekel of silver: that will I give to the man of God,
to tell us our way.

9:9 (Beforetime in Israel, when a man went to enquire of God, thus he
spake, Come, and let us go to the seer: for he that is now called a
Prophet was beforetime called a Seer.) 9:10 Then said Saul to his
servant, Well said; come, let us go. So they went unto the city where
the man of God was.

9:11 And as they went up the hill to the city, they found young
maidens going out to draw water, and said unto them, Is the seer here?
9:12 And they answered them, and said, He is; behold, he is before
you: make haste now, for he came to day to the city; for there is a
sacrifice of the people to day in the high place: 9:13 As soon as ye
be come into the city, ye shall straightway find him, before he go up
to the high place to eat: for the people will not eat until he come,
because he doth bless the sacrifice; and afterwards they eat that be
bidden. Now therefore get you up; for about this time ye shall find
him.

9:14 And they went up into the city: and when they were come into the
city, behold, Samuel came out against them, for to go up to the high
place.

9:15 Now the LORD had told Samuel in his ear a day before Saul came,
saying, 9:16 To morrow about this time I will send thee a man out of
the land of Benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be captain over my
people Israel, that he may save my people out of the hand of the
Philistines: for I have looked upon my people, because their cry is
come unto me.

9:17 And when Samuel saw Saul, the LORD said unto him, Behold the man
whom I spake to thee of! this same shall reign over my people.

9:18 Then Saul drew near to Samuel in the gate, and said, Tell me, I
pray thee, where the seer’s house is.

9:19 And Samuel answered Saul, and said, I am the seer: go up before
me unto the high place; for ye shall eat with me to day, and to morrow
I will let thee go, and will tell thee all that is in thine heart.

9:20 And as for thine asses that were lost three days ago, set not thy
mind on them; for they are found. And on whom is all the desire of
Israel? Is it not on thee, and on all thy father’s house? 9:21 And
Saul answered and said, Am not I a Benjamite, of the smallest of the
tribes of Israel? and my family the least of all the families of the
tribe of Benjamin? wherefore then speakest thou so to me? 9:22 And
Samuel took Saul and his servant, and brought them into the parlour,
and made them sit in the chiefest place among them that were bidden,
which were about thirty persons.

9:23 And Samuel said unto the cook, Bring the portion which I gave
thee, of which I said unto thee, Set it by thee.

9:24 And the cook took up the shoulder, and that which was upon it,
and set it before Saul. And Samuel said, Behold that which is left!
set it before thee, and eat: for unto this time hath it been kept for
thee since I said, I have invited the people. So Saul did eat with
Samuel that day.

9:25 And when they were come down from the high place into the city,
Samuel communed with Saul upon the top of the house.

9:26 And they arose early: and it came to pass about the spring of the
day, that Samuel called Saul to the top of the house, saying, Up, that
I may send thee away. And Saul arose, and they went out both of them,
he and Samuel, abroad.

9:27 And as they were going down to the end of the city, Samuel said
to Saul, Bid the servant pass on before us, (and he passed on), but
stand thou still a while, that I may shew thee the word of God.

10:1 Then Samuel took a vial of oil, and poured it upon his head, and
kissed him, and said, Is it not because the LORD hath anointed thee to
be captain over his inheritance? 10:2 When thou art departed from me
to day, then thou shalt find two men by Rachel’s sepulchre in the
border of Benjamin at Zelzah; and they will say unto thee, The asses
which thou wentest to seek are found: and, lo, thy father hath left
the care of the asses, and sorroweth for you, saying, What shall I do
for my son? 10:3 Then shalt thou go on forward from thence, and thou
shalt come to the plain of Tabor, and there shall meet thee three men
going up to God to Bethel, one carrying three kids, and another
carrying three loaves of bread, and another carrying a bottle of wine:
10:4 And they will salute thee, and give thee two loaves of bread;
which thou shalt receive of their hands.

10:5 After that thou shalt come to the hill of God, where is the
garrison of the Philistines: and it shall come to pass, when thou art
come thither to the city, that thou shalt meet a company of prophets
coming down from the high place with a psaltery, and a tabret, and a
pipe, and a harp, before them; and they shall prophesy: 10:6 And the
Spirit of the LORD will come upon thee, and thou shalt prophesy with
them, and shalt be turned into another man.

10:7 And let it be, when these signs are come unto thee, that thou do
as occasion serve thee; for God is with thee.

10:8 And thou shalt go down before me to Gilgal; and, behold, I will
come down unto thee, to offer burnt offerings, and to sacrifice
sacrifices of peace offerings: seven days shalt thou tarry, till I
come to thee, and shew thee what thou shalt do.

10:9 And it was so, that when he had turned his back to go from
Samuel, God gave him another heart: and all those signs came to pass
that day.

10:10 And when they came thither to the hill, behold, a company of
prophets met him; and the Spirit of God came upon him, and he
prophesied among them.

10:11 And it came to pass, when all that knew him beforetime saw that,
behold, he prophesied among the prophets, then the people said one to
another, What is this that is come unto the son of Kish? Is Saul also
among the prophets? 10:12 And one of the same place answered and
said, But who is their father? Therefore it became a proverb, Is Saul
also among the prophets? 10:13 And when he had made an end of
prophesying, he came to the high place.

10:14 And Saul’s uncle said unto him and to his servant, Whither went
ye? And he said, To seek the asses: and when we saw that they were no
where, we came to Samuel.

10:15 And Saul’s uncle said, Tell me, I pray thee, what Samuel said
unto you.

10:16 And Saul said unto his uncle, He told us plainly that the asses
were found. But of the matter of the kingdom, whereof Samuel spake, he
told him not.

10:17 And Samuel called the people together unto the LORD to Mizpeh;
10:18 And said unto the children of Israel, Thus saith the LORD God of
Israel, I brought up Israel out of Egypt, and delivered you out of the
hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all kingdoms, and of
them that oppressed you: 10:19 And ye have this day rejected your God,
who himself saved you out of all your adversities and your
tribulations; and ye have said unto him, Nay, but set a king over us.
Now therefore present yourselves before the LORD by your tribes, and
by your thousands.

10:20 And when Samuel had caused all the tribes of Israel to come
near, the tribe of Benjamin was taken.

10:21 When he had caused the tribe of Benjamin to come near by their
families, the family of Matri was taken, and Saul the son of Kish was
taken: and when they sought him, he could not be found.

10:22 Therefore they enquired of the LORD further, if the man should
yet come thither. And the LORD answered, Behold he hath hid himself
among the stuff.

10:23 And they ran and fetched him thence: and when he stood among the
people, he was higher than any of the people from his shoulders and
upward.

10:24 And Samuel said to all the people, See ye him whom the LORD hath
chosen, that there is none like him among all the people? And all the
people shouted, and said, God save the king.

10:25 Then Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, and wrote
it in a book, and laid it up before the LORD. And Samuel sent all the
people away, every man to his house.

10:26 And Saul also went home to Gibeah; and there went with him a
band of men, whose hearts God had touched.

10:27 But the children of Belial said, How shall this man save us? And
they despised him, and brought no presents. But he held his peace.

11:1 Then Nahash the Ammonite came up, and encamped against
Jabeshgilead: and all the men of Jabesh said unto Nahash, Make a
covenant with us, and we will serve thee.

11:2 And Nahash the Ammonite answered them, On this condition will I
make a covenant with you, that I may thrust out all your right eyes,
and lay it for a reproach upon all Israel.

11:3 And the elders of Jabesh said unto him, Give us seven days’
respite, that we may send messengers unto all the coasts of Israel:
and then, if there be no man to save us, we will come out to thee.

11:4 Then came the messengers to Gibeah of Saul, and told the tidings
in the ears of the people: and all the people lifted up their voices,
and wept.

11:5 And, behold, Saul came after the herd out of the field; and Saul
said, What aileth the people that they weep? And they told him the
tidings of the men of Jabesh.

11:6 And the Spirit of God came upon Saul when he heard those tidings,
and his anger was kindled greatly.

11:7 And he took a yoke of oxen, and hewed them in pieces, and sent
them throughout all the coasts of Israel by the hands of messengers,
saying, Whosoever cometh not forth after Saul and after Samuel, so
shall it be done unto his oxen. And the fear of the LORD fell on the
people, and they came out with one consent.

11:8 And when he numbered them in Bezek, the children of Israel were
three hundred thousand, and the men of Judah thirty thousand.

11:9 And they said unto the messengers that came, Thus shall ye say
unto the men of Jabeshgilead, To morrow, by that time the sun be hot,
ye shall have help. And the messengers came and shewed it to the men
of Jabesh; and they were glad.

11:10 Therefore the men of Jabesh said, To morrow we will come out
unto you, and ye shall do with us all that seemeth good unto you.

11:11 And it was so on the morrow, that Saul put the people in three
companies; and they came into the midst of the host in the morning
watch, and slew the Ammonites until the heat of the day: and it came
to pass, that they which remained were scattered, so that two of them
were not left together.

11:12 And the people said unto Samuel, Who is he that said, Shall Saul
reign over us? bring the men, that we may put them to death.

11:13 And Saul said, There shall not a man be put to death this day:
for to day the LORD hath wrought salvation in Israel.

11:14 Then said Samuel to the people, Come, and let us go to Gilgal,
and renew the kingdom there.

11:15 And all the people went to Gilgal; and there they made Saul king
before the LORD in Gilgal; and there they sacrificed sacrifices of
peace offerings before the LORD; and there Saul and all the men of
Israel rejoiced greatly.

12:1 And Samuel said unto all Israel, Behold, I have hearkened unto
your voice in all that ye said unto me, and have made a king over you.

12:2 And now, behold, the king walketh before you: and I am old and
grayheaded; and, behold, my sons are with you: and I have walked
before you from my childhood unto this day.

12:3 Behold, here I am: witness against me before the LORD, and before
his anointed: whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or
whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I
received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it
you.

12:4 And they said, Thou hast not defrauded us, nor oppressed us,
neither hast thou taken ought of any man’s hand.

12:5 And he said unto them, The LORD is witness against you, and his
anointed is witness this day, that ye have not found ought in my hand.
And they answered, He is witness.

12:6 And Samuel said unto the people, It is the LORD that advanced
Moses and Aaron, and that brought your fathers up out of the land of
Egypt.

12:7 Now therefore stand still, that I may reason with you before the
LORD of all the righteous acts of the LORD, which he did to you and to
your fathers.

12:8 When Jacob was come into Egypt, and your fathers cried unto the
LORD, then the LORD sent Moses and Aaron, which brought forth your
fathers out of Egypt, and made them dwell in this place.

12:9 And when they forgat the LORD their God, he sold them into the
hand of Sisera, captain of the host of Hazor, and into the hand of the
Philistines, and into the hand of the king of Moab, and they fought
against them.

12:10 And they cried unto the LORD, and said, We have sinned, because
we have forsaken the LORD, and have served Baalim and Ashtaroth: but
now deliver us out of the hand of our enemies, and we will serve thee.

12:11 And the LORD sent Jerubbaal, and Bedan, and Jephthah, and
Samuel, and delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every
side, and ye dwelled safe.

12:12 And when ye saw that Nahash the king of the children of Ammon
came against you, ye said unto me, Nay; but a king shall reign over
us: when the LORD your God was your king.

12:13 Now therefore behold the king whom ye have chosen, and whom ye
have desired! and, behold, the LORD hath set a king over you.

12:14 If ye will fear the LORD, and serve him, and obey his voice, and
not rebel against the commandment of the LORD, then shall both ye and
also the king that reigneth over you continue following the LORD your
God: 12:15 But if ye will not obey the voice of the LORD, but rebel
against the commandment of the LORD, then shall the hand of the LORD
be against you, as it was against your fathers.

12:16 Now therefore stand and see this great thing, which the LORD
will do before your eyes.

12:17 Is it not wheat harvest to day? I will call unto the LORD, and
he shall send thunder and rain; that ye may perceive and see that your
wickedness is great, which ye have done in the sight of the LORD, in
asking you a king.

12:18 So Samuel called unto the LORD; and the LORD sent thunder and
rain that day: and all the people greatly feared the LORD and Samuel.

12:19 And all the people said unto Samuel, Pray for thy servants unto
the LORD thy God, that we die not: for we have added unto all our sins
this evil, to ask us a king.

12:20 And Samuel said unto the people, Fear not: ye have done all this
wickedness: yet turn not aside from following the LORD, but serve the
LORD with all your heart; 12:21 And turn ye not aside: for then should
ye go after vain things, which cannot profit nor deliver; for they are
vain.

12:22 For the LORD will not forsake his people for his great name’s
sake: because it hath pleased the LORD to make you his people.

12:23 Moreover as for me, God forbid that I should sin against the
LORD in ceasing to pray for you: but I will teach you the good and the
right way: 12:24 Only fear the LORD, and serve him in truth with all
your heart: for consider how great things he hath done for you.

12:25 But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye
and your king.

13:1 Saul reigned one year; and when he had reigned two years over
Israel, 13:2 Saul chose him three thousand men of Israel; whereof two
thousand were with Saul in Michmash and in mount Bethel, and a
thousand were with Jonathan in Gibeah of Benjamin: and the rest of the
people he sent every man to his tent.

13:3 And Jonathan smote the garrison of the Philistines that was in
Geba, and the Philistines heard of it. And Saul blew the trumpet
throughout all the land, saying, Let the Hebrews hear.

13:4 And all Israel heard say that Saul had smitten a garrison of the
Philistines, and that Israel also was had in abomination with the
Philistines. And the people were called together after Saul to Gilgal.

13:5 And the Philistines gathered themselves together to fight with
Israel, thirty thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and
people as the sand which is on the sea shore in multitude: and they
came up, and pitched in Michmash, eastward from Bethaven.

13:6 When the men of Israel saw that they were in a strait, (for the
people were distressed,) then the people did hide themselves in caves,
and in thickets, and in rocks, and in high places, and in pits.

13:7 And some of the Hebrews went over Jordan to the land of Gad and
Gilead. As for Saul, he was yet in Gilgal, and all the people followed
him trembling.

13:8 And he tarried seven days, according to the set time that Samuel
had appointed: but Samuel came not to Gilgal; and the people were
scattered from him.

13:9 And Saul said, Bring hither a burnt offering to me, and peace
offerings. And he offered the burnt offering.

13:10 And it came to pass, that as soon as he had made an end of
offering the burnt offering, behold, Samuel came; and Saul went out to
meet him, that he might salute him.

13:11 And Samuel said, What hast thou done? And Saul said, Because I
saw that the people were scattered from me, and that thou camest not
within the days appointed, and that the Philistines gathered
themselves together at Michmash; 13:12 Therefore said I, The
Philistines will come down now upon me to Gilgal, and I have not made
supplication unto the LORD: I forced myself therefore, and offered a
burnt offering.

13:13 And Samuel said to Saul, Thou hast done foolishly: thou hast not
kept the commandment of the LORD thy God, which he commanded thee: for
now would the LORD have established thy kingdom upon Israel for ever.

13:14 But now thy kingdom shall not continue: the LORD hath sought him
a man after his own heart, and the LORD hath commanded him to be
captain over his people, because thou hast not kept that which the
LORD commanded thee.

13:15 And Samuel arose, and gat him up from Gilgal unto Gibeah of
Benjamin. And Saul numbered the people that were present with him,
about six hundred men.

13:16 And Saul, and Jonathan his son, and the people that were present
with them, abode in Gibeah of Benjamin: but the Philistines encamped
in Michmash.

13:17 And the spoilers came out of the camp of the Philistines in
three companies: one company turned unto the way that leadeth to
Ophrah, unto the land of Shual: 13:18 And another company turned the
way to Bethhoron: and another company turned to the way of the border
that looketh to the valley of Zeboim toward the wilderness.

13:19 Now there was no smith found throughout all the land of Israel:
for the Philistines said, Lest the Hebrews make them swords or spears:
13:20 But all the Israelites went down to the Philistines, to sharpen
every man his share, and his coulter, and his axe, and his mattock.

13:21 Yet they had a file for the mattocks, and for the coulters, and
for the forks, and for the axes, and to sharpen the goads.

13:22 So it came to pass in the day of battle, that there was neither
sword nor spear found in the hand of any of the people that were with
Saul and Jonathan: but with Saul and with Jonathan his son was there
found.

13:23 And the garrison of the Philistines went out to the passage of
Michmash.

14:1 Now it came to pass upon a day, that Jonathan the son of Saul
said unto the young man that bare his armour, Come, and let us go over
to the Philistines’ garrison, that is on the other side. But he told
not his father.

14:2 And Saul tarried in the uttermost part of Gibeah under a
pomegranate tree which is in Migron: and the people that were with him
were about six hundred men; 14:3 And Ahiah, the son of Ahitub,
Ichabod’s brother, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eli, the LORD’s
priest in Shiloh, wearing an ephod. And the people knew not that
Jonathan was gone.

14:4 And between the passages, by which Jonathan sought to go over
unto the Philistines’ garrison, there was a sharp rock on the one
side, and a sharp rock on the other side: and the name of the one was
Bozez, and the name of the other Seneh.

14:5 The forefront of the one was situate northward over against
Michmash, and the other southward over against Gibeah.

14:6 And Jonathan said to the young man that bare his armour, Come,
and let us go over unto the garrison of these uncircumcised: it may be
that the LORD will work for us: for there is no restraint to the LORD
to save by many or by few.

14:7 And his armourbearer said unto him, Do all that is in thine
heart: turn thee; behold, I am with thee according to thy heart.

14:8 Then said Jonathan, Behold, we will pass over unto these men, and
we will discover ourselves unto them.

14:9 If they say thus unto us, Tarry until we come to you; then we
will stand still in our place, and will not go up unto them.

14:10 But if they say thus, Come up unto us; then we will go up: for
the LORD hath delivered them into our hand: and this shall be a sign
unto us.

14:11 And both of them discovered themselves unto the garrison of the
Philistines: and the Philistines said, Behold, the Hebrews come forth
out of the holes where they had hid themselves.

14:12 And the men of the garrison answered Jonathan and his
armourbearer, and said, Come up to us, and we will shew you a thing.
And Jonathan said unto his armourbearer, Come up after me: for the
LORD hath delivered them into the hand of Israel.

14:13 And Jonathan climbed up upon his hands and upon his feet, and
his armourbearer after him: and they fell before Jonathan; and his
armourbearer slew after him.

14:14 And that first slaughter, which Jonathan and his armourbearer
made, was about twenty men, within as it were an half acre of land,
which a yoke of oxen might plow.

14:15 And there was trembling in the host, in the field, and among all
the people: the garrison, and the spoilers, they also trembled, and
the earth quaked: so it was a very great trembling.

14:16 And the watchmen of Saul in Gibeah of Benjamin looked; and,
behold, the multitude melted away, and they went on beating down one
another.

14:17 Then said Saul unto the people that were with him, Number now,
and see who is gone from us. And when they had numbered, behold,
Jonathan and his armourbearer were not there.

14:18 And Saul said unto Ahiah, Bring hither the ark of God. For the
ark of God was at that time with the children of Israel.

14:19 And it came to pass, while Saul talked unto the priest, that the
noise that was in the host of the Philistines went on and increased:
and Saul said unto the priest, Withdraw thine hand.

14:20 And Saul and all the people that were with him assembled
themselves, and they came to the battle: and, behold, every man’s
sword was against his fellow, and there was a very great discomfiture.

14:21 Moreover the Hebrews that were with the Philistines before that
time, which went up with them into the camp from the country round
about, even they also turned to be with the Israelites that were with
Saul and Jonathan.

14:22 Likewise all the men of Israel which had hid themselves in mount
Ephraim, when they heard that the Philistines fled, even they also
followed hard after them in the battle.

14:23 So the LORD saved Israel that day: and the battle passed over
unto Bethaven.

14:24 And the men of Israel were distressed that day: for Saul had
adjured the people, saying, Cursed be the man that eateth any food
until evening, that I may be avenged on mine enemies. So none of the
people tasted any food.

14:25 And all they of the land came to a wood; and there was honey
upon the ground.

14:26 And when the people were come into the wood, behold, the honey
dropped; but no man put his hand to his mouth: for the people feared
the oath.

14:27 But Jonathan heard not when his father charged the people with
the oath: wherefore he put forth the end of the rod that was in his
hand, and dipped it in an honeycomb, and put his hand to his mouth;
and his eyes were enlightened.

14:28 Then answered one of the people, and said, Thy father straitly
charged the people with an oath, saying, Cursed be the man that eateth
any food this day. And the people were faint.

14:29 Then said Jonathan, My father hath troubled the land: see, I
pray you, how mine eyes have been enlightened, because I tasted a
little of this honey.

14:30 How much more, if haply the people had eaten freely to day of
the spoil of their enemies which they found? for had there not been
now a much greater slaughter among the Philistines? 14:31 And they
smote the Philistines that day from Michmash to Aijalon: and the
people were very faint.

14:32 And the people flew upon the spoil, and took sheep, and oxen,
and calves, and slew them on the ground: and the people did eat them
with the blood.

14:33 Then they told Saul, saying, Behold, the people sin against the
LORD, in that they eat with the blood. And he said, Ye have
transgressed: roll a great stone unto me this day.

14:34 And Saul said, Disperse yourselves among the people, and say
unto them, Bring me hither every man his ox, and every man his sheep,
and slay them here, and eat; and sin not against the LORD in eating
with the blood.

And all the people brought every man his ox with him that night, and
slew them there.

14:35 And Saul built an altar unto the LORD: the same was the first
altar that he built unto the LORD.

14:36 And Saul said, Let us go down after the Philistines by night,
and spoil them until the morning light, and let us not leave a man of
them. And they said, Do whatsoever seemeth good unto thee. Then said
the priest, Let us draw near hither unto God.

14:37 And Saul asked counsel of God, Shall I go down after the
Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into the hand of Israel? But he
answered him not that day.

14:38 And Saul said, Draw ye near hither, all the chief of the people:
and know and see wherein this sin hath been this day.

14:39 For, as the LORD liveth, which saveth Israel, though it be in
Jonathan my son, he shall surely die. But there was not a man among
all the people that answered him.

14:40 Then said he unto all Israel, Be ye on one side, and I and
Jonathan my son will be on the other side. And the people said unto
Saul, Do what seemeth good unto thee.

14:41 Therefore Saul said unto the LORD God of Israel, Give a perfect
lot.

And Saul and Jonathan were taken: but the people escaped.

14:42 And Saul said, Cast lots between me and Jonathan my son. And
Jonathan was taken.

14:43 Then Saul said to Jonathan, Tell me what thou hast done. And
Jonathan told him, and said, I did but taste a little honey with the
end of the rod that was in mine hand, and, lo, I must die.

14:44 And Saul answered, God do so and more also: for thou shalt
surely die, Jonathan.

14:45 And the people said unto Saul, Shall Jonathan die, who hath
wrought this great salvation in Israel? God forbid: as the LORD
liveth, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground; for
he hath wrought with God this day. So the people rescued Jonathan,
that he died not.

14:46 Then Saul went up from following the Philistines: and the
Philistines went to their own place.

14:47 So Saul took the kingdom over Israel, and fought against all his
enemies on every side, against Moab, and against the children of
Ammon, and against Edom, and against the kings of Zobah, and against
the Philistines: and whithersoever he turned himself, he vexed them.

14:48 And he gathered an host, and smote the Amalekites, and delivered
Israel out of the hands of them that spoiled them.

14:49 Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan, and Ishui, and Melchishua:
and the names of his two daughters were these; the name of the
firstborn Merab, and the name of the younger Michal: 14:50 And the
name of Saul’s wife was Ahinoam, the daughter of Ahimaaz: and the name
of the captain of his host was Abner, the son of Ner, Saul’s uncle.

14:51 And Kish was the father of Saul; and Ner the father of Abner was
the son of Abiel.

14:52 And there was sore war against the Philistines all the days of
Saul: and when Saul saw any strong man, or any valiant man, he took
him unto him.

15:1 Samuel also said unto Saul, The LORD sent me to anoint thee to be
king over his people, over Israel: now therefore hearken thou unto the
voice of the words of the LORD.

15:2 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, I remember that which Amalek did to
Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way, when he came up from
Egypt.

15:3 Now go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have,
and spare them not; but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling,
ox and sheep, camel and ass.

15:4 And Saul gathered the people together, and numbered them in
Telaim, two hundred thousand footmen, and ten thousand men of Judah.

15:5 And Saul came to a city of Amalek, and laid wait in the valley.

15:6 And Saul said unto the Kenites, Go, depart, get you down from
among the Amalekites, lest I destroy you with them: for ye shewed
kindness to all the children of Israel, when they came up out of
Egypt. So the Kenites departed from among the Amalekites.

15:7 And Saul smote the Amalekites from Havilah until thou comest to
Shur, that is over against Egypt.

15:8 And he took Agag the king of the Amalekites alive, and utterly
destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword.

15:9 But Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best of the sheep,
and of the oxen, and of the fatlings, and the lambs, and all that was
good, and would not utterly destroy them: but every thing that was
vile and refuse, that they destroyed utterly.

15:10 Then came the word of the LORD unto Samuel, saying, 15:11 It
repenteth me that I have set up Saul to be king: for he is turned back
from following me, and hath not performed my commandments. And it
grieved Samuel; and he cried unto the LORD all night.

15:12 And when Samuel rose early to meet Saul in the morning, it was
told Samuel, saying, Saul came to Carmel, and, behold, he set him up a
place, and is gone about, and passed on, and gone down to Gilgal.

15:13 And Samuel came to Saul: and Saul said unto him, Blessed be thou
of the LORD: I have performed the commandment of the LORD.

15:14 And Samuel said, What meaneth then this bleating of the sheep in
mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear? 15:15 And Saul
said, They have brought them from the Amalekites: for the people
spared the best of the sheep and of the oxen, to sacrifice unto the
LORD thy God; and the rest we have utterly destroyed.

15:16 Then Samuel said unto Saul, Stay, and I will tell thee what the
LORD hath said to me this night. And he said unto him, Say on.

15:17 And Samuel said, When thou wast little in thine own sight, wast
thou not made the head of the tribes of Israel, and the LORD anointed
thee king over Israel? 15:18 And the LORD sent thee on a journey, and
said, Go and utterly destroy the sinners the Amalekites, and fight
against them until they be consumed.

15:19 Wherefore then didst thou not obey the voice of the LORD, but
didst fly upon the spoil, and didst evil in the sight of the LORD?
15:20 And Saul said unto Samuel, Yea, I have obeyed the voice of the
LORD, and have gone the way which the LORD sent me, and have brought
Agag the king of Amalek, and have utterly destroyed the Amalekites.

15:21 But the people took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of
the things which should have been utterly destroyed, to sacrifice unto
the LORD thy God in Gilgal.

15:22 And Samuel said, Hath the LORD as great delight in burnt
offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the LORD? Behold,
to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams.

15:23 For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is
as iniquity and idolatry. Because thou hast rejected the word of the
LORD, he hath also rejected thee from being king.

15:24 And Saul said unto Samuel, I have sinned: for I have
transgressed the commandment of the LORD, and thy words: because I
feared the people, and obeyed their voice.

15:25 Now therefore, I pray thee, pardon my sin, and turn again with
me, that I may worship the LORD.

15:26 And Samuel said unto Saul, I will not return with thee: for thou
hast rejected the word of the LORD, and the LORD hath rejected thee
from being king over Israel.

15:27 And as Samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upon the
skirt of his mantle, and it rent.

15:28 And Samuel said unto him, The LORD hath rent the kingdom of
Israel from thee this day, and hath given it to a neighbour of thine,
that is better than thou.

15:29 And also the Strength of Israel will not lie nor repent: for he
is not a man, that he should repent.

15:30 Then he said, I have sinned: yet honour me now, I pray thee,
before the elders of my people, and before Israel, and turn again with
me, that I may worship the LORD thy God.

15:31 So Samuel turned again after Saul; and Saul worshipped the LORD.

15:32 Then said Samuel, Bring ye hither to me Agag the king of the
Amalekites. And Agag came unto him delicately. And Agag said, Surely
the bitterness of death is past.

15:33 And Samuel said, As the sword hath made women childless, so
shall thy mother be childless among women. And Samuel hewed Agag in
pieces before the LORD in Gilgal.

15:34 Then Samuel went to Ramah; and Saul went up to his house to
Gibeah of Saul.

15:35 And Samuel came no more to see Saul until the day of his death:
nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul: and the LORD repented that he
had made Saul king over Israel.

16:1 And the LORD said unto Samuel, How long wilt thou mourn for Saul,
seeing I have rejected him from reigning over Israel? fill thine horn
with oil, and go, I will send thee to Jesse the Bethlehemite: for I
have provided me a king among his sons.

16:2 And Samuel said, How can I go? if Saul hear it, he will kill me.
And the LORD said, Take an heifer with thee, and say, I am come to
sacrifice to the LORD.

16:3 And call Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will shew thee what thou
shalt do: and thou shalt anoint unto me him whom I name unto thee.

16:4 And Samuel did that which the LORD spake, and came to Bethlehem.
And the elders of the town trembled at his coming, and said, Comest
thou peaceably? 16:5 And he said, Peaceably: I am come to sacrifice
unto the LORD: sanctify yourselves, and come with me to the sacrifice.
And he sanctified Jesse and his sons, and called them to the
sacrifice.

16:6 And it came to pass, when they were come, that he looked on
Eliab, and said, Surely the LORD’s anointed is before him.

16:7 But the LORD said unto Samuel, Look not on his countenance, or on
the height of his stature; because I have refused him: for the LORD
seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but
the LORD looketh on the heart.

16:8 Then Jesse called Abinadab, and made him pass before Samuel. And
he said, Neither hath the LORD chosen this.

16:9 Then Jesse made Shammah to pass by. And he said, Neither hath the
LORD chosen this.

16:10 Again, Jesse made seven of his sons to pass before Samuel. And
Samuel said unto Jesse, The LORD hath not chosen these.

16:11 And Samuel said unto Jesse, Are here all thy children? And he
said, There remaineth yet the youngest, and, behold, he keepeth the
sheep. And Samuel said unto Jesse, Send and fetch him: for we will not
sit down till he come hither.

16:12 And he sent, and brought him in. Now he was ruddy, and withal of
a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to. And the LORD said,
Arise, anoint him: for this is he.

16:13 Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst
of his brethren: and the Spirit of the LORD came upon David from that
day forward. So Samuel rose up, and went to Ramah.

16:14 But the Spirit of the LORD departed from Saul, and an evil
spirit from the LORD troubled him.

16:15 And Saul’s servants said unto him, Behold now, an evil spirit
from God troubleth thee.

16:16 Let our lord now command thy servants, which are before thee, to
seek out a man, who is a cunning player on an harp: and it shall come
to pass, when the evil spirit from God is upon thee, that he shall
play with his hand, and thou shalt be well.

16:17 And Saul said unto his servants, Provide me now a man that can
play well, and bring him to me.

16:18 Then answered one of the servants, and said, Behold, I have seen
a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite, that is cunning in playing, and a
mighty valiant man, and a man of war, and prudent in matters, and a
comely person, and the LORD is with him.

16:19 Wherefore Saul sent messengers unto Jesse, and said, Send me
David thy son, which is with the sheep.

16:20 And Jesse took an ass laden with bread, and a bottle of wine,
and a kid, and sent them by David his son unto Saul.

16:21 And David came to Saul, and stood before him: and he loved him
greatly; and he became his armourbearer.

16:22 And Saul sent to Jesse, saying, Let David, I pray thee, stand
before me; for he hath found favour in my sight.

16:23 And it came to pass, when the evil spirit from God was upon
Saul, that David took an harp, and played with his hand: so Saul was
refreshed, and was well, and the evil spirit departed from him.

17:1 Now the Philistines gathered together their armies to battle, and
were gathered together at Shochoh, which belongeth to Judah, and
pitched between Shochoh and Azekah, in Ephesdammim.

17:2 And Saul and the men of Israel were gathered together, and
pitched by the valley of Elah, and set the battle in array against the
Philistines.

17:3 And the Philistines stood on a mountain on the one side, and
Israel stood on a mountain on the other side: and there was a valley
between them.

17:4 And there went out a champion out of the camp of the Philistines,
named Goliath, of Gath, whose height was six cubits and a span.

17:5 And he had an helmet of brass upon his head, and he was armed
with a coat of mail; and the weight of the coat was five thousand
shekels of brass.

17:6 And he had greaves of brass upon his legs, and a target of brass
between his shoulders.

17:7 And the staff of his spear was like a weaver’s beam; and his
spear’s head weighed six hundred shekels of iron: and one bearing a
shield went before him.

17:8 And he stood and cried unto the armies of Israel, and said unto
them, Why are ye come out to set your battle in array? am not I a
Philistine, and ye servants to Saul? choose you a man for you, and let
him come down to me.

17:9 If he be able to fight with me, and to kill me, then will we be
your servants: but if I prevail against him, and kill him, then shall
ye be our servants, and serve us.

17:10 And the Philistine said, I defy the armies of Israel this day;
give me a man, that we may fight together.

17:11 When Saul and all Israel heard those words of the Philistine,
they were dismayed, and greatly afraid.

17:12 Now David was the son of that Ephrathite of Bethlehemjudah,
whose name was Jesse; and he had eight sons: and the man went among
men for an old man in the days of Saul.

17:13 And the three eldest sons of Jesse went and followed Saul to the
battle: and the names of his three sons that went to the battle were
Eliab the firstborn, and next unto him Abinadab, and the third
Shammah.

17:14 And David was the youngest: and the three eldest followed Saul.

17:15 But David went and returned from Saul to feed his father’s sheep
at Bethlehem.

17:16 And the Philistine drew near morning and evening, and presented
himself forty days.

17:17 And Jesse said unto David his son, Take now for thy brethren an
ephah of this parched corn, and these ten loaves, and run to the camp
of thy brethren; 17:18 And carry these ten cheeses unto the captain of
their thousand, and look how thy brethren fare, and take their pledge.

17:19 Now Saul, and they, and all the men of Israel, were in the
valley of Elah, fighting with the Philistines.

17:20 And David rose up early in the morning, and left the sheep with
a keeper, and took, and went, as Jesse had commanded him; and he came
to the trench, as the host was going forth to the fight, and shouted
for the battle.

17:21 For Israel and the Philistines had put the battle in array, army
against army.

17:22 And David left his carriage in the hand of the keeper of the
carriage, and ran into the army, and came and saluted his brethren.

17:23 And as he talked with them, behold, there came up the champion,
the Philistine of Gath, Goliath by name, out of the armies of the
Philistines, and spake according to the same words: and David heard
them.

17:24 And all the men of Israel, when they saw the man, fled from him,
and were sore afraid.

17:25 And the men of Israel said, Have ye seen this man that is come
up? surely to defy Israel is he come up: and it shall be, that the
man who killeth him, the king will enrich him with great riches, and
will give him his daughter, and make his father’s house free in
Israel.

17:26 And David spake to the men that stood by him, saying, What shall
be done to the man that killeth this Philistine, and taketh away the
reproach from Israel? for who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that
he should defy the armies of the living God? 17:27 And the people
answered him after this manner, saying, So shall it be done to the man
that killeth him.

17:28 And Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spake unto the men;
and Eliab’s anger was kindled against David, and he said, Why camest
thou down hither? and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the
wilderness? I know thy pride, and the naughtiness of thine heart; for
thou art come down that thou mightest see the battle.

17:29 And David said, What have I now done? Is there not a cause?
17:30 And he turned from him toward another, and spake after the same
manner: and the people answered him again after the former manner.

17:31 And when the words were heard which David spake, they rehearsed
them before Saul: and he sent for him.

17:32 And David said to Saul, Let no man’s heart fail because of him;
thy servant will go and fight with this Philistine.

17:33 And Saul said to David, Thou art not able to go against this
Philistine to fight with him: for thou art but a youth, and he a man
of war from his youth.

17:34 And David said unto Saul, Thy servant kept his father’s sheep,
and there came a lion, and a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock:
17:35 And I went out after him, and smote him, and delivered it out of
his mouth: and when he arose against me, I caught him by his beard,
and smote him, and slew him.

17:36 Thy servant slew both the lion and the bear: and this
uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he hath
defied the armies of the living God.

17:37 David said moreover, The LORD that delivered me out of the paw
of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of
the hand of this Philistine. And Saul said unto David, Go, and the
LORD be with thee.

17:38 And Saul armed David with his armour, and he put an helmet of
brass upon his head; also he armed him with a coat of mail.

17:39 And David girded his sword upon his armour, and he assayed to
go; for he had not proved it. And David said unto Saul, I cannot go
with these; for I have not proved them. And David put them off him.

17:40 And he took his staff in his hand, and chose him five smooth
stones out of the brook, and put them in a shepherd’s bag which he
had, even in a scrip; and his sling was in his hand: and he drew near
to the Philistine.

17:41 And the Philistine came on and drew near unto David; and the man
that bare the shield went before him.

17:42 And when the Philistine looked about, and saw David, he
disdained him: for he was but a youth, and ruddy, and of a fair
countenance.

17:43 And the Philistine said unto David, Am I a dog, that thou comest
to me with staves? And the Philistine cursed David by his gods.

17:44 And the Philistine said to David, Come to me, and I will give
thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field.

17:45 Then said David to the Philistine, Thou comest to me with a
sword, and with a spear, and with a shield: but I come to thee in the
name of the LORD of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou
hast defied.

17:46 This day will the LORD deliver thee into mine hand; and I will
smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and I will give the
carcases of the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the
air, and to the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know
that there is a God in Israel.

17:47 And all this assembly shall know that the LORD saveth not with
sword and spear: for the battle is the LORD’s, and he will give you
into our hands.

17:48 And it came to pass, when the Philistine arose, and came, and
drew nigh to meet David, that David hastened, and ran toward the army
to meet the Philistine.

17:49 And David put his hand in his bag, and took thence a stone, and
slang it, and smote the Philistine in his forehead, that the stone
sunk into his forehead; and he fell upon his face to the earth.

17:50 So David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a
stone, and smote the Philistine, and slew him; but there was no sword
in the hand of David.

17:51 Therefore David ran, and stood upon the Philistine, and took his
sword, and drew it out of the sheath thereof, and slew him, and cut
off his head therewith. And when the Philistines saw their champion
was dead, they fled.

17:52 And the men of Israel and of Judah arose, and shouted, and
pursued the Philistines, until thou come to the valley, and to the
gates of Ekron.

And the wounded of the Philistines fell down by the way to Shaaraim,
even unto Gath, and unto Ekron.

17:53 And the children of Israel returned from chasing after the
Philistines, and they spoiled their tents.

17:54 And David took the head of the Philistine, and brought it to
Jerusalem; but he put his armour in his tent.

17:55 And when Saul saw David go forth against the Philistine, he said
unto Abner, the captain of the host, Abner, whose son is this youth?
And Abner said, As thy soul liveth, O king, I cannot tell.

17:56 And the king said, Enquire thou whose son the stripling is.

17:57 And as David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine,
Abner took him, and brought him before Saul with the head of the
Philistine in his hand.

17:58 And Saul said to him, Whose son art thou, thou young man? And
David answered, I am the son of thy servant Jesse the Bethlehemite.

18:1 And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking unto
Saul, that the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and
Jonathan loved him as his own soul.

18:2 And Saul took him that day, and would let him go no more home to
his father’s house.

18:3 Then Jonathan and David made a covenant, because he loved him as
his own soul.

18:4 And Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him, and
gave it to David, and his garments, even to his sword, and to his bow,
and to his girdle.

18:5 And David went out whithersoever Saul sent him, and behaved
himself wisely: and Saul set him over the men of war, and he was
accepted in the sight of all the people, and also in the sight of
Saul’s servants.

18:6 And it came to pass as they came, when David was returned from
the slaughter of the Philistine, that the women came out of all cities
of Israel, singing and dancing, to meet king Saul, with tabrets, with
joy, and with instruments of musick.

18:7 And the women answered one another as they played, and said, Saul
hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands.

18:8 And Saul was very wroth, and the saying displeased him; and he
said, They have ascribed unto David ten thousands, and to me they have
ascribed but thousands: and what can he have more but the kingdom?
18:9 And Saul eyed David from that day and forward.

18:10 And it came to pass on the morrow, that the evil spirit from God
came upon Saul, and he prophesied in the midst of the house: and David
played with his hand, as at other times: and there was a javelin in
Saul’s hand.

18:11 And Saul cast the javelin; for he said, I will smite David even
to the wall with it. And David avoided out of his presence twice.

18:12 And Saul was afraid of David, because the LORD was with him, and
was departed from Saul.

18:13 Therefore Saul removed him from him, and made him his captain
over a thousand; and he went out and came in before the people.

18:14 And David behaved himself wisely in all his ways; and the LORD
was with him.

18:15 Wherefore when Saul saw that he behaved himself very wisely, he
was afraid of him.

18:16 But all Israel and Judah loved David, because he went out and
came in before them.

18:17 And Saul said to David, Behold my elder daughter Merab, her will
I give thee to wife: only be thou valiant for me, and fight the LORD’s
battles.

For Saul said, Let not mine hand be upon him, but let the hand of the
Philistines be upon him.

18:18 And David said unto Saul, Who am I? and what is my life, or my
father’s family in Israel, that I should be son in law to the king?
18:19 But it came to pass at the time when Merab Saul’s daughter
should have been given to David, that she was given unto Adriel the
Meholathite to wife.

18:20 And Michal Saul’s daughter loved David: and they told Saul, and
the thing pleased him.

18:21 And Saul said, I will give him her, that she may be a snare to
him, and that the hand of the Philistines may be against him.
Wherefore Saul said to David, Thou shalt this day be my son in law in
the one of the twain.

18:22 And Saul commanded his servants, saying, Commune with David
secretly, and say, Behold, the king hath delight in thee, and all his
servants love thee: now therefore be the king’s son in law.

18:23 And Saul’s servants spake those words in the ears of David. And
David said, Seemeth it to you a light thing to be a king’s son in law,
seeing that I am a poor man, and lightly esteemed? 18:24 And the
servants of Saul told him, saying, On this manner spake David.

18:25 And Saul said, Thus shall ye say to David, The king desireth not
any dowry, but an hundred foreskins of the Philistines, to be avenged
of the king’s enemies. But Saul thought to make David fall by the hand
of the Philistines.

18:26 And when his servants told David these words, it pleased David
well to be the king’s son in law: and the days were not expired.

18:27 Wherefore David arose and went, he and his men, and slew of the
Philistines two hundred men; and David brought their foreskins, and
they gave them in full tale to the king, that he might be the king’s
son in law. And Saul gave him Michal his daughter to wife.

18:28 And Saul saw and knew that the LORD was with David, and that
Michal Saul’s daughter loved him.

18:29 And Saul was yet the more afraid of David; and Saul became
David’s enemy continually.

18:30 Then the princes of the Philistines went forth: and it came to
pass, after they went forth, that David behaved himself more wisely
than all the servants of Saul; so that his name was much set by.

19:1 And Saul spake to Jonathan his son, and to all his servants, that
they should kill David.

19:2 But Jonathan Saul’s son delighted much in David: and Jonathan
told David, saying, Saul my father seeketh to kill thee: now
therefore, I pray thee, take heed to thyself until the morning, and
abide in a secret place, and hide thyself: 19:3 And I will go out and
stand beside my father in the field where thou art, and I will commune
with my father of thee; and what I see, that I will tell thee.

19:4 And Jonathan spake good of David unto Saul his father, and said
unto him, Let not the king sin against his servant, against David;
because he hath not sinned against thee, and because his works have
been to thee-ward very good: 19:5 For he did put his life in his hand,
and slew the Philistine, and the LORD wrought a great salvation for
all Israel: thou sawest it, and didst rejoice: wherefore then wilt
thou sin against innocent blood, to slay David without a cause? 19:6
And Saul hearkened unto the voice of Jonathan: and Saul sware, As the
LORD liveth, he shall not be slain.

19:7 And Jonathan called David, and Jonathan shewed him all those
things.

And Jonathan brought David to Saul, and he was in his presence, as in
times past.

19:8 And there was war again: and David went out, and fought with the
Philistines, and slew them with a great slaughter; and they fled from
him.

19:9 And the evil spirit from the LORD was upon Saul, as he sat in his
house with his javelin in his hand: and David played with his hand.

19:10 And Saul sought to smite David even to the wall with the
javelin: but he slipped away out of Saul’s presence, and he smote the
javelin into the wall: and David fled, and escaped that night.

19:11 Saul also sent messengers unto David’s house, to watch him, and
to slay him in the morning: and Michal David’s wife told him, saying,
If thou save not thy life to night, to morrow thou shalt be slain.

19:12 So Michal let David down through a window: and he went, and
fled, and escaped.

19:13 And Michal took an image, and laid it in the bed, and put a
pillow of goats’ hair for his bolster, and covered it with a cloth.

19:14 And when Saul sent messengers to take David, she said, He is
sick.

19:15 And Saul sent the messengers again to see David, saying, Bring
him up to me in the bed, that I may slay him.

19:16 And when the messengers were come in, behold, there was an image
in the bed, with a pillow of goats’ hair for his bolster.

19:17 And Saul said unto Michal, Why hast thou deceived me so, and
sent away mine enemy, that he is escaped? And Michal answered Saul, He
said unto me, Let me go; why should I kill thee? 19:18 So David fled,
and escaped, and came to Samuel to Ramah, and told him all that Saul
had done to him. And he and Samuel went and dwelt in Naioth.

19:19 And it was told Saul, saying, Behold, David is at Naioth in
Ramah.

19:20 And Saul sent messengers to take David: and when they saw the
company of the prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as appointed
over them, the Spirit of God was upon the messengers of Saul, and they
also prophesied.

19:21 And when it was told Saul, he sent other messengers, and they
prophesied likewise. And Saul sent messengers again the third time,
and they prophesied also.

19:22 Then went he also to Ramah, and came to a great well that is in
Sechu: and he asked and said, Where are Samuel and David? And one
said, Behold, they be at Naioth in Ramah.

19:23 And he went thither to Naioth in Ramah: and the Spirit of God
was upon him also, and he went on, and prophesied, until he came to
Naioth in Ramah.

19:24 And he stripped off his clothes also, and prophesied before
Samuel in like manner, and lay down naked all that day and all that
night. Wherefore they say, Is Saul also among the prophets? 20:1 And
David fled from Naioth in Ramah, and came and said before Jonathan,
What have I done? what is mine iniquity? and what is my sin before thy
father, that he seeketh my life? 20:2 And he said unto him, God
forbid; thou shalt not die: behold, my father will do nothing either
great or small, but that he will shew it me: and why should my father
hide this thing from me? it is not so.

20:3 And David sware moreover, and said, Thy father certainly knoweth
that I have found grace in thine eyes; and he saith, Let not Jonathan
know this, lest he be grieved: but truly as the LORD liveth, and as
thy soul liveth, there is but a step between me and death.

20:4 Then said Jonathan unto David, Whatsoever thy soul desireth, I
will even do it for thee.

20:5 And David said unto Jonathan, Behold, to morrow is the new moon,
and I should not fail to sit with the king at meat: but let me go,
that I may hide myself in the field unto the third day at even.

20:6 If thy father at all miss me, then say, David earnestly asked
leave of me that he might run to Bethlehem his city: for there is a
yearly sacrifice there for all the family.

20:7 If he say thus, It is well; thy servant shall have peace: but if
he be very wroth, then be sure that evil is determined by him.

20:8 Therefore thou shalt deal kindly with thy servant; for thou hast
brought thy servant into a covenant of the LORD with thee:
notwithstanding, if there be in me iniquity, slay me thyself; for why
shouldest thou bring me to thy father? 20:9 And Jonathan said, Far be
it from thee: for if I knew certainly that evil were determined by my
father to come upon thee, then would not I tell it thee? 20:10 Then
said David to Jonathan, Who shall tell me? or what if thy father
answer thee roughly? 20:11 And Jonathan said unto David, Come, and
let us go out into the field. And they went out both of them into the
field.

20:12 And Jonathan said unto David, O LORD God of Israel, when I have
sounded my father about to morrow any time, or the third day, and,
behold, if there be good toward David, and I then send not unto thee,
and shew it thee; 20:13 The LORD do so and much more to Jonathan: but
if it please my father to do thee evil, then I will shew it thee, and
send thee away, that thou mayest go in peace: and the LORD be with
thee, as he hath been with my father.

20:14 And thou shalt not only while yet I live shew me the kindness of
the LORD, that I die not: 20:15 But also thou shalt not cut off thy
kindness from my house for ever: no, not when the LORD hath cut off
the enemies of David every one from the face of the earth.

20:16 So Jonathan made a covenant with the house of David, saying, Let
the LORD even require it at the hand of David’s enemies.

20:17 And Jonathan caused David to swear again, because he loved him:
for he loved him as he loved his own soul.

20:18 Then Jonathan said to David, To morrow is the new moon: and thou
shalt be missed, because thy seat will be empty.

20:19 And when thou hast stayed three days, then thou shalt go down
quickly, and come to the place where thou didst hide thyself when the
business was in hand, and shalt remain by the stone Ezel.

20:20 And I will shoot three arrows on the side thereof, as though I
shot at a mark.

20:21 And, behold, I will send a lad, saying, Go, find out the arrows.
If I expressly say unto the lad, Behold, the arrows are on this side
of thee, take them; then come thou: for there is peace to thee, and no
hurt; as the LORD liveth.

20:22 But if I say thus unto the young man, Behold, the arrows are
beyond thee; go thy way: for the LORD hath sent thee away.

20:23 And as touching the matter which thou and I have spoken of,
behold, the LORD be between thee and me for ever.

20:24 So David hid himself in the field: and when the new moon was
come, the king sat him down to eat meat.

20:25 And the king sat upon his seat, as at other times, even upon a
seat by the wall: and Jonathan arose, and Abner sat by Saul’s side,
and David’s place was empty.

20:26 Nevertheless Saul spake not any thing that day: for he thought,
Something hath befallen him, he is not clean; surely he is not clean.

20:27 And it came to pass on the morrow, which was the second day of
the month, that David’s place was empty: and Saul said unto Jonathan
his son, Wherefore cometh not the son of Jesse to meat, neither
yesterday, nor to day? 20:28 And Jonathan answered Saul, David
earnestly asked leave of me to go to Bethlehem: 20:29 And he said, Let
me go, I pray thee; for our family hath a sacrifice in the city; and
my brother, he hath commanded me to be there: and now, if I have found
favour in thine eyes, let me get away, I pray thee, and see my
brethren. Therefore he cometh not unto the king’s table.

20:30 Then Saul’s anger was kindled against Jonathan, and he said unto
him, Thou son of the perverse rebellious woman, do not I know that
thou hast chosen the son of Jesse to thine own confusion, and unto the
confusion of thy mother’s nakedness? 20:31 For as long as the son of
Jesse liveth upon the ground, thou shalt not be established, nor thy
kingdom. Wherefore now send and fetch him unto me, for he shall surely
die.

20:32 And Jonathan answered Saul his father, and said unto him,
Wherefore shall he be slain? what hath he done? 20:33 And Saul cast a
javelin at him to smite him: whereby Jonathan knew that it was
determined of his father to slay David.

20:34 So Jonathan arose from the table in fierce anger, and did eat no
meat the second day of the month: for he was grieved for David,
because his father had done him shame.

20:35 And it came to pass in the morning, that Jonathan went out into
the field at the time appointed with David, and a little lad with him.

20:36 And he said unto his lad, Run, find out now the arrows which I
shoot. And as the lad ran, he shot an arrow beyond him.

20:37 And when the lad was come to the place of the arrow which
Jonathan had shot, Jonathan cried after the lad, and said, Is not the
arrow beyond thee? 20:38 And Jonathan cried after the lad, Make
speed, haste, stay not. And Jonathan’s lad gathered up the arrows, and
came to his master.

20:39 But the lad knew not any thing: only Jonathan and David knew the
matter.

20:40 And Jonathan gave his artillery unto his lad, and said unto him,
Go, carry them to the city.

20:41 And as soon as the lad was gone, David arose out of a place
toward the south, and fell on his face to the ground, and bowed
himself three times: and they kissed one another, and wept one with
another, until David exceeded.

20:42 And Jonathan said to David, Go in peace, forasmuch as we have
sworn both of us in the name of the LORD, saying, The LORD be between
me and thee, and between my seed and thy seed for ever. And he arose
and departed: and Jonathan went into the city.

21:1 Then came David to Nob to Ahimelech the priest: and Ahimelech was
afraid at the meeting of David, and said unto him, Why art thou alone,
and no man with thee? 21:2 And David said unto Ahimelech the priest,
The king hath commanded me a business, and hath said unto me, Let no
man know any thing of the business whereabout I send thee, and what I
have commanded thee: and I have appointed my servants to such and such
a place.

21:3 Now therefore what is under thine hand? give me five loaves of
bread in mine hand, or what there is present.

21:4 And the priest answered David, and said, There is no common bread
under mine hand, but there is hallowed bread; if the young men have
kept themselves at least from women.

21:5 And David answered the priest, and said unto him, Of a truth
women have been kept from us about these three days, since I came out,
and the vessels of the young men are holy, and the bread is in a
manner common, yea, though it were sanctified this day in the vessel.

21:6 So the priest gave him hallowed bread: for there was no bread
there but the shewbread, that was taken from before the LORD, to put
hot bread in the day when it was taken away.

21:7 Now a certain man of the servants of Saul was there that day,
detained before the LORD; and his name was Doeg, an Edomite, the
chiefest of the herdmen that belonged to Saul.

21:8 And David said unto Ahimelech, And is there not here under thine
hand spear or sword? for I have neither brought my sword nor my
weapons with me, because the king’s business required haste.

21:9 And the priest said, The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom
thou slewest in the valley of Elah, behold, it is here wrapped in a
cloth behind the ephod: if thou wilt take that, take it: for there is
no other save that here. And David said, There is none like that; give
it me.

21:10 And David arose and fled that day for fear of Saul, and went to
Achish the king of Gath.

21:11 And the servants of Achish said unto him, Is not this David the
king of the land? did they not sing one to another of him in dances,
saying, Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands?
21:12 And David laid up these words in his heart, and was sore afraid
of Achish the king of Gath.

21:13 And he changed his behaviour before them, and feigned himself
mad in their hands, and scrabbled on the doors of the gate, and let
his spittle fall down upon his beard.

21:14 Then said Achish unto his servants, Lo, ye see the man is mad:
wherefore then have ye brought him to me? 21:15 Have I need of mad
men, that ye have brought this fellow to play the mad man in my
presence? shall this fellow come into my house? 22:1 David therefore
departed thence, and escaped to the cave Adullam: and when his
brethren and all his father’s house heard it, they went down thither
to him.

22:2 And every one that was in distress, and every one that was in
debt, and every one that was discontented, gathered themselves unto
him; and he became a captain over them: and there were with him about
four hundred men.

22:3 And David went thence to Mizpeh of Moab: and he said unto the
king of Moab, Let my father and my mother, I pray thee, come forth,
and be with you, till I know what God will do for me.

22:4 And he brought them before the king of Moab: and they dwelt with
him all the while that David was in the hold.

22:5 And the prophet Gad said unto David, Abide not in the hold;
depart, and get thee into the land of Judah. Then David departed, and
came into the forest of Hareth.

22:6 When Saul heard that David was discovered, and the men that were
with him, (now Saul abode in Gibeah under a tree in Ramah, having his
spear in his hand, and all his servants were standing about him;) 22:7
Then Saul said unto his servants that stood about him, Hear now, ye
Benjamites; will the son of Jesse give every one of you fields and
vineyards, and make you all captains of thousands, and captains of
hundreds; 22:8 That all of you have conspired against me, and there is
none that sheweth me that my son hath made a league with the son of
Jesse, and there is none of you that is sorry for me, or sheweth unto
me that my son hath stirred up my servant against me, to lie in wait,
as at this day? 22:9 Then answered Doeg the Edomite, which was set
over the servants of Saul, and said, I saw the son of Jesse coming to
Nob, to Ahimelech the son of Ahitub.

22:10 And he enquired of the LORD for him, and gave him victuals, and
gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine.

22:11 Then the king sent to call Ahimelech the priest, the son of
Ahitub, and all his father’s house, the priests that were in Nob: and
they came all of them to the king.

22:12 And Saul said, Hear now, thou son of Ahitub. And he answered,
Here I am, my lord.

22:13 And Saul said unto him, Why have ye conspired against me, thou
and the son of Jesse, in that thou hast given him bread, and a sword,
and hast enquired of God for him, that he should rise against me, to
lie in wait, as at this day? 22:14 Then Ahimelech answered the king,
and said, And who is so faithful among all thy servants as David,
which is the king’s son in law, and goeth at thy bidding, and is
honourable in thine house? 22:15 Did I then begin to enquire of God
for him? be it far from me: let not the king impute any thing unto his
servant, nor to all the house of my father: for thy servant knew
nothing of all this, less or more.

22:16 And the king said, Thou shalt surely die, Ahimelech, thou, and
all thy father’s house.

22:17 And the king said unto the footmen that stood about him, Turn,
and slay the priests of the LORD: because their hand also is with
David, and because they knew when he fled, and did not shew it to me.
But the servants of the king would not put forth their hand to fall
upon the priests of the LORD.

22:18 And the king said to Doeg, Turn thou, and fall upon the priests.
And Doeg the Edomite turned, and he fell upon the priests, and slew on
that day fourscore and five persons that did wear a linen ephod.

22:19 And Nob, the city of the priests, smote he with the edge of the
sword, both men and women, children and sucklings, and oxen, and
asses, and sheep, with the edge of the sword.

22:20 And one of the sons of Ahimelech the son of Ahitub, named
Abiathar, escaped, and fled after David.

22:21 And Abiathar shewed David that Saul had slain the LORD’s
priests.

22:22 And David said unto Abiathar, I knew it that day, when Doeg the
Edomite was there, that he would surely tell Saul: I have occasioned
the death of all the persons of thy father’s house.

22:23 Abide thou with me, fear not: for he that seeketh my life
seeketh thy life: but with me thou shalt be in safeguard.

23:1 Then they told David, saying, Behold, the Philistines fight
against Keilah, and they rob the threshingfloors.

23:2 Therefore David enquired of the LORD, saying, Shall I go and
smite these Philistines? And the LORD said unto David, Go, and smite
the Philistines, and save Keilah.

23:3 And David’s men said unto him, Behold, we be afraid here in
Judah: how much more then if we come to Keilah against the armies of
the Philistines? 23:4 Then David enquired of the LORD yet again. And
the LORD answered him and said, Arise, go down to Keilah; for I will
deliver the Philistines into thine hand.

23:5 So David and his men went to Keilah, and fought with the
Philistines, and brought away their cattle, and smote them with a
great slaughter. So David saved the inhabitants of Keilah.

23:6 And it came to pass, when Abiathar the son of Ahimelech fled to
David to Keilah, that he came down with an ephod in his hand.

23:7 And it was told Saul that David was come to Keilah. And Saul
said, God hath delivered him into mine hand; for he is shut in, by
entering into a town that hath gates and bars.

23:8 And Saul called all the people together to war, to go down to
Keilah, to besiege David and his men.

23:9 And David knew that Saul secretly practised mischief against him;
and he said to Abiathar the priest, Bring hither the ephod.

23:10 Then said David, O LORD God of Israel, thy servant hath
certainly heard that Saul seeketh to come to Keilah, to destroy the
city for my sake.

23:11 Will the men of Keilah deliver me up into his hand? will Saul
come down, as thy servant hath heard? O LORD God of Israel, I beseech
thee, tell thy servant. And the LORD said, He will come down.

23:12 Then said David, Will the men of Keilah deliver me and my men
into the hand of Saul? And the LORD said, They will deliver thee up.

23:13 Then David and his men, which were about six hundred, arose and
departed out of Keilah, and went whithersoever they could go. And it
was told Saul that David was escaped from Keilah; and he forbare to go
forth.

23:14 And David abode in the wilderness in strong holds, and remained
in a mountain in the wilderness of Ziph. And Saul sought him every
day, but God delivered him not into his hand.

23:15 And David saw that Saul was come out to seek his life: and David
was in the wilderness of Ziph in a wood.

23:16 And Jonathan Saul’s son arose, and went to David into the wood,
and strengthened his hand in God.

23:17 And he said unto him, Fear not: for the hand of Saul my father
shall not find thee; and thou shalt be king over Israel, and I shall
be next unto thee; and that also Saul my father knoweth.

23:18 And they two made a covenant before the LORD: and David abode in
the wood, and Jonathan went to his house.

23:19 Then came up the Ziphites to Saul to Gibeah, saying, Doth not
David hide himself with us in strong holds in the wood, in the hill of
Hachilah, which is on the south of Jeshimon? 23:20 Now therefore, O
king, come down according to all the desire of thy soul to come down;
and our part shall be to deliver him into the king’s hand.

23:21 And Saul said, Blessed be ye of the LORD; for ye have compassion
on me.

23:22 Go, I pray you, prepare yet, and know and see his place where
his haunt is, and who hath seen him there: for it is told me that he
dealeth very subtilly.

23:23 See therefore, and take knowledge of all the lurking places
where he hideth himself, and come ye again to me with the certainty,
and I will go with you: and it shall come to pass, if he be in the
land, that I will search him out throughout all the thousands of
Judah.

23:24 And they arose, and went to Ziph before Saul: but David and his
men were in the wilderness of Maon, in the plain on the south of
Jeshimon.

23:25 Saul also and his men went to seek him. And they told David;
wherefore he came down into a rock, and abode in the wilderness of
Maon. And when Saul heard that, he pursued after David in the
wilderness of Maon.

23:26 And Saul went on this side of the mountain, and David and his
men on that side of the mountain: and David made haste to get away for
fear of Saul; for Saul and his men compassed David and his men round
about to take them.

23:27 But there came a messenger unto Saul, saying, Haste thee, and
come; for the Philistines have invaded the land.

23:28 Wherefore Saul returned from pursuing after David, and went
against the Philistines: therefore they called that place
Selahammahlekoth.

23:29 And David went up from thence, and dwelt in strong holds at
Engedi.

24:1 And it came to pass, when Saul was returned from following the
Philistines, that it was told him, saying, Behold, David is in the
wilderness of Engedi.

24:2 Then Saul took three thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and
went to seek David and his men upon the rocks of the wild goats.

24:3 And he came to the sheepcotes by the way, where was a cave; and
Saul went in to cover his feet: and David and his men remained in the
sides of the cave.

24:4 And the men of David said unto him, Behold the day of which the
LORD said unto thee, Behold, I will deliver thine enemy into thine
hand, that thou mayest do to him as it shall seem good unto thee. Then
David arose, and cut off the skirt of Saul’s robe privily.

24:5 And it came to pass afterward, that David’s heart smote him,
because he had cut off Saul’s skirt.

24:6 And he said unto his men, The LORD forbid that I should do this
thing unto my master, the LORD’s anointed, to stretch forth mine hand
against him, seeing he is the anointed of the LORD.

24:7 So David stayed his servants with these words, and suffered them
not to rise against Saul. But Saul rose up out of the cave, and went
on his way.

24:8 David also arose afterward, and went out of the cave, and cried
after Saul, saying, My lord the king. And when Saul looked behind him,
David stooped with his face to the earth, and bowed himself.

24:9 And David said to Saul, Wherefore hearest thou men’s words,
saying, Behold, David seeketh thy hurt? 24:10 Behold, this day thine
eyes have seen how that the LORD had delivered thee to day into mine
hand in the cave: and some bade me kill thee: but mine eye spared
thee; and I said, I will not put forth mine hand against my lord; for
he is the LORD’s anointed.

24:11 Moreover, my father, see, yea, see the skirt of thy robe in my
hand: for in that I cut off the skirt of thy robe, and killed thee
not, know thou and see that there is neither evil nor transgression in
mine hand, and I have not sinned against thee; yet thou huntest my
soul to take it.

24:12 The LORD judge between me and thee, and the LORD avenge me of
thee: but mine hand shall not be upon thee.

24:13 As saith the proverb of the ancients, Wickedness proceedeth from
the wicked: but mine hand shall not be upon thee.

24:14 After whom is the king of Israel come out? after whom dost thou
pursue? after a dead dog, after a flea.

24:15 The LORD therefore be judge, and judge between me and thee, and
see, and plead my cause, and deliver me out of thine hand.

24:16 And it came to pass, when David had made an end of speaking
these words unto Saul, that Saul said, Is this thy voice, my son
David? And Saul lifted up his voice, and wept.

24:17 And he said to David, Thou art more righteous than I: for thou
hast rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil.

24:18 And thou hast shewed this day how that thou hast dealt well with
me: forasmuch as when the LORD had delivered me into thine hand, thou
killedst me not.

24:19 For if a man find his enemy, will he let him go well away?
wherefore the LORD reward thee good for that thou hast done unto me
this day.

24:20 And now, behold, I know well that thou shalt surely be king, and
that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in thine hand.

24:21 Swear now therefore unto me by the LORD, that thou wilt not cut
off my seed after me, and that thou wilt not destroy my name out of my
father’s house.

24:22 And David sware unto Saul. And Saul went home; but David and his
men gat them up unto the hold.

25:1 And Samuel died; and all the Israelites were gathered together,
and lamented him, and buried him in his house at Ramah. And David
arose, and went down to the wilderness of Paran.

25:2 And there was a man in Maon, whose possessions were in Carmel;
and the man was very great, and he had three thousand sheep, and a
thousand goats: and he was shearing his sheep in Carmel.

25:3 Now the name of the man was Nabal; and the name of his wife
Abigail: and she was a woman of good understanding, and of a beautiful
countenance: but the man was churlish and evil in his doings; and he
was of the house of Caleb.

25:4 And David heard in the wilderness that Nabal did shear his sheep.

25:5 And David sent out ten young men, and David said unto the young
men, Get you up to Carmel, and go to Nabal, and greet him in my name:
25:6 And thus shall ye say to him that liveth in prosperity, Peace be
both to thee, and peace be to thine house, and peace be unto all that
thou hast.

25:7 And now I have heard that thou hast shearers: now thy shepherds
which were with us, we hurt them not, neither was there ought missing
unto them, all the while they were in Carmel.

25:8 Ask thy young men, and they will shew thee. Wherefore let the
young men find favour in thine eyes: for we come in a good day: give,
I pray thee, whatsoever cometh to thine hand unto thy servants, and to
thy son David.

25:9 And when David’s young men came, they spake to Nabal according to
all those words in the name of David, and ceased.

25:10 And Nabal answered David’s servants, and said, Who is David? and
who is the son of Jesse? there be many servants now a days that break
away every man from his master.

25:11 Shall I then take my bread, and my water, and my flesh that I
have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men, whom I know not
whence they be? 25:12 So David’s young men turned their way, and went
again, and came and told him all those sayings.

25:13 And David said unto his men, Gird ye on every man his sword. And
they girded on every man his sword; and David also girded on his
sword: and there went up after David about four hundred men; and two
hundred abode by the stuff.

25:14 But one of the young men told Abigail, Nabal’s wife, saying,
Behold, David sent messengers out of the wilderness to salute our
master; and he railed on them.

25:15 But the men were very good unto us, and we were not hurt,
neither missed we any thing, as long as we were conversant with them,
when we were in the fields: 25:16 They were a wall unto us both by
night and day, all the while we were with them keeping the sheep.

25:17 Now therefore know and consider what thou wilt do; for evil is
determined against our master, and against all his household: for he
is such a son of Belial, that a man cannot speak to him.

25:18 Then Abigail made haste, and took two hundred loaves, and two
bottles of wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and five measures of
parched corn, and an hundred clusters of raisins, and two hundred
cakes of figs, and laid them on asses.

25:19 And she said unto her servants, Go on before me; behold, I come
after you. But she told not her husband Nabal.

25:20 And it was so, as she rode on the ass, that she came down by the
covert on the hill, and, behold, David and his men came down against
her; and she met them.

25:21 Now David had said, Surely in vain have I kept all that this
fellow hath in the wilderness, so that nothing was missed of all that
pertained unto him: and he hath requited me evil for good.

25:22 So and more also do God unto the enemies of David, if I leave of
all that pertain to him by the morning light any that pisseth against
the wall.

25:23 And when Abigail saw David, she hasted, and lighted off the ass,
and fell before David on her face, and bowed herself to the ground,
25:24 And fell at his feet, and said, Upon me, my lord, upon me let
this iniquity be: and let thine handmaid, I pray thee, speak in thine
audience, and hear the words of thine handmaid.

25:25 Let not my lord, I pray thee, regard this man of Belial, even
Nabal: for as his name is, so is he; Nabal is his name, and folly is
with him: but I thine handmaid saw not the young men of my lord, whom
thou didst send.

25:26 Now therefore, my lord, as the LORD liveth, and as thy soul
liveth, seeing the LORD hath withholden thee from coming to shed
blood, and from avenging thyself with thine own hand, now let thine
enemies, and they that seek evil to my lord, be as Nabal.

25:27 And now this blessing which thine handmaid hath brought unto my
lord, let it even be given unto the young men that follow my lord.

25:28 I pray thee, forgive the trespass of thine handmaid: for the
LORD will certainly make my lord a sure house; because my lord
fighteth the battles of the LORD, and evil hath not been found in thee
all thy days.

25:29 Yet a man is risen to pursue thee, and to seek thy soul: but the
soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of life with the LORD thy
God; and the souls of thine enemies, them shall he sling out, as out
of the middle of a sling.

25:30 And it shall come to pass, when the LORD shall have done to my
lord according to all the good that he hath spoken concerning thee,
and shall have appointed thee ruler over Israel; 25:31 That this shall
be no grief unto thee, nor offence of heart unto my lord, either that
thou hast shed blood causeless, or that my lord hath avenged himself:
but when the LORD shall have dealt well with my lord, then remember
thine handmaid.

25:32 And David said to Abigail, Blessed be the LORD God of Israel,
which sent thee this day to meet me: 25:33 And blessed be thy advice,
and blessed be thou, which hast kept me this day from coming to shed
blood, and from avenging myself with mine own hand.

25:34 For in very deed, as the LORD God of Israel liveth, which hath
kept me back from hurting thee, except thou hadst hasted and come to
meet me, surely there had not been left unto Nabal by the morning
light any that pisseth against the wall.

25:35 So David received of her hand that which she had brought him,
and said unto her, Go up in peace to thine house; see, I have
hearkened to thy voice, and have accepted thy person.

25:36 And Abigail came to Nabal; and, behold, he held a feast in his
house, like the feast of a king; and Nabal’s heart was merry within
him, for he was very drunken: wherefore she told him nothing, less or
more, until the morning light.

25:37 But it came to pass in the morning, when the wine was gone out
of Nabal, and his wife had told him these things, that his heart died
within him, and he became as a stone.

25:38 And it came to pass about ten days after, that the LORD smote
Nabal, that he died.

25:39 And when David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, Blessed be
the LORD, that hath pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of
Nabal, and hath kept his servant from evil: for the LORD hath returned
the wickedness of Nabal upon his own head. And David sent and communed
with Abigail, to take her to him to wife.

25:40 And when the servants of David were come to Abigail to Carmel,
they spake unto her, saying, David sent us unto thee, to take thee to
him to wife.

25:41 And she arose, and bowed herself on her face to the earth, and
said, Behold, let thine handmaid be a servant to wash the feet of the
servants of my lord.

25:42 And Abigail hasted, and arose and rode upon an ass, with five
damsels of hers that went after her; and she went after the messengers
of David, and became his wife.

25:43 David also took Ahinoam of Jezreel; and they were also both of
them his wives.

25:44 But Saul had given Michal his daughter, David’s wife, to Phalti
the son of Laish, which was of Gallim.

26:1 And the Ziphites came unto Saul to Gibeah, saying, Doth not David
hide himself in the hill of Hachilah, which is before Jeshimon? 26:2
Then Saul arose, and went down to the wilderness of Ziph, having three
thousand chosen men of Israel with him, to seek David in the
wilderness of Ziph.

26:3 And Saul pitched in the hill of Hachilah, which is before
Jeshimon, by the way. But David abode in the wilderness, and he saw
that Saul came after him into the wilderness.

26:4 David therefore sent out spies, and understood that Saul was come
in very deed.

26:5 And David arose, and came to the place where Saul had pitched:
and David beheld the place where Saul lay, and Abner the son of Ner,
the captain of his host: and Saul lay in the trench, and the people
pitched round about him.

26:6 Then answered David and said to Ahimelech the Hittite, and to
Abishai the son of Zeruiah, brother to Joab, saying, Who will go down
with me to Saul to the camp? And Abishai said, I will go down with
thee.

26:7 So David and Abishai came to the people by night: and, behold,
Saul lay sleeping within the trench, and his spear stuck in the ground
at his bolster: but Abner and the people lay round about him.

26:8 Then said Abishai to David, God hath delivered thine enemy into
thine hand this day: now therefore let me smite him, I pray thee, with
the spear even to the earth at once, and I will not smite him the
second time.

26:9 And David said to Abishai, Destroy him not: for who can stretch
forth his hand against the LORD’s anointed, and be guiltless? 26:10
David said furthermore, As the LORD liveth, the LORD shall smite him;
or his day shall come to die; or he shall descend into battle, and
perish.

26:11 The LORD forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand against
the LORD’s anointed: but, I pray thee, take thou now the spear that is
at his bolster, and the cruse of water, and let us go.

26:12 So David took the spear and the cruse of water from Saul’s
bolster; and they gat them away, and no man saw it, nor knew it,
neither awaked: for they were all asleep; because a deep sleep from
the LORD was fallen upon them.

26:13 Then David went over to the other side, and stood on the top of
an hill afar off; a great space being between them: 26:14 And David
cried to the people, and to Abner the son of Ner, saying, Answerest
thou not, Abner? Then Abner answered and said, Who art thou that
criest to the king? 26:15 And David said to Abner, Art not thou a
valiant man? and who is like to thee in Israel? wherefore then hast
thou not kept thy lord the king? for there came one of the people in
to destroy the king thy lord.

26:16 This thing is not good that thou hast done. As the LORD liveth,
ye are worthy to die, because ye have not kept your master, the LORD’s
anointed.

And now see where the king’s spear is, and the cruse of water that was
at his bolster.

26:17 And Saul knew David’s voice, and said, Is this thy voice, my son
David? And David said, It is my voice, my lord, O king.

26:18 And he said, Wherefore doth my lord thus pursue after his
servant? for what have I done? or what evil is in mine hand? 26:19
Now therefore, I pray thee, let my lord the king hear the words of his
servant. If the LORD have stirred thee up against me, let him accept
an offering: but if they be the children of men, cursed be they before
the LORD; for they have driven me out this day from abiding in the
inheritance of the LORD, saying, Go, serve other gods.

26:20 Now therefore, let not my blood fall to the earth before the
face of the LORD: for the king of Israel is come out to seek a flea,
as when one doth hunt a partridge in the mountains.

26:21 Then said Saul, I have sinned: return, my son David: for I will
no more do thee harm, because my soul was precious in thine eyes this
day: behold, I have played the fool, and have erred exceedingly.

26:22 And David answered and said, Behold the king’s spear! and let
one of the young men come over and fetch it.

26:23 The LORD render to every man his righteousness and his
faithfulness; for the LORD delivered thee into my hand to day, but I
would not stretch forth mine hand against the LORD’s anointed.

26:24 And, behold, as thy life was much set by this day in mine eyes,
so let my life be much set by in the eyes of the LORD, and let him
deliver me out of all tribulation.

26:25 Then Saul said to David, Blessed be thou, my son David: thou
shalt both do great things, and also shalt still prevail. So David
went on his way, and Saul returned to his place.

27:1 And David said in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the
hand of Saul: there is nothing better for me than that I should
speedily escape into the land of the Philistines; and Saul shall
despair of me, to seek me any more in any coast of Israel: so shall I
escape out of his hand.

27:2 And David arose, and he passed over with the six hundred men that
were with him unto Achish, the son of Maoch, king of Gath.

27:3 And David dwelt with Achish at Gath, he and his men, every man
with his household, even David with his two wives, Ahinoam the
Jezreelitess, and Abigail the Carmelitess, Nabal’s wife.

27:4 And it was told Saul that David was fled to Gath: and he sought
no more again for him.

27:5 And David said unto Achish, If I have now found grace in thine
eyes, let them give me a place in some town in the country, that I may
dwell there: for why should thy servant dwell in the royal city with
thee? 27:6 Then Achish gave him Ziklag that day: wherefore Ziklag
pertaineth unto the kings of Judah unto this day.

27:7 And the time that David dwelt in the country of the Philistines
was a full year and four months.

27:8 And David and his men went up, and invaded the Geshurites, and
the Gezrites, and the Amalekites: for those nations were of old the
inhabitants of the land, as thou goest to Shur, even unto the land of
Egypt.

27:9 And David smote the land, and left neither man nor woman alive,
and took away the sheep, and the oxen, and the asses, and the camels,
and the apparel, and returned, and came to Achish.

27:10 And Achish said, Whither have ye made a road to day? And David
said, Against the south of Judah, and against the south of the
Jerahmeelites, and against the south of the Kenites.

27:11 And David saved neither man nor woman alive, to bring tidings to
Gath, saying, Lest they should tell on us, saying, So did David, and
so will be his manner all the while he dwelleth in the country of the
Philistines.

27:12 And Achish believed David, saying, He hath made his people
Israel utterly to abhor him; therefore he shall be my servant for
ever.

28:1 And it came to pass in those days, that the Philistines gathered
their armies together for warfare, to fight with Israel. And Achish
said unto David, Know thou assuredly, that thou shalt go out with me
to battle, thou and thy men.

28:2 And David said to Achish, Surely thou shalt know what thy servant
can do. And Achish said to David, Therefore will I make thee keeper of
mine head for ever.

28:3 Now Samuel was dead, and all Israel had lamented him, and buried
him in Ramah, even in his own city. And Saul had put away those that
had familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land.

28:4 And the Philistines gathered themselves together, and came and
pitched in Shunem: and Saul gathered all Israel together, and they
pitched in Gilboa.

28:5 And when Saul saw the host of the Philistines, he was afraid, and
his heart greatly trembled.

28:6 And when Saul enquired of the LORD, the LORD answered him not,
neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by prophets.

28:7 Then said Saul unto his servants, Seek me a woman that hath a
familiar spirit, that I may go to her, and enquire of her. And his
servants said to him, Behold, there is a woman that hath a familiar
spirit at Endor.

28:8 And Saul disguised himself, and put on other raiment, and he
went, and two men with him, and they came to the woman by night: and
he said, I pray thee, divine unto me by the familiar spirit, and bring
me him up, whom I shall name unto thee.

28:9 And the woman said unto him, Behold, thou knowest what Saul hath
done, how he hath cut off those that have familiar spirits, and the
wizards, out of the land: wherefore then layest thou a snare for my
life, to cause me to die? 28:10 And Saul sware to her by the LORD,
saying, As the LORD liveth, there shall no punishment happen to thee
for this thing.

28:11 Then said the woman, Whom shall I bring up unto thee? And he
said, Bring me up Samuel.

28:12 And when the woman saw Samuel, she cried with a loud voice: and
the woman spake to Saul, saying, Why hast thou deceived me? for thou
art Saul.

28:13 And the king said unto her, Be not afraid: for what sawest thou?
And the woman said unto Saul, I saw gods ascending out of the earth.

28:14 And he said unto her, What form is he of? And she said, An old
man cometh up; and he is covered with a mantle. And Saul perceived
that it was Samuel, and he stooped with his face to the ground, and
bowed himself.

28:15 And Samuel said to Saul, Why hast thou disquieted me, to bring
me up? And Saul answered, I am sore distressed; for the Philistines
make war against me, and God is departed from me, and answereth me no
more, neither by prophets, nor by dreams: therefore I have called
thee, that thou mayest make known unto me what I shall do.

28:16 Then said Samuel, Wherefore then dost thou ask of me, seeing the
LORD is departed from thee, and is become thine enemy? 28:17 And the
LORD hath done to him, as he spake by me: for the LORD hath rent the
kingdom out of thine hand, and given it to thy neighbour, even to
David: 28:18 Because thou obeyedst not the voice of the LORD, nor
executedst his fierce wrath upon Amalek, therefore hath the LORD done
this thing unto thee this day.

28:19 Moreover the LORD will also deliver Israel with thee into the
hand of the Philistines: and to morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with
me: the LORD also shall deliver the host of Israel into the hand of
the Philistines.

28:20 Then Saul fell straightway all along on the earth, and was sore
afraid, because of the words of Samuel: and there was no strength in
him; for he had eaten no bread all the day, nor all the night.

28:21 And the woman came unto Saul, and saw that he was sore troubled,
and said unto him, Behold, thine handmaid hath obeyed thy voice, and I
have put my life in my hand, and have hearkened unto thy words which
thou spakest unto me.

28:22 Now therefore, I pray thee, hearken thou also unto the voice of
thine handmaid, and let me set a morsel of bread before thee; and eat,
that thou mayest have strength, when thou goest on thy way.

28:23 But he refused, and said, I will not eat. But his servants,
together with the woman, compelled him; and he hearkened unto their
voice. So he arose from the earth, and sat upon the bed.

28:24 And the woman had a fat calf in the house; and she hasted, and
killed it, and took flour, and kneaded it, and did bake unleavened
bread thereof: 28:25 And she brought it before Saul, and before his
servants; and they did eat. Then they rose up, and went away that
night.

29:1 Now the Philistines gathered together all their armies to Aphek:
and the Israelites pitched by a fountain which is in Jezreel.

29:2 And the lords of the Philistines passed on by hundreds, and by
thousands: but David and his men passed on in the rereward with
Achish.

29:3 Then said the princes of the Philistines, What do these Hebrews
here? And Achish said unto the princes of the Philistines, Is not
this David, the servant of Saul the king of Israel, which hath been
with me these days, or these years, and I have found no fault in him
since he fell unto me unto this day? 29:4 And the princes of the
Philistines were wroth with him; and the princes of the Philistines
said unto him, Make this fellow return, that he may go again to his
place which thou hast appointed him, and let him not go down with us
to battle, lest in the battle he be an adversary to us: for wherewith
should he reconcile himself unto his master? should it not be with the
heads of these men? 29:5 Is not this David, of whom they sang one to
another in dances, saying, Saul slew his thousands, and David his ten
thousands? 29:6 Then Achish called David, and said unto him, Surely,
as the LORD liveth, thou hast been upright, and thy going out and thy
coming in with me in the host is good in my sight: for I have not
found evil in thee since the day of thy coming unto me unto this day:
nevertheless the lords favour thee not.

29:7 Wherefore now return, and go in peace, that thou displease not
the lords of the Philistines.

29:8 And David said unto Achish, But what have I done? and what hast
thou found in thy servant so long as I have been with thee unto this
day, that I may not go fight against the enemies of my lord the king?
29:9 And Achish answered and said to David, I know that thou art good
in my sight, as an angel of God: notwithstanding the princes of the
Philistines have said, He shall not go up with us to the battle.

29:10 Wherefore now rise up early in the morning with thy master’s
servants that are come with thee: and as soon as ye be up early in the
morning, and have light, depart.

29:11 So David and his men rose up early to depart in the morning, to
return into the land of the Philistines. And the Philistines went up
to Jezreel.

30:1 And it came to pass, when David and his men were come to Ziklag
on the third day, that the Amalekites had invaded the south, and
Ziklag, and smitten Ziklag, and burned it with fire; 30:2 And had
taken the women captives, that were therein: they slew not any, either
great or small, but carried them away, and went on their way.

30:3 So David and his men came to the city, and, behold, it was burned
with fire; and their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, were
taken captives.

30:4 Then David and the people that were with him lifted up their
voice and wept, until they had no more power to weep.

30:5 And David’s two wives were taken captives, Ahinoam the
Jezreelitess, and Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite.

30:6 And David was greatly distressed; for the people spake of stoning
him, because the soul of all the people was grieved, every man for his
sons and for his daughters: but David encouraged himself in the LORD
his God.

30:7 And David said to Abiathar the priest, Ahimelech’s son, I pray
thee, bring me hither the ephod. And Abiathar brought thither the
ephod to David.

30:8 And David enquired at the LORD, saying, Shall I pursue after this
troop? shall I overtake them? And he answered him, Pursue: for thou
shalt surely overtake them, and without fail recover all.

30:9 So David went, he and the six hundred men that were with him, and
came to the brook Besor, where those that were left behind stayed.

30:10 But David pursued, he and four hundred men: for two hundred
abode behind, which were so faint that they could not go over the
brook Besor.

30:11 And they found an Egyptian in the field, and brought him to
David, and gave him bread, and he did eat; and they made him drink
water; 30:12 And they gave him a piece of a cake of figs, and two
clusters of raisins: and when he had eaten, his spirit came again to
him: for he had eaten no bread, nor drunk any water, three days and
three nights.

30:13 And David said unto him, To whom belongest thou? and whence art
thou? And he said, I am a young man of Egypt, servant to an Amalekite;
and my master left me, because three days agone I fell sick.

30:14 We made an invasion upon the south of the Cherethites, and upon
the coast which belongeth to Judah, and upon the south of Caleb; and
we burned Ziklag with fire.

30:15 And David said to him, Canst thou bring me down to this company?
And he said, Swear unto me by God, that thou wilt neither kill me, nor
deliver me into the hands of my master, and I will bring thee down to
this company.

30:16 And when he had brought him down, behold, they were spread
abroad upon all the earth, eating and drinking, and dancing, because
of all the great spoil that they had taken out of the land of the
Philistines, and out of the land of Judah.

30:17 And David smote them from the twilight even unto the evening of
the next day: and there escaped not a man of them, save four hundred
young men, which rode upon camels, and fled.

30:18 And David recovered all that the Amalekites had carried away:
and David rescued his two wives.

30:19 And there was nothing lacking to them, neither small nor great,
neither sons nor daughters, neither spoil, nor any thing that they had
taken to them: David recovered all.

30:20 And David took all the flocks and the herds, which they drave
before those other cattle, and said, This is David’s spoil.

30:21 And David came to the two hundred men, which were so faint that
they could not follow David, whom they had made also to abide at the
brook Besor: and they went forth to meet David, and to meet the people
that were with him: and when David came near to the people, he saluted
them.

30:22 Then answered all the wicked men and men of Belial, of those
that went with David, and said, Because they went not with us, we will
not give them ought of the spoil that we have recovered, save to every
man his wife and his children, that they may lead them away, and
depart.

30:23 Then said David, Ye shall not do so, my brethren, with that
which the LORD hath given us, who hath preserved us, and delivered the
company that came against us into our hand.

30:24 For who will hearken unto you in this matter? but as his part is
that goeth down to the battle, so shall his part be that tarrieth by
the stuff: they shall part alike.

30:25 And it was so from that day forward, that he made it a statute
and an ordinance for Israel unto this day.

30:26 And when David came to Ziklag, he sent of the spoil unto the
elders of Judah, even to his friends, saying, Behold a present for you
of the spoil of the enemies of the LORD; 30:27 To them which were in
Bethel, and to them which were in south Ramoth, and to them which were
in Jattir, 30:28 And to them which were in Aroer, and to them which
were in Siphmoth, and to them which were in Eshtemoa, 30:29 And to
them which were in Rachal, and to them which were in the cities of the
Jerahmeelites, and to them which were in the cities of the Kenites,
30:30 And to them which were in Hormah, and to them which were in
Chorashan, and to them which were in Athach, 30:31 And to them which
were in Hebron, and to all the places where David himself and his men
were wont to haunt.

31:1 Now the Philistines fought against Israel: and the men of Israel
fled from before the Philistines, and fell down slain in mount Gilboa.

31:2 And the Philistines followed hard upon Saul and upon his sons;
and the Philistines slew Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Melchishua,
Saul’s sons.

31:3 And the battle went sore against Saul, and the archers hit him;
and he was sore wounded of the archers.

31:4 Then said Saul unto his armourbearer, Draw thy sword, and thrust
me through therewith; lest these uncircumcised come and thrust me
through, and abuse me. But his armourbearer would not; for he was sore
afraid. Therefore Saul took a sword, and fell upon it.

31:5 And when his armourbearer saw that Saul was dead, he fell
likewise upon his sword, and died with him.

31:6 So Saul died, and his three sons, and his armourbearer, and all
his men, that same day together.

31:7 And when the men of Israel that were on the other side of the
valley, and they that were on the other side Jordan, saw that the men
of Israel fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, they forsook the
cities, and fled; and the Philistines came and dwelt in them.

31:8 And it came to pass on the morrow, when the Philistines came to
strip the slain, that they found Saul and his three sons fallen in
mount Gilboa.

31:9 And they cut off his head, and stripped off his armour, and sent
into the land of the Philistines round about, to publish it in the
house of their idols, and among the people.

31:10 And they put his armour in the house of Ashtaroth: and they
fastened his body to the wall of Bethshan.

31:11 And when the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead heard of that which the
Philistines had done to Saul; 31:12 All the valiant men arose, and
went all night, and took the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons
from the wall of Bethshan, and came to Jabesh, and burnt them there.

31:13 And they took their bones, and buried them under a tree at
Jabesh, and fasted seven days.


The Second Book of Samuel

Otherwise Called:

The Second Book of the Kings


1:1 Now it came to pass after the death of Saul, when David was
returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites, and David had abode two
days in Ziklag; 1:2 It came even to pass on the third day, that,
behold, a man came out of the camp from Saul with his clothes rent,
and earth upon his head: and so it was, when he came to David, that he
fell to the earth, and did obeisance.

1:3 And David said unto him, From whence comest thou? And he said unto
him, Out of the camp of Israel am I escaped.

1:4 And David said unto him, How went the matter? I pray thee, tell
me.

And he answered, That the people are fled from the battle, and many of
the people also are fallen and dead; and Saul and Jonathan his son are
dead also.

1:5 And David said unto the young man that told him, How knowest thou
that Saul and Jonathan his son be dead? 1:6 And the young man that
told him said, As I happened by chance upon mount Gilboa, behold, Saul
leaned upon his spear; and, lo, the chariots and horsemen followed
hard after him.

1:7 And when he looked behind him, he saw me, and called unto me. And
I answered, Here am I.

1:8 And he said unto me, Who art thou? And I answered him, I am an
Amalekite.

1:9 He said unto me again, Stand, I pray thee, upon me, and slay me:
for anguish is come upon me, because my life is yet whole in me.

1:10 So I stood upon him, and slew him, because I was sure that he
could not live after that he was fallen: and I took the crown that was
upon his head, and the bracelet that was on his arm, and have brought
them hither unto my lord.

1:11 Then David took hold on his clothes, and rent them; and likewise
all the men that were with him: 1:12 And they mourned, and wept, and
fasted until even, for Saul, and for Jonathan his son, and for the
people of the LORD, and for the house of Israel; because they were
fallen by the sword.

1:13 And David said unto the young man that told him, Whence art thou?
And he answered, I am the son of a stranger, an Amalekite.

1:14 And David said unto him, How wast thou not afraid to stretch
forth thine hand to destroy the LORD’s anointed? 1:15 And David
called one of the young men, and said, Go near, and fall upon him. And
he smote him that he died.

1:16 And David said unto him, Thy blood be upon thy head; for thy
mouth hath testified against thee, saying, I have slain the LORD’s
anointed.

1:17 And David lamented with this lamentation over Saul and over
Jonathan his son: 1:18 (Also he bade them teach the children of Judah
the use of the bow: behold, it is written in the book of Jasher.)
1:19 The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places: how are the
mighty fallen! 1:20 Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the
streets of Askelon; lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice,
lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.

1:21 Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew, neither let there be
rain, upon you, nor fields of offerings: for there the shield of the
mighty is vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, as though he had not
been anointed with oil.

1:22 From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow
of Jonathan turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not empty.

1:23 Saul and Jonathan were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in
their death they were not divided: they were swifter than eagles, they
were stronger than lions.

1:24 Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you in
scarlet, with other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your
apparel.

1:25 How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! O Jonathan,
thou wast slain in thine high places.

1:26 I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan: very pleasant hast
thou been unto me: thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of
women.

1:27 How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished! 2:1
And it came to pass after this, that David enquired of the LORD,
saying, Shall I go up into any of the cities of Judah? And the LORD
said unto him, Go up. And David said, Whither shall I go up? And he
said, Unto Hebron.

2:2 So David went up thither, and his two wives also, Ahinoam the
Jezreelitess, and Abigail Nabal’s wife the Carmelite.

2:3 And his men that were with him did David bring up, every man with
his household: and they dwelt in the cities of Hebron.

2:4 And the men of Judah came, and there they anointed David king over
the house of Judah. And they told David, saying, That the men of
Jabeshgilead were they that buried Saul.

2:5 And David sent messengers unto the men of Jabeshgilead, and said
unto them, Blessed be ye of the LORD, that ye have shewed this
kindness unto your lord, even unto Saul, and have buried him.

2:6 And now the LORD shew kindness and truth unto you: and I also will
requite you this kindness, because ye have done this thing.

2:7 Therefore now let your hands be strengthened, and be ye valiant:
for your master Saul is dead, and also the house of Judah have
anointed me king over them.

2:8 But Abner the son of Ner, captain of Saul’s host, took Ishbosheth
the son of Saul, and brought him over to Mahanaim; 2:9 And made him
king over Gilead, and over the Ashurites, and over Jezreel, and over
Ephraim, and over Benjamin, and over all Israel.

2:10 Ishbosheth Saul’s son was forty years old when he began to reign
over Israel, and reigned two years. But the house of Judah followed
David.

2:11 And the time that David was king in Hebron over the house of
Judah was seven years and six months.

2:12 And Abner the son of Ner, and the servants of Ishbosheth the son
of Saul, went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon.

2:13 And Joab the son of Zeruiah, and the servants of David, went out,
and met together by the pool of Gibeon: and they sat down, the one on
the one side of the pool, and the other on the other side of the pool.

2:14 And Abner said to Joab, Let the young men now arise, and play
before us. And Joab said, Let them arise.

2:15 Then there arose and went over by number twelve of Benjamin,
which pertained to Ishbosheth the son of Saul, and twelve of the
servants of David.

2:16 And they caught every one his fellow by the head, and thrust his
sword in his fellow’s side; so they fell down together: wherefore that
place was called Helkathhazzurim, which is in Gibeon.

2:17 And there was a very sore battle that day; and Abner was beaten,
and the men of Israel, before the servants of David.

2:18 And there were three sons of Zeruiah there, Joab, and Abishai,
and Asahel: and Asahel was as light of foot as a wild roe.

2:19 And Asahel pursued after Abner; and in going he turned not to the
right hand nor to the left from following Abner.

2:20 Then Abner looked behind him, and said, Art thou Asahel? And he
answered, I am.

2:21 And Abner said to him, Turn thee aside to thy right hand or to
thy left, and lay thee hold on one of the young men, and take thee his
armour.

But Asahel would not turn aside from following of him.

2:22 And Abner said again to Asahel, Turn thee aside from following
me: wherefore should I smite thee to the ground? how then should I
hold up my face to Joab thy brother? 2:23 Howbeit he refused to turn
aside: wherefore Abner with the hinder end of the spear smote him
under the fifth rib, that the spear came out behind him; and he fell
down there, and died in the same place: and it came to pass, that as
many as came to the place where Asahel fell down and died stood still.

2:24 Joab also and Abishai pursued after Abner: and the sun went down
when they were come to the hill of Ammah, that lieth before Giah by
the way of the wilderness of Gibeon.

2:25 And the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together after
Abner, and became one troop, and stood on the top of an hill.

2:26 Then Abner called to Joab, and said, Shall the sword devour for
ever? knowest thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end?
how long shall it be then, ere thou bid the people return from
following their brethren? 2:27 And Joab said, As God liveth, unless
thou hadst spoken, surely then in the morning the people had gone up
every one from following his brother.

2:28 So Joab blew a trumpet, and all the people stood still, and
pursued after Israel no more, neither fought they any more.

2:29 And Abner and his men walked all that night through the plain,
and passed over Jordan, and went through all Bithron, and they came to
Mahanaim.

2:30 And Joab returned from following Abner: and when he had gathered
all the people together, there lacked of David’s servants nineteen men
and Asahel.

2:31 But the servants of David had smitten of Benjamin, and of Abner’s
men, so that three hundred and threescore men died.

2:32 And they took up Asahel, and buried him in the sepulchre of his
father, which was in Bethlehem. And Joab and his men went all night,
and they came to Hebron at break of day.

3:1 Now there was long war between the house of Saul and the house of
David: but David waxed stronger and stronger, and the house of Saul
waxed weaker and weaker.

3:2 And unto David were sons born in Hebron: and his firstborn was
Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess; 3:3 And his second, Chileab, of
Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite; and the third, Absalom the
son of Maacah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur; 3:4 And the
fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith; and the fifth, Shephatiah the son
of Abital; 3:5 And the sixth, Ithream, by Eglah David’s wife. These
were born to David in Hebron.

3:6 And it came to pass, while there was war between the house of Saul
and the house of David, that Abner made himself strong for the house
of Saul.

3:7 And Saul had a concubine, whose name was Rizpah, the daughter of
Aiah: and Ishbosheth said to Abner, Wherefore hast thou gone in unto
my father’s concubine? 3:8 Then was Abner very wroth for the words of
Ishbosheth, and said, Am I a dog’s head, which against Judah do shew
kindness this day unto the house of Saul thy father, to his brethren,
and to his friends, and have not delivered thee into the hand of
David, that thou chargest me to day with a fault concerning this
woman? 3:9 So do God to Abner, and more also, except, as the LORD
hath sworn to David, even so I do to him; 3:10 To translate the
kingdom from the house of Saul, and to set up the throne of David over
Israel and over Judah, from Dan even to Beersheba.

3:11 And he could not answer Abner a word again, because he feared
him.

3:12 And Abner sent messengers to David on his behalf, saying, Whose
is the land? saying also, Make thy league with me, and, behold, my
hand shall be with thee, to bring about all Israel unto thee.

3:13 And he said, Well; I will make a league with thee: but one thing
I require of thee, that is, Thou shalt not see my face, except thou
first bring Michal Saul’s daughter, when thou comest to see my face.

3:14 And David sent messengers to Ishbosheth Saul’s son, saying,
Deliver me my wife Michal, which I espoused to me for an hundred
foreskins of the Philistines.

3:15 And Ishbosheth sent, and took her from her husband, even from
Phaltiel the son of Laish.

3:16 And her husband went with her along weeping behind her to
Bahurim.

Then said Abner unto him, Go, return. And he returned.

3:17 And Abner had communication with the elders of Israel, saying, Ye
sought for David in times past to be king over you: 3:18 Now then do
it: for the LORD hath spoken of David, saying, By the hand of my
servant David I will save my people Israel out of the hand of the
Philistines, and out of the hand of all their enemies.

3:19 And Abner also spake in the ears of Benjamin: and Abner went also
to speak in the ears of David in Hebron all that seemed good to
Israel, and that seemed good to the whole house of Benjamin.

3:20 So Abner came to David to Hebron, and twenty men with him. And
David made Abner and the men that were with him a feast.

3:21 And Abner said unto David, I will arise and go, and will gather
all Israel unto my lord the king, that they may make a league with
thee, and that thou mayest reign over all that thine heart desireth.
And David sent Abner away; and he went in peace.

3:22 And, behold, the servants of David and Joab came from pursuing a
troop, and brought in a great spoil with them: but Abner was not with
David in Hebron; for he had sent him away, and he was gone in peace.

3:23 When Joab and all the host that was with him were come, they told
Joab, saying, Abner the son of Ner came to the king, and he hath sent
him away, and he is gone in peace.

3:24 Then Joab came to the king, and said, What hast thou done?
behold, Abner came unto thee; why is it that thou hast sent him away,
and he is quite gone? 3:25 Thou knowest Abner the son of Ner, that he
came to deceive thee, and to know thy going out and thy coming in, and
to know all that thou doest.

3:26 And when Joab was come out from David, he sent messengers after
Abner, which brought him again from the well of Sirah: but David knew
it not.

3:27 And when Abner was returned to Hebron, Joab took him aside in the
gate to speak with him quietly, and smote him there under the fifth
rib, that he died, for the blood of Asahel his brother.

3:28 And afterward when David heard it, he said, I and my kingdom are
guiltless before the LORD for ever from the blood of Abner the son of
Ner: 3:29 Let it rest on the head of Joab, and on all his father’s
house; and let there not fail from the house of Joab one that hath an
issue, or that is a leper, or that leaneth on a staff, or that falleth
on the sword, or that lacketh bread.

3:30 So Joab, and Abishai his brother slew Abner, because he had slain
their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the battle.

3:31 And David said to Joab, and to all the people that were with him,
Rend your clothes, and gird you with sackcloth, and mourn before
Abner. And king David himself followed the bier.

3:32 And they buried Abner in Hebron: and the king lifted up his
voice, and wept at the grave of Abner; and all the people wept.

3:33 And the king lamented over Abner, and said, Died Abner as a fool
dieth? 3:34 Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put into fetters:
as a man falleth before wicked men, so fellest thou. And all the
people wept again over him.

3:35 And when all the people came to cause David to eat meat while it
was yet day, David sware, saying, So do God to me, and more also, if I
taste bread, or ought else, till the sun be down.

3:36 And all the people took notice of it, and it pleased them: as
whatsoever the king did pleased all the people.

3:37 For all the people and all Israel understood that day that it was
not of the king to slay Abner the son of Ner.

3:38 And the king said unto his servants, Know ye not that there is a
prince and a great man fallen this day in Israel? 3:39 And I am this
day weak, though anointed king; and these men the sons of Zeruiah be
too hard for me: the LORD shall reward the doer of evil according to
his wickedness.

4:1 And when Saul’s son heard that Abner was dead in Hebron, his hands
were feeble, and all the Israelites were troubled.

4:2 And Saul’s son had two men that were captains of bands: the name
of the one was Baanah, and the name of the other Rechab, the sons of
Rimmon a Beerothite, of the children of Benjamin: (for Beeroth also
was reckoned to Benjamin.

4:3 And the Beerothites fled to Gittaim, and were sojourners there
until this day.) 4:4 And Jonathan, Saul’s son, had a son that was
lame of his feet. He was five years old when the tidings came of Saul
and Jonathan out of Jezreel, and his nurse took him up, and fled: and
it came to pass, as she made haste to flee, that he fell, and became
lame. And his name was Mephibosheth.

4:5 And the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Rechab and Baanah, went,
and came about the heat of the day to the house of Ishbosheth, who lay
on a bed at noon.

4:6 And they came thither into the midst of the house, as though they
would have fetched wheat; and they smote him under the fifth rib: and
Rechab and Baanah his brother escaped.

4:7 For when they came into the house, he lay on his bed in his
bedchamber, and they smote him, and slew him, and beheaded him, and
took his head, and gat them away through the plain all night.

4:8 And they brought the head of Ishbosheth unto David to Hebron, and
said to the king, Behold the head of Ishbosheth the son of Saul thine
enemy, which sought thy life; and the LORD hath avenged my lord the
king this day of Saul, and of his seed.

4:9 And David answered Rechab and Baanah his brother, the sons of
Rimmon the Beerothite, and said unto them, As the LORD liveth, who
hath redeemed my soul out of all adversity, 4:10 When one told me,
saying, Behold, Saul is dead, thinking to have brought good tidings, I
took hold of him, and slew him in Ziklag, who thought that I would
have given him a reward for his tidings: 4:11 How much more, when
wicked men have slain a righteous person in his own house upon his
bed? shall I not therefore now require his blood of your hand, and
take you away from the earth? 4:12 And David commanded his young men,
and they slew them, and cut off their hands and their feet, and hanged
them up over the pool in Hebron. But they took the head of Ishbosheth,
and buried it in the sepulchre of Abner in Hebron.

5:1 Then came all the tribes of Israel to David unto Hebron, and
spake, saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.

5:2 Also in time past, when Saul was king over us, thou wast he that
leddest out and broughtest in Israel: and the LORD said to thee, Thou
shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be a captain over Israel.

5:3 So all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron; and king
David made a league with them in Hebron before the LORD: and they
anointed David king over Israel.

5:4 David was thirty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
forty years.

5:5 In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months: and in
Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three years over all Israel and Judah.

5:6 And the king and his men went to Jerusalem unto the Jebusites, the
inhabitants of the land: which spake unto David, saying, Except thou
take away the blind and the lame, thou shalt not come in hither:
thinking, David cannot come in hither.

5:7 Nevertheless David took the strong hold of Zion: the same is the
city of David.

5:8 And David said on that day, Whosoever getteth up to the gutter,
and smiteth the Jebusites, and the lame and the blind that are hated
of David’s soul, he shall be chief and captain. Wherefore they said,
The blind and the lame shall not come into the house.

5:9 So David dwelt in the fort, and called it the city of David. And
David built round about from Millo and inward.

5:10 And David went on, and grew great, and the LORD God of hosts was
with him.

5:11 And Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar trees,
and carpenters, and masons: and they built David an house.

5:12 And David perceived that the LORD had established him king over
Israel, and that he had exalted his kingdom for his people Israel’s
sake.

5:13 And David took him more concubines and wives out of Jerusalem,
after he was come from Hebron: and there were yet sons and daughters
born to David.

5:14 And these be the names of those that were born unto him in
Jerusalem; Shammuah, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon, 5:15 Ibhar
also, and Elishua, and Nepheg, and Japhia, 5:16 And Elishama, and
Eliada, and Eliphalet.

5:17 But when the Philistines heard that they had anointed David king
over Israel, all the Philistines came up to seek David; and David
heard of it, and went down to the hold.

5:18 The Philistines also came and spread themselves in the valley of
Rephaim.

5:19 And David enquired of the LORD, saying, Shall I go up to the
Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? And the LORD said
unto David, Go up: for I will doubtless deliver the Philistines into
thine hand.

5:20 And David came to Baalperazim, and David smote them there, and
said, The LORD hath broken forth upon mine enemies before me, as the
breach of waters. Therefore he called the name of that place
Baalperazim.

5:21 And there they left their images, and David and his men burned
them.

5:22 And the Philistines came up yet again, and spread themselves in
the valley of Rephaim.

5:23 And when David enquired of the LORD, he said, Thou shalt not go
up; but fetch a compass behind them, and come upon them over against
the mulberry trees.

5:24 And let it be, when thou hearest the sound of a going in the tops
of the mulberry trees, that then thou shalt bestir thyself: for then
shall the LORD go out before thee, to smite the host of the
Philistines.

5:25 And David did so, as the LORD had commanded him; and smote the
Philistines from Geba until thou come to Gazer.

6:1 Again, David gathered together all the chosen men of Israel,
thirty thousand.

6:2 And David arose, and went with all the people that were with him
from Baale of Judah, to bring up from thence the ark of God, whose
name is called by the name of the LORD of hosts that dwelleth between
the cherubims.

6:3 And they set the ark of God upon a new cart, and brought it out of
the house of Abinadab that was in Gibeah: and Uzzah and Ahio, the sons
of Abinadab, drave the new cart.

6:4 And they brought it out of the house of Abinadab which was at
Gibeah, accompanying the ark of God: and Ahio went before the ark.

6:5 And David and all the house of Israel played before the LORD on
all manner of instruments made of fir wood, even on harps, and on
psalteries, and on timbrels, and on cornets, and on cymbals.

6:6 And when they came to Nachon’s threshingfloor, Uzzah put forth his
hand to the ark of God, and took hold of it; for the oxen shook it.

6:7 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Uzzah; and God smote
him there for his error; and there he died by the ark of God.

6:8 And David was displeased, because the LORD had made a breach upon
Uzzah: and he called the name of the place Perezuzzah to this day.

6:9 And David was afraid of the LORD that day, and said, How shall the
ark of the LORD come to me? 6:10 So David would not remove the ark of
the LORD unto him into the city of David: but David carried it aside
into the house of Obededom the Gittite.

6:11 And the ark of the LORD continued in the house of Obededom the
Gittite three months: and the LORD blessed Obededom, and all his
household.

6:12 And it was told king David, saying, The LORD hath blessed the
house of Obededom, and all that pertaineth unto him, because of the
ark of God. So David went and brought up the ark of God from the house
of Obededom into the city of David with gladness.

6:13 And it was so, that when they that bare the ark of the LORD had
gone six paces, he sacrificed oxen and fatlings.

6:14 And David danced before the LORD with all his might; and David
was girded with a linen ephod.

6:15 So David and all the house of Israel brought up the ark of the
LORD with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet.

6:16 And as the ark of the LORD came into the city of David, Michal
Saul’s daughter looked through a window, and saw king David leaping
and dancing before the LORD; and she despised him in her heart.

6:17 And they brought in the ark of the LORD, and set it in his place,
in the midst of the tabernacle that David had pitched for it: and
David offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the LORD.

6:18 And as soon as David had made an end of offering burnt offerings
and peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the LORD of
hosts.

6:19 And he dealt among all the people, even among the whole multitude
of Israel, as well to the women as men, to every one a cake of bread,
and a good piece of flesh, and a flagon of wine. So all the people
departed every one to his house.

6:20 Then David returned to bless his household. And Michal the
daughter of Saul came out to meet David, and said, How glorious was
the king of Israel to day, who uncovered himself to day in the eyes of
the handmaids of his servants, as one of the vain fellows shamelessly
uncovereth himself! 6:21 And David said unto Michal, It was before
the LORD, which chose me before thy father, and before all his house,
to appoint me ruler over the people of the LORD, over Israel:
therefore will I play before the LORD.

6:22 And I will yet be more vile than thus, and will be base in mine
own sight: and of the maidservants which thou hast spoken of, of them
shall I be had in honour.

6:23 Therefore Michal the daughter of Saul had no child unto the day
of her death.

7:1 And it came to pass, when the king sat in his house, and the LORD
had given him rest round about from all his enemies; 7:2 That the king
said unto Nathan the prophet, See now, I dwell in an house of cedar,
but the ark of God dwelleth within curtains.

7:3 And Nathan said to the king, Go, do all that is in thine heart;
for the LORD is with thee.

7:4 And it came to pass that night, that the word of the LORD came
unto Nathan, saying, 7:5 Go and tell my servant David, Thus saith the
LORD, Shalt thou build me an house for me to dwell in? 7:6 Whereas I
have not dwelt in any house since the time that I brought up the
children of Israel out of Egypt, even to this day, but have walked in
a tent and in a tabernacle.

7:7 In all the places wherein I have walked with all the children of
Israel spake I a word with any of the tribes of Israel, whom I
commanded to feed my people Israel, saying, Why build ye not me an
house of cedar? 7:8 Now therefore so shalt thou say unto my servant
David, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, I took thee from the sheepcote,
from following the sheep, to be ruler over my people, over Israel: 7:9
And I was with thee whithersoever thou wentest, and have cut off all
thine enemies out of thy sight, and have made thee a great name, like
unto the name of the great men that are in the earth.

7:10 Moreover I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and will
plant them, that they may dwell in a place of their own, and move no
more; neither shall the children of wickedness afflict them any more,
as beforetime, 7:11 And as since the time that I commanded judges to
be over my people Israel, and have caused thee to rest from all thine
enemies. Also the LORD telleth thee that he will make thee an house.

7:12 And when thy days be fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with thy
fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of
thy bowels, and I will establish his kingdom.

7:13 He shall build an house for my name, and I will stablish the
throne of his kingdom for ever.

7:14 I will be his father, and he shall be my son. If he commit
iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes
of the children of men: 7:15 But my mercy shall not depart away from
him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before thee.

7:16 And thine house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever
before thee: thy throne shall be established for ever.

7:17 According to all these words, and according to all this vision,
so did Nathan speak unto David.

7:18 Then went king David in, and sat before the LORD, and he said,
Who am I, O Lord GOD? and what is my house, that thou hast brought me
hitherto? 7:19 And this was yet a small thing in thy sight, O Lord
GOD; but thou hast spoken also of thy servant’s house for a great
while to come. And is this the manner of man, O Lord GOD? 7:20 And
what can David say more unto thee? for thou, Lord GOD, knowest thy
servant.

7:21 For thy word’s sake, and according to thine own heart, hast thou
done all these great things, to make thy servant know them.

7:22 Wherefore thou art great, O LORD God: for there is none like
thee, neither is there any God beside thee, according to all that we
have heard with our ears.

7:23 And what one nation in the earth is like thy people, even like
Israel, whom God went to redeem for a people to himself, and to make
him a name, and to do for you great things and terrible, for thy land,
before thy people, which thou redeemedst to thee from Egypt, from the
nations and their gods? 7:24 For thou hast confirmed to thyself thy
people Israel to be a people unto thee for ever: and thou, LORD, art
become their God.

7:25 And now, O LORD God, the word that thou hast spoken concerning
thy servant, and concerning his house, establish it for ever, and do
as thou hast said.

7:26 And let thy name be magnified for ever, saying, The LORD of hosts
is the God over Israel: and let the house of thy servant David be
established before thee.

7:27 For thou, O LORD of hosts, God of Israel, hast revealed to thy
servant, saying, I will build thee an house: therefore hath thy
servant found in his heart to pray this prayer unto thee.

7:28 And now, O Lord GOD, thou art that God, and thy words be true,
and thou hast promised this goodness unto thy servant: 7:29 Therefore
now let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may
continue for ever before thee: for thou, O Lord GOD, hast spoken it:
and with thy blessing let the house of thy servant be blessed for
ever.

8:1 And after this it came to pass that David smote the Philistines,
and subdued them: and David took Methegammah out of the hand of the
Philistines.

8:2 And he smote Moab, and measured them with a line, casting them
down to the ground; even with two lines measured he to put to death,
and with one full line to keep alive. And so the Moabites became
David’s servants, and brought gifts.

8:3 David smote also Hadadezer, the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, as he
went to recover his border at the river Euphrates.

8:4 And David took from him a thousand chariots, and seven hundred
horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen: and David houghed all the
chariot horses, but reserved of them for an hundred chariots.

8:5 And when the Syrians of Damascus came to succour Hadadezer king of
Zobah, David slew of the Syrians two and twenty thousand men.

8:6 Then David put garrisons in Syria of Damascus: and the Syrians
became servants to David, and brought gifts. And the LORD preserved
David whithersoever he went.

8:7 And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of
Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem.

8:8 And from Betah, and from Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, king David
took exceeding much brass.

8:9 When Toi king of Hamath heard that David had smitten all the host
of Hadadezer, 8:10 Then Toi sent Joram his son unto king David, to
salute him, and to bless him, because he had fought against Hadadezer,
and smitten him: for Hadadezer had wars with Toi. And Joram brought
with him vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of brass:
8:11 Which also king David did dedicate unto the LORD, with the silver
and gold that he had dedicated of all nations which he subdued; 8:12
Of Syria, and of Moab, and of the children of Ammon, and of the
Philistines, and of Amalek, and of the spoil of Hadadezer, son of
Rehob, king of Zobah.

8:13 And David gat him a name when he returned from smiting of the
Syrians in the valley of salt, being eighteen thousand men.

8:14 And he put garrisons in Edom; throughout all Edom put he
garrisons, and all they of Edom became David’s servants. And the LORD
preserved David whithersoever he went.

8:15 And David reigned over all Israel; and David executed judgment
and justice unto all his people.

8:16 And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the host; and Jehoshaphat
the son of Ahilud was recorder; 8:17 And Zadok the son of Ahitub, and
Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, were the priests; and Seraiah was the
scribe; 8:18 And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over both the
Cherethites and the Pelethites; and David’s sons were chief rulers.

9:1 And David said, Is there yet any that is left of the house of
Saul, that I may shew him kindness for Jonathan’s sake? 9:2 And there
was of the house of Saul a servant whose name was Ziba. And when they
had called him unto David, the king said unto him, Art thou Ziba? And
he said, Thy servant is he.

9:3 And the king said, Is there not yet any of the house of Saul, that
I may shew the kindness of God unto him? And Ziba said unto the king,
Jonathan hath yet a son, which is lame on his feet.

9:4 And the king said unto him, Where is he? And Ziba said unto the
king, Behold, he is in the house of Machir, the son of Ammiel, in
Lodebar.

9:5 Then king David sent, and fetched him out of the house of Machir,
the son of Ammiel, from Lodebar.

9:6 Now when Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, was
come unto David, he fell on his face, and did reverence. And David
said, Mephibosheth. And he answered, Behold thy servant! 9:7 And
David said unto him, Fear not: for I will surely shew thee kindness
for Jonathan thy father’s sake, and will restore thee all the land of
Saul thy father; and thou shalt eat bread at my table continually.

9:8 And he bowed himself, and said, What is thy servant, that thou
shouldest look upon such a dead dog as I am? 9:9 Then the king called
to Ziba, Saul’s servant, and said unto him, I have given unto thy
master’s son all that pertained to Saul and to all his house.

9:10 Thou therefore, and thy sons, and thy servants, shall till the
land for him, and thou shalt bring in the fruits, that thy master’s
son may have food to eat: but Mephibosheth thy master’s son shall eat
bread alway at my table. Now Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty
servants.

9:11 Then said Ziba unto the king, According to all that my lord the
king hath commanded his servant, so shall thy servant do. As for
Mephibosheth, said the king, he shall eat at my table, as one of the
king’s sons.

9:12 And Mephibosheth had a young son, whose name was Micha. And all
that dwelt in the house of Ziba were servants unto Mephibosheth.

9:13 So Mephibosheth dwelt in Jerusalem: for he did eat continually at
the king’s table; and was lame on both his feet.

10:1 And it came to pass after this, that the king of the children of
Ammon died, and Hanun his son reigned in his stead.

10:2 Then said David, I will shew kindness unto Hanun the son of
Nahash, as his father shewed kindness unto me. And David sent to
comfort him by the hand of his servants for his father. And David’s
servants came into the land of the children of Ammon.

10:3 And the princes of the children of Ammon said unto Hanun their
lord, Thinkest thou that David doth honour thy father, that he hath
sent comforters unto thee? hath not David rather sent his servants
unto thee, to search the city, and to spy it out, and to overthrow it?
10:4 Wherefore Hanun took David’s servants, and shaved off the one
half of their beards, and cut off their garments in the middle, even
to their buttocks, and sent them away.

10:5 When they told it unto David, he sent to meet them, because the
men were greatly ashamed: and the king said, Tarry at Jericho until
your beards be grown, and then return.

10:6 And when the children of Ammon saw that they stank before David,
the children of Ammon sent and hired the Syrians of Bethrehob and the
Syrians of Zoba, twenty thousand footmen, and of king Maacah a
thousand men, and of Ishtob twelve thousand men.

10:7 And when David heard of it, he sent Joab, and all the host of the
mighty men.

10:8 And the children of Ammon came out, and put the battle in array
at the entering in of the gate: and the Syrians of Zoba, and of Rehob,
and Ishtob, and Maacah, were by themselves in the field.

10:9 When Joab saw that the front of the battle was against him before
and behind, he chose of all the choice men of Israel, and put them in
array against the Syrians: 10:10 And the rest of the people he
delivered into the hand of Abishai his brother, that he might put them
in array against the children of Ammon.

10:11 And he said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou
shalt help me: but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee,
then I will come and help thee.

10:12 Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and
for the cities of our God: and the LORD do that which seemeth him
good.

10:13 And Joab drew nigh, and the people that were with him, unto the
battle against the Syrians: and they fled before him.

10:14 And when the children of Ammon saw that the Syrians were fled,
then fled they also before Abishai, and entered into the city. So Joab
returned from the children of Ammon, and came to Jerusalem.

10:15 And when the Syrians saw that they were smitten before Israel,
they gathered themselves together.

10:16 And Hadarezer sent, and brought out the Syrians that were beyond
the river: and they came to Helam; and Shobach the captain of the host
of Hadarezer went before them.

10:17 And when it was told David, he gathered all Israel together, and
passed over Jordan, and came to Helam. And the Syrians set themselves
in array against David, and fought with him.

10:18 And the Syrians fled before Israel; and David slew the men of
seven hundred chariots of the Syrians, and forty thousand horsemen,
and smote Shobach the captain of their host, who died there.

10:19 And when all the kings that were servants to Hadarezer saw that
they were smitten before Israel, they made peace with Israel, and
served them. So the Syrians feared to help the children of Ammon any
more.

11:1 And it came to pass, after the year was expired, at the time when
kings go forth to battle, that David sent Joab, and his servants with
him, and all Israel; and they destroyed the children of Ammon, and
besieged Rabbah. But David tarried still at Jerusalem.

11:2 And it came to pass in an eveningtide, that David arose from off
his bed, and walked upon the roof of the king’s house: and from the
roof he saw a woman washing herself; and the woman was very beautiful
to look upon.

11:3 And David sent and enquired after the woman. And one said, Is not
this Bathsheba, the daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite?
11:4 And David sent messengers, and took her; and she came in unto
him, and he lay with her; for she was purified from her uncleanness:
and she returned unto her house.

11:5 And the woman conceived, and sent and told David, and said, I am
with child.

11:6 And David sent to Joab, saying, Send me Uriah the Hittite. And
Joab sent Uriah to David.

11:7 And when Uriah was come unto him, David demanded of him how Joab
did, and how the people did, and how the war prospered.

11:8 And David said to Uriah, Go down to thy house, and wash thy feet.
And Uriah departed out of the king’s house, and there followed him a
mess of meat from the king.

11:9 But Uriah slept at the door of the king’s house with all the
servants of his lord, and went not down to his house.

11:10 And when they had told David, saying, Uriah went not down unto
his house, David said unto Uriah, Camest thou not from thy journey?
why then didst thou not go down unto thine house? 11:11 And Uriah
said unto David, The ark, and Israel, and Judah, abide in tents; and
my lord Joab, and the servants of my lord, are encamped in the open
fields; shall I then go into mine house, to eat and to drink, and to
lie with my wife? as thou livest, and as thy soul liveth, I will not
do this thing.

11:12 And David said to Uriah, Tarry here to day also, and to morrow I
will let thee depart. So Uriah abode in Jerusalem that day, and the
morrow.

11:13 And when David had called him, he did eat and drink before him;
and he made him drunk: and at even he went out to lie on his bed with
the servants of his lord, but went not down to his house.

11:14 And it came to pass in the morning, that David wrote a letter to
Joab, and sent it by the hand of Uriah.

11:15 And he wrote in the letter, saying, Set ye Uriah in the
forefront of the hottest battle, and retire ye from him, that he may
be smitten, and die.

11:16 And it came to pass, when Joab observed the city, that he
assigned Uriah unto a place where he knew that valiant men were.

11:17 And the men of the city went out, and fought with Joab: and
there fell some of the people of the servants of David; and Uriah the
Hittite died also.

11:18 Then Joab sent and told David all the things concerning the war;
11:19 And charged the messenger, saying, When thou hast made an end of
telling the matters of the war unto the king, 11:20 And if so be that
the king’s wrath arise, and he say unto thee, Wherefore approached ye
so nigh unto the city when ye did fight? knew ye not that they would
shoot from the wall? 11:21 Who smote Abimelech the son of
Jerubbesheth? did not a woman cast a piece of a millstone upon him
from the wall, that he died in Thebez? why went ye nigh the wall? then
say thou, Thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.

11:22 So the messenger went, and came and shewed David all that Joab
had sent him for.

11:23 And the messenger said unto David, Surely the men prevailed
against us, and came out unto us into the field, and we were upon them
even unto the entering of the gate.

11:24 And the shooters shot from off the wall upon thy servants; and
some of the king’s servants be dead, and thy servant Uriah the Hittite
is dead also.

11:25 Then David said unto the messenger, Thus shalt thou say unto
Joab, Let not this thing displease thee, for the sword devoureth one
as well as another: make thy battle more strong against the city, and
overthrow it: and encourage thou him.

11:26 And when the wife of Uriah heard that Uriah her husband was
dead, she mourned for her husband.

11:27 And when the mourning was past, David sent and fetched her to
his house, and she became his wife, and bare him a son. But the thing
that David had done displeased the LORD.

12:1 And the LORD sent Nathan unto David. And he came unto him, and
said unto him, There were two men in one city; the one rich, and the
other poor.

12:2 The rich man had exceeding many flocks and herds: 12:3 But the
poor man had nothing, save one little ewe lamb, which he had bought
and nourished up: and it grew up together with him, and with his
children; it did eat of his own meat, and drank of his own cup, and
lay in his bosom, and was unto him as a daughter.

12:4 And there came a traveller unto the rich man, and he spared to
take of his own flock and of his own herd, to dress for the wayfaring
man that was come unto him; but took the poor man’s lamb, and dressed
it for the man that was come to him.

12:5 And David’s anger was greatly kindled against the man; and he
said to Nathan, As the LORD liveth, the man that hath done this thing
shall surely die: 12:6 And he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because
he did this thing, and because he had no pity.

12:7 And Nathan said to David, Thou art the man. Thus saith the LORD
God of Israel, I anointed thee king over Israel, and I delivered thee
out of the hand of Saul; 12:8 And I gave thee thy master’s house, and
thy master’s wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel
and of Judah; and if that had been too little, I would moreover have
given unto thee such and such things.

12:9 Wherefore hast thou despised the commandment of the LORD, to do
evil in his sight? thou hast killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword,
and hast taken his wife to be thy wife, and hast slain him with the
sword of the children of Ammon.

12:10 Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house;
because thou hast despised me, and hast taken the wife of Uriah the
Hittite to be thy wife.

12:11 Thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will raise up evil against thee
out of thine own house, and I will take thy wives before thine eyes,
and give them unto thy neighbour, and he shall lie with thy wives in
the sight of this sun.

12:12 For thou didst it secretly: but I will do this thing before all
Israel, and before the sun.

12:13 And David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the LORD. And
Nathan said unto David, The LORD also hath put away thy sin; thou
shalt not die.

12:14 Howbeit, because by this deed thou hast given great occasion to
the enemies of the LORD to blaspheme, the child also that is born unto
thee shall surely die.

12:15 And Nathan departed unto his house. And the LORD struck the
child that Uriah’s wife bare unto David, and it was very sick.

12:16 David therefore besought God for the child; and David fasted,
and went in, and lay all night upon the earth.

12:17 And the elders of his house arose, and went to him, to raise him
up from the earth: but he would not, neither did he eat bread with
them.

12:18 And it came to pass on the seventh day, that the child died. And
the servants of David feared to tell him that the child was dead: for
they said, Behold, while the child was yet alive, we spake unto him,
and he would not hearken unto our voice: how will he then vex himself,
if we tell him that the child is dead? 12:19 But when David saw that
his servants whispered, David perceived that the child was dead:
therefore David said unto his servants, Is the child dead? And they
said, He is dead.

12:20 Then David arose from the earth, and washed, and anointed
himself, and changed his apparel, and came into the house of the LORD,
and worshipped: then he came to his own house; and when he required,
they set bread before him, and he did eat.

12:21 Then said his servants unto him, What thing is this that thou
hast done? thou didst fast and weep for the child, while it was alive;
but when the child was dead, thou didst rise and eat bread.

12:22 And he said, While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept:
for I said, Who can tell whether GOD will be gracious to me, that the
child may live? 12:23 But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast?
can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return
to me.

12:24 And David comforted Bathsheba his wife, and went in unto her,
and lay with her: and she bare a son, and he called his name Solomon:
and the LORD loved him.

12:25 And he sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet; and he called his
name Jedidiah, because of the LORD.

12:26 And Joab fought against Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and
took the royal city.

12:27 And Joab sent messengers to David, and said, I have fought
against Rabbah, and have taken the city of waters.

12:28 Now therefore gather the rest of the people together, and encamp
against the city, and take it: lest I take the city, and it be called
after my name.

12:29 And David gathered all the people together, and went to Rabbah,
and fought against it, and took it.

12:30 And he took their king’s crown from off his head, the weight
whereof was a talent of gold with the precious stones: and it was set
on David’s head. And he brought forth the spoil of the city in great
abundance.

12:31 And he brought forth the people that were therein, and put them
under saws, and under harrows of iron, and under axes of iron, and
made them pass through the brick-kiln: and thus did he unto all the
cities of the children of Ammon. So David and all the people returned
unto Jerusalem.

13:1 And it came to pass after this, that Absalom the son of David had
a fair sister, whose name was Tamar; and Amnon the son of David loved
her.

13:2 And Amnon was so vexed, that he fell sick for his sister Tamar;
for she was a virgin; and Amnon thought it hard for him to do anything
to her.

13:3 But Amnon had a friend, whose name was Jonadab, the son of
Shimeah David’s brother: and Jonadab was a very subtil man.

13:4 And he said unto him, Why art thou, being the king’s son, lean
from day to day? wilt thou not tell me? And Amnon said unto him, I
love Tamar, my brother Absalom’s sister.

13:5 And Jonadab said unto him, Lay thee down on thy bed, and make
thyself sick: and when thy father cometh to see thee, say unto him, I
pray thee, let my sister Tamar come, and give me meat, and dress the
meat in my sight, that I may see it, and eat it at her hand.

13:6 So Amnon lay down, and made himself sick: and when the king was
come to see him, Amnon said unto the king, I pray thee, let Tamar my
sister come, and make me a couple of cakes in my sight, that I may eat
at her hand.

13:7 Then David sent home to Tamar, saying, Go now to thy brother
Amnon’s house, and dress him meat.

13:8 So Tamar went to her brother Amnon’s house; and he was laid down.
And she took flour, and kneaded it, and made cakes in his sight, and
did bake the cakes.

13:9 And she took a pan, and poured them out before him; but he
refused to eat. And Amnon said, Have out all men from me. And they
went out every man from him.

13:10 And Amnon said unto Tamar, Bring the meat into the chamber, that
I may eat of thine hand. And Tamar took the cakes which she had made,
and brought them into the chamber to Amnon her brother.

13:11 And when she had brought them unto him to eat, he took hold of
her, and said unto her, Come lie with me, my sister.

13:12 And she answered him, Nay, my brother, do not force me; for no
such thing ought to be done in Israel: do not thou this folly.

13:13 And I, whither shall I cause my shame to go? and as for thee,
thou shalt be as one of the fools in Israel. Now therefore, I pray
thee, speak unto the king; for he will not withhold me from thee.

13:14 Howbeit he would not hearken unto her voice: but, being stronger
than she, forced her, and lay with her.

13:15 Then Amnon hated her exceedingly; so that the hatred wherewith
he hated her was greater than the love wherewith he had loved her. And
Amnon said unto her, Arise, be gone.

13:16 And she said unto him, There is no cause: this evil in sending
me away is greater than the other that thou didst unto me. But he
would not hearken unto her.

13:17 Then he called his servant that ministered unto him, and said,
Put now this woman out from me, and bolt the door after her.

13:18 And she had a garment of divers colours upon her: for with such
robes were the king’s daughters that were virgins apparelled. Then his
servant brought her out, and bolted the door after her.

13:19 And Tamar put ashes on her head, and rent her garment of divers
colours that was on her, and laid her hand on her head, and went on
crying.

13:20 And Absalom her brother said unto her, Hath Amnon thy brother
been with thee? but hold now thy peace, my sister: he is thy brother;
regard not this thing. So Tamar remained desolate in her brother
Absalom’s house.

13:21 But when king David heard of all these things, he was very
wroth.

13:22 And Absalom spake unto his brother Amnon neither good nor bad:
for Absalom hated Amnon, because he had forced his sister Tamar.

13:23 And it came to pass after two full years, that Absalom had
sheepshearers in Baalhazor, which is beside Ephraim: and Absalom
invited all the king’s sons.

13:24 And Absalom came to the king, and said, Behold now, thy servant
hath sheepshearers; let the king, I beseech thee, and his servants go
with thy servant.

13:25 And the king said to Absalom, Nay, my son, let us not all now
go, lest we be chargeable unto thee. And he pressed him: howbeit he
would not go, but blessed him.

13:26 Then said Absalom, If not, I pray thee, let my brother Amnon go
with us. And the king said unto him, Why should he go with thee?
13:27 But Absalom pressed him, that he let Amnon and all the king’s
sons go with him.

13:28 Now Absalom had commanded his servants, saying, Mark ye now when
Amnon’s heart is merry with wine, and when I say unto you, Smite
Amnon; then kill him, fear not: have not I commanded you? be
courageous, and be valiant.

13:29 And the servants of Absalom did unto Amnon as Absalom had
commanded.

Then all the king’s sons arose, and every man gat him up upon his
mule, and fled.

13:30 And it came to pass, while they were in the way, that tidings
came to David, saying, Absalom hath slain all the king’s sons, and
there is not one of them left.

13:31 Then the king arose, and tare his garments, and lay on the
earth; and all his servants stood by with their clothes rent.

13:32 And Jonadab, the son of Shimeah David’s brother, answered and
said, Let not my lord suppose that they have slain all the young men
the king’s sons; for Amnon only is dead: for by the appointment of
Absalom this hath been determined from the day that he forced his
sister Tamar.

13:33 Now therefore let not my lord the king take the thing to his
heart, to think that all the king’s sons are dead: for Amnon only is
dead.

13:34 But Absalom fled. And the young man that kept the watch lifted
up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came much people by the
way of the hill side behind him.

13:35 And Jonadab said unto the king, Behold, the king’s sons come: as
thy servant said, so it is.

13:36 And it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of speaking,
that, behold, the king’s sons came, and lifted up their voice and
wept: and the king also and all his servants wept very sore.

13:37 But Absalom fled, and went to Talmai, the son of Ammihud, king
of Geshur. And David mourned for his son every day.

13:38 So Absalom fled, and went to Geshur, and was there three years.

13:39 And the soul of king David longed to go forth unto Absalom: for
he was comforted concerning Amnon, seeing he was dead.

14:1 Now Joab the son of Zeruiah perceived that the king’s heart was
toward Absalom.

14:2 And Joab sent to Tekoah, and fetched thence a wise woman, and
said unto her, I pray thee, feign thyself to be a mourner, and put on
now mourning apparel, and anoint not thyself with oil, but be as a
woman that had a long time mourned for the dead: 14:3 And come to the
king, and speak on this manner unto him. So Joab put the words in her
mouth.

14:4 And when the woman of Tekoah spake to the king, she fell on her
face to the ground, and did obeisance, and said, Help, O king.

14:5 And the king said unto her, What aileth thee? And she answered, I
am indeed a widow woman, and mine husband is dead.

14:6 And thy handmaid had two sons, and they two strove together in
the field, and there was none to part them, but the one smote the
other, and slew him.

14:7 And, behold, the whole family is risen against thine handmaid,
and they said, Deliver him that smote his brother, that we may kill
him, for the life of his brother whom he slew; and we will destroy the
heir also: and so they shall quench my coal which is left, and shall
not leave to my husband neither name nor remainder upon the earth.

14:8 And the king said unto the woman, Go to thine house, and I will
give charge concerning thee.

14:9 And the woman of Tekoah said unto the king, My lord, O king, the
iniquity be on me, and on my father’s house: and the king and his
throne be guiltless.

14:10 And the king said, Whoever saith ought unto thee, bring him to
me, and he shall not touch thee any more.

14:11 Then said she, I pray thee, let the king remember the LORD thy
God, that thou wouldest not suffer the revengers of blood to destroy
any more, lest they destroy my son. And he said, As the LORD liveth,
there shall not one hair of thy son fall to the earth.

14:12 Then the woman said, Let thine handmaid, I pray thee, speak one
word unto my lord the king. And he said, Say on.

14:13 And the woman said, Wherefore then hast thou thought such a
thing against the people of God? for the king doth speak this thing as
one which is faulty, in that the king doth not fetch home again his
banished.

14:14 For we must needs die, and are as water spilt on the ground,
which cannot be gathered up again; neither doth God respect any
person: yet doth he devise means, that his banished be not expelled
from him.

14:15 Now therefore that I am come to speak of this thing unto my lord
the king, it is because the people have made me afraid: and thy
handmaid said, I will now speak unto the king; it may be that the king
will perform the request of his handmaid.

14:16 For the king will hear, to deliver his handmaid out of the hand
of the man that would destroy me and my son together out of the
inheritance of God.

14:17 Then thine handmaid said, The word of my lord the king shall now
be comfortable: for as an angel of God, so is my lord the king to
discern good and bad: therefore the LORD thy God will be with thee.

14:18 Then the king answered and said unto the woman, Hide not from
me, I pray thee, the thing that I shall ask thee. And the woman said,
Let my lord the king now speak.

14:19 And the king said, Is not the hand of Joab with thee in all
this? And the woman answered and said, As thy soul liveth, my lord
the king, none can turn to the right hand or to the left from ought
that my lord the king hath spoken: for thy servant Joab, he bade me,
and he put all these words in the mouth of thine handmaid: 14:20 To
fetch about this form of speech hath thy servant Joab done this thing:
and my lord is wise, according to the wisdom of an angel of God, to
know all things that are in the earth.

14:21 And the king said unto Joab, Behold now, I have done this thing:
go therefore, bring the young man Absalom again.

14:22 And Joab fell to the ground on his face, and bowed himself, and
thanked the king: and Joab said, To day thy servant knoweth that I
have found grace in thy sight, my lord, O king, in that the king hath
fulfilled the request of his servant.

14:23 So Joab arose and went to Geshur, and brought Absalom to
Jerusalem.

14:24 And the king said, Let him turn to his own house, and let him
not see my face. So Absalom returned to his own house, and saw not the
king’s face.

14:25 But in all Israel there was none to be so much praised as
Absalom for his beauty: from the sole of his foot even to the crown of
his head there was no blemish in him.

14:26 And when he polled his head, (for it was at every year’s end
that he polled it: because the hair was heavy on him, therefore he
polled it:) he weighed the hair of his head at two hundred shekels
after the king’s weight.

14:27 And unto Absalom there were born three sons, and one daughter,
whose name was Tamar: she was a woman of a fair countenance.

14:28 So Absalom dwelt two full years in Jerusalem, and saw not the
king’s face.

14:29 Therefore Absalom sent for Joab, to have sent him to the king;
but he would not come to him: and when he sent again the second time,
he would not come.

14:30 Therefore he said unto his servants, See, Joab’s field is near
mine, and he hath barley there; go and set it on fire. And Absalom’s
servants set the field on fire.

14:31 Then Joab arose, and came to Absalom unto his house, and said
unto him, Wherefore have thy servants set my field on fire? 14:32 And
Absalom answered Joab, Behold, I sent unto thee, saying, Come hither,
that I may send thee to the king, to say, Wherefore am I come from
Geshur? it had been good for me to have been there still: now
therefore let me see the king’s face; and if there be any iniquity in
me, let him kill me.

14:33 So Joab came to the king, and told him: and when he had called
for Absalom, he came to the king, and bowed himself on his face to the
ground before the king: and the king kissed Absalom.

15:1 And it came to pass after this, that Absalom prepared him
chariots and horses, and fifty men to run before him.

15:2 And Absalom rose up early, and stood beside the way of the gate:
and it was so, that when any man that had a controversy came to the
king for judgment, then Absalom called unto him, and said, Of what
city art thou? And he said, Thy servant is of one of the tribes of
Israel.

15:3 And Absalom said unto him, See, thy matters are good and right;
but there is no man deputed of the king to hear thee.

15:4 Absalom said moreover, Oh that I were made judge in the land,
that every man which hath any suit or cause might come unto me, and I
would do him justice! 15:5 And it was so, that when any man came nigh
to him to do him obeisance, he put forth his hand, and took him, and
kissed him.

15:6 And on this manner did Absalom to all Israel that came to the
king for judgment: so Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel.

15:7 And it came to pass after forty years, that Absalom said unto the
king, I pray thee, let me go and pay my vow, which I have vowed unto
the LORD, in Hebron.

15:8 For thy servant vowed a vow while I abode at Geshur in Syria,
saying, If the LORD shall bring me again indeed to Jerusalem, then I
will serve the LORD.

15:9 And the king said unto him, Go in peace. So he arose, and went to
Hebron.

15:10 But Absalom sent spies throughout all the tribes of Israel,
saying, As soon as ye hear the sound of the trumpet, then ye shall
say, Absalom reigneth in Hebron.

15:11 And with Absalom went two hundred men out of Jerusalem, that
were called; and they went in their simplicity, and they knew not any
thing.

15:12 And Absalom sent for Ahithophel the Gilonite, David’s
counsellor, from his city, even from Giloh, while he offered
sacrifices. And the conspiracy was strong; for the people increased
continually with Absalom.

15:13 And there came a messenger to David, saying, The hearts of the
men of Israel are after Absalom.

15:14 And David said unto all his servants that were with him at
Jerusalem, Arise, and let us flee; for we shall not else escape from
Absalom: make speed to depart, lest he overtake us suddenly, and bring
evil upon us, and smite the city with the edge of the sword.

15:15 And the king’s servants said unto the king, Behold, thy servants
are ready to do whatsoever my lord the king shall appoint.

15:16 And the king went forth, and all his household after him. And
the king left ten women, which were concubines, to keep the house.

15:17 And the king went forth, and all the people after him, and
tarried in a place that was far off.

15:18 And all his servants passed on beside him; and all the
Cherethites, and all the Pelethites, and all the Gittites, six hundred
men which came after him from Gath, passed on before the king.

15:19 Then said the king to Ittai the Gittite, Wherefore goest thou
also with us? return to thy place, and abide with the king: for thou
art a stranger, and also an exile.

15:20 Whereas thou camest but yesterday, should I this day make thee
go up and down with us? seeing I go whither I may, return thou, and
take back thy brethren: mercy and truth be with thee.

15:21 And Ittai answered the king, and said, As the LORD liveth, and
as my lord the king liveth, surely in what place my lord the king
shall be, whether in death or life, even there also will thy servant
be.

15:22 And David said to Ittai, Go and pass over. And Ittai the Gittite
passed over, and all his men, and all the little ones that were with
him.

15:23 And all the country wept with a loud voice, and all the people
passed over: the king also himself passed over the brook Kidron, and
all the people passed over, toward the way of the wilderness.

15:24 And lo Zadok also, and all the Levites were with him, bearing
the ark of the covenant of God: and they set down the ark of God; and
Abiathar went up, until all the people had done passing out of the
city.

15:25 And the king said unto Zadok, Carry back the ark of God into the
city: if I shall find favour in the eyes of the LORD, he will bring me
again, and shew me both it, and his habitation: 15:26 But if he thus
say, I have no delight in thee; behold, here am I, let him do to me as
seemeth good unto him.

15:27 The king said also unto Zadok the priest, Art not thou a seer?
return into the city in peace, and your two sons with you, Ahimaaz thy
son, and Jonathan the son of Abiathar.

15:28 See, I will tarry in the plain of the wilderness, until there
come word from you to certify me.

15:29 Zadok therefore and Abiathar carried the ark of God again to
Jerusalem: and they tarried there.

15:30 And David went up by the ascent of mount Olivet, and wept as he
went up, and had his head covered, and he went barefoot: and all the
people that was with him covered every man his head, and they went up,
weeping as they went up.

15:31 And one told David, saying, Ahithophel is among the conspirators
with Absalom. And David said, O LORD, I pray thee, turn the counsel of
Ahithophel into foolishness.

15:32 And it came to pass, that when David was come to the top of the
mount, where he worshipped God, behold, Hushai the Archite came to
meet him with his coat rent, and earth upon his head: 15:33 Unto whom
David said, If thou passest on with me, then thou shalt be a burden
unto me: 15:34 But if thou return to the city, and say unto Absalom, I
will be thy servant, O king; as I have been thy father’s servant
hitherto, so will I now also be thy servant: then mayest thou for me
defeat the counsel of Ahithophel.

15:35 And hast thou not there with thee Zadok and Abiathar the
priests? therefore it shall be, that what thing soever thou shalt
hear out of the king’s house, thou shalt tell it to Zadok and Abiathar
the priests.

15:36 Behold, they have there with them their two sons, Ahimaaz
Zadok’s son, and Jonathan Abiathar’s son; and by them ye shall send
unto me every thing that ye can hear.

15:37 So Hushai David’s friend came into the city, and Absalom came
into Jerusalem.

16:1 And when David was a little past the top of the hill, behold,
Ziba the servant of Mephibosheth met him, with a couple of asses
saddled, and upon them two hundred loaves of bread, and an hundred
bunches of raisins, and an hundred of summer fruits, and a bottle of
wine.

16:2 And the king said unto Ziba, What meanest thou by these? And Ziba
said, The asses be for the king’s household to ride on; and the bread
and summer fruit for the young men to eat; and the wine, that such as
be faint in the wilderness may drink.

16:3 And the king said, And where is thy master’s son? And Ziba said
unto the king, Behold, he abideth at Jerusalem: for he said, To day
shall the house of Israel restore me the kingdom of my father.

16:4 Then said the king to Ziba, Behold, thine are all that pertained
unto Mephibosheth. And Ziba said, I humbly beseech thee that I may
find grace in thy sight, my lord, O king.

16:5 And when king David came to Bahurim, behold, thence came out a
man of the family of the house of Saul, whose name was Shimei, the son
of Gera: he came forth, and cursed still as he came.

16:6 And he cast stones at David, and at all the servants of king
David: and all the people and all the mighty men were on his right
hand and on his left.

16:7 And thus said Shimei when he cursed, Come out, come out, thou
bloody man, and thou man of Belial: 16:8 The LORD hath returned upon
thee all the blood of the house of Saul, in whose stead thou hast
reigned; and the LORD hath delivered the kingdom into the hand of
Absalom thy son: and, behold, thou art taken in thy mischief, because
thou art a bloody man.

16:9 Then said Abishai the son of Zeruiah unto the king, Why should
this dead dog curse my lord the king? let me go over, I pray thee, and
take off his head.

16:10 And the king said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of
Zeruiah? so let him curse, because the LORD hath said unto him, Curse
David. Who shall then say, Wherefore hast thou done so? 16:11 And
David said to Abishai, and to all his servants, Behold, my son, which
came forth of my bowels, seeketh my life: how much more now may this
Benjamite do it? let him alone, and let him curse; for the LORD hath
bidden him.

16:12 It may be that the LORD will look on mine affliction, and that
the LORD will requite me good for his cursing this day.

16:13 And as David and his men went by the way, Shimei went along on
the hill’s side over against him, and cursed as he went, and threw
stones at him, and cast dust.

16:14 And the king, and all the people that were with him, came weary,
and refreshed themselves there.

16:15 And Absalom, and all the people the men of Israel, came to
Jerusalem, and Ahithophel with him.

16:16 And it came to pass, when Hushai the Archite, David’s friend,
was come unto Absalom, that Hushai said unto Absalom, God save the
king, God save the king.

16:17 And Absalom said to Hushai, Is this thy kindness to thy friend?
why wentest thou not with thy friend? 16:18 And Hushai said unto
Absalom, Nay; but whom the LORD, and this people, and all the men of
Israel, choose, his will I be, and with him will I abide.

16:19 And again, whom should I serve? should I not serve in the
presence of his son? as I have served in thy father’s presence, so
will I be in thy presence.

16:20 Then said Absalom to Ahithophel, Give counsel among you what we
shall do.

16:21 And Ahithophel said unto Absalom, Go in unto thy father’s
concubines, which he hath left to keep the house; and all Israel shall
hear that thou art abhorred of thy father: then shall the hands of all
that are with thee be strong.

16:22 So they spread Absalom a tent upon the top of the house; and
Absalom went in unto his father’s concubines in the sight of all
Israel.

16:23 And the counsel of Ahithophel, which he counselled in those
days, was as if a man had enquired at the oracle of God: so was all
the counsel of Ahithophel both with David and with Absalom.

17:1 Moreover Ahithophel said unto Absalom, Let me now choose out
twelve thousand men, and I will arise and pursue after David this
night: 17:2 And I will come upon him while he is weary and weak
handed, and will make him afraid: and all the people that are with him
shall flee; and I will smite the king only: 17:3 And I will bring back
all the people unto thee: the man whom thou seekest is as if all
returned: so all the people shall be in peace.

17:4 And the saying pleased Absalom well, and all the elders of
Israel.

17:5 Then said Absalom, Call now Hushai the Archite also, and let us
hear likewise what he saith.

17:6 And when Hushai was come to Absalom, Absalom spake unto him,
saying, Ahithophel hath spoken after this manner: shall we do after
his saying? if not; speak thou.

17:7 And Hushai said unto Absalom, The counsel that Ahithophel hath
given is not good at this time.

17:8 For, said Hushai, thou knowest thy father and his men, that they
be mighty men, and they be chafed in their minds, as a bear robbed of
her whelps in the field: and thy father is a man of war, and will not
lodge with the people.

17:9 Behold, he is hid now in some pit, or in some other place: and it
will come to pass, when some of them be overthrown at the first, that
whosoever heareth it will say, There is a slaughter among the people
that follow Absalom.

17:10 And he also that is valiant, whose heart is as the heart of a
lion, shall utterly melt: for all Israel knoweth that thy father is a
mighty man, and they which be with him are valiant men.

17:11 Therefore I counsel that all Israel be generally gathered unto
thee, from Dan even to Beersheba, as the sand that is by the sea for
multitude; and that thou go to battle in thine own person.

17:12 So shall we come upon him in some place where he shall be found,
and we will light upon him as the dew falleth on the ground: and of
him and of all the men that are with him there shall not be left so
much as one.

17:13 Moreover, if he be gotten into a city, then shall all Israel
bring ropes to that city, and we will draw it into the river, until
there be not one small stone found there.

17:14 And Absalom and all the men of Israel said, The counsel of
Hushai the Archite is better than the counsel of Ahithophel. For the
LORD had appointed to defeat the good counsel of Ahithophel, to the
intent that the LORD might bring evil upon Absalom.

17:15 Then said Hushai unto Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, Thus
and thus did Ahithophel counsel Absalom and the elders of Israel; and
thus and thus have I counselled.

17:16 Now therefore send quickly, and tell David, saying, Lodge not
this night in the plains of the wilderness, but speedily pass over;
lest the king be swallowed up, and all the people that are with him.

17:17 Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz stayed by Enrogel; for they might not
be seen to come into the city: and a wench went and told them; and
they went and told king David.

17:18 Nevertheless a lad saw them, and told Absalom: but they went
both of them away quickly, and came to a man’s house in Bahurim, which
had a well in his court; whither they went down.

17:19 And the woman took and spread a covering over the well’s mouth,
and spread ground corn thereon; and the thing was not known.

17:20 And when Absalom’s servants came to the woman to the house, they
said, Where is Ahimaaz and Jonathan? And the woman said unto them,
They be gone over the brook of water. And when they had sought and
could not find them, they returned to Jerusalem.

17:21 And it came to pass, after they were departed, that they came up
out of the well, and went and told king David, and said unto David,
Arise, and pass quickly over the water: for thus hath Ahithophel
counselled against you.

17:22 Then David arose, and all the people that were with him, and
they passed over Jordan: by the morning light there lacked not one of
them that was not gone over Jordan.

17:23 And when Ahithophel saw that his counsel was not followed, he
saddled his ass, and arose, and gat him home to his house, to his
city, and put his household in order, and hanged himself, and died,
and was buried in the sepulchre of his father.

17:24 Then David came to Mahanaim. And Absalom passed over Jordan, he
and all the men of Israel with him.

17:25 And Absalom made Amasa captain of the host instead of Joab:
which Amasa was a man’s son, whose name was Ithra an Israelite, that
went in to Abigail the daughter of Nahash, sister to Zeruiah Joab’s
mother.

17:26 So Israel and Absalom pitched in the land of Gilead.

17:27 And it came to pass, when David was come to Mahanaim, that Shobi
the son of Nahash of Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and Machir the
son of Ammiel of Lodebar, and Barzillai the Gileadite of Rogelim,
17:28 Brought beds, and basons, and earthen vessels, and wheat, and
barley, and flour, and parched corn, and beans, and lentiles, and
parched pulse, 17:29 And honey, and butter, and sheep, and cheese of
kine, for David, and for the people that were with him, to eat: for
they said, The people is hungry, and weary, and thirsty, in the
wilderness.

18:1 And David numbered the people that were with him, and set
captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds over them.

18:2 And David sent forth a third part of the people under the hand of
Joab, and a third part under the hand of Abishai the son of Zeruiah,
Joab’s brother, and a third part under the hand of Ittai the Gittite.
And the king said unto the people, I will surely go forth with you
myself also.

18:3 But the people answered, Thou shalt not go forth: for if we flee
away, they will not care for us; neither if half of us die, will they
care for us: but now thou art worth ten thousand of us: therefore now
it is better that thou succour us out of the city.

18:4 And the king said unto them, What seemeth you best I will do. And
the king stood by the gate side, and all the people came out by
hundreds and by thousands.

18:5 And the king commanded Joab and Abishai and Ittai, saying, Deal
gently for my sake with the young man, even with Absalom. And all the
people heard when the king gave all the captains charge concerning
Absalom.

18:6 So the people went out into the field against Israel: and the
battle was in the wood of Ephraim; 18:7 Where the people of Israel
were slain before the servants of David, and there was there a great
slaughter that day of twenty thousand men.

18:8 For the battle was there scattered over the face of all the
country: and the wood devoured more people that day than the sword
devoured.

18:9 And Absalom met the servants of David. And Absalom rode upon a
mule, and the mule went under the thick boughs of a great oak, and his
head caught hold of the oak, and he was taken up between the heaven
and the earth; and the mule that was under him went away.

18:10 And a certain man saw it, and told Joab, and said, Behold, I saw
Absalom hanged in an oak.

18:11 And Joab said unto the man that told him, And, behold, thou
sawest him, and why didst thou not smite him there to the ground? and
I would have given thee ten shekels of silver, and a girdle.

18:12 And the man said unto Joab, Though I should receive a thousand
shekels of silver in mine hand, yet would I not put forth mine hand
against the king’s son: for in our hearing the king charged thee and
Abishai and Ittai, saying, Beware that none touch the young man
Absalom.

18:13 Otherwise I should have wrought falsehood against mine own life:
for there is no matter hid from the king, and thou thyself wouldest
have set thyself against me.

18:14 Then said Joab, I may not tarry thus with thee. And he took
three darts in his hand, and thrust them through the heart of Absalom,
while he was yet alive in the midst of the oak.

18:15 And ten young men that bare Joab’s armour compassed about and
smote Absalom, and slew him.

18:16 And Joab blew the trumpet, and the people returned from pursuing
after Israel: for Joab held back the people.

18:17 And they took Absalom, and cast him into a great pit in the
wood, and laid a very great heap of stones upon him: and all Israel
fled every one to his tent.

18:18 Now Absalom in his lifetime had taken and reared up for himself
a pillar, which is in the king’s dale: for he said, I have no son to
keep my name in remembrance: and he called the pillar after his own
name: and it is called unto this day, Absalom’s place.

18:19 Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok, Let me now run, and bear the
king tidings, how that the LORD hath avenged him of his enemies.

18:20 And Joab said unto him, Thou shalt not bear tidings this day,
but thou shalt bear tidings another day: but this day thou shalt bear
no tidings, because the king’s son is dead.

18:21 Then said Joab to Cushi, Go tell the king what thou hast seen.
And Cushi bowed himself unto Joab, and ran.

18:22 Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok yet again to Joab, But
howsoever, let me, I pray thee, also run after Cushi. And Joab said,
Wherefore wilt thou run, my son, seeing that thou hast no tidings
ready? 18:23 But howsoever, said he, let me run. And he said unto
him, Run. Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of the plain, and overran Cushi.

18:24 And David sat between the two gates: and the watchman went up to
the roof over the gate unto the wall, and lifted up his eyes, and
looked, and behold a man running alone.

18:25 And the watchman cried, and told the king. And the king said, If
he be alone, there is tidings in his mouth. And he came apace, and
drew near.

18:26 And the watchman saw another man running: and the watchman
called unto the porter, and said, Behold another man running alone.
And the king said, He also bringeth tidings.

18:27 And the watchman said, Me thinketh the running of the foremost
is like the running of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok. And the king said, He
is a good man, and cometh with good tidings.

18:28 And Ahimaaz called, and said unto the king, All is well. And he
fell down to the earth upon his face before the king, and said,
Blessed be the LORD thy God, which hath delivered up the men that
lifted up their hand against my lord the king.

18:29 And the king said, Is the young man Absalom safe? And Ahimaaz
answered, When Joab sent the king’s servant, and me thy servant, I saw
a great tumult, but I knew not what it was.

18:30 And the king said unto him, Turn aside, and stand here. And he
turned aside, and stood still.

18:31 And, behold, Cushi came; and Cushi said, Tidings, my lord the
king: for the LORD hath avenged thee this day of all them that rose up
against thee.

18:32 And the king said unto Cushi, Is the young man Absalom safe? And
Cushi answered, The enemies of my lord the king, and all that rise
against thee to do thee hurt, be as that young man is.

18:33 And the king was much moved, and went up to the chamber over the
gate, and wept: and as he went, thus he said, O my son Absalom, my
son, my son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son,
my son! 19:1 And it was told Joab, Behold, the king weepeth and
mourneth for Absalom.

19:2 And the victory that day was turned into mourning unto all the
people: for the people heard say that day how the king was grieved for
his son.

19:3 And the people gat them by stealth that day into the city, as
people being ashamed steal away when they flee in battle.

19:4 But the king covered his face, and the king cried with a loud
voice, O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son, my son! 19:5 And Joab
came into the house to the king, and said, Thou hast shamed this day
the faces of all thy servants, which this day have saved thy life, and
the lives of thy sons and of thy daughters, and the lives of thy
wives, and the lives of thy concubines; 19:6 In that thou lovest thine
enemies, and hatest thy friends. For thou hast declared this day, that
thou regardest neither princes nor servants: for this day I perceive,
that if Absalom had lived, and all we had died this day, then it had
pleased thee well.

19:7 Now therefore arise, go forth, and speak comfortably unto thy
servants: for I swear by the LORD, if thou go not forth, there will
not tarry one with thee this night: and that will be worse unto thee
than all the evil that befell thee from thy youth until now.

19:8 Then the king arose, and sat in the gate. And they told unto all
the people, saying, Behold, the king doth sit in the gate. And all the
people came before the king: for Israel had fled every man to his
tent.

19:9 And all the people were at strife throughout all the tribes of
Israel, saying, The king saved us out of the hand of our enemies, and
he delivered us out of the hand of the Philistines; and now he is fled
out of the land for Absalom.

19:10 And Absalom, whom we anointed over us, is dead in battle. Now
therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing the king back? 19:11
And king David sent to Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, saying,
Speak unto the elders of Judah, saying, Why are ye the last to bring
the king back to his house? seeing the speech of all Israel is come to
the king, even to his house.

19:12 Ye are my brethren, ye are my bones and my flesh: wherefore then
are ye the last to bring back the king? 19:13 And say ye to Amasa,
Art thou not of my bone, and of my flesh? God do so to me, and more
also, if thou be not captain of the host before me continually in the
room of Joab.

19:14 And he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, even as the
heart of one man; so that they sent this word unto the king, Return
thou, and all thy servants.

19:15 So the king returned, and came to Jordan. And Judah came to
Gilgal, to go to meet the king, to conduct the king over Jordan.

19:16 And Shimei the son of Gera, a Benjamite, which was of Bahurim,
hasted and came down with the men of Judah to meet king David.

19:17 And there were a thousand men of Benjamin with him, and Ziba the
servant of the house of Saul, and his fifteen sons and his twenty
servants with him; and they went over Jordan before the king.

19:18 And there went over a ferry boat to carry over the king’s
household, and to do what he thought good. And Shimei the son of Gera
fell down before the king, as he was come over Jordan; 19:19 And said
unto the king, Let not my lord impute iniquity unto me, neither do
thou remember that which thy servant did perversely the day that my
lord the king went out of Jerusalem, that the king should take it to
his heart.

19:20 For thy servant doth know that I have sinned: therefore, behold,
I am come the first this day of all the house of Joseph to go down to
meet my lord the king.

19:21 But Abishai the son of Zeruiah answered and said, Shall not
Shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed the LORD’s
anointed? 19:22 And David said, What have I to do with you, ye sons
of Zeruiah, that ye should this day be adversaries unto me? shall
there any man be put to death this day in Israel? for do not I know
that I am this day king over Israel? 19:23 Therefore the king said
unto Shimei, Thou shalt not die. And the king sware unto him.

19:24 And Mephibosheth the son of Saul came down to meet the king, and
had neither dressed his feet, nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his
clothes, from the day the king departed until the day he came again in
peace.

19:25 And it came to pass, when he was come to Jerusalem to meet the
king, that the king said unto him, Wherefore wentest not thou with me,
Mephibosheth? 19:26 And he answered, My lord, O king, my servant
deceived me: for thy servant said, I will saddle me an ass, that I may
ride thereon, and go to the king; because thy servant is lame.

19:27 And he hath slandered thy servant unto my lord the king; but my
lord the king is as an angel of God: do therefore what is good in
thine eyes.

19:28 For all of my father’s house were but dead men before my lord
the king: yet didst thou set thy servant among them that did eat at
thine own table. What right therefore have I yet to cry any more unto
the king? 19:29 And the king said unto him, Why speakest thou any
more of thy matters? I have said, Thou and Ziba divide the land.

19:30 And Mephibosheth said unto the king, Yea, let him take all,
forasmuch as my lord the king is come again in peace unto his own
house.

19:31 And Barzillai the Gileadite came down from Rogelim, and went
over Jordan with the king, to conduct him over Jordan.

19:32 Now Barzillai was a very aged man, even fourscore years old: and
he had provided the king of sustenance while he lay at Mahanaim; for
he was a very great man.

19:33 And the king said unto Barzillai, Come thou over with me, and I
will feed thee with me in Jerusalem.

19:34 And Barzillai said unto the king, How long have I to live, that
I should go up with the king unto Jerusalem? 19:35 I am this day
fourscore years old: and can I discern between good and evil? can thy
servant taste what I eat or what I drink? can I hear any more the
voice of singing men and singing women? wherefore then should thy
servant be yet a burden unto my lord the king? 19:36 Thy servant will
go a little way over Jordan with the king: and why should the king
recompense it me with such a reward? 19:37 Let thy servant, I pray
thee, turn back again, that I may die in mine own city, and be buried
by the grave of my father and of my mother. But behold thy servant
Chimham; let him go over with my lord the king; and do to him what
shall seem good unto thee.

19:38 And the king answered, Chimham shall go over with me, and I will
do to him that which shall seem good unto thee: and whatsoever thou
shalt require of me, that will I do for thee.

19:39 And all the people went over Jordan. And when the king was come
over, the king kissed Barzillai, and blessed him; and he returned unto
his own place.

19:40 Then the king went on to Gilgal, and Chimham went on with him:
and all the people of Judah conducted the king, and also half the
people of Israel.

19:41 And, behold, all the men of Israel came to the king, and said
unto the king, Why have our brethren the men of Judah stolen thee
away, and have brought the king, and his household, and all David’s
men with him, over Jordan? 19:42 And all the men of Judah answered
the men of Israel, Because the king is near of kin to us: wherefore
then be ye angry for this matter? have we eaten at all of the king’s
cost? or hath he given us any gift? 19:43 And the men of Israel
answered the men of Judah, and said, We have ten parts in the king,
and we have also more right in David than ye: why then did ye despise
us, that our advice should not be first had in bringing back our king?
And the words of the men of Judah were fiercer than the words of the
men of Israel.

20:1 And there happened to be there a man of Belial, whose name was
Sheba, the son of Bichri, a Benjamite: and he blew a trumpet, and
said, We have no part in David, neither have we inheritance in the son
of Jesse: every man to his tents, O Israel.

20:2 So every man of Israel went up from after David, and followed
Sheba the son of Bichri: but the men of Judah clave unto their king,
from Jordan even to Jerusalem.

20:3 And David came to his house at Jerusalem; and the king took the
ten women his concubines, whom he had left to keep the house, and put
them in ward, and fed them, but went not in unto them. So they were
shut up unto the day of their death, living in widowhood.

20:4 Then said the king to Amasa, Assemble me the men of Judah within
three days, and be thou here present.

20:5 So Amasa went to assemble the men of Judah: but he tarried longer
than the set time which he had appointed him.

20:6 And David said to Abishai, Now shall Sheba the son of Bichri do
us more harm than did Absalom: take thou thy lord’s servants, and
pursue after him, lest he get him fenced cities, and escape us.

20:7 And there went out after him Joab’s men, and the Cherethites, and
the Pelethites, and all the mighty men: and they went out of
Jerusalem, to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.

20:8 When they were at the great stone which is in Gibeon, Amasa went
before them. And Joab’s garment that he had put on was girded unto
him, and upon it a girdle with a sword fastened upon his loins in the
sheath thereof; and as he went forth it fell out.

20:9 And Joab said to Amasa, Art thou in health, my brother? And Joab
took Amasa by the beard with the right hand to kiss him.

20:10 But Amasa took no heed to the sword that was in Joab’s hand: so
he smote him therewith in the fifth rib, and shed out his bowels to
the ground, and struck him not again; and he died. So Joab and Abishai
his brother pursued after Sheba the son of Bichri.

20:11 And one of Joab’s men stood by him, and said, He that favoureth
Joab, and he that is for David, let him go after Joab.

20:12 And Amasa wallowed in blood in the midst of the highway. And
when the man saw that all the people stood still, he removed Amasa out
of the highway into the field, and cast a cloth upon him, when he saw
that every one that came by him stood still.

20:13 When he was removed out of the highway, all the people went on
after Joab, to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.

20:14 And he went through all the tribes of Israel unto Abel, and to
Bethmaachah, and all the Berites: and they were gathered together, and
went also after him.

20:15 And they came and besieged him in Abel of Bethmaachah, and they
cast up a bank against the city, and it stood in the trench: and all
the people that were with Joab battered the wall, to throw it down.

20:16 Then cried a wise woman out of the city, Hear, hear; say, I pray
you, unto Joab, Come near hither, that I may speak with thee.

20:17 And when he was come near unto her, the woman said, Art thou
Joab? And he answered, I am he. Then she said unto him, Hear the
words of thine handmaid. And he answered, I do hear.

20:18 Then she spake, saying, They were wont to speak in old time,
saying, They shall surely ask counsel at Abel: and so they ended the
matter.

20:19 I am one of them that are peaceable and faithful in Israel: thou
seekest to destroy a city and a mother in Israel: why wilt thou
swallow up the inheritance of the LORD? 20:20 And Joab answered and
said, Far be it, far be it from me, that I should swallow up or
destroy.

20:21 The matter is not so: but a man of mount Ephraim, Sheba the son
of Bichri by name, hath lifted up his hand against the king, even
against David: deliver him only, and I will depart from the city. And
the woman said unto Joab, Behold, his head shall be thrown to thee
over the wall.

20:22 Then the woman went unto all the people in her wisdom. And they
cut off the head of Sheba the son of Bichri, and cast it out to Joab.
And he blew a trumpet, and they retired from the city, every man to
his tent. And Joab returned to Jerusalem unto the king.

20:23 Now Joab was over all the host of Israel: and Benaiah the son of
Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and over the Pelethites: 20:24 And
Adoram was over the tribute: and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was
recorder: 20:25 And Sheva was scribe: and Zadok and Abiathar were the
priests: 20:26 And Ira also the Jairite was a chief ruler about David.

21:1 Then there was a famine in the days of David three years, year
after year; and David enquired of the LORD. And the LORD answered, It
is for Saul, and for his bloody house, because he slew the Gibeonites.

21:2 And the king called the Gibeonites, and said unto them; (now the
Gibeonites were not of the children of Israel, but of the remnant of
the Amorites; and the children of Israel had sworn unto them: and Saul
sought to slay them in his zeal to the children of Israel and Judah.)
21:3 Wherefore David said unto the Gibeonites, What shall I do for
you? and wherewith shall I make the atonement, that ye may bless the
inheritance of the LORD? 21:4 And the Gibeonites said unto him, We
will have no silver nor gold of Saul, nor of his house; neither for us
shalt thou kill any man in Israel. And he said, What ye shall say,
that will I do for you.

21:5 And they answered the king, The man that consumed us, and that
devised against us that we should be destroyed from remaining in any
of the coasts of Israel, 21:6 Let seven men of his sons be delivered
unto us, and we will hang them up unto the LORD in Gibeah of Saul,
whom the LORD did choose. And the king said, I will give them.

21:7 But the king spared Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan the son of
Saul, because of the LORD’s oath that was between them, between David
and Jonathan the son of Saul.

21:8 But the king took the two sons of Rizpah the daughter of Aiah,
whom she bare unto Saul, Armoni and Mephibosheth; and the five sons of
Michal the daughter of Saul, whom she brought up for Adriel the son of
Barzillai the Meholathite: 21:9 And he delivered them into the hands
of the Gibeonites, and they hanged them in the hill before the LORD:
and they fell all seven together, and were put to death in the days of
harvest, in the first days, in the beginning of barley harvest.

21:10 And Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took sackcloth, and spread it
for her upon the rock, from the beginning of harvest until water
dropped upon them out of heaven, and suffered neither the birds of the
air to rest on them by day, nor the beasts of the field by night.

21:11 And it was told David what Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, the
concubine of Saul, had done.

21:12 And David went and took the bones of Saul and the bones of
Jonathan his son from the men of Jabeshgilead, which had stolen them
from the street of Bethshan, where the Philistines had hanged them,
when the Philistines had slain Saul in Gilboa: 21:13 And he brought up
from thence the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son; and
they gathered the bones of them that were hanged.

21:14 And the bones of Saul and Jonathan his son buried they in the
country of Benjamin in Zelah, in the sepulchre of Kish his father: and
they performed all that the king commanded. And after that God was
intreated for the land.

21:15 Moreover the Philistines had yet war again with Israel; and
David went down, and his servants with him, and fought against the
Philistines: and David waxed faint.

21:16 And Ishbibenob, which was of the sons of the giant, the weight
of whose spear weighed three hundred shekels of brass in weight, he
being girded with a new sword, thought to have slain David.

21:17 But Abishai the son of Zeruiah succoured him, and smote the
Philistine, and killed him. Then the men of David sware unto him,
saying, Thou shalt go no more out with us to battle, that thou quench
not the light of Israel.

21:18 And it came to pass after this, that there was again a battle
with the Philistines at Gob: then Sibbechai the Hushathite slew Saph,
which was of the sons of the giant.

21:19 And there was again a battle in Gob with the Philistines, where
Elhanan the son of Jaareoregim, a Bethlehemite, slew the brother of
Goliath the Gittite, the staff of whose spear was like a weaver’s
beam.

21:20 And there was yet a battle in Gath, where was a man of great
stature, that had on every hand six fingers, and on every foot six
toes, four and twenty in number; and he also was born to the giant.

21:21 And when he defied Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimeah the
brother of David slew him.

21:22 These four were born to the giant in Gath, and fell by the hand
of David, and by the hand of his servants.

22:1 And David spake unto the LORD the words of this song in the day
that the LORD had delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies,
and out of the hand of Saul: 22:2 And he said, The LORD is my rock,
and my fortress, and my deliverer; 22:3 The God of my rock; in him
will I trust: he is my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high
tower, and my refuge, my saviour; thou savest me from violence.

22:4 I will call on the LORD, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I
be saved from mine enemies.

22:5 When the waves of death compassed me, the floods of ungodly men
made me afraid; 22:6 The sorrows of hell compassed me about; the
snares of death prevented me; 22:7 In my distress I called upon the
LORD, and cried to my God: and he did hear my voice out of his temple,
and my cry did enter into his ears.

22:8 Then the earth shook and trembled; the foundations of heaven
moved and shook, because he was wroth.

22:9 There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his
mouth devoured: coals were kindled by it.

22:10 He bowed the heavens also, and came down; and darkness was under
his feet.

22:11 And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: and he was seen upon the
wings of the wind.

22:12 And he made darkness pavilions round about him, dark waters, and
thick clouds of the skies.

22:13 Through the brightness before him were coals of fire kindled.

22:14 The LORD thundered from heaven, and the most High uttered his
voice.

22:15 And he sent out arrows, and scattered them; lightning, and
discomfited them.

22:16 And the channels of the sea appeared, the foundations of the
world were discovered, at the rebuking of the LORD, at the blast of
the breath of his nostrils.

22:17 He sent from above, he took me; he drew me out of many waters;
22:18 He delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them that hated
me: for they were too strong for me.

22:19 They prevented me in the day of my calamity: but the LORD was my
stay.

22:20 He brought me forth also into a large place: he delivered me,
because he delighted in me.

22:21 The LORD rewarded me according to my righteousness: according to
the cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me.

22:22 For I have kept the ways of the LORD, and have not wickedly
departed from my God.

22:23 For all his judgments were before me: and as for his statutes, I
did not depart from them.

22:24 I was also upright before him, and have kept myself from mine
iniquity.

22:25 Therefore the LORD hath recompensed me according to my
righteousness; according to my cleanness in his eye sight.

22:26 With the merciful thou wilt shew thyself merciful, and with the
upright man thou wilt shew thyself upright.

22:27 With the pure thou wilt shew thyself pure; and with the froward
thou wilt shew thyself unsavoury.

22:28 And the afflicted people thou wilt save: but thine eyes are upon
the haughty, that thou mayest bring them down.

22:29 For thou art my lamp, O LORD: and the LORD will lighten my
darkness.

22:30 For by thee I have run through a troop: by my God have I leaped
over a wall.

22:31 As for God, his way is perfect; the word of the LORD is tried:
he is a buckler to all them that trust in him.

22:32 For who is God, save the LORD? and who is a rock, save our God?
22:33 God is my strength and power: and he maketh my way perfect.

22:34 He maketh my feet like hinds’ feet: and setteth me upon my high
places.

22:35 He teacheth my hands to war; so that a bow of steel is broken by
mine arms.

22:36 Thou hast also given me the shield of thy salvation: and thy
gentleness hath made me great.

22:37 Thou hast enlarged my steps under me; so that my feet did not
slip.

22:38 I have pursued mine enemies, and destroyed them; and turned not
again until I had consumed them.

22:39 And I have consumed them, and wounded them, that they could not
arise: yea, they are fallen under my feet.

22:40 For thou hast girded me with strength to battle: them that rose
up against me hast thou subdued under me.

22:41 Thou hast also given me the necks of mine enemies, that I might
destroy them that hate me.

22:42 They looked, but there was none to save; even unto the LORD, but
he answered them not.

22:43 Then did I beat them as small as the dust of the earth, I did
stamp them as the mire of the street, and did spread them abroad.

22:44 Thou also hast delivered me from the strivings of my people,
thou hast kept me to be head of the heathen: a people which I knew not
shall serve me.

22:45 Strangers shall submit themselves unto me: as soon as they hear,
they shall be obedient unto me.

22:46 Strangers shall fade away, and they shall be afraid out of their
close places.

22:47 The LORD liveth; and blessed be my rock; and exalted be the God
of the rock of my salvation.

22:48 It is God that avengeth me, and that bringeth down the people
under me.

22:49 And that bringeth me forth from mine enemies: thou also hast
lifted me up on high above them that rose up against me: thou hast
delivered me from the violent man.

22:50 Therefore I will give thanks unto thee, O LORD, among the
heathen, and I will sing praises unto thy name.

22:51 He is the tower of salvation for his king: and sheweth mercy to
his anointed, unto David, and to his seed for evermore.

23:1 Now these be the last words of David. David the son of Jesse
said, and the man who was raised up on high, the anointed of the God
of Jacob, and the sweet psalmist of Israel, said, 23:2 The Spirit of
the LORD spake by me, and his word was in my tongue.

23:3 The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spake to me, He that
ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God.

23:4 And he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun riseth,
even a morning without clouds; as the tender grass springing out of
the earth by clear shining after rain.

23:5 Although my house be not so with God; yet he hath made with me an
everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all
my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.

23:6 But the sons of Belial shall be all of them as thorns thrust
away, because they cannot be taken with hands: 23:7 But the man that
shall touch them must be fenced with iron and the staff of a spear;
and they shall be utterly burned with fire in the same place.

23:8 These be the names of the mighty men whom David had: The
Tachmonite that sat in the seat, chief among the captains; the same
was Adino the Eznite: he lift up his spear against eight hundred, whom
he slew at one time.

23:9 And after him was Eleazar the son of Dodo the Ahohite, one of the
three mighty men with David, when they defied the Philistines that
were there gathered together to battle, and the men of Israel were
gone away: 23:10 He arose, and smote the Philistines until his hand
was weary, and his hand clave unto the sword: and the LORD wrought a
great victory that day; and the people returned after him only to
spoil.

23:11 And after him was Shammah the son of Agee the Hararite. And the
Philistines were gathered together into a troop, where was a piece of
ground full of lentiles: and the people fled from the Philistines.

23:12 But he stood in the midst of the ground, and defended it, and
slew the Philistines: and the LORD wrought a great victory.

23:13 And three of the thirty chief went down, and came to David in
the harvest time unto the cave of Adullam: and the troop of the
Philistines pitched in the valley of Rephaim.

23:14 And David was then in an hold, and the garrison of the
Philistines was then in Bethlehem.

23:15 And David longed, and said, Oh that one would give me drink of
the water of the well of Bethlehem, which is by the gate! 23:16 And
the three mighty men brake through the host of the Philistines, and
drew water out of the well of Bethlehem, that was by the gate, and
took it, and brought it to David: nevertheless he would not drink
thereof, but poured it out unto the LORD.

23:17 And he said, Be it far from me, O LORD, that I should do this:
is not this the blood of the men that went in jeopardy of their lives?
therefore he would not drink it. These things did these three mighty
men.

23:18 And Abishai, the brother of Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was chief
among three. And he lifted up his spear against three hundred, and
slew them, and had the name among three.

23:19 Was he not most honourable of three? therefore he was their
captain: howbeit he attained not unto the first three.

23:20 And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man, of
Kabzeel, who had done many acts, he slew two lionlike men of Moab: he
went down also and slew a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow:
23:21 And he slew an Egyptian, a goodly man: and the Egyptian had a
spear in his hand; but he went down to him with a staff, and plucked
the spear out of the Egyptian’s hand, and slew him with his own spear.

23:22 These things did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and had the name
among three mighty men.

23:23 He was more honourable than the thirty, but he attained not to
the first three. And David set him over his guard.

23:24 Asahel the brother of Joab was one of the thirty; Elhanan the
son of Dodo of Bethlehem, 23:25 Shammah the Harodite, Elika the
Harodite, 23:26 Helez the Paltite, Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite,
23:27 Abiezer the Anethothite, Mebunnai the Hushathite, 23:28 Zalmon
the Ahohite, Maharai the Netophathite, 23:29 Heleb the son of Baanah,
a Netophathite, Ittai the son of Ribai out of Gibeah of the children
of Benjamin, 23:30 Benaiah the Pirathonite, Hiddai of the brooks of
Gaash, 23:31 Abialbon the Arbathite, Azmaveth the Barhumite, 23:32
Eliahba the Shaalbonite, of the sons of Jashen, Jonathan, 23:33
Shammah the Hararite, Ahiam the son of Sharar the Hararite, 23:34
Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai, the son of the Maachathite, Eliam the
son of Ahithophel the Gilonite, 23:35 Hezrai the Carmelite, Paarai the
Arbite, 23:36 Igal the son of Nathan of Zobah, Bani the Gadite, 23:37
Zelek the Ammonite, Nahari the Beerothite, armourbearer to Joab the
son of Zeruiah, 23:38 Ira an Ithrite, Gareb an Ithrite, 23:39 Uriah
the Hittite: thirty and seven in all.

24:1 And again the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel, and
he moved David against them to say, Go, number Israel and Judah.

24:2 For the king said to Joab the captain of the host, which was with
him, Go now through all the tribes of Israel, from Dan even to
Beersheba, and number ye the people, that I may know the number of the
people.

24:3 And Joab said unto the king, Now the LORD thy God add unto the
people, how many soever they be, an hundredfold, and that the eyes of
my lord the king may see it: but why doth my lord the king delight in
this thing? 24:4 Notwithstanding the king’s word prevailed against
Joab, and against the captains of the host. And Joab and the captains
of the host went out from the presence of the king, to number the
people of Israel.

24:5 And they passed over Jordan, and pitched in Aroer, on the right
side of the city that lieth in the midst of the river of Gad, and
toward Jazer: 24:6 Then they came to Gilead, and to the land of
Tahtimhodshi; and they came to Danjaan, and about to Zidon, 24:7 And
came to the strong hold of Tyre, and to all the cities of the Hivites,
and of the Canaanites: and they went out to the south of Judah, even
to Beersheba.

24:8 So when they had gone through all the land, they came to
Jerusalem at the end of nine months and twenty days.

24:9 And Joab gave up the sum of the number of the people unto the
king: and there were in Israel eight hundred thousand valiant men that
drew the sword; and the men of Judah were five hundred thousand men.

24:10 And David’s heart smote him after that he had numbered the
people.

And David said unto the LORD, I have sinned greatly in that I have
done: and now, I beseech thee, O LORD, take away the iniquity of thy
servant; for I have done very foolishly.

24:11 For when David was up in the morning, the word of the LORD came
unto the prophet Gad, David’s seer, saying, 24:12 Go and say unto
David, Thus saith the LORD, I offer thee three things; choose thee one
of them, that I may do it unto thee.

24:13 So Gad came to David, and told him, and said unto him, Shall
seven years of famine come unto thee in thy land? or wilt thou flee
three months before thine enemies, while they pursue thee? or that
there be three days’ pestilence in thy land? now advise, and see what
answer I shall return to him that sent me.

24:14 And David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait: let us fall now
into the hand of the LORD; for his mercies are great: and let me not
fall into the hand of man.

24:15 So the LORD sent a pestilence upon Israel from the morning even
to the time appointed: and there died of the people from Dan even to
Beersheba seventy thousand men.

24:16 And when the angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to
destroy it, the LORD repented him of the evil, and said to the angel
that destroyed the people, It is enough: stay now thine hand. And the
angel of the LORD was by the threshingplace of Araunah the Jebusite.

24:17 And David spake unto the LORD when he saw the angel that smote
the people, and said, Lo, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly: but
these sheep, what have they done? let thine hand, I pray thee, be
against me, and against my father’s house.

24:18 And Gad came that day to David, and said unto him, Go up, rear
an altar unto the LORD in the threshingfloor of Araunah the Jebusite.

24:19 And David, according to the saying of Gad, went up as the LORD
commanded.

24:20 And Araunah looked, and saw the king and his servants coming on
toward him: and Araunah went out, and bowed himself before the king on
his face upon the ground.

24:21 And Araunah said, Wherefore is my lord the king come to his
servant? And David said, To buy the threshingfloor of thee, to build
an altar unto the LORD, that the plague may be stayed from the people.

24:22 And Araunah said unto David, Let my lord the king take and offer
up what seemeth good unto him: behold, here be oxen for burnt
sacrifice, and threshing instruments and other instruments of the oxen
for wood.

24:23 All these things did Araunah, as a king, give unto the king. And
Araunah said unto the king, The LORD thy God accept thee.

24:24 And the king said unto Araunah, Nay; but I will surely buy it of
thee at a price: neither will I offer burnt offerings unto the LORD my
God of that which doth cost me nothing. So David bought the
threshingfloor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver.

24:25 And David built there an altar unto the LORD, and offered burnt
offerings and peace offerings. So the LORD was intreated for the land,
and the plague was stayed from Israel.


The First Book of the Kings

Commonly Called:

The Third Book of the Kings


1:1 Now king David was old and stricken in years; and they covered
him with clothes, but he gat no heat.

1:2 Wherefore his servants said unto him, Let there be sought for my
lord the king a young virgin: and let her stand before the king, and
let her cherish him, and let her lie in thy bosom, that my lord the
king may get heat.

1:3 So they sought for a fair damsel throughout all the coasts of
Israel, and found Abishag a Shunammite, and brought her to the king.

1:4 And the damsel was very fair, and cherished the king, and
ministered to him: but the king knew her not.

1:5 Then Adonijah the son of Haggith exalted himself, saying, I will
be king: and he prepared him chariots and horsemen, and fifty men to
run before him.

1:6 And his father had not displeased him at any time in saying, Why
hast thou done so? and he also was a very goodly man; and his mother
bare him after Absalom.

1:7 And he conferred with Joab the son of Zeruiah, and with Abiathar
the priest: and they following Adonijah helped him.

1:8 But Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and Nathan
the prophet, and Shimei, and Rei, and the mighty men which belonged to
David, were not with Adonijah.

1:9 And Adonijah slew sheep and oxen and fat cattle by the stone of
Zoheleth, which is by Enrogel, and called all his brethren the king’s
sons, and all the men of Judah the king’s servants: 1:10 But Nathan
the prophet, and Benaiah, and the mighty men, and Solomon his brother,
he called not.

1:11 Wherefore Nathan spake unto Bathsheba the mother of Solomon,
saying, Hast thou not heard that Adonijah the son of Haggith doth
reign, and David our lord knoweth it not? 1:12 Now therefore come,
let me, I pray thee, give thee counsel, that thou mayest save thine
own life, and the life of thy son Solomon.

1:13 Go and get thee in unto king David, and say unto him, Didst not
thou, my lord, O king, swear unto thine handmaid, saying, Assuredly
Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne?
why then doth Adonijah reign? 1:14 Behold, while thou yet talkest
there with the king, I also will come in after thee, and confirm thy
words.

1:15 And Bathsheba went in unto the king into the chamber: and the
king was very old; and Abishag the Shunammite ministered unto the
king.

1:16 And Bathsheba bowed, and did obeisance unto the king. And the
king said, What wouldest thou? 1:17 And she said unto him, My lord,
thou swarest by the LORD thy God unto thine handmaid, saying,
Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon
my throne.

1:18 And now, behold, Adonijah reigneth; and now, my lord the king,
thou knowest it not: 1:19 And he hath slain oxen and fat cattle and
sheep in abundance, and hath called all the sons of the king, and
Abiathar the priest, and Joab the captain of the host: but Solomon thy
servant hath he not called.

1:20 And thou, my lord, O king, the eyes of all Israel are upon thee,
that thou shouldest tell them who shall sit on the throne of my lord
the king after him.

1:21 Otherwise it shall come to pass, when my lord the king shall
sleep with his fathers, that I and my son Solomon shall be counted
offenders.

1:22 And, lo, while she yet talked with the king, Nathan the prophet
also came in.

1:23 And they told the king, saying, Behold Nathan the prophet. And
when he was come in before the king, he bowed himself before the king
with his face to the ground.

1:24 And Nathan said, My lord, O king, hast thou said, Adonijah shall
reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne? 1:25 For he is gone
down this day, and hath slain oxen and fat cattle and sheep in
abundance, and hath called all the king’s sons, and the captains of
the host, and Abiathar the priest; and, behold, they eat and drink
before him, and say, God save king Adonijah.

1:26 But me, even me thy servant, and Zadok the priest, and Benaiah
the son of Jehoiada, and thy servant Solomon, hath he not called.

1:27 Is this thing done by my lord the king, and thou hast not shewed
it unto thy servant, who should sit on the throne of my lord the king
after him? 1:28 Then king David answered and said, Call me Bathsheba.
And she came into the king’s presence, and stood before the king.

1:29 And the king sware, and said, As the LORD liveth, that hath
redeemed my soul out of all distress, 1:30 Even as I sware unto thee
by the LORD God of Israel, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall
reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne in my stead; even so
will I certainly do this day.

1:31 Then Bathsheba bowed with her face to the earth, and did
reverence to the king, and said, Let my lord king David live for ever.

1:32 And king David said, Call me Zadok the priest, and Nathan the
prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada. And they came before the
king.

1:33 The king also said unto them, Take with you the servants of your
lord, and cause Solomon my son to ride upon mine own mule, and bring
him down to Gihon: 1:34 And let Zadok the priest and Nathan the
prophet anoint him there king over Israel: and blow ye with the
trumpet, and say, God save king Solomon.

1:35 Then ye shall come up after him, that he may come and sit upon my
throne; for he shall be king in my stead: and I have appointed him to
be ruler over Israel and over Judah.

1:36 And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada answered the king, and said,
Amen: the LORD God of my lord the king say so too.

1:37 As the LORD hath been with my lord the king, even so be he with
Solomon, and make his throne greater than the throne of my lord king
David.

1:38 So Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son
of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, went down, and
caused Solomon to ride upon king David’s mule, and brought him to
Gihon.

1:39 And Zadok the priest took an horn of oil out of the tabernacle,
and anointed Solomon. And they blew the trumpet; and all the people
said, God save king Solomon.

1:40 And all the people came up after him, and the people piped with
pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rent with the
sound of them.

1:41 And Adonijah and all the guests that were with him heard it as
they had made an end of eating. And when Joab heard the sound of the
trumpet, he said, Wherefore is this noise of the city being in an
uproar? 1:42 And while he yet spake, behold, Jonathan the son of
Abiathar the priest came; and Adonijah said unto him, Come in; for
thou art a valiant man, and bringest good tidings.

1:43 And Jonathan answered and said to Adonijah, Verily our lord king
David hath made Solomon king.

1:44 And the king hath sent with him Zadok the priest, and Nathan the
prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites, and the
Pelethites, and they have caused him to ride upon the king’s mule:
1:45 And Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet have anointed him
king in Gihon: and they are come up from thence rejoicing, so that the
city rang again. This is the noise that ye have heard.

1:46 And also Solomon sitteth on the throne of the kingdom.

1:47 And moreover the king’s servants came to bless our lord king
David, saying, God make the name of Solomon better than thy name, and
make his throne greater than thy throne. And the king bowed himself
upon the bed.

1:48 And also thus said the king, Blessed be the LORD God of Israel,
which hath given one to sit on my throne this day, mine eyes even
seeing it.

1:49 And all the guests that were with Adonijah were afraid, and rose
up, and went every man his way.

1:50 And Adonijah feared because of Solomon, and arose, and went, and
caught hold on the horns of the altar.

1:51 And it was told Solomon, saying, Behold, Adonijah feareth king
Solomon: for, lo, he hath caught hold on the horns of the altar,
saying, Let king Solomon swear unto me today that he will not slay his
servant with the sword.

1:52 And Solomon said, If he will shew himself a worthy man, there
shall not an hair of him fall to the earth: but if wickedness shall be
found in him, he shall die.

1:53 So king Solomon sent, and they brought him down from the altar.
And he came and bowed himself to king Solomon: and Solomon said unto
him, Go to thine house.

2:1 Now the days of David drew nigh that he should die; and he charged
Solomon his son, saying, 2:2 I go the way of all the earth: be thou
strong therefore, and shew thyself a man; 2:3 And keep the charge of
the LORD thy God, to walk in his ways, to keep his statutes, and his
commandments, and his judgments, and his testimonies, as it is written
in the law of Moses, that thou mayest prosper in all that thou doest,
and whithersoever thou turnest thyself: 2:4 That the LORD may continue
his word which he spake concerning me, saying, If thy children take
heed to their way, to walk before me in truth with all their heart and
with all their soul, there shall not fail thee (said he) a man on the
throne of Israel.

2:5 Moreover thou knowest also what Joab the son of Zeruiah did to me,
and what he did to the two captains of the hosts of Israel, unto Abner
the son of Ner, and unto Amasa the son of Jether, whom he slew, and
shed the blood of war in peace, and put the blood of war upon his
girdle that was about his loins, and in his shoes that were on his
feet.

2:6 Do therefore according to thy wisdom, and let not his hoar head go
down to the grave in peace.

2:7 But shew kindness unto the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, and
let them be of those that eat at thy table: for so they came to me
when I fled because of Absalom thy brother.

2:8 And, behold, thou hast with thee Shimei the son of Gera, a
Benjamite of Bahurim, which cursed me with a grievous curse in the day
when I went to Mahanaim: but he came down to meet me at Jordan, and I
sware to him by the LORD, saying, I will not put thee to death with
the sword.

2:9 Now therefore hold him not guiltless: for thou art a wise man, and
knowest what thou oughtest to do unto him; but his hoar head bring
thou down to the grave with blood.

2:10 So David slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of
David.

2:11 And the days that David reigned over Israel were forty years:
seven years reigned he in Hebron, and thirty and three years reigned
he in Jerusalem.

2:12 Then sat Solomon upon the throne of David his father; and his
kingdom was established greatly.

2:13 And Adonijah the son of Haggith came to Bathsheba the mother of
Solomon. And she said, Comest thou peaceably? And he said, Peaceably.

2:14 He said moreover, I have somewhat to say unto thee. And she said,
Say on.

2:15 And he said, Thou knowest that the kingdom was mine, and that all
Israel set their faces on me, that I should reign: howbeit the kingdom
is turned about, and is become my brother’s: for it was his from the
LORD.

2:16 And now I ask one petition of thee, deny me not. And she said
unto him, Say on.

2:17 And he said, Speak, I pray thee, unto Solomon the king, (for he
will not say thee nay,) that he give me Abishag the Shunammite to
wife.

2:18 And Bathsheba said, Well; I will speak for thee unto the king.

2:19 Bathsheba therefore went unto king Solomon, to speak unto him for
Adonijah. And the king rose up to meet her, and bowed himself unto
her, and sat down on his throne, and caused a seat to be set for the
king’s mother; and she sat on his right hand.

2:20 Then she said, I desire one small petition of thee; I pray thee,
say me not nay. And the king said unto her, Ask on, my mother: for I
will not say thee nay.

2:21 And she said, Let Abishag the Shunammite be given to Adonijah thy
brother to wife.

2:22 And king Solomon answered and said unto his mother, And why dost
thou ask Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah? ask for him the kingdom
also; for he is mine elder brother; even for him, and for Abiathar the
priest, and for Joab the son of Zeruiah.

2:23 Then king Solomon sware by the LORD, saying, God do so to me, and
more also, if Adonijah have not spoken this word against his own life.

2:24 Now therefore, as the LORD liveth, which hath established me, and
set me on the throne of David my father, and who hath made me an
house, as he promised, Adonijah shall be put to death this day.

2:25 And king Solomon sent by the hand of Benaiah the son of Jehoiada;
and he fell upon him that he died.

2:26 And unto Abiathar the priest said the king, Get thee to Anathoth,
unto thine own fields; for thou art worthy of death: but I will not at
this time put thee to death, because thou barest the ark of the LORD
God before David my father, and because thou hast been afflicted in
all wherein my father was afflicted.

2:27 So Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being priest unto the LORD;
that he might fulfil the word of the LORD, which he spake concerning
the house of Eli in Shiloh.

2:28 Then tidings came to Joab: for Joab had turned after Adonijah,
though he turned not after Absalom. And Joab fled unto the tabernacle
of the LORD, and caught hold on the horns of the altar.

2:29 And it was told king Solomon that Joab was fled unto the
tabernacle of the LORD; and, behold, he is by the altar. Then Solomon
sent Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, saying, Go, fall upon him.

2:30 And Benaiah came to the tabernacle of the LORD, and said unto
him, Thus saith the king, Come forth. And he said, Nay; but I will die
here. And Benaiah brought the king word again, saying, Thus said Joab,
and thus he answered me.

2:31 And the king said unto him, Do as he hath said, and fall upon
him, and bury him; that thou mayest take away the innocent blood,
which Joab shed, from me, and from the house of my father.

2:32 And the LORD shall return his blood upon his own head, who fell
upon two men more righteous and better than he, and slew them with the
sword, my father David not knowing thereof, to wit, Abner the son of
Ner, captain of the host of Israel, and Amasa the son of Jether,
captain of the host of Judah.

2:33 Their blood shall therefore return upon the head of Joab, and
upon the head of his seed for ever: but upon David, and upon his seed,
and upon his house, and upon his throne, shall there be peace for ever
from the LORD.

2:34 So Benaiah the son of Jehoiada went up, and fell upon him, and
slew him: and he was buried in his own house in the wilderness.

2:35 And the king put Benaiah the son of Jehoiada in his room over the
host: and Zadok the priest did the king put in the room of Abiathar.

2:36 And the king sent and called for Shimei, and said unto him, Build
thee an house in Jerusalem, and dwell there, and go not forth thence
any whither.

2:37 For it shall be, that on the day thou goest out, and passest over
the brook Kidron, thou shalt know for certain that thou shalt surely
die: thy blood shall be upon thine own head.

2:38 And Shimei said unto the king, The saying is good: as my lord the
king hath said, so will thy servant do. And Shimei dwelt in Jerusalem
many days.

2:39 And it came to pass at the end of three years, that two of the
servants of Shimei ran away unto Achish son of Maachah king of Gath.
And they told Shimei, saying, Behold, thy servants be in Gath.

2:40 And Shimei arose, and saddled his ass, and went to Gath to Achish
to seek his servants: and Shimei went, and brought his servants from
Gath.

2:41 And it was told Solomon that Shimei had gone from Jerusalem to
Gath, and was come again.

2:42 And the king sent and called for Shimei, and said unto him, Did I
not make thee to swear by the LORD, and protested unto thee, saying,
Know for a certain, on the day thou goest out, and walkest abroad any
whither, that thou shalt surely die? and thou saidst unto me, The word
that I have heard is good.

2:43 Why then hast thou not kept the oath of the LORD, and the
commandment that I have charged thee with? 2:44 The king said
moreover to Shimei, Thou knowest all the wickedness which thine heart
is privy to, that thou didst to David my father: therefore the LORD
shall return thy wickedness upon thine own head; 2:45 And king Solomon
shall be blessed, and the throne of David shall be established before
the LORD for ever.

2:46 So the king commanded Benaiah the son of Jehoiada; which went
out, and fell upon him, that he died. And the kingdom was established
in the hand of Solomon.

3:1 And Solomon made affinity with Pharaoh king of Egypt, and took
Pharaoh’s daughter, and brought her into the city of David, until he
had made an end of building his own house, and the house of the LORD,
and the wall of Jerusalem round about.

3:2 Only the people sacrificed in high places, because there was no
house built unto the name of the LORD, until those days.

3:3 And Solomon loved the LORD, walking in the statutes of David his
father: only he sacrificed and burnt incense in high places.

3:4 And the king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there; for that was the
great high place: a thousand burnt offerings did Solomon offer upon
that altar.

3:5 In Gibeon the LORD appeared to Solomon in a dream by night: and
God said, Ask what I shall give thee.

3:6 And Solomon said, Thou hast shewed unto thy servant David my
father great mercy, according as he walked before thee in truth, and
in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart with thee; and thou hast
kept for him this great kindness, that thou hast given him a son to
sit on his throne, as it is this day.

3:7 And now, O LORD my God, thou hast made thy servant king instead of
David my father: and I am but a little child: I know not how to go out
or come in.

3:8 And thy servant is in the midst of thy people which thou hast
chosen, a great people, that cannot be numbered nor counted for
multitude.

3:9 Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy
people, that I may discern between good and bad: for who is able to
judge this thy so great a people? 3:10 And the speech pleased the
LORD, that Solomon had asked this thing.

3:11 And God said unto him, Because thou hast asked this thing, and
hast not asked for thyself long life; neither hast asked riches for
thyself, nor hast asked the life of thine enemies; but hast asked for
thyself understanding to discern judgment; 3:12 Behold, I have done
according to thy words: lo, I have given thee a wise and an
understanding heart; so that there was none like thee before thee,
neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee.

3:13 And I have also given thee that which thou hast not asked, both
riches, and honour: so that there shall not be any among the kings
like unto thee all thy days.

3:14 And if thou wilt walk in my ways, to keep my statutes and my
commandments, as thy father David did walk, then I will lengthen thy
days.

3:15 And Solomon awoke; and, behold, it was a dream. And he came to
Jerusalem, and stood before the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and
offered up burnt offerings, and offered peace offerings, and made a
feast to all his servants.

3:16 Then came there two women, that were harlots, unto the king, and
stood before him.

3:17 And the one woman said, O my lord, I and this woman dwell in one
house; and I was delivered of a child with her in the house.

3:18 And it came to pass the third day after that I was delivered,
that this woman was delivered also: and we were together; there was no
stranger with us in the house, save we two in the house.

3:19 And this woman’s child died in the night; because she overlaid
it.

3:20 And she arose at midnight, and took my son from beside me, while
thine handmaid slept, and laid it in her bosom, and laid her dead
child in my bosom.

3:21 And when I rose in the morning to give my child suck, behold, it
was dead: but when I had considered it in the morning, behold, it was
not my son, which I did bear.

3:22 And the other woman said, Nay; but the living is my son, and the
dead is thy son. And this said, No; but the dead is thy son, and the
living is my son. Thus they spake before the king.

3:23 Then said the king, The one saith, This is my son that liveth,
and thy son is the dead: and the other saith, Nay; but thy son is the
dead, and my son is the living.

3:24 And the king said, Bring me a sword. And they brought a sword
before the king.

3:25 And the king said, Divide the living child in two, and give half
to the one, and half to the other.

3:26 Then spake the woman whose the living child was unto the king,
for her bowels yearned upon her son, and she said, O my lord, give her
the living child, and in no wise slay it. But the other said, Let it
be neither mine nor thine, but divide it.

3:27 Then the king answered and said, Give her the living child, and
in no wise slay it: she is the mother thereof.

3:28 And all Israel heard of the judgment which the king had judged;
and they feared the king: for they saw that the wisdom of God was in
him, to do judgment.

4:1 So king Solomon was king over all Israel.

4:2 And these were the princes which he had; Azariah the son of Zadok
the priest, 4:3 Elihoreph and Ahiah, the sons of Shisha, scribes;
Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, the recorder.

4:4 And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the host: and Zadok and
Abiathar were the priests: 4:5 And Azariah the son of Nathan was over
the officers: and Zabud the son of Nathan was principal officer, and
the king’s friend: 4:6 And Ahishar was over the household: and
Adoniram the son of Abda was over the tribute.

4:7 And Solomon had twelve officers over all Israel, which provided
victuals for the king and his household: each man his month in a year
made provision.

4:8 And these are their names: The son of Hur, in mount Ephraim: 4:9
The son of Dekar, in Makaz, and in Shaalbim, and Bethshemesh, and
Elonbethhanan: 4:10 The son of Hesed, in Aruboth; to him pertained
Sochoh, and all the land of Hepher: 4:11 The son of Abinadab, in all
the region of Dor; which had Taphath the daughter of Solomon to wife:
4:12 Baana the son of Ahilud; to him pertained Taanach and Megiddo,
and all Bethshean, which is by Zartanah beneath Jezreel, from
Bethshean to Abelmeholah, even unto the place that is beyond Jokneam:
4:13 The son of Geber, in Ramothgilead; to him pertained the towns of
Jair the son of Manasseh, which are in Gilead; to him also pertained
the region of Argob, which is in Bashan, threescore great cities with
walls and brasen bars: 4:14 Ahinadab the son of Iddo had Mahanaim:
4:15 Ahimaaz was in Naphtali; he also took Basmath the daughter of
Solomon to wife: 4:16 Baanah the son of Hushai was in Asher and in
Aloth: 4:17 Jehoshaphat the son of Paruah, in Issachar: 4:18 Shimei
the son of Elah, in Benjamin: 4:19 Geber the son of Uri was in the
country of Gilead, in the country of Sihon king of the Amorites, and
of Og king of Bashan; and he was the only officer which was in the
land.

4:20 Judah and Israel were many, as the sand which is by the sea in
multitude, eating and drinking, and making merry.

4:21 And Solomon reigned over all kingdoms from the river unto the
land of the Philistines, and unto the border of Egypt: they brought
presents, and served Solomon all the days of his life.

4:22 And Solomon’s provision for one day was thirty measures of fine
flour, and threescore measures of meal, 4:23 Ten fat oxen, and twenty
oxen out of the pastures, and an hundred sheep, beside harts, and
roebucks, and fallowdeer, and fatted fowl.

4:24 For he had dominion over all the region on this side the river,
from Tiphsah even to Azzah, over all the kings on this side the river:
and he had peace on all sides round about him.

4:25 And Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every man under his vine and
under his fig tree, from Dan even to Beersheba, all the days of
Solomon.

4:26 And Solomon had forty thousand stalls of horses for his chariots,
and twelve thousand horsemen.

4:27 And those officers provided victual for king Solomon, and for all
that came unto king Solomon’s table, every man in his month: they
lacked nothing.

4:28 Barley also and straw for the horses and dromedaries brought they
unto the place where the officers were, every man according to his
charge.

4:29 And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and
largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the sea shore.

4:30 And Solomon’s wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of
the east country, and all the wisdom of Egypt.

4:31 For he was wiser than all men; than Ethan the Ezrahite, and
Heman, and Chalcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol: and his fame was in
all nations round about.

4:32 And he spake three thousand proverbs: and his songs were a
thousand and five.

4:33 And he spake of trees, from the cedar tree that is in Lebanon
even unto the hyssop that springeth out of the wall: he spake also of
beasts, and of fowl, and of creeping things, and of fishes.

4:34 And there came of all people to hear the wisdom of Solomon, from
all kings of the earth, which had heard of his wisdom.

5:1 And Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants unto Solomon; for he had
heard that they had anointed him king in the room of his father: for
Hiram was ever a lover of David.

5:2 And Solomon sent to Hiram, saying, 5:3 Thou knowest how that David
my father could not build an house unto the name of the LORD his God
for the wars which were about him on every side, until the LORD put
them under the soles of his feet.

5:4 But now the LORD my God hath given me rest on every side, so that
there is neither adversary nor evil occurrent.

5:5 And, behold, I purpose to build an house unto the name of the LORD
my God, as the LORD spake unto David my father, saying, Thy son, whom
I will set upon thy throne in thy room, he shall build an house unto
my name.

5:6 Now therefore command thou that they hew me cedar trees out of
Lebanon; and my servants shall be with thy servants: and unto thee
will I give hire for thy servants according to all that thou shalt
appoint: for thou knowest that there is not among us any that can
skill to hew timber like unto the Sidonians.

5:7 And it came to pass, when Hiram heard the words of Solomon, that
he rejoiced greatly, and said, Blessed be the LORD this day, which
hath given unto David a wise son over this great people.

5:8 And Hiram sent to Solomon, saying, I have considered the things
which thou sentest to me for: and I will do all thy desire concerning
timber of cedar, and concerning timber of fir.

5:9 My servants shall bring them down from Lebanon unto the sea: and I
will convey them by sea in floats unto the place that thou shalt
appoint me, and will cause them to be discharged there, and thou shalt
receive them: and thou shalt accomplish my desire, in giving food for
my household.

5:10 So Hiram gave Solomon cedar trees and fir trees according to all
his desire.

5:11 And Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand measures of wheat for food
to his household, and twenty measures of pure oil: thus gave Solomon
to Hiram year by year.

5:12 And the LORD gave Solomon wisdom, as he promised him: and there
was peace between Hiram and Solomon; and they two made a league
together.

5:13 And king Solomon raised a levy out of all Israel; and the levy
was thirty thousand men.

5:14 And he sent them to Lebanon, ten thousand a month by courses: a
month they were in Lebanon, and two months at home: and Adoniram was
over the levy.

5:15 And Solomon had threescore and ten thousand that bare burdens,
and fourscore thousand hewers in the mountains; 5:16 Beside the chief
of Solomon’s officers which were over the work, three thousand and
three hundred, which ruled over the people that wrought in the work.

5:17 And the king commanded, and they brought great stones, costly
stones, and hewed stones, to lay the foundation of the house.

5:18 And Solomon’s builders and Hiram’s builders did hew them, and the
stonesquarers: so they prepared timber and stones to build the house.

6:1 And it came to pass in the four hundred and eightieth year after
the children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the
fourth year of Solomon’s reign over Israel, in the month Zif, which is
the second month, that he began to build the house of the LORD.

6:2 And the house which king Solomon built for the LORD, the length
thereof was threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty cubits,
and the height thereof thirty cubits.

6:3 And the porch before the temple of the house, twenty cubits was
the length thereof, according to the breadth of the house; and ten
cubits was the breadth thereof before the house.

6:4 And for the house he made windows of narrow lights.

6:5 And against the wall of the house he built chambers round about,
against the walls of the house round about, both of the temple and of
the oracle: and he made chambers round about: 6:6 The nethermost
chamber was five cubits broad, and the middle was six cubits broad,
and the third was seven cubits broad: for without in the wall of the
house he made narrowed rests round about, that the beams should not be
fastened in the walls of the house.

6:7 And the house, when it was in building, was built of stone made
ready before it was brought thither: so that there was neither hammer
nor axe nor any tool of iron heard in the house, while it was in
building.

6:8 The door for the middle chamber was in the right side of the
house: and they went up with winding stairs into the middle chamber,
and out of the middle into the third.

6:9 So he built the house, and finished it; and covered the house with
beams and boards of cedar.

6:10 And then he built chambers against all the house, five cubits
high: and they rested on the house with timber of cedar.

6:11 And the word of the LORD came to Solomon, saying, 6:12 Concerning
this house which thou art in building, if thou wilt walk in my
statutes, and execute my judgments, and keep all my commandments to
walk in them; then will I perform my word with thee, which I spake
unto David thy father: 6:13 And I will dwell among the children of
Israel, and will not forsake my people Israel.

6:14 So Solomon built the house, and finished it.

6:15 And he built the walls of the house within with boards of cedar,
both the floor of the house, and the walls of the ceiling: and he
covered them on the inside with wood, and covered the floor of the
house with planks of fir.

6:16 And he built twenty cubits on the sides of the house, both the
floor and the walls with boards of cedar: he even built them for it
within, even for the oracle, even for the most holy place.

6:17 And the house, that is, the temple before it, was forty cubits
long.

6:18 And the cedar of the house within was carved with knops and open
flowers: all was cedar; there was no stone seen.

6:19 And the oracle he prepared in the house within, to set there the
ark of the covenant of the LORD.

6:20 And the oracle in the forepart was twenty cubits in length, and
twenty cubits in breadth, and twenty cubits in the height thereof: and
he overlaid it with pure gold; and so covered the altar which was of
cedar.

6:21 So Solomon overlaid the house within with pure gold: and he made
a partition by the chains of gold before the oracle; and he overlaid
it with gold.

6:22 And the whole house he overlaid with gold, until he had finished
all the house: also the whole altar that was by the oracle he overlaid
with gold.

6:23 And within the oracle he made two cherubims of olive tree, each
ten cubits high.

6:24 And five cubits was the one wing of the cherub, and five cubits
the other wing of the cherub: from the uttermost part of the one wing
unto the uttermost part of the other were ten cubits.

6:25 And the other cherub was ten cubits: both the cherubims were of
one measure and one size.

6:26 The height of the one cherub was ten cubits, and so was it of the
other cherub.

6:27 And he set the cherubims within the inner house: and they
stretched forth the wings of the cherubims, so that the wing of the
one touched the one wall, and the wing of the other cherub touched the
other wall; and their wings touched one another in the midst of the
house.

6:28 And he overlaid the cherubims with gold.

6:29 And he carved all the walls of the house round about with carved
figures of cherubims and palm trees and open flowers, within and
without.

6:30 And the floors of the house he overlaid with gold, within and
without.

6:31 And for the entering of the oracle he made doors of olive tree:
the lintel and side posts were a fifth part of the wall.

6:32 The two doors also were of olive tree; and he carved upon them
carvings of cherubims and palm trees and open flowers, and overlaid
them with gold, and spread gold upon the cherubims, and upon the palm
trees.

6:33 So also made he for the door of the temple posts of olive tree, a
fourth part of the wall.

6:34 And the two doors were of fir tree: the two leaves of the one
door were folding, and the two leaves of the other door were folding.

6:35 And he carved thereon cherubims and palm trees and open flowers:
and covered them with gold fitted upon the carved work.

6:36 And he built the inner court with three rows of hewed stone, and
a row of cedar beams.

6:37 In the fourth year was the foundation of the house of the LORD
laid, in the month Zif: 6:38 And in the eleventh year, in the month
Bul, which is the eighth month, was the house finished throughout all
the parts thereof, and according to all the fashion of it. So was he
seven years in building it.

7:1 But Solomon was building his own house thirteen years, and he
finished all his house.

7:2 He built also the house of the forest of Lebanon; the length
thereof was an hundred cubits, and the breadth thereof fifty cubits,
and the height thereof thirty cubits, upon four rows of cedar pillars,
with cedar beams upon the pillars.

7:3 And it was covered with cedar above upon the beams, that lay on
forty five pillars, fifteen in a row.

7:4 And there were windows in three rows, and light was against light
in three ranks.

7:5 And all the doors and posts were square, with the windows: and
light was against light in three ranks.

7:6 And he made a porch of pillars; the length thereof was fifty
cubits, and the breadth thereof thirty cubits: and the porch was
before them: and the other pillars and the thick beam were before
them.

7:7 Then he made a porch for the throne where he might judge, even the
porch of judgment: and it was covered with cedar from one side of the
floor to the other.

7:8 And his house where he dwelt had another court within the porch,
which was of the like work. Solomon made also an house for Pharaoh’s
daughter, whom he had taken to wife, like unto this porch.

7:9 All these were of costly stones, according to the measures of
hewed stones, sawed with saws, within and without, even from the
foundation unto the coping, and so on the outside toward the great
court.

7:10 And the foundation was of costly stones, even great stones,
stones of ten cubits, and stones of eight cubits.

7:11 And above were costly stones, after the measures of hewed stones,
and cedars.

7:12 And the great court round about was with three rows of hewed
stones, and a row of cedar beams, both for the inner court of the
house of the LORD, and for the porch of the house.

7:13 And king Solomon sent and fetched Hiram out of Tyre.

7:14 He was a widow’s son of the tribe of Naphtali, and his father was
a man of Tyre, a worker in brass: and he was filled with wisdom, and
understanding, and cunning to work all works in brass. And he came to
king Solomon, and wrought all his work.

7:15 For he cast two pillars of brass, of eighteen cubits high apiece:
and a line of twelve cubits did compass either of them about.

7:16 And he made two chapiters of molten brass, to set upon the tops
of the pillars: the height of the one chapiter was five cubits, and
the height of the other chapiter was five cubits: 7:17 And nets of
checker work, and wreaths of chain work, for the chapiters which were
upon the top of the pillars; seven for the one chapiter, and seven for
the other chapiter.

7:18 And he made the pillars, and two rows round about upon the one
network, to cover the chapiters that were upon the top, with
pomegranates: and so did he for the other chapiter.

7:19 And the chapiters that were upon the top of the pillars were of
lily work in the porch, four cubits.

7:20 And the chapiters upon the two pillars had pomegranates also
above, over against the belly which was by the network: and the
pomegranates were two hundred in rows round about upon the other
chapiter.

7:21 And he set up the pillars in the porch of the temple: and he set
up the right pillar, and called the name thereof Jachin: and he set up
the left pillar, and called the name thereof Boaz.

7:22 And upon the top of the pillars was lily work: so was the work of
the pillars finished.

7:23 And he made a molten sea, ten cubits from the one brim to the
other: it was round all about, and his height was five cubits: and a
line of thirty cubits did compass it round about.

7:24 And under the brim of it round about there were knops compassing
it, ten in a cubit, compassing the sea round about: the knops were
cast in two rows, when it was cast.

7:25 It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and
three looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and
three looking toward the east: and the sea was set above upon them,
and all their hinder parts were inward.

7:26 And it was an hand breadth thick, and the brim thereof was
wrought like the brim of a cup, with flowers of lilies: it contained
two thousand baths.

7:27 And he made ten bases of brass; four cubits was the length of one
base, and four cubits the breadth thereof, and three cubits the height
of it.

7:28 And the work of the bases was on this manner: they had borders,
and the borders were between the ledges: 7:29 And on the borders that
were between the ledges were lions, oxen, and cherubims: and upon the
ledges there was a base above: and beneath the lions and oxen were
certain additions made of thin work.

7:30 And every base had four brasen wheels, and plates of brass: and
the four corners thereof had undersetters: under the laver were
undersetters molten, at the side of every addition.

7:31 And the mouth of it within the chapiter and above was a cubit:
but the mouth thereof was round after the work of the base, a cubit
and an half: and also upon the mouth of it were gravings with their
borders, foursquare, not round.

7:32 And under the borders were four wheels; and the axletrees of the
wheels were joined to the base: and the height of a wheel was a cubit
and half a cubit.

7:33 And the work of the wheels was like the work of a chariot wheel:
their axletrees, and their naves, and their felloes, and their spokes,
were all molten.

7:34 And there were four undersetters to the four corners of one base:
and the undersetters were of the very base itself.

7:35 And in the top of the base was there a round compass of half a
cubit high: and on the top of the base the ledges thereof and the
borders thereof were of the same.

7:36 For on the plates of the ledges thereof, and on the borders
thereof, he graved cherubims, lions, and palm trees, according to the
proportion of every one, and additions round about.

7:37 After this manner he made the ten bases: all of them had one
casting, one measure, and one size.

7:38 Then made he ten lavers of brass: one laver contained forty
baths: and every laver was four cubits: and upon every one of the ten
bases one laver.

7:39 And he put five bases on the right side of the house, and five on
the left side of the house: and he set the sea on the right side of
the house eastward over against the south.

7:40 And Hiram made the lavers, and the shovels, and the basons. So
Hiram made an end of doing all the work that he made king Solomon for
the house of the LORD: 7:41 The two pillars, and the two bowls of the
chapiters that were on the top of the two pillars; and the two
networks, to cover the two bowls of the chapiters which were upon the
top of the pillars; 7:42 And four hundred pomegranates for the two
networks, even two rows of pomegranates for one network, to cover the
two bowls of the chapiters that were upon the pillars; 7:43 And the
ten bases, and ten lavers on the bases; 7:44 And one sea, and twelve
oxen under the sea; 7:45 And the pots, and the shovels, and the
basons: and all these vessels, which Hiram made to king Solomon for
the house of the LORD, were of bright brass.

7:46 In the plain of Jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground
between Succoth and Zarthan.

7:47 And Solomon left all the vessels unweighed, because they were
exceeding many: neither was the weight of the brass found out.

7:48 And Solomon made all the vessels that pertained unto the house of
the LORD: the altar of gold, and the table of gold, whereupon the
shewbread was, 7:49 And the candlesticks of pure gold, five on the
right side, and five on the left, before the oracle, with the flowers,
and the lamps, and the tongs of gold, 7:50 And the bowls, and the
snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons, and the censers of pure
gold; and the hinges of gold, both for the doors of the inner house,
the most holy place, and for the doors of the house, to wit, of the
temple.

7:51 So was ended all the work that king Solomon made for the house of
the LORD. And Solomon brought in the things which David his father had
dedicated; even the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, did he put
among the treasures of the house of the LORD.

8:1 Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, and all the heads of
the tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of Israel, unto
king Solomon in Jerusalem, that they might bring up the ark of the
covenant of the LORD out of the city of David, which is Zion.

8:2 And all the men of Israel assembled themselves unto king Solomon
at the feast in the month Ethanim, which is the seventh month.

8:3 And all the elders of Israel came, and the priests took up the
ark.

8:4 And they brought up the ark of the LORD, and the tabernacle of the
congregation, and all the holy vessels that were in the tabernacle,
even those did the priests and the Levites bring up.

8:5 And king Solomon, and all the congregation of Israel, that were
assembled unto him, were with him before the ark, sacrificing sheep
and oxen, that could not be told nor numbered for multitude.

8:6 And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the LORD
unto his place, into the oracle of the house, to the most holy place,
even under the wings of the cherubims.

8:7 For the cherubims spread forth their two wings over the place of
the ark, and the cherubims covered the ark and the staves thereof
above.

8:8 And they drew out the staves, that the ends of the staves were
seen out in the holy place before the oracle, and they were not seen
without: and there they are unto this day.

8:9 There was nothing in the ark save the two tables of stone, which
Moses put there at Horeb, when the LORD made a covenant with the
children of Israel, when they came out of the land of Egypt.

8:10 And it came to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy
place, that the cloud filled the house of the LORD, 8:11 So that the
priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud: for the
glory of the LORD had filled the house of the LORD.

8:12 Then spake Solomon, The LORD said that he would dwell in the
thick darkness.

8:13 I have surely built thee an house to dwell in, a settled place
for thee to abide in for ever.

8:14 And the king turned his face about, and blessed all the
congregation of Israel: (and all the congregation of Israel stood;)
8:15 And he said, Blessed be the LORD God of Israel, which spake with
his mouth unto David my father, and hath with his hand fulfilled it,
saying, 8:16 Since the day that I brought forth my people Israel out
of Egypt, I chose no city out of all the tribes of Israel to build an
house, that my name might be therein; but I chose David to be over my
people Israel.

8:17 And it was in the heart of David my father to build an house for
the name of the LORD God of Israel.

8:18 And the LORD said unto David my father, Whereas it was in thine
heart to build an house unto my name, thou didst well that it was in
thine heart.

8:19 Nevertheless thou shalt not build the house; but thy son that
shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house unto my
name.

8:20 And the LORD hath performed his word that he spake, and I am
risen up in the room of David my father, and sit on the throne of
Israel, as the LORD promised, and have built an house for the name of
the LORD God of Israel.

8:21 And I have set there a place for the ark, wherein is the covenant
of the LORD, which he made with our fathers, when he brought them out
of the land of Egypt.

8:22 And Solomon stood before the altar of the LORD in the presence of
all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands toward
heaven: 8:23 And he said, LORD God of Israel, there is no God like
thee, in heaven above, or on earth beneath, who keepest covenant and
mercy with thy servants that walk before thee with all their heart:
8:24 Who hast kept with thy servant David my father that thou
promisedst him: thou spakest also with thy mouth, and hast fulfilled
it with thine hand, as it is this day.

8:25 Therefore now, LORD God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my
father that thou promisedst him, saying, There shall not fail thee a
man in my sight to sit on the throne of Israel; so that thy children
take heed to their way, that they walk before me as thou hast walked
before me.

8:26 And now, O God of Israel, let thy word, I pray thee, be verified,
which thou spakest unto thy servant David my father.

8:27 But will God indeed dwell on the earth? behold, the heaven and
heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house that I
have builded? 8:28 Yet have thou respect unto the prayer of thy
servant, and to his supplication, O LORD my God, to hearken unto the
cry and to the prayer, which thy servant prayeth before thee to day:
8:29 That thine eyes may be open toward this house night and day, even
toward the place of which thou hast said, My name shall be there: that
thou mayest hearken unto the prayer which thy servant shall make
toward this place.

8:30 And hearken thou to the supplication of thy servant, and of thy
people Israel, when they shall pray toward this place: and hear thou
in heaven thy dwelling place: and when thou hearest, forgive.

8:31 If any man trespass against his neighbour, and an oath be laid
upon him to cause him to swear, and the oath come before thine altar
in this house: 8:32 Then hear thou in heaven, and do, and judge thy
servants, condemning the wicked, to bring his way upon his head; and
justifying the righteous, to give him according to his righteousness.

8:33 When thy people Israel be smitten down before the enemy, because
they have sinned against thee, and shall turn again to thee, and
confess thy name, and pray, and make supplication unto thee in this
house: 8:34 Then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy
people Israel, and bring them again unto the land which thou gavest
unto their fathers.

8:35 When heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, because they have
sinned against thee; if they pray toward this place, and confess thy
name, and turn from their sin, when thou afflictest them: 8:36 Then
hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy servants, and of thy
people Israel, that thou teach them the good way wherein they should
walk, and give rain upon thy land, which thou hast given to thy people
for an inheritance.

8:37 If there be in the land famine, if there be pestilence, blasting,
mildew, locust, or if there be caterpiller; if their enemy besiege
them in the land of their cities; whatsoever plague, whatsoever
sickness there be; 8:38 What prayer and supplication soever be made by
any man, or by all thy people Israel, which shall know every man the
plague of his own heart, and spread forth his hands toward this house:
8:39 Then hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, and do,
and give to every man according to his ways, whose heart thou knowest;
(for thou, even thou only, knowest the hearts of all the children of
men;) 8:40 That they may fear thee all the days that they live in the
land which thou gavest unto our fathers.

8:41 Moreover concerning a stranger, that is not of thy people Israel,
but cometh out of a far country for thy name’s sake; 8:42 (For they
shall hear of thy great name, and of thy strong hand, and of thy
stretched out arm;) when he shall come and pray toward this house;
8:43 Hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, and do according to all
that the stranger calleth to thee for: that all people of the earth
may know thy name, to fear thee, as do thy people Israel; and that
they may know that this house, which I have builded, is called by thy
name.

8:44 If thy people go out to battle against their enemy, whithersoever
thou shalt send them, and shall pray unto the LORD toward the city
which thou hast chosen, and toward the house that I have built for thy
name: 8:45 Then hear thou in heaven their prayer and their
supplication, and maintain their cause.

8:46 If they sin against thee, (for there is no man that sinneth not,)
and thou be angry with them, and deliver them to the enemy, so that
they carry them away captives unto the land of the enemy, far or near;
8:47 Yet if they shall bethink themselves in the land whither they
were carried captives, and repent, and make supplication unto thee in
the land of them that carried them captives, saying, We have sinned,
and have done perversely, we have committed wickedness; 8:48 And so
return unto thee with all their heart, and with all their soul, in the
land of their enemies, which led them away captive, and pray unto thee
toward their land, which thou gavest unto their fathers, the city
which thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built for thy name:
8:49 Then hear thou their prayer and their supplication in heaven thy
dwelling place, and maintain their cause, 8:50 And forgive thy people
that have sinned against thee, and all their transgressions wherein
they have transgressed against thee, and give them compassion before
them who carried them captive, that they may have compassion on them:
8:51 For they be thy people, and thine inheritance, which thou
broughtest forth out of Egypt, from the midst of the furnace of iron:
8:52 That thine eyes may be open unto the supplication of thy servant,
and unto the supplication of thy people Israel, to hearken unto them
in all that they call for unto thee.

8:53 For thou didst separate them from among all the people of the
earth, to be thine inheritance, as thou spakest by the hand of Moses
thy servant, when thou broughtest our fathers out of Egypt, O LORD
God.

8:54 And it was so, that when Solomon had made an end of praying all
this prayer and supplication unto the LORD, he arose from before the
altar of the LORD, from kneeling on his knees with his hands spread up
to heaven.

8:55 And he stood, and blessed all the congregation of Israel with a
loud voice, saying, 8:56 Blessed be the LORD, that hath given rest
unto his people Israel, according to all that he promised: there hath
not failed one word of all his good promise, which he promised by the
hand of Moses his servant.

8:57 The LORD our God be with us, as he was with our fathers: let him
not leave us, nor forsake us: 8:58 That he may incline our hearts unto
him, to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and his
statutes, and his judgments, which he commanded our fathers.

8:59 And let these my words, wherewith I have made supplication before
the LORD, be nigh unto the LORD our God day and night, that he
maintain the cause of his servant, and the cause of his people Israel
at all times, as the matter shall require: 8:60 That all the people of
the earth may know that the LORD is God, and that there is none else.

8:61 Let your heart therefore be perfect with the LORD our God, to
walk in his statutes, and to keep his commandments, as at this day.

8:62 And the king, and all Israel with him, offered sacrifice before
the LORD.

8:63 And Solomon offered a sacrifice of peace offerings, which he
offered unto the LORD, two and twenty thousand oxen, and an hundred
and twenty thousand sheep. So the king and all the children of Israel
dedicated the house of the LORD.

8:64 The same day did the king hallow the middle of the court that was
before the house of the LORD: for there he offered burnt offerings,
and meat offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings: because the
brasen altar that was before the LORD was too little to receive the
burnt offerings, and meat offerings, and the fat of the peace
offerings.

8:65 And at that time Solomon held a feast, and all Israel with him, a
great congregation, from the entering in of Hamath unto the river of
Egypt, before the LORD our God, seven days and seven days, even
fourteen days.

8:66 On the eighth day he sent the people away: and they blessed the
king, and went unto their tents joyful and glad of heart for all the
goodness that the LORD had done for David his servant, and for Israel
his people.

9:1 And it came to pass, when Solomon had finished the building of the
house of the LORD, and the king’s house, and all Solomon’s desire
which he was pleased to do, 9:2 That the LORD appeared to Solomon the
second time, as he had appeared unto him at Gibeon.

9:3 And the LORD said unto him, I have heard thy prayer and thy
supplication, that thou hast made before me: I have hallowed this
house, which thou hast built, to put my name there for ever; and mine
eyes and mine heart shall be there perpetually.

9:4 And if thou wilt walk before me, as David thy father walked, in
integrity of heart, and in uprightness, to do according to all that I
have commanded thee, and wilt keep my statutes and my judgments: 9:5
Then I will establish the throne of thy kingdom upon Israel for ever,
as I promised to David thy father, saying, There shall not fail thee a
man upon the throne of Israel.

9:6 But if ye shall at all turn from following me, ye or your
children, and will not keep my commandments and my statutes which I
have set before you, but go and serve other gods, and worship them:
9:7 Then will I cut off Israel out of the land which I have given
them; and this house, which I have hallowed for my name, will I cast
out of my sight; and Israel shall be a proverb and a byword among all
people: 9:8 And at this house, which is high, every one that passeth
by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss; and they shall say, Why
hath the LORD done thus unto this land, and to this house? 9:9 And
they shall answer, Because they forsook the LORD their God, who
brought forth their fathers out of the land of Egypt, and have taken
hold upon other gods, and have worshipped them, and served them:
therefore hath the LORD brought upon them all this evil.

9:10 And it came to pass at the end of twenty years, when Solomon had
built the two houses, the house of the LORD, and the king’s house,
9:11 (Now Hiram the king of Tyre had furnished Solomon with cedar
trees and fir trees, and with gold, according to all his desire,) that
then king Solomon gave Hiram twenty cities in the land of Galilee.

9:12 And Hiram came out from Tyre to see the cities which Solomon had
given him; and they pleased him not.

9:13 And he said, What cities are these which thou hast given me, my
brother? And he called them the land of Cabul unto this day.

9:14 And Hiram sent to the king sixscore talents of gold.

9:15 And this is the reason of the levy which king Solomon raised; for
to build the house of the LORD, and his own house, and Millo, and the
wall of Jerusalem, and Hazor, and Megiddo, and Gezer.

9:16 For Pharaoh king of Egypt had gone up, and taken Gezer, and burnt
it with fire, and slain the Canaanites that dwelt in the city, and
given it for a present unto his daughter, Solomon’s wife.

9:17 And Solomon built Gezer, and Bethhoron the nether, 9:18 And
Baalath, and Tadmor in the wilderness, in the land, 9:19 And all the
cities of store that Solomon had, and cities for his chariots, and
cities for his horsemen, and that which Solomon desired to build in
Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and in all the land of his dominion.

9:20 And all the people that were left of the Amorites, Hittites,
Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites, which were not of the children of
Israel, 9:21 Their children that were left after them in the land,
whom the children of Israel also were not able utterly to destroy,
upon those did Solomon levy a tribute of bondservice unto this day.

9:22 But of the children of Israel did Solomon make no bondmen: but
they were men of war, and his servants, and his princes, and his
captains, and rulers of his chariots, and his horsemen.

9:23 These were the chief of the officers that were over Solomon’s
work, five hundred and fifty, which bare rule over the people that
wrought in the work.

9:24 But Pharaoh’s daughter came up out of the city of David unto her
house which Solomon had built for her: then did he build Millo.

9:25 And three times in a year did Solomon offer burnt offerings and
peace offerings upon the altar which he built unto the LORD, and he
burnt incense upon the altar that was before the LORD. So he finished
the house.

9:26 And king Solomon made a navy of ships in Eziongeber, which is
beside Eloth, on the shore of the Red sea, in the land of Edom.

9:27 And Hiram sent in the navy his servants, shipmen that had
knowledge of the sea, with the servants of Solomon.

9:28 And they came to Ophir, and fetched from thence gold, four
hundred and twenty talents, and brought it to king Solomon.

10:1 And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon
concerning the name of the LORD, she came to prove him with hard
questions.

10:2 And she came to Jerusalem with a very great train, with camels
that bare spices, and very much gold, and precious stones: and when
she was come to Solomon, she communed with him of all that was in her
heart.

10:3 And Solomon told her all her questions: there was not any thing
hid from the king, which he told her not.

10:4 And when the queen of Sheba had seen all Solomon’s wisdom, and
the house that he had built, 10:5 And the meat of his table, and the
sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and
their apparel, and his cupbearers, and his ascent by which he went up
unto the house of the LORD; there was no more spirit in her.

10:6 And she said to the king, It was a true report that I heard in
mine own land of thy acts and of thy wisdom.

10:7 Howbeit I believed not the words, until I came, and mine eyes had
seen it: and, behold, the half was not told me: thy wisdom and
prosperity exceedeth the fame which I heard.

10:8 Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants, which stand
continually before thee, and that hear thy wisdom.

10:9 Blessed be the LORD thy God, which delighted in thee, to set thee
on the throne of Israel: because the LORD loved Israel for ever,
therefore made he thee king, to do judgment and justice.

10:10 And she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and
of spices very great store, and precious stones: there came no more
such abundance of spices as these which the queen of Sheba gave to
king Solomon.

10:11 And the navy also of Hiram, that brought gold from Ophir,
brought in from Ophir great plenty of almug trees, and precious
stones.

10:12 And the king made of the almug trees pillars for the house of
the LORD, and for the king’s house, harps also and psalteries for
singers: there came no such almug trees, nor were seen unto this day.

10:13 And king Solomon gave unto the queen of Sheba all her desire,
whatsoever she asked, beside that which Solomon gave her of his royal
bounty.

So she turned and went to her own country, she and her servants.

10:14 Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six
hundred threescore and six talents of gold, 10:15 Beside that he had
of the merchantmen, and of the traffick of the spice merchants, and of
all the kings of Arabia, and of the governors of the country.

10:16 And king Solomon made two hundred targets of beaten gold: six
hundred shekels of gold went to one target.

10:17 And he made three hundred shields of beaten gold; three pound of
gold went to one shield: and the king put them in the house of the
forest of Lebanon.

10:18 Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it
with the best gold.

10:19 The throne had six steps, and the top of the throne was round
behind: and there were stays on either side on the place of the seat,
and two lions stood beside the stays.

10:20 And twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other
upon the six steps: there was not the like made in any kingdom.

10:21 And all king Solomon’s drinking vessels were of gold, and all
the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold;
none were of silver: it was nothing accounted of in the days of
Solomon.

10:22 For the king had at sea a navy of Tharshish with the navy of
Hiram: once in three years came the navy of Tharshish, bringing gold,
and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.

10:23 So king Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth for riches
and for wisdom.

10:24 And all the earth sought to Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which
God had put in his heart.

10:25 And they brought every man his present, vessels of silver, and
vessels of gold, and garments, and armour, and spices, horses, and
mules, a rate year by year.

10:26 And Solomon gathered together chariots and horsemen: and he had
a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen,
whom he bestowed in the cities for chariots, and with the king at
Jerusalem.

10:27 And the king made silver to be in Jerusalem as stones, and
cedars made he to be as the sycomore trees that are in the vale, for
abundance.

10:28 And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn: the
king’s merchants received the linen yarn at a price.

10:29 And a chariot came up and went out of Egypt for six hundred
shekels of silver, and an horse for an hundred and fifty: and so for
all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of Syria, did they
bring them out by their means.

11:1 But king Solomon loved many strange women, together with the
daughter of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites,
Zidonians, and Hittites: 11:2 Of the nations concerning which the LORD
said unto the children of Israel, Ye shall not go in to them, neither
shall they come in unto you: for surely they will turn away your heart
after their gods: Solomon clave unto these in love.

11:3 And he had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred
concubines: and his wives turned away his heart.

11:4 For it came to pass, when Solomon was old, that his wives turned
away his heart after other gods: and his heart was not perfect with
the LORD his God, as was the heart of David his father.

11:5 For Solomon went after Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians,
and after Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites.

11:6 And Solomon did evil in the sight of the LORD, and went not fully
after the LORD, as did David his father.

11:7 Then did Solomon build an high place for Chemosh, the abomination
of Moab, in the hill that is before Jerusalem, and for Molech, the
abomination of the children of Ammon.

11:8 And likewise did he for all his strange wives, which burnt
incense and sacrificed unto their gods.

11:9 And the LORD was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned
from the LORD God of Israel, which had appeared unto him twice, 11:10
And had commanded him concerning this thing, that he should not go
after other gods: but he kept not that which the LORD commanded.

11:11 Wherefore the LORD said unto Solomon, Forasmuch as this is done
of thee, and thou hast not kept my covenant and my statutes, which I
have commanded thee, I will surely rend the kingdom from thee, and
will give it to thy servant.

11:12 Notwithstanding in thy days I will not do it for David thy
father’s sake: but I will rend it out of the hand of thy son.

11:13 Howbeit I will not rend away all the kingdom; but will give one
tribe to thy son for David my servant’s sake, and for Jerusalem’s sake
which I have chosen.

11:14 And the LORD stirred up an adversary unto Solomon, Hadad the
Edomite: he was of the king’s seed in Edom.

11:15 For it came to pass, when David was in Edom, and Joab the
captain of the host was gone up to bury the slain, after he had
smitten every male in Edom; 11:16 (For six months did Joab remain
there with all Israel, until he had cut off every male in Edom:) 11:17
That Hadad fled, he and certain Edomites of his father’s servants with
him, to go into Egypt; Hadad being yet a little child.

11:18 And they arose out of Midian, and came to Paran: and they took
men with them out of Paran, and they came to Egypt, unto Pharaoh king
of Egypt; which gave him an house, and appointed him victuals, and
gave him land.

11:19 And Hadad found great favour in the sight of Pharaoh, so that he
gave him to wife the sister of his own wife, the sister of Tahpenes
the queen.

11:20 And the sister of Tahpenes bare him Genubath his son, whom
Tahpenes weaned in Pharaoh’s house: and Genubath was in Pharaoh’s
household among the sons of Pharaoh.

11:21 And when Hadad heard in Egypt that David slept with his fathers,
and that Joab the captain of the host was dead, Hadad said to Pharaoh,
Let me depart, that I may go to mine own country.

11:22 Then Pharaoh said unto him, But what hast thou lacked with me,
that, behold, thou seekest to go to thine own country? And he
answered, Nothing: howbeit let me go in any wise.

11:23 And God stirred him up another adversary, Rezon the son of
Eliadah, which fled from his lord Hadadezer king of Zobah: 11:24 And
he gathered men unto him, and became captain over a band, when David
slew them of Zobah: and they went to Damascus, and dwelt therein, and
reigned in Damascus.

11:25 And he was an adversary to Israel all the days of Solomon,
beside the mischief that Hadad did: and he abhorred Israel, and
reigned over Syria.

11:26 And Jeroboam the son of Nebat, an Ephrathite of Zereda,
Solomon’s servant, whose mother’s name was Zeruah, a widow woman, even
he lifted up his hand against the king.

11:27 And this was the cause that he lifted up his hand against the
king: Solomon built Millo, and repaired the breaches of the city of
David his father.

11:28 And the man Jeroboam was a mighty man of valour: and Solomon
seeing the young man that he was industrious, he made him ruler over
all the charge of the house of Joseph.

11:29 And it came to pass at that time when Jeroboam went out of
Jerusalem, that the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite found him in the way;
and he had clad himself with a new garment; and they two were alone in
the field: 11:30 And Ahijah caught the new garment that was on him,
and rent it in twelve pieces: 11:31 And he said to Jeroboam, Take thee
ten pieces: for thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, Behold, I will
rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will give ten tribes
to thee: 11:32 (But he shall have one tribe for my servant David’s
sake, and for Jerusalem’s sake, the city which I have chosen out of
all the tribes of Israel:) 11:33 Because that they have forsaken me,
and have worshipped Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians, Chemosh
the god of the Moabites, and Milcom the god of the children of Ammon,
and have not walked in my ways, to do that which is right in mine
eyes, and to keep my statutes and my judgments, as did David his
father.

11:34 Howbeit I will not take the whole kingdom out of his hand: but I
will make him prince all the days of his life for David my servant’s
sake, whom I chose, because he kept my commandments and my statutes:
11:35 But I will take the kingdom out of his son’s hand, and will give
it unto thee, even ten tribes.

11:36 And unto his son will I give one tribe, that David my servant
may have a light alway before me in Jerusalem, the city which I have
chosen me to put my name there.

11:37 And I will take thee, and thou shalt reign according to all that
thy soul desireth, and shalt be king over Israel.

11:38 And it shall be, if thou wilt hearken unto all that I command
thee, and wilt walk in my ways, and do that is right in my sight, to
keep my statutes and my commandments, as David my servant did; that I
will be with thee, and build thee a sure house, as I built for David,
and will give Israel unto thee.

11:39 And I will for this afflict the seed of David, but not for ever.

11:40 Solomon sought therefore to kill Jeroboam. And Jeroboam arose,
and fled into Egypt, unto Shishak king of Egypt, and was in Egypt
until the death of Solomon.

11:41 And the rest of the acts of Solomon, and all that he did, and
his wisdom, are they not written in the book of the acts of Solomon?
11:42 And the time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel
was forty years.

11:43 And Solomon slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city
of David his father: and Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead.

12:1 And Rehoboam went to Shechem: for all Israel were come to Shechem
to make him king.

12:2 And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who was yet
in Egypt, heard of it, (for he was fled from the presence of king
Solomon, and Jeroboam dwelt in Egypt;) 12:3 That they sent and called
him. And Jeroboam and all the congregation of Israel came, and spake
unto Rehoboam, saying, 12:4 Thy father made our yoke grievous: now
therefore make thou the grievous service of thy father, and his heavy
yoke which he put upon us, lighter, and we will serve thee.

12:5 And he said unto them, Depart yet for three days, then come again
to me. And the people departed.

12:6 And king Rehoboam consulted with the old men, that stood before
Solomon his father while he yet lived, and said, How do ye advise that
I may answer this people? 12:7 And they spake unto him, saying, If
thou wilt be a servant unto this people this day, and wilt serve them,
and answer them, and speak good words to them, then they will be thy
servants for ever.

12:8 But he forsook the counsel of the old men, which they had given
him, and consulted with the young men that were grown up with him, and
which stood before him: 12:9 And he said unto them, What counsel give
ye that we may answer this people, who have spoken to me, saying, Make
the yoke which thy father did put upon us lighter? 12:10 And the
young men that were grown up with him spake unto him, saying, Thus
shalt thou speak unto this people that spake unto thee, saying, Thy
father made our yoke heavy, but make thou it lighter unto us; thus
shalt thou say unto them, My little finger shall be thicker than my
father’s loins.

12:11 And now whereas my father did lade you with a heavy yoke, I will
add to your yoke: my father hath chastised you with whips, but I will
chastise you with scorpions.

12:12 So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the third day,
as the king had appointed, saying, Come to me again the third day.

12:13 And the king answered the people roughly, and forsook the old
men’s counsel that they gave him; 12:14 And spake to them after the
counsel of the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy, and
I will add to your yoke: my father also chastised you with whips, but
I will chastise you with scorpions.

12:15 Wherefore the king hearkened not unto the people; for the cause
was from the LORD, that he might perform his saying, which the LORD
spake by Ahijah the Shilonite unto Jeroboam the son of Nebat.

12:16 So when all Israel saw that the king hearkened not unto them,
the people answered the king, saying, What portion have we in David?
neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse: to your tents, O
Israel: now see to thine own house, David. So Israel departed unto
their tents.

12:17 But as for the children of Israel which dwelt in the cities of
Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.

12:18 Then king Rehoboam sent Adoram, who was over the tribute; and
all Israel stoned him with stones, that he died. Therefore king
Rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot, to flee to
Jerusalem.

12:19 So Israel rebelled against the house of David unto this day.

12:20 And it came to pass, when all Israel heard that Jeroboam was
come again, that they sent and called him unto the congregation, and
made him king over all Israel: there was none that followed the house
of David, but the tribe of Judah only.

12:21 And when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he assembled all the
house of Judah, with the tribe of Benjamin, an hundred and fourscore
thousand chosen men, which were warriors, to fight against the house
of Israel, to bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam the son of Solomon.

12:22 But the word of God came unto Shemaiah the man of God, saying,
12:23 Speak unto Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and unto
all the house of Judah and Benjamin, and to the remnant of the people,
saying, 12:24 Thus saith the LORD, Ye shall not go up, nor fight
against your brethren the children of Israel: return every man to his
house; for this thing is from me. They hearkened therefore to the word
of the LORD, and returned to depart, according to the word of the
LORD.

12:25 Then Jeroboam built Shechem in mount Ephraim, and dwelt therein;
and went out from thence, and built Penuel.

12:26 And Jeroboam said in his heart, Now shall the kingdom return to
the house of David: 12:27 If this people go up to do sacrifice in the
house of the LORD at Jerusalem, then shall the heart of this people
turn again unto their lord, even unto Rehoboam king of Judah, and they
shall kill me, and go again to Rehoboam king of Judah.

12:28 Whereupon the king took counsel, and made two calves of gold,
and said unto them, It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem:
behold thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of
Egypt.

12:29 And he set the one in Bethel, and the other put he in Dan.

12:30 And this thing became a sin: for the people went to worship
before the one, even unto Dan.

12:31 And he made an house of high places, and made priests of the
lowest of the people, which were not of the sons of Levi.

12:32 And Jeroboam ordained a feast in the eighth month, on the
fifteenth day of the month, like unto the feast that is in Judah, and
he offered upon the altar. So did he in Bethel, sacrificing unto the
calves that he had made: and he placed in Bethel the priests of the
high places which he had made.

12:33 So he offered upon the altar which he had made in Bethel the
fifteenth day of the eighth month, even in the month which he had
devised of his own heart; and ordained a feast unto the children of
Israel: and he offered upon the altar, and burnt incense.

13:1 And, behold, there came a man of God out of Judah by the word of
the LORD unto Bethel: and Jeroboam stood by the altar to burn incense.

13:2 And he cried against the altar in the word of the LORD, and said,
O altar, altar, thus saith the LORD; Behold, a child shall be born
unto the house of David, Josiah by name; and upon thee shall he offer
the priests of the high places that burn incense upon thee, and men’s
bones shall be burnt upon thee.

13:3 And he gave a sign the same day, saying, This is the sign which
the LORD hath spoken; Behold, the altar shall be rent, and the ashes
that are upon it shall be poured out.

13:4 And it came to pass, when king Jeroboam heard the saying of the
man of God, which had cried against the altar in Bethel, that he put
forth his hand from the altar, saying, Lay hold on him. And his hand,
which he put forth against him, dried up, so that he could not pull it
in again to him.

13:5 The altar also was rent, and the ashes poured out from the altar,
according to the sign which the man of God had given by the word of
the LORD.

13:6 And the king answered and said unto the man of God, Intreat now
the face of the LORD thy God, and pray for me, that my hand may be
restored me again. And the man of God besought the LORD, and the
king’s hand was restored him again, and became as it was before.

13:7 And the king said unto the man of God, Come home with me, and
refresh thyself, and I will give thee a reward.

13:8 And the man of God said unto the king, If thou wilt give me half
thine house, I will not go in with thee, neither will I eat bread nor
drink water in this place: 13:9 For so was it charged me by the word
of the LORD, saying, Eat no bread, nor drink water, nor turn again by
the same way that thou camest.

13:10 So he went another way, and returned not by the way that he came
to Bethel.

13:11 Now there dwelt an old prophet in Bethel; and his sons came and
told him all the works that the man of God had done that day in
Bethel: the words which he had spoken unto the king, them they told
also to their father.

13:12 And their father said unto them, What way went he? For his sons
had seen what way the man of God went, which came from Judah.

13:13 And he said unto his sons, Saddle me the ass. So they saddled
him the ass: and he rode thereon, 13:14 And went after the man of God,
and found him sitting under an oak: and he said unto him, Art thou the
man of God that camest from Judah? And he said, I am.

13:15 Then he said unto him, Come home with me, and eat bread.

13:16 And he said, I may not return with thee, nor go in with thee:
neither will I eat bread nor drink water with thee in this place:
13:17 For it was said to me by the word of the LORD, Thou shalt eat no
bread nor drink water there, nor turn again to go by the way that thou
camest.

13:18 He said unto him, I am a prophet also as thou art; and an angel
spake unto me by the word of the LORD, saying, Bring him back with
thee into thine house, that he may eat bread and drink water. But he
lied unto him.

13:19 So he went back with him, and did eat bread in his house, and
drank water.

13:20 And it came to pass, as they sat at the table, that the word of
the LORD came unto the prophet that brought him back: 13:21 And he
cried unto the man of God that came from Judah, saying, Thus saith the
LORD, Forasmuch as thou hast disobeyed the mouth of the LORD, and hast
not kept the commandment which the LORD thy God commanded thee, 13:22
But camest back, and hast eaten bread and drunk water in the place, of
the which the Lord did say to thee, Eat no bread, and drink no water;
thy carcase shall not come unto the sepulchre of thy fathers.

13:23 And it came to pass, after he had eaten bread, and after he had
drunk, that he saddled for him the ass, to wit, for the prophet whom
he had brought back.

13:24 And when he was gone, a lion met him by the way, and slew him:
and his carcase was cast in the way, and the ass stood by it, the lion
also stood by the carcase.

13:25 And, behold, men passed by, and saw the carcase cast in the way,
and the lion standing by the carcase: and they came and told it in the
city where the old prophet dwelt.

13:26 And when the prophet that brought him back from the way heard
thereof, he said, It is the man of God, who was disobedient unto the
word of the LORD: therefore the LORD hath delivered him unto the lion,
which hath torn him, and slain him, according to the word of the LORD,
which he spake unto him.

13:27 And he spake to his sons, saying, Saddle me the ass. And they
saddled him.

13:28 And he went and found his carcase cast in the way, and the ass
and the lion standing by the carcase: the lion had not eaten the
carcase, nor torn the ass.

13:29 And the prophet took up the carcase of the man of God, and laid
it upon the ass, and brought it back: and the old prophet came to the
city, to mourn and to bury him.

13:30 And he laid his carcase in his own grave; and they mourned over
him, saying, Alas, my brother! 13:31 And it came to pass, after he
had buried him, that he spake to his sons, saying, When I am dead,
then bury me in the sepulchre wherein the man of God is buried; lay my
bones beside his bones: 13:32 For the saying which he cried by the
word of the LORD against the altar in Bethel, and against all the
houses of the high places which are in the cities of Samaria, shall
surely come to pass.

13:33 After this thing Jeroboam returned not from his evil way, but
made again of the lowest of the people priests of the high places:
whosoever would, he consecrated him, and he became one of the priests
of the high places.

13:34 And this thing became sin unto the house of Jeroboam, even to
cut it off, and to destroy it from off the face of the earth.

14:1 At that time Abijah the son of Jeroboam fell sick.

14:2 And Jeroboam said to his wife, Arise, I pray thee, and disguise
thyself, that thou be not known to be the wife of Jeroboam; and get
thee to Shiloh: behold, there is Ahijah the prophet, which told me
that I should be king over this people.

14:3 And take with thee ten loaves, and cracknels, and a cruse of
honey, and go to him: he shall tell thee what shall become of the
child.

14:4 And Jeroboam’s wife did so, and arose, and went to Shiloh, and
came to the house of Ahijah. But Ahijah could not see; for his eyes
were set by reason of his age.

14:5 And the LORD said unto Ahijah, Behold, the wife of Jeroboam
cometh to ask a thing of thee for her son; for he is sick: thus and
thus shalt thou say unto her: for it shall be, when she cometh in,
that she shall feign herself to be another woman.

14:6 And it was so, when Ahijah heard the sound of her feet, as she
came in at the door, that he said, Come in, thou wife of Jeroboam; why
feignest thou thyself to be another? for I am sent to thee with heavy
tidings.

14:7 Go, tell Jeroboam, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Forasmuch
as I exalted thee from among the people, and made thee prince over my
people Israel, 14:8 And rent the kingdom away from the house of David,
and gave it thee: and yet thou hast not been as my servant David, who
kept my commandments, and who followed me with all his heart, to do
that only which was right in mine eyes; 14:9 But hast done evil above
all that were before thee: for thou hast gone and made thee other
gods, and molten images, to provoke me to anger, and hast cast me
behind thy back: 14:10 Therefore, behold, I will bring evil upon the
house of Jeroboam, and will cut off from Jeroboam him that pisseth
against the wall, and him that is shut up and left in Israel, and will
take away the remnant of the house of Jeroboam, as a man taketh away
dung, till it be all gone.

14:11 Him that dieth of Jeroboam in the city shall the dogs eat; and
him that dieth in the field shall the fowls of the air eat: for the
LORD hath spoken it.

14:12 Arise thou therefore, get thee to thine own house: and when thy
feet enter into the city, the child shall die.

14:13 And all Israel shall mourn for him, and bury him: for he only of
Jeroboam shall come to the grave, because in him there is found some
good thing toward the LORD God of Israel in the house of Jeroboam.

14:14 Moreover the LORD shall raise him up a king over Israel, who
shall cut off the house of Jeroboam that day: but what? even now.

14:15 For the LORD shall smite Israel, as a reed is shaken in the
water, and he shall root up Israel out of this good land, which he
gave to their fathers, and shall scatter them beyond the river,
because they have made their groves, provoking the LORD to anger.

14:16 And he shall give Israel up because of the sins of Jeroboam, who
did sin, and who made Israel to sin.

14:17 And Jeroboam’s wife arose, and departed, and came to Tirzah: and
when she came to the threshold of the door, the child died; 14:18 And
they buried him; and all Israel mourned for him, according to the word
of the LORD, which he spake by the hand of his servant Ahijah the
prophet.

14:19 And the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, how he warred, and how he
reigned, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Israel.

14:20 And the days which Jeroboam reigned were two and twenty years:
and he slept with his fathers, and Nadab his son reigned in his stead.

14:21 And Rehoboam the son of Solomon reigned in Judah. Rehoboam was
forty and one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which the LORD did choose out
of all the tribes of Israel, to put his name there. And his mother’s
name was Naamah an Ammonitess.

14:22 And Judah did evil in the sight of the LORD, and they provoked
him to jealousy with their sins which they had committed, above all
that their fathers had done.

14:23 For they also built them high places, and images, and groves, on
every high hill, and under every green tree.

14:24 And there were also sodomites in the land: and they did
according to all the abominations of the nations which the LORD cast
out before the children of Israel.

14:25 And it came to pass in the fifth year of king Rehoboam, that
Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem: 14:26 And he took
away the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the
king’s house; he even took away all: and he took away all the shields
of gold which Solomon had made.

14:27 And king Rehoboam made in their stead brasen shields, and
committed them unto the hands of the chief of the guard, which kept
the door of the king’s house.

14:28 And it was so, when the king went into the house of the LORD,
that the guard bare them, and brought them back into the guard
chamber.

14:29 Now the rest of the acts of Rehoboam, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
14:30 And there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all their days.

14:31 And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried with his
fathers in the city of David. And his mother’s name was Naamah an
Ammonitess. And Abijam his son reigned in his stead.

15:1 Now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam the son of Nebat
reigned Abijam over Judah.

15:2 Three years reigned he in Jerusalem. and his mother’s name was
Maachah, the daughter of Abishalom.

15:3 And he walked in all the sins of his father, which he had done
before him: and his heart was not perfect with the LORD his God, as
the heart of David his father.

15:4 Nevertheless for David’s sake did the LORD his God give him a
lamp in Jerusalem, to set up his son after him, and to establish
Jerusalem: 15:5 Because David did that which was right in the eyes of
the LORD, and turned not aside from any thing that he commanded him
all the days of his life, save only in the matter of Uriah the
Hittite.

15:6 And there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all the days of
his life.

15:7 Now the rest of the acts of Abijam, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? And
there was war between Abijam and Jeroboam.

15:8 And Abijam slept with his fathers; and they buried him in the
city of David: and Asa his son reigned in his stead.

15:9 And in the twentieth year of Jeroboam king of Israel reigned Asa
over Judah.

15:10 And forty and one years reigned he in Jerusalem. And his
mother’s name was Maachah, the daughter of Abishalom.

15:11 And Asa did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, as did
David his father.

15:12 And he took away the sodomites out of the land, and removed all
the idols that his fathers had made.

15:13 And also Maachah his mother, even her he removed from being
queen, because she had made an idol in a grove; and Asa destroyed her
idol, and burnt it by the brook Kidron.

15:14 But the high places were not removed: nevertheless Asa’s heart
was perfect with the LORD all his days.

15:15 And he brought in the things which his father had dedicated, and
the things which himself had dedicated, into the house of the LORD,
silver, and gold, and vessels.

15:16 And there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all
their days.

15:17 And Baasha king of Israel went up against Judah, and built
Ramah, that he might not suffer any to go out or come in to Asa king
of Judah.

15:18 Then Asa took all the silver and the gold that were left in the
treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king’s
house, and delivered them into the hand of his servants: and king Asa
sent them to Benhadad, the son of Tabrimon, the son of Hezion, king of
Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying, 15:19 There is a league between
me and thee, and between my father and thy father: behold, I have sent
unto thee a present of silver and gold; come and break thy league with
Baasha king of Israel, that he may depart from me.

15:20 So Benhadad hearkened unto king Asa, and sent the captains of
the hosts which he had against the cities of Israel, and smote Ijon,
and Dan, and Abelbethmaachah, and all Cinneroth, with all the land of
Naphtali.

15:21 And it came to pass, when Baasha heard thereof, that he left off
building of Ramah, and dwelt in Tirzah.

15:22 Then king Asa made a proclamation throughout all Judah; none was
exempted: and they took away the stones of Ramah, and the timber
thereof, wherewith Baasha had builded; and king Asa built with them
Geba of Benjamin, and Mizpah.

15:23 The rest of all the acts of Asa, and all his might, and all that
he did, and the cities which he built, are they not written in the
book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? Nevertheless in the time
of his old age he was diseased in his feet.

15:24 And Asa slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers
in the city of David his father: and Jehoshaphat his son reigned in
his stead.

15:25 And Nadab the son of Jeroboam began to reign over Israel in the
second year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned over Israel two years.

15:26 And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, and walked in the way
of his father, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin.

15:27 And Baasha the son of Ahijah, of the house of Issachar,
conspired against him; and Baasha smote him at Gibbethon, which
belonged to the Philistines; for Nadab and all Israel laid siege to
Gibbethon.

15:28 Even in the third year of Asa king of Judah did Baasha slay him,
and reigned in his stead.

15:29 And it came to pass, when he reigned, that he smote all the
house of Jeroboam; he left not to Jeroboam any that breathed, until he
had destroyed him, according unto the saying of the LORD, which he
spake by his servant Ahijah the Shilonite: 15:30 Because of the sins
of Jeroboam which he sinned, and which he made Israel sin, by his
provocation wherewith he provoked the LORD God of Israel to anger.

15:31 Now the rest of the acts of Nadab, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
15:32 And there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all
their days.

15:33 In the third year of Asa king of Judah began Baasha the son of
Ahijah to reign over all Israel in Tirzah, twenty and four years.

15:34 And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, and walked in the way
of Jeroboam, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin.

16:1 Then the word of the LORD came to Jehu the son of Hanani against
Baasha, saying, 16:2 Forasmuch as I exalted thee out of the dust, and
made thee prince over my people Israel; and thou hast walked in the
way of Jeroboam, and hast made my people Israel to sin, to provoke me
to anger with their sins; 16:3 Behold, I will take away the posterity
of Baasha, and the posterity of his house; and will make thy house
like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat.

16:4 Him that dieth of Baasha in the city shall the dogs eat; and him
that dieth of his in the fields shall the fowls of the air eat.

16:5 Now the rest of the acts of Baasha, and what he did, and his
might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings
of Israel? 16:6 So Baasha slept with his fathers, and was buried in
Tirzah: and Elah his son reigned in his stead.

16:7 And also by the hand of the prophet Jehu the son of Hanani came
the word of the LORD against Baasha, and against his house, even for
all the evil that he did in the sight of the LORD, in provoking him to
anger with the work of his hands, in being like the house of Jeroboam;
and because he killed him.

16:8 In the twenty and sixth year of Asa king of Judah began Elah the
son of Baasha to reign over Israel in Tirzah, two years.

16:9 And his servant Zimri, captain of half his chariots, conspired
against him, as he was in Tirzah, drinking himself drunk in the house
of Arza steward of his house in Tirzah.

16:10 And Zimri went in and smote him, and killed him, in the twenty
and seventh year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned in his stead.

16:11 And it came to pass, when he began to reign, as soon as he sat
on his throne, that he slew all the house of Baasha: he left him not
one that pisseth against a wall, neither of his kinsfolks, nor of his
friends.

16:12 Thus did Zimri destroy all the house of Baasha, according to the
word of the LORD, which he spake against Baasha by Jehu the prophet.

16:13 For all the sins of Baasha, and the sins of Elah his son, by
which they sinned, and by which they made Israel to sin, in provoking
the LORD God of Israel to anger with their vanities.

16:14 Now the rest of the acts of Elah, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
16:15 In the twenty and seventh year of Asa king of Judah did Zimri
reign seven days in Tirzah. And the people were encamped against
Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines.

16:16 And the people that were encamped heard say, Zimri hath
conspired, and hath also slain the king: wherefore all Israel made
Omri, the captain of the host, king over Israel that day in the camp.

16:17 And Omri went up from Gibbethon, and all Israel with him, and
they besieged Tirzah.

16:18 And it came to pass, when Zimri saw that the city was taken,
that he went into the palace of the king’s house, and burnt the king’s
house over him with fire, and died.

16:19 For his sins which he sinned in doing evil in the sight of the
LORD, in walking in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin which he did,
to make Israel to sin.

16:20 Now the rest of the acts of Zimri, and his treason that he
wrought, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Israel? 16:21 Then were the people of Israel divided into
two parts: half of the people followed Tibni the son of Ginath, to
make him king; and half followed Omri.

16:22 But the people that followed Omri prevailed against the people
that followed Tibni the son of Ginath: so Tibni died, and Omri
reigned.

16:23 In the thirty and first year of Asa king of Judah began Omri to
reign over Israel, twelve years: six years reigned he in Tirzah.

16:24 And he bought the hill Samaria of Shemer for two talents of
silver, and built on the hill, and called the name of the city which
he built, after the name of Shemer, owner of the hill, Samaria.

16:25 But Omri wrought evil in the eyes of the LORD, and did worse
than all that were before him.

16:26 For he walked in all the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and
in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin, to provoke the LORD God of
Israel to anger with their vanities.

16:27 Now the rest of the acts of Omri which he did, and his might
that he shewed, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Israel? 16:28 So Omri slept with his fathers, and was
buried in Samaria: and Ahab his son reigned in his stead.

16:29 And in the thirty and eighth year of Asa king of Judah began
Ahab the son of Omri to reign over Israel: and Ahab the son of Omri
reigned over Israel in Samaria twenty and two years.

16:30 And Ahab the son of Omri did evil in the sight of the LORD above
all that were before him.

16:31 And it came to pass, as if it had been a light thing for him to
walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that he took to wife
Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Zidonians, and went and
served Baal, and worshipped him.

16:32 And he reared up an altar for Baal in the house of Baal, which
he had built in Samaria.

16:33 And Ahab made a grove; and Ahab did more to provoke the LORD God
of Israel to anger than all the kings of Israel that were before him.

16:34 In his days did Hiel the Bethelite build Jericho: he laid the
foundation thereof in Abiram his firstborn, and set up the gates
thereof in his youngest son Segub, according to the word of the LORD,
which he spake by Joshua the son of Nun.

17:1 And Elijah the Tishbite, who was of the inhabitants of Gilead,
said unto Ahab, As the LORD God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand,
there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word.

17:2 And the word of the LORD came unto him, saying, 17:3 Get thee
hence, and turn thee eastward, and hide thyself by the brook Cherith,
that is before Jordan.

17:4 And it shall be, that thou shalt drink of the brook; and I have
commanded the ravens to feed thee there.

17:5 So he went and did according unto the word of the LORD: for he
went and dwelt by the brook Cherith, that is before Jordan.

17:6 And the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and
bread and flesh in the evening; and he drank of the brook.

17:7 And it came to pass after a while, that the brook dried up,
because there had been no rain in the land.

17:8 And the word of the LORD came unto him, saying, 17:9 Arise, get
thee to Zarephath, which belongeth to Zidon, and dwell there: behold,
I have commanded a widow woman there to sustain thee.

17:10 So he arose and went to Zarephath. And when he came to the gate
of the city, behold, the widow woman was there gathering of sticks:
and he called to her, and said, Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water
in a vessel, that I may drink.

17:11 And as she was going to fetch it, he called to her, and said,
Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thine hand.

17:12 And she said, As the LORD thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but
an handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse: and,
behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for
me and my son, that we may eat it, and die.

17:13 And Elijah said unto her, Fear not; go and do as thou hast said:
but make me thereof a little cake first, and bring it unto me, and
after make for thee and for thy son.

17:14 For thus saith the LORD God of Israel, The barrel of meal shall
not waste, neither shall the cruse of oil fail, until the day that the
LORD sendeth rain upon the earth.

17:15 And she went and did according to the saying of Elijah: and she,
and he, and her house, did eat many days.

17:16 And the barrel of meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil
fail, according to the word of the LORD, which he spake by Elijah.

17:17 And it came to pass after these things, that the son of the
woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick; and his sickness was so
sore, that there was no breath left in him.

17:18 And she said unto Elijah, What have I to do with thee, O thou
man of God? art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and
to slay my son? 17:19 And he said unto her, Give me thy son. And he
took him out of her bosom, and carried him up into a loft, where he
abode, and laid him upon his own bed.

17:20 And he cried unto the LORD, and said, O LORD my God, hast thou
also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her
son? 17:21 And he stretched himself upon the child three times, and
cried unto the LORD, and said, O LORD my God, I pray thee, let this
child’s soul come into him again.

17:22 And the LORD heard the voice of Elijah; and the soul of the
child came into him again, and he revived.

17:23 And Elijah took the child, and brought him down out of the
chamber into the house, and delivered him unto his mother: and Elijah
said, See, thy son liveth.

17:24 And the woman said to Elijah, Now by this I know that thou art a
man of God, and that the word of the LORD in thy mouth is truth.

18:1 And it came to pass after many days, that the word of the LORD
came to Elijah in the third year, saying, Go, shew thyself unto Ahab;
and I will send rain upon the earth.

18:2 And Elijah went to shew himself unto Ahab. And there was a sore
famine in Samaria.

18:3 And Ahab called Obadiah, which was the governor of his house.
(Now Obadiah feared the LORD greatly: 18:4 For it was so, when Jezebel
cut off the prophets of the LORD, that Obadiah took an hundred
prophets, and hid them by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and
water.) 18:5 And Ahab said unto Obadiah, Go into the land, unto all
fountains of water, and unto all brooks: peradventure we may find
grass to save the horses and mules alive, that we lose not all the
beasts.

18:6 So they divided the land between them to pass throughout it: Ahab
went one way by himself, and Obadiah went another way by himself.

18:7 And as Obadiah was in the way, behold, Elijah met him: and he
knew him, and fell on his face, and said, Art thou that my lord
Elijah? 18:8 And he answered him, I am: go, tell thy lord, Behold,
Elijah is here.

18:9 And he said, What have I sinned, that thou wouldest deliver thy
servant into the hand of Ahab, to slay me? 18:10 As the LORD thy God
liveth, there is no nation or kingdom, whither my lord hath not sent
to seek thee: and when they said, He is not there; he took an oath of
the kingdom and nation, that they found thee not.

18:11 And now thou sayest, Go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here.

18:12 And it shall come to pass, as soon as I am gone from thee, that
the Spirit of the LORD shall carry thee whither I know not; and so
when I come and tell Ahab, and he cannot find thee, he shall slay me:
but I thy servant fear the LORD from my youth.

18:13 Was it not told my lord what I did when Jezebel slew the
prophets of the LORD, how I hid an hundred men of the LORD’s prophets
by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water? 18:14 And now
thou sayest, Go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here: and he shall
slay me.

18:15 And Elijah said, As the LORD of hosts liveth, before whom I
stand, I will surely shew myself unto him to day.

18:16 So Obadiah went to meet Ahab, and told him: and Ahab went to
meet Elijah.

18:17 And it came to pass, when Ahab saw Elijah, that Ahab said unto
him, Art thou he that troubleth Israel? 18:18 And he answered, I have
not troubled Israel; but thou, and thy father’s house, in that ye have
forsaken the commandments of the LORD, and thou hast followed Baalim.

18:19 Now therefore send, and gather to me all Israel unto mount
Carmel, and the prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty, and the
prophets of the groves four hundred, which eat at Jezebel’s table.

18:20 So Ahab sent unto all the children of Israel, and gathered the
prophets together unto mount Carmel.

18:21 And Elijah came unto all the people, and said, How long halt ye
between two opinions? if the LORD be God, follow him: but if Baal,
then follow him. And the people answered him not a word.

18:22 Then said Elijah unto the people, I, even I only, remain a
prophet of the LORD; but Baal’s prophets are four hundred and fifty
men.

18:23 Let them therefore give us two bullocks; and let them choose one
bullock for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it on wood, and
put no fire under: and I will dress the other bullock, and lay it on
wood, and put no fire under: 18:24 And call ye on the name of your
gods, and I will call on the name of the LORD: and the God that
answereth by fire, let him be God. And all the people answered and
said, It is well spoken.

18:25 And Elijah said unto the prophets of Baal, Choose you one
bullock for yourselves, and dress it first; for ye are many; and call
on the name of your gods, but put no fire under.

18:26 And they took the bullock which was given them, and they dressed
it, and called on the name of Baal from morning even until noon,
saying, O Baal, hear us. But there was no voice, nor any that
answered. And they leaped upon the altar which was made.

18:27 And it came to pass at noon, that Elijah mocked them, and said,
Cry aloud: for he is a god; either he is talking, or he is pursuing,
or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleepeth, and must be
awaked.

18:28 And they cried aloud, and cut themselves after their manner with
knives and lancets, till the blood gushed out upon them.

18:29 And it came to pass, when midday was past, and they prophesied
until the time of the offering of the evening sacrifice, that there
was neither voice, nor any to answer, nor any that regarded.

18:30 And Elijah said unto all the people, Come near unto me. And all
the people came near unto him. And he repaired the altar of the LORD
that was broken down.

18:31 And Elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of the
tribes of the sons of Jacob, unto whom the word of the LORD came,
saying, Israel shall be thy name: 18:32 And with the stones he built
an altar in the name of the LORD: and he made a trench about the
altar, as great as would contain two measures of seed.

18:33 And he put the wood in order, and cut the bullock in pieces, and
laid him on the wood, and said, Fill four barrels with water, and pour
it on the burnt sacrifice, and on the wood.

18:34 And he said, Do it the second time. And they did it the second
time.

And he said, Do it the third time. And they did it the third time.

18:35 And the water ran round about the altar; and he filled the
trench also with water.

18:36 And it came to pass at the time of the offering of the evening
sacrifice, that Elijah the prophet came near, and said, LORD God of
Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, let it be known this day that thou art
God in Israel, and that I am thy servant, and that I have done all
these things at thy word.

18:37 Hear me, O LORD, hear me, that this people may know that thou
art the LORD God, and that thou hast turned their heart back again.

18:38 Then the fire of the LORD fell, and consumed the burnt
sacrifice, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up
the water that was in the trench.

18:39 And when all the people saw it, they fell on their faces: and
they said, The LORD, he is the God; the LORD, he is the God.

18:40 And Elijah said unto them, Take the prophets of Baal; let not
one of them escape. And they took them: and Elijah brought them down
to the brook Kishon, and slew them there.

18:41 And Elijah said unto Ahab, Get thee up, eat and drink; for there
is a sound of abundance of rain.

18:42 So Ahab went up to eat and to drink. And Elijah went up to the
top of Carmel; and he cast himself down upon the earth, and put his
face between his knees, 18:43 And said to his servant, Go up now, look
toward the sea. And he went up, and looked, and said, There is
nothing. And he said, Go again seven times.

18:44 And it came to pass at the seventh time, that he said, Behold,
there ariseth a little cloud out of the sea, like a man’s hand. And he
said, Go up, say unto Ahab, Prepare thy chariot, and get thee down
that the rain stop thee not.

18:45 And it came to pass in the mean while, that the heaven was black
with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain. And Ahab rode, and
went to Jezreel.

18:46 And the hand of the LORD was on Elijah; and he girded up his
loins, and ran before Ahab to the entrance of Jezreel.

19:1 And Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, and withal how he
had slain all the prophets with the sword.

19:2 Then Jezebel sent a messenger unto Elijah, saying, So let the
gods do to me, and more also, if I make not thy life as the life of
one of them by to morrow about this time.

19:3 And when he saw that, he arose, and went for his life, and came
to Beersheba, which belongeth to Judah, and left his servant there.

19:4 But he himself went a day’s journey into the wilderness, and came
and sat down under a juniper tree: and he requested for himself that
he might die; and said, It is enough; now, O LORD, take away my life;
for I am not better than my fathers.

19:5 And as he lay and slept under a juniper tree, behold, then an
angel touched him, and said unto him, Arise and eat.

19:6 And he looked, and, behold, there was a cake baken on the coals,
and a cruse of water at his head. And he did eat and drink, and laid
him down again.

19:7 And the angel of the LORD came again the second time, and touched
him, and said, Arise and eat; because the journey is too great for
thee.

19:8 And he arose, and did eat and drink, and went in the strength of
that meat forty days and forty nights unto Horeb the mount of God.

19:9 And he came thither unto a cave, and lodged there; and, behold,
the word of the LORD came to him, and he said unto him, What doest
thou here, Elijah? 19:10 And he said, I have been very jealous for
the LORD God of hosts: for the children of Israel have forsaken thy
covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the
sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it
away.

19:11 And he said, Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the LORD.

And, behold, the LORD passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the
mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the LORD; but the LORD
was not in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake; but the LORD
was not in the earthquake: 19:12 And after the earthquake a fire; but
the LORD was not in the fire: and after the fire a still small voice.

19:13 And it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in
his mantle, and went out, and stood in the entering in of the cave.
And, behold, there came a voice unto him, and said, What doest thou
here, Elijah? 19:14 And he said, I have been very jealous for the
LORD God of hosts: because the children of Israel have forsaken thy
covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the
sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it
away.

19:15 And the LORD said unto him, Go, return on thy way to the
wilderness of Damascus: and when thou comest, anoint Hazael to be king
over Syria: 19:16 And Jehu the son of Nimshi shalt thou anoint to be
king over Israel: and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abelmeholah shalt
thou anoint to be prophet in thy room.

19:17 And it shall come to pass, that him that escapeth the sword of
Hazael shall Jehu slay: and him that escapeth from the sword of Jehu
shall Elisha slay.

19:18 Yet I have left me seven thousand in Israel, all the knees which
have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth which hath not kissed him.

19:19 So he departed thence, and found Elisha the son of Shaphat, who
was plowing with twelve yoke of oxen before him, and he with the
twelfth: and Elijah passed by him, and cast his mantle upon him.

19:20 And he left the oxen, and ran after Elijah, and said, Let me, I
pray thee, kiss my father and my mother, and then I will follow thee.
And he said unto him, Go back again: for what have I done to thee?
19:21 And he returned back from him, and took a yoke of oxen, and slew
them, and boiled their flesh with the instruments of the oxen, and
gave unto the people, and they did eat. Then he arose, and went after
Elijah, and ministered unto him.

20:1 And Benhadad the king of Syria gathered all his host together:
and there were thirty and two kings with him, and horses, and
chariots; and he went up and besieged Samaria, and warred against it.

20:2 And he sent messengers to Ahab king of Israel into the city, and
said unto him, Thus saith Benhadad, 20:3 Thy silver and thy gold is
mine; thy wives also and thy children, even the goodliest, are mine.

20:4 And the king of Israel answered and said, My lord, O king,
according to thy saying, I am thine, and all that I have.

20:5 And the messengers came again, and said, Thus speaketh Benhadad,
saying, Although I have sent unto thee, saying, Thou shalt deliver me
thy silver, and thy gold, and thy wives, and thy children; 20:6 Yet I
will send my servants unto thee to morrow about this time, and they
shall search thine house, and the houses of thy servants; and it shall
be, that whatsoever is pleasant in thine eyes, they shall put it in
their hand, and take it away.

20:7 Then the king of Israel called all the elders of the land, and
said, Mark, I pray you, and see how this man seeketh mischief: for he
sent unto me for my wives, and for my children, and for my silver, and
for my gold; and I denied him not.

20:8 And all the elders and all the people said unto him, Hearken not
unto him, nor consent.

20:9 Wherefore he said unto the messengers of Benhadad, Tell my lord
the king, All that thou didst send for to thy servant at the first I
will do: but this thing I may not do. And the messengers departed, and
brought him word again.

20:10 And Benhadad sent unto him, and said, The gods do so unto me,
and more also, if the dust of Samaria shall suffice for handfuls for
all the people that follow me.

20:11 And the king of Israel answered and said, Tell him, Let not him
that girdeth on his harness boast himself as he that putteth it off.

20:12 And it came to pass, when Benhadad heard this message, as he
was drinking, he and the kings in the pavilions, that he said unto his
servants, Set yourselves in array. And they set themselves in array
against the city.

20:13 And, behold, there came a prophet unto Ahab king of Israel,
saying, Thus saith the LORD, Hast thou seen all this great multitude?
behold, I will deliver it into thine hand this day; and thou shalt
know that I am the LORD.

20:14 And Ahab said, By whom? And he said, Thus saith the LORD, Even
by the young men of the princes of the provinces. Then he said, Who
shall order the battle? And he answered, Thou.

20:15 Then he numbered the young men of the princes of the provinces,
and they were two hundred and thirty two: and after them he numbered
all the people, even all the children of Israel, being seven thousand.

20:16 And they went out at noon. But Benhadad was drinking himself
drunk in the pavilions, he and the kings, the thirty and two kings
that helped him.

20:17 And the young men of the princes of the provinces went out
first; and Benhadad sent out, and they told him, saying, There are men
come out of Samaria.

20:18 And he said, Whether they be come out for peace, take them
alive; or whether they be come out for war, take them alive.

20:19 So these young men of the princes of the provinces came out of
the city, and the army which followed them.

20:20 And they slew every one his man: and the Syrians fled; and
Israel pursued them: and Benhadad the king of Syria escaped on an
horse with the horsemen.

20:21 And the king of Israel went out, and smote the horses and
chariots, and slew the Syrians with a great slaughter.

20:22 And the prophet came to the king of Israel, and said unto him,
Go, strengthen thyself, and mark, and see what thou doest: for at the
return of the year the king of Syria will come up against thee.

20:23 And the servants of the king of Syria said unto him, Their gods
are gods of the hills; therefore they were stronger than we; but let
us fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger
than they.

20:24 And do this thing, Take the kings away, every man out of his
place, and put captains in their rooms: 20:25 And number thee an army,
like the army that thou hast lost, horse for horse, and chariot for
chariot: and we will fight against them in the plain, and surely we
shall be stronger than they. And he hearkened unto their voice, and
did so.

20:26 And it came to pass at the return of the year, that Benhadad
numbered the Syrians, and went up to Aphek, to fight against Israel.

20:27 And the children of Israel were numbered, and were all present,
and went against them: and the children of Israel pitched before them
like two little flocks of kids; but the Syrians filled the country.

20:28 And there came a man of God, and spake unto the king of Israel,
and said, Thus saith the LORD, Because the Syrians have said, The LORD
is God of the hills, but he is not God of the valleys, therefore will
I deliver all this great multitude into thine hand, and ye shall know
that I am the LORD.

20:29 And they pitched one over against the other seven days. And so
it was, that in the seventh day the battle was joined: and the
children of Israel slew of the Syrians an hundred thousand footmen in
one day.

20:30 But the rest fled to Aphek, into the city; and there a wall fell
upon twenty and seven thousand of the men that were left. And Benhadad
fled, and came into the city, into an inner chamber.

20:31 And his servants said unto him, Behold now, we have heard that
the kings of the house of Israel are merciful kings: let us, I pray
thee, put sackcloth on our loins, and ropes upon our heads, and go out
to the king of Israel: peradventure he will save thy life.

20:32 So they girded sackcloth on their loins, and put ropes on their
heads, and came to the king of Israel, and said, Thy servant Benhadad
saith, I pray thee, let me live. And he said, Is he yet alive? he is
my brother.

20:33 Now the men did diligently observe whether any thing would come
from him, and did hastily catch it: and they said, Thy brother
Benhadad. Then he said, Go ye, bring him. Then Benhadad came forth to
him; and he caused him to come up into the chariot.

20:34 And Benhadad said unto him, The cities, which my father took
from thy father, I will restore; and thou shalt make streets for thee
in Damascus, as my father made in Samaria. Then said Ahab, I will send
thee away with this covenant. So he made a covenant with him, and sent
him away.

20:35 And a certain man of the sons of the prophets said unto his
neighbour in the word of the LORD, Smite me, I pray thee. And the man
refused to smite him.

20:36 Then said he unto him, Because thou hast not obeyed the voice of
the LORD, behold, as soon as thou art departed from me, a lion shall
slay thee.

And as soon as he was departed from him, a lion found him, and slew
him.

20:37 Then he found another man, and said, Smite me, I pray thee. And
the man smote him, so that in smiting he wounded him.

20:38 So the prophet departed, and waited for the king by the way, and
disguised himself with ashes upon his face.

20:39 And as the king passed by, he cried unto the king: and he said,
Thy servant went out into the midst of the battle; and, behold, a man
turned aside, and brought a man unto me, and said, Keep this man: if
by any means he be missing, then shall thy life be for his life, or
else thou shalt pay a talent of silver.

20:40 And as thy servant was busy here and there, he was gone. And the
king of Israel said unto him, So shall thy judgment be; thyself hast
decided it.

20:41 And he hasted, and took the ashes away from his face; and the
king of Israel discerned him that he was of the prophets.

20:42 And he said unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Because thou hast let
go out of thy hand a man whom I appointed to utter destruction,
therefore thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for his
people.

20:43 And the king of Israel went to his house heavy and displeased,
and came to Samaria.

21:1 And it came to pass after these things, that Naboth the
Jezreelite had a vineyard, which was in Jezreel, hard by the palace of
Ahab king of Samaria.

21:2 And Ahab spake unto Naboth, saying, Give me thy vineyard, that I
may have it for a garden of herbs, because it is near unto my house:
and I will give thee for it a better vineyard than it; or, if it seem
good to thee, I will give thee the worth of it in money.

21:3 And Naboth said to Ahab, The LORD forbid it me, that I should
give the inheritance of my fathers unto thee.

21:4 And Ahab came into his house heavy and displeased because of the
word which Naboth the Jezreelite had spoken to him: for he had said, I
will not give thee the inheritance of my fathers. And he laid him down
upon his bed, and turned away his face, and would eat no bread.

21:5 But Jezebel his wife came to him, and said unto him, Why is thy
spirit so sad, that thou eatest no bread? 21:6 And he said unto her,
Because I spake unto Naboth the Jezreelite, and said unto him, Give me
thy vineyard for money; or else, if it please thee, I will give thee
another vineyard for it: and he answered, I will not give thee my
vineyard.

21:7 And Jezebel his wife said unto him, Dost thou now govern the
kingdom of Israel? arise, and eat bread, and let thine heart be merry:
I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite.

21:8 So she wrote letters in Ahab’s name, and sealed them with his
seal, and sent the letters unto the elders and to the nobles that were
in his city, dwelling with Naboth.

21:9 And she wrote in the letters, saying, Proclaim a fast, and set
Naboth on high among the people: 21:10 And set two men, sons of
Belial, before him, to bear witness against him, saying, Thou didst
blaspheme God and the king. And then carry him out, and stone him,
that he may die.

21:11 And the men of his city, even the elders and the nobles who were
the inhabitants in his city, did as Jezebel had sent unto them, and as
it was written in the letters which she had sent unto them.

21:12 They proclaimed a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people.

21:13 And there came in two men, children of Belial, and sat before
him: and the men of Belial witnessed against him, even against Naboth,
in the presence of the people, saying, Naboth did blaspheme God and
the king. Then they carried him forth out of the city, and stoned him
with stones, that he died.

21:14 Then they sent to Jezebel, saying, Naboth is stoned, and is
dead.

21:15 And it came to pass, when Jezebel heard that Naboth was stoned,
and was dead, that Jezebel said to Ahab, Arise, take possession of the
vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, which he refused to give thee for
money: for Naboth is not alive, but dead.

21:16 And it came to pass, when Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, that
Ahab rose up to go down to the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, to
take possession of it.

21:17 And the word of the LORD came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying,
21:18 Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, which is in Samaria:
behold, he is in the vineyard of Naboth, whither he is gone down to
possess it.

21:19 And thou shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus saith the LORD, Hast
thou killed, and also taken possession? And thou shalt speak unto him,
saying, Thus saith the LORD, In the place where dogs licked the blood
of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine.

21:20 And Ahab said to Elijah, Hast thou found me, O mine enemy? And
he answered, I have found thee: because thou hast sold thyself to work
evil in the sight of the LORD.

21:21 Behold, I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy
posterity, and will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the
wall, and him that is shut up and left in Israel, 21:22 And will make
thine house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the
house of Baasha the son of Ahijah, for the provocation wherewith thou
hast provoked me to anger, and made Israel to sin.

21:23 And of Jezebel also spake the LORD, saying, The dogs shall eat
Jezebel by the wall of Jezreel.

21:24 Him that dieth of Ahab in the city the dogs shall eat; and him
that dieth in the field shall the fowls of the air eat.

21:25 But there was none like unto Ahab, which did sell himself to
work wickedness in the sight of the LORD, whom Jezebel his wife
stirred up.

21:26 And he did very abominably in following idols, according to all
things as did the Amorites, whom the LORD cast out before the children
of Israel.

21:27 And it came to pass, when Ahab heard those words, that he rent
his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay in
sackcloth, and went softly.

21:28 And the word of the LORD came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying,
21:29 Seest thou how Ahab humbleth himself before me? because he
humbleth himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days: but
in his son’s days will I bring the evil upon his house.

22:1 And they continued three years without war between Syria and
Israel.

22:2 And it came to pass in the third year, that Jehoshaphat the king
of Judah came down to the king of Israel.

22:3 And the king of Israel said unto his servants, Know ye that
Ramoth in Gilead is ours, and we be still, and take it not out of the
hand of the king of Syria? 22:4 And he said unto Jehoshaphat, Wilt
thou go with me to battle to Ramothgilead? And Jehoshaphat said to the
king of Israel, I am as thou art, my people as thy people, my horses
as thy horses.

22:5 And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel, Enquire, I pray
thee, at the word of the LORD to day.

22:6 Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, about
four hundred men, and said unto them, Shall I go against Ramothgilead
to battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up; for the LORD
shall deliver it into the hand of the king.

22:7 And Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the LORD
besides, that we might enquire of him? 22:8 And the king of Israel
said unto Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man, Micaiah the son of Imlah,
by whom we may enquire of the LORD: but I hate him; for he doth not
prophesy good concerning me, but evil. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not
the king say so.

22:9 Then the king of Israel called an officer, and said, Hasten
hither Micaiah the son of Imlah.

22:10 And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah sat
each on his throne, having put on their robes, in a void place in the
entrance of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets prophesied
before them.

22:11 And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made him horns of iron: and he
said, Thus saith the LORD, With these shalt thou push the Syrians,
until thou have consumed them.

22:12 And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to
Ramothgilead, and prosper: for the LORD shall deliver it into the
king’s hand.

22:13 And the messenger that was gone to call Micaiah spake unto him,
saying, Behold now, the words of the prophets declare good unto the
king with one mouth: let thy word, I pray thee, be like the word of
one of them, and speak that which is good.

22:14 And Micaiah said, As the LORD liveth, what the LORD saith unto
me, that will I speak.

22:15 So he came to the king. And the king said unto him, Micaiah,
shall we go against Ramothgilead to battle, or shall we forbear? And
he answered him, Go, and prosper: for the LORD shall deliver it into
the hand of the king.

22:16 And the king said unto him, How many times shall I adjure thee
that thou tell me nothing but that which is true in the name of the
LORD? 22:17 And he said, I saw all Israel scattered upon the hills,
as sheep that have not a shepherd: and the LORD said, These have no
master: let them return every man to his house in peace.

22:18 And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell
thee that he would prophesy no good concerning me, but evil? 22:19
And he said, Hear thou therefore the word of the LORD: I saw the LORD
sitting on his throne, and all the host of heaven standing by him on
his right hand and on his left.

22:20 And the LORD said, Who shall persuade Ahab, that he may go up
and fall at Ramothgilead? And one said on this manner, and another
said on that manner.

22:21 And there came forth a spirit, and stood before the LORD, and
said, I will persuade him.

22:22 And the LORD said unto him, Wherewith? And he said, I will go
forth, and I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets.
And he said, Thou shalt persuade him, and prevail also: go forth, and
do so.

22:23 Now therefore, behold, the LORD hath put a lying spirit in the
mouth of all these thy prophets, and the LORD hath spoken evil
concerning thee.

22:24 But Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah went near, and smote Micaiah
on the cheek, and said, Which way went the Spirit of the LORD from me
to speak unto thee? 22:25 And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shalt see in
that day, when thou shalt go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.

22:26 And the king of Israel said, Take Micaiah, and carry him back
unto Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the king’s son; 22:27
And say, Thus saith the king, Put this fellow in the prison, and feed
him with bread of affliction and with water of affliction, until I
come in peace.

22:28 And Micaiah said, If thou return at all in peace, the LORD hath
not spoken by me. And he said, Hearken, O people, every one of you.

22:29 So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up
to Ramothgilead.

22:30 And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, I will disguise
myself, and enter into the battle; but put thou on thy robes. And the
king of Israel disguised himself, and went into the battle.

22:31 But the king of Syria commanded his thirty and two captains that
had rule over his chariots, saying, Fight neither with small nor
great, save only with the king of Israel.

22:32 And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw
Jehoshaphat, that they said, Surely it is the king of Israel. And they
turned aside to fight against him: and Jehoshaphat cried out.

22:33 And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots perceived
that it was not the king of Israel, that they turned back from
pursuing him.

22:34 And a certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of
Israel between the joints of the harness: wherefore he said unto the
driver of his chariot, Turn thine hand, and carry me out of the host;
for I am wounded.

22:35 And the battle increased that day: and the king was stayed up in
his chariot against the Syrians, and died at even: and the blood ran
out of the wound into the midst of the chariot.

22:36 And there went a proclamation throughout the host about the
going down of the sun, saying, Every man to his city, and every man to
his own country.

22:37 So the king died, and was brought to Samaria; and they buried
the king in Samaria.

22:38 And one washed the chariot in the pool of Samaria; and the dogs
licked up his blood; and they washed his armour; according unto the
word of the LORD which he spake.

22:39 Now the rest of the acts of Ahab, and all that he did, and the
ivory house which he made, and all the cities that he built, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
22:40 So Ahab slept with his fathers; and Ahaziah his son reigned in
his stead.

22:41 And Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began to reign over Judah in the
fourth year of Ahab king of Israel.

22:42 Jehoshaphat was thirty and five years old when he began to
reign; and he reigned twenty and five years in Jerusalem. And his
mother’s name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.

22:43 And he walked in all the ways of Asa his father; he turned not
aside from it, doing that which was right in the eyes of the LORD:
nevertheless the high places were not taken away; for the people
offered and burnt incense yet in the high places.

22:44 And Jehoshaphat made peace with the king of Israel.

22:45 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, and his might that he
shewed, and how he warred, are they not written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Judah? 22:46 And the remnant of the
sodomites, which remained in the days of his father Asa, he took out
of the land.

22:47 There was then no king in Edom: a deputy was king.

22:48 Jehoshaphat made ships of Tharshish to go to Ophir for gold: but
they went not; for the ships were broken at Eziongeber.

22:49 Then said Ahaziah the son of Ahab unto Jehoshaphat, Let my
servants go with thy servants in the ships. But Jehoshaphat would not.

22:50 And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his
fathers in the city of David his father: and Jehoram his son reigned
in his stead.

22:51 Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria
the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and reigned two
years over Israel.

22:52 And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, and walked in the way
of his father, and in the way of his mother, and in the way of
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin: 22:53 For he served
Baal, and worshipped him, and provoked to anger the LORD God of
Israel, according to all that his father had done.


The Second Book of the Kings

Commonly Called:

The Fourth Book of the Kings


1:1 Then Moab rebelled against Israel after the death of Ahab.

1:2 And Ahaziah fell down through a lattice in his upper chamber that
was in Samaria, and was sick: and he sent messengers, and said unto
them, Go, enquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron whether I shall
recover of this disease.

1:3 But the angel of the LORD said to Elijah the Tishbite, Arise, go
up to meet the messengers of the king of Samaria, and say unto them,
Is it not because there is not a God in Israel, that ye go to enquire
of Baalzebub the god of Ekron? 1:4 Now therefore thus saith the LORD,
Thou shalt not come down from that bed on which thou art gone up, but
shalt surely die. And Elijah departed.

1:5 And when the messengers turned back unto him, he said unto them,
Why are ye now turned back? 1:6 And they said unto him, There came a
man up to meet us, and said unto us, Go, turn again unto the king that
sent you, and say unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Is it not because
there is not a God in Israel, that thou sendest to enquire of
Baalzebub the god of Ekron? therefore thou shalt not come down from
that bed on which thou art gone up, but shalt surely die.

1:7 And he said unto them, What manner of man was he which came up to
meet you, and told you these words? 1:8 And they answered him, He was
an hairy man, and girt with a girdle of leather about his loins. And
he said, It is Elijah the Tishbite.

1:9 Then the king sent unto him a captain of fifty with his fifty. And
he went up to him: and, behold, he sat on the top of an hill. And he
spake unto him, Thou man of God, the king hath said, Come down.

1:10 And Elijah answered and said to the captain of fifty, If I be a
man of God, then let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and
thy fifty.

And there came down fire from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty.

1:11 Again also he sent unto him another captain of fifty with his
fifty.

And he answered and said unto him, O man of God, thus hath the king
said, Come down quickly.

1:12 And Elijah answered and said unto them, If I be a man of God, let
fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty. And the
fire of God came down from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty.

1:13 And he sent again a captain of the third fifty with his fifty.
And the third captain of fifty went up, and came and fell on his knees
before Elijah, and besought him, and said unto him, O man of God, I
pray thee, let my life, and the life of these fifty thy servants, be
precious in thy sight.

1:14 Behold, there came fire down from heaven, and burnt up the two
captains of the former fifties with their fifties: therefore let my
life now be precious in thy sight.

1:15 And the angel of the LORD said unto Elijah, Go down with him: be
not afraid of him. And he arose, and went down with him unto the king.

1:16 And he said unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Forasmuch as thou hast
sent messengers to enquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron, is it not
because there is no God in Israel to enquire of his word? therefore
thou shalt not come down off that bed on which thou art gone up, but
shalt surely die.

1:17 So he died according to the word of the LORD which Elijah had
spoken.

And Jehoram reigned in his stead in the second year of Jehoram the son
of Jehoshaphat king of Judah; because he had no son.

1:18 Now the rest of the acts of Ahaziah which he did, are they not
written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? 2:1 And
it came to pass, when the LORD would take up Elijah into heaven by a
whirlwind, that Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal.

2:2 And Elijah said unto Elisha, Tarry here, I pray thee; for the LORD
hath sent me to Bethel. And Elisha said unto him, As the LORD liveth,
and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee. So they went down to
Bethel.

2:3 And the sons of the prophets that were at Bethel came forth to
Elisha, and said unto him, Knowest thou that the LORD will take away
thy master from thy head to day? And he said, Yea, I know it; hold ye
your peace.

2:4 And Elijah said unto him, Elisha, tarry here, I pray thee; for the
LORD hath sent me to Jericho. And he said, As the LORD liveth, and as
thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee. So they came to Jericho.

2:5 And the sons of the prophets that were at Jericho came to Elisha,
and said unto him, Knowest thou that the LORD will take away thy
master from thy head to day? And he answered, Yea, I know it; hold ye
your peace.

2:6 And Elijah said unto him, Tarry, I pray thee, here; for the LORD
hath sent me to Jordan. And he said, As the LORD liveth, and as thy
soul liveth, I will not leave thee. And they two went on.

2:7 And fifty men of the sons of the prophets went, and stood to view
afar off: and they two stood by Jordan.

2:8 And Elijah took his mantle, and wrapped it together, and smote the
waters, and they were divided hither and thither, so that they two
went over on dry ground.

2:9 And it came to pass, when they were gone over, that Elijah said
unto Elisha, Ask what I shall do for thee, before I be taken away from
thee. And Elisha said, I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit
be upon me.

2:10 And he said, Thou hast asked a hard thing: nevertheless, if thou
see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee; but if
not, it shall not be so.

2:11 And it came to pass, as they still went on, and talked, that,
behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and
parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into
heaven.

2:12 And Elisha saw it, and he cried, My father, my father, the
chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. And he saw him no more:
and he took hold of his own clothes, and rent them in two pieces.

2:13 He took up also the mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and went
back, and stood by the bank of Jordan; 2:14 And he took the mantle of
Elijah that fell from him, and smote the waters, and said, Where is
the LORD God of Elijah? and when he also had smitten the waters, they
parted hither and thither: and Elisha went over.

2:15 And when the sons of the prophets which were to view at Jericho
saw him, they said, The spirit of Elijah doth rest on Elisha. And they
came to meet him, and bowed themselves to the ground before him.

2:16 And they said unto him, Behold now, there be with thy servants
fifty strong men; let them go, we pray thee, and seek thy master: lest
peradventure the Spirit of the LORD hath taken him up, and cast him
upon some mountain, or into some valley. And he said, Ye shall not
send.

2:17 And when they urged him till he was ashamed, he said, Send. They
sent therefore fifty men; and they sought three days, but found him
not.

2:18 And when they came again to him, (for he tarried at Jericho,) he
said unto them, Did I not say unto you, Go not? 2:19 And the men of
the city said unto Elisha, Behold, I pray thee, the situation of this
city is pleasant, as my lord seeth: but the water is naught, and the
ground barren.

2:20 And he said, Bring me a new cruse, and put salt therein. And they
brought it to him.

2:21 And he went forth unto the spring of the waters, and cast the
salt in there, and said, Thus saith the LORD, I have healed these
waters; there shall not be from thence any more death or barren land.

2:22 So the waters were healed unto this day, according to the saying
of Elisha which he spake.

2:23 And he went up from thence unto Bethel: and as he was going up by
the way, there came forth little children out of the city, and mocked
him, and said unto him, Go up, thou bald head; go up, thou bald head.

2:24 And he turned back, and looked on them, and cursed them in the
name of the LORD. And there came forth two she bears out of the wood,
and tare forty and two children of them.

2:25 And he went from thence to mount Carmel, and from thence he
returned to Samaria.

3:1 Now Jehoram the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria
the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and reigned twelve
years.

3:2 And he wrought evil in the sight of the LORD; but not like his
father, and like his mother: for he put away the image of Baal that
his father had made.

3:3 Nevertheless he cleaved unto the sins of Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, which made Israel to sin; he departed not therefrom.

3:4 And Mesha king of Moab was a sheepmaster, and rendered unto the
king of Israel an hundred thousand lambs, and an hundred thousand
rams, with the wool.

3:5 But it came to pass, when Ahab was dead, that the king of Moab
rebelled against the king of Israel.

3:6 And king Jehoram went out of Samaria the same time, and numbered
all Israel.

3:7 And he went and sent to Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, saying, The
king of Moab hath rebelled against me: wilt thou go with me against
Moab to battle? And he said, I will go up: I am as thou art, my people
as thy people, and my horses as thy horses.

3:8 And he said, Which way shall we go up? And he answered, The way
through the wilderness of Edom.

3:9 So the king of Israel went, and the king of Judah, and the king of
Edom: and they fetched a compass of seven days’ journey: and there was
no water for the host, and for the cattle that followed them.

3:10 And the king of Israel said, Alas! that the LORD hath called
these three kings together, to deliver them into the hand of Moab!
3:11 But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the LORD,
that we may enquire of the LORD by him? And one of the king of
Israel’s servants answered and said, Here is Elisha the son of
Shaphat, which poured water on the hands of Elijah.

3:12 And Jehoshaphat said, The word of the LORD is with him. So the
king of Israel and Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom went down to him.

3:13 And Elisha said unto the king of Israel, What have I to do with
thee? get thee to the prophets of thy father, and to the prophets of
thy mother.

And the king of Israel said unto him, Nay: for the LORD hath called
these three kings together, to deliver them into the hand of Moab.

3:14 And Elisha said, As the LORD of hosts liveth, before whom I
stand, surely, were it not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat
the king of Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee.

3:15 But now bring me a minstrel. And it came to pass, when the
minstrel played, that the hand of the LORD came upon him.

3:16 And he said, Thus saith the LORD, Make this valley full of
ditches.

3:17 For thus saith the LORD, Ye shall not see wind, neither shall ye
see rain; yet that valley shall be filled with water, that ye may
drink, both ye, and your cattle, and your beasts.

3:18 And this is but a light thing in the sight of the LORD: he will
deliver the Moabites also into your hand.

3:19 And ye shall smite every fenced city, and every choice city, and
shall fell every good tree, and stop all wells of water, and mar every
good piece of land with stones.

3:20 And it came to pass in the morning, when the meat offering was
offered, that, behold, there came water by the way of Edom, and the
country was filled with water.

3:21 And when all the Moabites heard that the kings were come up to
fight against them, they gathered all that were able to put on armour,
and upward, and stood in the border.

3:22 And they rose up early in the morning, and the sun shone upon the
water, and the Moabites saw the water on the other side as red as
blood: 3:23 And they said, This is blood: the kings are surely slain,
and they have smitten one another: now therefore, Moab, to the spoil.

3:24 And when they came to the camp of Israel, the Israelites rose up
and smote the Moabites, so that they fled before them: but they went
forward smiting the Moabites, even in their country.

3:25 And they beat down the cities, and on every good piece of land
cast every man his stone, and filled it; and they stopped all the
wells of water, and felled all the good trees: only in Kirharaseth
left they the stones thereof; howbeit the slingers went about it, and
smote it.

3:26 And when the king of Moab saw that the battle was too sore for
him, he took with him seven hundred men that drew swords, to break
through even unto the king of Edom: but they could not.

3:27 Then he took his eldest son that should have reigned in his
stead, and offered him for a burnt offering upon the wall. And there
was great indignation against Israel: and they departed from him, and
returned to their own land.

4:1 Now there cried a certain woman of the wives of the sons of the
prophets unto Elisha, saying, Thy servant my husband is dead; and thou
knowest that thy servant did fear the LORD: and the creditor is come
to take unto him my two sons to be bondmen.

4:2 And Elisha said unto her, What shall I do for thee? tell me, what
hast thou in the house? And she said, Thine handmaid hath not any
thing in the house, save a pot of oil.

4:3 Then he said, Go, borrow thee vessels abroad of all thy
neighbours, even empty vessels; borrow not a few.

4:4 And when thou art come in, thou shalt shut the door upon thee and
upon thy sons, and shalt pour out into all those vessels, and thou
shalt set aside that which is full.

4:5 So she went from him, and shut the door upon her and upon her
sons, who brought the vessels to her; and she poured out.

4:6 And it came to pass, when the vessels were full, that she said
unto her son, Bring me yet a vessel. And he said unto her, There is
not a vessel more. And the oil stayed.

4:7 Then she came and told the man of God. And he said, Go, sell the
oil, and pay thy debt, and live thou and thy children of the rest.

4:8 And it fell on a day, that Elisha passed to Shunem, where was a
great woman; and she constrained him to eat bread. And so it was, that
as oft as he passed by, he turned in thither to eat bread.

4:9 And she said unto her husband, Behold now, I perceive that this is
an holy man of God, which passeth by us continually.

4:10 Let us make a little chamber, I pray thee, on the wall; and let
us set for him there a bed, and a table, and a stool, and a
candlestick: and it shall be, when he cometh to us, that he shall turn
in thither.

4:11 And it fell on a day, that he came thither, and he turned into
the chamber, and lay there.

4:12 And he said to Gehazi his servant, Call this Shunammite. And when
he had called her, she stood before him.

4:13 And he said unto him, Say now unto her, Behold, thou hast been
careful for us with all this care; what is to be done for thee?
wouldest thou be spoken for to the king, or to the captain of the
host? And she answered, I dwell among mine own people.

4:14 And he said, What then is to be done for her? And Gehazi
answered, Verily she hath no child, and her husband is old.

4:15 And he said, Call her. And when he had called her, she stood in
the door.

4:16 And he said, About this season, according to the time of life,
thou shalt embrace a son. And she said, Nay, my lord, thou man of God,
do not lie unto thine handmaid.

4:17 And the woman conceived, and bare a son at that season that
Elisha had said unto her, according to the time of life.

4:18 And when the child was grown, it fell on a day, that he went out
to his father to the reapers.

4:19 And he said unto his father, My head, my head. And he said to a
lad, Carry him to his mother.

4:20 And when he had taken him, and brought him to his mother, he sat
on her knees till noon, and then died.

4:21 And she went up, and laid him on the bed of the man of God, and
shut the door upon him, and went out.

4:22 And she called unto her husband, and said, Send me, I pray thee,
one of the young men, and one of the asses, that I may run to the man
of God, and come again.

4:23 And he said, Wherefore wilt thou go to him to day? it is neither
new moon, nor sabbath. And she said, It shall be well.

4:24 Then she saddled an ass, and said to her servant, Drive, and go
forward; slack not thy riding for me, except I bid thee.

4:25 So she went and came unto the man of God to mount Carmel. And it
came to pass, when the man of God saw her afar off, that he said to
Gehazi his servant, Behold, yonder is that Shunammite: 4:26 Run now, I
pray thee, to meet her, and say unto her, Is it well with thee? is it
well with thy husband? is it well with the child? And she answered, It
is well: 4:27 And when she came to the man of God to the hill, she
caught him by the feet: but Gehazi came near to thrust her away. And
the man of God said, Let her alone; for her soul is vexed within her:
and the LORD hath hid it from me, and hath not told me.

4:28 Then she said, Did I desire a son of my lord? did I not say, Do
not deceive me? 4:29 Then he said to Gehazi, Gird up thy loins, and
take my staff in thine hand, and go thy way: if thou meet any man,
salute him not; and if any salute thee, answer him not again: and lay
my staff upon the face of the child.

4:30 And the mother of the child said, As the LORD liveth, and as thy
soul liveth, I will not leave thee. And he arose, and followed her.

4:31 And Gehazi passed on before them, and laid the staff upon the
face of the child; but there was neither voice, nor hearing. Wherefore
he went again to meet him, and told him, saying, The child is not
awaked.

4:32 And when Elisha was come into the house, behold, the child was
dead, and laid upon his bed.

4:33 He went in therefore, and shut the door upon them twain, and
prayed unto the LORD.

4:34 And he went up, and lay upon the child, and put his mouth upon
his mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands upon his hands:
and stretched himself upon the child; and the flesh of the child waxed
warm.

4:35 Then he returned, and walked in the house to and fro; and went
up, and stretched himself upon him: and the child sneezed seven times,
and the child opened his eyes.

4:36 And he called Gehazi, and said, Call this Shunammite. So he
called her. And when she was come in unto him, he said, Take up thy
son.

4:37 Then she went in, and fell at his feet, and bowed herself to the
ground, and took up her son, and went out.

4:38 And Elisha came again to Gilgal: and there was a dearth in the
land; and the sons of the prophets were sitting before him: and he
said unto his servant, Set on the great pot, and seethe pottage for
the sons of the prophets.

4:39 And one went out into the field to gather herbs, and found a wild
vine, and gathered thereof wild gourds his lap full, and came and
shred them into the pot of pottage: for they knew them not.

4:40 So they poured out for the men to eat. And it came to pass, as
they were eating of the pottage, that they cried out, and said, O thou
man of God, there is death in the pot. And they could not eat thereof.

4:41 But he said, Then bring meal. And he cast it into the pot; and he
said, Pour out for the people, that they may eat. And there was no
harm in the pot.

4:42 And there came a man from Baalshalisha, and brought the man of
God bread of the firstfruits, twenty loaves of barley, and full ears
of corn in the husk thereof. And he said, Give unto the people, that
they may eat.

4:43 And his servitor said, What, should I set this before an hundred
men? He said again, Give the people, that they may eat: for thus
saith the LORD, They shall eat, and shall leave thereof.

4:44 So he set it before them, and they did eat, and left thereof,
according to the word of the LORD.

5:1 Now Naaman, captain of the host of the king of Syria, was a great
man with his master, and honourable, because by him the LORD had given
deliverance unto Syria: he was also a mighty man in valour, but he was
a leper.

5:2 And the Syrians had gone out by companies, and had brought away
captive out of the land of Israel a little maid; and she waited on
Naaman’s wife.

5:3 And she said unto her mistress, Would God my lord were with the
prophet that is in Samaria! for he would recover him of his leprosy.

5:4 And one went in, and told his lord, saying, Thus and thus said the
maid that is of the land of Israel.

5:5 And the king of Syria said, Go to, go, and I will send a letter
unto the king of Israel. And he departed, and took with him ten
talents of silver, and six thousand pieces of gold, and ten changes of
raiment.

5:6 And he brought the letter to the king of Israel, saying, Now when
this letter is come unto thee, behold, I have therewith sent Naaman my
servant to thee, that thou mayest recover him of his leprosy.

5:7 And it came to pass, when the king of Israel had read the letter,
that he rent his clothes, and said, Am I God, to kill and to make
alive, that this man doth send unto me to recover a man of his
leprosy? wherefore consider, I pray you, and see how he seeketh a
quarrel against me.

5:8 And it was so, when Elisha the man of God had heard that the king
of Israel had rent his clothes, that he sent to the king, saying,
Wherefore hast thou rent thy clothes? let him come now to me, and he
shall know that there is a prophet in Israel.

5:9 So Naaman came with his horses and with his chariot, and stood at
the door of the house of Elisha.

5:10 And Elisha sent a messenger unto him, saying, Go and wash in
Jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall come again to thee, and thou
shalt be clean.

5:11 But Naaman was wroth, and went away, and said, Behold, I thought,
He will surely come out to me, and stand, and call on the name of the
LORD his God, and strike his hand over the place, and recover the
leper.

5:12 Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better than all
the waters of Israel? may I not wash in them, and be clean? So he
turned and went away in a rage.

5:13 And his servants came near, and spake unto him, and said, My
father, if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, wouldest thou
not have done it? how much rather then, when he saith to thee, Wash,
and be clean? 5:14 Then went he down, and dipped himself seven times
in Jordan, according to the saying of the man of God: and his flesh
came again like unto the flesh of a little child, and he was clean.

5:15 And he returned to the man of God, he and all his company, and
came, and stood before him: and he said, Behold, now I know that there
is no God in all the earth, but in Israel: now therefore, I pray thee,
take a blessing of thy servant.

5:16 But he said, As the LORD liveth, before whom I stand, I will
receive none. And he urged him to take it; but he refused.

5:17 And Naaman said, Shall there not then, I pray thee, be given to
thy servant two mules’ burden of earth? for thy servant will
henceforth offer neither burnt offering nor sacrifice unto other gods,
but unto the LORD.

5:18 In this thing the LORD pardon thy servant, that when my master
goeth into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he leaneth on my
hand, and I bow myself in the house of Rimmon: when I bow down myself
in the house of Rimmon, the LORD pardon thy servant in this thing.

5:19 And he said unto him, Go in peace. So he departed from him a
little way.

5:20 But Gehazi, the servant of Elisha the man of God, said, Behold,
my master hath spared Naaman this Syrian, in not receiving at his
hands that which he brought: but, as the LORD liveth, I will run after
him, and take somewhat of him.

5:21 So Gehazi followed after Naaman. And when Naaman saw him running
after him, he lighted down from the chariot to meet him, and said, Is
all well? 5:22 And he said, All is well. My master hath sent me,
saying, Behold, even now there be come to me from mount Ephraim two
young men of the sons of the prophets: give them, I pray thee, a
talent of silver, and two changes of garments.

5:23 And Naaman said, Be content, take two talents. And he urged him,
and bound two talents of silver in two bags, with two changes of
garments, and laid them upon two of his servants; and they bare them
before him.

5:24 And when he came to the tower, he took them from their hand, and
bestowed them in the house: and he let the men go, and they departed.

5:25 But he went in, and stood before his master. And Elisha said unto
him, Whence comest thou, Gehazi? And he said, Thy servant went no
whither.

5:26 And he said unto him, Went not mine heart with thee, when the man
turned again from his chariot to meet thee? Is it a time to receive
money, and to receive garments, and oliveyards, and vineyards, and
sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and maidservants? 5:27 The leprosy
therefore of Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and unto thy seed for
ever. And he went out from his presence a leper as white as snow.

6:1 And the sons of the prophets said unto Elisha, Behold now, the
place where we dwell with thee is too strait for us.

6:2 Let us go, we pray thee, unto Jordan, and take thence every man a
beam, and let us make us a place there, where we may dwell. And he
answered, Go ye.

6:3 And one said, Be content, I pray thee, and go with thy servants.
And he answered, I will go.

6:4 So he went with them. And when they came to Jordan, they cut down
wood.

6:5 But as one was felling a beam, the axe head fell into the water:
and he cried, and said, Alas, master! for it was borrowed.

6:6 And the man of God said, Where fell it? And he shewed him the
place.

And he cut down a stick, and cast it in thither; and the iron did
swim.

6:7 Therefore said he, Take it up to thee. And he put out his hand,
and took it.

6:8 Then the king of Syria warred against Israel, and took counsel
with his servants, saying, In such and such a place shall be my camp.

6:9 And the man of God sent unto the king of Israel, saying, Beware
that thou pass not such a place; for thither the Syrians are come
down.

6:10 And the king of Israel sent to the place which the man of God
told him and warned him of, and saved himself there, not once nor
twice.

6:11 Therefore the heart of the king of Syria was sore troubled for
this thing; and he called his servants, and said unto them, Will ye
not shew me which of us is for the king of Israel? 6:12 And one of
his servants said, None, my lord, O king: but Elisha, the prophet that
is in Israel, telleth the king of Israel the words that thou speakest
in thy bedchamber.

6:13 And he said, Go and spy where he is, that I may send and fetch
him.

And it was told him, saying, Behold, he is in Dothan.

6:14 Therefore sent he thither horses, and chariots, and a great host:
and they came by night, and compassed the city about.

6:15 And when the servant of the man of God was risen early, and gone
forth, behold, an host compassed the city both with horses and
chariots. And his servant said unto him, Alas, my master! how shall we
do? 6:16 And he answered, Fear not: for they that be with us are more
than they that be with them.

6:17 And Elisha prayed, and said, LORD, I pray thee, open his eyes,
that he may see. And the LORD opened the eyes of the young man; and he
saw: and, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire
round about Elisha.

6:18 And when they came down to him, Elisha prayed unto the LORD, and
said, Smite this people, I pray thee, with blindness. And he smote
them with blindness according to the word of Elisha.

6:19 And Elisha said unto them, This is not the way, neither is this
the city: follow me, and I will bring you to the man whom ye seek. But
he led them to Samaria.

6:20 And it came to pass, when they were come into Samaria, that
Elisha said, LORD, open the eyes of these men, that they may see. And
the LORD opened their eyes, and they saw; and, behold, they were in
the midst of Samaria.

6:21 And the king of Israel said unto Elisha, when he saw them, My
father, shall I smite them? shall I smite them? 6:22 And he answered,
Thou shalt not smite them: wouldest thou smite those whom thou hast
taken captive with thy sword and with thy bow? set bread and water
before them, that they may eat and drink, and go to their master.

6:23 And he prepared great provision for them: and when they had eaten
and drunk, he sent them away, and they went to their master. So the
bands of Syria came no more into the land of Israel.

6:24 And it came to pass after this, that Benhadad king of Syria
gathered all his host, and went up, and besieged Samaria.

6:25 And there was a great famine in Samaria: and, behold, they
besieged it, until an ass’s head was sold for fourscore pieces of
silver, and the fourth part of a cab of dove’s dung for five pieces of
silver.

6:26 And as the king of Israel was passing by upon the wall, there
cried a woman unto him, saying, Help, my lord, O king.

6:27 And he said, If the LORD do not help thee, whence shall I help
thee? out of the barnfloor, or out of the winepress? 6:28 And the
king said unto her, What aileth thee? And she answered, This woman
said unto me, Give thy son, that we may eat him to day, and we will
eat my son to morrow.

6:29 So we boiled my son, and did eat him: and I said unto her on the
next day, Give thy son, that we may eat him: and she hath hid her son.

6:30 And it came to pass, when the king heard the words of the woman,
that he rent his clothes; and he passed by upon the wall, and the
people looked, and, behold, he had sackcloth within upon his flesh.

6:31 Then he said, God do so and more also to me, if the head of
Elisha the son of Shaphat shall stand on him this day.

6:32 But Elisha sat in his house, and the elders sat with him; and the
king sent a man from before him: but ere the messenger came to him, he
said to the elders, See ye how this son of a murderer hath sent to
take away mine head? look, when the messenger cometh, shut the door,
and hold him fast at the door: is not the sound of his master’s feet
behind him? 6:33 And while he yet talked with them, behold, the
messenger came down unto him: and he said, Behold, this evil is of the
LORD; what should I wait for the LORD any longer? 7:1 Then Elisha
said, Hear ye the word of the LORD; Thus saith the LORD, To morrow
about this time shall a measure of fine flour be sold for a shekel,
and two measures of barley for a shekel, in the gate of Samaria.

7:2 Then a lord on whose hand the king leaned answered the man of God,
and said, Behold, if the LORD would make windows in heaven, might this
thing be? And he said, Behold, thou shalt see it with thine eyes, but
shalt not eat thereof.

7:3 And there were four leprous men at the entering in of the gate:
and they said one to another, Why sit we here until we die? 7:4 If we
say, We will enter into the city, then the famine is in the city, and
we shall die there: and if we sit still here, we die also. Now
therefore come, and let us fall unto the host of the Syrians: if they
save us alive, we shall live; and if they kill us, we shall but die.

7:5 And they rose up in the twilight, to go unto the camp of the
Syrians: and when they were come to the uttermost part of the camp of
Syria, behold, there was no man there.

7:6 For the LORD had made the host of the Syrians to hear a noise of
chariots, and a noise of horses, even the noise of a great host: and
they said one to another, Lo, the king of Israel hath hired against us
the kings of the Hittites, and the kings of the Egyptians, to come
upon us.

7:7 Wherefore they arose and fled in the twilight, and left their
tents, and their horses, and their asses, even the camp as it was, and
fled for their life.

7:8 And when these lepers came to the uttermost part of the camp, they
went into one tent, and did eat and drink, and carried thence silver,
and gold, and raiment, and went and hid it; and came again, and
entered into another tent, and carried thence also, and went and hid
it.

7:9 Then they said one to another, We do not well: this day is a day
of good tidings, and we hold our peace: if we tarry till the morning
light, some mischief will come upon us: now therefore come, that we
may go and tell the king’s household.

7:10 So they came and called unto the porter of the city: and they
told them, saying, We came to the camp of the Syrians, and, behold,
there was no man there, neither voice of man, but horses tied, and
asses tied, and the tents as they were.

7:11 And he called the porters; and they told it to the king’s house
within.

7:12 And the king arose in the night, and said unto his servants, I
will now shew you what the Syrians have done to us. They know that we
be hungry; therefore are they gone out of the camp to hide themselves
in the field, saying, When they come out of the city, we shall catch
them alive, and get into the city.

7:13 And one of his servants answered and said, Let some take, I pray
thee, five of the horses that remain, which are left in the city,
(behold, they are as all the multitude of Israel that are left in it:
behold, I say, they are even as all the multitude of the Israelites
that are consumed:) and let us send and see.

7:14 They took therefore two chariot horses; and the king sent after
the host of the Syrians, saying, Go and see.

7:15 And they went after them unto Jordan: and, lo, all the way was
full of garments and vessels, which the Syrians had cast away in their
haste. And the messengers returned, and told the king.

7:16 And the people went out, and spoiled the tents of the Syrians. So
a measure of fine flour was sold for a shekel, and two measures of
barley for a shekel, according to the word of the LORD.

7:17 And the king appointed the lord on whose hand he leaned to have
the charge of the gate: and the people trode upon him in the gate, and
he died, as the man of God had said, who spake when the king came down
to him.

7:18 And it came to pass as the man of God had spoken to the king,
saying, Two measures of barley for a shekel, and a measure of fine
flour for a shekel, shall be to morrow about this time in the gate of
Samaria: 7:19 And that lord answered the man of God, and said, Now,
behold, if the LORD should make windows in heaven, might such a thing
be? And he said, Behold, thou shalt see it with thine eyes, but shalt
not eat thereof.

7:20 And so it fell out unto him: for the people trode upon him in the
gate, and he died.

8:1 Then spake Elisha unto the woman, whose son he had restored to
life, saying, Arise, and go thou and thine household, and sojourn
wheresoever thou canst sojourn: for the LORD hath called for a famine;
and it shall also come upon the land seven years.

8:2 And the woman arose, and did after the saying of the man of God:
and she went with her household, and sojourned in the land of the
Philistines seven years.

8:3 And it came to pass at the seven years’ end, that the woman
returned out of the land of the Philistines: and she went forth to cry
unto the king for her house and for her land.

8:4 And the king talked with Gehazi the servant of the man of God,
saying, Tell me, I pray thee, all the great things that Elisha hath
done.

8:5 And it came to pass, as he was telling the king how he had
restored a dead body to life, that, behold, the woman, whose son he
had restored to life, cried to the king for her house and for her
land. And Gehazi said, My lord, O king, this is the woman, and this is
her son, whom Elisha restored to life.

8:6 And when the king asked the woman, she told him. So the king
appointed unto her a certain officer, saying, Restore all that was
hers, and all the fruits of the field since the day that she left the
land, even until now.

8:7 And Elisha came to Damascus; and Benhadad the king of Syria was
sick; and it was told him, saying, The man of God is come hither.

8:8 And the king said unto Hazael, Take a present in thine hand, and
go, meet the man of God, and enquire of the LORD by him, saying, Shall
I recover of this disease? 8:9 So Hazael went to meet him, and took a
present with him, even of every good thing of Damascus, forty camels’
burden, and came and stood before him, and said, Thy son Benhadad king
of Syria hath sent me to thee, saying, Shall I recover of this
disease? 8:10 And Elisha said unto him, Go, say unto him, Thou mayest
certainly recover: howbeit the LORD hath shewed me that he shall
surely die.

8:11 And he settled his countenance stedfastly, until he was ashamed:
and the man of God wept.

8:12 And Hazael said, Why weepeth my lord? And he answered, Because I
know the evil that thou wilt do unto the children of Israel: their
strong holds wilt thou set on fire, and their young men wilt thou slay
with the sword, and wilt dash their children, and rip up their women
with child.

8:13 And Hazael said, But what, is thy servant a dog, that he should
do this great thing? And Elisha answered, The LORD hath shewed me that
thou shalt be king over Syria.

8:14 So he departed from Elisha, and came to his master; who said to
him, What said Elisha to thee? And he answered, He told me that thou
shouldest surely recover.

8:15 And it came to pass on the morrow, that he took a thick cloth,
and dipped it in water, and spread it on his face, so that he died:
and Hazael reigned in his stead.

8:16 And in the fifth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel,
Jehoshaphat being then king of Judah, Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat
king of Judah began to reign.

8:17 Thirty and two years old was he when he began to reign; and he
reigned eight years in Jerusalem.

8:18 And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, as did the house
of Ahab: for the daughter of Ahab was his wife: and he did evil in the
sight of the LORD.

8:19 Yet the LORD would not destroy Judah for David his servant’s
sake, as he promised him to give him alway a light, and to his
children.

8:20 In his days Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah, and made
a king over themselves.

8:21 So Joram went over to Zair, and all the chariots with him: and he
rose by night, and smote the Edomites which compassed him about, and
the captains of the chariots: and the people fled into their tents.

8:22 Yet Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah unto this day.
Then Libnah revolted at the same time.

8:23 And the rest of the acts of Joram, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? 8:24
And Joram slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in
the city of David: and Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead.

8:25 In the twelfth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel did
Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah begin to reign.

8:26 Two and twenty years old was Ahaziah when he began to reign; and
he reigned one year in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Athaliah,
the daughter of Omri king of Israel.

8:27 And he walked in the way of the house of Ahab, and did evil in
the sight of the LORD, as did the house of Ahab: for he was the son in
law of the house of Ahab.

8:28 And he went with Joram the son of Ahab to the war against Hazael
king of Syria in Ramothgilead; and the Syrians wounded Joram.

8:29 And king Joram went back to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds
which the Syrians had given him at Ramah, when he fought against
Hazael king of Syria. And Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah
went down to see Joram the son of Ahab in Jezreel, because he was
sick.

9:1 And Elisha the prophet called one of the children of the prophets,
and said unto him, Gird up thy loins, and take this box of oil in
thine hand, and go to Ramothgilead: 9:2 And when thou comest thither,
look out there Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi, and go
in, and make him arise up from among his brethren, and carry him to an
inner chamber; 9:3 Then take the box of oil, and pour it on his head,
and say, Thus saith the LORD, I have anointed thee king over Israel.
Then open the door, and flee, and tarry not.

9:4 So the young man, even the young man the prophet, went to
Ramothgilead.

9:5 And when he came, behold, the captains of the host were sitting;
and he said, I have an errand to thee, O captain. And Jehu said, Unto
which of all us? And he said, To thee, O captain.

9:6 And he arose, and went into the house; and he poured the oil on
his head, and said unto him, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, I have
anointed thee king over the people of the LORD, even over Israel.

9:7 And thou shalt smite the house of Ahab thy master, that I may
avenge the blood of my servants the prophets, and the blood of all the
servants of the LORD, at the hand of Jezebel.

9:8 For the whole house of Ahab shall perish: and I will cut off from
Ahab him that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut up and
left in Israel: 9:9 And I will make the house of Ahab like the house
of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of
Ahijah: 9:10 And the dogs shall eat Jezebel in the portion of Jezreel,
and there shall be none to bury her. And he opened the door, and fled.

9:11 Then Jehu came forth to the servants of his lord: and one said
unto him, Is all well? wherefore came this mad fellow to thee? And he
said unto them, Ye know the man, and his communication.

9:12 And they said, It is false; tell us now. And he said, Thus and
thus spake he to me, saying, Thus saith the LORD, I have anointed thee
king over Israel.

9:13 Then they hasted, and took every man his garment, and put it
under him on the top of the stairs, and blew with trumpets, saying,
Jehu is king.

9:14 So Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi conspired
against Joram. (Now Joram had kept Ramothgilead, he and all Israel,
because of Hazael king of Syria.

9:15 But king Joram was returned to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds
which the Syrians had given him, when he fought with Hazael king of
Syria.) And Jehu said, If it be your minds, then let none go forth
nor escape out of the city to go to tell it in Jezreel.

9:16 So Jehu rode in a chariot, and went to Jezreel; for Joram lay
there.

And Ahaziah king of Judah was come down to see Joram.

9:17 And there stood a watchman on the tower in Jezreel, and he spied
the company of Jehu as he came, and said, I see a company. And Joram
said, Take an horseman, and send to meet them, and let him say, Is it
peace? 9:18 So there went one on horseback to meet him, and said,
Thus saith the king, Is it peace? And Jehu said, What hast thou to do
with peace? turn thee behind me. And the watchman told, saying, The
messenger came to them, but he cometh not again.

9:19 Then he sent out a second on horseback, which came to them, and
said, Thus saith the king, Is it peace? And Jehu answered, What hast
thou to do with peace? turn thee behind me.

9:20 And the watchman told, saying, He came even unto them, and cometh
not again: and the driving is like the driving of Jehu the son of
Nimshi; for he driveth furiously.

9:21 And Joram said, Make ready. And his chariot was made ready. And
Joram king of Israel and Ahaziah king of Judah went out, each in his
chariot, and they went out against Jehu, and met him in the portion of
Naboth the Jezreelite.

9:22 And it came to pass, when Joram saw Jehu, that he said, Is it
peace, Jehu? And he answered, What peace, so long as the whoredoms of
thy mother Jezebel and her witchcrafts are so many? 9:23 And Joram
turned his hands, and fled, and said to Ahaziah, There is treachery, O
Ahaziah.

9:24 And Jehu drew a bow with his full strength, and smote Jehoram
between his arms, and the arrow went out at his heart, and he sunk
down in his chariot.

9:25 Then said Jehu to Bidkar his captain, Take up, and cast him in
the portion of the field of Naboth the Jezreelite: for remember how
that, when I and thou rode together after Ahab his father, the LORD
laid this burden upon him; 9:26 Surely I have seen yesterday the blood
of Naboth, and the blood of his sons, saith the LORD; and I will
requite thee in this plat, saith the LORD. Now therefore take and cast
him into the plat of ground, according to the word of the LORD.

9:27 But when Ahaziah the king of Judah saw this, he fled by the way
of the garden house. And Jehu followed after him, and said, Smite him
also in the chariot. And they did so at the going up to Gur, which is
by Ibleam.

And he fled to Megiddo, and died there.

9:28 And his servants carried him in a chariot to Jerusalem, and
buried him in his sepulchre with his fathers in the city of David.

9:29 And in the eleventh year of Joram the son of Ahab began Ahaziah
to reign over Judah.

9:30 And when Jehu was come to Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it; and she
painted her face, and tired her head, and looked out at a window.

9:31 And as Jehu entered in at the gate, she said, Had Zimri peace,
who slew his master? 9:32 And he lifted up his face to the window,
and said, Who is on my side? who? And there looked out to him two or
three eunuchs.

9:33 And he said, Throw her down. So they threw her down: and some of
her blood was sprinkled on the wall, and on the horses: and he trode
her under foot.

9:34 And when he was come in, he did eat and drink, and said, Go, see
now this cursed woman, and bury her: for she is a king’s daughter.

9:35 And they went to bury her: but they found no more of her than the
skull, and the feet, and the palms of her hands.

9:36 Wherefore they came again, and told him. And he said, This is the
word of the LORD, which he spake by his servant Elijah the Tishbite,
saying, In the portion of Jezreel shall dogs eat the flesh of Jezebel:
9:37 And the carcase of Jezebel shall be as dung upon the face of the
field in the portion of Jezreel; so that they shall not say, This is
Jezebel.

10:1 And Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria. And Jehu wrote letters, and
sent to Samaria, unto the rulers of Jezreel, to the elders, and to
them that brought up Ahab’s children, saying, 10:2 Now as soon as this
letter cometh to you, seeing your master’s sons are with you, and
there are with you chariots and horses, a fenced city also, and
armour; 10:3 Look even out the best and meetest of your master’s sons,
and set him on his father’s throne, and fight for your master’s house.

10:4 But they were exceedingly afraid, and said, Behold, two kings
stood not before him: how then shall we stand? 10:5 And he that was
over the house, and he that was over the city, the elders also, and
the bringers up of the children, sent to Jehu, saying, We are thy
servants, and will do all that thou shalt bid us; we will not make any
king: do thou that which is good in thine eyes.

10:6 Then he wrote a letter the second time to them, saying, If ye be
mine, and if ye will hearken unto my voice, take ye the heads of the
men your master’s sons, and come to me to Jezreel by to morrow this
time. Now the king’s sons, being seventy persons, were with the great
men of the city, which brought them up.

10:7 And it came to pass, when the letter came to them, that they took
the king’s sons, and slew seventy persons, and put their heads in
baskets, and sent him them to Jezreel.

10:8 And there came a messenger, and told him, saying, They have
brought the heads of the king’s sons. And he said, Lay ye them in two
heaps at the entering in of the gate until the morning.

10:9 And it came to pass in the morning, that he went out, and stood,
and said to all the people, Ye be righteous: behold, I conspired
against my master, and slew him: but who slew all these? 10:10 Know
now that there shall fall unto the earth nothing of the word of the
LORD, which the LORD spake concerning the house of Ahab: for the LORD
hath done that which he spake by his servant Elijah.

10:11 So Jehu slew all that remained of the house of Ahab in Jezreel,
and all his great men, and his kinsfolks, and his priests, until he
left him none remaining.

10:12 And he arose and departed, and came to Samaria. And as he was at
the shearing house in the way, 10:13 Jehu met with the brethren of
Ahaziah king of Judah, and said, Who are ye? And they answered, We are
the brethren of Ahaziah; and we go down to salute the children of the
king and the children of the queen.

10:14 And he said, Take them alive. And they took them alive, and slew
them at the pit of the shearing house, even two and forty men; neither
left he any of them.

10:15 And when he was departed thence, he lighted on Jehonadab the son
of Rechab coming to meet him: and he saluted him, and said to him, Is
thine heart right, as my heart is with thy heart? And Jehonadab
answered, It is. If it be, give me thine hand. And he gave him his
hand; and he took him up to him into the chariot.

10:16 And he said, Come with me, and see my zeal for the LORD. So they
made him ride in his chariot.

10:17 And when he came to Samaria, he slew all that remained unto Ahab
in Samaria, till he had destroyed him, according to the saying of the
LORD, which he spake to Elijah.

10:18 And Jehu gathered all the people together, and said unto them,
Ahab served Baal a little; but Jehu shall serve him much.

10:19 Now therefore call unto me all the prophets of Baal, all his
servants, and all his priests; let none be wanting: for I have a great
sacrifice to do to Baal; whosoever shall be wanting, he shall not
live. But Jehu did it in subtilty, to the intent that he might destroy
the worshippers of Baal.

10:20 And Jehu said, Proclaim a solemn assembly for Baal. And they
proclaimed it.

10:21 And Jehu sent through all Israel: and all the worshippers of
Baal came, so that there was not a man left that came not. And they
came into the house of Baal; and the house of Baal was full from one
end to another.

10:22 And he said unto him that was over the vestry, Bring forth
vestments for all the worshippers of Baal. And he brought them forth
vestments.

10:23 And Jehu went, and Jehonadab the son of Rechab, into the house
of Baal, and said unto the worshippers of Baal, Search, and look that
there be here with you none of the servants of the LORD, but the
worshippers of Baal only.

10:24 And when they went in to offer sacrifices and burnt offerings,
Jehu appointed fourscore men without, and said, If any of the men whom
I have brought into your hands escape, he that letteth him go, his
life shall be for the life of him.

10:25 And it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of offering
the burnt offering, that Jehu said to the guard and to the captains,
Go in, and slay them; let none come forth. And they smote them with
the edge of the sword; and the guard and the captains cast them out,
and went to the city of the house of Baal.

10:26 And they brought forth the images out of the house of Baal, and
burned them.

10:27 And they brake down the image of Baal, and brake down the house
of Baal, and made it a draught house unto this day.

10:28 Thus Jehu destroyed Baal out of Israel.

10:29 Howbeit from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made
Israel to sin, Jehu departed not from after them, to wit, the golden
calves that were in Bethel, and that were in Dan.

10:30 And the LORD said unto Jehu, Because thou hast done well in
executing that which is right in mine eyes, and hast done unto the
house of Ahab according to all that was in mine heart, thy children of
the fourth generation shall sit on the throne of Israel.

10:31 But Jehu took no heed to walk in the law of the LORD God of
Israel with all his heart: for he departed not from the sins of
Jeroboam, which made Israel to sin.

10:32 In those days the LORD began to cut Israel short: and Hazael
smote them in all the coasts of Israel; 10:33 From Jordan eastward,
all the land of Gilead, the Gadites, and the Reubenites, and the
Manassites, from Aroer, which is by the river Arnon, even Gilead and
Bashan.

10:34 Now the rest of the acts of Jehu, and all that he did, and all
his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Israel? 10:35 And Jehu slept with his fathers: and they
buried him in Samaria. And Jehoahaz his son reigned in his stead.

10:36 And the time that Jehu reigned over Israel in Samaria was twenty
and eight years.

11:1 And when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was
dead, she arose and destroyed all the seed royal.

11:2 But Jehosheba, the daughter of king Joram, sister of Ahaziah,
took Joash the son of Ahaziah, and stole him from among the king’s
sons which were slain; and they hid him, even him and his nurse, in
the bedchamber from Athaliah, so that he was not slain.

11:3 And he was with her hid in the house of the LORD six years. And
Athaliah did reign over the land.

11:4 And the seventh year Jehoiada sent and fetched the rulers over
hundreds, with the captains and the guard, and brought them to him
into the house of the LORD, and made a covenant with them, and took an
oath of them in the house of the LORD, and shewed them the king’s son.

11:5 And he commanded them, saying, This is the thing that ye shall
do; A third part of you that enter in on the sabbath shall even be
keepers of the watch of the king’s house; 11:6 And a third part shall
be at the gate of Sur; and a third part at the gate behind the guard:
so shall ye keep the watch of the house, that it be not broken down.

11:7 And two parts of all you that go forth on the sabbath, even they
shall keep the watch of the house of the LORD about the king.

11:8 And ye shall compass the king round about, every man with his
weapons in his hand: and he that cometh within the ranges, let him be
slain: and be ye with the king as he goeth out and as he cometh in.

11:9 And the captains over the hundreds did according to all things
that Jehoiada the priest commanded: and they took every man his men
that were to come in on the sabbath, with them that should go out on
the sabbath, and came to Jehoiada the priest.

11:10 And to the captains over hundreds did the priest give king
David’s spears and shields, that were in the temple of the LORD.

11:11 And the guard stood, every man with his weapons in his hand,
round about the king, from the right corner of the temple to the left
corner of the temple, along by the altar and the temple.

11:12 And he brought forth the king’s son, and put the crown upon him,
and gave him the testimony; and they made him king, and anointed him;
and they clapped their hands, and said, God save the king.

11:13 And when Athaliah heard the noise of the guard and of the
people, she came to the people into the temple of the LORD.

11:14 And when she looked, behold, the king stood by a pillar, as the
manner was, and the princes and the trumpeters by the king, and all
the people of the land rejoiced, and blew with trumpets: and Athaliah
rent her clothes, and cried, Treason, Treason.

11:15 But Jehoiada the priest commanded the captains of the hundreds,
the officers of the host, and said unto them, Have her forth without
the ranges: and him that followeth her kill with the sword. For the
priest had said, Let her not be slain in the house of the LORD.

11:16 And they laid hands on her; and she went by the way by the which
the horses came into the king’s house: and there was she slain.

11:17 And Jehoiada made a covenant between the LORD and the king and
the people, that they should be the LORD’s people; between the king
also and the people.

11:18 And all the people of the land went into the house of Baal, and
brake it down; his altars and his images brake they in pieces
thoroughly, and slew Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars. And
the priest appointed officers over the house of the LORD.

11:19 And he took the rulers over hundreds, and the captains, and the
guard, and all the people of the land; and they brought down the king
from the house of the LORD, and came by the way of the gate of the
guard to the king’s house. And he sat on the throne of the kings.

11:20 And all the people of the land rejoiced, and the city was in
quiet: and they slew Athaliah with the sword beside the king’s house.

11:21 Seven years old was Jehoash when he began to reign.

12:1 In the seventh year of Jehu Jehoash began to reign; and forty
years reigned he in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Zibiah of
Beersheba.

12:2 And Jehoash did that which was right in the sight of the LORD all
his days wherein Jehoiada the priest instructed him.

12:3 But the high places were not taken away: the people still
sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places.

12:4 And Jehoash said to the priests, All the money of the dedicated
things that is brought into the house of the LORD, even the money of
every one that passeth the account, the money that every man is set
at, and all the money that cometh into any man’s heart to bring into
the house of the LORD, 12:5 Let the priests take it to them, every man
of his acquaintance: and let them repair the breaches of the house,
wheresoever any breach shall be found.

12:6 But it was so, that in the three and twentieth year of king
Jehoash the priests had not repaired the breaches of the house.

12:7 Then king Jehoash called for Jehoiada the priest, and the other
priests, and said unto them, Why repair ye not the breaches of the
house? now therefore receive no more money of your acquaintance, but
deliver it for the breaches of the house.

12:8 And the priests consented to receive no more money of the people,
neither to repair the breaches of the house.

12:9 But Jehoiada the priest took a chest, and bored a hole in the lid
of it, and set it beside the altar, on the right side as one cometh
into the house of the LORD: and the priests that kept the door put
therein all the money that was brought into the house of the LORD.

12:10 And it was so, when they saw that there was much money in the
chest, that the king’s scribe and the high priest came up, and they
put up in bags, and told the money that was found in the house of the
LORD.

12:11 And they gave the money, being told, into the hands of them that
did the work, that had the oversight of the house of the LORD: and
they laid it out to the carpenters and builders, that wrought upon the
house of the LORD, 12:12 And to masons, and hewers of stone, and to
buy timber and hewed stone to repair the breaches of the house of the
LORD, and for all that was laid out for the house to repair it.

12:13 Howbeit there were not made for the house of the LORD bowls of
silver, snuffers, basons, trumpets, any vessels of gold, or vessels of
silver, of the money that was brought into the house of the LORD:
12:14 But they gave that to the workmen, and repaired therewith the
house of the LORD.

12:15 Moreover they reckoned not with the men, into whose hand they
delivered the money to be bestowed on workmen: for they dealt
faithfully.

12:16 The trespass money and sin money was not brought into the house
of the LORD: it was the priests’.

12:17 Then Hazael king of Syria went up, and fought against Gath, and
took it: and Hazael set his face to go up to Jerusalem.

12:18 And Jehoash king of Judah took all the hallowed things that
Jehoshaphat, and Jehoram, and Ahaziah, his fathers, kings of Judah,
had dedicated, and his own hallowed things, and all the gold that was
found in the treasures of the house of the LORD, and in the king’s
house, and sent it to Hazael king of Syria: and he went away from
Jerusalem.

12:19 And the rest of the acts of Joash, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
12:20 And his servants arose, and made a conspiracy, and slew Joash in
the house of Millo, which goeth down to Silla.

12:21 For Jozachar the son of Shimeath, and Jehozabad the son of
Shomer, his servants, smote him, and he died; and they buried him with
his fathers in the city of David: and Amaziah his son reigned in his
stead.

13:1 In the three and twentieth year of Joash the son of Ahaziah king
of Judah Jehoahaz the son of Jehu began to reign over Israel in
Samaria, and reigned seventeen years.

13:2 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, and
followed the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which made Israel to
sin; he departed not therefrom.

13:3 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel, and he
delivered them into the hand of Hazael king of Syria, and into the
hand of Benhadad the son of Hazael, all their days.

13:4 And Jehoahaz besought the LORD, and the LORD hearkened unto him:
for he saw the oppression of Israel, because the king of Syria
oppressed them.

13:5 (And the LORD gave Israel a saviour, so that they went out from
under the hand of the Syrians: and the children of Israel dwelt in
their tents, as beforetime.

13:6 Nevertheless they departed not from the sins of the house of
Jeroboam, who made Israel sin, but walked therein: and there remained
the grove also in Samaria.) 13:7 Neither did he leave of the people
to Jehoahaz but fifty horsemen, and ten chariots, and ten thousand
footmen; for the king of Syria had destroyed them, and had made them
like the dust by threshing.

13:8 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoahaz, and all that he did, and
his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Israel? 13:9 And Jehoahaz slept with his fathers; and they
buried him in Samaria: and Joash his son reigned in his stead.

13:10 In the thirty and seventh year of Joash king of Judah began
Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz to reign over Israel in Samaria, and
reigned sixteen years.

13:11 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD; he
departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made
Israel sin: but he walked therein.

13:12 And the rest of the acts of Joash, and all that he did, and his
might wherewith he fought against Amaziah king of Judah, are they not
written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? 13:13
And Joash slept with his fathers; and Jeroboam sat upon his throne:
and Joash was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel.

13:14 Now Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness whereof he died. And
Joash the king of Israel came down unto him, and wept over his face,
and said, O my father, my father, the chariot of Israel, and the
horsemen thereof.

13:15 And Elisha said unto him, Take bow and arrows. And he took unto
him bow and arrows.

13:16 And he said to the king of Israel, Put thine hand upon the bow.
And he put his hand upon it: and Elisha put his hands upon the king’s
hands.

13:17 And he said, Open the window eastward. And he opened it. Then
Elisha said, Shoot. And he shot. And he said, The arrow of the LORD’s
deliverance, and the arrow of deliverance from Syria: for thou shalt
smite the Syrians in Aphek, till thou have consumed them.

13:18 And he said, Take the arrows. And he took them. And he said unto
the king of Israel, Smite upon the ground. And he smote thrice, and
stayed.

13:19 And the man of God was wroth with him, and said, Thou shouldest
have smitten five or six times; then hadst thou smitten Syria till
thou hadst consumed it: whereas now thou shalt smite Syria but thrice.

13:20 And Elisha died, and they buried him. And the bands of the
Moabites invaded the land at the coming in of the year.

13:21 And it came to pass, as they were burying a man, that, behold,
they spied a band of men; and they cast the man into the sepulchre of
Elisha: and when the man was let down, and touched the bones of
Elisha, he revived, and stood up on his feet.

13:22 But Hazael king of Syria oppressed Israel all the days of
Jehoahaz.

13:23 And the LORD was gracious unto them, and had compassion on them,
and had respect unto them, because of his covenant with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and would not destroy them, neither cast he them
from his presence as yet.

13:24 So Hazael king of Syria died; and Benhadad his son reigned in
his stead.

13:25 And Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz took again out of the hand of
Benhadad the son of Hazael the cities, which he had taken out of the
hand of Jehoahaz his father by war. Three times did Joash beat him,
and recovered the cities of Israel.

14:1 In the second year of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel
reigned Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah.

14:2 He was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and
reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was
Jehoaddan of Jerusalem.

14:3 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, yet not
like David his father: he did according to all things as Joash his
father did.

14:4 Howbeit the high places were not taken away: as yet the people
did sacrifice and burnt incense on the high places.

14:5 And it came to pass, as soon as the kingdom was confirmed in his
hand, that he slew his servants which had slain the king his father.

14:6 But the children of the murderers he slew not: according unto
that which is written in the book of the law of Moses, wherein the
LORD commanded, saying, The fathers shall not be put to death for the
children, nor the children be put to death for the fathers; but every
man shall be put to death for his own sin.

14:7 He slew of Edom in the valley of salt ten thousand, and took
Selah by war, and called the name of it Joktheel unto this day.

14:8 Then Amaziah sent messengers to Jehoash, the son of Jehoahaz son
of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come, let us look one another in the
face.

14:9 And Jehoash the king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah,
saying, The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in
Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife: and there passed
by a wild beast that was in Lebanon, and trode down the thistle.

14:10 Thou hast indeed smitten Edom, and thine heart hath lifted thee
up: glory of this, and tarry at home: for why shouldest thou meddle to
thy hurt, that thou shouldest fall, even thou, and Judah with thee?
14:11 But Amaziah would not hear. Therefore Jehoash king of Israel
went up; and he and Amaziah king of Judah looked one another in the
face at Bethshemesh, which belongeth to Judah.

14:12 And Judah was put to the worse before Israel; and they fled
every man to their tents.

14:13 And Jehoash king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah, the son
of Jehoash the son of Ahaziah, at Bethshemesh, and came to Jerusalem,
and brake down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim unto the
corner gate, four hundred cubits.

14:14 And he took all the gold and silver, and all the vessels that
were found in the house of the LORD, and in the treasures of the
king’s house, and hostages, and returned to Samaria.

14:15 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoash which he did, and his might,
and how he fought with Amaziah king of Judah, are they not written in
the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? 14:16 And Jehoash
slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria with the kings of
Israel; and Jeroboam his son reigned in his stead.

14:17 And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived after the death
of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel fifteen years.

14:18 And the rest of the acts of Amaziah, are they not written in the
book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? 14:19 Now they made a
conspiracy against him in Jerusalem: and he fled to Lachish; but they
sent after him to Lachish, and slew him there.

14:20 And they brought him on horses: and he was buried at Jerusalem
with his fathers in the city of David.

14:21 And all the people of Judah took Azariah, which was sixteen
years old, and made him king instead of his father Amaziah.

14:22 He built Elath, and restored it to Judah, after that the king
slept with his fathers.

14:23 In the fifteenth year of Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah
Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel began to reign in Samaria,
and reigned forty and one years.

14:24 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD: he
departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made
Israel to sin.

14:25 He restored the coast of Israel from the entering of Hamath unto
the sea of the plain, according to the word of the LORD God of Israel,
which he spake by the hand of his servant Jonah, the son of Amittai,
the prophet, which was of Gathhepher.

14:26 For the LORD saw the affliction of Israel, that it was very
bitter: for there was not any shut up, nor any left, nor any helper
for Israel.

14:27 And the LORD said not that he would blot out the name of Israel
from under heaven: but he saved them by the hand of Jeroboam the son
of Joash.

14:28 Now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, and all that he did, and
his might, how he warred, and how he recovered Damascus, and Hamath,
which belonged to Judah, for Israel, are they not written in the book
of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? 14:29 And Jeroboam slept
with his fathers, even with the kings of Israel; and Zachariah his son
reigned in his stead.

15:1 In the twenty and seventh year of Jeroboam king of Israel began
Azariah son of Amaziah king of Judah to reign.

15:2 Sixteen years old was he when he began to reign, and he reigned
two and fifty years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Jecholiah
of Jerusalem.

15:3 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD,
according to all that his father Amaziah had done; 15:4 Save that the
high places were not removed: the people sacrificed and burnt incense
still on the high places.

15:5 And the LORD smote the king, so that he was a leper unto the day
of his death, and dwelt in a several house. And Jotham the king’s son
was over the house, judging the people of the land.

15:6 And the rest of the acts of Azariah, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
15:7 So Azariah slept with his fathers; and they buried him with his
fathers in the city of David: and Jotham his son reigned in his stead.

15:8 In the thirty and eighth year of Azariah king of Judah did
Zachariah the son of Jeroboam reign over Israel in Samaria six months.

15:9 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, as his
fathers had done: he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, who made Israel to sin.

15:10 And Shallum the son of Jabesh conspired against him, and smote
him before the people, and slew him, and reigned in his stead.

15:11 And the rest of the acts of Zachariah, behold, they are written
in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.

15:12 This was the word of the LORD which he spake unto Jehu, saying,
Thy sons shall sit on the throne of Israel unto the fourth generation.
And so it came to pass.

15:13 Shallum the son of Jabesh began to reign in the nine and
thirtieth year of Uzziah king of Judah; and he reigned a full month in
Samaria.

15:14 For Menahem the son of Gadi went up from Tirzah, and came to
Samaria, and smote Shallum the son of Jabesh in Samaria, and slew him,
and reigned in his stead.

15:15 And the rest of the acts of Shallum, and his conspiracy which he
made, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Israel.

15:16 Then Menahem smote Tiphsah, and all that were therein, and the
coasts thereof from Tirzah: because they opened not to him, therefore
he smote it; and all the women therein that were with child he ripped
up.

15:17 In the nine and thirtieth year of Azariah king of Judah began
Menahem the son of Gadi to reign over Israel, and reigned ten years in
Samaria.

15:18 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD: he
departed not all his days from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat,
who made Israel to sin.

15:19 And Pul the king of Assyria came against the land: and Menahem
gave Pul a thousand talents of silver, that his hand might be with him
to confirm the kingdom in his hand.

15:20 And Menahem exacted the money of Israel, even of all the mighty
men of wealth, of each man fifty shekels of silver, to give to the
king of Assyria. So the king of Assyria turned back, and stayed not
there in the land.

15:21 And the rest of the acts of Menahem, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
15:22 And Menahem slept with his fathers; and Pekahiah his son reigned
in his stead.

15:23 In the fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah Pekahiah the son
of Menahem began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned two
years.

15:24 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD: he
departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made
Israel to sin.

15:25 But Pekah the son of Remaliah, a captain of his, conspired
against him, and smote him in Samaria, in the palace of the king’s
house, with Argob and Arieh, and with him fifty men of the Gileadites:
and he killed him, and reigned in his room.

15:26 And the rest of the acts of Pekahiah, and all that he did,
behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
Israel.

15:27 In the two and fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah Pekah the
son of Remaliah began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned
twenty years.

15:28 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD: he
departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made
Israel to sin.

15:29 In the days of Pekah king of Israel came Tiglathpileser king of
Assyria, and took Ijon, and Abelbethmaachah, and Janoah, and Kedesh,
and Hazor, and Gilead, and Galilee, all the land of Naphtali, and
carried them captive to Assyria.

15:30 And Hoshea the son of Elah made a conspiracy against Pekah the
son of Remaliah, and smote him, and slew him, and reigned in his
stead, in the twentieth year of Jotham the son of Uzziah.

15:31 And the rest of the acts of Pekah, and all that he did, behold,
they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.

15:32 In the second year of Pekah the son of Remaliah king of Israel
began Jotham the son of Uzziah king of Judah to reign.

15:33 Five and twenty years old was he when he began to reign, and he
reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Jerusha,
the daughter of Zadok.

15:34 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD: he did
according to all that his father Uzziah had done.

15:35 Howbeit the high places were not removed: the people sacrificed
and burned incense still in the high places. He built the higher gate
of the house of the LORD.

15:36 Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
15:37 In those days the LORD began to send against Judah Rezin the
king of Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah.

15:38 And Jotham slept with his fathers, and was buried with his
fathers in the city of David his father: and Ahaz his son reigned in
his stead.

16:1 In the seventeenth year of Pekah the son of Remaliah Ahaz the son
of Jotham king of Judah began to reign.

16:2 Twenty years old was Ahaz when he began to reign, and reigned
sixteen years in Jerusalem, and did not that which was right in the
sight of the LORD his God, like David his father.

16:3 But he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, yea, and made
his son to pass through the fire, according to the abominations of the
heathen, whom the LORD cast out from before the children of Israel.

16:4 And he sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places, and on
the hills, and under every green tree.

16:5 Then Rezin king of Syria and Pekah son of Remaliah king of Israel
came up to Jerusalem to war: and they besieged Ahaz, but could not
overcome him.

16:6 At that time Rezin king of Syria recovered Elath to Syria, and
drave the Jews from Elath: and the Syrians came to Elath, and dwelt
there unto this day.

16:7 So Ahaz sent messengers to Tiglathpileser king of Assyria,
saying, I am thy servant and thy son: come up, and save me out of the
hand of the king of Syria, and out of the hand of the king of Israel,
which rise up against me.

16:8 And Ahaz took the silver and gold that was found in the house of
the LORD, and in the treasures of the king’s house, and sent it for a
present to the king of Assyria.

16:9 And the king of Assyria hearkened unto him: for the king of
Assyria went up against Damascus, and took it, and carried the people
of it captive to Kir, and slew Rezin.

16:10 And king Ahaz went to Damascus to meet Tiglathpileser king of
Assyria, and saw an altar that was at Damascus: and king Ahaz sent to
Urijah the priest the fashion of the altar, and the pattern of it,
according to all the workmanship thereof.

16:11 And Urijah the priest built an altar according to all that king
Ahaz had sent from Damascus: so Urijah the priest made it against king
Ahaz came from Damascus.

16:12 And when the king was come from Damascus, the king saw the
altar: and the king approached to the altar, and offered thereon.

16:13 And he burnt his burnt offering and his meat offering, and
poured his drink offering, and sprinkled the blood of his peace
offerings, upon the altar.

16:14 And he brought also the brasen altar, which was before the LORD,
from the forefront of the house, from between the altar and the house
of the LORD, and put it on the north side of the altar.

16:15 And king Ahaz commanded Urijah the priest, saying, Upon the
great altar burn the morning burnt offering, and the evening meat
offering, and the king’s burnt sacrifice, and his meat offering, with
the burnt offering of all the people of the land, and their meat
offering, and their drink offerings; and sprinkle upon it all the
blood of the burnt offering, and all the blood of the sacrifice: and
the brasen altar shall be for me to enquire by.

16:16 Thus did Urijah the priest, according to all that king Ahaz
commanded.

16:17 And king Ahaz cut off the borders of the bases, and removed the
laver from off them; and took down the sea from off the brasen oxen
that were under it, and put it upon the pavement of stones.

16:18 And the covert for the sabbath that they had built in the house,
and the king’s entry without, turned he from the house of the LORD for
the king of Assyria.

16:19 Now the rest of the acts of Ahaz which he did, are they not
written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? 16:20
And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in
the city of David: and Hezekiah his son reigned in his stead.

17:1 In the twelfth year of Ahaz king of Judah began Hoshea the son of
Elah to reign in Samaria over Israel nine years.

17:2 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, but not
as the kings of Israel that were before him.

17:3 Against him came up Shalmaneser king of Assyria; and Hoshea
became his servant, and gave him presents.

17:4 And the king of Assyria found conspiracy in Hoshea: for he had
sent messengers to So king of Egypt, and brought no present to the
king of Assyria, as he had done year by year: therefore the king of
Assyria shut him up, and bound him in prison.

17:5 Then the king of Assyria came up throughout all the land, and
went up to Samaria, and besieged it three years.

17:6 In the ninth year of Hoshea the king of Assyria took Samaria, and
carried Israel away into Assyria, and placed them in Halah and in
Habor by the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes.

17:7 For so it was, that the children of Israel had sinned against the
LORD their God, which had brought them up out of the land of Egypt,
from under the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and had feared other
gods, 17:8 And walked in the statutes of the heathen, whom the LORD
cast out from before the children of Israel, and of the kings of
Israel, which they had made.

17:9 And the children of Israel did secretly those things that were
not right against the LORD their God, and they built them high places
in all their cities, from the tower of the watchmen to the fenced
city.

17:10 And they set them up images and groves in every high hill, and
under every green tree: 17:11 And there they burnt incense in all the
high places, as did the heathen whom the LORD carried away before
them; and wrought wicked things to provoke the LORD to anger: 17:12
For they served idols, whereof the LORD had said unto them, Ye shall
not do this thing.

17:13 Yet the LORD testified against Israel, and against Judah, by all
the prophets, and by all the seers, saying, Turn ye from your evil
ways, and keep my commandments and my statutes, according to all the
law which I commanded your fathers, and which I sent to you by my
servants the prophets.

17:14 Notwithstanding they would not hear, but hardened their necks,
like to the neck of their fathers, that did not believe in the LORD
their God.

17:15 And they rejected his statutes, and his covenant that he made
with their fathers, and his testimonies which he testified against
them; and they followed vanity, and became vain, and went after the
heathen that were round about them, concerning whom the LORD had
charged them, that they should not do like them.

17:16 And they left all the commandments of the LORD their God, and
made them molten images, even two calves, and made a grove, and
worshipped all the host of heaven, and served Baal.

17:17 And they caused their sons and their daughters to pass through
the fire, and used divination and enchantments, and sold themselves to
do evil in the sight of the LORD, to provoke him to anger.

17:18 Therefore the LORD was very angry with Israel, and removed them
out of his sight: there was none left but the tribe of Judah only.

17:19 Also Judah kept not the commandments of the LORD their God, but
walked in the statutes of Israel which they made.

17:20 And the LORD rejected all the seed of Israel, and afflicted
them, and delivered them into the hand of spoilers, until he had cast
them out of his sight.

17:21 For he rent Israel from the house of David; and they made
Jeroboam the son of Nebat king: and Jeroboam drave Israel from
following the LORD, and made them sin a great sin.

17:22 For the children of Israel walked in all the sins of Jeroboam
which he did; they departed not from them; 17:23 Until the LORD
removed Israel out of his sight, as he had said by all his servants
the prophets. So was Israel carried away out of their own land to
Assyria unto this day.

17:24 And the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon, and from
Cuthah, and from Ava, and from Hamath, and from Sepharvaim, and placed
them in the cities of Samaria instead of the children of Israel: and
they possessed Samaria, and dwelt in the cities thereof.

17:25 And so it was at the beginning of their dwelling there, that
they feared not the LORD: therefore the LORD sent lions among them,
which slew some of them.

17:26 Wherefore they spake to the king of Assyria, saying, The nations
which thou hast removed, and placed in the cities of Samaria, know not
the manner of the God of the land: therefore he hath sent lions among
them, and, behold, they slay them, because they know not the manner of
the God of the land.

17:27 Then the king of Assyria commanded, saying, Carry thither one of
the priests whom ye brought from thence; and let them go and dwell
there, and let him teach them the manner of the God of the land.

17:28 Then one of the priests whom they had carried away from Samaria
came and dwelt in Bethel, and taught them how they should fear the
LORD.

17:29 Howbeit every nation made gods of their own, and put them in the
houses of the high places which the Samaritans had made, every nation
in their cities wherein they dwelt.

17:30 And the men of Babylon made Succothbenoth, and the men of Cuth
made Nergal, and the men of Hamath made Ashima, 17:31 And the Avites
made Nibhaz and Tartak, and the Sepharvites burnt their children in
fire to Adrammelech and Anammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim.

17:32 So they feared the LORD, and made unto themselves of the lowest
of them priests of the high places, which sacrificed for them in the
houses of the high places.

17:33 They feared the LORD, and served their own gods, after the
manner of the nations whom they carried away from thence.

17:34 Unto this day they do after the former manners: they fear not
the LORD, neither do they after their statutes, or after their
ordinances, or after the law and commandment which the LORD commanded
the children of Jacob, whom he named Israel; 17:35 With whom the LORD
had made a covenant, and charged them, saying, Ye shall not fear other
gods, nor bow yourselves to them, nor serve them, nor sacrifice to
them: 17:36 But the LORD, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt
with great power and a stretched out arm, him shall ye fear, and him
shall ye worship, and to him shall ye do sacrifice.

17:37 And the statutes, and the ordinances, and the law, and the
commandment, which he wrote for you, ye shall observe to do for
evermore; and ye shall not fear other gods.

17:38 And the covenant that I have made with you ye shall not forget;
neither shall ye fear other gods.

17:39 But the LORD your God ye shall fear; and he shall deliver you
out of the hand of all your enemies.

17:40 Howbeit they did not hearken, but they did after their former
manner.

17:41 So these nations feared the LORD, and served their graven
images, both their children, and their children’s children: as did
their fathers, so do they unto this day.

18:1 Now it came to pass in the third year of Hoshea son of Elah king
of Israel, that Hezekiah the son of Ahaz king of Judah began to reign.

18:2 Twenty and five years old was he when he began to reign; and he
reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also was
Abi, the daughter of Zachariah.

18:3 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD,
according to all that David his father did.

18:4 He removed the high places, and brake the images, and cut down
the groves, and brake in pieces the brasen serpent that Moses had
made: for unto those days the children of Israel did burn incense to
it: and he called it Nehushtan.

18:5 He trusted in the LORD God of Israel; so that after him was none
like him among all the kings of Judah, nor any that were before him.

18:6 For he clave to the LORD, and departed not from following him,
but kept his commandments, which the LORD commanded Moses.

18:7 And the LORD was with him; and he prospered whithersoever he went
forth: and he rebelled against the king of Assyria, and served him
not.

18:8 He smote the Philistines, even unto Gaza, and the borders
thereof, from the tower of the watchmen to the fenced city.

18:9 And it came to pass in the fourth year of king Hezekiah, which
was the seventh year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, that
Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up against Samaria, and besieged it.

18:10 And at the end of three years they took it: even in the sixth
year of Hezekiah, that is in the ninth year of Hoshea king of Israel,
Samaria was taken.

18:11 And the king of Assyria did carry away Israel unto Assyria, and
put them in Halah and in Habor by the river of Gozan, and in the
cities of the Medes: 18:12 Because they obeyed not the voice of the
LORD their God, but transgressed his covenant, and all that Moses the
servant of the LORD commanded, and would not hear them, nor do them.

18:13 Now in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah did Sennacherib king
of Assyria come up against all the fenced cities of Judah, and took
them.

18:14 And Hezekiah king of Judah sent to the king of Assyria to
Lachish, saying, I have offended; return from me: that which thou
puttest on me will I bear. And the king of Assyria appointed unto
Hezekiah king of Judah three hundred talents of silver and thirty
talents of gold.

18:15 And Hezekiah gave him all the silver that was found in the house
of the LORD, and in the treasures of the king’s house.

18:16 At that time did Hezekiah cut off the gold from the doors of the
temple of the LORD, and from the pillars which Hezekiah king of Judah
had overlaid, and gave it to the king of Assyria.

18:17 And the king of Assyria sent Tartan and Rabsaris and Rabshakeh
from Lachish to king Hezekiah with a great host against Jerusalem. And
they went up and came to Jerusalem. And when they were come up, they
came and stood by the conduit of the upper pool, which is in the
highway of the fuller’s field.

18:18 And when they had called to the king, there came out to them
Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, which was over the household, and Shebna
the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the recorder.

18:19 And Rabshakeh said unto them, Speak ye now to Hezekiah, Thus
saith the great king, the king of Assyria, What confidence is this
wherein thou trustest? 18:20 Thou sayest, (but they are but vain
words,) I have counsel and strength for the war. Now on whom dost thou
trust, that thou rebellest against me? 18:21 Now, behold, thou
trustest upon the staff of this bruised reed, even upon Egypt, on
which if a man lean, it will go into his hand, and pierce it: so is
Pharaoh king of Egypt unto all that trust on him.

18:22 But if ye say unto me, We trust in the LORD our God: is not that
he, whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken away, and
hath said to Judah and Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this altar
in Jerusalem? 18:23 Now therefore, I pray thee, give pledges to my
lord the king of Assyria, and I will deliver thee two thousand horses,
if thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them.

18:24 How then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the
least of my master’s servants, and put thy trust on Egypt for chariots
and for horsemen? 18:25 Am I now come up without the LORD against
this place to destroy it? The LORD said to me, Go up against this
land, and destroy it.

18:26 Then said Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, and Shebna, and Joah, unto
Rabshakeh, Speak, I pray thee, to thy servants in the Syrian language;
for we understand it: and talk not with us in the Jews’ language in
the ears of the people that are on the wall.

18:27 But Rabshakeh said unto them, Hath my master sent me to thy
master, and to thee, to speak these words? hath he not sent me to the
men which sit on the wall, that they may eat their own dung, and drink
their own piss with you? 18:28 Then Rabshakeh stood and cried with a
loud voice in the Jews’ language, and spake, saying, Hear the word of
the great king, the king of Assyria: 18:29 Thus saith the king, Let
not Hezekiah deceive you: for he shall not be able to deliver you out
of his hand: 18:30 Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the LORD,
saying, The LORD will surely deliver us, and this city shall not be
delivered into the hand of the king of Assyria.

18:31 Hearken not to Hezekiah: for thus saith the king of Assyria,
Make an agreement with me by a present, and come out to me, and then
eat ye every man of his own vine, and every one of his fig tree, and
drink ye every one the waters of his cistern: 18:32 Until I come and
take you away to a land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a
land of bread and vineyards, a land of oil olive and of honey, that ye
may live, and not die: and hearken not unto Hezekiah, when he
persuadeth you, saying, The LORD will deliver us.

18:33 Hath any of the gods of the nations delivered at all his land
out of the hand of the king of Assyria? 18:34 Where are the gods of
Hamath, and of Arpad? where are the gods of Sepharvaim, Hena, and
Ivah? have they delivered Samaria out of mine hand? 18:35 Who are
they among all the gods of the countries, that have delivered their
country out of mine hand, that the LORD should deliver Jerusalem out
of mine hand? 18:36 But the people held their peace, and answered him
not a word: for the king’s commandment was, saying, Answer him not.

18:37 Then came Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, which was over the
household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the
recorder, to Hezekiah with their clothes rent, and told him the words
of Rabshakeh.

19:1 And it came to pass, when king Hezekiah heard it, that he rent
his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the
house of the LORD.

19:2 And he sent Eliakim, which was over the household, and Shebna the
scribe, and the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, to
Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz.

19:3 And they said unto him, Thus saith Hezekiah, This day is a day of
trouble, and of rebuke, and blasphemy; for the children are come to
the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.

19:4 It may be the LORD thy God will hear all the words of Rabshakeh,
whom the king of Assyria his master hath sent to reproach the living
God; and will reprove the words which the LORD thy God hath heard:
wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that are left.

19:5 So the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah.

19:6 And Isaiah said unto them, Thus shall ye say to your master, Thus
saith the LORD, Be not afraid of the words which thou hast heard, with
which the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me.

19:7 Behold, I will send a blast upon him, and he shall hear a rumour,
and shall return to his own land; and I will cause him to fall by the
sword in his own land.

19:8 So Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria warring
against Libnah: for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish.

19:9 And when he heard say of Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, Behold, he is
come out to fight against thee: he sent messengers again unto
Hezekiah, saying, 19:10 Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of Judah,
saying, Let not thy God in whom thou trustest deceive thee, saying,
Jerusalem shall not be delivered into the hand of the king of Assyria.

19:11 Behold, thou hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to
all lands, by destroying them utterly: and shalt thou be delivered?
19:12 Have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers
have destroyed; as Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of
Eden which were in Thelasar? 19:13 Where is the king of Hamath, and
the king of Arpad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, of Hena,
and Ivah? 19:14 And Hezekiah received the letter of the hand of the
messengers, and read it: and Hezekiah went up into the house of the
LORD, and spread it before the LORD.

19:15 And Hezekiah prayed before the LORD, and said, O LORD God of
Israel, which dwellest between the cherubims, thou art the God, even
thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth; thou hast made heaven
and earth.

19:16 LORD, bow down thine ear, and hear: open, LORD, thine eyes, and
see: and hear the words of Sennacherib, which hath sent him to
reproach the living God.

19:17 Of a truth, LORD, the kings of Assyria have destroyed the
nations and their lands, 19:18 And have cast their gods into the fire:
for they were no gods, but the work of men’s hands, wood and stone:
therefore they have destroyed them.

19:19 Now therefore, O LORD our God, I beseech thee, save thou us out
of his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou art
the LORD God, even thou only.

19:20 Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent to Hezekiah, saying, Thus saith
the LORD God of Israel, That which thou hast prayed to me against
Sennacherib king of Assyria I have heard.

19:21 This is the word that the LORD hath spoken concerning him; The
virgin the daughter of Zion hath despised thee, and laughed thee to
scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head at thee.

19:22 Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom hast
thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against
the Holy One of Israel.

19:23 By thy messengers thou hast reproached the LORD, and hast said,
With the multitude of my chariots I am come up to the height of the
mountains, to the sides of Lebanon, and will cut down the tall cedar
trees thereof, and the choice fir trees thereof: and I will enter into
the lodgings of his borders, and into the forest of his Carmel.

19:24 I have digged and drunk strange waters, and with the sole of my
feet have I dried up all the rivers of besieged places.

19:25 Hast thou not heard long ago how I have done it, and of ancient
times that I have formed it? now have I brought it to pass, that thou
shouldest be to lay waste fenced cities into ruinous heaps.

19:26 Therefore their inhabitants were of small power, they were
dismayed and confounded; they were as the grass of the field, and as
the green herb, as the grass on the house tops, and as corn blasted
before it be grown up.

19:27 But I know thy abode, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and
thy rage against me.

19:28 Because thy rage against me and thy tumult is come up into mine
ears, therefore I will put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy
lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.

19:29 And this shall be a sign unto thee, Ye shall eat this year such
things as grow of themselves, and in the second year that which
springeth of the same; and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and
plant vineyards, and eat the fruits thereof.

19:30 And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah shall yet
again take root downward, and bear fruit upward.

19:31 For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and they that
escape out of mount Zion: the zeal of the LORD of hosts shall do this.

19:32 Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning the king of Assyria, He
shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come
before it with shield, nor cast a bank against it.

19:33 By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and shall
not come into this city, saith the LORD.

19:34 For I will defend this city, to save it, for mine own sake, and
for my servant David’s sake.

19:35 And it came to pass that night, that the angel of the LORD went
out, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians an hundred fourscore and
five thousand: and when they arose early in the morning, behold, they
were all dead corpses.

19:36 So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went and returned,
and dwelt at Nineveh.

19:37 And it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the house of
Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote him with
the sword: and they escaped into the land of Armenia. And Esarhaddon
his son reigned in his stead.

20:1 In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. And the prophet
Isaiah the son of Amoz came to him, and said unto him, Thus saith the
LORD, Set thine house in order; for thou shalt die, and not live.

20:2 Then he turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto the LORD,
saying, 20:3 I beseech thee, O LORD, remember now how I have walked
before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which is good in thy sight. And Hezekiah wept sore.

20:4 And it came to pass, afore Isaiah was gone out into the middle
court, that the word of the LORD came to him, saying, 20:5 Turn again,
and tell Hezekiah the captain of my people, Thus saith the LORD, the
God of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy
tears: behold, I will heal thee: on the third day thou shalt go up
unto the house of the LORD.

20:6 And I will add unto thy days fifteen years; and I will deliver
thee and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria; and I will
defend this city for mine own sake, and for my servant David’s sake.

20:7 And Isaiah said, Take a lump of figs. And they took and laid it
on the boil, and he recovered.

20:8 And Hezekiah said unto Isaiah, What shall be the sign that the
LORD will heal me, and that I shall go up into the house of the LORD
the third day? 20:9 And Isaiah said, This sign shalt thou have of the
LORD, that the LORD will do the thing that he hath spoken: shall the
shadow go forward ten degrees, or go back ten degrees? 20:10 And
Hezekiah answered, It is a light thing for the shadow to go down ten
degrees: nay, but let the shadow return backward ten degrees.

20:11 And Isaiah the prophet cried unto the LORD: and he brought the
shadow ten degrees backward, by which it had gone down in the dial of
Ahaz.

20:12 At that time Berodachbaladan, the son of Baladan, king of
Babylon, sent letters and a present unto Hezekiah: for he had heard
that Hezekiah had been sick.

20:13 And Hezekiah hearkened unto them, and shewed them all the house
of his precious things, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and
the precious ointment, and all the house of his armour, and all that
was found in his treasures: there was nothing in his house, nor in all
his dominion, that Hezekiah shewed them not.

20:14 Then came Isaiah the prophet unto king Hezekiah, and said unto
him, What said these men? and from whence came they unto thee? And
Hezekiah said, They are come from a far country, even from Babylon.

20:15 And he said, What have they seen in thine house? And Hezekiah
answered, All the things that are in mine house have they seen: there
is nothing among my treasures that I have not shewed them.

20:16 And Isaiah said unto Hezekiah, Hear the word of the LORD.

20:17 Behold, the days come, that all that is in thine house, and that
which thy fathers have laid up in store unto this day, shall be
carried into Babylon: nothing shall be left, saith the LORD.

20:18 And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shalt
beget, shall they take away; and they shall be eunuchs in the palace
of the king of Babylon.

20:19 Then said Hezekiah unto Isaiah, Good is the word of the LORD
which thou hast spoken. And he said, Is it not good, if peace and
truth be in my days? 20:20 And the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, and
all his might, and how he made a pool, and a conduit, and brought
water into the city, are they not written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Judah? 20:21 And Hezekiah slept with his
fathers: and Manasseh his son reigned in his stead.

21:1 Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign, and reigned
fifty and five years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was
Hephzibah.

21:2 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, after
the abominations of the heathen, whom the LORD cast out before the
children of Israel.

21:3 For he built up again the high places which Hezekiah his father
had destroyed; and he reared up altars for Baal, and made a grove, as
did Ahab king of Israel; and worshipped all the host of heaven, and
served them.

21:4 And he built altars in the house of the LORD, of which the LORD
said, In Jerusalem will I put my name.

21:5 And he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts
of the house of the LORD.

21:6 And he made his son pass through the fire, and observed times,
and used enchantments, and dealt with familiar spirits and wizards: he
wrought much wickedness in the sight of the LORD, to provoke him to
anger.

21:7 And he set a graven image of the grove that he had made in the
house, of which the LORD said to David, and to Solomon his son, In
this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all tribes of
Israel, will I put my name for ever: 21:8 Neither will I make the feet
of Israel move any more out of the land which I gave their fathers;
only if they will observe to do according to all that I have commanded
them, and according to all the law that my servant Moses commanded
them.

21:9 But they hearkened not: and Manasseh seduced them to do more evil
than did the nations whom the LORD destroyed before the children of
Israel.

21:10 And the LORD spake by his servants the prophets, saying, 21:11
Because Manasseh king of Judah hath done these abominations, and hath
done wickedly above all that the Amorites did, which were before him,
and hath made Judah also to sin with his idols: 21:12 Therefore thus
saith the LORD God of Israel, Behold, I am bringing such evil upon
Jerusalem and Judah, that whosoever heareth of it, both his ears shall
tingle.

21:13 And I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and the
plummet of the house of Ahab: and I will wipe Jerusalem as a man
wipeth a dish, wiping it, and turning it upside down.

21:14 And I will forsake the remnant of mine inheritance, and deliver
them into the hand of their enemies; and they shall become a prey and
a spoil to all their enemies; 21:15 Because they have done that which
was evil in my sight, and have provoked me to anger, since the day
their fathers came forth out of Egypt, even unto this day.

21:16 Moreover Manasseh shed innocent blood very much, till he had
filled Jerusalem from one end to another; beside his sin wherewith he
made Judah to sin, in doing that which was evil in the sight of the
LORD.

21:17 Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and all that he did, and
his sin that he sinned, are they not written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Judah? 21:18 And Manasseh slept with his
fathers, and was buried in the garden of his own house, in the garden
of Uzza: and Amon his son reigned in his stead.

21:19 Amon was twenty and two years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned two years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was
Meshullemeth, the daughter of Haruz of Jotbah.

21:20 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, as his
father Manasseh did.

21:21 And he walked in all the way that his father walked in, and
served the idols that his father served, and worshipped them: 21:22
And he forsook the LORD God of his fathers, and walked not in the way
of the LORD.

21:23 And the servants of Amon conspired against him, and slew the
king in his own house.

21:24 And the people of the land slew all them that had conspired
against king Amon; and the people of the land made Josiah his son king
in his stead.

21:25 Now the rest of the acts of Amon which he did, are they not
written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? 21:26
And he was buried in his sepulchre in the garden of Uzza: and Josiah
his son reigned in his stead.

22:1 Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
thirty and one years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Jedidah,
the daughter of Adaiah of Boscath.

22:2 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, and
walked in all the way of David his father, and turned not aside to the
right hand or to the left.

22:3 And it came to pass in the eighteenth year of king Josiah, that
the king sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, the son of Meshullam, the
scribe, to the house of the LORD, saying, 22:4 Go up to Hilkiah the
high priest, that he may sum the silver which is brought into the
house of the LORD, which the keepers of the door have gathered of the
people: 22:5 And let them deliver it into the hand of the doers of the
work, that have the oversight of the house of the LORD: and let them
give it to the doers of the work which is in the house of the LORD, to
repair the breaches of the house, 22:6 Unto carpenters, and builders,
and masons, and to buy timber and hewn stone to repair the house.

22:7 Howbeit there was no reckoning made with them of the money that
was delivered into their hand, because they dealt faithfully.

22:8 And Hilkiah the high priest said unto Shaphan the scribe, I have
found the book of the law in the house of the LORD. And Hilkiah gave
the book to Shaphan, and he read it.

22:9 And Shaphan the scribe came to the king, and brought the king
word again, and said, Thy servants have gathered the money that was
found in the house, and have delivered it into the hand of them that
do the work, that have the oversight of the house of the LORD.

22:10 And Shaphan the scribe shewed the king, saying, Hilkiah the
priest hath delivered me a book. And Shaphan read it before the king.

22:11 And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of the
book of the law, that he rent his clothes.

22:12 And the king commanded Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam the son of
Shaphan, and Achbor the son of Michaiah, and Shaphan the scribe, and
Asahiah a servant of the king’s, saying, 22:13 Go ye, enquire of the
LORD for me, and for the people, and for all Judah, concerning the
words of this book that is found: for great is the wrath of the LORD
that is kindled against us, because our fathers have not hearkened
unto the words of this book, to do according unto all that which is
written concerning us.

22:14 So Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam, and Achbor, and Shaphan, and
Asahiah, went unto Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son
of Tikvah, the son of Harhas, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt
in Jerusalem in the college;) and they communed with her.

22:15 And she said unto them, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Tell
the man that sent you to me, 22:16 Thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will
bring evil upon this place, and upon the inhabitants thereof, even all
the words of the book which the king of Judah hath read: 22:17 Because
they have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, that
they might provoke me to anger with all the works of their hands;
therefore my wrath shall be kindled against this place, and shall not
be quenched.

22:18 But to the king of Judah which sent you to enquire of the LORD,
thus shall ye say to him, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, As
touching the words which thou hast heard; 22:19 Because thine heart
was tender, and thou hast humbled thyself before the LORD, when thou
heardest what I spake against this place, and against the inhabitants
thereof, that they should become a desolation and a curse, and hast
rent thy clothes, and wept before me; I also have heard thee, saith
the LORD.

22:20 Behold therefore, I will gather thee unto thy fathers, and thou
shalt be gathered into thy grave in peace; and thine eyes shall not
see all the evil which I will bring upon this place. And they brought
the king word again.

23:1 And the king sent, and they gathered unto him all the elders of
Judah and of Jerusalem.

23:2 And the king went up into the house of the LORD, and all the men
of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem with him, and the
priests, and the prophets, and all the people, both small and great:
and he read in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant
which was found in the house of the LORD.

23:3 And the king stood by a pillar, and made a covenant before the
LORD, to walk after the LORD, and to keep his commandments and his
testimonies and his statutes with all their heart and all their soul,
to perform the words of this covenant that were written in this book.
And all the people stood to the covenant.

23:4 And the king commanded Hilkiah the high priest, and the priests
of the second order, and the keepers of the door, to bring forth out
of the temple of the LORD all the vessels that were made for Baal, and
for the grove, and for all the host of heaven: and he burned them
without Jerusalem in the fields of Kidron, and carried the ashes of
them unto Bethel.

23:5 And he put down the idolatrous priests, whom the kings of Judah
had ordained to burn incense in the high places in the cities of
Judah, and in the places round about Jerusalem; them also that burned
incense unto Baal, to the sun, and to the moon, and to the planets,
and to all the host of heaven.

23:6 And he brought out the grove from the house of the LORD, without
Jerusalem, unto the brook Kidron, and burned it at the brook Kidron,
and stamped it small to powder, and cast the powder thereof upon the
graves of the children of the people.

23:7 And he brake down the houses of the sodomites, that were by the
house of the LORD, where the women wove hangings for the grove.

23:8 And he brought all the priests out of the cities of Judah, and
defiled the high places where the priests had burned incense, from
Geba to Beersheba, and brake down the high places of the gates that
were in the entering in of the gate of Joshua the governor of the
city, which were on a man’s left hand at the gate of the city.

23:9 Nevertheless the priests of the high places came not up to the
altar of the LORD in Jerusalem, but they did eat of the unleavened
bread among their brethren.

23:10 And he defiled Topheth, which is in the valley of the children
of Hinnom, that no man might make his son or his daughter to pass
through the fire to Molech.

23:11 And he took away the horses that the kings of Judah had given to
the sun, at the entering in of the house of the LORD, by the chamber
of Nathanmelech the chamberlain, which was in the suburbs, and burned
the chariots of the sun with fire.

23:12 And the altars that were on the top of the upper chamber of
Ahaz, which the kings of Judah had made, and the altars which Manasseh
had made in the two courts of the house of the LORD, did the king beat
down, and brake them down from thence, and cast the dust of them into
the brook Kidron.

23:13 And the high places that were before Jerusalem, which were on
the right hand of the mount of corruption, which Solomon the king of
Israel had builded for Ashtoreth the abomination of the Zidonians, and
for Chemosh the abomination of the Moabites, and for Milcom the
abomination of the children of Ammon, did the king defile.

23:14 And he brake in pieces the images, and cut down the groves, and
filled their places with the bones of men.

23:15 Moreover the altar that was at Bethel, and the high place which
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin, had made, both that
altar and the high place he brake down, and burned the high place, and
stamped it small to powder, and burned the grove.

23:16 And as Josiah turned himself, he spied the sepulchres that were
there in the mount, and sent, and took the bones out of the
sepulchres, and burned them upon the altar, and polluted it, according
to the word of the LORD which the man of God proclaimed, who
proclaimed these words.

23:17 Then he said, What title is that that I see? And the men of the
city told him, It is the sepulchre of the man of God, which came from
Judah, and proclaimed these things that thou hast done against the
altar of Bethel.

23:18 And he said, Let him alone; let no man move his bones. So they
let his bones alone, with the bones of the prophet that came out of
Samaria.

23:19 And all the houses also of the high places that were in the
cities of Samaria, which the kings of Israel had made to provoke the
Lord to anger, Josiah took away, and did to them according to all the
acts that he had done in Bethel.

23:20 And he slew all the priests of the high places that were there
upon the altars, and burned men’s bones upon them, and returned to
Jerusalem.

23:21 And the king commanded all the people, saying, Keep the passover
unto the LORD your God, as it is written in the book of this covenant.

23:22 Surely there was not holden such a passover from the days of the
judges that judged Israel, nor in all the days of the kings of Israel,
nor of the kings of Judah; 23:23 But in the eighteenth year of king
Josiah, wherein this passover was holden to the LORD in Jerusalem.

23:24 Moreover the workers with familiar spirits, and the wizards, and
the images, and the idols, and all the abominations that were spied in
the land of Judah and in Jerusalem, did Josiah put away, that he might
perform the words of the law which were written in the book that
Hilkiah the priest found in the house of the LORD.

23:25 And like unto him was there no king before him, that turned to
the LORD with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his
might, according to all the law of Moses; neither after him arose
there any like him.

23:26 Notwithstanding the LORD turned not from the fierceness of his
great wrath, wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah, because of
all the provocations that Manasseh had provoked him withal.

23:27 And the LORD said, I will remove Judah also out of my sight, as
I have removed Israel, and will cast off this city Jerusalem which I
have chosen, and the house of which I said, My name shall be there.

23:28 Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
23:29 In his days Pharaohnechoh king of Egypt went up against the king
of Assyria to the river Euphrates: and king Josiah went against him;
and he slew him at Megiddo, when he had seen him.

23:30 And his servants carried him in a chariot dead from Megiddo, and
brought him to Jerusalem, and buried him in his own sepulchre. And the
people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and anointed him,
and made him king in his father’s stead.

23:31 Jehoahaz was twenty and three years old when he began to reign;
and he reigned three months in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was
Hamutal, the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.

23:32 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD,
according to all that his fathers had done.

23:33 And Pharaohnechoh put him in bands at Riblah in the land of
Hamath, that he might not reign in Jerusalem; and put the land to a
tribute of an hundred talents of silver, and a talent of gold.

23:34 And Pharaohnechoh made Eliakim the son of Josiah king in the
room of Josiah his father, and turned his name to Jehoiakim, and took
Jehoahaz away: and he came to Egypt, and died there.

23:35 And Jehoiakim gave the silver and the gold to Pharaoh; but he
taxed the land to give the money according to the commandment of
Pharaoh: he exacted the silver and the gold of the people of the land,
of every one according to his taxation, to give it unto Pharaohnechoh.

23:36 Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to reign;
and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was
Zebudah, the daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah.

23:37 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD,
according to all that his fathers had done.

24:1 In his days Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up, and Jehoiakim
became his servant three years: then he turned and rebelled against
him.

24:2 And the LORD sent against him bands of the Chaldees, and bands of
the Syrians, and bands of the Moabites, and bands of the children of
Ammon, and sent them against Judah to destroy it, according to the
word of the LORD, which he spake by his servants the prophets.

24:3 Surely at the commandment of the LORD came this upon Judah, to
remove them out of his sight, for the sins of Manasseh, according to
all that he did; 24:4 And also for the innocent blood that he shed:
for he filled Jerusalem with innocent blood; which the LORD would not
pardon.

24:5 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
24:6 So Jehoiakim slept with his fathers: and Jehoiachin his son
reigned in his stead.

24:7 And the king of Egypt came not again any more out of his land:
for the king of Babylon had taken from the river of Egypt unto the
river Euphrates all that pertained to the king of Egypt.

24:8 Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned in Jerusalem three months. And his mother’s name was Nehushta,
the daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem.

24:9 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD,
according to all that his father had done.

24:10 At that time the servants of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came
up against Jerusalem, and the city was besieged.

24:11 And Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came against the city, and
his servants did besiege it.

24:12 And Jehoiachin the king of Judah went out to the king of
Babylon, he, and his mother, and his servants, and his princes, and
his officers: and the king of Babylon took him in the eighth year of
his reign.

24:13 And he carried out thence all the treasures of the house of the
LORD, and the treasures of the king’s house, and cut in pieces all the
vessels of gold which Solomon king of Israel had made in the temple of
the LORD, as the LORD had said.

24:14 And he carried away all Jerusalem, and all the princes, and all
the mighty men of valour, even ten thousand captives, and all the
craftsmen and smiths: none remained, save the poorest sort of the
people of the land.

24:15 And he carried away Jehoiachin to Babylon, and the king’s
mother, and the king’s wives, and his officers, and the mighty of the
land, those carried he into captivity from Jerusalem to Babylon.

24:16 And all the men of might, even seven thousand, and craftsmen and
smiths a thousand, all that were strong and apt for war, even them the
king of Babylon brought captive to Babylon.

24:17 And the king of Babylon made Mattaniah his father’s brother king
in his stead, and changed his name to Zedekiah.

24:18 Zedekiah was twenty and one years old when he began to reign,
and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was
Hamutal, the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.

24:19 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD,
according to all that Jehoiakim had done.

24:20 For through the anger of the LORD it came to pass in Jerusalem
and Judah, until he had cast them out from his presence, that Zedekiah
rebelled against the king of Babylon.

25:1 And it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth
month, in the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadnezzar king of
Babylon came, he, and all his host, against Jerusalem, and pitched
against it; and they built forts against it round about.

25:2 And the city was besieged unto the eleventh year of king
Zedekiah.

25:3 And on the ninth day of the fourth month the famine prevailed in
the city, and there was no bread for the people of the land.

25:4 And the city was broken up, and all the men of war fled by night
by the way of the gate between two walls, which is by the king’s
garden: (now the Chaldees were against the city round about:) and the
king went the way toward the plain.

25:5 And the army of the Chaldees pursued after the king, and overtook
him in the plains of Jericho: and all his army were scattered from
him.

25:6 So they took the king, and brought him up to the king of Babylon
to Riblah; and they gave judgment upon him.

25:7 And they slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, and put out
the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him with fetters of brass, and carried
him to Babylon.

25:8 And in the fifth month, on the seventh day of the month, which is
the nineteenth year of king Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, came
Nebuzaradan, captain of the guard, a servant of the king of Babylon,
unto Jerusalem: 25:9 And he burnt the house of the LORD, and the
king’s house, and all the houses of Jerusalem, and every great man’s
house burnt he with fire.

25:10 And all the army of the Chaldees, that were with the captain of
the guard, brake down the walls of Jerusalem round about.

25:11 Now the rest of the people that were left in the city, and the
fugitives that fell away to the king of Babylon, with the remnant of
the multitude, did Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carry away.

25:12 But the captain of the guard left of the poor of the land to be
vinedressers and husbandmen.

25:13 And the pillars of brass that were in the house of the LORD, and
the bases, and the brasen sea that was in the house of the LORD, did
the Chaldees break in pieces, and carried the brass of them to
Babylon.

25:14 And the pots, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the spoons,
and all the vessels of brass wherewith they ministered, took they
away.

25:15 And the firepans, and the bowls, and such things as were of
gold, in gold, and of silver, in silver, the captain of the guard took
away.

25:16 The two pillars, one sea, and the bases which Solomon had made
for the house of the LORD; the brass of all these vessels was without
weight.

25:17 The height of the one pillar was eighteen cubits, and the
chapiter upon it was brass: and the height of the chapiter three
cubits; and the wreathen work, and pomegranates upon the chapiter
round about, all of brass: and like unto these had the second pillar
with wreathen work.

25:18 And the captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest, and
Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers of the door: 25:19
And out of the city he took an officer that was set over the men of
war, and five men of them that were in the king’s presence, which were
found in the city, and the principal scribe of the host, which
mustered the people of the land, and threescore men of the people of
the land that were found in the city: 25:20 And Nebuzaradan captain of
the guard took these, and brought them to the king of Babylon to
Riblah: 25:21 And the king of Babylon smote them, and slew them at
Riblah in the land of Hamath. So Judah was carried away out of their
land.

25:22 And as for the people that remained in the land of Judah, whom
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had left, even over them he made
Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, ruler.

25:23 And when all the captains of the armies, they and their men,
heard that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah governor, there came
to Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan
the son of Careah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite,
and Jaazaniah the son of a Maachathite, they and their men.

25:24 And Gedaliah sware to them, and to their men, and said unto
them, Fear not to be the servants of the Chaldees: dwell in the land,
and serve the king of Babylon; and it shall be well with you.

25:25 But it came to pass in the seventh month, that Ishmael the son
of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the seed royal, came, and ten
men with him, and smote Gedaliah, that he died, and the Jews and the
Chaldees that were with him at Mizpah.

25:26 And all the people, both small and great, and the captains of
the armies, arose, and came to Egypt: for they were afraid of the
Chaldees.

25:27 And it came to pass in the seven and thirtieth year of the
captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, on the
seven and twentieth day of the month, that Evilmerodach king of
Babylon in the year that he began to reign did lift up the head of
Jehoiachin king of Judah out of prison; 25:28 And he spake kindly to
him, and set his throne above the throne of the kings that were with
him in Babylon; 25:29 And changed his prison garments: and he did eat
bread continually before him all the days of his life.

25:30 And his allowance was a continual allowance given him of the
king, a daily rate for every day, all the days of his life.


The First Book of the Chronicles


1:1 Adam, Sheth, Enosh, 1:2 Kenan, Mahalaleel, Jered, 1:3 Henoch,
Methuselah, Lamech, 1:4 Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

1:5 The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and
Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.

1:6 And the sons of Gomer; Ashchenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah.

1:7 And the sons of Javan; Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim.

1:8 The sons of Ham; Cush, and Mizraim, Put, and Canaan.

1:9 And the sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabta, and Raamah,
and Sabtecha. And the sons of Raamah; Sheba, and Dedan.

1:10 And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be mighty upon the earth.

1:11 And Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim,
1:12 And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (of whom came the Philistines,) and
Caphthorim.

1:13 And Canaan begat Zidon his firstborn, and Heth, 1:14 The Jebusite
also, and the Amorite, and the Girgashite, 1:15 And the Hivite, and
the Arkite, and the Sinite, 1:16 And the Arvadite, and the Zemarite,
and the Hamathite.

1:17 The sons of Shem; Elam, and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and
Aram, and Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Meshech.

1:18 And Arphaxad begat Shelah, and Shelah begat Eber.

1:19 And unto Eber were born two sons: the name of the one was Peleg;
because in his days the earth was divided: and his brother’s name was
Joktan.

1:20 And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and
Jerah, 1:21 Hadoram also, and Uzal, and Diklah, 1:22 And Ebal, and
Abimael, and Sheba, 1:23 And Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab. All these
were the sons of Joktan.

1:24 Shem, Arphaxad, Shelah, 1:25 Eber, Peleg, Reu, 1:26 Serug, Nahor,
Terah, 1:27 Abram; the same is Abraham.

1:28 The sons of Abraham; Isaac, and Ishmael.

1:29 These are their generations: The firstborn of Ishmael, Nebaioth;
then Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam, 1:30 Mishma, and Dumah, Massa,
Hadad, and Tema, 1:31 Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah. These are the sons
of Ishmael.

1:32 Now the sons of Keturah, Abraham’s concubine: she bare Zimran,
and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah. And the
sons of Jokshan; Sheba, and Dedan.

1:33 And the sons of Midian; Ephah, and Epher, and Henoch, and Abida,
and Eldaah. All these are the sons of Keturah.

1:34 And Abraham begat Isaac. The sons of Isaac; Esau and Israel.

1:35 The sons of Esau; Eliphaz, Reuel, and Jeush, and Jaalam, and
Korah.

1:36 The sons of Eliphaz; Teman, and Omar, Zephi, and Gatam, Kenaz,
and Timna, and Amalek.

1:37 The sons of Reuel; Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah.

1:38 And the sons of Seir; Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah,
and Dishon, and Ezar, and Dishan.

1:39 And the sons of Lotan; Hori, and Homam: and Timna was Lotan’s
sister.

1:40 The sons of Shobal; Alian, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shephi, and
Onam.

and the sons of Zibeon; Aiah, and Anah.

1:41 The sons of Anah; Dishon. And the sons of Dishon; Amram, and
Eshban, and Ithran, and Cheran.

1:42 The sons of Ezer; Bilhan, and Zavan, and Jakan. The sons of
Dishan; Uz, and Aran.

1:43 Now these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom before
any king reigned over the children of Israel; Bela the son of Beor:
and the name of his city was Dinhabah.

1:44 And when Bela was dead, Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned
in his stead.

1:45 And when Jobab was dead, Husham of the land of the Temanites
reigned in his stead.

1:46 And when Husham was dead, Hadad the son of Bedad, which smote
Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his stead: and the name of his
city was Avith.

1:47 And when Hadad was dead, Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead.

1:48 And when Samlah was dead, Shaul of Rehoboth by the river reigned
in his stead.

1:49 And when Shaul was dead, Baalhanan the son of Achbor reigned in
his stead.

1:50 And when Baalhanan was dead, Hadad reigned in his stead: and the
name of his city was Pai; and his wife’s name was Mehetabel, the
daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab.

1:51 Hadad died also. And the dukes of Edom were; duke Timnah, duke
Aliah, duke Jetheth, 1:52 Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, duke Pinon, 1:53
Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, duke Mibzar, 1:54 Duke Magdiel, duke Iram.
These are the dukes of Edom.

2:1 These are the sons of Israel; Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah,
Issachar, and Zebulun, 2:2 Dan, Joseph, and Benjamin, Naphtali, Gad,
and Asher.

2:3 The sons of Judah; Er, and Onan, and Shelah: which three were born
unto him of the daughter of Shua the Canaanitess. And Er, the
firstborn of Judah, was evil in the sight of the LORD; and he slew
him.

2:4 And Tamar his daughter in law bore him Pharez and Zerah. All the
sons of Judah were five.

2:5 The sons of Pharez; Hezron, and Hamul.

2:6 And the sons of Zerah; Zimri, and Ethan, and Heman, and Calcol,
and Dara: five of them in all.

2:7 And the sons of Carmi; Achar, the troubler of Israel, who
transgressed in the thing accursed.

2:8 And the sons of Ethan; Azariah.

2:9 The sons also of Hezron, that were born unto him; Jerahmeel, and
Ram, and Chelubai.

2:10 And Ram begat Amminadab; and Amminadab begat Nahshon, prince of
the children of Judah; 2:11 And Nahshon begat Salma, and Salma begat
Boaz, 2:12 And Boaz begat Obed, and Obed begat Jesse, 2:13 And Jesse
begat his firstborn Eliab, and Abinadab the second, and Shimma the
third, 2:14 Nethaneel the fourth, Raddai the fifth, 2:15 Ozem the
sixth, David the seventh: 2:16 Whose sisters were Zeruiah, and
Abigail. And the sons of Zeruiah; Abishai, and Joab, and Asahel,
three.

2:17 And Abigail bare Amasa: and the father of Amasa was Jether the
Ishmeelite.

2:18 And Caleb the son of Hezron begat children of Azubah his wife,
and of Jerioth: her sons are these; Jesher, and Shobab, and Ardon.

2:19 And when Azubah was dead, Caleb took unto him Ephrath, which bare
him Hur.

2:20 And Hur begat Uri, and Uri begat Bezaleel.

2:21 And afterward Hezron went in to the daughter of Machir the father
of Gilead, whom he married when he was threescore years old; and she
bare him Segub.

2:22 And Segub begat Jair, who had three and twenty cities in the land
of Gilead.

2:23 And he took Geshur, and Aram, with the towns of Jair, from them,
with Kenath, and the towns thereof, even threescore cities. All these
belonged to the sons of Machir the father of Gilead.

2:24 And after that Hezron was dead in Calebephratah, then Abiah
Hezron’s wife bare him Ashur the father of Tekoa.

2:25 And the sons of Jerahmeel the firstborn of Hezron were, Ram the
firstborn, and Bunah, and Oren, and Ozem, and Ahijah.

2:26 Jerahmeel had also another wife, whose name was Atarah; she was
the mother of Onam.

2:27 And the sons of Ram the firstborn of Jerahmeel were, Maaz, and
Jamin, and Eker.

2:28 And the sons of Onam were, Shammai, and Jada. And the sons of
Shammai; Nadab and Abishur.

2:29 And the name of the wife of Abishur was Abihail, and she bare him
Ahban, and Molid.

2:30 And the sons of Nadab; Seled, and Appaim: but Seled died without
children.

2:31 And the sons of Appaim; Ishi. And the sons of Ishi; Sheshan. And
the children of Sheshan; Ahlai.

2:32 And the sons of Jada the brother of Shammai; Jether, and
Jonathan: and Jether died without children.

2:33 And the sons of Jonathan; Peleth, and Zaza. These were the sons
of Jerahmeel.

2:34 Now Sheshan had no sons, but daughters. And Sheshan had a
servant, an Egyptian, whose name was Jarha.

2:35 And Sheshan gave his daughter to Jarha his servant to wife; and
she bare him Attai.

2:36 And Attai begat Nathan, and Nathan begat Zabad, 2:37 And Zabad
begat Ephlal, and Ephlal begat Obed, 2:38 And Obed begat Jehu, and
Jehu begat Azariah, 2:39 And Azariah begat Helez, and Helez begat
Eleasah, 2:40 And Eleasah begat Sisamai, and Sisamai begat Shallum,
2:41 And Shallum begat Jekamiah, and Jekamiah begat Elishama.

2:42 Now the sons of Caleb the brother of Jerahmeel were, Mesha his
firstborn, which was the father of Ziph; and the sons of Mareshah the
father of Hebron.

2:43 And the sons of Hebron; Korah, and Tappuah, and Rekem, and Shema.

2:44 And Shema begat Raham, the father of Jorkoam: and Rekem begat
Shammai.

2:45 And the son of Shammai was Maon: and Maon was the father of
Bethzur.

2:46 And Ephah, Caleb’s concubine, bare Haran, and Moza, and Gazez:
and Haran begat Gazez.

2:47 And the sons of Jahdai; Regem, and Jotham, and Gesham, and Pelet,
and Ephah, and Shaaph.

2:48 Maachah, Caleb’s concubine, bare Sheber, and Tirhanah.

2:49 She bare also Shaaph the father of Madmannah, Sheva the father of
Machbenah, and the father of Gibea: and the daughter of Caleb was
Achsa.

2:50 These were the sons of Caleb the son of Hur, the firstborn of
Ephratah; Shobal the father of Kirjathjearim.

2:51 Salma the father of Bethlehem, Hareph the father of Bethgader.

2:52 And Shobal the father of Kirjathjearim had sons; Haroeh, and half
of the Manahethites.

2:53 And the families of Kirjathjearim; the Ithrites, and the Puhites,
and the Shumathites, and the Mishraites; of them came the Zareathites,
and the Eshtaulites, 2:54 The sons of Salma; Bethlehem, and the
Netophathites, Ataroth, the house of Joab, and half of the
Manahethites, the Zorites.

2:55 And the families of the scribes which dwelt at Jabez; the
Tirathites, the Shimeathites, and Suchathites. These are the Kenites
that came of Hemath, the father of the house of Rechab.

3:1 Now these were the sons of David, which were born unto him in
Hebron; the firstborn Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess; the second
Daniel, of Abigail the Carmelitess: 3:2 The third, Absalom the son of
Maachah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur: the fourth, Adonijah
the son of Haggith: 3:3 The fifth, Shephatiah of Abital: the sixth,
Ithream by Eglah his wife.

3:4 These six were born unto him in Hebron; and there he reigned seven
years and six months: and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three
years.

3:5 And these were born unto him in Jerusalem; Shimea, and Shobab, and
Nathan, and Solomon, four, of Bathshua the daughter of Ammiel: 3:6
Ibhar also, and Elishama, and Eliphelet, 3:7 And Nogah, and Nepheg,
and Japhia, 3:8 And Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphelet, nine.

3:9 These were all the sons of David, beside the sons of the
concubines, and Tamar their sister.

3:10 And Solomon’s son was Rehoboam, Abia his son, Asa his son,
Jehoshaphat his son, 3:11 Joram his son, Ahaziah his son, Joash his
son, 3:12 Amaziah his son, Azariah his son, Jotham his son, 3:13 Ahaz
his son, Hezekiah his son, Manasseh his son, 3:14 Amon his son, Josiah
his son.

3:15 And the sons of Josiah were, the firstborn Johanan, the second
Jehoiakim, the third Zedekiah, the fourth Shallum.

3:16 And the sons of Jehoiakim: Jeconiah his son, Zedekiah his son.

3:17 And the sons of Jeconiah; Assir, Salathiel his son, 3:18
Malchiram also, and Pedaiah, and Shenazar, Jecamiah, Hoshama, and
Nedabiah.

3:19 And the sons of Pedaiah were, Zerubbabel, and Shimei: and the
sons of Zerubbabel; Meshullam, and Hananiah, and Shelomith their
sister: 3:20 And Hashubah, and Ohel, and Berechiah, and Hasadiah,
Jushabhesed, five.

3:21 And the sons of Hananiah; Pelatiah, and Jesaiah: the sons of
Rephaiah, the sons of Arnan, the sons of Obadiah, the sons of
Shechaniah.

3:22 And the sons of Shechaniah; Shemaiah: and the sons of Shemaiah;
Hattush, and Igeal, and Bariah, and Neariah, and Shaphat, six.

3:23 And the sons of Neariah; Elioenai, and Hezekiah, and Azrikam,
three.

3:24 And the sons of Elioenai were, Hodaiah, and Eliashib, and
Pelaiah, and Akkub, and Johanan, and Dalaiah, and Anani, seven.

4:1 The sons of Judah; Pharez, Hezron, and Carmi, and Hur, and Shobal.

4:2 And Reaiah the son of Shobal begat Jahath; and Jahath begat
Ahumai, and Lahad. These are the families of the Zorathites.

4:3 And these were of the father of Etam; Jezreel, and Ishma, and
Idbash: and the name of their sister was Hazelelponi: 4:4 And Penuel
the father of Gedor, and Ezer the father of Hushah. These are the sons
of Hur, the firstborn of Ephratah, the father of Bethlehem.

4:5 And Ashur the father of Tekoa had two wives, Helah and Naarah.

4:6 And Naarah bare him Ahuzam, and Hepher, and Temeni, and
Haahashtari.

These were the sons of Naarah.

4:7 And the sons of Helah were, Zereth, and Jezoar, and Ethnan.

4:8 And Coz begat Anub, and Zobebah, and the families of Aharhel the
son of Harum.

4:9 And Jabez was more honourable than his brethren: and his mother
called his name Jabez, saying, Because I bare him with sorrow.

4:10 And Jabez called on the God of Israel, saying, Oh that thou
wouldest bless me indeed, and enlarge my coast, and that thine hand
might be with me, and that thou wouldest keep me from evil, that it
may not grieve me! And God granted him that which he requested.

4:11 And Chelub the brother of Shuah begat Mehir, which was the father
of Eshton.

4:12 And Eshton begat Bethrapha, and Paseah, and Tehinnah the father
of Irnahash. These are the men of Rechah.

4:13 And the sons of Kenaz; Othniel, and Seraiah: and the sons of
Othniel; Hathath.

4:14 And Meonothai begat Ophrah: and Seraiah begat Joab, the father of
the valley of Charashim; for they were craftsmen.

4:15 And the sons of Caleb the son of Jephunneh; Iru, Elah, and Naam:
and the sons of Elah, even Kenaz.

4:16 And the sons of Jehaleleel; Ziph, and Ziphah, Tiria, and Asareel.

4:17 And the sons of Ezra were, Jether, and Mered, and Epher, and
Jalon: and she bare Miriam, and Shammai, and Ishbah the father of
Eshtemoa.

4:18 And his wife Jehudijah bare Jered the father of Gedor, and Heber
the father of Socho, and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah. And these are
the sons of Bithiah the daughter of Pharaoh, which Mered took.

4:19 And the sons of his wife Hodiah the sister of Naham, the father
of Keilah the Garmite, and Eshtemoa the Maachathite.

4:20 And the sons of Shimon were, Amnon, and Rinnah, Benhanan, and
Tilon.

And the sons of Ishi were, Zoheth, and Benzoheth.

4:21 The sons of Shelah the son of Judah were, Er the father of Lecah,
and Laadah the father of Mareshah, and the families of the house of
them that wrought fine linen, of the house of Ashbea, 4:22 And Jokim,
and the men of Chozeba, and Joash, and Saraph, who had the dominion in
Moab, and Jashubilehem. And these are ancient things.

4:23 These were the potters, and those that dwelt among plants and
hedges: there they dwelt with the king for his work.

4:24 The sons of Simeon were, Nemuel, and Jamin, Jarib, Zerah, and
Shaul: 4:25 Shallum his son, Mibsam his son, Mishma his son.

4:26 And the sons of Mishma; Hamuel his son, Zacchur his son, Shimei
his son.

4:27 And Shimei had sixteen sons and six daughters: but his brethren
had not many children, neither did all their family multiply, like to
the children of Judah.

4:28 And they dwelt at Beersheba, and Moladah, and Hazarshual, 4:29
And at Bilhah, and at Ezem, and at Tolad, 4:30 And at Bethuel, and at
Hormah, and at Ziklag, 4:31 And at Bethmarcaboth, and Hazarsusim, and
at Bethbirei, and at Shaaraim. These were their cities unto the reign
of David.

4:32 And their villages were, Etam, and Ain, Rimmon, and Tochen, and
Ashan, five cities: 4:33 And all their villages that were round about
the same cities, unto Baal. These were their habitations, and their
genealogy.

4:34 And Meshobab, and Jamlech, and Joshah, the son of Amaziah, 4:35
And Joel, and Jehu the son of Josibiah, the son of Seraiah, the son of
Asiel, 4:36 And Elioenai, and Jaakobah, and Jeshohaiah, and Asaiah,
and Adiel, and Jesimiel, and Benaiah, 4:37 And Ziza the son of Shiphi,
the son of Allon, the son of Jedaiah, the son of Shimri, the son of
Shemaiah; 4:38 These mentioned by their names were princes in their
families: and the house of their fathers increased greatly.

4:39 And they went to the entrance of Gedor, even unto the east side
of the valley, to seek pasture for their flocks.

4:40 And they found fat pasture and good, and the land was wide, and
quiet, and peaceable; for they of Ham had dwelt there of old.

4:41 And these written by name came in the days of Hezekiah king of
Judah, and smote their tents, and the habitations that were found
there, and destroyed them utterly unto this day, and dwelt in their
rooms: because there was pasture there for their flocks.

4:42 And some of them, even of the sons of Simeon, five hundred men,
went to mount Seir, having for their captains Pelatiah, and Neariah,
and Rephaiah, and Uzziel, the sons of Ishi.

4:43 And they smote the rest of the Amalekites that were escaped, and
dwelt there unto this day.

5:1 Now the sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel, (for he was the
firstborn; but forasmuch as he defiled his father’s bed, his
birthright was given unto the sons of Joseph the son of Israel: and
the genealogy is not to be reckoned after the birthright.

5:2 For Judah prevailed above his brethren, and of him came the chief
ruler; but the birthright was Joseph’s:) 5:3 The sons, I say, of
Reuben the firstborn of Israel were, Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron, and
Carmi.

5:4 The sons of Joel; Shemaiah his son, Gog his son, Shimei his son,
5:5 Micah his son, Reaia his son, Baal his son, 5:6 Beerah his son,
whom Tilgathpilneser king of Assyria carried away captive: he was
prince of the Reubenites.

5:7 And his brethren by their families, when the genealogy of their
generations was reckoned, were the chief, Jeiel, and Zechariah, 5:8
And Bela the son of Azaz, the son of Shema, the son of Joel, who dwelt
in Aroer, even unto Nebo and Baalmeon: 5:9 And eastward he inhabited
unto the entering in of the wilderness from the river Euphrates:
because their cattle were multiplied in the land of Gilead.

5:10 And in the days of Saul they made war with the Hagarites, who
fell by their hand: and they dwelt in their tents throughout all the
east land of Gilead.

5:11 And the children of Gad dwelt over against them, in the land of
Bashan unto Salcah: 5:12 Joel the chief, and Shapham the next, and
Jaanai, and Shaphat in Bashan.

5:13 And their brethren of the house of their fathers were, Michael,
and Meshullam, and Sheba, and Jorai, and Jachan, and Zia, and Heber,
seven.

5:14 These are the children of Abihail the son of Huri, the son of
Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son of Michael, the son of Jeshishai,
the son of Jahdo, the son of Buz; 5:15 Ahi the son of Abdiel, the son
of Guni, chief of the house of their fathers.

5:16 And they dwelt in Gilead in Bashan, and in her towns, and in all
the suburbs of Sharon, upon their borders.

5:17 All these were reckoned by genealogies in the days of Jotham king
of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam king of Israel.

5:18 The sons of Reuben, and the Gadites, and half the tribe of
Manasseh, of valiant men, men able to bear buckler and sword, and to
shoot with bow, and skilful in war, were four and forty thousand seven
hundred and threescore, that went out to the war.

5:19 And they made war with the Hagarites, with Jetur, and Nephish,
and Nodab.

5:20 And they were helped against them, and the Hagarites were
delivered into their hand, and all that were with them: for they cried
to God in the battle, and he was intreated of them; because they put
their trust in him.

5:21 And they took away their cattle; of their camels fifty thousand,
and of sheep two hundred and fifty thousand, and of asses two
thousand, and of men an hundred thousand.

5:22 For there fell down many slain, because the war was of God. And
they dwelt in their steads until the captivity.

5:23 And the children of the half tribe of Manasseh dwelt in the land:
they increased from Bashan unto Baalhermon and Senir, and unto mount
Hermon.

5:24 And these were the heads of the house of their fathers, even
Epher, and Ishi, and Eliel, and Azriel, and Jeremiah, and Hodaviah,
and Jahdiel, mighty men of valour, famous men, and heads of the house
of their fathers.

5:25 And they transgressed against the God of their fathers, and went
a whoring after the gods of the people of the land, whom God destroyed
before them.

5:26 And the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Pul king of
Assyria, and the spirit of Tilgathpilneser king of Assyria, and he
carried them away, even the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half
tribe of Manasseh, and brought them unto Halah, and Habor, and Hara,
and to the river Gozan, unto this day.

6:1 The sons of Levi; Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.

6:2 And the sons of Kohath; Amram, Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel.

6:3 And the children of Amram; Aaron, and Moses, and Miriam. The sons
also of Aaron; Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

6:4 Eleazar begat Phinehas, Phinehas begat Abishua, 6:5 And Abishua
begat Bukki, and Bukki begat Uzzi, 6:6 And Uzzi begat Zerahiah, and
Zerahiah begat Meraioth, 6:7 Meraioth begat Amariah, and Amariah begat
Ahitub, 6:8 And Ahitub begat Zadok, and Zadok begat Ahimaaz, 6:9 And
Ahimaaz begat Azariah, and Azariah begat Johanan, 6:10 And Johanan
begat Azariah, (he it is that executed the priest’s office in the
temple that Solomon built in Jerusalem:) 6:11 And Azariah begat
Amariah, and Amariah begat Ahitub, 6:12 And Ahitub begat Zadok, and
Zadok begat Shallum, 6:13 And Shallum begat Hilkiah, and Hilkiah begat
Azariah, 6:14 And Azariah begat Seraiah, and Seraiah begat Jehozadak,
6:15 And Jehozadak went into captivity, when the LORD carried away
Judah and Jerusalem by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar.

6:16 The sons of Levi; Gershom, Kohath, and Merari.

6:17 And these be the names of the sons of Gershom; Libni, and Shimei.

6:18 And the sons of Kohath were, Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and
Uzziel.

6:19 The sons of Merari; Mahli, and Mushi. And these are the families
of the Levites according to their fathers.

6:20 Of Gershom; Libni his son, Jahath his son, Zimmah his son, 6:21
Joah his son, Iddo his son, Zerah his son, Jeaterai his son.

6:22 The sons of Kohath; Amminadab his son, Korah his son, Assir his
son, 6:23 Elkanah his son, and Ebiasaph his son, and Assir his son,
6:24 Tahath his son, Uriel his son, Uzziah his son, and Shaul his son.

6:25 And the sons of Elkanah; Amasai, and Ahimoth.

6:26 As for Elkanah: the sons of Elkanah; Zophai his son, and Nahath
his son, 6:27 Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, Elkanah his son.

6:28 And the sons of Samuel; the firstborn Vashni, and Abiah.

6:29 The sons of Merari; Mahli, Libni his son, Shimei his son, Uzza
his son, 6:30 Shimea his son, Haggiah his son, Asaiah his son.

6:31 And these are they whom David set over the service of song in the
house of the LORD, after that the ark had rest.

6:32 And they ministered before the dwelling place of the tabernacle
of the congregation with singing, until Solomon had built the house of
the LORD in Jerusalem: and then they waited on their office according
to their order.

6:33 And these are they that waited with their children. Of the sons
of the Kohathites: Heman a singer, the son of Joel, the son of
Shemuel, 6:34 The son of Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of
Eliel, the son of Toah, 6:35 The son of Zuph, the son of Elkanah, the
son of Mahath, the son of Amasai, 6:36 The son of Elkanah, the son of
Joel, the son of Azariah, the son of Zephaniah, 6:37 The son of
Tahath, the son of Assir, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, 6:38
The son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, the son of
Israel.

6:39 And his brother Asaph, who stood on his right hand, even Asaph
the son of Berachiah, the son of Shimea, 6:40 The son of Michael, the
son of Baaseiah, the son of Malchiah, 6:41 The son of Ethni, the son
of Zerah, the son of Adaiah, 6:42 The son of Ethan, the son of Zimmah,
the son of Shimei, 6:43 The son of Jahath, the son of Gershom, the son
of Levi.

6:44 And their brethren the sons of Merari stood on the left hand:
Ethan the son of Kishi, the son of Abdi, the son of Malluch, 6:45 The
son of Hashabiah, the son of Amaziah, the son of Hilkiah, 6:46 The son
of Amzi, the son of Bani, the son of Shamer, 6:47 The son of Mahli,
the son of Mushi, the son of Merari, the son of Levi.

6:48 Their brethren also the Levites were appointed unto all manner of
service of the tabernacle of the house of God.

6:49 But Aaron and his sons offered upon the altar of the burnt
offering, and on the altar of incense, and were appointed for all the
work of the place most holy, and to make an atonement for Israel,
according to all that Moses the servant of God had commanded.

6:50 And these are the sons of Aaron; Eleazar his son, Phinehas his
son, Abishua his son, 6:51 Bukki his son, Uzzi his son, Zerahiah his
son, 6:52 Meraioth his son, Amariah his son, Ahitub his son, 6:53
Zadok his son, Ahimaaz his son.

6:54 Now these are their dwelling places throughout their castles in
their coasts, of the sons of Aaron, of the families of the Kohathites:
for theirs was the lot.

6:55 And they gave them Hebron in the land of Judah, and the suburbs
thereof round about it.

6:56 But the fields of the city, and the villages thereof, they gave
to Caleb the son of Jephunneh.

6:57 And to the sons of Aaron they gave the cities of Judah, namely,
Hebron, the city of refuge, and Libnah with her suburbs, and Jattir,
and Eshtemoa, with their suburbs, 6:58 And Hilen with her suburbs,
Debir with her suburbs, 6:59 And Ashan with her suburbs, and
Bethshemesh with her suburbs: 6:60 And out of the tribe of Benjamin;
Geba with her suburbs, and Alemeth with her suburbs, and Anathoth with
her suburbs. All their cities throughout their families were thirteen
cities.

6:61 And unto the sons of Kohath, which were left of the family of
that tribe, were cities given out of the half tribe, namely, out of
the half tribe of Manasseh, by lot, ten cities.

6:62 And to the sons of Gershom throughout their families out of the
tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe
of Naphtali, and out of the tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen
cities.

6:63 Unto the sons of Merari were given by lot, throughout their
families, out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and
out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities.

6:64 And the children of Israel gave to the Levites these cities with
their suburbs.

6:65 And they gave by lot out of the tribe of the children of Judah,
and out of the tribe of the children of Simeon, and out of the tribe
of the children of Benjamin, these cities, which are called by their
names.

6:66 And the residue of the families of the sons of Kohath had cities
of their coasts out of the tribe of Ephraim.

6:67 And they gave unto them, of the cities of refuge, Shechem in
mount Ephraim with her suburbs; they gave also Gezer with her suburbs,
6:68 And Jokmeam with her suburbs, and Bethhoron with her suburbs,
6:69 And Aijalon with her suburbs, and Gathrimmon with her suburbs:
6:70 And out of the half tribe of Manasseh; Aner with her suburbs, and
Bileam with her suburbs, for the family of the remnant of the sons of
Kohath.

6:71 Unto the sons of Gershom were given out of the family of the half
tribe of Manasseh, Golan in Bashan with her suburbs, and Ashtaroth
with her suburbs: 6:72 And out of the tribe of Issachar; Kedesh with
her suburbs, Daberath with her suburbs, 6:73 And Ramoth with her
suburbs, and Anem with her suburbs: 6:74 And out of the tribe of
Asher; Mashal with her suburbs, and Abdon with her suburbs, 6:75 And
Hukok with her suburbs, and Rehob with her suburbs: 6:76 And out of
the tribe of Naphtali; Kedesh in Galilee with her suburbs, and Hammon
with her suburbs, and Kirjathaim with her suburbs.

6:77 Unto the rest of the children of Merari were given out of the
tribe of Zebulun, Rimmon with her suburbs, Tabor with her suburbs:
6:78 And on the other side Jordan by Jericho, on the east side of
Jordan, were given them out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer in the
wilderness with her suburbs, and Jahzah with her suburbs, 6:79
Kedemoth also with her suburbs, and Mephaath with her suburbs: 6:80
And out of the tribe of Gad; Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs, and
Mahanaim with her suburbs, 6:81 And Heshbon with her suburbs, and
Jazer with her suburbs.

7:1 Now the sons of Issachar were, Tola, and Puah, Jashub, and
Shimrom, four.

7:2 And the sons of Tola; Uzzi, and Rephaiah, and Jeriel, and Jahmai,
and Jibsam, and Shemuel, heads of their father’s house, to wit, of
Tola: they were valiant men of might in their generations; whose
number was in the days of David two and twenty thousand and six
hundred.

7:3 And the sons of Uzzi; Izrahiah: and the sons of Izrahiah; Michael,
and Obadiah, and Joel, Ishiah, five: all of them chief men.

7:4 And with them, by their generations, after the house of their
fathers, were bands of soldiers for war, six and thirty thousand men:
for they had many wives and sons.

7:5 And their brethren among all the families of Issachar were valiant
men of might, reckoned in all by their genealogies fourscore and seven
thousand.

7:6 The sons of Benjamin; Bela, and Becher, and Jediael, three.

7:7 And the sons of Bela; Ezbon, and Uzzi, and Uzziel, and Jerimoth,
and Iri, five; heads of the house of their fathers, mighty men of
valour; and were reckoned by their genealogies twenty and two thousand
and thirty and four.

7:8 And the sons of Becher; Zemira, and Joash, and Eliezer, and
Elioenai, and Omri, and Jerimoth, and Abiah, and Anathoth, and
Alameth. All these are the sons of Becher.

7:9 And the number of them, after their genealogy by their
generations, heads of the house of their fathers, mighty men of
valour, was twenty thousand and two hundred.

7:10 The sons also of Jediael; Bilhan: and the sons of Bilhan; Jeush,
and Benjamin, and Ehud, and Chenaanah, and Zethan, and Tharshish, and
Ahishahar.

7:11 All these the sons of Jediael, by the heads of their fathers,
mighty men of valour, were seventeen thousand and two hundred
soldiers, fit to go out for war and battle.

7:12 Shuppim also, and Huppim, the children of Ir, and Hushim, the
sons of Aher.

7:13 The sons of Naphtali; Jahziel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shallum,
the sons of Bilhah.

7:14 The sons of Manasseh; Ashriel, whom she bare: (but his concubine
the Aramitess bare Machir the father of Gilead: 7:15 And Machir took
to wife the sister of Huppim and Shuppim, whose sister’s name was
Maachah;) and the name of the second was Zelophehad: and Zelophehad
had daughters.

7:16 And Maachah the wife of Machir bare a son, and she called his
name Peresh; and the name of his brother was Sheresh; and his sons
were Ulam and Rakem.

7:17 And the sons of Ulam; Bedan. These were the sons of Gilead, the
son of Machir, the son of Manasseh.

7:18 And his sister Hammoleketh bare Ishod, and Abiezer, and Mahalah.

7:19 And the sons of Shemidah were, Ahian, and Shechem, and Likhi, and
Aniam.

7:20 And the sons of Ephraim; Shuthelah, and Bered his son, and Tahath
his son, and Eladah his son, and Tahath his son, 7:21 And Zabad his
son, and Shuthelah his son, and Ezer, and Elead, whom the men of Gath
that were born in that land slew, because they came down to take away
their cattle.

7:22 And Ephraim their father mourned many days, and his brethren came
to comfort him.

7:23 And when he went in to his wife, she conceived, and bare a son,
and he called his name Beriah, because it went evil with his house.

7:24 (And his daughter was Sherah, who built Bethhoron the nether, and
the upper, and Uzzensherah.) 7:25 And Rephah was his son, also
Resheph, and Telah his son, and Tahan his son.

7:26 Laadan his son, Ammihud his son, Elishama his son.

7:27 Non his son, Jehoshuah his son.

7:28 And their possessions and habitations were, Bethel and the towns
thereof, and eastward Naaran, and westward Gezer, with the towns
thereof; Shechem also and the towns thereof, unto Gaza and the towns
thereof: 7:29 And by the borders of the children of Manasseh,
Bethshean and her towns, Taanach and her towns, Megiddo and her towns,
Dor and her towns. In these dwelt the children of Joseph the son of
Israel.

7:30 The sons of Asher; Imnah, and Isuah, and Ishuai, and Beriah, and
Serah their sister.

7:31 And the sons of Beriah; Heber, and Malchiel, who is the father of
Birzavith.

7:32 And Heber begat Japhlet, and Shomer, and Hotham, and Shua their
sister.

7:33 And the sons of Japhlet; Pasach, and Bimhal, and Ashvath. These
are the children of Japhlet.

7:34 And the sons of Shamer; Ahi, and Rohgah, Jehubbah, and Aram.

7:35 And the sons of his brother Helem; Zophah, and Imna, and Shelesh,
and Amal.

7:36 The sons of Zophah; Suah, and Harnepher, and Shual, and Beri, and
Imrah, 7:37 Bezer, and Hod, and Shamma, and Shilshah, and Ithran, and
Beera.

7:38 And the sons of Jether; Jephunneh, and Pispah, and Ara.

7:39 And the sons of Ulla; Arah, and Haniel, and Rezia.

7:40 All these were the children of Asher, heads of their father’s
house, choice and mighty men of valour, chief of the princes. And the
number throughout the genealogy of them that were apt to the war and
to battle was twenty and six thousand men.

8:1 Now Benjamin begat Bela his firstborn, Ashbel the second, and
Aharah the third, 8:2 Nohah the fourth, and Rapha the fifth.

8:3 And the sons of Bela were, Addar, and Gera, and Abihud, 8:4 And
Abishua, and Naaman, and Ahoah, 8:5 And Gera, and Shephuphan, and
Huram.

8:6 And these are the sons of Ehud: these are the heads of the fathers
of the inhabitants of Geba, and they removed them to Manahath: 8:7 And
Naaman, and Ahiah, and Gera, he removed them, and begat Uzza, and
Ahihud.

8:8 And Shaharaim begat children in the country of Moab, after he had
sent them away; Hushim and Baara were his wives.

8:9 And he begat of Hodesh his wife, Jobab, and Zibia, and Mesha, and
Malcham, 8:10 And Jeuz, and Shachia, and Mirma. These were his sons,
heads of the fathers.

8:11 And of Hushim he begat Abitub, and Elpaal.

8:12 The sons of Elpaal; Eber, and Misham, and Shamed, who built Ono,
and Lod, with the towns thereof: 8:13 Beriah also, and Shema, who were
heads of the fathers of the inhabitants of Aijalon, who drove away the
inhabitants of Gath: 8:14 And Ahio, Shashak, and Jeremoth, 8:15 And
Zebadiah, and Arad, and Ader, 8:16 And Michael, and Ispah, and Joha,
the sons of Beriah; 8:17 And Zebadiah, and Meshullam, and Hezeki, and
Heber, 8:18 Ishmerai also, and Jezliah, and Jobab, the sons of Elpaal;
8:19 And Jakim, and Zichri, and Zabdi, 8:20 And Elienai, and Zilthai,
and Eliel, 8:21 And Adaiah, and Beraiah, and Shimrath, the sons of
Shimhi; 8:22 And Ishpan, and Heber, and Eliel, 8:23 And Abdon, and
Zichri, and Hanan, 8:24 And Hananiah, and Elam, and Antothijah, 8:25
And Iphedeiah, and Penuel, the sons of Shashak; 8:26 And Shamsherai,
and Shehariah, and Athaliah, 8:27 And Jaresiah, and Eliah, and Zichri,
the sons of Jeroham.

8:28 These were heads of the fathers, by their generations, chief men.

These dwelt in Jerusalem.

8:29 And at Gibeon dwelt the father of Gibeon; whose wife’s name was
Maachah: 8:30 And his firstborn son Abdon, and Zur, and Kish, and
Baal, and Nadab, 8:31 And Gedor, and Ahio, and Zacher.

8:32 And Mikloth begat Shimeah. And these also dwelt with their
brethren in Jerusalem, over against them.

8:33 And Ner begat Kish, and Kish begat Saul, and Saul begat Jonathan,
and Malchishua, and Abinadab, and Eshbaal.

8:34 And the son of Jonathan was Meribbaal; and Meribbaal begat Micah.

8:35 And the sons of Micah were, Pithon, and Melech, and Tarea, and
Ahaz.

8:36 And Ahaz begat Jehoadah; and Jehoadah begat Alemeth, and
Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri begat Moza, 8:37 And Moza begat Binea:
Rapha was his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son: 8:38 And Azel had
six sons, whose names are these, Azrikam, Bocheru, and Ishmael, and
Sheariah, and Obadiah, and Hanan. All these were the sons of Azel.

8:39 And the sons of Eshek his brother were, Ulam his firstborn,
Jehush the second, and Eliphelet the third.

8:40 And the sons of Ulam were mighty men of valour, archers, and had
many sons, and sons’ sons, an hundred and fifty. All these are of the
sons of Benjamin.

9:1 So all Israel were reckoned by genealogies; and, behold, they were
written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah, who were carried
away to Babylon for their transgression.

9:2 Now the first inhabitants that dwelt in their possessions in their
cities were, the Israelites, the priests, Levites, and the Nethinims.

9:3 And in Jerusalem dwelt of the children of Judah, and of the
children of Benjamin, and of the children of Ephraim, and Manasseh;
9:4 Uthai the son of Ammihud, the son of Omri, the son of Imri, the
son of Bani, of the children of Pharez the son of Judah.

9:5 And of the Shilonites; Asaiah the firstborn, and his sons.

9:6 And of the sons of Zerah; Jeuel, and their brethren, six hundred
and ninety.

9:7 And of the sons of Benjamin; Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son
of Hodaviah, the son of Hasenuah, 9:8 And Ibneiah the son of Jeroham,
and Elah the son of Uzzi, the son of Michri, and Meshullam the son of
Shephathiah, the son of Reuel, the son of Ibnijah; 9:9 And their
brethren, according to their generations, nine hundred and fifty and
six. All these men were chief of the fathers in the house of their
fathers.

9:10 And of the priests; Jedaiah, and Jehoiarib, and Jachin, 9:11 And
Azariah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok,
the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the ruler of the house of God;
9:12 And Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pashur, the son of
Malchijah, and Maasiai the son of Adiel, the son of Jahzerah, the son
of Meshullam, the son of Meshillemith, the son of Immer; 9:13 And
their brethren, heads of the house of their fathers, a thousand and
seven hundred and threescore; very able men for the work of the
service of the house of God.

9:14 And of the Levites; Shemaiah the son of Hasshub, the son of
Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, of the sons of Merari; 9:15 And
Bakbakkar, Heresh, and Galal, and Mattaniah the son of Micah, the son
of Zichri, the son of Asaph; 9:16 And Obadiah the son of Shemaiah, the
son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun, and Berechiah the son of Asa, the
son of Elkanah, that dwelt in the villages of the Netophathites.

9:17 And the porters were, Shallum, and Akkub, and Talmon, and Ahiman,
and their brethren: Shallum was the chief; 9:18 Who hitherto waited in
the king’s gate eastward: they were porters in the companies of the
children of Levi.

9:19 And Shallum the son of Kore, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of
Korah, and his brethren, of the house of his father, the Korahites,
were over the work of the service, keepers of the gates of the
tabernacle: and their fathers, being over the host of the LORD, were
keepers of the entry.

9:20 And Phinehas the son of Eleazar was the ruler over them in time
past, and the LORD was with him.

9:21 And Zechariah the son of Meshelemiah was porter of the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation.

9:22 All these which were chosen to be porters in the gates were two
hundred and twelve. These were reckoned by their genealogy in their
villages, whom David and Samuel the seer did ordain in their set
office.

9:23 So they and their children had the oversight of the gates of the
house of the LORD, namely, the house of the tabernacle, by wards.

9:24 In four quarters were the porters, toward the east, west, north,
and south.

9:25 And their brethren, which were in their villages, were to come
after seven days from time to time with them.

9:26 For these Levites, the four chief porters, were in their set
office, and were over the chambers and treasuries of the house of God.

9:27 And they lodged round about the house of God, because the charge
was upon them, and the opening thereof every morning pertained to
them.

9:28 And certain of them had the charge of the ministering vessels,
that they should bring them in and out by tale.

9:29 Some of them also were appointed to oversee the vessels, and all
the instruments of the sanctuary, and the fine flour, and the wine,
and the oil, and the frankincense, and the spices.

9:30 And some of the sons of the priests made the ointment of the
spices.

9:31 And Mattithiah, one of the Levites, who was the firstborn of
Shallum the Korahite, had the set office over the things that were
made in the pans.

9:32 And other of their brethren, of the sons of the Kohathites, were
over the shewbread, to prepare it every sabbath.

9:33 And these are the singers, chief of the fathers of the Levites,
who remaining in the chambers were free: for they were employed in
that work day and night.

9:34 These chief fathers of the Levites were chief throughout their
generations; these dwelt at Jerusalem.

9:35 And in Gibeon dwelt the father of Gibeon, Jehiel, whose wife’s
name was Maachah: 9:36 And his firstborn son Abdon, then Zur, and
Kish, and Baal, and Ner, and Nadab.

9:37 And Gedor, and Ahio, and Zechariah, and Mikloth.

9:38 And Mikloth begat Shimeam. And they also dwelt with their
brethren at Jerusalem, over against their brethren.

9:39 And Ner begat Kish; and Kish begat Saul; and Saul begat Jonathan,
and Malchishua, and Abinadab, and Eshbaal.

9:40 And the son of Jonathan was Meribbaal: and Meribbaal begat Micah.

9:41 And the sons of Micah were, Pithon, and Melech, and Tahrea, and
Ahaz.

9:42 And Ahaz begat Jarah; and Jarah begat Alemeth, and Azmaveth, and
Zimri; and Zimri begat Moza; 9:43 And Moza begat Binea; and Rephaiah
his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son.

9:44 And Azel had six sons, whose names are these, Azrikam, Bocheru,
and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and Obadiah, and Hanan: these were the sons
of Azel.

10:1 Now the Philistines fought against Israel; and the men of Israel
fled from before the Philistines, and fell down slain in mount Gilboa.

10:2 And the Philistines followed hard after Saul, and after his sons;
and the Philistines slew Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Malchishua, the
sons of Saul.

10:3 And the battle went sore against Saul, and the archers hit him,
and he was wounded of the archers.

10:4 Then said Saul to his armourbearer, Draw thy sword, and thrust me
through therewith; lest these uncircumcised come and abuse me. But his
armourbearer would not; for he was sore afraid. So Saul took a sword,
and fell upon it.

10:5 And when his armourbearer saw that Saul was dead, he fell
likewise on the sword, and died.

10:6 So Saul died, and his three sons, and all his house died
together.

10:7 And when all the men of Israel that were in the valley saw that
they fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, then they forsook
their cities, and fled: and the Philistines came and dwelt in them.

10:8 And it came to pass on the morrow, when the Philistines came to
strip the slain, that they found Saul and his sons fallen in mount
Gilboa.

10:9 And when they had stripped him, they took his head, and his
armour, and sent into the land of the Philistines round about, to
carry tidings unto their idols, and to the people.

10:10 And they put his armour in the house of their gods, and fastened
his head in the temple of Dagon.

10:11 And when all Jabeshgilead heard all that the Philistines had
done to Saul, 10:12 They arose, all the valiant men, and took away the
body of Saul, and the bodies of his sons, and brought them to Jabesh,
and buried their bones under the oak in Jabesh, and fasted seven days.

10:13 So Saul died for his transgression which he committed against
the LORD, even against the word of the LORD, which he kept not, and
also for asking counsel of one that had a familiar spirit, to enquire
of it; 10:14 And enquired not of the LORD: therefore he slew him, and
turned the kingdom unto David the son of Jesse.

11:1 Then all Israel gathered themselves to David unto Hebron, saying,
Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.

11:2 And moreover in time past, even when Saul was king, thou wast he
that leddest out and broughtest in Israel: and the LORD thy God said
unto thee, Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be ruler
over my people Israel.

11:3 Therefore came all the elders of Israel to the king to Hebron;
and David made a covenant with them in Hebron before the LORD; and
they anointed David king over Israel, according to the word of the
LORD by Samuel.

11:4 And David and all Israel went to Jerusalem, which is Jebus; where
the Jebusites were, the inhabitants of the land.

11:5 And the inhabitants of Jebus said to David, Thou shalt not come
hither. Nevertheless David took the castle of Zion, which is the city
of David.

11:6 And David said, Whosoever smiteth the Jebusites first shall be
chief and captain. So Joab the son of Zeruiah went first up, and was
chief.

11:7 And David dwelt in the castle; therefore they called it the city
of David.

11:8 And he built the city round about, even from Millo round about:
and Joab repaired the rest of the city.

11:9 So David waxed greater and greater: for the LORD of hosts was
with him.

11:10 These also are the chief of the mighty men whom David had, who
strengthened themselves with him in his kingdom, and with all Israel,
to make him king, according to the word of the LORD concerning Israel.

11:11 And this is the number of the mighty men whom David had;
Jashobeam, an Hachmonite, the chief of the captains: he lifted up his
spear against three hundred slain by him at one time.

11:12 And after him was Eleazar the son of Dodo, the Ahohite, who was
one of the three mighties.

11:13 He was with David at Pasdammim, and there the Philistines were
gathered together to battle, where was a parcel of ground full of
barley; and the people fled from before the Philistines.

11:14 And they set themselves in the midst of that parcel, and
delivered it, and slew the Philistines; and the LORD saved them by a
great deliverance.

11:15 Now three of the thirty captains went down to the rock to David,
into the cave of Adullam; and the host of the Philistines encamped in
the valley of Rephaim.

11:16 And David was then in the hold, and the Philistines’ garrison
was then at Bethlehem.

11:17 And David longed, and said, Oh that one would give me drink of
the water of the well of Bethlehem, that is at the gate! 11:18 And
the three brake through the host of the Philistines, and drew water
out of the well of Bethlehem, that was by the gate, and took it, and
brought it to David: but David would not drink of it, but poured it
out to the LORD.

11:19 And said, My God forbid it me, that I should do this thing:
shall I drink the blood of these men that have put their lives in
jeopardy? for with the jeopardy of their lives they brought it.
Therefore he would not drink it.

These things did these three mightiest.

11:20 And Abishai the brother of Joab, he was chief of the three: for
lifting up his spear against three hundred, he slew them, and had a
name among the three.

11:21 Of the three, he was more honourable than the two; for he was
their captain: howbeit he attained not to the first three.

11:22 Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man of
Kabzeel, who had done many acts; he slew two lionlike men of Moab:
also he went down and slew a lion in a pit in a snowy day.

11:23 And he slew an Egyptian, a man of great stature, five cubits
high; and in the Egyptian’s hand was a spear like a weaver’s beam; and
he went down to him with a staff, and plucked the spear out of the
Egyptian’s hand, and slew him with his own spear.

11:24 These things did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and had the name
among the three mighties.

11:25 Behold, he was honourable among the thirty, but attained not to
the first three: and David set him over his guard.

11:26 Also the valiant men of the armies were, Asahel the brother of
Joab, Elhanan the son of Dodo of Bethlehem, 11:27 Shammoth the
Harorite, Helez the Pelonite, 11:28 Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite,
Abiezer the Antothite, 11:29 Sibbecai the Hushathite, Ilai the
Ahohite, 11:30 Maharai the Netophathite, Heled the son of Baanah the
Netophathite, 11:31 Ithai the son of Ribai of Gibeah, that pertained
to the children of Benjamin, Benaiah the Pirathonite, 11:32 Hurai of
the brooks of Gaash, Abiel the Arbathite, 11:33 Azmaveth the
Baharumite, Eliahba the Shaalbonite, 11:34 The sons of Hashem the
Gizonite, Jonathan the son of Shage the Hararite, 11:35 Ahiam the son
of Sacar the Hararite, Eliphal the son of Ur, 11:36 Hepher the
Mecherathite, Ahijah the Pelonite, 11:37 Hezro the Carmelite, Naarai
the son of Ezbai, 11:38 Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar the son of
Haggeri, 11:39 Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Berothite, the
armourbearer of Joab the son of Zeruiah, 11:40 Ira the Ithrite, Gareb
the Ithrite, 11:41 Uriah the Hittite, Zabad the son of Ahlai, 11:42
Adina the son of Shiza the Reubenite, a captain of the Reubenites, and
thirty with him, 11:43 Hanan the son of Maachah, and Joshaphat the
Mithnite, 11:44 Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jehiel the sons of
Hothan the Aroerite, 11:45 Jediael the son of Shimri, and Joha his
brother, the Tizite, 11:46 Eliel the Mahavite, and Jeribai, and
Joshaviah, the sons of Elnaam, and Ithmah the Moabite, 11:47 Eliel,
and Obed, and Jasiel the Mesobaite.

12:1 Now these are they that came to David to Ziklag, while he yet
kept himself close because of Saul the son of Kish: and they were
among the mighty men, helpers of the war.

12:2 They were armed with bows, and could use both the right hand and
the left in hurling stones and shooting arrows out of a bow, even of
Saul’s brethren of Benjamin.

12:3 The chief was Ahiezer, then Joash, the sons of Shemaah the
Gibeathite; and Jeziel, and Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth; and Berachah,
and Jehu the Antothite.

12:4 And Ismaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty man among the thirty, and
over the thirty; and Jeremiah, and Jahaziel, and Johanan, and Josabad
the Gederathite, 12:5 Eluzai, and Jerimoth, and Bealiah, and
Shemariah, and Shephatiah the Haruphite, 12:6 Elkanah, and Jesiah, and
Azareel, and Joezer, and Jashobeam, the Korhites, 12:7 And Joelah, and
Zebadiah, the sons of Jeroham of Gedor.

12:8 And of the Gadites there separated themselves unto David into the
hold to the wilderness men of might, and men of war fit for the
battle, that could handle shield and buckler, whose faces were like
the faces of lions, and were as swift as the roes upon the mountains;
12:9 Ezer the first, Obadiah the second, Eliab the third, 12:10
Mishmannah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth, 12:11 Attai the sixth,
Eliel the seventh, 12:12 Johanan the eighth, Elzabad the ninth, 12:13
Jeremiah the tenth, Machbanai the eleventh.

12:14 These were of the sons of Gad, captains of the host: one of the
least was over an hundred, and the greatest over a thousand.

12:15 These are they that went over Jordan in the first month, when it
had overflown all his banks; and they put to flight all them of the
valleys, both toward the east, and toward the west.

12:16 And there came of the children of Benjamin and Judah to the hold
unto David.

12:17 And David went out to meet them, and answered and said unto
them, If ye be come peaceably unto me to help me, mine heart shall be
knit unto you: but if ye be come to betray me to mine enemies, seeing
there is no wrong in mine hands, the God of our fathers look thereon,
and rebuke it.

12:18 Then the spirit came upon Amasai, who was chief of the captains,
and he said, Thine are we, David, and on thy side, thou son of Jesse:
peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be to thine helpers; for thy God
helpeth thee.

Then David received them, and made them captains of the band.

12:19 And there fell some of Manasseh to David, when he came with the
Philistines against Saul to battle: but they helped them not: for the
lords of the Philistines upon advisement sent him away, saying, He
will fall to his master Saul to the jeopardy of our heads.

12:20 As he went to Ziklag, there fell to him of Manasseh, Adnah, and
Jozabad, and Jediael, and Michael, and Jozabad, and Elihu, and
Zilthai, captains of the thousands that were of Manasseh.

12:21 And they helped David against the band of the rovers: for they
were all mighty men of valour, and were captains in the host.

12:22 For at that time day by day there came to David to help him,
until it was a great host, like the host of God.

12:23 And these are the numbers of the bands that were ready armed to
the war, and came to David to Hebron, to turn the kingdom of Saul to
him, according to the word of the LORD.

12:24 The children of Judah that bare shield and spear were six
thousand and eight hundred, ready armed to the war.

12:25 Of the children of Simeon, mighty men of valour for the war,
seven thousand and one hundred.

12:26 Of the children of Levi four thousand and six hundred.

12:27 And Jehoiada was the leader of the Aaronites, and with him were
three thousand and seven hundred; 12:28 And Zadok, a young man mighty
of valour, and of his father’s house twenty and two captains.

12:29 And of the children of Benjamin, the kindred of Saul, three
thousand: for hitherto the greatest part of them had kept the ward of
the house of Saul.

12:30 And of the children of Ephraim twenty thousand and eight
hundred, mighty men of valour, famous throughout the house of their
fathers.

12:31 And of the half tribe of Manasseh eighteen thousand, which were
expressed by name, to come and make David king.

12:32 And of the children of Issachar, which were men that had
understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do; the heads
of them were two hundred; and all their brethren were at their
commandment.

12:33 Of Zebulun, such as went forth to battle, expert in war, with
all instruments of war, fifty thousand, which could keep rank: they
were not of double heart.

12:34 And of Naphtali a thousand captains, and with them with shield
and spear thirty and seven thousand.

12:35 And of the Danites expert in war twenty and eight thousand and
six hundred.

12:36 And of Asher, such as went forth to battle, expert in war, forty
thousand.

12:37 And on the other side of Jordan, of the Reubenites, and the
Gadites, and of the half tribe of Manasseh, with all manner of
instruments of war for the battle, an hundred and twenty thousand.

12:38 All these men of war, that could keep rank, came with a perfect
heart to Hebron, to make David king over all Israel: and all the rest
also of Israel were of one heart to make David king.

12:39 And there they were with David three days, eating and drinking:
for their brethren had prepared for them.

12:40 Moreover they that were nigh them, even unto Issachar and
Zebulun and Naphtali, brought bread on asses, and on camels, and on
mules, and on oxen, and meat, meal, cakes of figs, and bunches of
raisins, and wine, and oil, and oxen, and sheep abundantly: for there
was joy in Israel.

13:1 And David consulted with the captains of thousands and hundreds,
and with every leader.

13:2 And David said unto all the congregation of Israel, If it seem
good unto you, and that it be of the LORD our God, let us send abroad
unto our brethren every where, that are left in all the land of
Israel, and with them also to the priests and Levites which are in
their cities and suburbs, that they may gather themselves unto us:
13:3 And let us bring again the ark of our God to us: for we enquired
not at it in the days of Saul.

13:4 And all the congregation said that they would do so: for the
thing was right in the eyes of all the people.

13:5 So David gathered all Israel together, from Shihor of Egypt even
unto the entering of Hemath, to bring the ark of God from
Kirjathjearim.

13:6 And David went up, and all Israel, to Baalah, that is, to
Kirjathjearim, which belonged to Judah, to bring up thence the ark of
God the LORD, that dwelleth between the cherubims, whose name is
called on it.

13:7 And they carried the ark of God in a new cart out of the house of
Abinadab: and Uzza and Ahio drave the cart.

13:8 And David and all Israel played before God with all their might,
and with singing, and with harps, and with psalteries, and with
timbrels, and with cymbals, and with trumpets.

13:9 And when they came unto the threshingfloor of Chidon, Uzza put
forth his hand to hold the ark; for the oxen stumbled.

13:10 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Uzza, and he smote
him, because he put his hand to the ark: and there he died before God.

13:11 And David was displeased, because the LORD had made a breach
upon Uzza: wherefore that place is called Perezuzza to this day.

13:12 And David was afraid of God that day, saying, How shall I bring
the ark of God home to me? 13:13 So David brought not the ark home to
himself to the city of David, but carried it aside into the house of
Obededom the Gittite.

13:14 And the ark of God remained with the family of Obededom in his
house three months. And the LORD blessed the house of Obededom, and
all that he had.

14:1 Now Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and timber of
cedars, with masons and carpenters, to build him an house.

14:2 And David perceived that the LORD had confirmed him king over
Israel, for his kingdom was lifted up on high, because of his people
Israel.

14:3 And David took more wives at Jerusalem: and David begat more sons
and daughters.

14:4 Now these are the names of his children which he had in
Jerusalem; Shammua, and Shobab, Nathan, and Solomon, 14:5 And Ibhar,
and Elishua, and Elpalet, 14:6 And Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia, 14:7
And Elishama, and Beeliada, and Eliphalet.

14:8 And when the Philistines heard that David was anointed king over
all Israel, all the Philistines went up to seek David. And David heard
of it, and went out against them.

14:9 And the Philistines came and spread themselves in the valley of
Rephaim.

14:10 And David enquired of God, saying, Shall I go up against the
Philistines? And wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? And the LORD
said unto him, Go up; for I will deliver them into thine hand.

14:11 So they came up to Baalperazim; and David smote them there. Then
David said, God hath broken in upon mine enemies by mine hand like the
breaking forth of waters: therefore they called the name of that place
Baalperazim.

14:12 And when they had left their gods there, David gave a
commandment, and they were burned with fire.

14:13 And the Philistines yet again spread themselves abroad in the
valley.

14:14 Therefore David enquired again of God; and God said unto him, Go
not up after them; turn away from them, and come upon them over
against the mulberry trees.

14:15 And it shall be, when thou shalt hear a sound of going in the
tops of the mulberry trees, that then thou shalt go out to battle: for
God is gone forth before thee to smite the host of the Philistines.

14:16 David therefore did as God commanded him: and they smote the
host of the Philistines from Gibeon even to Gazer.

14:17 And the fame of David went out into all lands; and the LORD
brought the fear of him upon all nations.

15:1 And David made him houses in the city of David, and prepared a
place for the ark of God, and pitched for it a tent.

15:2 Then David said, None ought to carry the ark of God but the
Levites: for them hath the LORD chosen to carry the ark of God, and to
minister unto him for ever.

15:3 And David gathered all Israel together to Jerusalem, to bring up
the ark of the LORD unto his place, which he had prepared for it.

15:4 And David assembled the children of Aaron, and the Levites: 15:5
Of the sons of Kohath; Uriel the chief, and his brethren an hundred
and twenty: 15:6 Of the sons of Merari; Asaiah the chief, and his
brethren two hundred and twenty: 15:7 Of the sons of Gershom; Joel the
chief and his brethren an hundred and thirty: 15:8 Of the sons of
Elizaphan; Shemaiah the chief, and his brethren two hundred: 15:9 Of
the sons of Hebron; Eliel the chief, and his brethren fourscore: 15:10
Of the sons of Uzziel; Amminadab the chief, and his brethren an
hundred and twelve.

15:11 And David called for Zadok and Abiathar the priests, and for the
Levites, for Uriel, Asaiah, and Joel, Shemaiah, and Eliel, and
Amminadab, 15:12 And said unto them, Ye are the chief of the fathers
of the Levites: sanctify yourselves, both ye and your brethren, that
ye may bring up the ark of the LORD God of Israel unto the place that
I have prepared for it.

15:13 For because ye did it not at the first, the LORD our God made a
breach upon us, for that we sought him not after the due order.

15:14 So the priests and the Levites sanctified themselves to bring up
the ark of the LORD God of Israel.

15:15 And the children of the Levites bare the ark of God upon their
shoulders with the staves thereon, as Moses commanded according to the
word of the LORD.

15:16 And David spake to the chief of the Levites to appoint their
brethren to be the singers with instruments of musick, psalteries and
harps and cymbals, sounding, by lifting up the voice with joy.

15:17 So the Levites appointed Heman the son of Joel; and of his
brethren, Asaph the son of Berechiah; and of the sons of Merari their
brethren, Ethan the son of Kushaiah; 15:18 And with them their
brethren of the second degree, Zechariah, Ben, and Jaaziel, and
Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, Eliab, and Benaiah, and Maaseiah,
and Mattithiah, and Elipheleh, and Mikneiah, and Obededom, and Jeiel,
the porters.

15:19 So the singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, were appointed to sound
with cymbals of brass; 15:20 And Zechariah, and Aziel, and
Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, and Eliab, and Maaseiah, and
Benaiah, with psalteries on Alamoth; 15:21 And Mattithiah, and
Elipheleh, and Mikneiah, and Obededom, and Jeiel, and Azaziah, with
harps on the Sheminith to excel.

15:22 And Chenaniah, chief of the Levites, was for song: he instructed
about the song, because he was skilful.

15:23 And Berechiah and Elkanah were doorkeepers for the ark.

15:24 And Shebaniah, and Jehoshaphat, and Nethaneel, and Amasai, and
Zechariah, and Benaiah, and Eliezer, the priests, did blow with the
trumpets before the ark of God: and Obededom and Jehiah were
doorkeepers for the ark.

15:25 So David, and the elders of Israel, and the captains over
thousands, went to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of
the house of Obededom with joy.

15:26 And it came to pass, when God helped the Levites that bare the
ark of the covenant of the LORD, that they offered seven bullocks and
seven rams.

15:27 And David was clothed with a robe of fine linen, and all the
Levites that bare the ark, and the singers, and Chenaniah the master
of the song with the singers: David also had upon him an ephod of
linen.

15:28 Thus all Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of the LORD
with shouting, and with sound of the cornet, and with trumpets, and
with cymbals, making a noise with psalteries and harps.

15:29 And it came to pass, as the ark of the covenant of the LORD came
to the city of David, that Michal, the daughter of Saul looking out at
a window saw king David dancing and playing: and she despised him in
her heart.

16:1 So they brought the ark of God, and set it in the midst of the
tent that David had pitched for it: and they offered burnt sacrifices
and peace offerings before God.

16:2 And when David had made an end of offering the burnt offerings
and the peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the
LORD.

16:3 And he dealt to every one of Israel, both man and woman, to every
one a loaf of bread, and a good piece of flesh, and a flagon of wine.

16:4 And he appointed certain of the Levites to minister before the
ark of the LORD, and to record, and to thank and praise the LORD God
of Israel: 16:5 Asaph the chief, and next to him Zechariah, Jeiel, and
Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Mattithiah, and Eliab, and Benaiah, and
Obededom: and Jeiel with psalteries and with harps; but Asaph made a
sound with cymbals; 16:6 Benaiah also and Jahaziel the priests with
trumpets continually before the ark of the covenant of God.

16:7 Then on that day David delivered first this psalm to thank the
LORD into the hand of Asaph and his brethren.

16:8 Give thanks unto the LORD, call upon his name, make known his
deeds among the people.

16:9 Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him, talk ye of all his wondrous
works.

16:10 Glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that
seek the LORD.

16:11 Seek the LORD and his strength, seek his face continually.

16:12 Remember his marvellous works that he hath done, his wonders,
and the judgments of his mouth; 16:13 O ye seed of Israel his servant,
ye children of Jacob, his chosen ones.

16:14 He is the LORD our God; his judgments are in all the earth.

16:15 Be ye mindful always of his covenant; the word which he
commanded to a thousand generations; 16:16 Even of the covenant which
he made with Abraham, and of his oath unto Isaac; 16:17 And hath
confirmed the same to Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an
everlasting covenant, 16:18 Saying, Unto thee will I give the land of
Canaan, the lot of your inheritance; 16:19 When ye were but few, even
a few, and strangers in it.

16:20 And when they went from nation to nation, and from one kingdom
to another people; 16:21 He suffered no man to do them wrong: yea, he
reproved kings for their sakes, 16:22 Saying, Touch not mine anointed,
and do my prophets no harm.

16:23 Sing unto the LORD, all the earth; shew forth from day to day
his salvation.

16:24 Declare his glory among the heathen; his marvellous works among
all nations.

16:25 For great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised: he also is to
be feared above all gods.

16:26 For all the gods of the people are idols: but the LORD made the
heavens.

16:27 Glory and honour are in his presence; strength and gladness are
in his place.

16:28 Give unto the LORD, ye kindreds of the people, give unto the
LORD glory and strength.

16:29 Give unto the LORD the glory due unto his name: bring an
offering, and come before him: worship the LORD in the beauty of
holiness.

16:30 Fear before him, all the earth: the world also shall be stable,
that it be not moved.

16:31 Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice: and let men
say among the nations, The LORD reigneth.

16:32 Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof: let the fields
rejoice, and all that is therein.

16:33 Then shall the trees of the wood sing out at the presence of the
LORD, because he cometh to judge the earth.

16:34 O give thanks unto the LORD; for he is good; for his mercy
endureth for ever.

16:35 And say ye, Save us, O God of our salvation, and gather us
together, and deliver us from the heathen, that we may give thanks to
thy holy name, and glory in thy praise.

16:36 Blessed be the LORD God of Israel for ever and ever. And all the
people said, Amen, and praised the LORD.

16:37 So he left there before the ark of the covenant of the LORD
Asaph and his brethren, to minister before the ark continually, as
every day’s work required: 16:38 And Obededom with their brethren,
threescore and eight; Obededom also the son of Jeduthun and Hosah to
be porters: 16:39 And Zadok the priest, and his brethren the priests,
before the tabernacle of the LORD in the high place that was at
Gibeon, 16:40 To offer burnt offerings unto the LORD upon the altar of
the burnt offering continually morning and evening, and to do
according to all that is written in the law of the LORD, which he
commanded Israel; 16:41 And with them Heman and Jeduthun, and the rest
that were chosen, who were expressed by name, to give thanks to the
LORD, because his mercy endureth for ever; 16:42 And with them Heman
and Jeduthun with trumpets and cymbals for those that should make a
sound, and with musical instruments of God. And the sons of Jeduthun
were porters.

16:43 And all the people departed every man to his house: and David
returned to bless his house.

17:1 Now it came to pass, as David sat in his house, that David said
to Nathan the prophet, Lo, I dwell in an house of cedars, but the ark
of the covenant of the LORD remaineth under curtains.

17:2 Then Nathan said unto David, Do all that is in thine heart; for
God is with thee.

17:3 And it came to pass the same night, that the word of God came to
Nathan, saying, 17:4 Go and tell David my servant, Thus saith the
LORD, Thou shalt not build me an house to dwell in: 17:5 For I have
not dwelt in an house since the day that I brought up Israel unto this
day; but have gone from tent to tent, and from one tabernacle to
another.

17:6 Wheresoever I have walked with all Israel, spake I a word to any
of the judges of Israel, whom I commanded to feed my people, saying,
Why have ye not built me an house of cedars? 17:7 Now therefore thus
shalt thou say unto my servant David, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, I
took thee from the sheepcote, even from following the sheep, that thou
shouldest be ruler over my people Israel: 17:8 And I have been with
thee whithersoever thou hast walked, and have cut off all thine
enemies from before thee, and have made thee a name like the name of
the great men that are in the earth.

17:9 Also I will ordain a place for my people Israel, and will plant
them, and they shall dwell in their place, and shall be moved no more;
neither shall the children of wickedness waste them any more, as at
the beginning, 17:10 And since the time that I commanded judges to be
over my people Israel. Moreover I will subdue all thine enemies.
Furthermore I tell thee that the LORD will build thee an house.

17:11 And it shall come to pass, when thy days be expired that thou
must go to be with thy fathers, that I will raise up thy seed after
thee, which shall be of thy sons; and I will establish his kingdom.

17:12 He shall build me an house, and I will stablish his throne for
ever.

17:13 I will be his father, and he shall be my son: and I will not
take my mercy away from him, as I took it from him that was before
thee: 17:14 But I will settle him in mine house and in my kingdom for
ever: and his throne shall be established for evermore.

17:15 According to all these words, and according to all this vision,
so did Nathan speak unto David.

17:16 And David the king came and sat before the LORD, and said, Who
am I, O LORD God, and what is mine house, that thou hast brought me
hitherto? 17:17 And yet this was a small thing in thine eyes, O God;
for thou hast also spoken of thy servant’s house for a great while to
come, and hast regarded me according to the estate of a man of high
degree, O LORD God.

17:18 What can David speak more to thee for the honour of thy servant?
for thou knowest thy servant.

17:19 O LORD, for thy servant’s sake, and according to thine own
heart, hast thou done all this greatness, in making known all these
great things.

17:20 O LORD, there is none like thee, neither is there any God beside
thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears.

17:21 And what one nation in the earth is like thy people Israel, whom
God went to redeem to be his own people, to make thee a name of
greatness and terribleness, by driving out nations from before thy
people whom thou hast redeemed out of Egypt? 17:22 For thy people
Israel didst thou make thine own people for ever; and thou, LORD,
becamest their God.

17:23 Therefore now, LORD, let the thing that thou hast spoken
concerning thy servant and concerning his house be established for
ever, and do as thou hast said.

17:24 Let it even be established, that thy name may be magnified for
ever, saying, The LORD of hosts is the God of Israel, even a God to
Israel: and let the house of David thy servant be established before
thee.

17:25 For thou, O my God, hast told thy servant that thou wilt build
him an house: therefore thy servant hath found in his heart to pray
before thee.

17:26 And now, LORD, thou art God, and hast promised this goodness
unto thy servant: 17:27 Now therefore let it please thee to bless the
house of thy servant, that it may be before thee for ever: for thou
blessest, O LORD, and it shall be blessed for ever.

18:1 Now after this it came to pass, that David smote the Philistines,
and subdued them, and took Gath and her towns out of the hand of the
Philistines.

18:2 And he smote Moab; and the Moabites became David’s servants, and
brought gifts.

18:3 And David smote Hadarezer king of Zobah unto Hamath, as he went
to stablish his dominion by the river Euphrates.

18:4 And David took from him a thousand chariots, and seven thousand
horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen: David also houghed all the
chariot horses, but reserved of them an hundred chariots.

18:5 And when the Syrians of Damascus came to help Hadarezer king of
Zobah, David slew of the Syrians two and twenty thousand men.

18:6 Then David put garrisons in Syriadamascus; and the Syrians became
David’s servants, and brought gifts. Thus the LORD preserved David
whithersoever he went.

18:7 And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of
Hadarezer, and brought them to Jerusalem.

18:8 Likewise from Tibhath, and from Chun, cities of Hadarezer,
brought David very much brass, wherewith Solomon made the brasen sea,
and the pillars, and the vessels of brass.

18:9 Now when Tou king of Hamath heard how David had smitten all the
host of Hadarezer king of Zobah; 18:10 He sent Hadoram his son to king
David, to enquire of his welfare, and to congratulate him, because he
had fought against Hadarezer, and smitten him; (for Hadarezer had war
with Tou;) and with him all manner of vessels of gold and silver and
brass.

18:11 Them also king David dedicated unto the LORD, with the silver
and the gold that he brought from all these nations; from Edom, and
from Moab, and from the children of Ammon, and from the Philistines,
and from Amalek.

18:12 Moreover Abishai the son of Zeruiah slew of the Edomites in the
valley of salt eighteen thousand.

18:13 And he put garrisons in Edom; and all the Edomites became
David’s servants. Thus the LORD preserved David whithersoever he went.

18:14 So David reigned over all Israel, and executed judgment and
justice among all his people.

18:15 And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the host; and Jehoshaphat
the son of Ahilud, recorder.

18:16 And Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Abimelech the son of Abiathar,
were the priests; and Shavsha was scribe; 18:17 And Benaiah the son of
Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and the sons of
David were chief about the king.

19:1 Now it came to pass after this, that Nahash the king of the
children of Ammon died, and his son reigned in his stead.

19:2 And David said, I will shew kindness unto Hanun the son of
Nahash, because his father shewed kindness to me. And David sent
messengers to comfort him concerning his father. So the servants of
David came into the land of the children of Ammon to Hanun, to comfort
him.

19:3 But the princes of the children of Ammon said to Hanun, Thinkest
thou that David doth honour thy father, that he hath sent comforters
unto thee? are not his servants come unto thee for to search, and to
overthrow, and to spy out the land? 19:4 Wherefore Hanun took David’s
servants, and shaved them, and cut off their garments in the midst
hard by their buttocks, and sent them away.

19:5 Then there went certain, and told David how the men were served.
And he sent to meet them: for the men were greatly ashamed. And the
king said, Tarry at Jericho until your beards be grown, and then
return.

19:6 And when the children of Ammon saw that they had made themselves
odious to David, Hanun and the children of Ammon sent a thousand
talents of silver to hire them chariots and horsemen out of
Mesopotamia, and out of Syriamaachah, and out of Zobah.

19:7 So they hired thirty and two thousand chariots, and the king of
Maachah and his people; who came and pitched before Medeba. And the
children of Ammon gathered themselves together from their cities, and
came to battle.

19:8 And when David heard of it, he sent Joab, and all the host of the
mighty men.

19:9 And the children of Ammon came out, and put the battle in array
before the gate of the city: and the kings that were come were by
themselves in the field.

19:10 Now when Joab saw that the battle was set against him before and
behind, he chose out of all the choice of Israel, and put them in
array against the Syrians.

19:11 And the rest of the people he delivered unto the hand of Abishai
his brother, and they set themselves in array against the children of
Ammon.

19:12 And he said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou
shalt help me: but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee,
then I will help thee.

19:13 Be of good courage, and let us behave ourselves valiantly for
our people, and for the cities of our God: and let the LORD do that
which is good in his sight.

19:14 So Joab and the people that were with him drew nigh before the
Syrians unto the battle; and they fled before him.

19:15 And when the children of Ammon saw that the Syrians were fled,
they likewise fled before Abishai his brother, and entered into the
city. Then Joab came to Jerusalem.

19:16 And when the Syrians saw that they were put to the worse before
Israel, they sent messengers, and drew forth the Syrians that were
beyond the river: and Shophach the captain of the host of Hadarezer
went before them.

19:17 And it was told David; and he gathered all Israel, and passed
over Jordan, and came upon them, and set the battle in array against
them. So when David had put the battle in array against the Syrians,
they fought with him.

19:18 But the Syrians fled before Israel; and David slew of the
Syrians seven thousand men which fought in chariots, and forty
thousand footmen, and killed Shophach the captain of the host.

19:19 And when the servants of Hadarezer saw that they were put to the
worse before Israel, they made peace with David, and became his
servants: neither would the Syrians help the children of Ammon any
more.

20:1 And it came to pass, that after the year was expired, at the time
that kings go out to battle, Joab led forth the power of the army, and
wasted the country of the children of Ammon, and came and besieged
Rabbah. But David tarried at Jerusalem. And Joab smote Rabbah, and
destroyed it.

20:2 And David took the crown of their king from off his head, and
found it to weigh a talent of gold, and there were precious stones in
it; and it was set upon David’s head: and he brought also exceeding
much spoil out of the city.

20:3 And he brought out the people that were in it, and cut them with
saws, and with harrows of iron, and with axes. Even so dealt David
with all the cities of the children of Ammon. And David and all the
people returned to Jerusalem.

20:4 And it came to pass after this, that there arose war at Gezer
with the Philistines; at which time Sibbechai the Hushathite slew
Sippai, that was of the children of the giant: and they were subdued.

20:5 And there was war again with the Philistines; and Elhanan the son
of Jair slew Lahmi the brother of Goliath the Gittite, whose spear
staff was like a weaver’s beam.

20:6 And yet again there was war at Gath, where was a man of great
stature, whose fingers and toes were four and twenty, six on each
hand, and six on each foot and he also was the son of the giant.

20:7 But when he defied Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimea David’s
brother slew him.

20:8 These were born unto the giant in Gath; and they fell by the hand
of David, and by the hand of his servants.

21:1 And Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number
Israel.

21:2 And David said to Joab and to the rulers of the people, Go,
number Israel from Beersheba even to Dan; and bring the number of them
to me, that I may know it.

21:3 And Joab answered, The LORD make his people an hundred times so
many more as they be: but, my lord the king, are they not all my
lord’s servants? why then doth my lord require this thing? why will
he be a cause of trespass to Israel? 21:4 Nevertheless the king’s
word prevailed against Joab. Wherefore Joab departed, and went
throughout all Israel, and came to Jerusalem.

21:5 And Joab gave the sum of the number of the people unto David. And
all they of Israel were a thousand thousand and an hundred thousand
men that drew sword: and Judah was four hundred threescore and ten
thousand men that drew sword.

21:6 But Levi and Benjamin counted he not among them: for the king’s
word was abominable to Joab.

21:7 And God was displeased with this thing; therefore he smote
Israel.

21:8 And David said unto God, I have sinned greatly, because I have
done this thing: but now, I beseech thee, do away the iniquity of thy
servant; for I have done very foolishly.

21:9 And the LORD spake unto Gad, David’s seer, saying, 21:10 Go and
tell David, saying, Thus saith the LORD, I offer thee three things:
choose thee one of them, that I may do it unto thee.

21:11 So Gad came to David, and said unto him, Thus saith the LORD,
Choose thee 21:12 Either three years’ famine; or three months to be
destroyed before thy foes, while that the sword of thine enemies
overtaketh thee; or else three days the sword of the LORD, even the
pestilence, in the land, and the angel of the LORD destroying
throughout all the coasts of Israel. Now therefore advise thyself what
word I shall bring again to him that sent me.

21:13 And David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait: let me fall now
into the hand of the LORD; for very great are his mercies: but let me
not fall into the hand of man.

21:14 So the LORD sent pestilence upon Israel: and there fell of
Israel seventy thousand men.

21:15 And God sent an angel unto Jerusalem to destroy it: and as he
was destroying, the LORD beheld, and he repented him of the evil, and
said to the angel that destroyed, It is enough, stay now thine hand.
And the angel of the LORD stood by the threshingfloor of Ornan the
Jebusite.

21:16 And David lifted up his eyes, and saw the angel of the LORD
stand between the earth and the heaven, having a drawn sword in his
hand stretched out over Jerusalem. Then David and the elders of
Israel, who were clothed in sackcloth, fell upon their faces.

21:17 And David said unto God, Is it not I that commanded the people
to be numbered? even I it is that have sinned and done evil indeed;
but as for these sheep, what have they done? let thine hand, I pray
thee, O LORD my God, be on me, and on my father’s house; but not on
thy people, that they should be plagued.

21:18 Then the angel of the LORD commanded Gad to say to David, that
David should go up, and set up an altar unto the LORD in the
threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite.

21:19 And David went up at the saying of Gad, which he spake in the
name of the LORD.

21:20 And Ornan turned back, and saw the angel; and his four sons with
him hid themselves. Now Ornan was threshing wheat.

21:21 And as David came to Ornan, Ornan looked and saw David, and went
out of the threshingfloor, and bowed himself to David with his face to
the ground.

21:22 Then David said to Ornan, Grant me the place of this
threshingfloor, that I may build an altar therein unto the LORD: thou
shalt grant it me for the full price: that the plague may be stayed
from the people.

21:23 And Ornan said unto David, Take it to thee, and let my lord the
king do that which is good in his eyes: lo, I give thee the oxen also
for burnt offerings, and the threshing instruments for wood, and the
wheat for the meat offering; I give it all.

21:24 And king David said to Ornan, Nay; but I will verily buy it for
the full price: for I will not take that which is thine for the LORD,
nor offer burnt offerings without cost.

21:25 So David gave to Ornan for the place six hundred shekels of gold
by weight.

21:26 And David built there an altar unto the LORD, and offered burnt
offerings and peace offerings, and called upon the LORD; and he
answered him from heaven by fire upon the altar of burnt offering.

21:27 And the LORD commanded the angel; and he put up his sword again
into the sheath thereof.

21:28 At that time when David saw that the LORD had answered him in
the threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite, then he sacrificed there.

21:29 For the tabernacle of the LORD, which Moses made in the
wilderness, and the altar of the burnt offering, were at that season
in the high place at Gibeon.

21:30 But David could not go before it to enquire of God: for he was
afraid because of the sword of the angel of the LORD.

22:1 Then David said, This is the house of the LORD God, and this is
the altar of the burnt offering for Israel.

22:2 And David commanded to gather together the strangers that were in
the land of Israel; and he set masons to hew wrought stones to build
the house of God.

22:3 And David prepared iron in abundance for the nails for the doors
of the gates, and for the joinings; and brass in abundance without
weight; 22:4 Also cedar trees in abundance: for the Zidonians and they
of Tyre brought much cedar wood to David.

22:5 And David said, Solomon my son is young and tender, and the house
that is to be builded for the LORD must be exceeding magnifical, of
fame and of glory throughout all countries: I will therefore now make
preparation for it. So David prepared abundantly before his death.

22:6 Then he called for Solomon his son, and charged him to build an
house for the LORD God of Israel.

22:7 And David said to Solomon, My son, as for me, it was in my mind
to build an house unto the name of the LORD my God: 22:8 But the word
of the LORD came to me, saying, Thou hast shed blood abundantly, and
hast made great wars: thou shalt not build an house unto my name,
because thou hast shed much blood upon the earth in my sight.

22:9 Behold, a son shall be born to thee, who shall be a man of rest;
and I will give him rest from all his enemies round about: for his
name shall be Solomon, and I will give peace and quietness unto Israel
in his days.

22:10 He shall build an house for my name; and he shall be my son, and
I will be his father; and I will establish the throne of his kingdom
over Israel for ever.

22:11 Now, my son, the LORD be with thee; and prosper thou, and build
the house of the LORD thy God, as he hath said of thee.

22:12 Only the LORD give thee wisdom and understanding, and give thee
charge concerning Israel, that thou mayest keep the law of the LORD
thy God.

22:13 Then shalt thou prosper, if thou takest heed to fulfil the
statutes and judgments which the LORD charged Moses with concerning
Israel: be strong, and of good courage; dread not, nor be dismayed.

22:14 Now, behold, in my trouble I have prepared for the house of the
LORD an hundred thousand talents of gold, and a thousand thousand
talents of silver; and of brass and iron without weight; for it is in
abundance: timber also and stone have I prepared; and thou mayest add
thereto.

22:15 Moreover there are workmen with thee in abundance, hewers and
workers of stone and timber, and all manner of cunning men for every
manner of work.

22:16 Of the gold, the silver, and the brass, and the iron, there is
no number. Arise therefore, and be doing, and the LORD be with thee.

22:17 David also commanded all the princes of Israel to help Solomon
his son, saying, 22:18 Is not the LORD your God with you? and hath he
not given you rest on every side? for he hath given the inhabitants of
the land into mine hand; and the land is subdued before the LORD, and
before his people.

22:19 Now set your heart and your soul to seek the LORD your God;
arise therefore, and build ye the sanctuary of the LORD God, to bring
the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and the holy vessels of God, into
the house that is to be built to the name of the LORD.

23:1 So when David was old and full of days, he made Solomon his son
king over Israel.

23:2 And he gathered together all the princes of Israel, with the
priests and the Levites.

23:3 Now the Levites were numbered from the age of thirty years and
upward: and their number by their polls, man by man, was thirty and
eight thousand.

23:4 Of which, twenty and four thousand were to set forward the work
of the house of the LORD; and six thousand were officers and judges:
23:5 Moreover four thousand were porters; and four thousand praised
the LORD with the instruments which I made, said David, to praise
therewith.

23:6 And David divided them into courses among the sons of Levi,
namely, Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.

23:7 Of the Gershonites were, Laadan, and Shimei.

23:8 The sons of Laadan; the chief was Jehiel, and Zetham, and Joel,
three.

23:9 The sons of Shimei; Shelomith, and Haziel, and Haran, three.
These were the chief of the fathers of Laadan.

23:10 And the sons of Shimei were, Jahath, Zina, and Jeush, and
Beriah.

These four were the sons of Shimei.

23:11 And Jahath was the chief, and Zizah the second: but Jeush and
Beriah had not many sons; therefore they were in one reckoning,
according to their father’s house.

23:12 The sons of Kohath; Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel, four.

23:13 The sons of Amram; Aaron and Moses: and Aaron was separated,
that he should sanctify the most holy things, he and his sons for
ever, to burn incense before the LORD, to minister unto him, and to
bless in his name for ever.

23:14 Now concerning Moses the man of God, his sons were named of the
tribe of Levi.

23:15 The sons of Moses were, Gershom, and Eliezer.

23:16 Of the sons of Gershom, Shebuel was the chief.

23:17 And the sons of Eliezer were, Rehabiah the chief. And Eliezer
had none other sons; but the sons of Rehabiah were very many.

23:18 Of the sons of Izhar; Shelomith the chief.

23:19 Of the sons of Hebron; Jeriah the first, Amariah the second,
Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth.

23:20 Of the sons of Uzziel; Micah the first and Jesiah the second.

23:21 The sons of Merari; Mahli, and Mushi. The sons of Mahli;
Eleazar, and Kish.

23:22 And Eleazar died, and had no sons, but daughters: and their
brethren the sons of Kish took them.

23:23 The sons of Mushi; Mahli, and Eder, and Jeremoth, three.

23:24 These were the sons of Levi after the house of their fathers;
even the chief of the fathers, as they were counted by number of names
by their polls, that did the work for the service of the house of the
LORD, from the age of twenty years and upward.

23:25 For David said, The LORD God of Israel hath given rest unto his
people, that they may dwell in Jerusalem for ever: 23:26 And also unto
the Levites; they shall no more carry the tabernacle, nor any vessels
of it for the service thereof.

23:27 For by the last words of David the Levites were numbered from
twenty years old and above: 23:28 Because their office was to wait on
the sons of Aaron for the service of the house of the LORD, in the
courts, and in the chambers, and in the purifying of all holy things,
and the work of the service of the house of God; 23:29 Both for the
shewbread, and for the fine flour for meat offering, and for the
unleavened cakes, and for that which is baked in the pan, and for that
which is fried, and for all manner of measure and size; 23:30 And to
stand every morning to thank and praise the LORD, and likewise at
even: 23:31 And to offer all burnt sacrifices unto the LORD in the
sabbaths, in the new moons, and on the set feasts, by number,
according to the order commanded unto them, continually before the
LORD: 23:32 And that they should keep the charge of the tabernacle of
the congregation, and the charge of the holy place, and the charge of
the sons of Aaron their brethren, in the service of the house of the
LORD.

24:1 Now these are the divisions of the sons of Aaron. The sons of
Aaron; Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

24:2 But Nadab and Abihu died before their father, and had no
children: therefore Eleazar and Ithamar executed the priest’s office.

24:3 And David distributed them, both Zadok of the sons of Eleazar,
and Ahimelech of the sons of Ithamar, according to their offices in
their service.

24:4 And there were more chief men found of the sons of Eleazar than
of the sons of Ithamar, and thus were they divided. Among the sons of
Eleazar there were sixteen chief men of the house of their fathers,
and eight among the sons of Ithamar according to the house of their
fathers.

24:5 Thus were they divided by lot, one sort with another; for the
governors of the sanctuary, and governors of the house of God, were of
the sons of Eleazar, and of the sons of Ithamar.

24:6 And Shemaiah the son of Nethaneel the scribe, one of the Levites,
wrote them before the king, and the princes, and Zadok the priest, and
Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, and before the chief of the fathers of
the priests and Levites: one principal household being taken for
Eleazar, and one taken for Ithamar.

24:7 Now the first lot came forth to Jehoiarib, the second to Jedaiah,
24:8 The third to Harim, the fourth to Seorim, 24:9 The fifth to
Malchijah, the sixth to Mijamin, 24:10 The seventh to Hakkoz, the
eighth to Abijah, 24:11 The ninth to Jeshuah, the tenth to Shecaniah,
24:12 The eleventh to Eliashib, the twelfth to Jakim, 24:13 The
thirteenth to Huppah, the fourteenth to Jeshebeab, 24:14 The fifteenth
to Bilgah, the sixteenth to Immer, 24:15 The seventeenth to Hezir, the
eighteenth to Aphses, 24:16 The nineteenth to Pethahiah, the twentieth
to Jehezekel, 24:17 The one and twentieth to Jachin, the two and
twentieth to Gamul, 24:18 The three and twentieth to Delaiah, the four
and twentieth to Maaziah.

24:19 These were the orderings of them in their service to come into
the house of the LORD, according to their manner, under Aaron their
father, as the LORD God of Israel had commanded him.

24:20 And the rest of the sons of Levi were these: Of the sons of
Amram; Shubael: of the sons of Shubael; Jehdeiah.

24:21 Concerning Rehabiah: of the sons of Rehabiah, the first was
Isshiah.

24:22 Of the Izharites; Shelomoth: of the sons of Shelomoth; Jahath.

24:23 And the sons of Hebron; Jeriah the first, Amariah the second,
Jahaziel the third, Jekameam the fourth.

24:24 Of the sons of Uzziel; Michah: of the sons of Michah; Shamir.

24:25 The brother of Michah was Isshiah: of the sons of Isshiah;
Zechariah.

24:26 The sons of Merari were Mahli and Mushi: the sons of Jaaziah;
Beno.

24:27 The sons of Merari by Jaaziah; Beno, and Shoham, and Zaccur, and
Ibri.

24:28 Of Mahli came Eleazar, who had no sons.

24:29 Concerning Kish: the son of Kish was Jerahmeel.

24:30 The sons also of Mushi; Mahli, and Eder, and Jerimoth. These
were the sons of the Levites after the house of their fathers.

24:31 These likewise cast lots over against their brethren the sons of
Aaron in the presence of David the king, and Zadok, and Ahimelech, and
the chief of the fathers of the priests and Levites, even the
principal fathers over against their younger brethren.

25:1 Moreover David and the captains of the host separated to the
service of the sons of Asaph, and of Heman, and of Jeduthun, who
should prophesy with harps, with psalteries, and with cymbals: and the
number of the workmen according to their service was: 25:2 Of the sons
of Asaph; Zaccur, and Joseph, and Nethaniah, and Asarelah, the sons of
Asaph under the hands of Asaph, which prophesied according to the
order of the king.

25:3 Of Jeduthun: the sons of Jeduthun; Gedaliah, and Zeri, and
Jeshaiah, Hashabiah, and Mattithiah, six, under the hands of their
father Jeduthun, who prophesied with a harp, to give thanks and to
praise the LORD.

25:4 Of Heman: the sons of Heman: Bukkiah, Mattaniah, Uzziel, Shebuel,
and Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliathah, Giddalti, and Romamtiezer,
Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, and Mahazioth: 25:5 All these were the
sons of Heman the king’s seer in the words of God, to lift up the
horn. And God gave to Heman fourteen sons and three daughters.

25:6 All these were under the hands of their father for song in the
house of the LORD, with cymbals, psalteries, and harps, for the
service of the house of God, according to the king’s order to Asaph,
Jeduthun, and Heman.

25:7 So the number of them, with their brethren that were instructed
in the songs of the LORD, even all that were cunning, was two hundred
fourscore and eight.

25:8 And they cast lots, ward against ward, as well the small as the
great, the teacher as the scholar.

25:9 Now the first lot came forth for Asaph to Joseph: the second to
Gedaliah, who with his brethren and sons were twelve: 25:10 The third
to Zaccur, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 25:11 The
fourth to Izri, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 25:12 The
fifth to Nethaniah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 25:13
The sixth to Bukkiah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:
25:14 The seventh to Jesharelah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were
twelve: 25:15 The eighth to Jeshaiah, he, his sons, and his brethren,
were twelve: 25:16 The ninth to Mattaniah, he, his sons, and his
brethren, were twelve: 25:17 The tenth to Shimei, he, his sons, and
his brethren, were twelve: 25:18 The eleventh to Azareel, he, his
sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 25:19 The twelfth to Hashabiah,
he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 25:20 The thirteenth to
Shubael, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 25:21 The
fourteenth to Mattithiah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:
25:22 The fifteenth to Jeremoth, he, his sons, and his brethren, were
twelve: 25:23 The sixteenth to Hananiah, he, his sons, and his
brethren, were twelve: 25:24 The seventeenth to Joshbekashah, he, his
sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 25:25 The eighteenth to Hanani,
he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 25:26 The nineteenth to
Mallothi, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 25:27 The
twentieth to Eliathah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:
25:28 The one and twentieth to Hothir, he, his sons, and his brethren,
were twelve: 25:29 The two and twentieth to Giddalti, he, his sons,
and his brethren, were twelve: 25:30 The three and twentieth to
Mahazioth, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 25:31 The four
and twentieth to Romamtiezer, he, his sons, and his brethren, were
twelve.

26:1 Concerning the divisions of the porters: Of the Korhites was
Meshelemiah the son of Kore, of the sons of Asaph.

26:2 And the sons of Meshelemiah were, Zechariah the firstborn,
Jediael the second, Zebadiah the third, Jathniel the fourth, 26:3 Elam
the fifth, Jehohanan the sixth, Elioenai the seventh.

26:4 Moreover the sons of Obededom were, Shemaiah the firstborn,
Jehozabad the second, Joah the third, and Sacar the fourth, and
Nethaneel the fifth.

26:5 Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the seventh, Peulthai the eighth: for
God blessed him.

26:6 Also unto Shemaiah his son were sons born, that ruled throughout
the house of their father: for they were mighty men of valour.

26:7 The sons of Shemaiah; Othni, and Rephael, and Obed, Elzabad,
whose brethren were strong men, Elihu, and Semachiah.

26:8 All these of the sons of Obededom: they and their sons and their
brethren, able men for strength for the service, were threescore and
two of Obededom.

26:9 And Meshelemiah had sons and brethren, strong men, eighteen.

26:10 Also Hosah, of the children of Merari, had sons; Simri the
chief, (for though he was not the firstborn, yet his father made him
the chief;) 26:11 Hilkiah the second, Tebaliah the third, Zechariah
the fourth: all the sons and brethren of Hosah were thirteen.

26:12 Among these were the divisions of the porters, even among the
chief men, having wards one against another, to minister in the house
of the LORD.

26:13 And they cast lots, as well the small as the great, according to
the house of their fathers, for every gate.

26:14 And the lot eastward fell to Shelemiah. Then for Zechariah his
son, a wise counsellor, they cast lots; and his lot came out
northward.

26:15 To Obededom southward; and to his sons the house of Asuppim.

26:16 To Shuppim and Hosah the lot came forth westward, with the gate
Shallecheth, by the causeway of the going up, ward against ward.

26:17 Eastward were six Levites, northward four a day, southward four
a day, and toward Asuppim two and two.

26:18 At Parbar westward, four at the causeway, and two at Parbar.

26:19 These are the divisions of the porters among the sons of Kore,
and among the sons of Merari.

26:20 And of the Levites, Ahijah was over the treasures of the house
of God, and over the treasures of the dedicated things.

26:21 As concerning the sons of Laadan; the sons of the Gershonite
Laadan, chief fathers, even of Laadan the Gershonite, were Jehieli.

26:22 The sons of Jehieli; Zetham, and Joel his brother, which were
over the treasures of the house of the LORD.

26:23 Of the Amramites, and the Izharites, the Hebronites, and the
Uzzielites: 26:24 And Shebuel the son of Gershom, the son of Moses,
was ruler of the treasures.

26:25 And his brethren by Eliezer; Rehabiah his son, and Jeshaiah his
son, and Joram his son, and Zichri his son, and Shelomith his son.

26:26 Which Shelomith and his brethren were over all the treasures of
the dedicated things, which David the king, and the chief fathers, the
captains over thousands and hundreds, and the captains of the host,
had dedicated.

26:27 Out of the spoils won in battles did they dedicate to maintain
the house of the LORD.

26:28 And all that Samuel the seer, and Saul the son of Kish, and
Abner the son of Ner, and Joab the son of Zeruiah, had dedicated; and
whosoever had dedicated any thing, it was under the hand of Shelomith,
and of his brethren.

26:29 Of the Izharites, Chenaniah and his sons were for the outward
business over Israel, for officers and judges.

26:30 And of the Hebronites, Hashabiah and his brethren, men of
valour, a thousand and seven hundred, were officers among them of
Israel on this side Jordan westward in all the business of the LORD,
and in the service of the king.

26:31 Among the Hebronites was Jerijah the chief, even among the
Hebronites, according to the generations of his fathers. In the
fortieth year of the reign of David they were sought for, and there
were found among them mighty men of valour at Jazer of Gilead.

26:32 And his brethren, men of valour, were two thousand and seven
hundred chief fathers, whom king David made rulers over the
Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh, for every
matter pertaining to God, and affairs of the king.

27:1 Now the children of Israel after their number, to wit, the chief
fathers and captains of thousands and hundreds, and their officers
that served the king in any matter of the courses, which came in and
went out month by month throughout all the months of the year, of
every course were twenty and four thousand.

27:2 Over the first course for the first month was Jashobeam the son
of Zabdiel: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.

27:3 Of the children of Perez was the chief of all the captains of the
host for the first month.

27:4 And over the course of the second month was Dodai an Ahohite, and
of his course was Mikloth also the ruler: in his course likewise were
twenty and four thousand.

27:5 The third captain of the host for the third month was Benaiah the
son of Jehoiada, a chief priest: and in his course were twenty and
four thousand.

27:6 This is that Benaiah, who was mighty among the thirty, and above
the thirty: and in his course was Ammizabad his son.

27:7 The fourth captain for the fourth month was Asahel the brother of
Joab, and Zebadiah his son after him: and in his course were twenty
and four thousand.

27:8 The fifth captain for the fifth month was Shamhuth the Izrahite:
and in his course were twenty and four thousand.

27:9 The sixth captain for the sixth month was Ira the son of Ikkesh
the Tekoite: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.

27:10 The seventh captain for the seventh month was Helez the
Pelonite, of the children of Ephraim: and in his course were twenty
and four thousand.

27:11 The eighth captain for the eighth month was Sibbecai the
Hushathite, of the Zarhites: and in his course were twenty and four
thousand.

27:12 The ninth captain for the ninth month was Abiezer the
Anetothite, of the Benjamites: and in his course were twenty and four
thousand.

27:13 The tenth captain for the tenth month was Maharai the
Netophathite, of the Zarhites: and in his course were twenty and four
thousand.

27:14 The eleventh captain for the eleventh month was Benaiah the
Pirathonite, of the children of Ephraim: and in his course were twenty
and four thousand.

27:15 The twelfth captain for the twelfth month was Heldai the
Netophathite, of Othniel: and in his course were twenty and four
thousand.

27:16 Furthermore over the tribes of Israel: the ruler of the
Reubenites was Eliezer the son of Zichri: of the Simeonites,
Shephatiah the son of Maachah: 27:17 Of the Levites, Hashabiah the son
of Kemuel: of the Aaronites, Zadok: 27:18 Of Judah, Elihu, one of the
brethren of David: of Issachar, Omri the son of Michael: 27:19 Of
Zebulun, Ishmaiah the son of Obadiah: of Naphtali, Jerimoth the son of
Azriel: 27:20 Of the children of Ephraim, Hoshea the son of Azaziah:
of the half tribe of Manasseh, Joel the son of Pedaiah: 27:21 Of the
half tribe of Manasseh in Gilead, Iddo the son of Zechariah: of
Benjamin, Jaasiel the son of Abner: 27:22 Of Dan, Azareel the son of
Jeroham. These were the princes of the tribes of Israel.

27:23 But David took not the number of them from twenty years old and
under: because the LORD had said he would increase Israel like to the
stars of the heavens.

27:24 Joab the son of Zeruiah began to number, but he finished not,
because there fell wrath for it against Israel; neither was the number
put in the account of the chronicles of king David.

27:25 And over the king’s treasures was Azmaveth the son of Adiel: and
over the storehouses in the fields, in the cities, and in the
villages, and in the castles, was Jehonathan the son of Uzziah: 27:26
And over them that did the work of the field for tillage of the ground
was Ezri the son of Chelub: 27:27 And over the vineyards was Shimei
the Ramathite: over the increase of the vineyards for the wine cellars
was Zabdi the Shiphmite: 27:28 And over the olive trees and the
sycomore trees that were in the low plains was Baalhanan the Gederite:
and over the cellars of oil was Joash: 27:29 And over the herds that
fed in Sharon was Shitrai the Sharonite: and over the herds that were
in the valleys was Shaphat the son of Adlai: 27:30 Over the camels
also was Obil the Ishmaelite: and over the asses was Jehdeiah the
Meronothite: 27:31 And over the flocks was Jaziz the Hagerite. All
these were the rulers of the substance which was king David’s.

27:32 Also Jonathan David’s uncle was a counsellor, a wise man, and a
scribe: and Jehiel the son of Hachmoni was with the king’s sons: 27:33
And Ahithophel was the king’s counsellor: and Hushai the Archite was
the king’s companion: 27:34 And after Ahithophel was Jehoiada the son
of Benaiah, and Abiathar: and the general of the king’s army was Joab.

28:1 And David assembled all the princes of Israel, the princes of the
tribes, and the captains of the companies that ministered to the king
by course, and the captains over the thousands, and captains over the
hundreds, and the stewards over all the substance and possession of
the king, and of his sons, with the officers, and with the mighty men,
and with all the valiant men, unto Jerusalem.

28:2 Then David the king stood up upon his feet, and said, Hear me, my
brethren, and my people: As for me, I had in mine heart to build an
house of rest for the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and for the
footstool of our God, and had made ready for the building: 28:3 But
God said unto me, Thou shalt not build an house for my name, because
thou hast been a man of war, and hast shed blood.

28:4 Howbeit the LORD God of Israel chose me before all the house of
my father to be king over Israel for ever: for he hath chosen Judah to
be the ruler; and of the house of Judah, the house of my father; and
among the sons of my father he liked me to make me king over all
Israel: 28:5 And of all my sons, (for the LORD hath given me many
sons,) he hath chosen Solomon my son to sit upon the throne of the
kingdom of the LORD over Israel.

28:6 And he said unto me, Solomon thy son, he shall build my house and
my courts: for I have chosen him to be my son, and I will be his
father.

28:7 Moreover I will establish his kingdom for ever, if he be constant
to do my commandments and my judgments, as at this day.

28:8 Now therefore in the sight of all Israel the congregation of the
LORD, and in the audience of our God, keep and seek for all the
commandments of the LORD your God: that ye may possess this good land,
and leave it for an inheritance for your children after you for ever.

28:9 And thou, Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and
serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind: for the LORD
searcheth all hearts, and understandeth all the imaginations of the
thoughts: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou
forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.

28:10 Take heed now; for the LORD hath chosen thee to build an house
for the sanctuary: be strong, and do it.

28:11 Then David gave to Solomon his son the pattern of the porch, and
of the houses thereof, and of the treasuries thereof, and of the upper
chambers thereof, and of the inner parlours thereof, and of the place
of the mercy seat, 28:12 And the pattern of all that he had by the
spirit, of the courts of the house of the LORD, and of all the
chambers round about, of the treasuries of the house of God, and of
the treasuries of the dedicated things: 28:13 Also for the courses of
the priests and the Levites, and for all the work of the service of
the house of the LORD, and for all the vessels of service in the house
of the LORD.

28:14 He gave of gold by weight for things of gold, for all
instruments of all manner of service; silver also for all instruments
of silver by weight, for all instruments of every kind of service:
28:15 Even the weight for the candlesticks of gold, and for their
lamps of gold, by weight for every candlestick, and for the lamps
thereof: and for the candlesticks of silver by weight, both for the
candlestick, and also for the lamps thereof, according to the use of
every candlestick.

28:16 And by weight he gave gold for the tables of shewbread, for
every table; and likewise silver for the tables of silver: 28:17 Also
pure gold for the fleshhooks, and the bowls, and the cups: and for the
golden basons he gave gold by weight for every bason; and likewise
silver by weight for every bason of silver: 28:18 And for the altar of
incense refined gold by weight; and gold for the pattern of the
chariot of the cherubims, that spread out their wings, and covered the
ark of the covenant of the LORD.

28:19 All this, said David, the LORD made me understand in writing by
his hand upon me, even all the works of this pattern.

28:20 And David said to Solomon his son, Be strong and of good
courage, and do it: fear not, nor be dismayed: for the LORD God, even
my God, will be with thee; he will not fail thee, nor forsake thee,
until thou hast finished all the work for the service of the house of
the LORD.

28:21 And, behold, the courses of the priests and the Levites, even
they shall be with thee for all the service of the house of God: and
there shall be with thee for all manner of workmanship every willing
skilful man, for any manner of service: also the princes and all the
people will be wholly at thy commandment.

29:1 Furthermore David the king said unto all the congregation,
Solomon my son, whom alone God hath chosen, is yet young and tender,
and the work is great: for the palace is not for man, but for the LORD
God.

29:2 Now I have prepared with all my might for the house of my God the
gold for things to be made of gold, and the silver for things of
silver, and the brass for things of brass, the iron for things of
iron, and wood for things of wood; onyx stones, and stones to be set,
glistering stones, and of divers colours, and all manner of precious
stones, and marble stones in abundance.

29:3 Moreover, because I have set my affection to the house of my God,
I have of mine own proper good, of gold and silver, which I have given
to the house of my God, over and above all that I have prepared for
the holy house.

29:4 Even three thousand talents of gold, of the gold of Ophir, and
seven thousand talents of refined silver, to overlay the walls of the
houses withal: 29:5 The gold for things of gold, and the silver for
things of silver, and for all manner of work to be made by the hands
of artificers. And who then is willing to consecrate his service this
day unto the LORD? 29:6 Then the chief of the fathers and princes of
the tribes of Israel and the captains of thousands and of hundreds,
with the rulers of the king’s work, offered willingly, 29:7 And gave
for the service of the house of God of gold five thousand talents and
ten thousand drams, and of silver ten thousand talents, and of brass
eighteen thousand talents, and one hundred thousand talents of iron.

29:8 And they with whom precious stones were found gave them to the
treasure of the house of the LORD, by the hand of Jehiel the
Gershonite.

29:9 Then the people rejoiced, for that they offered willingly,
because with perfect heart they offered willingly to the LORD: and
David the king also rejoiced with great joy.

29:10 Wherefore David blessed the LORD before all the congregation:
and David said, Blessed be thou, LORD God of Israel our father, for
ever and ever.

29:11 Thine, O LORD is the greatness, and the power, and the glory,
and the victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the heaven and in
the earth is thine; thine is the kingdom, O LORD, and thou art exalted
as head above all.

29:12 Both riches and honour come of thee, and thou reignest over all;
and in thine hand is power and might; and in thine hand it is to make
great, and to give strength unto all.

29:13 Now therefore, our God, we thank thee, and praise thy glorious
name.

29:14 But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to
offer so willingly after this sort? for all things come of thee, and
of thine own have we given thee.

29:15 For we are strangers before thee, and sojourners, as were all
our fathers: our days on the earth are as a shadow, and there is none
abiding.

29:16 O LORD our God, all this store that we have prepared to build
thee an house for thine holy name cometh of thine hand, and is all
thine own.

29:17 I know also, my God, that thou triest the heart, and hast
pleasure in uprightness. As for me, in the uprightness of mine heart I
have willingly offered all these things: and now have I seen with joy
thy people, which are present here, to offer willingly unto thee.

29:18 O LORD God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, our fathers, keep
this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy
people, and prepare their heart unto thee: 29:19 And give unto Solomon
my son a perfect heart, to keep thy commandments, thy testimonies, and
thy statutes, and to do all these things, and to build the palace, for
the which I have made provision.

29:20 And David said to all the congregation, Now bless the LORD your
God.

And all the congregation blessed the LORD God of their fathers, and
bowed down their heads, and worshipped the LORD, and the king.

29:21 And they sacrificed sacrifices unto the LORD, and offered burnt
offerings unto the LORD, on the morrow after that day, even a thousand
bullocks, a thousand rams, and a thousand lambs, with their drink
offerings, and sacrifices in abundance for all Israel: 29:22 And did
eat and drink before the LORD on that day with great gladness. And
they made Solomon the son of David king the second time, and anointed
him unto the LORD to be the chief governor, and Zadok to be priest.

29:23 Then Solomon sat on the throne of the LORD as king instead of
David his father, and prospered; and all Israel obeyed him.

29:24 And all the princes, and the mighty men, and all the sons
likewise of king David, submitted themselves unto Solomon the king.

29:25 And the LORD magnified Solomon exceedingly in the sight of all
Israel, and bestowed upon him such royal majesty as had not been on
any king before him in Israel.

29:26 Thus David the son of Jesse reigned over all Israel.

29:27 And the time that he reigned over Israel was forty years; seven
years reigned he in Hebron, and thirty and three years reigned he in
Jerusalem.

29:28 And he died in a good old age, full of days, riches, and honour:
and Solomon his son reigned in his stead.

29:29 Now the acts of David the king, first and last, behold, they are
written in the book of Samuel the seer, and in the book of Nathan the
prophet, and in the book of Gad the seer, 29:30 With all his reign and
his might, and the times that went over him, and over Israel, and over
all the kingdoms of the countries.


The Second Book of the Chronicles


1:1 And Solomon the son of David was strengthened in his kingdom, and
the LORD his God was with him, and magnified him exceedingly.

1:2 Then Solomon spake unto all Israel, to the captains of thousands
and of hundreds, and to the judges, and to every governor in all
Israel, the chief of the fathers.

1:3 So Solomon, and all the congregation with him, went to the high
place that was at Gibeon; for there was the tabernacle of the
congregation of God, which Moses the servant of the LORD had made in
the wilderness.

1:4 But the ark of God had David brought up from Kirjathjearim to the
place which David had prepared for it: for he had pitched a tent for
it at Jerusalem.

1:5 Moreover the brasen altar, that Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son
of Hur, had made, he put before the tabernacle of the LORD: and
Solomon and the congregation sought unto it.

1:6 And Solomon went up thither to the brasen altar before the LORD,
which was at the tabernacle of the congregation, and offered a
thousand burnt offerings upon it.

1:7 In that night did God appear unto Solomon, and said unto him, Ask
what I shall give thee.

1:8 And Solomon said unto God, Thou hast shewed great mercy unto David
my father, and hast made me to reign in his stead.

1:9 Now, O LORD God, let thy promise unto David my father be
established: for thou hast made me king over a people like the dust of
the earth in multitude.

1:10 Give me now wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and come in
before this people: for who can judge this thy people, that is so
great? 1:11 And God said to Solomon, Because this was in thine heart,
and thou hast not asked riches, wealth, or honour, nor the life of
thine enemies, neither yet hast asked long life; but hast asked wisdom
and knowledge for thyself, that thou mayest judge my people, over whom
I have made thee king: 1:12 Wisdom and knowledge is granted unto thee;
and I will give thee riches, and wealth, and honour, such as none of
the kings have had that have been before thee, neither shall there any
after thee have the like.

1:13 Then Solomon came from his journey to the high place that was at
Gibeon to Jerusalem, from before the tabernacle of the congregation,
and reigned over Israel.

1:14 And Solomon gathered chariots and horsemen: and he had a thousand
and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, which he
placed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem.

1:15 And the king made silver and gold at Jerusalem as plenteous as
stones, and cedar trees made he as the sycomore trees that are in the
vale for abundance.

1:16 And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn: the
king’s merchants received the linen yarn at a price.

1:17 And they fetched up, and brought forth out of Egypt a chariot for
six hundred shekels of silver, and an horse for an hundred and fifty:
and so brought they out horses for all the kings of the Hittites, and
for the kings of Syria, by their means.

2:1 And Solomon determined to build an house for the name of the LORD,
and an house for his kingdom.

2:2 And Solomon told out threescore and ten thousand men to bear
burdens, and fourscore thousand to hew in the mountain, and three
thousand and six hundred to oversee them.

2:3 And Solomon sent to Huram the king of Tyre, saying, As thou didst
deal with David my father, and didst send him cedars to build him an
house to dwell therein, even so deal with me.

2:4 Behold, I build an house to the name of the LORD my God, to
dedicate it to him, and to burn before him sweet incense, and for the
continual shewbread, and for the burnt offerings morning and evening,
on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn feasts of the
LORD our God. This is an ordinance for ever to Israel.

2:5 And the house which I build is great: for great is our God above
all gods.

2:6 But who is able to build him an house, seeing the heaven and
heaven of heavens cannot contain him? who am I then, that I should
build him an house, save only to burn sacrifice before him? 2:7 Send
me now therefore a man cunning to work in gold, and in silver, and in
brass, and in iron, and in purple, and crimson, and blue, and that can
skill to grave with the cunning men that are with me in Judah and in
Jerusalem, whom David my father did provide.

2:8 Send me also cedar trees, fir trees, and algum trees, out of
Lebanon: for I know that thy servants can skill to cut timber in
Lebanon; and, behold, my servants shall be with thy servants, 2:9 Even
to prepare me timber in abundance: for the house which I am about to
build shall be wonderful great.

2:10 And, behold, I will give to thy servants, the hewers that cut
timber, twenty thousand measures of beaten wheat, and twenty thousand
measures of barley, and twenty thousand baths of wine, and twenty
thousand baths of oil.

2:11 Then Huram the king of Tyre answered in writing, which he sent to
Solomon, Because the LORD hath loved his people, he hath made thee
king over them.

2:12 Huram said moreover, Blessed be the LORD God of Israel, that made
heaven and earth, who hath given to David the king a wise son, endued
with prudence and understanding, that might build an house for the
LORD, and an house for his kingdom.

2:13 And now I have sent a cunning man, endued with understanding, of
Huram my father’s, 2:14 The son of a woman of the daughters of Dan,
and his father was a man of Tyre, skilful to work in gold, and in
silver, in brass, in iron, in stone, and in timber, in purple, in
blue, and in fine linen, and in crimson; also to grave any manner of
graving, and to find out every device which shall be put to him, with
thy cunning men, and with the cunning men of my lord David thy father.

2:15 Now therefore the wheat, and the barley, the oil, and the wine,
which my lord hath spoken of, let him send unto his servants: 2:16 And
we will cut wood out of Lebanon, as much as thou shalt need: and we
will bring it to thee in floats by sea to Joppa; and thou shalt carry
it up to Jerusalem.

2:17 And Solomon numbered all the strangers that were in the land of
Israel, after the numbering wherewith David his father had numbered
them; and they were found an hundred and fifty thousand and three
thousand and six hundred.

2:18 And he set threescore and ten thousand of them to be bearers of
burdens, and fourscore thousand to be hewers in the mountain, and
three thousand and six hundred overseers to set the people a work.

3:1 Then Solomon began to build the house of the LORD at Jerusalem in
mount Moriah, where the Lord appeared unto David his father, in the
place that David had prepared in the threshingfloor of Ornan the
Jebusite.

3:2 And he began to build in the second day of the second month, in
the fourth year of his reign.

3:3 Now these are the things wherein Solomon was instructed for the
building of the house of God. The length by cubits after the first
measure was threescore cubits, and the breadth twenty cubits.

3:4 And the porch that was in the front of the house, the length of it
was according to the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and the
height was an hundred and twenty: and he overlaid it within with pure
gold.

3:5 And the greater house he cieled with fir tree, which he overlaid
with fine gold, and set thereon palm trees and chains.

3:6 And he garnished the house with precious stones for beauty: and
the gold was gold of Parvaim.

3:7 He overlaid also the house, the beams, the posts, and the walls
thereof, and the doors thereof, with gold; and graved cherubims on the
walls.

3:8 And he made the most holy house, the length whereof was according
to the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof
twenty cubits: and he overlaid it with fine gold, amounting to six
hundred talents.

3:9 And the weight of the nails was fifty shekels of gold. And he
overlaid the upper chambers with gold.

3:10 And in the most holy house he made two cherubims of image work,
and overlaid them with gold.

3:11 And the wings of the cherubims were twenty cubits long: one wing
of the one cherub was five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house:
and the other wing was likewise five cubits, reaching to the wing of
the other cherub.

3:12 And one wing of the other cherub was five cubits, reaching to the
wall of the house: and the other wing was five cubits also, joining to
the wing of the other cherub.

3:13 The wings of these cherubims spread themselves forth twenty
cubits: and they stood on their feet, and their faces were inward.

3:14 And he made the vail of blue, and purple, and crimson, and fine
linen, and wrought cherubims thereon.

3:15 Also he made before the house two pillars of thirty and five
cubits high, and the chapiter that was on the top of each of them was
five cubits.

3:16 And he made chains, as in the oracle, and put them on the heads
of the pillars; and made an hundred pomegranates, and put them on the
chains.

3:17 And he reared up the pillars before the temple, one on the right
hand, and the other on the left; and called the name of that on the
right hand Jachin, and the name of that on the left Boaz.

4:1 Moreover he made an altar of brass, twenty cubits the length
thereof, and twenty cubits the breadth thereof, and ten cubits the
height thereof.

4:2 Also he made a molten sea of ten cubits from brim to brim, round
in compass, and five cubits the height thereof; and a line of thirty
cubits did compass it round about.

4:3 And under it was the similitude of oxen, which did compass it
round about: ten in a cubit, compassing the sea round about. Two rows
of oxen were cast, when it was cast.

4:4 It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and
three looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and
three looking toward the east: and the sea was set above upon them,
and all their hinder parts were inward.

4:5 And the thickness of it was an handbreadth, and the brim of it
like the work of the brim of a cup, with flowers of lilies; and it
received and held three thousand baths.

4:6 He made also ten lavers, and put five on the right hand, and five
on the left, to wash in them: such things as they offered for the
burnt offering they washed in them; but the sea was for the priests to
wash in.

4:7 And he made ten candlesticks of gold according to their form, and
set them in the temple, five on the right hand, and five on the left.

4:8 He made also ten tables, and placed them in the temple, five on
the right side, and five on the left. And he made an hundred basons of
gold.

4:9 Furthermore he made the court of the priests, and the great court,
and doors for the court, and overlaid the doors of them with brass.

4:10 And he set the sea on the right side of the east end, over
against the south.

4:11 And Huram made the pots, and the shovels, and the basons. And
Huram finished the work that he was to make for king Solomon for the
house of God; 4:12 To wit, the two pillars, and the pommels, and the
chapiters which were on the top of the two pillars, and the two
wreaths to cover the two pommels of the chapiters which were on the
top of the pillars; 4:13 And four hundred pomegranates on the two
wreaths; two rows of pomegranates on each wreath, to cover the two
pommels of the chapiters which were upon the pillars.

4:14 He made also bases, and lavers made he upon the bases; 4:15 One
sea, and twelve oxen under it.

4:16 The pots also, and the shovels, and the fleshhooks, and all their
instruments, did Huram his father make to king Solomon for the house
of the LORD of bright brass.

4:17 In the plain of Jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground
between Succoth and Zeredathah.

4:18 Thus Solomon made all these vessels in great abundance: for the
weight of the brass could not be found out.

4:19 And Solomon made all the vessels that were for the house of God,
the golden altar also, and the tables whereon the shewbread was set;
4:20 Moreover the candlesticks with their lamps, that they should burn
after the manner before the oracle, of pure gold; 4:21 And the
flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, made he of gold, and that
perfect gold; 4:22 And the snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons,
and the censers, of pure gold: and the entry of the house, the inner
doors thereof for the most holy place, and the doors of the house of
the temple, were of gold.

5:1 Thus all the work that Solomon made for the house of the LORD was
finished: and Solomon brought in all the things that David his father
had dedicated; and the silver, and the gold, and all the instruments,
put he among the treasures of the house of God.

5:2 Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, and all the heads of
the tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of Israel, unto
Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of the
city of David, which is Zion.

5:3 Wherefore all the men of Israel assembled themselves unto the king
in the feast which was in the seventh month.

5:4 And all the elders of Israel came; and the Levites took up the
ark.

5:5 And they brought up the ark, and the tabernacle of the
congregation, and all the holy vessels that were in the tabernacle,
these did the priests and the Levites bring up.

5:6 Also king Solomon, and all the congregation of Israel that were
assembled unto him before the ark, sacrificed sheep and oxen, which
could not be told nor numbered for multitude.

5:7 And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the LORD
unto his place, to the oracle of the house, into the most holy place,
even under the wings of the cherubims: 5:8 For the cherubims spread
forth their wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubims covered
the ark and the staves thereof above.

5:9 And they drew out the staves of the ark, that the ends of the
staves were seen from the ark before the oracle; but they were not
seen without. And there it is unto this day.

5:10 There was nothing in the ark save the two tables which Moses put
therein at Horeb, when the LORD made a covenant with the children of
Israel, when they came out of Egypt.

5:11 And it came to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy
place: (for all the priests that were present were sanctified, and did
not then wait by course: 5:12 Also the Levites which were the singers,
all of them of Asaph, of Heman, of Jeduthun, with their sons and their
brethren, being arrayed in white linen, having cymbals and psalteries
and harps, stood at the east end of the altar, and with them an
hundred and twenty priests sounding with trumpets:) 5:13 It came even
to pass, as the trumpeters and singers were as one, to make one sound
to be heard in praising and thanking the LORD; and when they lifted up
their voice with the trumpets and cymbals and instruments of musick,
and praised the LORD, saying, For he is good; for his mercy endureth
for ever: that then the house was filled with a cloud, even the house
of the LORD; 5:14 So that the priests could not stand to minister by
reason of the cloud: for the glory of the LORD had filled the house of
God.

6:1 Then said Solomon, The LORD hath said that he would dwell in the
thick darkness.

6:2 But I have built an house of habitation for thee, and a place for
thy dwelling for ever.

6:3 And the king turned his face, and blessed the whole congregation
of Israel: and all the congregation of Israel stood.

6:4 And he said, Blessed be the LORD God of Israel, who hath with his
hands fulfilled that which he spake with his mouth to my father David,
saying, 6:5 Since the day that I brought forth my people out of the
land of Egypt I chose no city among all the tribes of Israel to build
an house in, that my name might be there; neither chose I any man to
be a ruler over my people Israel: 6:6 But I have chosen Jerusalem,
that my name might be there; and have chosen David to be over my
people Israel.

6:7 Now it was in the heart of David my father to build an house for
the name of the LORD God of Israel.

6:8 But the LORD said to David my father, Forasmuch as it was in thine
heart to build an house for my name, thou didst well in that it was in
thine heart: 6:9 Notwithstanding thou shalt not build the house; but
thy son which shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the
house for my name.

6:10 The LORD therefore hath performed his word that he hath spoken:
for I am risen up in the room of David my father, and am set on the
throne of Israel, as the LORD promised, and have built the house for
the name of the LORD God of Israel.

6:11 And in it have I put the ark, wherein is the covenant of the
LORD, that he made with the children of Israel.

6:12 And he stood before the altar of the LORD in the presence of all
the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands: 6:13 For
Solomon had made a brasen scaffold of five cubits long, and five
cubits broad, and three cubits high, and had set it in the midst of
the court: and upon it he stood, and kneeled down upon his knees
before all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands
toward heaven.

6:14 And said, O LORD God of Israel, there is no God like thee in the
heaven, nor in the earth; which keepest covenant, and shewest mercy
unto thy servants, that walk before thee with all their hearts: 6:15
Thou which hast kept with thy servant David my father that which thou
hast promised him; and spakest with thy mouth, and hast fulfilled it
with thine hand, as it is this day.

6:16 Now therefore, O LORD God of Israel, keep with thy servant David
my father that which thou hast promised him, saying, There shall not
fail thee a man in my sight to sit upon the throne of Israel; yet so
that thy children take heed to their way to walk in my law, as thou
hast walked before me.

6:17 Now then, O LORD God of Israel, let thy word be verified, which
thou hast spoken unto thy servant David.

6:18 But will God in very deed dwell with men on the earth? behold,
heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less
this house which I have built! 6:19 Have respect therefore to the
prayer of thy servant, and to his supplication, O LORD my God, to
hearken unto the cry and the prayer which thy servant prayeth before
thee: 6:20 That thine eyes may be open upon this house day and night,
upon the place whereof thou hast said that thou wouldest put thy name
there; to hearken unto the prayer which thy servant prayeth toward
this place.

6:21 Hearken therefore unto the supplications of thy servant, and of
thy people Israel, which they shall make toward this place: hear thou
from thy dwelling place, even from heaven; and when thou hearest,
forgive.

6:22 If a man sin against his neighbour, and an oath be laid upon him
to make him swear, and the oath come before thine altar in this house;
6:23 Then hear thou from heaven, and do, and judge thy servants, by
requiting the wicked, by recompensing his way upon his own head; and
by justifying the righteous, by giving him according to his
righteousness.

6:24 And if thy people Israel be put to the worse before the enemy,
because they have sinned against thee; and shall return and confess
thy name, and pray and make supplication before thee in this house;
6:25 Then hear thou from the heavens, and forgive the sin of thy
people Israel, and bring them again unto the land which thou gavest to
them and to their fathers.

6:26 When the heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, because they
have sinned against thee; yet if they pray toward this place, and
confess thy name, and turn from their sin, when thou dost afflict
them; 6:27 Then hear thou from heaven, and forgive the sin of thy
servants, and of thy people Israel, when thou hast taught them the
good way, wherein they should walk; and send rain upon thy land, which
thou hast given unto thy people for an inheritance.

6:28 If there be dearth in the land, if there be pestilence, if there
be blasting, or mildew, locusts, or caterpillers; if their enemies
besiege them in the cities of their land; whatsoever sore or
whatsoever sickness there be: 6:29 Then what prayer or what
supplication soever shall be made of any man, or of all thy people
Israel, when every one shall know his own sore and his own grief, and
shall spread forth his hands in this house: 6:30 Then hear thou from
heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, and render unto every man
according unto all his ways, whose heart thou knowest; (for thou only
knowest the hearts of the children of men:) 6:31 That they may fear
thee, to walk in thy ways, so long as they live in the land which thou
gavest unto our fathers.

6:32 Moreover concerning the stranger, which is not of thy people
Israel, but is come from a far country for thy great name’s sake, and
thy mighty hand, and thy stretched out arm; if they come and pray in
this house; 6:33 Then hear thou from the heavens, even from thy
dwelling place, and do according to all that the stranger calleth to
thee for; that all people of the earth may know thy name, and fear
thee, as doth thy people Israel, and may know that this house which I
have built is called by thy name.

6:34 If thy people go out to war against their enemies by the way that
thou shalt send them, and they pray unto thee toward this city which
thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built for thy name; 6:35
Then hear thou from the heavens their prayer and their supplication,
and maintain their cause.

6:36 If they sin against thee, (for there is no man which sinneth
not,) and thou be angry with them, and deliver them over before their
enemies, and they carry them away captives unto a land far off or
near; 6:37 Yet if they bethink themselves in the land whither they are
carried captive, and turn and pray unto thee in the land of their
captivity, saying, We have sinned, we have done amiss, and have dealt
wickedly; 6:38 If they return to thee with all their heart and with
all their soul in the land of their captivity, whither they have
carried them captives, and pray toward their land, which thou gavest
unto their fathers, and toward the city which thou hast chosen, and
toward the house which I have built for thy name: 6:39 Then hear thou
from the heavens, even from thy dwelling place, their prayer and their
supplications, and maintain their cause, and forgive thy people which
have sinned against thee.

6:40 Now, my God, let, I beseech thee, thine eyes be open, and let
thine ears be attent unto the prayer that is made in this place.

6:41 Now therefore arise, O LORD God, into thy resting place, thou,
and the ark of thy strength: let thy priests, O LORD God, be clothed
with salvation, and let thy saints rejoice in goodness.

6:42 O LORD God, turn not away the face of thine anointed: remember
the mercies of David thy servant.

7:1 Now when Solomon had made an end of praying, the fire came down
from heaven, and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices; and
the glory of the LORD filled the house.

7:2 And the priests could not enter into the house of the LORD,
because the glory of the LORD had filled the LORD’s house.

7:3 And when all the children of Israel saw how the fire came down,
and the glory of the LORD upon the house, they bowed themselves with
their faces to the ground upon the pavement, and worshipped, and
praised the LORD, saying, For he is good; for his mercy endureth for
ever.

7:4 Then the king and all the people offered sacrifices before the
LORD.

7:5 And king Solomon offered a sacrifice of twenty and two thousand
oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep: so the king and all
the people dedicated the house of God.

7:6 And the priests waited on their offices: the Levites also with
instruments of musick of the LORD, which David the king had made to
praise the LORD, because his mercy endureth for ever, when David
praised by their ministry; and the priests sounded trumpets before
them, and all Israel stood.

7:7 Moreover Solomon hallowed the middle of the court that was before
the house of the LORD: for there he offered burnt offerings, and the
fat of the peace offerings, because the brasen altar which Solomon had
made was not able to receive the burnt offerings, and the meat
offerings, and the fat.

7:8 Also at the same time Solomon kept the feast seven days, and all
Israel with him, a very great congregation, from the entering in of
Hamath unto the river of Egypt.

7:9 And in the eighth day they made a solemn assembly: for they kept
the dedication of the altar seven days, and the feast seven days.

7:10 And on the three and twentieth day of the seventh month he sent
the people away into their tents, glad and merry in heart for the
goodness that the LORD had shewed unto David, and to Solomon, and to
Israel his people.

7:11 Thus Solomon finished the house of the LORD, and the king’s
house: and all that came into Solomon’s heart to make in the house of
the LORD, and in his own house, he prosperously effected.

7:12 And the LORD appeared to Solomon by night, and said unto him, I
have heard thy prayer, and have chosen this place to myself for an
house of sacrifice.

7:13 If I shut up heaven that there be no rain, or if I command the
locusts to devour the land, or if I send pestilence among my people;
7:14 If my people, which are called by my name, shall humble
themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked
ways; then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and
will heal their land.

7:15 Now mine eyes shall be open, and mine ears attent unto the prayer
that is made in this place.

7:16 For now have I chosen and sanctified this house, that my name may
be there for ever: and mine eyes and mine heart shall be there
perpetually.

7:17 And as for thee, if thou wilt walk before me, as David thy father
walked, and do according to all that I have commanded thee, and shalt
observe my statutes and my judgments; 7:18 Then will I stablish the
throne of thy kingdom, according as I have covenanted with David thy
father, saying, There shall not fail thee a man to be ruler in Israel.

7:19 But if ye turn away, and forsake my statutes and my commandments,
which I have set before you, and shall go and serve other gods, and
worship them; 7:20 Then will I pluck them up by the roots out of my
land which I have given them; and this house, which I have sanctified
for my name, will I cast out of my sight, and will make it to be a
proverb and a byword among all nations.

7:21 And this house, which is high, shall be an astonishment to every
one that passeth by it; so that he shall say, Why hath the LORD done
thus unto this land, and unto this house? 7:22 And it shall be
answered, Because they forsook the LORD God of their fathers, which
brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, and laid hold on other
gods, and worshipped them, and served them: therefore hath he brought
all this evil upon them.

8:1 And it came to pass at the end of twenty years, wherein Solomon
had built the house of the LORD, and his own house, 8:2 That the
cities which Huram had restored to Solomon, Solomon built them, and
caused the children of Israel to dwell there.

8:3 And Solomon went to Hamathzobah, and prevailed against it.

8:4 And he built Tadmor in the wilderness, and all the store cities,
which he built in Hamath.

8:5 Also he built Bethhoron the upper, and Bethhoron the nether,
fenced cities, with walls, gates, and bars; 8:6 And Baalath, and all
the store cities that Solomon had, and all the chariot cities, and the
cities of the horsemen, and all that Solomon desired to build in
Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and throughout all the land of his
dominion.

8:7 As for all the people that were left of the Hittites, and the
Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites,
which were not of Israel, 8:8 But of their children, who were left
after them in the land, whom the children of Israel consumed not, them
did Solomon make to pay tribute until this day.

8:9 But of the children of Israel did Solomon make no servants for his
work; but they were men of war, and chief of his captains, and
captains of his chariots and horsemen.

8:10 And these were the chief of king Solomon’s officers, even two
hundred and fifty, that bare rule over the people.

8:11 And Solomon brought up the daughter of Pharaoh out of the city of
David unto the house that he had built for her: for he said, My wife
shall not dwell in the house of David king of Israel, because the
places are holy, whereunto the ark of the LORD hath come.

8:12 Then Solomon offered burnt offerings unto the LORD on the altar
of the LORD, which he had built before the porch, 8:13 Even after a
certain rate every day, offering according to the commandment of
Moses, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn
feasts, three times in the year, even in the feast of unleavened
bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles.

8:14 And he appointed, according to the order of David his father, the
courses of the priests to their service, and the Levites to their
charges, to praise and minister before the priests, as the duty of
every day required: the porters also by their courses at every gate:
for so had David the man of God commanded.

8:15 And they departed not from the commandment of the king unto the
priests and Levites concerning any matter, or concerning the
treasures.

8:16 Now all the work of Solomon was prepared unto the day of the
foundation of the house of the LORD, and until it was finished. So the
house of the LORD was perfected.

8:17 Then went Solomon to Eziongeber, and to Eloth, at the sea side in
the land of Edom.

8:18 And Huram sent him by the hands of his servants ships, and
servants that had knowledge of the sea; and they went with the
servants of Solomon to Ophir, and took thence four hundred and fifty
talents of gold, and brought them to king Solomon.

9:1 And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came
to prove Solomon with hard questions at Jerusalem, with a very great
company, and camels that bare spices, and gold in abundance, and
precious stones: and when she was come to Solomon, she communed with
him of all that was in her heart.

9:2 And Solomon told her all her questions: and there was nothing hid
from Solomon which he told her not.

9:3 And when the queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom of Solomon, and
the house that he had built, 9:4 And the meat of his table, and the
sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and
their apparel; his cupbearers also, and their apparel; and his ascent
by which he went up into the house of the LORD; there was no more
spirit in her.

9:5 And she said to the king, It was a true report which I heard in
mine own land of thine acts, and of thy wisdom: 9:6 Howbeit I believed
not their words, until I came, and mine eyes had seen it: and, behold,
the one half of the greatness of thy wisdom was not told me: for thou
exceedest the fame that I heard.

9:7 Happy are thy men, and happy are these thy servants, which stand
continually before thee, and hear thy wisdom.

9:8 Blessed be the LORD thy God, which delighted in thee to set thee
on his throne, to be king for the LORD thy God: because thy God loved
Israel, to establish them for ever, therefore made he thee king over
them, to do judgment and justice.

9:9 And she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and
of spices great abundance, and precious stones: neither was there any
such spice as the queen of Sheba gave king Solomon.

9:10 And the servants also of Huram, and the servants of Solomon,
which brought gold from Ophir, brought algum trees and precious
stones.

9:11 And the king made of the algum trees terraces to the house of the
LORD, and to the king’s palace, and harps and psalteries for singers:
and there were none such seen before in the land of Judah.

9:12 And king Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all her desire,
whatsoever she asked, beside that which she had brought unto the king.
So she turned, and went away to her own land, she and her servants.

9:13 Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six
hundred and threescore and six talents of gold; 9:14 Beside that which
chapmen and merchants brought. And all the kings of Arabia and
governors of the country brought gold and silver to Solomon.

9:15 And king Solomon made two hundred targets of beaten gold: six
hundred shekels of beaten gold went to one target.

9:16 And three hundred shields made he of beaten gold: three hundred
shekels of gold went to one shield. And the king put them in the house
of the forest of Lebanon.

9:17 Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it
with pure gold.

9:18 And there were six steps to the throne, with a footstool of gold,
which were fastened to the throne, and stays on each side of the
sitting place, and two lions standing by the stays: 9:19 And twelve
lions stood there on the one side and on the other upon the six steps.
There was not the like made in any kingdom.

9:20 And all the drinking vessels of king Solomon were of gold, and
all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure
gold: none were of silver; it was not any thing accounted of in the
days of Solomon.

9:21 For the king’s ships went to Tarshish with the servants of Huram:
every three years once came the ships of Tarshish bringing gold, and
silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.

9:22 And king Solomon passed all the kings of the earth in riches and
wisdom.

9:23 And all the kings of the earth sought the presence of Solomon, to
hear his wisdom, that God had put in his heart.

9:24 And they brought every man his present, vessels of silver, and
vessels of gold, and raiment, harness, and spices, horses, and mules,
a rate year by year.

9:25 And Solomon had four thousand stalls for horses and chariots, and
twelve thousand horsemen; whom he bestowed in the chariot cities, and
with the king at Jerusalem.

9:26 And he reigned over all the kings from the river even unto the
land of the Philistines, and to the border of Egypt.

9:27 And the king made silver in Jerusalem as stones, and cedar trees
made he as the sycomore trees that are in the low plains in abundance.

9:28 And they brought unto Solomon horses out of Egypt, and out of all
lands.

9:29 Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, first and last, are they not
written in the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the prophecy of
Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the visions of Iddo the seer against
Jeroboam the son of Nebat? 9:30 And Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over
all Israel forty years.

9:31 And Solomon slept with his fathers, and he was buried in the city
of David his father: and Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead.

10:1 And Rehoboam went to Shechem: for to Shechem were all Israel come
to make him king.

10:2 And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who was in
Egypt, whither he fled from the presence of Solomon the king, heard
it, that Jeroboam returned out of Egypt.

10:3 And they sent and called him. So Jeroboam and all Israel came and
spake to Rehoboam, saying, 10:4 Thy father made our yoke grievous: now
therefore ease thou somewhat the grievous servitude of thy father, and
his heavy yoke that he put upon us, and we will serve thee.

10:5 And he said unto them, Come again unto me after three days. And
the people departed.

10:6 And king Rehoboam took counsel with the old men that had stood
before Solomon his father while he yet lived, saying, What counsel
give ye me to return answer to this people? 10:7 And they spake unto
him, saying, If thou be kind to this people, and please them, and
speak good words to them, they will be thy servants for ever.

10:8 But he forsook the counsel which the old men gave him, and took
counsel with the young men that were brought up with him, that stood
before him.

10:9 And he said unto them, What advice give ye that we may return
answer to this people, which have spoken to me, saying, Ease somewhat
the yoke that thy father did put upon us? 10:10 And the young men
that were brought up with him spake unto him, saying, Thus shalt thou
answer the people that spake unto thee, saying, Thy father made our
yoke heavy, but make thou it somewhat lighter for us; thus shalt thou
say unto them, My little finger shall be thicker than my father’s
loins.

10:11 For whereas my father put a heavy yoke upon you, I will put more
to your yoke: my father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise
you with scorpions.

10:12 So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam on the third
day, as the king bade, saying, Come again to me on the third day.

10:13 And the king answered them roughly; and king Rehoboam forsook
the counsel of the old men, 10:14 And answered them after the advice
of the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy, but I will
add thereto: my father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise
you with scorpions.

10:15 So the king hearkened not unto the people: for the cause was of
God, that the LORD might perform his word, which he spake by the hand
of Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat.

10:16 And when all Israel saw that the king would not hearken unto
them, the people answered the king, saying, What portion have we in
David? and we have none inheritance in the son of Jesse: every man to
your tents, O Israel: and now, David, see to thine own house. So all
Israel went to their tents.

10:17 But as for the children of Israel that dwelt in the cities of
Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.

10:18 Then king Rehoboam sent Hadoram that was over the tribute; and
the children of Israel stoned him with stones, that he died. But king
Rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot, to flee to
Jerusalem.

10:19 And Israel rebelled against the house of David unto this day.

11:1 And when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he gathered of the house
of Judah and Benjamin an hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men,
which were warriors, to fight against Israel, that he might bring the
kingdom again to Rehoboam.

11:2 But the word of the LORD came to Shemaiah the man of God, saying,
11:3 Speak unto Rehoboam the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and to all
Israel in Judah and Benjamin, saying, 11:4 Thus saith the LORD, Ye
shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren: return every man to
his house: for this thing is done of me. And they obeyed the words of
the LORD, and returned from going against Jeroboam.

11:5 And Rehoboam dwelt in Jerusalem, and built cities for defence in
Judah.

11:6 He built even Bethlehem, and Etam, and Tekoa, 11:7 And Bethzur,
and Shoco, and Adullam, 11:8 And Gath, and Mareshah, and Ziph, 11:9
And Adoraim, and Lachish, and Azekah, 11:10 And Zorah, and Aijalon,
and Hebron, which are in Judah and in Benjamin fenced cities.

11:11 And he fortified the strong holds, and put captains in them, and
store of victual, and of oil and wine.

11:12 And in every several city he put shields and spears, and made
them exceeding strong, having Judah and Benjamin on his side.

11:13 And the priests and the Levites that were in all Israel resorted
to him out of all their coasts.

11:14 For the Levites left their suburbs and their possession, and
came to Judah and Jerusalem: for Jeroboam and his sons had cast them
off from executing the priest’s office unto the LORD: 11:15 And he
ordained him priests for the high places, and for the devils, and for
the calves which he had made.

11:16 And after them out of all the tribes of Israel such as set their
hearts to seek the LORD God of Israel came to Jerusalem, to sacrifice
unto the LORD God of their fathers.

11:17 So they strengthened the kingdom of Judah, and made Rehoboam the
son of Solomon strong, three years: for three years they walked in the
way of David and Solomon.

11:18 And Rehoboam took him Mahalath the daughter of Jerimoth the son
of David to wife, and Abihail the daughter of Eliab the son of Jesse;
11:19 Which bare him children; Jeush, and Shamariah, and Zaham.

11:20 And after her he took Maachah the daughter of Absalom; which
bare him Abijah, and Attai, and Ziza, and Shelomith.

11:21 And Rehoboam loved Maachah the daughter of Absalom above all his
wives and his concubines: (for he took eighteen wives, and threescore
concubines; and begat twenty and eight sons, and threescore
daughters.) 11:22 And Rehoboam made Abijah the son of Maachah the
chief, to be ruler among his brethren: for he thought to make him
king.

11:23 And he dealt wisely, and dispersed of all his children
throughout all the countries of Judah and Benjamin, unto every fenced
city: and he gave them victual in abundance. And he desired many
wives.

12:1 And it came to pass, when Rehoboam had established the kingdom,
and had strengthened himself, he forsook the law of the LORD, and all
Israel with him.

12:2 And it came to pass, that in the fifth year of king Rehoboam
Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, because they had
transgressed against the LORD, 12:3 With twelve hundred chariots, and
threescore thousand horsemen: and the people were without number that
came with him out of Egypt; the Lubims, the Sukkiims, and the
Ethiopians.

12:4 And he took the fenced cities which pertained to Judah, and came
to Jerusalem.

12:5 Then came Shemaiah the prophet to Rehoboam, and to the princes of
Judah, that were gathered together to Jerusalem because of Shishak,
and said unto them, Thus saith the LORD, Ye have forsaken me, and
therefore have I also left you in the hand of Shishak.

12:6 Whereupon the princes of Israel and the king humbled themselves;
and they said, The LORD is righteous.

12:7 And when the LORD saw that they humbled themselves, the word of
the LORD came to Shemaiah, saying, They have humbled themselves;
therefore I will not destroy them, but I will grant them some
deliverance; and my wrath shall not be poured out upon Jerusalem by
the hand of Shishak.

12:8 Nevertheless they shall be his servants; that they may know my
service, and the service of the kingdoms of the countries.

12:9 So Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, and took away
the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the
king’s house; he took all: he carried away also the shields of gold
which Solomon had made.

12:10 Instead of which king Rehoboam made shields of brass, and
committed them to the hands of the chief of the guard, that kept the
entrance of the king’s house.

12:11 And when the king entered into the house of the LORD, the guard
came and fetched them, and brought them again into the guard chamber.

12:12 And when he humbled himself, the wrath of the LORD turned from
him, that he would not destroy him altogether: and also in Judah
things went well.

12:13 So king Rehoboam strengthened himself in Jerusalem, and reigned:
for Rehoboam was one and forty years old when he began to reign, and
he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which the LORD had
chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, to put his name there. And his
mother’s name was Naamah an Ammonitess.

12:14 And he did evil, because he prepared not his heart to seek the
LORD.

12:15 Now the acts of Rehoboam, first and last, are they not written
in the book of Shemaiah the prophet, and of Iddo the seer concerning
genealogies? And there were wars between Rehoboam and Jeroboam
continually.

12:16 And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city
of David: and Abijah his son reigned in his stead.

13:1 Now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam began Abijah to reign
over Judah.

13:2 He reigned three years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also was
Michaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. And there was war between
Abijah and Jeroboam.

13:3 And Abijah set the battle in array with an army of valiant men of
war, even four hundred thousand chosen men: Jeroboam also set the
battle in array against him with eight hundred thousand chosen men,
being mighty men of valour.

13:4 And Abijah stood up upon mount Zemaraim, which is in mount
Ephraim, and said, Hear me, thou Jeroboam, and all Israel; 13:5 Ought
ye not to know that the LORD God of Israel gave the kingdom over
Israel to David for ever, even to him and to his sons by a covenant of
salt? 13:6 Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon the
son of David, is risen up, and hath rebelled against his lord.

13:7 And there are gathered unto him vain men, the children of Belial,
and have strengthened themselves against Rehoboam the son of Solomon,
when Rehoboam was young and tenderhearted, and could not withstand
them.

13:8 And now ye think to withstand the kingdom of the LORD in the hand
of the sons of David; and ye be a great multitude, and there are with
you golden calves, which Jeroboam made you for gods.

13:9 Have ye not cast out the priests of the LORD, the sons of Aaron,
and the Levites, and have made you priests after the manner of the
nations of other lands? so that whosoever cometh to consecrate himself
with a young bullock and seven rams, the same may be a priest of them
that are no gods.

13:10 But as for us, the LORD is our God, and we have not forsaken
him; and the priests, which minister unto the LORD, are the sons of
Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their business: 13:11 And they burn
unto the LORD every morning and every evening burnt sacrifices and
sweet incense: the shewbread also set they in order upon the pure
table; and the candlestick of gold with the lamps thereof, to burn
every evening: for we keep the charge of the LORD our God; but ye have
forsaken him.

13:12 And, behold, God himself is with us for our captain, and his
priests with sounding trumpets to cry alarm against you. O children of
Israel, fight ye not against the LORD God of your fathers; for ye
shall not prosper.

13:13 But Jeroboam caused an ambushment to come about behind them: so
they were before Judah, and the ambushment was behind them.

13:14 And when Judah looked back, behold, the battle was before and
behind: and they cried unto the LORD, and the priests sounded with the
trumpets.

13:15 Then the men of Judah gave a shout: and as the men of Judah
shouted, it came to pass, that God smote Jeroboam and all Israel
before Abijah and Judah.

13:16 And the children of Israel fled before Judah: and God delivered
them into their hand.

13:17 And Abijah and his people slew them with a great slaughter: so
there fell down slain of Israel five hundred thousand chosen men.

13:18 Thus the children of Israel were brought under at that time, and
the children of Judah prevailed, because they relied upon the LORD God
of their fathers.

13:19 And Abijah pursued after Jeroboam, and took cities from him,
Bethel with the towns thereof, and Jeshanah with the towns thereof,
and Ephraim with the towns thereof.

13:20 Neither did Jeroboam recover strength again in the days of
Abijah: and the LORD struck him, and he died.

13:21 But Abijah waxed mighty, and married fourteen wives, and begat
twenty and two sons, and sixteen daughters.

13:22 And the rest of the acts of Abijah, and his ways, and his
sayings, are written in the story of the prophet Iddo.

14:1 So Abijah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city
of David: and Asa his son reigned in his stead. In his days the land
was quiet ten years.

14:2 And Asa did that which was good and right in the eyes of the LORD
his God: 14:3 For he took away the altars of the strange gods, and the
high places, and brake down the images, and cut down the groves: 14:4
And commanded Judah to seek the LORD God of their fathers, and to do
the law and the commandment.

14:5 Also he took away out of all the cities of Judah the high places
and the images: and the kingdom was quiet before him.

14:6 And he built fenced cities in Judah: for the land had rest, and
he had no war in those years; because the LORD had given him rest.

14:7 Therefore he said unto Judah, Let us build these cities, and make
about them walls, and towers, gates, and bars, while the land is yet
before us; because we have sought the LORD our God, we have sought
him, and he hath given us rest on every side. So they built and
prospered.

14:8 And Asa had an army of men that bare targets and spears, out of
Judah three hundred thousand; and out of Benjamin, that bare shields
and drew bows, two hundred and fourscore thousand: all these were
mighty men of valour.

14:9 And there came out against them Zerah the Ethiopian with an host
of a thousand thousand, and three hundred chariots; and came unto
Mareshah.

14:10 Then Asa went out against him, and they set the battle in array
in the valley of Zephathah at Mareshah.

14:11 And Asa cried unto the LORD his God, and said, LORD, it is
nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have
no power: help us, O LORD our God; for we rest on thee, and in thy
name we go against this multitude. O LORD, thou art our God; let no
man prevail against thee.

14:12 So the LORD smote the Ethiopians before Asa, and before Judah;
and the Ethiopians fled.

14:13 And Asa and the people that were with him pursued them unto
Gerar: and the Ethiopians were overthrown, that they could not recover
themselves; for they were destroyed before the LORD, and before his
host; and they carried away very much spoil.

14:14 And they smote all the cities round about Gerar; for the fear of
the LORD came upon them: and they spoiled all the cities; for there
was exceeding much spoil in them.

14:15 They smote also the tents of cattle, and carried away sheep and
camels in abundance, and returned to Jerusalem.

15:1 And the Spirit of God came upon Azariah the son of Oded: 15:2 And
he went out to meet Asa, and said unto him, Hear ye me, Asa, and all
Judah and Benjamin; The LORD is with you, while ye be with him; and if
ye seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will
forsake you.

15:3 Now for a long season Israel hath been without the true God, and
without a teaching priest, and without law.

15:4 But when they in their trouble did turn unto the LORD God of
Israel, and sought him, he was found of them.

15:5 And in those times there was no peace to him that went out, nor
to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants
of the countries.

15:6 And nation was destroyed of nation, and city of city: for God did
vex them with all adversity.

15:7 Be ye strong therefore, and let not your hands be weak: for your
work shall be rewarded.

15:8 And when Asa heard these words, and the prophecy of Oded the
prophet, he took courage, and put away the abominable idols out of all
the land of Judah and Benjamin, and out of the cities which he had
taken from mount Ephraim, and renewed the altar of the LORD, that was
before the porch of the LORD.

15:9 And he gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and the strangers with
them out of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of Simeon: for they fell to
him out of Israel in abundance, when they saw that the LORD his God
was with him.

15:10 So they gathered themselves together at Jerusalem in the third
month, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Asa.

15:11 And they offered unto the LORD the same time, of the spoil which
they had brought, seven hundred oxen and seven thousand sheep.

15:12 And they entered into a covenant to seek the LORD God of their
fathers with all their heart and with all their soul; 15:13 That
whosoever would not seek the LORD God of Israel should be put to
death, whether small or great, whether man or woman.

15:14 And they sware unto the LORD with a loud voice, and with
shouting, and with trumpets, and with cornets.

15:15 And all Judah rejoiced at the oath: for they had sworn with all
their heart, and sought him with their whole desire; and he was found
of them: and the LORD gave them rest round about.

15:16 And also concerning Maachah the mother of Asa the king, he
removed her from being queen, because she had made an idol in a grove:
and Asa cut down her idol, and stamped it, and burnt it at the brook
Kidron.

15:17 But the high places were not taken away out of Israel:
nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect all his days.

15:18 And he brought into the house of God the things that his father
had dedicated, and that he himself had dedicated, silver, and gold,
and vessels.

15:19 And there was no more war unto the five and thirtieth year of
the reign of Asa.

16:1 In the six and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa Baasha king of
Israel came up against Judah, and built Ramah, to the intent that he
might let none go out or come in to Asa king of Judah.

16:2 Then Asa brought out silver and gold out of the treasures of the
house of the LORD and of the king’s house, and sent to Benhadad king
of Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying, 16:3 There is a league
between me and thee, as there was between my father and thy father:
behold, I have sent thee silver and gold; go, break thy league with
Baasha king of Israel, that he may depart from me.

16:4 And Benhadad hearkened unto king Asa, and sent the captains of
his armies against the cities of Israel; and they smote Ijon, and Dan,
and Abelmaim, and all the store cities of Naphtali.

16:5 And it came to pass, when Baasha heard it, that he left off
building of Ramah, and let his work cease.

16:6 Then Asa the king took all Judah; and they carried away the
stones of Ramah, and the timber thereof, wherewith Baasha was
building; and he built therewith Geba and Mizpah.

16:7 And at that time Hanani the seer came to Asa king of Judah, and
said unto him, Because thou hast relied on the king of Syria, and not
relied on the LORD thy God, therefore is the host of the king of Syria
escaped out of thine hand.

16:8 Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubims a huge host, with very
many chariots and horsemen? yet, because thou didst rely on the LORD,
he delivered them into thine hand.

16:9 For the eyes of the LORD run to and fro throughout the whole
earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is
perfect toward him. Herein thou hast done foolishly: therefore from
henceforth thou shalt have wars.

16:10 Then Asa was wroth with the seer, and put him in a prison house;
for he was in a rage with him because of this thing. And Asa oppressed
some of the people the same time.

16:11 And, behold, the acts of Asa, first and last, lo, they are
written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.

16:12 And Asa in the thirty and ninth year of his reign was diseased
in his feet, until his disease was exceeding great: yet in his disease
he sought not to the LORD, but to the physicians.

16:13 And Asa slept with his fathers, and died in the one and fortieth
year of his reign.

16:14 And they buried him in his own sepulchres, which he had made for
himself in the city of David, and laid him in the bed which was filled
with sweet odours and divers kinds of spices prepared by the
apothecaries’ art: and they made a very great burning for him.

17:1 And Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead, and strengthened
himself against Israel.

17:2 And he placed forces in all the fenced cities of Judah, and set
garrisons in the land of Judah, and in the cities of Ephraim, which
Asa his father had taken.

17:3 And the LORD was with Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first
ways of his father David, and sought not unto Baalim; 17:4 But sought
to the Lord God of his father, and walked in his commandments, and not
after the doings of Israel.

17:5 Therefore the LORD stablished the kingdom in his hand; and all
Judah brought to Jehoshaphat presents; and he had riches and honour in
abundance.

17:6 And his heart was lifted up in the ways of the LORD: moreover he
took away the high places and groves out of Judah.

17:7 Also in the third year of his reign he sent to his princes, even
to Benhail, and to Obadiah, and to Zechariah, and to Nethaneel, and to
Michaiah, to teach in the cities of Judah.

17:8 And with them he sent Levites, even Shemaiah, and Nethaniah, and
Zebadiah, and Asahel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehonathan, and Adonijah,
and Tobijah, and Tobadonijah, Levites; and with them Elishama and
Jehoram, priests.

17:9 And they taught in Judah, and had the book of the law of the LORD
with them, and went about throughout all the cities of Judah, and
taught the people.

17:10 And the fear of the LORD fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands
that were round about Judah, so that they made no war against
Jehoshaphat.

17:11 Also some of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat presents, and
tribute silver; and the Arabians brought him flocks, seven thousand
and seven hundred rams, and seven thousand and seven hundred he goats.

17:12 And Jehoshaphat waxed great exceedingly; and he built in Judah
castles, and cities of store.

17:13 And he had much business in the cities of Judah: and the men of
war, mighty men of valour, were in Jerusalem.

17:14 And these are the numbers of them according to the house of
their fathers: Of Judah, the captains of thousands; Adnah the chief,
and with him mighty men of valour three hundred thousand.

17:15 And next to him was Jehohanan the captain, and with him two
hundred and fourscore thousand.

17:16 And next him was Amasiah the son of Zichri, who willingly
offered himself unto the LORD; and with him two hundred thousand
mighty men of valour.

17:17 And of Benjamin; Eliada a mighty man of valour, and with him
armed men with bow and shield two hundred thousand.

17:18 And next him was Jehozabad, and with him an hundred and
fourscore thousand ready prepared for the war.

17:19 These waited on the king, beside those whom the king put in the
fenced cities throughout all Judah.

18:1 Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honour in abundance, and joined
affinity with Ahab.

18:2 And after certain years he went down to Ahab to Samaria. And Ahab
killed sheep and oxen for him in abundance, and for the people that he
had with him, and persuaded him to go up with him to Ramothgilead.

18:3 And Ahab king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat king of Judah, Wilt
thou go with me to Ramothgilead? And he answered him, I am as thou
art, and my people as thy people; and we will be with thee in the war.

18:4 And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel, Enquire, I pray
thee, at the word of the LORD to day.

18:5 Therefore the king of Israel gathered together of prophets four
hundred men, and said unto them, Shall we go to Ramothgilead to
battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up; for God will deliver
it into the king’s hand.

18:6 But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the LORD
besides, that we might enquire of him? 18:7 And the king of Israel
said unto Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man, by whom we may enquire of
the LORD: but I hate him; for he never prophesied good unto me, but
always evil: the same is Micaiah the son of Imla. And Jehoshaphat
said, Let not the king say so.

18:8 And the king of Israel called for one of his officers, and said,
Fetch quickly Micaiah the son of Imla.

18:9 And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah sat either
of them on his throne, clothed in their robes, and they sat in a void
place at the entering in of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets
prophesied before them.

18:10 And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah had made him horns of iron,
and said, Thus saith the LORD, With these thou shalt push Syria until
they be consumed.

18:11 And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to
Ramothgilead, and prosper: for the LORD shall deliver it into the hand
of the king.

18:12 And the messenger that went to call Micaiah spake to him,
saying, Behold, the words of the prophets declare good to the king
with one assent; let thy word therefore, I pray thee, be like one of
theirs, and speak thou good.

18:13 And Micaiah said, As the LORD liveth, even what my God saith,
that will I speak.

18:14 And when he was come to the king, the king said unto him,
Micaiah, shall we go to Ramothgilead to battle, or shall I forbear?
And he said, Go ye up, and prosper, and they shall be delivered into
your hand.

18:15 And the king said to him, How many times shall I adjure thee
that thou say nothing but the truth to me in the name of the LORD?
18:16 Then he said, I did see all Israel scattered upon the mountains,
as sheep that have no shepherd: and the LORD said, These have no
master; let them return therefore every man to his house in peace.

18:17 And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee
that he would not prophesy good unto me, but evil? 18:18 Again he
said, Therefore hear the word of the LORD; I saw the LORD sitting upon
his throne, and all the host of heaven standing on his right hand and
on his left.

18:19 And the LORD said, Who shall entice Ahab king of Israel, that he
may go up and fall at Ramothgilead? And one spake saying after this
manner, and another saying after that manner.

18:20 Then there came out a spirit, and stood before the LORD, and
said, I will entice him. And the LORD said unto him, Wherewith? 18:21
And he said, I will go out, and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all
his prophets. And the Lord said, Thou shalt entice him, and thou shalt
also prevail: go out, and do even so.

18:22 Now therefore, behold, the LORD hath put a lying spirit in the
mouth of these thy prophets, and the LORD hath spoken evil against
thee.

18:23 Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came near, and smote Micaiah
upon the cheek, and said, Which way went the Spirit of the LORD from
me to speak unto thee? 18:24 And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shalt see
on that day when thou shalt go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.

18:25 Then the king of Israel said, Take ye Micaiah, and carry him
back to Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the king’s son;
18:26 And say, Thus saith the king, Put this fellow in the prison, and
feed him with bread of affliction and with water of affliction, until
I return in peace.

18:27 And Micaiah said, If thou certainly return in peace, then hath
not the LORD spoken by me. And he said, Hearken, all ye people.

18:28 So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up
to Ramothgilead.

18:29 And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, I will disguise
myself, and I will go to the battle; but put thou on thy robes. So the
king of Israel disguised himself; and they went to the battle.

18:30 Now the king of Syria had commanded the captains of the chariots
that were with him, saying, Fight ye not with small or great, save
only with the king of Israel.

18:31 And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw
Jehoshaphat, that they said, It is the king of Israel. Therefore they
compassed about him to fight: but Jehoshaphat cried out, and the LORD
helped him; and God moved them to depart from him.

18:32 For it came to pass, that, when the captains of the chariots
perceived that it was not the king of Israel, they turned back again
from pursuing him.

18:33 And a certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of
Israel between the joints of the harness: therefore he said to his
chariot man, Turn thine hand, that thou mayest carry me out of the
host; for I am wounded.

18:34 And the battle increased that day: howbeit the king of Israel
stayed himself up in his chariot against the Syrians until the even:
and about the time of the sun going down he died.

19:1 And Jehoshaphat the king of Judah returned to his house in peace
to Jerusalem.

19:2 And Jehu the son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him, and
said to king Jehoshaphat, Shouldest thou help the ungodly, and love
them that hate the LORD? therefore is wrath upon thee from before the
LORD.

19:3 Nevertheless there are good things found in thee, in that thou
hast taken away the groves out of the land, and hast prepared thine
heart to seek God.

19:4 And Jehoshaphat dwelt at Jerusalem: and he went out again through
the people from Beersheba to mount Ephraim, and brought them back unto
the LORD God of their fathers.

19:5 And he set judges in the land throughout all the fenced cities of
Judah, city by city, 19:6 And said to the judges, Take heed what ye
do: for ye judge not for man, but for the LORD, who is with you in the
judgment.

19:7 Wherefore now let the fear of the LORD be upon you; take heed and
do it: for there is no iniquity with the LORD our God, nor respect of
persons, nor taking of gifts.

19:8 Moreover in Jerusalem did Jehoshaphat set of the Levites, and of
the priests, and of the chief of the fathers of Israel, for the
judgment of the LORD, and for controversies, when they returned to
Jerusalem.

19:9 And he charged them, saying, Thus shall ye do in the fear of the
LORD, faithfully, and with a perfect heart.

19:10 And what cause soever shall come to you of your brethren that
dwell in your cities, between blood and blood, between law and
commandment, statutes and judgments, ye shall even warn them that they
trespass not against the LORD, and so wrath come upon you, and upon
your brethren: this do, and ye shall not trespass.

19:11 And, behold, Amariah the chief priest is over you in all matters
of the LORD; and Zebadiah the son of Ishmael, the ruler of the house
of Judah, for all the king’s matters: also the Levites shall be
officers before you. Deal courageously, and the LORD shall be with the
good.

20:1 It came to pass after this also, that the children of Moab, and
the children of Ammon, and with them other beside the Ammonites, came
against Jehoshaphat to battle.

20:2 Then there came some that told Jehoshaphat, saying, There cometh
a great multitude against thee from beyond the sea on this side Syria;
and, behold, they be in Hazazontamar, which is Engedi.

20:3 And Jehoshaphat feared, and set himself to seek the LORD, and
proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah.

20:4 And Judah gathered themselves together, to ask help of the LORD:
even out of all the cities of Judah they came to seek the LORD.

20:5 And Jehoshaphat stood in the congregation of Judah and Jerusalem,
in the house of the LORD, before the new court, 20:6 And said, O LORD
God of our fathers, art not thou God in heaven? and rulest not thou
over all the kingdoms of the heathen? and in thine hand is there not
power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee? 20:7 Art not
thou our God, who didst drive out the inhabitants of this land before
thy people Israel, and gavest it to the seed of Abraham thy friend for
ever? 20:8 And they dwelt therein, and have built thee a sanctuary
therein for thy name, saying, 20:9 If, when evil cometh upon us, as
the sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we stand before this
house, and in thy presence, (for thy name is in this house,) and cry
unto thee in our affliction, then thou wilt hear and help.

20:10 And now, behold, the children of Ammon and Moab and mount Seir,
whom thou wouldest not let Israel invade, when they came out of the
land of Egypt, but they turned from them, and destroyed them not;
20:11 Behold, I say, how they reward us, to come to cast us out of thy
possession, which thou hast given us to inherit.

20:12 O our God, wilt thou not judge them? for we have no might
against this great company that cometh against us; neither know we
what to do: but our eyes are upon thee.

20:13 And all Judah stood before the LORD, with their little ones,
their wives, and their children.

20:14 Then upon Jahaziel the son of Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the
son of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, a Levite of the sons of Asaph,
came the Spirit of the LORD in the midst of the congregation; 20:15
And he said, Hearken ye, all Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and thou king Jehoshaphat, Thus saith the LORD unto you, Be not afraid
nor dismayed by reason of this great multitude; for the battle is not
yours, but God’s.

20:16 To morrow go ye down against them: behold, they come up by the
cliff of Ziz; and ye shall find them at the end of the brook, before
the wilderness of Jeruel.

20:17 Ye shall not need to fight in this battle: set yourselves, stand
ye still, and see the salvation of the LORD with you, O Judah and
Jerusalem: fear not, nor be dismayed; to morrow go out against them:
for the LORD will be with you.

20:18 And Jehoshaphat bowed his head with his face to the ground: and
all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell before the LORD,
worshipping the LORD.

20:19 And the Levites, of the children of the Kohathites, and of the
children of the Korhites, stood up to praise the LORD God of Israel
with a loud voice on high.

20:20 And they rose early in the morning, and went forth into the
wilderness of Tekoa: and as they went forth, Jehoshaphat stood and
said, Hear me, O Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem; Believe in
the LORD your God, so shall ye be established; believe his prophets,
so shall ye prosper.

20:21 And when he had consulted with the people, he appointed singers
unto the LORD, and that should praise the beauty of holiness, as they
went out before the army, and to say, Praise the LORD; for his mercy
endureth for ever.

20:22 And when they began to sing and to praise, the LORD set
ambushments against the children of Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir, which
were come against Judah; and they were smitten.

20:23 For the children of Ammon and Moab stood up against the
inhabitants of mount Seir, utterly to slay and destroy them: and when
they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to
destroy another.

20:24 And when Judah came toward the watch tower in the wilderness,
they looked unto the multitude, and, behold, they were dead bodies
fallen to the earth, and none escaped.

20:25 And when Jehoshaphat and his people came to take away the spoil
of them, they found among them in abundance both riches with the dead
bodies, and precious jewels, which they stripped off for themselves,
more than they could carry away: and they were three days in gathering
of the spoil, it was so much.

20:26 And on the fourth day they assembled themselves in the valley of
Berachah; for there they blessed the LORD: therefore the name of the
same place was called, The valley of Berachah, unto this day.

20:27 Then they returned, every man of Judah and Jerusalem, and
Jehoshaphat in the forefront of them, to go again to Jerusalem with
joy; for the LORD had made them to rejoice over their enemies.

20:28 And they came to Jerusalem with psalteries and harps and
trumpets unto the house of the LORD.

20:29 And the fear of God was on all the kingdoms of those countries,
when they had heard that the LORD fought against the enemies of
Israel.

20:30 So the realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet: for his God gave him rest
round about.

20:31 And Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah: he was thirty and five years
old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty and five years in
Jerusalem.

And his mother’s name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.

20:32 And he walked in the way of Asa his father, and departed not
from it, doing that which was right in the sight of the LORD.

20:33 Howbeit the high places were not taken away: for as yet the
people had not prepared their hearts unto the God of their fathers.

20:34 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, first and last, behold,
they are written in the book of Jehu the son of Hanani, who is
mentioned in the book of the kings of Israel.

20:35 And after this did Jehoshaphat king of Judah join himself with
Ahaziah king of Israel, who did very wickedly: 20:36 And he joined
himself with him to make ships to go to Tarshish: and they made the
ships in Eziongaber.

20:37 Then Eliezer the son of Dodavah of Mareshah prophesied against
Jehoshaphat, saying, Because thou hast joined thyself with Ahaziah,
the LORD hath broken thy works. And the ships were broken, that they
were not able to go to Tarshish.

21:1 Now Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his
fathers in the city of David. And Jehoram his son reigned in his
stead.

21:2 And he had brethren the sons of Jehoshaphat, Azariah, and Jehiel,
and Zechariah, and Azariah, and Michael, and Shephatiah: all these
were the sons of Jehoshaphat king of Israel.

21:3 And their father gave them great gifts of silver, and of gold,
and of precious things, with fenced cities in Judah: but the kingdom
gave he to Jehoram; because he was the firstborn.

21:4 Now when Jehoram was risen up to the kingdom of his father, he
strengthened himself, and slew all his brethren with the sword, and
divers also of the princes of Israel.

21:5 Jehoram was thirty and two years old when he began to reign, and
he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.

21:6 And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, like as did the
house of Ahab: for he had the daughter of Ahab to wife: and he wrought
that which was evil in the eyes of the LORD.

21:7 Howbeit the LORD would not destroy the house of David, because of
the covenant that he had made with David, and as he promised to give a
light to him and to his sons for ever.

21:8 In his days the Edomites revolted from under the dominion of
Judah, and made themselves a king.

21:9 Then Jehoram went forth with his princes, and all his chariots
with him: and he rose up by night, and smote the Edomites which
compassed him in, and the captains of the chariots.

21:10 So the Edomites revolted from under the hand of Judah unto this
day.

The same time also did Libnah revolt from under his hand; because he
had forsaken the LORD God of his fathers.

21:11 Moreover he made high places in the mountains of Judah and
caused the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit fornication, and
compelled Judah thereto.

21:12 And there came a writing to him from Elijah the prophet, saying,
Thus saith the LORD God of David thy father, Because thou hast not
walked in the ways of Jehoshaphat thy father, nor in the ways of Asa
king of Judah, 21:13 But hast walked in the way of the kings of
Israel, and hast made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to go a
whoring, like to the whoredoms of the house of Ahab, and also hast
slain thy brethren of thy father’s house, which were better than
thyself: 21:14 Behold, with a great plague will the LORD smite thy
people, and thy children, and thy wives, and all thy goods: 21:15 And
thou shalt have great sickness by disease of thy bowels, until thy
bowels fall out by reason of the sickness day by day.

21:16 Moreover the LORD stirred up against Jehoram the spirit of the
Philistines, and of the Arabians, that were near the Ethiopians: 21:17
And they came up into Judah, and brake into it, and carried away all
the substance that was found in the king’s house, and his sons also,
and his wives; so that there was never a son left him, save Jehoahaz,
the youngest of his sons.

21:18 And after all this the LORD smote him in his bowels with an
incurable disease.

21:19 And it came to pass, that in process of time, after the end of
two years, his bowels fell out by reason of his sickness: so he died
of sore diseases. And his people made no burning for him, like the
burning of his fathers.

21:20 Thirty and two years old was he when he began to reign, and he
reigned in Jerusalem eight years, and departed without being desired.
Howbeit they buried him in the city of David, but not in the
sepulchres of the kings.

22:1 And the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah his youngest son
king in his stead: for the band of men that came with the Arabians to
the camp had slain all the eldest. So Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king
of Judah reigned.

22:2 Forty and two years old was Ahaziah when he began to reign, and
he reigned one year in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also was Athaliah
the daughter of Omri.

22:3 He also walked in the ways of the house of Ahab: for his mother
was his counsellor to do wickedly.

22:4 Wherefore he did evil in the sight of the LORD like the house of
Ahab: for they were his counsellors after the death of his father to
his destruction.

22:5 He walked also after their counsel, and went with Jehoram the son
of Ahab king of Israel to war against Hazael king of Syria at
Ramothgilead: and the Syrians smote Joram.

22:6 And he returned to be healed in Jezreel because of the wounds
which were given him at Ramah, when he fought with Hazael king of
Syria. And Azariah the son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to see
Jehoram the son of Ahab at Jezreel, because he was sick.

22:7 And the destruction of Ahaziah was of God by coming to Joram: for
when he was come, he went out with Jehoram against Jehu the son of
Nimshi, whom the LORD had anointed to cut off the house of Ahab.

22:8 And it came to pass, that, when Jehu was executing judgment upon
the house of Ahab, and found the princes of Judah, and the sons of the
brethren of Ahaziah, that ministered to Ahaziah, he slew them.

22:9 And he sought Ahaziah: and they caught him, (for he was hid in
Samaria,) and brought him to Jehu: and when they had slain him, they
buried him: Because, said they, he is the son of Jehoshaphat, who
sought the LORD with all his heart. So the house of Ahaziah had no
power to keep still the kingdom.

22:10 But when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was
dead, she arose and destroyed all the seed royal of the house of
Judah.

22:11 But Jehoshabeath, the daughter of the king, took Joash the son
of Ahaziah, and stole him from among the king’s sons that were slain,
and put him and his nurse in a bedchamber. So Jehoshabeath, the
daughter of king Jehoram, the wife of Jehoiada the priest, (for she
was the sister of Ahaziah,) hid him from Athaliah, so that she slew
him not.

22:12 And he was with them hid in the house of God six years: and
Athaliah reigned over the land.

23:1 And in the seventh year Jehoiada strengthened himself, and took
the captains of hundreds, Azariah the son of Jeroham, and Ishmael the
son of Jehohanan, and Azariah the son of Obed, and Maaseiah the son of
Adaiah, and Elishaphat the son of Zichri, into covenant with him.

23:2 And they went about in Judah, and gathered the Levites out of all
the cities of Judah, and the chief of the fathers of Israel, and they
came to Jerusalem.

23:3 And all the congregation made a covenant with the king in the
house of God. And he said unto them, Behold, the king’s son shall
reign, as the LORD hath said of the sons of David.

23:4 This is the thing that ye shall do; A third part of you entering
on the sabbath, of the priests and of the Levites, shall be porters of
the doors; 23:5 And a third part shall be at the king’s house; and a
third part at the gate of the foundation: and all the people shall be
in the courts of the house of the LORD.

23:6 But let none come into the house of the LORD, save the priests,
and they that minister of the Levites; they shall go in, for they are
holy: but all the people shall keep the watch of the LORD.

23:7 And the Levites shall compass the king round about, every man
with his weapons in his hand; and whosoever else cometh into the
house, he shall be put to death: but be ye with the king when he
cometh in, and when he goeth out.

23:8 So the Levites and all Judah did according to all things that
Jehoiada the priest had commanded, and took every man his men that
were to come in on the sabbath, with them that were to go out on the
sabbath: for Jehoiada the priest dismissed not the courses.

23:9 Moreover Jehoiada the priest delivered to the captains of
hundreds spears, and bucklers, and shields, that had been king
David’s, which were in the house of God.

23:10 And he set all the people, every man having his weapon in his
hand, from the right side of the temple to the left side of the
temple, along by the altar and the temple, by the king round about.

23:11 Then they brought out the king’s son, and put upon him the
crown, and gave him the testimony, and made him king. And Jehoiada and
his sons anointed him, and said, God save the king.

23:12 Now when Athaliah heard the noise of the people running and
praising the king, she came to the people into the house of the LORD:
23:13 And she looked, and, behold, the king stood at his pillar at the
entering in, and the princes and the trumpets by the king: and all the
people of the land rejoiced, and sounded with trumpets, also the
singers with instruments of musick, and such as taught to sing praise.
Then Athaliah rent her clothes, and said, Treason, Treason.

23:14 Then Jehoiada the priest brought out the captains of hundreds
that were set over the host, and said unto them, Have her forth of the
ranges: and whoso followeth her, let him be slain with the sword. For
the priest said, Slay her not in the house of the LORD.

23:15 So they laid hands on her; and when she was come to the entering
of the horse gate by the king’s house, they slew her there.

23:16 And Jehoiada made a covenant between him, and between all the
people, and between the king, that they should be the LORD’s people.

23:17 Then all the people went to the house of Baal, and brake it
down, and brake his altars and his images in pieces, and slew Mattan
the priest of Baal before the altars.

23:18 Also Jehoiada appointed the offices of the house of the LORD by
the hand of the priests the Levites, whom David had distributed in the
house of the LORD, to offer the burnt offerings of the LORD, as it is
written in the law of Moses, with rejoicing and with singing, as it
was ordained by David.

23:19 And he set the porters at the gates of the house of the LORD,
that none which was unclean in any thing should enter in.

23:20 And he took the captains of hundreds, and the nobles, and the
governors of the people, and all the people of the land, and brought
down the king from the house of the LORD: and they came through the
high gate into the king’s house, and set the king upon the throne of
the kingdom.

23:21 And all the people of the land rejoiced: and the city was quiet,
after that they had slain Athaliah with the sword.

24:1 Joash was seven years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
forty years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also was Zibiah of
Beersheba.

24:2 And Joash did that which was right in the sight of the LORD all
the days of Jehoiada the priest.

24:3 And Jehoiada took for him two wives; and he begat sons and
daughters.

24:4 And it came to pass after this, that Joash was minded to repair
the house of the LORD.

24:5 And he gathered together the priests and the Levites, and said to
them, Go out unto the cities of Judah, and gather of all Israel money
to repair the house of your God from year to year, and see that ye
hasten the matter. Howbeit the Levites hastened it not.

24:6 And the king called for Jehoiada the chief, and said unto him,
Why hast thou not required of the Levites to bring in out of Judah and
out of Jerusalem the collection, according to the commandment of Moses
the servant of the LORD, and of the congregation of Israel, for the
tabernacle of witness? 24:7 For the sons of Athaliah, that wicked
woman, had broken up the house of God; and also all the dedicated
things of the house of the LORD did they bestow upon Baalim.

24:8 And at the king’s commandment they made a chest, and set it
without at the gate of the house of the LORD.

24:9 And they made a proclamation through Judah and Jerusalem, to
bring in to the LORD the collection that Moses the servant of God laid
upon Israel in the wilderness.

24:10 And all the princes and all the people rejoiced, and brought in,
and cast into the chest, until they had made an end.

24:11 Now it came to pass, that at what time the chest was brought
unto the king’s office by the hand of the Levites, and when they saw
that there was much money, the king’s scribe and the high priest’s
officer came and emptied the chest, and took it, and carried it to his
place again. Thus they did day by day, and gathered money in
abundance.

24:12 And the king and Jehoiada gave it to such as did the work of the
service of the house of the LORD, and hired masons and carpenters to
repair the house of the LORD, and also such as wrought iron and brass
to mend the house of the LORD.

24:13 So the workmen wrought, and the work was perfected by them, and
they set the house of God in his state, and strengthened it.

24:14 And when they had finished it, they brought the rest of the
money before the king and Jehoiada, whereof were made vessels for the
house of the LORD, even vessels to minister, and to offer withal, and
spoons, and vessels of gold and silver. And they offered burnt
offerings in the house of the LORD continually all the days of
Jehoiada.

24:15 But Jehoiada waxed old, and was full of days when he died; an
hundred and thirty years old was he when he died.

24:16 And they buried him in the city of David among the kings,
because he had done good in Israel, both toward God, and toward his
house.

24:17 Now after the death of Jehoiada came the princes of Judah, and
made obeisance to the king. Then the king hearkened unto them.

24:18 And they left the house of the LORD God of their fathers, and
served groves and idols: and wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem for
this their trespass.

24:19 Yet he sent prophets to them, to bring them again unto the LORD;
and they testified against them: but they would not give ear.

24:20 And the Spirit of God came upon Zechariah the son of Jehoiada
the priest, which stood above the people, and said unto them, Thus
saith God, Why transgress ye the commandments of the LORD, that ye
cannot prosper? because ye have forsaken the LORD, he hath also
forsaken you.

24:21 And they conspired against him, and stoned him with stones at
the commandment of the king in the court of the house of the LORD.

24:22 Thus Joash the king remembered not the kindness which Jehoiada
his father had done to him, but slew his son. And when he died, he
said, The LORD look upon it, and require it.

24:23 And it came to pass at the end of the year, that the host of
Syria came up against him: and they came to Judah and Jerusalem, and
destroyed all the princes of the people from among the people, and
sent all the spoil of them unto the king of Damascus.

24:24 For the army of the Syrians came with a small company of men,
and the LORD delivered a very great host into their hand, because they
had forsaken the LORD God of their fathers. So they executed judgment
against Joash.

24:25 And when they were departed from him, (for they left him in
great diseases,) his own servants conspired against him for the blood
of the sons of Jehoiada the priest, and slew him on his bed, and he
died: and they buried him in the city of David, but they buried him
not in the sepulchres of the kings.

24:26 And these are they that conspired against him; Zabad the son of
Shimeath an Ammonitess, and Jehozabad the son of Shimrith a Moabitess.

24:27 Now concerning his sons, and the greatness of the burdens laid
upon him, and the repairing of the house of God, behold, they are
written in the story of the book of the kings. And Amaziah his son
reigned in his stead.

25:1 Amaziah was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and
he reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name
was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem.

25:2 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, but not
with a perfect heart.

25:3 Now it came to pass, when the kingdom was established to him,
that he slew his servants that had killed the king his father.

25:4 But he slew not their children, but did as it is written in the
law in the book of Moses, where the LORD commanded, saying, The
fathers shall not die for the children, neither shall the children die
for the fathers, but every man shall die for his own sin.

25:5 Moreover Amaziah gathered Judah together, and made them captains
over thousands, and captains over hundreds, according to the houses of
their fathers, throughout all Judah and Benjamin: and he numbered them
from twenty years old and above, and found them three hundred thousand
choice men, able to go forth to war, that could handle spear and
shield.

25:6 He hired also an hundred thousand mighty men of valour out of
Israel for an hundred talents of silver.

25:7 But there came a man of God to him, saying, O king, let not the
army of Israel go with thee; for the LORD is not with Israel, to wit,
with all the children of Ephraim.

25:8 But if thou wilt go, do it; be strong for the battle: God shall
make thee fall before the enemy: for God hath power to help, and to
cast down.

25:9 And Amaziah said to the man of God, But what shall we do for the
hundred talents which I have given to the army of Israel? And the man
of God answered, The LORD is able to give thee much more than this.

25:10 Then Amaziah separated them, to wit, the army that was come to
him out of Ephraim, to go home again: wherefore their anger was
greatly kindled against Judah, and they returned home in great anger.

25:11 And Amaziah strengthened himself, and led forth his people, and
went to the valley of salt, and smote of the children of Seir ten
thousand.

25:12 And other ten thousand left alive did the children of Judah
carry away captive, and brought them unto the top of the rock, and
cast them down from the top of the rock, that they all were broken in
pieces.

25:13 But the soldiers of the army which Amaziah sent back, that they
should not go with him to battle, fell upon the cities of Judah, from
Samaria even unto Bethhoron, and smote three thousand of them, and
took much spoil.

25:14 Now it came to pass, after that Amaziah was come from the
slaughter of the Edomites, that he brought the gods of the children of
Seir, and set them up to be his gods, and bowed down himself before
them, and burned incense unto them.

25:15 Wherefore the anger of the LORD was kindled against Amaziah, and
he sent unto him a prophet, which said unto him, Why hast thou sought
after the gods of the people, which could not deliver their own people
out of thine hand? 25:16 And it came to pass, as he talked with him,
that the king said unto him, Art thou made of the king’s counsel?
forbear; why shouldest thou be smitten? Then the prophet forbare, and
said, I know that God hath determined to destroy thee, because thou
hast done this, and hast not hearkened unto my counsel.

25:17 Then Amaziah king of Judah took advice, and sent to Joash, the
son of Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come, let us
see one another in the face.

25:18 And Joash king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying,
The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon,
saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife: and there passed by a
wild beast that was in Lebanon, and trode down the thistle.

25:19 Thou sayest, Lo, thou hast smitten the Edomites; and thine heart
lifteth thee up to boast: abide now at home; why shouldest thou meddle
to thine hurt, that thou shouldest fall, even thou, and Judah with
thee? 25:20 But Amaziah would not hear; for it came of God, that he
might deliver them into the hand of their enemies, because they sought
after the gods of Edom.

25:21 So Joash the king of Israel went up; and they saw one another in
the face, both he and Amaziah king of Judah, at Bethshemesh, which
belongeth to Judah.

25:22 And Judah was put to the worse before Israel, and they fled
every man to his tent.

25:23 And Joash the king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah, the son
of Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, at Bethshemesh, and brought him to
Jerusalem, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of
Ephraim to the corner gate, four hundred cubits.

25:24 And he took all the gold and the silver, and all the vessels
that were found in the house of God with Obededom, and the treasures
of the king’s house, the hostages also, and returned to Samaria.

25:25 And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived after the death
of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel fifteen years.

25:26 Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah, first and last, behold, are
they not written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel? 25:27
Now after the time that Amaziah did turn away from following the LORD
they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem; and he fled to
Lachish: but they sent to Lachish after him, and slew him there.

25:28 And they brought him upon horses, and buried him with his
fathers in the city of Judah.

26:1 Then all the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was sixteen years
old, and made him king in the room of his father Amaziah.

26:2 He built Eloth, and restored it to Judah, after that the king
slept with his fathers.

26:3 Sixteen years old was Uzziah when he began to reign, and he
reigned fifty and two years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also was
Jecoliah of Jerusalem.

26:4 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD,
according to all that his father Amaziah did.

26:5 And he sought God in the days of Zechariah, who had understanding
in the visions of God: and as long as he sought the LORD, God made him
to prosper.

26:6 And he went forth and warred against the Philistines, and brake
down the wall of Gath, and the wall of Jabneh, and the wall of Ashdod,
and built cities about Ashdod, and among the Philistines.

26:7 And God helped him against the Philistines, and against the
Arabians that dwelt in Gurbaal, and the Mehunims.

26:8 And the Ammonites gave gifts to Uzziah: and his name spread
abroad even to the entering in of Egypt; for he strengthened himself
exceedingly.

26:9 Moreover Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem at the corner gate, and
at the valley gate, and at the turning of the wall, and fortified
them.

26:10 Also he built towers in the desert, and digged many wells: for
he had much cattle, both in the low country, and in the plains:
husbandmen also, and vine dressers in the mountains, and in Carmel:
for he loved husbandry.

26:11 Moreover Uzziah had an host of fighting men, that went out to
war by bands, according to the number of their account by the hand of
Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the ruler, under the hand of Hananiah,
one of the king’s captains.

26:12 The whole number of the chief of the fathers of the mighty men
of valour were two thousand and six hundred.

26:13 And under their hand was an army, three hundred thousand and
seven thousand and five hundred, that made war with mighty power, to
help the king against the enemy.

26:14 And Uzziah prepared for them throughout all the host shields,
and spears, and helmets, and habergeons, and bows, and slings to cast
stones.

26:15 And he made in Jerusalem engines, invented by cunning men, to be
on the towers and upon the bulwarks, to shoot arrows and great stones
withal.

And his name spread far abroad; for he was marvellously helped, till
he was strong.

26:16 But when he was strong, his heart was lifted up to his
destruction: for he transgressed against the LORD his God, and went
into the temple of the LORD to burn incense upon the altar of incense.

26:17 And Azariah the priest went in after him, and with him fourscore
priests of the LORD, that were valiant men: 26:18 And they withstood
Uzziah the king, and said unto him, It appertaineth not unto thee,
Uzziah, to burn incense unto the LORD, but to the priests the sons of
Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense: go out of the sanctuary;
for thou hast trespassed; neither shall it be for thine honour from
the LORD God.

26:19 Then Uzziah was wroth, and had a censer in his hand to burn
incense: and while he was wroth with the priests, the leprosy even
rose up in his forehead before the priests in the house of the LORD,
from beside the incense altar.

26:20 And Azariah the chief priest, and all the priests, looked upon
him, and, behold, he was leprous in his forehead, and they thrust him
out from thence; yea, himself hasted also to go out, because the LORD
had smitten him.

26:21 And Uzziah the king was a leper unto the day of his death, and
dwelt in a several house, being a leper; for he was cut off from the
house of the LORD: and Jotham his son was over the king’s house,
judging the people of the land.

26:22 Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah, first and last, did Isaiah
the prophet, the son of Amoz, write.

26:23 So Uzziah slept with his fathers, and they buried him with his
fathers in the field of the burial which belonged to the kings; for
they said, He is a leper: and Jotham his son reigned in his stead.

27:1 Jotham was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and
he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also was
Jerushah, the daughter of Zadok.

27:2 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD,
according to all that his father Uzziah did: howbeit he entered not
into the temple of the LORD. And the people did yet corruptly.

27:3 He built the high gate of the house of the LORD, and on the wall
of Ophel he built much.

27:4 Moreover he built cities in the mountains of Judah, and in the
forests he built castles and towers.

27:5 He fought also with the king of the Ammonites, and prevailed
against them. And the children of Ammon gave him the same year an
hundred talents of silver, and ten thousand measures of wheat, and ten
thousand of barley. So much did the children of Ammon pay unto him,
both the second year, and the third.

27:6 So Jotham became mighty, because he prepared his ways before the
LORD his God.

27:7 Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all his wars, and his
ways, lo, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and
Judah.

27:8 He was five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and
reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem.

27:9 And Jotham slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the
city of David: and Ahaz his son reigned in his stead.

28:1 Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
sixteen years in Jerusalem: but he did not that which was right in the
sight of the LORD, like David his father: 28:2 For he walked in the
ways of the kings of Israel, and made also molten images for Baalim.

28:3 Moreover he burnt incense in the valley of the son of Hinnom, and
burnt his children in the fire, after the abominations of the heathen
whom the LORD had cast out before the children of Israel.

28:4 He sacrificed also and burnt incense in the high places, and on
the hills, and under every green tree.

28:5 Wherefore the LORD his God delivered him into the hand of the
king of Syria; and they smote him, and carried away a great multitude
of them captives, and brought them to Damascus. And he was also
delivered into the hand of the king of Israel, who smote him with a
great slaughter.

28:6 For Pekah the son of Remaliah slew in Judah an hundred and twenty
thousand in one day, which were all valiant men; because they had
forsaken the LORD God of their fathers.

28:7 And Zichri, a mighty man of Ephraim, slew Maaseiah the king’s
son, and Azrikam the governor of the house, and Elkanah that was next
to the king.

28:8 And the children of Israel carried away captive of their brethren
two hundred thousand, women, sons, and daughters, and took also away
much spoil from them, and brought the spoil to Samaria.

28:9 But a prophet of the LORD was there, whose name was Oded: and he
went out before the host that came to Samaria, and said unto them,
Behold, because the LORD God of your fathers was wroth with Judah, he
hath delivered them into your hand, and ye have slain them in a rage
that reacheth up unto heaven.

28:10 And now ye purpose to keep under the children of Judah and
Jerusalem for bondmen and bondwomen unto you: but are there not with
you, even with you, sins against the LORD your God? 28:11 Now hear me
therefore, and deliver the captives again, which ye have taken captive
of your brethren: for the fierce wrath of the LORD is upon you.

28:12 Then certain of the heads of the children of Ephraim, Azariah
the son of Johanan, Berechiah the son of Meshillemoth, and Jehizkiah
the son of Shallum, and Amasa the son of Hadlai, stood up against them
that came from the war, 28:13 And said unto them, Ye shall not bring
in the captives hither: for whereas we have offended against the LORD
already, ye intend to add more to our sins and to our trespass: for
our trespass is great, and there is fierce wrath against Israel.

28:14 So the armed men left the captives and the spoil before the
princes and all the congregation.

28:15 And the men which were expressed by name rose up, and took the
captives, and with the spoil clothed all that were naked among them,
and arrayed them, and shod them, and gave them to eat and to drink,
and anointed them, and carried all the feeble of them upon asses, and
brought them to Jericho, the city of palm trees, to their brethren:
then they returned to Samaria.

28:16 At that time did king Ahaz send unto the kings of Assyria to
help him.

28:17 For again the Edomites had come and smitten Judah, and carried
away captives.

28:18 The Philistines also had invaded the cities of the low country,
and of the south of Judah, and had taken Bethshemesh, and Ajalon, and
Gederoth, and Shocho with the villages thereof, and Timnah with the
villages thereof, Gimzo also and the villages thereof: and they dwelt
there.

28:19 For the LORD brought Judah low because of Ahaz king of Israel;
for he made Judah naked, and transgressed sore against the LORD.

28:20 And Tilgathpilneser king of Assyria came unto him, and
distressed him, but strengthened him not.

28:21 For Ahaz took away a portion out of the house of the LORD, and
out of the house of the king, and of the princes, and gave it unto the
king of Assyria: but he helped him not.

28:22 And in the time of his distress did he trespass yet more against
the LORD: this is that king Ahaz.

28:23 For he sacrificed unto the gods of Damascus, which smote him:
and he said, Because the gods of the kings of Syria help them,
therefore will I sacrifice to them, that they may help me. But they
were the ruin of him, and of all Israel.

28:24 And Ahaz gathered together the vessels of the house of God, and
cut in pieces the vessels of the house of God, and shut up the doors
of the house of the LORD, and he made him altars in every corner of
Jerusalem.

28:25 And in every several city of Judah he made high places to burn
incense unto other gods, and provoked to anger the LORD God of his
fathers.

28:26 Now the rest of his acts and of all his ways, first and last,
behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.

28:27 And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the
city, even in Jerusalem: but they brought him not into the sepulchres
of the kings of Israel: and Hezekiah his son reigned in his stead.

29:1 Hezekiah began to reign when he was five and twenty years old,
and he reigned nine and twenty years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s
name was Abijah, the daughter of Zechariah.

29:2 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD,
according to all that David his father had done.

29:3 He in the first year of his reign, in the first month, opened the
doors of the house of the LORD, and repaired them.

29:4 And he brought in the priests and the Levites, and gathered them
together into the east street, 29:5 And said unto them, Hear me, ye
Levites, sanctify now yourselves, and sanctify the house of the LORD
God of your fathers, and carry forth the filthiness out of the holy
place.

29:6 For our fathers have trespassed, and done that which was evil in
the eyes of the LORD our God, and have forsaken him, and have turned
away their faces from the habitation of the LORD, and turned their
backs.

29:7 Also they have shut up the doors of the porch, and put out the
lamps, and have not burned incense nor offered burnt offerings in the
holy place unto the God of Israel.

29:8 Wherefore the wrath of the LORD was upon Judah and Jerusalem, and
he hath delivered them to trouble, to astonishment, and to hissing, as
ye see with your eyes.

29:9 For, lo, our fathers have fallen by the sword, and our sons and
our daughters and our wives are in captivity for this.

29:10 Now it is in mine heart to make a covenant with the LORD God of
Israel, that his fierce wrath may turn away from us.

29:11 My sons, be not now negligent: for the LORD hath chosen you to
stand before him, to serve him, and that ye should minister unto him,
and burn incense.

29:12 Then the Levites arose, Mahath the son of Amasai, and Joel the
son of Azariah, of the sons of the Kohathites: and of the sons of
Merari, Kish the son of Abdi, and Azariah the son of Jehalelel: and of
the Gershonites; Joah the son of Zimmah, and Eden the son of Joah:
29:13 And of the sons of Elizaphan; Shimri, and Jeiel: and of the sons
of Asaph; Zechariah, and Mattaniah: 29:14 And of the sons of Heman;
Jehiel, and Shimei: and of the sons of Jeduthun; Shemaiah, and Uzziel.

29:15 And they gathered their brethren, and sanctified themselves, and
came, according to the commandment of the king, by the words of the
LORD, to cleanse the house of the LORD.

29:16 And the priests went into the inner part of the house of the
LORD, to cleanse it, and brought out all the uncleanness that they
found in the temple of the LORD into the court of the house of the
LORD. And the Levites took it, to carry it out abroad into the brook
Kidron.

29:17 Now they began on the first day of the first month to sanctify,
and on the eighth day of the month came they to the porch of the LORD:
so they sanctified the house of the LORD in eight days; and in the
sixteenth day of the first month they made an end.

29:18 Then they went in to Hezekiah the king, and said, We have
cleansed all the house of the LORD, and the altar of burnt offering,
with all the vessels thereof, and the shewbread table, with all the
vessels thereof.

29:19 Moreover all the vessels, which king Ahaz in his reign did cast
away in his transgression, have we prepared and sanctified, and,
behold, they are before the altar of the LORD.

29:20 Then Hezekiah the king rose early, and gathered the rulers of
the city, and went up to the house of the LORD.

29:21 And they brought seven bullocks, and seven rams, and seven
lambs, and seven he goats, for a sin offering for the kingdom, and for
the sanctuary, and for Judah. And he commanded the priests the sons of
Aaron to offer them on the altar of the LORD.

29:22 So they killed the bullocks, and the priests received the blood,
and sprinkled it on the altar: likewise, when they had killed the
rams, they sprinkled the blood upon the altar: they killed also the
lambs, and they sprinkled the blood upon the altar.

29:23 And they brought forth the he goats for the sin offering before
the king and the congregation; and they laid their hands upon them:
29:24 And the priests killed them, and they made reconciliation with
their blood upon the altar, to make an atonement for all Israel: for
the king commanded that the burnt offering and the sin offering should
be made for all Israel.

29:25 And he set the Levites in the house of the LORD with cymbals,
with psalteries, and with harps, according to the commandment of
David, and of Gad the king’s seer, and Nathan the prophet: for so was
the commandment of the LORD by his prophets.

29:26 And the Levites stood with the instruments of David, and the
priests with the trumpets.

29:27 And Hezekiah commanded to offer the burnt offering upon the
altar.

And when the burnt offering began, the song of the LORD began also
with the trumpets, and with the instruments ordained by David king of
Israel.

29:28 And all the congregation worshipped, and the singers sang, and
the trumpeters sounded: and all this continued until the burnt
offering was finished.

29:29 And when they had made an end of offering, the king and all that
were present with him bowed themselves, and worshipped.

29:30 Moreover Hezekiah the king and the princes commanded the Levites
to sing praise unto the LORD with the words of David, and of Asaph the
seer. And they sang praises with gladness, and they bowed their heads
and worshipped.

29:31 Then Hezekiah answered and said, Now ye have consecrated
yourselves unto the LORD, come near and bring sacrifices and thank
offerings into the house of the LORD. And the congregation brought in
sacrifices and thank offerings; and as many as were of a free heart
burnt offerings.

29:32 And the number of the burnt offerings, which the congregation
brought, was threescore and ten bullocks, an hundred rams, and two
hundred lambs: all these were for a burnt offering to the LORD.

29:33 And the consecrated things were six hundred oxen and three
thousand sheep.

29:34 But the priests were too few, so that they could not flay all
the burnt offerings: wherefore their brethren the Levites did help
them, till the work was ended, and until the other priests had
sanctified themselves: for the Levites were more upright in heart to
sanctify themselves than the priests.

29:35 And also the burnt offerings were in abundance, with the fat of
the peace offerings, and the drink offerings for every burnt offering.
So the service of the house of the LORD was set in order.

29:36 And Hezekiah rejoiced, and all the people, that God had prepared
the people: for the thing was done suddenly.

30:1 And Hezekiah sent to all Israel and Judah, and wrote letters also
to Ephraim and Manasseh, that they should come to the house of the
LORD at Jerusalem, to keep the passover unto the LORD God of Israel.

30:2 For the king had taken counsel, and his princes, and all the
congregation in Jerusalem, to keep the passover in the second month.

30:3 For they could not keep it at that time, because the priests had
not sanctified themselves sufficiently, neither had the people
gathered themselves together to Jerusalem.

30:4 And the thing pleased the king and all the congregation.

30:5 So they established a decree to make proclamation throughout all
Israel, from Beersheba even to Dan, that they should come to keep the
passover unto the LORD God of Israel at Jerusalem: for they had not
done it of a long time in such sort as it was written.

30:6 So the posts went with the letters from the king and his princes
throughout all Israel and Judah, and according to the commandment of
the king, saying, Ye children of Israel, turn again unto the LORD God
of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, and he will return to the remnant of
you, that are escaped out of the hand of the kings of Assyria.

30:7 And be not ye like your fathers, and like your brethren, which
trespassed against the LORD God of their fathers, who therefore gave
them up to desolation, as ye see.

30:8 Now be ye not stiffnecked, as your fathers were, but yield
yourselves unto the LORD, and enter into his sanctuary, which he hath
sanctified for ever: and serve the LORD your God, that the fierceness
of his wrath may turn away from you.

30:9 For if ye turn again unto the LORD, your brethren and your
children shall find compassion before them that lead them captive, so
that they shall come again into this land: for the LORD your God is
gracious and merciful, and will not turn away his face from you, if ye
return unto him.

30:10 So the posts passed from city to city through the country of
Ephraim and Manasseh even unto Zebulun: but they laughed them to
scorn, and mocked them.

30:11 Nevertheless divers of Asher and Manasseh and of Zebulun humbled
themselves, and came to Jerusalem.

30:12 Also in Judah the hand of God was to give them one heart to do
the commandment of the king and of the princes, by the word of the
LORD.

30:13 And there assembled at Jerusalem much people to keep the feast
of unleavened bread in the second month, a very great congregation.

30:14 And they arose and took away the altars that were in Jerusalem,
and all the altars for incense took they away, and cast them into the
brook Kidron.

30:15 Then they killed the passover on the fourteenth day of the
second month: and the priests and the Levites were ashamed, and
sanctified themselves, and brought in the burnt offerings into the
house of the LORD.

30:16 And they stood in their place after their manner, according to
the law of Moses the man of God: the priests sprinkled the blood,
which they received of the hand of the Levites.

30:17 For there were many in the congregation that were not
sanctified: therefore the Levites had the charge of the killing of the
passovers for every one that was not clean, to sanctify them unto the
LORD.

30:18 For a multitude of the people, even many of Ephraim, and
Manasseh, Issachar, and Zebulun, had not cleansed themselves, yet did
they eat the passover otherwise than it was written. But Hezekiah
prayed for them, saying, The good LORD pardon every one 30:19 That
prepareth his heart to seek God, the LORD God of his fathers, though
he be not cleansed according to the purification of the sanctuary.

30:20 And the LORD hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people.

30:21 And the children of Israel that were present at Jerusalem kept
the feast of unleavened bread seven days with great gladness: and the
Levites and the priests praised the LORD day by day, singing with loud
instruments unto the LORD.

30:22 And Hezekiah spake comfortably unto all the Levites that taught
the good knowledge of the LORD: and they did eat throughout the feast
seven days, offering peace offerings, and making confession to the
LORD God of their fathers.

30:23 And the whole assembly took counsel to keep other seven days:
and they kept other seven days with gladness.

30:24 For Hezekiah king of Judah did give to the congregation a
thousand bullocks and seven thousand sheep; and the princes gave to
the congregation a thousand bullocks and ten thousand sheep: and a
great number of priests sanctified themselves.

30:25 And all the congregation of Judah, with the priests and the
Levites, and all the congregation that came out of Israel, and the
strangers that came out of the land of Israel, and that dwelt in
Judah, rejoiced.

30:26 So there was great joy in Jerusalem: for since the time of
Solomon the son of David king of Israel there was not the like in
Jerusalem.

30:27 Then the priests the Levites arose and blessed the people: and
their voice was heard, and their prayer came up to his holy dwelling
place, even unto heaven.

31:1 Now when all this was finished, all Israel that were present went
out to the cities of Judah, and brake the images in pieces, and cut
down the groves, and threw down the high places and the altars out of
all Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim also and Manasseh, until they had
utterly destroyed them all. Then all the children of Israel returned,
every man to his possession, into their own cities.

31:2 And Hezekiah appointed the courses of the priests and the Levites
after their courses, every man according to his service, the priests
and Levites for burnt offerings and for peace offerings, to minister,
and to give thanks, and to praise in the gates of the tents of the
LORD.

31:3 He appointed also the king’s portion of his substance for the
burnt offerings, to wit, for the morning and evening burnt offerings,
and the burnt offerings for the sabbaths, and for the new moons, and
for the set feasts, as it is written in the law of the LORD.

31:4 Moreover he commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem to give
the portion of the priests and the Levites, that they might be
encouraged in the law of the LORD.

31:5 And as soon as the commandment came abroad, the children of
Israel brought in abundance the firstfruits of corn, wine, and oil,
and honey, and of all the increase of the field; and the tithe of all
things brought they in abundantly.

31:6 And concerning the children of Israel and Judah, that dwelt in
the cities of Judah, they also brought in the tithe of oxen and sheep,
and the tithe of holy things which were consecrated unto the LORD
their God, and laid them by heaps.

31:7 In the third month they began to lay the foundation of the heaps,
and finished them in the seventh month.

31:8 And when Hezekiah and the princes came and saw the heaps, they
blessed the LORD, and his people Israel.

31:9 Then Hezekiah questioned with the priests and the Levites
concerning the heaps.

31:10 And Azariah the chief priest of the house of Zadok answered him,
and said, Since the people began to bring the offerings into the house
of the LORD, we have had enough to eat, and have left plenty: for the
LORD hath blessed his people; and that which is left is this great
store.

31:11 Then Hezekiah commanded to prepare chambers in the house of the
LORD; and they prepared them, 31:12 And brought in the offerings and
the tithes and the dedicated things faithfully: over which Cononiah
the Levite was ruler, and Shimei his brother was the next.

31:13 And Jehiel, and Azaziah, and Nahath, and Asahel, and Jerimoth,
and Jozabad, and Eliel, and Ismachiah, and Mahath, and Benaiah, were
overseers under the hand of Cononiah and Shimei his brother, at the
commandment of Hezekiah the king, and Azariah the ruler of the house
of God.

31:14 And Kore the son of Imnah the Levite, the porter toward the
east, was over the freewill offerings of God, to distribute the
oblations of the LORD, and the most holy things.

31:15 And next him were Eden, and Miniamin, and Jeshua, and Shemaiah,
Amariah, and Shecaniah, in the cities of the priests, in their set
office, to give to their brethren by courses, as well to the great as
to the small: 31:16 Beside their genealogy of males, from three years
old and upward, even unto every one that entereth into the house of
the LORD, his daily portion for their service in their charges
according to their courses; 31:17 Both to the genealogy of the priests
by the house of their fathers, and the Levites from twenty years old
and upward, in their charges by their courses; 31:18 And to the
genealogy of all their little ones, their wives, and their sons, and
their daughters, through all the congregation: for in their set office
they sanctified themselves in holiness: 31:19 Also of the sons of
Aaron the priests, which were in the fields of the suburbs of their
cities, in every several city, the men that were expressed by name, to
give portions to all the males among the priests, and to all that were
reckoned by genealogies among the Levites.

31:20 And thus did Hezekiah throughout all Judah, and wrought that
which was good and right and truth before the LORD his God.

31:21 And in every work that he began in the service of the house of
God, and in the law, and in the commandments, to seek his God, he did
it with all his heart, and prospered.

32:1 After these things, and the establishment thereof, Sennacherib
king of Assyria came, and entered into Judah, and encamped against the
fenced cities, and thought to win them for himself.

32:2 And when Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib was come, and that he was
purposed to fight against Jerusalem, 32:3 He took counsel with his
princes and his mighty men to stop the waters of the fountains which
were without the city: and they did help him.

32:4 So there was gathered much people together, who stopped all the
fountains, and the brook that ran through the midst of the land,
saying, Why should the kings of Assyria come, and find much water?
32:5 Also he strengthened himself, and built up all the wall that was
broken, and raised it up to the towers, and another wall without, and
repaired Millo in the city of David, and made darts and shields in
abundance.

32:6 And he set captains of war over the people, and gathered them
together to him in the street of the gate of the city, and spake
comfortably to them, saying, 32:7 Be strong and courageous, be not
afraid nor dismayed for the king of Assyria, nor for all the multitude
that is with him: for there be more with us than with him: 32:8 With
him is an arm of flesh; but with us is the LORD our God to help us,
and to fight our battles. And the people rested themselves upon the
words of Hezekiah king of Judah.

32:9 After this did Sennacherib king of Assyria send his servants to
Jerusalem, (but he himself laid siege against Lachish, and all his
power with him,) unto Hezekiah king of Judah, and unto all Judah that
were at Jerusalem, saying, 32:10 Thus saith Sennacherib king of
Assyria, Whereon do ye trust, that ye abide in the siege in Jerusalem?
32:11 Doth not Hezekiah persuade you to give over yourselves to die by
famine and by thirst, saying, The LORD our God shall deliver us out of
the hand of the king of Assyria? 32:12 Hath not the same Hezekiah
taken away his high places and his altars, and commanded Judah and
Jerusalem, saying, Ye shall worship before one altar, and burn incense
upon it? 32:13 Know ye not what I and my fathers have done unto all
the people of other lands? were the gods of the nations of those lands
any ways able to deliver their lands out of mine hand? 32:14 Who was
there among all the gods of those nations that my fathers utterly
destroyed, that could deliver his people out of mine hand, that your
God should be able to deliver you out of mine hand? 32:15 Now
therefore let not Hezekiah deceive you, nor persuade you on this
manner, neither yet believe him: for no god of any nation or kingdom
was able to deliver his people out of mine hand, and out of the hand
of my fathers: how much less shall your God deliver you out of mine
hand? 32:16 And his servants spake yet more against the LORD God, and
against his servant Hezekiah.

32:17 He wrote also letters to rail on the LORD God of Israel, and to
speak against him, saying, As the gods of the nations of other lands
have not delivered their people out of mine hand, so shall not the God
of Hezekiah deliver his people out of mine hand.

32:18 Then they cried with a loud voice in the Jews’ speech unto the
people of Jerusalem that were on the wall, to affright them, and to
trouble them; that they might take the city.

32:19 And they spake against the God of Jerusalem, as against the gods
of the people of the earth, which were the work of the hands of man.

32:20 And for this cause Hezekiah the king, and the prophet Isaiah the
son of Amoz, prayed and cried to heaven.

32:21 And the LORD sent an angel, which cut off all the mighty men of
valour, and the leaders and captains in the camp of the king of
Assyria. So he returned with shame of face to his own land. And when
he was come into the house of his god, they that came forth of his own
bowels slew him there with the sword.

32:22 Thus the LORD saved Hezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem
from the hand of Sennacherib the king of Assyria, and from the hand of
all other, and guided them on every side.

32:23 And many brought gifts unto the LORD to Jerusalem, and presents
to Hezekiah king of Judah: so that he was magnified in the sight of
all nations from thenceforth.

32:24 In those days Hezekiah was sick to the death, and prayed unto
the LORD: and he spake unto him, and he gave him a sign.

32:25 But Hezekiah rendered not again according to the benefit done
unto him; for his heart was lifted up: therefore there was wrath upon
him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem.

32:26 Notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his
heart, both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the wrath of
the LORD came not upon them in the days of Hezekiah.

32:27 And Hezekiah had exceeding much riches and honour: and he made
himself treasuries for silver, and for gold, and for precious stones,
and for spices, and for shields, and for all manner of pleasant
jewels; 32:28 Storehouses also for the increase of corn, and wine, and
oil; and stalls for all manner of beasts, and cotes for flocks.

32:29 Moreover he provided him cities, and possessions of flocks and
herds in abundance: for God had given him substance very much.

32:30 This same Hezekiah also stopped the upper watercourse of Gihon,
and brought it straight down to the west side of the city of David.
And Hezekiah prospered in all his works.

32:31 Howbeit in the business of the ambassadors of the princes of
Babylon, who sent unto him to enquire of the wonder that was done in
the land, God left him, to try him, that he might know all that was in
his heart.

32:32 Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, and his goodness, behold,
they are written in the vision of Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz,
and in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.

32:33 And Hezekiah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the
chiefest of the sepulchres of the sons of David: and all Judah and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honour at his death. And Manasseh his
son reigned in his stead.

33:1 Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned fifty and five years in Jerusalem: 33:2 But did that which was
evil in the sight of the LORD, like unto the abominations of the
heathen, whom the LORD had cast out before the children of Israel.

33:3 For he built again the high places which Hezekiah his father had
broken down, and he reared up altars for Baalim, and made groves, and
worshipped all the host of heaven, and served them.

33:4 Also he built altars in the house of the LORD, whereof the LORD
had said, In Jerusalem shall my name be for ever.

33:5 And he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts
of the house of the LORD.

33:6 And he caused his children to pass through the fire in the valley
of the son of Hinnom: also he observed times, and used enchantments,
and used witchcraft, and dealt with a familiar spirit, and with
wizards: he wrought much evil in the sight of the LORD, to provoke him
to anger.

33:7 And he set a carved image, the idol which he had made, in the
house of God, of which God had said to David and to Solomon his son,
In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen before all the
tribes of Israel, will I put my name for ever: 33:8 Neither will I any
more remove the foot of Israel from out of the land which I have
appointed for your fathers; so that they will take heed to do all that
I have commanded them, according to the whole law and the statutes and
the ordinances by the hand of Moses.

33:9 So Manasseh made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to err,
and to do worse than the heathen, whom the LORD had destroyed before
the children of Israel.

33:10 And the LORD spake to Manasseh, and to his people: but they
would not hearken.

33:11 Wherefore the LORD brought upon them the captains of the host of
the king of Assyria, which took Manasseh among the thorns, and bound
him with fetters, and carried him to Babylon.

33:12 And when he was in affliction, he besought the LORD his God, and
humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers, 33:13 And
prayed unto him: and he was intreated of him, and heard his
supplication, and brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom.
Then Manasseh knew that the LORD he was God.

33:14 Now after this he built a wall without the city of David, on the
west side of Gihon, in the valley, even to the entering in at the fish
gate, and compassed about Ophel, and raised it up a very great height,
and put captains of war in all the fenced cities of Judah.

33:15 And he took away the strange gods, and the idol out of the house
of the LORD, and all the altars that he had built in the mount of the
house of the LORD, and in Jerusalem, and cast them out of the city.

33:16 And he repaired the altar of the LORD, and sacrificed thereon
peace offerings and thank offerings, and commanded Judah to serve the
LORD God of Israel.

33:17 Nevertheless the people did sacrifice still in the high places,
yet unto the LORD their God only.

33:18 Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and his prayer unto his
God, and the words of the seers that spake to him in the name of the
LORD God of Israel, behold, they are written in the book of the kings
of Israel.

33:19 His prayer also, and how God was intreated of him, and all his
sins, and his trespass, and the places wherein he built high places,
and set up groves and graven images, before he was humbled: behold,
they are written among the sayings of the seers.

33:20 So Manasseh slept with his fathers, and they buried him in his
own house: and Amon his son reigned in his stead.

33:21 Amon was two and twenty years old when he began to reign, and
reigned two years in Jerusalem.

33:22 But he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, as did
Manasseh his father: for Amon sacrificed unto all the carved images
which Manasseh his father had made, and served them; 33:23 And humbled
not himself before the LORD, as Manasseh his father had humbled
himself; but Amon trespassed more and more.

33:24 And his servants conspired against him, and slew him in his own
house.

33:25 But the people of the land slew all them that had conspired
against king Amon; and the people of the land made Josiah his son king
in his stead.

34:1 Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
in Jerusalem one and thirty years.

34:2 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, and
walked in the ways of David his father, and declined neither to the
right hand, nor to the left.

34:3 For in the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, he
began to seek after the God of David his father: and in the twelfth
year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, and
the groves, and the carved images, and the molten images.

34:4 And they brake down the altars of Baalim in his presence; and the
images, that were on high above them, he cut down; and the groves, and
the carved images, and the molten images, he brake in pieces, and made
dust of them, and strowed it upon the graves of them that had
sacrificed unto them.

34:5 And he burnt the bones of the priests upon their altars, and
cleansed Judah and Jerusalem.

34:6 And so did he in the cities of Manasseh, and Ephraim, and Simeon,
even unto Naphtali, with their mattocks round about.

34:7 And when he had broken down the altars and the groves, and had
beaten the graven images into powder, and cut down all the idols
throughout all the land of Israel, he returned to Jerusalem.

34:8 Now in the eighteenth year of his reign, when he had purged the
land, and the house, he sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, and Maaseiah
the governor of the city, and Joah the son of Joahaz the recorder, to
repair the house of the LORD his God.

34:9 And when they came to Hilkiah the high priest, they delivered the
money that was brought into the house of God, which the Levites that
kept the doors had gathered of the hand of Manasseh and Ephraim, and
of all the remnant of Israel, and of all Judah and Benjamin; and they
returned to Jerusalem.

34:10 And they put it in the hand of the workmen that had the
oversight of the house of the LORD, and they gave it to the workmen
that wrought in the house of the LORD, to repair and amend the house:
34:11 Even to the artificers and builders gave they it, to buy hewn
stone, and timber for couplings, and to floor the houses which the
kings of Judah had destroyed.

34:12 And the men did the work faithfully: and the overseers of them
were Jahath and Obadiah, the Levites, of the sons of Merari; and
Zechariah and Meshullam, of the sons of the Kohathites, to set it
forward; and other of the Levites, all that could skill of instruments
of musick.

34:13 Also they were over the bearers of burdens, and were overseers
of all that wrought the work in any manner of service: and of the
Levites there were scribes, and officers, and porters.

34:14 And when they brought out the money that was brought into the
house of the LORD, Hilkiah the priest found a book of the law of the
LORD given by Moses.

34:15 And Hilkiah answered and said to Shaphan the scribe, I have
found the book of the law in the house of the LORD. And Hilkiah
delivered the book to Shaphan.

34:16 And Shaphan carried the book to the king, and brought the king
word back again, saying, All that was committed to thy servants, they
do it.

34:17 And they have gathered together the money that was found in the
house of the LORD, and have delivered it into the hand of the
overseers, and to the hand of the workmen.

34:18 Then Shaphan the scribe told the king, saying, Hilkiah the
priest hath given me a book. And Shaphan read it before the king.

34:19 And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of the
law, that he rent his clothes.

34:20 And the king commanded Hilkiah, and Ahikam the son of Shaphan,
and Abdon the son of Micah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah a
servant of the king’s, saying, 34:21 Go, enquire of the LORD for me,
and for them that are left in Israel and in Judah, concerning the
words of the book that is found: for great is the wrath of the LORD
that is poured out upon us, because our fathers have not kept the word
of the LORD, to do after all that is written in this book.

34:22 And Hilkiah, and they that the king had appointed, went to
Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tikvath, the son
of Hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the
college:) and they spake to her to that effect.

34:23 And she answered them, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Tell
ye the man that sent you to me, 34:24 Thus saith the LORD, Behold, I
will bring evil upon this place, and upon the inhabitants thereof,
even all the curses that are written in the book which they have read
before the king of Judah: 34:25 Because they have forsaken me, and
have burned incense unto other gods, that they might provoke me to
anger with all the works of their hands; therefore my wrath shall be
poured out upon this place, and shall not be quenched.

34:26 And as for the king of Judah, who sent you to enquire of the
LORD, so shall ye say unto him, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel
concerning the words which thou hast heard; 34:27 Because thine heart
was tender, and thou didst humble thyself before God, when thou
heardest his words against this place, and against the inhabitants
thereof, and humbledst thyself before me, and didst rend thy clothes,
and weep before me; I have even heard thee also, saith the LORD.

34:28 Behold, I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shalt be
gathered to thy grave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see all the
evil that I will bring upon this place, and upon the inhabitants of
the same. So they brought the king word again.

34:29 Then the king sent and gathered together all the elders of Judah
and Jerusalem.

34:30 And the king went up into the house of the LORD, and all the men
of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the priests, and the
Levites, and all the people, great and small: and he read in their
ears all the words of the book of the covenant that was found in the
house of the LORD.

34:31 And the king stood in his place, and made a covenant before the
LORD, to walk after the LORD, and to keep his commandments, and his
testimonies, and his statutes, with all his heart, and with all his
soul, to perform the words of the covenant which are written in this
book.

34:32 And he caused all that were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin to
stand to it. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem did according to the
covenant of God, the God of their fathers.

34:33 And Josiah took away all the abominations out of all the
countries that pertained to the children of Israel, and made all that
were present in Israel to serve, even to serve the LORD their God. And
all his days they departed not from following the LORD, the God of
their fathers.

35:1 Moreover Josiah kept a passover unto the LORD in Jerusalem: and
they killed the passover on the fourteenth day of the first month.

35:2 And he set the priests in their charges, and encouraged them to
the service of the house of the LORD, 35:3 And said unto the Levites
that taught all Israel, which were holy unto the LORD, Put the holy
ark in the house which Solomon the son of David king of Israel did
build; it shall not be a burden upon your shoulders: serve now the
LORD your God, and his people Israel, 35:4 And prepare yourselves by
the houses of your fathers, after your courses, according to the
writing of David king of Israel, and according to the writing of
Solomon his son.

35:5 And stand in the holy place according to the divisions of the
families of the fathers of your brethren the people, and after the
division of the families of the Levites.

35:6 So kill the passover, and sanctify yourselves, and prepare your
brethren, that they may do according to the word of the LORD by the
hand of Moses.

35:7 And Josiah gave to the people, of the flock, lambs and kids, all
for the passover offerings, for all that were present, to the number
of thirty thousand, and three thousand bullocks: these were of the
king’s substance.

35:8 And his princes gave willingly unto the people, to the priests,
and to the Levites: Hilkiah and Zechariah and Jehiel, rulers of the
house of God, gave unto the priests for the passover offerings two
thousand and six hundred small cattle and three hundred oxen.

35:9 Conaniah also, and Shemaiah and Nethaneel, his brethren, and
Hashabiah and Jeiel and Jozabad, chief of the Levites, gave unto the
Levites for passover offerings five thousand small cattle, and five
hundred oxen.

35:10 So the service was prepared, and the priests stood in their
place, and the Levites in their courses, according to the king’s
commandment.

35:11 And they killed the passover, and the priests sprinkled the
blood from their hands, and the Levites flayed them.

35:12 And they removed the burnt offerings, that they might give
according to the divisions of the families of the people, to offer
unto the LORD, as it is written in the book of Moses. And so did they
with the oxen.

35:13 And they roasted the passover with fire according to the
ordinance: but the other holy offerings sod they in pots, and in
caldrons, and in pans, and divided them speedily among all the people.

35:14 And afterward they made ready for themselves, and for the
priests: because the priests the sons of Aaron were busied in offering
of burnt offerings and the fat until night; therefore the Levites
prepared for themselves, and for the priests the sons of Aaron.

35:15 And the singers the sons of Asaph were in their place, according
to the commandment of David, and Asaph, and Heman, and Jeduthun the
king’s seer; and the porters waited at every gate; they might not
depart from their service; for their brethren the Levites prepared for
them.

35:16 So all the service of the LORD was prepared the same day, to
keep the passover, and to offer burnt offerings upon the altar of the
LORD, according to the commandment of king Josiah.

35:17 And the children of Israel that were present kept the passover
at that time, and the feast of unleavened bread seven days.

35:18 And there was no passover like to that kept in Israel from the
days of Samuel the prophet; neither did all the kings of Israel keep
such a passover as Josiah kept, and the priests, and the Levites, and
all Judah and Israel that were present, and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem.

35:19 In the eighteenth year of the reign of Josiah was this passover
kept.

35:20 After all this, when Josiah had prepared the temple, Necho king
of Egypt came up to fight against Charchemish by Euphrates: and Josiah
went out against him.

35:21 But he sent ambassadors to him, saying, What have I to do with
thee, thou king of Judah? I come not against thee this day, but
against the house wherewith I have war: for God commanded me to make
haste: forbear thee from meddling with God, who is with me, that he
destroy thee not.

35:22 Nevertheless Josiah would not turn his face from him, but
disguised himself, that he might fight with him, and hearkened not
unto the words of Necho from the mouth of God, and came to fight in
the valley of Megiddo.

35:23 And the archers shot at king Josiah; and the king said to his
servants, Have me away; for I am sore wounded.

35:24 His servants therefore took him out of that chariot, and put him
in the second chariot that he had; and they brought him to Jerusalem,
and he died, and was buried in one of the sepulchres of his fathers.
And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.

35:25 And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah: and all the singing men and
the singing women spake of Josiah in their lamentations to this day,
and made them an ordinance in Israel: and, behold, they are written in
the lamentations.

35:26 Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and his goodness, according
to that which was written in the law of the LORD, 35:27 And his deeds,
first and last, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of
Israel and Judah.

36:1 Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and
made him king in his father’s stead in Jerusalem.

36:2 Jehoahaz was twenty and three years old when he began to reign,
and he reigned three months in Jerusalem.

36:3 And the king of Egypt put him down at Jerusalem, and condemned