THE MYTH OF VUKUB-CAKIX

After this catastrophe, ere yet the earth was quite recovered from
the wrath of the gods, there existed a man "full of pride," whose name
was Vukub-Cakix. The name signifies "Seven-times-the-colour-of-fire,"
or "Very brilliant," and was justified by the fact that its owner's
eyes were of silver, his teeth of emerald, and other parts of his
anatomy of precious metals. In his own opinion Vukub-Cakix's existence
rendered unnecessary that of the sun and the moon, and this egoism
so disgusted the gods that they resolved upon his overthrow. His two
sons, Zipacna and Cabrakan (earth-heaper [4] (?) and earthquake),
were daily employed, the one in heaping up mountains, and the
other in demolishing them, and these also incurred the wrath of
the immortals. Shortly after the decision of the deities the twin
hero-gods Hun-Ahpu and Xbalanque came to earth with the intention of
chastising the arrogance of Vukub-Cakix and his progeny.

Now Vukub-Cakix had a great tree of the variety known in Central
America as "nanze" or "tapal," bearing a fruit round, yellow, and
aromatic, and upon this fruit he depended for his daily sustenance. One
day on going to partake of it for his morning meal he mounted to
its summit in order to espy the choicest fruits, when to his great
indignation he discovered that Hun-Ahpu and Xbalanque had been before
him, and had almost denuded the tree of its produce. The hero-gods,
who lay concealed within the foliage, now added injury to theft by
hurling at Vukub-Cakix a dart from a blow-pipe, which had the effect
of precipitating him from the summit of the tree to the earth. He
arose in great wrath, bleeding profusely from a severe wound in the
jaw. Hun-Ahpu then threw himself upon Vukub-Cakix, who in terrible
anger seized the god by the arm and wrenched it from the body. He then
proceeded to his dwelling, where he was met and anxiously interrogated
by his spouse Chimalmat. Tortured by the pain in his teeth and jaw he,
in an excess of spite, hung Hun-Ahpu's arm over a blazing fire, and
then threw himself down to bemoan his injuries, consoling himself,
however, with the idea that he had adequately avenged himself upon
the interlopers who had dared to disturb his peace.

But Hun-Ahpu and Xbalanque were in no mind that he should escape
so easily, and the recovery of Hun-Ahpu's arm must be made at all
hazards. With this end in view they consulted two venerable beings
in whom we readily recognise the father-mother divinities, Xpiyacoc
and Xmucane4, disguised for the nonce as sorcerers. These personages
accompanied Hun-Ahpu and Xbalanque to the abode of Vukub-Cakix, whom
they found in a state of intense agony. The ancients persuaded him
to be operated upon in order to relieve his sufferings, and for his
glittering teeth they substituted grains of maize. Next they removed
his eyes of emerald, upon which his death speedily followed, as did
that of his wife Chimalmat. Hun-Ahpu's arm was recovered, re-affixed
to his shoulder, and all ended satisfactorily for the hero-gods.

But their mission was not yet complete. The sons of Vukub-Cakix,
Zipacna and Cabrakan, remained to be accounted for. Zipacna consented,
at the entreaty of four hundred youths, incited by the hero-gods,
to assist them in transporting a huge tree which was destined for the
roof-tree of a house they were building. Whilst assisting them he was
beguiled by them into entering a great ditch which they had dug for the
purpose of destroying him, and when once he descended was overwhelmed
by tree-trunks by his treacherous acquaintances, who imagined him
to be slain. But he took refuge in a side-tunnel of the excavation,
cut off his hair and nails for the ants to carry up to his enemies as
a sign of his death, waited until the youths had become intoxicated
with pulque because of joy at his supposed demise, and then, emerging
from the pit, shook the house that the youths had built over his body
about their heads, so that all were destroyed in its ruins.

But Hun-Ahpu and Xbalanque were grieved that the four hundred
had perished, and laid a more efficacious trap for Zipacna. The
mountain-bearer, carrying the mountains by night, sought his
sustenance by day by the shore of the river, where he lived upon
fish and crabs. The hero-gods constructed an artificial crab which
they placed in a cavern at the bottom of a deep ravine. The hungry
titan descended to the cave, which he entered on all-fours. But a
neighbouring mountain had been undermined by the divine brothers,
and its bulk was cast upon him. Thus at the foot of Mount Meavan
perished the proud "Mountain Maker," whose corpse was turned into
stone by the catastrophe.

Of the family of boasters only Cabrakan remained. Discovered by the
hero-gods at his favourite pastime of overturning the hills, they
enticed him in an easterly direction, challenging him to overthrow a
particularly high mountain. On the way they shot a bird with their
blow-pipes, and poisoned it with earth. This they gave to Cabrakan
to eat. After partaking of the poisoned fare his strength deserted
him, and failing to move the mountain he was bound and buried by the
victorious hero-gods.


THE SECOND BOOK

Mystery veils the commencement of the Second Book of the "Popol
Vuh." The theme is the birth and family of Hun-Ahpu and Xbalanque,
and the scribe intimates that only half is to be told concerning the
history of their father. Xpiyacoc and Xmucane, the father and mother
deities, had two sons, Hunhun-Ahpu and Vukub-Hunahpu, the first being,
so far as can be gathered, a bi-sexual personage. He had by a wife,
Xbakiyalo, two sons, Hunbatz and Hunchouen, men full of wisdom and
artistic genius. All of them were addicted to the recreation of
dicing and playing at ball, and a spectator of their pastimes was
Voc, the messenger of Hurakan. Xbakiyalo having died, Hunhun-Ahpu
and Vukub-Hunahpu, leaving the former's sons behind, played a game of
ball which in its progress took them into the vicinity of the realm
of Xibalba (the underworld). This reached the ears of the monarchs
of that place, Hun-Came and Vukub-Came, who, after consulting their
counsellors, challenged the strangers to a game of ball, with the
object of defeating and disgracing them.

For this purpose they dispatched four messengers in the shape of
owls. The brothers accepted the challenge, after a touching farewell
with their mother Xmucane, and their sons and nephews, and followed
the feathered heralds down the steep incline to Xibalba from the
playground at Ninxor Carchah. [5] After an ominous crossing over a
river of blood they came to the residence of the kings of Xibalba,
where they underwent the mortification of mistaking two wooden
figures for the monarchs. Invited to sit on the seat of honour,
they discovered it to be a red-hot stone, and the contortions which
resulted from their successful trick caused unbounded merriment
among the Xibalbans. Then they were thrust into the House of Gloom,
where they were sacrificed and buried. The head of Hunhun-Ahpu was,
however, suspended from a tree, which speedily became covered with
gourds, from which it was almost impossible to distinguish the bloody
trophy. All in Xibalba were forbidden the fruit of that tree.

But one person in Xibalba had resolved to disobey the mandate. This
was the virgin princess Xquiq (Blood), the daughter of Cuchumaquiq,
who went unattended to the spot. Standing under the branches gazing
at the fruit, the maiden stretched out her hand, and the head of
Hunhun-Ahpu spat into the palm. The spittle caused her to conceive,
and she returned home, being assured by the head of the hero-god that
no harm should result to her. This thing was done by order of Hurakan,
the Heart of Heaven. In six months' time her father became aware of
her condition, and despite her protestations the royal messengers
of Xibalba, the owls, received orders to kill her and return with
her heart in a vase. She, however, escaped by bribing the owls with
splendid promises for the future to spare her and substitute for her
heart the coagulated sap of the blood-wart.

In her extremity Xquiq went for protection to the home of Xmucane,
who now looked after the young Hunbatz and Hunchouen. Xmucane would
not at first believe her tale. But Xquiq appealed to the gods, and
performed a miracle by gathering a basket of maize where no maize grew,
and thus gained her confidence.

Shortly afterwards Xquiq became the mother of twin boys, the heroes
of the First Book, Hun-Ahpu, and Xbalanque. These did not find
favour in the eyes of Xmucane, their grandmother. Their infantile
cries aroused the wrath of this venerable person, and she vented
it upon them by turning them out of doors. They speedily took to
an outdoor life, however, and became mighty hunters, and expert in
the use of their blow-pipes, with which they shot birds and other
small game. The ill-treatment which they received from Hunbatz and
Hunchouen caused them at last to retaliate, and those who had made
their lives miserable were punished by being transformed by the divine
children into apes. The venerable Xmucane, filled with grief at the
metamorphosis and flight of her ill-starred grandsons, who had made
her home joyous with their singing and flute-playing, was told that
she would be permitted to behold their faces once more if she could
do so without losing her gravity, but their antics and grimaces caused
her such merriment that on three separate occasions she was unable to
restrain her laughter and the men-monkeys appeared no more. Hun-Ahpu
and Xbalanque now became expert musicians, and one of their favourite
airs was that of "Hun-Ahpu qoy," the "monkey of Hun-Ahpu."

The divine twins were now old enough to undertake labour in
the field, and their first task was the clearing of a milpa or
maize-plantation. They were possessed of magic tools, which had the
merit of working themselves in the absence of the young hunters at
the chase, and those they found a capital substitute for their own
directing presence upon the first day. Returning at night from hunting,
they smeared their faces and hands with dirt so that Xmucane might
be deceived into imagining that they had been hard at work in the
maize-field. But during the night the wild beasts met and replaced
all the roots and shrubs which the brothers--or rather their magic
tools--had removed. The twins resolved to watch for them on the
ensuing night, but despite all their efforts the animals succeeded
in making good their escape, save one, the rat, which was caught
in a handkerchief. The rabbit and deer lost their tails in getting
away. The rat, in gratitude that they had spared its life, told them of
the glorious deeds of their great fathers and uncles, their games at
ball, and of the existence of a set of implements necessary to play
the game which they had left in the house. They discovered these,
and went to play in the ball-ground of their fathers.

It was not long, however, until Hun-Came and Vukub-Came, the princes of
Xibalba, heard them at play, and decided to lure them to the Underworld
as they had lured their fathers. Messengers were despatched to the
house of Xmucane, who, filled with alarm, despatched a louse to carry
the message to her grandsons. The louse, wishing to ensure greater
speed to reach the brothers, consented to be swallowed by a toad, the
toad by a serpent, and the serpent by the great bird Voc. The other
animals duly liberated one another; but despite his utmost efforts,
the toad could not get rid of the louse, who had played him a trick by
lodging in his gums, and had not been swallowed at all. The message,
however, was duly delivered, and the players returned home to take
leave of their grandmother and mother. Before their departure they
each planted a cane in the middle of the house, which was to acquaint
those they left behind with their welfare, since it would wither if
any fatal circumstance befel them.

Pursuing the route their fathers had followed, they passed the river
of blood and the river Papuhya. But they sent an animal called
Xan as avant courier with orders to prick all the Xibalbans with
a hair from Hun-Ahpu's leg, thus discovering those of the dwellers
in the Underworld who were made of wood--those whom their fathers
had unwittingly bowed to as men--and also learning the names of the
others by their inquiries and explanations when pricked. Thus they
did not salute the mannikins on their arrival at the Xibalban court,
nor did they sit upon the red-hot stone. They even passed scatheless
through the first ordeal of the House of Gloom. The Xibalbans were
furious, and their wrath was by no means allayed when they found
themselves beaten at the game of ball to which they had challenged
the brothers. Then Hun-Came and Vukub-Came ordered the twins to bring
them four bouquets of flowers, asking the guards of the royal gardens
to watch most carefully, and committed Hun-Ahpu and Xbalanque to the
"House of Lances"--the second ordeal--where the lancers were directed
to kill them. The brothers, however, had at their beck and call a
swarm of ants, which entered the royal gardens on the first errand, and
they succeeded in bribing the lancers. The Xibalbans, white with fury,
ordered that the owls, the guardians of the gardens, should have their
lips split, and otherwise showed their anger at their third defeat.

Then came the third ordeal in the "House of Cold." Here the heroes
escaped death by freezing by being warmed with burning pine-cones. In
the fourth and fifth ordeals they were equally lucky, for they passed
a night each in the "House of Tigers" and the "House of Fire" without
injury. But at the sixth ordeal misfortune overtook them in the "House
of Bats." Hun-Ahpu's head being cut off by Camazotz, "Ruler of Bats,"
who suddenly appeared from above.

The beheading of Hun-Ahpu does not, however, appear to have terminated
fatally, but owing to the unintelligible nature of the text at this
juncture, it is impossible to ascertain in what manner he was cured
of such a lethal wound. This episode is followed by an assemblage
of all the animals, and another contest at ball-playing, after which
the brothers emerged uninjured from all the ordeals of the Xibalbans.

But in order to further astound their "hosts," Hun-Ahpu and Xbalanque
confided to two sorcerers named Xulu and Pacaw that the Xibalbans
had failed because the animals were not on their side, and directing
them what to do with their bones, they stretched themselves upon a
funeral pile and died together. Their bones were beaten to powder and
thrown into the river, where they sank, and were transformed into young
men. On the fifth day they reappeared like men-fishes, and on the sixth
in the form of ragged old men, dancing, burning and restoring houses,
killing and restoring each other to life, with other wonders. The
princes of Xibalba, hearing of their skill, requested them to exhibit
their magical powers, which they did by burning the royal palace and
restoring it, killing and resuscitating the king's dog, and cutting a
man in pieces, and bringing him to life again. The monarchs of Xibalba,
anxious to experience the novel sensation of a temporary death,
requested to be slain and resuscitated. They were speedily killed,
but the brothers refrained from resuscitating their arch-enemies.

Announcing their real names, the brothers proceeded to punish the
princes of Xibalba. The game of ball was forbidden them, they were
to perform menial tasks, and only the beasts of the forest were they
to hold in vassalage. They appear after this to achieve a species of
doubtful distinction as plutonic deities or demons. They are described
as warlike, ugly as owls, inspiring evil and discord. Their faces
were painted black and white to show their faithless nature.

Xmucane, waiting at home for the brothers, was alternately filled
with joy and grief as the canes grew green and withered, according to
the varying fortunes of her grandsons. These young men were busied at
Xibalba with paying fitting funeral honours to their father and uncle,
who now mounted to heaven and became the sun and moon, whilst the four
hundred youths slain by Zipacna became the stars. Thus concludes the
second book.


THE THIRD BOOK

The beginning of the third book finds the gods once more in council. In
the darkness they commune concerning the creation of man. The Creator
and Former made four perfect men. These beings were wholly created
from yellow and white maize. Their names were Balam-Quitzé (Tiger
with the Sweet Smile), Balam-Agab (Tiger of the Night), Mahucutah
(The Distinguished Name), and Iqi-Balam (Tiger of the Moon). They
had neither father nor mother, neither were they made by the ordinary
agents in the work of creation. Their creation was a miracle of the
Former. [6]

But Hurakan was not altogether satisfied with his handiwork. These men
were too perfect. They knew overmuch. Therefore the gods took counsel
as to how to proceed with man. They must not become as gods (note here
the Christian influence). Let us now contract their sight so that
they may only be able to see a portion of the earth and be content,
said the gods. Then Hurakan breathed a cloud over their eyes, which
became partially veiled. Then the four men slept, and four women were
made, Caha-Paluma (Falling Water), Choimha (Beautiful Water), Tzununiha
(House of the Water), and Cakixa (Water of Aras or Parrots), who became
the wives of the men in their respective order as mentioned above.

These were the ancestors of the Kichés only. Then were created the
ancestors of other peoples. They were ignorant of the methods of
worship, and lifting their eyes to heaven prayed to the Creator,
the Former, for peaceable lives and the return of the sun. But no
sun came, and they grew uneasy. So they set out for Tulan-Zuiva,
or the Seven Caves, and there gods were given unto them, each man,
as head of a group of the race, a god. Balam-Quitzé received the
god Tohil. Balam-Agab received the god Avilix, and Mahucutah the god
Hacavitz. Iqi-Balam received a god, but as he had no family his god
is not taken into account in the native mythology.

The Kichés now began to feel the want of fire, and the god Tohil, the
creator of fire, supplied them with this element. But soon afterwards
a mighty rain extinguished all the fires in the land. Tohil, however,
always renewed the supply. And fire in those days was the chief
necessity, for as yet there was no sun.

Tulan was a place of misfortune to man, for not only did he suffer from
cold and famine, but here his speech was so confounded that the first
four men were no longer able to comprehend each other. They determined
to leave Tulan, and under the leadership of the god Tohil set out
to search for a new abode. On they wandered through innumerable
hardships. Many mountains had they to climb, and a long passage
to make through the sea which was miraculously divided for their
journey from shore to shore. At length they came to a mountain which
they called Hacavitz, after one of their gods, and here they rested,
for here they had been instructed that they should see the sun. And
the sun appeared. Animals and men were transported with delight. All
the celestial bodies were now established. But the sun was not as it
is to-day. He was not strong, but as reflected in a mirror.

As he arose the three tribal gods were turned into stone, as were the
gods--probably totems--connected with the wild animals. Then arose
the first Kiché city.

As time progressed the first men grew old, and, impelled by visions,
they began to offer human sacrifices. For this purpose they raided
the villages of the neighbouring peoples, who retaliated. But by the
miraculous aid of a horde of wasps and hornets the Kichés utterly
routed their enemies. And the aliens became tributory to them.

Now it came nigh the death-time of the first men, and they called
their descendants together to hearken unto their last counsels. In the
anguish of their hearts they sang the Kamucu, the song "We see," that
they had sung when it first became light. Then they took leave of their
wives and sons, one by one. And suddenly they were not. But in their
place was a huge bundle, which was never unfolded. And it was called
the "Majesty Enveloped." And so died the first men of the Kichés.


THE FOURTH BOOK

The Fourth Book brings us down to what is presumably history. We say
"presumably," because we have only the bare testimony of the "Popol
Vuh" to go upon. We can note therein the evolution of the Kiché
people from a comparatively simple and pastoral state of society to
a political condition of considerable complexity. This account of the
later periods is extremely confused, and as the names of many of the
Kiché monarchs are the same as those of the gods, it is often difficult
to discriminate between saga and history. Interminable conflicts are
the subject of most of this book, and by the time the transcriber
reached the twelfth chapter he seems to have tired of his labours
and to have made up his mind to conclude with a genealogical list of
the Kiché kings. He here traces the genealogies of the three royal
houses of Cavek, Nihaib, and Ahau-Kiché. The state of transition and
turmoil in which the country was for many years after the conquest
must have tended to the disappearance of native records of any kind,
and our author does not appear to have been as well versed in the
history of his country which immediately preceded his own time as he
was in her mythology and legends. According to a tradition recited by
Don Domingo Juarros in his "History of the Kingdom of Guatemala," the
Toltecs emigrated from the neighbourhood of Tula in Mexico by direction
of an oracle, in consequence of the great increase of population in
the reign of Nimaquiché, fifth King of the Toltecs. "In performing
this journey they expended many years and suffered extraordinary
hardships." Nimaquiché was succeeded by his son Aexopil, from whom
was descended Kicab Tanub, the contemporary of Montezuma II. This
does not at all agree with the "Popol Vuh" account.


COSMOGONY OF THE "POPOL VUH"


The cosmogony of the "Popol Vuh" exhibits many signs of Christian
influence, but it would be quite erroneous to infer that such influence
was of a direct nature; that is, that the native compiler deliberately
infused into the original narrative those outstanding features of the
Christian cosmogony, which were undoubtedly quite familiar to him. The
resemblance which is apparent between the first few chapters of the
"Popol Vuh" and the creation-myth in Genesis is no more the result of
design than was the metamorphosis of King Arthur's Brythonic warriors
into Norman knights by the jongleurs. The inclusion of obviously
Christian elements was undoubtedly unconscious. A native Guatemalan,
nurtured in the Christian faith, could, in fact, quite be expected
to produce an incongruous blending of Christian and pagan cosmogony
such as is here dealt with.

But another and more important question arises in connection with
the initial chapters of the "Popol Vuh"--those which give an account
of the Kiché creation-myth. Under the veneer of Biblical cosmogony
the original myth would appear to be the sum of more than one native
creation-story. We have here a number of beings, each of whom appear
in some manner to exercise the function of a creator, and it might be
gathered from this that the account now before us was produced by the
fusion and reconciliation of more than one legend connected with the
creation--a reconciliation of early rival faiths. We have to guide
us in this the proved facts of a composite Peruvian cosmogony. The
ruling Inca caste skilfully welded together no less than four early
creation-myths, reserving for their own divine ancestors the headship
of the heavens. And it is not unreasonable to believe that the diverse
ethnological elements of which the Maya-Kiché people were undoubtedly
composed possessed divergent cosmogonies, which were reconciled to
one another in the later traditional versions of the "Popol Vuh."

This would lead to the further supposition that the "Popol Vuh" is
a monument of very considerable antiquity. The fusion of religious
beliefs is, even with savages, a work of many generations. It would
be rash to attempt to discover any approximate date for the original
conception of the "Popol Vuh." The only version which we possess is
that now under review, and as the lack of an earlier version makes
comparison impossible, we are thus without the guidance with which
the criteria of philology would undoubtedly furnish us. That the Mayan
civilisation was of very considerable antiquity is possible, although
no adequate proof exists for the assumption. This much is certain: that
at the period of the Conquest written language was still in a state
of transition from the pictographic to the phonetic-ideographic stage,
and that therefore no version of the "Popol Vuh" which had been fixed
by its receiving literary form could have long existed. It is much more
probable that it existed for many generations by being handed down from
mouth to mouth--a manner of literary preservation exceedingly common
with the American peoples. The memories of the natives of America were
and still are matter for astonishment for all who come into contact
with them. The Conquistadores were astounded at the ease with which
the Mexicans could recite poems and orations of stupendous length,
and numerous instances of Indian feats of mnemonics are on record.

It is worthy of notice that the Kiché myth embodies the general
aboriginal idea of creation which prevailed in the New World. In many
of them the central idea of creation is supplied by the brooding
of a great bird over the dark primeval waste of waters. Thus the
Athapascans thought that a mighty raven, with eyes of fire and wings
whose clapping was as the thunder, descended to the ocean and raised
the earth to its surface. [7] The Muscokis believed that a couple
of pigeons, skimming the surface of the deep, espied a blade of
grass upon its surface, which slowly evolved into the dry land. [8]
The Zuñis imagined that Awonawilona, the All-father, so impregnated
the waters that a scum appeared upon their surface which became the
earth and sky. [9] The Iroquois said that their female ancestor,
expelled from heaven by her angry spouse, landed upon the sea, from
which mud at once arose. The Mixtecs imagined that two winds--those
of the Nine Serpents and the Nine Caverns--under the guise of a bird
and a winged serpent respectively, caused the waters to subside and the
land to appear. The Costa Rican Guaymis related, according to Melendez,
that Noncomala waded into the water and met the water-nymph Rutbe, who
bore him twins, the sun and moon. In all these accounts, from widely
divergent nations, it is surprising to note such unanimity of belief;
and when the tenacity of legend is borne in mind, it is perhaps not
too rash to state a belief in an original American creation-myth,
which seems none the less possible when the fact of the ethnological
unity among the American tribes is remembered.

It is by no means difficult to satisfactorily prove the genuine
American character of the "Popol Vuh." In its case reading is
believing. Macpherson, in his preface to the first edition of the poems
of Ossian, says of an "ingenious gentleman" that ere he had read the
poems he thought and remarked that a man diffident of his abilities
might well ascribe these compositions to a person living in a remote
antiquity; but when he had perused them his sentiments were changed. He
found they abounded too much with those ideas that only belong to an
early state of society to be the work of a modern poet. However this
may apply to the reputed compositions of the Goidelic bard, there can
be no doubt that it can be used with justice as regards the "Popol
Vuh." To any one who has given it a careful examination it must be
abundantly evident that it is a composition that has passed through
several stages of development; that it is unquestionably of aboriginal
origin; and that it has only been influenced by European thought in a
secondary and unessential manner. The very fact that it was composed
in the Kiché tongue is almost sufficient proof of its genuine American
character. The scholarship of the nineteenth century was unequal to
the adequate translation of the "Popol Vuh"; the twentieth century
has as yet shown no signs of being able to accomplish the task. It
is, therefore, not difficult to credit that if modern scholarship is
unable to properly translate the work, that of the eighteenth century
was unable to create it; no European of that epoch was sufficiently
versed in Kiché theology and history to compose in faultless Kiché
such a work as the "Popol Vuh," breathing as it does in every line
an intimate and natural acquaintance with the antiquities of Guatemala.

The "Popol Vuh" is not the only mythi-historical work composed by an
aboriginal American. In Mexico Ixtlilxochitl, and in Peru Garcilasso
de la Vega, wrote exhaustive treatises upon the history and customs of
their native countrymen shortly after the conquests of Mexico and Peru,
and hieroglyphic records, such as the "Wallam Olum," are not unknown
among the North American Indians. In fact, the intelligence which
fails to regard the "Popol Vuh" as a genuine aboriginal production
must be more sceptical than critical.


KICHÉ AND MEXICAN MYTHOLOGY

The connection of Kiché and Mayan mythology with that of Mexico is
obvious, but not altogether proven. It is possible that the main lines
of the three systems were similar; that certain great deities like
Gucumatz were common to all, but that the inclusion of local gods
lent a very different complexion to the three mythologies. It also
seems not unreasonable to suppose that the Kiché people must have
been more liable to influence from the south, that is, from the north
of South America. The inclusion of an Antillean deity (Hurakan) in
their pantheon practically proves that they were, and their relative
proximity to the Caribs--the great maritime race of America--leads
to the assumption that they may have been influenced by those roving
merchants and sailors more or less profoundly. This, however, can
only be matter for surmise, and, however strong the probabilities
seem in favour of such a theory, proof is wanting to strengthen it.


THE PANTHEON OF THE "POPOL VUH"


It must be remembered that we are dealing with Kiché and not with
Mayan mythology. Although the two had much in common, it would be most
unsafe in the present state of knowledge to attempt to identify Kiché
with Mayan deities; such an attempt would, indeed, assume the bulk of
a formidable treatise. Scholarship at the present time hesitates to
designate the representations of Mayan gods on the walls of "buried"
cities otherwise than by a letter of the alphabet, and it is therefore
wise to thoroughly ignore the question of Mayan affinities in dealing
with myths purely Kiché. This does not apply to the Kiché-Mexican
affinities. Mexican and Kiché deities are mostly known quantities,
but this cannot be said of their Mayan congenors. The reason for
this is that until Mayan myth is reconciled with the evidence of
the Mayan monuments no certitude can be arrived at. This cannot
well be achieved until the Mayan hieroglyphs give up their secret,
a contingency of which there is no immediate likelihood. Bearing
this in mind, we may proceed to a brief consideration of the Kiché
pantheon and its probable Mexican affinities.

Almost at the beginning we encounter a pair of masculine-feminine
beings of a type nearly hermaphroditic, named Xpiyacoc and Xmucane,
who are credited with a considerable share of the creation of organic
life in the Kiché cosmogony. These, we will remember, appeared in