The story of Ixion, whirling round upon the wheel, teaches {us} what a
rolling thing is fortune. Sisyphus, with immense labour, pushing the
stone up the lofty hill, which ever, his labour lost, rolls back from
the top, shows that men's miseries are endless. When Tantalus is
athirst, standing in the midst of the river, the greedy are described,
whom a sufficiency of blessings surrounds, but none can they enjoy. The
wicked Danaïds carry water in urns, and cannot fill their pierced
vessels; just so, whatever you bestow on luxury, will flow out beneath.
Wretched Tityus is stretched over nine acres,[6] presenting for dire
punishment a liver that ever grows again: by this it is shown that the
greater the extent of land a man possesses, the heavier are his cares.
Antiquity purposely wrapped up the truth, in order that the wise might
understand--the ignorant remain in error.

    [Footnote NF.6: _Nine acres_)--Ver. 13. "Jugera." The
    "jugerum" was a piece of land 240 feet long by 120 wide.]


FABLE VII.

THE AUTHOR.

_On the Oracle of Apollo._

Phoebus! who dost inhabit Delphi and the beauteous Parnassus, say what is
most useful to us. Why do the locks of the holy prophetess stand erect;
the tripods shake; the holy shrines resound; the laurels, too,[7]
quiver, and the very day grow pale? Smitten by the Divinity, the Pythia
utters {these} words, and the warning of the Delian God instructs the
nations: "Practise virtue; pay your vows to the Gods above; defend your
country, your parents, your children, {and} your chaste wives with arms;
repel the foe with the sword; assist your friends; spare the wretched;
favour the good; meet the treacherous face to face; punish offences;
chastise the impious; inflict vengeance on those who, by base adultery,
defile the marriage couch; beware of the wicked; trust no man too far."
Thus having said, the Maiden falls frenzied to the ground: frenzied,
indeed, for what she said, she said in vain.

    [Footnote NF.7: _The laurels, too_)--Ver. 5. The "cortina" or
    oracular shrine was surrounded with laurels; which were said to
    quiver while the oracles were being pronounced. This is probably
    the most beautiful portion of these newly-discovered poems. Still,
    it cannot with propriety be called a Fable.]


FABLE VIII.

ÆSOP AND THE AUTHOR.

_On a bad Author who praised himself._

A Person had recited[8] some worthless composition to Æsop, in which he
had inordinately bragged about himself. Desirous, therefore, to know
what the Sage thought {thereof}: "Does it appear to you," said he, "that
I have been too conceited? I have no empty confidence in my own
capacity." Worried to death with the execrable volume, Æsop replied:
"I greatly approve of your bestowing praise on yourself, for it will
never be your lot to receive it from another."

    [Footnote NF.8: _A person had recited_)--Ver. 1. Adry remarks
    that this is not a Fable, but only an Epigram.]


FABLE IX.

POMPEIUS MAGNUS AND HIS SOLDIER.

_How difficult it is to understand a man._

A Soldier of Pompeius Magnus, a man of huge bulk, by talking mincingly
and walking with an affected gait, had acquired the character of an
effeminate wretch, {and that} most fully established. Lying in wait by
night for the beasts of burden of his General, he drives away the mules
{laden} with garments and gold, and a vast weight of silver. A rumour of
what has been done gets abroad; the soldier is accused, {and} carried
off to the Prætorium. On this, Magnus {says to him}: "How say you? Have
you dared to rob me, comrade?" The soldier forthwith spits into his left
hand, and scatters about the spittle with his fingers. "Even thus,
General," says he, "may my eyes drip out, if I have seen or touched
{your property}." Then Magnus, a man of easy disposition, orders the
false accusers to be sent about their business,[9] and will not believe
the man guilty of so great audacity.

Not long afterwards a barbarian, confiding in his strength of hand,
challenges one of the Romans. Each man fears to accept the challenge,
and the leaders of highest rank mutter {among themselves}. At length,
this effeminate wretch in appearance, but Mars in prowess, approached
the General, who was seated on his tribunal, and, with a lisping voice,
said "May I?"[10] But Magnus, getting angry, as {well he might}, the
matter being so serious, ordered him to be turned out. Upon this, an
aged man among the Chieftain's friends, {remarked}: "I think it would be
better for this person to be exposed to the hazards of Fortune, since in
him our loss would be but small, than a valiant man, who, if conquered
through {some} mischance, might entail upon you a charge of rashness."
Magnus acquiesced, and gave the Soldier permission to go out to meet
{the champion}, whose head, to the surprise of the army, he whipped off
sooner than you could say it, and returned victorious. Thereupon said
Pompeius: "With great pleasure I present you with the soldier's crown,
because you have vindicated the honor of the Roman name; nevertheless,"
said he, "may my eyes drip out" (imitating the unseemly act with which
the Soldier had accompanied his oath), "if you did not carry off my
property from among the baggage."

    [Footnote NF.9: _About their business_)--Ver. 13. The words
    suggested in Orellius, "Indicii falsi auctores propelli jubet,"
    are used here to fill up the lacuna.]

    [Footnote NF.10: _May I?_)--Ver. 29. "Licet?" meaning: "Do you
    give me permission to go against the enemy?" The story about the
    spittle savours of the middle ages.]


FABLE X.

JUNO, VENUS, AND THE HEN.

_On the Lustfulness of Women._

When Juno[11] was praising her own chastity, Venus did not lose the
opportunity of a joke, and, to show that there was no female equal to
herself {in that virtue}, is said to have asked this question of the
Hen: "Tell me, will you, with how much food could you be satisfied?" The
hen replied: "Whatever you give me will be enough; but still you must
let me scratch a bit with my feet." "To keep you from scratching," said
{the Goddess}, "is a measure of wheat enough?" "Certainly; indeed it is
too much; but still do allow me to scratch." "In fine," {said Venus},
"what do you require, on condition of not scratching at all?" Then at
last the hen confessed the weak point in her nature: "Though a {whole}
barn were open for me, still scratch I must." Juno is said to have
laughed at the joke of Venus, for by the Hen she meant the Female Sex.

    [Footnote NF.11: _When Juno_)--Ver. 1. This story is both
    silly and in very bad taste.]


FABLE XI.

THE FATHER OF A FAMILY AND ÆSOP.

_How a bad-tempered Son may be tamed._

A Father of a family had a passionate Son, who, as soon as he had got
out of his fathers sight, inflicted many a blow upon the servants, and
gave loose to the impetuous temper of youth. Æsop consequently told this
short story to the old man.

A certain Man was yoking an old Ox along with a Calf; and when the Ox
shunning {to bear} the yoke with a neck so unfit for it, alleged the
failing strength of his years: "You have no reason to fear," said the
Countryman, "I don't do this that you may labour, but that you may tame
him, who with his heels and horns has made many lame." Just so, unless
you always keep your son by you, and by your management restrain his
temper, take care that the broils in your house don't increase to a
still greater degree. Gentleness is the remedy for a bad temper.[12]

    [Footnote NF.12: _Remedy for a bad temper_)--Ver. 15. This
    doctrine is stated in far too general terms.]


FABLE XII.

THE PHILOSOPHER AND THE VICTOR IN THE GYMNASTIC GAMES.

_How Boastfulness may sometimes be checked._

A Philosopher chancing to find the Victor in a gymnastic contest too
fond of boasting, asked him whether his adversary had been the stronger
man. {To this} the other {replied}: "Don't mention it; my strength was
far greater." "Then, you simpleton," retorted {the Philosopher}, "what
praise do you deserve, if you, being the stronger, have conquered one
who was not so powerful? You might perhaps have been tolerated if you
had told us that you had conquered one who was your superior in
strength."


FABLE XIII.

THE ASS AND THE LYRE.

_How Genius is often wasted through Misfortune._

An Ass espied a Lyre lying in a meadow: he approached and tried the
strings with his hoof; they sounded at his touch. "By my faith, a pretty
thing," said he; "it happens unfortunately that I am not skilled in the
art. If any person of greater skill had found it, he might have charmed
my ears with divine notes."

So Genius is often wasted through Misfortune.[13]

    [Footnote NF.13: _Genius often wasted._)--Ver. 7. It seems to
    border upon the absurd to speak of an ass losing the opportunity
    of cultivating his "ingenium." He can hardly with propriety be
    quoted under any circumstances as a specimen of a "mute inglorious
    Milton."]


FABLE XIV.

THE WIDOW AND THE SOLDIER.

_The great Inconstancy and Lustfulness of Women._

A certain Woman[14] had for some years lost her beloved Husband, and had
placed his body in a tomb; and as she could by no means be forced from
it, and passed her life in mourning at the sepulchre, she obtained a
distinguished character for strict chastity. In the meantime, some
persons who had plundered the temple of Jupiter suffered the penalty of
crucifixion. In order that no one might remove their remains, soldiers
were appointed as guards of the dead bodies, close by the monument in
which the woman had shut herself up. Some time after, one of the Guards,
being thirsty, asked, in the middle of the night, for some water, of a
servant-maid, who chanced just then to be assisting her mistress, who
was going to rest; for she had been watching by a lamp, and had
prolonged her vigils to a late hour. The door being a little open, the
Soldier peeps in, and beholds a Woman, emaciated indeed, but of
beauteous features. His smitten heart is immediately inflamed, and he
gradually burns with unchaste desires. His crafty shrewdness invents a
thousand pretences for seeing her more frequently. Wrought upon by daily
intercourse, by degrees she became more complaisant to the stranger, and
soon enthralled his heart by a closer tie. While the careful Guard is
here passing his nights, a body is missed from one of the crosses. The
Soldier in his alarm relates to the Woman what has happened; but the
chaste Matron replies: "You have no grounds for fear;" and gives up the
body of her Husband to be fastened to the cross, that he may not undergo
punishment for his negligence.

Thus did profligacy usurp the place of honour.

    [Footnote NF.14: _A certain Woman_)--Ver. 1. This is the story
    of the Matron of Ephesus, told in a much more interesting manner
    by Petronius Arbiter.]


FABLE XV.

THE RICH SUITOR AND THE POOR ONE.

_Fortune sometimes favours Men beyond their hopes and expectations._

Two Youths were courting a Maiden at the same time; the Rich man got the
better of the birth and good looks of the Poor one. When the appointed
day for the nuptials had arrived, the woe-begone Lover, because he could
not endure his grief, betook himself to some gardens near at hand;
a little beyond which, the splendid villa of the Rich man was about to
receive the Maiden from her mother's bosom, as his house in the city
seemed not to be roomy enough. The marriage procession is arranged,
a great crowd flocks to the scene, and Hymenæus gives the marriage
torch. Now an Ass, which used to gain a living for the Poor man, was
standing at the threshold of a gate; and it so happens the maidens lead
him along, that the fatigues of the way may not hurt the tender feet {of
the Bride}. On a sudden, by the pity of Venus, the heavens are swept by
winds, the crash of thunder resounds through the firmament, and brings
on a rough night with heavy rain; light is withdrawn from their eyes,
and at the same moment a storm of hail, spreading in all directions,
beats upon them, frightening and scattering them on all sides,
compelling each to seek safety for himself in flight. The Ass runs under
the well-known roof close at hand, and with a loud voice gives notice of
his presence. The servants run out of doors, behold with admiration the
beautiful Maiden, and then go and tell their master. He, seated at table
with a few companions, was consoling his passion with repeated draughts.
When the news was brought him, exulting with delight, {both} Bacchus and
Venus exhorting him, he celebrated his joyous nuptials amid the
applauses of his comrades. The bride's parents sought their daughter
through the crier, {while} the intended Husband grieved at the loss of
his Wife. After what had taken place became known to the public, all
agreed in approving of the favour shown by the Gods of heaven.


FABLE XVI.

ÆSOP AND HIS MISTRESS.

_How injurious it often is to tell the Truth._

Æsop being in the service of an Ugly Woman, who wasted the whole day in
painting herself up, and used fine clothes, pearls, gold, {and} silver,
yet found no one who would touch her with a finger: "May I {say} a few
words?" said he. "Say on," {she replied}. "{Then} I think," {said he},
"that you will effect anything you wish, if you lay aside your
ornaments." "Do I then seem to you so much preferable by myself?" {said
she}. "Why, no; if you don't make presents, your bed will enjoy its
repose." "But your sides," she replied, "shan't enjoy their repose;"[15]
and ordered the talkative Slave to be flogged. Shortly after a thief
took away a silver bracelet. When the Woman was told that it could not
be found, full of fury she summoned all {her slaves}, and threatened
them with a severe flogging if they did not tell the truth. "Threaten
others," said {Æsop}, "indeed you won't trick me, mistress; I was lately
beaten with the whip because I told the truth."

    [Footnote NF.15: _Shan't enjoy their repose_)--Ver. 9. The
    play upon the word "cessabo," seems redolent of the wit of the
    middle ages, and not of the days of Phædrus.]


FABLE XVII.

A COCK CARRIED IN A LITTER BY CATS.

_An extreme feeling of Security often leads Men into Danger._

A Cock had some Cats to carry him in his litter: a Fox on seeing him
borne along in this pompous manner, said: "I advise you to be on your
guard against treachery, for if you were to examine the countenances of
those creatures, you would pronounce that they are carrying a booty, not
a burden." As soon as the savage brotherhood[16] began to be hungry,
they tore their Master to pieces, and went shares in the proceeds of
their guilt.

    [Footnote NF.16: _Savage brotherhood_)--Ver. 6. "Societas."
    The brotherhood of litter-carriers, perhaps four or six in
    number.]


FABLE XVIII.

THE SOW BRINGING FORTH, AND THE WOLF

_We must first make trial of a Man before we entrust ourselves to him._

A Sow was lying and groaning, her travail coming on; a Wolf came running
to her aid, and, offering his assistance, said that he could perform the
duties of midwife. She, however, understanding the treachery of the
wicked animal, rejected the suspicious services of the evil-doer, and
said: "If you keep at a greater distance it is enough."

But had she entrusted herself to the perfidious Wolf, she would have had
just as much pain to cry for, and her death {into the bargain}.


FABLE XIX.

THE RUNAWAY SLAVE AND ÆSOP.

_There is no necessity to add evil to evil._

A Slave, when running away from a Master of severe disposition, met
Æsop, to whom he was known as a neighbour: "Why {are} you in such a
hurry?" {said Æsop}. "I'll tell you candidly, father," {said the other},
"for you are worthy to be called by that name, as our sorrows are safely
entrusted to you. Stripes are in superabundance; victuals fail: every
now and then I am sent to the farm as a slave to the rustics {there}: if
he dines at home I am kept standing by him all night, or if he is
invited out, I remain until daylight in the street. I have fairly earned
my liberty; but with grey hairs I am {still} a slave. If I were
conscious to myself of any fault, I should bear this patiently: I never
have had a bellyful, and, unhappy that I am, I have to put up with a
severe master besides. For these reasons, and {for others} which it
would take too long to recount, I have determined to go wherever my feet
may carry me." "Listen then," said Æsop; "When you have committed no
fault, you suffer these inconveniences as you say: what if you had
offended? What do you suppose you would {then} have had to suffer?"

By such advice he was prevented from running away.


FABLE XX.

THE CHARIOT-HORSE SOLD FOR THE MILL.

_Whatever happens, we must bear it with equanimity._

A certain Man withdrew from his chariot a Horse, ennobled by many
victories, and sold him for the mill. As he was being led out of doors
from the mill-stones to water, he saw his fellows going towards the
Circus, to celebrate the joyous contests at the games. With tears
starting forth, he said, "Go on and be happy; celebrate without me the
festive day in the race; at the place to which the accursed hand of the
thief has dragged me, will I lament my sad fate."


FABLE XXI.

THE HUNGRY BEAR.

_Hunger sharpens the wits._

If at any time[17] sustenance is wanting to the Bear in the woods, he
runs to the rocky shore, and, grasping a rock, gradually lets down his
shaggy thighs into the water; and as soon as the Crabs have stuck to the
long hair, betaking himself to shore, the crafty fellow shakes off his
sea-spoil, and enjoys the food that he has collected in every quarter.
Thus even in Fools does hunger sharpen the wits.

    [Footnote NF.17: _If at any time_)--Ver. 1. This is not a
    Fable; it is merely an anecdote in natural history, and one not
    very unlikely to have been true.]


FABLE XXII.

THE TRAVELLER AND THE RAVEN.

_Men are very frequently imposed upon by words._

A Man while going through the fields along his solitary path, heard the
word "Hail!" whereat he stopped for a moment, but seeing no one, went on
his way. Again the same sound saluted him from a hidden spot; encouraged
by the hospitable voice, he stopped short, that whoever it was might
receive the like civility. When, looking all about, he had remained long
in perplexity, and had lost the time in which he might have walked some
miles, a Raven showed himself, and hovering above him, continually
repeated "Hail!" Then, perceiving that he had been deluded: "Perdition
seize you," said he, "most mischievous bird, to have thus delayed me
when I was in such a hurry."


FABLE XXIII.

THE SHEPHERD AND THE SHE-GOAT.

_Nothing is secret which shall not be made manifest._[18]

A Shepherd had broken[19] the horn of a She-Goat with his staff, {and}
began to entreat her not to betray him to his Master. "Although unjustly
injured," {said she}, "still, I shall be silent; but the thing itself
will proclaim your offence."

    [Footnote NF.18: _Be made manifest_)--Ver. 1. This moral is
    couched in the same words as St. Luke, viii. 17: "For nothing is
    secret which shall not be made manifest."]

    [Footnote NF.19: _A Shepherd had broken_)--Ver. 1. As Adry
    remarks, this Fable more closely resembles the brevity and
    elegance of Phædrus.]


FABLE XXIV.

THE SERPENT AND THE LIZARD.

_When the Lion's skin fails, the Fox's must be employed; that is to say,
when strength fails, we must employ craftiness._

A Serpent chanced to catch a Lizard by the tail; but when she tried to
devour it with open throat, it snatched up a little twig that lay close
at hand, and, holding it transversely with pertinacious bite, checked
the greedy jaws, agape to devour it, by this cleverly contrived
impediment. So the Serpent dropped the prey from her mouth unenjoyed.


FABLE XXV.

THE CROW AND THE SHEEP.

_Many are in the habit of injuring the weak and cringing to the
powerful._

An pestilent Crow had taken her seat upon a Sheep; which after carrying
her a long time on her back and much against her inclination, remarked:
"If you had done thus to a Dog with his sharp teeth, you would have
suffered for it." To this the rascally {Crow replied}: "I despise the
defenceless, and I yield to the powerful; I know whom to vex, and whom
to flatter craftily; by these means I put off my old age for years."


FABLE XXVI.

THE SERVANT AND THE MASTER.

_There is no curse more severe than a bad conscience._

A Servant having been guilty[20] of a secret offence in debauching the
wife of his master, on the latter coming to know of it, he said, in the
presence of those standing by: "Are you quite pleased with yourself?
For, when you ought not, you do please yourself; but not with impunity,
for when you ought to be pleased, you cannot be."

    [Footnote NF.20: _Having been guilty_)--Ver. 5. Chambry, one
    of the French Editors, omits this, as unworthy of Phædrus, and
    Adry pronounces it unintelligible. The meaning of this, which is
    Jannelli's version, seems to be: "When you ought not to please
    yourself, you do please yourself, in committing the crime; but the
    consequence is that, afterwards, when you ought to feel pleased,
    in that you have gratified your desires, you cannot, in
    consequence of your guilty conscience." It is so mutilated,
    however, that Cassitti, Jannelli, and other Editors give entirely
    different versions.]


FABLE XXVII.

THE HARE AND THE HERDSMAN.

_Many are kind in words, faithless at heart._

A Hare was flying from the Huntsman with speedy foot, and being seen by
a Herdsman, as she was creeping into a thicket: "By the Gods of heaven,
I beg of you," said she, "and by all your hopes, do not betray me,
Herdsman; I have never done any injury to this field."[21] "Don't be
afraid," the Countryman replied, "remain concealed without
apprehension." And now the Huntsman coming up, {enquired}: "Pray,
Herdsman, has a Hare come this way?" "She did come, but went off that
way to the left;" {he answered}, winking and nodding to the right. The
Huntsman in his haste did not understand him, and hurried out of sight.

Then {said} the Herdsman: "Are you not glad that I concealed you?"
"I don't deny," said she, "that to your tongue I owe most sincere
thanks, and I return them, but I wish you may be deprived of your
perfidious eyes."

    [Footnote NF.21: _Injury to this field_)--Ver. 4. The Hare is
    more an enemy to the flowers in gardens than to the fields. It was
    probably for this reason that the Romans sacrificed this animal to
    the Goddess Flora.]


FABLE XXVIII.

THE YOUNG MAN AND THE COURTESAN.

_Many things are pleasing which still are not to our advantage._

While a perfidious Courtesan was fawning upon a Youth, and he, though
wronged {by her} many a time and oft, still showed himself indulgent to
the Woman, the faithless {Creature thus addressed him}: "Though many
contend {for me} with {their} gifts, still do I esteem you the most."
The Youth, recollecting how many times he had been deceived, replied:
"Gladly, my love, do I hear these words; not because you are constant,
but because you administer to my pleasures."


FABLE XXIX.

THE BEAVER.

_Many would escape, if for the sake of safety they would disregard their
comforts._

The Beaver (to which the talkative Greeks have given the name of Castor,
thus bestowing upon an animal the name of a God[22]--they who boast of
the abundance of their epithets) when can no longer escape the dogs, is
said to bite off his testicles, because he is aware that it is for them
he is sought; a thing which I would not deny being done through an
instinct granted by the Gods; for as soon as the Huntsman has found the
drug, he ceases his pursuit, and calls off the dogs.

If men could manage, so as to be ready to part with what they own, in
order to live in safety for the future, there would be no one to devise
stratagems to the detriment of the naked body.

    [Footnote NF.22: _Name of a God_)--Ver. 3. This pun upon the
    resemblance of "Castor," the name of the demigod, to "Castor,"
    "a beaver," seems to be a puerile pun; and the remark upon the
    limited "copia verborum" of the Greeks, seems more likely to
    proceed from the Archbishop of Sipontum than from Phædrus, who was
    evidently proud of his Grecian origin.]


FABLE XXX.

THE BUTTERFLY AND THE WASP.

_Not past but present Fortune must be regarded._

A Butterfly[23] seeing a Wasp flying by: "Oh, sad is our lot," said she,
"derived from the depths of hell, from the recesses of which we have
received our existence. I, eloquent in peace, brave in battle, most
skilled in every art, whatever I once was, behold, light and rotten, and
mere ashes do I fly.[24] You, who were a Mule[25] with panniers, hurt
whomsoever you choose, by fixing your sting in him." The Wasp, too,
uttered these words, well suited to her disposition: "Consider not what
we were, but what we now are."

    [Footnote NF.23: _A Butterfly_)--Ver. 1. This Fable is in a
    sadly mutilated state, and critics are at a loss to say, with any
    certainty, what is meant by it. Whether the supposed word in l. 2,
    "barathris," (if really the correct reading), means the depths of
    hell, or the inner folds of the leaves in which the Butterfly is
    enveloped in the chrysalis state, or whether it means something
    else, will probably always remain a matter of doubt. However, the
    Fable seems to allude to the prevalent idea, that the soul, when
    disengaged from the body, took the form of a butterfly. Indeed
    the Greeks called both the soul and a butterfly by the name of
    +psuchê+. There are six or seven different versions of the first
    five lines.]

    [Footnote NF.24: _Ashes do I fly_)--Ver. 6. It is just
    possible that this may allude to the soul being disengaged from
    the corruption of the body.]

    [Footnote NF.25: _Who were a Mule_)--Ver. 7. She would seem
    here to allude to the doctrine of the transmigration of souls. It
    may possibly have been a notion, that as the human soul took the
    form of a Butterfly, the souls of animals appeared in the shapes
    of Wasps and Flies.]


FABLE XXXI.

THE GROUND-SWALLOW AND THE FOX.

_Confidence is not to be placed in the wicked._

A Bird which the Rustics call a Ground-Swallow ({terraneola}), because
it makes its nest in the ground, chanced to meet a wicked Fox, on seeing
whom she soared aloft on her wings. "Save you," said the other; "why,
pray, do you fly from me, as though I had not abundance of food in the
meadows,--crickets, beetles, {and} plenty of locusts. You have nothing
to fear, I beg {to assure you}; I love you dearly for your quiet ways,
and your harmless life." {The Bird} replied: "You speak very fairly,
indeed; however, I am not near you, but up in the air; I shall therefore
proceed, and that is the way in which I trust my life to you."


FABLE XXXII.

THE EPILOGUE.[26]

_Of those who read this book._

Whatever my Muse has here written in sportive mood, both malice and
worth equally join in praising; but the latter with candour, while the
other is secretly annoyed.

    [Footnote NF.26: _The Epilogue_)--This appears in reality to
    be only the Fragment of an Epilogue.]


ÆSOPIAN FABLES.[1]

THE AUTHORS OF WHICH ARE NOT KNOWN

    [Footnote AF.1: _Æsopian Fables_)--These Æsopian Fables appear
    much more worthy of the genius of Phædrus than the preceding ones,
    which have been attributed to him by the Italian Editors. The name
    of the author or authors of these is unknown; but from the
    internal evidence, it is not improbable that some may have been
    composed by Phædrus.]


FABLE I.

THE SICK KITE.

A Kite having been sick for many months, and seeing now there was no
longer any hope of his recovery, asked his Mother to go round the sacred
places, and make the most earnest vows for his recovery. "I will do so,
my Son," said she, "but I am greatly afraid I shall obtain no help; but
you, who have polluted every temple {and} every altar with your ravages,
sparing no sacrificial food, what is it you would now have me ask?"


FABLE II.

THE HARES TIRED OF LIFE.

He who cannot endure his own misfortune, let him look at others, and
learn patience.

On one occasion, the Hares being scared in the woods by a great noise,
cried out, that, on account of their continued alarms, they would end
their lives. So they repaired to a certain pond, into which, in their
despondency, they were going to throw themselves. Alarmed at their
approach, some Frogs fled distractedly into the green sedge. "Oh!" says
one {of the hares}, "there are others too whom fear of misfortune
torments. Endure existence as others do."


FABLE III.

JUPITER AND THE FOX.

No fortune conceals baseness of nature.

Jupiter having changed a Fox into a human shape, while she was sitting
as a Mistress on a royal throne, she saw a beetle creeping out of a
corner, and sprang nimbly towards the well-known prey. The Gods of
heaven smiled; the Great Father was ashamed, and expelled the Concubine,
repudiated and disgraced, addressing her in these words: "Live on in the
manner that you deserve, you, who cannot make a worthy use of my
kindness."


FABLE IV.

THE LION AND THE MOUSE.

This Fable teaches that no one should hurt those of more humble
condition.

While a Lion was asleep in a wood, where some Field-Mice were sporting
about, one of them by chance leaped upon the Lion as he lay. The Lion
awoke and seized the wretched {creature} with a sudden spring. The
captive implored pardon {and} suppliantly confessed his crime, a sin of
imprudence. The Monarch, not deeming it a glorious thing to exact
vengeance for this, pardoned him and let him go. A few days after, the
Lion, while roaming by night, fell into a trap. When he perceived that
he was caught in the snare, he began to roar with his loudest voice. At
this tremendous noise the Mouse instantly ran to his assistance, and
exclaimed: "You have no need to fear; I will make an adequate return for
your great kindness." Immediately he began to survey all the knots and
the fastenings of the knots; and gnawing the strings after he had
examined them, loosened the snare. Thus did the Mouse restore the
captured Lion to the woods.


FABLE V.

THE MAN AND THE TREES.

Those perish, who give assistance to their foes.

A certain Man, having made an axe, besought the Trees to afford him a
handle from their wood that would prove firm: they all desired that a
piece of Olive-tree should be given. He accepted the offer, and, fitting
on the handle, set to work with the axe to hew down the huge trunks.
While he was selecting such as he thought fit, the Oak is reported thus
to have said to the Ash: "We richly deserve to be cut down."


FABLE VI.

THE MOUSE AND THE FROG.

A Mouse, in order that he might pass over a river with greater ease,
sought the aid of a Frog. She tied the fore leg of the Mouse to her
hinder thigh. Hardly had they swum to the middle of the river, when the
Frog dived suddenly, trying to reach the bottom, that she might
perfidiously deprive the Mouse of life. While he struggled with all his
might not to sink, a Kite that was flying near at hand, beheld the prey,
and seizing the floundering Mouse in his talons, at the same time bore
off the Frog that was fastened to him.

Thus do men often perish while meditating the destruction others.


FABLE VII.

THE TWO COCKS AND THE HAWK.

A Cock who had often fought with {another} Cock, and been beaten,
requested a Hawk {to act as} umpire in the contest. The latter conceived
hopes, if both should come, of devouring him who should first present
himself. Shortly after, when he saw that they had come to plead their
cause, he seized the one who first brought his case into court. The
victim clamorously exclaimed: "'Tis not I that should be punished, but
the one who took to flight;" the Bird {replied}: "Do not suppose that
you can this day escape my talons; it is just that you should now
yourself endure the treacheries you were planning for another."[2]

He who often cogitates upon the death of others, little knows what sad
Fate he may be preparing for himself.

    [Footnote AF.2: _Planning for another_)--Ver. 10. The nature
    of the reason assigned by the Hawk is not very clear. Perhaps the
    writer did not care that he should give even so much as a specious
    reason.]


FABLE VIII.

THE SNAIL AND THE APE.

A Snail, smitten with admiration of a Mirror which she had found, began
to climb its shining face, and lick it, fancying she could confer no
greater favour upon it, than to stain its brightness with her slime. An
Ape, when he saw the Mirror {thus} defiled, remarked: "He who allows
himself to be trodden by such {beings}, deserves to suffer such a
disgrace."

This Fable is written for those Women who unite themselves to ignorant
and foolish Men.


FABLE IX.

THE CITY MOUSE AND COUNTRY MOUSE.

A City Mouse being once entertained at the table of a Country one, dined
on humble acorns in a hole. Afterwards he prevailed upon the Countryman
by his entreaties to enter the city and a cellar that abounded with the
choicest things. Here, while they were enjoying remnants of various
kinds, the door is thrown open, and in comes the Butler; the Mice,
terrified at the noise, fly in different directions, and the City one
easily hides himself in his well-known holes; while the unfortunate
Rustic, all trepidation in that strange house, and dreading death, runs
to-and-fro along the walls. When the Butler had taken what he wanted,
and had shut the door, the City Mouse bade the Country one again to
take courage. The latter, still in a state of perturbation, replied:
"I hardly can take any food for fear. Do you think he will come?"
--"Why are you in such a fright?" said the City one; "come, let us
enjoy dainties which you may seek in vain in the country." The
Countryman {replied}: "You, who don't know what it is to fear, will
enjoy all these things; but, free from care and at liberty, may acorns
be my food!"

'Tis better to live secure in poverty, than to be consumed by the cares
attendant upon riches.


FABLE X.

THE ASS FAWNING UPON HIS MASTER.

An Ass, seeing the Dog fawn upon his master, and how he was crammed at
his table each day, and had bits thrown to him in abundance by the
Servants, thus remarked: "If the Master and the Servants are so very
fond of a most filthy Dog, what must it be with me, if I should pay him
similar attentions, who am much better than this Dog, and useful and
praiseworthy in many respects; who am supported by the pure streams of
undefiled water, and never in the habit of feeding upon nasty food?
Surely I am more worthy than a whelp to enjoy a happy life, and to
obtain the highest honor." While the Ass is thus soliloquising, he sees
his Master enter the stable; so running up to him in haste and braying
aloud, he leaps upon him, claps both feet on his shoulders, begins to
lick his face; and tearing his clothes with his dirty hoofs, he fatigues
his Master with his heavy weight, as he stupidly fawns upon him. At
their Master's outcry the Servants run to the spot, and seizing
everywhere such sticks and stones as come in their way, they punish the
braying {beast}, and knocking him off his Master's body, soon send him
back, half-dead to the manger, with sore limbs and battered rump.

{This} Fable teaches that a fool is not to thrust himself upon those who
do not want him, or affect to perform the part of one superior {to him}.


FABLE XI.

THE CRANE, THE CROW, AND THE COUNTRYMAN.

A Crane and a Crow had made a league on oath, that the Crane should
protect the Crow against the Birds, {and} that the Crow should foretell
the future, so that the Crane might be on her guard. After this, on
their frequently flying into the fields of a certain Countryman, and
tearing up by the roots what had been sown, the owner of the field saw
it, and being vexed, cried out: "Give me a stone, Boy, that I may hit
the Crane." When the Crow heard this, at once she warned the Crane, who
took all due precaution. On another day, too, the Crow hearing him ask
for a stone, again warned the Crane carefully to avoid the danger. The
Countryman, suspecting that the divining Bird heard his commands, said
to the Boy: "If I say, give me a cake, do you secretly hand me a stone."
The Crane came {again}; he bade the Boy give him a cake, but the Boy
gave him a stone, with which he hit the Crane, and broke her legs. The
Crane, on being wounded, said: "Prophetic Crow, where now are your
auspices? Why did you not hasten to warn your companion, as you swore
you would, that no such evil might befall me?" The Crow made answer: "It
is not my art that deserves to be blamed; but the purposes of
double-tongued people are so deceiving, who say one thing and do
another."

Those who impose upon the inexperienced by deceitful promises, fail not
to cajole them by-and-bye with pretended reasons.


FABLE XII.

THE BIRDS AND THE SWALLOW.

The Birds having assembled in one spot, saw a Man sowing flax in a
field. When the Swallow found that they thought nothing at all of this,
she is reported to have called them together, and thus addressed them:
"Danger awaits us all from this, if the seed should come to maturity."
The Birds laughed {at her}. When the crop, however, sprang up, the
Swallow again remarked: "Our destruction is impending; come, let us root
up the noxious blades, lest, if they shortly grow up, nets may be made
thereof, and we may be taken by the contrivances of man." The Birds
persist in laughing at the words of the Swallow, and foolishly despise
{this} most prudent advice. But she, in her caution, at once betook
herself to Man, that she might suspend her nest in safety under his
rafters. The Birds, however, who had disregarded her wholesome advice,
being caught in nets made of the flax, came to an untimely end.


FABLE XIII.

THE PARTRIDGE AND THE FOX.

Once on a time a Partridge was sitting in a lofty tree. A Fox came up,
and began {thus} to speak: "O Partridge, how beautiful is your aspect!
Your beak transcends the coral; your thighs the brightness of purple.
And then, if you were to sleep, how much more beauteous you would be."
As soon as the silly Bird had closed her eyes, that instant the Fox
seized the credulous thing. Suppliantly she uttered these words, mingled
with loud cries: "O Fox, I beseech you, by the graceful dexterity of
your exquisite skill, utter my name as before, and then you shall devour
me." The Fox, willing to speak, opened his mouth, and so the Partridge
escaped destruction. Then said the deluded Fox: "What need was there for
me to speak?" The Partridge retorted: "And what necessity was there for
me to sleep, when my hour for sleep had not come?"

This is for those who speak when there is no occasion, and who sleep
when it is requisite to be on the watch.


FABLE XIV.

THE ASS, THE OX, AND THE BIRDS.

An Ass and an Ox, fastened to the same yoke, were drawing a waggon.
While the Ox was pulling with all his might he broke his horn. The Ass
swears that he experiences no help whatever from his weak companion.
Exerting himself in the labour, the Ox breaks his other horn, and at
length falls dead upon the ground. Presently, the Herdsman loads the Ass
with the flesh of the Ox, and he breaks down amid a thousand blows, and
stretched in the middle of the road, expires. The Birds flying to the
prey, exclaim: "If you had shown yourself compassionate to the Ox when
he entreated you, you would not have been food for us through your
untimely death."


FABLE XV.

THE LION AND THE SHEPHERD.

A Lion,[3] while wandering in a wood, trod on a thorn, and soon after
came up, wagging his tail, to a Shepherd: "Don't be alarmed," {said he},
"I suppliantly entreat your aid; I am not in search for prey." Lifting
up the {wounded} foot, the Man places it in his lap, and, taking out the
thorn, relieves {the patient's} severe pain: whereupon the Lion returns
to the woods. Some time after, the Shepherd (being accused on a false
charge) is condemned, and is ordered to be exposed to ravening Beasts at
the ensuing games. While the Beasts, on being let out,[4] are roaming
to-and-fro, the Lion recognizes the Man who effected the cure, and again
raising his foot, places it in the Shepherd's lap. The King, as soon as
he aware of this, immediately restored the Lion to the woods, and the
Shepherd to his friends.

    [Footnote AF.3: _A Lion_)--Ver. 1. This story is also told by
    Seneca--De Beneficiis, B. II. c. 19, and by Aulus Gellius, B. III.
    c. 14.]

    [Footnote AF.4: _The Beasts, on being let out_)--Ver. 10. The
    beasts were sent forth from "caveæ," or "cages," into the area of
    the Circus or Amphitheatre.]


FABLE XVI.

THE GNAT AND THE BULL.

A Gnat having challenged a Bull to a trial of strength, all the People
came to see the combat. Then {said} the Gnat: "'Tis enough that you have
come to meet me in combat; for {though} little in my own idea, I am
great in your judgment," {and so saying}, he took himself off on light
wing through the air, and duped the multitude, and eluded the threats of
the Bull. {Now} if the Bull had kept in mind his strength of neck, and
had contemned an ignoble foe, the vapouring of the trifler would have
been all in vain.

He loses character who puts himself on a level with the undeserving.


FABLE XVII.

THE HORSE AND THE ASS.

A Steed, swelling {with pride} beneath his trappings, met an Ass, and
because the latter, wearied with his load, made room very slowly:
"Hardly," said {the Horse}, "can I restrain myself from kicking you
severely." The Ass held his peace, only appealing with his groans to the
Gods. The Horse in a short space of time, broken-winded with running, is
sent to the farm. There the Ass espying him laden with dung, thus jeered
him: "Where are your former trappings, vain boaster, who have now fallen
into the misery which you treated with such contempt?"

Let not the fortunate man, unmindful of the uncertainty of fortune,
despise the lowly one, seeing that he knows not what he may come to
himself.


FABLE XVIII.

THE BIRDS, THE BEASTS, AND THE BAT.

The Birds were at war with the Beasts, and the conquerors were defeated
in their turn; but the Bat, fearing the doubtful issue of {the strife},
always betook himself to those whom he saw victorious. When they had
returned to their former state of peace, the fraud was apparent to both
sides; convicted therefore of a crime so disgraceful, {and} flying from
the light, he thenceforth hid himself in deep darkness, always flying
alone by night.

Whoever offers himself for sale to both sides, will live a life of
disgrace, hateful to them both.


FABLE XIX.

THE NIGHTINGALE, THE HAWK, AND THE FOWLER.

While a Hawk was sitting in a Nightingale's nest, on the watch for a
Hare, he found there some young ones. The Mother, alarmed at the danger
of her offspring, flew up, and suppliantly entreated him to spare her
young ones. "I will do what you wish," he replied, "if you will sing me
a tuneful song with a clear voice." On this, much as her heart failed
her, still, through fear, she obeyed, and being compelled, full of grief
she sang. The Hawk, who had seized the prey, {then} said: "You have not
sung your best;" and, seizing one of the young ones with his claws,
began to devour it. A Fowler approaches from another direction, and
stealthily extending his reed,[5] touches the perfidious {creature} with
bird-lime, and drags him to the ground.

Whoever lays crafty stratagems for others, ought to beware that he
himself be not entrapped by cunning.

    [Footnote AF.5: _Extending his reed_)--Ver. 13. From this it
    would appear, that fowlers stood behind trees, and used reeds
    tipped with birdlime, for the purpose of taking birds.]


FABLE XX.

THE WOLF, THE FOX, AND THE SHEPHERD.

A Wolf, in the course of time, had collected a store in his den, that he
might have food, which he might enjoy at his ease for many months.
A Fox, on learning this, went to the Wolf's den, and {said} with
tremulous voice: "Is all right, brother? For not having seen you on the
look-out for prey in your woods, life has been saddened every day." The
Wolf, when he perceived the envy of his rival, {replied}: "You have not
come hither from any anxiety on my account, but that you may get a
share. I know what is your deceitful aim." The Fox enraged, comes to a
Shepherd, {and} says: "Shepherd, will you return me thanks, if to-day I
deliver up to you the enemy of your flock, so that you need have no more
anxiety?" The Shepherd {replied}: "I will serve you, and will with
pleasure give you anything you like." She points out the Wolf's den to
the Shepherd, who shuts him in, despatches him immediately with a spear,
and gladly gratifies his rival with the property of another. When,
however, the Fox had fallen into the Hunter's hands, being caught and
mangled by the Dogs, she said: "Hardly have I done an injury to another,
ere I am now punished {myself}."

Whoever ventures to injure another, ought to beware lest a greater evil
befall himself.


FABLE XXI.

THE SHEEP AND THE WOLVES.

When the Sheep and the Wolves[6] engaged in battle, the former, safe
under the protection of the dogs, were victorious. The Wolves sent
ambassadors, and demanded a peace, ratified on oath, on these terms;
that the Sheep should give up the Dogs, and receive as hostages the
whelps of the Wolves. The Sheep, hoping that lasting concord would be
thus secured, did as the Wolves demanded. Shortly after, when the whelps
began to howl, the Wolves, alleging as a pretext, that their young ones
were being murdered, and that the peace had been broken by the Sheep,
made a simultaneous rush on every side, and attacked the latter {thus}
deprived of protectors; {and} so a late repentance condemned their folly
in putting faith in their enemies.

If a person gives up to others the safeguard under which he has
previously lived in security, he will afterwards wish it back, but in
vain.

    [Footnote AF.6: _The Sheep and the Wolves_)--Ver. 1.
    Demosthenes is said to have related this Fable to the Athenians,
    when dissuading them from surrendering the Orators to Alexander.]


FABLE XXII.

THE APE AND THE FOX.

An Ape asked a Fox to spare him some part of her exceeding length of
tail, with which he might be enabled to cover his most unseemly hinder
parts. "For of what use," said he, "is a tail of such extraordinary
length? For what purpose do you drag such a vast weight along the
ground?" The Fox {answered}: "Even if it were longer, and much bulkier,
I would rather drag it along the ground and through mud and thorns, than
give you a part; that you might not appear more comely through what
covers me."

Greedy and rich {man}, this Fable has a lesson for you, who, though you
have a superabundance, still give nothing to the poor.


FABLE XXIII.

THE WOLF, THE SHEPHERD, AND THE HUNTSMAN.

A Wolf, flying from the Huntsman's close pursuit, was seen by a
Shepherd, {who noticed} which way he fled, and in what spot he concealed
himself. "Herdsman," {said} the terrified fugitive, "by all your hopes,
do not, I do adjure you by the great Gods, betray an innocent being, who
has done you no injury."

"Don't fear," the Shepherd replied; "I'll point in another direction."
Soon after, the Huntsman comes up in haste: "Shepherd, have you not seen
a Wolf come this way? Which way did he run?" The Shepherd replied, in a
loud voice: "He certainly did come, but he fled to the left," but he
secretly motioned with his eyes towards the right. The other did not
understand him, and went on in haste. Then {said} the Shepherd to the
Wolf: "What thanks will you give me for having concealed you?" "To your
tongue, I give especial ones," said the Wolf, "but on your deceitful
eyes I pray that the darkness of eternal night may fall."

He who, courteous in his words, conceals deceit in his heart, may
understand that he is himself described in this Fable.


FABLE XXIV.

THE TRUTHFUL MAN, THE LIAR, AND THE APES.

A Liar and a Truthful Man, while travelling together, chanced to come
into the land of the Apes. One of the number, who had made himself King,
seeing them, ordered them to be detained, that he might learn what men
said of him, {and} at the same time he ordered all the Apes to stand in
lengthened array on the right and left; and that a throne should be
placed for himself, as he had formerly seen was the practice with the
Kings among men. After this he questions the men {so} ordered to be
brought before him: "What do you think of me, strangers?" "You seem to
be a most mighty King," the Liar replied. "What of these whom you see
now about me?" "These are ministers,[7] these are lieutenants, and
leaders of troops." The Ape thus lyingly praised, together with his
crew, orders a present to be given to the flatterer. On this the
Truth-teller {remarked} to himself: "If so great the reward for lying,
with what gifts shall I not be presented, if, according to my custom,
I tell the truth?" The Ape then {turns} to the Truthful Man: "And what
do you think of me and those whom you see standing before me?" He made
answer: "You are a genuine Ape, and all these {are} Apes, who are like
you." The King, enraged, ordered him to be torn with teeth and claws,
because he had told the truth.

A courtly lie is praised by the wicked; plain-spoken truth brings
destruction on the good.

    [Footnote AF.7: _Your ministers_)--Ver. 13. "Comites" here
    seems to mean "ministers," in the sense in which the word was used
    in the times of the later Roman emperors.]


FABLE XXV.

THE MAN AND THE LION.

A Man was disputing with a Lion which was the stronger of the two, and
while they were seeking evidence on the matter in dispute, they came at
last to a sepulchre, on which {the human disputant} pointed out a Lion,
depicted with his jaws rent asunder by a Man--a striking proof of
superior strength. The Lion made answer: "This was painted by a human
hand; if Lions knew how to paint, you would see the man undermost. But I
will give a more convincing proof of our valour." He {accordingly} led
the Man to some games,[8] where, calling his attention to men slain in
reality by Lions, he said: "There is no need of the testimony of
pictures here; real valour is shown by deeds."

{This} Fable teaches that liars use colouring in vain, when a sure test
is produced.

    [Footnote AF.8: _Some games_)--Ver. 9. "Spectaculum," or
    "venatio." These were exhibited by the wealthy Romans in the
    amphitheatre or circus, and on some occasions many hundred beasts
    were slain in one day. Of course, as here mentioned, their
    assailants would sometimes meet with an untimely end.]


FABLE XXVI.

THE STORK, THE GOOSE, AND THE HAWK.

A Stork, having come to a well-known pool, found a Goose diving
frequently beneath the water, {and} enquired why she did so. The other
replied: "This is our custom, and we find our food in the mud; and then,
besides, we thus find safety, and escape the attack of the Hawk when he
comes against us." "I am much stronger than the Hawk," said the Stork;
"if you choose to make an alliance with me, you will be able
victoriously to deride him." The Goose believing her, and immediately
accepting her aid, goes with her into the fields: forthwith comes the
Hawk, and seizes the Goose in his remorseless claws and devours her,
while the Stork flies off. The Goose {called out after her}: "He who
trusts himself to so weak a protector, deserves to come to a still worse
end."


FABLE XXVII.

THE SHEEP AND THE CROW.

A Crow, sitting at her ease upon a Sheep's back, pecked her with her
beak. After she had done this for a long time, the Sheep, so patient
under injury, remarked: "If you had offered this affront to the Dog, you
could not have endured his barking." But the Crow {thus answered} the
Sheep: "I never sit on the neck of one so strong, as I know whom I may
provoke; my years having taught me cunning, I am civil to the robust,
but insolent to the defenceless. Of such a nature have the Gods thought
fit to create me."

{This} Fable was written for those base persons who oppress the
innocent, {and} fear to annoy the bold.


FABLE XXVIII.

THE ANT AND THE GRASSHOPPER.

In winter time, an Ant was dragging forth from her hole, and drying, the
grains which, in her foresight, she had collected during the summer.
A Grasshopper, being hungry, begged her to give him something: the Ant
{replied}: "What were you doing in summer?" The other {said}: "I had not
leisure to think of the future: I was wandering through hedges and
meadows, singing away." The Ant laughing, and carrying back the grains,
said: "Very well, you who were singing away in the summer, dance in the
winter."

Let the sluggard always labour at the proper time, lest when he has
nothing, he beg in vain.


FABLE XXIX.

THE HORSE AND THE ASS.

An Ass asked a Horse for a little barley. "With all my heart," said he,
"if I had more than I wanted, I would give you plenty, in accordance
with my dignified position; but bye-and-bye, as soon as I shall have
come to my manger in the evening, I will give you a sackful of wheat."
The Ass replied: "If you now deny me on a trifling occasion, what am I
to suppose you will do on one of greater importance?"

They who, while making great promises, refuse small favours, show that
they are very tenacious of giving.


FABLE XXX.

THE OLD LION AND THE FOX.

Worn with years, a Lion pretended illness. Many Beasts came for the
purpose of visiting the sick King, whom at once he devoured. But a wary
Fox stood at a distance before the den, saluting the King. On the Lion
asking her why she did not come in: "Because," {said she}, "I see many
foot-marks of those who have gone in, but none of those who came out."

The dangers of others are generally of advantage to the wary.


FABLE XXXI.

THE CAMEL AND THE FLEA.

A Flea, chancing to sit on the back of a Camel who was going along
weighed down with heavy burdens, was quite delighted with himself, as he
appeared to be so much higher. After they had made a long journey, they
came together in the evening to the stable. The Flea immediately
exclaimed, skipping lightly to the ground: "See, I have got down
directly, that I may not weary you any longer, {so} galled as you are."
The Camel {replied}: "I thank you; but neither when you were on me did I
find myself oppressed by your weight, nor do I feel myself at all
lightened now you have dismounted."

He who, while he is of no standing, boasts to be of a lofty one, falls
under contempt when he comes to be known.


FABLE XXXII.

THE KID AND THE WOLF.

A She-Goat, that she might keep her young one in safety, on going forth
to feed, warned {her} heedless Kid not to open the door, because she
knew that many wild beasts were prowling about the cattle stalls. When
she was gone, there came a Wolf, imitating the voice of the dam, and
ordered the door to be opened for him. When the Kid heard him, looking
through a chink, he said to the Wolf: "I hear a sound like my Mother's
{voice}, but you are a deceiver, and an enemy to me; under my Mother's
voice you are seeking to drink my blood, and stuff yourself with my
flesh. Farewell."

'Tis greatly to the credit of children to be obedient to their parents.


FABLE XXXIII.

THE POOR MAN AND THE SERPENT.

In the house of a certain Poor Man, a Serpent was always in the habit of
coming to his table, and being fed there plentifully upon the crumbs.
Shortly after, the Man becoming rich, he began to be angry with the
Serpent, and wounded him with an axe. After the lapse of some time he
returned to his former poverty. When he saw that like the varying lot of
the Serpent, his own fortunes also changed, he coaxingly begged him to
pardon the offence. Then said the Serpent to him: "You will repent of
your wickedness until my wound is healed; don't suppose, however, that I
take you henceforth with implicit confidence to be my friend. Still,
I could wish to be reconciled with you, if only I could never recall to
mind the perfidious axe."

He deserves to be suspected, who has once done an injury; and an
intimacy with him is always to be renewed with caution.


FABLE XXXIV.

THE EAGLE AND THE KITE.

An Eagle was sitting on a branch with a Kite, in sorrowful mood. "Why,"
{said} the Kite, "do I see you with such a melancholy air?" "I am
looking out," said she, "for a mate suited to myself, and cannot find
one." "Take me," {said the Kite}, "who am so much stronger than you."
"Well, are you able to get a living by what you can carry away?" "Many's
the time that I have seized and carried off an ostrich in my talons."
Induced by his words, the Eagle took him as her mate. A short time
having passed after the nuptials, the Eagle {said}: "Go and carry off
for me the booty you promised me." Soaring aloft, the Kite brings back a
field-mouse, most filthy, and stinking from long-contracted mouldiness.
"Is this," said the Eagle, "the performance of your promise?" The Kite
replied to her: "That I might contract a marriage with royalty, there is
nothing I would not have pledged myself to do, although I knew that I
was unable."

Those who seek anxiously for partners of higher rank, painfully lament a
deception that has united them to the worthless.


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *


  THE FABLES OF PHÆDRUS,

  Translated Into English Verse
  By CHRISTOPHER SMART, A.M.,
  Fellow Of Pembroke Hall, Cambridge.