The moral of this story, however, is, firstly, that no one, however
great he may be, should permit himself to jest at any one beneath him,
even if he be only a hedgehog. And, secondly, it teaches, that when a
man marries, he should take a wife in his own position, who looks just
as he himself looks. So whosoever is a hedgehog let him see to it that
his wife is a hedgehog also, and so forth.


188 The Spindle, The Shuttle, and the Needle

There was once a girl whose father and mother died while she was still
a little child. All alone, in a small house at the end of the village,
dwelt her godmother, who supported herself by spinning, weaving, and
sewing. The old woman took the forlorn child to live with her, kept her
to her work, and educated her in all that is good. When the girl was
fifteen years old, the old woman became ill, called the child to her
bedside, and said, “Dear daughter, I feel my end drawing near. I leave
thee the little house, which will protect thee from wind and weather,
and my spindle, shuttle, and needle, with which thou canst earn thy
bread.” Then she laid her hands on the girl’s head, blessed her, and
said, “Only preserve the love of God in thy heart, and all will go well
with thee.” Thereupon she closed her eyes, and when she was laid in the
earth, the maiden followed the coffin, weeping bitterly, and paid her
the last mark of respect. And now the maiden lived quite alone in the
little house, and was industrious, and span, wove, and sewed, and the
blessing of the good old woman was on all that she did. It seemed as if
the flax in the room increased of its own accord, and whenever she wove
a piece of cloth or carpet, or had made a shirt, she at once found a
buyer who paid her amply for it, so that she was in want of nothing,
and even had something to share with others.

About this time, the son of the King was travelling about the country
looking for a bride. He was not to choose a poor one, and did not want
to have a rich one. So he said, “She shall be my wife who is the
poorest, and at the same time the richest.” When he came to the village
where the maiden dwelt, he inquired, as he did wherever he went, who
was the richest and also the poorest girl in the place? They first
named the richest; the poorest, they said, was the girl who lived in
the small house quite at the end of the village. The rich girl was
sitting in all her splendour before the door of her house, and when the
prince approached her, she got up, went to meet him, and made him a low
curtsey. He looked at her, said nothing, and rode on. When he came to
the house of the poor girl, she was not standing at the door, but
sitting in her little room. He stopped his horse, and saw through the
window, on which the bright sun was shining, the girl sitting at her
spinning-wheel, busily spinning. She looked up, and when she saw that
the prince was looking in, she blushed all over her face, let her eyes
fall, and went on spinning. I do not know whether, just at that moment,
the thread was quite even; but she went on spinning until the King’s
son had ridden away again. Then she went to the window, opened it, and
said, “It is so warm in this room!” but she still looked after him as
long as she could distinguish the white feathers in his hat. Then she
sat down to work again in her own room and went on with her spinning,
and a saying which the old woman had often repeated when she was
sitting at her work, came into her mind, and she sang these words to
herself,—

“Spindle, my spindle, haste, haste thee away,
And here to my house bring the wooer, I pray.”


And what do you think happened? The spindle sprang out of her hand in
an instant, and out of the door, and when, in her astonishment, she got
up and looked after it, she saw that it was dancing out merrily into
the open country, and drawing a shining golden thread after it. Before
long, it had entirely vanished from her sight. As she had now no
spindle, the girl took the weaver’s shuttle in her hand, sat down to
her loom, and began to weave.

The spindle, however, danced continually onwards, and just as the
thread came to an end, reached the prince. “What do I see?” he cried;
“the spindle certainly wants to show me the way!” turned his horse
about, and rode back with the golden thread. The girl was, however,
sitting at her work singing,

“Shuttle, my shuttle, weave well this day,
And guide the wooer to me, I pray.”


Immediately the shuttle sprang out of her hand and out by the door.
Before the threshold, however, it began to weave a carpet which was
more beautiful than the eyes of man had ever yet beheld. Lilies and
roses blossomed on both sides of it, and on a golden ground in the
centre green branches ascended, under which bounded hares and rabbits,
stags and deer stretched their heads in between them, brightly-coloured
birds were sitting in the branches above; they lacked nothing but the
gift of song. The shuttle leapt hither and thither, and everything
seemed to grow of its own accord.

As the shuttle had run away, the girl sat down to sew. She held the
needle in her hand and sang,

“Needle, my needle, sharp-pointed and fine,
Prepare for a wooer this house of mine.”


Then the needle leapt out of her fingers, and flew everywhere about the
room as quick as lightning. It was just as if invisible spirits were
working; they covered tables and benches with green cloth in an
instant, and the chairs with velvet, and hung the windows with silken
curtains. Hardly had the needle put in the last stitch than the maiden
saw through the window the white feathers of the prince, whom the
spindle had brought thither by the golden thread. He alighted, stepped
over the carpet into the house, and when he entered the room, there
stood the maiden in her poor garments, but she shone out from within
them like a rose surrounded by leaves. “Thou art the poorest and also
the richest,” said he to her. “Come with me, thou shalt be my bride.”
She did not speak, but she gave him her hand. Then he gave her a kiss,
led her forth, lifted her on to his horse, and took her to the royal
castle, where the wedding was solemnized with great rejoicings. The
spindle, shuttle, and needle were preserved in the treasure-chamber,
and held in great honour.


189 The Peasant and the Devil

There was once on a time a far-sighted, crafty peasant whose tricks
were much talked about. The best story is, however, how he once got
hold of the Devil, and made a fool of him. The peasant had one day been
working in his field, and as twilight had set in, was making ready for
the journey home, when he saw a heap of burning coals in the middle of
his field, and when, full of astonishment, he went up to it, a little
black devil was sitting on the live coals. “Thou dost indeed sit upon a
treasure!” said the peasant. “Yes, in truth,” replied the Devil, “on a
treasure which contains more gold and silver than thou hast ever seen
in thy life!” “The treasure lies in my field and belongs to me,” said
the peasant. “It is thine,” answered the Devil, “if thou wilt for two
years give me the half of everything thy field produces. Money I have
enough of, but I have a desire for the fruits of the earth.” The
peasant agreed to the bargain. “In order, however, that no dispute may
arise about the division,” said he, “everything that is above ground
shall belong to thee, and what is under the earth to me.” The Devil was
quite satisfied with that, but the cunning peasant had sown turnips.

Now when the time for harvest came, the Devil appeared and wanted to
take away his crop; but he found nothing but the yellow withered
leaves, while the peasant, full of delight, was digging up his turnips.
“Thou hast had the best of it for once,” said the Devil, “but the next
time that won’t do. What grows above ground shall be thine, and what is
under it, mine.” “I am willing,” replied the peasant; but when the time
came to sow, he did not again sow turnips, but wheat. The grain became
ripe, and the peasant went into the field and cut the full stalks down
to the ground. When the Devil came, he found nothing but the stubble,
and went away in a fury down into a cleft in the rocks. “That is the
way to cheat the Devil,” said the peasant, and went and fetched away
the treasure.


190 The Crumbs on the Table

A countryman one day said to his little puppies, “Come into the parlour
and enjoy yourselves, and pick up the bread-crumbs on the table; your
mistress has gone out to pay some visits.” Then the little dogs said,
“No, no, we will not go. If the mistress gets to know it, she will beat
us.” The countryman said, “She will know nothing about it. Do come;
after all, she never gives you anything good.” Then the little dogs
again said, “Nay, nay, we must let it alone; we must not go.” But the
countryman let them have no peace until at last they went, and got on
the table, and ate up the bread-crumbs with all their might. But at
that very moment the mistress came, and seized the stick in great
haste, and beat them and treated them very hardly. And when they were
outside the house, the little dogs said to the countryman, “Dost, dost,
dost, dost, dost thou see?” Then the countryman laughed and said,
“Didn’t, didn’t, didn’t, you expect it?” So they just had to run away.


191 The Sea-Hare

There was once upon a time a princess, who, high under the battlements
in her castle, had an apartment with twelve windows, which looked out
in every possible direction, and when she climbed up to it and looked
around her, she could inspect her whole kingdom. When she looked out of
the first, her sight was more keen than that of any other human being;
from the second she could see still better, from the third more
distinctly still, and so it went on, until the twelfth, from which she
saw everything above the earth and under the earth, and nothing at all
could be kept secret from her. Moreover, as she was haughty, and would
be subject to no one, but wished to keep the dominion for herself
alone, she caused it to be proclaimed that no one should ever be her
husband who could not conceal himself from her so effectually, that it
should be quite impossible for her to find him. He who tried this,
however, and was discovered by her, was to have his head struck off,
and stuck on a post. Ninety-seven posts with the heads of dead men were
already standing before the castle, and no one had come forward for a
long time. The princess was delighted, and thought to herself, “Now I
shall be free as long as I live.” Then three brothers appeared before
her, and announced to her that they were desirous of trying their luck.
The eldest believed he would be quite safe if he crept into a lime-pit,
but she saw him from the first window, made him come out, and had his
head cut off. The second crept into the cellar of the palace, but she
perceived him also from the first window, and his fate was sealed. His
head was placed on the nine and ninetieth post. Then the youngest came
to her and entreated her to give him a day for consideration, and also
to be so gracious as to overlook it if she should happen to discover
him twice, but if he failed the third time, he would look on his life
as over. As he was so handsome, and begged so earnestly, she said,
“Yes, I will grant thee that, but thou wilt not succeed.”

Next day he meditated for a long time how he should hide himself, but
all in vain. Then he seized his gun and went out hunting. He saw a
raven, took a good aim at him, and was just going to fire, when the
bird cried, “Don’t shoot; I will make it worth thy while not.” He put
his gun down, went on, and came to a lake where he surprised a large
fish which had come up from the depths below to the surface of the
water. When he had aimed at it, the fish cried, “Don’t shoot, and I
will make it worth thy while.” He allowed it to dive down again, went
onwards, and met a fox which was lame. He fired and missed it, and the
fox cried, “You had much better come here and draw the thorn out of my
foot for me.” He did this; but then he wanted to kill the fox and skin
it, the fox said, “Stop, and I will make it worth thy while.” The youth
let him go, and then as it was evening, returned home.

Next day he was to hide himself; but howsoever much he puzzled his
brains over it, he did not know where. He went into the forest to the
raven and said, “I let thee live on, so now tell me where I am to hide
myself, so that the King’s daughter shall not see me.” The raven hung
his head and thought it over for a longtime. At length he croaked, “I
have it.” He fetched an egg out of his nest, cut it into two parts, and
shut the youth inside it; then made it whole again, and seated himself
on it. When the King’s daughter went to the first window she could not
discover him, nor could she from the others, and she began to be
uneasy, but from the eleventh she saw him. She ordered the raven to be
shot, and the egg to be brought and broken, and the youth was forced to
come out. She said, “For once thou art excused, but if thou dost not do
better than this, thou art lost!”

Next day he went to the lake, called the fish to him and said, “I
suffered thee to live, now tell me where to hide myself so that the
King’s daughter may not see me.” The fish thought for a while, and at
last cried, “I have it! I will shut thee up in my stomach.” He
swallowed him, and went down to the bottom of the lake. The King’s
daughter looked through her windows, and even from the eleventh did not
see him, and was alarmed; but at length from the twelfth she saw him.
She ordered the fish to be caught and killed, and then the youth
appeared. Every one can imagine what a state of mind he was in. She
said, “Twice thou art forgiven, but be sure that thy head will be set
on the hundredth post.”

On the last day, he went with a heavy heart into the country, and met
the fox. “Thou knowest how to find all kinds of hiding-places,” said
he; “I let thee live, now advise me where I shall hide myself so that
the King’s daughter shall not discover me.” “That’s a hard task,”
answered the fox, looking very thoughtful. At length he cried, “I have
it!” and went with him to a spring, dipped himself in it, and came out
as a stall-keeper in the market, and dealer in animals. The youth had
to dip himself in the water also, and was changed into a small
sea-hare. The merchant went into the town, and showed the pretty little
animal, and many persons gathered together to see it. At length the
King’s daughter came likewise, and as she liked it very much, she
bought it, and gave the merchant a good deal of money for it. Before he
gave it over to her, he said to it, “When the King’s daughter goes to
the window, creep quickly under the braids of her hair.” And now the
time arrived when she was to search for him. She went to one window
after another in turn, from the first to the eleventh, and did not see
him. When she did not see him from the twelfth either, she was full of
anxiety and anger, and shut it down with such violence that the glass
in every window shivered into a thousand pieces, and the whole castle
shook.

She went back and felt the sea-hare beneath the braids of her hair.
Then she seized it, and threw it on the ground exclaiming, “Away with
thee, get out of my sight!” It ran to the merchant, and both of them
hurried to the spring, wherein they plunged, and received back their
true forms. The youth thanked the fox, and said, “The raven and the
fish are idiots compared with thee; thou knowest the right tune to
play, there is no denying that!”

The youth went straight to the palace. The princess was already
expecting him, and accommodated herself to her destiny. The wedding was
solemnized, and now he was king, and lord of all the kingdom. He never
told her where he had concealed himself for the third time, and who had
helped him, so she believed that he had done everything by his own
skill, and she had a great respect for him, for she thought to herself,
“He is able to do more than I.”


192 The Master-Thief

One day an old man and his wife were sitting in front of a miserable
house resting a while from their work. Suddenly a splendid carriage
with four black horses came driving up, and a richly-dressed man
descended from it. The peasant stood up, went to the great man, and
asked what he wanted, and in what way he could be useful to him? The
stranger stretched out his hand to the old man, and said, “I want
nothing but to enjoy for once a country dish; cook me some potatoes, in
the way you always have them, and then I will sit down at your table
and eat them with pleasure.” The peasant smiled and said, “You are a
count or a prince, or perhaps even a duke; noble gentlemen often have
such fancies, but you shall have your wish.” The wife went into the
kitchen, and began to wash and rub the potatoes, and to make them into
balls, as they are eaten by the country-folks. Whilst she was busy with
this work, the peasant said to the stranger, “Come into my garden with
me for a while, I have still something to do there.” He had dug some
holes in the garden, and now wanted to plant some trees in them. “Have
you no children,” asked the stranger, “who could help you with your
work?” “No,” answered the peasant, “I had a son, it is true, but it is
long since he went out into the world. He was a ne’er-do-well; sharp,
and knowing, but he would learn nothing and was full of bad tricks, at
last he ran away from me, and since then I have heard nothing of him.”

The old man took a young tree, put it in a hole, drove in a post beside
it, and when he had shovelled in some earth and had trampled it firmly
down, he tied the stem of the tree above, below, and in the middle,
fast to the post by a rope of straw. “But tell me,” said the stranger,
“why you don’t tie that crooked knotted tree, which is lying in the
corner there, bent down almost to the ground, to a post also that it
may grow straight, as well as these?” The old man smiled and said,
“Sir, you speak according to your knowledge, it is easy to see that you
are not familiar with gardening. That tree there is old, and
mis-shapen, no one can make it straight now. Trees must be trained
while they are young.” “That is how it was with your son,” said the
stranger, “if you had trained him while he was still young, he would
not have run away; now he too must have grown hard and mis-shapen.”
“Truly it is a long time since he went away,” replied the old man, “he
must have changed.” “Would you know him again if he were to come to
you?” asked the stranger. “Hardly by his face,” replied the peasant,
“but he has a mark about him, a birth-mark on his shoulder, that looks
like a bean.” When he had said that the stranger pulled off his coat,
bared his shoulder, and showed the peasant the bean. “Good God!” cried
the old man, “Thou art really my son!” and love for his child stirred
in his heart. “But,” he added, “how canst thou be my son, thou hast
become a great lord and livest in wealth and luxury? How hast thou
contrived to do that?” “Ah, father,” answered the son, “the young tree
was bound to no post and has grown crooked, now it is too old, it will
never be straight again. How have I got all that? I have become a
thief, but do not be alarmed, I am a master-thief. For me there are
neither locks nor bolts, whatsoever I desire is mine. Do not imagine
that I steal like a common thief, I only take some of the superfluity
of the rich. Poor people are safe, I would rather give to them than
take anything from them. It is the same with anything which I can have
without trouble, cunning and dexterity I never touch it.” “Alas, my
son,” said the father, “it still does not please me, a thief is still a
thief, I tell thee it will end badly.” He took him to his mother, and
when she heard that was her son, she wept for joy, but when he told her
that he had become a master-thief, two streams flowed down over her
face. At length she said, “Even if he has become a thief, he is still
my son, and my eyes have beheld him once more.” They sat down to table,
and once again he ate with his parents the wretched food which he had
not eaten for so long. The father said, “If our Lord, the count up
there in the castle, learns who thou art, and what trade thou
followest, he will not take thee in his arms and cradle thee in them as
he did when he held thee at the font, but will cause thee to swing from
a halter.” “Be easy, father, he will do me no harm, for I understand my
trade. I will go to him myself this very day.” When evening drew near,
the master-thief seated himself in his carriage, and drove to the
castle. The count received him civilly, for he took him for a
distinguished man. When, however, the stranger made himself known, the
count turned pale and was quite silent for some time. At length he
said, “Thou art my godson, and on that account mercy shall take the
place of justice, and I will deal leniently with thee. Since thou
pridest thyself on being a master-thief, I will put thy art to the
proof, but if thou dost not stand the test, thou must marry the
rope-maker’s daughter, and the croaking of the raven must be thy music
on the occasion.” “Lord count,” answered the master-thief, “Think of
three things, as difficult as you like, and if I do not perform your
tasks, do with me what you will.” The count reflected for some minutes,
and then said, “Well, then, in the first place, thou shalt steal the
horse I keep for my own riding, out of the stable; in the next, thou
shalt steal the sheet from beneath the bodies of my wife and myself
when we are asleep, without our observing it, and the wedding-ring of
my wife as well; thirdly and lastly, thou shalt steal away out of the
church, the parson and clerk. Mark what I am saying, for thy life
depends on it.”

The master-thief went to the nearest town; there he bought the clothes
of an old peasant woman, and put them on. Then he stained his face
brown, and painted wrinkles on it as well, so that no one could have
recognized him. Then he filled a small cask with old Hungary wine in
which was mixed a powerful sleeping-drink. He put the cask in a basket,
which he took on his back, and walked with slow and tottering steps to
the count’s castle. It was already dark when he arrived. He sat down on
a stone in the court-yard and began to cough, like an asthmatic old
woman, and to rub his hands as if he were cold. In front of the door of
the stable some soldiers were lying round a fire; one of them observed
the woman, and called out to her, “Come nearer, old mother, and warm
thyself beside us. After all, thou hast no bed for the night, and must
take one where thou canst find it.” The old woman tottered up to them,
begged them to lift the basket from her back, and sat down beside them
at the fire. “What hast thou got in thy little cask, old lady?” asked
one. “A good mouthful of wine,” she answered. “I live by trade, for
money and fair words I am quite ready to let you have a glass.” “Let us
have it here, then,” said the soldier, and when he had tasted one glass
he said, “When wine is good, I like another glass,” and had another
poured out for himself, and the rest followed his example. “Hallo,
comrades,” cried one of them to those who were in the stable, “here is
an old goody who has wine that is as old as herself; take a draught, it
will warm your stomachs far better than our fire.” The old woman
carried her cask into the stable. One of the soldiers had seated
himself on the saddled riding-horse, another held its bridle in his
hand, a third had laid hold of its tail. She poured out as much as they
wanted until the spring ran dry. It was not long before the bridle fell
from the hand of the one, and he fell down and began to snore, the
other left hold of the tail, lay down and snored still louder. The one
who was sitting in the saddle, did remain sitting, but bent his head
almost down to the horse’s neck, and slept and blew with his mouth like
the bellows of a forge. The soldiers outside had already been asleep
for a long time, and were lying on the ground motionless, as if dead.
When the master-thief saw that he had succeeded, he gave the first a
rope in his hand instead of the bridle, and the other who had been
holding the tail, a wisp of straw, but what was he to do with the one
who was sitting on the horse’s back? He did not want to throw him down,
for he might have awakened and have uttered a cry. He had a good idea,
he unbuckled the girths of the saddle, tied a couple of ropes which
were hanging to a ring on the wall fast to the saddle, and drew the
sleeping rider up into the air on it, then he twisted the rope round
the posts, and made it fast. He soon unloosed the horse from the chain,
but if he had ridden over the stony pavement of the yard they would
have heard the noise in the castle. So he wrapped the horse’s hoofs in
old rags, led him carefully out, leapt upon him, and galloped off.

When day broke, the master galloped to the castle on the stolen horse.
The count had just got up, and was looking out of the window. “Good
morning, Sir Count,” he cried to him, “here is the horse, which I have
got safely out of the stable! Just look, how beautifully your soldiers
are lying there sleeping; and if you will but go into the stable, you
will see how comfortable your watchers have made it for themselves.”
The count could not help laughing, then he said, “For once thou hast
succeeded, but things won’t go so well the second time, and I warn thee
that if thou comest before me as a thief, I will handle thee as I would
a thief.” When the countess went to bed that night, she closed her hand
with the wedding-ring tightly together, and the count said, “All the
doors are locked and bolted, I will keep awake and wait for the thief,
but if he gets in by the window, I will shoot him.” The master-thief,
however, went in the dark to the gallows, cut a poor sinner who was
hanging there down from the halter, and carried him on his back to the
castle. Then he set a ladder up to the bedroom, put the dead body on
his shoulders, and began to climb up. When he had got so high that the
head of the dead man showed at the window, the count, who was watching
in his bed, fired a pistol at him, and immediately the master let the
poor sinner fall down, and hid himself in one corner. The night was
sufficiently lighted by the moon, for the master to see distinctly how
the count got out of the window on to the ladder, came down, carried
the dead body into the garden, and began to dig a hole in which to lay
it. “Now,” thought the thief, “the favourable moment has come,” stole
nimbly out of his corner, and climbed up the ladder straight into the
countess’s bedroom. “Dear wife,” he began in the count’s voice, “the
thief is dead, but, after all, he is my godson, and has been more of a
scape-grace than a villain. I will not put him to open shame; besides,
I am sorry for the parents. I will bury him myself before daybreak, in
the garden that the thing may not be known, so give me the sheet, I
will wrap up the body in it, and bury him as a dog burries things by
scratching.” The countess gave him the sheet. “I tell you what,”
continued the thief, “I have a fit of magnanimity on me, give me the
ring too,—the unhappy man risked his life for it, so he may take it
with him into his grave.” She would not gainsay the count, and although
she did it unwillingly she drew the ring from her finger, and gave it
to him. The thief made off with both these things, and reached home
safely before the count in the garden had finished his work of burying.

What a long face the count did pull when the master came next morning,
and brought him the sheet and the ring. “Art thou a wizard?” said he,
“Who has fetched thee out of the grave in which I myself laid thee, and
brought thee to life again?” “You did not bury me,” said the thief,
“but the poor sinner on the gallows,” and he told him exactly how
everything had happened, and the count was forced to own to him that he
was a clever, crafty thief. “But thou hast not reached the end yet,” he
added, “thou hast still to perform the third task, and if thou dost not
succeed in that, all is of no use.” The master smiled and returned no
answer. When night had fallen he went with a long sack on his back, a
bundle under his arms, and a lantern in his hand to the village-church.
In the sack he had some crabs, and in the bundle short wax-candles. He
sat down in the churchyard, took out a crab, and stuck a wax-candle on
his back. Then he lighted the little light, put the crab on the ground,
and let it creep about. He took a second out of the sack, and treated
it in the same way, and so on until the last was out of the sack.
Hereupon he put on a long black garment that looked like a monk’s cowl,
and stuck a gray beard on his chin. When at last he was quite
unrecognizable, he took the sack in which the crabs had been, went into
the church, and ascended the pulpit. The clock in the tower was just
striking twelve; when the last stroke had sounded, he cried with a loud
and piercing voice, “Hearken, sinful men, the end of all things has
come! The last day is at hand! Hearken! Hearken! Whosoever wishes to go
to heaven with me must creep into the sack. I am Peter, who opens and
shuts the gate of heaven. Behold how the dead outside there in the
churchyard, are wandering about collecting their bones. Come, come, and
creep into the sack; the world is about to be destroyed!” The cry
echoed through the whole village. The parson and clerk who lived
nearest to the church, heard it first, and when they saw the lights
which were moving about the churchyard, they observed that something
unusual was going on, and went into the church. They listened to the
sermon for a while, and then the clerk nudged the parson and said, “It
would not be amiss if we were to use the opportunity together, and
before the dawning of the last day, find an easy way of getting to
heaven.” “To tell the truth,” answered the parson, “that is what I
myself have been thinking, so if you are inclined, we will set out on
our way.” “Yes,” answered the clerk, “but you, the pastor, have the
precedence, I will follow.” So the parson went first, and ascended the
pulpit where the master opened his sack. The parson crept in first, and
then the clerk. The master immediately tied up the sack tightly, seized
it by the middle, and dragged it down the pulpit-steps, and whenever
the heads of the two fools bumped against the steps, he cried, “We are
going over the mountains.” Then he drew them through the village in the
same way, and when they were passing through puddles, he cried, “Now we
are going through wet clouds.” And when at last he was dragging them up
the steps of the castle, he cried, “Now we are on the steps of heaven,
and will soon be in the outer court.” When he had got to the top, he
pushed the sack into the pigeon-house, and when the pigeons fluttered
about, he said, “Hark how glad the angels are, and how they are
flapping their wings!” Then he bolted the door upon them, and went
away.

Next morning he went to the count, and told him that he had performed
the third task also, and had carried the parson and clerk out of the
church. “Where hast thou left them?” asked the lord. “They are lying
upstairs in a sack in the pigeon-house, and imagine that they are in
heaven.” The count went up himself, and convinced himself that the
master had told the truth. When he had delivered the parson and clerk
from their captivity, he said, “Thou art an arch-thief, and hast won
thy wager. For once thou escapest with a whole skin, but see that thou
leavest my land, for if ever thou settest foot on it again, thou may’st
count on thy elevation to the gallows.” The arch-thief took leave of
his parents, once more went forth into the wide world, and no one has
ever heard of him since.


193 The Drummer

A young drummer went out quite alone one evening into the country, and
came to a lake on the shore of which he perceived three pieces of white
linen lying. “What fine linen,” said he, and put one piece in his
pocket. He returned home, thought no more of what he had found, and
went to bed. Just as he was going to sleep, it seemed to him as if some
one was saying his name. He listened, and was aware of a soft voice
which cried to him, “Drummer, drummer, wake up!” As it was a dark night
he could see no one, but it appeared to him that a figure was hovering
about his bed. “What do you want?” he asked. “Give me back my dress,”
answered the voice, “that you took away from me last evening by the
lake.” “You shall have it back again,” said the drummer, “if you will
tell me who you are.” “Ah,” replied the voice, “I am the daughter of a
mighty King; but I have fallen into the power of a witch, and am shut
up on the glass-mountain. I have to bathe in the lake every day with my
two sisters, but I cannot fly back again without my dress. My sisters
have gone away, but I have been forced to stay behind. I entreat you to
give me my dress back.” “Be easy, poor child,” said the drummer. “I
will willingly give it back to you.” He took it out of his pocket, and
reached it to her in the dark. She snatched it in haste, and wanted to
go away with it. “Stop a moment, perhaps I can help you.” “You can only
help me by ascending the glass-mountain, and freeing me from the power
of the witch. But you cannot come to the glass-mountain, and indeed if
you were quite close to it you could not ascend it.” “When I want to do
a thing I always can do it,” said the drummer; “I am sorry for you, and
have no fear of anything. But I do not know the way which leads to the
glass-mountain.” “The road goes through the great forest, in which the
man-eaters live,” she answered, “and more than that, I dare not tell
you.” And then he heard her wings quiver, as she flew away.

By daybreak the drummer arose, buckled on his drum, and went without
fear straight into the forest. After he had walked for a while without
seeing any giants, he thought to himself, “I must waken up the
sluggards,” and he hung his drum before him, and beat such a reveille
that the birds flew out of the trees with loud cries. It was not long
before a giant who had been lying sleeping among the grass, rose up,
and was as tall as a fir-tree. “Wretch!” cried he; “what art thou
drumming here for, and wakening me out of my best sleep?” “I am
drumming,” he replied, “because I want to show the way to many
thousands who are following me.” “What do they want in my forest?”
demanded the giant. “They want to put an end to thee, and cleanse the
forest of such a monster as thou art!” “Oho!” said the giant, “I will
trample you all to death like so many ants.” “Dost thou think thou
canst do anything against us?” said the drummer; “if thou stoopest to
take hold of one, he will jump away and hide himself; but when thou art
lying down and sleeping, they will come forth from every thicket, and
creep up to thee. Every one of them has a hammer of steel in his belt,
and with that they will beat in thy skull.” The giant grew angry and
thought, “If I meddle with the crafty folk, it might turn out badly for
me. I can strangle wolves and bears, but I cannot protect myself from
these earth-worms.” “Listen, little fellow,” said he; “go back again,
and I will promise you that for the future I will leave you and your
comrades in peace, and if there is anything else you wish for, tell me,
for I am quite willing to do something to please you.” “Thou hast long
legs,” said the drummer, “and canst run quicker than I; carry me to the
glass-mountain, and I will give my followers a signal to go back, and
they shall leave thee in peace this time.” “Come here, worm,” said the
giant; “seat thyself on my shoulder, I will carry thee where thou
wishest to be.” The giant lifted him up, and the drummer began to beat
his drum up aloft to his heart’s delight. The giant thought, “That is
the signal for the other people to turn back.”

After a while, a second giant was standing in the road, who took the
drummer from the first, and stuck him in his button-hole. The drummer
laid hold of the button, which was as large as a dish, held on by it,
and looked merrily around. Then they came to a third giant, who took
him out of the button-hole, and set him on the rim of his hat. Then the
drummer walked backwards and forwards up above, and looked over the
trees, and when he perceived a mountain in the blue distance, he
thought, “That must be the glass-mountain,” and so it was. The giant
only made two steps more, and they reached the foot of the mountain,
where the giant put him down. The drummer demanded to be put on the
summit of the glass-mountain, but the giant shook his head, growled
something in his beard, and went back into the forest.

And now the poor drummer was standing before the mountain, which was as
high as if three mountains were piled on each other, and at the same
time as smooth as a looking-glass, and did not know how to get up it.
He began to climb, but that was useless, for he always slipped back
again. “If one was a bird now,” thought he; but what was the good of
wishing, no wings grew for him.

Whilst he was standing thus, not knowing what to do, he saw, not far
from him, two men who were struggling fiercely together. He went up to
them and saw that they were disputing about a saddle which was lying on
the ground before them, and which both of them wanted to have. “What
fools you are,” said he, “to quarrel about a saddle, when you have not
a horse for it!” “The saddle is worth fighting about,” answered one of
the men; “whosoever sits on it, and wishes himself in any place, even
if it should be the very end of the earth, gets there the instant he
has uttered the wish. The saddle belongs to us in common. It is my turn
to ride on it, but that other man will not let me do it.” “I will soon
decide the quarrel,” said the drummer, and he went to a short distance
and stuck a white rod in the ground. Then he came back and said, “Now
run to the goal, and whoever gets there first, shall ride first.” Both
put themselves into a trot; but hardly had they gone a couple of steps
before the drummer swung himself on the saddle, wished himself on the
glass-mountain, and before any one could turn round, he was there. On
the top of the mountain was a plain; there stood an old stone house,
and in front of the house lay a great fish-pond, but behind it was a
dark forest. He saw neither men nor animals, everything was quiet; only
the wind rustled amongst the trees, and the clouds moved by quite close
above his head. He went to the door and knocked. When he had knocked
for the third time, an old woman with a brown face and red eyes opened
the door. She had spectacles on her long nose, and looked sharply at
him; then she asked what he wanted. “Entrance, food, and a bed for the
night,” replied the drummer. “That thou shalt have,” said the old
woman, “if thou wilt perform three services in return.” “Why not?” he
answered, “I am not afraid of any kind of work, however hard it may
be.” The old woman let him go in, and gave him some food and a good bed
at night. The next morning when he had had his sleep out, she took a
thimble from her wrinkled finger, reached it to the drummer, and said,
“Go to work now, and empty out the pond with this thimble; but thou
must have it done before night, and must have sought out all the fishes
which are in the water and laid them side by side, according to their
kind and size.” “That is strange work,” said the drummer, but he went
to the pond, and began to empty it. He baled the whole morning; but
what can any one do to a great lake with a thimble, even if he were to
bale for a thousand years?

When it was noon, he thought, “It is all useless, and whether I work or
not it will come to the same thing.” So he gave it up and sat down.
Then came a maiden out of the house who set a little basket with food
before him, and said, “What ails thee, that thou sittest so sadly
here?” He looked at her, and saw that she was wondrously beautiful.
“Ah,” said he, “I cannot finish the first piece of work, how will it be
with the others? I came forth to seek a king’s daughter who is said to
dwell here, but I have not found her, and I will go farther.” “Stay
here,” said the maiden, “I will help thee out of thy difficulty. Thou
art tired, lay thy head in my lap, and sleep. When thou awakest again,
thy work will be done.” The drummer did not need to be told that twice.
As soon as his eyes were shut, she turned a wishing-ring and said,
“Rise, water. Fishes, come out.” Instantly the water rose on high like
a white mist, and moved away with the other clouds, and the fishes
sprang on the shore and laid themselves side by side each according to
his size and kind. When the drummer awoke, he saw with amazement that
all was done. But the maiden said, “One of the fish is not lying with
those of its own kind, but quite alone; when the old woman comes
to-night and sees that all she demanded has been done, she will ask
thee, ‘What is this fish lying alone for?’ Then throw the fish in her
face, and say, ‘This one shall be for thee, old witch.’” In the evening
the witch came, and when she had put this question, he threw the fish
in her face. She behaved as if she did not remark it, and said nothing,
but looked at him with malicious eyes. Next morning she said,
“Yesterday it was too easy for thee, I must give thee harder work.
To-day thou must hew down the whole of the forest, split the wood into
logs, and pile them up, and everything must be finished by the
evening.” She gave him an axe, a mallet, and two wedges. But the axe
was made of lead, and the mallet and wedges were of tin. When he began
to cut, the edge of the axe turned back, and the mallet and wedges were
beaten out of shape. He did not know how to manage, but at mid-day the
maiden came once more with his dinner and comforted him. “Lay thy head
on my lap,” said she, “and sleep; when thou awakest, thy work will be
done.” She turned her wishing-ring, and in an instant the whole forest
fell down with a crash, the wood split, and arranged itself in heaps,
and it seemed just as if unseen giants were finishing the work. When he
awoke, the maiden said, “Dost thou see that the wood is piled up and
arranged, one bough alone remains; but when the old woman comes this
evening and asks thee about that bough, give her a blow with it, and
say, ‘That is for thee, thou witch.’”

The old woman came, “There thou seest how easy the work was!” said she;
“but for whom hast thou left that bough which is lying there still?”

“For thee, thou witch,” he replied, and gave her a blow with it. But
she pretended not to feel it, laughed scornfully, and said, “Early
to-morrow morning thou shalt arrange all the wood in one heap, set fire
to it, and burn it.” He rose at break of day, and began to pick up the
wood, but how can a single man get a whole forest together? The work
made no progress. The maiden, however, did not desert him in his need.
She brought him his food at noon, and when he had eaten, he laid his
head on her lap, and went to sleep. When he awoke, the entire pile of
wood was burning in one enormous flame, which stretched its tongues out
into the sky. “Listen to me,” said the maiden, “when the witch comes,
she will give thee all kinds of orders; do whatever she asks thee
without fear, and then she will not be able to get the better of thee,
but if thou art afraid, the fire will lay hold of thee, and consume
thee. At last when thou hast done everything, seize her with both thy
hands, and throw her into the midst of the fire.” The maiden departed,
and the old woman came sneaking up to him. “Oh, I am cold,” said she,
“but that is a fire that burns; it warms my old bones for me, and does
me good! But there is a log lying there which won’t burn, bring it out
for me. When thou hast done that, thou art free, and mayst go where
thou likest, come; go in with a good will.”

The drummer did not reflect long; he sprang into the midst of the
flames, but they did not hurt him, and could not even singe a hair of
his head. He carried the log out, and laid it down. Hardly, however,
had the wood touched the earth than it was transformed, and the
beautiful maiden who had helped him in his need stood before him, and
by the silken and shining golden garments which she wore, he knew right
well that she was the King’s daughter. But the old woman laughed
venomously, and said, “Thou thinkest thou hast her safe, but thou hast
not got her yet!” Just as she was about to fall on the maiden and take
her away, the youth seized the old woman with both his hands, raised
her up on high, and threw her into the jaws of the fire, which closed
over her as if it were delighted that an old witch was to be burnt.

Then the King’s daughter looked at the drummer, and when she saw that
he was a handsome youth and remembered how he had risked his life to
deliver her, she gave him her hand, and said, “Thou hast ventured
everything for my sake, but I also will do everything for thine.
Promise to be true to me, and thou shalt be my husband. We shall not
want for riches, we shall have enough with what the witch has gathered
together here.” She led him into the house, where there were chests and
coffers crammed with the old woman’s treasures. The maiden left the
gold and silver where it was, and took only the precious stones. She
would not stay any longer on the glass-mountain, so the drummer said to
her, “Seat thyself by me on my saddle, and then we will fly down like
birds.” “I do not like the old saddle,” said she, “I need only turn my
wishing-ring and we shall be at home.” “Very well, then,” answered the
drummer, “then wish us in front of the town-gate.” In the twinkling of
an eye they were there, but the drummer said, “I will just go to my
parents and tell them the news, wait for me outside here, I shall soon
be back.” “Ah,” said the King’s daughter, “I beg thee to be careful. On
thy arrival do not kiss thy parents on the right cheek, or else thou
wilt forget everything, and I shall stay behind here outside, alone and
deserted.” “How can I forget thee?” said he, and promised her to come
back very soon, and gave his hand upon it. When he went into his
father’s house, he had changed so much that no one knew who he was, for
the three days which he had passed on the glass-mountain had been three
years. Then he made himself known, and his parents fell on his neck
with joy, and his heart was so moved that he forgot what the maiden had
said, and kissed them on both cheeks. But when he had given them the
kiss on the right cheek, every thought of the King’s daughter vanished
from him. He emptied out his pockets, and laid handfuls of the largest
jewels on the table. The parents had not the least idea what to do with
the riches. Then the father built a magnificent castle all surrounded
by gardens, woods, and meadows as if a prince were going to live in it,
and when it was ready, the mother said, “I have found a maiden for
thee, and the wedding shall be in three days. The son was content to do
as his parents desired.”

The poor King’s daughter had stood for a long time without the town
waiting for the return of the young man. When evening came, she said,
“He must certainly have kissed his parents on the right cheek, and has
forgotten me.” Her heart was full of sorrow, she wished herself into a
solitary little hut in a forest, and would not return to her father’s
court. Every evening she went into the town and passed the young man’s
house; he often saw her, but he no longer knew her. At length she heard
the people saying, “The wedding will take place to-morrow.” Then she
said, “I will try if I can win his heart back.”

On the first day of the wedding ceremonies, she turned her
wishing-ring, and said, “A dress as bright as the sun.” Instantly the
dress lay before her, and it was as bright as if it had been woven of
real sunbeams. When all the guests were assembled, she entered the
hall. Every one was amazed at the beautiful dress, and the bride most
of all, and as pretty dresses were the things she had most delight in,
she went to the stranger and asked if she would sell it to her. “Not
for money,” she answered, “but if I may pass the first night outside
the door of the room where your betrothed sleeps, I will give it up to
you.” The bride could not overcome her desire and consented, but she
mixed a sleeping-draught with the wine her betrothed took at night,
which made him fall into a deep sleep, When all had become quiet, the
King’s daughter crouched down by the door of the bedroom, opened it
just a little, and cried,

“Drummer, drummer, I pray thee hear!
Hast thou forgotten thou heldest me dear?
That on the glass-mountain we sat hour by hour?
That I rescued thy life from the witch’s power?
Didst thou not plight thy troth to me?
Drummer, drummer, hearken to me!”


But it was all in vain, the drummer did not awake, and when morning
dawned, the King’s daughter was forced to go back again as she came. On
the second evening she turned her wishing-ring and said, “A dress as
silvery as the moon.” When she appeared at the feast in the dress which
was as soft as moonbeams, it again excited the desire of the bride, and
the King’s daughter gave it to her for permission to pass the second
night also, outside the door of the bedroom. Then in the stillness of
the night, she cried,

“Drummer, drummer, I pray thee hear!
Hast thou forgotten thy heldest me dear?
That on the glass-mountain we sat hour by hour?
That I rescued thy life from the witch’s power?
Didst thou not plight thy troth to me?
Drummer, drummer, hearken to me!”


But the drummer, who was stupefied with the sleeping-draught, could not
be aroused. Sadly next morning she went back to her hut in the forest.
But the people in the house had heard the lamentation of the
stranger-maiden, and told the bridegroom about it. They told him also
that it was impossible that he could hear anything of it, because the
maiden he was going to marry had poured a sleeping-draught into his
wine.

On the third evening, the King’s daughter turned her wishing-ring, and
said, “A dress glittering like the stars.” When she showed herself
therein at the feast, the bride was quite beside herself with the
splendour of the dress, which far surpassed the others, and she said,
“I must, and will have it.” The maiden gave it as she had given the
others for permission to spend the night outside the bridegroom’s door.
The bridegroom, however, did not drink the wine which was handed to him
before he went to bed, but poured it behind the bed, and when
everything was quiet, he heard a sweet voice which called to him,

“Drummer, drummer, I pray thee hear!
Hast thou forgotten thou held me dear?
That on the glass-mountain we sat hour by hour?
That I rescued thy life from the witch’s power?
Didst thou not plight thy troth to me?
Drummer, drummer, hearken to me!”


Suddenly, his memory returned to him. “Ah,” cried he, “how can I have
acted so unfaithfully; but the kiss which in the joy of my heart I gave
my parents, on the right cheek, that is to blame for it all, that is
what stupefied me!” He sprang up, took the King’s daughter by the hand,
and led her to his parents’ bed. “This is my true bride,” said he; “if
I marry the other, I shall do a great wrong.” The parents, when they
heard how everything had happened, gave their consent. Then the lights
in the hall were lighted again, drums and trumpets were brought,
friends and relations were invited to come, and the real wedding was
solemnized with great rejoicing. The first bride received the beautiful
dresses as a compensation, and declared herself satisfied.


194 The Ear of Corn

In former times, when God himself still walked the earth, the
fruitfulness of the soil was much greater than it is now; then the ears
of corn did not bear fifty or sixty, but four or five hundred-fold.
Then the corn grew from the bottom to the very top o f the stalk, and
according to the length of the stalk was the length of the ear. Men
however are so made, that when they are too well off they no longer
value the blessings which come from God, but grow indifferent and
careless. One day a woman was passing by a corn-field when her little
child, who was running beside her, fell into a puddle, and dirtied her
frock. On this the mother tore up a handful of the beautiful ears of
corn, and cleaned the frock with them.

When the Lord, who just then came by, saw that, he was angry, and said,
“Henceforth shall the stalks of corn bear no more ears; men are no
longer worthy of heavenly gifts.” The by-standers who heard this, were
terrified, and fell on their knees and prayed that he would still leave
something on the stalks, even if the people were undeserving of it, for
the sake of the innocent birds which would otherwise have to starve.
The Lord, who foresaw their suffering, had pity on them, and granted
the request. So the ears were left as they now grow.


195 The Grave-Mound

A rich farmer was one day standing in his yard inspecting his fields
and gardens. The corn was growing up vigorously and the fruit-trees
were heavily laden with fruit. The grain of the year before still lay
in such immense heaps on the floors that the rafters could hardly bear
it. Then he went into the stable, where were well-fed oxen, fat cows,
and horses bright as looking-glass. At length he went back into his
sitting-room, and cast a glance at the iron chest in which his money
lay.

Whilst he was thus standing surveying his riches, all at once there was
a loud knock close by him. The knock was not at the door of his room,
but at the door of his heart. It opened, and he heard a voice which
said to him, “Hast thou done good to thy family with it? Hast thou
considered the necessities of the poor? Hast thou shared thy bread with
the hungry? Hast thou been contented with what thou hast, or didst thou
always desire to have more?” The heart was not slow in answering, “I
have been hard and pitiless, and have never shown any kindness to my
own family. If a beggar came, I turned away my eyes from him. I have
not troubled myself about God, but have thought only of increasing my
wealth. If everything which the sky covers had been mine own, I should
still not have had enough.”

When he was aware of this answer he was greatly alarmed, his knees
began to tremble, and he was forced to sit down.

Then there was another knock, but the knock was at the door of his
room. It was his neighbour, a poor man who had a number of children
whom he could no longer satisfy with food. “I know,” thought the poor
man, “that my neighbour is rich, but he is as hard as he is rich. I
don’t believe he will help me, but my children are crying for bread, so
I will venture it.” He said to the rich man, “You do not readily give
away anything that is yours, but I stand here like one who feels the
water rising above his head. My children are starving, lend me four
measures* of corn.” The rich man looked at him long, and then the first
sunbeam of mercy began to melt away a drop of the ice of greediness. “I
will not lend thee four measures,” he answered, “but I will make thee a
present of eight, but thou must fulfil one condition.” “What am I to
do?” said the poor man. “When I am dead, thou shalt watch for three
nights by my grave.” The peasant was disturbed in his mind at this
request, but in the need in which he was, he would have consented to
anything; he accepted, therefore, and carried the corn home with him.

It seemed as if the rich man had foreseen what was about to happen, for
when three days were gone by, he suddenly dropped down dead. No one
knew exactly how it came to pass, but no one grieved for him. When he
was buried, the poor man remembered his promise; he would willingly
have been released from it, but he thought, “After all, he acted kindly
by me. I have fed my hungry children with his corn, and even if that
were not the case, where I have once given my promise I must keep it.”
At nightfall he went into the churchyard, and seated himself on the
grave-mound. Everything was quiet, only the moon appeared above the
grave, and frequently an owl flew past and uttered her melancholy cry.
When the sun rose, the poor man betook himself in safety to his home,
and in the same manner the second night passed quietly by. On the
evening of the third day he felt a strange uneasiness, it seemed to him
that something was about to happen. When he went out he saw, by the
churchyard-wall, a man whom he had never seen before. He was no longer
young, had scars on his face, and his eyes looked sharply and eagerly
around. He was entirely covered with an old cloak, and nothing was
visible but his great riding-boots. “What are you looking for here?”
the peasant asked. “Are you not afraid of the lonely churchyard?”

“I am looking for nothing,” he answered, “and I am afraid of nothing! I
am like the youngster who went forth to learn how to shiver, and had
his labour for his pains, but got the King’s daughter to wife and great
wealth with her, only I have remained poor. I am nothing but a paid-off
soldier, and I mean to pass the night here, because I have no other
shelter.” “If you are without fear,” said the peasant, “stay with me,
and help me to watch that grave there.”

“To keep watch is a soldier’s business,” he replied, “whatever we fall
in with here, whether it be good or bad, we will share it between us.”
The peasant agreed to this, and they seated themselves on the grave
together.

All was quiet until midnight, when suddenly a shrill whistling was
heard in the air, and the two watchers perceived the Evil One standing
bodily before them. “Be off, you ragamuffins!” cried he to them, “the
man who lies in that grave belongs to me; I want to take him, and if
you don’t go away I will wring your necks!” “Sir with the red feather,”
said the soldier, “you are not my captain, I have no need to obey you,
and I have not yet learned how to fear. Go away, we shall stay sitting
here.”

The Devil thought to himself, “Money is the best thing with which to
get hold of these two vagabonds.” So he began to play a softer tune,
and asked quite kindly, if they would not accept a bag of money, and go
home with it? “That is worth listening to,” answered the soldier, “but
one bag of gold won’t serve us, if you will give as much as will go
into one of my boots, we will quit the field for you and go away.”

“I have not so much as that about me,” said the Devil, “but I will
fetch it. In the neighbouring town lives a money-changer who is a good
friend of mine, and will readily advance it to me.” When the Devil had
vanished the soldier took his left boot off, and said, “We will soon
pull the charcoal-burner’s nose for him, just give me your knife,
comrade.” He cut the sole off the boot, and put it in the high grass
near the grave on the edge of a hole that was half over-grown. “That
will do,” said he; “now the chimney-sweep may come.”

They both sat down and waited, and it was not long before the Devil
returned with a small bag of gold in his hand. “Just pour it in,” said
the soldier, raising up the boot a little, “but that won’t be enough.”

The Black One shook out all that was in the bag; the gold fell through,
and the boot remained empty. “Stupid Devil,” cried the soldier, “it
won’t do! Didn’t I say so at once? Go back again, and bring more.” The
Devil shook his head, went, and in an hour’s time came with a much
larger bag under his arm. “Now pour it in,” cried the soldier, “but I
doubt the boot won’t be full.” The gold clinked as it fell, but the
boot remained empty. The Devil looked in himself with his burning eyes,
and convinced himself of the truth. “You have shamefully big calves to
your legs!” cried he, and made a wry face. “Did you think,” replied the
soldier, “that I had a cloven foot like you? Since when have you been
so stingy? See that you get more gold together, or our bargain will
come to nothing!” The Wicked One went off again. This time he stayed
away longer, and when at length he appeared he was panting under the
weight of a sack which lay on his shoulders. He emptied it into the
boot, which was just as far from being filled as before. He became
furious, and was just going to tear the boot out of the soldier’s
hands, but at that moment the first ray of the rising sun broke forth
from the sky, and the Evil Spirit fled away with loud shrieks. The poor
soul was saved.

The peasant wished to divide the gold, but the soldier said, “Give what
falls to my lot to the poor, I will come with thee to thy cottage, and
together we will live in rest and peace on what remains, as long as God
is pleased to permit.”


196 Old Rinkrank

There was once on a time a King who had a daughter, and he caused a
glass mountain to be made, and said that whosoever could cross to the
other side of it without falling should have his daughter to wife. Then
there was one who loved the King’s daughter, and he asked the King if
he might have her. “Yes,” said the King; “if you can cross the mountain
without falling, you shall have her.” And the princess said she would
go over it with him, and would hold him if he were about to fall. So
they set out together to go over it, and when they were half way up the
princess slipped and fell, and the glass-mountain opened and shut her
up inside it, and her betrothed could not see where she had gone, for
the mountain closed immediately. Then he wept and lamented much, and
the King was miserable too, and had the mountain broken open where she
had been lost, and though the would be able to get her out again, but
they could not find the place into which she had fallen. Meanwhile the
King’s daughter had fallen quite deep down into the earth into a great
cave. An old fellow with a very long gray beard came to meet her, and
told her that if she would be his servant and do everything he bade
her, she might live, if not he would kill her. So she did all he bade
her. In the mornings he took his ladder out of his pocket, and set it
up against the mountain and climbed to the top by its help, and then he
drew up the ladder after him. The princess had to cook his dinner, make
his bed, and do all his work, and when he came home again he always
brought with him a heap of gold and silver. When she had lived with him
for many years, and had grown quite old, he called her Mother Mansrot,
and she had to call him Old Rinkrank. Then once when he was out, and
she had made his bed and washed his dishes, she shut the doors and
windows all fast, and there was one little window through which the
light shone in, and this she left open. When Old Rinkrank came home, he
knocked at his door, and cried, “Mother Mansrot, open the door for me.”
“No,” said she, “Old Rinkrank, I will not open the door for thee.” Then
he said,

“Here stand I, poor Rinkrank,
On my seventeen long shanks,
On my weary, worn-out foot,
Wash my dishes, Mother Mansrot.”


“I have washed thy dishes already,” said she. Then again he said,

“Here stand I, poor Rinkrank,
On my seventeen long shanks,
On my weary, worn-out foot,
Make me my bed, Mother Mansrot.”


“I have made thy bed already,” said she. Then again he said,

“Here stand I, poor Rinkrank,
On my seventeen long shanks,
On my weary, worn-out foot,
Open the door, Mother Mansrot.”


Then he ran all round his house, and saw that the little window was
open, and thought, “I will look in and see what she can be about, and
why she will not open the door for me.” He tried to peep in, but could
not get his head through because of his long beard. So he first put his
beard through the open window, but just as he had got it through,
Mother Mansrot came by and pulled the window down with a cord which she
had tied to it, and his beard was shut fast in it. Then he began to cry
most piteously, for it hurt him very much, and to entreat her to
release him again. But she said not until he gave her the ladder with
which he ascended the mountain. Then, whether he would or not, he had
to tell her where the ladder was. And she fastened a very long ribbon
to the window, and then she set up the ladder, and ascended the
mountain, and when she was at the top of it she opened the window. She
went to her father, and told him all that had happened to her. The King
rejoiced greatly, and her betrothed was still there, and they went and
dug up the mountain, and found Old Rinkrank inside it with all his gold
and silver. Then the King had Old Rinkrank put to death, and took all
his gold and silver. The princess married her betrothed, and lived
right happily in great magnificence and joy.


197 The Crystal Ball

There was once an enchantress, who had three sons who loved each other
as brothers, but the old woman did not trust them, and thought they
wanted to steal her power from her. So she changed the eldest into an
eagle, which was forced to dwell in the rocky mountains, and was often
seen sweeping in great circles in the sky. The second, she changed into
a whale, which lived in the deep sea, and all that was seen of it was
that it sometimes spouted up a great jet of water in the air. Each of
them only bore his human form for only two hours daily. The third son,
who was afraid she might change him into a raging wild beast a bear
perhaps, or a wolf, went secretly away. He had heard that a King’s
daughter who was bewitched, was imprisoned in the Castle of the Golden
Sun, and was waiting for deliverance. Those, however, who tried to free
her risked their lives; three-and-twenty youths had already died a
miserable death, and now only one other might make the attempt, after
which no more must come. And as his heart was without fear, he caught
at the idea of seeking out the Castle of the Golden Sun. He had already
travelled about for a long time without being able to find it, when he
came by chance into a great forest, and did not know the way out of it.
All at once he saw in the distance two giants, who made a sign to him
with their hands, and when he came to them they said, “We are
quarrelling about a cap, and which of us it is to belong to, and as we
are equally strong, neither of us can get the better of the other. The
small men are cleverer than we are, so we will leave the decision to
thee.” “How can you dispute about an old cap?” said the youth. “Thou
dost not know what properties it has! It is a wishing-cap; whosoever
puts it on, can wish himself away wherever he likes, and in an instant
he will be there.” “Give me the cap,” said the youth, “I will go a
short distance off, and when I call you, you must run a race, and the
cap shall belong to the one who gets first to me.” He put it on and
went away, and thought of the King’s daughter, forgot the giants, and
walked continually onward. At length he sighed from the very bottom of
his heart, and cried, “Ah, if I were but at the Castle of the Golden
Sun,” and hardly had the words passed his lips than he was standing on
a high mountain before the gate of the castle.

He entered and went through all the rooms, until in the last he found
the King’s daughter. But how shocked he was when he saw her. She had an
ashen-gray face full of wrinkles, blear eyes, and red hair. “Are you
the King’s daughter, whose beauty the whole world praises?” cried he.
“Ah,” she answered, “this is not my form; human eyes can only see me in
this state of ugliness, but that thou mayst know what I am like, look
in the mirror it does not let itself be misled it will show thee my
image as it is in truth.” She gave him the mirror in his hand, and he
saw therein the likeness of the most beautiful maiden on earth, and
saw, too, how the tears were rolling down her cheeks with grief. Then
said he, “How canst thou be set free? I fear no danger.” She said, “He
who gets the crystal ball, and holds it before the enchanter, will
destroy his power with it, and I shall resume my true shape. Ah,” she
added, “so many have already gone to meet death for this, and thou art
so young; I grieve that thou shouldst encounter such great danger.”
“Nothing can keep me from doing it,” said he, “but tell me what I must
do.” “Thou shalt know everything,” said the King’s daughter; “when thou
descendest the mountain on which the castle stands, a wild bull will
stand below by a spring, and thou must fight with it, and if thou hast
the luck to kill it, a fiery bird will spring out of it, which bears in
its body a burning egg, and in the egg the crystal ball lies like a
yolk. The bird will not, however, let the egg fall until forced to do
so, and if it falls on the ground, it will flame up and burn everything
that is near, and melt even ice itself, and with it the crystal ball,
and then all thy trouble will have been in vain.”

The youth went down to the spring, where the bull snorted and bellowed
at him. After a long struggle he plunged his sword in the animal’s
body, and it fell down. Instantly a fiery bird arose from it, and was
about to fly away, but the young man’s brother, the eagle, who was
passing between the clouds, swooped down, hunted it away to the sea,
and struck it with his beak until, in its extremity, it let the egg
fall. The egg did not, however, fall into the sea, but on a fisherman’s
hut which stood on the shore and the hut began at once to smoke and was
about to break out in flames. Then arose in the sea waves as high as a
house, they streamed over the hut, and subdued the fire. The other
brother, the whale, had come swimming to them, and had driven the water
up on high. When the fire was extinguished, the youth sought for the
egg and happily found it; it was not yet melted, but the shell was
broken by being so suddenly cooled with the water, and he could take
out the crystal ball unhurt.

When the youth went to the enchanter and held it before him, the latter
said, “My power is destroyed, and from this time forth thou art the
King of the Castle of the Golden Sun. With this canst thou likewise
give back to thy brothers their human form.” Then the youth hastened to
the King’s daughter, and when he entered the room, she was standing
there in the full splendour of her beauty, and joyfully they exchanged
rings with each other.


198 Maid Maleen

There was once a King who had a son who asked in marriage the daughter
of a mighty King; she was called Maid Maleen, and was very beautiful.
As her father wished to give her to another, the prince was rejected;
but as they both loved each other with all their hearts, they would not
give each other up, and Maid Maleen said to her father, “I can and will
take no other for my husband.” Then the King flew into a passion, and
ordered a dark tower to be built, into which no ray of sunlight or
moonlight should enter. When it was finished, he said, “Therein shalt
thou be imprisoned for seven years, and then I will come and see if thy
perverse spirit is broken.” Meat and drink for the seven years were
carried into the tower, and then she and her waiting-woman were led
into it and walled up, and thus cut off from the sky and from the
earth. There they sat in the darkness, and knew not when day or night
began. The King’s son often went round and round the tower, and called
their names, but no sound from without pierced through the thick walls.
What else could they do but lament and complain? Meanwhile the time
passed, and by the diminution of the food and drink they knew that the
seven years were coming to an end. They thought the moment of their
deliverance was come; but no stroke of the hammer was heard, no stone
fell out of the wall, and it seemed to Maid Maleen that her father had
forgotten her. As they only had food for a short time longer, and saw a
miserable death awaiting them, Maid Maleen said, “We must try our last
chance, and see if we can break through the wall.” She took the
bread-knife, and picked and bored at the mortar of a stone, and when
she was tired, the waiting-maid took her turn. With great labour they
succeeded in getting out one stone, and then a second, and a third, and
when three days were over the first ray of light fell on their
darkness, and at last the opening was so large that they could look
out. The sky was blue, and a fresh breeze played on their faces; but
how melancholy everything looked all around! Her father’s castle lay in
ruins, the town and the villages were, so far as could be seen,
destroyed by fire, the fields far and wide laid to waste, and no human
being was visible. When the opening in the wall was large enough for
them to slip through, the waiting-maid sprang down first, and then Maid
Maleen followed. But where were they to go? The enemy had ravaged the
whole kingdom, driven away the King, and slain all the inhabitants.
They wandered forth to seek another country, but nowhere did they find
a shelter, or a human being to give them a mouthful of bread, and their
need was so great that they were forced to appease their hunger with
nettles. When, after long journeying, they came into another country,
they tried to get work everywhere; but wherever they knocked they were
turned away, and no one would have pity on them. At last they arrived
in a large city and went to the royal palace. There also they were
ordered to go away, but at last the cook said that they might stay in
the kitchen and be scullions.

The son of the King in whose kingdom they were, was, however, the very
man who had been betrothed to Maid Maleen. His father had chosen
another bride for him, whose face was as ugly as her heart was wicked.
The wedding was fixed, and the maiden had already arrived; but because
of her great ugliness, however, she shut herself in her room, and
allowed no one to see her, and Maid Maleen had to take her her meals
from the kitchen. When the day came for the bride and the bridegroom to
go to church, she was ashamed of her ugliness, and afraid that if she
showed herself in the streets, she would be mocked and laughed at by
the people. Then said she to Maid Maleen, “A great piece of luck has
befallen thee. I have sprained my foot, and cannot well walk through
the streets; thou shalt put on my wedding-clothes and take my place; a
greater honour than that thou canst not have!” Maid Maleen, however,
refused it, and said, “I wish for no honour which is not suitable for
me.” It was in vain, too, that the bride offered her gold. At last she
said angrily, “If thou dost not obey me, it shall cost thee thy life. I
have but to speak the word, and thy head will lie at thy feet.” Then
she was forced to obey, and put on the bride’s magnificent clothes and
all her jewels. When she entered the royal hall, every one was amazed
at her great beauty, and the King said to his son, “This is the bride
whom I have chosen for thee, and whom thou must lead to church.” The
bridegroom was astonished, and thought, “She is like my Maid Maleen,
and I should believe that it was she herself, but she has long been
shut up in the tower, or dead.” He took her by the hand and led her to
church. On the way was a nettle-plant, and she said,

“Oh, nettle-plant,
Little nettle-plant,
What dost thou here alone?
I have known the time
When I ate thee unboiled,
When I ate thee unroasted.”


“What art thou saying?” asked the King’s son. “Nothing,” she replied,
“I was only thinking of Maid Maleen.” He was surprised that she knew
about her, but kept silence. When they came to the foot-plank into the
churchyard, she said,

“Foot-bridge, do not break,
I am not the true bride.”


“What art thou saying there?” asked the King’s son. “Nothing,” she
replied, “I was only thinking of Maid Maleen.” “Dost thou know Maid
Maleen?” “No,” she answered, “how should I know her; I have only heard
of her.” When they came to the church-door, she said once more,

“Church-door, break not,
I am not the true bride.”


“What art thou saying there?” asked he. “Ah,” she answered, “I was only
thinking of Maid Maleen.” Then he took out a precious chain, put it
round her neck, and fastened the clasp. Thereupon they entered the
church, and the priest joined their hands together before the altar,
and married them. He led her home, but she did not speak a single word
the whole way. When they got back to the royal palace, she hurried into
the bride’s chamber, put off the magnificent clothes and the jewels,
dressed herself in her gray gown, and kept nothing but the jewel on her
neck, which she had received from the bridegroom.

When the night came, and the bride was to be led into the prince’s
apartment, she let her veil fall over her face, that he might not
observe the deception. As soon as every one had gone away, he said to
her, “What didst thou say to the nettle-plant which was growing by the
wayside?”

“To which nettle-plant?” asked she; “I don’t talk to nettle-plants.”
“If thou didst not do it, then thou art not the true bride,” said he.
So she bethought herself, and said,

“I must go out unto my maid,
Who keeps my thoughts for me.”


She went out and sought Maid Maleen. “Girl, what hast thou been saying
to the nettle?” “I said nothing but,

“Oh, nettle-plant,
Little nettle-plant,
What dost thou here alone?
I have known the time
When I ate thee unboiled,
When I ate thee unroasted.”


The bride ran back into the chamber, and said, “I know now what I said
to the nettle,” and she repeated the words which she had just heard.
“But what didst thou say to the foot-bridge when we went over it?”
asked the King’s son. “To the foot-bridge?” she answered. “I don’t talk
to foot-bridges.” “Then thou art not the true bride.”

She again said,

“I must go out unto my maid,
Who keeps my thoughts for me,”


And ran out and found Maid Maleen, “Girl, what didst thou say to the
foot-bridge?”

“I said nothing but,

“Foot-bridge, do not break,
I am not the true bride.”


“That costs thee thy life!” cried the bride, but she hurried into the
room, and said, “I know now what I said to the foot-bridge,” and she
repeated the words. “But what didst thou say to the church-door?” “To
the church-door?” she replied; “I don’t talk to church-doors.” “Then
thou art not the true bride.”

She went out and found Maid Maleen, and said, “Girl, what didst thou
say to the church-door?”

“I said nothing but,

“Church-door, break not,
I am not the true bride.”


“That will break thy neck for thee!” cried the bride, and flew into a
terrible passion, but she hastened back into the room, and said, “I
know now what I said to the church-door,” and she repeated the words.
“But where hast thou the jewel which I gave thee at the church-door?”
“What jewel?” she answered; “thou didst not give me any jewel.” “I
myself put it round thy neck, and I myself fastened it; if thou dost
not know that, thou art not the true bride.” He drew the veil from her
face, and when he saw her immeasurable ugliness, he sprang back
terrified, and said, “How comest thou here? Who art thou?” “I am thy
betrothed bride, but because I feared lest the people should mock me
when they saw me out of doors, I commanded the scullery-maid to dress
herself in my clothes, and to go to church instead of me.” “Where is
the girl?” said he; “I want to see her, go and bring her here.” She
went out and told the servants that the scullery-maid was an impostor,
and that they must take her out into the court-yard and strike off her
head. The servants laid hold of Maid Maleen and wanted to drag her out,
but she screamed so loudly for help, that the King’s son heard her
voice, hurried out of his chamber and ordered them to set the maiden
free instantly. Lights were brought, and then he saw on her neck the
gold chain which he had given her at the church-door. “Thou art the
true bride,” said he, “who went with me to the church; come with me now
to my room.” When they were both alone, he said, “On the way to church
thou didst name Maid Maleen, who was my betrothed bride; if I could
believe it possible, I should think she was standing before me thou art
like her in every respect.” She answered, “I am Maid Maleen, who for
thy sake was imprisoned seven years in the darkness, who suffered
hunger and thirst, and has lived so long in want and poverty. To-day,
however, the sun is shining on me once more. I was married to thee in
the church, and I am thy lawful wife.” Then they kissed each other, and
were happy all the days of their lives. The false bride was rewarded
for what she had done by having her head cut off.

The tower in which Maid Maleen had been imprisoned remained standing
for a long time, and when the children passed by it they sang,

“Kling, klang, gloria.
Who sits within this tower?
A King’s daughter, she sits within,
A sight of her I cannot win,
The wall it will not break,
The stone cannot be pierced.
Little Hans, with your coat so gay,
Follow me, follow me, fast as you may.”


199 The Boots of Buffalo-Leather

A soldier who is afraid of nothing, troubles himself about nothing. One
of this kind had received his discharge, and as he had learnt no trade
and could earn nothing, he travelled about and begged alms of kind
people. He had an old waterproof on his back, and a pair of
riding-boots of buffalo-leather which were still left to him. One day
he was walking he knew not where, straight out into the open country,
and at length came to a forest. He did not know where he was, but saw
sitting on the trunk of a tree, which had been cut down, a man who was
well dressed and wore a green shooting-coat. The soldier shook hands
with him, sat down on the grass by his side, and stretched out his
legs. “I see thou hast good boots on, which are well blacked,” said he
to the huntsman; “but if thou hadst to travel about as I have, they
would not last long. Look at mine, they are of buffalo-leather, and
have been worn for a long time, but in them I can go through thick and
thin.” After a while the soldier got up and said, “I can stay no
longer, hunger drives me onwards; but, Brother Bright-boots, where does
this road lead to?” “I don’t know that myself,” answered the huntsman,
“I have lost my way in the forest.” “Then thou art in the same plight
as I,” said the soldier; “birds of a feather flock together, let us
remain together, and seek our way.” The huntsman smiled a little, and
they walked on further and further, until night fell. “We do not get
out of the forest,” said the soldier, “but there in the distance I see
a light shining, which will help us to something to eat.” They found a
stone house, knocked at the door, and an old woman opened it. “We are
looking for quarters for the night,” said the soldier, “and some lining
for our stomachs, for mine is as empty as an old knapsack.” “You cannot
stay here,” answered the old woman; “this is a robber’s house, and you
would do wisely to get away before they come home, or you will be
lost.” “It won’t be so bad as that,” answered the soldier, “I have not
had a mouthful for two days, and whether I am murdered here or die of
hunger in the forest is all the same to me. I shall go in.” The
huntsman would not follow, but the soldier drew him in with him by the
sleeve. “Come, my dear brother, we shall not come to an end so quickly
as that!” The old woman had pity on them and said, “Creep in here
behind the stove, and if they leave anything, I will give it to you on
the sly when they are asleep.” Scarcely were they in the corner before
twelve robbers came bursting in, seated themselves at the table which
was already laid, and vehemently demanded some food. The old woman
brought in some great dishes of roast meat, and the robbers enjoyed
that thoroughly. When the smell of the food ascended the nostrils of
the soldier, he said to the huntsman, “I cannot hold out any longer, I
shall seat myself at the table, and eat with them.” “Thou wilt bring us
to destruction,” said the huntsman, and held him back by the arm. But
the soldier began to cough loudly. When the robbers heard that, they
threw away their knives and forks, leapt up, and discovered the two who
were behind the stove. “Aha, gentlemen, are you in the corner?” cried
they, “What are you doing here? Have you been sent as spies? Wait a
while, and you shall learn how to fly on a dry bough.” “But do be
civil,” said the soldier, “I am hungry, give me something to eat, and
then you can do what you like with me.” The robbers were astonished,
and the captain said, “I see that thou hast no fear; well, thou shalt
have some food, but after that thou must die.” “We shall see,” said the
soldier, and seated himself at the table, and began to cut away
valiantly at the roast meat. “Brother Brightboots, come and eat,” cried
he to the huntsman; “thou must be as hungry as I am, and cannot have
better roast meat at home,” but the huntsman would not eat. The robbers
looked at the soldier in astonishment, and said, “The rascal uses no
ceremony.” After a while he said, “I have had enough food, now get me
something good to drink.” The captain was in the mood to humour him in
this also, and called to the old woman, “Bring a bottle out of the
cellar, and mind it be of the best.” The soldier drew the cork out with
a loud noise, and then went with the bottle to the huntsman and said,
“Pay attention, brother, and thou shalt see something that will
surprise thee; I am now going to drink the health of the whole clan.”
Then he brandished the bottle over the heads of the robbers, and cried,
“Long life to you all, but with your mouths open and your right hands
lifted up,” and then he drank a hearty draught. Scarcely were the words
said than they all sat motionless as if made of stone, and their mouths
were open and their right hands stretched up in the air. The huntsman
said to the soldier, “I see that thou art acquainted with tricks of
another kind, but now come and let us go home.” “Oho, my dear brother,
but that would be marching away far too soon; we have conquered the
enemy, and must first take the booty. Those men there are sitting fast,
and are opening their mouths with astonishment, but they will not be
allowed to move until I permit them. Come, eat and drink.” The old
woman had to bring another bottle of the best wine, and the soldier
would not stir until he had eaten enough to last for three days. At
last when day came, he said, “Now it is time to strike our tents, and
that our march may be a short one, the old woman shall show us the
nearest way to the town.” When they had arrived there, he went to his
old comrades, and said, “Out in the forest I have found a nest full of
gallows’ birds, come with me and we will take it.” The soldier led
them, and said to the huntsman, “Thou must go back again with me to see
how they shake when we seize them by the feet.” He placed the men round
about the robbers, and then he took the bottle, drank a mouthful,
brandished it above them, and cried, “Live again.” Instantly they all
regained the power of movement, but were thrown down and bound hand and
foot with cords. Then the soldier ordered them to be thrown into a cart
as if they had been so many sacks, and said, “Now drive them straight
to prison.” The huntsman, however, took one of the men aside and gave
him another commission besides. “Brother Bright-boots,” said the
soldier, “we have safely routed the enemy and been well fed, now we
will quietly walk behind them as if we were stragglers!” When they
approached the town, the soldier saw a crowd of people pouring through
the gate of the town who were raising loud cries of joy, and waving
green boughs in the air. Then he saw that the entire body-guard was
coming up. “What can this mean?” said he to the huntsman. “Dost thou
not know?” he replied, “that the King has for a long time been absent
from his kingdom, and that to-day he is returning, and every one is
going to meet him.” “But where is the King?” said the soldier, “I do
not see him.” “Here he is,” answered the huntsman, “I am the King, and
have announced my arrival.” Then he opened his hunting-coat, and his
royal garments were visible. The soldier was alarmed, and fell on his
knees and begged him to forgive him for having in his ignorance treated
him as an equal, and spoken to him by such a name. But the King shook
hands with him, and said, “Thou art a brave soldier, and hast saved my
life. Thou shalt never again be in want, I will take care of thee. And
if ever thou wouldst like to eat a piece of roast meat, as good as that
in the robber’s house, come to the royal kitchen. But if thou wouldst
drink a health, thou must first ask my permission.”


200 The Golden Key

In the winter time, when deep snow lay on the ground, a poor boy was
forced to go out on a sledge to fetch wood. When he had gathered it
together, and packed it, he wished, as he was so frozen with cold, not
to go home at once, but to light a fire and warm himself a little. So
he scraped away the snow, and as he was thus clearing the ground, he
found a tiny, gold key. Hereupon he thought that where the key was, the
lock must be also, and dug in the ground and found an iron chest. “If
the key does but fit it!” thought he; “no doubt there are precious
things in that little box.” He searched, but no keyhole was there. At
last he discovered one, but so small that it was hardly visible. He
tried it, and the key fitted it exactly. Then he turned it once round,
and now we must wait until he has quite unlocked it and opened the lid,
and then we shall learn what wonderful things were lying in that box.


Children’s Legends


Legend 1 St. Joseph in the Forest

There was once on a time a mother who had three daughters, the eldest
of whom was rude and wicked, the second much better, although she had
her faults, but the youngest was a pious, good child. The mother was,
however, so strange, that it was just the eldest daughter whom she most
loved, and she could not bear the youngest. On this account, she often
sent the poor girl out into the great forest in order to get rid of
her, for she thought she would lose herself and never come back again.
But the guardian-angel which every good child has, did not forsake her,
but always brought her into the right path again. Once, however, the
guardian-angel behaved as if he were not there, and the child could not
find her way out of the forest again. She walked on constantly until
evening came, and then she saw a tiny light burning in the distance,
ran up to it at once, and came to a little hut. She knocked, the door
opened, and she came to a second door, where she knocked again. An old
man, who had a snow-white beard and looked venerable, opened it for
her; and he was no other than St. Joseph. He said quite kindly, “Come,
dear child, seat thyself on my little chair by the fire, and warm
thyself; I will fetch thee clear water if thou art thirsty; but here in
the forest, I have nothing for thee to eat but a couple of little
roots, which thou must first scrape and boil.”

St. Joseph gave her the roots. The girl scraped them clean, then she
brought a piece of pancake and the bread that her mother had given her
to take with her; mixed all together in a pan, and cooked herself a
thick soup. When it was ready, St. Joseph said, “I am so hungry; give
me some of thy food.” The child was quite willing, and gave him more
than she kept for herself, but God’s blessing was with her, so that she
was satisfied. When they had eaten, St. Joseph said, “Now we will go to
bed; I have, however, only one bed, lay thyself in it. I will lie on
the ground on the straw.” “No,” answered she, “stay in your own bed,
the straw is soft enough for me.” St. Joseph, however, took the child
in his arms, and carried her into the little bed, and there she said
her prayers, and fell asleep. Next morning when she awoke, she wanted
to say good morning to St. Joseph, but she did not see him. Then she
got up and looked for him, but could not find him anywhere; at last she
perceived, behind the door, a bag with money so heavy that she could
just carry it, and on it was written that it was for the child who had
slept there that night. On this she took the bag, bounded away with it,
and got safely to her mother, and as she gave her mother all the money,
she could not help being satisfied with her.

The next day, the second child also took a fancy to go into the forest.
Her mother gave her a much larger piece of pancake and bread. It
happened with her just as with the first child. In the evening she came
to St. Joseph’s little hut, who gave her roots for a thick soup. When
it was ready, he likewise said to her, “I am so hungry, give me some of
thy food.” Then the child said, “You may have your share.” Afterwards,
when St. Joseph offered her his bed and wanted to lie on the straw, she
replied, “No, lie down in the bed, there is plenty of room for both of
us.” St. Joseph took her in his arms and put her in the bed, and laid
himself on the straw.

In the morning when the child awoke and looked for St. Joseph, he had
vanished, but behind the door she found a little sack of money that was
about as long as a hand, and on it was written that it was for the
child who had slept there last night. So she took the little bag and
ran home with it, and took it to her mother, but she secretly kept two
pieces for herself.

The eldest daughter had by this time grown curious, and the next
morning also insisted on going out into the forest. Her mother gave her
pancakes with her—as many as she wanted, and bread and cheese as well.
In the evening she found St. Joseph in his little hut, just as the two
others had found him. When the soup was ready and St. Joseph said, “I
am so hungry, give me some of thy food,” the girl answered, “Wait until
I am satisfied; then if there is anything left thou shalt have it.” She
ate, however, nearly the whole of it, and St. Joseph had to scrape the
dish. Afterwards, the good old man offered her his bed, and wanted to
lie on the straw. She took it without making any opposition, laid
herself down in the little bed, and left the hard straw to the
white-haired man. Next morning when she awoke, St. Joseph was not to be
found, but she did not trouble herself about that. She looked behind
the door for a money-bag. She fancied something was lying on the
ground, but as she could not very well distinguish what it was, she
stooped down, and examined it closely, but it remained hanging to her
nose, and when she got up again, she saw, to her horror, that it was a
second nose, which was hanging fast to her own. Then she began to
scream and howl, but that did no good; she was forced to see it always
on her nose, for it stretched out so far. Then she ran out and screamed
without stopping till she met St. Joseph, at whose feet she fell and
begged until, out of pity, he took the nose off her again, and even
gave her two farthings. When she got home, her mother was standing
before the door, and asked, “What hast thou had given to thee?” Then
she lied and said, “A great bag of money, but I have lost it on the
way.” “Lost it!” cried the mother, “oh, but we will soon find it
again,” and took her by the hand, and wanted to seek it with her. At
first she began to cry, and did not wish to go, but at last she went.
On the way, however, so many lizards and snakes broke loose on both of
them, that they did not know how to save themselves. At last they stung
the wicked child to death, and they stung the mother in the foot,
because she had not brought her up better.


Legend 2 The Twelve Apostles

Three hundred years before the birth of the Lord Christ, there lived a
mother who had twelve sons, but was so poor and needy that she no
longer knew how she was to keep them alive at all. She prayed to God
daily that he would grant that all her sons might be on the earth with
the Redeemer who was promised. When her necessity became still greater
she sent one of them after the other out into the world to seek bread
for her. The eldest was called Peter, and he went out and had already
walked a long way, a whole day’s journey, when he came into a great
forest. He sought for a way out, but could find none, and went farther
and farther astray, and at the same time felt such great hunger that he
could scarcely stand. At length he became so weak that he was forced to
lie down, and he believed death to be at hand. Suddenly there stood
beside him a small boy who shone with brightness, and was as beautiful
and kind as an angel. The child smote his little hands together, until
Peter was forced to look up and saw him. Then the child said, “Why art
thou sitting there in such trouble?” “Alas!” answered Peter, “I am
going about the world seeking bread, that I may yet see the dear
Saviour who is promised, that is my greatest desire.” The child said,
“Come with me, and thy wish shall be fulfilled.” He took poor Peter by
the hand, and led him between some cliffs to a great cavern. When they
entered it, everything was shining with gold, silver, and crystal, and
in the midst of it twelve cradles were standing side by side. Then said
the little angel, “Lie down in the first, and sleep a while, I will
rock thee.” Peter did so, and the angel sang to him and rocked him
until he was al seep. And when he was asleep, the second brother came
also, guided thither by his guardian angel, and he was rocked to sleep
like the first, and thus came the others, one after the other, until
all twelve lay there sleeping in the golden cradles. They slept,
however, three hundred years, until the night when the Saviour of the
world was born. Then they awoke, and were with him on earth, and were
called the twelve apostles.


Legend 3 The Rose

There was once a poor woman who had two children. The youngest had to
go every day into the forest to fetch wood. Once when she had gone a
long way to seek it, a little child, who was quite strong, came and
helped her industriously to pick up the wood and carry it home, and
then before a moment had passed the strange child disappeared. The
child told her mother this, but at first she would not believe it. At
length she brought a rose home, and told her mother that the beautiful
child had given her this rose, and had told her that when it was in
full bloom, he would return. The mother put the rose in water. One
morning her child could not get out of bed, the mother went to the bed
and found her dead, but she lay looking very happy. On the same
morning, the rose was in full bloom.


Legend 4 Poverty and Humility Lead to Heaven

There was once a King’s son who went out into the world, and he was
full of thought and sad. He looked at the sky, which was so beautifully
pure and blue, then he sighed, and said, “How well must all be with one
up there in heaven!” Then he saw a poor gray-haired man who was coming
along the road towards him, and he spoke to him, and asked, “How can I
get to heaven?” The man answered, “By poverty and humility. Put on my
ragged clothes, wander about the world for seven years, and get to know
what misery is, take no money, but if thou art hungry ask compassionate
hearts for a bit of bread; in this way thou wilt reach heaven.”

Then the King’s son took off his magnificent coat, and wore in its
place the beggar’s garment, went out into the wide world, and suffered
great misery. He took nothing but a little food, said nothing, but
prayed to the Lord to take him into his heaven. When the seven years
were over, he returned to his father’s palace, but no one recognized
him. He said to the servants, “Go and tell my parents that I have come
back again.” But the servants did not believe it, and laughed and left
him standing there. Then said he, “Go and tell it to my brothers that
they may come down, for I should so like to see them again.” The
servants would not do that either, but at last one of them went, and
told it to the King’s children, but these did not believe it, and did
not trouble themselves about it. Then he wrote a letter to his mother,
and described to her all his misery, but he did not say that he was her
son. So, out of pity, the Queen had a place under the stairs assigned
to him, and food taken to him daily by two servants. But one of them
was ill-natured and said, “Why should the beggar have the good food?”
and kept it for himself, or gave it to the dogs, and took the weak,
wasted-away beggar nothing but water; the other, however, was honest,
and took the beggar what was sent to him. It was little, but he could
live on it for a while, and all the time he was quite patient, but he
grew continually weaker. As, however, his illness increased, he desired
to receive the last sacrament. When the host was being elevated down
below, all the bells in the town and neighbourhood began to ring. After
mass the priest went to the poor man under the stairs, and there he lay
dead. In one hand he had a rose, in the other a lily, and beside him
was a paper in which was written his history.

When he was buried, a rose grew on one side of his grave, and a lily on
the other.


Legend 5 God’s Food

There were once upon a time two sisters, one of whom had no children
and was rich, and the other had five and was a widow, and so poor that
she no longer had food enough to satisfy herself and her children. In
her need, therefore, she went to her sister, and said, “My children and
I are suffering the greatest hunger; thou art rich, give me a mouthful
of bread.” The very rich sister was as hard as a stone, and said, “I
myself have nothing in the house,” and drove away the poor creature
with harsh words. After some time the husband of the rich sister came
home, and was just going to cut himself a piece of bread, but when he
made the first cut into the loaf, out flowed red blood. When the woman
saw that she was terrified and told him what had occurred. He hurried
away to help the widow and her children, but when he entered her room,
he found her praying. She had her two youngest children in her arms,
and the three eldest were lying dead. He offered her food, but she
answered, “For earthly food have we no longer any desire. God has
already satisfied the hunger of three of us, and he will hearken to our
supplications likewise.” Scarcely had she uttered these words than the
two little ones drew their last breath, whereupon her heart broke, and
she sank down dead.


Legend 6 The Three Green Twigs

There was once on a time a hermit who lived in a forest at the foot of
a mountain, and passed his time in prayer and good works, and every
evening he carried, to the glory of God, two pails of water up the
mountain. Many a beast drank of it, and many a plant was refreshed by
it, for on the heights above, a strong wind blew continually, which
dried the air and the ground, and the wild birds which dread mankind
wheel about there, and with their sharp eyes search for a drink. And
because the hermit was so pious, an angel of God, visible to his eyes,
went up with him, counted his steps, and when the work was completed,
brought him his food, even as the prophet of old was by God’s command
fed by the raven. When the hermit in his piety had already reached a
great age, it happened that he once saw from afar a poor sinner being
taken to the gallows. He said carelessly to himself, “There, that one
is getting his deserts!” In the evening, when he was carrying the water
up the mountain, the angel who usually accompanied him did not appear,
and also brought him no food. Then he was terrified, and searched his
heart, and tried to think how he could have sinned, as God was so
angry, but he did not discover it. Then he neither ate nor drank, threw
himself down on the ground, and prayed day and night. And as he was one
day thus bitterly weeping in the forest, he heard a little bird singing
beautifully and delightfully, and then he was still more troubled and
said, “How joyously thou singest, the Lord is not angry with thee. Ah,
if thou couldst but tell me how I can have offended him, that I might
do penance, and then my heart also would be glad again.” Then the bird
began to speak and said, “Thou hast done injustice, in that thou hast
condemned a poor sinner who was being led to the gallows, and for that
the Lord is angry with thee. He alone sits in judgement. However, if
thou wilt do penance and repent thy sins, he will forgive thee.” Then
the angel stood beside him with a dry branch in his hand and said,
“Thou shalt carry this dry branch until three green twigs sprout out of
it, but at night when thou wilt sleep, thou shalt lay it under thy
head. Thou shalt beg thy bread from door to door, and not tarry more
than one night in the same house. That is the penance which the Lord
lays on thee.”

Then the hermit took the piece of wood, and went back into the world,
which he had not seen for so long. He ate and drank nothing but what
was given him at the doors; many petitions were, however, not listened
to, and many doors remained shut to him, so that he often did not get a
crumb of bread.

Once when he had gone from door to door from morning till night, and no
one had given him anything, and no one would shelter him for the night,
he went forth into a forest, and at last found a cave which someone had
made, and an old woman was sitting in it. Then said he, “Good woman,
keep me with you in your house for this night;” but she said, “No, I
dare not, even if I wished, I have three sons who are wicked and wild,
if they come home from their robbing expedition, and find you, they
would kill us both.” The hermit said, “Let me stay, they will do no
injury either to you or to me.” and the woman was compassionate, and
let herself be persuaded. Then the man lay down beneath the stairs, and
put the bit of wood under his head. When the old woman saw him do that,
she asked the reason of it, on which he told her that he carried the
bit of wood about with him for a penance, and used it at night for a
pillow, and that he had offended the Lord, because, when he had seen a
poor sinner on the way to the gallows, he had said he was getting his
deserts. Then the woman began to weep and cried, “If the Lord thus
punishes one single word, how will it fare with my sons when they
appear before him in judgment?”

At midnight the robbers came home and blustered and stormed. They made
a fire, and when it had lighted up the cave and they saw a man lying
under the stairs, they fell in a rage and cried to their mother, “Who
is the man? Have we not forbidden any one whatsoever to be taken in?”
Then said the mother, “Let him alone, it is a poor sinner who is
expiating his crime.” The robbers asked, “What has he done?” “Old man,”
cried they, “tell us thy sins.” The old man raised himself and told
them how he, by one single word, had so sinned that God was angry with
him, and how he was now expiating this crime. The robbers were so
powerfully touched in their hearts by this story, that they were
shocked with their life up to this time, reflected, and began with
hearty repentance to do penance for it. The hermit, after he had
converted the three sinners, lay down to sleep again under the stairs.
In the morning, however, they found him dead, and out of the dry wood
on which his head lay, three green twigs had grown up on high. Thus the
Lord had once more received him into his favour.


Legend 7 Our Lady’s Little Glass

Once upon a time a waggoner’s cart which was heavily laden with wine
had stuck so fast that in spite of all that he could do, he could not
get it to move again. Then it chanced that Our Lady just happened to
come by that way, and when she perceived the poor man’s distress, she
said to him, “I am tired and thirsty, give me a glass of wine, and I
will set thy cart free for thee.” “Willingly,” answered the waggoner,
“but I have no glass in which I can give thee the wine.” Then Our Lady
plucked a little white flower with red stripes, called field bindweed,
which looks very like a glass, and gave it to the waggoner. He filled
it with wine, and then Our Lady drank it, and in the self-same instant
the cart was set free, and the waggoner could drive onwards. The little
flower is still always called Our Lady’s Little Glass.


Legend 8 The Aged Mother

In a large town there was an old woman who sat in the evening alone in
her room thinking how she had lost first her husband, then both her
children, then one by one all her relations, and at length, that very
day, her last friend, and now she was quite alone and desolate. She was
very sad at heart, and heaviest of all her losses to her was that of
her sons; and in her pain she blamed God for it. She was still sitting
lost in thought, when all at once she heard the bells ringing for early
prayer. She was surprised that she had thus in her sorrow watched
through the whole night, and lighted her lantern and went to church. It
was already lighted up when she arrived, but not as it usually was with
wax candles, but with a dim light. It was also crowded already with
people, and all the seats were filled; and when the old woman got to
her usual place it also was not empty, but the whole bench was entirely
full. And when she looked at the people, they were none other than her
dead relations who were sitting there in their old-fashioned garments,
but with pale faces. They neither spoke nor sang; but a soft humming
and whispering was heard all over the church. Then an aunt of hers
stood up, stepped forward, and said to the poor old woman, “Look there
beside the altar, and thou wilt see thy sons.” The old woman looked
there, and saw her two children, one hanging on the gallows, the other
bound to the wheel. Then said the aunt, “Behold, so would it have been
with them if they had lived, and if the good God had not taken them to
himself when they were innocent children.” The old woman went trembling
home, and on her knees thanked God for having dealt with her more
kindly than she had been able to understand, and on the third day she
lay down and died.


Legend 9 The Heavenly Wedding

A poor peasant-boy one day heard the priest say in church that
whosoever desired to enter into the kingdom of heaven must always go
straight onward. So he set out, and walked continually straight onwards
over hill and valley without ever turning aside. At length his way led
him into a great town, and into the midst of a church, where just at
that time God’s service was being performed. Now when he beheld all the
magnificence of this, he thought he had reached heaven, sat down, and
rejoiced with his whole heart. When the service was over, and the clerk
bade him go out, he replied, “No, I will not go out again, I am glad to
be in heaven at last.” So the clerk went to the priest, and told him
that there was a child in the church who would not go out again,
because he believed he was in heaven. The priest said, “If he believes
that, we will leave him inside.” So he went to him, and asked if he had
any inclination to work. “Yes,” the little fellow replied, “I am
accustomed to work, but I will not go out of heaven again.” So he
stayed in the church, and when he saw how the people came and knelt and
prayed to Our Lady with the blessed child Jesus which was carved in
wood, he thought “that is the good God,” and said, “Dear God, how thin
you are! The people must certainly let you starve; but every day I will
give you half my dinner.” From this time forth, he every day took half
his dinner to the image, and the image began to enjoy the food. When a
few weeks had gone by, people remarked that the image was growing
larger and stout and strong, and wondered much. The priest also could
not understand it, but stayed in the church, and followed the little
boy about, and then he saw how he shared his food with the Virgin Mary,
and how she accepted it.

After some time the boy became ill, and for eight days could not leave
his bed; but as soon as he could get up again, the first thing he did
was to take his food to Our Lady. The priest followed him, and heard
him say, “Dear God, do not take it amiss that I have not brought you
anything for such a long time, for I have been ill and could not get
up.” Then the image answered him and said, “I have seen thy good-will,
and that is enough for me. Next Sunday thou shalt go with me to the
wedding.” The boy rejoiced at this, and repeated it to the priest, who
begged him to go and ask the image if he, too, might be permitted to
go. “No,” answered the image, “thou alone.” The priest wished to
prepare him first, and give him the holy communion and the child was
willing, and next Sunday, when the host came to him, he fell down and
died, and was at the eternal wedding.


Legend 10 The Hazel-Branch

One afternoon the Christ-child had laid himself in his cradle-bed and
had fallen asleep. Then his mother came to him, looked at him full of
gladness, and said, “Hast thou laid thyself down to sleep, my child?
Sleep sweetly, and in the meantime I will go into the wood, and fetch
thee a handful of strawberries, for I know that thou wilt be pleased
with them when thou awakest.” In the wood outside, she found a spot
with the most beautiful strawberries; but as she was stooping down to
gather one, an adder sprang up out of the grass. She was alarmed, left
the strawberries where they were, and hastened away. The adder darted
after her; but Our Lady, as you can readily understand, knew what it
was best to do. She hid herself behind a hazel-bush, and stood there
until the adder had crept away again. Then she gathered the
strawberries, and as she set out on her way home she said, “As the
hazel-bush has been my protection this time, it shall in future protect
others also.” Therefore, from the most remote times, a green
hazel-branch has been the safest protection against adders, snakes, and
everything else which creeps on the earth.