the story of my life:

“I am the daughter of a rich count. My parents died when I was still in
my tender youth, and recommended me in their last will to my elder
brother, by whom I was brought up. We loved each other so tenderly, and
were so alike in our way of thinking and our inclinations, that we both
embraced the resolution never to marry, but to stay together to the end
of our lives. In our house there was no lack of company; neighbors and
friends visited us often, and we showed the greatest hospitality to
every one. So it came to pass one evening that a stranger came riding
to our castle, and, under pretext of not being able to get on to the
next place, begged for shelter for the night. We granted his request
with ready courtesy, and he entertained us in the most agreeable manner
during supper by conversation intermingled with stories. My brother
liked the stranger so much that he begged him to spend a couple of days
with us, to which, after some hesitation, he consented. We did not rise
from table until late in the night, the stranger was shown to room, and
I hastened, as I was tired, to lay my limbs in my soft bed. Hardly had
I slept for a short time, when the sound of faint and delightful music
awoke me. As I could not conceive from whence it came, I wanted to
summon my waiting-maid who slept in the next room, but to my
astonishment I found that speech was taken away from me by an unknown
force. I felt as if a mountain were weighing down my breast, and was
unable to make the very slightest sound. In the meantime, by the light
of my night-lamp, I saw the stranger enter my room through two doors
which were fast bolted. He came to me and said, that by magic arts
which were at his command, he had caused the lovely music to sound in
order to awaken me, and that he now forced his way through all
fastenings with the intention of offering me his hand and heart. My
repugnance to his magic arts was, however, so great, that I vouchsafed
him no answer. He remained for a time standing without moving,
apparently with the idea of waiting for a favorable decision, but as I
continued to keep silence, he angrily declared he would revenge himself
and find means to punish my pride, and left the room. I passed the
night in the greatest disquietude, and only fell asleep towards
morning. When I awoke, I hurried to my brother, but did not find him in
his room, and the attendants told me that he had ridden forth with the
stranger to the chase by daybreak.

“I at once suspected nothing good. I dressed myself quickly, ordered my
palfrey to be saddled, and accompanied only by one servant, rode full
gallop to the forest. The servant fell with his horse, and could not
follow me, for the horse had broken its foot. I pursued my way without
halting, and in a few minutes I saw the stranger coming towards me with
a beautiful stag which he led by a cord. I asked him where he had left
my brother, and how he had come by this stag, out of whose great eyes I
saw tears flowing. Instead of answering me, he began to laugh loudly. I
fell into a great rage at this, pulled out a pistol and discharged it
at the monster; but the ball rebounded from his breast and went into my
horse’s head. I fell to the ground, and the stranger muttered some
words which deprived me of consciousness.

“When I came to my senses again I found myself in this underground cave
in a glass coffin. The magician appeared once again, and said he had
changed my brother into a stag, my castle with all that belonged to it,
diminished in size by his arts, he had shut up in the other glass
chest, and my people, who were all turned into smoke, he had confined
in glass bottles. He told me that if I would now comply with his wish,
it was an easy thing for him to put everything back in its former
state, as he had nothing to do but open the vessels, and everything
would return once more to its natural form. I answered him as little as
I had done the first time. He vanished and left me in my prison, in
which a deep sleep came on me. Amongst the visions which passed before
my eyes, that was the most comforting in which a young man came and set
me free, and when I opened my eyes to-day I saw thee, and beheld my
dream fulfilled. Help me to accomplish the other things which happened
in those visions. The first is that we lift the glass chest in which my
castle is enclosed, on to that broad stone.”

As soon as the stone was laden, it began to rise up on high with the
maiden and the young man, and mounted through the opening of the
ceiling into the upper hall, from whence they then could easily reach
the open air. Here the maiden opened the lid, and it was marvellous to
behold how the castle, the houses, and the farm buildings which were
enclosed, stretched themselves out and grew to their natural size with
the greatest rapidity. After this, the maiden and the tailor returned
to the cave beneath the earth, and had the vessels which were filled
with smoke carried up by the stone. The maiden had scarcely opened the
bottles when the blue smoke rushed out and changed itself into living
men, in whom she recognized her servants and her people. Her joy was
still more increased when her brother, who had killed the magician in
the form of the bull, came out of the forest towards them in his human
form, and on the self-same day the maiden, in accordance with her
promise, gave her hand at the altar to the lucky tailor.


164 Lazy Harry

Harry was lazy, and although he had nothing else to do but drive his
goat daily to pasture, he nevertheless groaned when he went home after
his day’s work was done. “It is indeed a heavy burden,” said he, “and a
wearisome employment to drive a goat into the field this way year after
year, till late into the autumn! If one could but lie down and sleep,
but no, one must have one’s eyes open lest it hurts the young trees, or
squeezes itself through the hedge into a garden, or runs away
altogether. How can one have any rest, or peace of one’s life?” He
seated himself, collected his thoughts, and considered how he could set
his shoulders free from this burden. For a long time all thinking was
to no purpose, but suddenly it was as if scales fell from his eyes. “I
know what I will do,” he cried, “I will marry fat Trina who has also a
goat, and can take mine out with hers, and then I shall have no more
need to trouble myself.”

So Harry got up, set his weary legs in motion, and went right across
the street, for it was no farther, to where the parents of fat Trina
lived, and asked for their industrious and virtuous daughter in
marriage. The parents did not reflect long. “Birds of a feather, flock
together,” they thought, and consented.

So fat Trina became Harry’s wife, and led out both the goats. Harry had
a good time of it, and had no work that he required to rest from but
his own idleness. He only went out with her now and then, and said, “I
merely do it that I may afterwards enjoy rest more, otherwise one loses
all feeling for it.”

But fat Trina was no less idle. “Dear Harry,” said she one day, “why
should we make our lives so toilsome when there is no need for it, and
thus ruin the best days of our youth? Would it not be better for us to
give the two goats which disturb us every morning in our sweetest sleep
with their bleating, to our neighbor, and he will give us a beehive for
them. We will put the beehive in a sunny place behind the house, and
trouble ourselves no more about it. Bees do not require to be taken
care of, or driven into the field; they fly out and find the way home
again for themselves, and collect honey without giving the very least
trouble.” “Thou hast spoken like a sensible woman,” replied Harry. “We
will carry out thy proposal without delay, and besides all that, honey
tastes better and nourishes one better than goat’s milk, and it can be
kept longer too.”

The neighbor willingly gave a beehive for the two goats. The bees flew
in and out from early morning till late evening without ever tiring,
and filled the hive with the most beautiful honey, so that in autumn
Harry was able to take a whole pitcherful out of it.

They placed the jug on a board which was fixed to the wall of their
bed-room, and as they were afraid that it might be stolen from them, or
that the mice might find it, Trina brought in a stout hazel-stick and
put it beside her bed, so that without unnecessary getting up she might
reach it with her hand, and drive away the uninvited guests. Lazy Harry
did not like to leave his bed before noon. “He who rises early,” said
he, “wastes his substance.”

One morning when he was still lying amongst the feathers in broad
daylight, resting after his long sleep, he said to his wife, “Women are
fond of sweet things, and thou art always tasting the honey in private;
it will be better for us to exchange it for a goose with a young
gosling, before thou eatest up the whole of it.” “But,” answered Trina,
“not before we have a child to take care of them! Am I to worry myself
with the little geese, and spend all my strength on them to no
purpose.” “Dost thou think,” said Harry, “that the youngster will look
after geese? Now-a-days children no longer obey, they do according to
their own fancy, because they consider themselves cleverer than their
parents, just like that lad who was sent to seek the cow and chased
three blackbirds.” “Oh,” replied Trina, “this one shall fare badly if
he does not do what I say! I will take a stick and belabour his skin
for him with more blows than I can count. Look, Harry,” cried she in
her zeal, and seized the stick which she had to drive the mice away
with, “Look, this is the way I will fall on him!” She reached her arm
out to strike, but unhappily hit the honey-pitcher above the bed. The
pitcher struck against the wall and fell down in fragments, and the
fine honey streamed down on the ground. “There lie the goose and the
young gosling,” said Harry, “and want no looking after. But it is lucky
that the pitcher did not fall on my head. We have all reason to be
satisfied with our lot.” And then as he saw that there was still some
honey in one of the fragments he stretched out his hand for it, and
said quite gaily, “The remains, my wife, we will still eat with a
relish, and we will rest a little after the fright we have had. What
matters if we do get up a little later the day is always long enough.”
“Yes,” answered Trina, “we shall always get to the end of it at the
proper time. Dost thou know that the snail was once asked to a wedding
and set out to go, but arrived at the christening. In front of the
house it fell over the fence, and said, ‘Speed does no good.’”


165 The Griffin

There was once upon a time a King, but where he reigned and what he was
called, I do not know. He had no son, but an only daughter who had
always been ill, and no doctor had been able to cure her. Then it was
foretold to the King that his daughter should eat herself well with an
apple. So he ordered it to be proclaimed throughout the whole of his
kingdom, that whosoever brought his daughter an apple with which she
could eat herself well, should have her to wife, and be King. This
became known to a peasant who had three sons, and he said to the
eldest, “Go out into the garden and take a basketful of those beautiful
apples with the red cheeks and carry them to the court; perhaps the
King’s daughter will be able to eat herself well with them, and then
thou wilt marry her and be King.” The lad did so, and set out.

When he had gone a short way he met a little iron man who asked him
what he had there in the basket, to which replied Uele, for so was he
named, “Frogs’ legs.” On this the little man said, “Well, so shall it
be, and remain,” and went away. At length Uele arrived at the palace,
and made it known that he had brought apples which would cure the
King’s daughter if she ate them. This delighted the King hugely, and he
caused Uele to be brought before him; but, alas! when he opened the
basket, instead of having apples in it he had frogs’ legs which were
still kicking about. On this the King grew angry, and had him driven
out of the house. When he got home he told his father how it had fared
with him. Then the father sent the next son, who was called Seame, but
all went with him just as it had gone with Uele. He also met the little
iron man, who asked what he had there in the basket. Seame said, “Hogs’
bristles,” and the iron man said, “well, so shall it be, and remain.”
When Seame got to the King’s palace and said he brought apples with
which the King’s daughter might eat herself well, they did not want to
let him go in, and said that one fellow had already been there, and had
treated them as if they were fools. Seame, however, maintained that he
certainly had the apples, and that they ought to let him go in. At
length they believed him, and led him to the King. But when he
uncovered the basket, he had but hogs’ bristles. This enraged the King
most terribly, so he caused Seame to be whipped out of the house. When
he got home he related all that had befallen him, then the youngest
boy, whose name was Hans, but who was always called Stupid Hans, came
and asked his father if he might go with some apples. “Oh!” said the
father, “thou wouldst be just the right fellow for such a thing! If the
clever ones can’t manage it, what canst thou do?” The boy, however, did
not believe him, and said, “Indeed, father, I wish to go.” “Just get
away, thou stupid fellow, thou must wait till thou art wiser,” said the
father to that, and turned his back. Hans, however, pulled at the back
of his smock-frock and said, “Indeed, father, I wish to go.” “Well,
then, so far as I am concerned thou mayst go, but thou wilt soon come
home again!” replied the old man in a spiteful voice. The boy, however,
was tremendously delighted and jumped for joy. “Well, act like a fool!
thou growest more stupid every day!” said the father again. Hans,
however, did not care about that, and did not let it spoil his
pleasure, but as it was then night, he thought he might as well wait
until the morrow, for he could not get to court that day. All night
long he could not sleep in his bed, and if he did doze for a moment, he
dreamt of beautiful maidens, of palaces, of gold, and of silver, and
all kinds of things of that sort. Early in the morning, he went forth
on his way, and directly afterwards the little shabby-looking man in
his iron clothes, came to him and asked what he was carrying in the
basket. Hans gave him the answer that he was carrying apples with which
the King’s daughter was to eat herself well. “Then,” said the little
man, “so shall they be, and remain.” But at the court they would none
of them let Hans go in, for they said two had already been there who
had told them that they were bringing apples, and one of them had
frogs’ legs, and the other hogs’ bristles. Hans, however, resolutely
maintained that he most certainly had no frogs’ legs, but some of the
most beautiful apples in the whole kingdom. As he spoke so pleasantly,
the door-keeper thought he could not be telling a lie, and asked him to
go in, and he was right, for when Hans uncovered his basket in the
King’s presence, golden-yellow apples came tumbling out. The King was
delighted, and caused some of them to be taken to his daughter, and
then waited in anxious expectation until news should be brought to him
of the effect they had. But before much time had passed by, news was
brought to him: but who do you think it was who came? it was his
daughter herself! As soon as she had eaten of those apples, she was
cured, and sprang out of her bed. The joy the King felt cannot be
described! but now he did not want to give his daughter in marriage to
Hans, and said he must first make him a boat which would go quicker on
dry land than on water. Hans agreed to the conditions, and went home,
and related how it had fared with him. Then the father sent Uele into
the forest to make a boat of that kind. He worked diligently, and
whistled all the time. At mid-day, when the sun was at the highest,
came the little iron man and asked what he was making? Uele gave him
for answer, “Wooden bowls for the kitchen.” The iron man said, “So it
shall be, and remain.” By evening Uele thought he had now made the
boat, but when he wanted to get into it, he had nothing but wooden
bowls. The next day Seame went into the forest, but everything went
with him just as it had done with Uele. On the third day Stupid Hans
went. He worked away most industriously, so that the whole forest
resounded with the heavy strokes, and all the while he sang and
whistled right merrily. At mid-day, when it was the hottest, the little
man came again, and asked what he was making? “A boat which will go
quicker on dry land than on the water,” replied Hans, “and when I have
finished it, I am to have the King’s daughter for my wife.” “Well,”
said the little man, “such an one shall it be, and remain.” In the
evening, when the sun had turned into gold, Hans finished his boat, and
all that was wanted for it. He got into it and rowed to the palace. The
boat went as swiftly as the wind. The King saw it from afar, but would
not give his daughter to Hans yet, and said he must first take a
hundred hares out to pasture from early morning until late evening, and
if one of them got away, he should not have his daughter. Hans was
contented with this, and the next day went with his flock to the
pasture, and took great care that none of them ran away.

Before many hours had passed came a servant from the palace, and told
Hans that he must give her a hare instantly, for some visitors had come
unexpectedly. Hans, however, was very well aware what that meant, and
said he would not give her one; the King might set some hare soup
before his guest next day. The maid, however, would not believe in his
refusal, and at last she began to get angry with him. Then Hans said
that if the King’s daughter came herself, he would give her a hare. The
maid told this in the palace, and the daughter did go herself. In the
meantime, however, the little man came again to Hans, and asked him
what he was doing there? He said he had to watch over a hundred hares
and see that none of them ran away, and then he might marry the King’s
daughter and be King. “Good,” said the little man, “there is a whistle
for thee, and if one of them runs away, just whistle with it, and then
it will come back again.” When the King’s daughter came, Hans gave her
a hare into her apron; but when she had gone about a hundred steps with
it, he whistled, and the hare jumped out of the apron, and before she
could turn round was back to the flock again. When the evening came the
hare-herd whistled once more, and looked to see if all were there, and
then drove them to the palace. The King wondered how Hans had been able
to take a hundred hares to graze without losing any of them; he would,
however, not give him his daughter yet, and said he must now bring him
a feather from the Griffin’s tail. Hans set out at once, and walked
straight forwards. In the evening he came to a castle, and there he
asked for a night’s lodging, for at that time there were no inns. The
lord of the castle promised him that with much pleasure, and asked
where he was going? Hans answered, “To the Griffin.” “Oh! to the
Griffin! They tell me he knows everything, and I have lost the key of
an iron money-chest; so you might be so good as to ask him where it
is.” “Yes, indeed,” said Hans, “I will do that.” Early the next morning
he went onwards, and on his way arrived at another castle in which he
again stayed the night. When the people who lived there learnt that he
was going to the Griffin, they said they had in the house a daughter
who was ill, and that they had already tried every means to cure her,
but none of them had done her any good, and he might be so kind as to
ask the Griffin what would make their daughter healthy again? Hans said
he would willingly do that, and went onwards. Then he came to a lake,
and instead of a ferry-boat, a tall, tall man was there who had to
carry everybody across. The man asked Hans whither he was journeying?
“To the Griffin,” said Hans. “Then when you get to him,” said the man,
“just ask him why I am forced to carry everybody over the lake.” “Yes,
indeed, most certainly I’ll do that,” said Hans. Then the man took him
up on his shoulders, and carried him across. At length Hans arrived at
the Griffin’s house, but the wife only was at home, and not the Griffin
himself. Then the woman asked him what he wanted? Thereupon he told her
everything;—that he had to get a feather out of the Griffin’s tail, and
that there was a castle where they had lost the key of their
money-chest, and he was to ask the Griffin where it was?—that in
another castle the daughter was ill, and he was to learn what would
cure her?—and then not far from thence there was a lake and a man
beside it, who was forced to carry people across it, and he was very
anxious to learn why the man was obliged to do it. Then said the woman,
“But look here, my good friend, no Christian can speak to the Griffin;
he devours them all; but if you like, you can lie down under his bed,
and in the night, when he is quite fast asleep, you can reach out and
pull a feather out of his tail, and as for those things which you are
to learn, I will ask about them myself.” Hans was quite satisfied with
this, and got under the bed. In the evening, the Griffin came home, and
as soon as he entered the room, said, “Wife, I smell a Christian.”
“Yes,” said the woman, “one was here to-day, but he went away again;”
and on that the Griffin said no more.

In the middle of the night when the Griffin was snoring loudly, Hans
reached out and plucked a feather from his tail. The Griffin woke up
instantly, and said, “Wife, I smell a Christian, and it seems to me
that somebody was pulling at my tail.” His wife said, “Thou hast
certainly been dreaming, and I told thee before that a Christian was
here to-day, but that he went away again. He told me all kinds of
things that in one castle they had lost the key of their money-chest,
and could find it nowhere.” “Oh! the fools!” said the Griffin; “the key
lies in the wood-house under a log of wood behind the door.” “And then
he said that in another castle the daughter was ill, and they knew no
remedy that would cure her.” “Oh! the fools!” said the Griffin; “under
the cellar-steps a toad has made its nest of her hair, and if she got
her hair back she would be well.” “And then he also said that there was
a place where there was a lake and a man beside it who was forced to
carry everybody across.” “Oh, the fool!” said the Griffin; “if he only
put one man down in the middle, he would never have to carry another
across.” Early the next morning the Griffin got up and went out. Then
Hans came forth from under the bed, and he had a beautiful feather, and
had heard what the Griffin had said about the key, and the daughter,
and the ferry-man. The Griffin’s wife repeated it all once more to him
that he might not forget it, and then he went home again. First he came
to the man by the lake, who asked him what the Griffin had said, but
Hans replied that he must first carry him across, and then he would
tell him. So the man carried him across, and when he was over Hans told
him that all he had to do was to set one person down in the middle of
the lake, and then he would never have to carry over any more. The man
was hugely delighted, and told Hans that out of gratitude he would take
him once more across, and back again. But Hans said no, he would save
him the trouble, he was quite satisfied already, and pursued his way.
Then he came to the castle where the daughter was ill; he took her on
his shoulders, for she could not walk, and carried her down the
cellar-steps and pulled out the toad’s nest from beneath the lowest
step and gave it into her hand, and she sprang off his shoulder and up
the steps before him, and was quite cured. Then were the father and
mother beyond measure rejoiced, and they gave Hans gifts of gold and of
silver, and whatsoever else he wished for, that they gave him. And when
he got to the other castle he went at once into the wood-house, and
found the key under the log of wood behind the door, and took it to the
lord of the castle. He also was not a little pleased, and gave Hans as
a reward much of the gold that was in the chest, and all kinds of
things besides, such as cows, and sheep, and goats. When Hans arrived
before the King, with all these things—with the money, and the gold,
and the silver and the cows, sheep and goats, the King asked him how he
had come by them. Then Hans told him that the Griffin gave every one
whatsoever he wanted. So the King thought he himself could make such
things useful, and set out on his way to the Griffin; but when he got
to the lake, it happened that he was the very first who arrived there
after Hans, and the man put him down in the middle of it and went away,
and the King was drowned. Hans, however, married the daughter, and
became King.


166 Strong Hans

There were once a man and a woman who had an only child, and lived
quite alone in a solitary valley. It came to pass that the mother once
went into the wood to gather branches of fir, and took with her little
Hans, who was just two years old. As it was spring-time, and the child
took pleasure in the many-coloured flowers, she went still further
onwards with him into the forest. Suddenly two robbers sprang out of
the thicket, seized the mother and child, and carried them far away
into the black forest, where no one ever came from one year’s end to
another. The poor woman urgently begged the robbers to set her and her
child free, but their hearts were made of stone, they would not listen
to her prayers and entreaties, and drove her on farther by force. After
they had worked their way through bushes and briars for about two
miles, they came to a rock where there was a door, at which the robbers
knocked and it opened at once. They had to go through a long dark
passage, and at last came into a great cavern, which was lighted by a
fire which burnt on the hearth. On the wall hung swords, sabres, and
other deadly weapons which gleamed in the light, and in the midst stood
a black table at which four other robbers were sitting gambling, and
the captain sat at the head of it. As soon as he saw the woman he came
and spoke to her, and told her to be at ease and have no fear, they
would do nothing to hurt her, but she must look after the
house-keeping, and if she kept everything in order, she should not fare
ill with them. Thereupon they gave her something to eat, and showed her
a bed where she might sleep with her child.

The woman stayed many years with the robbers, and Hans grew tall and
strong. His mother told him stories, and taught him to read an old book
of tales about knights which she found in the cave. When Hans was nine
years old, he made himself a strong club out of a branch of fir, hid it
behind the bed, and then went to his mother and said, “Dear mother,
pray tell me who is my father; I must and will know.” His mother was
silent and would not tell him, that he might not become home-sick;
moreover she knew that the godless robbers would not let him go away,
but it almost broke her heart that Hans should not go to his father. In
the night, when the robbers came home from their robbing expedition,
Hans brought out his club, stood before the captain, and said, “I now
wish to know who is my father, and if thou dost not at once tell me I
will strike thee down.” Then the captain laughed, and gave Hans such a
box on the ear that he rolled under the table. Hans got up again, held
his tongue, and thought, “I will wait another year and then try again,
perhaps I shall do better then.” When the year was over, he brought out
his club again, rubbed the dust off it, looked at it well, and said,
“It is a stout strong club.” At night the robbers came home, drank one
jug of wine after another, and their heads began to be heavy. Then Hans
brought out his club, placed himself before the captain, and asked him
who was his father? But the captain again gave him such a vigorous box
on the ear that Hans rolled under the table, but it was not long before
he was up again, and beat the captain and the robbers so with his club,
that they could no longer move either their arms or their legs. His
mother stood in a corner full of admiration of his bravery and
strength. When Hans had done his work, he went to his mother, and said,
“Now I have shown myself to be in earnest, but now I must also know who
is my father.” “Dear Hans,” answered the mother, “come, we will go and
seek him until we find him.” She took from the captain the key to the
entrance-door, and Hans fetched a great meal-sack and packed into it
gold and silver, and whatsoever else he could find that was beautiful,
until it was full, and then he took it on his back. They left the cave,
but how Hans did open his eyes when he came out of the darkness into
daylight, and saw the green forest, and the flowers, and the birds, and
the morning sun in the sky. He stood there and wondered at everything
just as if he had not been very wise. His mother looked for the way
home, and when they had walked for a couple of hours, they got safely
into their lonely valley and to their little house. The father was
sitting in the doorway. He wept for joy when he recognized his wife and
heard that Hans was his son, for he had long regarded them both as
dead. But Hans, although he was not twelve years old, was a head taller
than his father. They went into the little room together, but Hans had
scarcely put his sack on the bench by the stove, than the whole house
began to crack the bench broke down and then the floor, and the heavy
sack fell through into the cellar. “God save us!” cried the father,
“what’s that? Now thou hast broken our little house to pieces!” “Don’t
grow any grey hairs about that, dear father,” answered Hans; “there, in
that sack, is more than is wanting for a new house.” The father and
Hans at once began to build a new house; to buy cattle and land, and to
keep a farm. Hans ploughed the fields, and when he followed the plough
and pushed it into the ground, the bullocks had scarcely any need to
draw. The next spring, Hans said, “Keep all the money and get a
walking-stick that weighs a hundred-weight made for me that I may go
a-travelling.” When the wished-for stick was ready, he left his
father’s house, went forth, and came to a deep, dark forest. There he
heard something crunching and cracking, looked round, and saw a
fir-tree which was wound round like a rope from the bottom to the top,
and when he looked upwards he saw a great fellow who had laid hold of
the tree and was twisting it like a willow-wand. “Hollo!” cried Hans,
“what art thou doing up there?” the fellow replied, “I got some faggots
together yesterday and am twisting a rope for them.” “That is what I
like,” thought Hans, “he has some strength,” and he called to him,
“Leave that alone, and come with me.” The fellow came down, and he was
taller by a whole head than Hans, and Hans was not little. “Thy name is
now Fir-twister,” said Hans to him. Thereupon they went further and
heard something knocking and hammering with such force that the ground
shook at every stroke. Shortly afterwards they came to a mighty rock,
before which a giant was standing and striking great pieces of it away
with his fist. When Hans asked what he was about, he answered, “At
night, when I want to sleep, bears, wolves, and other vermin of that
kind come, which sniff and snuffle about me and won’t let me rest; so I
want to build myself a house and lay myself inside it, so that I may
have some peace.” “Oh, indeed,” thought Hans, “I can make use of this
one also;” and said to him, “Leave thy house-building alone, and go
with me; thou shalt be called Rock-splitter.” The man consented, and
they all three roamed through the forest, and wherever they went the
wild beasts were terrified, and ran away from them. In the evening they
came to an old deserted castle, went up into it, and laid themselves
down in the hall to sleep. The next morning Hans went into the garden.
It had run quite wild, and was full of thorns and bushes. And as he was
thus walking round about, a wild boar rushed at him; he, however, gave
it such a blow with his club that it fell directly. He took it on his
shoulders and carried it in, and they put it on a spit, roasted it, and
enjoyed themselves. Then they arranged that each day, in turn, two
should go out hunting, and one should stay at home, and cook nine
pounds of meat for each of them. Fir-twister stayed at home the first,
and Hans and Rock-splitter went out hunting. When Fir-twister was busy
cooking, a little shrivelled-up old mannikin came to him in the castle,
and asked for some meat. “Be off, sly hypocrite,” he answered, “thou
needest no meat.” But how astonished Fir-twister was when the little
insignificant dwarf sprang up at him, and belaboured him so with his
fists that he could not defend himself, but fell on the ground and
gasped for breath! The dwarf did not go away until he had thoroughly
vented his anger on him. When the two others came home from hunting,
Fir-twister said nothing to them of the old mannikin and of the blows
which he himself had received, and thought, “When they stay at home,
they may just try their chance with the little scrubbing-brush;” and
the mere thought of that gave him pleasure already.

The next day Rock-splitter stayed at home, and he fared just as
Fir-twister had done, he was very ill-treated by the dwarf because he
was not willing to give him any meat. When the others came home in the
evening, Fir-twister easily saw what he had suffered, but both kept
silence, and thought, “Hans also must taste some of that soup.”

Hans, who had to stay at home the next day, did his work in the kitchen
as it had to be done, and as he was standing skimming the pan, the
dwarf came and without more ado demanded a bit of meat. Then Hans
thought, “He is a poor wretch, I will give him some of my share, that
the others may not run short,” and handed him a bit. When the dwarf had
devoured it, he again asked for some meat, and good-natured Hans gave
it to him, and told him it was a handsome piece, and that he was to be
content with it. But the dwarf begged again for the third time. “Thou
art shameless!” said Hans, and gave him none. Then the malicious dwarf
wanted to spring on him and treat him as he had treated Fir-twister and
Rock-splitter, but he had got to the wrong man. Hans, without exerting
himself much, gave him a couple of blows which made him jump down the
castle steps. Hans was about to run after him, but fell right over him,
for he was so tall. When he rose up again, the dwarf had got the start
of him. Hans hurried after him as far as the forest, and saw him slip
into a hole in the rock. Hans now went home, but he had marked the
spot. When the two others came back, they were surprised that Hans was
so well. He told them what had happened, and then they no longer
concealed how it had fared with them. Hans laughed and said, “It served
you quite right; why were you so greedy with your meat? It is a
disgrace that you who are so big should have let yourselves be beaten
by the dwarf.” Thereupon they took a basket and a rope, and all three
went to the hole in the rock into which the dwarf had slipped, and let
Hans and his club down in the basket. When Hans had reached the bottom,
he found a door, and when he opened it a maiden was sitting there who
was lovely as any picture, nay, so beautiful that no words can express
it, and by her side sat the dwarf and grinned at Hans like a sea-cat!
She, however, was bound with chains, and looked so mournfully at him
that Hans felt great pity for her, and thought to himself, “Thou must
deliver her out of the power of the wicked dwarf,” and gave him such a
blow with his club that he fell down dead. Immediately the chains fell
from the maiden, and Hans was enraptured with her beauty. She told him
she was a King’s daughter whom a savage count had stolen away from her
home, and imprisoned there among the rocks, because she would have
nothing to say to him. The count had, however, set the dwarf as a
watchman, and he had made her bear misery and vexation enough. And now
Hans placed the maiden in the basket and had her drawn up; the basket
came down again, but Hans did not trust his two companions, and
thought, “They have already shown themselves to be false, and told me
nothing about the dwarf; who knows what design they may have against
me?” So he put his club in the basket, and it was lucky he did; for
when the basket was half-way up, they let it fall again, and if Hans
had really been sitting in it he would have been killed. But now he did
not know how he was to work his way out of the depths, and when he
turned it over and over in his mind he found no counsel. “It is indeed
sad,” said he to himself, “that I have to waste away down here,” and as
he was thus walking backwards and forwards, he once more came to the
little chamber where the maiden had been sitting, and saw that the
dwarf had a ring on his finger which shone and sparkled. Then he drew
it off and put it on, and when he turned it round on his finger, he
suddenly heard something rustle over his head. He looked up and saw
spirits of the air hovering above, who told him he was their master,
and asked what his desire might be? Hans was at first struck dumb, but
afterwards he said that they were to carry him above again. They obeyed
instantly, and it was just as if he had flown up himself. When,
however, he was above again, he found no one in sight. Fir-twister and
Rock-splitter had hurried away, and had taken the beautiful maiden with
them. But Hans turned the ring, and the spirits of the air came and
told him that the two were on the sea. Hans ran and ran without
stopping, until he came to the sea-shore, and there far, far out on the
water, he perceived a little boat in which his faithless comrades were
sitting; and in fierce anger he leapt, without thinking what he was
doing, club in hand into the water, and began to swim, but the club,
which weighed a hundredweight, dragged him deep down until he was all
but drowned. Then in the very nick of time he turned his ring, and
immediately the spirits of the air came and bore him as swift as
lightning into the boat. He swung his club and gave his wicked comrades
the reward they merited and threw them into the water, and then he
sailed with the beautiful maiden, who had been in the greatest alarm,
and whom he delivered for the second time, home to her father and
mother, and married her, and all rejoiced exceedingly.


167 The Peasant in Heaven

Once on a time a poor pious peasant died, and arrived before the gate
of heaven. At the same time a very rich, rich lord came there who also
wanted to get into heaven. Then Saint Peter came with the key, and
opened the door, and let the great man in, but apparently did not see
the peasant, and shut the door again. And now the peasant outside,
heard how the great man was received in heaven with all kinds of
rejoicing, and how they were making music, and singing within. At
length all became quiet again, and Saint Peter came and opened the gate
of heaven, and let the peasant in. The peasant, however, expected that
they would make music and sing when he went in also, but all remained
quite quiet; he was received with great affection, it is true, and the
angels came to meet him, but no one sang. Then the peasant asked Saint
Peter how it was that they did not sing for him as they had done when
the rich man went in, and said that it seemed to him that there in
heaven things were done with just as much partiality as on earth. Then
said Saint Peter, “By no means, thou art just as dear to us as any one
else, and wilt enjoy every heavenly delight that the rich man enjoys,
but poor fellows like thee come to heaven every day, but a rich man
like this does not come more than once in a hundred years!”


168 Lean Lisa

Lean Lisa was of a very different way of thinking from lazy Harry and
fat Trina, who never let anything disturb their peace. She scoured
everything with ashes, from morning till evening, and burdened her
husband, Long Laurence, with so much work that he had heavier weights
to carry than an ass with three sacks. It was, however, all to no
purpose, they had nothing and came to nothing. One night as she lay in
bed, and could hardly move one limb for weariness, she still did not
allow her thoughts to go to sleep. She thrust her elbows into her
husband’s side, and said, “Listen, Lenz, to what I have been thinking:
if I were to find one florin and one was given to me, I would borrow
another to put to them, and thou too shouldst give me another, and then
as soon as I had got the four florins together, I would buy a young
cow.” This pleased the husband right well. “It is true,” said he, “that
I do not know where I am to get the florin which thou wantest as a gift
from me; but, if thou canst get the money together, and canst buy a cow
with it, thou wilt do well to carry out thy project. I shall be glad,”
he added, “if the cow has a calf, and then I shall often get a drink of
milk to refresh me.” “The milk is not for thee,” said the woman, “we
must let the calf suck that it may become big and fat, and we may be
able to sell it well.” “Certainly,” replied the man, “but still we will
take a little milk; that will do no harm.” “Who has taught thee to
manage cows?” said the woman; “Whether it does harm or not, I will not
allow it, and even if thou wert to stand on thy head for it, thou
shouldst not have a drop of the milk! Dost thou think, because there is
no satisfying thee, Long Laurence, that thou art to eat up what I earn
with so much difficulty?” “Wife,” said the man, “be quiet, or I will
give thee a blow on thy mouth!” “What!” cried she, “thou threatenest
me, thou glutton, thou rascal, thou lazy Harry!” She was just laying
hold of his hair, but long Laurence got up, seized both Lean Lisa’s
withered arms in one hand, and with the other he pressed down her head
into the pillow, let her scold, and held her until she fell asleep for
very weariness. Whether she continued to wrangle when she awoke next
morning, or whether she went out to look for the florin which she
wanted to find, that I know not.


169 The Hut in the Forest

A poor wood-cutter lived with his wife and three daughters in a little
hut on the edge of a lonely forest. One morning as he was about to go
to his work, he said to his wife, “Let my dinner be brought into the
forest to me by my eldest daughter, or I shall never get my work done,
and in order that she may not miss her way,” he added, “I will take a
bag of millet with me and strew the seeds on the path.” When,
therefore, the sun was just above the center of the forest, the girl
set out on her way with a bowl of soup, but the field-sparrows, and
wood-sparrows, larks and finches, blackbirds and siskins had picked up
the millet long before, and the girl could not find the track. Then
trusting to chance, she went on and on, until the sun sank and night
began to fall. The trees rustled in the darkness, the owls hooted, and
she began to be afraid. Then in the distance she perceived a light
which glimmered between the trees. “There ought to be some people
living there, who can take me in for the night,” thought she, and went
up to the light. It was not long before she came to a house the windows
of which were all lighted up. She knocked, and a rough voice from
inside cried, “Come in.” The girl stepped into the dark entrance, and
knocked at the door of the room. “Just come in,” cried the voice, and
when she opened the door, an old gray-haired man was sitting at the
table, supporting his face with both hands, and his white beard fell
down over the table almost as far as the ground. By the stove lay three
animals, a hen, a cock, and a brindled cow. The girl told her story to
the old man, and begged for shelter for the night. The man said,

“Pretty little hen,
Pretty little cock,
And pretty brindled cow,
What say ye to that?”


“Duks,” answered the animals, and that must have meant, “We are
willing,” for the old man said, “Here you shall have shelter and food,
go to the fire, and cook us our supper.” The girl found in the kitchen
abundance of everything, and cooked a good supper, but had no thought
of the animals. She carried the full dishes to the table, seated
herself by the gray-haired man, ate and satisfied her hunger. When she
had had enough, she said, “But now I am tired, where is there a bed in
which I can lie down, and sleep?” The animals replied,

“Thou hast eaten with him,
Thou hast drunk with him,
Thou hast had no thought for us,
So find out for thyself where thou canst pass the night.”


Then said the old man, “Just go upstairs, and thou wilt find a room
with two beds, shake them up, and put white linen on them, and then I,
too, will come and lie down to sleep.” The girl went up, and when she
had shaken the beds and put clean sheets on, she lay down in one of
them without waiting any longer for the old man. After some time,
however, the gray-haired man came, took his candle, looked at the girl
and shook his head. When he saw that she had fallen into a sound sleep,
he opened a trap-door, and let her down into the cellar.

Late at night the wood-cutter came home, and reproached his wife for
leaving him to hunger all day. “It is not my fault,” she replied, “the
girl went out with your dinner, and must have lost herself, but she is
sure to come back to-morrow.” The wood-cutter, however, arose before
dawn to go into the forest, and requested that the second daughter
should take him his dinner that day. “I will take a bag with lentils,”
said he; “the seeds are larger than millet, the girl will see them
better, and can’t lose her way.” At dinner-time, therefore, the girl
took out the food, but the lentils had disappeared. The birds of the
forest had picked them up as they had done the day before, and had left
none. The girl wandered about in the forest until night, and then she
too reached the house of the old man, was told to go in, and begged for
food and a bed. The man with the white beard again asked the animals,

“Pretty little hen,
Pretty little cock,
And pretty brindled cow,
What say ye to that?”


The animals again replied “Duks,” and everything happened just as it
had happened the day before. The girl cooked a good meal, ate and drank
with the old man, and did not concern herself about the animals, and
when she inquired about her bed they answered,

“Thou hast eaten with him,
Thou hast drunk with him,
Thou hast had no thought for us,
To find out for thyself where thou canst pass the night.”


When she was asleep the old man came, looked at her, shook his head,
and let her down into the cellar.

On the third morning the wood-cutter said to his wife, “Send our
youngest child out with my dinner to-day, she has always been good and
obedient, and will stay in the right path, and not run about after
every wild humble-bee, as her sisters did.” The mother did not want to
do it, and said, “Am I to lose my dearest child, as well?”

“Have no fear,” he replied, “the girl will not go astray; she is too
prudent and sensible; besides I will take some peas with me, and strew
them about. They are still larger than lentils, and will show her the
way.” But when the girl went out with her basket on her arm, the
wood-pigeons had already got all the peas in their crops, and she did
not know which way she was to turn. She was full of sorrow and never
ceased to think how hungry her father would be, and how her good mother
would grieve, if she did not go home. At length when it grew dark, she
saw the light and came to the house in the forest. She begged quite
prettily to be allowed to spend the night there, and the man with the
white beard once more asked his animals,

“Pretty little hen,
Pretty little cock,
And beautiful brindled cow,
What say ye to that?”


“Duks,” said they. Then the girl went to the stove where the animals
were lying, and petted the cock and hen, and stroked their smooth
feathers with her hand, and caressed the brindled cow between her
horns, and when, in obedience to the old man’s orders, she had made
ready some good soup, and the bowl was placed upon the table, she said,
“Am I to eat as much as I want, and the good animals to have nothing?
Outside is food in plenty, I will look after them first.” So she went
and brought some barley and stewed it for the cock and hen, and a whole
armful of sweet-smelling hay for the cow. “I hope you will like it,
dear animals,” said she, “and you shall have a refreshing draught in
case you are thirsty.” Then she fetched in a bucketful of water, and
the cock and hen jumped on to the edge of it and dipped their beaks in,
and then held up their heads as the birds do when they drink, and the
brindled cow also took a hearty draught. When the animals were fed, the
girl seated herself at the table by the old man, and ate what he had
left. It was not long before the cock and the hen began to thrust their
heads beneath their wings, and the eyes of the cow likewise began to
blink. Then said the girl, “Ought we not to go to bed?”

“Pretty little hen,
Pretty little cock,
And pretty brindled cow,
What say ye to that?”


The animals answered “Duks,”

“Thou hast eaten with us,
Thou hast drunk with us,
Thou hast had kind thought for all of us,
We wish thee good-night.”


Then the maiden went upstairs, shook the feather-beds, and laid clean
sheets on them, and when she had done it the old man came and lay down
on one of the beds, and his white beard reached down to his feet. The
girl lay down on the other, said her prayers, and fell asleep.

She slept quietly till midnight, and then there was such a noise in the
house that she awoke. There was a sound of cracking and splitting in
every corner, and the doors sprang open, and beat against the walls.
The beams groaned as if they were being torn out of their joints, it
seemed as if the staircase were falling down, and at length there was a
crash as if the entire roof had fallen in. As, however, all grew quiet
once more, and the girl was not hurt, she stayed quietly lying where
she was, and fell asleep again. But when she woke up in the morning
with the brilliancy of the sunshine, what did her eyes behold? She was
lying in a vast hall, and everything around her shone with royal
splendor; on the walls, golden flowers grew up on a ground of green
silk, the bed was of ivory, and the canopy of red velvet, and on a
chair close by, was a pair of shoes embroidered with pearls. The girl
believed that she was in a dream, but three richly clad attendants came
in, and asked what orders she would like to give? “If you will go,” she
replied, “I will get up at once and make ready some soup for the old
man, and then I will feed the pretty little hen, and the cock, and the
beautiful brindled cow.” She thought the old man was up already, and
looked round at his bed; he, however, was not lying in it, but a
stranger. And while she was looking at him, and becoming aware that he
was young and handsome, he awoke, sat up in bed, and said, “I am a
King’s son, and was bewitched by a wicked witch, and made to live in
this forest, as an old gray-haired man; no one was allowed to be with
me but my three attendants in the form of a cock, a hen, and a brindled
cow. The spell was not to be broken until a girl came to us whose heart
was so good that she showed herself full of love, not only towards
mankind, but towards animals—and that thou hast done, and by thee at
midnight we were set free, and the old hut in the forest was changed
back again into my royal palace.” And when they had arisen, the King’s
son ordered the three attendants to set out and fetch the father and
mother of the girl to the marriage feast. “But where are my two
sisters?” inquired the maiden. “I have locked them in the cellar, and
to-morrow they shall be led into the forest, and shall live as servants
to a charcoal-burner, until they have grown kinder, and do not leave
poor animals to suffer hunger.”


170 Sharing Joy and Sorrow

There was once a tailor, who was a quarrelsome fellow, and his wife,
who was good, industrious, and pious, never could please him. Whatever
she did, he was not satisfied, but grumbled and scolded, and knocked
her about and beat her. As the authorities at last heard of it, they
had him summoned, and put in prison in order to make him better. He was
kept for a while on bread and water, and then set free again. He was
forced, however, to promise not to beat his wife any more, but to live
with her in peace, and share joy and sorrow with her, as married people
ought to do. All went on well for a time, but then he fell into his old
ways, and was surly and quarrelsome. And because he dared not beat her,
he would seize her by the hair and tear it out. The woman escaped from
him, and sprang out into the yard, but he ran after her with his
yard-measure and scissors, and chased her about, and threw the
yard-measure and scissors at her, and whatever else came his way. When
he hit her he laughed, and when he missed her, he stormed and swore.
This went on so long that the neighbors came to the wife’s assistance.
The tailor was again summoned before the magistrates, and reminded of
his promise. “Dear gentlemen,” said he, “I have kept my word, I have
not beaten her, but have shared joy and sorrow with her.” “How can that
be,” said the judge, “when she continually brings such heavy complaints
against you?” “I have not beaten her, but just because she looked so
strange I wanted to comb her hair with my hand; she, however, got away
from me, and left me quite spitefully. Then I hurried after her, and in
order to bring her back to her duty, I threw at her as a well-meant
admonition whatever came readily to hand. I have shared joy and sorrow
with her also, for whenever I hit her I was full of joy, and she of
sorrow, and if I missed her, then she was joyful, and I sorry.” The
judges were not satisfied with this answer, but gave him the reward he
deserved.


171 The Willow-Wren

In former days every sound still had its meaning and application. When
the smith’s hammer resounded, it cried, “Strike away! strike away.”
When the carpenter’s plane grated, it said, “Here goes! here goes.” If
the mill wheel began to clack, it said, “Help, Lord God! help, Lord
God!” And if the miller was a cheat and happened to leave the mill, it
spoke high German, and first asked slowly, “Who is there? Who is
there?” and then answered quickly, “The miller! the miller!” and at
last quite in a hurry, “He steals bravely! he steals bravely! three
pecks in a bushel.”

At this time the birds also had their own language which every one
understood; now it only sounds like chirping, screeching, and
whistling, and to some like music without words. It came into the
bird’s mind, however, that they would no longer be without a ruler, and
would choose one of themselves to be their King. One alone amongst
them, the green plover, was opposed to this. He had lived free, and
would die free, and anxiously flying hither and thither, he cried,
“Where shall I go? where shall I go?” He retired into a solitary and
unfrequented marsh, and showed himself no more among his fellows.

The birds now wished to discuss the matter, and on a fine May morning
they all gathered together from the woods and fields: eagles and
chaffinches, owls and crows, larks and sparrows, how can I name them
all? Even the cuckoo came, and the hoopoe, his clerk, who is so called
because he is always heard a few days before him, and a very small bird
which as yet had no name, mingled with the band. The hen, which by some
accident had heard nothing of the whole matter, was astonished at the
great assemblage. “What, what, what is going to be done?” she cackled;
but the cock calmed his beloved hen, and said, “Only rich people,” and
told her what they had on hand. It was decided, however, that the one
who could fly the highest should be King. A tree-frog which was sitting
among the bushes, when he heard that, cried a warning, “No, no, no!
no!” because he thought that many tears would be shed because of this;
but the crow said, “Caw, caw,” and that all would pass off peaceably.
It was now determined that on this fine morning they should at once
begin to ascend, so that hereafter no one should be able to say, “I
could easily have flown much higher, but the evening came on, and I
could do no more.” On a given signal, therefore, the whole troop rose
up in the air. The dust ascended from the land, and there was
tremendous fluttering and whirring and beating of wings, and it looked
as if a black cloud was rising up. The little birds were, however, soon
left behind. They could go no farther, and fell back to the ground. The
larger birds held out longer, but none could equal the eagle, who
mounted so high that he could have picked the eyes out of the sun. And
when he saw that the others could not get up to him, he thought, “Why
shouldst thou fly still higher, thou art the King?” and began to let
himself down again. The birds beneath him at once cried to him. “Thou
must be our King, no one has flown so high as thou.” “Except me,”
screamed the little fellow without a name, who had crept into the
breast-feathers of the eagle. And as he was not at all tired, he rose
up and mounted so high that he reached heaven itself. When, however, he
had gone as far as this, he folded his wings together, and called down
with clear and penetrating voice, “I am King! I am King.”

“Thou, our King?” cried the birds angrily. “Thou hast compassed it by
trick and cunning!” So they made another condition. He should be King
who could go down lowest in the ground. How the goose did flap about
with its broad breast when it was once more on the land! How quickly
the cock scratched a hole! The duck came off the worst of all, for she
leapt into a ditch, but sprained her legs, and waddled away to a
neighboring pond, crying, “Cheating, cheating!” The little bird without
a name, however, sought out a mouse-hole, slipped down into it, and
cried out of it with his small voice, “I am King! I am King!”

“Thou our King!” cried the birds still more angrily. “Dost thou think
thy cunning shall prevail?” They determined to keep him a prisoner in
the hole and starve him out. The owl was placed as sentinel in front of
it, and was not to let the rascal out if she had any value for her
life. When evening was come all the birds were feeling very tired after
exerting their wings so much, so they went to bed with their wives and
children. The owl alone remained standing by the mouse-hole, gazing
steadfastly into it with her great eyes. In the meantime she, too, had
grown tired and thought to herself, “You might certainly shut one eye,
you will still watch with the other, and the little miscreant shall not
come out of his hole.” So she shut one eye, and with the other looked
straight at the mouse-hole. The little fellow put his head out and
peeped, and wanted to slip away, but the owl came forward immediately,
and he drew his head back again. Then the owl opened the one eye again,
and shut the other, intending to shut them in turn all through the
night.

But when she next shut the one eye, she forgot to open the other, and
as soon as both her eyes were shut she fell asleep. The little fellow
soon observed that, and slipped away.

From that day forth, the owl has never dared to show herself by
daylight, for if she does the other birds chase her and pluck her
feathers out. She only flies out by night, but hates and pursues mice
because they make such ugly holes. The little bird, too, is very
unwilling to let himself be seen, because he is afraid it will cost him
his life if he is caught. He steals about in the hedges, and when he is
quite safe, he sometimes cries, “I am King,” and for this reason, the
other birds call him in mockery, ‘King of the hedges’ (Zaunkönig). No
one, however, was so happy as the lark at not having to obey the little
King. As soon as the sun appears, she ascends high in the air and
cries, “Ah, how beautiful that is! beautiful that is! beautiful,
beautiful! ah, how beautiful that is!”


172 The Sole

The fishes had for a long time been discontented because no order
prevailed in their kingdom. None of them turned aside for the others,
but all swam to the right or the left as they fancied, or darted
between those who wanted to stay together, or got into their way; and a
strong one gave a weak one a blow with its tail, which drove it away,
or else swallowed it up without more ado. “How delightful it would be,”
said they, “if we had a king who enforced law and justice among us!”
and they met together to choose for their ruler, the one who could
cleave through the water most quickly, and give help to the weak ones.

They placed themselves in rank and file by the shore, and the pike gave
the signal with his tail, on which they all started. Like an arrow, the
pike darted away, and with him the herring, the gudgeon, the perch, the
carp, and all the rest of them. Even the sole swam with them, and hoped
to reach the winning-place. All at once, the cry was heard, “The
herring is first!” “Who is first?” screamed angrily the flat envious
sole, who had been left far behind, “who is first?” “The herring! The
herring,” was the answer. “The naked herring?” cried the jealous
creature, “the naked herring?” Since that time the sole’s mouth has
been at one side for a punishment.


173 The Bittern and the Hoopoe

“Where do you like best to feed your flocks?” said a man to an old
cow-herd. “Here, sir, where the grass is neither too rich nor too poor,
or else it is no use.” “Why not?” asked the man. “Do you hear that
melancholy cry from the meadow there?” answered the shepherd, “that is
the bittern; he was once a shepherd, and so was the hoopoe also,—I will
tell you the story. The bittern pastured his flocks on rich green
meadows where flowers grew in abundance, so his cows became wild and
unmanageable. The hoopoe drove his cattle on to high barren hills,
where the wind plays with the sand, and his cows became thin, and got
no strength. When it was evening, and the shepherds wanted to drive
their cows homewards, the bittern could not get his together again;
they were too high-spirited, and ran away from him. He called, “Come,
cows, come,” but it was of no use; they took no notice of his calling.
The hoopoe, however, could not even get his cows up on their legs, so
faint and weak had they become. “Up, up, up,” screamed he, but it was
in vain, they remained lying on the sand. That is the way when one has
no moderation. And to this day, though they have no flocks now to
watch, the bittern cries, “Come, cows, come,” and the hoopoe, “Up, up,
up.”


174 The Owl

Two or three hundred years ago, when people were far from being so
crafty and cunning as they are now-a-day, an extraordinary event took
place in a little town. By some mischance one of the great owls, called
horned owls, had come from the neighboring woods into the barn of one
of the townsfolk in the night-time, and when day broke did not dare to
venture forth again from her retreat, for fear of the other birds,
which raised a terrible outcry whenever she appeared. In the morning
when the man-servant went into the barn to fetch some straw, he was so
mightily alarmed at the sight of the owl sitting there in a corner,
that he ran away and announced to his master that a monster, the like
of which he had never set eyes on in his life, and which could devour a
man without the slightest difficulty, was sitting in the barn, rolling
its eyes about in its head. “I know you already,” said the master, “you
have courage enough to chase a blackbird about the fields, but when you
see a dead hen lying, you have to get a stick before you go near it. I
must go and see for myself what kind of a monster it is,” added the
master, and went quite boldly into the granary and looked round him.
When, however, he saw the strange grim creature with his own eyes, he
was no less terrified than the servant had been. With two bounds he
sprang out, ran to his neighbours, and begged them imploringly to lend
him assistance against an unknown and dangerous beast, or else the
whole town might be in danger if it were to break loose out of the
barn, where it was shut up. A great noise and clamour arose in all the
streets, the townsmen came armed with spears, hay-forks, scythes, and
axes, as if they were going out against an enemy; finally, the senators
appeared with the burgomaster at their head. When they had drawn up in
the market-place, they marched to the barn, and surrounded it on all
sides. Thereupon one of the most courageous of them stepped forth and
entered with his spear lowered, but came running out immediately
afterwards with a shriek and as pale as death, and could not utter a
single word. Yet two others ventured in, but they fared no better. At
last one stepped forth; a great strong man who was famous for his
warlike deeds, and said, “You will not drive away the monster by merely
looking at him; we must be in earnest here, but I see that you have all
tuned into women, and not one of you dares to encounter the animal.” He
ordered them to give him some armour, had a sword and spear brought,
and armed himself. All praised his courage, though many feared for his
life. The two barn-doors were opened, and they saw the owl, which in
the meantime had perched herself on the middle of a great cross-beam.
He had a ladder brought, and when he raised it, and made ready to climb
up, they all cried out to him that he was to bear himself bravely, and
commended him to St. George, who slew the dragon. When he had just got
to the top, and the owl perceived that he had designs on her, and was
also bewildered by the crowd and the shouting, and knew not how to
escape, she rolled her eyes, ruffled her feathers, flapped her wings,
snapped her beak, and cried, “Tuwhit, tuwhoo,” in a harsh voice.
“Strike home! strike home!” screamed the crowd outside to the valiant
hero. “Any one who was standing where I am standing,” answered he,
“would not cry, strike home!” He certainly did plant his foot one rung
higher on the ladder, but then he began to tremble, and half-fainting,
went back again.

And now there was no one left who dared to put himself in such danger.
“The monster,” said they, “has poisoned and mortally wounded the very
strongest man among us, by snapping at him and just breathing on him!
Are we, too, to risk our lives?” They took counsel as to what they
ought to do to prevent the whole town being destroyed. For a long time
everything seemed to be of no use, but at length the burgomaster found
an expedient. “My opinion,” said he, “is that we ought, out of the
common purse, to pay for this barn, and whatsoever corn, straw, or hay
it contains, and thus indemnify the owner, and then burn down the whole
building, and the terrible beast with it. Thus no one will have to
endanger his life. This is no time for thinking of expense, and
niggardliness would be ill applied.” All agreed with him. So they set
fire to the barn at all four corners, and with it the owl was miserably
burnt. Let any one who will not believe it, go thither and inquire for
himself.


175 The Moon

In days gone by there was a land where the nights were always dark, and
the sky spread over it like a black cloth, for there the moon never
rose, and no star shone in the obscurity. At the creation of the world,
the light at night had been sufficient. Three young fellows once went
out of this country on a travelling expedition, and arrived in another
kingdom, where, in the evening when the sun had disappeared behind the
mountains, a shining globe was placed on an oak-tree, which shed a soft
light far and wide. By means of this, everything could very well be
seen and distinguished, even though it was not so brilliant as the sun.
The travellers stopped and asked a countryman who was driving past with
his cart, what kind of a light that was. “That is the moon,” answered
he; “our mayor bought it for three thalers, and fastened it to the
oak-tree. He has to pour oil into it daily, and to keep it clean, so
that it may always burn clearly. He receives a thaler a week from us
for doing it.”

When the countryman had driven away, one of them said, “We could make
some use of this lamp, we have an oak-tree at home, which is just as
big as this, and we could hang it on that. What a pleasure it would be
not to have to feel about at night in the darkness!” “I’ll tell you
what we’ll do,” said the second; “we will fetch a cart and horses and
carry away the moon. The people here may buy themselves another.” “I’m
a good climber,” said the third, “I will bring it down.” The fourth
brought a cart and horses, and the third climbed the tree, bored a hole
in the moon, passed a rope through it, and let it down. When the
shining ball lay in the cart, they covered it over with a cloth, that
no one might observe the theft. They conveyed it safely into their own
country, and placed it on a high oak. Old and young rejoiced, when the
new lamp let its light shine over the whole land, and bed-rooms and
sitting-rooms were filled with it. The dwarfs came forth from their
caves in the rocks, and the tiny elves in their little red coats danced
in rings on the meadows.

The four took care that the moon was provided with oil, cleaned the
wick, and received their weekly thaler, but they became old men, and
when one of them grew ill, and saw that he was about to die, he
appointed that one quarter of the moon, should, as his property, be
laid in the grave with him. When he died, the mayor climbed up the
tree, and cut off a quarter with the hedge-shears, and this was placed
in his coffin. The light of the moon decreased, but still not visibly.
When the second died, the second quarter was buried with him, and the
light diminished. It grew weaker still after the death of the third,
who likewise took his part of it away with him; and when the fourth was
borne to his grave, the old state of darkness recommenced, and whenever
the people went out at night without their lanterns they knocked their
heads together.

When, however, the pieces of the moon had united themselves together
again in the world below, where darkness had always prevailed, it came
to pass that the dead became restless and awoke from their sleep. They
were astonished when they were able to see again; the moonlight was
quite sufficient for them, for their eyes had become so weak that they
could not have borne the brilliance of the sun. They rose up and were
merry, and fell into their former ways of living. Some of them went to
the play and to dance, others hastened to the public-houses, where they
asked for wine, got drunk, brawled, quarreled, and at last took up
cudgels, and belabored each other. The noise became greater and
greater, and at last reached even to heaven.

Saint Peter who guards the gate of heaven thought the lower world had
broken out in revolt and gathered together the heavenly troops, which
are to drive back the Evil One when he and his associates storm the
abode of the blessed. As these, however, did not come, he got on his
horse and rode through the gate of heaven, down into the world below.
There he reduced the dead to subjection, bade them lie down in their
graves again, took the moon away with him, and hung it up in heaven.


176 The Duration of Life

When God had created the world and was about to fix the length of each
creature’s life, the ass came and asked, “Lord, how long shall I live?”
“Thirty years,” replied God; “does that content thee?” “Ah, Lord,”
answered the ass, “that is a long time. Think of my painful existence!
To carry heavy burdens from morning to night, to drag sacks of corn to
the mill, that others may eat bread, to be cheered and refreshed with
nothing but blows and kicks. Relieve me of a portion of this long
time.” Then God had pity on him and relieved him of eighteen years. The
ass went away comforted, and the dog appeared. “How long wouldst thou
like to live?” said God to him. “Thirty years are too many for the ass,
but thou wilt be satisfied with that.” “Lord,” answered the dog, “is
that thy will? Consider how I shall have to run, my feet will never
hold out so long, and when I have once lost my voice for barking, and
my teeth for biting, what will be left for me to do but run from one
corner to another and growl?” God saw that he was right, and released
him from twelve years of life. Then came the monkey. “Thou wilt
certainly live thirty years willingly?” said the Lord to him. “Thou
hast no need to work as the ass and the dog have to do, and wilt always
enjoy thyself.” “Ah! Lord,” he answered, “it may seem as if that were
the case, but it is quite different. When it rains porridge I have no
spoon. I am always to play merry pranks, and make faces which force
people to laugh, and if they give me an apple, and I bite into it, why
it is sour! How often sadness hides itself behind mirth! I shall never
be able to hold out for thirty years.” God was gracious and took off
ten.

At last man appeared, joyous, healthy and vigorous, and begged God to
appoint his time for him. “Thirty years shalt thou live,” said the
Lord. “Is that enough for thee?” “What a short time,” cried man, “when
I have built my house and my fire burns on my own hearth; when I have
planted trees which blossom and bear fruit, and am just intending to
enjoy my life, I am to die! O Lord, lengthen my time.” “I will add to
it the ass’s eighteen years,” said God. “That is not enough,” replied
the man. “Thou shalt also have the dog’s twelve years.” “Still too
little!” “Well, then,” said God, “I will give thee the monkey’s ten
years also, but more thou shalt not have.” The man went away, but was
not satisfied.

So man lives seventy years. The first thirty are his human years, which
are soon gone; then is he healthy, merry, works with pleasure, and is
glad of his life. Then follow the ass’s eighteen years, when one burden
after another is laid on him, he has to carry the corn which feeds
others, and blows and kicks are the reward of his faithful services.
Then come the dog’s twelve years, when he lies in the corner, and
growls and has no longer any teeth to bite with, and when this time is
over the monkey’s ten years form the end. Then man is weak-headed and
foolish, does silly things, and becomes the jest of the children.


177 Death’s Messengers

In ancient times a giant was once travelling on a great highway, when
suddenly an unknown man sprang up before him, and said, “Halt, not one
step farther!” “What!” cried the giant, “a creature whom I can crush
between my fingers, wants to block my way? Who art thou that thou
darest to speak so boldly?” “I am Death,” answered the other. “No one
resists me, and thou also must obey my commands.” But the giant
refused, and began to struggle with Death. It was a long, violent
battle, at last the giant got the upper hand, and struck Death down
with his fist, so that he dropped by a stone. The giant went his way,
and Death lay there conquered, and so weak that he could not get up
again. “What will be done now,” said he, “if I stay lying here in a
corner? No one will die in the world, and it will get so full of people
that they won’t have room to stand beside each other.” In the meantime
a young man came along the road, who was strong and healthy, singing a
song, and glancing around on every side. When he saw the half-fainting
one, he went compassionately to him, raised him up, poured a
strengthening draught out of his flask for him, and waited till he came
round. “Dost thou know,” said the stranger, whilst he was getting up,
“who I am, and who it is whom thou hast helped on his legs again?”
“No,” answered the youth, “I do not know thee.” “I am Death,” said he.
“I spare no one, and can make no exception with thee, but that thou
mayst see that I am grateful, I promise thee that I will not fall on
thee unexpectedly, but will send my messengers to thee before I come
and take thee away.” “Well,” said the youth, “it is something gained
that I shall know when thou comest, and at any rate be safe from thee
for so long.” Then he went on his way, and was light-hearted, and
enjoyed himself, and lived without thought. But youth and health did
not last long, soon came sicknesses and sorrows, which tormented him by
day, and took away his rest by night. “Die, I shall not,” said he to
himself, “for Death will send his messengers before that, but I do wish
these wretched days of sickness were over.” As soon as he felt himself
well again he began once more to live merrily. Then one day some one
tapped him on the shoulder. He looked round, and Death stood behind
him, and said, “Follow me, the hour of thy departure from this world
has come.” “What,” replied the man, “wilt thou break thy word? Didst
thou not promise me that thou wouldst send thy messengers to me before
coming thyself? I have seen none!” “Silence!” answered Death. “Have I
not sent one messenger to thee after another? Did not fever come and
smite thee, and shake thee, and cast thee down? Has dizziness not
bewildered thy head? Has not gout twitched thee in all thy limbs? Did
not thine ears sing? Did not tooth-ache bite into thy cheeks? Was it
not dark before thine eyes? And besides all that, has not my own
brother Sleep reminded thee every night of me? Didst thou not lie by
night as if thou wert already dead? The man could make no answer; he
yielded to his fate, and went away with Death.


178 Master Pfriem (Master Cobbler’s Awl)

Master Pfriem was a short, thin, but lively man, who never rested a
moment. His face, of which his turned-up nose was the only prominent
feature, was marked with small-pox and pale as death, his hair was gray
and shaggy, his eyes small, but they glanced perpetually about on all
sides. He saw everything, criticised everything, knew everything best,
and was always in the right. When he went into the streets, he moved
his arms about as if he were rowing; and once he struck the pail of a
girl, who was carrying water, so high in the air that he himself was
wetted all over by it. “Stupid thing,” cried he to her, while he was
shaking himself, “couldst thou not see that I was coming behind thee?”
By trade he was a shoemaker, and when he worked he pulled his thread
out with such force that he drove his fist into every one who did not
keep far enough off. No apprentice stayed more than a month with him,
for he had always some fault to find with the very best work. At one
time it was that the stitches were not even, at another that one shoe
was too long, or one heel higher than the other, or the leather not cut
large enough. “Wait,” said he to his apprentice, “I will soon show thee
how we make skins soft,” and he brought a strap and gave him a couple
of strokes across the back. He called them all sluggards. He himself
did not turn much work out of his hands, for he never sat still for a
quarter of an hour. If his wife got up very early in the morning and
lighted the fire, he jumped out of bed, and ran bare-footed into the
kitchen, crying, “Wilt thou burn my house down for me? That is a fire
one could roast an ox by! Does wood cost nothing?” If the servants were
standing by their wash-tubs and laughing, and telling each other all
they knew, he scolded them, and said, “There stand the geese cackling,
and forgetting their work, to gossip! And why fresh soap? Disgraceful
extravagance and shameful idleness into the bargain! They want to save
their hands, and not rub the things properly!” And out he would run and
knock a pail full of soap and water over, so that the whole kitchen was
flooded. Someone was building a new house, so he hurried to the window
to look on. “There, they are using that red sand-stone again that never
dries!” cried he. “No one will ever be healthy in that house! and just
look how badly the fellows are laying the stones! Besides, the mortar
is good for nothing! It ought to have gravel in it, not sand. I shall
live to see that house tumble down on the people who are in it.” He sat
down, put a couple of stitches in, and then jumped up again, unfastened
his leather-apron, and cried, “I will just go out, and appeal to those
men’s consciences.” He stumbled on the carpenters. “What’s this?” cried
he, “you are not working by the line! Do you expect the beams to be
straight?—one wrong will put all wrong.” He snatched an axe out of a
carpenter’s hand and wanted to show him how he ought to cut; but as a
cart loaded with clay came by, he threw the axe away, and hastened to
the peasant who was walking by the side of it: “You are not in your
right mind,” said he, “who yokes young horses to a heavily-laden cart?
The poor beasts will die on the spot.” The peasant did not give him an
answer, and Pfriem in a rage ran back into his workshop. When he was
setting himself to work again, the apprentice reached him a shoe.
“Well, what’s that again?” screamed he, “Haven’t I told you you ought
not to cut shoes so broad? Who would buy a shoe like this, which is
hardly anything else but a sole? I insist on my orders being followed
exactly.” “Master,” answered the apprentice, “you may easily be quite
right about the shoe being a bad one, but it is the one which you
yourself cut out, and yourself set to work at. When you jumped up a
while since, you knocked it off the table, and I have only just picked
it up. An angel from heaven, however, would never make you believe
that.”

One night Master Pfriem dreamed he was dead, and on his way to heaven.
When he got there, he knocked loudly at the door. “I wonder,” said he
to himself, “that they have no knocker on the door,—one knocks one’s
knuckles sore.” The apostle Peter opened the door, and wanted to see
who demanded admission so noisily. “Ah, it’s you, Master Pfriem;” said
he, “well, I’ll let you in, but I warn you that you must give up that
habit of yours, and find fault with nothing you see in heaven, or you
may fare ill.” “You might have spared your warning,” answered Pfriem.
“I know already what is seemly, and here, God be thanked, everything is
perfect, and there is nothing to blame as there is on earth.” So he
went in, and walked up and down the wide expanses of heaven. He looked
around him, to the left and to the right, but sometimes shook his head,
or muttered something to himself. Then he saw two angels who were
carrying away a beam. It was the beam which some one had had in his own
eye whilst he was looking for the splinter in the eye of another. They
did not, however, carry the beam lengthways, but obliquely. “Did any
one ever see such a piece of stupidity?” thought Master Pfriem; but he
said nothing, and seemed satisfied with it. “It comes to the same thing
after all, whichever way they carry the beam, straight or crooked, if
they only get along with it, and truly I do not see them knock against
anything.” Soon after this he saw two angels who were drawing water out
of a well into a bucket, but at the same time he observed that the
bucket was full of holes, and that the water was running out of it on
every side. They were watering the earth with rain. “Hang it,” he
exclaimed; but happily recollected himself, and thought, “Perhaps it is
only a pastime. If it is an amusement, then it seems they can do
useless things of this kind even here in heaven, where people, as I
have already noticed, do nothing but idle about.” He went farther and
saw a cart which had stuck fast in a deep hole. “It’s no wonder,” said
he to the man who stood by it; “who would load so unreasonably? what
have you there?” “Good wishes,” replied the man, “I could not go along
the right way with it, but still I have pushed it safely up here, and
they won’t leave me sticking here.” In fact an angel did come and
harnessed two horses to it. “That’s quite right,” thought Pfriem, “but
two horses won’t get that cart out, it must at least have four to it.”
Another angel came and brought two more horses; she did not, however,
harness them in front of it, but behind. That was too much for Master
Pfriem, “Clumsy creature,” he burst out with, “what are you doing
there? Has any one ever since the world began seen a cart drawn in that
way? But you, in your conceited arrogance, think that you know
everything best.” He was going to say more, but one of the inhabitants
of heaven seized him by the throat and pushed him forth with
irresistible strength. Beneath the gateway Master Pfriem turned his
head round to take one more look at the cart, and saw that it was being
raised into the air by four winged horses.

At this moment Master Pfriem awoke. “Things are certainly arranged in
heaven otherwise than they are on earth,” said he to himself, “and that
excuses much; but who can see horses harnessed both behind and before
with patience; to be sure they had wings, but who could know that? It
is, besides, great folly to fix a pair of wings to a horse that has
four legs to run with already! But I must get up, or else they will
make nothing but mistakes for me in my house. It is a lucky thing for
me though, that I am not really dead.”


179 The Goose-Girl at the Well

There was once upon a time a very old woman, who lived with her flock
of geese in a waste place among the mountains, and there had a little
house. The waste was surrounded by a large forest, and every morning
the old woman took her crutch and hobbled into it. There, however, the
dame was quite active, more so than any one would have thought,
considering her age, and collected grass for her geese, picked all the
wild fruit she could reach, and carried everything home on her back.
Any one would have thought that the heavy load would have weighed her
to the ground, but she always brought it safely home. If any one met
her, she greeted him quite courteously. “Good day, dear countryman, it
is a fine day. Ah! you wonder that I should drag grass about, but every
one must take his burthen on his back.” Nevertheless, people did not
like to meet her if they could help it, and took by preference a
round-about way, and when a father with his boys passed her, he
whispered to them, “Beware of the old woman. She has claws beneath her
gloves; she is a witch.” One morning, a handsome young man was going
through the forest. The sun shone bright, the birds sang, a cool breeze
crept through the leaves, and he was full of joy and gladness. He had
as yet met no one, when he suddenly perceived the old witch kneeling on
the ground cutting grass with a sickle. She had already thrust a whole
load into her cloth, and near it stood two baskets, which were filled
with wild apples and pears. “But, good little mother,” said he, “how
canst thou carry all that away?” “I must carry it, dear sir,” answered
she, “rich folk’s children have no need to do such things, but with the
peasant folk the saying goes, don’t look behind you, you will only see
how crooked your back is!”

“Will you help me?” she said, as he remained standing by her. “You have
still a straight back and young legs, it would be a trifle to you.
Besides, my house is not so very far from here, it stands there on the
heath behind the hill. How soon you would bound up thither.” The young
man took compassion on the old woman. “My father is certainly no
peasant,” replied he, “but a rich count; nevertheless, that you may see
that it is not only peasants who can carry things, I will take your
bundle.” “If you will try it,” said she, “I shall be very glad. You
will certainly have to walk for an hour, but what will that signify to
you; only you must carry the apples and pears as well?” It now seemed
to the young man just a little serious, when he heard of an hour’s
walk, but the old woman would not let him off, packed the bundle on his
back, and hung the two baskets on his arm. “See, it is quite light,”
said she. “No, it is not light,” answered the count, and pulled a
rueful face. “Verily, the bundle weighs as heavily as if it were full
of cobble stones, and the apples and pears are as heavy as lead! I can
scarcely breathe.” He had a mind to put everything down again, but the
old woman would not allow it. “Just look,” said she mockingly, “the
young gentleman will not carry what I, an old woman, have so often
dragged along. You are ready with fine words, but when it comes to be
earnest, you want to take to your heels. Why are you standing loitering
there?” she continued. “Step out. No one will take the bundle off
again.” As long as he walked on level ground, it was still bearable,
but when they came to the hill and had to climb, and the stones rolled
down under his feet as if they were alive, it was beyond his strength.
The drops of perspiration stood on his forehead, and ran, hot and cold,
down his back. “Dame,” said he, “I can go no farther. I want to rest a
little.” “Not here,” answered the old woman, “when we have arrived at
our journey’s end, you can rest; but now you must go forward. Who knows
what good it may do you?” “Old woman, thou art becoming shameless!”
said the count, and tried to throw off the bundle, but he laboured in
vain; it stuck as fast to his back as if it grew there. He turned and
twisted, but he could not get rid of it. The old woman laughed at this,
and sprang about quite delighted on her crutch. “Don’t get angry, dear
sir,” said she, “you are growing as red in the face as a turkey-cock!
Carry your bundle patiently. I will give you a good present when we get
home.”

What could he do? He was obliged to submit to his fate, and crawl along
patiently behind the old woman. She seemed to grow more and more
nimble, and his burden still heavier. All at once she made a spring,
jumped on to the bundle and seated herself on the top of it; and
however withered she might be, she was yet heavier than the stoutest
country lass. The youth’s knees trembled, but when he did not go on,
the old woman hit him about the legs with a switch and with
stinging-nettles. Groaning continually, he climbed the mountain, and at
length reached the old woman’s house, when he was just about to drop.
When the geese perceived the old woman, they flapped their wings,
stretched out their necks, ran to meet her, cackling all the while.
Behind the flock walked, stick in hand, an old wench, strong and big,
but ugly as night. “Good mother,” said she to the old woman, “has
anything happened to you, you have stayed away so long?” “By no means,
my dear daughter,” answered she, “I have met with nothing bad, but, on
the contrary, with this kind gentleman, who has carried my burthen for
me; only think, he even took me on his back when I was tired. The way,
too, has not seemed long to us; we have been merry, and have been
cracking jokes with each other all the time.” At last the old woman
slid down, took the bundle off the young man’s back, and the baskets
from his arm, looked at him quite kindly, and said, “Now seat yourself
on the bench before the door, and rest. You have fairly earned your
wages, and they shall not be wanting.” Then she said to the goose-girl,
“Go into the house, my dear daughter, it is not becoming for thee to be
alone with a young gentleman; one must not pour oil on to the fire, he
might fall in love with thee.” The count knew not whether to laugh or
to cry. “Such a sweetheart as that,” thought he, “could not touch my
heart, even if she were thirty years younger.” In the meantime the old
woman stroked and fondled her geese as if they were children, and then
went into the house with her daughter. The youth lay down on the bench,
under a wild apple-tree. The air was warm and mild; on all sides
stretched a green meadow, which was set with cowslips, wild thyme, and
a thousand other flowers; through the midst of it rippled a clear brook
on which the sun sparkled, and the white geese went walking backwards
and forwards, or paddled in the water. “It is quite delightful here,”
said he, “but I am so tired that I cannot keep my eyes open; I will
sleep a little. If only a gust of wind does not come and blow my legs
off my body, for they are as rotten as tinder.”

When he had slept a little while, the old woman came and shook him till
he awoke. “Sit up,” said she, “thou canst not stay here; I have
certainly treated thee hardly, still it has not cost thee thy life. Of
money and land thou hast no need, here is something else for thee.”
Thereupon she thrust a little book into his hand, which was cut out of
a single emerald. “Take great care of it,” said she, “it will bring
thee good fortune.” The count sprang up, and as he felt that he was
quite fresh, and had recovered his vigor, he thanked the old woman for
her present, and set off without even once looking back at the
beautiful daughter. When he was already some way off, he still heard in
the distance the noisy cry of the geese.

For three days the count had to wander in the wilderness before he
could find his way out. He then reached a large town, and as no one
knew him, he was led into the royal palace, where the King and Queen
were sitting on their throne. The count fell on one knee, drew the
emerald book out of his pocket, and laid it at the Queen’s feet. She
bade him rise and hand her the little book. Hardly, however, had she
opened it, and looked therein, than she fell as if dead to the ground.
The count was seized by the King’s servants, and was being led to
prison, when the Queen opened her eyes, and ordered them to release
him, and every one was to go out, as she wished to speak with him in
private.

When the Queen was alone, she began to weep bitterly, and said, “Of
what use to me are the splendours and honours with which I am
surrounded; every morning I awake in pain and sorrow. I had three
daughters, the youngest of whom was so beautiful that the whole world
looked on her as a wonder. She was as white as snow, as rosy as
apple-blossom, and her hair as radiant as sun-beams. When she cried,
not tears fell from her eyes, but pearls and jewels only. When she was
fifteen years old, the King summoned all three sisters to come before
his throne. You should have seen how all the people gazed when the
youngest entered, it was just as if the sun were rising! Then the King
spoke, “My daughters, I know not when my last day may arrive; I will
to-day decide what each shall receive at my death. You all love me, but
the one of you who loves me best, shall fare the best.” Each of them
said she loved him best. “Can you not express to me,” said the King,
“how much you do love me, and thus I shall see what you mean?” The
eldest spoke. “I love my father as dearly as the sweetest sugar.” The
second, “I love my father as dearly as my prettiest dress.” But the
youngest was silent. Then the father said, “And thou, my dearest child,
how much dost thou love me?” “I do not know, and can compare my love
with nothing.” But her father insisted that she should name something.
So she said at last, “The best food does not please me without salt,
therefore I love my father like salt.” When the King heard that, he
fell into a passion, and said, “If thou lovest me like salt, thy love
shall also be repaid thee with salt.” Then he divided the kingdom
between the two elder, but caused a sack of salt to be bound on the
back of the youngest, and two servants had to lead her forth into the
wild forest. We all begged and prayed for her, said the Queen, “but the
King’s anger was not to be appeased. How she cried when she had to
leave us! The whole road was strewn with the pearls which flowed from
her eyes. The King soon afterwards repented of his great severity, and
had the whole forest searched for the poor child, but no one could find
her. When I think that the wild beasts have devoured her, I know not
how to contain myself for sorrow; many a time I console myself with the
hope that she is still alive, and may have hidden herself in a cave, or
has found shelter with compassionate people. But picture to yourself,
when I opened your little emerald book, a pearl lay therein, of exactly
the same kind as those which used to fall from my daughter’s eyes; and
then you can also imagine how the sight of it stirred my heart. You
must tell me how you came by that pearl.” The count told her that he
had received it from the old woman in the forest, who had appeared very
strange to him, and must be a witch, but he had neither seen nor hear
anything of the Queen’s child. The King and the Queen resolved to seek
out the old woman. They thought that there where the pearl had been,
they would obtain news of their daughter.

The old woman was sitting in that lonely place at her spinning-wheel,
spinning. It was already dusk, and a log which was burning on the
hearth gave a scanty light. All at once there was a noise outside, the
geese were coming home from the pasture, and uttering their hoarse
cries. Soon afterwards the daughter also entered. But the old woman
scarcely thanked her, and only shook her head a little. The daughter
sat down beside her, took her spinning-wheel, and twisted the threads
as nimbly as a young girl. Thus they both sat for two hours, and
exchanged never a word. At last something rustled at the window, and
two fiery eyes peered in. It was an old night-owl, which cried, “Uhu!”
three times. The old woman looked up just a little, then she said,
“Now, my little daughter, it is time for thee to go out and do thy
work.” She rose and went out, and where did she go? Over the meadows
ever onward into the valley. At last she came to a well, with three old
oak-trees standing beside it; meanwhile the moon had risen large and
round over the mountain, and it was so light that one could have found
a needle. She removed a skin which covered her face, then bent down to
the well, and began to wash herself. When she had finished, she dipped
the skin also in the water, and then laid it on the meadow, so that it
should bleach in the moonlight, and dry again. But how the maiden was
changed! Such a change as that was never seen before! When the gray
mask fell off, her golden hair broke forth like sunbeams, and spread
about like a mantle over her whole form. Her eyes shone out as brightly
as the stars in heaven, and her cheeks bloomed a soft red like
apple-blossom.

But the fair maiden was sad. She sat down and wept bitterly. One tear
after another forced itself out of her eyes, and rolled through her
long hair to the ground. There she sat, and would have remained sitting
a long time, if there had not been a rustling and cracking in the
boughs of the neighbouring tree. She sprang up like a roe which has
been overtaken by the shot of the hunter. Just then the moon was
obscured by a dark cloud, and in an instant the maiden had put on the
old skin and vanished, like a light blown out by the wind.

She ran back home, trembling like an aspen-leaf. The old woman was
standing on the threshold, and the girl was about to relate what had
befallen her, but the old woman laughed kindly, and said, “I already
know all.” She led her into the room and lighted a new log. She did
not, however, sit down to her spinning again, but fetched a broom and
began to sweep and scour, “All must be clean and sweet,” she said to
the girl. “But, mother,” said the maiden, “why do you begin work at so
late an hour? What do you expect?” “Dost thou know then what time it
is?” asked the old woman. “Not yet midnight,” answered the maiden, “but
already past eleven o’clock.” “Dost thou not remember,” continued the
old woman, “that it is three years to-day since thou camest to me? Thy
time is up, we can no longer remain together.” The girl was terrified,
and said, “Alas! dear mother, will you cast me off? Where shall I go? I
have no friends, and no home to which I can go. I have always done as
you bade me, and you have always been satisfied with me; do not send me
away.” The old woman would not tell the maiden what lay before her. “My
stay here is over,” she said to her, “but when I depart, house and
parlour must be clean: therefore do not hinder me in my work. Have no
care for thyself, thou shalt find a roof to shelter thee, and the wages
which I will give thee shall also content thee.” “But tell me what is
about to happen,” the maiden continued to entreat. “I tell thee again,
do not hinder me in my work. Do not say a word more, go to thy chamber,
take the skin off thy face, and put on the silken gown which thou hadst
on when thou camest to me, and then wait in thy chamber until I call
thee.”

But I must once more tell of the King and Queen, who had journeyed
forth with the count in order to seek out the old woman in the
wilderness. The count had strayed away from them in the wood by night,
and had to walk onwards alone. Next day it seemed to him that he was on
the right track. He still went forward, until darkness came on, then he
climbed a tree, intending to pass the night there, for he feared that
he might lose his way. When the moon illumined the surrounding country
he perceived a figure coming down the mountain. She had no stick in her
hand, but yet he could see that it was the goose-girl, whom he had seen
before in the house of the old woman. “Oho,” cried he, “there she
comes, and if I once get hold of one of the witches, the other shall
not escape me!” But how astonished he was, when she went to the well,
took off the skin and washed herself, when her golden hair fell down
all about her, and she was more beautiful than any one whom he had ever
seen in the whole world. He hardly dared to breathe, but stretched his
head as far forward through the leaves as he dared, and stared at her.
Either he bent over too far, or whatever the cause might be, the bough
suddenly cracked, and that very moment the maiden slipped into the
skin, sprang away like a roe, and as the moon was suddenly covered,
disappeared from his eyes. Hardly had she disappeared, before the count
descended from the tree, and hastened after her with nimble steps. He
had not been gone long before he saw, in the twilight, two figures
coming over the meadow. It was the King and Queen, who had perceived
from a distance the light shining in the old woman’s little house, and
were going to it. The count told them what wonderful things he had seen
by the well, and they did not doubt that it had been their lost
daughter. They walked onwards full of joy, and soon came to the little
house. The geese were sitting all round it, and had thrust their heads
under their wings and were sleeping, and not one of them moved. The
King and Queen looked in at the window, the old woman was sitting there
quite quietly spinning, nodding her head and never looking round. The
room was perfectly clean, as if the little mist men, who carry no dust
on their feet, lived there. Their daughter, however, they did not see.
They gazed at all this for a long time, at last they took heart, and
knocked softly at the window. The old woman appeared to have been
expecting them; she rose, and called out quite kindly, “Come in,—I know
you already.” When they had entered the room, the old woman said, “You
might have spared yourself the long walk, if you had not three years
ago unjustly driven away your child, who is so good and lovable. No
harm has come to her; for three years she has had to tend the geese;
with them she has learnt no evil, but has preserved her purity of
heart. You, however, have been sufficiently punished by the misery in
which you have lived.” Then she went to the chamber and called, “Come
out, my little daughter.” Thereupon the door opened, and the princess
stepped out in her silken garments, with her golden hair and her
shining eyes, and it was as if an angel from heaven had entered.

She went up to her father and mother, fell on their necks and kissed
them; there was no help for it, they all had to weep for joy. The young
count stood near them, and when she perceived him she became as red in
the face as a moss-rose, she herself did not know why. The King said,
“My dear child, I have given away my kingdom, what shall I give thee?”
“She needs nothing,” said the old woman. “I give her the tears that she
has wept on your account; they are precious pearls, finer than those
that are found in the sea, and worth more than your whole kingdom, and
I give her my little house as payment for her services.” When the old
woman had said that, she disappeared from their sight. The walls
rattled a little, and when the King and Queen looked round, the little
house had changed into a splendid palace, a royal table had been
spread, and the servants were running hither and thither.

The story goes still further, but my grandmother, who related it to me,
had partly lost her memory, and had forgotten the rest. I shall always
believe that the beautiful princess married the count, and that they
remained together in the palace, and lived there in all happiness so
long as God willed it. Whether the snow-white geese, which were kept
near the little hut, were verily young maidens (no one need take
offence,) whom the old woman had taken under her protection, and
whether they now received their human form again, and stayed as
handmaids to the young Queen, I do not exactly know, but I suspect it.
This much is certain, that the old woman was no witch, as people
thought, but a wise woman, who meant well. Very likely it was she who,
at the princess’s birth, gave her the gift of weeping pearls instead of
tears. That does not happen now-a-days, or else the poor would soon
become rich.


180 Eve’s Various Children

When Adam and Eve were driven out of Paradise, they were compelled to
build a house for themselves on unfruitful ground, and eat their bread
in the sweat of their brow. Adam dug up the land, and Eve span. Every
year Eve brought a child into the world; but the children were unlike
each other, some pretty, and some ugly. After a considerable time had
gone by, God sent an angel to them, to announce that he was coming to
inspect their household. Eve, delighted that the Lord should be so
gracious, cleaned her house diligently, decked it with flowers, and
strewed reeds on the floor. Then she brought in her children, but only
the beautiful ones. She washed and bathed them, combed their hair, put
clean raiment on them, and cautioned them to conduct themselves
decorously and modestly in the presence of the Lord. They were to bow
down before him civilly, hold out their hands, and to answer his
questions modestly and sensibly. The ugly children were, however, not
to let themselves be seen. One hid himself beneath the hay, another
under the roof, a third in the straw, the fourth in the stove, the
fifth in the cellar, the sixth under a tub, the seventh beneath the
wine-cask, the eighth under an old fur cloak, the ninth and tenth
beneath the cloth out of which she always made their clothes, and the
eleventh and twelfth under the leather out of which she cut their
shoes. She had scarcely got ready, before there was a knock at the
house-door. Adam looked through a chink, and saw that it was the Lord.
Adam opened the door respectfully, and the Heavenly Father entered.
There, in a row, stood the pretty children, and bowed before him, held
out their hands, and knelt down. The Lord, however, began to bless
them, laid his hands on the first, and said, “Thou shalt be a powerful
king;” and to the second, “Thou a prince,” to the third, “Thou a
count,” to the fourth, “Thou a knight,” to the fifth, “Thou a
nobleman,” to the sixth, “Thou a burgher,” to the seventh, “Thou a
merchant,” to the eighth, “Thou a learned man.” He bestowed upon them
also all his richest blessings. When Eve saw that the Lord was so mild
and gracious, she thought, “I will bring hither my ill-favoured
children also, it may be that he will bestow his blessing on them
likewise.” So she ran and brought them out of the hay, the straw, the
stove, and wherever else she had concealed them. Then came the whole
coarse, dirty, shabby, sooty band. The Lord smiled, looked at them all,
and said, “I will bless these also.” He laid his hands on the first,
and said to him, “Thou shalt be a peasant,” to the second, “Thou a
fisherman,” to the third, “Thou a smith,” to the fourth, “Thou a
tanner,” to the fifth, “Thou a weaver,” to the sixth, “Thou a
shoemaker,” to the seventh, “Thou a tailor,” to the eighth, “Thou a
potter,” to the ninth, “Thou a waggoner,” to the tenth, “Thou a
sailor,” to the eleventh, “Thou an errand-boy,” to the twelfth, “Thou a
scullion all the days of thy life.”

When Eve had heard all this she said, “Lord, how unequally thou
dividest thy gifts! After all they are all of them my children, whom I
have brought into the world, thy favours should be given to all alike.”
But God answered, “Eve, thou dost not understand. It is right and
necessary that the entire world should be supplied from thy children;
if they were all princes and lords, who would grow corn, thresh it,
grind and bake it? Who would be blacksmiths, weavers, carpenters,
masons, labourers, tailors and seamstresses? Each shall have his own
place, so that one shall support the other, and all shall be fed like
the limbs of one body.” Then Eve answered, “Ah, Lord, forgive me, I was
too quick in speaking to thee. Have thy divine will with my children.”


181 The Nix of the Mill-Pond

There was once upon a time a miller who lived with his wife in great
contentment. They had money and land, and their prosperity increased
year by year more and more. But ill-luck comes like a thief in the
night, as their wealth had increased so did it again decrease, year by
year, and at last the miller could hardly call the mill in which he
lived, his own. He was in great distress, and when he lay down after
his day’s work, found no rest, but tossed about in his bed, full of
care. One morning he rose before daybreak and went out into the open
air, thinking that perhaps there his heart might become lighter. As he
was stepping over the mill-dam the first sunbeam was just breaking
forth, and he heard a rippling sound in the pond. He turned round and
perceived a beautiful woman, rising slowly out of the water. Her long
hair, which she was holding off her shoulders with her soft hands, fell
down on both sides, and covered her white body. He soon saw that she
was the Nix of the Mill-pond, and in his fright did not know whether he
should run away or stay where he was. But the nix made her sweet voice
heard, called him by his name, and asked him why he was so sad? The
miller was at first struck dumb, but when he heard her speak so kindly,
he took heart, and told her how he had formerly lived in wealth and
happiness, but that now he was so poor that he did not know what to do.
“Be easy,” answered the nix, “I will make thee richer and happier than
thou hast ever been before, only thou must promise to give me the young
thing which has just been born in thy house.” “What else can that be,”
thought the miller, “but a young puppy or kitten?” and he promised her
what she desired. The nix descended into the water again, and he
hurried back to his mill, consoled and in good spirits. He had not yet
reached it, when the maid-servant came out of the house, and cried to
him to rejoice, for his wife had given birth to a little boy. The
miller stood as if struck by lightning; he saw very well that the
cunning nix had been aware of it, and had cheated him. Hanging his
head, he went up to his wife’s bedside and when she said, “Why dost
thou not rejoice over the fine boy?” he told her what had befallen him,
and what kind of a promise he had given to the nix. “Of what use to me
are riches and prosperity?” he added, “if I am to lose my child; but
what can I do?” Even the relations, who had come thither to wish them
joy, did not know what to say. In the meantime prosperity again
returned to the miller’s house. All that he undertook succeeded, it was
as if presses and coffers filled themselves of their own accord, and as
if money multiplied nightly in the cupboards. It was not long before
his wealth was greater than it had ever been before. But he could not
rejoice over it untroubled, for the bargain which he had made with the
nix tormented his soul. Whenever he passed the mill-pond, he feared she
might ascend and remind him of his debt. He never let the boy himself
go near the water. “Beware,” he said to him, “if thou dost but touch
the water, a hand will rise, seize thee, and draw thee down.” But as
year after year went by and the nix did not show herself again, the
miller began to feel at ease. The boy grew up to be a youth and was
apprenticed to a huntsman. When he had learnt everything, and had
become an excellent huntsman, the lord of the village took him into his
service. In the village lived a beautiful and true-hearted maiden, who
pleased the huntsman, and when his master perceived that, he gave him a
little house, the two were married, lived peacefully and happily, and
loved each other with all their hearts.

One day the huntsman was chasing a roe; and when the animal turned
aside from the forest into the open country, he pursued it and at last
shot it. He did not notice that he was now in the neighbourhood of the
dangerous mill-pond, and went, after he had disembowelled the stag, to
the water, in order to wash his blood-stained hands. Scarcely, however,
had he dipped them in than the nix ascended, smilingly wound her
dripping arms around him, and drew him quickly down under the waves,
which closed over him. When it was evening, and the huntsman did not
return home, his wife became alarmed. She went out to seek him, and as
he had often told her that he had to be on his guard against the snares
of the nix, and dared not venture into the neighbourhood of the
mill-pond, she already suspected what had happened. She hastened to the
water, and when she found his hunting-pouch lying on the shore, she
could no longer have any doubt of the misfortune. Lamenting her sorrow,
and wringing her hands, she called on her beloved by name, but in vain.
She hurried across to the other side of the pond, and called him anew;
she reviled the nix with harsh words, but no answer followed. The
surface of the water remained calm, only the crescent moon stared
steadily back at her. The poor woman did not leave the pond. With hasty
steps, she paced round and round it, without resting a moment,
sometimes in silence, sometimes uttering a loud cry, sometimes softly
sobbing. At last her strength came to an end, she sank down to the
ground and fell into a heavy sleep. Presently a dream took possession
of her. She was anxiously climbing upwards between great masses of
rock; thorns and briars caught her feet, the rain beat in her face, and
the wind tossed her long hair about. When she had reached the summit,
quite a different sight presented itself to her; the sky was blue, the
air soft, the ground sloped gently downwards, and on a green meadow,
gay with flowers of every colour, stood a pretty cottage. She went up
to it and opened the door; there sat an old woman with white hair, who
beckoned to her kindly. At that very moment, the poor woman awoke, day
had already dawned, and she at once resolved to act in accordance with
her dream. She laboriously climbed the mountain; everything was exactly
as she had seen it in the night. The old woman received her kindly, and
pointed out a chair on which she might sit. “Thou must have met with a
misfortune,” she said, “since thou hast sought out my lonely cottage.”
With tears, the woman related what had befallen her. “Be comforted,”
said the old woman, “I will help thee. Here is a golden comb for thee.
Tarry till the full moon has risen, then go to the mill-pond, seat
thyself on the shore, and comb thy long black hair with this comb. When
thou hast done, lay it down on the bank, and thou wilt see what will
happen.” The woman returned home, but the time till the full moon came,
passed slowly. At last the shining disc appeared in the heavens, then
she went out to the mill-pond, sat down and combed her long black hair
with the golden comb, and when she had finished, she laid it down at
the water’s edge. It was not long before there was a movement in the
depths, a wave rose, rolled to the shore, and bore the comb away with
it. In not more than the time necessary for the comb to sink to the
bottom, the surface of the water parted, and the head of the huntsman
arose. He did not speak, but looked at his wife with sorrowful glances.
At the same instant, a second wave came rushing up, and covered the
man’s head. All had vanished, the mill-pond lay peaceful as before, and
nothing but the face of the full moon shone on it. Full of sorrow, the
woman went back, but again the dream showed her the cottage of the old
woman. Next morning she again set out and complained of her woes to the
wise woman. The old woman gave her a golden flute, and said, “Tarry
till the full moon comes again, then take this flute; play a beautiful
air on it, and when thou hast finished, lay it on the sand; then thou
wilt see what will happen.” The wife did as the old woman told her. No
sooner was the flute lying on the sand than there was a stirring in the
depths, and a wave rushed up and bore the flute away with it.
Immediately afterwards the water parted, and not only the head of the
man, but half of his body also arose. He stretched out his arms
longingly towards her, but a second wave came up, covered him, and drew
him down again. “Alas, what does it profit me?” said the unhappy woman,
“that I should see my beloved, only to lose him again!” Despair filled
her heart anew, but the dream led her a third time to the house of the
old woman. She set out, and the wise woman gave her a golden
spinning-wheel, consoled her and said, “All is not yet fulfilled, tarry
until the time of the full moon, then take the spinning-wheel, seat
thyself on the shore, and spin the spool full, and when thou hast done
that, place the spinning-wheel near the water, and thou wilt see what
will happen.” The woman obeyed all she said exactly; as soon as the
full moon showed itself, she carried the golden spinning-wheel to the
shore, and span industriously until the flax came to an end, and the
spool was quite filled with the threads. No sooner was the wheel
standing on the shore than there was a more violent movement than
before in the depths of the pond, and a mighty wave rushed up, and bore
the wheel away with it. Immediately the head and the whole body of the
man rose into the air, in a water-spout. He quickly sprang to the
shore, caught his wife by the hand and fled. But they had scarcely gone
a very little distance, when the whole pond rose with a frightful roar,
and streamed out over the open country. The fugitives already saw death
before their eyes, when the woman in her terror implored the help of
the old woman, and in an instant they were transformed, she into a
toad, he into a frog. The flood which had overtaken them could not
destroy them, but it tore them apart and carried them far away. When
the water had dispersed and they both touched dry land again, they
regained their human form, but neither knew where the other was; they
found themselves among strange people, who did not know their native
land. High mountains and deep valleys lay between them. In order to
keep themselves alive, they were both obliged to tend sheep. For many
long years they drove their flocks through field and forest and were
full of sorrow and longing. When spring had once more broken forth on
the earth, they both went out one day with their flocks, and as chance
would have it, they drew near each other. They met in a valley, but did
not recognize each other; yet they rejoiced that they were no longer so
lonely. Henceforth they each day drove their flocks to the same place;
they did not speak much, but they felt comforted. One evening when the
full moon was shining in the sky, and the sheep were already at rest,
the shepherd pulled the flute out of his pocket, and played on it a
beautiful but sorrowful air. When he had finished he saw that the
shepherdess was weeping bitterly. “Why art thou weeping?” he asked.
“Alas,” answered she, “thus shone the full moon when I played this air
on the flute for the last time, and the head of my beloved rose out of
the water.” He looked at her, and it seemed as if a veil fell from his
eyes, and he recognized his dear wife, and when she looked at him, and
the moon shone in his face she knew him also. They embraced and kissed
each other, and no one need ask if they were happy.


182 The Little Folks’ Presents

A tailor and a goldsmith were travelling together, and one evening when
the sun had sunk behind the mountains, they heard the sound of distant
music, which became more and more distinct. It sounded strange, but so
pleasant that they forgot all their weariness and stepped quickly
onwards. The moon had already arisen when they reached a hill on which
they saw a crowd of little men and women, who had taken each other’s
hands, and were whirling round in the dance with the greatest pleasure
and delight.

They sang to it most charmingly, and that was the music which the
travellers had heard. In the midst of them sat an old man who was
rather taller than the rest. He wore a parti-coloured coat, and his
iron-grey beard hung down over his breast. The two remained standing
full of astonishment, and watched the dance. The old man made a sign
that they should enter, and the little folks willingly opened their
circle. The goldsmith, who had a hump, and like all hunchbacks was
brave enough, stepped in; the tailor felt a little afraid at first, and
held back, but when he saw how merrily all was going, he plucked up his
courage, and followed. The circle closed again directly, and the little
folks went on singing and dancing with the wildest leaps. The old man,
however, took a large knife which hung to his girdle, whetted it, and
when it was sufficiently sharpened, he looked round at the strangers.
They were terrified, but they had not much time for reflection, for the
old man seized the goldsmith and with the greatest speed, shaved the
hair of his head clean off, and then the same thing happened to the
tailor. But their fear left them when, after he had finished his work,
the old man clapped them both on the shoulder in a friendly manner, as
much as to say, they had behaved well to let all that be done to them
willingly, and without any struggle. He pointed with his finger to a
heap of coals which lay at one side, and signified to the travellers by
his gestures that they were to fill their pockets with them. Both of
them obeyed, although they did not know of what use the coals would be
to them, and then they went on their way to seek a shelter for the
night. When they had got into the valley, the clock of the neighbouring
monastery struck twelve, and the song ceased. In a moment all had
vanished, and the hill lay in solitude in the moonlight.

The two travellers found an inn, and covered themselves up on their
straw-beds with their coats, but in their weariness forgot to take the
coals out of them before doing so. A heavy weight on their limbs
awakened them earlier than usual. They felt in the pockets, and could
not believe their eyes when they saw that they were not filled with
coals, but with pure gold; happily, too, the hair of their heads and
beards was there again as thick as ever.

They had now become rich folks, but the goldsmith, who, in accordance
with his greedy disposition, had filled his pockets better, was as rich
again as the tailor. A greedy man, even if he has much, still wishes to
have more, so the goldsmith proposed to the tailor that they should
wait another day, and go out again in the evening in order to bring
back still greater treasures from the old man on the hill. The tailor
refused, and said, “I have enough and am content; now I shall be a
master, and marry my dear object (for so he called his sweetheart), and
I am a happy man.” But he stayed another day to please him. In the
evening the goldsmith hung a couple of bags over his shoulders that he
might be able to stow away a great deal, and took the road to the hill.
He found, as on the night before, the little folks at their singing and
dancing, and the old man again shaved him clean, and signed to him to
take some coal away with him. He was not slow about sticking as much
into his bags as would go, went back quite delighted, and covered
himself over with his coat. “Even if the gold does weigh heavily,” said
he, “I will gladly bear that,” and at last he fell asleep with the
sweet anticipation of waking in the morning an enormously rich man.

When he opened his eyes, he got up in haste to examine his pockets, but
how amazed he was when he drew nothing out of them but black coals, and
that howsoever often he put his hands in them. “The gold I got the
night before is still there for me,” thought he, and went and brought
it out, but how shocked he was when he saw that it likewise had again
turned into coal. He smote his forehead with his dusty black hand, and
then he felt that his whole head was bald and smooth, as was also the
place where his beard should have been. But his misfortunes were not
yet over; he now remarked for the first time that in addition to the
hump on his back, a second, just as large, had grown in front on his
breast. Then he recognized the punishment of his greediness, and began
to weep aloud. The good tailor, who was wakened by this, comforted the
unhappy fellow as well as he could, and said, “Thou hast been my
comrade in my travelling time; thou shalt stay with me and share in my
wealth.” He kept his word, but the poor goldsmith was obliged to carry
the two humps as long as he lived, and to cover his bald head with a
cap.


183 The Giant and the Tailor

A certain tailor who was great at boasting but ill at doing, took it
into his head to go abroad for a while, and look about the world. As
soon as he could manage it, he left his workshop, and wandered on his
way, over hill and dale, sometimes hither, sometimes thither, but ever
on and on. Once when he was out he perceived in the blue distance a
steep hill, and behind it a tower reaching to the clouds, which rose up
out of a wild dark forest. “Thunder and lightning,” cried the tailor,
“what is that?” and as he was strongly goaded by curiosity, he went
boldly towards it. But what made the tailor open his eyes and mouth
when he came near it, was to see that the tower had legs, and leapt in
one bound over the steep hill, and was now standing as an all powerful
giant before him. “What dost thou want here, thou tiny fly’s leg?”
cried the giant, with a voice as if it were thundering on every side.
The tailor whimpered, “I want just to look about and see if I can earn
a bit of bread for myself, in this forest.” “If that is what thou art
after,” said the giant, “thou mayst have a place with me.” “If it must
be, why not? What wages shall I receive?” “Thou shalt hear what wages
thou shalt have. Every year three hundred and sixty-five days, and when
it is leap-year, one more into the bargain. Does that suit thee?” “All
right,” replied the tailor, and thought, in his own mind, “a man must
cut his coat according to his cloth; I will try to get away as fast as
I can.” On this the giant said to him, “Go, little ragamuffin, and
fetch me a jug of water.” “Had I not better bring the well itself at
once, and the spring too?” asked the boaster, and went with the pitcher
to the water. “What! the well and the spring too,” growled the giant in
his beard, for he was rather clownish and stupid, and began to be
afraid. “That knave is not a fool, he has a wizard in his body. Be on
thy guard, old Hans, this is no serving-man for thee.” When the tailor
had brought the water, the giant bade him go into the forest, and cut a
couple of blocks of wood and bring them back. “Why not the whole
forest, at once, with one stroke. The whole forest, young and old, with
all that is there, both rough and smooth?” asked the little tailor, and
went to cut the wood. “What! the whole forest, young and old, with all
that is there, both rough and smooth, and the well and its spring too,”
growled the credulous giant in his beard, and was still more terrified.
“The knave can do much more than bake apples, and has a wizard in his
body. Be on thy guard, old Hans, this is no serving-man for thee!” When
the tailor had brought the wood, the giant commanded him to shoot two
or three wild boars for supper. “Why not rather a thousand at one shot,
and bring them all here?” inquired the ostentatious tailor. “What!”
cried the timid giant in great terror; “Let well alone to-night, and
lie down to rest.”

The giant was so terribly alarmed that he could not close an eye all
night long for thinking what would be the best way to get rid of this
accursed sorcerer of a servant. Time brings counsel. Next morning the
giant and the tailor went to a marsh, round which stood a number of
willow-trees. Then said the giant, “Hark thee, tailor, seat thyself on
one of the willow-branches, I long of all things to see if thou art big
enough to bend it down.” All at once the tailor was sitting on it,
holding his breath, and making himself so heavy that the bough bent
down. When, however, he was compelled to draw breath, it hurried him
(for unfortunately he had not put his goose in his pocket) so high into
the air that he never was seen again, and this to the great delight of
the giant. If the tailor has not fallen down again, he must be hovering
about in the air.


184 The Nail

A merchant had done good business at the fair; he had sold his wares,
and lined his money-bags with gold and silver. Then he wanted to travel
homewards, and be in his own house before nightfall. So he packed his
trunk with the money on his horse, and rode away.

At noon he rested in a town, and when he wanted to go farther the
stable-boy brought out his horse and said, “A nail is wanting, sir, in
the shoe of its left hind foot.” “Let it be wanting,” answered the
merchant; “the shoe will certainly stay on for the six miles I have
still to go. I am in a hurry.”

In the afternoon, when he once more alighted and had his horse fed, the
stable-boy went into the room to him and said, “Sir, a shoe is missing
from your horse’s left hind foot. Shall I take him to the blacksmith?”
“Let it still be wanting,” answered the man; “the horse can very well
hold out for the couple of miles which remain. I am in haste.”

He rode forth, but before long the horse began to limp. It had not
limped long before it began to stumble, and it had not stumbled long
before it fell down and broke its leg. The merchant was forced to leave
the horse where it was, and unbuckle the trunk, take it on his back,
and go home on foot. And there he did not arrive until quite late at
night. “And that unlucky nail,” said he to himself, “has caused all
this disaster.”

Hasten slowly.


185 The Poor Boy in the Grave

There was once a poor shepherd-boy whose father and mother were dead,
and he was placed by the authorities in the house of a rich man, who
was to feed him and bring him up. The man and his wife, had however,
bad hearts, and were greedy and anxious about their riches, and vexed
whenever any one put a morsel of their bread in his mouth. The poor
young fellow might do what he liked, he got little to eat, but only so
many blows the more.

One day he had to watch a hen and her chickens, but she ran through a
quick-set hedge with them, and a hawk darted down instantly, and
carried her off through the air. The boy called, “Thief! thief!
rascal!” with all the strength of his body. But what good did that do?
The hawk did not bring its prey back again. The man heard the noise,
and ran to the spot, and as soon as he saw that his hen was gone, he
fell in a rage, and gave the boy such a beating that he could not stir
for two days. Then he had to take care of the chickens without the hen,
but now his difficulty was greater, for one ran here and the other
there. He thought he was doing a very wise thing when he tied them all
together with a string, because then the hawk would not be able to
steal any of them away from him. But he was very much mistaken. After
two days, worn out with running about and hunger, he fell asleep; the
bird of prey came, and seized one of the chickens, and as the others
were tied fast to it, it carried them all off together, perched itself
on a tree, and devoured them. The farmer was just coming home, and when
he saw the misfortune, he got angry and beat the boy so unmercifully
that he was forced to lie in bed for several days.

When he was on his legs again, the farmer said to him, “Thou art too
stupid for me, I cannot make a herdsman of thee, thou must go as
errand-boy.” Then he sent him to the judge, to whom he was to carry a
basketful of grapes, and he gave him a letter as well. On the way
hunger and thirst tormented the unhappy boy so violently that he ate
two of the bunches of grapes. He took the basket to the judge, but when
the judge had read the letter, and counted the bunches he said, “Two
clusters are wanting.” The boy confessed quite honestly that, driven by
hunger and thirst, he had devoured the two which were wanting. The
judge wrote a letter to the farmer, and asked for the same number of
grapes again. These also the boy had to take to him with a letter. As
he again was so extremely hungry and thirsty, he could not help it, and
again ate two bunches. But first he took the letter out of the basket,
put it under a stone and seated himself thereon in order that the
letter might not see and betray him. The judge, however, again made him
give an explanation about the missing bunches. “Ah,” said the boy, “how
have you learnt that? The letter could not know about it, for I put it
under a stone before I did it.” The judge could not help laughing at
the boy’s simplicity, and sent the man a letter wherein he cautioned
him to keep the poor boy better, and not let him want for meat and
drink, and also that he was to teach him what was right and what was
wrong.

“I will soon show thee the difference,” said the hard man, “if thou
wilt eat, thou must work, and if thou dost anything wrong, thou shalt
be quite sufficiently taught by blows.”

The next day he set him a hard task. He was to chop two bundles of
straw for food for the horses, and then the man threatened: “In five
hours,” said he, “I shall be back again, and if the straw is not cut to
chaff by that time, I will beat thee until thou canst not move a limb.”
The farmer went with his wife, the man-servant and the girl, to the
yearly fair, and left nothing behind for the boy but a small bit of
bread. The boy seated himself on the bench, and began to work with all
his might. As he got warm over it he put his little coat off and threw
it on the straw. In his terror lest he should not get done in time he
kept constantly cutting, and in his haste, without noticing it, he
chopped his little coat as well as the straw. He became aware of the
misfortune too late; there was no repairing it. “Ah,” cried he, “now
all is over with me! The wicked man did not threaten me for nothing; if
he comes back and sees what I have done, he will kill me. Rather than
that I will take my own life.”

The boy had once heard the farmer’s wife say, “I have a pot with poison
in it under my bed.” She, however, had only said that to keep away
greedy people, for there was honey in it. The boy crept under the bed,
brought out the pot, and ate all that was in it. “I do not know,” said
he, “folks say death is bitter, but it tastes very sweet to me. It is
no wonder that the farmer’s wife has so often longed for death.” He
seated himself in a little chair, and was prepared to die. But instead
of becoming weaker he felt himself strengthened by the nourishing food.
“It cannot have been poison,” thought he, “but the farmer once said
there was a small bottle of poison for flies in the box in which he
keeps his clothes; that, no doubt, will be the true poison, and bring
death to me.” It was, however, no poison for flies, but Hungarian wine.
The boy got out the bottle, and emptied it. “This death tastes sweet
too,” said he, but shortly after when the wine began to mount into his
brain and stupefy him, he thought his end was drawing near. “I feel
that I must die,” said he, “I will go away to the churchyard, and seek
a grave.” He staggered out, reached the churchyard, and laid himself in
a newly dug grave. He lost his senses more and more. In the
neighbourhood was an inn where a wedding was being kept; when he heard
the music, he fancied he was already in Paradise, until at length he
lost all consciousness. The poor boy never awoke again; the heat of the
strong wine and the cold night-dew deprived him of life, and he
remained in the grave in which he had laid himself.

When the farmer heard the news of the boy’s death he was terrified, and
afraid of being brought to justice indeed, his distress took such a
powerful hold of him that he fell fainting to the ground. His wife, who
was standing on the hearth with a pan of hot fat, ran to him to help
him. But the flames darted against the pan, the whole house caught
fire, in a few hours it lay in ashes, and the rest of the years they
had to live they passed in poverty and misery, tormented by the pangs
of conscience.


186 The True Sweethearts

There was once on a time a girl who was young and beautiful, but she
had lost her mother when she was quite a child, and her step-mother did
all she could to make the girl’s life wretched. Whenever this woman
gave her anything to do, she worked at it indefatigably, and did
everything that lay in her power. Still she could not touch the heart
of the wicked woman by that; she was never satisfied; it was never
enough. The harder the girl worked, the more work was put upon her, and
all that the woman thought of was how to weigh her down with still
heavier burdens, and make her life still more miserable.

One day she said to her, “Here are twelve pounds of feathers which thou
must pick, and if they are not done this evening, thou mayst expect a
good beating. Dost thou imagine thou art to idle away the whole day?”
The poor girl sat down to the work, but tears ran down her cheeks as
she did so, for she saw plainly enough that it was quite impossible to
finish the work in one day. Whenever she had a little heap of feathers
lying before her, and she sighed or smote her hands together in her
anguish, they flew away, and she had to pick them out again, and begin
her work anew. Then she put her elbows on the table, laid her face in
her two hands, and cried, “Is there no one, then, on God’s earth to
have pity on me?” Then she heard a low voice which said, “Be comforted,
my child, I have come to help thee.” The maiden looked up, and an old
woman was by her side. She took the girl kindly by the hand, and said,
“Only tell me what is troubling thee.” As she spoke so kindly, the girl
told her of her miserable life, and how one burden after another was
laid upon her, and she never could get to the end of the work which was
given to her. “If I have not done these feathers by this evening, my
step-mother will beat me; she has threatened she will, and I know she
keeps her word.” Her tears began to flow again, but the good old woman
said, “Do not be afraid, my child; rest a while, and in the meantime I
will look to thy work.” The girl lay down on her bed, and soon fell
asleep. The old woman seated herself at the table with the feathers,
and how they did fly off the quills, which she scarcely touched with
her withered hands! The twelve pounds were soon finished, and when the
girl awoke, great snow-white heaps were lying, piled up, and everything
in the room was neatly cleared away, but the old woman had vanished.
The maiden thanked God, and sat still till evening came, when the
step-mother came in and marvelled to see the work completed. “Just
look, you awkward creature,” said she, “what can be done when people
are industrious; and why couldst thou not set about something else?
There thou sittest with thy hands crossed.” When she went out she said,
“The creature is worth more than her salt. I must give her some work
that is still harder.”

Next morning she called the girl, and said, “There is a spoon for thee;
with that thou must empty out for me the great pond which is beside the
garden, and if it is not done by night, thou knowest what will happen.”
The girl took the spoon, and saw that it was full of holes; but even if
it had not been, she never could have emptied the pond with it. She set
to work at once, knelt down by the water, into which her tears were
falling, and began to empty it. But the good old woman appeared again,
and when she learnt the cause of her grief, she said, “Be of good
cheer, my child. Go into the thicket and lie down and sleep; I will
soon do thy work.” As soon as the old woman was alone, she barely
touched the pond, and a vapour rose up on high from the water, and
mingled itself with the clouds. Gradually the pond was emptied, and
when the maiden awoke before sunset and came thither, she saw nothing
but the fishes which were struggling in the mud. She went to her
step-mother, and showed her that the work was done. “It ought to have
been done long before this,” said she, and grew white with anger, but
she meditated something new.

On the third morning she said to the girl, “Thou must build me a castle
on the plain there, and it must be ready by the evening.” The maiden
was dismayed, and said, “How can I complete such a great work?” “I will
endure no opposition,” screamed the step-mother. “If thou canst empty a
pond with a spoon that is full of holes, thou canst build a castle too.
I will take possession of it this very day, and if anything is wanting,
even if it be the most trifling thing in the kitchen or cellar, thou
knowest what lies before thee!” She drove the girl out, and when she
entered the valley, the rocks were there, piled up one above the other,
and all her strength would not have enabled her even to move the very
smallest of them. She sat down and wept, and still she hoped the old
woman would help her. The old woman was not long in coming; she
comforted her and said, “Lie down there in the shade and sleep, and I
will soon build the castle for thee. If it would be a pleasure to thee,
thou canst live in it thyself.” When the maiden had gone away, the old
woman touched the gray rocks. They began to rise, and immediately moved
together as if giants had built the walls; and on these the building
arose, and it seemed as if countless hands were working invisibly, and
placing one stone upon another. There was a dull heavy noise from the
ground; pillars arose of their own accord on high, and placed
themselves in order near each other. The tiles laid themselves in order
on the roof, and when noon-day came, the great weather-cock was already
turning itself on the summit of the tower, like a golden figure of the
Virgin with fluttering garments. The inside of the castle was being
finished while evening was drawing near. How the old woman managed it,
I know not; but the walls of the rooms were hung with silk and velvet,
embroidered chairs were there, and richly ornamented arm-chairs by
marble tables; crystal chandeliers hung down from the ceilings, and
mirrored themselves in the smooth pavement; green parrots were there in
gilt cages, and so were strange birds which sang most beautifully, and
there was on all sides as much magnificence as if a king were going to
live there. The sun was just setting when the girl awoke, and the
brightness of a thousand lights flashed in her face. She hurried to the
castle, and entered by the open door. The steps were spread with red
cloth, and the golden balustrade beset with flowering trees. When she
saw the splendour of the apartment, she stood as if turned to stone.
Who knows how long she might have stood there if she had not remembered
the step-mother? “Alas!” she said to herself, “if she could but be
satisfied at last, and would give up making my life a misery to me.”
The girl went and told her that the castle was ready. “I will move into
it at once,” said she, and rose from her seat. When they entered the
castle, she was forced to hold her hand before her eyes, the brilliancy
of everything was so dazzling. “Thou seest,” said she to the girl, “how
easy it has been for thee to do this; I ought to have given thee
something harder.” She went through all the rooms, and examined every
corner to see if anything was wanting or defective; but she could
discover nothing. “Now we will go down below,” said she, looking at the
girl with malicious eyes. “The kitchen and the cellar still have to be
examined, and if thou hast forgotten anything thou shalt not escape thy
punishment.” But the fire was burning on the hearth, and the meat was
cooking in the pans, the tongs and shovel were leaning against the
wall, and the shining brazen utensils all arranged in sight. Nothing
was wanting, not even a coal-box and water-pail. “Which is the way to
the cellar?” she cried. “If that is not abundantly filled, it shall go
ill with thee.” She herself raised up the trap-door and descended; but
she had hardly made two steps before the heavy trap-door which was only
laid back, fell down. The girl heard a scream, lifted up the door very
quickly to go to her aid, but she had fallen down, and the girl found
her lying lifeless at the bottom.

And now the magnificent castle belonged to the girl alone. She at first
did not know how to reconcile herself to her good fortune. Beautiful
dresses were hanging in the wardrobes, the chests were filled with gold
or silver, or with pearls and jewels, and she never felt a desire that
she was not able to gratify. And soon the fame of the beauty and riches
of the maiden went over all the world. Wooers presented themselves
daily, but none pleased her. At length the son of the King came and he
knew how to touch her heart, and she betrothed herself to him. In the
garden of the castle was a lime-tree, under which they were one day
sitting together, when he said to her, “I will go home and obtain my
father’s consent to our marriage. I entreat thee to wait for me here
under this lime-tree, I shall be back with thee in a few hours.” The
maiden kissed him on his left cheek, and said, “Keep true to me, and
never let any one else kiss thee on this cheek. I will wait here under
the lime-tree until thou returnest.”

The maid stayed beneath the lime-tree until sunset, but he did not
return. She sat three days from morning till evening, waiting for him,
but in vain. As he still was not there by the fourth day, she said,
“Some accident has assuredly befallen him. I will go out and seek him,
and will not come back until I have found him.” She packed up three of
her most beautiful dresses, one embroidered with bright stars, the
second with silver moons, the third with golden suns, tied up a handful
of jewels in her handkerchief, and set out. She inquired everywhere for
her betrothed, but no one had seen him; no one knew anything about him.
Far and wide did she wander through the world, but she found him not.
At last she hired herself to a farmer as a cow-herd, and buried her
dresses and jewels beneath a stone.

And now she lived as a herdswoman, guarded her herd, and was very sad
and full of longing for her beloved one; she had a little calf which
she taught to know her, and fed it out of her own hand, and when she
said,

“Little calf, little calf, kneel by my side,
And do not forget thy shepherd-maid,
As the prince forgot his betrothed bride,
Who waited for him ’neath the lime-tree’s shade.”


the little calf knelt down, and she stroked it.

And when she had lived for a couple of years alone and full of grief, a
report was spread over all the land that the King’s daughter was about
to celebrate her marriage. The road to the town passed through the
village where the maiden was living, and it came to pass that once when
the maiden was driving out her herd, her bridegroom travelled by. He
was sitting proudly on his horse, and never looked round, but when she
saw him she recognized her beloved, and it was just as if a sharp knife
had pierced her heart. “Alas!” said she, “I believed him true to me,
but he has forgotten me.”

Next day he again came along the road. When he was near her she said to
the little calf,

“Little calf, little calf, kneel by my side,
And do not forget thy shepherd-maid,
As the prince forgot his betrothed bride,
Who waited for him ’neath the lime-tree’s shade.”


When he was aware of the voice, he looked down and reined in his horse.
He looked into the herd’s face, and then put his hands before his eyes
as if he were trying to remember something, but he soon rode onwards
and was out of sight. “Alas!” said she, “he no longer knows me,” and
her grief was ever greater.

Soon after this a great festival three days long was to be held at the
King’s court, and the whole country was invited to it.

“Now will I try my last chance,” thought the maiden, and when evening
came she went to the stone under which she had buried her treasures.
She took out the dress with the golden suns, put it on, and adorned
herself with the jewels. She let down her hair, which she had concealed
under a handkerchief, and it fell down in long curls about her, and
thus she went into the town, and in the darkness was observed by no
one. When she entered the brightly-lighted hall, every one started back
in amazement, but no one knew who she was. The King’s son went to meet
her, but he did not recognize her. He led her out to dance, and was so
enchanted with her beauty, that he thought no more of the other bride.
When the feast was over, she vanished in the crowd, and hastened before
daybreak to the village, where she once more put on her herd’s dress.

Next evening she took out the dress with the silver moons, and put a
half-moon made of precious stones in her hair. When she appeared at the
festival, all eyes were turned upon her, but the King’s son hastened to
meet her, and filled with love for her, danced with her alone, and no
longer so much as glanced at anyone else. Before she went away she was
forced to promise him to come again to the festival on the last
evening.

When she appeared for the third time, she wore the star-dress which
sparkled at every step she took, and her hair-ribbon and girdle were
starred with jewels. The prince had already been waiting for her for a
long time, and forced his way up to her. “Do but tell who thou art,”
said he, “I feel just as if I had already known thee a long time.”
“Dost thou not know what I did when thou leftest me?” Then she stepped
up to him, and kissed him on his left cheek, and in a moment it was as
if scales fell from his eyes, and he recognized the true bride. “Come,”
said he to her, “here I stay no longer,” gave her his hand, and led her
down to the carriage. The horses hurried away to the magic castle as if
the wind had been harnessed to the carriage. The illuminated windows
already shone in the distance. When they drove past the lime-tree,
countless glow-worms were swarming about it. It shook its branches, and
sent forth their fragrance. On the steps flowers were blooming, and the
room echoed with the song of strange birds, but in the hall the entire
court was assembled, and the priest was waiting to marry the bridegroom
to the true bride.


187 The Hare and the Hedgehog

This story, my dear young folks, seems to be false, but it really is
true, for my grandfather, from whom I have it, used always, when
relating it, to say complacently, “It must be true, my son, or else no
one could tell it to you.” The story is as follows. One Sunday morning
about harvest time, just as the buckwheat was in bloom, the sun was
shining brightly in heaven, the east wind was blowing warmly over the
stubble-fields, the larks were singing in the air, the bees buzzing
among the buckwheat, the people were all going in their Sunday clothes
to church, and all creatures were happy, and the hedgehog was happy
too.

The hedgehog, however, was standing by his door with his arms akimbo,
enjoying the morning breezes, and slowly trilling a little song to
himself, which was neither better nor worse than the songs which
hedgehogs are in the habit of singing on a blessed Sunday morning.
Whilst he was thus singing half aloud to himself, it suddenly occurred
to him that, while his wife was washing and drying the children, he
might very well take a walk into the field, and see how his turnips
were going on. The turnips were, in fact, close beside his house, and
he and his family were accustomed to eat them, for which reason he
looked upon them as his own. No sooner said than done. The hedgehog
shut the house-door behind him, and took the path to the field. He had
not gone very far from home, and was just turning round the sloe-bush
which stands there outside the field, to go up into the turnip-field,
when he observed the hare who had gone out on business of the same
kind, namely, to visit his cabbages. When the hedgehog caught sight of
the hare, he bade him a friendly good morning. But the hare, who was in
his own way a distinguished gentleman, and frightfully haughty, did not
return the hedgehog’s greeting, but said to him, assuming at the same
time a very contemptuous manner, “How do you happen to be running about
here in the field so early in the morning?” “I am taking a walk,” said
the hedgehog. “A walk!” said the hare, with a smile. “It seems to me
that you might use your legs for a better purpose.” This answer made
the hedgehog furiously angry, for he can bear anything but an attack on
his legs, just because they are crooked by nature. So now the hedgehog
said to the hare, “You seem to imagine that you can do more with your
legs than I with mine.” “That is just what I do think,” said the hare.
“That can be put to the test,” said the hedgehog. “I wager that if we
run a race, I will outstrip you.” “That is ridiculous! You with your
short legs!” said the hare, “but for my part I am willing, if you have
such a monstrous fancy for it. What shall we wager?” “A golden
louis-d’or and a bottle of brandy,” said the hedgehog. “Done,” said the
hare. “Shake hands on it, and then we may as well come off at once.”
“Nay,” said the hedgehog, “there is no such great hurry! I am still
fasting, I will go home first, and have a little breakfast. In
half-an-hour I will be back again at this place.”

Hereupon the hedgehog departed, for the hare was quite satisfied with
this. On his way the hedgehog thought to himself, “The hare relies on
his long legs, but I will contrive to get the better of him. He may be
a great man, but he is a very silly fellow, and he shall pay for what
he has said.” So when the hedgehog reached home, he said to his wife,
“Wife, dress thyself quickly, thou must go out to the field with me.”
“What is going on, then?” said his wife. “I have made a wager with the
hare, for a gold louis-d’or and a bottle of brandy. I am to run a race
with him, and thou must be present.” “Good heavens, husband,” the wife
now cried, “art thou not right in thy mind, hast thou completely lost
thy wits? What can make thee want to run a race with the hare?” “Hold
thy tongue, woman,” said the hedgehog, “that is my affair. Don’t begin
to discuss things which are matters for men. Be off, dress thyself, and
come with me.” What could the hedgehog’s wife do? She was forced to
obey him, whether she liked it or not.

So when they had set out on their way together, the hedgehog said to
his wife, “Now pay attention to what I am going to say. Look you, I
will make the long field our race-course. The hare shall run in one
furrow, and I in another, and we will begin to run from the top. Now
all that thou hast to do is to place thyself here below in the furrow,
and when the hare arrives at the end of the furrow, on the other side
of thee, thou must cry out to him, ‘I am here already!’”

Then they reached the field, and the hedgehog showed his wife her
place, and then walked up the field. When he reached the top, the hare
was already there. “Shall we start?” said the hare. “Certainly,” said
the hedgehog. “Then both at once.” So saying, each placed himself in
his own furrow. The hare counted, “Once, twice, thrice, and away!” and
went off like a whirlwind down the field. The hedgehog, however, only
ran about three paces, and then he stooped down in the furrow, and
stayed quietly where he was. When the hare therefore arrived in full
career at the lower end of the field, the hedgehog’s wife met him with
the cry, “I am here already!” The hare was shocked and wondered not a
little, he thought no other than that it was the hedgehog himself who
was calling to him, for the hedgehog’s wife looked just like her
husband. The hare, however, thought to himself, “That has not been done
fairly,” and cried, “It must be run again, let us have it again.” And
once more he went off like the wind in a storm, so that he seemed to
fly. But the hedgehog’s wife stayed quietly in her place. So when the
hare reached the top of the field, the hedgehog himself cried out to
him, “I am here already.” The hare, however, quite beside himself with
anger, cried, “It must be run again, we must have it again.” “All
right,” answered the hedgehog, “for my part we’ll run as often as you
choose.” So the hare ran seventy-three times more, and the hedgehog
always held out against him, and every time the hare reached either the
top or the bottom, either the hedgehog or his wife said, “I am here
already.”

At the seventy-fourth time, however, the hare could no longer reach the
end. In the middle of the field he fell to the ground, blood streamed
out of his mouth, and he lay dead on the spot. But the hedgehog took
the louis-d’or which he had won and the bottle of brandy, called his
wife out of the furrow, and both went home together in great delight,
and if they are not dead, they are living there still.

This is how it happened that the hedgehog made the hare run races with
him on the Buxtehuder heath till he died, and since that time no hare
has ever had any fancy for running races with a Buxtehuder hedgehog.