THE STORY OF OEDIPUS

Fragment #1—C.I.G. Ital. et Sic. 1292. ii. 11: ....the _Story of
Oedipus_ by Cinaethon in six thousand six hundred verses.

Fragment #2—Pausanias, ix. 5.10: Judging by Homer I do not believe that
Oedipus had children by Iocasta: his sons were born of Euryganeia as
the writer of the Epic called the _Story of Oedipus_ clearly shows.

Fragment #3—Scholiast on Euripides Phoen., 1750: The authors of the
_Story of Oedipus_ (say) of the Sphinx: ‘But furthermore (she killed)
noble Haemon, the dear son of blameless Creon, the comeliest and
loveliest of boys.’


THE THEBAID

Fragment #1—Contest of Homer and Hesiod: Homer travelled about reciting
his epics, first the “Thebaid”, in seven thousand verses, which begins:
‘Sing, goddess, of parched Argos, whence lords...’

Fragment #2—Athenaeus, xi. 465 E: ‘Then the heaven-born hero,
golden-haired Polyneices, first set beside Oedipus a rich table of
silver which once belonged to Cadmus the divinely wise: next he filled
a fine golden cup with sweet wine. But when Oedipus perceived these
treasures of his father, great misery fell on his heart, and he
straight-way called down bitter curses there in the presence of both
his sons. And the avenging Fury of the gods failed not to hear him as
he prayed that they might never divide their father’s goods in loving
brotherhood, but that war and fighting might be ever the portion of
them both.’

Fragment #3—Laurentian Scholiast on Sophocles, O.C. 1375: ‘And when
Oedipus noticed the haunch 2801 he threw it on the ground and said:
“Oh! Oh! my sons have sent this mocking me...” So he prayed to Zeus the
king and the other deathless gods that each might fall by his brother’s
hand and go down into the house of Hades.’

Fragment #4—Pausanias, viii. 25.8: Adrastus fled from Thebes ‘wearing
miserable garments, and took black-maned Areion 2802 with him.’

Fragment #5—Pindar, Ol. vi. 15: 2803 ‘But when the seven dead had
received their last rites in Thebes, the Son of Talaus lamented and
spoke thus among them: “Woe is me, for I miss the bright eye of my
host, a good seer and a stout spearman alike.”’

Fragment #6—Apollodorus, i. 74: Oeneus married Periboea the daughter of
Hipponous. The author of the _Thebais_ says that when Olenus had been
stormed, Oeneus received her as a prize.

Fragment #7—Pausanias, ix. 18.6: Near the spring is the tomb of
Asphodicus. This Asphodicus killed Parthenopaeus the son of Talaus in
the battle against the Argives, as the Thebans say; though that part of
the _Thebais_ which tells of the death of Parthenopaeus says that it
was Periclymenus who killed him.


THE EPIGONI

Fragment #1—Contest of Homer and Hesiod: Next (Homer composed) the
_Epigoni_ in seven thousand verses, beginning, ‘And now, Muses, let us
begin to sing of younger men.’

Fragment #2—Photius, Lexicon: Teumesia. Those who have written on
Theban affairs have given a full account of the Teumesian fox. 2901
They relate that the creature was sent by the gods to punish the
descendants of Cadmus, and that the Thebans therefore excluded those of
the house of Cadmus from kingship. But (they say) a certain Cephalus,
the son of Deion, an Athenian, who owned a hound which no beast ever
escaped, had accidentally killed his wife Procris, and being purified
of the homicide by the Cadmeans, hunted the fox with his hound, and
when they had overtaken it both hound and fox were turned into stones
near Teumessus. These writers have taken the story from the Epic Cycle.

Fragment #3—Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. i. 308: The authors
of the _Thebais_ say that Manto the daughter of Teiresias was sent to
Delphi by the Epigoni as a first fruit of their spoil, and that in
accordance with an oracle of Apollo she went out and met Rhacius, the
son of Lebes, a Mycenaean by race. This man she married—for the oracle
also contained the command that she should marry whomsoever she might
meet—and coming to Colophon, was there much cast down and wept over the
destruction of her country.


THE CYPRIA

Fragment #1—Proclus, Chrestomathia, i: This 3001 is continued by the
epic called _Cypria_ which is current is eleven books. Its contents are
as follows.

Zeus plans with Themis to bring about the Trojan war. Strife arrives
while the gods are feasting at the marriage of Peleus and starts a
dispute between Hera, Athena, and Aphrodite as to which of them is
fairest. The three are led by Hermes at the command of Zeus to
Alexandrus on Mount Ida for his decision, and Alexandrus, lured by his
promised marriage with Helen, decides in favour of Aphrodite.

Then Alexandrus builds his ships at Aphrodite’s suggestion, and Helenus
foretells the future to him, and Aphrodite order Aeneas to sail with
him, while Cassandra prophesies as to what will happen afterwards.
Alexandrus next lands in Lacedaemon and is entertained by the sons of
Tyndareus, and afterwards by Menelaus in Sparta, where in the course of
a feast he gives gifts to Helen.

After this, Menelaus sets sail for Crete, ordering Helen to furnish the
guests with all they require until they depart. Meanwhile, Aphrodite
brings Helen and Alexandrus together, and they, after their union, put
very great treasures on board and sail away by night. Hera stirs up a
storm against them and they are carried to Sidon, where Alexandrus
takes the city. From there he sailed to Troy and celebrated his
marriage with Helen.

In the meantime Castor and Polydeuces, while stealing the cattle of
Idas and Lynceus, were caught in the act, and Castor was killed by
Idas, and Lynceus and Idas by Polydeuces. Zeus gave them immortality
every other day.

Iris next informs Menelaus of what has happened at his home. Menelaus
returns and plans an expedition against Ilium with his brother, and
then goes on to Nestor. Nestor in a digression tells him how Epopeus
was utterly destroyed after seducing the daughter of Lycus, and the