part is as definitely continental; Delos is ignored and Delphi alone is
the important centre of Apollo’s worship. From this it is clear that
the two parts need not be of one date—The first, indeed, is ascribed
(Scholiast on Pindar _Nem_. ii, 2) to Cynaethus of Chios (_fl_. 504
B.C.), a date which is obviously far too low; general considerations
point rather to the eighth century. The second part is not later than
600 B.C.; for (1) the chariot-races at Pytho, which commenced in 586
B.C., are unknown to the writer of the hymn, (2) the temple built by
Trophonius and Agamedes for Apollo (ll. 294-299) seems to have been
still standing when the hymn was written, and this temple was burned in
548. We may at least be sure that the first part is a Chian work, and
that the second was composed by a continental poet familiar with
Delphi.

The _Hymn to Hermes_ differs from others in its burlesque, quasi-comic
character, and it is also the best-known of the Hymns to English
readers in consequence of Shelley’s translation.

After a brief narrative of the birth of Hermes, the author goes on to
show how he won a place among the gods. First the new-born child found
a tortoise and from its shell contrived the lyre; next, with much
cunning circumstance, he stole Apollo’s cattle and, when charged with
the theft by Apollo, forced that god to appear in undignified guise
before the tribunal of Zeus. Zeus seeks to reconcile the pair, and
Hermes by the gift of the lyre wins Apollo’s friendship and purchases
various prerogatives, a share in divination, the lordship of herds and
animals, and the office of messenger from the gods to Hades.

The Hymn is hard to date. Hermes’ lyre has seven strings and the
invention of the seven-stringed lyre is ascribed to Terpander (_flor_.
676 B.C.). The hymn must therefore be later than that date, though
Terpander, according to Weir Smyth 1116, may have only modified the
scale of the lyre; yet while the burlesque character precludes an early
date, this feature is far removed, as Allen and Sikes remark, from the
silliness of the _Battle of the Frogs and Mice_, so that a date in the
earlier part of the sixth century is most probable.

The _Hymn to Aphrodite_ is not the least remarkable, from a literary
point of view, of the whole collection, exhibiting as it does in a
masterly manner a divine being as the unwilling victim of an
irresistible force. It tells how all creatures, and even the gods
themselves, are subject to the will of Aphrodite, saving only Artemis,
Athena, and Hestia; how Zeus to humble her pride of power caused her to
love a mortal, Anchises; and how the goddess visited the hero upon Mt.
Ida. A comparison of this work with the Lay of Demodocus (_Odyssey_
viii, 266 ff.), which is superficially similar, will show how far
superior is the former in which the goddess is but a victim to forces
stronger than herself. The lines (247-255) in which Aphrodite tells of
her humiliation and grief are specially noteworthy.

There are only general indications of date. The influence of Hesiod is
clear, and the hymn has almost certainly been used by the author of the
_Hymn to Demeter_, so that the date must lie between these two periods,
and the seventh century seems to be the latest date possible.

The _Hymn to Dionysus_ relates how the god was seized by pirates and
how with many manifestations of power he avenged himself on them by
turning them into dolphins. The date is widely disputed, for while
Ludwich believes it to be a work of the fourth or third century, Allen
and Sikes consider a sixth or seventh century date to be possible. The
story is figured in a different form on the reliefs from the choragic
monument of Lysicrates, now in the British Museum 1117.

Very different in character is the _Hymn to Ares_, which is Orphic in
character. The writer, after lauding the god by detailing his
attributes, prays to be delivered from feebleness and weakness of soul,
as also from impulses to wanton and brutal violence.

The only other considerable hymn is that to _Pan_, which describes how
he roams hunting among the mountains and thickets and streams, how he
makes music at dusk while returning from the chase, and how he joins in
dancing with the nymphs who sing the story of his birth. This, beyond
most works of Greek literature, is remarkable for its fresh and
spontaneous love of wild natural scenes.

The remaining hymns are mostly of the briefest compass, merely hailing
the god to be celebrated and mentioning his chief attributes. The Hymns
to _Hermes_ (xviii), to the _Dioscuri_ (xvii), and to _Demeter_ (xiii)
are mere abstracts of the longer hymns iv, xxxiii, and ii.

The Epigrams of Homer

The _Epigrams of Homer_ are derived from the pseudo-Herodotean _Life of
Homer_, but many of them occur in other documents such as the _Contest
of Homer and Hesiod_, or are quoted by various ancient authors. These
poetic fragments clearly antedate the “Life” itself, which seems to
have been so written round them as to supply appropriate occasions for
their composition. Epigram iii on Midas of Larissa was otherwise
attributed to Cleobulus of Lindus, one of the Seven Sages; the address
to Glaucus (xi) is purely Hesiodic; xiii, according to MM. Croiset, is
a fragment from a gnomic poem. Epigram xiv is a curious poem attributed
on no very obvious grounds to Hesiod by Julius Pollox. In it the poet
invokes Athena to protect certain potters and their craft, if they
will, according to promise, give him a reward for his song; if they
prove false, malignant gnomes are invoked to wreck the kiln and hurt
the potters.

The Burlesque Poems

To Homer were popularly ascribed certain burlesque poems in which
Aristotle (_Poetics_ iv) saw the germ of comedy. Most interesting of
these, were it extant, would be the _Margites_. The hero of the epic is
at once sciolist and simpleton, “knowing many things, but knowing them
all badly”. It is unfortunately impossible to trace the plan of the
poem, which presumably detailed the adventures of this unheroic
character: the metre used was a curious mixture of hexametric and
iambic lines. The date of such a work cannot be high: Croiset thinks it
may belong to the period of Archilochus (c. 650 B.C.), but it may well
be somewhat later.

Another poem, of which we know even less, is the _Cercopes_. These
Cercopes (‘Monkey-Men’) were a pair of malignant dwarfs who went about
the world mischief-making. Their punishment by Heracles is represented
on one of the earlier metopes from Selinus. It would be idle to
speculate as to the date of this work.

Finally there is the _Battle of the Frogs and Mice_. Here is told the