story of Oedipus, the madness of Heracles, and the story of Theseus and
Ariadne. Then they travel over Hellas and gather the leaders, detecting
Odysseus when he pretends to be mad, not wishing to join the
expedition, by seizing his son Telemachus for punishment at the
suggestion of Palamedes.

All the leaders then meet together at Aulis and sacrifice. The incident
of the serpent and the sparrows 3002 takes place before them, and
Calchas foretells what is going to befall. After this, they put out to
sea, and reach Teuthrania and sack it, taking it for Ilium. Telephus
comes out to the rescue and kills Thersander and son of Polyneices, and
is himself wounded by Achilles. As they put out from Mysia a storm
comes on them and scatters them, and Achilles first puts in at Scyros
and married Deidameia, the daughter of Lycomedes, and then heals
Telephus, who had been led by an oracle to go to Argos, so that he
might be their guide on the voyage to Ilium.

When the expedition had mustered a second time at Aulis, Agamemnon,
while at the chase, shot a stag and boasted that he surpassed even
Artemis. At this the goddess was so angry that she sent stormy winds
and prevented them from sailing. Calchas then told them of the anger of
the goddess and bade them sacrifice Iphigeneia to Artemis. This they
attempt to do, sending to fetch Iphigeneia as though for marriage with
Achilles.

Artemis, however, snatched her away and transported her to the Tauri,
making her immortal, and putting a stag in place of the girl upon the
altar.

Next they sail as far as Tenedos: and while they are feasting,
Philoctetes is bitten by a snake and is left behind in Lemnos because
of the stench of his sore. Here, too, Achilles quarrels with Agamemnon
because he is invited late. Then the Greeks tried to land at Ilium, but
the Trojans prevent them, and Protesilaus is killed by Hector. Achilles
then kills Cycnus, the son of Poseidon, and drives the Trojans back.
The Greeks take up their dead and send envoys to the Trojans demanding
the surrender of Helen and the treasure with her. The Trojans refusing,
they first assault the city, and then go out and lay waste the country
and cities round about. After this, Achilles desires to see Helen, and
Aphrodite and Thetis contrive a meeting between them. The Achaeans next
desire to return home, but are restrained by Achilles, who afterwards
drives off the cattle of Aeneas, and sacks Lyrnessus and Pedasus and
many of the neighbouring cities, and kills Troilus. Patroclus carries
away Lycaon to Lemnos and sells him as a slave, and out of the spoils
Achilles receives Briseis as a prize, and Agamemnon Chryseis. Then
follows the death of Palamedes, the plan of Zeus to relieve the Trojans
by detaching Achilles from the Hellenic confederacy, and a catalogue of
the Trojan allies.

Fragment #2—Tzetzes, Chil. xiii. 638: Stasinus composed the _Cypria_
which the more part say was Homer’s work and by him given to Stasinus
as a dowry with money besides.

Fragment #3—Scholiast on Homer, Il. i. 5: ‘There was a time when the
countless tribes of men, though wide-dispersed, oppressed the surface
of the deep-bosomed earth, and Zeus saw it and had pity and in his wise
heart resolved to relieve the all-nurturing earth of men by causing the
great struggle of the Ilian war, that the load of death might empty the
world. And so the heroes were slain in Troy, and the plan of Zeus came
to pass.’

Fragment #4—Volumina Herculan, II. viii. 105: The author of the
_Cypria_ says that Thetis, to please Hera, avoided union with Zeus, at
which he was enraged and swore that she should be the wife of a mortal.

Fragment #5—Scholiast on Homer, Il. xvii. 140: For at the marriage of
Peleus and Thetis, the gods gathered together on Pelion to feast and
brought Peleus gifts. Cheiron gave him a stout ashen shaft which he had
cut for a spear, and Athena, it is said, polished it, and Hephaestus
fitted it with a head. The story is given by the author of the
_Cypria_.

Fragment #6—Athenaeus, xv. 682 D, F: The author of the _Cypria_,
whether Hegesias or Stasinus, mentions flowers used for garlands. The
poet, whoever he was, writes as follows in his first book:

(ll. 1-7) ‘She clothed herself with garments which the Graces and Hours
had made for her and dyed in flowers of spring—such flowers as the
Seasons wear—in crocus and hyacinth and flourishing violet and the
rose’s lovely bloom, so sweet and delicious, and heavenly buds, the
flowers of the narcissus and lily. In such perfumed garments is
Aphrodite clothed at all seasons.

((LACUNA))

(ll. 8-12) Then laughter-loving Aphrodite and her handmaidens wove
sweet-smelling crowns of flowers of the earth and put them upon their
heads—the bright-coiffed goddesses, the Nymphs and Graces, and golden
Aphrodite too, while they sang sweetly on the mount of many-fountained
Ida.’

Fragment #7—Clement of Alexandria, Protrept ii. 30. 5: ‘Castor was
mortal, and the fate of death was destined for him; but Polydeuces,
scion of Ares, was immortal.’

Fragment #8—Athenaeus, viii. 334 B: ‘And after them she bare a third
child, Helen, a marvel to men. Rich-tressed Nemesis once gave her birth
when she had been joined in love with Zeus the king of the gods by
harsh violence. For Nemesis tried to escape him and liked not to lie in
love with her father Zeus the Son of Cronos; for shame and indignation
vexed her heart: therefore she fled him over the land and fruitless
dark water. But Zeus ever pursued and longed in his heart to catch her.
Now she took the form of a fish and sped over the waves of the
loud-roaring sea, and now over Ocean’s stream and the furthest bounds
of Earth, and now she sped over the furrowed land, always turning into
such dread creatures as the dry land nurtures, that she might escape
him.’

Fragment #9—Scholiast on Euripides, Andr. 898: The writer 3003 of the
Cyprian histories says that (Helen’s third child was) Pleisthenes and
that she took him with her to Cyprus, and that the child she bore
Alexandrus was Aganus.

Fragment #10—Herodotus, ii. 117: For it is said in the _Cypria_ that
Alexandrus came with Helen to Ilium from Sparta in three days, enjoying
a favourable wind and calm sea.

Fragment #11—Scholiast on Homer, Il. iii. 242: For Helen had been
previously carried off by Theseus, and it was in consequence of this
earlier rape that Aphidna, a town in Attica, was sacked and Castor was
wounded in the right thigh by Aphidnus who was king at that time. Then
the Dioscuri, failing to find Theseus, sacked Athens. The story is in
the Cyclic writers.

Plutarch, Thes. 32: Hereas relates that Alycus was killed by Theseus
himself near Aphidna, and quotes the following verses in evidence: ‘In
spacious Aphidna Theseus slew him in battle long ago for rich-haired
Helen’s sake.’ 3004

Fragment #12—Scholiast on Pindar, Nem. x. 114: (ll. 1-6) ‘Straightway
Lynceus, trusting in his swift feet, made for Taygetus. He climbed its
highest peak and looked throughout the whole isle of Pelops, son of
Tantalus; and soon the glorious hero with his dread eyes saw
horse-taming Castor and athlete Polydeuces both hidden within a hollow
oak.’

Philodemus, On Piety: (Stasinus?) writes that Castor was killed with a
spear shot by Idas the son of Aphareus.

Fragment #13—Athenaeus, 35 C: ‘Menelaus, know that the gods made wine
the best thing for mortal man to scatter cares.’

Fragment #14—Laurentian Scholiast on Sophocles, Elect. 157: Either he
follows Homer who spoke of the three daughters of Agamemnon, or—like
the writer of the _Cypria_—he makes them four, (distinguishing)
Iphigeneia and Iphianassa.

Fragment #15—3005 Contest of Homer and Hesiod: ‘So they feasted all day
long, taking nothing from their own houses; for Agamemnon, king of men,
provided for them.’

Fragment #16—Louvre Papyrus: ‘I never thought to enrage so terribly the
stout heart of Achilles, for very well I loved him.’

Fragment #17—Pausanias, iv. 2. 7: The poet of the _Cypria_ says that
the wife of Protesilaus—who, when the Hellenes reached the Trojan
shore, first dared to land—was called Polydora, and was the daughter of
Meleager, the son of Oeneus.

Fragment #18—Eustathius, 119. 4: Some relate that Chryseis was taken
from Hypoplacian 3006 Thebes, and that she had not taken refuge there
nor gone there to sacrifice to Artemis, as the author of the _Cypria_
states, but was simply a fellow townswoman of Andromache.

Fragment #19—Pausanias, x. 31. 2: I know, because I have read it in the
epic _Cypria_, that Palamedes was drowned when he had gone out fishing,
and that it was Diomedes and Odysseus who caused his death.

Fragment #20—Plato, Euthyphron, 12 A: ‘That it is Zeus who has done
this, and brought all these things to pass, you do not like to say; for
where fear is, there too is shame.’

Fragment #21—Herodian, On Peculiar Diction: ‘By him she conceived and
bare the Gorgons, fearful monsters who lived in Sarpedon, a rocky
island in deep-eddying Oceanus.’

Fragment #22—Clement of Alexandria, Stromateis vii. 2. 19: Again,
Stasinus says: ‘He is a simple man who kills the father and lets the
children live.’


THE AETHIOPIS

Fragment #1—Proclus, Chrestomathia, ii: The _Cypria_, described in the
preceding book, has its sequel in the _Iliad_ of Homer, which is
followed in turn by the five books of the _Aethiopis_, the work of
Arctinus of Miletus. Their contents are as follows. The Amazon
Penthesileia, the daughter of Ares and of Thracian race, comes to aid
the Trojans, and after showing great prowess, is killed by Achilles and
buried by the Trojans. Achilles then slays Thersites for abusing and
reviling him for his supposed love for Penthesileia. As a result a
dispute arises amongst the Achaeans over the killing of Thersites, and
Achilles sails to Lesbos and after sacrificing to Apollo, Artemis, and
Leto, is purified by Odysseus from bloodshed.

Then Memnon, the son of Eos, wearing armour made by Hephaestus, comes
to help the Trojans, and Thetis tells her son about Memnon.

A battle takes place in which Antilochus is slain by Memnon and Memnon
by Achilles. Eos then obtains of Zeus and bestows upon her son
immortality; but Achilles routs the Trojans, and, rushing into the city
with them, is killed by Paris and Apollo. A great struggle for the body
then follows, Aias taking up the body and carrying it to the ships,
while Odysseus drives off the Trojans behind. The Achaeans then bury
Antilochus and lay out the body of Achilles, while Thetis, arriving
with the Muses and her sisters, bewails her son, whom she afterwards
catches away from the pyre and transports to the White Island. After
this, the Achaeans pile him a cairn and hold games in his honour.
Lastly a dispute arises between Odysseus and Aias over the arms of
Achilles.

Fragment #2—Scholiast on Homer, Il. xxiv. 804: Some read: ‘Thus they
performed the burial of Hector. Then came the Amazon, the daughter of
great-souled Ares the slayer of men.’

Fragment #3—Scholiast on Pindar, Isth. iii. 53: The author of the
_Aethiopis_ says that Aias killed himself about dawn.


THE LITTLE ILIAD

Fragment #1—Proclus, Chrestomathia, ii: Next comes the _Little Iliad_
in four books by Lesches of Mitylene: its contents are as follows. The
adjudging of the arms of Achilles takes place, and Odysseus, by the
contriving of Athena, gains them. Aias then becomes mad and destroys
the herd of the Achaeans and kills himself. Next Odysseus lies in wait
and catches Helenus, who prophesies as to the taking of Troy, and
Diomede accordingly brings Philoctetes from Lemnos. Philoctetes is
healed by Machaon, fights in single combat with Alexandrus and kills
him: the dead body is outraged by Menelaus, but the Trojans recover and
bury it. After this Deiphobus marries Helen, Odysseus brings
Neoptolemus from Scyros and gives him his father’s arms, and the ghost
of Achilles appears to him.

Eurypylus the son of Telephus arrives to aid the Trojans, shows his
prowess and is killed by Neoptolemus. The Trojans are now closely
besieged, and Epeius, by Athena’s instruction, builds the wooden horse.
Odysseus disfigures himself and goes in to Ilium as a spy, and there
being recognized by Helen, plots with her for the taking of the city;
after killing certain of the Trojans, he returns to the ships. Next he
carries the Palladium out of Troy with help of Diomedes. Then after
putting their best men in the wooden horse and burning their huts, the
main body of the Hellenes sail to Tenedos. The Trojans, supposing their
troubles over, destroy a part of their city wall and take the wooden
horse into their city and feast as though they had conquered the
Hellenes.

Fragment #2—Pseudo-Herodotus, Life of Homer: ‘I sing of Ilium and
Dardania, the land of fine horses, wherein the Danai, followers of
Ares, suffered many things.’

Fragment #3—Scholiast on Aristophanes, Knights 1056 and Aristophanes
ib: The story runs as follows: Aias and Odysseus were quarrelling as to
their achievements, says the poet of the _Little Iliad_, and Nestor
advised the Hellenes to send some of their number to go to the foot of
the walls and overhear what was said about the valour of the heroes
named above. The eavesdroppers heard certain girls disputing, one of
them saying that Aias was by far a better man than Odysseus and
continuing as follows:

‘For Aias took up and carried out of the strife the hero, Peleus’ son:
this great Odysseus cared not to do.’

To this another replied by Athena’s contrivance:

‘Why, what is this you say? A thing against reason and untrue! Even a
woman could carry a load once a man had put it on her shoulder; but she
could not fight. For she would fail with fear if she should fight.’

Fragment #4—Eustathius, 285. 34: The writer of the _Little Iliad_ says
that Aias was not buried in the usual way 3101, but was simply buried
in a coffin, because of the king’s anger.

Fragment #5—Eustathius on Homer, Il. 326: The author of the _Little
Iliad_ says that Achilles after putting out to sea from the country of
Telephus came to land there: ‘The storm carried Achilles the son of
Peleus to Scyros, and he came into an uneasy harbour there in that same
night.’

Fragment #6—Scholiast on Pindar, Nem. vi. 85: ‘About the spear-shaft
was a hoop of flashing gold, and a point was fitted to it at either
end.’

Fragment #7—Scholiast on Euripides Troades, 822: ‘...the vine which the
son of Cronos gave him as a recompense for his son. It bloomed richly
with soft leaves of gold and grape clusters; Hephaestus wrought it and
gave it to his father Zeus: and he bestowed it on Laomedon as a price
for Ganymedes.’

Fragment #8—Pausanias, iii. 26. 9: The writer of the epic _Little
Iliad_ says that Machaon was killed by Eurypylus, the son of Telephus.

Fragment #9—Homer, Odyssey iv. 247 and Scholiast: ‘He disguised
himself, and made himself like another person, a beggar, the like of
whom was not by the ships of the Achaeans.’

The Cyclic poet uses ‘beggar’ as a substantive, and so means to say
that when Odysseus had changed his clothes and put on rags, there was
no one so good for nothing at the ships as Odysseus.

Fragment #10—3102 Plutarch, Moralia, p. 153 F: And Homer put forward
the following verses as Lesches gives them: ‘Muse, tell me of those
things which neither happened before nor shall be hereafter.’

And Hesiod answered:

‘But when horses with rattling hoofs wreck chariots, striving for
victory about the tomb of Zeus.’

And it is said that, because this reply was specially admired, Hesiod
won the tripod (at the funeral games of Amphidamas).

Fragment #11—Scholiast on Lycophr., 344: Sinon, as it had been arranged
with him, secretly showed a signal-light to the Hellenes. Thus Lesches
writes:—‘It was midnight, and the clear moon was rising.’

Fragment #12—Pausanias, x. 25. 5: Meges is represented 3103 wounded in
the arm just as Lescheos the son of Aeschylinus of Pyrrha describes in
his _Sack of Ilium_ where it is said that he was wounded in the battle
which the Trojans fought in the night by Admetus, son of Augeias.
Lycomedes too is in the picture with a wound in the wrist, and Lescheos
says he was so wounded by Agenor...

Pausanias, x. 26. 4: Lescheos also mentions Astynous, and here he is,
fallen on one knee, while Neoptolemus strikes him with his sword...

Pausanias, x. 26. 8: The same writer says that Helicaon was wounded in
the night-battle, but was recognised by Odysseus and by him conducted
alive out of the fight...

Pausanias, x. 27. 1: Of them 3104, Lescheos says that Eion was killed
by Neoptolemus, and Admetus by Philoctetes... He also says that Priam
was not killed at the heart of Zeus Herceius, but was dragged away from
the altar and destroyed off hand by Neoptolemus at the doors of the
house... Lescheos says that Axion was the son of Priam and was slain by
Eurypylus, the son of Euaemon. Agenor—according to the same poet—was
butchered by Neoptolemus.

Fragment #13—Aristophanes, Lysistrata 155 and Scholiast: ‘Menelaus at
least, when he caught a glimpse somehow of the breasts of Helen unclad,
cast away his sword, methinks.’ Lesches the Pyrrhaean also has the same
account in his _Little Iliad_.

Pausanias, x. 25. 8: Concerning Aethra Lesches relates that when Ilium
was taken she stole out of the city and came to the Hellenic camp,
where she was recognised by the sons of Theseus; and that Demophon
asked her of Agamemnon. Agamemnon wished to grant him this favour, but
he would not do so until Helen consented. And when he sent a herald,
Helen granted his request.

Fragment #14—Scholiast on Lycophr. Alex., 1268: ‘Then the bright son of
bold Achilles led the wife of Hector to the hollow ships; but her son
he snatched from the bosom of his rich-haired nurse and seized him by
the foot and cast him from a tower. So when he had fallen bloody death
and hard fate seized on Astyanax. And Neoptolemus chose out Andromache,
Hector’s well-girded wife, and the chiefs of all the Achaeans gave her
to him to hold requiting him with a welcome prize. And he put
Aeneas3105, the famous son of horse-taming Anchises, on board his
sea-faring ships, a prize surpassing those of all the Danaans.’


THE SACK OF ILIUM

Fragment #1—Proclus, Chrestomathia, ii: Next come two books of the
_Sack of Ilium_, by Arctinus of Miletus with the following contents.
The Trojans were suspicious of the wooden horse and standing round it
debated what they ought to do. Some thought they ought to hurl it down
from the rocks, others to burn it up, while others said they ought to
dedicate it to Athena. At last this third opinion prevailed. Then they
turned to mirth and feasting believing the war was at an end. But at
this very time two serpents appeared and destroyed Laocoon and one of
his two sons, a portent which so alarmed the followers of Aeneas that
they withdrew to Ida. Sinon then raised the fire-signal to the
Achaeans, having previously got into the city by pretence. The Greeks
then sailed in from Tenedos, and those in the wooden horse came out and
fell upon their enemies, killing many and storming the city.
Neoptolemus kills Priam who had fled to the altar of Zeus Herceius (1);
Menelaus finds Helen and takes her to the ships, after killing
Deiphobus; and Aias the son of Ileus, while trying to drag Cassandra
away by force, tears away with her the image of Athena. At this the
Greeks are so enraged that they determine to stone Aias, who only
escapes from the danger threatening him by taking refuge at the altar
of Athena. The Greeks, after burning the city, sacrifice Polyxena at
the tomb of Achilles: Odysseus murders Astyanax; Neoptolemus takes
Andromache as his prize, and the remaining spoils are divided. Demophon
and Acamas find Aethra and take her with them. Lastly the Greeks sail
away and Athena plans to destroy them on the high seas.

Fragment #2—Dionysus Halicarn, Rom. Antiq. i. 68: According to
Arctinus, one Palladium was given to Dardanus by Zeus, and this was in
Ilium until the city was taken. It was hidden in a secret place, and a
copy was made resembling the original in all points and set up for all
to see, in order to deceive those who might have designs against it.
This copy the Achaeans took as a result of their plots.

Fragment #3—Scholiast on Euripedes, Andromache 10: The Cyclic poet who
composed the _Sack_ says that Astyanax was also hurled from the city
wall.

Fragment #4—Scholiast on Euripedes, Troades 31: For the followers of
Acamus and Demophon took no share—it is said—of the spoils, but only
Aethra, for whose sake, indeed, they came to Ilium with Menestheus to
lead them. Lysimachus, however, says that the author of the _Sack_
writes as follows: ‘The lord Agamemnon gave gifts to the Sons of
Theseus and to bold Menestheus, shepherd of hosts.’

Fragment #5—Eustathius on Iliad, xiii. 515: Some say that such praise
as this 3201 does not apply to physicians generally, but only to
Machaon: and some say that he only practised surgery, while Podaleirius
treated sicknesses. Arctinus in the _Sack of Ilium_ seems to be of this
opinion when he says:

(ll. 1-8) ‘For their father the famous Earth-Shaker gave both of them
gifts, making each more glorious than the other. To the one he gave
hands more light to draw or cut out missiles from the flesh and to heal
all kinds of wounds; but in the heart of the other he put full and
perfect knowledge to tell hidden diseases and cure desperate
sicknesses. It was he who first noticed Aias’ flashing eyes and clouded
mind when he was enraged.’

Fragment #6—Diomedes in Gramm., Lat. i. 477: ‘Iambus stood a little
while astride with foot advanced, that so his strained limbs might get
power and have a show of ready strength.’


THE RETURNS

Fragment #1—Proclus, Chrestomathia, ii: After the _Sack of Ilium_
follow the _Returns_ in five books by Agias of Troezen. Their contents
are as follows. Athena causes a quarrel between Agamemnon and Menelaus
about the voyage from Troy. Agamemnon then stays on to appease the
anger of Athena. Diomedes and Nestor put out to sea and get safely
home. After them Menelaus sets out and reaches Egypt with five ships,
the rest having been destroyed on the high seas. Those with Calchas,
Leontes, and Polypoetes go by land to Colophon and bury Teiresias who
died there. When Agamemnon and his followers were sailing away, the
ghost of Achilles appeared and tried to prevent them by foretelling
what should befall them. The storm at the rocks called Capherides is
then described, with the end of Locrian Aias. Neoptolemus, warned by
Thetis, journeys overland and, coming into Thrace, meets Odysseus at
Maronea, and then finishes the rest of his journey after burying
Phoenix who dies on the way. He himself is recognized by Peleus on
reaching the Molossi.

Then comes the murder of Agamemnon by Aegisthus and Clytaemnestra,
followed by the vengeance of Orestes and Pylades. Finally, Menelaus
returns home.

Fragment #2—Argument to Euripides Medea: ‘Forthwith Medea made Aeson a
sweet young boy and stripped his old age from him by her cunning skill,
when she had made a brew of many herbs in her golden cauldrons.’

Fragment #3—Pausanias, i. 2: The story goes that Heracles was besieging
Themiscyra on the Thermodon and could not take it; but Antiope, being
in love with Theseus who was with Heracles on this expedition, betrayed
the place. Hegias gives this account in his poem.

Fragment #4—Eustathius, 1796. 45: The Colophonian author of the
_Returns_ says that Telemachus afterwards married Circe, while
Telegonus the son of Circe correspondingly married Penelope.

Fragment #5—Clement of Alex. Strom., vi. 2. 12. 8: ‘For gifts beguile
men’s minds and their deeds as well.’ 3301

Fragment #6—Pausanias, x. 28. 7: The poetry of Homer and the
_Returns_—for here too there is an account of Hades and the terrors
there—know of no spirit named Eurynomus.

Athenaeus, 281 B: The writer of the “Return of the Atreidae” 3302 says
that Tantalus came and lived with the gods, and was permitted to ask
for whatever he desired. But the man was so immoderately given to
pleasures that he asked for these and for a life like that of the gods.
At this Zeus was annoyed, but fulfilled his prayer because of his own
promise; but to prevent him from enjoying any of the pleasures
provided, and to keep him continually harassed, he hung a stone over
his head which prevents him from ever reaching any of the pleasant
things near by.


THE TELEGONY

Fragment #1—Proclus, Chrestomathia, ii: After the _Returns_ comes the
_Odyssey_ of Homer, and then the _Telegony_ in two books by Eugammon of
Cyrene, which contain the following matters. The suitors of Penelope
are buried by their kinsmen, and Odysseus, after sacrificing to the
Nymphs, sails to Elis to inspect his herds. He is entertained there by
Polyxenus and receives a mixing bowl as a gift; the story of Trophonius
and Agamedes and Augeas then follows. He next sails back to Ithaca and
performs the sacrifices ordered by Teiresias, and then goes to
Thesprotis where he marries Callidice, queen of the Thesprotians. A war
then breaks out between the Thesprotians, led by Odysseus, and the
Brygi. Ares routs the army of Odysseus and Athena engages with Ares,
until Apollo separates them. After the death of Callidice Polypoetes,
the son of Odysseus, succeeds to the kingdom, while Odysseus himself
returns to Ithaca. In the meantime Telegonus, while travelling in
search of his father, lands on Ithaca and ravages the island: Odysseus
comes out to defend his country, but is killed by his son unwittingly.
Telegonus, on learning his mistake, transports his father’s body with
Penelope and Telemachus to his mother’s island, where Circe makes them
immortal, and Telegonus marries Penelope, and Telemachus Circe.

Fragment #2—Eustathias, 1796. 35: The author of the _Telegony_, a
Cyrenaean, relates that Odysseus had by Calypso a son Telegonus or
Teledamus, and by Penelope Telemachus and Acusilaus.


HOMERICA


THE EXPEDITION OF AMPHIARAUS

Fragment #1—Pseudo-Herodotus, Life of Homer: Sitting there in the
tanner’s yard, Homer recited his poetry to them, the _Expedition of
Amphiarus to Thebes_ and the _Hymns to the Gods_ composed by him.


THE TAKING OF OECHALIA

Fragment #1—Eustathius, 330. 41: An account has there been given of
Eurytus and his daughter Iole, for whose sake Heracles sacked Oechalia.
Homer also seems to have written on this subject, as that historian
shows who relates that Creophylus of Samos once had Homer for his guest
and for a reward received the attribution of the poem which they call
the _Taking of Oechalia_. Some, however, assert the opposite; that
Creophylus wrote the poem, and that Homer lent his name in return for
his entertainment. And so Callimachus writes: ‘I am the work of that
Samian who once received divine Homer in his house. I sing of Eurytus
and all his woes and of golden-haired Ioleia, and am reputed one of
Homer’s works. Dear Heaven! how great an honour this for Creophylus!’

Fragment #2—Cramer, Anec. Oxon. i. 327: ‘Ragged garments, even those
which now you see.’ This verse (_Odyssey_ xiv. 343) we shall also find
in the _Taking of Oechalia_.

Fragment #3—Scholaist on Sophocles Trach., 266: There is a disagreement
as to the number of the sons of Eurytus. For Hesiod says Eurytus and
Antioche had as many as four sons; but Creophylus says two.

Fragment #4—Scholiast on Euripides Medea, 273: Didymus contrasts the
following account given by Creophylus, which is as follows: while Medea
was living in Corinth, she poisoned Creon, who was ruler of the city at
that time, and because she feared his friends and kinsfolk, fled to
Athens. However, since her sons were too young to go along with her,
she left them at the altar of Hera Acraea, thinking that their father
would see to their safety. But the relatives of Creon killed them and
spread the story that Medea had killed her own children as well as
Creon.


THE PHOCAIS

Fragment #1—Pseudo-Herodotus, Life of Homer: While living with
Thestorides, Homer composed the _Lesser Iliad_ and the _Phocais_;
though the Phocaeans say that he composed the latter among them.


THE MARGITES

Fragment #1—Suidas, s.v.: Pigres. A Carian of Halicarnassus and brother
of Artemisia, wife of Mausolus, who distinguished herself in war...
3401 He also wrote the _Margites_ attributed to Homer and the _Battle
of the Frogs and Mice_.

Fragment #2—Atilius Fortunatianus, p. 286, Keil: ‘There came to
Colophon an old man and divine singer, a servant of the Muses and of
far-shooting Apollo. In his dear hands he held a sweet-toned lyre.’

Fragment #3—Plato, Alcib. ii. p. 147 A: ‘He knew many things but knew
all badly...’

Aristotle, Nic. Eth. vi. 7, 1141: ‘The gods had taught him neither to
dig nor to plough, nor any other skill; he failed in every craft.’

Fragment #4—Scholiast on Aeschines in Ctes., sec. 160: He refers to
Margites, a man who, though well grown up, did not know whether it was
his father or his mother who gave him birth, and would not lie with his
wife, saying that he was afraid she might give a bad account of him to
her mother.

Fragment #5—Zenobius, v. 68: ‘The fox knows many a wile; but the
hedge-hog’s one trick 3402 can beat them all.’ 3403


THE CERCOPES

Fragment #1—Suidas, s.v.: Cercopes. These were two brothers living upon
the earth who practised every kind of knavery. They were called
Cercopes 3501 because of their cunning doings: one of them was named
Passalus and the other Acmon. Their mother, a daughter of Memnon,
seeing their tricks, told them to keep clear of Black-bottom, that is,
of Heracles. These Cercopes were sons of Theia and Ocean, and are said
to have been turned to stone for trying to deceive Zeus.

‘Liars and cheats, skilled in deeds irremediable, accomplished knaves.
Far over the world they roamed deceiving men as they wandered
continually.’


THE BATTLE OF FROGS AND MICE

(ll. 1-8) Here I begin: and first I pray the choir of the Muses to come
down from Helicon into my heart to aid the lay which I have newly
written in tablets upon my knee. Fain would I sound in all men’s ears
that awful strife, that clamorous deed of war, and tell how the Mice
proved their valour on the Frogs and rivalled the exploits of the
Giants, those earth-born men, as the tale was told among mortals. Thus
did the war begin.

(ll. 9-12) One day a thirsty Mouse who had escaped the ferret,
dangerous foe, set his soft muzzle to the lake’s brink and revelled in
the sweet water. There a loud-voiced pond-larker spied him: and uttered
such words as these.

(ll. 13-23) ‘Stranger, who are you? Whence come you to this shore, and
who is he who begot you? Tell me all this truly and let me not find you
lying. For if I find you worthy to be my friend, I will take you to my
house and give you many noble gifts such as men give to their guests. I
am the king Puff-jaw, and am honoured in all the pond, being ruler of
the Frogs continually. The father that brought me up was Mud-man who
mated with Waterlady by the banks of Eridanus. I see, indeed, that you
are well-looking and stouter than the ordinary, a sceptred king and a
warrior in fight; but, come, make haste and tell me your descent.’

(ll. 24-55) Then Crumb-snatcher answered him and said: ‘Why do you ask
my race, which is well-known amongst all, both men and gods and the
birds of heaven? Crumb-snatcher am I called, and I am the son of
Bread-nibbler—he was my stout-hearted father—and my mother was
Quern-licker, the daughter of Ham-gnawer the king: she bare me in the
mouse-hole and nourished me with food, figs and nuts and dainties of
all kinds. But how are you to make me your friend, who am altogether
different in nature? For you get your living in the water, but I am
used to each such foods as men have: I never miss the thrice-kneaded
loaf in its neat, round basket, or the thin-wrapped cake full of sesame
and cheese, or the slice of ham, or liver vested in white fat, or
cheese just curdled from sweet milk, or delicious honey-cake which even
the blessed gods long for, or any of all those cates which cooks make
for the feasts of mortal men, larding their pots and pans with spices
of all kinds. In battle I have never flinched from the cruel onset, but
plunged straight into the fray and fought among the foremost. I fear
not man though he has a big body, but run along his bed and bite the
tip of his toe and nibble at his heel; and the man feels no hurt and
his sweet sleep is not broken by my biting. But there are two things I
fear above all else the whole world over, the hawk and the ferret—for
these bring great grief on me—and the piteous trap wherein is
treacherous death. Most of all I fear the ferret of the keener sort
which follows you still even when you dive down your hole. 3601 I gnaw
no radishes and cabbages and pumpkins, nor feed on green leeks and
parsley; for these are food for you who live in the lake.’

(ll. 56-64) Then Puff-jaw answered him with a smile: ‘Stranger you
boast too much of belly-matters: we too have many marvels to be seen
both in the lake and on the shore. For the Son of Chronos has given us
Frogs the power to lead a double life, dwelling at will in two separate
elements; and so we both leap on land and plunge beneath the water. If
you would learn of all these things, ’tis easy done: just mount upon my
back and hold me tight lest you be lost, and so you shall come
rejoicing to my house.’

(ll. 65-81) So said he, and offered his back. And the Mouse mounted at
once, putting his paws upon the other’s sleek neck and vaulting nimbly.
Now at first, while he still saw the land near by, he was pleased, and
was delighted with Puff-jaw’s swimming; but when dark waves began to
wash over him, he wept loudly and blamed his unlucky change of mind: he
tore his fur and tucked his paws in against his belly, while within him
his heart quaked by reason of the strangeness: and he longed to get to
land, groaning terribly through the stress of chilling fear. He put out
his tail upon the water and worked it like a steering oar, and prayed
to heaven that he might get to land. But when the dark waves washed
over him he cried aloud and said: ‘Not in such wise did the bull bear
on his back the beloved load, when he brought Europa across the sea to
Crete, as this Frog carries me over the water to his house, raising his
yellow back in the pale water.’

(ll. 82-92) Then suddenly a water-snake appeared, a horrid sight for
both alike, and held his neck upright above the water. And when he saw
it, Puff-jaw dived at once, and never thought how helpless a friend he
would leave perishing; but down to the bottom of the lake he went, and
escaped black death. But the Mouse, so deserted, at once fell on his
back, in the water. He wrung his paws and squeaked in agony of death:
many times he sank beneath the water and many times he rose up again
kicking. But he could not escape his doom, for his wet fur weighed him
down heavily. Then at the last, as he was dying, he uttered these
words.

(ll. 93-98) ‘Ah, Puff-jaw, you shall not go unpunished for this
treachery! You threw me, a castaway, off your body as from a rock. Vile
coward! On land you would not have been the better man, boxing, or
wrestling, or running; but now you have tricked me and cast me in the
water. Heaven has an avenging eye, and surely the host of Mice will
punish you and not let you escape.’

(ll. 99-109) With these words he breathed out his soul upon the water.
But Lick-platter as he sat upon the soft bank saw him die and, raising
a dreadful cry, ran and told the Mice. And when they heard of his fate,
all the Mice were seized with fierce anger, and bade their heralds
summon the people to assemble towards dawn at the house of
Bread-nibbler, the father of hapless Crumb-snatcher who lay
outstretched on the water face up, a lifeless corpse, and no longer
near the bank, poor wretch, but floating in the midst of the deep. And
when the Mice came in haste at dawn, Bread-nibbler stood up first,
enraged at his son’s death, and thus he spoke.

(ll. 110-121) ‘Friends, even if I alone had suffered great wrong from
the Frogs, assuredly this is a first essay at mischief for you all. And
now I am pitiable, for I have lost three sons. First the abhorred
ferret seized and killed one of them, catching him outside the hole;
then ruthless men dragged another to his doom when by unheard-of arts
they had contrived a wooden snare, a destroyer of Mice, which they call
a trap. There was a third whom I and his dear mother loved well, and
him Puff-jaw has carried out into the deep and drowned. Come, then, and
let us arm ourselves and go out against them when we have arrayed
ourselves in rich-wrought arms.’

(ll. 122-131) With such words he persuaded them all to gird themselves.
And Ares who has charge of war equipped them. First they fastened on
greaves and covered their shins with green bean-pods broken into two
parts which they had gnawed out, standing over them all night. Their
breast plates were of skin stretched on reeds, skilfully made from a
ferret they had flayed. For shields each had the centre-piece of a
lamp, and their spears were long needles all of bronze, the work of
Ares, and the helmets upon their temples were pea-nut shells.

(ll. 132-138) So the Mice armed themselves. But when the Frogs were
aware of it, they rose up out of the water and coming together to one
place gathered a council of grievous war. And while they were asking
whence the quarrel arose, and what the cause of this anger, a herald
drew near bearing a wand in his paws, Pot-visitor the son of
great-hearted Cheese-carver. He brought the grim message of war,
speaking thus:

(ll. 139-143) ‘Frogs, the Mice have sent me with their threats against
you, and bid you arm yourselves for war and battle; for they have seen
Crumb-snatcher in the water whom your king Puff-jaw slew. Fight, then,
as many of you as are warriors among the Frogs.’

(ll. 144-146) With these words he explained the matter. So when this
blameless speech came to their ears, the proud Frogs were disturbed in
their hearts and began to blame Puff-jaw. But he rose up and said:

(ll. 147-159) ‘Friends, I killed no Mouse, nor did I see one perishing.
Surely he was drowned while playing by the lake and imitating the
swimming of the Frogs, and now these wretches blame me who am
guiltless. Come then; let us take counsel how we may utterly destroy
the wily Mice. Moreover, I will tell you what I think to be the best.
Let us all gird on our armour and take our stand on the very brink of
the lake, where the ground breaks down sheer: then when they come out
and charge upon us, let each seize by the crest the Mouse who attacks
him, and cast them with their helmets into the lake; for so we shall
drown these dry-hobs 3602 in the water, and merrily set up here a
trophy of victory over the slaughtered Mice.’

(ll. 160-167) By this speech he persuaded them to arm themselves.

They covered their shins with leaves of mallows, and had breastplates
made of fine green beet-leaves, and cabbage-leaves, skilfully
fashioned, for shields. Each one was equipped with a long, pointed rush
for a spear, and smooth snail-shells to cover their heads. Then they
stood in close-locked ranks upon the high bank, waving their spears,
and were filled, each of them, with courage.

(ll. 168-173) Now Zeus called the gods to starry heaven and showed them
the martial throng and the stout warriors so many and so great, all
bearing long spears; for they were as the host of the Centaurs and the
Giants. Then he asked with a sly smile; ‘Who of the deathless gods will
help the Frogs and who the Mice?’

And he said to Athena;

(ll. 174-176) ‘My daughter, will you go aid the Mice? For they all
frolic about your temple continually, delighting in the fat of
sacrifice and in all kinds of food.’

(ll. 177-196) So then said the son of Cronos. But Athena answered him:
‘I would never go to help the Mice when they are hard pressed, for they
have done me much mischief, spoiling my garlands and my lamps too, to
get the oil. And this thing that they have done vexes my heart
exceedingly: they have eaten holes in my sacred robe, which I wove
painfully spinning a fine woof on a fine warp, and made it full of
holes. And now the money-lender is at me and charges me interest which
is a bitter thing for immortals. For I borrowed to do my weaving, and
have nothing with which to repay. Yet even so I will not help the
Frogs; for they also are not considerable: once, when I was returning
early from war, I was very tired, and though I wanted to sleep, they
would not let me even doze a little for their outcry; and so I lay
sleepless with a headache until cock-crow. No, gods, let us refrain
from helping these hosts, or one of us may get wounded with a sharp
spear; for they fight hand to hand, even if a god comes against them.
Let us rather all amuse ourselves watching the fight from heaven.’

(ll. 197-198) So said Athena. And the other gods agreed with her, and
all went in a body to one place.

(ll. 199-201) Then gnats with great trumpets sounded the fell note of
war, and Zeus the son of Cronos thundered from heaven, a sign of
grievous battle.

(ll. 202-223) First Loud-croaker wounded Lickman in the belly, right
through the midriff. Down fell he on his face and soiled his soft fur
in the dust: he fell with a thud and his armour clashed about him. Next
Troglodyte shot at the son of Mudman, and drove the strong spear deep
into his breast; so he fell, and black death seized him and his spirit
flitted forth from his mouth. Then Beety struck Pot-visitor to the
heart and killed him, and Bread-nibbler hit Loud-crier in the belly, so
that he fell on his face and his spirit flitted forth from his limbs.
Now when Pond-larker saw Loud-crier perishing, he struck in quickly and
wounded Troglodyte in his soft neck with a rock like a mill-stone, so
that darkness veiled his eyes. Thereat Ocimides was seized with grief,
and struck out with his sharp reed and did not draw his spear back to
him again, but felled his enemy there and then. And Lickman shot at him
with a bright spear and hit him unerringly in the midriff. And as he
marked Cabbage-eater running away, he fell on the steep bank, yet even
so did not cease fighting but smote that other so that he fell and did
not rise again; and the lake was dyed with red blood as he lay
outstretched along the shore, pierced through the guts and shining
flanks. Also he slew Cheese-eater on the very brink....

((LACUNA))

(ll. 224-251) But Reedy took to flight when he saw Ham-nibbler, and
fled, plunging into the lake and throwing away his shield. Then
blameless Pot-visitor killed Brewer and Water-larked killed the lord
Ham-nibbler, striking him on the head with a pebble, so that his brains
flowed out at his nostrils and the earth was bespattered with blood.
Faultless Muck-coucher sprang upon Lick-platter and killed him with his
spear and brought darkness upon his eyes: and Leeky saw it, and dragged
Lick-platter by the foot, though he was dead, and choked him in the
lake. But Crumb-snatcher was fighting to avenge his dead comrades, and
hit Leeky before he reached the land; and he fell forward at the blow
and his soul went down to Hades. And seeing this, the Cabbage-climber
took a clod of mud and hurled it at the Mouse, plastering all his
forehead and nearly blinding him. Thereat Crumb-snatcher was enraged
and caught up in his strong hand a huge stone that lay upon the ground,
a heavy burden for the soil: with that he hit Cabbage-climber below the
knee and splintered his whole right shin, hurling him on his back in
the dust. But Croakperson kept him off, and rushing at the Mouse in
turn, hit him in the middle of the belly and drove the whole reed-spear
into him, and as he drew the spear back to him with his strong hand,
all his foe’s bowels gushed out upon the ground. And when Troglodyte
saw the deed, as he was limping away from the fight on the river bank,
he shrank back sorely moved, and leaped into a trench to escape sheer
death. Then Bread-nibbler hit Puff-jaw on the toes—he came up at the
last from the lake and was greatly distressed....

((LACUNA))

(ll. 252-259) And when Leeky saw him fallen forward, but still half
alive, he pressed through those who fought in front and hurled a sharp
reed at him; but the point of the spear was stayed and did not break
his shield. Then noble Rueful, like Ares himself, struck his flawless
head-piece made of four pots—he only among the Frogs showed prowess in
the throng. But when he saw the other rush at him, he did not stay to
meet the stout-hearted hero but dived down to the depths of the lake.

(ll. 260-271) Now there was one among the Mice, Slice-snatcher, who
excelled the rest, dear son of Gnawer the son of blameless
Bread-stealer. He went to his house and bade his son take part in the
war. This warrior threatened to destroy the race of Frogs utterly 3603,
and splitting a chestnut-husk into two parts along the joint, put the
two hollow pieces as armour on his paws: then straightway the Frogs
were dismayed and all rushed down to the lake, and he would have made
good his boast—for he had great strength—had not the Son of Cronos, the
Father of men and gods, been quick to mark the thing and pitied the
Frogs as they were perishing. He shook his head, and uttered this word:

(ll. 272-276) ‘Dear, dear, how fearful a deed do my eyes behold!
Slice-snatcher makes no small panic rushing to and fro among the Frogs
by the lake. Let us then make all haste and send warlike Pallas or even
Ares, for they will stop his fighting, strong though he is.’

(ll. 277-284) So said the Son of Cronos; but Hera answered him: ‘Son of
Cronos, neither the might of Athena nor of Ares can avail to deliver
the Frogs from utter destruction. Rather, come and let us all go to
help them, or else let loose your weapon, the great and formidable
Titan-killer with which you killed Capaneus, that doughty man, and
great Enceladus and the wild tribes of Giants; ay, let it loose, for so
the most valiant will be slain.’

(ll. 285-293) So said Hera: and the Son of Cronos cast a lurid
thunderbolt: first he thundered and made great Olympus shake, and the
cast the thunderbolt, the awful weapon of Zeus, tossing it lightly
forth. Thus he frightened them all, Frogs and Mice alike, hurling his
bolt upon them. Yet even so the army of the Mice did not relax, but
hoped still more to destroy the brood of warrior Frogs. Only, the Son
of Cronos, on Olympus, pitied the Frogs and then straightway sent them
helpers.

(ll. 294-303) So there came suddenly warriors with mailed backs and
curving claws, crooked beasts that walked sideways, nut-cracker-jawed,
shell-hided: bony they were, flat-backed, with glistening shoulders and
bandy legs and stretching arms and eyes that looked behind them. They
had also eight legs and two feelers—persistent creatures who are called
crabs. These nipped off the tails and paws and feet of the Mice with
their jaws, while spears only beat on them. Of these the Mice were all
afraid and no longer stood up to them, but turned and fled. Already the
sun was set, and so came the end of the one-day war.


OF THE ORIGIN OF HOMER AND HESIOD, AND OF THEIR CONTEST


Everyone boasts that the most divine of poets, Homer and Hesiod, are
said to be his particular countrymen. Hesiod, indeed, has put a name to
his native place and so prevented any rivalry, for he said that his
father ‘settled near Helicon in a wretched hamlet, Ascra, which is
miserable in winter, sultry in summer, and good at no season.’ But, as
for Homer, you might almost say that every city with its inhabitants
claims him as her son. Foremost are the men of Smyrna who say that he
was the Son of Meles, the river of their town, by a nymph Cretheis, and
that he was at first called Melesigenes. He was named Homer later, when
he became blind, this being their usual epithet for such people. The
Chians, on the other hand, bring forward evidence to show that he was
their countryman, saying that there actually remain some of his
descendants among them who are called Homeridae. The Colophonians even
show the place where they declare that he began to compose when a
schoolmaster, and say that his first work was the _Margites_.

As to his parents also, there is on all hands great disagreement.

Hellanicus and Cleanthes say his father was Maeon, but Eugaeon says
Meles; Callicles is for Mnesagoras, Democritus of Troezen for Daemon, a
merchant-trader. Some, again, say he was the son of Thamyras, but the
Egyptians say of Menemachus, a priest-scribe, and there are even those
who father him on Telemachus, the son of Odysseus. As for his mother,
she is variously called Metis, Cretheis, Themista, and Eugnetho. Others
say she was an Ithacan woman sold as a slave by the Phoenicians; other,
Calliope the Muse; others again Polycasta, the daughter of Nestor.

Homer himself was called Meles or, according to different accounts,
Melesigenes or Altes. Some authorities say he was called Homer, because
his father was given as a hostage to the Persians by the men of Cyprus;
others, because of his blindness; for amongst the Aeolians the blind
are so called. We will set down, however, what we have heard to have
been said by the Pythia concerning Homer in the time of the most sacred
Emperor Hadrian. When the monarch inquired from what city Homer came,
and whose son he was, the priestess delivered a response in hexameters
after this fashion:

‘Do you ask me of the obscure race and country of the heavenly siren?
Ithaca is his country, Telemachus his father, and Epicasta, Nestor’s
daughter, the mother that bare him, a man by far the wisest of mortal
kind.’ This we must most implicitly believe, the inquirer and the
answerer being who they are—especially since the poet has so greatly
glorified his grandfather in his works.

Now some say that he was earlier than Hesiod, others that he was
younger and akin to him. They give his descent thus: Apollo and
Aethusa, daughter of Poseidon, had a son Linus, to whom was born
Pierus. From Pierus and the nymph Methone sprang Oeager; and from
Oeager and Calliope Orpheus; from Orpheus, Dres; and from him, Eucles.
The descent is continued through Iadmonides, Philoterpes, Euphemus,
Epiphrades and Melanopus who had sons Dius and Apelles. Dius by
Pycimede, the daughter of Apollo had two sons Hesiod and Perses; while
Apelles begot Maeon who was the father of Homer by a daughter of the
River Meles.

According to one account they flourished at the same time and even had
a contest of skill at Chalcis in Euboea. For, they say, after Homer had
composed the _Margites_, he went about from city to city as a minstrel,
and coming to Delphi, inquired who he was and of what country? The
Pythia answered:

‘The Isle of Ios is your mother’s country and it shall receive you
dead; but beware of the riddle of the young children.’ 3701

Hearing this, it is said, he hesitated to go to Ios, and remained in
the region where he was. Now about the same time Ganyctor was
celebrating the funeral rites of his father Amphidamas, king of Euboea,
and invited to the gathering not only all those who were famous for
bodily strength and fleetness of foot, but also those who excelled in
wit, promising them great rewards. And so, as the story goes, the two
went to Chalcis and met by chance. The leading Chalcidians were judges
together with Paneides, the brother of the dead king; and it is said
that after a wonderful contest between the two poets, Hesiod won in the
following manner: he came forward into the midst and put Homer one
question after another, which Homer answered. Hesiod, then, began:

‘Homer, son of Meles, inspired with wisdom from heaven, come, tell me
first what is best for mortal man?’

HOMER: ‘For men on earth ’tis best never to be born at all; or being
born, to pass through the gates of Hades with all speed.’

Hesiod then asked again:

‘Come, tell me now this also, godlike Homer: what think you in your
heart is most delightsome to men?’

Homer answered:

‘When mirth reigns throughout the town, and feasters about the house,
sitting in order, listen to a minstrel; when the tables beside them are
laden with bread and meat, and a wine-bearer draws sweet drink from the
mixing-bowl and fills the cups: this I think in my heart to be most
delightsome.’

It is said that when Homer had recited these verses, they were so
admired by the Greeks as to be called golden by them, and that even now
at public sacrifices all the guests solemnly recite them before feasts
and libations. Hesiod, however, was annoyed by Homer’s felicity and
hurried on to pose him with hard questions. He therefore began with the
following lines:

‘Come, Muse; sing not to me of things that are, or that shall be, or
that were of old; but think of another song.’

Then Homer, wishing to escape from the impasse by an apt answer,
replied:—

‘Never shall horses with clattering hoofs break chariots, striving for
victory about the tomb of Zeus.’

Here again Homer had fairly met Hesiod, and so the latter turned to
sentences of doubtful meaning 3702: he recited many lines and required
Homer to complete the sense of each appropriately. The first of the
following verses is Hesiod’s and the next Homer’s: but sometimes Hesiod
puts his question in two lines.

HESIOD: ‘Then they dined on the flesh of oxen and their horses’ necks—’

HOMER: ‘They unyoked dripping with sweat, when they had had enough of
war.’

HESIOD: ‘And the Phrygians, who of all men are handiest at ships—’

HOMER: ‘To filch their dinner from pirates on the beach.’

HESIOD: ‘To shoot forth arrows against the tribes of cursed giants with
his hands—’

HOMER: ‘Heracles unslung his curved bow from his shoulders.’

HESIOD: ‘This man is the son of a brave father and a weakling—’

HOMER: ‘Mother; for war is too stern for any woman.’

HESIOD: ‘But for you, your father and lady mother lay in love—’

HOMER: ‘When they begot you by the aid of golden Aphrodite.’

HESIOD: ‘But when she had been made subject in love, Artemis, who
delights in arrows—’

HOMER: ‘Slew Callisto with a shot of her silver bow.’

HESIOD: ‘So they feasted all day long, taking nothing—’

HOMER: ‘From their own houses; for Agamemnon, king of men, supplied
them.’

HESIOD: ‘When they had feasted, they gathered among the glowing ashes
the bones of the dead Zeus—’

HOMER: ‘Born Sarpedon, that bold and godlike man.’

HESIOD: ‘Now we have lingered thus about the plain of Simois, forth
from the ships let us go our way, upon our shoulders—’

HOMER: ‘Having our hilted swords and long-helved spears.’

HESIOD: ‘Then the young heroes with their hands from the sea—’

HOMER: ‘Gladly and swiftly hauled out their fleet ship.’

HESIOD: ‘Then they came to Colchis and king Aeetes—’

HOMER: ‘They avoided; for they knew he was inhospitable and lawless.’

HESIOD: ‘Now when they had poured libations and deeply drunk, the
surging sea—’

HOMER: ‘They were minded to traverse on well-built ships.’

HESIOD: ‘The Son of Atreus prayed greatly for them that they all might
perish—’

HOMER: ‘At no time in the sea: and he opened his mouth said:’

HESIOD: ‘Eat, my guests, and drink, and may no one of you return home
to his dear country—’

HOMER: ‘Distressed; but may you all reach home again unscathed.’

When Homer had met him fairly on every point Hesiod said:

‘Only tell me this thing that I ask: How many Achaeans went to Ilium
with the sons of Atreus?’

Homer answered in a mathematical problem, thus:

‘There were fifty hearths, and at each hearth were fifty spits, and on
each spit were fifty carcases, and there were thrice three hundred
Achaeans to each joint.’

This is found to be an incredible number; for as there were fifty
hearths, the number of spits is two thousand five hundred; and of
carcasses, one hundred and twenty thousand...

Homer, then, having the advantage on every point, Hesiod was jealous
and began again:

‘Homer, son of Meles, if indeed the Muses, daughters of great Zeus the
most high, honour you as it is said, tell me a standard that is both
best and worst for mortal-men; for I long to know it.’ Homer replied:
‘Hesiod, son of Dius, I am willing to tell you what you command, and
very readily will I answer you. For each man to be a standard will I
answer you. For each man to be a standard to himself is most excellent
for the good, but for the bad it is the worst of all things. And now
ask me whatever else your heart desires.’

HESIOD: ‘How would men best dwell in cities, and with what
observances?’

HOMER: ‘By scorning to get unclean gain and if the good were honoured,
but justice fell upon the unjust.’

HESIOD: ‘What is the best thing of all for a man to ask of the gods in
prayer?’

HOMER: ‘That he may be always at peace with himself continually.’

HESIOD: ‘Can you tell me in briefest space what is best of all?’

HOMER: ‘A sound mind in a manly body, as I believe.’

HESIOD: ‘Of what effect are righteousness and courage?’

HOMER: ‘To advance the common good by private pains.’

HESIOD: ‘What is the mark of wisdom among men?’

HOMER: ‘To read aright the present, and to march with the occasion.’

HESIOD: ‘In what kind of matter is it right to trust in men?’

HOMER: ‘Where danger itself follows the action close.’

HESIOD: ‘What do men mean by happiness?’

HOMER: ‘Death after a life of least pain and greatest pleasure.’

After these verses had been spoken, all the Hellenes called for Homer
to be crowned. But King Paneides bade each of them recite the finest
passage from his own poems. Hesiod, therefore, began as follows:

‘When the Pleiads, the daughters of Atlas, begin to rise begin the
harvest, and begin ploughing ere they set. For forty nights and days
they are hidden, but appear again as the year wears round, when first
the sickle is sharpened. This is the law of the plains and for those
who dwell near the sea or live in the rich-soiled valleys, far from the
wave-tossed deep: strip to sow, and strip to plough, and strip to reap
when all things are in season.’ 3703

Then Homer:

‘The ranks stood firm about the two Aiantes, such that not even Ares
would have scorned them had he met them, nor yet Athena who saves
armies. For there the chosen best awaited the charge of the Trojans and
noble Hector, making a fence of spears and serried shields. Shield
closed with shield, and helm with helm, and each man with his fellow,
and the peaks of their head-pieces with crests of horse-hair touched as
they bent their heads: so close they stood together. The murderous
battle bristled with the long, flesh-rending spears they held, and the
flash of bronze from polished helms and new-burnished breast-plates and
gleaming shields blinded the eyes. Very hard of heart would he have
been, who could then have seen that strife with joy and felt no pang.’
3704

Here, again, the Hellenes applauded Homer admiringly, so far did the
verses exceed the ordinary level; and demanded that he should be
adjudged the winner. But the king gave the crown to Hesiod, declaring
that it was right that he who called upon men to follow peace and
husbandry should have the prize rather than one who dwelt on war and
slaughter. In this way, then, we are told, Hesiod gained the victory
and received a brazen tripod which he dedicated to the Muses with this
inscription:

‘Hesiod dedicated this tripod to the Muses of Helicon after he had
conquered divine Homer at Chalcis in a contest of song.’

After the gathering was dispersed, Hesiod crossed to the mainland and
went to Delphi to consult the oracle and to dedicate the first fruits
of his victory to the god. They say that as he was approaching the
temple, the prophetess became inspired and said:

‘Blessed is this man who serves my house,—Hesiod, who is honoured by
the deathless Muses: surely his renown shall be as wide as the light of
dawn is spread. But beware of the pleasant grove of Nemean Zeus; for
there death’s end is destined to befall you.’

When Hesiod heard this oracle, he kept away from the Peloponnesus,
supposing that the god meant the Nemea there; and coming to Oenoe in
Locris, he stayed with Amphiphanes and Ganyetor the sons of Phegeus,
thus unconsciously fulfilling the oracle; for all that region was
called the sacred place of Nemean Zeus. He continued to stay a somewhat
long time at Oenoe, until the young men, suspecting Hesiod of seducing
their sister, killed him and cast his body into the sea which separates
Achaea and Locris. On the third day, however, his body was brought to
land by dolphins while some local feast of Ariadne was being held.
Thereupon, all the people hurried to the shore, and recognized the
body, lamented over it and buried it, and then began to look for the
assassins. But these, fearing the anger of their countrymen, launched a
fishing boat, and put out to sea for Crete: they had finished half
their voyage when Zeus sank them with a thunderbolt, as Alcidamas
states in his “Museum”. Eratosthenes, however, says in his “Hesiod”
that Ctimenus and Antiphus, sons of Ganyetor, killed him for the reason
already stated, and were sacrificed by Eurycles the seer to the gods of
hospitality. He adds that the girl, sister of the above-named, hanged
herself after she had been seduced, and that she was seduced by some
stranger, Demodes by name, who was travelling with Hesiod, and who was
also killed by the brothers. At a later time the men of Orchomenus
removed his body as they were directed by an oracle, and buried him in
their own country where they placed this inscription on his tomb:

‘Ascra with its many cornfields was his native land; but in death the
land of the horse-driving Minyans holds the bones of Hesiod, whose
renown is greatest among men of all who are judged by the test of wit.’

So much for Hesiod. But Homer, after losing the victory, went from
place to place reciting his poems, and first of all the _Thebais_ in
seven thousand verses which begins: ‘Goddess, sing of parched Argos
whence kings...’, and then the _Epigoni_ in seven thousand verses
beginning: ‘And now, Muses, let us begin to sing of men of later days’;
for some say that these poems also are by Homer. Now Xanthus and
Gorgus, son of Midas the king, heard his epics and invited him to
compose a epitaph for the tomb of their father on which was a bronze
figure of a maiden bewailing the death of Midas. He wrote the following
lines:—

‘I am a maiden of bronze and sit upon the tomb of Midas. While water
flows, and tall trees put forth leaves, and rivers swell, and the sea
breaks on the shore; while the sun rises and shines and the bright moon
also, ever remaining on this mournful tomb I tell the passer-by that
Midas here lies buried.’

For these verses they gave him a silver bowl which he dedicated to
Apollo at Delphi with this inscription: ‘Lord Phoebus, I, Homer, have
given you a noble gift for the wisdom I have of you: do you ever grant
me renown.’

After this he composed the _Odyssey_ in twelve thousand verses, having
previously written the _Iliad_ in fifteen thousand five hundred verses
3705. From Delphi, as we are told, he went to Athens and was
entertained by Medon, king of the Athenians. And being one day in the
council hall when it was cold and a fire was burning there, he drew off
the following lines:

‘Children are a man’s crown, and towers of a city, horses are the
ornament of a plain, and ships of the sea; and good it is to see a
people seated in assembly. But with a blazing fire a house looks
worthier upon a wintry day when the Son of Cronos sends down snow.’

From Athens he went on to Corinth, where he sang snatches of his poems
and was received with distinction. Next he went to Argos and there
recited these verses from the _Iliad_:

‘The sons of the Achaeans who held Argos and walled Tiryns, and
Hermione and Asine which lie along a deep bay, and Troezen, and Eiones,
and vine-clad Epidaurus, and the island of Aegina, and Mases,—these
followed strong-voiced Diomedes, son of Tydeus, who had the spirit of
his father the son of Oeneus, and Sthenelus, dear son of famous
Capaneus. And with these two there went a third leader, Eurypylus, a
godlike man, son of the lord Mecisteus, sprung of Talaus; but
strong-voiced Diomedes was their chief leader. These men had eighty
dark ships wherein were ranged men skilled in war, Argives with linen
jerkins, very goads of war.’ 3706

This praise of their race by the most famous of all poets so
exceedingly delighted the leading Argives, that they rewarded him with
costly gifts and set up a brazen statue to him, decreeing that
sacrifice should be offered to Homer daily, monthly, and yearly; and
that another sacrifice should be sent to Chios every five years. This
is the inscription they cut upon his statue:

‘This is divine Homer who by his sweet-voiced art honoured all proud
Hellas, but especially the Argives who threw down the god-built walls
of Troy to avenge rich-haired Helen. For this cause the people of a
great city set his statue here and serve him with the honours of the
deathless gods.’

After he had stayed for some time in Argos, he crossed over to Delos,
to the great assembly, and there, standing on the altar of horns, he
recited the _Hymn to Apollo_ 3707 which begins: ‘I will remember and
not forget Apollo the far-shooter.’ When the hymn was ended, the
Ionians made him a citizen of each one of their states, and the Delians
wrote the poem on a whitened tablet and dedicated it in the temple of
Artemis. The poet sailed to Ios, after the assembly was broken up, to
join Creophylus, and stayed there some time, being now an old man. And,
it is said, as he was sitting by the sea he asked some boys who were
returning from fishing:

‘Sirs, hunters of deep-sea prey, have we caught anything?’

To this replied:

‘All that we caught, we left behind, and carry away all that we did not
catch.’

Homer did not understand this reply and asked what they meant. They
then explained that they had caught nothing in fishing, but had been
catching their lice, and those of the lice which they caught, they left
behind; but carried away in their clothes those which they did not
catch. Hereupon Homer remembered the oracle and, perceiving that the
end of his life had come composed his own epitaph. And while he was
retiring from that place, he slipped in a clayey place and fell upon
his side, and died, it is said, the third day after. He was buried in
Ios, and this is his epitaph:

‘Here the earth covers the sacred head of divine Homer, the glorifier
of hero-men.’


ENDNOTES


1101 (return) [ sc. in Boeotia, Locris and Thessaly: elsewhere the
movement was forced and unfruitful.]

1102 (return) [ The extant collection of three poems, _Works and Days_,
_Theogony_, and _Shield of Heracles_, which alone have come down to us
complete, dates at least from the 4th century A.D.: the title of the
Paris Papyrus (Bibl. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 1099) names only these three
works.]

1103 (return) [ _Der Dialekt des Hesiodes_, p. 464: examples are AENEMI
(W. and D. 683) and AROMENAI (_ib_. 22).]

1104 (return) [ T.W. Allen suggests that the conjured Delian and
Pythian hymns to Apollo (_Homeric Hymns_ III) may have suggested this
version of the story, the Pythian hymn showing strong continental
influence.]

1105 (return) [ She is said to have given birth to the lyrist
Stesichorus.]

1106 (return) [ See Kinkel _Epic. Graec. Frag._ i. 158 ff.]

1107 (return) [ See _Great Works_, frag. 2.]

1108 (return) [ _Hesiodi Fragmenta_, pp. 119 f.]

1109 (return) [ Possibly the division of this poem into two books is a
division belonging solely to this ‘developed poem’, which may have
included in its second part a summary of the Tale of Troy.]

1110 (return) [ Goettling’s explanation.]

1111 (return) [ x. 1. 52.]

1112 (return) [ Odysseus appears to have been mentioned once only—and
that casually—in the _Returns_.]

1113 (return) [ M.M. Croiset note that the _Aethiopis_ and the _Sack_
were originally merely parts of one work containing lays (the
Amazoneia, Aethiopis, Persis, etc.), just as the _Iliad_ contained
various lays such as the Diomedeia.]

1114 (return) [ No date is assigned to him, but it seems likely that he
was either contemporary or slightly earlier than Lesches.]

1115 (return) [ Cp. Allen and Sikes, _Homeric Hymns_ p. xv. In the text
I have followed the arrangement of these scholars, numbering the Hymns
to Dionysus and to Demeter, I and II respectively: to place _Demeter_
after _Hermes_, and the Hymn to Dionysus at the end of the collection
seems to be merely perverse.]

1116 (return) [ _Greek Melic Poets_, p. 165.]

1117 (return) [ This monument was returned to Greece in the 1980’s.—
DBK.]

1118 (return) [ Cp. Marckscheffel, _Hesiodi fragmenta_, p. 35. The
papyrus fragment recovered by Petrie (_Petrie Papyri_, ed. Mahaffy, p.
70, No. xxv.) agrees essentially with the extant document, but differs
in numerous minor textual points.]

1201 (return) [ See Schubert, _Berl. Klassikertexte_ v. 1.22 ff.; the
other papyri may be found in the publications whose name they bear.]

1202 (return) [ Unless otherwise noted, all MSS. are of the 15th
century.]

1203 (return) [ To this list I would also add the following: _Hesiod
and Theognis_, translated by Dorothea Wender (Penguin Classics, London,
1973).—DBK.]

1301 (return) [ That is, the poor man’s fare, like ‘bread and cheese’.]

1302 (return) [ The All-endowed.]

1303 (return) [ The jar or casket contained the gifts of the gods
mentioned in l.82.]

1304 (return) [ Eustathius refers to Hesiod as stating that men sprung
“from oaks and stones and ashtrees”. Proclus believed that the Nymphs
called Meliae (_Theogony_, 187) are intended. Goettling would render:
“A race terrible because of their (ashen) spears.”]

1305 (return) [ Preserved only by Proclus, from whom some inferior MSS.
have copied the verse. The four following lines occur only in Geneva
Papyri No. 94. For the restoration of ll. 169b-c see “Class. Quart.”
vii. 219-220. (NOTE: Mr. Evelyn-White means that the version quoted by
Proclus stops at this point, then picks up at l. 170.—DBK).]

1306 (return) [ _i.e._ the race will so degenerate that at the last
even a new-born child will show the marks of old age.]

1307 (return) [ Aidos, as a quality, is that feeling of reverence or
shame which restrains men from wrong: Nemesis is the feeling of
righteous indignation aroused especially by the sight of the wicked in
undeserved prosperity (_cf. Psalms_, lxxii. 1-19).]

1308 (return) [ The alternative version is: ‘and, working, you will be
much better loved both by gods and men; for they greatly dislike the
idle.’]

1309 (return) [ _i.e._ neighbours come at once and without making
preparations, but kinsmen by marriage (who live at a distance) have to
prepare, and so are long in coming.]

1310 (return) [ Early in May.]

1311 (return) [ In November.]

1312 (return) [ In October.]

1313 (return) [ For pounding corn.]

1314 (return) [ A mallet for breaking clods after ploughing.]

1315 (return) [ The loaf is a flattish cake with two intersecting lines
scored on its upper surface which divide it into four equal parts.]

1316 (return) [ The meaning is obscure. A scholiast renders ‘giving
eight mouthfulls’; but the elder Philostratus uses the word in contrast
to ‘leavened’.]

1317 (return) [ About the middle of November.]

1318 (return) [ Spring is so described because the buds have not yet
cast their iron-grey husks.]

1319 (return) [ In December.]

1320 (return) [ In March.]

1321 (return) [ The latter part of January and earlier part of
February.]

1322 (return) [ _i.e._ the octopus or cuttle.]

1323 (return) [ _i.e._ the darker-skinned people of Africa, the
Egyptians or Aethiopians.]

1324 (return) [ _i.e._ an old man walking with a staff (the ‘third
leg’— as in the riddle of the Sphinx).]

1325 (return) [ February to March.]

1326 (return) [ _i.e._ the snail. The season is the middle of May.]

1327 (return) [ In June.]

1328 (return) [ July.]

1329 (return) [ _i.e._ a robber.]

1330 (return) [ September.]

1331 (return) [ The end of October.]

1332 (return) [ That is, the succession of stars which make up the full
year.]

1333 (return) [ The end of October or beginning of November.]

1334 (return) [ July-August.]

1335 (return) [ _i.e._ untimely, premature. Juvenal similarly speaks of
‘cruda senectus’ (caused by gluttony).]

1336 (return) [ The thought is parallel to that of ‘O, what a goodly
outside falsehood hath.’]

1337 (return) [ The ‘common feast’ is one to which all present
subscribe. Theognis (line 495) says that one of the chief pleasures of
a banquet is the general conversation. Hence the present passage means
that such a feast naturally costs little, while the many present will
make pleasurable conversation.]

1338 (return) [ _i.e._ ‘do not cut your finger-nails’.]

1339 (return) [ _i.e._ things which it would be sacrilege to disturb,
such as tombs.]

1340 (return) [ H.G. Evelyn-White prefers to switch ll. 768 and 769,
reading l. 769 first then l. 768.—DBK]

1341 (return) [ The month is divided into three periods, the waxing,
the mid-month, and the waning, which answer to the phases of the moon.]

1342 (return) [ _i.e._ the ant.]

1343 (return) [ Such seems to be the meaning here, though the epithet
is otherwise rendered ‘well-rounded’. Corn was threshed by means of a
sleigh with two runners having three or four rollers between them, like
the modern Egyptian _nurag_.]

1401 (return) [ This halt verse is added by the Scholiast on Aratus,
172.]

1402 (return) [ The “Catasterismi” (“Placings among the Stars”) is a
collection of legends relating to the various constellations.]

1403 (return) [ The Straits of Messina.]

1501 (return) [ Or perhaps ‘a Scythian’.]

1601 (return) [ The epithet probably indicates coquettishness.]

1602 (return) [ A proverbial saying meaning, ‘why enlarge on irrelevant
topics?’]

1603 (return) [ ‘She of the noble voice’: Calliope is queen of Epic
poetry.]

1604 (return) [ Earth, in the cosmology of Hesiod, is a disk surrounded
by the river Oceanus and floating upon a waste of waters. It is called
the foundation of all (the qualification ‘the deathless ones...’ etc.
is an interpolation), because not only trees, men, and animals, but
even the hills and seas (ll. 129, 131) are supported by it.]

1605 (return) [ Aether is the bright, untainted upper atmosphere, as
distinguished from Aer, the lower atmosphere of the earth.]

1606 (return) [ Brontes is the Thunderer; Steropes, the Lightener; and
Arges, the Vivid One.]

1607 (return) [ The myth accounts for the separation of Heaven and
Earth. In Egyptian cosmology Nut (the Sky) is thrust and held apart
from her brother Geb (the Earth) by their father Shu, who corresponds
to the Greek Atlas.]

1608 (return) [ Nymphs of the ash-trees, as Dryads are nymphs of the
oak-trees. Cp. note on _Works and Days_, l. 145.]

1609 (return) [ ‘Member-loving’: the title is perhaps only a perversion
of the regular PHILOMEIDES (laughter-loving).]

1610 (return) [ Cletho (the Spinner) is she who spins the thread of
man’s life; Lachesis (the Disposer of Lots) assigns to each man his
destiny; Atropos (She who cannot be turned) is the ‘Fury with the
abhorred shears.’]

1611 (return) [ Many of the names which follow express various
qualities or aspects of the sea: thus Galene is ‘Calm’, Cymothoe is the
‘Wave-swift’, Pherusa and Dynamene are ‘She who speeds (ships)’ and
‘She who has power’.]

1612 (return) [ The ‘Wave-receiver’ and the ‘Wave-stiller’.]

1613 (return) [ ‘The Unerring’ or ‘Truthful’; cp. l. 235.]

1614 (return) [ _i.e._ Poseidon.]

1615 (return) [ Goettling notes that some of these nymphs derive their
names from lands over which they preside, as Europa, Asia, Doris,
Ianeira (‘Lady of the Ionians’), but that most are called after some
quality which their streams possessed: thus Xanthe is the ‘Brown’ or
‘Turbid’, Amphirho is the ‘Surrounding’ river, Ianthe is ‘She who
delights’, and Ocyrrhoe is the ‘Swift-flowing’.]

1616 (return) [ _i.e._ Eos, the ‘Early-born’.]

1617 (return) [ Van Lennep explains that Hecate, having no brothers to
support her claim, might have been slighted.]

1618 (return) [ The goddess of the _hearth_ (the Roman _Vesta_), and so
of the house. Cp. _Homeric Hymns_ v.22 ff.; xxxix.1 ff.]

1619 (return) [ The variant reading ‘of his father’ (sc. Heaven) rests
on inferior MS. authority and is probably an alteration due to the
difficulty stated by a Scholiast: ‘How could Zeus, being not yet
begotten, plot against his father?’ The phrase is, however, part of the
prophecy. The whole line may well be spurious, and is rejected by
Heyne, Wolf, Gaisford and Guyet.]

1620 (return) [ Pausanias (x. 24.6) saw near the tomb of Neoptolemus ‘a
stone of no great size’, which the Delphians anointed every day with
oil, and which he says was supposed to be the stone given to Cronos.]

1621 (return) [ A Scholiast explains: ‘Either because they (men) sprang
from the Melian nymphs (cp. l. 187); or because, when they were born
(?), they cast themselves under the ash-trees, that is, the trees.’ The
reference may be to the origin of men from ash-trees: cp. _Works and
Days_, l. 145 and note.]

1622 (return) [ _sc_. Atlas, the Shu of Egyptian mythology: cp. note on
line 177.]

1623 (return) [ Oceanus is here regarded as a continuous stream
enclosing the earth and the seas, and so as flowing back upon himself.]

1624 (return) [ The conception of Oceanus is here different: he has
nine streams which encircle the earth and then flow out into the ‘main’
which appears to be the waste of waters on which, according to early
Greek and Hebrew cosmology, the disk-like earth floated.]

1625 (return) [ _i.e._ the threshold is of ‘native’ metal, and not
artificial.]

1626 (return) [ According to Homer Typhoeus was overwhelmed by Zeus
amongst the Arimi in Cilicia. Pindar represents him as buried under
Aetna, and Tzetzes reads Aetna in this passage.]

1627 (return) [ The epithet (which means literally _well-bored_) seems
to refer to the spout of the crucible.]

1628 (return) [ The fire god. There is no reference to volcanic action:
iron was smelted on Mount Ida; cp. _Epigrams of Homer_, ix. 2-4.]

1629 (return) [ _i.e._ Athena, who was born ‘on the banks of the river
Trito’ (cp. l. 929l)]

1630 (return) [ Restored by Peppmuller. The nineteen following lines
from another recension of lines 889-900, 924-9 are quoted by Chrysippus
(in Galen).]

1631 (return) [ _sc_. the aegis. Line 929s is probably spurious, since
it disagrees with l. 929q and contains a suspicious reference to
Athens.]

1701 (return) [ A catalogue of heroines each of whom was introduced
with the words E OIE, ‘Or like her’.]

1702 (return) [ An antiquarian writer of Byzantium, c. 490-570 A.D.]

1703 (return) [ Constantine VII. ‘Born in the Porphyry Chamber’,
905-959 A.D.]

1704 (return) [ “Berlin Papyri”, 7497 (left-hand fragment) and
“Oxyrhynchus Papyri”, 421 (right-hand fragment). For the restoration
see “Class. Quart.” vii. 217-8.]

1705 (return) [ As the price to be given to her father for her: so in
_Iliad_ xviii. 593 maidens are called ‘earners of oxen’. Possibly
Glaucus, like Aias (fr. 68, ll. 55 ff.), raided the cattle of others.]

1706 (return) [ _i.e._ Glaucus should father the children of others.
The curse of Aphrodite on the daughters of Tyndareus (fr. 67) may be
compared.]

1707 (return) [ Porphyry, scholar, mathematician, philosopher and
historian, lived 233-305 (?) A.D. He was a pupil of the neo-Platonist
Plotinus.]

1708 (return) [ Author of a geographical lexicon, produced after 400
A.D., and abridged under Justinian.]

1709 (return) [ Archbishop of Thessalonica 1175-1192 (?) A.D., author
of commentaries on Pindar and on the _Iliad_ and _Odyssey_.]

1710 (return) [ In the earliest times a loin-cloth was worn by
athletes, but was discarded after the 14th Olympiad.]

1711 (return) [ Slight remains of five lines precede line 1 in the
original: after line 20 an unknown number of lines have been lost, and
traces of a verse preceding line 21 are here omitted. Between lines 29
and 30 are fragments of six verses which do not suggest any definite
restoration. (NOTE: Line enumeration is that according to Evelyn-White;
a slightly different line numbering system is adopted in the original
publication of this fragment.—DBK)]

1712 (return) [ The end of Schoeneus’ speech, the preparations and the
beginning of the race are lost.]

1713 (return) [ Of the three which Aphrodite gave him to enable him to
overcome Atalanta.]

1714 (return) [ The geographer; fl. c.24 B.C.]

1715 (return) [ Of Miletus, flourished about 520 B.C. His work, a
mixture of history and geography, was used by Herodotus.]

1716 (return) [ The Hesiodic story of the daughters of Proetus can be
reconstructed from these sources. They were sought in marriage by all
the Greeks (Pauhellenes), but having offended Dionysus (or, according
to Servius, Juno), were afflicted with a disease which destroyed their
beauty (or were turned into cows). They were finally healed by
Melampus.]

1717 (return) [ Fl. 56-88 A.D.: he is best known for his work on
Vergil.]

1718 (return) [ This and the following fragment segment are meant to be
read together.—DBK.]

1719 (return) [ This fragment as well as fragments #40A, #101, and #102
were added by Mr. Evelyn-White in an appendix to the second edition
(1919). They are here moved to the _Catalogues_ proper for easier use
by the reader.—DBK.]

1720 (return) [ For the restoration of ll. 1-16 see “Ox. Pap.” pt. xi.
pp. 46-7: the supplements of ll. 17-31 are by the Translator (cp.
“Class. Quart.” x. (1916), pp. 65-67).]

1721 (return) [ The crocus was to attract Europa, as in the very
similar story of Persephone: cp. _Homeric Hymns_ ii. lines 8 ff.]

1722 (return) [ Apollodorus of Athens (fl. 144 B.C.) was a pupil of
Aristarchus. He wrote a Handbook of Mythology, from which the extant
work bearing his name is derived.]

1723 (return) [ Priest at Praeneste. He lived c. 170-230 A.D.]

1724 (return) [ Son of Apollonius Dyscolus, lived in Rome under Marcus
Aurelius. His chief work was on accentuation.]

1725 (return) [ This and the next two fragment segments are meant to be
read together.—DBK.]

1726 (return) [ Sacred to Poseidon. For the custom observed there, cp.
_Homeric Hymns_ iii. 231 ff.]

1727 (return) [ The allusion is obscure.]

1728 (return) [ Apollonius ‘the Crabbed’ was a grammarian of Alexandria
under Hadrian. He wrote largely on Grammar and Syntax.]

1729 (return) [ 275-195 (?) B.C., mathematician, astronomer, scholar,
and head of the Library of Alexandria.]

1730 (return) [ Of Cyme. He wrote a universal history covering the
period between the Dorian Migration and 340 B.C.]

1731 (return) [ _i.e._ the nomad Scythians, who are described by
Herodotus as feeding on mares’ milk and living in caravans.]

1732 (return) [ The restorations are mainly those adopted or suggested
in “Ox. Pap.” pt. xi. pp. 48 ff.: for those of ll. 8-14 see “Class.
Quart.” x. (1916) pp. 67-69.]

1733 (return) [ _i.e._ those who seek to outwit the oracle, or to ask
of it more than they ought, will be deceived by it and be led to ruin:
cp. _Hymn to Hermes_, 541 ff.]

1734 (return) [ Zetes and Calais, sons of Boreas, who were amongst the
Argonauts, delivered Phineus from the Harpies. The Strophades (‘Islands
of Turning’) are here supposed to have been so called because the sons
of Boreas were there turned back by Iris from pursuing the Harpies.]

1735 (return) [ An Epicurean philosopher, fl. 50 B.C.]

1736 (return) [ ‘Charming-with-her-voice’ (or ‘Charming-the-mind’),
‘Song’, and ‘Lovely-sounding’.]

1737 (return) [ Diodorus Siculus, fl. 8 B.C., author of an universal
history ending with Caesar’s Gallic Wars.]

1738 (return) [ The first epic in the “Trojan Cycle”; like all ancient
epics it was ascribed to Homer, but also, with more probability, to
Stasinus of Cyprus.]

1739 (return) [ This fragment is placed by Spohn after _Works and Days_
l. 120.]

1740 (return) [ A Greek of Asia Minor, author of the “Description of
Greece” (on which he was still engaged in 173 A.D.).]

1741 (return) [ Wilamowitz thinks one or other of these citations
belongs to the Catalogue.]

1742 (return) [ Lines 1-51 are from Berlin Papyri, 9739; lines 52-106
with B. 1-50 (and following fragments) are from Berlin Papyri, 10560. A
reference by Pausanias (iii. 24. 10) to ll. 100 ff. proves that the two
fragments together come from the _Catalogue of Women_. The second book
(the beginning of which is indicated after l. 106) can hardly be the
second book of the _Catalogues_ proper: possibly it should be assigned
to the EOIAI, which were sometimes treated as part of the _Catalogues_,
and sometimes separated from it. The remains of thirty-seven lines
following B. 50 in the Papyrus are too slight to admit of restoration.]

1743 (return) [ sc. the Suitor whose name is lost.]

1744 (return) [ Wooing was by proxy; so Agamemnon wooed Helen for his
brother Menelaus (ll. 14-15), and Idomeneus, who came in person and
sent no deputy, is specially mentioned as an exception, and the reasons
for this—if the restoration printed in the text be right—is stated (ll.
69 ff.).]

1745 (return) [ The Papyrus here marks the beginning of a second book
possibly of the _Eoiae_. The passage (ll. 2-50) probably led up to an
account of the Trojan (and Theban?) war, in which, according to _Works
and Days_ ll. 161-166, the Race of Heroes perished. The opening of the
_Cypria_ is somewhat similar. Somewhere in the fragmentary lines 13-19
a son of Zeus—almost certainly Apollo—was introduced, though for what
purpose is not clear. With l. 31 the destruction of man (cp. ll. 4-5)
by storms which spoil his crops begins: the remaining verses are
parenthetical, describing the snake “which bears its young in the
spring season”.]

1746 (return) [ _i.e._ the snake; as in _Works and Days_ l. 524, the
“Boneless One” is the cuttle-fish.]

1747 (return) [ c. 1110-1180 A.D. His chief work was a poem,
“Chiliades”, in accentual verse of nearly 13,000 lines.]

1748 (return) [ According to this account Iphigeneia was carried by
Artemis to the Taurie Chersonnese (the Crimea). The Tauri (Herodotus
iv. 103) identified their maiden-goddess with Iphigeneia; but Euripides
(_Iphigeneia in Tauris_) makes her merely priestess of the goddess.]

1749 (return) [ Of Alexandria. He lived in the 5th century, and
compiled a Greek Lexicon.]

1750 (return) [ For his murder Minos exacted a yearly tribute of boys
and girls, to be devoured by the Minotaur, from the Athenians.]

1751 (return) [ Of Naucratis. His “Deipnosophistae” (“Dons at Dinner”)
is an encyclopaedia of miscellaneous topics in the form of a dialogue.
His date is c. 230 A.D.]

1752 (return) [ There is a fancied connection between LAAS (‘stone’)
and LAOS (‘people’). The reference is to the stones which Deucalion and
Pyrrha transformed into men and women after the Flood.]

1753 (return) [ Eustathius identifies Ileus with Oileus, father of
Aias. Here again is fanciful etymology, ILEUS being similar to ILEOS
(complaisant, gracious).]

1754 (return) [ Imitated by Vergil, “Aeneid” vii. 808, describing
Camilla.]

1755 (return) [ c. 600 A.D., a lecturer and grammarian of
Constantinople.]

1756 (return) [ Priest of Apollo, and, according to Homer, discoverer
of wine. Maronea in Thrace is said to have been called after him.]

1757 (return) [ The crow was originally white, but was turned black by
Apollo in his anger at the news brought by the bird.]

1758 (return) [ A philosopher of Athens under Hadrian and Antonius. He
became a Christian and wrote a defence of the Christians addressed to
Antoninus Pius.]

1759 (return) [ Zeus slew Asclepus (fr. 90) because of his success as a
healer, and Apollo in revenge killed the Cyclopes (fr. 64). In
punishment Apollo was forced to serve Admetus as herdsman. (Cp.
Euripides, _Alcestis_, 1-8)]

1760 (return) [ For Cyrene and Aristaeus, cp. Vergil, _Georgics_, iv.
315 ff.]

1761 (return) [ A writer on mythology of uncertain date.]

1762 (return) [ In Epirus. The oracle was first consulted by Deucalion
and Pyrrha after the Flood. Later writers say that the god responded in
the rustling of leaves in the oaks for which the place was famous.]

1763 (return) [ The fragment is part of a leaf from a papyrus book of
the 4th century A.D.]

1764 (return) [ According to Homer and later writers Meleager wasted
away when his mother Althea burned the brand on which his life
depended, because he had slain her brothers in the dispute for the hide
of the Calydonian boar. (Cp. Bacchylides, “Ode” v. 136 ff.)]

1765 (return) [ The fragment probably belongs to the _Catalogues_
proper rather than to the Eoiae; but, as its position is uncertain, it
may conveniently be associated with Frags. 99A and the _Shield of
Heracles_.]

1766 (return) [ Most of the smaller restorations appear in the original
publication, but the larger are new: these last are highly conjectual,
there being no definite clue to the general sense.]

1767 (return) [ Alcmaon (who took part in the second of the two heroic
Theban expeditions) is perhaps mentioned only incidentally as the son
of Amphiaraus, who seems to be clearly indicated in ll. 7-8, and whose
story occupies ll. 5-10. At l. 11 the subject changes and Electryon is
introduced as father of Alcmena.]

1768 (return) [ The association of ll. 1-16 with ll. 17-24 is presumed
from the apparent mention of Erichthonius in l. 19. A new section must
then begin at l. 21. See “Ox. Pap.” pt. xi. p. 55 (and for restoration
of ll. 5-16, ib. p. 53). ll. 19-20 are restored by the Translator.]

1801 (return) [ A mountain peak near Thebes which took its name from
the Sphinx (called in _Theogony_ l. 326 PHIX).]

1802 (return) [ Cyanus was a glass-paste of deep blue colour: the
‘zones’ were concentric bands in which were the scenes described by the
poet. The figure of Fear (l. 44) occupied the centre of the shield, and
Oceanus (l. 314) enclosed the whole.]

1803 (return) [ ‘She who drives herds,’ _i.e._ ‘The Victorious’, since
herds were the chief spoil gained by the victor in ancient warfare.]

1804 (return) [ The cap of darkness which made its wearer invisible.]

1805 (return) [ The existing text of the vineyard scene is a compound
of two different versions, clumsily adapted, and eked out with some
makeshift additions.]

1806 (return) [ The conception is similar to that of the sculptured
group at Athens of Two Lions devouring a Bull (Dickens, _Cat. of the
Acropolis Museum_, No. 3).]

1901 (return) [ A Greek sophist who taught rhetoric at Rome in the time
of Hadrian. He is the author of a collection of proverbs in three
books.]

2001 (return) [ When Heracles prayed that a son might be born to
Telamon and Eriboea, Zeus sent forth an eagle in token that the prayer
would be granted. Heracles then bade the parents call their son Aias
after the eagle (_aietos_).]

2002 (return) [ Oenomaus, king of Pisa in Elis, warned by an oracle
that he should be killed by his son-in-law, offered his daughter
Hippodamia to the man who could defeat him in a chariot race, on
condition that the defeated suitors should be slain by him. Ultimately
Pelops, through the treachery of the charioteer of Oenomaus, became
victorious.]

2003 (return) [ sc. to Scythia.]

2004 (return) [ In the Homeric _Hymn to Hermes_ Battus almost
disappears from the story, and a somewhat different account of the
stealing of the cattle is given.]

2101 (return) [ sc. Colophon. Proclus in his abstract of the _Returns_
(sc. of the heroes from Troy) says Calchas and his party were present
at the death of Teiresias at Colophon, perhaps indicating another
version of this story.]

2102 (return) [ ll. 1-2 are quoted by Athenaeus, ii. p. 40; ll. 3-4 by
Clement of Alexandria, _Stromateis_ vi. 2. 26. Buttman saw that the two
fragments should be joined. (NOTE: These two fragments should be read
together.—DBK)]

2201 (return) [ sc. the golden fleece of the ram which carried Phrixus
and Helle away from Athamas and Ino. When he reached Colchis Phrixus
sacrificed the ram to Zeus.]

2202 (return) [ Euboea properly means the ‘Island of fine Cattle (or
Cows)’.]

2301 (return) [ This and the following fragment are meant to be read
together.—DBK]

2302 (return) [ cp. Hesiod _Theogony_ 81 ff. But Theognis 169, ‘Whomso
the god honour, even a man inclined to blame praiseth him’, is much
nearer.]

2401 (return) [ Cf. Scholion on Clement, “Protrept.” i. p. 302.]

2402 (return) [ This line may once have been read in the text of _Works
and Days_ after l. 771.]

2501 (return) [ ll. 1-9 are preserved by Diodorus Siculus iii. 66. 3;
ll. 10-21 are extant only in M.]

2502 (return) [ Dionysus, after his untimely birth from Semele, was
sewn into the thigh of Zeus.]

2503 (return) [ _sc_. Semele. Zeus is here speaking.]

2504 (return) [ The reference is apparently to something in the body of
the hymn, now lost.]

2505 (return) [ The Greeks feared to name Pluto directly and mentioned
him by one of many descriptive titles, such as ‘Host of Many’: compare
the Christian use of O DIABOLOS or our ‘Evil One’.]

2506 (return) [ Demeter chooses the lowlier seat, supposedly as being
more suitable to her assumed condition, but really because in her
sorrow she refuses all comforts.]

2507 (return) [ An act of communion—the drinking of the potion here
described—was one of the most important pieces of ritual in the
Eleusinian mysteries, as commemorating the sorrows of the goddess.]

2508 (return) [ Undercutter and Woodcutter are probably popular names
(after the style of Hesiod’s ‘Boneless One’) for the worm thought to be
the cause of teething and toothache.]

2509 (return) [ The list of names is taken—with five additions—from
Hesiod, _Theogony_ 349 ff.: for their general significance see note on
that passage.]

2510 (return) [ Inscriptions show that there was a temple of Apollo
Delphinius (cp. ii. 495-6) at Cnossus and a Cretan month bearing the
same name.]

2511 (return) [ sc. that the dolphin was really Apollo.]

2512 (return) [ The epithets are transferred from the god to his altar
‘Overlooking’ is especially an epithet of Zeus, as in Apollonius
Rhodius ii. 1124.]

2513 (return) [ Pliny notices the efficacy of the flesh of a tortoise
against withcraft. In _Geoponica_ i. 14. 8 the living tortoise is
prescribed as a charm to preserve vineyards from hail.]

2514 (return) [ Hermes makes the cattle walk backwards way, so that
they seem to be going towards the meadow instead of leaving it (cp. l.
345); he himself walks in the normal manner, relying on his sandals as
a disguise.]

2515 (return) [ Such seems to be the meaning indicated by the context,
though the verb is taken by Allen and Sikes to mean, ‘to be like
oneself’, and so ‘to be original’.]

2516 (return) [ Kuhn points out that there is a lacuna here. In l. 109
the borer is described, but the friction of this upon the fireblock (to
which the phrase ‘held firmly’ clearly belongs) must also have been
mentioned.]

2517 (return) [ The cows being on their sides on the ground, Hermes
bends their heads back towards their flanks and so can reach their
backbones.]

2518 (return) [ O. Muller thinks the ‘hides’ were a stalactite
formation in the ‘Cave of Nestor’ near Messenian Pylos,—though the cave
of Hermes is near the Alpheus (l. 139). Others suggest that actual
skins were shown as relics before some cave near Triphylian Pylos.]

2519 (return) [ Gemoll explains that Hermes, having offered all the
meat as sacrifice to the Twelve Gods, remembers that he himself as one
of them must be content with the savour instead of the substance of the
sacrifice. Can it be that by eating he would have forfeited the
position he claimed as one of the Twelve Gods?]

2520 (return) [ _Lit_. “thorn-plucker”.]

2521 (return) [ Hermes is ambitious (l. 175), but if he is cast into
Hades he will have to be content with the leadership of mere babies
like himself, since those in Hades retain the state of growth—whether
childhood or manhood—in which they are at the moment of leaving the
upper world.]

2522 (return) [ Literally, ‘you have made him sit on the floor’, _i.e._
‘you have stolen everything down to his last chair.’]

2523 (return) [ The Thriae, who practised divination by means of
pebbles (also called THRIAE). In this hymn they are represented as aged
maidens (ll. 553-4), but are closely associated with bees (ll. 559-563)
and possibly are here conceived as having human heads and breasts with
the bodies and wings of bees. See the edition of Allen and Sikes,
Appendix III.]

2524 (return) [ Cronos swallowed each of his children the moment that
they were born, but ultimately was forced to disgorge them. Hestia,
being the first to be swallowed, was the last to be disgorged, and so
was at once the first and latest born of the children of Cronos. Cp.
Hesiod _Theogony_, ll. 495-7.]

2525 (return) [ Mr. Evelyn-White prefers a different order for lines
#87-90 than that preserved in the MSS. This translation is based upon
the following sequence: ll. 89,90,87,88.—DBK.]

2526 (return) [ ‘Cattle-earning’, because an accepted suitor paid for
his bride in cattle.]

2527 (return) [ The name Aeneas is here connected with the epithet
AIEOS (awful): similarly the name Odysseus is derived (in _Odyssey_
i.62) from ODYSSMAI (I grieve).]

2528 (return) [ Aphrodite extenuates her disgrace by claiming that the
race of Anchises is almost divine, as is shown in the persons of
Ganymedes and Tithonus.]

2529 (return) [ So Christ connecting the word with OMOS. L. and S. give
= OMOIOS, ‘common to all’.]

2530 (return) [ Probably not Etruscans, but the non-Hellenic peoples of
Thrace and (according to Thucydides) of Lemnos and Athens. Cp.
Herodotus i. 57; Thucydides iv. 109.]

2531 (return) [ This line appears to be an alternative to ll. 10-11.]

2532 (return) [ The name Pan is here derived from PANTES, ‘all’. Cp.
Hesiod, _Works and Days_ ll. 80-82, _Hymn to Aphrodite_ (v) l. 198. for
the significance of personal names.]

2533 (return) [ Mr. Evelyn-White prefers to switch l. 10 and 11,
reading 11 first then 10.—DBK.]

2534 (return) [ An extra line is inserted in some MSS. after l. 15.—
DBK.]

2535 (return) [ The epithet is a usual one for birds, cp. Hesiod,
_Works and Days_, l. 210; as applied to Selene it may merely indicate
her passage, like a bird, through the air, or mean ‘far flying’.]

2601 (return) [ The _Epigrams_ are preserved in the pseudo-Herodotean
_Life of Homer_. Nos. III, XIII, and XVII are also found in the
_Contest of Homer and Hesiod_, and No. I is also extant at the end of
some MSS. of the _Homeric Hymns_.]

2602 (return) [ sc. from Smyrna, Homer’s reputed birth-place.]

2603 (return) [ The councillors at Cyme who refused to support Homer at
the public expense.]

2604 (return) [ The ‘better fruit’ is apparently the iron smelted out
in fires of pine-wood.]

2605 (return) [ Hecate: cp. Hesiod, _Theogony_, l. 450.]

2606 (return) [ _i.e._ in protection.]

2607 (return) [ This song is called by pseudo-Herodotus EIRESIONE. The
word properly indicates a garland wound with wool which was worn at
harvest-festivals, but came to be applied first to the harvest song and
then to any begging song. The present is akin the Swallow-Song
(XELIDONISMA), sung at the beginning of spring, and answered to the
still surviving English May-Day songs. Cp. Athenaeus, viii. 360 B.]

2608 (return) [ The lice which they caught in their clothes they left
behind, but carried home in their clothes those which they could not
catch.]

2701 (return) [ See the cylix reproduced by Gerhard, _Abhandlungen_,
taf. 5,4. Cp. Stesichorus, Frag. 3 (Smyth).]

2801 (return) [ The haunch was regarded as a dishonourable portion.]

2802 (return) [ The horse of Adrastus, offspring of Poseidon and
Demeter, who had changed herself into a mare to escape Poseidon.]

2803 (return) [ Restored from Pindar Ol. vi. 15 who, according to
Asclepiades, derives the passage from the _Thebais_.]

2901 (return) [ So called from Teumessus, a hill in Boeotia. For the
derivation of Teumessus cp. Antimachus _Thebais_ fr. 3 (Kinkel).]

3001 (return) [ The preceding part of the Epic Cycle (?).]

3002 (return) [ While the Greeks were sacrificing at Aulis, a serpent
appeared and devoured eight young birds from their nest and lastly the
mother of the brood. This was interpreted by Calchas to mean that the
war would swallow up nine full years. Cp. _Iliad_ ii, 299 ff.]

3003 (return) [ _i.e._ Stasinus (or Hegesias: cp. fr. 6): the phrase
‘Cyprian histories’ is equivalent to “The Cypria”.]

3004 (return) [ Cp. Allen “C.R.” xxvii. 190.]

3005 (return) [ These two lines possibly belong to the account of the
feast given by Agamemnon at Lemnos.]

3006 (return) [ sc. the Asiatic Thebes at the foot of Mt. Placius.]

3101 (return) [ sc. after cremation.]

3102 (return) [ This fragment comes from a version of the _Contest of
Homer and Hesiod_ widely different from that now extant. The words ‘as
Lesches gives them (says)’ seem to indicate that the verse and a half
assigned to Homer came from the _Little Iliad_. It is possible they may
have introduced some unusually striking incident, such as the actual
Fall of Troy.]

3103 (return) [ _i.e._ in the paintings by Polygnotus at Delphi.]

3104 (return) [ _i.e._ the dead bodies in the picture.]

3105 (return) [ According to this version Aeneas was taken to
Pharsalia. Better known are the Homeric account (according to which
Aeneas founded a new dynasty at Troy), and the legends which make him
seek a new home in Italy.]

3201 (return) [ sc. knowledge of both surgery and of drugs.]

3301 (return) [ Clement attributes this line to Augias: probably Agias
is intended.]

3302 (return) [ Identical with the _Returns_, in which the Sons of
Atreus occupy the most prominent parts.]

3401 (return) [ This Artemisia, who distinguished herself at the battle
of Salamis (Herodotus, vii. 99) is here confused with the later
Artemisia, the wife of Mausolus, who died 350 B.C.]

3402 (return) [ _i.e._ the fox knows many ways to baffle its foes,
while the hedge-hog knows one only which is far more effectual.]

3403 (return) [ Attributed to Homer by Zenobius, and by Bergk to the
_Margites_.]

3501 (return) [ _i.e._ ‘monkey-men’.]

3601 (return) [ Lines 42-52 are intrusive; the list of vegetables which
the Mouse cannot eat must follow immediately after the various dishes
of which he does eat.]

3602 (return) [ lit. ‘those unable to swim’.]

3603 (return) [ This may be a parody of Orion’s threat in Hesiod,
“Astronomy”, frag. 4.]

3701 (return) [ sc. the riddle of the fisher-boys which comes at the
end of this work.]

3702 (return) [ The verses of Hesiod are called doubtful in meaning
because they are, if taken alone, either incomplete or absurd.]

3703 (return) [ _Works and Days_, ll. 383-392.]

3704 (return) [ _Iliad_ xiii, ll. 126-133, 339-344.]

3705 (return) [ The accepted text of the _Iliad_ contains 15,693
verses; that of the _Odyssey_, 12,110.]

3706 (return) [ _Iliad_ ii, ll. 559-568 (with two additional verses).]

3707 (return) [ _Homeric Hymns_, iii.]


End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Hesiod, The Homeric Hymns, and Homerica, by
Homer and Hesiod