BOOK IV. LE JIN.

【第一章】子曰、里仁為美、擇不處仁、焉得知。
【第二章】子曰、不仁者、不可以久處約、不可以長處樂、仁者安仁、知者
利仁。
        CHAP. I. The Master said, 'It is virtuous manners which
constitute the excellence of a neighborhood. If a man in
selecting a residence, do not fix on one where such prevail, how
can he be wise?'
        CHAP. II. The Master said, 'Those who are without virtue
cannot abide long either in a condition of poverty and hardship,
or in a condition of enjoyment. The virtuous rest in virtue; the
wise desire virtue.'

【第三章】子曰、惟仁者、能好人、能惡人。
【第四章】子曰、苟志於仁矣、無惡也。
【第五章】【一節】子曰、富與貴、是人之所欲也、不以其道得之、不處也。
貧與賤、是人之所惡也、不以其道得之、不去也。【二節】君子去仁、惡乎
成名。【三節】君子無終食之間
        CHAP. III. The Master said, 'It is only the (truly) virtuous
man, who can love, or who can hate, others.'
        CHAP. IV. The Master said, 'If the will be set on virtue,
there will be no practice of wickedness.'
        CHAP. V. 1. The Master said, 'Riches and honours are
what men desire. If it cannot be obtained in the proper way,
they should not be held. Poverty and meanness are what men
dislike. If it cannot be avoided in the proper way, they should
not be avoided.
        2. 'If a superior man abandon virtue, how can he fulfil
the requirements of that name?
        3. 'The superior man does not, even for the space of a
single meal, act contrary to virtue. In moments of haste, he
cleaves to it. In seasons of danger, he cleaves to it.'

違仁、造次必於是、顛沛必於是。
【第六章】【一節】子曰、我未見好仁者、惡不仁者、好仁者、無以尚之、
惡不仁者、其為仁矣、不使不仁者、加乎其身。【二節】有能一日用其力於
仁矣乎、我未見力不足者。【三節】蓋有之矣、我未之見也。
【第七章】子曰、人之過也、各於其黨、觀過、斯知仁矣。
        CHAP. VI. 1. The Master said, 'I have not seen a person
who loved virtue, or one who hated what was not virtuous. He
who loved virtue, would esteem nothing above it. He who hated
what is not virtuous, would practise virtue in such a way that
he would not allow anything that is not virtuous to approach
his person.
        2. 'Is any one able for one day to apply his strength to
virtue? I have not seen the case in which his strength would be
insufficient.
        3. 'Should there possibly be any such case, I have not
seen it.'
        CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'The faults of men are
characteristic of the class to which they belong. By observing a
man's faults, it may be known that he is virtuous.'

【第八章】子曰、朝聞道、夕死、可矣。
【第八章】子曰、士志於道、而恥惡衣惡食者、未足與議也。
【第十章】子曰、君子之於天下也、無適也、無莫也、義之與比。
【十一章】子曰、君子懷德、小人懷土、君子懷刑、小
        CHAP. VIII. The Master said, 'If a man in the morning
hear the right way, he may die in the evening without regret.'
        CHAP. IX. The Master said, 'A scholar, whose mind is set
on truth, and who is ashamed of bad clothes and bad food, is
not fit to be discoursed with.'
        CHAP. X. The Master said, 'The superior man, in the
world, does not set his mind either for anything, or against
anything; what is right he will follow.'
        CHAP. XI. The Master said, 'The superior man thinks of
virtue; the small man thinks of comfort. The superior man
thinks of the sanctions of law; the small man thinks of favours
which he may receive.'

人懷惠。
【十二章】子曰、放於利而行、多怨。
【十三章】子曰、能以禮讓為國乎、何有、不能以禮讓為國、如禮何。
【十四章】子曰、不患無位、患所以立、不患莫己知、求為可知也。
【十五章】【一節】子曰、參乎、吾道一以貫之。曾子曰、唯。【二節】子
出、門人問
        CHAP. XII. The Master said: 'He who acts with a constant
view to his own advantage will be much murmured against.'
        CHAP. XIII. The Master said, 'Is a prince is able to govern
his kingdom with the complaisance proper to the rules of
propriety, what difficulty will he have? If he cannot govern it
with that complaisance, what has he to do with the rules of
propriety?'
        CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'A man should say, I am not
concerned that I have no place, I am concerned how I may fit
myself for one. I am not concerned that I am not known, I seek
to be worthy to be known.'
        CHAP. XV. 1. The Master said, 'Shan, my doctrine is that
of an all-pervading unity.' The disciple Tsang replied, 'Yes.'
        2. The Master went out, and the other disciples asked,
saying,

曰、何謂也。曾子曰、夫子之道、忠恕而已矣。
【十六章】子曰、君子喻於義、小人喻於利。
【十七章】子曰、見賢思齊焉、見不賢而內自省也。
【十八章】子曰、事父母幾諫、見志不從、又敬
'What do his words mean?' Tsang said, 'The doctrine of our
master is to be true to the principles of our nature and the
benevolent exercise of them to others,-- this and nothing more.'
        CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'The mind of the superior
man is conversant with righteousness; the mind of the mean
man is conversant with gain.'
        CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'When we see men of worth,
we should think of equalling them; when we see men of a
contrary character, we should turn inwards and examine
ourselves.'
        CHAP. XVIII. The Master said, 'In serving his parents, a
son may remonstrate with them, but gently; when he sees that
they do not incline to follow his advice, he shows an increased
degree of reverence, but does not abandon his purpose; and
should they punish him, he does not allow himself to murmur.'

不違、勞而不怨。
【十九章】子曰、父母在、不遠游、游必有方。
【二十章】子曰、三年無改於父之道、可謂孝矣。
【廿一章】子曰、父母之年、不可不知也、一則以喜、一則以懼。
【廿二章】子曰、古者言之不出、恥躬之不逮也。
【廿三章】子曰、以約、失之者鮮矣。
        CHAP. XIX. The Master said, 'While his parents are alive,
the son may not go abroad to a distance. If he does go abroad,
he must have a fixed place to which he goes.'
        CHAP. XX. The Master said, 'If the son for three years
does not alter from the way of his father, he may be called
filial.'
        CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'The years of parents may by
no means not be kept in the memory, as an occasion at once for
joy and for fear.'
        CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'The reason why the
ancients did not readily give utterance to their words, was that
they feared lest their actions should not come up to them.'
        CHAP. XXIII. The Master said, 'The cautious seldom err.'

【廿四章】子曰、君子欲訥於言、而敏於行。
【廿五章】子曰、德不孤、必有鄰。
【廿六章】子游曰、事君數、斯辱矣、朋友數、斯疏矣。
        CHAP. XXIV. The Master said, 'The superior man wishes
to be slow in his speech and earnest in his conduct.'
        CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'Virtue is not left to stand
alone. He who practises it will have neighbors.'
        CHAP. XXVI. Tsze-yu said, 'In serving a prince, frequent
remonstrances lead to disgrace. Between friends, frequent
reproofs make the friendship distant.'

公冶長第五