BOOK V. KUNG-YE CH'ANG.

【第一章】【一節】子謂公冶長、可妻也、雖在縲絏之中、非其罪也。以其
子妻之。【二節】子謂南容、
        CHAP. I. 1. The Master said of Kung-ye Ch'ang that he
might be wived; although he was put in bonds, he had not been
guilty of any crime. Accordingly, he gave him his own daughter
to wife.
        2. Of Nan Yung he said that if the country were well
governed

邦有道不廢、邦無道免於刑戮。以其兄之子妻之。
【第二章】子謂子賤、君子哉若人、魯無君子者、斯焉取斯。
【第三章】子貢問曰、賜也何如。子曰、女器也。曰、何器也。曰、瑚璉也。
he would not be out of office, and if it were ill-governed, he
would escape punishment and disgrace. He gave him the
daughter of his own elder brother to wife.
        CHAP. II. The Master said of Tsze-chien, 'Of superior
virtue indeed is such a man! If there were not virtuous men in
Lu, how could this man have acquired this character?'
        CHAP. III. Tsze-kung asked, 'What do you say of me,
Ts'ze? The Master said, 'You are a utensil.' 'What utensil?' 'A
gemmed sacrificial utensil.'

【第四章】【一節】或曰、雍也仁、而不佞。【二節】子曰、焉用佞、禦人
以口給、屢憎於人、不知其仁、焉用佞。
【第五章】子使漆雕開仕。對曰、吾斯之未能信。子說。
【第六章】子曰、道不行、乘桴浮于海、從我者、
        CHAP. IV. 1. Some one said, 'Yung is truly virtuous, but he
is not ready with his tongue.'
        2. The Master said, 'What is the good of being ready with
the tongue? They who encounter men with smartnesses of
speech for the most part procure themselves hatred. I know
not whether he be truly virtuous, but why should he show
readiness of the tongue?'
        CHAP. V. The Master was wishing Ch'i-tiao K'ai to enter
on official employment. He replied, 'I am not yet able to rest in
the assurance of THIS.' The Master was pleased.
        CHAP. VI. The Master said, 'My doctrines make no way. I
will get upon a raft, and float about on the sea. He that will
accompany me will be Yu, I dare say.' Tsze-lu hearing this was
glad,

其由與。子路聞之喜。子曰、由也、好勇過我、無所取材。
【第七章】【一節】孟武伯問子路仁乎。子曰、不知也。【二節】又問。子
曰、由也、千乘之國、可使治其賦也、不知其仁也。【三節】求也何如。子
曰、求也、千室之邑、百乘之家、可使為之宰也、不知其仁也。【四節】赤
也何如。子曰、赤也、束帶立於朝、可使與賓客言也、不知其仁也。
upon which the Master said, 'Yu is fonder of daring than I am.
He does not exercise his judgment upon matters.'
        CHAP. VII. 1. Mang Wu asked about Tsze-lu, whether he
was perfectly virtuous. The Master said, 'I do not know.'
        2. He asked again, when the Master replied, 'In a
kingdom of a thousand chariots, Yu might be employed to
manage the military levies, but I do not know whether he be
perfectly virtuous.'
        3. 'And what do you say of Ch'iu?' The Master replied, 'In
a city of a thousand families, or a clan of a hundred chariots,
Ch'iu might be employed as governor, but I do not know
whether he is perfectly virtuous.'
        4. 'What do you say of Ch'ih?' The Master replied, 'With
his sash girt and standing in a court, Ch'ih might be employed
to converse with the visitors and guests, but I do not know
whether he is perfectly virtuous.'

【第八章】【一節】子謂子貢曰、女與回也、孰愈。【二節】對曰、賜也、
何敢望回、回也、聞一以知十、賜也、聞一以知二。【三節】子曰、弗如也、
吾與女、弗如也。
【第九章】宰予晝寢。子曰、朽木不可雕也、糞土之牆、不可朽也、於予與
何誅。【二節】子曰、始吾於人也、聽其言而信其行、今吾於人也、
        CHAP. VIII. 1. The Master said to Tsze-kung, 'Which do
you consider superior, yourself or Hui?'
        2. Tsze-kung replied, 'How dare I compare myself with
Hui? Hui hears one point and knows all about a subject; I hear
one point, and know a second.'
        3. The Master said, 'You are not equal to him. I grant you,
you are not equal to him.'
        CHAP. IX. 1. Tsai Yu being asleep during the daytime, the
Master said, 'Rotten wood cannot be carved; a wall of dirty
earth will not receive the trowel. This Yu!-- what is the use of
my reproving him?'
        2. The Master said, 'At first, my way with men was to
hear their words, and give them credit for their conduct. Now
my way is to hear their words, and look at their conduct. It is
from Yu that I have learned to make this change.'

聽其言而觀其行、於予與改是。
【第十章】子曰、吾未見剛者。或對曰、申棖。子曰、棖也慾、焉得剛。
【十一章】子貢曰、我不欲人之加諸我也、吾亦欲無加諸人。子曰、賜也、
非爾所及也。
【十二章】子貢曰、夫子之文章、
        CHAP. X. The Master said, 'I have not seen a firm and
unbending man.' Some one replied, 'There is Shan Ch'ang.'
'Ch'ang,' said the Master, 'is under the influence of his passions;
how can he be pronounced firm and unbending?'
        CHAP. XI. Tsze-kung said, 'What I do not wish men to do
to me, I also wish not to do to men.' The Master said, 'Ts'ze, you
have not attained to that.'
        CHAP. XII. Tsze-kung said, 'The Master's personal
displays of his principles and ordinary descriptions of them
may be heard. His discourses about man's nature, and the way
of Heaven, cannot be heard.'

可得而聞也、夫子之言性與天道、不可得而聞也。
【十三章】子路有聞、未之能行、唯恐有聞。
【十四章】子貢問曰、孔文子、何以謂之文也。子曰、敏而好學、不恥下問、
是以謂之文也。
【十五章】子謂子產、有君子之道四焉、其行己也恭、其事上也敬、其養民
也惠、其使民
        CHAP. XIII. When Tsze-lu heard anything, if he had not
yet succeeded in carrying it into practice, he was only afraid
lest he should hear something else.
        CHAP. XIV. Tsze-kung asked, saying, 'On what ground did
Kung-wan get that title of Wan?' The Master said, 'He was of an
active nature and yet fond of learning, and he was not ashamed
to ask and learn of his inferiors!-- On these grounds he has
been styled Wan.'
        CHAP. XV. The Master said of Tsze-ch'an that he had four
of the characteristics of a superior man:-- in his conduct of
himself, he was humble; in serving his superiors, he was
respectful; in nourishing the people, he was kind; in ordering
the people, he was just.'

也義。
【十六章】子曰、晏平仲善與人交、久而敬之。
【十七章】子曰、藏文仲、居蔡、山節藻梲、何如其知也。
【十八章】【一節】子張問曰、令尹子文三仕為令尹、無喜色、三已之、無
慍色。舊令尹之政、必以告新令尹、何如。子曰、忠矣。曰、仁矣乎。曰、
        CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'Yen P'ing knew well how to
maintain friendly intercourse. The acquaintance might be long,
but he showed the same respect as at first.'
        CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'Tsang Wan kept a large
tortoise in a house, on the capitals of the pillars of which he
had hills made, and with representations of duckweed on the
small pillars above the beams supporting the rafters.-- Of what
sort was his wisdom?'
        CHAP. XVIII. 1. Tsze-chang asked, saying, 'The minister
Tsze-wan thrice took office, and manifested no joy in his
countenance. Thrice he retired from office, and manifested no
displeasure. He made it a point to inform the new minister of
the way in which he had conducted the government;-- what do
you say of him?' The Master replied. 'He was loyal.' 'Was he
perfectly virtuous?' 'I do not know. How can he be pronounced
perfectly virtuous?'

未知、焉得仁。【二節】崔子弒齊君、陳文子有馬十乘、棄而違之。至於他
邦、則曰、猶吾大夫崔子也、違之、之一邦、則又曰、猶吾大夫崔子也、違
之、何如。子曰、清矣。曰、仁矣乎。曰、未知、焉得仁。
【十九章】季文子三思而後行。子聞之曰、再、斯可矣。
【二十章】子曰、甯武子、邦有道、則
        2. Tsze-chang proceeded, 'When the officer Ch'ui killed
the prince of Ch'i, Ch'an Wan, though he was the owner of forty
horses, abandoned them and left the country. Coming to
another State, he said, "They are here like our great officer,
Ch'ui," and left it. He came to a second State, and with the same
observation left it also;-- what do you say of him?' The Master
replied, 'He was pure.' 'Was he perfectly virtuous?' 'I do not
know. How can he be pronounced perfectly virtuous?'
        CHAP. XIX. Chi Wan thought thrice, and then acted. When
the Master was informed of it, he said, 'Twice may do.'
        CHAP. XX. The Master said, 'When good order prevailed in
his country, Ning Wu acted the part of a wise man. When his
country was in disorder, he acted the part of a stupid man.
Others may equal his wisdom, but they cannot equal his
stupidity.'

知、邦無道、則愚、其知可及也、其愚不可及也。
【廿一章】子在陳曰、歸與歸與、吾黨之小子狂簡、斐然成章、不知所以裁
之。
【廿二章】子曰、伯夷叔齊、不念舊惡、怨是用希。
【廿三章】子曰、孰謂微生高
        CHAP. XXI. When the Master was in Ch'an, he said, 'Let
me return! Let me return! The little children of my school are
ambitious and too hasty. They are accomplished and complete
so far, but they do not know how to restrict and shape
themselves.'
        CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'Po-i and Shu-ch'i did not
keep the former wickednesses of men in mind, and hence the
resentments directed towards them were few.'
        CHAP. XXIII. The Master said, 'Who says of Wei-shang
Kao

直、或乞醃焉、乞諸鄰而與之。
【廿四章】子曰、巧言令色、足恭、左丘明恥之、丘亦恥之、匿怨而友其人、
左丘明恥之、丘亦恥之。
【一節】顏淵季路侍。子曰、盍各言爾志。【二節】子路曰、願車馬、衣輕
裘、與朋友共、蔽之而無憾。【三節】顏淵曰、願無
that he is upright? One begged some vinegar of him, and he
begged it of a neighbor and gave it to the man.'
        CHAP. XXIV. The Master said, 'Fine words, an insinuating
appearance, and excessive respect;-- Tso Ch'iu-ming was
ashamed of them. I also am ashamed of them. To conceal
resentment against a person, and appear friendly with him;--
Tso Ch'iu-ming was ashamed of such conduct. I also am
ashamed of it.'
        CHAP. XXV. 1. Yen Yuan and Chi Lu being by his side, the
Master said to them, 'Come, let each of you tell his wishes.'
        2. Tsze-lu said, 'I should like, having chariots and horses,
and light fur dresses, to share them with my friends, and
though they should spoil them, I would not be displeased.'
        3. Yen Yuan said, 'I should like not to boast of my
excellence, nor to make a display of my meritorious deeds.'

伐善、無施勞。【四節】子路曰、願聞子之志。子曰、老者安之、朋友信之、
少者懷之。
【廿六章】子曰、已矣乎、吾未見能見其過、而內自訟者也。
【廿七章】子曰、十室之邑、必有忠信、如丘者焉、不如丘之好學也。
        4. Tsze-lu then said, 'I should like, sir, to hear your
wishes.' The Master said, 'They are, in regard to the aged, to
give them rest; in regard to friends, to show them sincerity; in
regard to the young, to treat them tenderly.'
        CHAP. XXVI. The Master said, 'It is all over! I have not
yet seen one who could perceive his faults, and inwardly
accuse himself.'
        CHAP. XXVII. The Master said, 'In a hamlet of ten
families, there may be found one honourable and sincere as I
am, but not so fond of learning.'

雍也第六