BOOK VI. YUNG YEY.

【第一章】【一節】子曰、雍也可使南面。【二節】仲弓問子桑伯子。子曰、
可也、簡。【三節】仲弓曰、居敬而行簡、以臨其民、不亦可乎、居簡而行
簡、無乃大簡乎。【四節】子曰、雍之言然。
        CHAP. I. 1. The Master said, 'There is Yung!-- He might
occupy the place of a prince.'
        2. Chung-kung asked about Tsze-sang Po-tsze. The Master
said, 'He may pass. He does not mind small matters.'
        3. Chung-kung said, 'If a man cherish in himself a
reverential feeling of the necessity of attention to business,
though he may be easy in small matters in his government of
the people, that may be allowed. But if he cherish in himself
that easy feeling, and also carry it out in his practice, is not
such an easy mode of procedure excessive?'
        4. The Master said, 'Yung's words are right.'

【第二章】【一節】哀公問弟子孰為好學。【二節】孔子對曰、有顏回者好
學、不遷怒、不貳過、不幸短命死矣、今也則亡、未聞好學者也。
【第三章】【一節】子華使於齊、冉子為其母請粟。子曰、與之釜。請益。
曰、與之庾。冉子與之粟五秉。【二節】子曰、赤之適齊也、乘肥馬、衣輕
裘、吾
        CHAP. II. The Duke Ai asked which of the disciples loved
to learn. Confucius replied to him, 'There was Yen Hui; HE loved
to learn. He did not transfer his anger; he did not repeat a fault.
Unfortunately, his appointed time was short and he died; and
now there is not such another. I have not yet heard of any one
who loves to learn as he did.'
        CHAP. III. 1. Tsze-hwa being employed on a mission to
Ch'i, the disciple Zan requested grain for his mother. The
Master said, 'Give her a fu.' Yen requested more. 'Give her an
yu,' said the Master. Yen gave her five ping.
        2. The Master said, 'When Ch'ih was proceeding to Ch'i, he
had fat horses to his carriage, and wore light furs. I have heard
that

聞之也、君子周急、不繼富。【三節】原思為之宰、與之粟九百、辭。【四
節】子曰、毋、以與爾鄰里鄉黨乎。
【第四章】子謂仲弓曰、犁牛之子騂且角、雖欲勿用、山川其舍諸。
【第五章】子曰、回也、其心三月不違仁、其餘、則日月至焉而已矣。
a superior man helps the distressed, but does not add to the
wealth of the rich.'
        3. Yuan Sze being made governor of his town by the
Master, he gave him nine hundred measures of grain, but Sze
declined them.
        4.  The Master said, 'Do not decline them. May you not
give them away in the neighborhoods, hamlets, towns, and
villages?'
        CHAP. IV. The Master, speaking of Chung-kung, said, 'If
the calf of a brindled cow be red and horned, although men
may not wish to use it, would the spirits of the mountains and
rivers put it aside?'
        CHAP. V. The Master said, 'Such was Hui that for three
months there would be nothing in his mind contrary to perfect
virtue. The others may attain to this on some days or in some
months, but nothing more.'

【第六章】季康子問仲由、可使從政也與。子曰、由也果、於從政乎何有。
曰、賜也、可使從政也與。曰、賜也達、於從政乎何有。曰、求也、可使從
政也與。曰、求也藝、於從政乎何有。
【第七章】季氏使閔子騫為費宰、閔子騫曰、善為我辭焉、如有復我者、則
吾必在汶上矣。
        CHAP. VI. Chi K'ang asked about Chung-yu, whether he
was fit to be employed as an officer of government. The Master
said, 'Yu is a man of decision; what difficulty would he find in
being an officer of government?' K'ang asked, 'Is Ts'ze fit to be
employed as an officer of government?' and was answered,
'Ts'ze is a man of intelligence; what difficulty would he find in
being an officer of government?' And to the same question
about Ch'iu the Master gave the same reply, saying, 'Ch'iu is a
man of various ability.'
        CHAP. VII. The chief of the Chi family sent to ask Min
Tsze-ch'ien to be governor of Pi. Min Tsze-ch'ien said, 'Decline
the offer for me politely. If any one come again to me with a
second invitation, I shall be obliged to go and live on the banks
of the Wan.'

【第八章】伯牛有疾、子問之、自牖執其手、曰、亡之、命矣夫、斯人也、
而有斯疾也、斯人也、而有斯疾也。
【第九章】子曰、賢哉回也、一簞食、一瓢飲、在陋巷、人不堪其憂、回也
不改其樂、賢哉回也。
【第十章】冉求曰、非不說子之道、力不足也。子曰、力不
        CHAP. VIII. Po-niu being ill, the Master went to ask for
him. He took hold of his hand through the window, and said, 'It
is killing him. It is the appointment of Heaven, alas! That such a
man should have such a sickness! That such a man should have
such a sickness!'
                CHAP. IX. The Master said, 'Admirable indeed was
the virtue of Hui! With a single bamboo dish of rice, a single
gourd dish of drink, and living in his mean narrow lane, while
others could not have endured the distress, he did not allow his
joy to be affected by it. Admirable indeed was the virtue of
Hui!'
        CHAP. X. Yen Ch'iu said, 'It is not that I do not delight in
your doctrines, but my strength is insufficient.' The Master
said, 'Those whose strength is insufficient give over in the
middle of the way but now you limit yourself.'

足者、中道而廢、今女畫。
【十一章】子謂子夏曰、女為君子儒、無為小人儒。
【十二章】子游為武城宰、子曰、女得人焉耳乎。曰、有澹臺滅明者、行不
由徑、非公事、未嘗至於偃之室也。
【十三章】子曰、孟之反不伐、奔而殿、將入門、策其馬、曰、非敢後也、
馬不進也。
        CHAP. XI. The Master said to Tsze-hsia, 'Do you be a
scholar after the style of the superior man, and not after that of
the mean man.'
        CHAP. XII. Tsze-yu being governor of Wu-ch'ang, the
Master said to him, 'Have you got good men there?' He
answered, 'There is Tan-t'ai Mieh-ming, who never in walking
takes a short cut, and never comes to my office, excepting on
public business.'
        CHAP. XIII. The Master said, 'Mang Chih-fan does not
boast of his merit. Being in the rear on an occasion of flight,
when they were about to enter the gate, he whipped up his
horse, saying, "It is not that I dare to be last. My horse would
not advance."'

【十四章】子曰、不有祝鮀之佞、而有宋朝之美、難乎免於今之世矣。
【十五章】子曰、誰能出不由戶？何莫由斯道也。
【十六章】子曰、質勝文則野、文勝質則史、文質彬彬、然後君子。
【十七章】子曰、人之生也直、罔之生也、幸而免。
        CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'Without the specious speech
of the litanist T'o and the beauty of the prince Chao of Sung, it
is difficult to escape in the present age.'
        CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'Who can go out but by the
door? How is it that men will not walk according to these
ways?'
        CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'Where the solid qualities are
in excess of accomplishments, we have rusticity; where the
accomplishments are in excess of the solid qualities, we have
the manners of a clerk. When the accomplishments and solid
qualities are equally blended, we then have the man of virtue.'
        CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'Man is born for
uprightness. If a man lose his uprightness, and yet live, his
escape from death is the effect of mere good fortune.'

【十八章】子曰、知之者、不如好之者、好之者、不如樂之者。
【十九章】子曰、中人以上、可以語上也、中人以下、不可以語上也。
【二十章】樊遲問知。子曰、務民之義、敬鬼神而遠之、可謂知矣。問仁。
曰、仁者先難而後獲、可
        CHAP. XVIII. The Master said, 'They who know the truth
are not equal to those who love it, and they who love it are not
equal to those who delight in it.'
        CHAP. XIX. The Master said, 'To those whose talents are
above mediocrity, the highest subjects may be announced. To
those who are below mediocrity, the highest subjects may not
be announced.'
        CHAP. XX. Fan Ch'ih asked what constituted wisdom. The
Master said, 'To give one's self earnestly to the duties due to
men, and, while respecting spiritual beings, to keep aloof from
them, may be called wisdom.' He asked about perfect virtue.
The Master said, 'The man of virtue makes the difficulty to be
overcome his first business, and success only a subsequent
consideration;-- this may be called perfect virtue.'

謂仁矣。
【廿一章】子曰、知者樂水、仁者樂山、知者動、仁者靜。知者樂、仁者壽。
【廿二章】子曰、齊一變、至於魯、魯一變、至於道。
【廿三章】子曰、觚不觚、觚哉觚哉。
【廿四章】宰我問曰、仁者雖告之曰、井有仁焉、其從之
        CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'The wise find pleasure in
water; the virtuous find pleasure in hills. The wise are active;
the virtuous are tranquil. The wise are joyful; the virtuous are
long-lived.'
        CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'Ch'i, by one change, would
come to the State of Lu. Lu, by one change, would come to a
State where true principles predominated.'
        CHAP. XXIII. The Master said, 'A cornered vessel without
corners.-- A strange cornered vessel! A strange cornered
vessel!'
        CHAP. XXIV. Tsai Wo asked, saying, 'A benevolent man,
though it be told him,-- 'There is a man in the well' will go in
after him, I suppose.' Confucius said, 'Why should he do so?' A
superior

也。子曰、何為其然也、君子可逝也、不可陷也、可欺也、不可罔也。
【廿五章】子曰、君子博學於文、約之以禮、亦可以弗畔矣夫。
【廿六章】子見南子、子路不說、夫子矢之、曰、予所否者、天厭之、天厭
之。
【廿七章】子曰、中庸之為德也、其至矣乎、民鮮久矣。
man may be made to go to the well, but he cannot be made to
go down into it. He may be imposed upon, but he cannot be
fooled.'
        CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'The superior man,
extensively studying all learning, and keeping himself under
the restraint of the rules of propriety, may thus likewise not
overstep what is right.'
        CHAP. XXVI. The Master having visited Nan-tsze, Tsze-lu
was displeased, on which the Master swore, saying, 'Wherein I
have done improperly, may Heaven reject me, may Heaven
reject me!'
        CHAP. XXVII. The Master said, 'Perfect is the virtue which
is

【廿八章】【一節】子貢曰、如有博施於民、而能濟眾、何如、可謂仁乎。
子曰、何事於仁、必也聖乎、堯舜其猶病諸。【二節】夫仁者、己欲立而立
人、己欲達而達人。【三節】能近取譬、可謂仁之方也已。
according to the Constant Mean! Rare for a long time has been
its practise among the people.'
        CHAP. XXVIII. 1. Tsze-kung said, 'Suppose the case of a
man extensively conferring benefits on the people, and able to
assist all, what would you say of him? Might he be called
perfectly virtuous?' The Master said, 'Why speak only of virtue
in connexion with him? Must he not have the qualities of a
sage? Even Yao and Shun were still solicitous about this.
        2. 'Now the man of perfect virtue, wishing to be
established himself, seeks also to establish others; wishing to
be enlarged himself, he seeks also to enlarge others.
        3. 'To be able to judge of others by what is nigh in
ourselves;-- this may be called the art of virtue.'

述而第七