BOOK XI. HSIEN TSIN.

【第一章】【一節】子曰、先進於禮樂、野人也、後進於禮樂、君子也、【二
節】如用之、則吾從先進。
【第二章】【一節】子曰、從我於陳蔡者、皆不及門也。【二節】德行、顏
淵、閔子騫、冉伯牛、仲弓。言語、宰我、子貢。政事、冉
        CHAP. I. 1. The Master said, 'The men of former times, in
the matters of ceremonies and music were rustics, it is said,
while the men of these latter times, in ceremonies and music,
are accomplished gentlemen.
        2. 'If I have occasion to use those things, I follow the men
of former times.'
        CHAP. II. 1. The Master said, 'Of those who were with me
in Ch'an and Ts'ai, there are none to be found to enter my door.'
        2. Distinguished for their virtuous principles and practice,
there were Yen Yuan, Min Tsze-ch'ien, Zan Po-niu, and Chung-
kung; for their ability in speech, Tsai Wo and Tsze-kung; for
their adminis-

有、李路。文學、子游、子夏。
【第三章】子曰、回也、非助我者也、於吾言、無所不說。
【第四章】子曰、孝哉閔子騫、人不間於其父母昆弟之言。
【第五章】南容三復白圭、孔子以其兄之子妻之。
trative talents, Zan Yu and Chi Lu; for their literary
acquirements, Tsze-yu and Tsze-hsia.
        CHAP. III. The Master said, 'Hui gives me no assistance.
There is nothing that I say in which he does not delight.'
        CHAP. IV. The Master said, 'Filial indeed is Min Tsze-
ch'ien! Other people say nothing of him different from the
report of his parents and brothers.'
        CHAP. V. Nan Yung was frequently repeating the lines
about a white scepter stone. Confucius gave him the daughter
of his elder brother to wife.

【第六章】李康子問弟子孰為好學。孔子對曰、有顏回者好學、不幸短命死
矣、今也則亡。
【第七章】【一節】顏淵死、顏路請子之車、以為之(guo3 木+享、與槨
同)。【二節】子曰、才不才、亦各言其子也、鯉也死、有棺而無(guo3 木
+享、與槨同)、吾不徒行以為之(guo3 木+享、與槨同)、以吾從大夫之後、
不可徒行也。
【第八章】顏淵死、子曰、噫、天喪予、天喪予。
        CHAP. VI. Chi K'ang asked which of the disciples loved to
learn. Confucius replied to him, 'There was Yen Hui; he loved to
learn. Unfortunately his appointed time was short, and he died.
Now there is no one who loves to learn, as he did.'
        CHAP. VII. 1. When Yen Yuan died, Yen Lu begged the
carriage of the Master to sell and get an outer shell for his son's
coffin.
        2. The Master said, 'Every one calls his son his son,
whether he has talents or has not talents. There was Li; when
he died, he had a coffin but no outer shell. I would not walk on
foot to get a shell for him, because, having followed in the rear
of the great officers, it was not proper that I should walk on
foot.'
        CHAP. VIII. When Yen Yuan died, the Master said, 'Alas!
Heaven is destroying me! Heaven is destroying me!'

【第九章】【一節】顏淵死、子哭之慟、從者曰、子慟矣。【二節】曰、有
慟乎。【三節】非夫人之為慟而誰為。
【第十章】【一節】顏淵死、門人欲厚葬之。子曰、不可。【二節】門人厚
葬之。【三節】子曰、回也、視予猶父也、予不得視猶子也、非我也、夫二
三子也。
【十一章】李路問事鬼神。子曰、未能事人、焉能事鬼。敢
        CHAP. IX. 1. When Yen Yuan died, the Master bewailed
him exceedingly, and the disciples who were with him said,
'Master, your grief is excessive?'
        2. 'Is it excessive?' said he.
        3. 'If I am not to mourn bitterly for this man, for whom
should I mourn?'
        CHAP. X. 1. When Yen Yuan died, the disciples wished to
give him a great funeral, and the Master said, 'You may not do
so.'
        2. The disciples did bury him in great style.
        3. The Master said, 'Hui behaved towards me as his
father. I have not been able to treat him as my son. The fault is
not mine; it belongs to you, O disciples.'
        CHAP. XI. Chi Lu asked about serving the spirits of the
dead. The Master said, 'While you are not able to serve men,
how can you serve their spirits?' Chi Lu added, 'I venture to
ask about

問死。曰、未知生、焉知死。
【十二章】【一節】閔子侍側、誾誾如也、子路行行如也、冉有、子貢、侃
侃如也。子樂。【二節】若由也、不得其死然。
【十三章】【一節】魯人為長府。【二節】閔子騫曰、仍舊貫、如之何、何
必改作。【三節】子曰、夫人不言、言必有中。
death?' He was answered, 'While you do not know life, how can
you know about death?'
        CHAP. XII. 1. The disciple Min was standing by his side,
looking bland and precise; Tsze-lu, looking bold and soldierly;
Zan Yu and Tsze-kung, with a free and straightforward manner.
The Master was pleased.
        2. He said, 'Yu, there!-- he will not die a natural death.'
        CHAP. XIII. 1. Some parties in Lu were going to take
down and rebuild the Long Treasury.
        2. Min Tsze-ch'ien said, 'Suppose it were to be repaired
after its old style;-- why must it be altered and made anew?'
        3. The Master said, 'This man seldom speaks; when he
does, he is sure to hit the point.'

【十四章】【一節】子曰、由之瑟、奚為於丘之門。【二節】門人不敬子路。
子曰、由也、升堂矣、未入於室也。
【十五章】【一節】子貢問師與商也孰賢。子曰、師也過、商也不及。【二
節】曰、然則師愈與。【三節】子曰、過猶不及。
【十六章】【一節】李氏富於周公、而求也為之聚斂而附
        CHAP. XIV. 1. The Master said, 'What has the lute of Yu to
do in my door?'
        2. The other disciples began not to respect Tsze-lu. The
Master said, 'Yu has ascended to the hall, though he has not yet
passed into the inner apartments.'
        CHAP. XV. 1. Tsze-kung asked which of the two, Shih or
Shang, was the superior. The Master said, 'Shih goes beyond the
due mean, and Shang does not come up to it.'
        2. 'Then,' said Tsze-kung, 'the superiority is with Shih, I
suppose.'
        3. The Master said, 'To go beyond is as wrong as to fall
short.'
        CHAP. XVI. 1. The head of the Chi family was richer than
the duke of Chau had been, and yet Ch'iu collected his imposts
for him, and increased his wealth.

益之。【二節】子曰、非吾徒也、小子、鳴鼓而攻之可也。
【十七章】【一節】柴也愚。【二節】參也魯。【三節】師也辟。【四節】
由也喭。
【十八章】【一節】子曰、回也奇庶乎屢空。【二節】賜不受命、而貨殖焉、
億則屢中。
【十九章】子張問善人之
        2. The Master said, 'He is no disciple of mine. My little
children, beat the drum and assail him.'
        CHAP. XVII. 1. Ch'ai is simple.
        2. Shan is dull.
        3. Shih is specious.
        4. Yu is coarse.
        CHAP. XVIII. 1. The Master said, 'There is Hui! He has
nearly attained to perfect virtue. He is often in want.
        2. 'Ts'ze does not acquiesce in the appointments of
Heaven, and his goods are increased by him. Yet his judgments
are often correct.'
        CHAP. XIX. Tsze-chang asked what were the
characteristics of

道。子曰、不踐(ji1、迂+亦、與跡同)、亦不入於室。
【二十章】子曰、論篤是與、君子者乎、色莊者乎。
【廿一章】子路問聞斯行諸。子曰、有父兄在、如之何其聞斯行之。冉有問
聞斯行諸。子曰、聞斯行之。公西華曰、由也問聞斯行諸、子曰、有父兄在、
求也
the GOOD man. The Master said, 'He does not tread in the
footsteps of others, but moreover, he does not enter the
chamber of the sage.'
        CHAP. XX. The Master said, 'If, because a man's discourse
appears solid and sincere, we allow him to be a good man, is he
really a superior man? or is his gravity only in appearance?'
        CHAP. XXI. Tsze-lu asked whether he should immediately
carry into practice what he heard. The Master said, 'There are
your father and elder brothers to be consulted;-- why should
you act on that principle of immediately carrying into practice
what you hear?' Zan Yu asked the same, whether he should
immediately carry into practice what he heard, and the Master
answered, 'Immediately carry into practice what you hear.'
Kung-hsi Hwa said, 'Yu asked whether he should carry
immediately into practice what he heard, and you said, "There
are your father and elder brothers to be consulted." Ch'iu asked
whether he should immediately carry into practice what he
heard, and you said, "Carry it immediately into practice." I,
Ch'ih, am perplexed, and venture to ask you for an explanation.'
The Master said, 'Ch'iu is retiring and slow; therefore,

問聞斯行諸、子曰、聞斯行之、赤也感、敢問。子曰、求也退、故進之、由
也兼人、故退之。
【廿二章】子畏於匡、顏淵後、子曰、吾以女為死矣。曰、子在、回何敢死。
【廿三章】【一節】李子然問仲由冉求、可謂大臣與。【二節】子曰、吾以
子為異之問、曾由與求之問。【三節】所謂大臣者、以道事君、不可則止。
【四節】今由
I urged him forward. Yu has more than his own share of
energy; therefore I kept him back.'
        CHAP. XXII. The Master was put in fear in K'wang and
Yen Yuan fell behind. The Master, on his rejoining him, said, 'I
thought you had died.' Hui replied, 'While you were alive, how
should I presume to die?'
        CHAP. XXIII. 1. Chi Tsze-zan asked whether Chung Yu and
Zan Ch'iu could be called great ministers.
        2. The Master said, 'I thought you would ask about some
extraordinary individuals, and you only ask about Yu and Ch'iu!
        3. 'What is called a great minister, is one who serves his
prince according to what is right, and when he finds he cannot
do so, retires.

與求也、可謂具臣矣。【五節】曰、然則從之者與。【六節】子曰、弒父與
君、亦不從也。
【廿四章】【一節】子路使子羔為費宰。【二節】子曰、賊夫人之子。【三
節】子路曰、有民人焉、有社稷焉、何必讀書、然後為學。【四節】子曰、
是故惡夫佞者。
【廿五章】【一節】子路、曾(上析、下日、與晰同)、冉有、公西華、侍坐。
【二節】子曰、以吾一日
        4. 'Now, as to Yu and Ch'iu, they may be called ordinary
ministers.'
        5. Tsze-zan said, 'Then they will always follow their
chief;-- will they?'
        6. The Master said, 'In an act of parricide or regicide, they
would not follow him.'
        CHAP. XXIV. 1. Tsze-lu got Tsze-kao appointed governor
of Pi.
        2. The Master said, 'You are injuring a man's son.'
        3. Tsze-lu said, 'There are (there) common people and
officers; there are the altars of the spirits of the land and grain.
Why must one read books before he can be considered to have
learned?'
        4. The Master said, 'It is on this account that I hate your
glib-tongued people.'
        CHAP. XXV. 1. Tsze-lu, Tsang Hsi, Zan Yu, and Kung-hsi
Hwa were sitting by the Master.
        2. He said to them, 'Though I am a day or so older than
you, do not think of that.

長乎爾、毋吾以也。【三節】居則曰、不吾知也、如或知爾、則何以哉。【四
節】子路率爾而對曰、千乘之國、攝乎大國之閒、加之以師旅、因之以饑饉、
由也為之、比及三年、可使有勇、且知方也。夫子哂之。【五節】求、爾何
如。對曰、方六七十、如五六十、求也為之、比及三年、可使足民、如其禮
樂、以
        3. 'From day to day you are saying, "We are not known."
If some ruler were to know you, what would you like to do?'
        4. Tsze-lu hastily and lightly replied, 'Suppose the case of
a State of ten thousand chariots; let it be straitened between
other large States; let it be suffering from invading armies; and
to this let there be added a famine in corn and in all
vegetables:-- if I were intrusted with the government of it, in
three years' time I could make the people to be bold, and to
recognise the rules of righteous conduct.' The Master smiled at
him.
        5. Turning to Yen Yu, he said, 'Ch'iu, what are your
wishes?' Ch'iu replied, 'Suppose a state of sixty or seventy li
square, or one of fifty or sixty, and let me have the government
of it;-- in three years' time, I could make plenty to abound
among the people. As to teaching them the principles of
propriety, and music, I must wait for the rise of a superior man
to do that.'

俟君子。【六節】赤、爾何如。對曰、非曰能之、願學焉、宗廟之事、如會
同、端章甫、願為小相焉。【七節】點、爾何如。鼓瑟希鏗爾、舍瑟而作、
對曰、異乎三子者之撰。子曰、何傷乎、赤各言其志也。曰、莫春者、春服
既成、冠者五六人、童子六七人、浴乎沂、風乎舞雩、詠而歸。夫子喟然歎
曰、吾與
        6. 'What are your wishes, Ch'ih,' said the Master next to
Kung-hsi Hwa. Ch'ih replied, 'I do not say that my ability
extends to these things, but I should wish to learn them. At the
services of the ancestral temple, and at the audiences of the
princes with the sovereign, I should like, dressed in the dark
square-made robe and the black linen cap, to act as a small
assistant.'
        7. Last of all, the Master asked Tsang Hsi, 'Tien, what are
your wishes?' Tien, pausing as he was playing on his lute, while
it was yet twanging, laid the instrument aside, and rose. 'My
wishes,' he said, 'are different from the cherished purposes of
these three gentlemen.' 'What harm is there in that?' said the
Master; 'do you also, as well as they, speak out your wishes.'
Tien then said, 'In this, the last month of spring, with the dress
of the season all complete, along with five or six young men
who have assumed the cap, and six or seven boys, I would
wash in the I, enjoy the breeze among the rain altars, and
return home singing.' The Master heaved a sigh and said, 'I
give my approval to Tien.'

點也。【八節】三子者出、曾(上析、下日、與晰同)後、曾(上析、下日、
與晰同)曰、夫三子者之言何如。子曰、亦各言其志也已矣。【九節】曰、
夫子何哂由也。【十節】曰、為國以禮、其言不讓、是故哂之。【十一節】
唯求則非邦也與。安見方六七十、如五六十、而非邦也者。【十二節】唯赤
則非邦也與。宗廟會同、非諸侯而何、赤也為之小、孰能為之大。
        8. The three others having gone out, Tsang Hsi remained
behind, and said, 'What do you think of the words of these
three friends?' The Master replied, 'They simply told each one
his wishes.'
        9. Hsi pursued, 'Master, why did you smile at Yu?'
        10. He was answered, 'The management of a State
demands the rules of propriety. His words were not humble;
therefore I smiled at him.'
        11. Hsi again said, 'But was it not a State which Ch'iu
proposed for himself?' The reply was, 'Yes; did you ever see a
territory of sixty or seventy li or one of fifty or sixty, which
was not a State?'
        12. Once more, Hsi inquired, 'And was it not a State which
Ch'ih proposed for himself?' The Master again replied, 'Yes; who
but princes have to do with ancestral temples, and with
audiences but the sovereign? If Ch'ih were to be a small
assistant in these services, who could be a great one?

顏淵第十二