BOOK III. PA YIH.

【第一章】孔子謂季氏、八佾舞於庭、是可忍也、孰不可忍也。
        CHAP. I. Confucius said of the head of the Chi family, who
had eight rows of pantomimes in his area, 'If he can bear to do
this, what may he not bear to do?'

【第二章】三家者、以雍徹。子曰、相維辟公、天子穆穆、奚取於三家之堂。
【第三章】子曰、人而不仁、如禮何、人而不仁、如樂何。
【第四章】【一節】林放問禮之本。【二節】子曰、大哉問。【三節】禮、
與其奢也、寧
        CHAP. II. The three families used the YUNG ode, while the
vessels were being removed, at the conclusion of the sacrifice.
The Master said, '"Assisting are the princes;-- the son of heaven
looks profound and grave:"-- what application can these words
have in the hall of the three families?'
        CHAP. III. The Master said, 'If a man be without the
virtues proper to humanity, what has he to do with the rites of
propriety? If a man be without the virtues proper to humanity,
what has he to do with music?'
        CHAP. IV. 1. Lin Fang asked what was the first thing to be
attended to in ceremonies.
        2. The Master said, 'A great question indeed!
        3. 'In festive ceremonies, it is better to be sparing than
extravagant.

儉、喪、與其易也、寧戚。
【第五章】子曰、夷狄之有君、不如諸夏之亡也。
【第六章】季氏旅於泰山。子謂冉有曰、女弗能救與。對曰、不能。子曰、
嗚呼、曾謂泰山、不如林放乎。
In the ceremonies of mourning, it is better that there be deep
sorrow than a minute attention to observances.'
        CHAP. V. The Master said, 'The rude tribes of the east and
north have their princes, and are not like the States of our
great land which are without them.'
        CHAP. VI. The chief of the Chi family was about to
sacrifice to the T'ai mountain. The Master said to Zan Yu, 'Can
you not save him from this?' He answered, 'I cannot.' Confucius
said, 'Alas! will you say that the T'ai mountain is not so
discerning as Lin Fang?'

【第七章】子曰、君子無所爭、必也射乎、揖讓而升、下而飲、其爭也君子。
【第八章】子夏問曰、巧笑倩兮、美目盼兮、素以為絢兮。何為也。【二節】
子曰、繪事後素。【三節】曰、禮後乎。子曰、起予者商也、始可與言詩已
矣。
        CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'The student of virtue has no
contentions. If it be said he cannot avoid them, shall this be in
archery? But he bows complaisantly to his competitors; thus he
ascends the hall, descends, and exacts the forfeit of drinking. In
his contention, he is still the Chun-tsze.'
        CHAP. VIII. 1. Tsze-hsia asked, saying, 'What is the
meaning of the passage-- "The pretty dimples of her artful
smile! The well-defined black and white of her eye! The plain
ground for the colours?"'
        2. The Master said, 'The business of laying on the colours
follows (the preparation of) the plain ground.'
        3. 'Ceremonies then are a subsequent thing?' The Master
said, 'It is Shang who can bring out my meaning. Now I can
begin to talk about the odes with him.'

【第九章】子曰、夏禮吾能言之、杞不足徵也、殷禮吾能言之、宋不足徵也、
文獻不足故也、足、則吾能徵之矣。
【第十章】子曰、禘、自既灌而往者、吾不欲觀之矣。
【十一章】或問禘之說。子曰、不知也、知其說者、之於天下也、其如示諸
        CHAP. IX. The Master said, 'I could describe the
ceremonies of the Hsia dynasty, but Chi cannot sufficiently
attest my words. I could describe the ceremonies of the Yin
dynasty, but Sung cannot sufficiently attest my words. (They
cannot do so) because of the insufficiency of their records and
wise men. If those were sufficient, I could adduce them in
support of my words.'
        CHAP. X. The Master said, 'At the great sacrifice, after the
pouring out of the libation, I have no wish to look on.'
        CHAP. XI. Some one asked the meaning of the great
sacrifice. The Master said, 'I do not know. He who knew its
meaning would find it as easy to govern the kingdom as to look
on this;-- pointing to his palm.

斯乎。指其掌。
【十二章】【一節】祭如在、祭神如神在。【二節】子曰、吾不與祭、如不
祭。
【一節】王孫賈問曰、與其媚於奧、寧媚於(zao4 上穴，中土，下黽)、何
謂也。【二節】子曰、不然、獲罪於天、無所禱也。
        CHAP. XII. 1. He sacrificed to the dead, as if they were
present. He sacrificed to the spirits, as if the spirits were
present.
        2. The Master said, 'I consider my not being present at
the sacrifice, as if I did not sacrifice.'
        CHAP. XIII. 1. Wang-sun Chia asked, saying, 'What is the
meaning of the saying, "It is better to pay court to the furnace
than to the south-west corner?"'
        2. The Master said, 'Not so. He who offends against
Heaven has none to whom he can pray.'

【十四章】子曰、周監於二代、郁郁乎文哉、吾從周。
【十五章】子入大廟、每事問。或曰、孰謂鄹人之子知禮乎、入大廟、每事
問。子聞之曰、是禮也。
【十六章】子曰、射不主皮、為力不同科、古之道也。
        CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'Chau had the advantage of
viewing the two past dynasties. How complete and elegant are
its regulations! I follow Chau.'
        CHAP. XV. The Master, when he entered the grand
temple, asked about everything. Some one said, 'Who will say
that the son of the man of Tsau knows the rules of propriety!
He has entered the grand temple and asks about everything.'
The Master heard the remark, and said, 'This is a rule of
propriety.'
        CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'In archery it is not going
through the leather which is the principal thing;-- because
people's strength is not equal. This was the old way.'

【十七章】【一節】子貢欲去告朔之餼羊。【二節】子曰、賜也、爾愛其羊、
我愛其禮。
【十八章】子曰、事君盡禮、人以為諂也。
【十九章】【一節】定公問君使臣、臣事君、如之何。孔子對曰、君使臣以
禮、臣事君以忠。
【二十章】子曰、關睢樂而不淫、哀而不傷。
        CHAP. XVII. 1. Tsze-kung wished to do away with the
offering of a sheep connected with the inauguration of the first
day of each month.
        2. The Master said, 'Ts'ze, you love the sheep; I love the
ceremony.'
        CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'The full observance of the
rules of propriety in serving one's prince is accounted by
people to be flattery.'
        CHAP. XIX. The Duke Ting asked how a prince should
employ his ministers, and how ministers should serve their
prince. Confucius replied, 'A prince should employ his minister
according to according to the rules of propriety; ministers
should serve their prince with faithfulness.'
        CHAP. XX. The Master said, 'The Kwan Tsu is expressive of
enjoyment without being licentious, and of grief without being
hurtfully excessive.'

【廿一章】【一節】哀公問社於宰我。宰我對曰、夏后氏以松、殷人以柏、
周人以栗、曰、使民戰栗。【二節】子聞之曰、成事不說、遂事不諫、既往
不咎。
【廿二章】【一節】子曰、管仲之器小哉。【二節】或曰、管仲儉乎。【三
節】曰、管氏有三歸、
        CHAP. XXI. 1. The Duke Ai asked Tsai Wo about the altars
of the spirits of the land. Tsai Wo replied, 'The Hsia sovereign
planted the pine tree about them; the men of the Yin planted
the cypress; and the men of the Chau planted the chestnut tree,
meaning thereby to cause the people to be in awe.'
        2. When the Master heard it, he said, 'Things that are
done, it is needless to speak about; things that have had their
course, it is needless to remonstrate about; things that are past,
it is needless to blame.'
        CHAP. XXII. 1. The Master said, 'Small indeed was the
capacity of Kwan Chung!'
        2. Some one said, 'Was Kwan Chung parsimonious?'
'Kwan,' was the reply, 'had the San Kwei, and his officers
performed no double duties; how can he be considered
parsimonious?'
        3. 'Then, did Kwan Chung know the rules of propriety?'
The

官事不攝、焉得儉。【四節】然則管仲知禮乎。【五節】曰、邦君樹塞門、
管氏亦樹塞門、邦君為兩君之好、有反坫、管氏亦有反坫、管氏而知禮、孰
不知禮。
【廿三章】子語魯大師樂曰、樂其可知也、始作、翕如也、從之、純如也、
繳如也、繹如也、以成。
Master said, 'The princes of States have a screen intercepting
the view at their gates. Kwan had likewise a screen at his gate.
The princes of States on any friendly meeting between two of
them, had a stand on which to place their inverted cups. Kwan
had also such a stand. If Kwan knew the rules of propriety,
who does not know them?'
        CHAP. XXXII. The Master instructing the grand music-
master of Lu said, 'How to play music may be known. At the
commencement of the piece, all the parts should sound
together. As it proceeds, they should be in harmony while
severally distinct and flowing without break, and thus on to the
conclusion.'

【廿四章】儀封人請見、曰、君子之至於斯也、吾未嘗不得見也。從者見之、
出曰、二三子、何患於喪乎、天下之無道也久矣、天將以夫子為木鐸。
【廿五章】子謂韶、盡美矣、又盡善也、謂武、盡美矣、未盡善也。
【廿六章】子曰、居上不寬、為禮
        CHAP. XXIV. The border warden at Yi requested to be
introduced to the Master, saying, 'When men of superior virtue
have come to this, I have never been denied the privilege of
seeing them.' The followers of the sage introduced him, and
when he came out from the interview, he said, 'My friends,
why are you distressed by your master's loss of office? The
kingdom has long been without the principles of truth and
right; Heaven is going to use your master as a bell with its
wooden tongue.'
        CHAP. XXV. The Master said of the Shao that it was
perfectly beautiful and also perfectly good. He said of the Wu
that it was perfectly beautiful but not perfectly good.
        CHAP. XXVI. The Master said, 'High station filled without
indulgent generosity; ceremonies performed without reverence;
mourning conducted without sorrow;-- wherewith should I
contemplate such ways?'

不敬、臨喪不哀、吾何以觀之哉。


里仁第四