BOOK XIV. HSIEN WAN.

【第一章】憲問恥。子曰、邦有道穀、邦無道穀、恥也。
        CHAP. I. Hsien asked what was shameful. The Master
said, 'When good government prevails in a state, to be thinking
only of salary; and, when bad government prevails, to be
thinking, in the same way, only of salary;-- this is shameful.'

【第二章】【一節】克、伐、怨、欲、不行焉、可以為仁矣。【二節】子曰、
可以為難矣、仁則吾不知也。
【第三章】子曰、士而懷居、不足以為士矣。
【第四章】子曰、邦有道、危言危行、邦無道、危行言孫。
【第五章】子曰、有德者、必有言、有言者、不必有德、仁者、必有勇、勇
者、不必有仁。
        CHAP. II. 1. 'When the love of superiority, boasting,
resentments, and covetousness are repressed, this may be
deemed perfect virtue.'
        2. The Master said, 'This may be regarded as the
achievement of what is difficult. But I do not know that it is to
be deemed perfect virtue.'
        CHAP. III. The Master said, 'The scholar who cherishes
the love of comfort is not fit to be deemed a scholar.'
        CHAP. IV. The Master said, 'When good government
prevails in a state, language may be lofty and bold, and actions
the same. When bad government prevails, the actions may be
lofty and bold, but the language may be with some reserve.'
        CHAP. V. The Master said, 'The virtuous will be sure to
speak correctly, but those whose speech is good may not
always be virtuous. Men of principle are sure to be bold, but
those who are bold may not always be men of principle.'

【第六章】南宮适問於孔子曰、羿善射、奡盪舟、俱不得其死然、禹稷躬稼、
而有天下夫子不答。南宮适出。子曰、君子哉若人、尚德哉若人。
【第七章】子曰、君子而不仁者有矣夫、未有小人而仁者也。
        CHAP. VI. Nan-kung Kwo, submitting an inquiry to
Confucius, said, 'I was skillful at archery, and Ao could move a
boat along upon the land, but neither of them died a natural
death. Yu and Chi personally wrought at the toils of husbandry,
and they became possessors of the kingdom.' The Master made
no reply; but when Nan-kung Kwo went out, he said, 'A
superior man indeed is this! An esteemer of virtue indeed is
this!'
        CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'Superior men, and yet not
always virtuous, there have been, alas! But there never has
been a mean man, and, at the same time, virtuous.'

【第八章】子曰、愛之、能勿勞乎、忠焉、能勿誨乎。
【第九章】子曰、為命、裨諶草創之、世叔討論之、行人子羽修飾之、東里
子產潤色之。
【第十章】【一節】或問子產。子曰、惠人也。【二節】問子西。曰、彼哉
彼哉。【三節】問管仲。曰、人也、奪伯氏駢邑三百、飯疏食、沒齒、
        CHAP. VIII. The Master said, 'Can there be love which
does not lead to strictness with its object? Can there be loyalty
which does not lead to the instruction of its object?'
        CHAP. IX. The Master said, 'In preparing the
governmental notifications, P'i Shan first made the rough
draught; Shi-shu examined and discussed its contents; Tsze-yu,
the manager of Foreign intercourse, then polished the style;
and, finally, Tsze-ch'an of Tung-li gave it the proper elegance
and finish.'
        CHAP. X. 1. Some one asked about Tsze-ch'an. The Master
said, 'He was a kind man.'
        2. He asked about Tsze-hsi. The Master said, 'That man!
That man!'
        3. He asked about Kwan Chung. 'For him,' said the Master,
'the city of Pien, with three hundred families, was taken from
the chief of the Po family, who did not utter a murmuring
word, though, to the end of his life, he had only coarse rice to
eat.'

無怨言。
【十一章】子曰、貧而無怨、難、富而無驕、易。
【十二章】子曰、孟公綽、為趙魏老則優、不可以為滕薛大夫。
【十三章】【一節】子路問成人。子曰、若臧武仲之知、公綽之不欲、卞莊
子之勇、冉求之藝、文之以禮樂、亦可以為成人矣。【二節】曰、今之成人
者、何必然、見
        CHAP. XI. The Master said, 'To be poor without
murmuring is difficult. To be rich without being proud is easy.'
        CHAP. XII. The Master said, 'Mang Kung-ch'o is more than
fit to be chief officer in the families of Chao and Wei, but he is
not fit to be great officer to either of the States Tang or Hsieh.'
        CHAP. XIII. 1. Tsze-lu asked what constituted a
COMPLETE man. The Master said, 'Suppose a man with the
knowledge of Tsang Wu-chung, the freedom from covetousness
of Kung-ch'o, the bravery of Chwang of Pien, and the varied
talents of Zan Ch'iu; add to these the accomplishments of the
rules of propriety and music:-- such a one might be reckoned a
COMPLETE man.'
        2. He then added, 'But what is the necessity for a
complete man of the present day to have all these things? The
man, who in the

利思義、見危授命、久要不忘平生之言、亦可以為成人矣。
【十四章】【一節】子問公叔文子於公明賈曰、信乎、夫子不言不笑、不取
乎。【二節】公明賈對曰、以告者過也。夫子時然後言、人不厭其言、樂然
後笑、人不厭其笑、義然後取、人不厭其取。子曰、其然、豈其然乎。
view of gain, thinks of righteousness; who in the view of
danger is prepared to give up his life; and who does not forget
an old agreement however far back it extends:-- such a man
may be reckoned a COMPLETE man.'
        CHAP. XIV. 1. The Master asked Kung-ming Chia about
Kung-shu Wan, saying, 'Is it true that your master speaks not,
laughs not, and takes not?'
        2. Kung-ming Chia replied, 'This has arisen from the
reporters going beyond the truth.-- My master speaks when it
is the time to speak, and so men do not get tired of his
speaking. He laughs when there is occasion to be joyful, and so
men do not get tired of his laughing. He takes when it is
consistent with righteousness to do so, and so men do not get
tired of his taking.' The Master said, 'So! But is it so with him?'

【十五章】子曰、臧武仲、以防求為後於魯、雖曰不要君、吾不信也。
【十六章】子曰、晉文公譎而不正、齊桓公正而不譎。
【十七章】【一節】子路曰、桓公殺公子糾、召忽死之、管仲不死、
        CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'Tsang Wu-chung, keeping
possession of Fang, asked of the duke of Lu to appoint a
successor to him in his family. Although it may be said that he
was not using force with his sovereign, I believe he was.'
        CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'The duke Wan of Tsin was
crafty and not upright. The duke Hwan of Ch'i was upright and
not crafty.'
        CHAP. XVII. 1. Tsze-lu said, 'The Duke Hwan caused his
brother Chiu to be killed, when Shao Hu died with his master,
but Kwan Chung did not die. May not I say that he was wanting
in virtue?'

曰、未仁乎。【二節】子曰、桓公九合諸侯、不以兵車、管仲之力也、如其
仁、如其仁。
【十八章】【一節】子貢曰、管仲非仁者與、桓公殺公子糾、不能死、又相
之。【二節】子曰、管仲相桓公、霸諸侯、一匡天下、民到于今、受其賜、
微管仲、吾其被髮左衽矣。【三節】豈若匹夫匹婦之為諒也、
        2. The Master said, 'The Duke Hwan assembled all the
princes together, and that not with weapons of war and
chariots:-- it was all through the influence of Kwan Chung.
Whose beneficence was like his? Whose beneficence was like
his?'
        CHAP. XVIII. 1. Tsze-kung said, 'Kwan Chung, I
apprehend, was wanting in virtue. When the Duke Hwan
caused his brother Chiu to be killed, Kwan Chung was not able
to die with him. Moreover, he became prime minister to Hwan.'
        2. The Master said, 'Kwan Chung acted as prime minister
to the Duke Hwan, made him leader of all the princes, and
united and rectified the whole kingdom. Down to the present
day, the people enjoy the gifts which he conferred. But for
Kwan Chung, we should now be wearing our hair unbound, and
the lappets of our coats buttoning on the left side.
        3. 'Will you require from him the small fidelity of
common

自經於溝瀆、而莫之知也。
【十九章】【一節】公叔文子之臣、大夫僎、與文子同升諸公。【二節】子
聞之曰、可以為矣。
【二十章】【一節】子言衛靈公之無道也、康子曰、夫如是、奚而不喪。【二
節】孔子曰、仲叔圉治賓客、祝鮀治
men and common women, who would commit suicide in a
stream or ditch, no one knowing anything about them?'
        CHAP. XIX. 1. The great officer, Hsien, who had been
family-minister to Kung-shu Wan, ascended to the prince's
court in company with Wan.
        2. The Master, having heard of it, said, 'He deserved to be
considered WAN (the accomplished).'
        CHAP. XX. 1. The Master was speaking about the
unprincipled course of the duke Ling of Wei, when Ch'i K'ang
said, 'Since he is of such a character, how is it he does not lose
his State?'
        2. Confucius said, 'The Chung-shu Yu has the
superintendence of his guests and of strangers; the litanist, T'o,
has the management

宗廟、王孫賈治軍旅、夫如是、奚其喪。
【廿一章】子曰、其言之不怍、則為之也難。
【廿二章】【一節】陳成子弒簡公。【二節】孔子沐浴而朝、告於哀公曰、
陳恆弒其君、請討之。【三節】公曰、告夫三子。【四節】孔子曰、以吾從
大夫之後、不敢不告也、君
of his ancestral temple; and Wang-sun Chia has the direction of
the army and forces:-- with such officers as these, how should
he lose his State?'
        CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'He who speaks without
modesty will find it difficult to make his words good.'
        CHAP. XXII. 1. Chan Ch'ang murdered the Duke Chien of
Ch'i.
        2. Confucius bathed, went to court, and informed the
duke Ai, saying, 'Chan Hang has slain his sovereign. I beg that
you will undertake to punish him.'
        3. The duke said, 'Inform the chiefs of the three families
of it.'
        4. Confucius retired, and said, 'Following in the rear of the
great officers, I did not dare not to represent such a matter,
and my prince says, "Inform the chiefs of the three families of
it."'

曰、告夫三子者。【四節】之三子告、不可、孔子曰、以吾從大夫之後、不
敢不告也。
【廿三章】子路問事君。子曰、勿欺也、而犯之。
【廿四章】子曰、君子上達、小人下達。
【廿五章】子曰、古之學者為己、今之學者為人。
【廿六章】【一節】蘧伯玉使人於孔子。【二節】孔子與之坐、而問焉、曰、
夫子何為。
        5. He went to the chiefs, and informed them, but they
would not act. Confucius then said, 'Following in the rear of the
great officers, I did not dare not to represent such a matter.'
        CHAP. XXIII. Tsze-lu asked how a ruler should be served.
The Master said, 'Do not impose on him, and, moreover,
withstand him to his face.'
        CHAP. XXIV. The Master said, 'The progress of the
superior man is upwards; the progress of the mean man is
downwards.'
        CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'In ancient times, men
learned with a view to their own improvement. Now-a-days,
men learn with a view to the approbation of others.'
        CHAP. XXVI. 1. Chu Po-yu sent a messenger with friendly
inquiries to Confucius.
        2. Confucius sat with him, and questioned him. 'What,'
said he, 'is your master engaged in?' The messenger replied,
'My master is

對曰、夫子欲寡其過、而未能也、使者出、子曰、使乎、使乎。
【廿七章】子曰、不在其位、不謀其政。
【廿八章】曾子曰、君子思不出其位。
【廿九章】子曰、君子恥其言而過其行。
【三十章】【一節】子曰、君子道者三、我無能焉、仁者不憂、知者不惑、
勇者不懼。【二節】子貢曰、夫子自道也。
anxious to make his faults few, but he has not yet succeeded.'
He then went out, and the Master said, 'A messenger indeed! A
messenger indeed!'
        CHAP. XXVII. The Master said, 'He who is not in any
particular office, has nothing to do with plans for the
administration of its duties.'
        CHAP. XXVIII. The philosopher Tsang said, 'The superior
man, in his thoughts, does not go out of his place.'
        CHAP. XXIX. The Master said, 'The superior man is modest
in his speech, but exceeds in his actions.'
        CHAP. XXX. 1. The Master said, 'The way of the superior
man is threefold, but I am not equal to it. Virtuous, he is free
from anxieties; wise, he is free from perplexities; bold, he is
free from fear.
        2. Tsze-kung said, 'Master, that is what you yourself say.'

【卅一章】子貢方人、子曰、賜也賢乎哉、夫我則不暇。
【卅二章】子曰、不患人之不己知、患其不能也。
【卅三章】子曰、不逆詐、不億不信、抑亦先覺者、是賢乎。
【卅四章】【一節】微生畝謂孔子曰、丘何為是栖栖者與、無乃為佞乎。【二
節】孔子曰、非敢為佞也、疾固也。
        CHAP. XXXI. Tsze-kung was in the habit of comparing
men together. The Master said, 'Tsze must have reached a high
pitch of excellence! Now, I have not leisure for this.'
        CHAP. XXXII. The Master said, 'I will not be concerned at
men's not knowing me; I will be concerned at my own want of
ability.'
        CHAP. XXXIII. The Master said, 'He who does not
anticipate attempts to deceive him, nor think beforehand of his
not being believed, and yet apprehends these things readily
(when they occur);-- is he not a man of superior worth?'
        CHAP. XXXIV. 1. Wei-shang Mau said to Confucius, 'Ch'iu,
how is it that you keep roosting about? Is it not that you are an
insinuating talker?'
        2. Confucius said, 'I do not dare to play the part of such a
talker, but I hate obstinacy.'

【卅五章】子曰、驥、不稱其力、稱其德也。
【卅六章】【一節】或曰、以德報怨、何如。【二節】子曰、何以報德。【三
節】以直報怨、以德報德。
【卅七章】【一節】子曰、莫我知也夫。【二節】子貢曰、何為其莫知子也。
子曰、不怨天、不尤人、下學
        CHAP. XXXV. The Master said, 'A horse is called a ch'i, not
because of its strength, but because of its other good qualities.'
        CHAP. XXXVI. 1. Some one said, 'What do you say
concerning the principle that injury should be recompensed
with kindness?'
        2. The Master said, 'With what then will you recompense
kindness?
        3. 'Recompense injury with justice, and recompense
kindness with kindness.'
        CHAP. XXXVII. 1. The Master said, 'Alas! there is no one
that knows me.'
        2. Tsze-kung said, 'What do you mean by thus saying--
that no one knows you?' The Master replied, 'I do not murmur
against

而上達、知我者其天乎。
【卅八章】【一節】公伯寮愬子路於李孫、子服景伯以告、曰、夫子固有惑
志於公伯寮、吾力猶能肆諸市朝。【二節】子曰、道之將行也與、命也、道
之將廢也與、命也、公伯寮其如命何。
Heaven. I do not grumble against men. My studies lie low, and
my penetration rises high. But there is Heaven;-- that knows
me!'
        CHAP. XXXVIII. 1. The Kung-po Liao, having slandered
Tsze-lu to Chi-sun, Tsze-fu Ching-po informed Confucius of it,
saying, 'Our master is certainly being led astray by the Kung-po
Liao, but I have still power enough left to cut Liao off, and
expose his corpse in the market and in the court.'
        2. The Master said, 'If my principles are to advance, it is
so ordered. If they are to fall to the ground, it is so ordered.
What can the Kung-po Liao do where such ordering is
concerned?'

【卅九章】【一節】子曰、賢者辟世。【二節】其次辟地。【三節】其次辟
色。【四節】其次辟言。
【四十章】子曰、作者七人矣。
【四一章】子路宿於石門、晨門曰、奚自。子路曰、自孔氏。曰、是知其不
可而為之者與。
【四二章】【一節】子擊磬於衛、有荷蕢、而過孔氏之門者、
        CHAP. XXXIX. 1. The Master said, 'Some men of worth
retire from the world.
        2. Some retire from particular states.
        3. Some retire because of disrespectful looks.
        4. Some retire because of contradictory language.'
        CHAP. XL.  The Master said, 'Those who have done this
are seven men.'
        CHAP. XLI. Tsze-lu happening to pass the night in Shih-
man, the gatekeeper said to him, 'Whom do you come from?'
Tsze-lu said, 'From Mr. K'ung.' 'It is he,-- is it not?'-- said the
other, 'who knows the impracticable nature of the times and
yet will be doing in them.'
        CHAP. XLII. 1. The Master was playing, one day, on a
musical stone in Wei, when a man, carrying a straw basket,
passed the door

曰、有心哉、擊磬乎。【二節】既、而曰、鄙哉、硜硜乎、莫己知也、斯已
而已矣、深則厲、淺則揭。【三節】子曰、果哉、末之難矣。
【四三章】【一節】子張曰、書云、高宗諒陰三年不言、何謂也。【二節】
子曰、何必高宗、古之人皆然、君薨、百官總己、以聽於冢宰、三年。
of the house where Confucius was, and said, 'His heart is full
who so beats the musical stone.'
        2. A little while after, he added, 'How contemptible is the
one-ideaed obstinacy those sounds display! When one is taken
no notice of, he has simply at once to give over his wish for
public employment. "Deep water must be crossed with the
clothes on; shallow water may be crossed with the clothes held
up."'
        3. The Master said, 'How determined is he in his purpose!
But this is not difficult!'
        CHAP. XLIII. 1. Tsze-chang said, 'What is meant when the
Shu says that Kao-tsung, while observing the usual imperial
mourning, was for three years without speaking?'
        2. The Master said, 'Why must Kao-tsung be referred to
as an example of this? The ancients all did so. When the
sovereign died, the officers all attended to their several duties,
taking instructions from the prime minister for three years.'

【四四章】子曰、上好禮、則民易使也。
【四五章】子路問君子、子曰、修己以敬。曰、如斯而已乎。曰、修己以安
人、曰、如斯而已乎。曰、修己以安百姓。修己以安百姓、堯舜其猶病諸。
【四六章】原壤夷俟、子曰、幼
        CHAP. XLIV. The Master said, 'When rulers love to
observe the rules of propriety, the people respond readily to
the calls on them for service.'
        CHAP. XLV. Tsze-lu asked what constituted the superior
man. The Master said, 'The cultivation of himself in reverential
carefulness.' 'And is this all?' said Tsze-lu. 'He cultivates
himself so as to give rest to others,' was the reply. 'And is this
all?' again asked Tsze-lu. The Master said, 'He cultivates
himself so as to give rest to all the people. He cultivates himself
so as to give rest to all the people:-- even Yao and Shun were
still solicitous about this.'
        CHAP. XLVI. Yuan Zang was squatting on his heels, and

而不孫弟、長而無述焉、老而不死、是為賊。以杖叩其脛。
【四七章】【一節】闕黨童子將命、或問之曰、益者與。【二節】子曰、吾
見其居於位也、見其與先生並行也、非求益者也、欲速成者也。
so waited the approach of the Master, who said to him, 'In
youth not humble as befits a junior; in manhood, doing nothing
worthy of being handed down; and living on to old age:-- this is
to be a pest.' With this he hit him on the shank with his staff.
        CHAP. XLVI. 1. A youth of the village of Ch'ueh was
employed by Confucius to carry the messages between him and
his visitors. Some one asked about him, saying, 'I suppose he
has made great progress.'
        2. The Master said, 'I observe that he is fond of occupying
the seat of a full-grown man; I observe that he walks shoulder
to shoulder with his elders. He is not one who is seeking to
make progress in learning. He wishes quickly to become a man.'

衛靈公第十五