BOOK IX. TSZE HAN.

【第一章】子罕言、利、與命、與仁。
【第二章】【一節】達巷黨人曰、大哉孔子、搏學而無所成名。【二節】子
聞之、謂門弟子曰、吾何執、執御乎、執射乎、吾執御矣。
        CHAP. I. The subjects of which the Master seldom spoke
were-- profitableness, and also the appointments of Heaven,
and perfect virtue.
        CHAP. II. 1. A man of the village of Ta-hsiang said, 'Great
indeed is the philosopher K'ung! His learning is extensive, and
yet he does not render his name famous by any particular
thing.'
        2. The Master heard the observation, and said to his
disciples, 'What shall I practise? Shall I practise charioteering,
or shall I practise archery? I will practise charioteering.'

【第三章】【一節】子曰、麻冕、禮也、今也純、儉、吾從眾。【二節】拜
下、禮也。今拜乎上、泰也、雖遠眾、吾從下。
【第四章】子絕四、毋意、毋必、毋固、毋我。
【第五章】【一節】子畏於匡。【二節】曰、文王既沒、文不在茲乎。【三
節】天之將喪斯文也、後死者不得與於斯文也、
        CHAP. III. 1. The Master said, 'The linen cap is that
prescribed by the rules of ceremony, but now a silk one is
worn. It is economical, and I follow the common practice.
        2. 'The rules of ceremony prescribe the bowing below the
hall, but now the practice is to bow only after ascending it. That
is arrogant. I continue to bow below the hall, though I oppose
the common practice.'
        CHAP. IV. There were four things from which the Master
was entirely free. He had no foregone conclusions, no arbitrary
predeterminations, no obstinacy, and no egoism.
        CHAP. V. 1. The Master was put in fear in K'wang.
        2. He said, 'After the death of King Wan, was not the
cause of truth lodged here in me?

天之未喪斯文也、匡人其如予何。
【第六章】【一節】大宰問於子貢、曰、夫子聖者與、何其多能也。【二節】
子貢曰、固天縱之將聖、又多能也。【三節】子聞之曰、大宰知我乎、吾少
也賤、故多能、鄙事、君子多乎哉、不多也。【四節】牢曰、子云、吾不試、
故藝。
        3. 'If Heaven had wished to let this cause of truth perish,
then I, a future mortal, should not have got such a relation to
that cause. While Heaven does not let the cause of truth perish,
what can the people of K'wang do to me?'
        CHAP. VI. 1. A high officer asked Tsze-kung, saying, 'May
we not say that your Master is a sage? How various is his
ability!'
        2. Tsze-kung said, 'Certainly Heaven has endowed him
unlimitedly. He is about a sage. And, moreover, his ability is
various.'
        3. The Master heard of the conversation and said, 'Does
the high officer know me? When I was young, my condition
was low, and therefore I acquired my ability in many things,
but they were mean matters. Must the superior man have such
variety of ability? He does not need variety of ability.'
        4. Lao said, 'The Master said, "Having no official
employment, I acquired many arts."'

【第七章】子曰、吾有知乎哉、無知也、有鄙夫問於我、空空如也、我叩其
兩端而竭焉。
【第八章】子曰、鳳鳥不至、河不出圖、吾已矣乎。
【第九章】子見齊衰者、冕衣裳者、與瞽者、見之、雖少必作、過之必趨。
        CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'Am I indeed possessed of
knowledge? I am not knowing. But if a mean person, who
appears quite empty-like, ask anything of me, I set it forth
from one end to the other, and exhaust it.'
        CHAP. VIII. The Master said, 'The FANG bird does not
come; the river sends forth no map:-- it is all over with me!'
        CHAP. IX. When the Master saw a person in a mourning
dress, or any one with the cap and upper and lower garments
of full dress, or a blind person, on observing them approaching,
though they were younger than himself, he would rise up, and
if he had to pass by them, he would do so hastily.

【第十章】【一節】顏淵喟然歎曰、仰之彌高、鑽之彌堅、瞻之在前、忽焉
在後夫子循循然善誘人、博我以文、約我以禮。【三節】欲罷不能、既竭吾
才、如有所立卓爾、雖欲從之、末由也已。
【十一章】【一節】子疾病、子路使門人為臣。【二節】病間曰、久矣哉、
由之行詐也、無臣而為有
        CHAP. X. 1. Yen Yuan, in admiration of the Master's
doctrines, sighed and said, 'I looked up to them, and they
seemed to become more high; I tried to penetrate them, and
they seemed to become more firm; I looked at them before me,
and suddenly they seemed to be behind.
        2. 'The Master, by orderly method, skilfully leads men on.
He enlarged my mind with learning, and taught me the
restraints of propriety.
        3. 'When I wish to give over the study of his doctrines, I
cannot do so, and having exerted all my ability, there seems
something to stand right up before me; but though I wish to
follow and lay hold of it, I really find no way to do so.'
        CHAP. XI. 1. The Master being very ill, Tsze-lu wished the
disciples to act as ministers to him.
        2. During a remission of his illness, he said, 'Long has the
conduct of Yu been deceitful! By pretending to have ministers
when I have them not, whom should I impose upon? Should I
impose upon Heaven?

臣、吾誰欺、欺天乎。【三節】且予與其死於臣之手也、無寧死於二三子之
手乎、且予縱不得大葬、予死於道路乎。
【十二章】子貢曰、有美玉於斯、韞(du2 匚＋賣、與「櫝」同)而藏諸、求
善賈而沽諸。子曰、沽之哉、沽之哉、我待賈者也。
【十三章】【一節】子欲居九夷。【二節】或曰、陋、如之何。子曰、君子
居之、何陋之有。
【十四章】子曰、吾自衛反魯、然後樂
        3. 'Moreover, than that I should die in the hands of
ministers, is it not better that I should die in the hands of you,
my disciples? And though I may not get a great burial, shall I
die upon the road?'
        CHAP. XII. Tsze-kung said, 'There is a beautiful gem here.
Should I lay it up in a case and keep it? or should I seek for a
good price and sell it?' The Master said, 'Sell it! Sell it! But I
would wait for one to offer the price.'
        CHAP. XIII. 1. The Master was wishing to go and live
among the nine wild tribes of the east.
        2. Some one said, 'They are rude. How can you do such a
thing?' The Master said, 'If a superior man dwelt among them,
what rudeness would there be?'
        CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'I returned from Wei to Lu,
and then the music was reformed, and the pieces in the Royal
songs and Praise songs all found their proper places.'

正、雅頌各得其所。
【十五章】子曰、出則事公卿、入則事父兄、喪事不敢不勉、不為酒困、何
有於我哉。
【十六章】子在川上曰、逝者如斯夫、不舍晝夜。
【十七章】子曰、吾未見好德、如好色者也。
【十八章】子曰、譬如為山、未成一簣、止、吾止也、譬如平地、雖
        CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'Abroad, to serve the high
ministers and nobles; at home, to serve one's father and elder
brothers; in all duties to the dead, not to dare not to exert one's
self; and not to be overcome of wine:-- which one of these
things do I attain to?'
        CHAP. XVI. The Master standing by a stream, said, 'It
passes on just like this, not ceasing day or night!'
        CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'I have not seen one who
loves virtue as he loves beauty.'
        CHAP. XVIII. The Master said, 'The prosecution of
learning may be compared to what may happen in raising a
mound. If there want but one basket of earth to complete the
work, and I stop, the

覆一簣、進、吾往也。
【十九章】子曰、語之而不惰者、其回也與。
【二十章】子謂顏淵曰、惜乎、吾見其進也、未見其止也。
【廿一章】子曰、苗而不秀者、有矣夫、秀而不實者、有矣夫。
【廿二章】子曰、後生可畏、焉知來者之不如今也、四十五十而無聞焉、斯
亦不足畏也已。
stopping is my own work. It may be compared to throwing
down the earth on the level ground. Though but one basketful
is thrown at a time, the advancing with it is my own going
forward.'
        CHAP. XIX. The Master said, 'Never flagging when I set
forth anything to him;-- ah! that is Hui.'
        CHAP. XX. The Master said of Yen Yuan, 'Alas! I saw his
constant advance. I never saw him stop in his progress.'
        CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'There are cases in which the
blade springs, but the plant does not go on to flower! There are
cases where it flowers, but no fruit is subsequently produced!'
        CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'A youth is to be regarded
with respect. How do we know that his future will not be equal
to our present? If he reach the age of forty or fifty, and has not
made himself heard of, then indeed he will not be worth being
regarded with respect.'

【廿三章】子曰、法語之言、能無從乎、改之為貴、巽與之言、能無說乎、
繹之為貴、說而不繹、從而不改、吾末如之何也已矣。
【廿四章】子曰、主忠信、毋友不如己者、過則勿憚改。
【廿五章】子曰、三軍可奪師也、匹夫不可奪志也。
        CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'Can men refuse to assent to
the words of strict admonition? But it is reforming the conduct
because of them which is valuable. Can men refuse to be
pleased with words of gentle advice? But it is unfolding their
aim which is valuable. If a man be pleased with these words,
but does not unfold their aim, and assents to those, but does
not reform his conduct, I can really do nothing with him.'
        CHAP. XXIV. The Master said, 'Hold faithfulness and
sincerity as first principles. Have no friends not equal to
yourself. When you have faults, do not fear to abandon them.'
        CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'The commander of the
forces of a large state may be carried off, but the will of even a
common man cannot be taken from him.'

【廿六章】【一節】子曰、衣敝縕袍、與衣孤貉者立、而不恥者、其由也與。
【二節】不忮不求、何用不臧。【三節】子路終身誦之、子曰、是道也、何
足以臧。
【廿七章】子曰、歲寒、然後知松柏之後彫也。
【廿八章】子曰、知者不惑、仁者不憂、勇者不懼。
【廿九章】子曰、可與共學、未可與
        CHAP. XXVI. 1. The Master said, 'Dressed himself in a
tattered robe quilted with hemp, yet standing by the side of
men dressed in furs, and not ashamed;-- ah! it is Yu who is
equal to this!
        2. '"He dislikes none, he covets nothing;-- what can he do
but what is good!"'
        3. Tsze-lu kept continually repeating these words of the
ode, when the Master said, 'Those things are by no means
sufficient to constitute (perfect) excellence.'
        CHAP. XXVII. The Master said, 'When the year becomes
cold, then we know how the pine and the cypress are the last
to lose their leaves.'
        CHAP. XXVIII. The Master said, 'The wise are free from
perplexities; the virtuous from anxiety; and the bold from fear.'
        CHAP. XXIX. The Master said, 'There are some with whom
we may study in common, but we shall find them unable to go
along

適道、可與適道、未可與立、可與立、未可與權。
【三十章】【一節】唐棣之華、偏其反而、豈不爾思、室是遠而。【二節】
子曰、未之思也、未何遠之有。
with us to principles. Perhaps we may go on with them to
principles, but we shall find them unable to get established in
those along with us. Or if we may get so established along with
them, we shall find them unable to weigh occurring events
along with us.'
        CHAP. XXX. 1. How the flowers of the aspen-plum flutter
and turn! Do I not think of you? But your house is distant.
        2. The Master said, 'It is the want of thought about it.
How is it distant?'

鄉黨第十