BOOK VII. SHU R.

【第一章】子曰、述而不作、信而好古、竊比於我老彭。
【第二章】子曰、默而識之、學而不厭、誨人不倦、何有於我哉。
【第三章】子曰、德之不脩、學之不講、聞義不能徒、不善不能改、
        CHAP. I. The Master said, 'A transmitter and not a maker,
believing in and loving the ancients, I venture to compare
myself with our old P'ang.'
        CHAP. II. The Master said, 'The silent treasuring up of
knowledge; learning without satiety; and instructing others
without being wearied:-- which one of these things belongs to
me?'
        CHAP. III. The Master said, 'The leaving virtue without
proper cultivation; the not thoroughly discussing what is
learned; not being able to move towards righteousness of which
a knowledge is gained; and not being able to change what is not
good:-- these are the things which occasion me solicitude.'

是吾憂也。
【第四章】子之燕居、申申如也、夭夭如也。
【第五章】子曰、甚矣吾衰也、久矣、吾不復夢見周公。
【第六章】【一節】子曰、志於道。【二節】據於德。【三節】依於仁。【四
節】游於藝。
        CHAP. IV. When the Master was unoccupied with
business, his manner was easy, and he looked pleased.
        CHAP. V. The Master said, 'Extreme is my decay. For a
long time, I have not dreamed, as I was wont to do, that I saw
the duke of Chau.'
        CHAP. VI. 1. The Master said, 'Let the will be set on the
path of duty.
        2. 'Let every attainment in what is good be firmly
grasped.
        3. 'Let perfect virtue be accorded with.
        4. 'Let relaxation and enjoyment be found in the polite
arts.'

【第七章】子曰、自行束脩以上、吾未嘗無誨焉。
【第八章】子曰、不憤不啟、不悱不發、舉一隅、不以三隅反、則不復也。
【第九章】【一節】子食於有喪者之側、未嘗飽也。【二節】子於是日哭、
則不歌。
【第十章】【一節】子謂顏淵曰、用之則行、舍之則藏、惟我
        CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'From the man bringing his
bundle of dried flesh for my teaching upwards, I have never
refused instruction to any one.'
        CHAP. VIII. The Master said, 'I do not open up the truth
to one who is not eager to get knowledge, nor help out any one
who is not anxious to explain himself. When I have presented
one corner of a subject to any one, and he cannot from it learn
the other three, I do not repeat my lesson.'
        CHAP. IX. 1. When the Master was eating by the side of a
mourner, he never ate to the full.
        2. He did not sing on the same day in which he had been
weeping.
        CHAP. X. 1. The Master said to Yen Yuan, 'When called to
office, to undertake its duties; when not so called, to lie
retired;-- it is only I and you who have attained to this.'

與爾有是夫。【二節】子路曰、子行三軍則誰與。【三節】子曰、暴虎馮河、
死而無悔者、吾不與也、必也臨事而懼、好謀而成者也。
【十一章】子曰、富而可求也、雖執鞭之士、吾亦為之、如不可求、從吾所
好。
【十二章】子之所慎、齊、戰、疾。
        2. Tsze-lu said, 'If you had the conduct of the armies of a
great State, whom would you have to act with you?'
        3. The Master said, 'I would not have him to act with me,
who will unarmed attack a tiger, or cross a river without a
boat, dying without any regret. My associate must be the man
who proceeds to action full of solicitude, who is fond of
adjusting his plans, and then carries them into execution.'
        CHAP. XI. The Master said, 'If the search for riches is sure
to be successful, though I should become a groom with whip in
hand to get them, I will do so. As the search may not be
successful, I will follow after that which I love.'
        CHAP. XII. The things in reference to which the Master
exercised the greatest caution were -- fasting, war, and
sickness.

【十三章】子在齊聞韶、三月不知肉味、曰、不圖為樂之至於斯也。
【十四章】【一節】冉有曰、夫子為衛君乎。子貢曰、諾、吾將問之。【二
節】入曰、伯夷叔齊、何人也。曰、古之賢人也。曰、怨乎。曰、求仁而得
仁、又何怨。出曰、夫子不為也。
        CHAP. XIII. When the Master was in Ch'i, he heard the
Shao, and for three months did not know the taste of flesh. 'I
did not think'' he said, 'that music could have been made so
excellent as this.'
        CHAP. XIV. 1. Yen Yu said, 'Is our Master for the ruler of
Wei?' Tsze-kung said, 'Oh! I will ask him.'
        2. He went in accordingly, and said, 'What sort of men
were Po-i and Shu-ch'i?' 'They were ancient worthies,' said the
Master. 'Did they have any repinings because of their course?'
The Master again replied, 'They sought to act virtuously, and
they did so; what was there for them to repine about?' On this,
Tsze-kung went out and said, 'Our Master is not for him.'

【十五章】子曰、飯疏食飲水、曲肱而枕之、樂亦在其中矣、不義而富且貴、
於我如浮雲。
【十六章】子曰、加我數年、五十以學易、可以無大過矣。
【十七章】子所雅言、詩､書､執禮、皆雅言也。
        CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'With coarse rice to eat, with
water to drink, and my bended arm for a pillow;-- I have still
joy in the midst of these things. Riches and honours acquired
by unrighteousness, are to me as a floating cloud.'
        CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'If some years were added to
my life, I would give fifty to the study of the Yi, and then I
might come to be without great faults.'
        CHAP. XVII The Master's frequent themes of discourse
were-- the Odes, the History, and the maintenance of the Rules
of Propriety. On all these he frequently discoursed.

【十八章】【一節】葉公問孔子於子路、子路不對。【二節】子曰、女奚不
曰、其為人也、發憤忘食、樂以忘憂、不知老之將至云爾。
【十九章】子曰、我非生而知之者、好古、敏以求之者也。
【二十章】子不語、怪、力、亂、神。
        CHAP. XVIII. 1. The Duke of Sheh asked Tsze-lu about
Confucius, and Tsze-lu did not answer him.
        2. The Master said, 'Why did you not say to him,-- He is
simply a man, who in his eager pursuit (of knowledge) forgets
his food, who in the joy of its attainment forgets his sorrows,
and who does not perceive that old age is coming on?'
        CHAP. XIX. The Master said, 'I am not one who was born
in the possession of knowledge; I am one who is fond of
antiquity, and earnest in seeking it there.'
        CHAP. XX. The subjects on which the Master did not talk,
were-- extraordinary things, feats of strength, disorder, and
spiritual beings.

【廿一章】子曰、三人行、必有我師焉、擇其善者而從之、其不善者而改之。
【廿二章】子曰、天生德於予、桓魋其如予何。
【廿三章】子曰、二三子、以我為隱乎、吾無隱乎爾、吾無行而不與二三子
者、是丘也、
【廿四章】子以四教、文、行、忠、信。
        CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'When I walk along with two
others, they may serve me as my teachers. I will select their
good qualities and follow them, their bad qualities and avoid
them.'
        CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'Heaven produced the virtue
that is in me. Hwan T'ui-- what can he do to me?'
        CHAP. XXIII. The Master said, 'Do you think, my disciples,
that I have any concealments? I conceal nothing from you.
There is nothing which I do that is not shown to you, my
disciples;-- that is my way.'
        CHAP. XXIV. There were four things which the Master
taught,-- letters, ethics, devotion of soul, and truthfulness.

【廿五章】【一節】子曰、聖人吾不得而見之矣、得見君子者、斯可矣。【二
節】子曰、善人吾不得而見之矣、得見有恆者、斯可矣。【三節】亡而為有、
虛而為盈、約而為泰、難乎有恆矣。
【廿六章】子釣而不綱、弋不射宿。
【廿七章】子曰、蓋有不知而作
        CHAP. XXV. 1. The Master said, 'A sage it is not mine to
see; could I see a man of real talent and virtue, that would
satisfy me.'
        2. The Master said, 'A good man it is not mine to see;
could I see a man possessed of constancy, that would satisfy
me.
        3. 'Having not and yet affecting to have, empty and yet
affecting to be full, straitened and yet affecting to be at ease:--
it is difficult with such characteristics to have constancy.'
        CHAP. XXVI. The Master angled,-- but did not use a net.
He shot,-- but not at birds perching.
        CHAP. XXVII. The Master said, 'There may be those who
act without knowing why. I do not do so. Hearing much and
selecting what is good and following it; seeing much and
keeping it in memory:-- this is the second style of knowledge.'

之者、我無是也。多聞、擇其善者而從之、多見而識之、知之次也。
【廿八章】【一節】互鄉難與言、童子見、門人惑。【二節】子曰、與其進
也、不與其退也、唯何甚、人潔己以進、與其潔也、不保其往也。
子曰、仁遠乎哉、我欲仁、斯仁至矣。
【三十章】【一節】陳司敗問昭公知禮乎。孔子曰、知禮。孔子退、揖巫馬
期而進
        CHAP. XXVIII. 1. It was difficult to talk (profitably and
reputably) with the people of Hu-hsiang, and a lad of that place
having had an interview with the Master, the disciples
doubted.
        2. The Master said, 'I admit people's approach to me
without committing myself as to what they may do when they
have retired. Why must one be so severe? If a man purify
himself to wait upon me, I receive him so purified, without
guaranteeing his past conduct.'
        CHAP. XXIX. The Master said, 'Is virtue a thing remote? I
wish to be virtuous, and lo! virtue is at hand.'
        CHAP. XXX. 1. The minister of crime of Ch'an asked
whether the duke Chao knew propriety, and Confucius said, 'He
knew propriety.'
        2. Confucius having retired, the minister bowed to Wu-
ma Ch'i

之、曰、吾聞君子不黨、君子亦黨乎、君取於吳為同姓、謂之吳孟子、君而
知禮、孰不知禮。【三節】 巫馬期以告。子曰、丘也幸、苟有過、人必知
之。
【卅一章】子與人歌、而善、必使反之、而後和之。
【卅二章】子曰、文、莫吾猶人
to come forward, and said, 'I have heard that the superior man
is not a partisan. May the superior man be a partisan also? The
prince married a daughter of the house of Wu, of the same
surname with himself, and called her,-- "The elder Tsze of Wu."
If the prince knew propriety, who does not know it?'
        3. Wu-ma Ch'i reported these remarks, and the Master
said, 'I am fortunate! If I have any errors, people are sure to
know them.'
        CHAP. XXXI. When the Master was in company with a
person who was singing, if he sang well, he would make him
repeat the song, while he accompanied it with his own voice.
        CHAP. XXXII. The Master said, 'In letters I am perhaps
equal to other men, but the character of the superior man,
carrying out in his conduct what he professes, is what I have
not yet attained to.'

也、躬行君子、則吾未之有得。
【卅三章】子曰、若聖與仁、則吾豈敢、抑為之不厭、誨人不倦、則可謂云
爾已矣。公西華曰、正唯弟子不能學也。
【卅四章】子疾病。子路請禱。子曰、有諸。子路對曰、有之、誄曰、禱爾
於上下神
祗 。子曰、丘之禱久矣。
        CHAP. XXXIII. The Master said, 'The sage and the man of
perfect virtue;-- how dare I rank myself with them? It may
simply be said of me, that I strive to become such without
satiety, and teach others without weariness.' Kung-hsi Hwa
said, 'This is just what we, the disciples, cannot imitate you in.'
        CHAP. XXXIV. The Master being very sick, Tsze-lu asked
leave to pray for him. He said, 'May such a thing be done?'
Tsze-lu replied, 'It may. In the Eulogies it is said, "Prayer has
been made for thee to the spirits of the upper and lower
worlds."' The Master said, 'My praying has been for a long
time.'

【卅五章】子曰、奢則不孫、儉則固、與其不孫也、寧固。
【卅六章】子曰、君子坦蕩蕩、小人長戚戚。
【卅七章】子溫而厲、威而不猛、恭而安。
        CHAP. XXXV. The Master said, 'Extravagance leads to
insubordination, and parsimony to meanness. It is better to be
mean than to be insubordinate.'
        CHAP. XXXVI. The Master said, 'The superior man is
satisfied and composed; the mean man is always full of
distress.'
        CHAP. XXXVII. The Master was mild, and yet dignified;
majestic, and yet not fierce; respectful, and yet easy.

泰伯第八