BOOK VIII. T'AI-PO.

【第一章】子曰、太伯其可謂至德也已矣、三以天下讓、民無得而稱焉。
        CHAP. I. The Master said, 'T'ai-po may be said to have
reached the highest point of virtuous action. Thrice he declined
the kingdom, and the people in ignorance of his motives could
not express their approbation of his conduct.'

【第二章】【一節】子曰、恭而無禮則勞、慎而無禮則葸、勇而無禮則亂、
直而無禮則絞。【二節】君子篤於親、則民興於仁、故舊不遺、則民不偷。
【第三章】曾子有疾、召門弟子曰、啟予
        CHAP. II. 1. The Master said, 'Respectfulness, without the
rules of propriety, becomes laborious bustle; carefulness,
without the rules of propriety, becomes timidity; boldness,
without the rules of propriety, becomes insubordination;
straightforwardness, without the rules of propriety, becomes
rudeness.
        2. 'When those who are in high stations perform well all
their duties to their relations, the people are aroused to virtue.
When old friends are not neglected by them, the people are
preserved from meanness.'
        CHAP. III. The philosopher Tsang being ill, he called to
him the disciples of his school, and said, 'Uncover my feet,
uncover my hands. It is said in the Book of Poetry, "We should
be apprehensive and cautious, as if on the brink of a deep gulf,
as if treading on thin ice," and so have I been. Now and
hereafter, I know my escape from all injury to my person, O ye,
my little children.'

足、啟予手、詩云、戰戰兢兢、如臨深淵、如履薄冰、而今而後、吾知免夫、
小子。
【第四章】【一節】曾子有疾、孟敬子問之。曾子言曰、鳥之將死、其鳴也
哀、人之將死、其言也善。【三節】君子所貴乎道者三、動容貌、斯遠暴慢
矣、正顏色、斯近信笑、出辭氣、斯遠鄙倍矣、籩豆之事、則有司存。
        CHAP. IV. 1. The philosopher Tsang being ill, Meng Chang
went to ask how he was.
        2. Tsang said to him, 'When a bird is about to die, its
notes are mournful; when a man is about to die, his words are
good.
        3. 'There are three principles of conduct which the man of
high rank should consider specially important:-- that in his
deportment and manner he keep from violence and
heedlessness; that in regulating his countenance he keep near
to sincerity; and that in his words and tones he keep far from
lowness and impropriety. As to such matters as attending to
the sacrificial vessels, there are the proper officers for them.'

【第五章】曾子曰、以能問於不能、以多問於寡、有若無、實若處、犯而不
校、昔者吾友、嘗從事於斯矣。
【第六章】曾子曰、可以託六尺之孤、可以寄百里之命、臨大節、而不可奪
也、君子人與、君子人也。
【第七章】【一節】曾子曰、士、不可以不弘毅、任重而道遠。【二節】仁
以為己
        CHAP. V. The philosopher Tsang said, 'Gifted with ability,
and yet putting questions to those who were not so; possessed
of much, and yet putting questions to those possessed of little;
having, as though he had not; full, and yet counting himself as
empty; offended against, and yet entering into no altercation;
formerly I had a friend who pursued this style of conduct.'
        CHAP. VI. The philosopher Tsang said, 'Suppose that there
is an individual who can be entrusted with the charge of a
young orphan prince, and can be commissioned with authority
over a state of a hundred li, and whom no emergency however
great can drive from his principles:-- is such a man a superior
man? He is a superior man indeed.'
        CHAP. VII. 1. The philosopher Tsang said, 'The officer
may not be without breadth of mind and vigorous endurance.
His burden is heavy and his course is long.

任、不亦重乎、死而後已、不亦遠乎。
【第八章】【一節】子曰、興於詩。【二節】立於禮。【三節】成於樂。
【第九章】子曰、民可使由之、不可使知之。
【第十章】子曰、好勇疾貧、亂也、人而不仁、疾之已甚、亂也。
        2. 'Perfect virtue is the burden which he considers it is
his to sustain;-- is it not heavy? Only with death does his
course stop;-- is it not long?
        CHAP. VIII. 1. The Master said, 'It is by the Odes that the
mind is aroused.
        2. 'It is by the Rules of Propriety that the character is
established.
        3. 'It is from Music that the finish is received.'
        CHAP. IX. The Master said, 'The people may be made to
follow a path of action, but they may not be made to
understand it.'
        CHAP. X. The Master said, 'The man who is fond of daring
and is dissatisfied with poverty, will proceed to
insubordination. So will the man who is not virtuous, when you
carry your dislike of him to an extreme.'

子曰、如有周公之才之美、使驕且吝、其餘不足觀也已。
【十二章】子曰、三年學、不至於穀、不易得也。
【十三章】【一節】子曰、篤信好學、守死善道。【二節】危邦不入、亂邦
不居、天下有道則見、無道則隱。【三節】邦有道、貧且賤焉、恥也、邦無
道、富且貴焉、恥也。
        CHAP. XI. The Master said, 'Though a man have abilities
as admirable as those of the Duke of Chau, yet if he be proud
and niggardly, those other things are really not worth being
looked at.'
        CHAP. XII. The Master said, 'It is not easy to find a man
who has learned for three years without coming to be good.'
        CHAP. XIII. 1. The Master said, 'With sincere faith he
unites the love of learning; holding firm to death, he is
perfecting the excellence of his course.
        2. 'Such an one will not enter a tottering State, nor dwell
in a disorganized one. When right principles of government
prevail in the kingdom, he will show himself; when they are
prostrated, he will keep concealed.
        3. 'When a country is well-governed, poverty and a mean
condition are things to be ashamed of. When a country is ill-
governed, riches and honour are things to be ashamed of.'

【十四章】子曰、不在其位、不謀其政。
【十五章】子曰、師摯之始、關睢之亂、洋洋乎盈耳哉。
【十六章】子曰、狂而不直、侗而不愿、悾悾而不信、吾不知之矣。
【十七章】子曰、學如不及、猶恐失之。
【十八章】子曰、巍巍乎、舜禹之
        CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'He who is not in any
particular office, has nothing to do with plans for the
administration of its duties.'
        CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'When the music master Chih
first entered on his office, the finish of the Kwan Tsu was
magnificent;-- how it filled the ears!'
        CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'Ardent and yet not upright;
stupid and yet not attentive; simple and yet not sincere:-- such
persons I do not understand.'
        CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'Learn as if you could not
reach your object, and were always fearing also lest you should
lose it.'
        CHAP. XVIII. The Master said, 'How majestic was the
manner in which Shun and Yu held possession of the empire, as
if it were nothing to them!'

有天下也、而不與焉。
【十九章】【一節】子曰、大哉、堯之為君也、巍巍乎、唯天為大、唯堯則
之、蕩蕩乎、民無能名焉。【二節】巍巍乎、其有成功也、煥乎、其有文章。
【二十章】【一節】舜有臣五人、而天下治。【二節】武王曰、予有亂臣十
人。【三節】孔子曰、才難、不其然乎、唐虞之際、於斯為盛、
        CHAP. XIX. 1. The Master said, 'Great indeed was Yao as a
sovereign! How majestic was he! It is only Heaven that is
grand, and only Yao corresponded to it. How vast was his
virtue! The people could find no name for it.
        2. 'How majestic was he in the works which he
accomplished! How glorious in the elegant regulations which he
instituted!'
        CHAP. XX. 1. Shun had five ministers, and the empire was
well-governed.
        2. King Wu said, 'I have ten able ministers.'
        3. Confucius said, 'Is not the saying that talents are
difficult to find, true? Only when the dynasties of T'ang and Yu
met, were they more abundant than in this of Chau, yet there
was a woman among them. The able ministers were no more
than nine men.

有婦人焉、九人而已【四節】三分天下有其二、以服事殷、周之德、其可謂
至德也已矣。
【廿一章】子曰、禹吾無間然矣、菲飲食、而致孝乎鬼神、惡衣服、而致美
乎黻冕、卑宮室、而盡力乎溝恤、禹吾無間然矣。
        4. 'King Wan possessed two of the three parts of the
empire, and with those he served the dynasty of Yin. The
virtue of the house of Chau may be said to have reached the
highest point indeed.'
        CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'I can find no flaw in the
character of Yu. He used himself coarse food and drink, but
displayed the utmost filial piety towards the spirits. His
ordinary garments were poor, but he displayed the utmost
elegance in his sacrificial cap and apron. He lived in a low mean
house, but expended all his strength on the ditches and water-
channels. I can find nothing like a flaw in Yu.'

子罕第九