BOOK X. HEANG TANG.

【第一章】【一節】孔子於鄉黨、恂恂如也、似不能言者。【二節】其在宗
廟朝廷、便便然、唯謹爾。
【第二章】【一節】朝、與下大夫言、侃侃如也、與上大夫言、誾誾如也。
【二節】君在、踧踖如也、與與如也。
        CHAP. I. 1. Confucius, in his village, looked simple and
sincere, and as if he were not able to speak.
        2. When he was in the prince's ancestorial temple, or in
the court, he spoke minutely on every point, but cautiously.
        CHAP II. 1. When he was waiting at court, in speaking
with the great officers of the lower grade, he spake freely, but
in a straightforward manner; in speaking with those of the
higher grade, he did so blandly, but precisely.
        2. When the ruler was present, his manner displayed
respectful uneasiness; it was grave, but self-possessed.

【第三章】【一節】 君召使擯、色勃如也、足躩如也。【二節】揖所與立、
左右手、衣前後、檐如也。【三節】趨進、翼如也。【四節】賓退、必復命
曰、賓不顧矣。
【第四章】【一節】入公門、鞠
        CHAP. III. 1. When the prince called him to employ him
in the reception of a visitor, his countenance appeared to
change, and his legs to move forward with difficulty.
        2. He inclined himself to the other officers among whom
he stood, moving his left or right arm, as their position
required, but keeping the skirts of his robe before and behind
evenly adjusted.
        3. He hastened forward, with his arms like the wings of a
bird.
        4. When the guest had retired, he would report to the
prince, 'The visitor is not turning round any more.'
        CHAP. IV. 1. When he entered the palace gate, he seemed
to bend his body, as if it were not sufficient to admit him.

躬如也、如不容。【二節】立不中門、行不履閾。【三節】過位、色勃如也、
足躩如也、其言似不足者。【四節】攝齊升堂、鞠躬如也、屏氣似不息者。
【五節】出、降一等、逞顏色、怡怡如也、沒階、趨進、翼如也、復其位、
踧踖如也。
【第五章】【一節】執圭、鞠躬如也、如
        2. When he was standing, he did not occupy the middle of
the gate-way; when he passed in or out, he did not tread upon
the threshold.
        3. When he was passing the vacant place of the prince,
his countenance appeared to change, and his legs to bend under
him, and his words came as if he hardly had breath to utter
them.
        4. He ascended the reception hall, holding up his robe
with both his hands, and his body bent; holding in his breath
also, as if he dared not breathe.
        5. When he came out from the audience, as soon as he
had descended one step, he began to relax his countenance, and
had a satisfied look. When he had got to the bottom of the
steps, he advanced rapidly to his place, with his arms like
wings, and on occupying it, his manner still showed respectful
uneasiness.
        CHAP. V. 1. When he was carrying the scepter of his
ruler, he seemed to bend his body, as if he were not able to
bear its weight. He did not hold it higher than the position of
the hands in making

不勝、上如揖、下如授、勃如戰色、足蹜蹜如有循。【二節】享禮、有容色。
【三節】私覿、愉愉如也
【第六章】【一節】君子不以紺緅飾。【二節】紅紫不以為褻服。【三節】
當暑袗絺綌、必表而出之。【四節】緇衣羔裘、素衣麑裘、黃衣
a bow, nor lower than their position in giving anything to
another. His countenance seemed to change, and look
apprehensive, and he dragged his feet along as if they were
held by something to the ground.
        2. In presenting the presents with which he was charged,
he wore a placid appearance.
        3. At his private audience, he looked highly pleased.
        CHAP. VI. 1. The superior man did not use a deep purple,
or a puce colour, in the ornaments of his dress.
        2. Even in his undress, he did not wear anything of a red
or reddish colour.
        3. In warm weather, he had a single garment either of
coarse or fine texture, but he wore it displayed over an inner
garment.
        4. Over lamb's fur he wore a garment of black; over
fawn's fur one of white; and over fox's fur one of yellow.

狐裘。【五節】褻裘長、短右袂。【六節】必有寢衣、長一身有半。【七節】
狐貉之厚以居。【八節】去喪、無所不佩。【九節】非帷裳、必殺之。【十
節】羔裘玄冠不以弔。【十一節】吉月、必朝服而朝。
        5. The fur robe of his undress was long, with the right
sleeve short.
        6. He required his sleeping dress to be half as long again
as his body.
        7. When staying at home, he used thick furs of the fox or
the badger.
        8. When he put off mourning, he wore all the appendages
of the girdle.
        9. His under-garment, except when it was required to be
of the curtain shape, was made of silk cut narrow above and
wide below.
        10. He did not wear lamb's fur or a black cap, on a visit of
condolence.
        11. On the first day of the month he put on his court
robes, and presented himself at court.

【第七章】【一節】齊、必有明衣、布。【二節】齊必變食、居必遷坐。
【第八章】【一節】食不厭精、膾不厭細。【二節】食饐而餲、魚餒而肉敗、
不食、色惡不食、臭惡不食、失飪不食、不時不食。【三節】割不正不食、
不得其醬不食。【四節】肉雖多、不使勝食氣、惟酒無量、不及亂。【五節】
沽酒
        CHAP. VII. 1. When fasting, he thought it necessary to
have his clothes brightly clean and made of linen cloth.
        2. When fasting, he thought it necessary to change his
food, and also to change the place where he commonly sat in
the apartment.
        CHAP. VIII. 1. He did not dislike to have his rice finely
cleaned, nor to have his minced meat cut quite small.
        2. He did not eat rice which had been injured by heat or
damp and turned sour, nor fish or flesh which was gone. He did
not eat what was discoloured, or what was of a bad flavour, nor
anything which was ill-cooked, or was not in season.
        3. He did not eat meat which was not cut properly, nor
what was served without its proper sauce.
        4. Though there might be a large quantity of meat, he
would not allow what he took to exceed the due proportion for
the rice. It was only in wine that he laid down no limit for
himself, but he did not allow himself to be confused by it.
        5. He did not partake of wine and dried meat bought in
the market.

市脯不食。【六節】不撤薑食。【七節】不多食。【八節】祭於公、不宿肉。
祭肉不出三日、出三日、不食之矣。【九節】食不語、寢不言。【十節】雖
疏食菜羹、瓜祭、必齊如也。
【第九章】席不正不坐。
【第十章】【一節】鄉人飲酒、杖者出、斯出矣。【二節】鄉人儺、朝服而
立於阼階。
        6. He was never without ginger when he ate.
        7. He did not eat much.
        8. When he had been assisting at the prince's sacrifice, he
did not keep the flesh which he received overnight. The flesh
of his family sacrifice he did not keep over three days. If kept
over three days, people could not eat it.
        9. When eating, he did not converse. When in bed, he did
not speak.
        10. Although his food might be coarse rice and vegetable
soup, he would offer a little of it in sacrifice with a grave,
respectful air.
        CHAP. IX. If his mat was not straight, he did not sit on it.
        CHAP. X. 1. When the villagers were drinking together, on
those who carried staffs going out, he went out immediately
after.
        2. When the villagers were going through their
ceremonies to drive away pestilential influences, he put on his
court robes and stood on the eastern steps.

【十一章】【一節】問人於他邦、再拜而送之。【二節】康子饋藥、拜而受
之、曰、丘未達、不敢嘗。
【十二章】廄焚、子退朝、曰、傷人乎、不問馬。
【十三章】【一節】君賜食、必正席、先嘗之、君賜腥、必熟而薦之、君賜
生、必畜之。【二節】侍食於君、
        CHAP. XI. 1. When he was sending complimentary
inquiries to any one in another State, he bowed twice as he
escorted the messenger away.
        2. Chi K'ang having sent him a present of physic, he
bowed and received it, saying, 'I do not know it. I dare not
taste it.'
        CHAP. XII. The stable being burned down, when he was
at court, on his return he said, 'Has any man been hurt?' He did
not ask about the horses.
        CHAP. XIII. 1. When the prince sent him a gift of cooked
meat, he would adjust his mat, first taste it, and then give it
away to others. When the prince sent him a gift of undressed
meat, he would have it cooked, and offer it to the spirits of his
ancestors. When the prince sent him a gift of a living animal, he
would keep it alive.
        2. When he was in attendance on the prince and joining
in the entertainment, the prince only sacrificed. He first tasted
everything.

君祭、先飯。【三節】疾、君視之、東首、加朝服拖紳。【四節】君命召、
不俟駕行矣。
【十四章】入大廟每事問。
【十五章】【一節】朋友死、無所歸、曰、於我殯。【二節】朋友之饋、雖
車馬、非祭肉不拜。
【十六章】【一節】寢不尸、居不容。【二節】見齊衰者、雖狎必變、見冕
者、與瞽者、雖褻必以貌。【三節】凶
        3. When he was ill and the prince came to visit him, he
had his head to the east, made his court robes be spread over
him, and drew his girdle across them.
        4. When the prince's order called him, without waiting for
his carriage to be yoked, he went at once.
        CHAP. XIV. When he entered the ancestral temple of the
State, he asked about everything.
        CHAP. XV. 1. When any of his friends died, if he had no
relations who could be depended on for the necessary offices,
he would say, 'I will bury him.'
        2. When a friend sent him a present, though it might be a
carriage and horses, he did not bow.
        3. The only present for which he bowed was that of the
flesh of sacrifice.
        CHAP. XVI. 1. In bed, he did not lie like a corpse. At
home, he did not put on any formal deportment.
        2. When he saw any one in a mourning dress, though it
might be an acquaintance, he would change countenance; when
he saw any one wearing the cap of full dress, or a blind person,
though he might be in his undress, he would salute them in a
ceremonious manner.

服者式之、式負版者。【四節】有盛饌、必變色而作。【五節】迅雷、風烈、
必變。
【十七章】【一節】升車、必正立、執綏。【二節】車中、不內顧、不疾言、
不親指。
【十八章】【一節】色斯舉矣、翔而後集。【二節】曰、山梁雌雉、時哉時
哉。子路共之、三嗅而作。
        3. To any person in mourning he bowed forward to the
crossbar of his carriage; he bowed in the same way to any one
bearing the tables of population.
        4. When he was at an entertainment where there was an
abundance of provisions set before him, he would change
countenance and rise up.
        5. On a sudden clap of thunder, or a violent wind, he
would change countenance.
        CHAP. XVII. 1. When he was about to mount his carriage,
he would stand straight, holding the cord.
        2. When he was in the carriage, he did not turn his head
quite round, he did not talk hastily, he did not point with his
hands.
        CHAP. XVIII. 1. Seeing the countenance, it instantly rises.
It flies round, and by and by settles.
        2. The Master said, 'There is the hen-pheasant on the hill
bridge. At its season! At its season!' Tsze-lu made a motion to
it. Thrice it smelt him and then rose.

先進第十一