Now when the Shah came nigh unto the city, Kai Kaous went forth to

meet him, and he prostrated him in the dust before his son. But Kai

Khosrau suffered it not, but raised him, and he kissed him upon his

cheeks, and he took his hand, and he told unto him of all the wonders

that he had beheld upon his travels, and of the mighty deeds that

had been done of Rustem and his men. And Kai Kaous was filled with

marvel at his grandson, and he could not cease from praising him and

pouring gifts before his face. And when they had feasted the army,

and were sated with speech, they went in unto the temple of Ormuzd

and gave thanks unto God for all His blessings.

Now while these things were passing in the land of Iran, Afrasiyab

wandered over the earth, and he knew neither rest nor nourishment.

And his soul was unquiet, and his body was weary, and he feared danger

on all sides. And he roamed till that he found a cavern in the side

of a mountain, and he crept into it for rest. And he remained a while

within the cave pondering his evil deeds, and his heart was filled

with repentance. And he prayed aloud unto God that He would grant

him forgiveness of his sins, and the cries of his sorrow rent the

air.

Now the sound thereof pierced even unto the ears of Houm, a hermit

of the race of Feridoun, who had taken up his abode in the mountains.

And Houm, when he heard the cries, said within himself, "These are

lamentations of Afrasiyab." So he sought out the spot whence they

came forth, and when he had found Afrasiyab he wrestled with him and

caught him in his snare. Then he bound him, and led him even into

Iran before the face of Kai Khosrau, that the Shah might deal with

him according to his desire.

Now when Afrasiyab was come before the Shah, Kai Khosrau reproached

him yet again with his vile deeds. And when he had done speaking,

he lifted up his sword and he smote with it the neck of Afrasiyab,

and he severed his head from off his trunk, even as Afrasiyab had

done unto Saiawush, his father. And thus was the throne of Turan made

void of Afrasiyab, and his evil deeds had in the end brought evil

upon himself. And Gersiwaz, whom the Shah had taken captive in the

battle, was witness of the fate of his brother. And when he had looked

upon the end of Afrasiyab, Kai Khosrau lifted up the sword against

him also, and caused him to perish in like manner as he had slain

Saiawush.

And when it was done, and the vengeance was complete, the Shah caused

a writing to be sent unto all his lands, and to every noble therein

and every vassal, even from the west unto the east. And he told unto

them therein how that the war of vengeance was ended, and how that

the earth was delivered of the serpent brood. And he bade them think

on the arts of peace and deliver up their hearts to gladness. And

when it was done Kai Kaous made him ready to depart from the world.

So he gave thanks unto God that He had suffered him to see the avenging

of Saiawush accomplished, and he said-