"This thing which thou relatest unto us, it is not right, and if there

be a son so evil, let him be put into chains and cast in bondage."

Then Gushtasp said, "Let Isfendiyar be put into chains."

And Isfendiyar opened his mouth in vain before his father, for Gushtasp

would not listen unto his voice. So they cast him out into a dungeon,

and chains of weight were hung upon him, and the daylight came not

nigh unto him, neither did joy enter into his heart. And he languished

many years, and the heart of the Shah was not softened towards him.

Now when Arjasp learned that the might of Isfendiyar was fettered,

and that Gushtasp was given over to pleasures, he gathered together

an army to fall into Iran and avenge the defeat that was come upon

his hosts. So he fell upon Balkh before any were aware of it and he

put to death Lohurasp the Shah and he made captive the daughters of

Gushtasp. And Arjasp threw fire into the temples of Zerdusht and did

much destruction unto the city and it was some while ere Gushtasp

learned that which he had done. But when he had news thereof he was

dismayed, and he called together his army and put himself at their

head. But the Turanians were mightier than he, and they routed him

utterly, and Gushtasp fled before their face. Then the Shah called

together his nobles, and consulted with them how he should act in

these sore straits. And one among them who was wise above the rest

said-

"I counsel thee that thou release Isfendiyar, thy son, and that thou

give to him the command, for he alone can deliver the land."

And Gushtasp said, "I will do as thou sayest, and if Isfendiyar shall

deliver us from this foe, I will abandon unto him the throne and the

crown."

Then he sent messengers unto Isfendiyar that they should unbind his

chains. But Isfendiyar, when they came before him, closed ear unto

their voice. And he said-

"My father hath kept me in bondage until he hath need of me. Why therefore

should I weary me in his cause? I will not go unto his aid."

Then the men reasoned with him, and they told unto him how it had

been revealed unto Gushtasp that the words spoken of Gurjam were false,

and that he had sworn that he would deliver this man of false words

unto the vengeance of his son. But Isfendiyar was deaf yet again to

their voice. Then one spake and said-

"Thou knowest not that thy brother is in bondage unto Arjasp. Surely

it behoveth thee to deliver him."

When Isfendiyar heard these words he sprang unto his feet, and he

commanded that the chains be struck from off his limbs. And because

the men were slow, he was angered, and shook himself mightily, so

that the fetters fell down at his feet. Then he made haste to go before

his father. And peace was made between them on that day, and Gushtasp

sware a great oath that he would give the throne unto Isfendiyar when

he should return unto him victorious.