Then Kai Khosrau said, "My mother hath told me of the things which

she learned of my father. For I am son unto Saiawush, and before he

entered upon death he foretold unto Ferangis how Gew would come forth

from Iran to lead me unto the throne."

Then Gew said, "Prove unto me thy words. Suffer that mine eyes behold

the mark of the Kaianides which thou bearest about thy body."

Then Kai Khosrau uncovered his arm, and when Gew looked upon the mark

that was borne of all the royal house since the time of Kai Kobad,

he fell down upon the ground and did homage before this youth. But

Kai Khosrau raised him from the dust and embraced him, and questioned

him concerning his journey and the hardships he had passed through.

Then Gew mounted the young King upon his charger, and he walked before

him bearing an Indian sword unsheathed in his hand. And they journeyed

until they came to the city that Saiawush had builded.

Now when Ferangis saw them she received them joyfully, for her quick

spirit divined what was come to pass. But she counselled them to tarry

not in whatsoever they would do. For she said-

"When Afrasiyab shall learn of this he will neither eat nor sleep,

he will send out an army against us. Let us flee, therefore, before

he cometh. And listen now unto the words that I shall speak. Go forth

unto the mountain that is raised unto the clouds, and take with thee

a saddle and a bridle. And when thou shalt have scaled its crest thou

wilt behold a meadow green as a paradise, and browsing upon it the

flocks of Saiawush. And in their midst will be Behzah the steed of

battle. Go nigh unto him, my son, and embrace him, and whisper thy

name into his ear; and when he shall have heard it he will suffer

thee to mount him, and seated upon him thou shalt escape from the

slayer of thy father."

Then Gew and Kai Khosrau went out and did as Ferangis told unto them;

and they found the steed, and when Behzah beheld the saddle of Saiawush

and the leopard-skin he had worn, he sighed, and his eyes were filled

with tears. Then he suffered Kai Khosrau to mount him, and they turned

back unto Ferangis. And she chose forth the armour of Saiawush from

among her treasures and gave it to her son, and she clad herself in

mail of Roum like unto a warrior, and she sprang upon a horse of battle,

and when all was done they set forth to fly from the land of Afrasiyab.

Now one brought tidings unto Piran of these things, and he was dismayed

thereat, for he said-

"Now will be accomplished the fears of Afrasiyab, and mine honour

will be tarnished in his eyes."

So he bade Kelbad and three hundred valiant knights pursue Kai Khosrau

and bind him and bring him back in chains.