But Bahman grew up in the courts of Rustem, and the Pehliva guarded

him like to a son.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE DEATH OF RUSTEM

How shall a man escape from that which is written; How shall he flee

from his destiny?

There stood a slave in the house of Zal, and she was fair to see,

so that the heart of the aged man went out to her. And there was born

to her a son, goodly of mien, like unto Saum the hero, and Zal named

him Shugdad. Then he consulted the Mubids concerning him, and they

searched the stars for his destiny, and they read therein that he

would do much evil in the house of his father, and lay low the race

of Saum, the son of Neriman. Now Zal, when he heard this, was sore

afflicted, and he prayed unto God that He would avert this fate from

his head. And he reared him tenderly, and when he was come unto man's

estate he sent him forth into Cabul. And the King of Cabul rejoiced

in the sight of the hero, and he kept him beside him and gave unto

him his daughter to wife.

Now the King of Cabul paid tribute unto Rustem, and it was a grievance

to him to do so, and since he had taken Shugdad as his son he deemed

that it was fitting that he should be relieved of this burden. And

he spake thereof unto Shugdad, and said how Rustem ceased not to demand

it.

And Shugdad said, "This man is foolish. What mattereth it whether

he be my brother or a stranger, let us consider how we may ensnare

him."

So Shugdad and the King of Cabul passed a night pondering how they

should bring Rustem unto destruction. And Shugdad said-

"Call together thy nobles unto a feast, and when thou shalt have drunk

wine, speak insults unto me, and I will be angered and ride forth

unto Zaboulistan and make plaint of thee before Rustem, and assuredly

he will come forth to avenge me. And while I am gone, cause a deep

pit to be dug on the road that Rustem must pass, a pit that will swallow

him and Rakush his steed, and line the sides thereof with sharp spears,

and swords, and lances. And when it is done, cover it with earth and

let no man know thereof, nay, whisper it not even unto the moon."

And the King said, "Thy device is good," and he made a great feast

and called thereto his warriors, and he spake words of insult unto

Shugdad, and he reproached him, and said that he was not of the race

of Saum, but son unto a slave. And he said that Rudabeh would refuse

to him the name of brother unto Rustem. And he spake lightly also

of Rustem. Then Shugdad uprose as though he were angered, and vowed

that he would ride unto Zaboulistan and call forth Rustem to avenge

the words that the King had spoken.