And Piran consented unto the desires of Afrasiyab, and he rejoiced

because he had spared the babe. Then he took the infant from its mother

and bare it unto the mountains of Kalun, and confided the boy unto

the shepherds of the flocks. And he said-

"Guard this child even as your souls, so that neither rain nor dust

come near him."

Thus it came about that no man knew of the babe, neither did Ferangis

know whither it was vanished. But oftentimes was Piran sore disturbed

in his spirit, for he knew that the beginning of strife was yet to

come, and that much evil must befall Turan from this infant. Yet he

forgot not his promise of protection given unto Saiawush his friend,

whom he had led to put his trust in Afrasiyab. So he quieted his spirit

from thinking, for he knew that no man can change the course of the

stars.

Now when some time was passed the shepherds came out to Piran and

told him how they could not restrain this boy, whose valour was like

to that of a king. Then Piran went forth to visit Kai Khosrau, and

he was amazed when he looked upon him and beheld his beauty and his

strength, and he pressed him unto his heart with tenderness. Then

Kai Khosrau said-

"O thou that bearest high thy head, art thou not ashamed to press

unto thee the son of a shepherd? "

But Piran was inflamed with love for the boy, so he pondered not his

words, but said-

"O heir of kings, thou art not the son of a shepherd." Then he told

him of his birth, and clad him in robes befitting his station, and

took him back with him unto his house. And henceforward was Kai Khosrau

reared in the bosom of Piran and of Ferangis his mother. And the days

rolled above their heads in happiness.

Then it came about one night that Piran was awakened by a messenger

from Afrasiyab the King. And the King bade Piran come before him.

And when he was come unto him, he said-

"My heart is disquieted because of the child of Saiawush, and I repent

me of my weakness which kept him alive; for in my dreams I have beheld

that he will do much evil unto Turan. Wherefore I would now slay him

to avert calamity."

Then Piran, wise in counsel, opened his mouth before Afrasiyab and

spake, saying-

"O King, disquiet not thyself because of this boy, for he is devoid

of wit; and though his face be like unto that of a Peri, his head,

which should bear a crown, is empty of reason. Commit, therefore,

no violence, but suffer that this innocent continue to dwell among

the flocks."

Afrasiyab, when he had listened to these words of wile, was comforted;

yet he said-

"Send Kai Khosrau before me, that I may behold with mine eyes his

simplicity."

And Piran assented to his request, because he ventured not to gainsay

it. So he returned him unto his house and sought out the boy, and

told him how he should disguise his wit before the King. Then he led

him unto the court mounted upon a goodly charger, and all the people

shouted when they beheld his beauty and his kingly mien. And Afrasiyab

too was confounded at his aspect, and he gazed with wonder at his

limbs of power, and he strove to remember the promise that he had

given unto Piran that he would not hurt a hair of the head of this

boy. Then he began to question him that he might search his spirit.

And he said-