The Peri-faced, when she had heard these words, was glad in his presence.

But when the day was passed there came in unto them the King her father,

and he told Rustem how that tidings of Rakush were come unto his ears,

and how that the courser would shortly be within the gates. And Rustem,

when he heard it, was filled with longing after his steed, and when

he knew that he was come he hastened forth to caress him. And with

his own hands he fastened the saddle, and gave thanks unto Ormuzd,

who had restored his joy between his hands. Then he knew that the

time to depart was come. And he opened his arms and took unto his

heart Tahmineh the fair of face, and he bathed her cheek with his

tears and covered her hair with kisses. Then he flung him upon Rakush,

and the swift-footed bare him quickly from out of her sight. And Tahmineh

was sorrowful exceedingly, and Rustem too was filled with thoughts

as he turned him back into Zaboulistan. And he pondered this adventure

in his heart, but to no man did he speak of what he had seen or done.

Now when nine moons had run their course there was born unto Tahmineh

a son in the likeness of his father, a babe whose mouth was filled

with smiles, wherefore men called him Sohrab. And when he numbered

but one month he was like unto a child of twelve, and when he numbered

five years he was skilled in arms and all the arts of war, and when

ten years were rolled above his head there was none in the land that

could resist him in the games of strength. Then he came before his

mother and spake words of daring. And he said-

"Since I am taller and stouter than my peers, teach unto me my race

and lineage, and what I shall say when men ask me the name of my sire.

But if thou refuse an answer unto my demands, I will strike thee out

from the rolls of the living."

When Tahmineh beheld the ardour of her son, she smiled in her spirit

because that his fire was like to that of his father. And she opened

her mouth and said-

"Hear my words, O my son, and be glad in thine heart, neither give

way in thy spirit to anger. For thou art the offspring of Rustem,

thou art descended from the seed of Saum and Zal, and Neriman was

thy forefather. And since God made the world it hath held none like

unto Rustem, thy sire."

Then she showed to him a letter written by the Pehliva, and gave to

him the gold and jewels Rustem had sent at his birth. And she spake

and said-

"Cherish these gifts with gratitude, for it is thy father who hath

sent them. Yet remember, O my son, that thou close thy lips concerning

these things; for Turan groaneth under the hand of Afrasiyab, and

he is foe unto Rustem the glorious. If, therefore, he should learn

of thee, he would seek to destroy the son for hatred of the sire.

Moreover, O my boy, if Rustem learned that thou wert become a mountain

of valour, perchance he would demand thee at my hands, and the sorrow

of thy loss would crush the heart of thy mother."