And soon the battle raged hot and strong many days, and deeds of valour

were done on either side; but the men of Turan could not stand against

the men of Iran, neither could the strength of Rustem be broken. For

he put forth the power of a lion, and his shadow extended for miles.

And from that day men named him Tehemten (which being interpreted,

meaneth the strong-limbed), for he did deeds of prowess in the sight

of men. And Afrasiyab was discomfited, and fled before him, and his

army followed after, and their hearts were bruised and full of care.

But the Iranians, when they beheld that their foes had vanished before

them, turned them unto Kai Kobad and did homage before his throne.

And Kai Kobad celebrated the victory with much pomp, as is the manner

of kings; and he placed Rustem upon his right hand and Zal upon his

left, and they feasted and made them merry with wine.

In the meantime Afrasiyab returned him unto Poshang his father, who

was of the race of Tur. And he came before him right sorrowful and

spake, saying-

"O King, whose name is glorious, thou didst evil to provoke this war.

The land which Feridoun the great did give in ancient time unto Tur

the valiant, it hath been delivered unto thee, and the partition was

just. Why, therefore, seekest thou to enlarge thy border? Verily I

say, if thou haste not to make peace with Iran, Kai Kobad will send

out against us an army from the four quarters of the earth, and they

will subdue us, and by our own act we shall make the land too narrow

for us. For the world is not delivered of the race of Irij, and the

noxious poison hath not been converted into honey. For when one dieth

another taketh his place, and never do they leave the world without

a master. And there is arisen of the race of Saum a warrior called

Rustem, and none can withstand him. He hath broken the power of thine

host, and the world hath not seen his like for stoutness; and withal

he is but little more than a weanling. Ponder therefore, O King, how

shall it be when he may be come to years of vigour. Surely I am a

man who desireth to possess the world, the stay of thine army, and

thy refuge in danger, but before this boy my power fadeth like unto

the mists that rise above the hills."

When the King of Turan had listened to these words, the tears of bitterness

fell from his eyes. Then he called before him a scribe and he bade

him write a letter unto Kai Kobad, the Shah. And the scribe adorned

it with many colours and fair designs. And the scribe wrote-

"In the name of Ormuzd, the ruler of the sun and moon, greeting and

salutation unto Kai Kobad the gracious from the meanest of his servants.

Listen unto me, O valiant Shah, and ponder the words that I shall

write. May grace fall upon the soul of Feridoun, who wove the woof

of our race! Why should we any longer hold the world in confusion?

That which he fixed, surely it was right, for he parted the world

with equity, and we do wrong before him when we depart from the grooves

that he hath shaped. I pray thee, therefore, let us no longer speak

of Tur and his evil acts unto Irij, for if Irij was the cause of our

hates, surely by Minuchihr hath he been avenged. Let us return, then,

within the bounds that Feridoun hath blest, and let us part the world

anew, as it was parted for Tur, and Selim, and Irij. For wherefore

should we seek the land of another, since in the end each will receive

in heritage a spot no larger than his body? If then Kai Kobad will

listen unto my prayer, let the Jihun be the boundary between us, and

none of my people shall behold its waters, nay, not even in a dream,

neither shall any Iranian cross its floods, save only in amity."