"O Shah of birds, O bird of God, who confoundest the wicked, mayst

thou be great for ever."

But while he yet spake the Simurgh flew upwards, and the gaze of Saum

was fixed upon his son. And as he looked he saw that he was worthy

of the throne, and that there was neither fault nor blemish in him,

save only his silvery locks. Then his heart rejoiced within him, and

he blessed him, and entreated his forgiveness. And he said-

"O my son, open thine heart unto the meanest of God's servants, and

I swear unto thee, in the presence of Him that made us, that never

again will I harden my heart towards thee, and that I will grant unto

thee all thy desires."

Then he clothed him in rich robes and named him Zal, which being interpreted

meaneth the aged. And he showed him unto the army. And when they had

looked on the youth they saw that he was goodly of visage and of limb,

and they shouted for very joy. Then the host made them ready to return

unto Seistan. And the kettle-drummers rode at their head, mounted

upon mighty elephants whose feet raised a cloud of dust that rose

unto the sky. And the tabors were beat, and the trumpets brayed, and

the cymbals clashed, and sounds of rejoicing filled the land because

that Saum had found his son, and that Zal was a hero among men.

Now the news spread even unto Minuchihr that Saum was returning from

the mountains with great pomp and joy. And when he had heard it he

bade Nuder go forth to meet the Pehliva and bid him bring Zal unto

the court. And when Saum heard the desires of his master he obeyed

and came within his gates. Then he beheld the Shah seated upon the

throne of the Kaianides, bearing his crown upon his head, and on his

right hand sat Karun the Pehliva, and he bade Saum be seated on his

left. And the Shah commanded Saum that he should speak. Then Saum

unbosomed himself before the Shah and spake concerning his son, neither

did he hide his evil deed. And Minuchihr commanded that Zal be brought

before him. So the chamberlains brought him into the presence of the

King, and he was clad in robes of splendour, and the King was amazed

at his aspect. And he turned and said unto Saum-

"O Pehliva of the world, the Shah enjoineth you have a care of this

noble youth, and guard him for the land of Iran. And teach him forthwith

the arts of war, and the pleasures and customs of the banquet, for

how should one that hath been reared in a nest be familiar with our

ways?

Then the Shah bade the Mubids cast Zal's horoscope, and they read

that he would be a brave and prudent knight. Now when he had heard

this the Pehliva was relieved of all his fears, and the Shah rejoiced

and covered Saum with gifts. Arab horses did he give unto him with

golden saddles, Indian swords in scabbards of gold, brocades of Roum,

skins of beasts, and carpets of Ind, and the rubies and pearls were

past the numbering. And slaves poured musk and amber before him. And

Minuchihr also granted to Saum a throne, and a crown and a girdle

of gold, and he named him ruler of all the lands that stretch from

the Sea of China to that of Sind, from Zaboulistan to the Caspian.

Then he bade that the Pehliva's horse be led forth, and sent him away

from his presence. And Saum called down blessings upon the Shah, and

turned his face towards home. And his train followed after him, and

the sound of music went before them.