Now while the hero was sleeping there passed by seven knights of Turan,

and they beheld Rakush and coveted him. So they threw their cords

at him to ensnare him. But Rakush, when he beheld their design, pawed

the ground in anger, and fell upon them as he had fallen upon the

lion. And of one man he bit off the head, and another he struck down

under his hoofs, and he would have overcome them all, but they were

too many. So they ensnared him and led him into the city, thinking

in their hearts, "Verily a goodly capture have we made." But Rustem

when he awoke from his slumbers was downcast and sore grieved when

he saw not his steed, and he said unto himself-

"How can I stand against the Turks, and how can I traverse the desert

alone?"

And his heart was full of trouble. Then he sought for the traces of

the horse's hoofs, and he followed them, and they led him even unto

the gates of the city. Now when those within beheld Rustem, and that

he came before them on foot, the King and the nobles came forth to

greet him, and inquired of him how this was come about. Then Rustem

told them how Rakush was vanished while he slumbered, and how he had

followed his track even unto these gates. And he sware a great oath,

and vowed that if his courser were not restored unto him many heads

should quit their trunks. Then the King of Samengan, when he saw that

Rustem was beside himself with anger, spoke words of soothing, and

said that none of his people should do wrong unto the hero; and he

begged him that he would enter into his house and abide with him until

that search had been made, saying-

"Surely Rakush cannot be hid."

And Rustem was satisfied at these words, and cast suspicion from his

spirit, and entered the house of the King, and feasted with him, and

beguiled the hours with wine. And the King rejoiced in his guest,

and encompassed him with sweet singers and all honour. And when the

night was fallen the King himself led Rustem unto a couch perfumed

with musk and roses, and he bade him slumber sweetly until the morning.

And he declared to him yet again that all was well for him and for

his steed.

Now when a portion of the night was spent, and the star of morning

stood high in the arch of heaven, the door of Rustem's chamber was

opened, and a murmur of soft voices came in from the threshold. And

there stepped within a slave bearing a lamp perfumed with amber, and

a woman whose beauty was veiled came after her. And as she moved musk

was scattered from her robes. And the women came nigh unto the bed

of the hero heavy with wine and slumber. And he was amazed when he

saw them. And when he had roused him somewhat he spake and said-