"They are slaves sent forth by the moon of Cabul into the garden of

flowers."

Now when Zal heard this his heart leaped for joy, and he set forth

unto the river's bank with only one page to bear him company. And

seeing a water-bird fly upwards, he took his bow and shot it through

the heart, and it fell among the rose-gatherers. Then Zal bade the

boy cross the water and bring him the bird. And when he had landed,

the moon-faced women pressed about him and questioned him, saying-

"O youth, tell us the name of him who aimeth thus surely, for verily

he is a king among men."

Then the boy answering said, "What! know ye not the son of Saum the

hero? The world hath not his equal for strength and beauty."

But the girls reproved him, and said, "Not so, boast not thus vainly,

for the house of Mihrab holdeth a sun that o'ershines all besides."

And the page smiled, and the smile yet lingered on his lips when he

came back to Zal. And Zal said-

"Why smilest thou, boy? What have they spoken unto thee that thou

openest thy lips and showest thy ivory teeth? "

Then the boy told unto him the speech of the women. And Zal said-

"Go over yet again and bid them tarry, that they may bear back jewels

with their roses."

And he chose forth from among his treasures trinkets of pearl and

gold, and sent them to the slaves. Then the one who had sworn to serve

Rudabeh above the rest craved that she might look upon the face of

the hero, for she said-

"A secret that is known to three is one no longer."

And Zal granted her desire, and she told him of Rudabeh and of her

beauty, and his passion burned the more. And he spake-

"Show unto me, I pray thee, the path by which I may behold this fair

one, for my heart is filled with longing."

Then the slave said, "Suffer that we go back to the house of the women,

and we will fill the ears of Rudabeh with praises of the son of Saum,

and will entangle her in the meshes of our net, and the lion shall

rejoice in his chase of the lamb."

Then Zal bade her go forth, and the women returned to the house rejoicing

and saying-

"The lion entereth the snare spread forth to entrap him, and the wishes

of Rudabeh and Zal will be accomplished."

But when they were come to the gates the porter chid them that they

were gone without while the stranger sojourned in Cabul, and they

were troubled and sore afraid for their secret. But they stilled his

wrath and came unto where Rudabeh awaited them. And they told her

of Zal, the son of Saum, and of his beauty and his prowess. And Rudabeh

smiled and said-

"Wherefore have ye thus changed your note? For a while back ye spake

with scorn of this bird-reared youth, on whose head hang the locks

of a sage, but now are ye loud in his praises."