And Zal thought again yet a while and answered-

"Two shining horses, one black, one white. That run for ever in rapid

flight; The one is the day, the other the night, That count the throbs

of the heavens height, Like the hunted prey from the following chase

They flee, yet neither wins the race."

Then the third Mubid questioned him and said-

"Thirty knights before the king Pass along. Regard the thing Closely;

one is gone. Again Look- the thirty are in train."

And Zal answered and spake-

"Thirty knights of whom the train Is full, then fails, then fills

again, Know, each moon is reckoned thus, So willed by God who governs

us, And thy word is true of the faint moon's wane, Now failing in

darkness, now shining plain."

Then the fourth Mubid questioned him and said-

"See a green garden full of springs; A strong man with a sickle keen

Enters, and reaps both dry and green; No word thine utmost anguish

wrings."

And Zal bethought him and replied-

"Thy word was of a garden green, A reaper with a sickle keen, Who

cuts alike the fresh and the dry Nor heedeth prayer nor any cry: Time

is the reaper, we the grass; Pity nor fear his spirit has, But old

and young he reaps alike. No rank can stay his sickle's strike, No

love, but he will leave it lorn, For to this end all men are born.

Birth opes to all the gate of Life, Death shuts it down on love and

strife, And Fate, that counts the breath of man, Measures to each

a reckoned span."

Then the fifth Mubid questioned him and said-

"Look how two lofty cypresses Spring up, like reeds, from stormy seas,

There builds a bird his dwelling-place; Upon the one all night he

stays, But swift, with the dawn, across he flies; The abandoned tree

dries up and dies, While that whereon he sets his feet Breathes odours

out, surpassing sweet. The one is dead for ever and aye, The other

lives and blooms alway."

Then Zal yet again bethought him before he said-

"Hear of the sea-born cypresses, Where builds a bird, and rests, and

flees. From the Ram to the Scales the earth o'erpowers, Shadows obscure

of the night that lowers, But when the Scales' sign it must quit,

Darkness and gloom o'ermaster it; The sides of heaven thy fable shows

Whence grief to man or blessing flows, The sun like a bird flies to

and fro, Weal with him bringing, but leaving woe."

Then the sixth Mubid questioned him, and it was the last question

that he asked, and he deemed it the hardest of all to answer. And

all men hung upon his words and listened to the answer of Zal. And

the Mubid said-

"Builded on a rock I found A town. Men left the gate and chose A thicket

on the level ground. Soon their soaring mansions rose Lifting roofs

that reach the moon, Some men slaves, some kings, became, Of their

earlier city soon The memory died in all. Its name None breathed.

But hark! an earthquake; down, Lost in the chasm lies the land- Now

long they for their rock-built town, Enduring things they understand.

Seek in thy soul the truth of this; This before kings proclaim, I

was, If rightly thou the riddle rede, Black earth to musk thou hast

changed indeed."