Now when Shugdad was come unto the courts of Zal, and had told unto

Rustem the words that the King of Cabul had spoken, he was beside

himself with anger, and he said-

"I will slake my vengeance for this speech."

Then he chose out an army and made ready to go into Cabul. But Shugdad

said-

"Wherefore dost thou take forth so large an army? Surely Cabul shall

be obedient when it but looketh upon thy face. Yet this army will

cause the King to think that thou holdest him an enemy worthy of regard."

Then Rustem said, "That which thou sayest, it is wise," and he disbanded

the army, and took with him but few men and rode with them to Cabul.

In the mean season the King of Cabul had done that which Shugdad had

counselled, and the pits that had been dug were concealed with cunning.

Now when Rustem came nigh to the city, Shugdad sent a messenger before

him unto the King of Cabul, saying-

"Rustem cometh against thee, it behoveth thee to ask pardon for thy

words."

And the King came forth, and his tongue was filled with honey, but

his heart was filled with poison. And he bowed himself in the dust

before Rustem, and he asked his forgiveness for the words that he

had spoken, and he said-

"Consider not the words of thy servant that he did speak when his

head was troubled with wine."

And Rustem forgave the King, and consented to be his guest. Then a

great banquet was made, and while they feasted the King told unto

Rustem how his forests were filled with wild asses and with rams,

and he invited him to hunt therein ere he should return unto Zaboulistan.

And these words were joy unto the ears of Rustem, and he consented

unto the desires of the King. So the next day the King made ready

a great hunt, and he led it unto the spot where the pits were hidden.

And Shugdad ran beside the horse of Rustem, and showed unto him the

path. But Rakush, when he smelt the soil that had been newly turned,

reared him in air, and refused to go onwards. Then Rustem commanded

him to go forward, but Rakush would not listen to his voice. And Rustem

was angry when he beheld that Rakush was afraid. But Rakush sprang

back yet again. Then Rustem took a whip and struck him, and before

this day he had never raised his hand against his steed. So Rakush

was grieved in his soul, and he did that which Rustem desired, and

he sprang forward and fell into the pit. And the sharp spears entered

his body and tore it, and they pierced also the flesh of Rustem, and

steed and rider were impaled upon the irons that had been hidden by

the King. But Rustem put forth all his strength, and raised himself.

Yet when he had done it he was weary, and fell down beside the pit.

And he swooned in his agony.