Then Zal and Rustem, and Gudarz the aged, listened unto the voice

of the Shah, for they knew that he spake that which it became them

to obey. But the others refused ear unto his voice, and they followed

after him yet another day, but their force was spent in the desert.

Now when the evening of that day was come they found a running stream.

Then Kai Khosrau said, "Let us halt in this spot." And when they were

encamped he spake unto them of the things that were past, and he said

unto them that when the sun should have lifted up its face anew they

should behold him no longer in their midst, for the time of his departure

was at hand. And when the night was fallen he drew aside and bathed

his body in the water, and prayed unto God his Maker. Then he came

yet again before his nobles, and he awakened them from their slumbers,

and he spake unto them words of parting. And he said-

"When the daylight shall be come back, I say unto you, return upon

your path, neither linger in this place, though it should rain musk

and amber, for out of the mountains a great storm will arise that

shall uproot the trees and strip the leaves from off their branches.

And there shall come a fall of snow such as Iran hath not seen the

like. But if ye do not as I say unto you, verily ye shall never find

the path of return."

Now the nobles were troubled when they heard these words, and the

slumber that fell upon their eyelids was fined with sorrow. But when

the raven of night flew upwards, and the glory of the world flooded

the earth with its light, Kai Khosrau was vanished from among them,

and they sought out his traces in vain. Now when they beheld that

he was gone, they wept in the bitterness of their hearts, and Friburz

spake, saying-

"O my friends, listen to the words that I shall speak. I pray of you,

let us linger yet a while in this spot, lest peradventure Kai Khosrau

should return. And since it is good to be here, I know not wherefore

we should haste to depart."

And the nobles listened to his voice, and they encamped them on this

spot, and they spake continually of Kai Khosrau, and wept for him,

but they forgot the commandment that he had spoken. Now while they

slept there arose a mighty wind, and it brought forth clouds, and

the sky grew dark, and before the daylight was come back unto the

world the earth was wrapped in snow like to a shroud, and none could

tell the valleys and the hills asunder. And the nobles, when they

awoke, knew not whither they should turn, and they sought after their

path in vain. And the snow fell down upon them, and they could not

free them of its might, and though they strove against it, it rose

above their heads and buried them, and after a little the life departed

out of their bodies.