"Mayst thou live as long as the sun and moon, and may thy heart continue

steadfast, mayst thou ever be the joy of Iran!"

Then when Rustem was departed, Kai Kaous gave himself up unto delights

and to wine, but he governed his land right gloriously. He struck

the neck of care with the sword of justice, he caused the earth to

be clad with verdure, and God granted unto him His countenance, and

the hand of Ahriman could do no hurt.

Thus endeth the history of the march into Mazinderan.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

KAI KAOUS COMMITTETH MORE FOLLIES

Whilom the fancy seized upon the Shah of Iran that he would visit

his empire, and look face to face upon his vassals, and exact their

tribute. So he passed from Turan into China, and from Mikran into

Berberistan. And wheresoever he passed men did homage before him,

for the bull cannot wage battle with the lion. But it could not remain

thus for ever, and already there sprang forth thorns in the garden

of roses. For while the fortunes of the world thus prospered, a chieftain

raised the standard of revolt in Egypt, and the people of the land

turned them from the gates of submission unto Iran. And there was

joined unto them the King of Hamaveran, who desired to throw off the

yoke of Persia. But Kai Kaous, when the tidings thereof came unto

him, got ready his army and marched against the rebels. And when he

came before them, their army, that had seemed invincible, was routed,

and the King of Hamaveran was foremost to lay down his arms and ask

pardon of his Shah. And Kai Kaous granted his petition, and the King

departed joyously from out his presence. Then one of those who stood

about the Shah said unto him-

"Is it known to thee, O Shah, that this King hideth behind his curtains

a daughter of beauty? It would beseem my lord that he should take

this moon unto himself for wife."

And Kai Kaous answered, "Thy counsel is good, and I will therefore

send messengers unto her father, and demand of him that he give me

his daughter as tribute, and to cement the peace that hath been made

between us."

When the King of Hamaveran heard this message his heart was filled

with gall, and his head was heavy with sorrow, and he murmured in

his spirit that Kai Kaous, who owned the world, should desire to take

from him his chiefest treasure. And he hid not his grief from the

Shah in his answer, but he wrote also that he knew it behoved him

to do the thing that Kai Kaous desired. Then in his distress he called

before him Sudaveh his daughter, whom he loved, and he told her all

his troubles, and bade her counsel him how he should act. For he said-

"If I lose thee, the light of my life is gone out. Yet how may I stand

against the Shah?"