The Kings, when they heard this and the message of their father, trembled

for fear. And Tur said unto Silim-

"Henceforth we must forego pleasure, for it behoveth us to hasten,

and not tarry till the teeth of this young lion be sharpened, and

he be waxed tall and strong."

Then they made ready their armies, and the number of their men was

past the counting. Helmet was joined to helmet, and spear to spear,

and jewels, baggage, and elephants without number went with them,

and you would have said it was a host that none could understand.

And they marched from Turan into Iran, and the two Kings rode before

them, their hearts filled with hate. But the star of these evil ones

was sinking. For Feridoun, when he learned that an army had crossed

the Jihun, called unto him Minuchihr his son, and bade him place himself

at the head of the warriors. And the host of the Shah was mighty to

behold, great and strong, and it covered the land like unto a cloud

of locusts. And they marched from Temmische unto the desert, and Minuchihr

commanded them with might. And on his right rode Karun the Avenger,

and on his left Saum, the son of Neriman, and above their heads waved

the flag of Kawah, and their armour glistened in the sun. Like as

a lion breaketh forth from the jungle to seize upon his prey, so did

this army rush forth to avenge the death of Irij. And the head of

Minuchihr rose above the rest like to the moon or the sun when it

shineth above the mountains. And he exhorted them in words of fire

that they rest not, neither weary, until they should have broken the

power of these sons of Ahriman.

Now Tur and Silim, when they saw that the Iranians were come out against

them, set in order their army. And when the day had torn asunder the

folds of night, the two armies met in battle, and the fight waged

strong until the setting of the sun. And the earth was a sea of blood,

and the feet of the elephants were like to pillars of coral. And when

the sun was sunk to his rest, Tur and Silim consulted how they might

seize upon Minuchihr by fraud, for they saw that his arm was strong

and his courage undaunted. So Tur set forth at the head of a small

band to surprise him in his tents. But Minuchihr was aware of his

evil plans, and sprang upon him. And when Tur would have fled Minuchihr

followed after him and struck a lance into his back. And when he had

killed him he cut his head from his trunk, and the body did he give

unto the wild beasts, but the head he sent to Feridoun. And he wrote

to him and sent him greeting, and told him all that was come about,

and how he should neither rest nor tarry until the death of Irij be

avenged.