Then Bahram replied, "Speak; thou art in the sky, and I am on the

ground."

Then Firoud asked of him who were the chiefs of this army, and wherefore

they were come forth. And Bahram named unto him the names of might.

Then Firoud said unto him-

"Why hast thou not spoken the name of Bahram? There is none among

all the host of Iran that mine eyes would rather look upon."

Then Bahram said, "O youth, say unto me who hath spoken unto thee

thus of Bahram, and who hath made thee acquainted with Gudarz and

Gew."

Then Firoud said, "My mother hath made them known unto me, and she

bade me seek out Bahram from among this host, because that he was

foster-brother unto my father."

Then Bahram spake, and said, "Verily thou are Firoud, of the seed

of Saiawush."

And Firoud answered, "Thou hast said. I am a branch of the cypress

that was struck down."

. Then Bahram said, "Uncover thine arm, that I may behold the mark

of the Kaianides."

And Firoud did so, and Bahram beheld the mark. Then he knew that Firoud

was of the race of Kai Kobad, and he did homage before him, and he

drew nigh unto him on the mountain. Then Firoud laid bare before Bahram

his desires, and he said how that he would make a great feast unto

the army in his house, and how, when this was done, he desired to

take the lead and march with it into Turan, and he craved Bahram to

bear his words of greeting unto Tus. And Bahram said-

"O Prince, brave and young, I will bear thy message unto Tus, and

I will implore of him that he listen to thy voice. Yet because he

is a man easily angered, I fear the answer he may return. For though

he be valiant, yet is he also vain, and he cannot forget that he is

sprung from the race of the Kaianides, and he deemeth ever that the

first place pertaineth unto him."

Then Bahram told Firoud wherefore he had been sent forth by Tus, and

he departed from him, saying-

"If Tus hearken unto my voice, I will return unto thee; but if thou

beholdest another, confide not thyself to him."

Then he departed, and came before Tus, and related to him all that

he had heard. And Tus was beside himself with anger, and he cried

out against this young man, and questioned wherefore he would usurp

his place. And he upbraided Bahram for that which he had done, and

he refused to give credit unto his words, and he sware that he would

cause this youth to perish. And he called upon his warriors, and bade

them go forth and sever the head of this Turk. But Bahram said unto

them-

"Ye know not that he sendeth you forth against Firoud, who is brother

unto Kai Khosrau, and sprung from the seed of Saiawush. I counsel

you have the fear of the Shah before your eyes, and lift not your

hands in injustice against his brother."