"I counsel you, wrap ye this man in robes of gold, for my mace hath

made him blue."

Now when the Turanians beheld that Pilsam was dead, they wept sore,

and their courage departed from out of them. And in vain did Afrasiyab

pray them to keep their hearts. Yet he said within himself-

"The good fortune that watched over me is asleep."

And when they were met in battle yet again, and the army of Rustem

had beaten down once more that of Afrasiyab, the King bethought him

of flight. And the hosts of Turan vanished like to the wind, but they

left behind them much riches and goodly treasure.

Now while they were flying from the face of Rustem, Afrasiyab said

unto Piran-

"Counsel me how I shall act concerning this child of Saiawush."

And Piran said, "Haste not to put him to death, for he shall in nowise

do thee hurt. But if thou wilt listen unto my voice, send him far

into Khoten, that he be hidden from sight, and that the men of Iran

learn not of his being."

And Afrasiyab did as Piran counselled, and a messenger was sent forth

to lead out the young King and his mother unto the land of Cathay.

And Afrasiyab himself fled until that he came within the borders of

China, and no man knew where he was hidden. And the land of Turan

was given over to plunder, and the Iranians scathed it with fire and

sword because of Saiawush, whom Afrasiyab had foully slain. And Rustem

seated himself in the seat of Afrasiyab, and for the space of seven

years did he rule over the land. But in the eighth messengers came

out to him, and said how that Kai Kaous was without a guide in Iran,

and how they feared lest folly might result from his deeds. So Rustem

went forth to stand beside his Shah.

Now when Afrasiyab learned that Rustem was departed out of the land

of Turan, his fears forsook him, and he gathered together a mighty

army, and he fell upon his borders, and he regained them unto himself.

And he wept when he beheld the havoc that was come upon Turan, and

he incited his army to be avenged. So they fell into Iran, and shattered

its host, and they suffered not that repose come near unto their foes.

And they pursued them with fire and sword, and laid waste their fields.

And during seven years the heavens withheld their rains, and good

fortune was turned away from Iran, and the prosperity of the land

was quenched. And men groaned sore under these misfortunes, neither

did Rustem come forth from Zaboulistan unto their aid.

Then it came about one night that Gudarz, who was descended from Kawah

the smith, dreamed a dream. He beheld a cloud heavy with rain, and

on the cloud was seated the Serosch the blessed. And the angel of

God said unto Gudarz-

"Open thine ears, if thou wilt deliver thy land from anguish, and

from Afrasiyab the Turk. There abideth in Turan the son of a noble

race, an issue sprung from the loins of Saiawush, who is brave, and

beareth high his head. And he is sprung from Kai Kobad and from Tur,

and from him alone can deliverance come to Iran. Suffer, therefore,

that Gew, thy son, go forth in search of Kai Khosrau, and bid him

remain in his saddle until he shall have found this boy. For such

is the will of Ormuzd."