"O thou eternally just and good, O source of happiness, incline thine

ear unto me and listen to my voice. If I have sinned, if I have strayed

in the paths of Ahriman, behold my repentance and pardon me. My soul

is ashamed, my heart is angered for reason of this child, for will

not the nobles say this boy presageth evil? They will hold me up to

shame, and what can I reply to their questions? It behoveth me to

remove this stain, that the land of Iran be not accursed."

Thus spake Saum in his anger, railing against fate, and he commanded

his servants to take the child and cast it forth out of the land.

Now there standeth far from the haunts of men the Mount Alberz, whose

head toucheth the stars, and never had mortal foot been planted upon

its crest. And upon it had the Simurgh, the bird of marvel, builded

her nest. Of ebony and of sandal-wood did she build it, and twined

it with aloes, so that it was like unto a king's house, and the evil

sway of Saturn could not reach thereto. And at the foot of this mount

was laid the child of Saum. Then the Simurgh, when she spied the infant

lying upon the ground, bereft of clothes and wherewithal to nourish

it, sucking its fingers for very hunger, darted to earth and raised

him in her talons. And she bare him unto her nest, that her young

might devour him. But when she had brought him her heart was stirred

within her for compassion. Therefore she bade her young ones spare

the babe and treat him like to a brother. Then she chose out tender

flesh to feed her guest, and tended the infant forsaken of his sire.

And thus did the Simurgh, nor ever wearied till that moons and years

had rolled above their heads, and the babe was grown to be a youth

full of strength and beauty. And his renown filled the land, for neither

good nor evil can be hidden for ever. And his fame spread even unto

the ears of Saum, the son of Neriman.

Then it came to pass that Saum dreamed a dream, wherein he beheld

a man riding towards him mounted upon an Arab steed. And the man gave

him tidings of his son, and taunted him, saying-

"O thou who hast offended against every duty, who disownest thy son

because that his hair is white, though thine own resembleth the silver

poplar, and to whom a bird seemeth fit nurse for thine offspring,

wilt thou abjure all kinship with him for ever?"

Now when Saum awoke he remembered his dream, and fear came upon him

for his sin. And he called unto him his Mubids, and questioned them

concerning the stripling of the Mount Alberz, and whether this could

be indeed his son, for surely frosts and heat must long since have

destroyed him. Then the Mubids answered and said-