Then Rustem stepped within the rocky tomb wherein the Deev was hidden,

and the air was murky and heavy with evil odours, and the Pehliva

could not see his path. But he went on void of fear, though the spot

was fearful and dangers lurked in its sides. And when he was come

unto the end of the cave he found a great mass like to a mountain,

and it was the Deev in his midday slumber. Then Rustem woke him, and

the Deev was astonished at his daring, and sprang at the hero, and

threw a great stone like a small mountain upon him. And Rustem's heart

trembled, and he said unto himself, "If I escape to-day, I shall live

for ever." And he fell on the Deev, and they struggled hot and sore,

and the Deev tore Rustem, but Rustem defended himself, and they wrestled

with force till that the blood and sweat ran down in rivers from their

bodies. Then Rustem prayed to God, and God heard him and gave him

strength, and in the end Rustem overcame the White Deev and slew him.

And he severed his head from his trunk, and cut his heart from out

his midst.

Then Rustem returned him unto Aulad and told him what he had done.

And Aulad said-

"O brave lion, who hast vanquished the world with thy sword, release

now, I pray thee, this thy servant, for thy snare is entered into

my flesh. And suffer that I recall to thee how that thou hast promised

to me a recompense, and surely thou wilt fulfil thy word."

And Rustem answered and said, "Ay, verily; but I have yet much to

do ere that my mission be ended. For I have still to conquer the King

of Mazinderan; but when these things shall be accomplished, in truth

I will fulfil my words unto thee."

Then he bade Aulad follow him, and they retraced their steps until

they were come unto the spot where Kai Kaous was held in bondage.

And when Kai Kaous learned that Rustem was returned with victory upon

his brow he shouted for joy, and all the host shouted with him, and

they could not contain themselves for happiness. And they called down

the blessings of Heaven upon the head of Rustem. But when the hero

came before them, he took of the blood of the White Deev and poured

it into their eyes, and the eyes of Kai Kaous and his men were opened,

and they once again beheld the glory of the day. Then they swept the

ground around them with fire, with swords they overcame their gaolers.

But when they had finished, Kai Kaous bade them desist from further

bloodshed.

Then Kai Kaous wrote a letter unto the King of Mazinderan, and he

counselled him that he should conclude a peace. And he related to

him how that his mainstay was broken, for Rustem had overcome Arzang

and slain the White Deev. And he said that Rustem would slay him also

if he should not submit unto Iran and pay tribute to its Shah. Then

Kai Kaous sent a messenger with this writing unto the King of Mazinderan.