Now there was fought a battle such as men have not seen the like.

And the earth was covered with steel, and arrows fell from the clouds

like hail, and the ground was torn with hoofs, and blood flowed like

water upon the plains. And the dead lay around in masses, and the

feet of the horses could not stir because of them. Then the chiefs

of the army said among themselves-

"If we part not these heroes upon the field of vengeance, there will

remain nought when the night is come save only the earth that turns,

and God, the Master of the world."

Yet they withdrew not from the combat until the darkness had thrown

a mantle over the earth, and they could no longer look upon their

foes.

Now when the earth was become like unto ebony, the leaders of the

hosts met in conference. And it was decided between them that they

should choose forth valiant men from their midst, and that on the

morrow the fate of the lands should be decided by them. For they grieved

for the blood that had been spilled, and they desired that the hand

of destruction be stayed. So when the morning was come they chose

forth their champions, and ten men of valour were picked from each

host, and Piran and Gudarz led them out unto the plain. Now on each

side of the plain uprose a mountain. So Gudarz said unto his comrades-

"Whosoever among you hath laid low his adversary, let him mount this

hill and plant the flag that he hath won upon its crest, that the

army may learn whom we have vanquished."

And Piran spake unto his men in like manner. Then the ten drew up

and faced one another, and each man stood opposed to the adversary

that he had chosen. Now Friburz was the first to begin combat, and

he was opposed unto Kelbad, the kinsman of Piran. And he rode at him

with fury, and he laid him low with his bow, and he galloped with

joy unto the mountain and planted the standard of Kelbad upon its

crest. Then when it was done, Gew came forward to meet his adversary,

and he was placed over against Zereh, the man whom Kai Khosrau hated

because he had severed the head of Saiawush from its trunk. And Gew

was careful not to slay him, but he threw his cord about him and caught

him in the snares and bound him. Then he took from him his standard,

and led him bound unto the mountain. And there followed after him

Gourazeh, and he too laid low his foe and planted his flag upon the

crest of the hill. And likewise did all the champions of Iran; and

when the ninth hour was ended there waved nine standards from off

the hill, and none remained to fight save only Piran and Gudarz the

aged. Then Gudarz girded him for the combat, and for a mighty space

they wrestled sore, but in the end Gudarz laid low the power of Piran.