"Not so, let us go forth and seek the wild boars."

Then Girgin said, "Go thou alone, for it is thou who hast engaged

in this combat, and who hast taken to thyself the gifts of the Shah.

Therefore it behoveth me only to look on."

When Byzun heard these words he was amazed, but he regarded them not,

and he entered in upon the forest. And after a while he came upon

the wild boars, and they fell upon him. But he slew them with his

mace, and he reddened the ground with their gore, and he went after

them, even unto their lairs, and not one of them did he suffer to

escape. Then when he had done thus, he parted their mighty teeth from

off their heads and hung them about his saddle, that the men of Iran

might behold them. And after this he turned him back unto Girgin.

Now Girgin, when he beheld him mounted upon his horse, and bearing

round his saddle the tokens of his triumph, was envious thereat. And

with his mouth he gave him joy, but Ahriman took hold of his spirit.

So he pondered all night long how he could lay a snare for Byzun.

And when the morning was come he praised his prowess, and they quaffed

wine together, and fair words were exchanged between them. Then Girgin

said-

"This land is known unto me, for I sojourned here with Rustem. And

I know that at the distance of two farsangs lies the garden of Afrasiyab,

where his women go forth to keep the feast of spring. And I bethink

me that the time is at hand. Wherefore, I say unto thee, let us go

hence, and behold with our eyes the fair ones whom the King of Turan

hideth behind his curtains."

Now these words inflamed the blood of Byzun, and he gave ear unto

Girgin, for he was young, and he acted like a young man. So they set

forth upon the road, and Girgin filled the mind of Byzun with feasts

and with sounds of music. And when they were come unto the spot, Byzun

burned with impatience to look upon the women of Afrasiyab. And Girgin

feigned as though he would restrain his foot within the skirt of patience,

but he rejoiced in secret, for he hoped that from this deed evil would

arise. So Byzun sped forth unto the garden, and he hid himself beneath

the shade of a tall cypress, and he feasted his eyes upon the beauty

of the women. And the garden was clad in its robes of spring, and

the world was green and fair, and all the air was filled with the

sweet sounds of music and of song. And there moved amid the rose-bushes

maidens of Peri face, and in stature they were like to the cypress-trees,

and one was exalted above them all. And she was daughter unto Afrasiyab,

and Manijeh was she named.

Now it came about that as Manijeh stood at the door of her tent she

beheld Byzun where he was hid. And she marvelled at his beauty, and

her heart was captive unto him. So she called about her her maidens,

and said-