But when those within the castle learned that their chief was bound

they raised great lamentation, and their fears were sore. And Gurdafrid

too, when she learned it, was grieved, but she was ashamed also for

the fate of Hujir. So she took forth burnished mail and clad herself

therein, and she hid her tresses under a helmet of Roum, and she mounted

a steed of battle and came forth before the walls like to a warrior.

And she uttered a cry of thunder, and flung it amid the ranks of Turan,

and she defied the champions to come forth to single combat. And none

came, for they beheld her how she was strong, and they knew not that

it was a woman, and they were afraid. But Sohrab, when he saw it,

stepped forth and said-

"I will accept thy challenge, and a second prize will fall into my

hands."

Then he girded himself and made ready for the fight. And the maid,

when she saw he was ready, rained arrows upon him with art, and they

fell quick like hail, and whizzed about his head; and Sohrab, when

he saw it, could not defend himself, and was angry and ashamed. Then

he covered his head with a shield and ran at the maid. But she, when

she saw him approach, dropped her bow and couched a lance, and thrust

at Sohrab with vigour, and shook him mightily, and it wanted little

and she would have thrown him from his seat. And Sohrab was amazed,

and his wrath knew no bounds. Then he ran at Gurdafrid with fury,

and seized the reins of her steed, and caught her by the waist, and

tore her armour, and threw her upon the ground. Yet ere he could raise

his hand to strike her, she drew her sword and shivered his lance

in twain, and leaped again upon her steed. And when she saw that the

day was hers, she was weary of further combat, and she sped back unto

the fortress. But Sohrab gave rein unto his horse, and followed after

her in his great anger. And he caught her, and seized her, and tore

the helmet from off her head, for he desired to look upon the face

of the man who could withstand the son of Rustem. And lo! when he

had done so, there rolled forth from the helmet coils of dusky hue,

and Sohrab beheld it was a woman that had overcome him in the fight.

And he was confounded. But when he had found speech he said-

"If the daughters of Iran are like to thee, and go forth unto battle,

none can stand against this land."

Then he took his cord and threw it about her, and bound her in its

snare, saying-

"Seek not to escape me, O moon of beauty, for never hath prey like

unto thee fallen between my hands."

Then Gurdafrid, full of wile, turned unto him her face that was unveiled,

for she beheld no other means of safety, and she said unto him-