In the meanwhile the young hero of the world sped forth to do his

duty unto the Shah. And Rakush caused the ground to vanish under his

feet, and in twelve hours was a two days' journey accomplished. Then

when eve was fallen, Rustem ensnared a wild ass, and made a fire and

roasted it for his meal. And when he had done he released Rakush from

the bonds of his saddle and prepared for himself a couch among the

reeds, neither was he afraid of wild beasts or of Deevs.

But in the reeds was hidden the lair of a fierce lion, and the lion

when he returned unto his haunt beheld the tall man and the horse

that watched beside him. And he rejoiced at the fat meal that he held

was in store. And he thought within his mind, "I will first subdue

the steed, then the rider will be an easy prey." And he fell upon

Rakush. But Rakush defended himself mightily. With his hoofs did he

trample upon the forehead of the lion, with his sharp teeth did he

tear his skin, and he trampled upon him till he died. But the noise

of the struggle had wakened Rustem, and when he beheld the body of

the lion, and Rakush standing beside it, he knew what had been done.

Then he opened his mouth in reproof, and said-

"O thoughtless steed, who bade thee combat lions? Wherefore didst

thou not wake me? for if thou hadst been overcome, who, I pray thee,

could have borne my weight into Mazinderan, whither I must hie me

to deliver the Shah?

When he had thus spoken he turned again to sleep, but Rakush was sorrowful

and downcast in his spirit.

Now when morn was come they set forth once again upon their travels.

And all day long they passed through a desert, and the pitiless sun

burned down upon their heads, and the sand was living fire, and the

steed and rider were like to perish of thirst, and nowhere could Rustem

find the traces of water. So he made him ready to die, and commended

his soul unto God, and prayed Him to remember Kai Kaous, His servant,

nor abandon him in his distress. Then he laid him down to await the

end. But lo! when he thought it was come, there passed before him

a ram, well nourished and fat. And Rustem said unto himself-

"Surely the watering-place of this beast cannot be distant."

Then he roused him and led Rakush and followed in the footsteps of

the ram, and behold, it led him unto a spring of water, cool and clear.

And Rustem drank thereof with greed, and he gave unto Rakush, and

bathed him in the waters, and when they were both refreshed he sought

for the traces of the ram. And they were nowhere to be found. Then

Rustem knew that Ormuzd had wrought a wonder for his sake, and he

fell upon the ground and lifted up his soul in thankfulness. Then

when he had caught and eaten a wild ass, he laid him down to slumber.

And he spake and said unto Rakush-