Then Bashuntan sighed and said, "Alas! a Deev hath taken possession

of thy spirit."'

Now Rustem, when he was come into his house, commanded that his leopard-skin

should be brought before him, and his helmet of Roum, his spear of

Ind also, and the war garb of Rakush. And when he saw them, he said-

"O my raiment of battle, ye have rested a long time from strife, yet

now must I take you forth again to combat, and it is for the hardest

fight that ye have fought. For I must lift my hand against the son

of my master, or suffer that he disgrace me in the sight of men."

And Rustem was sad, and all night he spake unto Zal of his end, and

what he should do if he fell in battle.

Then when the morning was come he girded on his armour, but he resolved

in his spirit that he would strive again with Isfendiyar in words.

So he rode forth unto the tents of the young King; and when he was

come nigh unto them he shouted with a loud voice. And he said-

"O Isfendiyar, hero of great renown, the man with whom thou wouldst

wrestle is come forth; make thee ready, therefore, to meet him."

Then Isfendiyar came out from his tents, and he was armed for battle.

Now when they were met, Rustem opened his mouth and prayed him yet

again that he would stay his hand from this impiety. And he said-

"If thy soul thirsteth after blood and the tumult of battle, suffer

that our hosts meet in combat, that thy desires may be satisfied."

But Isfendiyar said, "Thy talk is folly; thou art armed for the conflict,

let not the hours be lost."

Then Rustem sighed and made him ready for combat. And he assailed

Isfendiyar with his lance, but with a nimble stroke Isfendiyar resisted

his attack. And they fought with their lances until they were bent,

and when that was done they betook them unto swords. And ever the

heroes parried the strokes that were dealt. And when their swords

were broken they seized upon maces, but either hero warded off the

blows. And they fought until that their shields were rent and their

helmets dinted with the blows, and their armour was pierced in many

places. And it was a bitter fight. But the end thereof came not, and

they were weary, and neither had gained the upper hand. So they rested

them awhile from combat. But when they were rested they fell again

one on another, and they fought with arrows and bows. And the arrows

of Isfendiyar whizzed through the air and fastened into the body of

Rustem and of Rakush his steed; and twice thirty ar-rows did Isfendiyar

thus send forth, until that Rakush was like to perish from his wounds.

And Rustem also was covered with gore, and no man before this one

had ever done harm unto his body. But the arrows of Rustem had done

no ill unto Isfendiyar, because Zerdusht had charmed his body against

all dangers, so that it was like unto brass.