And Sudaveh replied, "If there be no remedy, I counsel thee to rejoice

at that which cannot be changed."

Now when her father heard these words he knew that she was not afflicted

concerning that which was come about. So he sent for the envoy of

Kai Kaous and assented unto his demands, and they concluded an alliance

according to the forms of the land. Then when the King had poured

gifts before the messenger, and feasted him with wine, he sent forth

an escort to bear his daughter unto the tents of the Shah. And the

young moon went forth in a litter, and she was robed in garbs of splendour,

and when Kai Kaous beheld her loveliness he was struck dumb for very

joy. Then he raised Sudaveh unto the throne beside him, and named

her worthy to be his spouse. And they were glad in each other, and

rejoiced; but all was not to be well thus quickly.

For the King of Hamaveran was sore in his heart that the light of

his life was gone from him, and he cast about in his spirit how he

should regain her unto himself. And when she had been gone but seven

days, he sent forth a messenger unto Kai Kaous and entreated him that

he would come and feast within his gates, so that all the land might

rejoice in their alliance.

When Sudaveh heard this message her mind misgave her, and she feared

evil. Wherefore she counselled the Shah that he should abstain from

this feast. But Kai Kaous would not listen unto the fears of Sudaveh,

he would not give ear unto her warning. Wherefore he went forth unto

the city of the King of Hamaveran, and made merry with him many days.

And the King caused gifts to be rained down upon Kai Kaous, and he

flattered him, and cozened his vanity, and he made much of his men,

and he darkened their wits with fair words and sweet wine. Then when

he had lulled their fears, and caused them to forget wherefore and

why and all knowledge of misfortune, he fell upon them and bound them

with strong chains, and overthrew their glories and their thrones.

And Kai Kaous did he send unto a fortress whose head touched the sky

and whose foot was planted in the ocean. Then he sent forth a strong

band into the camp of Iran, and veiled women went with them, and he

charged them that they bring back Sudaveh unto his arms.

Now when Sudaveh saw the men and the women that went with them she

guessed what was come about, and she cried aloud and tore her robes

in anguish. And when they had brought her before her father she reproved

him for his treachery, and she sware that none should part her from

Kai Kaous, even though he were hidden in a tomb. Then the King was

angered when he saw that her heart was taken from him and given to

the Shah, and he bade that she be flung into the same prison as her

lord. And Sudaveh was glad at his resolve, and she went into the dungeon

with a light heart, and she seated herself beside the Shah, and served

him and comforted him, and they bore the weight of captivity together.