And Hujir said, "It is the tent of Tus, the son of Nuder, for he beareth

an elephant as his ensign."

Then Sohrab said, "Whose is the camp in which stand many warriors

clad in rich armour? A flag of gold with a lion worked upon it waveth

along its field."

And Hujir said, "It belongeth unto Gudarz the brave. And those who

stand about it are his sons, for eighty men of might are sprung from

his loins."

Then Sohrab said, "To whom belongeth the tent draped with green tissues?

Before its doors is planted the flag of Kawah. I see upon its throne

a Pehliva, nobler of mien than all his fellows, whose head striketh

the stars. And beside him standeth a steed tall as he, and his standard

showeth a lion and a writhing dragon."

When Hujir heard this question he thought within himself, "If I tell

unto this lion the signs whereby he may know Rustem the Pehliva, surely

he will fall upon him and seek to destroy him. It will beseem me better,

therefore, to keep silent, and to omit his name from the list of the

heroes." So he said unto Sohrab-

"This is some ally who is come unto Kai Kaous from far Cathay, and

his name is not known unto me."

And Sohrab when he heard it was downcast, and his heart was sad that

he could nowhere discover Rustem; and though it seemed unto him that

he beheld the marks whereby his mother said that he would know him,

he could not credit the words of his eyes against the words of Hujir.

Still he asked yet again the name of the warrior, and yet again Hujir

denied it unto him, for it was written that that should come to pass

which had been decreed. But Sohrab ceased not from his questionings.

And he asked-

"Who dwelleth beneath the standard with the head of a wolf?"

And Hujir said, "It is Gew, the son of Gudarz, who dwelleth within

that tent, and men call him Gew the valiant."

Then Sohrab said, "Whose is the seat over which are raised awnings

and brocades of Roum, that glisten with gold in the sunlight?

And Hujir said, "It is the throne of Fraburz, the son of the Shah."

Then Sohrab said, "It beseemeth the son of a Shah to surround himself

with such splendour."

And he pointed unto a tent with trappings of yellow that was encircled

by flags of many colours. And he questioned of its owner.

And Hujir said, "Guraz the lion-hearted is master therein."

Then Sohrab, when he could not learn the tent of his father, questioned

Hujir concerning Rustem, and he asked yet a third time of the green

tent. Yet Hujir ever replied that he knew not the name of its master.

And when Sohrab pressed him concerning Rustem, he said that Rustem

lingered in Zaboulistan, for it was the feast of roses. But Sohrab

refused to give ear unto the thought that Kai Kaous should go forth

to battle without the aid of Rustem, whose might none could match.

So he said unto Hujir-