Now Isfendiyar, when he beheld that Rustem staggered in his seat,

called out unto him to surrender himself into his hands and suffer

chains to be put about his body. But Rustem said-

"Not so, I will meet thee again in the morning," and he turned and

swam across the stream, so that Isfendiyar was amazed, for he knew

that the steed and rider had been sore wounded. And he exulted in

his heart, and he reviled Rustem with his lips, but in his soul he

was filled with wonder at the Pehliva, and his heart went out to him.

Now when Zal and Rudabeh beheld the Pehliva and that he was wounded,

they rent the air with their cries, for never yet was he returned

unto them vanquished, neither had any man done hurt unto the elephant-limbed.

And they wailed sore in their distress, and Rustem joined his lamentations

unto theirs. Then they pondered how they should act, and Zal bethought

him of the Simurgh that had been his nurse, and the feather that she

had given him from her breast that he might call upon her in the day

of his need. So he brought it and cast it into the fire as she had

commanded, and straightway a sound of rushing wings filled the air

and the sky was darkened, and the bird of God stood before Zal. And

she spake and said unto him-

"O my son, what is come about that thou callest upon thy nurse that

shielded thee?"

Then Zal told her all, and how Rustem was nigh to die of his wounds,

and how Rakush too was sick unto death. Then the Simurgh said-

"Bring me before them."

And when she had seen them, she passed her wings over their hurts

and forthwith they were whole. Then she spake unto Rustem and questioned

him wherefore he sought to combat the son of the Shah, and Rustem

told her. Then she said-

"Seek yet again to turn Isfendiyar unto thyself; yet if he listen

not unto thy voice, I will reveal unto thee the secrets of Fate. For

it is written that whosoever sheddeth the blood of Isfendiyar, he

also shall perish; and while he liveth he shall not know joy, and

in the life to come he shall suffer pains. But if this fate dismay

thee not, go forth with me and I will teach thee this night how thou

shalt close the mouth of thine enemy."

Then the Simurgh showed unto Rustem the way he should follow, and

Rustem rode after her, and they halted not until they were come unto

the sea-coast. And the Simurgh led him into a garden wherein grew

a tamarisk, tall and strong, and the roots thereof were in the ground,

but the branches pierced even unto the sky. Then the bird of God bade

Rustem break from the tree a branch that was long and slender, and

fashion it into an arrow, and she said-

"Only through his eyes can Isfendiyar be wounded. If, therefore, thou

wouldst slay him, direct this arrow unto his forehead, and verily

it shall not miss its aim."