"Let not thine army slumber, and trust not thy foe because he is drawn

back. I charge thee keep thine eyes fixed upon the land of Rustem,

for if thy vigilance slumber he will surely come forth and destroy

thee, for he alone is to be feared of the men of Iran. Therefore be

brave and watchful, and may Heaven preserve thee unto my throne."

And Piran listened unto the words spoken of Afrasiyab, as it beseemed

him. And when he was returned unto his kingdom, he set watchers upon

all sides, that they might acquaint him concerning Rustem the Pehliva.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE VENGEANCE OF KAI KHOSRAU

Dire was the wailing among the army of Iran at their sore defeat,

and they turned them back discomfited. And they came before the Shah,

their hearts torn with anguish. And their hands were crossed upon

their breasts, and they were humble as slaves. And Kai Khosrau was

angry when he beheld them, and he remembered Firoud, and he railed

against Tus, from whom was sprung this evil. And he said-

"Cursed be he and his elephants and his cymbals." And the Shah withdrew

from his courts, and he withheld his countenance from the land. So

the nobles went out unto Rustem, and entreated of him that he would

intercede for them with the Shah. And Rustem did as they desired,

and he pleaded for the army and its leaders, and he spake good even

of Tus. And Kai Khosrau inclined his ear unto his Pehliva, and he

let the light of his countenance shine again upon his army, and he

confided unto Tus once more the standard of Kawah, but he made Gew

march beside him and restrain his haste.

So they set forth again unto Turan, and Afrasiyab, when he learned

of their approach, made ready his army also. And there were joined

unto him the hosts of the Khakan of China, and of the Kamous of Kushan,

men mighty in the battlefield. And from Ind and all the highlands

of Asia there came forth troops unto the aid of Afrasiyab, King of

Turan. And he rejoiced thereat, for he was assured that if Rustem

came not forth to aid them, the men of Iran could not stand against

his host.

Now when the two armies met, many and fierce were the combats waged

between them, and blows were given and received, and swords flashed

and showers of arrows descended on all sides. And the blood of brave

men was shed like unto the shedding of rain from a black cloud. And

day by day were the Iranians weakened, for they were smitten with

great slaughter, and the number of their dead was past the counting.

But Afrasiyab rejoiced in his victory, and his heart shouted within

him when he learned after many days that the Iranians were drawn back

into the mountains. But Kai Khosrau, when he learned it, was afflicted,

and wept sore. Then he sent greeting unto Rustem, his Pehliva, and

he craved of him that he would come forth to aid the army, for in

him alone could he put his trust. And Rustem said-