So they made them ready, and when they had bound their steeds they

fell upon each other, and the crash of their encounter was heard like

thunder throughout the camps. And they measured their strength from

the morning until the setting of the sun. And when the day was about

to vanish, Sohrab seized upon Rustem by the girdle and threw him upon

the ground, and kneeled upon him, and drew forth his sword from his

scabbard, and would have severed his head from his trunk. Then Rustem

knew that only wile could save him. So he opened his mouth and said-

"O young man, thou knowest not the customs of the combat. It is written

in the laws of honour that he who overthroweth a brave man for the

first time should not destroy him, but preserve him for fight a second

time, then only is it given unto him to kill his adversary."

And Sohrab listened to Rustem's words of craft and stayed his hand,

and he let the warrior go, and because that the day was ended he sought

to fight no more, but turned him aside and chased the deer until the

night was spent. Then came to him Human, and asked of the adventures

of the day. And Sohrab told him how he had vanquished the tall man,

and how he had granted him freedom. And Human reproached him with

his folly, and said-

"Alas, young man, thou didst fall into a snare, for this is not the

custom among the brave. And now perchance thou wilt yet fall under

the hands of this warrior."

Sohrab was abashed when he heard the words of Human, but he said-

"Be not grieved, for in an hour we meet again in battle, and verily

he will not stand a third time against my youthful strength."

Now while Sohrab was thus doing, Rustem was gone beside a running

brook, and laved his limbs, and prayed to God in his distress. And

he entreated of Ormuzd that He would grant him such strength that

the victory must be his. And Ormuzd heard him, and gave to him such

strength that the rock whereon Rustem stood gave way under his feet,

because it had not the power to bear him. Then Rustem saw it was too

much, and he prayed yet again that part thereof be taken from him.

And once more Ormuzd listened to his voice. Then when the time for

combat was come, Rustem turned him to the meeting-place, and his heart

was full of cares and his face of fears. But Sohrab came forth like

a giant refreshed, and he ran at Rustem like to a mad elephant, and

he cried with a voice of thunder-

"O thou who didst flee from battle, wherefore art thou come out once

more against me? But I say unto thee, this time shall thy words of

guile avail thee nought."

And Rustem, when he heard him, and looked upon him, was seized with

misgiving, and he learned to know fear. So he prayed to Ormuzd that

He would restore to him the power He had taken back. But he suffered

not Sohrab to behold his fears, and they made them ready for the fight.

And he closed upon Sohrab with all his new-found might, and shook

him terribly, and though Sohrab returned his attacks with vigour,

the hour of his overthrow was come. For Rustem took him by the girdle

and hurled him unto the earth, and he broke his back like to a reed,

and he drew forth his sword to sever his body. Then Sohrab knew it

was the end, and he gave a great sigh, and writhed in his agony, and

he said-