While Kai Kaous thus strove with repentance, Rustem learned tidings

of him, and he set out with an army to seek him. And when he had found

him he gave rein unto his anger, and he rebuked him for his follies,

and he said-

"Hath the world seen the like of this man? Hath a more foolish head

sat upon the throne of Iran? Ye would say there were no brains within

this skull, or that not one of its thoughts was good. Kai Kaous is

like a thing that is possessed, and every wind beareth him away. Thrice

hast thou now fallen into mishap, and who can tell whether thy spirit

hath yet learned wisdom? And it will be a reproach unto Iran all her

days that a king puffed up with idle pride was seated upon her throne,

a man who deemed in his folly that he could mount unto the skies,

and visit the sun and moon, and count the stars one by one. I entreat

of thee to bethink thee of thy forefathers, and follow in their steps,

and rule the land in equity, neither rush after these mad adventures."

When Kai Kaous had listened to the bitter words spoken by Rustem,

he was bowed down in his spirit and ashamed before him in his soul.

And when at last he opened his mouth it was to utter words of humility.

And he said unto Rustem-

"Surely that which thou speakest, it is true."

Then he suffered himself to be led back unto his palace, and many

days and nights did he lie in the dust before God, and it was long

before he held him worthy to mount again upon his throne. But when

he deemed that God had forgiven him, he seated him upon it once again.

In humility did he mount it, and he filled it in wisdom. And henceforth

he ruled the land with justice, and he did that which was right in

the sight of God, and bathed his face with the waters of sincerity.

And kings and rulers did homage before him, and forgot the follies

that he had done, and Kai Kaous grew worthy of the throne of light.

And Iran was exalted at his hands, and power and prosperity increased

within its borders.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

RUSTEM AND SOHRAB

Give ear unto the combat of Sohrab against Rustem, though it be a

tale replete with tears.

It came about that on a certain day Rustem arose from his couch, and

his mind was filled with forebodings. He bethought him therefore to

go out to the chase. So he saddled Rakush and made ready his quiver

with arrows. Then he turned him unto the wilds that lie near Turan,

even in the direction of the city of Samengan. And when he was come

nigh unto it, he started a herd of asses and made sport among them

till that he was weary of the hunt. Then he caught one and slew it

and roasted it for his meal, and when he had eaten it and broken the

bones for the marrow, he laid himself down to slumber, and Rakush

cropped the pasture beside him.