"Into our hands hath it been given to settle the course of the world.

For it is known unto me that Sohrab is sprung from Rustem the Pehliva,

but from Rustem must it be hidden who it is that goeth out against

him, then peradventure he will perish by the hands of this young lion,

and Iran, devoid of Rustem, will fall a prey into my hands. Then will

we subdue Sohrab also, and all the world will be ours. But if it be

written that Sohrab fall under the hand of Tehemten, then the grief

he shall endure when he shall learn that he hath slain his son will

bring him to the grave for sorrow."

So spake Afrasiyab in his guile, and when he had done unveiling his

black heart he bade the warriors depart unto Samengan. And they bare

with them gifts of great price to pour before the face of Sohrab.

And they bare also a letter filled with soft words. And in the letter

Afrasiyab lauded Sohrab for his resolve, and told him how that if

Iran be subdued the world would henceforth know peace, for upon his

own head would he place the crown of the Kaianides; and Turan, Iran,

and Samengan should be as one land.

When Sohrab had read this letter, and saw the gifts and the aid sent

out to him, he rejoiced aloud, for he deemed that now none could withstand

his might. So he caused the cymbals of departure to be clashed, and

the army made them ready to go forth. Then Sohrab led them into the

land of Iran. And their track was marked by desolation and destruction,

for they spared nothing that they passed. And they spread fire and

dismay abroad, and they marched on unstayed until they came unto the

White Castle, the fortress wherein Iran put its trust.

Now the guardian of the castle was named Hujir, and there lived with

him Gustahem the brave, but he was grown old, and could aid no longer

save with his counsels. And there abode also his daughter Gurdafrid,

a warlike maid, firm in the saddle, and practised in the fight. Now

when Hujir beheld from afar a dusky cloud of armed men he came forth

to meet them. And Sohrab, when he saw him, drew his sword, and demanded

his name, and bade him prepare to meet his end. And he taunted him

with rashness that he was come forth thus unaided to stand against

a lion. But Hujir answered Sohrab with taunts again, and vowed that

he would sever his head from his trunk and send it for a trophy unto

the Shah. Yet Sohrab only smiled when he heard these words, and he

challenged Hujir to come near. And they met in combat, and wrestled

sore one with another, and stalwart were their strokes and strong;

but Sohrab overcame Hujir as though he were an infant, and he bound

him and sent him captive unto Human.