Now when Gersiwaz beheld Byzun, he cried, "O vile man, thou art fallen

into my hands! How wilt thou now save thy life? "

And Byzun was dismayed, for he had neither sword nor armour, and he

thought within himself-

"I fear me that my life will end this day."

But he drew forth from his boot a dagger that was hidden therein,

and he threatened Gersiwaz, and he said that he would plunge it into

his breast if he led him not before Afrasiyab.

Now Gersiwaz knew that Byzun was quick to act, and would do that which

he spake, so he held back from combat, and he seized Byzun and bound

him, and led him before Afrasiyab. And when Afrasiyab saw him in such

plight, he said-

"O man of evil, wherefore didst thou come into my land?"

Then Byzun told him how he was gone forth to slay the boars, and how

he was come into the garden of Afrasiyab, and he said that a Peri

had borne him unto the palace, for he would not do hurt unto Manijeh.

But Afrasiyab refused belief unto his words, and he commanded that

a gibbet should be raised without his court, and that Byzun be hung

thereon, because he had dishonoured the house of the women, and had

stolen like a thief in the night into the house of the King. And in

vain did Byzun invoke mercy at the hands of Afrasiyab, and he was

led forth beyond the courts. And the men of Afrasiyab made ready the

gallows, and Byzun stood bound beneath. And he wept sore in his distress,

and he prayed to the winds that they would bear tidings of him unto

the Shah of Iran, and he sware that his death should be avenged upon

Turan.

Now while he waited thus there passed by Piran, the Pehliva, who was

come forth to do homage unto the King. And when he beheld the gibbet

he questioned concerning it, and when he learned that it was for Byzun

he was troubled. So he got him from his horse and came near unto the

youth, and questioned him of this adventure. And Byzun told him all

that was come about, and how his evil comrade had laid for him a snare.

Then Piran commanded that punishment be stayed until he should have

spoken unto Afrasiyab. And he went in and stood before the King as

a suppliant. Then Afrasiyab bade him make known his desires. And Piran

opened his mouth and spake words of wisdom unto Afrasiyab, his King.

And he reminded him of the death of Saiawush, and how Byzun was of

much account in his own country, and how surely his blood would be

avenged. And he said how the land of Turan was not ready to stand

again in a new war, and he prayed Afrasiyab to content him with a

dungeon. And he said-

"Heap chains upon Byzun, and let the earth hide him, that Iran may

not know whither he is vanished."