And Rustem said, "Suffer that I go forth to tell them unto Kai Kaous,

for verily he will listen unto that which I shall speak, and honour

will fall upon Saiawush for this adventure."

Wherefore Rustem went before the King, and told him they had conquered

Afrasiyab, and how he was become afraid, and how there was concluded

a peace between them. And he vaunted the wisdom of Saiawush that was

quick to act and quick to refrain, and he craved the Shah to confirm

what they had done. But Kai Kaous was angered when he heard it, and

he said that Saiawush had done like to an infant. And he loaded reproaches

upon Rustem, and said that his counsels were vile, and he sware that

he would be avenged upon Turan. Then he recalled all they had suffered

in the days that were past at the hands of Afrasiyab, and he said

the tree of vengeance could not be uprooted. And he desired Rustem

that he turn him back unto Balkh, and say unto Saiawush that he should

destroy these hostages of Turan, and that he should fall again upon

Afrasiyab, nor cease from fighting. But Rustem, when he had heard

him to an end, opened his mouth and said unto the Shah-

"O King, listen to my voice, and do not that which is evil! Verily

I say unto thee that Saiawush will not break his oath unto Afrasiyab,

neither will he destroy these men of Turan that were delivered into

his hands."

When Kai Kaous heard his speech his anger was kindled, and he upbraided

Rustem, and said that his evil counsels had caused Saiawush to swerve

from the straight path; and he taunted him and bade him go back unto

Seistan, and he said that Tus should go forth as Pehliva unto his

son. Then Rustem too was angered, and he gave back the reproaches

of the Shah, and he turned him and quitted the courts and sped him

back unto his kingdom. But Kai Kaous sent Tus unto the army at his

borders, and he bade him speak his desires unto Saiawush his son.

Now Saiawush, when he learned what was come about, was sore discomfited,

and he pondered how he should act. For he said, "How can I come before

Ormuzd if I depart from mine oath? Yet, however I shall act, I see

around me but perdition."

Then he called for Bahram and Zengueh, and confided to them his troubles.

And he said how that Kai Kaous was a king who knew not good from evil,

and how he had accomplished that wherefore the army went forth, yet

how the Shah desired that vengeance should not cease. And he said-

"If I listen to the commands of the King, I do that which is evil;

yet if I listen not, surely he will destroy me. Wherefore I will send

back unto Afrasiyab the men he hath placed within my hands, and then

hide me from sight."