"I have beheld my grandson, the light of mine eyes, avenge me and

himself. And now am I ready to go forth unto Thee, for thrice fifty

years have rolled above my head, and my hair is white and my heart

is weary."

And after he had thus spoken Kai Kaous passed away, and there remained

of him in the world but the memory of his name. Then Kai Khosrau mourned

for his grandsire as was fitting. But when the days of mourning were

ended he mounted again the throne of the Kaianides, and for sixty

years did Kai Khosrau rule the world in equity, and wisdom flourished

under his hands. And wheresoever the Shah looked he beheld that his

hand was stretched out in gladness, and there was peace in all the

lands. Then he gave praise unto God that He had suffered him to do

these things. And when he had done so he pondered within himself,

and he grew afraid lest Ahriman should get possession of his soul,

and lest he should grow uplifted in pride like unto Jemshid, that

forgot whence came his weal and the source of his blessings. So he

said within himself-

"It behoveth me to be careful, for I am sprung from the race of Zohak,

and perchance I may become a curse unto the earth, like to him. Wherefore

I will entreat of Ormuzd that He take me unto Himself before this

evil befall me, since there is no longer work for me to do on earth."

Then he gave commandment to the keepers of the curtains that they

suffer no man to enter in upon him, but he bade them refuse it with

all kindness. And when it was done Kai Khosrau withdrew him into the

inner courts, and he ungirded him of his sash of might, and he laved

his limbs in a running stream, and he presented himself in prayer

before God his Maker. And for seven days the Shah stood in the presence

of Ormuzd, neither did he weary to importune Him in prayer.

Now while he did so many great ones of Iran came unto the courts of

the Shah and demanded audience. And it was refused them. Then they

murmured among themselves, and they marvelled why the thoughts of

the King should have grown dark in a time of good fortune. And when

they found that their importunity availed them nought, they consulted

among themselves what they should do. Then Gudarz said-

"Let us send tidings of these things even unto Zal and Rustem, and

entreat of them that they come unto our aid, for perchance Kai Khosrau

will listen unto their voice."

So Gew was sent forth into Zaboulistan.

Now when he was gone, it came about that on a certain day, when the

sun had lifted his shield of gold above the world, Kai Khosrau ordained

that the curtains of the audience-chamber be lifted. So there came

in unto him his Mubids and the nobles, and they stood about his throne,

and their hands were crossed in supplication. Then Kai Khosrau, when

he saw it, asked of them what they desired. So they opened their mouths

and said-