Now Kai Kaous remained in the land after which he had yearned, and

his heart was heavy with bitterness. And the eyes of his soul were

opened, and he cried continually, "This fault is mine;" and he cast

about in his spirit how he might release his host from the hands of

the Deevs. But the Deevs guarded him straitly, and he could send no

messenger into Iran. Howbeit it came about that a messenger escaped

their borders, and bore unto Zal the writing of Kai Kaous the afflicted.

And Kai Kaous bowed himself in his spirit unto the dust before Zal,

and he wrote to him all that was come about, and how that he and his

host were blind and captive, and he poured forth his repentance, and

he said-

"I have sought what the foolish seek, and found what they find. And

if thou wilt not gird thy loins to succour me, I perish indeed."

When Zal heard this message he gnawed his hands in vexation. Then

he called before him Rustem, and said-

"The hour is come to saddle Rakush and to avenge the world with thy

sword. As for me, I number two hundred years, and have no longer the

strength to fight with Deevs. But thou art young and mighty. Cast

about thee, therefore, thy leopard-skin and deliver Iran from bondage."

And Rustem said, "My sword is ready, and I will go hence as thou dost

bid. Yet of old, O my father, the mighty did not go forth of their

own will to fight the powers of hell, neither doth one who is not

weary of this world go into the mouth of a hungry lion. But if God

be with me I shall overcome the Deevs and gird our army anew with

the sashes of might. And I pray that His blessing rest upon me."

Then Zal, when he heard these noble words, blessed his son, and prayed

that Ormuzd too would give him his blessing. And he bestowed on him

wise counsel, and told him how he could come unto the land of Mazinderan.

And he said-

"Two roads lead unto this kingdom, and both are hard and fraught with

danger. The one taken of Kai Kaous is the safest, but it is long,

and it behoveth vengeance to be fleet. Choose therefore, I charge

thee, the shorter road, though it be beset with baleful things, and

may Ormuzd return thee safe unto mine arms."

When Rustem had drunk in the counsels of his father he seated him

on Rakush the fleet of foot. But when he would have departed, his

mother came out before him, and she made great wailing that Rustem

should go before the evil Deevs. And she would have hindered him,

but Rustem suffered her not. He comforted her with his voice, and

bade her be of good cheer. He showed unto her how that he had not

of his own choice chosen this adventure. And he bade her rest her

hopes in God. And when he had done speaking she let him depart, but

the heart of Rudabeh yearned after her son, and her eyes were red

with weeping many days.