"Young shepherd, how knowest thou the day from the night? What doest

thou with thy flocks? How countest thou thy sheep and thy goats?"

And Kai Khosrau replied-

"There is no game, and I have neither cords nor bow and arrows."

Then the King questioned him concerning the milk that was given of

the herds. And Kai Khosrau said-

"The tiger-cats are dangerous and have mighty claws."

Then Afrasiyab put to him yet a third question, and he asked of him-

"What is the name of thy mother?"

And Kai Khosrau answered and said-"

"The dog ventureth not to bark when a lion threateneth him."

Then Afrasiyab asked him yet again whether he desired to go forth

into the land of Iran and be avenged upon his enemies. And Kai Khosrau

answered and said-

"When a leopard appeareth, the heart of a brave man is torn with fear."

And Afrasiyab smiled at these answers and questioned him no further.

And he said unto Piran-

"Restore the boy unto his mother, and let him be reared with kindness

in the city that Saiawush hath builded, for I behold that from him

can no harm alight upon Turan."

When Piran heard these words he hastened to remove Kai Khosrau from

the court, and his heart was glad because of the danger that had passed

by. So Kai Khosrau was reared in the house of his father, and Ferangis

spake unto him of Saiawush and of the vengeance that was due. And

she instructed him concerning the heroes of Iran and their deeds of

prowess, as she had learned them from Saiawush her lord.

In the mean season Kai Kaous had learned of the death of Saiawush

his son, and a mighty wailing went forth throughout the land of Iran,

so that even the nightingale in the cypress was silent of her song,

and the leaves of the pomegranate tree in the forest were withered

for sorrow. And the heroes that stood about the throne of Kai Kaous

clad themselves in the garb of woe, and bare dust upon their heads

in place of helmets. And Rustem, when he learned of it, was bowed

to the earth with agony, and for seven days he stirred not from the

ground, neither would he let food or comfort come near him. But on

the eighth he roused him from the earth, and caused the trumpets of

brass to be sounded into the air. And he assembled his warriors, and

marched with them into Iran, and he came before Kai Kaous and demanded

audience.

Now when he was come into the presence-chamber he found the Shah seated

upon his throne. He was clothed in dust from his head unto his feet,

because of his grief. But Rustem regarded it not, and straightway

reproached him, and said-

"O King of evil nature, behold the harvest that is sprung from the

seed that thou didst sow! The love of Sudaveh and her vile intents

have torn from off thy head the diadem of kings, and Iran hath suffered

cruel loss because of thy folly and thy suspicions. It is better for

a king that he be laid within his shroud than that he be given over

to the dominion of a woman. Alas for Saiawush! Was ever hero like

unto him? And henceforward I will know neither rest nor joy until

his cruel death be avenged."