"Let Tus go forth and see if this indeed be so, and if Rustem be truly

fallen, let the drums call men unto battle that we may avenge him

upon this Turk."

Now Sohrab, when he beheld afar off the men that were come out to

seek Rustem, turned to his father and said-

"I entreat of thee that thou do unto me an act of love. Let not the

Shah fall upon the men of Turan, for they came not forth in enmity

to him but to do my desire, and on my head alone resteth this expedition.

Wherefore I desire not that they should perish when I can defend them

no longer. As for me, I came like the thunder and I vanish like the

wind, but perchance it is given unto us to meet again above."

Then Rustem promised to do the desires of Sohrab. And he went before

the men of Iran, and when they beheld him yet alive they set up a

great shout, but when they saw that his clothes were torn, and that

he bare about him the marks of sorrow, they asked of him what was

come to pass. Then he told them how he had caused a noble son to perish.

And they were grieved for him, and joined in his wailing. Then he

bade one among them go forth into the camp of Turan, and deliver this

message unto Human. And he sent word unto him, saying-

"The sword of vengeance must slumber in the scabbard. Thou art now

leader of the host, return, therefore, whence thou camest, and depart

across the river ere many days be fallen. As for me, I will fight

no more, yet neither will I speak unto thee again, for thou didst

hide from my son the tokens of his father, of thine iniquity thou

didst lead him into this pit."

Then when he had thus spoken, Rustem turned him yet again unto his

son. And the nobles went with him, and they beheld Sohrab, and heard

his groans of pain. And Rustem, when he saw the agony of the boy,

was beside himself, and would have made an end of his own life, but

the nobles suffered it not, and stayed his hand. Then Rustem remembered

him that Kai Kaous had a balm mighty to heal. And he prayed Gudarz

go before the Shah, and bear unto him a message of entreaty from Rustem

his servant. And he said-

"O Shah, if ever I have done that which was good in thy sight, if

ever my hand have been of avail unto thee, recall now my benefits

in the hour of my need, and have pity upon my dire distress. Send

unto me, I pray thee, of the balm that is among thy treasures, that

my son may be healed by thy grace."

And Gudarz outstripped the whirlwind in his speed to bear unto the

Shah this message. But the heart of Kai Kaous was hardened, and he

remembered not the benefits he had received from Rustem, and he recalled

only the proud words that he had spoken before him. And he was afraid

lest the might of Sohrab be joined to that of his father, and that

together they prove mightier than he, and turn upon him. So he shut

his ear unto the cry of his Pehliva. And Gudarz bore back the answer

of the Shah, and he said-