"If thou turn thee not, make thee ready for combat; for verily I say

unto thee, that unless thou cast out Zerdusht, this man of guile,

I will overthrow thy kingdom and seat me upon thy throne."

When Gushtasp heard the haughty words that Arjasp had spoken, he marvelled

within himself. Then he called before him a scribe, and sent back

answer unto Arjasp. And he said that he would deliver up unto the

sword whosoever swerved from the paths of Zerdusht, and whosoever

would not choose them, him also would he destroy. And he bade him,

therefore, get ready to meet Iran in battle. Then when he had sent

this writing, Gushtasp got together his hosts and mustered them, and

he beheld that they outnumbered the grass upon the fields. And the

dust that uprose from their feet darkened the sky, and the neighing

of their horses and the clashing of their armour were heard above

the music of the cymbals. And the banners pierced the clouds like

to trees that grow upon a mountain. And Gushtasp gave the command

of this host unto Isfendiyar, his son. And Isfendiyar was a hero of

renown, and his tongue was a bright sword, and his heart was bounteous

as the ocean, and his hands were like the clouds when rain falls to

gladden the earth. And he took the lead of the army, and he led it

forth into Turan.

Now when the men of Turan and of Iran met in conflict, a great battle

was waged between them, and for the space of twice seven days they

did not cease from combat, neither did any of the heroes close their

eyes in slumber. And their rage was hot one against another, but in

the end the might of Iran overcame, and Arjasp fled before the face

of Isfendiyar.

Then Isfendiyar returned him unto Iran, and presented himself before

his father, and demanded a blessing at his hands. But Gushtasp said-

"The time is not yet come when thou shouldest mount the throne."

So he sent him forth yet again that he might turn all the lands unto

the faith of Zerdusht. And Isfendiyar did as Gushtasp commanded.

Now while he was gone forth there came before the Shah one Gurjam,

who was of evil mind and foe unto Isfendiyar. And he spake ill of

Isfendiyar unto his father, and he said unto Gushtasp that his son

strove to wrest from him the sovereignty. And Gushtasp, when he learned

it, was wroth, and he sent forth messengers that they should search

out Isfendiyar, and bring him before the Shah in the assembly of the

nobles. And when Isfendiyar was come, Gushtasp spake not unto him

in greeting, but he turned him to his nobles, and he recounted unto

them a parable. Then he told unto them of a son who sought to put

to death his father, and he asked of them what punishment this father

should mete out unto his child. And the nobles cried with one accord-