"Who is this young man, that he despiseth an army, and how may he

treat us with disdain? 'Though he be of the race of the Kaianides,

and of the seed of Kai Kobad, he hath opened a door, and knoweth not

whither it leadeth."

And as he spake he girded his armour about him, and made him ready

to go out against Firoud.

Now when Firoud beheld him he sighed, and said, "This army is valiant,

but it cannot distinguish good from evil. I fear me that by them will

Saiawush not be avenged, for their leader is devoid of sense. Else

could he not persist in enmity against me. Tell me now, I pray, who

this new foe may be?"

Then Tokhareh said, "It is Gew, the son of Gudarz, a knight of great

renown, before whom even the lion trembleth unto his marrow. And he

led forth thy brother into Iran, and he is girt with the armour of

Saiawush, that no man can pierce with in arrow. Direct thy bow, therefore,

yet again unto the charger, or thy strife will be vain."

And Firoud the brave did as Tokhareh said, and he sent forth his arrow,

and the horse of Gew sank unto the earth. Now all the nobles rejoiced

when Gew returned unto them in safety; but Byzun, his son, was wroth,

and he upbraided his father, and he said-

"O thou who fearest not an army, how canst thou turn thee back before

a single knight?"

Then he sware a great oath that he would not quit the saddle until

the blood of Rivniz and of Zerasp should be avenged.

Now Gew was afraid for his son, who was young, and would have restrained

him. But Byzun suffered it not, and when his father saw that he was

resolved, he gave unto him the armour of Saiawush, and sent him forth

unto the mountain.

Now when Firoud saw that yet another was come out against him, he

questioned Tokhareh again of his name. And Tokhareh said-

"It is a youth who hath not his like in Iran. Byzun is he called,

and he is only son unto Gew the brave. And because that he is clad

in the armour of Saiawush, thy father, strike at his horse, or thy

bow will avail thee nought."

So Firoud shot his arrows at the horse, and he laid it low, as he

had done the others. Then Byzun cried, saying-

"O young man, who aimest thus surely, thou shalt behold how warriors

fight on foot."

And he ran up the side of the mountain, that he might come near unto

Firoud. But Firoud turned and entered in upon his gates, and he rained

down stones from his walls upon the head of his adversary. Then Byzun

taunted him, and said-

"O hero of renown, thou fliest before a man on foot, thou who art

brave! Alas! whither is vanished thy courage? "

Then he returned unto the camp, and told unto Tus how that this scion

of the Kaianides was filled with valour, and how his bow was sure,

and he said that he feared no man could stand against him. But Tus

said, "I will raze unto the dust his castle, I will destroy this Turk,

and avenge the blood that he hath spilled."