"Not so, strike not, for Zohak's hour is not yet come."

Then the Serosch bade the Shah bind the usurper and carry him far

from the haunts of men, and there fasten him to a rock. And Feridoun

did as he was bidden, and led forth Zohak to the Mount Demawend. And

he bound him to the rock with mighty chains and nails driven into

his hands, and left him to perish in agony. And the hot sun shone

down upon the barren cliffs, and there was neither tree nor shrub

to shelter him, and the chains entered into his flesh, and his tongue

was consumed with thirst. Thus after a while the earth was delivered

of Zohak the evil one, and Feridoun reigned in his stead.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

FERIDOUN

Five hundred years did Feridoun rule the world, and might and virtue

increased in the land, and all his days he did that which was good.

And he roamed throughout the kingdom to seek out that which was open

and that which was hid, and wrong was righted at his hands. With kindness

did he curb the sway of evil. He ordered the world like to a paradise,

he planted the cypress and the rose where the wild herb had sprouted.

Now after many years were passed there were born to him three sons,

whose mother was of the house of Jemshid. And the sons were fair of

mien, tall and strong, yet their names were not known to men, for

Feridoun had not tested their hearts. But when he beheld that they

were come to years of strength he called them about his throne and

bade them search out the King of Yemen, who had three daughters, fair

as the moon, that they should woo them unto themselves. And the sons

of Feridoun did according to the command of their father. They set

forth unto Yemen, and there went with them a host countless as the

stars. And when they were come to Yemen, the King came forth to greet

them, and his train was like to the plumage of a pheasant. Then the

sons of Feridoun gained the hands of the daughters of Serv, King of

Yemen, and departed with them to their own land. And Serv gave to

his new sons much treasure laid upon the backs of camels, and umbrellas

too did he give unto them in sign of kingship.

Now it came about that when Feridoun learned that his sons were returning,

he went forth to meet them and prove their hearts. So he took upon

him the form of a dragon that foamed at the mouth with fury, and from

whose jaws sprang mighty flames. And when his sons were come near

unto the mountain pass, he came upon them suddenly, like to a whirlwind,

and raised a cloud of dust about the place with his writhings, and

his roaring filled the air with noise. Then he threw himself upon

the eldest born, and the prince laid down his spear and said, "A wise

and prudent man striveth not with dragons." And he turned his back

and fled before the monster, and left him to fall upon his brothers.

Then the dragon sprang upon the second, and he said, "An it be that

I must fight, what matter if it be a furious lion or a knight full

of valour?" So he took his bow and stretched it. But the youngest

came towards him, and seeing the dragon, said, "Thou reptile, flee

from our presence, and strut not in the path of lions. For if thou

hast heard the name of Feridoun, beware how thou doest thus, for we

are his sons, armed with spears and ready for the fight. Quit therefore,

I counsel thee, thine evil path, lest I plant upon thy head the crown

of enmity."