Then Rustem went before Kai Kaous and told him of this boy of valour,

and he prayed unto Ormuzd that He would give him strength to vanquish

his foe. Yet he made ready also his house lest he should fall in the

fight, and he commanded that a tender message be borne unto Rudabeh,

and he sent words of comfort unto Zal, his father. And Sohrab, too,

in his camp lauded the might of Rustem, and he said how the battle

had been sore, and how his mind had misgiven him of the issue. And

he spake unto Human, saying-

"My mind is filled with thoughts of this aged man, mine adversary,

for it would seem unto me that his stature is like unto mine, and

that I behold about him the tokens that my mother recounted unto me.

And my heart goeth out towards him, and I muse if it be Rustem, my

father. For it behoveth me not to combat him. Wherefore, I beseech

thee, tell unto me how this may be."

But Human answered and said, "Oft have I looked upon the face of Rustem

in battle, and mine eyes have beheld his deeds of valour; but this

man in no wise resembleth him, nor is his manner of wielding his club

the same."

These things spake Human in his vileness, because that Afrasiyab had

enjoined him to lead Sohrab into destruction. And Sohrab held his

peace, but he was not wholly satisfied.

Now when the day had begun to lighten the sky and clear away the shadows,

Rustem and Sohrab strode forth unto the midway spot that stretched

between the armies. And Sohrab bare in his hands a mighty club, and

the garb of battle was upon him; but his mouth was full of smiles,

and he asked of Rustem how he had rested, and he said-

"Wherefore hast thou prepared thy heart for battle? Cast from thee,

I beg, this mace and sword of vengeance, and let us doff our armour,

and seat ourselves together in amity, and let wine soften our angry

deeds. For it seemeth unto me that this conflict is impure. And if

thou wilt listen to my desires, my heart shall speak to thee of love,

and I will make the tears of shame spring up into thine eyes. And

for this cause I ask thee yet again, tell me thy name, neither hide

it any longer, for I behold that thou art of noble race. And it would

seem unto me that thou art Rustem, the chosen one, the Lord of Zaboulistan,

the son of Zal, the son of Saum the hero."

But Rustem answered, "O hero of tender age, we are not come forth

to parley but to combat, and mine ears are sealed against thy words

of lure. I am an old man, and thou art young, but we are girded for

battle, and the Master of the world shall decide between us."

Then Sohrab said, "O man of many years, wherefore wilt thou not listen

to the counsel of a stripling? I desired that thy soul should leave

thee upon thy bed, but thou hast elected to perish in the combat.

That which is ordained it must be done, therefore let us make ready

for the conflict."