Now when the Iranians had broken down the bars of the gates and entered

into the castle, they came unto the chamber and beheld the bodies

of Firoud and of his mother. And when they saw them, they could not

withhold their tears, and they sorrowed for the anger of Tus, and

the fear of Kai Khosrau came upon them. And Gudarz said unto Tus-

"Thou hast sown hatred, and thou wilt reap war. It beseemeth not a

leader to be quick to ire. Thy haste hath brought to death a youth

of the race of the Kaianides, and hath caused the blood of thy sons

to be spilled."

When Tus heard these words he wept in his sorrow, and said-

"Evil fortune is come upon me."

Then he caused a royal tomb to be made, and seated Firoud therein

upon a throne of gold, and he decked him with all the signs of kingship.

And when he had so done he returned with his army unto the plains,

and three days they halted in their grief. But on the fourth the trumpets

were sounded for departure, and Tus led forth the army towards Turan.

Now when Afrasiyab learned that a host was come forth against him

from out of Iran, he bade Piran make ready his army. For he said-

"Kai Khosrau hath unveiled unto us the secrets of his heart, and we

know now that forgiveness is not hidden in his soul."

Now while they made them in order, there came a great storm of snow

that covered the earth like to a carpet, and the water became hard,

and for many days no man beheld the earth or the sun. And food was

lacking unto the Iranians, and they were fain to devour their steeds

of battle. And when at last the sun came back, the earth was changed

into a lake, and the Iranians suffered yet again. Then Tus said-

"Let us return whence we came forth."

But his army said, "Not so. Shall we flee before the face of Afrasiyab?"

So they made them ready to meet their foes. And they fought right

valiantly, and many were the heads of Turan that were laid in the

dust by their hands, and the victory inclined towards them. Then Tus

was glad, and made a great feast and invited thereto his warriors.

And he darkened their heads with wine, so that they laid aside their

armour, neither did they set watches in the camp. Now Piran, when

he learned of this, saw that the time served him, and when the night

was fallen he went out against the camp of Iran. And all the nobles

were drunk save only Gudarz the wise. Now when he heard that the Turanians

were come into the camp, he ran to the tents of Tus and cried, saying-

"Is this the hour to hold the wine-cup?"

Then he called together his sons, and he set his army in order; but

the Turanians routed them utterly, for the men of Iran were heavy

with wine, and they knew not whither they sent their blows. And the

carnage was great, and when the sun had brought back the day the ground

was strewn thick with the bodies of the Iranians. And cries of agony

were heard around, and there were none to heal the hurts, for those

that were whole were captive. And Tus was beside himself for sorrow,

and Gudarz alone was not defraught of reason. So the old man sent

forth a messenger to bear the tidings of woe unto the Shah. Now he

was a messenger that made the earth disappear beneath his feet, and

speedily did he stand within the courts of the King. And Kai Khosrau,

when he had listened to his words, was angered, and his tongue called

down curses on the head of Tus. Then he pondered all night how he

should act, but when the cock crew he wrote a letter unto Friburz

the son of Kai Kaous. And he bade him take unto him the flag of Kawah

and the golden boots, and lead the army in the place of Tus. And he

bade him in all things be obedient to the counsels of Gudarz the wise,

and he recalled how Tus had disobeyed his commandments, and he said-