Now, while these things were passing in the house of Zal, in the land

of Zaboulistan, Minuchihr made him ready to pass from the world, for

he had reached twice sixty years. He called before him Nauder his

son, and gave him wise counsels, and exhorted him that he should ever

walk in the paths of wisdom. And he bade him rest his throne upon

the strength of Saum and Zal, and the child that was sprung from their

loins. Then when he had spoken, Minuchihr closed his eyes and sighed,

and there remained of him only a memory in the world.

But Nauder forgot the counsels of his father. He vexed the land and

reigned in anger, and cruel deeds were committed in his name, so that

the people rose up and cried against the King. And men of might came

unto Saum and laid before him their plaints, and the petitions of

the people, and they prayed that he would wrest the crown from the

head of Nauder, and place it upon his own. But Saum was sore grieved

when he had heard these words, and he spake, saying-

"Not so, for it beseemeth me not to put out my hand after the crown,

for Nauder is of the race of the Kaianides, and unto them is given

majesty and might."

Then he girt his sword about his loins, and took with him a host,

and rode before the face of the Shah. And when he was come unto him,

Saum exhorted him with prayers and tears that he would turn him from

the paths of evil. And Nauder listened unto the voice of Saum the

Pehliva, and joy was abroad once more.

But the tidings spread, even into Turan, that Minuchihr the just was

departed, and that the hand of Nauder was heavy upon the land. And

Poshang, who was of the race of Tur, heard the news thereof with gladness,

for he deemed that the time was ripe to remember the vengeance that

was due unto the blood of his sire. Therefore he called about him

his warriors, and bade them go forth to war against Iran, saying the

time was come to avenge his father and draw unto himself the heritage.

And while his son Afrasiyab made ready the host to fulfil the desire

of his father, there spread the news that Saum the Pehliva had been

gathered unto the dust, and that Zal tarried in his house to build

him a tomb. And the news gave courage unto Afrasiyab and his men,

and they made haste to gain the frontier.

But the grandson of Feridoun had learned of their coming, and he prepared

him to meet the foes of his land. Then he sent forth an army that

overshadowed the earth in its progress. But the army of Afrasiyab

was great also, and it covered the ground like unto ants and locusts.

And both hosts pitched their tents in the plains of Dehstan, and made

them ready for the fight. And the horses neighed loud, and the pawing

of their hoofs shook the deep places of the earth, and the dust of

their trampling uprose even unto heaven. Then when they had put their

men into array, they fell upon each other, and for two days did they

rage in fierce combat, neither did the victory lean to either side.

And the clamour and confusion were mighty, and earth and sky seemed

blended into one. And the carnage was great, and blood flowed like

water, and heads fell from their trunks like unto autumn leaves that

are withered. But on the third day it came about that the upper hand

was given unto the men of Turan, and Nauder the King, and the flower

of his army with him, fell into the hands of the foe.