Then Afrasiyab cut off the head of Nauder the Shah, and sat himself

down upon the throne of light. And he proclaimed himself lord of Iran,

and required of all men that they should do him homage, and pour gifts

before his face. But the people would not listen unto his voice, and

they sent messengers into Seistan, and craved counsel of the Pehliva

in their distress. And Zal, when he heard their tidings, cast aside

the sorrow for Saum his father, and girded his loins in enmity against

the son of Tur. And he bade the Iranians choose out Zew, the son of

Thamasp, of the blood of Feridoun, of wisdom in speech, that he should

rule over them on the throne of the Kaianides. And the people did

as Zal commanded.

Now the throne of Feridoun grew young again under the sway of Zew.

With power did he beat back the host of Turan, a covenant of peace

did he wring from their hands. And it was written that the Jihun should

divide the lands, and that the power of Zal the Pehliva should end

where men take up their abode in tents. And Zew ruled rightly in the

sight of Ormuzd, and God gave unto the land the key of abundance.

Yet few were the years that he commanded with equity, and Garshasp

his son reigned in his stead. But neither to him was it given to reign

long with glory, and bitter fruit sprouted yet again from the tree

of misfortune. For the throne of the Kaianides was empty, and Afrasiyab,

when he learned thereof, followed the counsels of Poshang his father,

and hurried him unto the land of Iran, that he might place himself

upon the seat of power. And all the men of Iran, when they learned

thereof, were sore afraid, and they turned them once again unto the

son of Saum. And they spake unto him hard words, and heaped reproaches

upon him that he had not averted these dangers from their heads. And

Zal in his heart smiled at their ingratitude and lipwisdom, but he

also sorrowed with them and with his land. And he spake, saying-

"I have ever done for you what was fitting and right, and all my life

have I feared no enemy save only old age. But that enemy is now upon

me, therefore I charge you that ye look unto Rustem to deliver you.

Howbeit he shall be backed by the counsels of his father."

Then he called before him his son, who was yet of tender age, and

he said unto him-

"O my son, thy lips still smell of milk, and thy heart should go out

to pleasure. But the days are grave, and Iran looketh unto thee in

its danger. I must send thee forth to cope with heroes."

And Rustem answered and said, "Thou knowest, O my father, that my

desires are rather after war than pleasures. Give unto me, therefore,

a steed of strength and the mace of Saum thy father, and suffer that

I go out to meet the hosts of Ahriman."