Now when Tus arrived and learned what was come to pass, he was confounded;

and when tidings thereof reached Kai Kaous, he was struck down with

dismay. He cried out against Afrasiyab, and against Saiawush his son,

and his anger was kindled. Yet he refrained from combat, and his mouth

was silent of war.

In the meantime Saiawush was come into Turan, and all the land had

decked itself to do him honour. And Piran came forth to greet him,

and there followed after him elephants, white of hue, richly caparisoned,

laden with gifts. And these he poured before Saiawush, and gave him

welcome. And he told him how Afrasiyab yearned to look upon his face,

and he said-

"Turn thee in amity unto the King, and let not thy mind be troubled

concerning that which thou hast heard about him. For Afrasiyab hath

an ill fame, but he deserveth it not, for he is good."

Then Piran led Saiawush before Afrasiyab. And when Afrasiyab saw him,

he rejoiced at his strength and his beauty, and his heart went out

towards him, and he embraced him, and spake, saying-

"The evil that hath disturbed the world is quieted, and the lamb and

the leopard can feed together, for now is there friendship between

our lands."

Then he called down blessings upon the head of Saiawush, and he took

him by the hand and seated him beside him on the throne. And he turned

to Piran, and said-

"Kai Kaous is a man void of sense, or surely he would not suffer a

son like unto this to depart from out his sight."

And Afrasiyab could not cease from gazing upon Saiawush, and all that

he had he placed it at his command. He gave to him a palace, and rich

brocades, and jewels and gold past the counting; and he prepared for

him a feast, and there were played the games of skill, and Saiawush

showed his prowess before Afrasiyab. And the sight of Saiawush became

a light to the eyes of the King of Turan and a joy unto his heart,

and he loved him like to a father. And Saiawush abode within his courts

many days, and in gladness and in sorrow, in gaiety or in sadness,

Afrasiyab would have none other about him. And the name of Saiawush

abode ever upon his lips. And in this wise there rolled twelve moons

over their heads, and in the end Saiawush took unto himself to wife

the daughter of Piran the Pehliva. And yet again the heavens revolved

above his head, and he continued to abide within the house of Afrasiyab.

Then Piran gave counsel unto Saiawush that he should ask of Afrasiyab

the hand of his daughter to wife. For he said-

"Thy home is now in Turan, wherefore it behoveth thee to establish

thy might; and if Afrasiyab be thy father indeed, there can no hurt

come near to thee. And peradventure, if a son be born unto thee of

the daughter of Afrasiyab, he will bind up for ever the enmity of

the lands."