But when the sun had unsheathed its sword of light and the sombre

night was fled in fear, Kai Khosrau commanded that the trumpets of

departure sound. Then the army came before the Shah, and he gave into

the keeping of Tus the standard of Kawah, and he bade him lead forth

the hosts. And he said unto Tus-

"Be obedient unto my will and lead mine army aright. I desire of thee

that thou avenge the death of my father, but I desire also that thou

molest none but those that fight. Have mercy upon the labourer and

spare the helpless. And furthermore, I charge thee that thou pass

not through the land of Kelat, but that thou leave it on one side

and take thy course through the desert. For in Kelat abideth Firoud

my brother, who was born of the daughter of Piran, and he dwelleth

in happiness, and I would not that sorrow come nigh unto him. And

he knoweth no man in Iran, not even by name, and unto no man hath

he done hurt, and I desire that no harm come to him."

And Tus said, "I will remember thy will and take the road that thou

commandest."

Then the army set forth towards Turan, and they marched many days

until they came to a spot where the roads parted. And the one led

unto the desert, arid and devoid of water, and the other led unto

Kelat. Now when they were come to the parting of the roads the army

halted until Tus should have told unto them which road they should

follow. And when Tus came up he said unto Gudarz-

"The desert is void of water, and what shall we do deprived thereof,

for the army sore needeth refreshment after its march of weariness?

It is better, therefore, that we should take the road that leadeth

to Kelat, and abide there a while that our men may be rested."

And Gudarz said, "The King hath set thee at the head of his army,

but I counsel thee choose the path that he hath named, lest sorrow

come upon thee."

But Tus laughed, and said, "O noble hero, disquiet not thyself, for

what I do is pleasing in. the sight of the King."

Then he commanded the army that they march into Kelat, and he remembered

not the desires of Kai Khosrau.

Now when Firoud saw that the sky was darkened with dust from the feet

of dromedaries and elephants of battle, he called before him Tokhareh

his counsellor, and questioned him concerning these things. And Tokhareh

said-

"O young man, thou knowest not what is come to pass. This army pertaineth

unto thy brother, and he hath sent it forth into Turan that the death

of thy father be avenged; and it marcheth right upon Kelat, and I

know not where the battle may take place."

Now Firoud, who was void of experience, was troubled when he learned

this; and he made safe his castle that was upon a high hill, and he

gathered in his flocks. Then he seated himself upon the ramparts and

looked down over the sea of armour that approached him. And when he

had done so he went in before his mother, who had never ceased from

weeping for Saiawush her spouse. And he told her what was come about,

and he asked of her how he should act. Then she said unto him-