"Go forth and question the stranger who regardeth us, for I bethink

me that he is a Peri, or that Saiawush is come back unto the earth,

for no mortal can own such beauty, neither can any man enter here."

Then one went forth and bare unto Byzun this message. And his heart

leaped thereat, and he said-

"Say unto your mistress that I am come forth from Iran to slay the

wild boars of Arman. And I came hither that perchance I might gaze

upon the face of the daughter of Afrasiyab, for tidings of her beauty

were told unto me, and reached even unto Iran. Go, therefore, and

ask if I may speak with her."

Then the handmaidens did as Byzun desired, and Manijeh said, "Let

him come forth."

So Byzun entered into the tents of Manijeh, and she received him with

joy, and she caused his feet to be washed with musk and amber, and

she poured jewels before him, and prepared for him a feast of sweet

meats. And slaves stood around and made soft music, and the heart

of Byzun was ensnared in the meshes of the net that had been spread.

And three days and three nights did he sojourn beside Manijeh, and

his passion for her waxed greater, and he thought not of Iran, neither

of the time of departure. And Manijeh too rejoiced in his presence,

and when the time was come for her to quit the garden of spring she

would not part with him. So she gave unto him a cup wherein she had

mingled a potion. And the wine caused Byzun to sleep, and while he

slept the maidens bare him in a litter even into the house of Afrasiyab.

And Manijeh hid him behind the curtains of the women, and none, save

only her handmaidens, were aware of his presence.

Now when Byzun awoke he asked whither he was come, and when he learned

that he was in the house of Afrasiyab he was afraid, and desired to

return unto Iran. But Manijeh quieted his distrust, and he forgot

his fears in her love. And she made the earth glad about him, and

the hours fled on the wings of wine and of joy. And many days sped

thus, and none knew what passed in the house of the women.

Then it came about that a guardian of the door learned thereof, and

he came before Afrasiyab, and told unto him that his daughter hid

within her house a man of the race of Iran. And Afrasiyab, when he

learned it, was beside himself with anger, and he cursed Manijeh,

and he said-

"The hour is come unto this man."

Then he called for Gersiwaz, his brother, and bade him go forth with

a band of armed men unto the house of the women. And Gersiwaz did

as Afrasiyab commanded, and he put guards at all the doors. Then the

sounds of lutes and of rejoicing fell upon his ear, for none were

aware of the vengeance that was come upon them. And when Gersiwaz

was come unto the house of Manijeh, the daughter of Afrasiyab, he

brake open the doors, and stood in the midst of the revels. And he

beheld within the chamber many slaves playing on lutes of gold, and

fair women that handed the wine-cups. And Manijeh was seated upon

a throne of gold, and beside her was Byzun, the son of Gew, the Iranian,

and joy was painted on his visage.