Now when they were come there they rested them a while, and feasted

in the house of Zal. And while they revelled there came out to join

them riders from Cabul and from Ind, and wherever there was a king

of might he sent over his army to aid them. Then when a month had

rolled above their heads they took their leave of Zal and of Zaboulistan,

and went forward till they came unto Balkh. And at Balkh the men of

Turan met them, and Gersiwaz, the brother of Afrasiyab, was at their

head. Now when he saw the hosts of Iran, he knew that the hour to

fight was come. So the two armies made them in order, and they waged

battle hot and sore, and for three days the fighting raged without

ceasing, but on the fourth victory passed over to Iran. Then Saiawush

called before him a scribe, and wrote a letter, perfumed with musk,

unto Kai Kaous his father. And when he had invoked the blessings of

Heaven upon his head, he told him all that was come to pass, and how

he had conquered the foes of Iran. And Kai Kaous, when he had read

the letter, rejoiced, and wrote an answer unto his son, and his gladness

shone in his words, and you would have said it was a letter like to

the tender green of spring.

But Afrasiyab, when he learned the news, was discomfited, and that

which Gersiwaz told unto him was bitter to his taste, and he was beside

himself for anger. Now when he had heard his brother to an end, Afrasiyab

laid him down to slumber. Yet ere the night was spent there came out

one to the house of Gersiwaz and told unto him that Afrasiyab was

shouting like to a man bereft of reason. Then Gersiwaz went in unto

the King, and he beheld him lying upon the floor of his chamber roaring

in agony of spirit. Then he raised him, and questioned him wherefore

he cried out thus. But Afrasiyab said-

"Question me not until I have recovered my wits, for I am like to

one possessed."

Then he desired that torches be brought within to light up the darkness,

and he gathered his robes about him and mounted upon his throne. And

when he had done so he called for the Mubids, and he recounted to

them the dream that had visited his slumber. And he told how that

he had seen the earth filled with serpents, and the Iranians were

fallen upon him, and evil was come to him from Kai Kaous and a boy

that stood beside him on the throne. And he trembled as he related

his dream, and he would take no comfort from the words of Gersiwaz.

Now the Mubids as they listened were afraid, and when Afrasiyab bade

them open their lips, they dared not for fear. Then the King said

that he would cleave open their heads if they spake not, and he sware

unto them a great oath that he would spare them, even though the words

they should utter be evil. Then they revealed to him how it was written

that Saiawush would bring destruction upon Turan, and how he would

be victorious over the Turks, and how, even though he should fall

by the hands of Afrasiyab, this evil could not be stayed. And they

counselled Afrasiyab to contend no longer against the son of Kai Kaous,

for surely if he stayed not his hand this evil could not be turned

aside.