"If I learn nought concerning him until the feast of Neurouz be come,

I will search for him in the crystal globe wherein I can behold the

world, and read the secrets of destiny."

Now when the horsemen had sought Byzun in vain throughout the plains

of Iran and in the gorges of the land of Arman, they returned them

unto the courts of the Shah. So when the feast of Neurouz was come,

Kai Khosrau clothed himself in a robe of Roum, and he took from off

his head the crown of the Kaianides, and he presented himself in humility

before Ormuzd. Then he took in his hand the globe of crystal, and

he prayed to God that He would grant unto him to behold the seven

zones of the world. And God granted it. And Kai Khosrau surveyed all

the lands of the earth, and nowhere upon them could he behold Byzun.

And he was downcast and sad in his spirit, for he deemed that Byzun

was departed from the world. Then Ormuzd showed unto him where he

was hidden in a pit, and Kai Khosrau beheld him, and the damsel that

watched beside him. So he called before him Gew, and said-

"Let thy heart cease from sorrow, for thy son liveth, and he is tended

by a maiden of noble birth. But he is bound, and a mighty stone is

laid above his prison, and Rustem alone can deliver him. Wherefore

I counsel thee, speed forth unto Zaboulistan and entreat the son of

Zal that he come unto our aid yet again."

Then Kai Khosrau wrote a letter unto Rustem, wherein he told him all

that was come about, and he gave the writing unto Gew. And Gew sped

forth therewith unto Zaboulistan.

Now when he was come within the courts of Rustem, Zal beheld him from

afar, and he feared that evil was come upon Iran since the Shah sent

forth a man of might like unto Gew to be his messenger. So he came

forth in haste and questioned him. And when he learned his mission

he bade him come within, and he told him how Rustem was gone forth

to chase the wild ass, and he made a feast for him, and entertained

him until his son was returned within the courts. Now when Rustem

learned the tidings, his eyes were filled with tears, but he spake

comfort unto Gew, and he said-

"Be not disquieted, for verily Rustem shall not remove the saddle

from Rakush until he hath grasped the hand of Byzun, and broken his

chains and his prison."

And when he had read the letter of the Shah, he made him ready to

go, before Kai Khosrau. And when he was come into his presence, he

did obeisance before him, and he said-

"O King of kings, I am ready to do thy commandments, for my mother

brought me into the world that I might weary myself for thee, and

unto thee pertaineth rest and joy, and unto me combat everlasting."