"O hero without flaw, is it well that thou shouldest seek to make

me captive, and show me unto the army? For they have beheld our combat,

and that I overcame thee, and surely now they will gibe when they

learn that thy strength was withstood by a woman. Better would it

beseem thee to hide this adventure, lest thy cheeks have cause to

blush because of me. Therefore let us conclude a peace together. The

castle shall be thine, and all it holds; follow after me then, and

take possession of thine own."

Now Sohrab, when he had listened, was beguiled by her words and her

beauty, and he said-

"Thou dost wisely to make peace with me, for verily these walls could

not resist my might."

And he followed after her unto the heights of the castle, and he stood

with her before its gates. And Gustahem, when he saw them, opened

the portal, and Gurdafrid stepped within the threshold, but when Sohrab

would have followed after her she shut the door upon him. Then Sohrab

saw that she had befooled him, and his fury knew no bounds. But ere

he was recovered from his surprise she came out upon the battlements

and scoffed at him, and counselled him to go back whence he was come;

for surely, since he could not stand against a woman, he would fall

an easy prey before Rustem, when the Pehliva should have learned that

robbers from Turan were broken into the land. And Sohrab was made

yet madder for her words, and he departed from the walls in his wrath,

and rode far in his anger, and spread terror in his path. And he vowed

that he would yet bring the maid into subjection.

In the meantime Gustahem the aged called before him a scribe, and

bade him write unto Kai Kaous all that was come about, and how an

army was come forth from Turan, at whose head rode a chief that was

a child in years, a lion in strength and stature. And he told how

Hujir had been bound, and how the fortress was like to fall into the

hands of the enemy; for there were none to defend it save only his

daughter and himself and he craved the Shah to come to their aid.

Albeit when the day had followed yet again upon the night, Sohrab

made ready his host to fall upon the castle. But when he came near

thereto he found it was empty, and the doors thereof stood open, and

no warriors appeared upon its walls. And he was surprised, for he

knew not that in the darkness the inmates were fled by a passage that

was hidden under the earth. And he searched the building for Gurdafrid,

for his heart yearned after her in love, and he cried aloud-

"Woe, woe is me that this moon is vanished behind the clouds!"

Now when Kai Kaous had gotten the writing of Gustahem, he was sore

afflicted and much afraid, and he called about him his nobles and

asked their counsels. And he said-