And all the land was glad that a son was come unto Zal the hero, and

the sounds of feasting and joy were heard throughout its breadth.

Then fleet messengers brought the sweet tidings unto Saum. And they

bare with them an image of Rustem sewn of silk, whereon were traced

the features of this lion's whelp, and a club was put into its hands,

and it was mounted upon a dromedary. Now when Saum beheld the image

his heart leaped up within him. He poured mountains of gold before

the messengers, and gave thanks unto Ormuzd that he had suffered his

eyes to look upon this child.

And when eight summers had rolled above their heads, Saum learned

that Rustem was mighty of stature and fair of mien, and his heart

yearned towards him. He therefore made ready a mighty host and passed

unto Zaboulistan, that he might look upon his son. And Rustem rode

forth to meet his sire, mounted upon an elephant of war, and when

he beheld Saum he fell upon his face and craved his blessing. And

Saum blessed Rustem, the son of Zal.

Then Rustem spake unto Saum and said, "O Pehliva, I rejoice in that

I am sprung from thee, for my desires are not after the feast, neither

do I covet sleep or rest. My heart is fixed upon valour, a horse do

I crave and a saddle, a coat of mail and a helmet, and my delight

is in the arrow. Thine enemies will I vanquish, and may my courage

be like unto thine."

And Saum, when he had heard these words, was astonished, and blessed

Rustem yet again. And his eyes could not cease from gazing upon the

face of the boy, and he lingered in the land until a moon had run

her course.

Now it befell that when yet two springs had passed, Rustem was awakened

from his slumber by a mighty roaring that shook the walls of the house,

even unto the foundation, and a cry went forth that the white elephant

of the King had broken its chain in fury, and that the housemates

were in danger. And Rustem, when he learned it, sprang from his bed,

and desired of the guards that they should suffer him to pass into

the court that he might conquer the beast. But the guards barred the

way from him, saying-

"How can we answer for it before the King if thou run into danger?"

But Rustem would not listen to their voice. He forced a passage for

himself with his mighty arms, with his strong fists he broke down

the barriers of the door. And when he was without he beheld how that

all the warriors were sore afraid of the elephant, because that he

was mad with rage. And Rustem was ashamed for them in his soul, and

he ran towards the beast with a loud cry. Then the elephant, when

he saw him, raised his trunk to strike him, but Rustem beat him upon

the head with his club, and smote him that he died. And when he had

done this deed, he returned unto his bed and slept until the morning.

But the news of his prowess spread throughout the house of the King

and far into the land, even unto the realms of Saum. And Zal, and

all men with him, rejoiced because a hero was arisen in Iran.