"May it please the Shah to tell unto us wherein we have failed that

we are shut out from his presence."

Then Kai Khosrau answered and said, "The fault is not with you, and

the sight of my nobles is a feast unto mine eyes. But my heart hath

conceived a desire that will not be quieted, and it giveth me rest

neither by day nor by night and I know not how it will end. Yet the

time is not ripe to tell unto you my secrets, but verily I will speak

when the hour is come. Return, therefore, unto your homes, and be

glad in your spirits, and rejoice in the wine-cup, for no foe troubleth

the land, and prosperity hangeth over Iran."

Then when he had so spoken, Kai Khosrau dismissed them graciously.

But when they were departed he gave commandment that the curtains

be closed, and that no man be suffered to enter his courts. And he

presented him yet again before God, and he prayed in the fervour of

his spirit, and he entreated of Ormuzd that He would suffer him to

depart from the world now that his task therein was ended. For he

beheld that this life is but vanity, and he yearned to go hence unto

his Maker. And for the space of five weeks did Kai Khosrau stand thus

before his God, and he could neither eat nor sleep, and his heart

was disquieted.

Now it came about one night that Kai Khosrau fell asleep for weariness.

And there appeared unto him a vision, and the Serosch, the angel of

God, stood before him. And he spake words of comfort to Kai Khosrau,

and he said that the Shah had done that which was right in the sight

of God, and he bade him prepare for his end, and he said-

"Before thou goest hence choose from amongst thy nobles a king that

is worthy the throne. And let him be a man that hath a care of all

things that are created, even unto the tiny emmet that creepeth along

the ground. And when thou hast ordered all things, the moment of thy

departure shall be come."

When Kai Khosrau awoke from his dream he rejoiced, and poured out

his thanks before God. Then he went unto his throne and seated himself

thereon, and got together his treasures. And he ordered the world

for his departure.

Now while he did so, Zal and Rustem, his son, were come unto the city,

and their hearts were filled with sore displeasure because of that

which the nobles had told unto them. And the army came forth to greet

them, and they wept sore, and prayed of Zal that he would turn back

unto them the heart of Kai Khosrau. And they said, "A Deev hath led

him astray." Then Zal and Rustem went in before the Shah. And Kai

Khosrau, when he saw them, was amazed, but he was glad also, and he

gave them his hand in greeting. And he accorded to them seats of honour,

as was their due, and when he had done so, he asked of them wherefore

they were come forth. Then Zal opened his mouth and spake, saying-