And Rustem listened and pondered these words in his heart, and knew

that they were good. But he said-

"Fear hath never been known of me, neither hath Rustem shunned the

din of arms, and I depart not because of Sohrab, but because that

scorn and insult have been my recompense."

Yet when he had pondered a while longer, he saw that he must return

unto the Shah. So he did that which he knew to be right, and he rode

till he came unto the gates of Kai Kaous, and he strode with a proud

step into his presence.

Now when the Shah beheld Rustem from afar, he stepped down from off

his throne and came before his Pehliva, and craved his pardon for

that which was come about. And he said how he had been angered because

Rustem had tarried in his coming, and how haste was his birthright,

and how he had forgotten himself in his vexation. But now was his

mouth filled with the dust of repentance. And Rustem said-

"The world is the Shah's, and it behoveth thee to do as beseemeth

thee best with thy servants. And until old age shall my loins be girt

in fealty unto thee. And may power and majesty be thine for ever!"

And Kai Kaous answered and said, "O my Pehliva, may thy days be blessed

unto the end!"

Then he invited him to feast with him, and they drank wine till far

into the night, and held counsel together how they should act; and

slaves poured rich gifts before Rustem, and the nobles rejoiced, and

all was well again within the gates of the King.

Then when the sun had risen and clothed the world with love, the clarions

of war were sounded throughout the city, and men made them ready to

go forth in enmity before the Turks. And the legions of Persia came

forth at the behest of their Shah, and their countless thousands hid

the earth under their feet, and the air was darkened by their spears.

And when they were come unto the plains where stood the fortress of

Hujir, they set up their tents as was their manner. So the watchmen

saw them from the battlements, and he set up a great cry. And Sohrab

heard the cry, and questioned the man wherefore he shouted; and when

he learned that the enemy were come, he rejoiced, and demanded a cup

of wine, and drank to their destruction. Then he called forth Human

and showed him the army, and bade him be of good cheer, for he said

that he saw within its ranks no hero of mighty mace who could stand

against himself. So he bade his warriors to a banquet of wine, and

he said that they would feast until the time was come to meet their

foes in battle. And they did as Sohrab said.

Now when night had thrown her mantle over the earth, Rustem came before

the Shah and craved that he would suffer him to go forth beyond the

camp that he might see what manner of man was this stripling. And

Kai Kaous granted his request, and said that it was worthy a Pehliva

of renown. Then Rustem went forth disguised in the garb of a Turk,

and he entered the castle in secret, and he came within the chamber

where Sohrab held his feast. Now when he had looked upon the boy he

saw that he was like to a tall cypress of good sap, and that his arms

were sinewy and strong like to the flanks of a camel, and that his

stature was that of a hero. And he saw that round about him stood

brave warriors. And slaves with golden bugles poured wine before them,

and they were all glad, neither did they dream of sorrow. Then it

came about that while Rustem regarded them, Zindeh changed his seat

and came nigh unto the spot where Rustem was watching. Now Zindeh

was brother unto Tahmineh, and she had sent him forth with her son

that he might point out to him his father, whom he alone knew of all

the army, and she did it that harm might not befall if the heroes

should meet in battle. Now Zindeh, when he had changed his seat, thought

that he espied a watcher, and he strode towards the place where Rustem

was hid, and he came before him and said-