Now the King, when he had read the letter, and learned how that Arzang

and the White Deev and all his train were slain, was sore troubled,

and he paled in his spirit, and it seemed to him that the sun of his

glory was about to set. Howbeit he suffered not the messenger to behold

his distress, but wrote haughty words unto Kai Kaous, and dared him

to come forth to meet him. And he boasted of his might and reproached

Kai Kaous with his folly. And he threatened that he would raze Iran

unto the dust.

When Kai Kaous had read this answer he was wroth, and his nobles with

him. And Rustem spake and said-

"Permit me, O my Shah, that I go forth before the King of Mazinderan,

and intrust unto me yet another writing."

Then Kai Kaous sent for a scribe, and the scribe cut a reed like to

the point of an arrow, and he wrote with it the words that Kai Kaous

dictated. And Kai Kaous made not many words. He bade the King lay

aside his arrogance, and he warned him of the fate that would await

his disobedience, and he said unto him that if he listened not he

might hang his severed head on the walls of his own city. Then he

signed the letter with his royal seal, and Rustem bore it forth from

the camp.

Now when the King of Mazinderan learned that Kai Kaous sent him yet

another messenger, he bade the flower of his army go forth to meet

him. And Rustem, when he saw them come near, laid hold upon a tree

of great stature and spreading branches that grew by the wayside.

And he uprooted the tree from the earth, and brandished it in his

hands like to a javelin. And those that saw it were amazed at his

strength. Then Rustem, when he beheld their awe, flung the tree among

them, and many a brave man was dismounted by this mace. Then there

stepped forth from the midst of the host one of the giants of Mazinderan,

and he begged that he might grasp Rustem by the hand. And when he

had hold of the hand of the Pehliva he pressed it with all his might,

for he thought that he could wring off this hand of valour. But Rustem

smiled at the feebleness of his grasp, and he grasped him in return,

and the giant grew pale, and the veins started forth upon his hands.

Then one set off to tell the King what he had seen. And the King sent

forth his doughtiest knight, and bade him retrieve the honour of their

strength. And Kalahour the knight said-

"Verily so will I do, and I will force the tears of pain from the

eyes of this messenger."

And he came towards Rustem and wrung his hand, and his gripe was like

to a vise, and Rustem felt the pang thereof, and he winced in his

suffering. But he would not let the men of Mazinderan glory in his

triumph. He took the hand of Kalahour in his own, and grasped it and

crushed it till that the blood issued from its veins and the nails

fell from off its fingers. Then Kalahour turned him and went before

the Shah and showed unto him his hand. And he counselled him to make

peace with the land that could send forth such messengers whose might

none could withstand. But the King was loath to sue for peace, and

he commanded that the messenger be brought before him.