Then the youth that sat upon the throne opened his mouth and said,

"Kai Kobad is known unto me, and if thou wilt enter this garden and

rejoice my soul with thy presence I will give thee tidings concerning

him."

When Rustem heard these words he sprang from off his horse and came

within the gates. And the youth took his hand and led him unto the

steps of the throne. Then he mounted it yet again, and when he had

filled a cup with wine, he pledged the guest within his gates. Then

he gave a cup unto Rustem, and questioned him wherefore he sought

for Kai Kobad, and at whose desire he was come forth to find him.

And Rustem told him of the Mubids, and how that his father had sent

him with all speed to pray the young King that he would be their Shah,

and lead the host against the enemies of Iran. Then the youth, when

he had listened to an end, smiled and said-

"O Pehliva, behold me, for verily I am Kai Kobad of the race of Feridoun!"

And Rustem, when he had heard these words, fell on the ground before

his feet, and saluted him Shah. Then the King raised him, and commanded

that the slaves should give him yet another cup of wine, and he bore

it to his lips in honour of Rustem, the son of Zal, the son of Saum,

the son of Neriman. And they gave a cup also unto Rustem, and he cried-

"May the Shah live for ever!"

Then instruments of music rent the air, and joy spread over all the

assembly. But when silence was fallen yet again, Kai Kobad opened

his mouth and said-

"Hearken, O my knights, unto the dream that I had dreamed, and ye

will know wherefore I called upon you this day to stand in majesty

about my throne. For in my sleep I beheld two falcons white of wing,

and they came out unto me from Iran, and in their beaks they bare

a sunny crown. And the crown they placed upon my head. And behold

now is Rustem come out unto me like to a white bird, and his father,

the nursling of a bird, hath sent him, and they have given unto me

the crown of Iran."

And Rustem, when he had heard this dream, said, "Surely thy vision

was given unto thee of God! But now, I pray thee, up and tarry no

longer, for the land of Iran groaneth sore and awaiteth thee with

much travail."

So Kai Kobad listened to the desires of Rustem, and swung him upon

his steed of war; and they rode day and night, until they came down

from the hills unto the green plains that are watered by murmuring

streams. And Rustem brought the King safely through the outposts of

the enemy; and when the night was fallen, he led him within the tents

of Zal, and none knew that he was come save only the Mubids. For seven

days did they hold counsel together, and on the eighth the message

of the stars was received with joy. And Zal made ready a throne of

ivory and a banquet, and the crown of Iran was placed upon the head

of the young Shah. Then the nobles came and did homage before him,

and they revelled in wine till the night was far spent. And they prayed

him that he would make him ready to lead them against the Turks. And

Kai Kobad mustered the army and did as they desired.