Meantime the news spread even unto Turan, and there too did all men

grieve and weep for the child of prowess that was fallen in his bloom.

And the King of Samengan tore his vestments, but when his daughter

learned it she was beside herself with affliction. And Tahmineh cried

after her son, and bewailed the evil fate that had befallen him, and

she heaped black earth upon her head, and tore her hair, and wrung

her hands, and rolled on the ground in her agony. And her mouth was

never weary of plaining. Then she caused the garments of Sohrab to

be brought unto her, and his throne and his steed. And she regarded

them, and stroked the courser and poured tears upon his hoofs, and

she cherished the robes as though they yet contained her boy, and

she pressed the head of the palfrey unto her breast, and she kissed

the helmet that Sohrab had worn. Then with his sword she cut off the

tail of his steed and set fire unto the house of Sohrab, and she gave

his gold and jewels unto the poor. And when a year had thus rolled

over her bitterness, the breath departed from out her body, and her

spirit went forth after Sohrab her son.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

SAIAWUSH

On a certain day it came about that Tus, Gew, Gudarz, and other brave

knights of Iran went forth to chase wild asses in the forests of Daghoui.

Now when they were come into the wood, they found therein a woman

of surpassing beauty, and the hearts of Tus and Gew burned towards

her in love. And when they had questioned her of her lineage, and

learned that she was of the race of Feridoun, each desired to take

her to wife. But none would give way unto the other, and hot words

were bandied, and they were like to come unto blows. Then one spake,

and said-

"I counsel you, let Kai Kaous decide between you." And they listened

to the voice of the counsellor, and they took with them the Peri-faced,

and led her before Kai Kaous, and recounted to him all that was come

about. But Kai Kaous, when he beheld the beauty of the maid, longed

after her for himself, and he said that she was worthy of the throne;

and he took her and led her into the house of his women.

Now after many days there was born to her a son, and he was of goodly

mien, tall and strong, and the name that was given to him was Saiawush.

And Kai Kaous rejoiced in this son of his race, but he was grieved

also because of the message of the stars concerning him. For it was

written that the heavens were hostile unto this infant; neither would

his virtues avail him aught, for these above all would lead him into

destruction.

In the meantime the news that a son had been born unto the Shah spread

even unto the land of Rustem. And the Pehliva, when he learned thereof,

aroused him from his sorrow for Sohrab, and he came forth out of Zaboulistan,

and asked for the babe at the hands of its father, that he might rear

it unto Iran. And Kai Kaous suffered it, and Rustem bare the child

unto his kingdom, and trained him in the arts of war and of the banquet.

And Saiawush increased in might and beauty, and you would have said

that the world held not his like.