"We have regarded this affair too lightly, for it is full of danger.

Wherefore I have no place in the house of Rustem, neither should he

enter into mine, for the sword must decide our strife. For which cause

I shall not bid him unto my feast."

Then Bashuntan answered and said, "A Deev hath led thee astray, O

my brother, for it is not fitting that men like unto Rustem and Isfendiyar

should meet in enmity. Wherefore I counsel thee that thou listen not

unto our father, for his desires are evil, and he seeketh but to ensnare

thee. Yet thou art wiser than he; abandon, therefore, this device

of evil."

But Isfendiyar answered and said, "If I obey not the words of the

King, my father, it will be a reproach unto me in this world, and

I shall have to render account for it in the next before God, my Maker.

And I would not lose both worlds because of Rustem."

Then Bashuntan said, "I have given unto thee counsel according to

my wisdom, it resteth with thee to do as thou desirest."

Then Isfendiyar bade the cooks serve before him the banquet, but he

sent not forth to call Rustem unto the feast.

Now Rustem, when he had waited a long while and beheld that Isfendiyar

sent not to call him forth, was angered, and he said-

"Is this the courtesy of a King?"

And he sprang upon Rakush and rode unto the tents of the prince that

he might question him wherefore he regarded Rustem thus lightly. Now

the warriors of Iran, when they beheld the Pehliva, murmured among

themselves against Gushtasp, and they spake as with the voice of one

man, that surely the Shah was bereft of reason or he would not thus

send Isfendiyar unto death. And they said-

"Gushtasp loveth yet more his treasures and his throne as age creepeth

upon him, and this is but a device to preserve them unto himself."

Now Rustem, when he had presented himself before Isfendiyar, spake

and said-

"O young man, it would seem unto me that thou didst not deem thy guest

worthy a messenger. Yet I say unto thee that it is I who have made

the throne of Iran to shine out unto all the world, and I have ever

been the Pehliva of its Shahs, and have endured much pain and toil

for their sakes. And I have not passed a day save in doing that which

is right, and I have purged the land of its enemies. I am the protector

of the Kings of Iran, and the mainstay of the good in all places of

the earth. Wherefore it behoveth thee not to treat me thus disdainfully."

Then Isfendiyar said, "O Rustem, be not angered against me, but listen

wherefore I sent not forth to call thee. For the day was hot and the

road long, and I bethought me that fatigue would come upon thee from

this course. Therefore I had resolved to visit thee in the morning.

But since thou hast taken upon thee this fatigue, I pray of thee that

thou rest within my tents, and that we empty the wine-cup together."