"An thou show not unto me the tents of Rustem, I will strike thy head

from off thy shoulders, and the world shall fade before thine eyes.

Choose, therefore, the truth or thy life."

And Hujir thought within himself, "Though five score men cannot withstand

Rustem when he be roused to battle-fury, my mind misgiveth me that

he may have found his equal in this boy. And, for that the stripling

is younger, it might come about that he subdue the Pehliva. What recketh

my life against the weal of Iran? I will therefore abandon me into

his hands rather than show unto him the marks of Rustem the Pehliva."

So he said-

"Why seekest thou to know Rustem the Pehliva? Surely thou wilt know

him in battle, and he shall strike thee dumb, and quell thy pride

of youth. Yet I will not show him unto thee."

When Sohrab heard these words he raised his sword and smote Hujir,

and made an end of him with a great blow. Then he made himself ready

for fight, and leaped upon his steed of battle, and he rode till he

came unto the camp of the Iranians, and he broke down the barriers

with his spear, and fear seized upon all men when they beheld his

stalwart form and majesty of mien and action. Then Sohrab opened his

mouth, and his voice of thunder was heard even unto the far ends of

the camp. And he spake words of pride, and called forth the Shah to

do battle with him, and he sware with a loud voice that the blood

of Zindeh should be avenged. Now when Sohrab's voice had rung throughout

the camp, confusion spread within its borders, and none of those who

stood about the throne would accept his challenge for the Shah. And

with one accord they said that Rustem was their sole support, and

that his sword alone could cause the sun to weep. And Tus sped him

within the courts of Rustem. And Rustem said-

"The hardest tasks doth Kai Kaous ever lay upon me."

But the nobles would not suffer him to linger, neither to waste time

in words, and they buckled upon him his armour, and they threw his

leopard-skin about him, and they saddled Rakush, and made ready the

hero for the strife. And they pushed him forth, and called after him-

"Haste, haste, for no common combat awaiteth thee, for verily Ahriman

standeth before us."

Now when Rustem was come before Sohrab, and beheld the youth, brave

and strong, with a breast like unto Saum, he said to him-

"Let us go apart from hence, and step forth from out the lines of

the armies."

For there was a zone between the two camps that none might pass. And

Sohrab assented to the demand of Rustem, and they stepped out into

it, and made them ready for single combat. But when Sohrab would have

fallen upon him, the soul of Rustem melted with compassion, and he

desired to save a boy thus fair and valiant. So he said unto him-