When Kai Kaous had listened to the words of his Pehliva, the colour

of shame mounted into his cheek, but he held his peace, for he knew

that the words spoken of Rustem were deserved. Then Rustem, when he

saw that the King answered him not, strode out from his presence.

And he went into the house of the women, and sought for Sudaveh, who

had given over Saiawush unto death. And when he had found her, he

tore her from off her throne, and he plunged his dagger into her heart,

and he quitted her not until the life was gone from her. And Kai Kaous,

when he learned it, trembled and was afraid, for he dared not oppose

himself unto Rustem. Then Rustem commanded that the army of vengeance

be made ready. And he said-

"I will make the earth to tremble before my mace, as it shall tremble

on the day of judgment."

And when all was prepared they made them haste to be gone, and the

air was full of the gleaming of armour, and the rattling of drums

was heard on all sides.

Now when Afrasiyab learned that a great army was come forth from Iran

to avenge the death of Saiawush, he bade Sarkha, the best beloved

of his sons, lead forth the hosts of Turan against them. But he craved

Sarkha have a care that Rustem, the son of Zal, put not his life in

danger. And Sarkha set forth, bearing aloft the black banner of Turan,

and he went towards the plains where Rustem was encamped. Now when

the armies beheld one another, their hearts were inflamed, and the

battle raged sore, and many were the brave heads laid low on that

day. And Sarkha fell into the hands of Rustem, and he spared him not,

because he was the best beloved son of Afrasiyab. So he gave orders

that Sarkha be slain, even as Saiawush was slain, that the heart of

his enemy might be rent with anguish.

And when Afrasiyab learned it he was beside himself with grief. And

when he had torn his hair and wailed in the dust for his son, he arose

to go forth unto the army, that he might avenge his death. And he

said unto his knights-

"Henceforth ye must not think of sleep or hunger, neither must ye

breathe aught but vengeance, for I will never stay my hand until this

murder be avenged."

Now when the army that was with Afrasiyab came nigh unto Rustem, Pilsam,

that was brother to Piran, a warrior valiant and true, challenged

Rustem unto single combat. Then Piran sought to stay him because of

his youth, but Pilsam listened not unto his counsel. So Rustem came

forth against him, and he was armed with a stout lance, and he was

wrapped about with his anger. And he fell upon Pilsam with fury, and

he lifted him from his saddle, and he took him by the girdle and flung

him, as a thing that is vile, into the midst of the camp of the Turanians.

Then he shouted with a voice of thunder-