Then she exhorted him once more that he bring this matter to a good

end, and she led him on the path of return unto Zaboulistan, and when

he was come there she blessed him and departed from out his sight.

Now when the morning was come, Rustem came unto the camp of Isfendiyar,

and he was mounted upon Rakush his steed. And Isfendiyar slumbered,

for he thought that of a surety Rustem was perished of his wounds.

Then Rustem lifted up his voice, and cried-

"O man, eager to fight, wherefore slumberest thou when Rustem standeth

before thee?"

Now Isfendiyar, when he heard his voice and saw that it was truly

Rustem that stood before him, was amazed, and he said unto his nobles-

"This is the deed of Zal the sorcerer."

But unto Rustem he cried, "Make ready for combat; for this day thou

shalt not escape my might. May thy name perish from off the earth."

Then Rustem spake, saying-

"I am not come forth to battle, but to treaty. Turn aside thine heart

from evil, and root out this enmity. Make not, I pray thee, thy soul

to be a dwelling-place for Deevs. And suffer that I recall unto thee

the deeds I have done for Iran, and the list thereof is long. And

feast this day within my house, and let us ride forth together unto

the courts of the Shah, that I may make my peace with Gushtasp thy

father."

But Isfendiyar was angered at these words, and he said-

"Wilt thou never cease from speaking? Thou exhortest me to quit the

paths of God, for I do wrong when I obey not the voice of my father.

Choose, therefore, betwixt chains and the combat."

When Isfendiyar had so spoken, Rustem knew that his speech was of

no avail. So he sighed and made ready for combat; and he took forth

the arrow that was given to him of the Simurgh, and he let it fly

towards his enemy. And it pierced the eye of the young King, and he

fell upon the mane of his steed, and his blood reddened the field

of battle. Then Rustem said unto him-

"The bitter harvest thou hast sown hath borne fruit."

Now Isfendiyar swooned in his agony and fell upon the ground. And

there came out to him his brother and Bahman, his son; and they wailed

when they beheld how his plight was evil. But when he was come unto

himself he called after Rustem, and the Pehliva got him down from

Rakush and came unto where he lay, and knelt beside him. And Isfendiyar

said-

"My life ebbeth unto the close, wherefore I would confide unto thee

my wishes. And thou shalt behold how greatly I honour thee, for it

is not thou that hast brought me unto death, but Gushtasp, my father;

and verily the curse of the prophet shall fall upon his head, for

thou wert but the instrument of Fate. And listen now unto the words

that I shall speak, for it is not given unto me to say many- I desire

that thou take unto thyself Bahman, my son, and that thou rear him

in the land of Zaboulistan, and that thou teach him the arts of war

and of the banquet. And when the hour of Gushtasp shall be come, I

charge thee that thou put Bahman in his place, and aid him with thy

counsels that he may be upright in the sight of men."