"Do the men of Iran refuse tidings unto the poor?"

Then Rustem repented him of his harshness, and said-

"Woman, who art thou, and how do these things regard thee? "

And he caused food to be put before her, and he comforted her with

kind words. Then Manijeh said-

"I am daughter unto Afrasiyab, and my father hath cast me forth because

of Byzun."

And she told him all that was come about, and how she had tended her

beloved, and how she had kept him alive. And she related unto Rustem

how he languished in his chains, and how they put their trust alone

in Rustem the Pehliva. And she said-

"When it was told unto me that men from Iran were come forth, I sped

hither unto thee, for I hoped that tidings of Byzun might come thus

unto the mighty warrior."

When Rustem heard her words he was moved with compassion. And when

he had spoken softly unto her, he gave to her savoury meats, and he

bade her bear them unto Byzun. Now within the body of a fowl he had

hidden a ring whereon was graven his seal. And when Byzun came upon

it, and felt the ring, and that it bare the name of Rustem, his heart

laughed within him, for he knew that the end of his ills was come.

And his lips laughed also, and his laughter shook the walls of the

pit.

Now when Manijeh heard his laughter she was amazed, and she feared

lest his wits were distraught, and she leaned over the mouth of the

pit and spake, saying-

"O man of ill fortune, wherefore is thy heart thus light, thou who

seest neither sun, nor moon, nor stars?"

Then Byzun answered and said, "Hope is sprung up in my breast."

And Manijeh said, "Whence dost thou behold the rays of hope?"

And Byzun answered, "I know not whether I can confide it unto thee,

for a woman cannot keep a secret."

Now Manijeh was pained at these words, and she upbraided Byzun, and

recalled to him all she had suffered for his sake. And Byzun repented

him of his hasty speech, for he knew that she was prudent and strong

of spirit. So he said-

"Swear unto me a great oath, and I will tell it unto thee."

And Manijeh sware. Then Byzun said-

"I know that the merchant who is come forth from Iran is come out

because of me. Go therefore again into his presence, and say unto

him, 'O Pehliva of the King of kings, tell unto me, art thou the master

of Rakush?' "

Now Manijeh, when she had heard these words, sped forth to do the

bidding of Byzun. And she came before Rustem, and spake to him the

words that had been told her. And he answered and said-

"Go say unto thy friend, verily I am the master of Rakush, and that

I am come forth to deliver him."

Then he bade her gather together wood into a pyre, and set light thereto

when the night should be come, that he might know where Byzun was

laid. And Manijeh did as Rustem commanded, and she wearied not to

scour the land, and she stripped the trees of their branches, and

her tender body was torn of thorns; but she bare all gladly for the

sake of Byzun, whom she loved. And when the night was fallen she set

light unto the wood, and Rustem came forth unto the spot, and his

seven comrades came with him. And each strove in turn to lift the

stone that closed the pit, but none could roll it aside. Then Rustem

prayed to God that He would grant him strength, and he came unto the

mouth of the pit, and he bent down his body, and he spake unto Byzun,

and questioned him how he was come into these straits. Then he said-