When Afrasiyab heard these words he would not let them take root in

his spirit, yet he could not refuse countenance to the testimony of

his brother. And he was sad, and spake not, and Gersiwaz knew not

whether the seeds he had strewn had taken root. So when a few days

were gone by he came again before the King and repeated unto him the

charges that he had made, and he urged him to act, and suffer not

Turan to be disgraced. Then Afrasiyab was caught in the meshes of

the net that Gersiwaz had spread. And he bade Gersiwaz go forth and

summon Saiawush unto his courts, and invite him to bring the daughter

of Afrasiyab to feast with her father. And Gersiwaz sped forth with

gladness, and delivered the message of Afrasiyab unto the young King.

Then Saiawush said-

"I am ready to do the will of Afrasiyab, and the bridle of my horse

is tied unto thy charger."

Then Gersiwaz thought within him, "If Saiawush come into the presence

of Afrasiyab, his courage and open spirit will give the lie unto my

words."

So he feigned before Saiawush a great sorrow, and when the King questioned

him thereof he consented to pour out before him the griefs of his

spirit. And he said to him how that he loved him tenderly, and how

he was in sorrow for his sake, because that the ear of Afrasiyab had

been poisoned against him, and he counselled him that he should not

seek the courts of the King. And he said-

"Suffer me to return alone, and I will soften the heart of Afrasiyab

towards thee; and when he shall be returned unto a right spirit, I

will summon thee forth unto his house."

Now Saiawush, who was true and void of guile, listened unto these

words, for he knew not that they were false. So he sent words of greeting

and of excuse unto Afrasiyab, and he said that he could not quit the

chamber of Ferangis, for she was sick and chained unto her couch.

And Gersiwaz rode forth bearing the letter, and he sware unto Saiawush

that he would cement the peace that was broken. But when he came unto

Afrasiyab he delivered not the writing, but spake evil things of Saiawush,

and maligned him. And he fed the anger of Afrasiyab, until the King

commanded that the army be led forth to go against Saiawush his friend,

and he took the lead thereof himself.

Now when the men of Turan came nigh unto the city that Saiawush had

builded, Gersiwaz sent an envoy unto Saiawush, saying-

"Flee, I counsel thee, for my words have availed nought, and Afrasiyab

cometh forth in enmity against thee."

When Saiawush learned this he was sore downcast in his spirit, and

he went unto Ferangis and charged her how she should act when he should

be fallen by the hands of Afrasiyab, for he held it vile to go forth

in combat with one who had been to him a father. So he made ready

his house for death. Now when he came to his steed of battle he pressed

its head unto his breast, and he wept over it and spake into its ear.

And he said-