"O Shah, live for ever I bear a message from the humblest of thy slaves,

who are bowed unto the earth with contrition, wherefore they have

not ventured into thy presence. And they pray that thou pardon their

evil deed, for their hearts are good, and they did it not of themselves,

but because it was written that they should do this wrong, and that

which is written in the stars surely it is accomplished. And therefore,

O King, their eyes are filled with tears, and they pray thee incline

unto them thine ear. And as a sign of thy grace send unto them Minuchihr

thy son, for their hearts yearn to look upon his face and do him homage."

Now when Feridoun had listened to the words of his sons, he knitted

his brows in anger, for he knew that they sought only to beguile him.

And he said unto the messenger-

"Go, say unto your masters that their false-hearted words shall avail

them nothing. And ask them if they be not shamed to utter white words

with tongues of blackness. I have heard their message, hear now the

answer that I send. Ye say unto me that ye desire the love of Minuchihr,

and I ask of you, What did ye for Irij? And now that ye are delivered

of him ye seek the blood of his son. Verily I say unto you, never

shall ye look upon his face save when he leadeth a mighty army. Then

shall be watered with blood the leaves and fruits of the tree sprung

from the vengeance that is due. For unto this day hath vengeance slumbered,

since it became me not to stretch forth mine hand in battle upon my

sons; but now is there sprung a branch from the tree which the enemy

uprooted, and he shall come as a raging lion, girt with the vengeance

of his sire. And I say unto you, take back the treasures ye have sent

me, for think ye that for coloured toys I will abandon my vengeance,

and efface for baubles the blood that ye have spilled, or sell for

gold the head of mine offspring? And say yet again that while the

father of Irij lives he will not abandon his intent. And now that

thou hast listened unto my message, lay it up in thy heart and make

haste from hence."

When the messenger had heard these words he departed with speed. And

when he was come unto Silim and Tur he told them thereof, and how

he had seen Minuchihr sitting upon a throne of gold, and how for strength

he was like unto Tahumers, who had bound the Deevs. And he told how

heroes bearing names that filled the world with wonder stood round

about him, Kawah the smith, and Karun his son, and Serv, the King

of Yemen, and next in might unto the Shah was Saum, the son of Neriman,

the unvanquished in fight, and Guerschasp the victorious, his treasurer.

Then he spake of the treasures that filled the house of Feridoun,

and of the army great in number, so that the men of Roum and China

could not stand against them. And he told how their hearts were filled

with hatred of the Kings because of Irij.