Then he turned him and strode from out the presence-chamber. And he

sprang upon Rakush, who waited without, and he was vanished from before

their eyes ere yet the nobles had rallied from their astonishment.

And they were downcast and oppressed with boding cares, and they held

counsel among themselves what to do; for Rustem was their mainstay,

and they knew that, bereft of his arm and counsel, they could not

stand against this Turk. And they blamed Kai Kaous, and counted over

the good deeds that Rustem had done for him, and they pondered and

spake long. And in the end they resolved to send a messenger unto

Kai Kaous, and they chose from their midst Gudarz the aged, and bade

him stand before the Shah. And Gudarz did as they desired, and he

spake long and without fear, and he counted over each deed that had

been done by Rustem; and he reproached the Shah with his ingratitude,

and he said how Rustem was the shepherd, and how the flock could not

be led without its leader. And Kai Kaous heard him unto the end, and

he knew that his words were the words of reason and truth, and he

was ashamed of that which he had done, and confounded when he beheld

his acts thus naked before him. And he humbled himself before Gudarz,

and said-

"That which thou sayest, surely it is right."

And he entreated Gudarz to go forth and seek Rustem, and bid him forget

the evil words of his Shah, and bring him back to the succour of Iran.

And Gudarz hastened forth to do as Kai Kaous desired, and he told

the nobles of his mission and they joined themselves unto him, and

all the chiefs of Iran went forth in quest of Rustem. And when they

had found him, they prostrated themselves into the dust before him,

and Gudarz told him of his mission, and he prayed him to remember

that Kai Kaous was a man devoid of understanding, whose thoughts flowed

over like to new wine that fermenteth. And he said-

"Though Rustem be angered against the King, yet hath the land of Iran

done no wrong that it should perish at his hands. Yet, if Rustem save

it not, surely it will fall under this Turk."

But Rustem said, "My patience hath an end, and I fear none but God.

What is this Kai Kaous that he should anger me? and what am I that

I have need of him? I have not deserved the evil words that he spake

unto me, but now will I think of them no longer, but cast aside all

thoughts of Iran."

When the nobles heard these words they grew pale, and fear took hold

on their hearts. But Gudarz, full of wisdom, opened his mouth and

said-

"O Pehliva! the land, when it shall learn of this, will deem that

Rustem is fled before the face of this Turk; and when men shall believe

that Tehemten is afraid, they will cease to combat, and Iran will

be downtrodden at his hands. Turn thee not, therefore, at this hour

from thy allegiance to the Shah, and tarnish not thy glory by this

retreat, neither suffer that the downfall of Iran rest upon thy head.

Put from thee, therefore, the words that Kai Kaous spake in his empty

anger, and lead us forth to battle against this Turk. For it must

not be spoken that Rustem feared to fight a beardless boy."