Then Rustem sent a messenger unto Rudabeh, his mother, to make ready

a great feast in his courts. And Bahman sped back unto his father.

Now Isfendiyar, when he had listened unto the words sent by Rustem,

mounted his steed, and rode forth to meet him. And Rustem was come

forth also, and they met beside the stream. Then Rakush swam across

its breadth, and the hero of the world stood before Isfendiyar, and

he greeted him, and did homage unto the son of his Shah. And Rustem

rejoiced in the sight of Isfendiyar, and he deemed that he beheld

in him the face of Saiawush. And he said unto him-

"O young man, let us commune together concerning the things that divide

us."

And Isfendiyar assented unto the desires of Rustem, and he pressed

him unto his bosom, and his eyes could not cease from gazing upon

his strength. Then Rustem said-

"O hero, I have a prayer to make before thee; I crave that thou enter

into my house as my guest."

And Isfendiyar said, "I cannot listen unto thy demand, for the Shah

commanded me neither to rest nor tarry until I should have brought

thee unto him in chains. But I entreat of thee that thou consider

that the chains of the King of kings do not dishonour, and that thou

listen willingly unto the desires of the Shah, for I would not lift

my hand in anger against thee, and I am grieved that it hath been

given unto me to do this thing. But it behoveth me to fulfil the commandments

of my father."

Thus spake Isfendiyar in the unquietude of his spirit, for he knew

that what was demanded of Rustem was not fitting or right. And Rustem

replied, saying-

"It would be counted shame unto me if thou shouldst refuse to enter

into my house. I pray thee, therefore, yet again that thou accede

to my desires, and when it shall be done I will do that which thou

desirest, save only that I cannot submit unto the chains. For no man

hath beheld me fettered, neither shall any do so while I draw my breath.

I have spoken, and that which I have said, it is true."

And Isfendiyar said, "I may not feast with thee, and if thou listen

not to my voice, I must fall upon thee in enmity. But to-day let there

be a truce between us, and drink thou with me in my tents."

And Rustem said, "I will do so gladly, suffer only that I go forth

and change my robes, for I am clad for the chase. And when thy meal

shall be ready, send forth a messenger that he may lead me thither."

And when he had so spoken, Rustem leaped upon Rakush and returned

unto his courts. Now when he had arrayed himself for the banquet,

he awaited the envoy that Isfendiyar should send. But Isfendiyar was

full of cares, and he said unto Bashuntan, his brother-