Then Piran made haste to come before Afrasiyab, and he spake to him

and said-

"The land is changed into a sea of blood, for Rustem is come forth,

and who can stand against him? And he followeth after me close. Wherefore

I counsel thee, flee; for how canst thou stand alone against him?

Alas for the woe that thou hast brought upon Turan! Thou hast wounded

our hearts with the iron of the arrow wherewith thou didst slay Saiawush

the noble."

Then he urged upon him that he tarry not. So Afrasiyab fled from before

the face of Rustem and hid himself in the mountains. And when Rustem

came into his courts and found that the King was fled, he seized upon

much booty and divided it among his men, and he feasted them many

days in the house of Afrasiyab, and he suffered them to enjoy repose.

Then he destroyed with fire the palace, and when he had done so he

turned him to go back unto Kai Khosrau.

Now when he was come within the city of the Shah, glad cries rang

through all the air, and the sound of drums filled the land of Iran,

and there was joy throughout its breadth because the destroyer of

Turan was returned. And the heart of Kai Khosrau rejoiced like a paradise,

and he came out to meet his Pehliva mounted upon an elephant gaily

caparisoned, and music and singers went before him. And he invited

him to a great feast, and he poured rich gifts upon him. And for a

month Rustem abode in the presence of his Shah, making merry with

wine. And the singers chanted of his great deeds, and the sounds of

flutes and stringed instruments went with their words. But when that

time was over Rustem asked of Kai Khosrau that he would suffer him

to return unto Zal his father, for his heart yearned to look upon

his face. And Kai Khosrau suffered it.

Now Rustem was not returned long unto Zaboulistan before there came

into the courts of the Shah a shepherd who desired to speak with Kai

Khosrau. And the Shah granted his request, and the man opened his

mouth before him, and he said-

"A wild ass is broken in among my horses, and he doeth great mischief,

for his breath is like unto a lion. Send forth, therefore, I entreat

of thee, O King of Kings, a warrior of thine host that he may slay

him."

Now Kai Khosrau, when he had listened, knew that this was not a wild

ass but the Deev Akwan, who had taken this disguise upon him. So he

cast about whom he should send forth to meet him, and he knew there

was none other but Rustem, the son of Zal, to whom he could turn in

this strait. So he sent a messenger swift as a cloud before a storm

to summon him forth yet again. And Rustem obeyed the voice of his

Shah, and he set forth in search of the Deev, and he was mounted upon

Rakush his steed. And in his hand was a mighty mace, and round his

wrist was rolled a cord of length. And he went in search of the wild

ass, and when he had found him he threw his cord about him. But the

ass vanished under his hands. Then Rustem knew that it was a Deev,

and that he fought against the arts of magic. Yet was he not dismayed.

And after a while the ass came forth again, and Rustem threw his cord

once more about him. And yet again the Deev vanished under his hand.

And thus did the Deev three days and three nights without ceasing,

so that weariness came upon Rustem and he was heavy with slumber.

So he sought out a spot of safety and he laid him down to rest, and

he bade Rakush browse beside him.