"Not so, thou most ungrateful unto God, thou more cruel than the lion,

the tiger, and the crocodile, for even savage beasts tend their young,

whilst thou didst reject thine own, because thou heldest the white

hair given unto him by his Creator for a reproach in the sight of

men. O faint of heart, arise and seek thy child, for surely one whom

God hath blessed can never perish. And turn thou unto him and pray

that he forgive thee."

When Saum had heard these words he was contrite, and called about

him his army and set forth unto the mountains. And when they were

come unto the mount that is raised up to the Pleiades, Saum beheld

the Simurgh and the nest, and a stripling that was like unto himself

walking around it. And his desire to get unto him was great, but he

strove in vain to scale the crest. Then Saum called upon God in his

humility. And God heard him, and put it into the heart of the Simurgh

to look down and behold the warrior and the army that was with him.

And when she had seen Saum she knew wherefore the chief was come,

and she spake and said-

"O thou who hast shared this nest, I have reared thee and been to

thee a mother, for thy father cast thee out; the hour is come to part

us, and I must give thee again unto thy people. For thy father is

Saum the hero, the Pehliva of the world, greatest among the great,

and he is come hither to seek his son, and splendour awaiteth thee

beside him."

When the youth had heard her words his eyes were filled with tears

and his heart with sorrow, for he had never gazed upon men, though

he had learned their speech. And he said-

"Art thou then weary of me, or am I no longer fit to be thy house-fellow?

See, thy nest is unto me a throne, thy sheltering wings a parent.

To thee I owe all that I am, for thou wast my friend in need."

And the Simurgh answered him saying, "I do not send thee away for

enmity, O my son; nay, I would keep thee beside me for ever, but another

destiny is better for thee. When thou shalt have seen the throne and

its pomp my nest will sink in thine esteem. Go forth, therefore, my

son, and try thy fortune in the world. But that thou mayst remember

thy nurse who shielded thee, and reared thee amid her little ones,

that thou mayst remain under the shadow of her wings, bear with thee

this feather from her breast. And in the day of thy need cast it into

the fire, and I will come like unto a cloud and deliver thee from

danger."

Thus she spake, and raised him in her talons and bore him to the spot

where Saum was bowed to the dust in penitence. Now when Saum beheld

his son, whose body was like unto an elephant's for strength and beauty,

he bent low before the Simurgh and covered her with benison. And he

cried out and said-