"Who shall stand against this Turk? For Gustahem doth liken him in

power unto Rustem, and saith he resembleth the seed of Neriman."

Then the warriors cried with one accord, "Unto Rustem alone can we

look in this danger!"

And Kai Kaous hearkened to their voice, and he called for a scribe

and dictated unto him a letter. And he wrote unto his Pehliva, and

invoked the blessings of Heaven upon his head, and he told him all

that was come to pass, and how new dangers threatened Iran, and how

to Rustem alone could he look for help in his trouble. And he recalled

unto Tehemten all that he had done for him in the days that were gone

by, and he entreated him once again to be his refuge. And he said-

"When thou shalt receive this letter, stay not to speak the word that

hangeth upon thy lips; and if thou bearest roses in thy hands, stop

not to smell them, but haste thee to help us in our need."

Then Kai Kaous sent forth Gew with this writing unto Zaboulistan,

and bade him neither rest nor tarry until he should stand before the

face of Rustem. And he said-

"When thou hast done my behest, turn thee again unto me; neither abide

within the courts of the Pehliva, nor linger by the roadside."

And Gew did as the Shah commanded, and took neither food nor rest

till he set foot within the gates of Rustem. And Rustem greeted him

kindly, and asked him of his mission; and when he had read the writing

of the Shah, he questioned Gew concerning Sohrab. For he said-

"I should not marvel if such an hero arose in Iran, but that a warrior

of renown should come forth from amid the Turks, I cannot believe

it. But thou sayest none knoweth whence cometh this knight. I have

myself a son in Samengan, but he is yet an infant, and his mother

writeth to me that he rejoiceth in the sports of his age, and though

he be like to become a hero among men, his time is not yet come to

lead forth an army. And that which thou sayest hath been done, surely

it is not the work of a babe. But enter, I pray thee, into my house,

and we will confer together concerning this adventure."

Then Rustem bade his cooks make ready a banquet, and he feasted Gew,

and troubled his head with wine, and caused him to forget cares and

time. But when morn was come Gew remembered the commands of the Shah

that he tarry not, but return with all speed, and he spake thereof

to Rustem, and prayed him to make known his resolve. But Rustem spake,

saying-

"Disquiet not thyself, for death will surely fall upon these men of

Turan. Stay with me yet another day and rest, and water thy lips that

are parched. For though this Sohrab be a hero like to Saum and Zal

and Neriman, verily he shall fall by my hands."