Now Afrasiyab knew that the words of Piran were wise, and he gave

ear unto them. So Byzun was led forth unto a desert place and he was

laden with chains of iron and his tender flesh was bound and he was

thrown into a deep hole. And the opening thereof was closed with a

mighty stone that the Deev Akwan had torn from the nethermost sea,

and neither sun nor moon could be seen by Byzun, and Afrasiyab trusted

that his reason would forsake him in this pit. And when he had done

thus unto Byzun, he bade Gersiwaz go in unto the house of the daughter

that had dishonoured him, and tear off her costly robes, and her crown,

and her veil. And he said-

"Let her be cast forth also into the desert, that she may behold the

dungeon wherein Byzun is hid. And say unto her, 'Thou hast been his

Spring, be now his comforter, and wait upon him in his narrow prison."'

And Gersiwaz did as Afrasiyab commanded, and he tore the veil from

off Manijeh, and he caused her to walk barefooted unto the spot where

Byzun was hid.

Now Manijeh was bowed down with sorrow, and she wept sore, and she

wandered through the desert day and night bewailing her fate. And

ever did she return unto the pit, and she sought how she might enter

therein. But she could not move the mighty stone that closed its mouth.

Yet after some days were gone by she found an opening where she could

thrust in her hand. Now when she had found it she rejoiced, and daily

she went forth unto the city and begged of men that they would give

her bread. And none knew her for the daughter of Afrasiyab, but all

had pity upon her sorry plight, and they gave her freely of that which

they had. And she returned with it unto Byzun, and she fed him through

the hole that she had made. And she spake unto him sweet words of

comfort, and she kept his heart alive within him.

Now while these things were passing in Turan, Girgin was returned

unto Iran much discomfited. And he pondered how he should come before

the Shah, and what he should say unto Gew. And he told them that they

had of their combined strength overcome the boars, and he boasted

that he had done deeds of great prowess, and he said that a wild ass

was come forth out of the forest and had borne away Byzun from before

his eyes, and verily he held that it must be a Deev. Then Kai Khosrau

questioned him closely, and when he had done so he saw that Girgin

held not unto his story. So his mind misgave him, and he commanded

that Girgin be put in chains. And he said-

"I will guard thee until I have learned tidings of Byzun."

Now Gew was beside himself with grief because of his only son, whom

he loved, but Kai Khosrau spake comfort unto his soul. And he bade

riders go forth unto all corners of the wind to seek tidings of Byzun,

and he said-