When Afrasiyab heard this message, he took counsel with Gersiwaz,

and he said-

"If I cease from warring against Saiawush surely none of these things

can come about. It beseemeth me to seek after peace. I will send therefore

silver and jewels and rich gifts unto Saiawush, and will bind up with

gold the eye of war."

So he bade Gersiwaz take from his treasures rich brocades of Roum,

and jewels of price, and bear them across the Jihun to the camp of

Saiawush. And he sent a message unto him, saying-

"The world is disturbed since the days of Silim and Tur, the valiant,

since the times of Irij, who was killed unjustly. But now, let us

forget these things, let us conclude an alliance together, and let

peace reign in our borders."

And Gersiwaz did as Afrasiyab bade, and he went forth, and a train

of camels bearing rich presents followed after him. And he marched

till he came within the tents of Saiawush.

Now when he had delivered his message unto Saiawush, the young King

marvelled thereat; and he took counsel with Rustem how they should

act, for he trusted not in the words of Afrasiyab, and he deemed that

poison was hidden under these flowers. And Rustem counselled him that

they should entertain Gersiwaz the space of seven days, and that joy

and feasting should resound throughout the camp, and in the mean season

they would ponder their deeds. And it was done as Rustem said, and

the sounds of revelry were abroad, and Gersiwaz rejoiced in the presence

of Saiawush. But on the eighth day Gersiwaz presented himself before

Saiawush in audience, and demanded a reply. And Saiawush said-

"We have pondered thy message, and we yield to thy request, for we

desire not bloodshed but peace. Yet since it behoveth us to know that

poison be not hidden under thy words, we desire of thee that thou

send over to us as hostages an hundred chosen men of Turan, allied

unto Afrasiyab by blood, that we may guard them as a pledge of thy

words."

When Gersiwaz heard this answer, he sent it unto Afrasiyab by a messenger

quick as the wind. And Afrasiyab, when he heard it, was troubled,

for he said-

"If I give way to this demand I bereave the land of its choicest warriors;

yet if I refuse, Saiawush will deny belief unto my words, and the

evils foretold will fall upon me."

So he chose out from among his army men allied to him by blood, and

he sent them forth unto Saiawush. Then he caused the trumpets to sound,

and retreated with his army unto Turan, and restored unto Iran the

lands he had seized.

Now when Rustem beheld the warriors, and that Afrasiyab had spoken

that which was true, he suffered Gersiwaz to depart; and he held counsel

with Saiawush how they should acquaint Kai Kaous with that which was

come to pass, for Saiawush said-

"If Kai Kaous desire vengeance rather than peace, he will be angered

and commit a deed of folly. Who shall bear unto him these tidings?"