Now after some time the Shah opened his mouth and called before him

Byzun, and he said-

"Lead forth before me Lohurasp, who is sprung from the seed of Husheng,

the Shah."

And Byzun did as Kai Khosrau commanded.

Now when he had brought Lohurasp before the throne, Kai Khosrau descended

from its height, and he gave his hand unto Lohurasp and blessed him.

Then he put upon his head the crown of the Kaianides and saluted him

Shah, and he said-

"May the world be submissive to thy will."

But the nobles, when they saw it, were confounded, and they murmured

among themselves that Lohurasp should have the kingdom, and they questioned

wherefore they should pay allegiance unto him. Then Kai Khosrau was

angered, and he opened his lips, saying-

"Ye speak of that ye know not, and haste hath unbridled your tongues.

For I say unto you that which I have done I have done justly, and

in the sight of God, and I know that Lohurasp is a man worthy the

throne, and that Iran will prosper under his hands. And I desire that

ye salute him Shah, and whosoever regardeth not this, my last desire,

I hold him a rebel unto God, and judgment shall fall upon him."

Now Zal, when he heard these words, knew that they were just. So he

stepped out from among the nobles and came before Lohurasp, and did

obeisance unto him as to the Shah. And the army, when they saw it,

shouted their homage also, and all the land of Iran was made acquainted

with the tidings.

Now when it was done, Kai Khosrau turned him to his nobles, saying-

"I go now to prepare my spirit for death." And when he had so spoken

he entered behind the curtains of his house. And he called before

him his women, and he told unto them how he should depart. And they

wept sore at the tidings. Then Kai Khosrau confided them unto Lohurasp,

and he gave to him safe counsels, and he said-

"Be thou the woof and the warp of justice."

And when all was ready, he gat him upon his horse to go forth into

the mountains. And Lohurasp would have gone also, but Kai Khosrau

suffered it not. But there went with him Zal and Rustem, Gudarz also,

and Gustahem and Gew, and Byzun the valiant, and Friburz, the son

of Kai Kaous, and Tus the Pehliva. And they followed after him from

the plains unto the crest of the mountains. And they ceased not from

mourning that which was done of Kai Khosrau, and they said among themselves

that never had Shah done like unto him. And they strove to change

his purpose. But Kai Khosrau said unto them-

"All is well, wherefore weep ye and trouble my spirit? "

Now when they were gone with him the space of seven days, Kai Khosrau

turned unto his nobles and spake, saying-

"Return now upon the road that ye are come, for I am about to enter

in upon a path where neither herb nor water can be found. Wherefore

I entreat of you that ye spare yourselves this weariness."