Then Rudabeh began privily to deck her house that it might be worthy

a guest. With brocades of Roum and carpets of Ind did she hang it,

and she perfumed it with musk and ambergris, and flowers did she cause

to bloom about the rooms. And when the sun was sunk, and the doors

of the house were locked and the keys withdrawn, a slave went forth

unto Zal, the son of Saum. And she spake unto him in a low voice-

"Come now, for all is ready."

And Zal followed after her. And when they were come to the house of

the women Zal beheld the daughter of the King standing upon the roof,

and her beauty was like unto a cypress on which the full moon shineth.

And when she beheld him, she spake and said-

"I bid thee welcome, O young man, son of a hero, and may the blessing

of Heaven rest upon thee."

And Zal answered her benison, and prayed that he might enter into

nearer converse, for he was on the ground and she was on the roof.

Then the Peri-faced loosened her tresses, and they were long, so that

they fell from the battlements unto the ground. And she said unto

Zal-

"Here hast thou a cord without flaw. Mount, O Pehliva, and seize my

black locks, for it is fitting that I should be a snare unto thee."

But Zal cried, "Not so, O fair one, it would beseem me ill to do thee

hurt."

And he covered her hair with kisses. Then he called for a cord and

made a running knot, and threw it upwards and fastened it to the battlements.

And with a bound he swung himself upon the roof. Then Rudabeh took

his hand and they stepped down together into the golden chambers,

and the slaves stood round about them. And they gazed upon each other

and knew that they excelled in beauty, and the hours slipped by in

sweet talk, while love was fanned in their hearts. Then Zal cried-

"O fair cypress, musk-perfumed, when Minuchihr shall learn of this

he will be angered and Saum also will chide. And they will say I have

forgotten my God, and will lift their hands against me. But I swear

unto thee that this life is to me vile if it be not spent in thy presence.

And I call upon Heaven to hear me that none other but thee will I

call my bride."

And Rudabeh said, "I too will swear unto thee this oath."

So the hours sped, and there arose from out the tents of the King

the sound of drums that announce the coming of the day. Then cried

Zal and Rudabeh of one accord-

"O glory of the world, tarry yet a while, neither arrive so quickly."

But the sun gave no ear to their reproaches, and the hour to part

was come. Then Zal swung himself from the battlements unto the ground,

and quitted the house of his beloved.