"The King hath sent me out that I lead thee before him. I pray thee,

therefore, come unto me, and I swear unto thee that no harm shall

befall thee at his hands. For when I shall have led thee before him,

I will demand as my guerdon that he suffer thee to go unharmed."

So Bahman laid up these words in his spirit, and he went with all

speed unto the courts of Rustem. Now, he found therein none but Zal,

for Rustem was gone forth with his warriors to chase the wild ass.

And Zal came forth with courtesy to greet Bahman, and he asked of

him his desires, and he invited him unto a feast. But Bahman said-

"My mission doth admit of no delay. Isfendiyar hath bidden me not

tarry by the road. Tell me, therefore, where I may find thy son."

Then Zal showed unto him the way.

Now when Bahman was come unto the spot, he beheld a man like unto

a mountain, who was roasting a wild ass for his supper. And in his

hand was a wine-cup, and about him stood brave knights. Then Bahman

said within himself, "Surely this is Rustem," and he watched him from

where he was hid, and he beheld that Rustem devoured the whole of

a wild ass for his meal, and he was amazed at the might and majesty

of this man. Then he thought within him, "Peradventure if I cast down

a rock upon him, I may slay him, for surely even Isfendiyar, my father,

shall not withstand his strength." So he loosened a rock from the

mountain-side, and set it rolling unto the spot where Rustem was encamped.

Now Zevarah heard the sound thereof, and beheld the rock, and he said

unto Rustem-

"Behold a rock that springeth forth from the mountain-side."

But Rustem smiled, and arose not from his seat; and when the rock

was upon him, he lifted up his foot and threw it far unto the other

side. Then Bahman was amazed, but he was affrighted also, and he dared

not come forth at once. Yet when he was come before the Pehliva, Rustem

greeted him kindly, and would have entertained him. And Bahman suffered

it, and he marvelled yet again when he beheld that which was eaten

of Rustem, and he was afraid. Then he delivered unto him the message

of Isfendiyar, his father. And Rustem listened unto it, and when it

was ended he spake, saying-

"Bear greeting unto the hero of renown, and say unto him that I have

longed to look upon his face, and that I rejoice that he is come forth

unto Zaboulistan. But his demand is the device of Deevs, and I would

counsel him that he depart not from the paths of wisdom. And I say

unto him, Count not upon thy strength, for it is given to no man to

shut up the winds within a cage, neither can any man stand against

my might. And I have ever done that which was right before the Shahs,

thy fathers, and no man hath beheld Rustem in chains. Therefore thy

demand is foolish, and I bid thee abandon it, and honour my house

with thy presence. And when we shall have feasted, I will go forth

with thee before Gushtasp, thy father, and the reins of my horse shall

be tied unto thine throughout the journey. And when I shall be come

before the Shah, and shall have taken counsel with him, I know that

his anger against me, which is unjust, will vanish like unto smoke."