"Listen, O my horse, and be brave and prudent; neither attach thyself

unto any man until the day that Kai Khosrau, my son, shall arise to

avenge me. From him alone receive the saddle and the rein."

Then he bade the men of Iran that were about him go back unto their

land, and when all was ready he went forth beyond the gates. But even

yet he hoped to turn from him the suspicions of Afrasiyab, and he

would not suffer his men to offer combat unto the men of Turan. So

he went before Afrasiyab, and questioned him wherefore he was come

out in anger against him. Now Gersiwaz suffered not Afrasiyab to reply,

but heaped reproaches upon Saiawush, and said that he had received

him vilely, and that he had slandered his benefactor. And Saiawush,

when he had listened, was confounded, and in vain did he strive to

bear down the upbraiding of his foe. For the heart of Afrasiyab was

angered yet the more, now that his eyes rested yet again upon the

face of Saiawush, whom he loved, because he deemed that he must give

credit unto the words of his brother, and because distrust of Iran

was graven in his soul. So he hardened himself against the speech

of Saiawush, and he bade the army fall upon his beloved. But Saiawush

remembered his oath, and he stretched not forth his hand against Afrasiyab,

neither did he defend himself from the assaults of his men, and he

bade the warriors that were with him that they unsheathe not the sword.

So speedily were they mown down, and their bodies lay round about

Saiawush their King. And when all were slain a knight stretched out

his hand against Saiawush, yet he slew him not, but bound him with

cords, and led him before Afrasiyab the King. And Afrasiyab commanded

that Saiawush be led forth into a desert place, and that his head

be severed from off his trunk. Now the army murmured when they heard

this command, and beheld the beauty of Saiawush and his face of truth,

and there stepped forth one from among the nobles to plead for him.

But Gersiwaz would not suffer the heart of Afrasiyab to be softened.

Now while Gersiwaz yet spake evil of the young King, there came forth

from the house of the women Ferangis, the daughter of Afrasiyab, and

she demanded audience of her father. And when he would have denied

it, she forced herself into his presence, and she pleaded for her

lord, and she sware that evil tongues had maligned him, and she entreated

of her father that he would not destroy the joy he had given to her.

And she said-

"Listen, O King! if thou destroyest Saiawush, thou becomest a foe

unto thyself. Deliver not by thy folly the land of Turan unto the

winds, and remember the deeds that have been done of Iran in the days

that are gone by. An avenger will arise from out the midst of the

Kaianides. Mayest thou never recall my counsel too late."