And he made ready yet another banquet, and three days they caroused

without ceasing. But on the fourth Gew uprose with resolve, and came

before Rustem girt for departure. And he said-

"It behoveth me to return, O Pehliva, for I bethink me how Kai Kaous

is a man hard and choleric, and the fear of Sohrab weigheth upon his

heart, and his soul burneth with impatience, and he hath lost sleep,

and hath hunger and thirst on this account. And he will be wroth against

us if we delay yet longer to do his behest."

Then Rustem said, "Fear not, for none on earth dare be angered with

me."

But he did as Gew desired, and made ready his army, and saddled Rakush,

and set forth from Zaboulistan, and a great train followed after him.

Now when they came nigh unto the courts of the Shah, the nobles came

forth to meet them, and do homage before Rustem. And when they were

come in Rustem gat him from Rakush and hastened into the presence

of his lord. But Kai Kaous, when he beheld him, was angry, and spake

not, and his brows were knit with fury; and when Rustem had done obeisance

before him, he unlocked the doors of his mouth, and words of folly

escaped his lips. And he said-

"Who is Rustem, that he defieth my power and disregardeth my commands?

If I had a sword within my grasp I would split his head like to an

orange. Seize him, I command, and hang him upon the nearest gallows,

and let his name be never spoken in my presence."

When he heard these words Gew trembled in his heart, but he said,

"Dost thou put forth thy hand against Rustem?"

And the Shah when he heard it was beside himself, and he cried with

a loud voice that Gew be hanged together with the other; and he bade

Tus lead them forth. And Tus would have led them out, for he hoped

the anger of the Shah would be appeased; but Rustem broke from his

grasp and stood before Kai Kaous, and all the nobles were filled with

fear when they saw his anger. And he flung reproaches at Kai Kaous,

and he recalled to him his follies, and the march into Mazinderan

and Hamaveran, and his flight into Heaven; and he reminded him how

that but for Rustem he would not now be seated upon the throne of

light. And he bade him threaten Sohrab the Turk with his gallows,

and he said-

"I am a free man and no slave, and am servant alone unto God; and

without Rustem Kai Kaous is as nothing. And the world is subject unto

me, and Rakush is my throne, and my sword is my seal, and my helmet

my crown. And but for me, who called forth Kai Kobad, thine eyes had

never looked upon this throne. And had I desired it I could have sat

upon its seat. But now am I weary of thy follies, and I will turn

me away from Iran, and when this Turk shall have put you under his

yoke I shall not learn thereof."