The Epic of Kings

By Ferdowsi

Translated by Helen Zimmern

[1883]

----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE SHAHS OF OLD

Kaiumers first sat upon the throne of Persia, and was master of the

world. He took up his abode in the mountains, and clad himself and

his people in tiger-skins, and from him sprang all kindly nurture

and the arts of clothing, till then unknown. Men and beasts from all

parts of the earth came to do him homage and receive laws at his hands,

and his glory was like to the sun. Then Ahriman the Evil, when he

saw how the Shah's honour was increased, waxed envious, and sought

to usurp the diadem of the world. So he bade his son, a mighty Deev,

gather together an army to go out against Kaiumers and his beloved

son Saiamuk and destroy them utterly.

Now the Serosch, the angel who defendeth men from the snares of the

Deevs, and who each night flieth seven times around the earth that

he may watch over the children of Ormuzd, when he learned this, appeared

like unto a Peri and warned Kaiumers. So when Saiamuk set forth at

the head of his warriors to meet the army of Ahriman, he knew that

he was contending against a Deev, and he put forth all his strength.

But the Deev was mightier than he, and overcame him, and crushed him

under his hands.

When Kaiumers heard the news of mourning, he was bowed to the ground.

For a year did he weep without ceasing, and his army wept with him;

yea, even the savage beasts and the birds of the air joined in the

wailing. And sorrow reigned in the land, and all the world was darkened

until the Serosch bade the Shah lift his head and think on vengeance.

And Kaiumers obeyed, and commanded Husheng, the son of Saiamuk, "Take

the lead of the army, and march against the Deevs." And the King,

by reason of his great age, went in the rear. Now there were in the

host Peris; also tigers, lions, wolves, and other fierce creatures,

and when the black Deev heard their roaring he trembled for very fear.

Neither could he hold himself against them, and Husheng routed him

utterly. Then when Kaiumers saw that his well-beloved son was revenged

he laid him down to die, and the world was void of him, and Husheng

reigned in his stead.

Now Husheng was a wise man and just, and the heavens revolved over

his throne forty years. justice did he spread over the land, and the

world was better for his reign. For he first gave to men fire, and

showed them how to draw it from out the stone; and he taught them

how they might lead the rivers, that they should water the land and

make it fertile; and he bade them till and reap. And he divided the

beasts and paired them and gave them names. And when he passed to

a brighter life he left the world empty of a throne of power. But

Tahumers, his son, was not unworthy of his sire. He too opened the

eyes of men, and they learned to spin and to weave; and he reigned

over the land long and mightily. But of him also were the Deevs right

envious, and sought to destroy him. Yet Tahumers overcame them and

cast them to earth. Then some craved mercy at his hands, and sware

how they would show him an art if he would spare them, and Tahumers

listened to their voice. And they taught him the art of writing, and

thus from the evil Deevs came a boon upon mankind.