So the beloved of Ahriman, Zohak the Serpent, sat upon the throne

of Iran, the kingdom of Light. And he continued to pile evil upon

evil till the measure thereof was full to overflowing, and all the

land cried out against him. But Zohak and his councillors, the Deevs,

shut ear unto this cry, and the Shah reigned thus for the space of

a thousand years, and vice stalked in daylight, but virtue was hidden.

And despair filled all hearts, for it was as though mankind must perish

to still the appetite of those snakes sprung from Evil, for daily

were two men slaughtered to satisfy their desire. Neither had Zohak

mercy upon any man. And darkness was spread over the land because

of his wickedness.

But Ormuzd saw it and was moved with compassion for his people, and

he declared they should no longer suffer for the sin of Jemshid. And

he caused a grandson to be born to Jemshid, and his parents called

him Feridoun.

Now it befell that when he was born, Zohak dreamed he beheld a youth

slender like to a cypress, and he came towards him bearing a cow-headed

mace, and with it he struck Zohak to the ground. Then the tyrant awoke

and trembled, and called for his Mubids, that they should interpret

to him this dream. And they were troubled, for they foresaw danger,

and he menaced them if they foretold him evil. And they were silent

for fear three days, but on the fourth one who had courage spake and

said-

"There will arise one named Feridoun, who shall inherit thy throne

and reverse thy fortunes, and strike thee down with a cow-headed mace."

When Zohak heard these words he swooned, and the Mubids fled before

his wrath. But when he had recovered he bade the world be scoured

for Feridoun. And henceforth Zohak was consumed for bitterness of

spirit, and he knew neither rest nor joy.

Now it came about that the mother of Feridoun feared lest the Shah

should destroy the child if he learned that he was sprung from Jemshid's

race. So she hid him in the thick forest where dwelt the wondrous

cow Purmaieh, whose hairs were like unto the plumes of a peacock for

beauty. And she prayed the guardian of Purmaieh to have a care of

her son, and for three years he was reared in the wood, and Purmaieh

was his nurse. But when the time was accomplished the mother knew

that news of Purmaieh had reached the ears of Zohak, and she feared

he would find her son. Therefore she took him far into Ind, to a pious

hermit who dwelt on the Mount Alberz. And she prayed the hermit to

guard her boy, who was destined for mighty deeds. And the hermit granted

her request. And it befell that while she sojourned with him Zohak

had found the beauteous Purmaieh and learned of Feridoun, and when

he heard that the boy was fled he was like unto a mad elephant in

his fury. He slew the wondrous cow and all the living things round

about, and made the forest a desert. Then he continued his search,

but neither tidings nor sight could he get of Feridoun, and his heart

was filled with anguish.