"What death desire ye that the Kamous should die, for his hour is

come?"

Then he threw him among the nobles, and they made an end of him with

their spears, and they flung his body to the vultures.

Now when the Khakan heard of the death of the Kamous, he sware that

he would avenge him, and he sent forth a messenger to defy Rustem.

But Rustem said unto the messenger-

"I seek no quarrel with the Khakan, and in all your army I desire

only to look upon the face of Piran. And I beg of him that he will

come forth to greet me, for my heart burneth towards him, because

he was afflicted for the death of Saiawush, my foster-son, and because

of the good he did unto Kai Khosrau and unto his mother."

So the messenger bare these words unto Piran. And Piran, when he had

taken counsel, listened unto the desires of Rustem, and came into

his tents. And he said-

"I am Piran, leader of the hosts of Turan. Speak unto me thy name."

And Rustem said, "I am Rustem of Zaboulistan, and I am armed with

a mace and a sword of Cabul."

Then he gave him greeting from Kai Khosrau, and he lauded him for

the good deeds that he had done unto Saiawush and to his son, and

he entreated him that he would turn away from Afrasiyab, and go with

him unto Kai Khosrau. And he said-

"Iran desireth not to destroy the innocent. Therefore deliver over

unto me the men upon whose head resteth the blood of Saiawush, and

we will withdraw our hosts, and there shall be peace in the land."

Then Piran said, "That which thou askest, verily it can never be,

for the slayers of Saiawush are near kinsfolk unto Afrasiyab. And

because he hath named me the leader of his hosts, it may not be that

I abandon them. But I say unto thee, that it would be sweeter unto

me to die than to conduct this warfare, and that my heart is torn

because I must lift up the sword of enmity against Kai Khosrau, my

son."

And Rustem saw that the words that Piran spake were true, and he sorrowed

for him. And when they parted it was in friendship, although they

knew that battle must rage between them. Then they drew up their armies,

and for forty days there was waged a battle, mighty and terrible.

And great ravages were committed, and Rustem did deeds of valour,

and the strong and the weak were alike impotent before him. And the

plains were strewn with the bodies of the slain, until that an ant

could not have found a road to pass between them, and the blood of

the wounded streamed on all sides, and heads without bodies and bodies

without heads covered the ground. For neither the claw of the leopard

nor the trunk of the elephant, neither the high mountains nor the

waters of the earth, could prevail against Rustem when he fought at

the head of his hosts. And he slew the mightiest among the Turanians,

and only Piran was he mindful to spare. And the Khakan of China was

enmeshed in his cord, and he sent him bound unto Kai Khosrau with

news of the victory. And when the Turanians fled before his face,

he followed after them and pursued them unto the mountains.