Now when Kai Kaous was come home again unto his land, he sent a writing

unto Afrasiyab. And he said-

"Quit, I command thee, the land of Iran, nor seek to enlarge thyself

at my cost. For knowest thou not that Iran is mine, and that the world

pertaineth unto me?"

But Afrasiyab answered, "The words which thou dost write are not becoming

unto a man such as thou, who didst covet Mazinderan and the countries

round about. If thou wert satisfied with Iran, wherefore didst thou

venture afield? And I say unto thee, Iran is mine, because of Tur

my forefather, and because I subdued it under my hand."

When Kai Kaous had heard these words he knew that Afrasiyab would

not yield save unto force. So he drew up his army into array, and

they marched out to meet the King of Turan. And Afrasiyab met them

with a great host, and the sound of drums and cymbals filled the air.

And great was the strife and bloody, but Rustem broke the force of

Turan, and the fortunes of its army were laid to rest upon the field

of battle. And Afrasiyab, when he beheld it, was discomfited, and

his spirit boiled over like to new wine that fermenteth. And he mourned

over his army and the warriors that he had trained, and he conjured

those that remained to make yet another onslaught, and he spake fair

promises unto them if they would deliver unto his hands Rustem, the

Pehliva. And he said-

"Whoever shall bring him alive before me, I will give unto him a kingdom

and an umbrella, and the hand of my daughter in marriage."

And the Turks, when they heard these words, girded them yet again

for resistance. But it availed them nought, for the Iranians were

mightier than they, and they watered the earth with their blood until

the ground was like a rose. And the fortunes of the Turks were as

a light put out, and Afrasiyab fled before the face of Rustem, and

the remnant of his army went after him.

Then Kai Kaous seated himself once more upon his throne, and men were

glad that there was peace. And the Shah opened the doors of justice

and splendour, and all men did that which was right, and the wolf

turned him away from the lamb, and there was gladness through all

the length of Iran. And the Shah gave thanks unto Rustem that he had

aided him yet again, and he named him Jahani Pehliva, which being

interpreted meaneth the champion of the world, and he called him the

source of his happiness. Then he busied himself with building mighty

towers and palaces, and the land of Iran was made fair at his hands,

and all was well once more within its midst.

But Ahriman the wakeful was not pleased thereat, and he pondered how

he could once again arouse the ambition of the Shah. So he held counsel

with his Deevs how they might turn the heart of Kai Kaous from the

right path. And one among them said-