When the warriors heard these words, they retreated back into the

tents. But Tus was angered exceedingly, and he commanded yet again

that one should go forth to do his behests. Then Rivniz, who was husband

unto the daughter of Tus, said that he would do his desires. So he

rode forth unto the mountain.

Now when Firoud beheld a horseman, who brandished aloft his sword

in enmity, he said unto Tokhareh-

"Tus despiseth my words, and since Bahram cometh not back, my heart

is disquieted. Look, I pray thee, if thou canst tell unto me what

noble this may be."

And Tokhareh said, "It is Rivniz, a knight of great cunning, son unto

Tus, whose daughter he hath in marriage."

Then Firoud asked, saying, "Since he attacketh me, whom shall I slay-the

steed or its rider?"

And Tokhareh said, "Direct thine arms against the man, then perchance,

when Tus shall learn of his death, he will repent him that he listened

not unto thy words of peace."

So Firoud bent his bow and shot Rivniz through the breast. And he

fell dead from off his saddle, and his horse turned him back in terror

unto the camp. Now when Tus beheld the horse that was come back without

its rider, he knew what was come to pass, and his anger against Firoud

burned yet the more. So he called unto him Zerasp his son, and bade

him go forth and avenge the blood of Rivniz. And when Firoud saw him

approach, he asked yet again the name of his foe, and he prepared

his bow, that Tus might learn that he was a man that should not be

treated with dishonour. And when Zerasp would have fought with him,

he pinned him dead unto his saddle. And the horse sped back with him

into the camp, so that Tus saw that which was come about. Then his

fury knew no limit, and he sprang upon his charger, and he set forth

himself against Firoud.

Now when Tokhareh beheld it, he said unto Firoud-

"Tus himself is come forth to combat thee, and thou canst not stand

against this crocodile. Retreat, therefore, I counsel thee, into thy

castle, and let us await the decrees of the stars."

But Firoud answered in anger, "Who is Tus, that I should fear him?

I will not flee from his presence."

Then Tokhareh said, "If thou be resolved to do battle with this lion,

I counsel thee that thou destroy him not, lest thy brother be angered

if the leader of his host perish by thy hand. Moreover, the army will

come forth to avenge him, and how canst thou stand against an host?

Direct thine arrows, therefore, against his charger, for a prince

fighteth not on foot. if, therefore, thou kill his horse from Under

him, thou wilt have shown unto him thy skill."

Then Firoud did as Tokhareh counselled, and the arrow was faithful

to its aim, and he shot the horse of Tus from under him, and laid

the charger low upon the ground. And Tus had to turn him back on foot

unto his camp, and rage against Firoud burned in his spirit. And the

nobles, when they beheld their Pehliva treated thus with contempt,-

were angry also, and Gew said-