And the King put his seal upon the letter and sent it unto Kai Kobad,

and the messenger bare with him rich gifts of jewels and steeds of

Araby. And when Kai Kobad had read the letter he smiled in his spirit

and said-

"Verily not my people sought out this war but Afrasiyab, who deemed

that he could wrest unto himself the crown of Iran, and could subdue

the masterless land unto his will. And he hath but followed in the

footsteps of Tur his father, for even as he robbed the throne of Irij,

so did Afrasiyab take from it Nauder the Shah. And I say to you that

I need not make peace with you because of any fear, but I will do

it because war is not pleasing unto me. I will give unto you, therefore,

the farther side of the river, and it shall be a boundary between

us, and I pray that Afrasiyab may find rest within his borders."

And Kai Kobad did according to his word. He drew up a fresh covenant

between them, and planted a new tree in the garden of power. And the

messenger took the writing unto Poshang, King of Turan, and Kai Kobad

proclaimed that there was peace throughout the land.

Now for the space of an hundred years did Kai Kobad rule over Iran,

and he administered his realm with clemency, and the earth was quiet

before him, and he gat his people great honour, and I ask of you what

king can be likened unto him? But when this time had passed, his strength

waned, and he knew that a green leaf was about to fade. So he called

before him Kai Kaous his son, and gave unto him counsels many and

wise. And when he had done speaking he bade them make ready his grave,

and he exchanged the palace for the tomb. And thus endeth the history

of Kai Kobad the glorious. It behoveth us now to speak of his son.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE MARCH INTO MAZINDERAN

Kai aous seated him on the crystal throne, and the world was obedient

to his will. But Ahriman was angry that his power was so long broken

in Iran, and he sware unto himself that happiness should no longer

smile upon the land. And he imagined guile in his black heart.

Now it came about one day that the Shah sat in his trellised bower

in the garden of roses, drinking wine and making merry with his court.

Then Ahriman, when he beheld that they were thus forgetful of care,

saw that the time served him. So he sent forth a Deev clad as a singer,

and bade him ask for audience before the Shah. And the Deev did as

he was bidden. And he came before the servants of the King, and begged

for entrance into the arbour of flowers.

"For verily," he said, "I am a singer of sweet songs, and I come from

Mazinderan, and desire to pour my homage at the throne of my lord."