And Rustem sware unto him that it should be done at his desire. Then

Isfendiyar made him ready to depart, and he spake words of comfort

unto his son, and he sent greetings unto his mother and to his wives

that were in Iran. And he made them say unto his father that hence-forward

he need not fear him beside the throne; and he cursed the name of

Gushtasp, and he said that the Shah had done that which was worthy

of his black soul. And he bade them speak before the throne and say-

"We shall meet again before the judge, and we shall speak, and listen

to His decree."

Then he said unto Rustem, "Thou hast done this deed by the arts of

magic."

And Rustem said, "It is true, for thou wouldst not listen unto my

voice, and I could not bend my spirit unto chains."

And Isfendiyar said, "I am not angered against thee; thou hast done

that thou couldst not alter, for it was written in the stars, and

surely that which is written in the stars is accomplished."

Then Rustem said, "God is my witness that I strove to turn thee from

thy resolve."

And Isfendiyar said, "It is known unto me." And when he had thus spoken

he sighed, and the sun of that King was set. And there was great lamentation

for him in the army, and Rustem, too, bewailed the hero that was fallen,

and he prayed God for his soul. And he said-

"May thine enemies reap that which they have sown."

Then Rustem made ready for Isfendiyar a coffin of iron, and he caused

it to be lined with silken stuffs, and he laid therein the body of

the young King. And it was placed upon the back of a dromedary and

forty others followed in its wake, and all the army of Isfendiyar

came after them, clad in robes of mourning. And Bashuntan marched

at the head of the train, and he led the horse of Isfendiyar, and

its saddle was reversed, and its mane and its tail were shorn. And

from its sides hung the armour of the young King. And weeping resounded

through the ranks, and with sorrow did the army return unto Iran.

But Rustem remained in Zaboulistan, and he kept beside him Bahman,

the son of Isfendiyar.

Now when Gushtasp learned the tidings of woe, he was bowed down to

the earth with sorrow, and remorse came upon him and he strewed dust

upon his head and he humbled himself before God. And men came before

him and reproached him with that which he had done unto Isfendiyar,

and he knew not how he should answer them. And Bashuntan came in and

saluted him not, but upbraided him with his vile deeds. And he said-

"Neither the Simurgh, nor Rustem, nor Zal have made an end of Isfendiyar,

but only thou, for thou alone hast caused him to perish."

And for the space of one year men ceased not to lament for Isfendiyar,

and for many years were tears shed for that arrow. And men cried continually,

"The glory of Iran hath been laid low, and it is at the hands of her

Shah that it hath been done."