"I demand of thee that thou swear before me a great oath, and that

thou keep it carefully. Swear unto me that thy heart shall be ever

filled with hatred of Afrasiyab, and that thou wilt not let this flame

be quenched by the waters of forgetfulness, and that thou regard him

not as the father of thy mother, and that thou think only of Saiawush

thy sire, whom he hath slain. And swear unto me further that there

shall be no other mediator between you save only the sword and the

mace."

Then Kai Khosrau turned him towards the fire and sware the oath demanded

of his sire, and he vowed to keep it in the name of God the Most High.

And Kai Kaous caused the oath to be written on a royal scroll, and

he confided it to the care of Rustem his Pehliva. And when it was

done they feasted seven days without ceasing, but on the eighth Kai

Khosrau mounted his throne. Then he called about him his nobles, and

he said unto them that the time was ripe to avenge the death of his

father, and he bade them make ready their armies, and he told them

how on a certain day they should lead them out before him.

Now when the day was come Kai Khosrau descended into the plains to

receive them. And he was seated upon an elephant of war, and on his

head he wore the crown of might, and about his neck the chain of supremacy;

and in his hand he bare a mace of might, and on his arms were bracelets

of great worth, and precious stones were strewn about his garments.

Now when he was come into the midst of the camp he threw a ball of

silver into a cup of gold. And when the army heard the sound thereof

they knew it to be the signal, and they arose and passed before the

Shah. And the first to come forth was the army of Friburz. And Friburz

was seated upon a horse of saffron hue, and he wore shoes of gold

upon his feet, and in his hands were a sword and a mace; and around

his saddle was rolled a cord of might, and over his head floated a

banner the colour of the sun. And Kai Khosrau, when he saw him, invoked

blessings upon his head. And there came after Friburz Gudarz the wise

in counsel, and behind him was borne a standard whereon was broidered

a lion. And at his right hand and his left marched his mighty sons,

and a brave army followed after them. And they did homage before the

Shah, and Kai Khosrau regarded them kindly. Then there came after

them yet many other noble knights, eager for battle as a bull whom

no man hath put to flight, and the sounds of cymbals and the bells

of war-elephants filled the air, and lances and targets gleamed in

the sun, and banners of many hues streamed upon the breeze. And Kai

Khosrau blessed his heroes every one. Then he caused his treasurer

to bring forth rich gifts of gold and jewels and slaves, and brocades

of Roum, and cloth of gold, and skins of beaver. And they placed them

before him, and he divided them into portions, and he said they should

be owned of those who should do feats of valour in the war against

Afrasiyab. Then he bade them to a great feast, and they made merry

in the house of the Shah.