And Zal pondered this riddle but a little while, and then opened his

mouth and said-

"The eternal, final world is shown By image of a rock-built town;

The thicket is our passing life, A place of pleasure and of pain,

A world of dreams and eager strife, A time for labour, and loss, and

gain; This counts thy heart-beats, at its will Prolongs their pulse

or makes it still. But winds and earthquake rouse: a cry Goes up of

bitterness and woe, Now we must leave our homes below And climb the

rocky fastness high. Another reaps our fruit of pain, That yet to

another leaves his gain; So was it aye, must so remain. Well for us

if our name endure, Though we shall pass, beloved and pure, For all

the evil man hath done, Stalks, when he dies, in the sight of the

sun; When dust is strown on breast and head, Then desolation reigns

with dread."

When Zal had spoken thus the Shah was glad, and an the assembly were

amazed, and lauded the son of Saum. And the King bade a great banquet

be prepared, and they drank wine until the world was darkened, and

the heads of the drinkers were troubled. Then when morn was come Zal

prayed that the Shah would dismiss him. But Minuchihr said-

"Not so, abide with me yet another day," and he bade the drums be

beaten to call together his heroes, for he desired to test Zal also

in feats of strength. And the Shah sat upon the roof of his house

and looked down upon the games, and he beheld Zal, the son of Saum,

do mighty deeds of prowess. With his arrow did he shoot farther and

straighter than the rest, and with his spear he pierced all shields,

and in wrestling he overcame the strongest who had never known defeat.

When the nobles beheld these doughty deeds they shouted and clapped

their hands, and Minuchihr loaded Zal with gifts. Then he prepared

a reply unto the letter of Saum. And he wrote-

"O my Pehliva, hero of great renown, I have listened to thy desires,

and I have beheld the youth who is worthy to be thy son. And he hath

found favour in my sight, and I send him back to thee satisfied. May

his enemies be impotent to harm him."

Then when the Shah had given him leave to go, Zal set forth, and he

bare his head high in the joy of his heart. And when he came before

his father and gave to him the letter of the Shah, Saum was young

again for happiness. Then the drums sounded the signal to depart,

and the tents were prepared, and a messenger, mounted on a fleet dromedary,

was sent unto Mihrab to tell him that Saum and Zal were setting forth

for Cabul. And when Mihrab heard the tidings his fears were stilled,

and he commanded that his army be clad in festal array. And silken

standards of bright colour decked the city, and the sounds of trumpets,

harps, and cymbals filled the air. And Sindokht told the glad tidings

to Rudabeh, and they made ready the house like unto a paradise. Carpets

broidered with gold and precious stones did they lay down upon its

floors, and set forth thrones of ivory and rich carving. And the ground

they watered with rose-water and wine.