"O Kai Khosrau, we desire not that thou go hence."

And the Shah accorded forgiveness unto the old man, because of the

great love he bare him; and he lifted him from the ground and kissed

him. And when he had done so, he bade him go forth with Rustem. And

he commanded that the nobles and all their armies should camp upon

the plains. And Zal did as the Shah desired, and the hosts were encamped

without the doors.

Now when it was done, Kai Khosrau mounted upon the crystal throne,

and he held in his hand the ox-headed mace, and he bare on his head

the crown of the Kaianides, and a sash of might was girded round his

loins. And on his right hand stood Rustem the Pehliva, and on his

left Zal the aged. And he lifted up his voice and spake words of wisdom

unto his army; and he said unto them that the sojourn of man was brief

upon the earth, and that it became him to remember his end. And he

said how he had also bethought him of his death. And he spake, saying-

"I have made me ready to depart, and my testament will I speak before

you. I will give richly unto those that have wearied themselves in

my service, and of those to whom I owe gratitude I will speak unto

God, and implore of Him that He reward them according to their deserts.

And I give unto the Iranians my gold, and my armour, and my jewels,

and whosoever is great among you to him do I give a province."

Thus for the space of seven days did the Shah sit upon his throne

and order his treasurer how he should act. Then on the eighth he called

before him Gudarz the wise, and he gave to him instructions. And he

bade him be kind unto the poor, and the widowed, and the fatherless,

and he entreated him to dry the eye of care. Then he gave unto him

much treasure, and rendered unto him thanks for the services that

he had done before him. And he gave rich gifts also unto Zal, and

Gew, and Rustem, and to all his nobles, according to their degree.

And he desired of them that they should ask a boon at his hands, and

whatsoever it was he gave it. And he spake, saying-

"May my memory be hateful unto none."

Then he called before him Rustem, and praised the mighty deeds that

he had done, and he invoked the blessings of Heaven upon his Pehliva.

And after many days, when all these things were accomplished, the

Shah was weary, but his task was not yet fulfilled. For there was

one among the nobles whose name he had not named. And the others knew

thereof, but they ventured not again to admonish Kai Khosrau, for

they were amazed at his wisdom and his justice, and they saw that

he did that which was right.