"Verily thou hast done that which thou sayest, and there is none who

is thine equal in this world, save only Rustem, the son of Zal. And

he acknowledgeth none his like. Now because he is grown proud in his

spirit, and hath rendered no homage unto me, neither is come forth

to aid me against Arjasp, I desire that thou go forth unto Zaboulistan,

and that thou lead out the Pehliva, and bring him bound before me,

that he may know that I am the Shah, and that he must do my behests.

And when thou shalt have done it, I swear unto thee by Him from whom

cometh all strength, and who hath kindled the sun and the stars unto

light, that I will step down from the throne, neither withhold it

from thee any longer."

Then Isfendiyar said, "O King, I would entreat of thee that thou ponder

the words that thou hast spoken. For thine ancestors held this old

man, ripe in wisdom, in much honour, and he was a staff unto their

throne. Now since thou calledst him not forth, it was not fitting

he should aid thee against Turan."

But Gushtasp would not listen unto the words of Isfendiyar, and he

said-

"If thou lead not Rustem bound before me, I will not grant unto thee

the throne."

Then Isfendiyar said, "Thou sendest me forth in guile on this emprise,

for verily no man hath stood against the might of Rustem, wherefore

I perceive that thou desirest not to abandon unto me the throne. I

say unto thee, therefore, that I desire it no longer; but since I

am thy slave, it beseemeth me to obey thy behests. I go forth therefore,

and if peradventure I fall before Rustem, thou wilt answer unto God

for my blood."

And when he had so spoken, Isfendiyar went out of the presence of

the Shah, and he was exceeding sorrowful. Then he gathered together

an army, and he set forth upon the road that leadeth to Seistan.

Now when they were gone but a little way, the camel that walked at

their head laid him down in the dust. And the drivers struck him,

but he would not rise from the earth. Then Isfendiyar said, "The omen

is evil." But he commanded the driver that he cut off the head, that

the evil might fall upon the beast and tarnish not the glory of the

Shah. And it was done as Isfendiyar desired, but he could not rid

him of his sadness, and he pondered in his spirit this sign.

Now when they were come unto the land of Zaboulistan, Isfendiyar spake,

saying-

"I will send an envoy unto Rustem, a man prudent and wise. And I will

entreat of the Pehliva that he come before me with gladness, for I

desire no evil unto him, and I come forth only at the behest of the

Shah."

Then he called before him Bahman, his son, and he spake long unto

him, and he charged him with a message unto Rustem. And he bade him

speak unto the son of Zal how Gushtasp was angered because he sought

not his courts, wherefore he deemed that Rustem was grown proud in

his spirit, and would uplift himself above his Shah. And he said-