"Friburz is thy son also, why therefore wilt thou give the crown unto

one who is sprung from the race of Afrasiyab?

Then Gew said, "It is fitting that the son of Saiawush should succeed

unto the throne."

But Tus listened not, and refused allegiance unto Kai Khosrau, and

there was strife among the nobles of Iran.

Then one came before Kai Kaous and begged of him that he would declare

himself, for he said-

"If we are divided among ourselves we shall fall a prey into the hands

of Afrasiyab. Let the Shah, therefore, bind up this quarrel."

Then Kai Kaous said, "Ye ask of me that which is hard, for both my

sons are dear unto me, and how should I choose between them? Yet I

will bethink me of a means to quiet this dissension. Let Kai Khosrau

and Friburz go forth unto Bahman, the fortress that is upon my borders

which no man hath conquered, for it is an abode of Deevs, and fire

issueth thence continually. And let them take with them an army, and

I will bestow my crown and my treasures upon him at whose hands the

castle shall be subdued."

So Friburz and Kai Khosrau set forth, and Kai Khosrau suffered that

his elder take the lead. But in vain did Friburz strive against the

Deevs that were hidden behind the walls, and when seven days had passed

he returned discomfited from his emprise. Then Kai Khosrau set forth,

and he wrote a letter, amber-perfumed, and in it he desired the evil

Deevs that they give place unto him in the name of Ormuzd. And he

affixed the letter unto the point of his lance, and when he was come

nigh unto the burning fort he flung it beyond the walls. Then a great

noise rent the air like thunder, and the world became darkened, and

when the light returned unto the sky the castle was vanished from

off the face of the earth.

Now when Kai Kaous heard it, he knew that the son of Saiawush was

learned in the arts of magic, as was fitting unto a king; and he beheld

also that he was wise and brave. And because that he was weary he

surrendered the throne unto him, and Kai Khosrau wore the crown of

the Kaianides in his stead.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

FIROUD

But a little while had Kai Khosrau sat upon the throne of Iran, yet

the world resounded with his fame, and all men bare upon their lips

the praises of his wisdom. He cleansed the earth of the rust of care,

and the power of Afrasiyab was chained up. And men from all parts

of the earth came forth to do homage before him; and Rustem also,

and Zal the aged, did obeisance at his footstool. And there came with

them an army that made the plains black like to ebony, and the sounds

of their war trumpets made the heart to tremble. Then Kai Kaous made

ready a great feast to do honour to his Pehliva. And when they were

seated thereat his mouth ran over with praises of Saiawush, and he

lamented the evil that he had done, and he poured maledictions upon

the head of Afrasiyab. And he spake unto Kai Khosrau his son, and

said-