After these things were come about, the Iranians, because that their

Shah was held captive, returned unto Iran much discomfited. And when

the news spread that the throne was empty many would have seized thereon.

And Afrasiyab, when he learned it, straightway forgot hunger and sleep,

and marched a strong army across the border. And he laid waste the

land of Iran, and men, women, and children fell into bondage at his

hands, and the world was darkened unto the kingdom of light. Then

some arose and went before the son of Zal to crave his help in this

sore need, saying unto him-

"Be thou our shield against misfortune, and deliver us from affliction,

for the glory of the Kaianides is vanished, and the land which was

a paradise is one no more."

Now Rustem, when he heard the news, was grieved for the land, but

he was angered also against the Shah that he had thus once again run

into danger. Yet he told the messengers that he would seek to deliver

Kai Kaous, and that when he had done so he would remember the land

of Iran. And forthwith he sent a secret messenger unto Kai Kaous,

a man subtle and wise, and caused him to say unto the Shah-

"An army cometh forth from Iran to redeem thee. Rejoice, therefore,

and cast aside thy fears."

And he also sent a writing unto the King of Hamaveran, and the writing

was filled with threats, and spake only of maces and swords and combat.

And Rustem loaded the King with reproaches because of his treachery,

and he bade him prepare to meet Rustem the mighty.

When the King of Hamaveran had read this letter his head was troubled,

and he defied Rustem, and threatened him that if he came forth against

him he should meet at his hands the fate of the Shah. But Rustem only

smiled when he heard this answer, and he said-

"Surely this man is foolish, or Ahriman hath filled his mind with

smoke."

Then he mounted Rakush, and made ready to go into Hamaveran, and a

vast train of warriors went after him. And the King of Hamaveran,

when he saw it sent forth his army against him. But the army were

afraid when they beheld Rustem and his might of mien, his mace, and

his strong arms and lion chest, and their hearts departed from out

their bodies, and they fled from before his sight, and returned them

unto the King of Hamaveran.

Now the King was seated in the midst of his counsellors, and when

he saw the army thus scattered before they had struck a blow, his

heart misgave him, and he craved counsel of his chiefs. Then they

counselled him that he should cast about him for allies. So the King

of Hamaveran sent messengers of entreaty unto the Kings of Egypt and

Berberistan, and they listened to his prayers, and sent out a great

army unto his aid. And they drew them up against Rustem, and the armies

stretched for two leagues in length, and you would have said the handful

of Rustem could not withstand their force. Yet Rustem bade his men

be not discomfited, and rest their hopes on God. Then he fell upon

the armies of the Kings like to a flame that darteth forth, and the

ground was drenched with gore, and on all sides rolled heads that

were severed from their bodies; and wheresoever Rakush and Rustem

showed themselves, there was great havoc made in the ranks. And ere

the evening was come, the Kings of Egypt and Berberistan were his

captives; and when the sun was set, the King of Hamaveran knew that

a day of ill fortune was ended. So he sent forth to crave mercy at

the hands of the Pehliva. And Rustem listened to his voice, and said

that he would stay his hand if the King would restore unto him Kai

Kaous, and the men and treasures that were his. Then the King of Hamaveran

granted the just requests of Rustem. So Kai Kaous was led forth from

his prison, and Sudaveh came with him. And when they beheld him, the

King of Hamaveran and his allies declared their allegiance unto him,

and they marched with him into Iran to go out against Afrasiyab. And

Sudaveh went with the army in a litter clothed with fair stuffs, and

encrusted with wood of aloes. And she was veiled that none might behold

her beauty, and she went with the men like to the sun when he marcheth

behind a cloud.