"I have heard, even in Zaboulistan, that the curtains of the Shah

are closed unto his servants. And the people cry out thereat, and

men say that Kai Khosrau is departed from the path that is right.

Wherefore I am come forth to entreat of thee, if thou have a secret

care, that thou confide it to thy servant, and surely a device may

be found. For since the days of Minuchihr there is no Shah like to

thee, but thy nobles are afraid lest thou stumble in the paths of

Zohak and Afrasiyab. Wherefore they entreat of me that I admonish

thee."

Now when Kai Khosrau had listened unto the voice of Zal the aged,

he was not angered, but he answered, saying-

"O Zal, thou knowest not that whereof thou speakest. For I have withdrawn

myself from men that I might do no evil, and I have prayed unto God

that He take me unto Himself. And now is the Serosch come unto me,

and I know that Ormuzd hath listened unto my voice."

When the nobles heard this they were afflicted, but Zal was angered,

and he deemed that the wits of Kai Khosrau were distraught. And he

said-

"Since I have stood before the throne of the Kaianides no Shah hath

spoken words like to thine. And I fear that a Deev hath led thee astray,

and I implore of thee that thou listen not unto his voice, and that

thou give ear unto the words of an aged man, and that thou turn thee

back into the path that is right."

And when Zal had done speaking, the nobles cried with one accord that

he had spoken for them also. Then Kai Khosrau was sorrowful, but he

would not suffer anger to come into his spirit. And when he had pondered,

he opened his mouth and spake, saying-

"O Zal, I have given ear unto the words which thou hast spoken, give

ear now unto the answer. For I have not departed from the paths of

Ormuzd, and no Deev hath led me astray. And I swear it unto thee,

even by God the Most High. But because I am sprung from Afrasiyab

the evil one, and am linked unto the race of Zohak, I am afraid, and

I fear to grow like to Jemshid and Tur, who wearied the world with

their oppressions. And, behold, I have avenged my father, and have

made the world submissive unto my will; and I have established justice

in the realm, and the earth is glad, wherefore there is no longer

aught for me to do, for the power of the wicked is broken. Therefore,

lest I grow uplifted in my soul, I have entreated of Ormuzd that He

suffer me now to go hence, even unto Himself. For I am weary of the

throne and of my majesty, and my soul crieth for rest."

When Zal heard these words he was confounded, for he knew that they

were true. And he fell in the dust before the Shah, and he craved

his forgiveness for the hard speech that he had spoken, and he wept,

saying-