"This letter, written by Saum thy father in his sorrow, hath awakened

an old pain within me. But for the sake of my faithful servant I will

do unto thee that which is thy desire. Yet I ask that thou abide with

me a little while that I may seek counsel about thee."

Then the cooks brought forth a table of gold, and Zal was seated beside

the Shah and all the nobles according to their rank, and they ate

flesh and drank wine together. Then when the mantle of night was fallen

over the earth Zal sprang upon his steed and scoured the land in the

unrest of his spirit, for his heart was full of thoughts and his mouth

of words. But when morning was come he presented himself before the

Shah in audience. And his speech and mien found favour in the eyes

of the Shah, and he called unto him his Wise Men and bade them question

the stars of this matter. Three days and three nights did the Mubids

search the heavens without ceasing, and on the fourth they came before

the Shah and spake. And they said unto him-

"Hail to thee, hero of the golden girdle, for we bring unto thee glad

tidings. The son of Saum and the daughter of Mihrab shall be a glorious

pair, and from their union shall spring a son like to a war-elephant,

and he shall subdue all men by his sword and raise the glory of Iran

even unto the skies. And he shall uproot the wicked from the earth

so that there shall be no room for them. Segsars and Mazinderan shall

feel the weight of his mace, and he shall bring much woe upon Turan,

but Iran shall be loaded with prosperity at his hands. And he will

give back sleep to the unhappy, and close the doors of discord, and

bar the paths of wrong-doing. The kingdom will rejoice while he lives;

Roum, Ind, and Iran will grave his name upon their seals."

When the Shah had heard this he charged the Mubids that they keep

secret that which they had revealed unto him. And he called for Zal

that he might question him and test his wisdom. And the Wise Men and

the Mubids were seated in a circle, and they put these questions to

the son of Saum.

And the first opened his mouth and said-

"Twelve trees, well grown and green, Fair and lofty, have I seen;

Each has sprung with vigorous sprout, Sending thirty branches out;

Wax no more, nor wane, they can In the kingdom of Iran."

And Zal pondered a while and then answered and said-

'Twelve moons in the year, and each I praise As a new-made king on

a new throne's blaze: Each comes to an end in thirty days."

Then the second Mubid questioned him and said-

"Thou whose head is high in air, Rede me now of coursers twain; Both

are noble, swift to speed; Black as storms in the night one steed,

The other crystal, white and fair, They race for ever and haste in

vain, Towards a goal they never gain."