Then Rustem loosened the bonds of Aulad, and bade him lead him into

the city where Kai Kaous pined in his bondage. And Aulad led him.

Now when they neared the city, Rakush neighed so loud that the sound

pierced even unto the spot where Kai Kaous was hidden. And the Shah,

when he heard it, rejoiced, for he knew that succour was come. And

he told it unto his comrades. But they refused to listen unto these

words, and deemed that grief had distraught his wits. In vain therefore

did Kai Kaous insist unto them that his ears had heard the voice of

Rakush. But not long did he combat their unbelief, for presently there

came before him Tehemten, the stout of limb, and when the nobles heard

his voice and his step they repented them of their doubts. And Kai

Kaous embraced Rustem and blessed him, and questioned him of his journey

and of Zal. Then he said-

"O my Pehliva, we may no longer waste the moments with sweet words.

I must send thee forth yet again to battle. For when the White Deev

shall learn that Arzang is defeated, he will come forth from out his

mountain fastness, and bring with him the whole multitude of evil

ones, and even thy might will not stand before them. Go therefore

unto the Seven Mountains, and conquer the White Deev ere the tidings

reach him of thy coming. Unto thee alone can Iran look for her succour,

for I cannot aid thee, neither can my warriors assist thee with their

arms, for our eyes are filled with darkness, and their light is gone

out. Yet I grieve to send thee into this emprise alone, for I have

heard it spoken that the dwelling of the Deevs is a spot of fear and

terror, but alas! my grief is of no avail. And I conjure thee, slay

the Deev, and bring unto me the blood of his heart, for a Mubid hath

revealed unto me that only by this blood can our sight be restored.

And go forth now, my son, and may Ormuzd be gracious unto thee, and

may the tree of gladness sprout again for Iran!

Then Rustem did as Kai Kaous commanded, and he rode forth, and Aulad

went beside him to lead him in the way. And when they had passed the

Seven Mountains and were come unto the gates of hell, Rustem spake

unto Aulad, and said-

"Thou hast ever led me aright, and all that thou hast spoken I have

surely found it true. Tell me, therefore, now how I shall vanquish

the Deevs."

And Aulad said, "Tarry, I counsel thee, till that the sun be high

in the heavens. For when it beateth fierce upon the earth the Deevs

are wont to lay them down to slumber, and when they are drunk with

sleep they shall fall an easy prey into thine hands."

Then Rustem did as Aulad bade him, and he halted by the roadside,

and he bound Aulad from head to foot in his snare, and he seated himself

upon the ends. But when the sun was high he drew forth his sword from

out its sheath, and shouted loud his name, and flung it among the

Deevs like to a thunderbolt. Then before they were well awakened from

their sleep, he threw himself upon them, and none could resist him,

and he scattered their heads with his sword. And when he had dispersed

the guards he came unto the lair of the White Deev.