Then he made a place for him at his left hand.

But Rustem said, "This is not my place. It is not fitting that I should

sit upon thy left, for my seat hath ever been at the right hand of

the Shah."

Then Isfendiyar bade a chair of gold be brought, and he caused it

to be placed upon his right, and he bade Rustem be seated upon it.

And Rustem sat him down, but he was angered in his spirit because

of the dishonour that Isfendiyar had shown unto him.

Now when they had drunk together awhile, Isfendiyar lifted up his

voice and said-

"O Rustem, it hath been told unto me that thine origin is evil, for

thou art sprung from a Deev whom Saum cast forth from his house. And

he was reared of a vile bird, and his nourishment was garbage."

Then Rustem said, "Why speakest thou words that do hurt?" And he told

unto him of his father, and Saum, and Neriman who was of the race

of Husheng the Shah. And he vaunted the great deeds done of his house,

and he hid not that which he had accomplished himself, and he said-

"Six hundred years have passed since I came forth from the loins of

Zal, and for that space I have been the Pehliva of the world, and

have feared neither that which was manifest, nor that which was hid.

And I speak these things that thou mayest know. Thou art the King,

and they that carry high their heads are thy subjects, but thou art

new unto the world, wherefore thou knowest not the things that are

come to pass."

When Isfendiyar had listened unto the words of Rustem, he smiled and

spake, saying-

"I have given ear unto thy voice, give ear now also unto the words

that I shall speak."

Then he vaunted him of his forefathers, and he recounted unto Rustem

how that he had overcome the Turks, and how Gushtasp had cast him

into chains, and he told him of the seven stations, and that he had

converted the world unto the faith of Zerdusht. And he said-

"We have spoken enough concerning ourselves, let us drink until we

be weary."

But Rustem said, "Not so, for thou hast not heard all the deeds that

I have done, for they are many, and the ear sufficeth not to hear

them, nor the mouth to tell. For if thou knewest them, thou wouldest

not exalt thyself above me, or think to cast me into chains."

And he recounted to him yet again of his deeds of might.

But Isfendiyar said, "I entreat of thee that thou apply thyself unto

the wine-cup, for verily thou shalt fall tomorrow in the fight, and

the days of thy feasting shall be ended."

And Rustem answered, "Boast not thus rashly, thou shalt yet repent

thee of thy words. But to-morrow will we meet in conflict since thou

desirest it, and when I shall have lifted thee from off thy saddle,

I will bear thee unto my house and spread a feast before thee, and

pour upon thee my treasures. And when it shall be done, I will return

with thee unto the courts of the Shah, thy father, and uproot from

his spirit this plant of evil. And when thou shalt be mounted into

his seat, I will serve thee with gladness as thy Pehliva."