Then Zal's heart laughed within him when he heard these words of manhood.

And he commanded that all the flocks of horses, both from Zaboulistan

and Cabul, be brought before his son, that he might choose from their

midst his steed of battle. And they were passed in order before Rustem,

and he laid upon the backs of each his hand of might to test them

if they could bear his weight of valour. And the horses shuddered

as they bent beneath his grasp, and sank upon their haunches in weakness.

And thus did he do with them all in turn, until he came unto the flocks

of Cabul. Then he perceived in their midst a mare mighty and strong,

and there followed after her a colt like to its mother, with the chest

and shoulders of a lion. And in strength it seemed like an elephant,

and in colour it was as rose leaves that have been scattered upon

a saffron ground. Now Rustem, when he had tested the colt with his

eyes, made a running knot in his cord and threw it about the beast.

And he caught the colt in the snare, though the mare defended it mightily.

Then the keeper of the flock came before Rustem and said-

"O youth puissant and tall, take not, I counsel thee, the horse of

another."

And Rustem answered him and asked, "To whom then pertaineth this steed?

I see no mark upon its flanks."

And the keeper said, "We know not its master, but rumours are rife

anent it throughout the land, and men name it the Rakush of Rustem.

And I warn thee, the mother will never permit thee to ride on it.

Three years has it been ready for the saddle, but none would she suffer

to mount thereon."

Then Rustem, when he heard these words, swung himself upon the colt

with a great bound. And the mare, when she saw it, ran at him and

would have pulled him down, but when she had heard his voice she suffered

it. And the rose-coloured steed bore Rustem along the plains like

unto the wind. Then when he was returned, the son of Zal spake and

said to the keeper-

"I pray thee, tell unto me what is the price of this dragon?"

But the keeper replied, "If thou be Rustem, mount him, and retrieve

the sorrows of Iran. For his price is the land of Iran, and seated

upon him thou wilt save the world."

And Rustem rejoiced in Rakush (whose name, being interpreted, meaneth

the lightning), and Zal rejoiced with him, and they made them ready

to stand against Afrasiyab.

Now it was in the time of roses, and the meadows smiled with verdure,

when Zal led forth his hosts against the offspring of Tur. And the

standard of Kawah streamed upon the breeze, and Mihrab marched on

the left, and Gustahem marched on the right, and Zal went in the midst

of the men, but Rustem went at the head of all. And there followed

after him a number like to the sands of the sea, and the sounds of

cymbals and bells made a noise throughout the land like unto the day

of judgment, when the earth shall cry unto the dead, "Arise." And

they marched in order even unto the shores of the river Rai, and the

two armies were but some farsangs apart.