Now when Kai Kaous learned that a singer waited without, he commanded

that he should be brought in. Then he gave him wine and permitted

him to open his mouth before him. Now the Deev, when he had done homage

before the Shah, warbled unto his lyre words of deep cunning. And

he sang how that no land was like unto his own for beauty and riches,

and he inflamed the desires of the Shah after Mazinderan. And Ahriman

fanned the flame within the mind of the King, and when the Deev had

ended, Kai Kaous was become uplifted in his heart, like unto Jemshid.

So he turned him unto his warriors and said-

"O my friends, mighty and brave, we have abandoned ourselves unto

feasting, we have revelled in the arms of peace. But it behoveth not

men to live long in this wise, lest they grow idle and weak. And above

all it behoveth not me that am a Shah, for the Shah is called to be

a hero among men, and the world should be his footstool. Now verily

the power and splendour of Jemshid was lower than mine, and my wealth

surpasseth that of Zohak and Kai Kobad. It beseemeth me therefore

to be greater also than they in prowess, and to be master of Mazinderan,

which ever resisted their might. I bid you therefore make ready for

combat, and I will lead you into the land whereof this singer hath

sung so sweetly."

Now the nobles, when they had heard these words, grew pale with fear,

for there was not one among them who listed to combat with Deevs.

But none durst open their lips in answer, yet their hearts were full

of fear and their mouths of sighs. But at last, when they could keep

silence no longer, some spake and said-

"Lord, we are thy servants, and that which thou biddest surely we

must do."

But among themselves they took counsel how they should act if the

Shah held firm by his desire. And they recalled how not even Jemshid

in his pride had thought to conquer the Deevs of Mazinderan, before

whom the sword hath no power and wisdom no avail, neither had Feridoun,

learned in magic, or Minuchihr the mighty, ventured on this emprise.

Then they bethought them of Zal the son of Saum, and they sent forth

a wind-footed dromedary and a messenger. And they said unto Zal-

"Haste, we pray thee, neither tarry to cleanse thine head though it

be covered with dust; for Ahriman hath strown evil seed in the heart

of Kai Kaous, and it ripeneth to fruit already, and already it hath

borne fruit, and Iran is threatened with danger. But we look to thee

that thou speak words of good counsel unto the Shah, and avert these

sorrows from our heads."

Now Zal was sore distressed when he learned that a leaf on the tree

of the Kaianides was thus faded. And he said-

"Kai Kaous is void of knowledge, and the sun must revolve yet oft

above his head before he learneth the wisdom of the great. For unto

true wisdom alone is it given to know when to strike and when to tarry.

But he is like unto a child who deemeth the world will tremble if

it but upraiseth its sword. And but for my duty unto God and unto

Iran, I would abandon him to his folly."