Then he chose forth from among the warriors men of renown, that they

should go out with him to deliver Byzun. And Girgin sent greeting

unto Rustem, and craved of him that he would plead for him with the

Shah. And he bewailed his fault, and he entreated that he might go

out to succour Byzun. And Rustem asked his forgiveness of Kai Khosrau,

and when the Shah would have refused his suit, he pressed him hard.

So Kai Khosrau listened to the desires of his Pehliva. Then he said

unto him-

"Tell me what men and treasures thou desirest to bear with thee into

Turan."

And Rustem said, "I desire not a large army, for I think to regain

Byzun by the arts of wile. Give unto me, therefore, jewels and rich

brocades, and carpets, and stuffs of value, for I purpose to go forth

in the garb of a merchant."

Then Kai Khosrau gave him the key to all his treasures, and Rustem

chose forth rich stuffs, and loaded them upon an hundred camels. And

he desired seven valiant knights that they should go forth with him

clad in the dress of merchants, and that an army be posted in secret

upon the borders. And when all was ready the caravan went forth. And

they journeyed until they came into the town of Khoten, and all the

people came forth to gaze upon their merchandise. Then Rustem, in

his disguise, went unto the house of Piran, and he poured gifts before

him, and he asked leave of him that he might remain within the borders

to sell his wares. And Piran granted his request. So Rustem took for

himself a house, and showed his goods unto the people, and bartered

them, and it was noised through all the land that a caravan was come

out from Iran, and all who had need of aught flocked into the city.

And the news spread even unto the ears of Manijeh. And when she learned

that it was men of Iran who were come forth, she made her way unto

the city, and came before Rustem and questioned him, saying-

"What news is there abroad in Iran concerning Byzun, the son of Gew,

and doth no army come forth to save him? O noble merchant, I entreat

of thee when thou goest back to thy land, to seek out Gew, and Kai

Khosrau, and Rustem the mighty, and bring unto them tidings of Byzun,

lest he perish in his chains."

Now Rustem, when he heard her words, was afraid for his secret, for

he knew not who she was. Wherefore he spoke roughly unto her, and

he said-

"I am a man of peace and of ignoble birth, a merchant, and I know

nought of Gew, or of Byzun, or of the Shah. Get thee hence, maiden,

thou dost but hinder my business, and this alone concerneth me."

When he had thus spoken, Manijeh looked on him with sorrow, and wept,

saying-