Now when Saum had drunk in these words, his soul was uplifted, and

he poured gifts upon the Mubids. Then he called to him the messenger

of Zal, and he gave him pieces of silver, and bade him return unto

his master and say-

"I hold thy passion folly, O my son, but because of the oath that

I have sworn to thee it shall be done at thy desire. I will hie me

unto Iran and lay thy suit before the Shah."

Then Saum called together his army and set forth for Iran, and the

sound of trumpets and cymbals went before him.

Now when the messenger was come back to Zal, he rejoiced and praised

God, and gave gold and silver to the poor, and gifts unto his servants.

But when night was come he could not close his eyes in slumber, nor

could he rest during the day. Neither did he drink wine nor demand

the singers, for his soul was filled with longing after his love.

And presently there came out to him a slave, and he gave unto her

Saum's letter that she might bear it to Rudabeh. And Rudabeh rejoiced

also, and chose from among her treasures a costly crown and a ring

of worth, and bade the woman bear them unto Zal. Now as she quitted

the chamber she met Sindokht. And the Queen questioned her and said-

"Whence comest thou? Reply to all my questions, neither seek thou

to deceive me, for already a long time do I suspect thy passing to

and fro."

And the woman trembled as she heard these words, and fell down and

kissed the feet of the Queen, and said-

"Have pity on thine handmaiden, who is poor and gaineth her bread

as she can. I go into the houses of the rich and sell to them robes

and jewels. And Rudabeh hath this day bought of me a tiara and a bracelet

of gold."

Then said Sindokht, "Show unto me the money thou hast received for

the same, that my anger be appeased."

And the woman answered and said, "Demand not that I show unto thee

that which I have not, for Rudabeh will pay me to-morrow."

Now Sindokht knew that these words were feigned, and she searched

the sleeve of the woman, and lo! she found therein the tiara that

Rudabeh had broidered with her hands. Then she was angered, and commanded

that the slave should be bound in chains. And she desired that her

daughter be brought into her presence. And when she was come, Sindokht

opened her mouth and spake, saying-

"O moon of noble race, to whom hath been taught naught but that which

is good, how hast thou gone astray upon the paths of evil? O my daughter,

confide unto thy mother thy secrets. From whom cometh this woman?

For what man are destined thy gifts?"

When she had heard, Rudabeh was abashed, but after a while she told

all unto Sindokht. Now when the Queen had heard she was confounded,

for she feared the wrath of the Shah, and that he would raze Cabul

to the dust for this mischance. And she went into her rooms and wept

in her sorrow. Then presently Mihrab the King came in to Sindokht,

and he was of joyful mind, for Zal had received him graciously. But

when he beheld her tears he questioned of her grief. Then she told

him how that his daughter was filled with love for Zal, the son of

Saum. And when Mihrab had heard her to an end, his heart also was

troubled, for he knew that Cabul could not stand before the Shah.