But Isfendiyar said, "Thy words are idle, and we waste but our breath

in talk of combat. Let us therefore apply us to the banquet."

And they did so, and ate and drank until the night was far spent,

and all men were amazed at the hunger of Rustem.

Now when it was time for him to depart, he prayed Isfendiyar yet again

that he would be his guest, and yet again Isfendiyar refused it to

him, and he said-

"Suffer that I put chains about thee, and lead thee forth into Iran,

that Gushtasp be satisfied. But if thou wilt not do this thing, I

must attack thee with the spear."

Now Rustem, when he heard these words, was sorrowful in his soul.

And he thought within him-

"If I suffer these chains it is a stain that cannot be wiped out,

and I cannot outlive my dishonour, for men will mock at Rustem, who

permitted a boy to lead him bound. Yet if I slay this youth, I do

evil, for he is son unto the Shah, and my glory will be tarnished,

for men will say I lifted my hand against a Kaianide. And there can

arise no good out of this combat. Wherefore I will strive yet again

to win him unto wisdom."

So he lifted up his voice and said, "I pray thee listen not to the

counsel of Deevs, and shut thy lips concerning these chains. For it

seemeth unto me that Gushtasp desireth evil against thee, that he

sendeth thee forth against Rustem, the unvanquished in fight. Dishonour,

therefore, not the champion of thy fathers, but feast within my gates,

and let us ride forth in friendship unto Iran."

But Isfendiyar said, "I charge thee, old man, that thou waste not

words concerning this thing, for I will not disobey the behests of

my father. Prepare, therefore, for combat; for to-morrow I will make

the world dark unto thine eyes."

Then Rustem said, "O foolish youth! when I grasp my mace, the head

of my foe is lost. Prepare thee rather for thine end."

And when he had so spoken, he rode forth from out the tents of Isfendiyar,

and he was exceeding sorrowful. But Isfendiyar smiled after him and

said-

"The mother that hath borne thee shall weep. I will cast thee down

from Rakush, I will lead thee bound into Iran."

But once again did Bashuntan come before Isfendiyar, and he pleaded

with him for Rustem, and he bade him remember the great deeds that

he had done unto Iran, and he desired him not to lift his hand against

the Pehliva.

But Isfendiyar said-

"He is a thorn in my rose-garden, and through him alone can I attain

unto the throne. Strive not, therefore, to hinder me, for thy pains

will be in vain. For Zerdusht hath spoken that whosoever honoureth

not the behests of his king, he shall surely suffer the pains of hell.

And my father hath told unto me to do this thing, and though I grieve

to do hurt unto Rustem, the desires of the Shah must be accomplished."