Now after many days, when Zal, and Rustem, and Gudarz beheld that

the nobles returned not, they grew afraid and sent forth riders to

seek them. And the men searched long, but in the end they found the

bodies, and they bare them down into the plains. And sore was the

wailing in the army when they beheld it, and a noble tomb was raised

above their heads. But Lohurasp, when he learned that Kai Khosrau

was vanished, mounted the throne of the Kaianides. And he called before

him his people that they should do allegiance unto him. And they did

so, and the place of Kai Khosrau knew him no more.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

ISFENDIYAR

Lohurasp reigned in wisdom upon the crystal throne, and Iran was

as wax under his hands. And men were content under his sway, save

only Gushtasp, his son, who was rebellious of spirit. And Gushtasp

was angered because his father would not abandon unto him the sovereignty.

Wherefore, when he beheld that his pleading was vain, he stole away

from Iran and sought out the land of Roum, and the city that Silim

his forefather had builded. And he did great deeds of prowess in the

land, so that the King gave unto him his daughter to wife.

Now Lohurasp, when he learned of the mighty deeds done of his son,

strove to win him back unto himself. So he sent forth messengers bearing

words of greeting and entreated of Gushtasp that he would return unto

the courts of his father. And he sware unto him that if he would listen

unto his voice, he would abandon unto him the throne. So Gushtasp

listened to the voice of his father, and he returned him unto Iran.

And Lohurasp stepped down from off the throne of the Kaianides and

gave place unto Gushtasp, his son. And one hundred and twenty years

had he reigned in equity, and now that it was done he hid himself

within the temples of Balkh, that he might live in the sight of God,

and make him ready to meet his end. And Gushtasp, his son, ruled the

land worthily, and he administered justice in such wise that sheep

could drink at the same brook as the wolves.

Now when he had sat some while upon the throne, there appeared in

the land Zerdusht, the prophet of the Most High. And he came before

the Shah and taught him, and he went out in all the land and gave

unto the people a new faith. And he purged Iran of the might of Ahriman.

He reared throughout the realm a tree of goodly foliage, and men rested

beneath its branches. And whosoever ate of the leaves thereof was

learned in all that regardeth the life to come, but whosoever ate

of the branches was perfect in wisdom and faith. And Zerdusht gave

unto men the Zendavesta, and he bade them obey its precepts if they

would attain everlasting life.

But tidings concerning Zerdusht were come even unto Arjasp, who sat

upon the throne of Afrasiyab, and he said within himself, "This thing

is vile." So he refused ear unto the faith, and he sent a writing

unto Gushtasp, wherein he bade him return unto the creed of his fathers.

And he said-