Then it came about that the love of Kai Kaous for Sudaveh grew yet

mightier, and he was as wax under her hands. And when she saw that

her empire over him was strengthened, she filled his ear with plaints

of Saiawush, and she darkened the mind of the Shah till that his spirit

was troubled, and he knew not where he should turn for truth.

Now while Kai Kaous thus dallied behind the curtains of his house,

Afrasiyab made him ready with three thousand chosen men to fall upon

the land of Iran. And Kai Kaous, when he learned it, was sad, for

he knew that he must exchange the banquet for the battle; and he was

angered also with Afrasiyab, and he poured out words of reproof against

him because he had broken his covenant and had once more attacked

his land. Yet he made him ready to lead forth his army. Then a Mubid

prayed him that he would not go forth himself, and he recalled unto

Kai Kaous how twice already he had endangered his kingdom. But Kai

Kaous was wroth when he heard these words, and he bade the Mubid depart

from his presence, and he sware that he alone could turn the army

unto good issue.

But Saiawush, when he heard it, took heart of grace, for he thought

within his spirit, "If the King grant unto me to lead forth his army,

perchance I may win unto myself a name of valour, and be delivered

from the wiles of Sudaveh." So he girded himself with the armour of

battle and came before the King his father, and made known to him

his request. And he recalled unto Kai Kaous how that he was his son,

and how he was sprung from a worthy race, and how his rank permitted

him to lead forth a host; and Kai Kaous listened to his words with

gladness, and assented to his desires. Then messengers were sent unto

Rustem to bid him go forth to battle with his charge and guard him.

And Kai Kaous said unto his Pehliva-

"If thou watchest over him, I can slumber; but if thou reposest, then

doth it beseem me to act."

And Rustem answered and said, "O King, I am thy servant, and it behoveth

me to do thy will. As for Saiawush, he is the light of my heart and

the joy of my soul; I rejoice to lead him forth before his enemies."

So the trumpets of war were sounded, and the clang of armour and the

tramp of horsemen and of foot filled the air. And five Mubids bare

aloft the standard of Kawah, and the army followed after them. And

they passed in order before Kai Kaous, and he blessed the troops and

his son, who rode at their head. And he spake, saying-

"May thy good star shine down upon thee, and mayst thou come back

to me victorious and glad."

Then Kai Kaous returned him unto his house, and Saiawush gave the

signal to depart. And they marched until they came unto the land of

Zaboulistan.