And Saiawush listened to the counsel of Piran, for he knew that it

was good, and he asked the hand of Ferangis of her father, and Afrasiyab

gave it to him with great joy. Then a mighty feast was made for the

bridal, and Afrasiyab poured gifts upon Saiawush past the telling,

and he bestowed on him a kingdom and a throne, and he blessed him

as his son; and when at length he suffered him to go forth unto his

realm, he sorrowed sore at his loss.

Now the space of one year did Saiawush abide in his province, and

at the end thereof, when he had visited its breadth, he builded for

himself a city in the midst. And he named it Gangdis, and it was a

place of beauty, such as the world hath not seen the like. And Saiawush

built houses and planted trees without number, and he also caused

an open space to be made wherein men could rejoice in the game of

ball. And he was glad in the possession of this city, and all men

around him rejoiced, and the earth was the happier for his presence,

and there was no cloud upon the heaven of his life. Yet the Mubids

told unto him that Gangdis would lead to his ill-fortune, and Saiawush

was afflicted thereat. But when a little time was sped and he beheld

no evil, he put from him their words, and he rejoiced in the time

that was; and he was glad in the house of his women, and he put his

trust in Afrasiyab.

But that which is written in the stars, surely it must be accomplished!

So it came about after many years that Gersiwaz was jealous of the

love which Afrasiyab his brother bare unto Saiawush, and of the power

that was his; and he pondered in his heart how he might destroy him.

Then he came before Afrasiyab, and prayed the King that he would suffer

him to go forth and visit the city that Saiawush had builded, whereof

the mouths of men ran over in praises. And Afrasiyab granted his request,

and bade him bear words of love unto Saiawush his son. So Gersiwaz

sped forth unto the city of Gangdis, and the master thereof received

him kindly, and asked him tidings of the King. And he feasted him

many days within his house, and he showed freely unto him all that

was his; and when he departed he heaped gifts upon his head, for he

knew not that Gersiwaz came in enmity unto him, and that these things

but fanned his envy.

Now when Gersiwaz returned unto Afrasiyab, the King questioned him

concerning his darling. Then Gersiwaz answered and said-

"O King, he is no longer the man whom thou knewest. His spirit is

uplifted in pride of might, and his heart goeth out towards Iran.

And but that I should make my name to be infamous unto the nations,

I would have hidden from thee this grief. But it behoveth me to tell

unto thee that which I have seen and which mine ears have heard. For

it hath been made known unto me that Saiawush is in treaty with his

father, and that they seek to destroy thee utterly."