"Suffer thy servant to go forth. For I would make ready an host, since

it behoveth us not to cease from the vengeance that is due unto Saiawush,

for his murderers yet cumber the ground."

Wherefore Rustem departed yet again from out the courts of the Shah.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BYZUN AND MANIJEH

Peace reigned again within the borders of Iran, and P the sword slept

in its scabbard, and Kai Khosrau ordered the world with wisdom. And

men rejoiced that the glory of Turan had been brought low, and the

Shah feasted his nobles in lightness of heart.

Now it came about one day that while they were shortening the hours

with wine there entered in unto them the keeper of the curtains of

the door. And he said that men from Arman stood without and craved

an audience. Then Kai Khosrau bade that they be let in. So the men

came before him, and they uttered cries of lamentation, and they fell

down at his feet and implored his aid. And Kai Khosrau said-

"Who hath done you wrong?"

Then the men answered, "Our wrong cometh unto us from the borders

of Turan, for there issue forth thence wild boars that break into

our fields and do destruction to our crops. And our fortunes are entwined

with the ground, and no man can overcome these beasts. Wherefore,

we pray thee, send forth a Pehliva that he may subdue them, for our

land groaneth under this plague."

Then Kai Khosrau said, "It shall be done as you desire," and he dismissed

them graciously. Then he called before him his treasurer, and bade

him bring forth precious stones, and horses with girdles of gold,

and rich brocades of Roum. And when they were placed before him he

showed them to his nobles, and he said that whoever would go forth

to combat the wild boars should not find him close-handed. But for

a while none answered, for no man listed to go forth to battle with

wild beasts. Then Byzun, the son of Gew, arose and spake, saying-

"If the Shah will grant leave unto me, I will go forth and slay these

foes."

Now Gew was grieved thereat, because that Byzun was his only son,

and he feared for his youth. Therefore he sought to restrain him.

But Byzun suffered it not, and he said-

"O King, listen unto my desires; for though I be young in years, yet

am I old in prudence, and I will do nought that is not fitting unto

thy slave."

And Kai Khosrau granted his request, but he bade him take forth with

him Girgin, the wise in counsel, that he should guide him aright.

And Byzun did as the Shah desired, and they set forth unto the land

of Arman.

Now when they were come unto the wood they rested them, and made a

great fire, and drank wine until they were refreshed. Then Girgin

would have laid him down to slumber. But Byzun said-