"Let these treasures be given unto the treasurer of my son."

When Sindokht beheld that her gifts were accepted, she rejoiced and

raised her voice in speech. And she questioned Saum, saying-

"Tell me, I pray thee, what wrong have the people of Cabul done unto

thee that thou wouldst destroy them?"

Then answered Saum the hero, "Reply unto my questions and lie not.

Art thou the slave or the wife of Mihrab, and is it thy daughter whom

Zal hath seen? If indeed it be so, tell me, I pray, of her beauty,

that I may know if she be worthy of my son."

Then Sindokht said, "O Pehliva, swear to me first a great oath that

thou wilt spare my life and the lives of those dear unto me. And when

I am assured of thy protection I will recount all that thou desirest."

Then Saum took the hand of Sindokht, and he sware unto her a great

oath, and gave her his word and his promise. And when she had heard

it she was no longer afraid, and she told him all her secrets. And

she said-

"I am of the race of Zohak, and wife unto the valiant Mihrab, and

mother of Rudabeh, who hath found favour in the eyes of thy son. And

I am come to learn of thy desire, and who are thine enemies in Cabul.

Destroy the wicked, and those who merit chastisement, but spare, I

pray thee, the innocent, or thy deeds will change day into night."

Then spake Saum, "My oath is sacred, and if it cost my life, thou

and thine and Cabul may rest assured that I will not harm them. And

I desire that Zal should find a wife in Rudabeh, though she be of

an alien race."

And he told her how that he had written to the Shah a letter of supplication

such as only one in grief could pen, and how Zal was absent with the

message, and he craved her to tell him of Rudabeh.

But Sindokht replied, "If the Pehliva of the world will make the hearts

of his slaves rejoice, he will visit us and look with his own eyes

upon our moon."

And Saum smiled and said, "Rest content and deliver thine heart of

cares, for all shall end according unto thy desires."

When Sindokht heard this she bade him farewell and made all haste

to return. And Saum loaded her with gifts and bade her depart in peace.

And Sindokht's face shone brightly, like unto the moon when she hath

been eclipsed, and hope once more reigned in her breast.

Now listen to what happened to Zal while these things were passing

in Seistan. When he was come to the court of Minuchihr he hastened

into his presence, and kissed the ground at his feet, and lay prostrate

before him in the dust. And when the Shah saw this he was moved, and

bade his servants raise Zal, and pour musk before him. Then Zal drew

nigh unto the throne and gave to the King the letter written by Saum

the son of Neriman. And when Minuchihr had read it he was grieved,

and said-