"Who art thou? Come forth into the light that I may behold thy face."

But ere he could speak further, Rustem had lifted up his hand and

struck him, and laid him dead upon the ground.

Now Sohrab, when he saw that Zindeh was gone out, was disquieted,

and he asked of his slaves wherefore the hero returned not unto the

banquet. So they went forth to seek him, and when they had found him

in his blood, they came and told Sohrab what they had seen. But Sohrab

would not believe it; so he ran to the spot and bade them bring torches,

and all the warriors and singing girls followed after him. Then when

Sohrab saw that it was true he was sore grieved; but he suffered not

that the banquet be ended, for he would not that the spirits of his

men be damped with pity. So they went back yet again to the feast.

Meanwhile Rustem returned him to the camp, and as he would have entered

the lines he encountered Gew, who went around to see that all was

safe. And Gew, when he saw a tall man clad in the garb of a Turk,

drew his sword and held himself ready for combat. But Rustem smiled

and opened his mouth, and Gew knew his voice, and came to him and

questioned him what he did without in the darkness. And Rustem told

him. Then he went before Kai Kaous also and related what he had seen,

and how no man like unto Sohrab was yet come forth from amid the Turks.

And he likened him unto Saum, the son of Neriman.

Now when the morning was come, Sohrab put on his armour. Then he went

unto a height whence he could look down over the camp of the Iranians.

And he took with him Hujir, and spake to him, saying-

"Seek not to deceive me, nor swerve from the paths of truth. For if

thou reply unto my questions with sincerity, I will loosen thy bonds

and give thee treasures; but if thou deceive me, thou shalt languish

till death in thy chains."

And Hujir said, "I will give answer unto thee according to my knowledge."

Then Sohrab said, "I am about to question thee concerning the nobles

whose camps are spread beneath our feet, and thou shalt name unto

me those whom I point out. Behold yon tent of gold brocade, adorned

with skins of leopard, before whose doors stand an hundred elephants

of war. Within its gates is a throne of turquoise, and over it floateth

a standard of violet with a moon and sun worked in its centre. Tell

unto me now whose is this pavilion that standeth thus in the midst

of the whole camp?"

And Hujir replied, "It pertaineth unto the Shah of Iran."

Then Sohrab said, "I behold on its right hand yet another tent draped

in the colours of mourning, and above it floateth a standard whereon

is worked an elephant."