Now it came to pass that on a certain morning Mihrab stepped forth

from his palace to the house of the women to visit Sindokht his wife,

and her daughter Rudabeh. Truly the house was like to a garden for

colour and perfume, and over all shone those moons of beauty. Now

when Mihrab had greeted Rudabeh he marvelled at her loveliness, and

called down the blessings of Heaven upon her head. Then Sindokht opened

her lips and questioned Mihrab concerning the stranger whose tents

were without their gates. And she said-

"I pray thee tell unto me what manner of man is this white-haired

son of Saum, and is he worthy the nest or the throne? "

Then Mihrab said unto her, "O my fair cypress, the son of Saum is

a hero among men. His heart is like unto a lion's, his strength is

as an elephant's, to his friends he is a gracious Nile, unto his enemies

a wasting crocodile. And in him are even blemishes turned to beauties,

his white locks but enhance his glory."

When Rudabeh had listened to these words her heart burned with love

for Zal, so that she could neither eat nor rest, and was like unto

one that hath changed her shape. And after a while, because that she

could bear the burden thereof no longer, she told her secret to the

slaves that loved and served her. And she charged them tell no man,

and entreated of them that they would aid her to allay the troubles

of her heart. And when the slaves had listened to her story, they

were filled with fear, and with one accord entreated her that she

would dismiss from her heart one branded among men, and whom his own

father had cast out. But Rudabeh would not listen to their voice.

And when they beheld that she was firm in her spirit, and that their

words were vain, they cast about how they might serve her. And one

among them who was wise above the rest opened her lips and spake-

"O moon-faced beauty, slender cypress, it shall be done at thy desire.

Thy slaves will neither rest nor slumber until the royal youth shall

have become the footstool to thy feet."

Then Rudabeh was glad and said-

"An the issue be happy, there shall be planted for thee a noble tree,

and it shall bear riches and jewels, and wisdom shall cull its fruits."

Then the slaves pondered in their hearts how they should compass their

end, for they knew that only by craft could it be brought about. Straightway

they clothed themselves in costly raiment, and went forth blithely

into the garden of flowers that was spread beside the river's bank

without the city. And they gathered roses, and decked their hair with

blossoms, and threw them into the stream for sooth-telling; and as

they gathered they came unto the spot over against which were pitched

the tents of Zal. Now Zal beheld them from his tent, and he questioned

them concerning these rose-gatherers. And one uprose and said unto

him-