But Sohrab replied, "Nought can be hidden upon earth for aye. To all

men are known the deeds of Rustem, and since my birth be thus noble,

wherefore hast thou kept it dark from me so long? I will go forth

with an army of brave Turks and lead them unto Iran, I will cast Kai

Kaous from off his throne, I will give to Rustem the crown of the

Kaianides, and together we will subdue the land of Turan, and Afrasiyab

shall be slain by my hands. Then will I mount the throne in his stead.

But thou shalt be called Queen of Iran. for since Rustem is my father

and I am his son no other kings shall rule in this world, for to us

alone behoveth it to wear the crowns of might. And I pant in longing

after the battlefield, and I desire that the world should behold my

prowess. But a horse is needful unto me, a steed tall and strong of

power to bear me, for it beseemeth me not to go on foot before mine

enemies."

Now Tahmineh, when she had heard the words of this boy, rejoiced in

her soul at his courage. So she bade the guardians of the flocks lead

out the horses before Sohrab her son. And they did as she had bidden,

and Sohrab surveyed the steeds, and tested their strength like as

his father had done before him of old, and he bowed them under his

hand, and he could not be satisfied. And thus for many days did he

seek a worthy steed. Then one came before him and told of a foal sprung

from Rakush, the swift of foot. When Sohrab heard the tidings he smiled,

and bade that the foal be led before him. And he tested it and found

it to be strong. So he saddled it and sprang upon its back and cried,

saying-

"Now that I own a horse like thee, the world shall be made dark to

many."

Then he made ready for war against Iran, and the nobles and warriors

flocked around him. And when all was in order Sohrab came before his

grandsire and craved his counsel and his aid to go forth into the

land of Iran and seek out his father. And the King of Samengan, when

he heard these wishes, deemed them to be just, and he opened the doors

of his treasures without stint and gave unto Sohrab of his wealth,

for he was filled with pleasure at this boy. And he invested Sohrab

with all the honours of a King, and he bestowed on him all the marks

of his good pleasure.

Meantime a certain man brought news unto Afrasiyab that Sohrab was

making ready an army to fall upon Iran, and to cast Kai Kaous from

off his throne. And he told Afrasiyab how the courage and valour of

Sohrab exceeded words. And Afrasiyab, when he heard this, hid not

his contentment, and he called before him Human and Barman, the doughty.

Then he bade them gather together an army and join the ranks of Sohrab,

and he confided to them his secret purpose, but he enjoined them to

tell no man thereof. For he said-