But the world grew dark before the eyes of Afrasiyab with anger. And

he spake, and said-

"Go hence, and trouble not again my face; for how canst thou judge

of that which is right?"

Then he commanded that she should be bound, and cast into a dungeon.

Now Gersiwaz, when he beheld the anger of the King, deemed that the

time was ripe. He therefore gave a sign unto the men that held Saiawush

in bondage, and desired that they should slay him. And by the hairs

of his head they dragged him unto a desert place, and the sword of

Gersiwaz was planted in the breast of the royal cedar. But when it

was done, and they had severed the head from the trunk, a mighty storm

arose over the earth, and the heavens were darkened. Then they trembled

and were sore afraid, and repented them of their deed. And clamour

arose in the house of Saiawush, and the cries of Ferangis reached

even unto Afrasiyab her father. Then the King commanded that she should

be killed also. But Piran spake, and said-

"Not so, wicked and foolish man. Wouldst thou lift thine hand against

thine offspring, and hast thou not done enough that is evil? Shed

not, I counsel thee, the blood of yet another innocent. But if thou

desire to look no more upon Ferangis, I pray thee confide her unto

me, that she may be to me a daughter in my house, and I will guard

her from sorrow."

Then Afrasiyab said, "Do that which seemeth best in thy sight."

And he was glad in his heart, for he desired not to look upon the

face that should recall to him the friend that he had loved. So Piran

took Ferangis unto his house beyond the mountains, and Afrasiyab returned

unto his courts. But the King was sorrowful in his spirit and unquiet

in his heart, and he could not cease from thinking of Saiawush, and

he repented of that which he had done.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE RETURN OF KAI KHOSRAU

In a little time it came about that there was born unto Ferangis,

in the house of Piran, a son of the race of Saiawush. And Piran, when

he had seen the babe, goodly of mien, who already in his cradle was

like unto a king, sware a great oath that Afrasiyab should not destroy

it. And when he went before the King to tell unto him the tidings,

he pleaded for him with his lips. Now the heart of Afrasiyab had been

softened in his sorrow for Saiawush, wherefore he shut his ear unto

the evil counsellors that bade him destroy the babe which should bring

vengeance upon Turan. And he said-

" I repent me of mine evil deed unto Saiawush, and though it be written

that much evil shall come upon me from this child sprung from the

loins of Tur and Kai Kobad, I will strive no more to hinder the decree

of the stars; let him, therefore, be reared unto manhood. Yet I pray

that he be brought up among shepherds in the mountains far from the

haunts of men, and that his birth be hidden from him, that he may

not learn of his father or of the cruel things I did unto Saiawush."