When Gudarz awoke, he thanked God for his dream, and touched the ground

with his white beard. And when the sun was risen and had chased away

the ravens of night, he called before him his son, and he spake to

him of his dream. And he commanded him that he go forth to do the

behests of God.

And Gew said, "I will obey thine orders while I live."

Then Gudarz said, "What companions wilt thou take with thee?

And Gew said, "My cord and my horse will suffice unto me for company,

for it is best to take none with me into Turan. For behold, if I lead

out an host, men will ask what I am, and wherefore I come forth; but

if I go alone, their doubts will slumber."

Then Gudarz said, "Go, and peace be upon thee."

So Gew made ready his steed, and when he had bidden farewell unto

the old man his father, he set out upon his travels. And wherever

he met a man walking alone, he questioned him concerning Kai Khosrau;

and if the man knew not the name, he struck off his head, that none

might learn his secret or wherefore he was come forth.

Now Gew wandered thus many days throughout the length of Turan, like

to a man distraught, and he could learn nought concerning Kai Khosrau,

the young king. And seven years rolled thus above his head, and he

grew lean and sorrowful. And for house he had nought save only his

saddle, and for nourishment and clothing the flesh and skin of the

wild ass, and in place of wine he had only bad water. And he began

to be downcast in his spirit, and afraid lest the dream dreamed of

his father had been sent unto him by a Deev. Now it came about one

day that while he pondered thus he entered a forest, and when he was

come into its midst, he beheld therein a fountain, and a young man,

slim as a cypress, seated beside it. And the youth held in his hand

a wine-cup, and on his head was a crown of flowers, and his mien was

such that the soul of Gew rejoiced thereat, and the door of his cares

was loosened. And he said within himself-

"If this be not the King, then must I abandon my search, for I think

to behold in him the face of Saiawush."

Then he went nigh unto him.

Now when Kai Khosrau beheld the warrior, he smiled and said-

"O Gew, thou art welcome unto my sight, since thou art come hither

at the behest of God. Tell unto me now, I pray thee, tidings of Tus

and Gudarz, of Rustem, and of Kai Kaous the King. Are they happy?

Do they know of Kai Khosrau?"

When Gew heard this speech, he was confounded; and when he had returned

thanks unto God, he opened his mouth and spake, saying-

"O young King, who bearest high thy head, reveal unto me who hath

told thee of Gudarz and of Tus, of Rustem and of Kai Kaous, and how

knowest thou my name and aspect."