Then when the guests were come near unto Cabul, Mihrab went forth

to meet them, and he placed upon the head of Zal a crown of diamonds,

and they came into the city in triumph. And all the people did homage

before them, and Sindokht met them at the doors of the King's house,

and poured out musk and precious stones before them. Then Saum, when

he had replied to their homage, smiled, and turned to Sindokht and

said-

"How much longer dost thou think to hide Rudabeh from our eyes?"

And Sindokht said, "What wilt thou give me to see the sun?"

Then Saum replied, "All that thou wilt, even unto my slaves and my

throne, will I give to thee."

Then Sindokht led him within the curtains, and when Saum beheld Rudabeh

he was struck dumb with wonder, for her beauty exceeded dreams, and

he knew not how he could find words to praise her. Then he asked of

Mihrab that he would give unto him her hand, and they concluded an

alliance according to custom and the law. And the lovers were seated

upon a throne, and Mihrab read out the list of the gifts, and it was

so long the ear did not suffice to hear them. Then they repaired unto

the banquet, and they feasted seven days without ceasing. And when

a month had passed Saum went back to Seistan, and Zal and Rudabeh

followed after him. And speedily did he set forth again to battle,

and left the kingdom in the hands of his son, and Zal administered

it with wisdom and judgment. And Rudabeh sat beside him on the throne,

and he placed a crown of gold upon her head.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

RUSTEM

Now ere the son of Zal was born, Rudabeh was sore afflicted, and

neither by day nor night could she find rest. Then Zal in his trouble

bethought him of the Simurgh, his nurse, and how she had given unto

him a feather that he might use it in the hour of his need. And he

cast the feather into the fire as she had commanded, and straightway

a sound of rushing wings filled the air, and the sky was darkened

and the bird of God stood before Zal. And she said unto him-

"O my son, wherefore art thou troubled, and why are the eyes of this

lion wet with tears?"

Then he told her of his sorrow, and she bade him be of good cheer,

"For verily thy nurse who shielded thee, and reared thee when thy

father cast thee out, is come yet again to succour thee."

And she told him how he should act, and when she had done speaking

she turned her once more towards her nest. But Zal did as she had

commanded, and there was born to him a son comely of limb. And when

Rudabeh beheld the babe, she smiled and said-

"Verily he shall be called Rustem (which, being interpreted, meaneth

delivered), for I am delivered of my pains."