Then Ahriman imagined a device in his black heart. He took upon himself

the form of a youth, and craved that he might serve the King as cook.

And Zohak, who knew him not, received him well and granted his request,

and the keys of the kitchen were given unto him. Now hitherto men

had been nourished with herbs, but Ahriman prepared flesh for Zohak.

New dishes did he put before him, and the royal favour was accorded

to his savory meats. And the flesh gave the King courage and strength

like to that of a lion, and he commanded that his cook should be brought

before him and ask a boon at his hands. And the cook said-

"If the King take pleasure in his servant, grant that he may kiss

his shoulders."

Now Zohak, who feared no evil, granted the request, and Ahriman kissed

him on his shoulders. And when he had done so, the ground opened beneath

his feet and covered the cook, so that all men present were amazed

thereat. But from his kiss sprang hissing serpents, venomous and black;

and the King was afraid, and desired that they should be cut off from

the root. But as often as the snakes were cut down did they grow again,

and in vain the wise men and physicians cast about for a remedy. Then

Ahriman came once again disguised as a learned man, and was led before

Zohak, and he spake, saying-

"This ill cannot be healed, neither can the serpents be uprooted.

Prepare food for them, therefore, that they may be fed, and give unto

them for nourishment the brains of men, for perchance this may destroy

them."

But in his secret heart Ahriman desired that the world might thus

be made desolate; and daily were the serpents fed, and the fear of

the King was great in the land. The world withered in his thrall,

the customs of good men were forgotten, and the desires of the wicked

were accomplished.

Now it was spread abroad in Iran that in the land of Thasis there

reigned a man who was mighty and terrible to his foes. Then the kings

and nobles who had withdrawn from Jemshid because he had rebelled

against God, turned to Zohak and besought him that he would be their

ruler, and they proclaimed him Shah. And the armies of Arabia and

Persia marched against Jemshid, and he fled before their face. For

the space of twice fifty years no man knew whither he was gone, for

he hid from the wrath of the Serpent-King. But in the fulness of time

he could no longer escape the fury of Zohak, whose servants found

him as he wandered on the sea-shore of Cathay, and they sawed him

in twain, and sent tidings thereof to their lord. And thus perished

the throne and power of Jemshid like unto the grass that withereth,

because that he was grown proud, and would have lifted himself above

his Maker.