Now when the brilliant sun was vanished and the black night had invaded

the earth with her army of stars, Firoud caused his castle to be strengthened.

And while he did so, his mother dreamed a dream of evil portent, and

she came forth weeping before her son. And she spake, saying-

"O my son, the stars are evil disposed towards us, and I am afraid

for thee."

Then Firoud answered her, saying, "Woe unto thee, my mother, for I

know it is not given unto thee to cease from shedding tears of sorrow.

For verily I shall perish like unto my father, in the flower of my

youth. Yet will I not crave mercy of these Iranians."

And he bade her go back unto the chamber of the women, and pray God

for his soul.

Now when the sun returned and lifted his glorious face above the vault

of heaven, there was heard the sound of armour on all sides, and Firoud

beheld that the host of Iran was come forth against him. So he went

out beyond the gates, leading his warriors. And since there was no

plain whereon they could give battle, they fought upon the mountain-side,

and many were the Turkish heads that were felled. But Firoud made

great havoc among his enemies, and they beheld that he was a lion

in the fight. But the stars of the young hero were waning, for even

a brave man cannot contend alone against an host. For when he would

have ridden back unto his castle, Rehham and Byzun lay in ambush against

him, and they closed unto him the two ends of the path. But Firoud

was not dismayed thereat. He fell upon the son of Gew, and would have

slain him; but Rehham came upon him from behind, and struck him down

with a mighty club. Then Firoud knew that his hour was come, and he

returned unto his mother. Now when she saw him she raised a great

cry, but he bade her keep silence, and he spake, saying-

"Weep not, for the time suffereth it not. For the Iranians follow

fast upon me, and they will enter and take this house, and do violence

unto thee and to thy women. Go out, therefore, and cast you from off

the walls into the abyss, that death may come upon you, and that Byzun

when he entereth find none alive. As for me, my moments are but few,

for the heroes of Iran have murdered the days of my youth."

And the women did as he commanded, save only his mother, who abode

beside him until the breath was gone out from his body. Then she made

a great fire, and threw therein all his treasures, and she went out

into the stables and laid low the horses that were therein. And when

she had made the place a desert unto the Iranians, she returned unto

the feet of her son, and pierced her body with a sword.