In this year Zohak caused his army to be strengthened, and he demanded

of his people that they should certify that he had ever been to them

a just and noble king. And they obeyed for very fear. But while they

sware there arose without the doorway of the Shah the cry of one who

demanded justice. And Zohak commanded that he should be brought in,

and the man stood before the assembly of the nobles.

Then Zohak opened his mouth and said, "I charge thee give a name unto

him who hath done thee wrong."

And the man, when he saw it was the Shah who questioned him, smote

his head with his hands. But he answered and said-

"I am Kawah, a blacksmith and a blameless man, and I sue for justice,

and it is against thee, O King, that I cry out. Seventeen fair sons

have I called mine, yet only one remaineth to me, for that his brethren

were slain to still the hunger of thy serpents, and now they have

taken from me this last child also. I pray thee spare him unto me,

nor heap thy cruelties upon the land past bearing."

And the Shah feared Kawah's wrath, beholding that it was great, and

he granted him the life of his son and sought to win him with soft

words. Then he prayed him that he would also sign the testimony that

Zohak was a just and noble king.

But Kawah cried, "Not so, thou wicked and ignoble man, ally of Deevs,

I will not lend my hand unto this lie," and he seized the declaration

and tore it into fragments and scattered them into the air. And when

he had done so he strode forth from the palace, and all the nobles

and people were astonished, so that none dared uplift a finger to

restrain him. Then Kawah went to the market-place and related to the

people all that which he had seen, and recalled to them the evil deeds

of Zohak and the wrongs they had suffered at his hands. And he provoked

them to shake off the yoke of Ahriman. And taking off the leathern

apron wherewith blacksmiths cover their knees when they strike with

the hammer, he raised it aloft upon the point of a lance and cried-

"Be this our banner to march forth and seek out Feridoun and entreat

him that he deliver us from out the hands of the Serpent-King."

Then the people set up a shout of joy and gathered themselves round

Kawah, and he led them out of the city bearing aloft his standard.

And they marched thus for many days unto the palace of Feridoun.

Now these things came about in the land of Iran after twice eight

years were passed over the head of Feridoun. And when that time was

accomplished, he descended from the Mount Alberz and sought out his

mother, questioning her of his lineage. And she told him how that

he was sprung from the race of Jemshid, and also of Zohak and of his

evil deeds.