Minuchihr, too, when he had heard these things, was troubled, for

he beheld in them the device of Ahriman, and feared lest this union

should bring evil upon Iran. And he bade Nauder call Saum before him.

Now when Saum heard the desire of the Shah, he spake and said-

"I obey, and the sight of the King will be a banquet. unto my soul."

Then Saum went into the presence of Minuchihr, and he kissed the ground,

and called down blessings upon the head of the Shah. But Minuchihr

raised him and seated him beside him on the throne, and straightway

began to question him concerning the war, and the Deevs of Mazinderan.

Then Saum told him all the story of his battles. And Minuchihr listened

with joy though the tale was long, and when Saum had ended he praised

his prowess. And he lifted his crown unto heaven and rejoiced that

his enemies were thus confounded. Then be bade a banquet be spread,

and all night long the heroes feasted and shortened the hours with

wine. But when the first rays of morn had shed their light, the curtains

of the Shah's house were opened, that he might hold audience and grant

the petitions of his people. And Saum the Pehliva came the first to

stand before the King, for he desired to speak to him of Zal. But

the Shah of the world would not suffer him to open his lips, but said

unto him-

"Go hence, O Saum, and take with thee thine army, for I command thee

to go yet again to battle. Set forth unto Cabul and burn the house

of Mihrab the King, and utterly destroy his race and all who serve

him, nor suffer that any of the seed of Zohak escape destruction,

for I will that the earth be delivered of this serpent brood."

When Saum heard these words he knew that the Shah was angered, and

that speech would avail him naught. So he kissed the throne and touched

the earth with his forehead, and said, "Lord, I am thy servant, and

I obey thy desires." And he departed, and the earth trembled under

the stamping of footmen and of hoofs, and the air of the city was

darkened with his spears.

Now the news of Saum's intent reached even unto Cabul, and the land

was sunk in woe, and weeping filled the house of the King. But Zal

was wroth, and he went forth to meet his father. And when he was come

to the spot where he had encamped his army, he craved an audience.

And Saum granted it, and Zal reminded him yet again of his oath, and

desired that he would spare the land of Cabul, nor visit his judgments

upon the innocent. When Saum had listened, his heart was moved, and

he said-

"O my son, thou speakest that which is right. To thee have I been

unjust from the day of thy birth. But stay thy wrath, for surely I

will find a remedy, and thy wishes shall yet be accomplished. For

thou shalt bear a letter unto the Shah, and when he shall have looked

on thy face, he will be moved with compassion and cease to trouble

thee."