Then when the tidings came to Seistan that the great hero was drawing

nigh, the city decked itself in festive garbs, and every man called

down the blessings of Heaven upon Zal, the son of Saum, and poured

gifts at his feet. And there was joy in all the land for that Saum

had taken back his son.

Now Saum forthwith called about him his Mubids, and bade them instruct

the youth in all the virtues of a king.

And daily Zal increased in wisdom and strength, and his fame filled

the land. And when Saum went forth to fight the battles of the Shah,

he left the kingdom under his hands, and Zal administered it with

judgment and virtue.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

ZAL AND RUDABEH

Anon it came about that Zal desired to see the kingdom. And he set

forth, and there followed after him a goodly train, and when they

had journeyed a while they marched with pomp into Cabul. Now Mihrab,

who was descended from Zohak the Serpent, reigned in Cabul, yet he

was worthy, prudent, and wise. When he heard that the son of Saum,

to whom he paid tribute, drew nigh unto the city, he went out to meet

him, and his nobles went with him, and slaves bearing costly gifts.

And Zal, hearing that Mihrab was at hand, prepared a feast in his

tents, and Mihrab and his train feasted with him until the night was

far spent. Now, after the King was gone, Zal praised his beauty. Then

a noble rose up and said unto him-

"O Zal, thou knowest not beauty since thou hast not beheld the daughter

of this man. For she is like unto the slender cypress, her face is

brighter than the sun, her mouth is a pomegranate flower."

When Zal heard these words he was filled with longing, and sleep would

not visit his eyelids for thinking of her beauty.

Now, when the day dawned, he opened the doors of his court, and the

nobles stood about him, each man according to his rank. And presently

there came from Cabul Mihrab the King to tender morning greeting to

the stranger without his gates. And Zal desired that Mihrab should

crave a boon at his hands. Then spake Mihrab unto him saying-

"O ruler mighty and great, I have but one desire, and to bring it

to pass is easy. For I crave thee that thou dwell as guest beneath

my roof, and let my heart rejoice in thy presence."

Then Zal said unto him, "O King, ask not this boon at my hands, I

pray thee, for it can in nowise be accomplished. The Shah and Saum

would be angered should they learn that I had eaten under the roof

of Zohak. I beg of thee ask aught but this."

When Mihrab heard these words he was sorrowful, and bent low before

Zal, and departed from out the tents. And the eye of Zal looked after

him, and yet again he spake his praises. Then he bethought him of

the King's daughter, and how that she was fair, and he was sunk in

brooding and desire, and the days passed unheeded over his head.