"I pray thee bring up this youth and nourish him for the kingdom,

and aid him with thy might and mind."

And he took the hand of Minuchihr and put it into that of Saum, and

said-

"Thanks be unto God the merciful, who hath listened unto my voice,

and granted the desires of His servant. For now shall I go hence,

and the world will I cumber no more."

Then when he had given gifts unto his servants he withdrew into solitude,

and gazed without cease upon the heads of his sons, neither refrained

he from bewailing their evil fate, and the sorrow they had brought

upon him. And daily he grew fainter, and at last the light of his

life expired, and Feridoun vanished from the earth, but his name remained

behind him. And Minuchihr mourned for his grandsire with weeping and

lamentation, and raised above him a stately tomb. But when the seven

days of mourning were ended, he put upon his head the crown of the

Kaianides, and girt his loins with a red sash of might. And the nation

called him Shah, and he was beloved in the land.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

ZAL

Seistan, which is to the south of Iran, was ruled by Saum, the Pehliva,

girt with might and glory, and, but for the grief that he was childless,

his days were happy. Then it came to pass that a son was born unto

him, beautiful of face and limb, who had neither fault nor blemish

save that his hair was like unto that of an aged man. Now the women

were afraid to tell Saum, lest he be wroth when he should learn that

his child was thus set apart from his fellow-men. So the infant had

gazed upon the light eight days ere he knew thereof. Then a woman,

brave above the rest, ventured into his presence. She bowed herself

unto the dust and craved of Saum the boon of speech. And he suffered

her, and she spake, saying-

"May the Lord keep and guard thee. May thine enemies be utterly destroyed.

May the days of Saum the hero be happy. For the Almighty hath accomplished

his desire. He hath given to him an heir, a son is born unto the mighty

warrior behind the curtains of his house, a moon-faced boy, beautiful

of face and limb, in whom there is neither fault nor blemish, save

that his hair is like unto that of an aged man. I beseech thee, O

my master, bethink thee that this gift is from God, nor give place

in thine heart to ingratitude."

When Saum had listened to her words he arose and went unto the house

of the women. And he beheld the babe that was beautiful of face and

limb, but whose head was like unto that of an aged man. Then Saum,

fearing the jeers of his enemies, quitted the paths of wisdom. He

lifted his head unto heaven and murmured against the Lord of Destiny,

and cried, saying-