Albeit, when Afrasiyab heard that Rustem and Zal were come out against

him, he was in nowise dismayed, for he said, "The son is but a boy,

and the father is old; it will not, therefore, be hard for me to keep

my power in Iran." And he made ready his warriors with gladness of

heart.

But Zal, when he had drawn up his army in battle array, spake unto

them, saying-

"O men valiant in fight, we are great in number, but there is wanting

to us a chief, for we are without the counsels of a Shah, and verily

no labour succeedeth when the head is lacking. But rejoice, and be

not downcast in your hearts, for a Mubid hath revealed unto me that

there yet liveth one of the race of Feridoun to whom pertaineth the

throne, and that he is a youth wise and brave."

And when he had thus spoken, he turned him to Rustem and said-

"I charge thee, O my son, depart in haste for the Mount Alberz, neither

tarry by the way. And wend thee unto Kai Kobad, and say unto him that

his army awaiteth him, and that the throne of the Kaianides is empty."

And Rustem, when he had heard his father's command, touched with his

eyelashes the ground before his feet, and straightway departed. In

his hand he bare a mace of might, and under him was Rakush the swift

of foot. And he rode till he came within sight of the Mount Alberz,

whereon had stood the cradle of his father. Then he beheld at its

foot a house beauteous like unto that of a king. And around it was

spread a garden whence came the sounds of running waters, and trees

of tall stature uprose therein, and under their shade, by a gurgling

rill, there stood a throne, and a youth, fair like to the moon, was

seated thereon. And round about him leaned knights girt with red sashes

of power, and you would have said it was a paradise for perfume and

beauty.

Now when those within the garden beheld the son of Zal ride by, they

came out unto him and said-

"O Pehliva, it behoveth us not to let thee go farther before thou

hast permitted us to greet thee as our guest. We pray thee, therefore,

descend from off thy horse and drink the cup of friendship in our

house."

But Rustem said, "Not so, I thank you, but suffer that I may pass

unto the mountain with an errand that brooketh no delay. For the borders

of Iran are encircled by the enemy, and the throne is empty of a king.

Wherefore I may not stay to taste of wine."

Then they answered him, "If thou goest unto the mount, tell us, we

pray thee, thy mission, for unto us is it given to guard its sides."

And Rustem replied, "I seek there a king of the seed of Feridoun,

who cleansed the world of the abominations of Zohak, a youth who reareth

high his head. I pray ye, therefore, if ye know aught of Kai Kobad,

that ye give me tidings where I may find him."