When Afrasiyab heard these words he awoke, and cried out in his fear.

And he called upon the names of his guards. But no man came forth,

because they had been laid low by the hands of Rustem. Then Afrasiyab

made his way unto the door, and because it was dark he escaped thence,

and he fled before the face of Rustem, and left his house between

his hands. Then Rustem took much rich booty of slaves, and horses,

and jewels, and when he had done so he sped back unto his army, for

he knew that with the day Afrasiyab would come forth with an host

to assail him. And it came about as he foresaw, and when the day was

risen the watchers cried out that an army marched forth from Turan.

Then Rustem set his men in battle order, and he sent Manijeh and the

slaves and the booty into Iran, and he placed himself at the head

of the host, and Byzun rode beside him. And there was fought a mighty

battle, and great was the slaughter, and the bodies of the slain and

the broken armour covered the earth. And the banner of Turan sank,

and Afrasiyab fled before his enemies.

Then Rustem returned with joy unto Kai Khosrau, and the Shah was glad

also. And he came forth to greet his Pehliva, and there rode with

him Gew and Gudarz, his warriors. And when Kai Khosrau saw Rustem

he embraced him, and said-

"O stay of my soul, and man of valour, thou resemblest the sun, for

wheresoever men may look they behold the traces of thy mighty deeds.

Happy is Zal who owneth a son such as thou!"

Then he blessed him, and showered rich gifts upon him; and Gew blessed

him also, and Gudarz, because he had brought back Byzun into their

midst. Then Kai Khosrau gave orders that a great feast be prepared,

and the heroes drank until their heads were heavy with wine. But in

the morning Rustem came before the Shah in audience, and opened his

mouth and said-

"May it please the King to lend his ear unto his slave. I desire to

return unto Zal, my father."

And Kai Khosrau listened to the just desires of Rustem, though he

would fain have kept him in his courts.

Now when Rustem was departed, Kai Khosrau called before him Byzun,

and he spake to him of that which was come about, and he poured pity

upon the daughter of Afrasiyab when he learned all she had suffered

for the sake of Byzun; and he gave him rich gifts, and bade him bear

them unto her, and he said-

"Cherish this woman in thy bosom, and suffer not that grief come nigh

unto her, neither speak to her cold words, for she hath endured much

for thee. And may thy life beside her be happy."

And when the Shah had thus spoken he dismissed Byzun from his presence.

Thus endeth the history of Byzun and Manijeh.