"O King, hast thou no fear of God, no pity for thy father? I pray

thee destroy me not, lest God ask vengeance for my blood. Let it not

be spoken that thou who hast life takest that gift from others. Do

not this evil. Crush not even the tiny ant that beareth a grain of

corn, for she hath life, and sweet life is a boon. I will vanish from

thy sight, I will live in solitude and secrecy, so thou grant that

I may yet behold the sun."

But these words angered Tur only the more, and he drew from his boot

a dagger that was poisoned and sharp, and he thrust it into the breast

of Irij, the kingly cedar. And the young lord of the world paled and

was dead. Then Tur cut the head from the trunk, and filled it with

musk and ambergris, and sent it unto the old man his father, who had

parted the world, saying-

"Behold the head of thy darling, give unto him now the crown and the

throne."

And when they had done this evil deed the brethren furled their tents,

and turned them back again unto the lands of Roum and Cathay.

Now Feridoun held his eyes fastened upon the road whither Irij was

gone, and his heart yearned after him. And when he heard that the

time of his return was come, he bade a host go forth to meet him,

and he himself went in the wake. Now when they were gone but a little

way they beheld a mighty cloud of dust upon the sky. And the cloud

neared, and there came thence a dromedary whereon was seated a knight

clad in the garb of woe. And he bare in his arms a casket of gold,

and in the casket were rich stuffs of silk, and in the stuffs was

wrapped the head of Irij. And when Feridoun beheld the face of the

messenger his heart was smote with fear, but when he saw the head

of his son he fell from his horse with sorrow. Then a cry of wailing

rent the air, and the army shouted for grief, and the flags were torn,

and the drums broken, and the elephants and cymbals hung with the

colours of mourning, because that Irij was gone from the world. And

Feridoun returned on foot unto the city, and all the nobles went with

him, and they retraced their steps in the dust. Now when they were

come to the garden of Irij, Feridoun faltered in his sorrow, and he

pressed the head of the young King, his son, unto his breast. And

he cast black earth upon his throne, and tore his hair, and shed tears,

and his cries mounted even unto the seventh sphere. And he spake in

his grief and said-

"O Master of the world, that metest out justice, look down, I pray

thee, upon this innocent whom his brethren have foully murdered! Sear

their hearts that joy cannot enter, and grant unto me my prayer. Suffer

that I may live until a hero, a warrior mighty to avenge, be sprung

from the seed of Irij. Then when I shall have beheld his face I will

go hence as it beseemeth me and the earth shall cover my body."