----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE DEFEAT OF AFRASIYAB

Mourning and sorrow filled the heart of Afrasiyab because of his

defeat, and he pondered in his spirit how the fortunes of Iran might

be retrieved. So he sent messengers unto all his vassals that they

should unsheathe the sword of strife and make ready an army. And the

nobles did as Afrasiyab bade them, and they got together an host that

covered the ground, and sent it forth before the King. And the King

placed Schideh his son at the head thereof, and he said unto him-

"Open not the door of peace, neither treat Kai Khosrau other than

as an enemy."

Now when the Shah heard tidings of the army that Afrasiyab had made

ready against him, he commanded that no man who could use the bridle

and the stirrup should stay within the borders of Iran. And when the

army was ready he placed at its head Gudarz the wise. But Kai Khosrau

bade yet again that Gudarz should seek to win Piran the Pehliva unto

Iran ere the hosts met in battle. For the Shah remembered the benefits

he had received at his hands, and it grieved him sore to go out against

him in enmity. And Gudarz did as the Shah desired, and when he had

crossed the Jihun he sent Gew, his son, unto Piran that he might speak

with him. But Piran shut ear unto the voice of Gew, and he said that

he had led forth his army to battle, and that it behoved him to do

that which was commanded of Afrasiyab.

So the two armies were drawn up in order of battle, and each desired

that the other should fall upon them the first. And for three days

and three nights they faced each other, and you would have said that

no man so much as moved his lips. And Gudarz was posted before his

men, and day and night he searched the stars and the sun and moon

for augury. And he demanded of them whether he should advance or whether

he should stay. And Piran also waited that he might behold what the

Iranians would do.

But Byzun was angry thereat, and he went before his father and entreated

him to urge his grandsire unto action. "For surely," he said, "Gudarz

hath lost his wits that he thus regardeth the sun and stars, and thinketh

not of the enemy." And Gew strove in vain to quiet him.

And in the ranks of Turan also Human grew impatient, and he asked

permission of his brother to challenge the nobles of Iran to single

fight. And Piran sought to dissuade him in vain. So he got ready his

steed of battle, and rode until he came within the lines of Iran.

And when he was come thither he sought out Rehham, the son of Gudarz,

and challenged him to measure his strength. But Rehham said-

"My soul thirsteth after the combat, yet since my father hath commanded

that the army advance not, it beseemeth me not to forget his behests.

And remember, O valiant Turk, that he who ventureth first upon the

battlefield hath no need to seek the pathway to return."