Now when Rustem was come unto himself, he saw Shugdad, and he beheld

in his face the joy felt of this evil man at this adventure. Then

he knew that it was his brother that was his foe. So he said unto

him-

"It is thou who hast done this deed."

And Shugdad said, "Thou hast caused many to perish by the sword; it

is meet that thou shouldst perish by it thyself."

Now while they yet spake, the King of Cabul came nigh unto the spot.

And when he beheld Rustem, that weltered in his blood, he feigned

a great sorrow, and he cried-

"O hero of renown, what thing hath befallen thee?

I will send forth my physicians, that they heal thee."

And Rustem said, "O man of wile, the time of physicians is gone by,

and there is none that can heal me, save only death, that cometh to

all men in their turn."

Then he said unto Shugdad, "Give unto me my bow, and place before

me two arrows, and refuse not unto me this last request. For I would

have them beside me lest a lion go by ere I am dead, and devour me

for his prey."

And Shugdad gave unto Rustem his bow; but when he had done so he was

afraid, and he ran unto a plane tree that stood near by. And the tree

was old and hollow, and Shugdad hid himself in its trunk. But Rustem

beheld him where he was hid, though the dimness of death was come

over his eyes. So he raised him from the ground in his agony, and

he took his bow and bent it with force, and he shot an arrow and fixed

Shugdad unto the tree wherein he was hid. And the aim was just, and

pierced even unto the heart of this evil man, so that he died. And

Rustem, when he saw it, smiled, and said-

"Thanks be unto God, the Merciful, whom all my days I have sought

to serve, that He hath granted unto me to avenge myself upon this

wretch while the life is yet in me, and ere two nights have passed

over this vengeance."

But when he had so spoken the breath went out of him, and the hero

who had borne high his head was vanished from this world.

Now a warrior of the train of Rustem rode with all speed unto Zaboulistan,

and told unto Zal the tidings of sorrow. And Zal was dismayed thereat,

and his grief was boundless, and he cried continually after his son,

and he heaped curses upon Shugdad, that had uprooted this royal tree.

And he said-

"Wherefore have I been suffered to see this day? Wherefore have I

not died before Rustem, my son? Wherefore am I left alone to mourn

his memory?"

Now while he lamented thus, Feramorz, the son of Rustem, gathered

together an army to avenge his father. And he went into Cabul, and

he laid low all the men he found therein, and he slew the King and

all his house, and he changed the land into a desert. And when he

had done so, he sought out the body of Rustem, and of Rakush his steed,

and he did unto them all honour, and they were borne in sorrow unto

Zaboulistan. And Zal caused a noble tomb to be built for Rustem, his

son, and he laid him therein, and there was placed beside him also

Rakush, the steed that had served him unto the end.

And the wailing throughout the land because of the death of Rustem

was such as the world hath not known the like. And Zal was crushed

with sorrow, and Rudabeh was distraught with grief. And for many moons

were no sounds save those of wailing heard in the courts of Seistan.

And Rudabeh refused to take comfort, and she cried without ceasing-

"He is gone before us, but we shall follow. Let us rest our hopes

in God."

And she gave unto the poor of her treasures, and daily she prayed

unto Ormuzd, saying-

"O Thou who reignest above, to whom alone pertaineth honour and glory,

purify the soul of Rustem from all sin, and grant that he rejoice

in the fruits that he hath sown on earth, and give him a place beside

Thee."

And now may the blessing of God rest upon all men. I have told unto

them the Epic of Kings, and the Epic of Kings is come to a close,

and the tale of their deeds is ended.

THE END