Now when all was ready, Kai Kaous bade Saiawush his son ride into

the midst of the burning mount, that he might prove his innocence.

And Saiawush did as the King commanded, and he came before Kai Kaous,

and saluted him, and made him ready for the ordeal. And when he came

nigh unto the burning wood, he commended his soul unto God, and prayed

that He would make him pure before his father. And when he had done

so, he gave rein unto his horse, and entered into the flame. And a

great cry of sorrow arose from all men in the plains and in the city,

for they held that no man could come forth alive from this furnace.

And Sudaveh heard the cry, and came forth upon the roof of her house

that she might behold the sight, and she prayed that ill might befall

unto Saiawush, and she held her eyes fastened upon the pyre. But the

nobles gazed on the face of Kai Kaous, and their mouths were filled

with execrations, and their lips trembled with wrath at this deed.

And Saiawush rode on undaunted, and his white robes and ebon steed

shone forth between the flames, and their anger was reflected upon

his helmet of gold. And he rode until he was come unto the end of

the pathway, and when he came forth there was not singed a hair of

his head, neither had the smoke blackened his garments.

Now when the people beheld that he was come forth alive, they rent

the welkin with their shouting. And the nobles came forth to greet

him, and, save only Sudaveh, there was joy in all hearts. Now Saiawush

rode till he came before the Shah, and then he got him off his horse,

and did homage before his father. And when Kai Kaous beheld him, and

saw that there were no signs of fire about him, he knew that he was

innocent. So he raised his son from off the ground, and placed Saiawush

beside him on the throne, and asked his forgiveness for that which

was come to pass. And Saiawush granted it. Then Kai Kaous feasted

his son with wine and song, and three days did they spend in revels,

and the door of the King's treasury was opened.

But on the fourth day Kai Kaous mounted the throne of the Kaianides.

He took in his hand the ox-headed mace, and he commanded that Sudaveh

be led before him. Then he reproached her with her evil deeds, and

he bade her make ready to depart the world, for verily death was decreed

unto her. And in vain did Sudaveh ask for pardon at the hands of the

King, for she continued to speak ill of Saiawush, and she said that

by the arts of magic alone had he escaped the fire, and she ceased

not to cry against him. So the King gave orders that she be led forth

unto death, and the nobles approved his resolve, and invoked the blessings

of Heaven upon the head of the Shah. But Saiawush, when he learned

it, was grieved, for he knew that the woman was beloved of his father.

And he went before Kai Kaous, and craved her pardon. And Kai Kaous

granted it with gladness, for his heart yearned after Sudaveh. So

Saiawush led her back, and the curtains of the house of the women

hid her once more behind them, and the Shah was glad again in her

sight.