Thus wept Feridoun in the bitterness of his soul, neither would he

take comfort day and night, nor quit the garden of his son. And the

earth was his couch and the dust his bed, and he watered the ground

with his tears. And he rested in this spot till that the grass was

grown above his bosom, and his eyes were blinded with weeping. Yet

his tongue did not cease from plaining and his heart from sorrow.

And he cried continually-

"O Irij, O my son, my son, never prince died a death like thine! Thy

head was severed by Ahriman, thy body torn by lions."

Thus mourned Feridoun, and the voice of lamentation was abroad.

Then it came about that after many years had passed Feridoun bethought

him of the daughter of Irij, and how that men said she was fair. And

he sought for her in the house of the women; and when he learned that

she was fair indeed, he desired that a husband be found for her, and

he wedded her unto Pescheng, who was a hero of the race of Jemshid.

And there was born unto them a son fair and strong, worthy the throne.

And when he was yet but a tender babe they brought him to Feridoun

and cried-

"O Lord of earth, let thy soul rejoice, behold this Irij!"

Then the lips of Feridoun were wreathed with smiles, and he took up

the infant in his arms and cried unto God, saying-

"O God, grant that my sight be restored unto me, that I may behold

the face of this babe."

And as he prayed his eyes were opened, and his sight rested upon his

son. Then Feridoun gave thanks unto God. And he called down blessings

upon the child, and prayed that the day might be blessed also, and

the heart of his enemies be torn with anguish. And he named him Minuchihr,

saying, "A branch worthy of a noble stock hath borne fruit." And the

child was reared in the house of Feridoun, and he suffered not that

ill came near unto him, and though the years passed above his head

the stars brought him no evil. And when he was of a ripe age Feridoun

gave to Minuchihr a throne of gold, and a mace, and a crown of jewels,

and the key to all his treasures. Then he commanded his nobles that

they should do him reverence and salute him king. And there were gathered

about the throne Karun, the son of Kawah, and Serv, King of Yemen,

and Guerschasp the victorious, and many other mighty princes more

than tongue can name. But the young Shah outshone them in strength

and beauty, and joy was once more in the land.

But tidings of the splendour that surrounded Feridoun pierced even

unto the lands of Roum and China, and the kings thereof were troubled

and downcast in their hearts. Then they conferred how they should

regain the favour of the Shah, for they feared Minuchihr when he should

be come unto years of might. So they sent a messenger unto Feridoun

bearing rich gifts, and bade him speak unto their father and say-