"The heart of Kai Kaous is flinty, and his evil nature is like to

a bitter gourd that ceaseth never to bear fruit. Yet I counsel thee,

go before him thyself, and see if peradventure thou soften this rock."

And Rustem in his grief did as Gudarz counselled, and turned to go

before the Shah, but he was not come before him ere a messenger overtook

him, and told unto him that Sohrab was departed from the world. Then

Rustem set up a wailing such as the earth hath not heard the like

of, and he heaped reproaches upon himself, and he could not cease

from plaining the son that was fallen by his hands. And he cried continually-

"I that am old have killed my son. I that am strong have uprooted

this mighty boy. I have torn the heart of my child, I have laid low

the head of a Pehliva."

Then he made a great fire, and flung into it his tent of many colours,

and his trappings of Roum, his saddle, and his leopard-skin, his armour

well tried in battle, and all the appurtenances of his throne. And

he stood by and looked on to see his pride laid in the dust. And he

tore his flesh, and cried aloud-

"My heart is sick unto death."

Then he commanded that Sohrab be swathed in rich brocades of gold

worthy of his body. And when they had enfolded him, and Rustem learned

that the Turanians had quitted the borders, he made ready his army

to return unto Zaboulistan. And the nobles marched before the bier,

and their heads were covered with ashes, and their garments were torn.

And the drums of the war-elephants were shattered, and the cymbals

broken, and the tails of the horses were shorn to the root, and all

the signs of mourning were abroad.

Now Zal, when he saw the host returning thus in sorrow, marvelled

what was come about; for he beheld Rustem at their head, wherefore

he knew that the wailing was not for his son. And he came before Rustem

and questioned him. And Rustem led him unto the bier and showed unto

him the youth that was like in feature and in might unto Saum the

son of Neriman, and he told him all that was come to pass, and how

this was his son, who in years was but an infant, but a hero in battle.

And Rudabeh too came out to behold the child, and she joined her lamentations

unto theirs. Then they built for Sohrab a tomb like to a horse's hoof,

and Rustem laid him therein in a chamber of gold perfumed with ambergris.

And he covered him with brocades of gold. And when it was done, the

house of Rustem grew like to a grave, and its courts were filled with

the voice of sorrow. And no joy would enter into the heart of Rustem,

and it was long before he held high his head.