Now Ferangis and her son slept for weariness by the roadside, but

Gew held guard over them. And when he beheld Kelbad and the men that

were with him, he knew that they were come in pursuit; yet he awakened

not Kai Khosrau, but of his strength alone put them to flight. But

when they were gone he roused the sleepers, and he urged haste upon

them.

But Piran, when he beheld that Kelbad returned unto him defeated at

the hand of one man, was loath to credit it, and he was angered against

him, and said that he would go forth himself. So Piran made him ready,

and a thousand brave warriors went with him. For Piran was afraid

of the anger of Afrasiyab, and that he would put this flight unto

his account, and not unto that of the rotation of the stars. Now when

he was come unto the fugitives Gew and the young King slumbered, but

Ferangis was keeping watch. And when she beheld the army she woke

them and bade them prepare for combat; but Gew suffered not that Kai

Khosrau should go forth, for he said-

"If I fall, what mattereth that? my father hath seventy and eight

sons like unto me; but thou art alone, and if thy head shall fall,

what other is worthy of the crown?"

And Kai Khosrau did as Gew desired. Then Gew gave combat unto Piran,

and by his courage he overcame the army; and he caught the old man

Piran in the meshes of his cord. Then he brought him bound before

Ferangis and Kai Khosrau her son.

Now Piran, when he beheld Kai Khosrau, demanded not mercy at his hands,

but invoked the blessings of Heaven upon his head, and he mourned

the fate of Saiawush. And he said-

"O King, had thy slave been nigh unto Afrasiyab, surely the head of

thy father would not have fallen at his hands. And it was I who preserved

thee and Ferangis thy mother, yet now is it given unto me to fall

under thy hands."

When Kai Khosrau heard these words his heart went out unto Piran,

and when he looked towards his mother he saw that her eyes were filled

with tears. Then she opened her mouth and poured forth curses upon

Afrasiyab her father, and she wailed the fate of Saiawush, and she

pleaded for the life of this good old man. For she said-

"His tenderness hath been an asylum unto our sorrow, and now is it

given unto us to remember the benefits we have received at his hands."

But Gew, when he heard it, said-

"O Queen, I pray thee speak not thus, for I have sworn a great oath

that I would stain the earth with the blood of Piran, and how can

I depart from my vow?"

Then Kai Khosrau said, "O hero like unto a lion, thou shalt not break

the oath that thou hast made before God. Satisfy thy heart and accomplish

thy vow. Pierce with thy dagger the ear of Piran, and let his blood

fall on the earth, that thy vengeance and my clemency may both be

satisfied."