Then the glorious Feridoun, when he had thus made trial of their hearts,

vanished from their sight. But presently he came again with the face

of their father, and many warriors, elephants, and cymbals were in

his train. And Feridoun bore in his hand the cow-headed mace, and

the Kawanee, the apron of Kawah, the kingly standard, was waved above

his head. Now when the sons saw their father, they alighted from their

steeds and ran to greet him, and kissed the ground before his feet.

And the cymbals were clashed, and the trumpets brayed, and sounds

of rejoicing were heard around. Then Feridoun raised his sons and

kissed their foreheads, and gave unto them honour according to their

due. And when they were come to the royal house he prayed to God that

He would bless his offspring, and calling them about him, he seated

them upon thrones of splendour. Then he opened his mouth and said

unto them-

"O my sons, listen unto the words that I shall speak. The raging dragon

whose breath was danger was but your father, who sought to test your

hearts, and having learned them gave way with joy. But now will I

give to you names such as are fitting unto men. The first-born shall

be called Silim (may thy desires be accomplished in the world!) for

thou soughtest to save thyself from the clutches of the dragon, nor

didst thou hesitate in the hour of flight. A man who fleeth neither

before an elephant nor a lion, call him rather foolhardy than brave.

And the second, who from the beginning showed his courage, which was

ardent as a flame, I will call him Tur, the courageous, whom even

a mad elephant cannot daunt. But the youngest is a man prudent and

brave, who knoweth both how to haste and how to tarry; he chose the

midway between the flame and the ground, as it beseemeth a man of

counsel, and he hath proven himself brave, prudent, and bold. Irij

shall he be called, that the gate of power may be his goal, for first

did he show gentleness, but his bravery sprang forth at the hour of

danger."

When Feridoun had thus opened his lips he called for the book wherein

are written the stars, and he searched for the planets of his sons.

And he found that Jupiter reigned in the sign of the Archer in the

house of Silim, and the sun in the Lion in that of Tur, but in the

house of Irij there reigned the moon in the Scorpion. And when he

saw this he was sorrowful, for he knew that for Irij were grief and

bale held in store. Then having read the secrets of Fate, Feridoun

parted the world and gave the three parts unto his sons in suzerainty.

Roum and Khaver, which are the lands of the setting sun, did he give

unto Silim. Turan and Turkestan did he give unto Tur, and made him

master of the Turks and of China, but unto Irij he gave Iran, with

the throne of might and the crown of supremacy.