And Kai Kaous said, "Blessed be he who sang to me of the glories of

this realm."

And he marched after Gew with the rest of his host, and seven days

did they never cease from plundering, neither could they be sated

with the gold and jewels that they found. But on the eighth the tidings

of their deeds pierced unto the King of Mazinderan, and his heart

was heavy with care. He therefore sent a messenger unto the mountains

where dwelt the White Deev, who was powerful and strong, and he entreated

him that he would come unto his succour, or verily the land would

perish under the feet of Iran.

The White Deev, when he heard the message, uprose like to a mountain

in his strength, and he said-

"Let not the King of Mazinderan be troubled, for surely the hosts

of Iran shall vanish at my approach."

Then, when the night was fallen, he spread a dark cloud, heavy and

thick, over the land, and no light could pierce it, neither could

fires be seen across its midst, and you would have said the world

was steeped in pitch. And the army of Iran was wrapt in a tent of

blackness. Then the Deev caused it to rain stones and javelins, and

the Iranians could not behold their source, neither could they defend

themselves or stand against the arts of magic. And they wandered astray

in their distress, and no man could find his fellow, and their hearts

were angered against the Shah for this emprise. But when the morning

was come, and glory was arisen upon the world, they could not see

it, for the light of their eyes was gone out. And Kai Kaous too was

blinded, and he wept sore, and the whole army wept with him in their

anguish. And the Shah cried in his distress-

"O Zal, O my Pehliva wise and great, wherefore did I shut mine ear

unto thy voice!"

And the army echoed his words in their hearts, but their lips were

silent for boundless sorrow.

Then the White Deev spake unto Kai Kaous with a voice of thunder,

and he said-

"O King, thou hast been struck like to a rotten trunk, on thine own

head alone resteth this destruction, for thou hast attained unto Mazinderan,

and entered the land after which thy heart desired."

And he bade his legion guard the Shah and all his army, and he withheld

from them wine and good cheer, and gave unto them but enough for sustenance,

for he desired not that they should die, but gloried in their wretchedness.

Then when he had so done he sent tidings thereof unto the King of

Mazinderan. And he bade the King take back the booty and rejoice in

the defeat of Iran. And he counselled him that he suffer not Kai Kaous

to perish, that he might learn to know good fortune from ill. And

the White Deev bade the King sing praises unto Ahriman the mighty,

who had sent him unto his aid. And having spoken thus he returned

him unto his home in the mountains, but the King of Mazinderan rejoiced

in his spoils.