"Listen, O my son I There is a new Shah in Iran, and he is brother

unto thee, for ye are sprung from one father. Now, since thy brother

sendeth forth an host to avenge his murder, it beseemeth thee not

to remain aloof, but rather shouldst thou serve as vanguard unto the

host. Wherefore call together thy knights, and then go forth and seek

out the leader of this host, and make thyself known to him. For it

behoveth not a stranger to reap this glory or usurp the place that

is due unto thy rank."

Then Firoud said, "Who shall be my stay in battle among the heroes

who carry high their heads?"

And his mother said, "Seek out Bahram, for he was a friend unto thy

father. And listen also to the words of Tokhareh, and go not out at

once with thine army until thou hast made thyself known unto the men

of Iran."

Then Firoud said, "O my mother, I will faithfully observe thy counsel."

And he went forth unto a high place on the mountain, and he took with

him Tokhareh, and they looked down upon the mighty army that was spread

at their feet. Then Firoud questioned of the warriors, and Tokhareh

answered him according to his knowledge. And he counted up the standards

of the heroes, and he made Firoud acquainted with the names of might

in Iran.

Now, while they were so doing, Tus beheld them upon the heights, and

he was angered at the sight of them, and said-

"Let a wary knight go forth unto those two seated aloft, and search

out what manner of men they be. And if they be of the army, let them

be lashed two hundred times about the head; but if they be Turks and

spies, bind them, and bring them before me that I may destroy them."

Then Bahram, the son of Gudarz, said, "I will search into this matter."

And he rode forth towards the mountain. Now Firoud, beholding him,

said unto Tokhareh, "Who is he that cometh out with so haughty an

air? By his bearing it would seem that he holdeth me of light esteem,

and that he would mount hither by force."

Then Tokhareh said, "O Prince, be not angered thus easily. I know

not his name, but I seem to behold the device of Gudarz, and perchance

this is one of his sons."

Now Bahram, when he had neared the summit, lifted up his voice, that

was like unto thunder, and cried, saying-

"Who art thou that seatest thyself upon the heights and lookest down

upon the army? Fearest thou not Tus the Pehliva? "

Then Firoud answered and said-

"Speak not unto me thus haughtily, for I have given thee no cause.

Thinkest thou, perchance, that I am but a wild ass of the desert,

and that thou art a lion, great of might? It behoveth a man of sense

to put a bridle on his tongue. For I say unto thee, that thou art

in nowise my better, neither in courage nor in might. Look upon me,

and judge whether I have not head and heart and brain, and when thou

shalt have seen that I possess them, threaten me not with empty words.

I counsel this unto thee in friendship. And if thou wilt listen to

reason, I will put some questions unto thee."