Now when the earth was flooded with light, and the nobles and chiefs

had tendered unto Zal their morning greetings as was their wont, he

called about him his Mubids, and laid before them how that he was

filled with love for a daughter of the Serpent. And the Mubids when

they heard it were troubled, and their lips were closed, and the words

were chained upon their tongues. For there was none of them that listed

to mingle poison in the honey of this love. Whereupon Zal reproved

them, and said that he would bestow on them rich gifts if they would

open their mouths. Then they spake and said unto him that the honour

of a king could not suffer by a woman, and though Mihrab be indeed

of Zohak's race, he was noble and valiant. And they urged him to write

unto his father and crave Saum to wait upon the Shah.

Then Zal called unto him a scribe and bade him write down the words

that he spake. And he told unto Saum his love and his fears. And he

recalled unto him how that he had cast him out, and how that he had

lived in a nest, and a bird had reared him, and the sun had poured

down upon his head, and raw flesh had been his nourishment the while

his father had sat within a goodly house clothed in silk. And he recalled

the promise given to him by Saum. Neither did he seek to justify that

which was come about. Then he gave the letter to a messenger, and

bade him ride until he should be come into the presence of Saum.

When Saum had heard the words of his son his spirit was troubled,

and he cried-

"Woe unto me, for now is clear what hath so long been hidden. One

whom a wild bird hath reared looketh for the fulfilment of wild desires,

and seeks union with an accursed race."

And he pondered long what he should answer. For he said, "If I say,

Abandon this desire, sow no discord, return to reason, I break my

oath and God will punish me. Yet if I say, Thy desire is just, satisfy

the passions of thy heart, what offspring can come to pass from the

union of a Deev and the nursling of a bird?"

And the heart of Saum was heavy with care. So he called unto him his

Mubids that they should search the stars, for he said-

"If I mingle fire and water I do ill, and ill will come of it."

Then all that day the Wise Men searched the secrets of Fate, and they

cast the horoscope of Zal and Rudabeh, and at even they returned to

the King rejoicing. And they found him torn with anguish. Then they

said-

"Hail unto thee, O Saum, for we have followed the movement of the

stars and counted their course, and we have read the message of the

skies. And it is written, 'A clear spring shall issue into the day,

a son shall be born to Zal, a hero full of power and glory, and there

shall not be his like in Iran.' "