Now when evening was fallen over the land they came unto a green and

shady vale, and a brook ran through it, and cool woods clothed its

sides. And beside a spring there was spread a table, and wine and

all manner of good cheer stood thereon. And Rustem, when he saw it,

loosened his saddle and bade Rakush graze and drink, and he seated

him beside the table and enjoyed its fare. And his spirit laughed

with pleasure that he had found a table ready dressed within the desert,

for he knew not that it was the table of the magicians, who were fled

on his approach. And he ate and drank, and when he had stilled his

hunger he took up a lyre that lay beside him, and he lilted to it

in his ease of heart. And he sang-

"Rustem is the scourge of the base, Not for him were pleasures meant;

Rare are his feasts and holidays, His garden is the desert place,

The battlefield his tournament.

"There the sword of Rustem cleaves Not the armour of jousting knights,

But the skulls of dragons and Deevs; Nor shall Rustem, as he believes,

Ever be quit of the foes he fights.

"Cups of wine and wreaths of rose, Gardens where cool arbours stand,

Fortune gave such gifts as those Not to Rustem, but hurtling foes,

Strife, and a warrior's heart and hand."

Now the song of Rustem was come to the ears of one of the witches,

and she changed herself into a damsel with a face of spring. And she

came before Rustem and asked him his name, and toyed with him, and

he was pleased with her company. And he poured out wine and handed

it unto her, and bade her drink unto Ormuzd. But the magician, when

she heard the name of God, fell into a tremble and her visage changed,

and Rustem beheld her in all her vileness. Then his quick spirit knew

her for what she was, and he made a noose and caught her in his snare,

and severed her in twain. And all the magicians, when they saw it,

were afraid, and none durst come forth to meet the hero. But Rustem

straightway departed from this spot.

And Rustem rode till that he was come unto a land where the sun never

shineth, neither stars lighten the blackness, and he could not see

his path. So he suffered Rakush to lead him at his will. And they

stumbled along amid the blackness, but at the end they came out again

into the light. And Rustem beheld a land that was swathed in verdure,

and fields wherein the crops were sprouting. Then he loosened Rakush

and bade him graze, and laid himself down to slumber awhile.

Now Rakush went forth to graze in a field that had been sown, and

the guardian thereof, when he saw it, was angry, and ran unto the

spot where Rustem was couched, and beat the soles of his feet with

a stick and woke him. And he flung reproaches and evil words upon

him for that his horse was broken into the pastures. Then Rustem was

angry, and fell upon the man, and took him by the ears and tore them

from his body. And the man fled, howling in his agony, and came before

Aulad, the ruler of the land, and laid his plaints before him. And

Aulad also was angry, and went forth to seek Rustem, and demand his

name and mission, and wherefore he had thus disturbed their peace.

And Aulad sware that he would destroy him for this deed.