Then Zal revolved in his mind this trouble even until the sun was

set. But when the glory of the world was arisen yet again, he girt

his sash about his loins, and took in his hand the mace of might and

set forth unto the throne of the Shah. And he craved for audience,

and prostrated himself before the King. And when Kai Kaous permitted

it, Zal opened his mouth and spake words of wisdom. And he said-

"O King powerful and great, word is come unto me, even unto Seistan,

of thy device. But it seemeth unto me that mine ears have not heard

aright. For Mazinderan is the abode of Deevs, and no man can overcome

their skill. Give not, therefore, unto the wind thy men and thy treasures.

Turn, I pray thee, from this scheme, neither plant in the garden of

Iran the tree of folly, whose leaves are curses and whose fruits are

evil, for thus did not the kings before thee."

Then Kai Kaous, when he had listened, said, "I despise not thy counsel,

nor do I bid thee hold thy peace, for thou art a pillar unto Iran.

But neither shall thy words divert me from my desire, and Mazinderan

shall pay tribute to my hands. For thou considerest not how that my

heart is bolder and my might more great than that of my fathers before

me. I go, therefore, and the kingdom will I leave between thy hands

and those of Rustem thy son."

When Zal heard these words, and beheld that Kai Kaous was firm in

his purpose, he ceased from opposing. Then he bowed him unto the dust,

and spake, saying-

"O Shah, it is thine to command, and whether it be just or unjust,

thy servants serve thee even unto death. I have spoken the words that

weighed upon my heart. Three things it is not given to do, even unto

a king: to elude death, to bind up the eye of destiny, to live without

nurture. Mayst thou never repent thee of thy resolve, mayst thou never

regret my counsels in the hour of danger, may the might of the Shah

shine for ever!"

And when he had ended, Zal went out of the presence of the King, and

he was right sorrowful, and the nobles mourned with him when they

learned how nought had been accomplished.

Then, ere the day succeeded unto the night, Kai Kaous set forth with

his horsemen unto Mazinderan.

Now when they were come within its borders, Kai Kaous commanded Gew

that he should choose forth a strong band from out their midst, and

go before the city with mighty clubs. And he bade him destroy the

dwellers of the town, neither should they spare the women nor the

young, because that they too were the children of Deevs. And Gew did

as the Shah commanded. Then clubs rained down upon the people like

to hail, and the city that resembled a garden was changed into a desert,

and all the inmates thereof perished at the hands of the enemy, neither

did they find any mercy in their eyes. But when the men of Iran had

ceased from killing, they sent news thereof unto the Shah, and told

him of the riches that were hidden within the palaces.