Then Rustem answered, "I am the thunder-cloud that sendeth forth lightnings,

and none can stand before my strength. But if thou shouldest hear

my name, the blood would stand still within thy veins. Thou art come

against me with an host, see therefore how I shall scatter them like

the wind."

And when he had thus spoken, Rustem fell upon the warriors of Aulad,

and he beat them down before him, and their heads fell under the blows

of his sword of death. And the army was routed at the hands of one

man. Now Aulad, when he saw it, wept and fled; but Rustem pursued

him, and threw his noose about him, and caught him in the snare. And

the world became dark unto Aulad. Then Rustem bound him, and threw

him on the ground, and said-

"If thou speak unto me that which is true, verily I will release thee;

and when I shall have overcome the Deevs, I will give the land of

Mazinderan into thy hands. Tell me, therefore, where dwelleth the

White Deev, and where may I find the Shah and his men, and how can

I deliver them from bondage?"

Then Aulad answered and told Rustem how it was an hundred farsangs

unto the spot where Kai Kaous groaned in his bondage, and how it was

yet another hundred unto the mountain pass where dwelt the Deev. And

he told him how the passes were guarded by lions and magicians and

mighty men, and how none had ever pierced thereunto. And he counselled

him to desist from this quest.

But Rustem smiled, and said, "Be thou my guide, and thou wilt behold

an elephant overcome the might of evil."

And when he had thus spoken he sprang upon Rakush, and Aulad in his

bonds ran after him, and they sped like the wind, neither did they

halt by night or day till they were come unto the spot where Kai Kaous

had been smitten by the Deevs. And when they were come there they

could behold the watch-fires of Mazinderan. Then Rustem laid him down

to sleep, and he tied Aulad unto a tree that he should not escape

him. But when the sun was risen he laid the mace of Saum before his

saddle, and rode with gladness towards the city of the Deevs.

Now when Rustem was come nigh unto the tents of Arzang, that led the

army of Mazinderan, he uttered a cry that rent the mountains. And

the cry brought forth Arzang from out his tent, and when he perceived

Rustem he ran at him, and would have thrown him down. But Rustem sprang

upon Arzang, and he seemed an insect in his grasp. And he overcame

him, and parted his head from his body, and hung it upon his saddlebow

in triumph. And fear came upon the army of Mazinderan when they saw

it, and they fled in faintness of spirit, and so great was the confusion

that none beheld whither he bent his steps. And fathers fell upon

sons, and brothers upon brothers, and dismay was spread throughout

the land.