But Kai Khosrau, when he had read this message, knew that Afrasiyab

sought only to beguile him. So he sent a writing unto the King of

Turan, and he said-

"The cause of strife between us is not sprung from Saiawush alone,

but for that which thou didst aforetime, and which thy fathers did

unto Irij. Yet that which thou hast done hath caused the measure of

wrath to overflow. Wherefore the sword alone can decide between us."

Then he challenged the nobles of Turan to come forth in combat. And

he himself strove with Schideh, the son of Afrasiyab, and he laid

him low after the manner in which Afrasiyab had laid low the head

of Saiawush. And when he had done so, the army of Turan came forth

to avenge their king, but the men of Iran overcame them. And Afrasiyab

was constrained to fly from before the face of Kai Khosrau, and it

was as gall and wormwood unto his spirit. And Kai Khosrau followed

after him, and he would not suffer him to hide himself from his sight;

and he made him come forth yet again in battle, and yet again he routed

him utterly. And the men of Iran slew the men of Turan until the field

of battle was like unto a sea of blood, and they fought until the

night covered the heavens, and the eyes of the warriors were darkened

with sleep. And Afrasiyab fled yet again beyond the borders of Turan,

and he craved of his vassals that they would hide him from the wrath

of Kai Khosrau. But the nobles were afraid of the Shah, and of Rustem,

who went with him; and they refused shelter unto Afrasiyab, and he

was hunted over the face of the earth. Then he sought out the King

of China, and asked of him that he would shelter him. And the King

gave him shelter for a while. But when Kai Khosrau learned where Afrasiyab

was hid, he followed after him, and he bade the King of China render

to him his enemy, and he menaced him with fire and sword if he did

not listen to his behest. So the King bade Afrasiyab depart from out

his borders. And Afrasiyab fled yet again, but wheresoever he hid

himself he was found of Kai Khosrau, and his life was a weariness

unto him.

Now for the space of two years Kai Khosrau did thus unto Afrasiyab,

and the glory of Turan was eclipsed, and Rustem reigned within the

land. And when the second year was ended the power of Afrasiyab was

broken, and Kai Khosrau bethought him to return unto Iran and seek

out Kai Kaous, his sire. And the old Shah, when he learned it, was

young again for joy. He caused his house to be decked worthy a guest,

and he made ready great feasts, and he called forth all his nobles

to do honour unto Kai Khosrau, his son. And all the land was decked

in festal garb, and the world resembled cloth of gold, and musk and

amber perfumed the air, and jewels were strewn about the streets like

unto vile dust.