Howbeit when Tahumers had sat upon the golden throne for the space

of thirty years he passed away, but his works endured; and Jemshid,

his glorious son, whose heart was filled with the counsels of his

father, came after him. Now Jemshid reigned over the land seven hundred

years girt with might, and Deevs, birds, and Peris obeyed him. And

the world was happier for his sake, and he too was glad, and death

was unknown among men, neither did they wot of pain or sorrow. And

he first parcelled out men into classes; priests, warriors, artificers,

and husbandmen did he name them. And the year also he divided into

periods. And by aid of the Deevs he raised mighty works, and Persepolis

was builded by him, that to this day is called Tukht-e-Jemsheed, which

being interpreted meaneth the throne of Jemshid. Then, when these

things were accomplished, men flocked from all corners of the earth

around his throne to do him homage and pour gifts before his face.

And Jemshid prepared a feast, and bade them keep it, and called it

Neurouz, which is the New Day, and the people of Persia keep it to

this hour. And Jemshid's power increased, and the world was at peace,

and men beheld in him nought but what was good.

Then it came about that the heart of Jemshid was uplifted in pride,

and he forgot whence came his weal and the source of his blessings.

He beheld only himself upon the earth, and he named himself God, and

sent forth his image to be worshipped. But when he had spoken thus,

the Mubids, which are astrologers and wise men, hung their heads in

sorrow, and no man knew how he should answer the Shah. And God withdrew

his hand from Jemshid, and the kings and the nobles rose up against

him, and removed their warriors from his court, and Ahriman had power

over the land.

Now there dwelt in the deserts of Arabia a king named Mirtas, generous

and just, and he had a son, Zohak, whom he loved. And it came about

that Ahriman visited the palace disguised as a noble, and tempted

Zohak that he should depart from the paths of virtue. And he spake

unto him and said-

"If thou wilt listen to me, and enter into a covenant, I will raise

thy head above the sun."

Now the young man was guileless and simple of heart, and he sware

unto the Deev that he would obey him in all things. Then Ahriman bade

him slay his father, "for this old man," he said, "cumbereth the ground,

and while he liveth thou wilt remain unknown." When Zohak heard this

he was filled with grief, and would have broken his oath, but Ahriman

suffered him not, but made him set a trap for Mirtas. And Zohak and

the evil Ahriman held their peace and Mirtas fell into the snare and

was killed. Then Zohak placed the crown of Thasis upon his head, and

Ahriman taught him the arts of magic, and he ruled over his people

in good and evil, for he was not yet wholly given up to guile.