"That which is come about, it is my fault, and henceforward will my

youth be a theme of derision among the people. But I sped not forth

for empty glory, but I went out to seek my father; for my mother had

told me by what tokens I should know him, and I perish for longing

after him. And now have my pains been fruitless, for it hath not been

given unto me to look upon his face. Yet I say unto thee, if thou

shouldest become a fish that swimmeth in the depths of the ocean,

if thou shouldest change into a star that is concealed in the farthest

heaven, my father would draw thee forth from thy hiding-place, and

avenge my death upon thee when he shall learn that the earth is become

my bed. For my father is Rustem the Pehliva, and it shall be told

unto him how that Sohrab his son perished in the quest after his face."

When Rustem heard these words his sword fell from out of his grasp,

and he was shaken with dismay. And there broke from his heart a groan

as of one whose heart was racked with anguish. And the earth became

dark before his eyes, and he sank down lifeless beside his son. But

when he had opened his eyes once more, he cried unto Sohrab in the

agony of his spirit. And he said-

"Bearest thou about thee a token of Rustem, that I may know that the

words which thou speakest are true? For I am Rustem the unhappy, and

may my name be struck from the lists of men!"

When Sohrab heard these words his misery was boundless, and he cried-

"If thou art indeed my father, then hast thou stained thy sword in

the life-blood of thy son. And thou didst it of thine obstinacy. For

I sought to turn thee unto love, and I implored of thee thy name,

for I thought to behold in thee the tokens recounted of my mother.

But I appealed unto thy heart in vain, and now is the time gone by

for meeting. Yet open, I beseech thee, mine armour, and regard the

jewel upon mine arm. For it is an onyx given unto me by my father,

as a token whereby he should know me."

Then Rustem did as Sohrab bade him, and he opened his mail and saw

the onyx; and when he had seen it he tore his clothes in his distress,

and he covered his head with ashes. And the tears of penitence ran

from his eyes, and he roared aloud in his sorrow. But Sohrab said-

"It is in vain, there is no remedy. Weep not, therefore, for doubtless

it was written that this should be."

Now when the sun was set, and Rustem returned not to the camp, the

nobles of Iran were afraid, and they went forth to seek him. And when

they were gone but a little way they came upon Rakush, and when they

saw that he was alone they raised a wailing, for they deemed that

of a surety Rustem was perished. And they went and told Kai Kaous

thereof, and he said-