Then the elephant-bodied stood before the King of Mazinderan. And

the King questioned him of his journey, and of Kai Kaous, and of the

road that he was come. And while he questioned he took muster of him

with his eyes, and when he had done speaking he cried-

"Surely thou art Rustem, for thou hast the arms and breast of a Pehliva."

But Rustem replied, "Not so, I am but a slave who is not held worthy

to serve even in his train; for he is a Pehliva great and strong,

whose like the earth hath not seen." Then he handed unto the King

the writing of his master. But when the King had read it he was wild

with anger, and he said to Rustem-

"Surely he that hath sent thee is mad that he addresseth such words

unto me. For if he be master in Iran, I am lord of Mazinderan, and

never shall he call me his vassal. And verily it was his own overweening

that let him fall between my hands, yet hath he learned no lesson

from his disasters, but deemeth he can crush me with haughty words.

Go, say unto him that the King of Mazinderan will meet him in battle,

and verily his pride shall learn to know humility."

And when the King had thus spoken he dismissed Rustem from his presence,

but he would have had him bear forth rich gifts. But Rustem would

not take them, for he too was angered, and he spurred him unto Kai

Kaous with a heart hungry for vengeance.

And Kai Kaous made ready his army, and the King of Mazinderan did

likewise. And they marched forth unto the meeting-place, and the earth

groaned under the feet of the war-elephants. And for seven days did

the battle rage fast and furious, and all the earth was darkened with

the black dust; and the fire of swords and maces flashed through the

blackness like to lightning from a thundercloud. And the screams of

the Deevs, and the shouts of the warriors, and the clanging of the

trumpets, and the beating of drums, and the neighing of horses, and

the groans of the dying made the earth hideous with noise. And the

blood of the brave turned the plain into a lake, and it was a combat

such as none hath seen the like. But victory leaned to neither side.

Then on the eighth day Kai Kaous took from his head the crown of the

Kaianides and bowed him in the dust before Ormuzd. And he prayed and

said-

"O Lord of earth, incline thine ear unto my voice, and grant that

I may overcome these Deevs who rest not their faith in Thee. And I

pray Thee do this not for my sake, who am unworthy of Thy benefits,

but for the sake of Iran, Thy kingdom."

Then he put the crown once more upon his head, and went out again

before the army.

And all that day the hosts fought like lions, and pity and mercy were

vanished from the world, and heaven itself seemed to rain maces. But

Ormuzd had heard the prayer of His servant, and when evening was come

the army of Mazinderan was faded like a flower. Then Rustem, perceiving

the King of Mazinderan, challenged him to single combat. And the King

consented, and Rustem overcame him, and raised his lance to strike

him, saying-