"Perish, O evil Deev! for thy name is struck out of the lists of those

who carry high their heads."

But when he was about to strike him, the King put forth his arts of

magic, and he was changed into a rock within sight of all the army.

And Rustem was confounded thereat, and he knew not what he should

do. But Kai Kaous commanded that the rock should be brought before

his throne. So those among the army who were strong of limb meshed

it with cords and tried to raise it from the earth. But the rock resisted

all their efforts and none could move it a jot. Then Rustem, the elephant-limbed,

came forward to test his power, and he grasped the rock in his mighty

fist, and he bore it in his hands across the hills, even unto the

spot that Kai Kaous had named, and all the army shouted with amazement

when they saw it.

Now when Rustem had laid down the stone at the feet of the Shah, he

spake and said unto it-

"Issue forth, I command thee, O King of Mazinderan, or I will break

thee into atoms with my mace."

When the King heard this threat he was afraid, and came out of the

stone, and stood before Rustem in all his vileness. And Rustem took

his hand and smiled and led him before Kai Kaous, and said-

"I bring thee this piece of rock, whom fear of my blows hath brought

into subjection."

Then Kai Kaous reproached the King with all the evil he had done him,

and when he had spoken he bade that the head of this wicked man should

be severed from its trunk. And it was done as Kai Kaous commanded.

Then Kai Kaous gave thanks unto God, and distributed rich gifts unto

his army, to each man according to his deserts. And he prepared a

feast, and bade them rejoice and make merry with wine. And at last

he called before him Rustem, his Pehliva, and gave to him thanks,

and said that but for his aid he would not have sat again upon his

throne. But Rustem said-

"Not so, O King, thy thanks are due unto Aulad, for he it was who

led me aright, and instructed me how I could vanquish the Deevs. Grant,

therefore, now that I may fulfil my promise unto him, and bestow on

him the crown of Mazinderan."

When Kai Kaous heard these words he did as Rustem desired, and Aulad

received the crown and the land, and there was peace yet again in

Iran. And the land rejoiced thereat, and Kai Kaous opened the doors

of his treasures, and all was well within his borders. Then Rustem

came before the Shah and prayed that he might be permitted to return

unto his father. And Kai Kaous listened to the just desires of his

Pehliva, and he sent him forth laden with rich gifts, and he could

not cease from pouring treasure before him. And he blessed him, and

said-