Now when the Iranians beheld the standard of Piran planted aloft amid

those of his champions, they were beside themselves for joy, and they

called down the blessings of Heaven upon the knight. Then a messenger

was sent to bear the tidings unto Kai Khosrau, and he took with him

Zereh that the Shah might with his own hand sever that vile head from

off its trunk. And Kai Khosrau rejoiced at the news, and he rode forth

that he might visit his army. But when he beheld the body of Piran

he wept sore, and he remembered his kindness of old, and he grieved

for the man that had been to him a father. Then he commanded that

a royal tomb be raised unto Piran, and he seated him therein upon

a throne of gold, and he did unto him all reverence. But when it was

done he aided his army to beat back the men of Turan yet again, and

he caused them to sue for peace. And when they had brought forth their

armour and piled it at the feet of Kai Khosrau, he bade them depart

in peace. Then he returned with joy unto his own land, and he gave

thanks unto God for the victory that was his. But he knew also that

the time of peace could not be long, and that Afrasiyab would dream

of vengeance.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE PASSING OF KAI KHOSRAU

Now it came to pass as Kai Khosrau foretold. For Afrasiyab, when

he learned the death of Piran, was beside himself with grief. And

he lifted up his voice in wailing, and he spake, saying-

"I will no longer taste the joys of life, nor live like unto a man

that weareth a crown, until I be avenged upon Kai Khosrau, the offspring

of an accursed race. May the seed of Saiawush perish from off the

face of the earth!

"And when he had so spoken he made ready for yet another war, and

from all corners of the earth the kings came forth to aid him. And

Kai Khosrau, when he learned thereof, got ready his army also, and

he sware that he would lead this war of vengeance unto a good end.

So he sent greeting unto Rustem his Pehliva, and prayed of him that

he would aid him in his resolve. And Rustem listened to the voice

of his Shah, and came forth from Zaboulistan with a mighty army to

aid him. Then the Shah confided his hosts unto Tur and Rustem, and

the valleys, and the hills, and the deserts, and the plains were filled

with the dust that uprose from their footsteps. And they were warriors

that bare high their heads, and they knew neither weariness nor fear.

Now when the armies met, Afrasiyab called before him Pescheng, his

son, and bade him bear a writing unto the Shah of Iran. And he wrote,

saying-

"That which thou hast done, it is contrary to custom; for a son may

not lift his hand against his father, and the head of a grandson that

goeth out in enmity against his grandsire is filled with evil. And

I say unto thee, Saiawush was not slain without just cause, for he

turned him away from his ruler. And if thou sayest unto me that I

am an evil man, and issue of the race of Ahriman, remember that thou

too art sprung from my loins, and that thy insults fall back upon

thyself. Renounce, therefore, this strife, and let a treaty be made

between us, and the blood of Saiawush be forgotten. And if thou wilt

listen unto my voice, I will cover thee with jewels, and gold and

precious things will I give unto thee, and joy shall reign throughout

the land."