"I know no longer who is my friend or my foe."

Then he put his seal to the letter and gave it unto the messenger.

And the man sped forth and brought it into the camp. Then Friburz

read it out before the army. And when he had heard it Tus did that

which the Shah desired, and when he had given over unto Friburz the

command he turned him to go back unto Iran.

Now when he was come before Kai Khosrau, he fell upon the earth before

his throne, and the Shah raised him not, neither did he give him words

of greeting. And when he parted his lips, it was to let forth words

of anger. And he made known to him his sore displeasure, and he reproached

him with the death of Firoud, and he said-

"But that thou art sprung from Minuchihr, and that thy beard is white,

I would sever thy head from off thy body for this deed. Yet, as it

is, a dungeon shall be thy dwelling, and thine evil nature thy gaoler."

And when he had thus spoken he drove him from his presence, and gave

orders that he should be put into chains.

Now while these things passed in Iran, Friburz craved of Piran that

he would grant unto him a truce. And Piran said-

"It is ye who have broken into our land; yet I will listen unto your

desires and grant unto you this truce, and it shall be of the length

of one moon. But I counsel unto you that ye quit the land of Turan

in its course."

But Friburz would not Lead back the army thus discomfited, and he

spent the time accorded to him in preparation, and when it was at

an end he offered battle again to the Turanians. And there was waged

a combat s sun hath not looked upon its like, and the army of the

Iranians was overthrown. And the slaughter was terrible, neither did

the men of Turan escape, and many were the great ones of the land

that perished. And the men of Iran fought till that their strength

was departed. They had sought the conflict and found defeat. And they

that were not slain fled from the battlefield, and it is they that

saved their lives in this manner whom thou must bewail.

Now when another day was risen upon the world, Piran sent for his

guards to bring him news of the Iranians. And when they told him that

their tents were vanished from off the plains, he sent the news of

victory to Afrasiyab. And the King rejoiced thereat, and all the land

prepared a great feast unto the army. And when Piran entered into

the city the terraces thereof were decked with carpets of gay hue,

and the houses were clothed with arras of Roum, and pieces of silver

rained down upon the warriors. And the King poured upon Piran gifts

of such number that you would not have patience to hear me recount

them. And he sent him back unto Khoten with much honour and many counsels.

And he said-