For many years had the sons of Feridoun sat upon their golden thrones

in happiness and peace, but evil was hidden in the bosom of Fate.

For Feridoun had grown old, and his strength inclined to the grave.

And as his life waned, the evil passions of his sons waxed stronger.

The heart of Silim was changed, and his desires turned towards evil;

his soul also was steeped in greed. And he pondered in his spirit

the parting of the lands, and he revolted thereat in his thoughts,

because that the youngest bore the crown of supremacy. Then he bade

a messenger mount him upon a dromedary swift of foot, and bear this

saying unto Tur-

"O King of Turan, thy brother greeteth thee, and may thy days be long

in the land. Tell unto me, I pray thee, for thou hast might and wisdom,

should we remain thus ever satisfied, for surely unto us, not unto

Irij, pertaineth the throne of Iran, but now is our brother set above

our heads, and should we not strive against the injustice of our father?

"

Now. when Tur had listened to these words, his head was filled with

wind, and he spake unto the messenger and said-

"Say unto your master, O my brother, full of courage, since our father

deceived us when we were young and void of guile, with his own hands

hath he planted a tree whence must issue fruit of blood and leaves

that are poison. Let us therefore meet and take counsel together how

we may rid us of our evil fate."

When Silim heard this he set forth from Roum, and Tur also quitted

China, and they met to counsel together how they should act. Then

they sent a messenger unto Feridoun the glorious, and they said-

"O King, aged and great, fearest thou not to go home unto thy God?

for evil hast thou done, and injustice dost thou leave behind thee.

Thy realm hast thou allotted with iniquity, and thine eldest born

hast thou treated with disfavour. But we thy sons entreat thee that

ere it be too late thou listen to our voice. Command thou Irij to

step down from the throne of Iran, and hide him in some corner of

the earth, that he be weak and forgotten like ourselves. Yet if thou

doest not our bidding, we will bring forth riders from Turkestan and

Khaver filled with vengeance, and will utterly destroy Irij and the

land of Iran."

When Feridoun had listened to these hard words he was angered, and

straightway said-

"Speak unto these men, senseless and impure, these sons of Ahriman,

perverse of heart, and say unto them, Feridoun rejoiceth that ye have

laid bare before him your hearts, for now he knoweth what manner of

men ye are. And he answereth unto you that he hath parted his realm

with equity. Many counsellors did he seek, and night and day did they

ponder it, and gave unto each that which seemed best in their sight.

And he now speaketh unto you a word that he doth bid you treasure

in your hearts, As ye sow, so also shall ye reap, for there is for

us another, an eternal home. And this is the rede sent unto you by

an aged man, that he who betrayeth his brother for greed is not worthy

to be sprung from a noble race. So pray unto God that He turn your

hearts from evil."