When the messenger had heard these words he departed. Then Feridoun

called Irij before him and warned him against the craft of his brethren,

and bade him prepare an army and go forth to meet them. But Irij,

when he had heard of the evil thoughts of his brothers, was moved,

and said-

"Not so, O my father, suffer that I go forth alone and speak unto

my brethren, that I may still the anger that they feel against me.

And I will entreat them that they put not their trust in the glory

of this world, and will recall unto them the name of Jemshid, and

how that his end was evil because that he was uplifted in his heart."

Then Feridoun answered and said, "Go forth, my son, if such be thy

desire. The wish of thy brethren is even unto war, but thou seekest

the paths of peace. Yet I pray thee take with thee worthy knights,

and return unto me with speed, for my life is rooted in thy happiness."

And he gave him a letter signed with his royal seal that he should

bear it unto the kings of Roum and China. And Feridoun wrote how that

he was old, and desired neither gold nor treasures, save only that

his sons should be united. And he commended unto them his youngest

born, who was descended from his throne and come forth to meet them

with peace in his heart.

Now when Irij was come to the spot where his brethren were encamped,

the army saw him and was filled with wonder at his beauty and at his

kingly form, and they murmured among themselves, saying, "Surely this

one alone is worthy to bear the sceptre." But when Silim and Tur heard

this murmur their anger was deepened, and they retreated into their

tents, and all night long did they hold counsel how they might do

hurt unto their brother.

Now when the curtain that hid the sun was lifted, the brethren went

forth unto the tents of Irij. And Irij would have greeted them, but

they suffered him not, but straightway began to question him, and

heap reproaches upon his head. And Tur said-

"Why hast thou uplifted thyself above us, and is it meet that thy

elders bow down before thee?"

When Irij heard their words, he answered, "O Kings greedy of power,

I say unto you, if ye desire happiness, strive after peace. I covet

neither the royal crown nor the hosts of Iran; power that endeth in

discord is an honour that leadeth to tears. And I will step down from

the throne of Iran if it shall foster peace between us, for I crave

not the possession of the world if ye are afflicted by the sight.

For I am humble of heart, and my faith bids me be kind."

Now Tur heard these words, but they softened not his spirit, for he

knew only that which is evil, and wist not that Irij spoke truly.

And he took up the chair whereon he sat and threw it at his brother

in his anger. Then Irij called for mercy at his hands, saying-