Now Silim, when he learned the fate of his brother, was sore afraid,

and cast about him for an ally. And there came unto him Kakoui, of

the seed of Zohak. But Minuchihr wrestled with him for a morning's

space and overcame him also, though the Deev was strong and powerful

in fight. Then Silim was cast down yet more, and he sought to hide

him by the sea-shore. But Minuchihr cut off his path and overtook

him, and with his own hand he slew him, and cut his head from his

trunk. And he raised the head upon his lance. And when the army of

Silim saw this they fled into the hills, and vanished like cattle

whom the snow hath driven from their pasture. Then they took counsel

and chose out a man from among their midst, one that was prudent and

gentle of speech. And they bade him go before the Shah and say-

"Have mercy upon us, O Shah, for neither hate nor vengeance drove

us forth against thee, but only this, that we obeyed the wills of

our lords. But we ourselves are peaceful men, tillers of the earth

and keepers of cattle, and we pray thee that thou let us return in

safety whence we are come. And we acknowledge thee our Shah, and we

pray thee make thy servants acquainted with thy desires."

When Minuchihr had heard these words he spake and said-

"My desire is not after these men, neither is my longing after blood

but mercy. Let every man lay down his arms and go his ways, and let

peace be in the land, and joy wait upon your feet."

When the men heard this they praised the Shah, and called down blessings

upon his head. And they came before him, every man bearing his armour

and the weapons of battle. And they laid them at his feet, and of

weapons there was reared a mighty mountain, and the blue steel glistened

in the sun. Then Minuchihr dismissed them graciously. And when the

army was dispersed he sent a messenger unto Feridoun bearing the head

of Silim and a writing. And when he had ordered all things he set

out at the head of his warriors unto the city of Feridoun. And his

grandsire came forth to meet him, and there came with him many elephants

swathed in gold, and warriors arrayed in rich attire, and a large

multitude clad in garments of bright hue. And flags waved above them,

and trumpets brayed, and cymbals clashed, and sounds of rejoicing

filled the air. But when Minuchihr saw that his grandsire came towards

him, he got from his horse and ran to meet him, and fell at his feet

and craved his blessing. And Feridoun blessed Minuchihr and raised

him from the dust. And he bade him sit again upon his horse and took

his hand, and they entered the city in triumph. And when they were

come to the King's house, Feridoun seated Minuchihr upon a throne

of gold. Then he called unto him Saum, the son of Neriman, and said-