"O Shah, since the day that mine arm could wield a mace, I have ever

fought the battles of Iran, and it would seem that rest may never

come nigh unto me. Yet since I am thy slave, it behoveth me to obey.

I am ready to do thy desires."

So he made ready an host to go unto the succour of Iran. And while

he did so the army was defeated yet again, and all heart went from

the Iranians, and they would have given them over unto their foes.

But while they pondered it, there came tidings unto Gudarz that Rustem

was drawing nigh. Yet they feared to give way unto belief. But Piran

when he heard it was sore discomfited, for he remembered of old the

might of Rustem, and he knew that none could stand before it. But

the Khakan and the Kamous scoffed at his fears, and they made loud

boastings that Rustem should fall by their hands.

Now when some days had passed in this disquietude, it came about one

night that, when the moon showed her face above the mountains, like

unto a victorious king seated upon a throne of turquoise, a watchman

of Iran set up a great cry. And he said-

"The plain is filled with dust, and the night resoundeth with noise.

And I behold a mighty army drawing nigh, and they bear torches, and

in their midst rideth Rustem the mighty."

When the men of Iran heard this, they set up a great shout, and their

hearts seemed to come back into their bodies, and their courage, that

had been as dead, returned. And glad was the greeting that they gave

unto Rustem the Pehliva. And Rustem mustered them and put them into

battle order, and when the sun had wearied of the black veil, and

had torn the night asunder, and reappeared unto the world, the men

of Iran called upon the host of Turan to come forth in combat. And

they defied them unto battle, and they fought with new valour, and

they made great havoc in their ranks. And when the evening was come,

the day belonged unto Iran.

Then Piran called before him Human the brave, and said unto him-

"The nobles of Iran have found again their courage, since an army

is come to their aid. Yet I would know if Rustem be their leader,

for him alone do I fear."

And when he learned it his spirit was troubled. But the Kamous mocked

him, and sware a great oath that, ere the sun should be set once more,

he would have broken the might of Rustem. For he said-

"There is none, not even a mad elephant, that is mine equal in the

fight."

So when the day was come, the Kamous challenged Rustem unto single

combat. And Rustem strode forth from the camp, and the Kamous met

him upon the plain. Then they struggled sore, and wrestled one with

another, but in the end Rustem caught the Kamous in the meshes of

his cord. And he showed him unto the army, and he asked of them, saying-