"This place cannot be taken, my pains have been in vain."

Yet he pondered in his spirit how it might be done, and he knew that

only wile could avail. Wherefore he disguised himself in the garb

of a merchant, and chose forth from his army a hundred camels, and

he loaded them with brocades of Roum and much treasure. A hundred

and sixty stalwart warriors too did he choose forth, and he seated

them in chests, and the chests he bound upon the backs of the camels.

And when the caravan was ready he marched at its head unto the doors

of the fortress.

Now when he was come thither, he craved permission of Arjasp that

he might enter and sell unto them that dwelt therein. And Arjasp granted

his request, and gave unto him houseroom, and bade him barter his

wares in safety. Then Isfendiyar spread forth his goods and unloaded

the treasures of the camels, but the chests wherein were hidden the

warriors did he keep from the eyes of men. And after he had sojourned

a while in the castle he beheld his sisters, and he saw that they

were held as slaves, and his heart went out towards them. So he spake

to them tenderly, and they knew his voice, and that help was come

out to them, but they held their peace and made no sign. And Isfendiyar,

when he saw that he was trusted of Arjasp, came before him and asked

of him a boon. And Arjasp said that he would grant it. Then Isfendiyar

said-

"Suffer that ere I go hence I may feast thee and thy nobles, that

I may show my gratitude."

And it was done as Isfendiyar desired, and he made a great feast and

troubled the heads of the nobles with wine. And when their heads were

heavy and the moon was seated upon her silver throne, Isfendiyar arose

and let forth his warriors from the chests. Then he fell upon the

nobles and slew them, and they weltered in their blood. And with his

own hand Isfendiyar struck down Arjasp, and he hung up his sons upon

high gallows. Then he made signals unto his army that they should

come forth to aid him, for there were yet many men hidden in the fort,

and Isfendiyar had but a handful wherewith to withstand them. And

they did as he desired, and there was a great slaughter within the

brazen fort, but Isfendiyar bare off the victory. Then he took with

him his sisters and much booty, and made haste to return unto Iran,

and come into the presence of Gushtasp, his father. And the Shah rejoiced

in his sight, and he made a great feast, and gave gifts richly unto

all his servants. And the mouths of men overflowed with the doughty

deeds done of Isfendiyar, and there was gladness throughout the land.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

RUSTEM AND ISFENDIYAR

When a little while had been passed in feasting, Isfendiyar came

before Gushtasp, his father, and demanded the fulfilment of the promises

that he had made unto him. And he recalled unto Gushtasp how he had

mistrusted him and thrown him into chains. And he spake of the doughty

deeds that he had done at his behest, and he craved him to remember

that Isfendiyar was his son. And Gushtasp knew that that which was

spoken was right, but he desired not to abandon the throne. Wherefore

he communed within him what he should do. Then he opened his mouth

and spake, saying-