Now when the Deev saw that Rustem was sleeping, he drew nigh and loosened

the earth whereon he lay, and lifted it and placed it upon his head,

that he might cast it away and destroy Rustem. But as he carried him

Rustem awoke, and when he saw what was come to pass he feared that

his hour was come. And the Deev, when he beheld that Rustem was awakened,

spake, and said unto him-

"O hero, which death dost thou covet? Shall I fling thee down upon

the mountain or cast thee into the sea?"

Now Rustem knew that the Deev questioned him in wile, and he bethought

him that he would of a surety do that which Rustem desired not, so

he said-

"I have heard it said that it is not given to those that perish in

the waters to look upon the face of the Serosch or to find rest in

the life that is beyond."

Then the Deev said, "I desire that thou know not repose."

And he flung him into the sea at a spot where hungry crocodiles would

devour him.

Now Rustem, when he felt the water beneath him, forthwith drew out

his sword and combated the crocodiles with his right hand, and with

his left he swam towards the shore. And long did he struggle and sore,

but when the night was fallen he put his foot upon the dry land. Then,

when he had given thanks unto God and rested him, he returned unto

the spot where he had found the Deev. And he sought after Rakush his

steed, and his eye beheld him not. Then fear filled his spirit, and

he roamed around to seek him. And he found him at last among the horses

of Afrasiyab, that grazed in a spot hard by, for the keepers had ensnared

him. But when Rakush heard the voice of Rustem he neighed aloud, and

brake from the keepers and ran towards his master. And Rustem put

the saddle upon him and mounted him. Then he slew the keepers and

took their herds unto himself.

Now while he was so doing Afrasiyab came forth from his hiding-place,

for his heart yearned to look upon his horses. And when he beheld

Rustem in their midst he was dismayed, and knew not whither he should

turn, for he deemed that the Pehliva had discovered his hiding-place

and was come forth against him. So he offered battle unto him with

the men that were with him. And Rustem accepted the challenge, although

he was alone; and he fought with might and overcame the men, and slew

sixty of them with his sword and forty with his mace. And Afrasiyab

fled once more from before him.

Now when it was done the Deev came forth again, for he thought he

could quell Rustem now that he was weary. But Rustem sprang on him

and crushed him, and he was slain at his hands. Then the Pehliva returned

unto Kai Khosrau. And when the Shah had learned of all his deeds,

and beheld the booty that he had brought back, his mouth could not

cease from praising the prowess of Rustem, and he would have kept

his Pehliva beside him for ever. But Rustem said-