"O young man, the air is warm and soft, but the earth is cold. I have

pity upon thee, and would not take from thee the boon of life. Yet

if we combat together, surely thou wilt fall by my hands, for none

have withstood my power, neither men nor Deevs nor dragons. Desist,

therefore, from this enterprise, and quit the ranks of Turan, for

Iran hath need of heroes like unto thee."

Now while Rustem spake thus, the heart of Sohrab went out to him.

And he looked at him wistfully, and said-

"O hero, I am about to put unto thee a question, and I entreat of

thee that thou reply to me according to the truth. Tell unto me thy

name, that my heart may rejoice in thy words, for it seemeth unto

me that thou art none other than Rustem, the son of Zal, the son of

Saum, the son of Neriman."

But Rustem replied, "Thou errest, I am not Rustem, neither am I sprung

from the race of Neriman. Rustem is a Pehliva, but I, I am a slave,

and own neither a crown nor a throne."

These words spake Rustem that Sohrab might be afraid when he beheld

his prowess, and deem that yet greater might was hidden in the camp

of his enemy. But Sohrab when he heard these words was sad, and his

hopes that were risen so high were shattered, and the day that had

looked so bright was made dark unto his eyes. Then he made him ready

for the combat, and they fought until their spears were shivered and

their swords hacked like unto saws. And when all their weapons were

bent, they betook them unto clubs, and they waged war with these until

they were broken. Then they strove until their mail was torn and their

horses spent with exhaustion, and even then they could not desist,

but wrestled with one another with their hands till that the sweat

and blood ran down from their bodies. And they contended until their

throats were parched and their bodies weary, and to neither was given

the victory. Then they stayed them a while to rest, and Rustem thought

within his mind how all his days he had not coped with such a hero.

And it seemed to him that his contest with the White Deev had been

as nought to this.

Now when they had rested a while they fell to again, and they fought

with arrows, but still none could surpass the other. Then Rustem strove

to hurl Sohrab from his steed, but it availed him nought, and he could

shake him no more than the mountain can be moved from its seat. So

they betook themselves again unto clubs, and Sohrab aimed at Rustem

with might and smote him, and Rustem reeled beneath the stroke, and

bit his lips in agony. Then Sohrab vaunted his advantage, and-bade

Rustem go and measure him with his equals; for though his strength

be great, he could not stand against a youth. So they went their ways,

and Rustem fell upon the men of Turan, and spread confusion far and

wide among their ranks; and Sohrab raged along the lines of Iran,

and men and horses fell under his hands. And Rustem was sad in his

soul, and he turned with sorrow into his camp. But when he saw the

destruction Sohrab had wrought his anger was kindled, and he reproached

the youth, and challenged him to come forth yet again to single combat.

But because that the day was far spent they resolved to rest until

the morrow.