"I would ask of thee a boon. Grant thy forgiveness unto Girgin, if

it be given unto me to move this stone, and to free thee from out

of this pit. For verily he repenteth him of his evil deed, and because

he is valiant I would that there should be peace between you."

But Byzun said, "Thou knowest not all the evil that Girgin hath brought

upon me. I cannot give ear unto thy request, for I desire to take

vengeance upon him."

Then Rustem said, "If thy mind be thus evil that thou wilt not listen

to my desires, nor remember how I am come forth in friendship to succour

thee, I shall mount upon Rakush and leave thee to perish in thy chains."

When Byzun heard these words he gave a loud cry, and bewailed his

evil plight. And he said, "Be it as thou desirest."

Then Rustem laid hold of the stone, and he put forth all his strength,

and he lifted it from off the mouth of the pit and threw it far into

the desert. Then he let down his cord and enmeshed Byzun therein,

and drew him forth from his dungeon. And he was a sorry sight to see,

for the earth had withered his body, and his skin hung about his bones.

Now Rustem, when he had broken the chains of Byzun, covered him with

a cloak and set him upon a horse, and he took Manijeh also, and led

them unto his house in the city. Then when he had refreshed them with

water, and covered them with new robes, he desired that they be led

unto the spot where the army was hidden. And he said unto Byzun-

"I desire to fall upon Turan, but thou art too wasted to fight."

But Byzun said, "Not so; let Manijeh go forth into shelter, but it

behoveth not a man to be guarded like a woman."

And he refused ear to the desires of Rustem, and he clad him in a

coat of mail, and he girded him to ride beside the Pehliva. And they

went forth in the darkness until they were come unto the house of

Afrasiyab. And when they were come there, Rustem lifted the doors

from off their hinges and entered into the precincts, and he slew

the guards that kept the curtains, and he made him a passage unto

the chamber of Afrasiyab. And when he stood therein he lifted up his

voice of thunder, and he cried-

"Sleep, man of folly, and may thy slumbers be deep. Thou hast rested

upon thy throne while Byzun was hidden in a pit. But thou hast forgotten

that a road leadeth from Iran into Turan, and thou didst think in

thine evil heart that none would come forth to avenge him. Listen,

therefore, unto my voice; for I am Rustem, the son of Zal, the Pehliva,

and I have broken down thy doors, and released Byzun from his chains,

and I am come to do vengeance upon thee."