Then Zal kissed the ground before his father and craved the blessings

of God upon his head. And Saum dictated a letter to the Shah, and

he spoke therein of all he had done for Minuchihr, and how he had

killed the dragon that had laid waste the land, how he had ever subdued

the foes of Iran, and how the frontiers were enlarged by his hands.

Yet now was he waxing old, and could no longer do doughty deeds. But

a brave son was his, worthy and true, who would follow in his footsteps.

Only his heart was devoured of love, and perchance he would die if

his longing were unsatisfied. And therewith he commended to the wisdom

of the Shah the affairs of Zal.

When the letter was ended Zal set forth with it unto the court, and

the flower of his army went with him.

But the fear of Minuchihr was great in Cabul, and Mihrab pondered

how he should quench the wrath of the King of kings. And he spake

to Sindokht and said-

"For that the King is angered against me because of thee and thy daughter,

and because I cannot stand before him, I will lead Rudabeh unto his

court and kill her before his eyes. Perchance his anger may be thus

allayed."

Sindokht listened to his words in silence, and when he had ended she

cast about her for a plan, for she was quick of wit. And when she

had found one she came again into the presence of Mihrab, and she

craved of him that he should give her the key of his treasury. For

she said-

"This is not the hour to be strait-handed; suffer that I take what

seemeth good unto me and go before Saum, it may be that I move him

to spare the land."

And Mihrab agreed to her demand because of the fear that devoured

him. Then Sindokht went out to the house of Saum, and she took with

her three hundred thousand pieces of gold, and sixty horses caparisoned

in silver, bearing sixty slaves that held cups filled to the brim

with musk and camphor, and rubies, and turquoise, and precious stones

of every kind. And there followed two hundred dromedaries and four

tall Indian elephants laden with carpets and brocades of Roum, and

the train reached for two miles beyond the King's gates. Now when

Sindokht was come to Seistan she bade the guardians of the door say

unto Saum that an envoy was come from Cabul bearing a message. And

Saum granted an audience, and Sindokht was brought into his presence.

Then she kissed the ground at his feet and called upon Heaven to shower

down blessings on his head. And when she had done so, she caused her

gifts to be laid before Saum, and when Saum beheld these treasures,

he marvelled and thought within himself, "How cometh it that a woman

is sent as envoy from a land that boasteth such riches? If I accept

them the Shah will be angered, and if I refuse perchance Zal will

reproach me that I rob him of his heritage." So he lifted his head

and said-