"Who art thou, and what is thy name and thy desire, and what seekest

thou from me in the dark night?"

Then the Peri-faced answered him, saying, "I am Tahmineh, the daughter

of the King of Samengan, of the race of the leopard and the lion,

and none of the princes of this earth are worthy of my hand, neither

hath any man seen me unveiled. But my heart is torn with anguish,

and my spirit is tossed with desire, for I have heard of thy deeds

of prowess, and how thou fearest neither Deev nor lion, neither leopard

nor crocodile, and how thy hand is swift to strike, and how thou didst

venture alone into Mazinderan, and how wild asses are devoured of

thee, and how the earth groaneth under the tread of thy feet, and

how men perish at thy blows, and how even the eagle dareth not swoop

down upon her prey when she beholdeth thy sword. These things and

more have they told unto me, and mine eyes have yearned to look upon

thy face. And now hath God brought thee within the gates of my father,

and I am come to say unto thee that I am thine if thou wilt hear me,

and if thou wilt not, none other will I espouse. And consider, O Pehliva,

how that love hath obscured mine understanding and withdrawn me from

the bosom of discretion, yet peradventure God will grant unto me a

son like to thee for strength and valour, to whom shall be given the

empire of the world. And if thou wilt listen unto me, I will lead

forth before thee Rakush thy steed, and I will place under thy feet

the land of Samengan."

Now while this moon of beauty was yet speaking, Rustem regarded her.

And he saw that she was fair, and that wisdom abode in her mind; and

when he heard of Rakush, his spirit was decided within him, and he

held that this adventure could not end save gloriously. So he sent

a Mubid unto the King and demanded the hand of Tahmineh from her father.

And the King, when he heard the news, was rejoiced, and gave his daughter

unto the Pehliva, and they concluded an alliance according to custom

and the rites. And all men, young and old, within the house and city

of the King were glad at this alliance, and called down blessings

upon Rustem.

Now Rustem, when he was alone with the Peri-faced, took from his arm

an onyx that was known unto all the world. And he gave it to her,

and said-

"Cherish this jewel, and if Heaven cause thee to give birth unto a

daughter, fasten it within her locks, and it will shield her from

evil; but if it be granted unto thee to bring forth a son, fasten

it upon his arm, that he may wear it like his father. And he shall

be strong as Keriman, of stature like unto Saum the son of Neriman,

and of grace of speech like unto Zal, my father."