Now when Saiawush was become strong (so that he could ensnare a lion),

he came before Rustem, bearing high his head. And he spake, saying-

"I desire to go before the Shah, that my father may behold me, and

see what manner of man thou hast made of me."

And Rustem deemed that he spake well. So he made great preparations,

and marched unto Iran with a mighty host, and Saiawush rode with him

at their head. And the land rejoiced when it looked on the face of

Saiawush, and there was great joy in the courts of the King, and jewels

and gold and precious things past the telling rained upon Rustem and

Saiawush his charge. And Kai Kaous was glad when he beheld the boy,

and gave rich rewards unto Rustem; but Saiawush did he place beside

him on the throne. And all men spake his praises, and there was a

feast given, such as the world hath not seen the like.

Then Saiawush stayed in the courts of his father, and seven years

did he prove his spirit; but in the eighth, when he had found him

worthy, he gave unto him a throne and a crown. And all was well, and

men had forgotten the evil message of the stars. But that which is

written in the heavens, it is surely accomplished, and the day of

ill fortune drew nigh. For it came about that Sudaveh beheld the youth

of Saiawush, and her eyes were filled with his beauty, and her soul

burned after him. So she sent unto him a messenger, and invited him

to enter the house of the women. But he sent in answer words of excuse,

for he trusted her not. Then Sudaveh made complaint before Kai Kaous

that Saiawush had deafened his ear unto her request, and she bade

the Shah send him behind the curtains of the women's house, that his

son might become acquainted with his sisters. And Kai Kaous did that

which Sudaveh asked of him, and Saiawush obeyed his commands.

But Sudaveh, when she had so far accomplished her longing that she

had gotten him within the house, desired that he should speak with

her alone. But Saiawush resisted her wish. And three times did Sudaveh

entice him behind the curtains of the house, and three times was Saiawush

cold unto her yearning. Then Sudaveh was wroth, and she made complaint

unto the Shah, and she slandered the fair fame of Saiawush, and she

spread evil reports of him throughout the land, and she inflamed the

heart of Kai Kaous against his son. Now the Shah was angered beyond

measure, and it availed nought unto Saiawush to defend himself, for

Kai Kaous was filled with the love of Sudaveh, and he listened only

unto her voice. And he remembered how she had borne his captivity

in Hamaveran, and he knew not of her evil deceits. And when she said

that Saiawush had done her great wrong, Kai Kaous was troubled in

his spirit, and he resolved how he should act, for his heart went

out also unto his son, and he feared that guile lurked in these things.

And he could not decide between them. So he caused dromedaries to

be sent forth, even unto the borders of the land, and bring forth

wood from the forests. And they did so, and there was reared a mighty

heap of logs, so that the eye could behold it at a distance of two

farsangs. And it was piled so that a path ran through its midst such

as a mounted knight could traverse. And the Shah commanded that naphtha

be poured upon the wood; and when it was done he bade that it be lighted,

and there were needed two hundred men to light the pyre, so great

was its width and height. And the flames and smoke overspread the

heavens, and men shouted for fear when they beheld the tongues of

fire, and the heat thereof was felt in the far corners of the land.