"Suffer that I go before the Shah, and I will do thy behest."

And Ahriman suffered it. Then the Deev took upon him the form of a

youth, and in his hand he held a cluster of roses, and he presented

them unto the Shah, and he kissed the ground before his feet. And

when Kai Kaous had given him leave to speak he opened his mouth and

said-

"O Shah, live for ever! though such is thy might and majesty that

the vault of heaven alone should be thy throne. All the world is submissive

before thee, and I can bethink me but of one thing that is lacking

unto thy glory."

Then Kai Kaous questioned him of this one thing, and the Deev said-

"It is that thou knowest not the nature of the sun and moon, nor wherefore

the planets roll, neither the secret causes that set them in motion.

Thou art master of all the earth, therefore shouldst thou not make

the heavens also obedient to thy will?"

When Kai Kaous heard these words of guile his mind was dimmed, and

he forgot that man cannot mount unto the skies, and he pondered without

ceasing how he could fly unto the stars and inquire into their secrets.

And he consulted many wise men in his trouble, but none could aid

him. But at last it came about that a certain man taught him how he

could perchance accomplish his designs. And Kai Kaous did according

to his instructions. He built him a framework of aloe-wood, and at

the four corners thereof he placed javelins upright, and on their

points he put the flesh of goats. Then he chose out four eagles strong

of wing, and bound them unto the corners of this chariot. And when

it was done, Kai Kaous seated himself in the midst thereof with much

pomp. And the eagles, when they smelt the flesh, desired after it,

and they flapped their wings and raised themselves, and raised the

framework with them. And they struggled sore, but they could not attain

unto the meat; but ever as they struggled they bore aloft with them

Kai Kaous and the throne whereon he sat. And so long as their hunger

lasted, they strove after the prey. But at length their strength would

hold no longer, and they desisted from the attempt. And behold! as

they desisted the fabric fell back to earth, and the shock thereof

was great. And but for Ormuzd Kai Kaous would have perished in the

presumption of his spirit.

Now the eagles had borne the Shah even unto the desert of Cathay,

and there was no man to succour him, and he suffered from the pangs

of hunger, and there was nothing to assuage his longing, neither could

his thirst be stilled. And he was alone, and sorrowful and shamed

in his soul that he had yet again brought derision upon Iran. And

he prayed to God in his trouble, and entreated pardon for his sins.