Then said Feridoun, "I will uproot this monster from the earth, and

his palace will I raze to the dust."

But his mother spake, and said, "Not so, my son, let not thine youthful

anger betray thee; for how canst thou stand against all the world?"

Yet not long did she suffer the hard task to hinder him, for soon

a mighty crowd came towards the palace led by one who bare an apron

uplifted upon a lance. Then Feridoun knew that succour was come unto

him. And when he had listened to Kawah, he came into the presence

of his mother with the helmet of kings upon his head, and he said

unto her-

"Mother, I go to the wars, and it remaineth for thee to pray God for

my safety."

Then he caused a mighty club to be made for him, and he traced the

pattern thereof upon the ground, and the top thereof was the head

of a cow, in memory of Purmaieh, his nurse. Then he cased the standard

of Kawah in rich brocades of Roum, and hung jewels upon it. And when

all was made ready, they set forth towards the West to seek out Zohak,

for, they knew not that he was gone to Ind in search of Feridoun.

Now when they were come to Bagdad, which is upon the banks of the

Tigris, they halted, and Feridoun bade the guardians of the flood

convey them across. But these refused, saying, the King bade that

none should pass save only those who bore the royal seal. When Feridoun

heard these words he was wroth, and he regarded not the rushing river

nor the dangers hidden within its floods. He girded his loins and

plunged with his steed into the waters, and all the army followed

after him. Now they struggled sore with the rushing stream, and it

seemed as though the waves would bear them down. But their brave horses

overcame all dangers, and they stepped in safety upon the shore. Then

they turned their faces towards the city which is now called Jerusalem,

for here stood the glorious house that Zohak had builded. And when

they had entered the city all the people rallied round Feridoun, for

they hated Zohak and looked to Feridoun to deliver them. And he slew

the Deevs that held the palace, and cast down the evil talisman that

was graven upon the walls. Then he mounted the throne of the idolater

and placed the crown of Iran upon his head, and all the people bowed

down before him and called him Shah.

Now when Zohak returned from his search after Feridoun and learned

that he was seated upon his throne, he encompassed the city with his

host. But the army of Feridoun marched against him, and the desires

of the people went with them. And all that day bricks fell from the

walls and stones from the terraces, and it rained arrows and spears

like to hail falling from a dark cloud, until Feridoun had overcome

the might of Zohak. Then Feridoun raised his cow-headed mace to slay

the Serpent-King. But the blessed Serosch swooped down, and cried-