So Isfendiyar went out against the foes of Iran, and he mowed them

down with the sword and he caused arrows to rain upon them like hail

in spring, and the sun was darkened by the flight of the weapons.

And he brake the power of Arjasp, King of Turan, and he drove him

out from the borders of the realm. And when it was done, and the men

of Iran had prevailed over the men of Turan, Isfendiyar presented

himself before his father and craved of him the fulfilment of his

promises. But Gushtasp, when he beheld that all was well once more,

repented him of his resolve, for he desired not to give the throne

unto his son. So he pondered in his spirit what he should say in his

excuse, and he was ashamed in his soul. But his mouth revealed not

the thoughts of his heart, and he spake angrily unto his son, and

he said-

"I marvel that thou comest before me with this demand; for while thy

sisters languish in the bondage of Arjasp, it beseemeth us not to

hold this war as ended, lest men mock us with their tongues. And it

hath been told unto me that they are hidden in the brazen fortress,

and that Arjasp and all his men are gone in behind its walls. I charge

thee, therefore, overthrow the castle and deliver thy sisters who

pine. And I swear unto thee, when thou hast done it, I will abandon

unto thee the throne, and thy name shall be exalted in the land."

Then Isfendiyar said, "I am the servant of the Shah, let him command

his slave what he shall do."

And Gushtasp said, "Go forth."

Then Isfendiyar answered, "I go, but the road is not known unto me."

And Gushtasp said, "A Mubid hath revealed it unto me. Three roads

lead unto the fortress of brass, and the one requireth three months

to traverse, but it is safe, and much pasture is found on its path.

And the second demandeth but two moons, yet it is a desert void of

herbs. And the third asketh but seven days, but it is fraught with

danger."

Then Isfendiyar said, "No man can die before his time is come. It

behoveth a man of valour to choose ever the shortest path."

Now the Mubids and the nobles who knew the dangers that were hidden

in this path sought to deter him, but Isfendiyar would not listen

to their voice. So he set forth with his army, and they marched until

they came to the spot where the roads divided. Now it needed seven

stages to reach the fortress of Arjasp, and at each stage there lurked

a danger, and never yet had any man overcome them or passed beneath

its walls. But Isfendiyar would not give ear to fear, and he set forth

upon the road, and each day he overcame a danger, and each danger

was greater than the last. And on the first day he slew two raging

wolves, and on the second he laid low two evil Deevs that were clothed

as lions, and on the third he overcame a dragon whose breath was poison.

And on the fourth day Isfendiyar slew a great magician who would have

lured him into the paths of evil, and on the fifth he slew a mighty

bird whom no man had ever struck down. And weariness was not known

of Isfendiyar, neither could he rest from his labours, for there was

no camping-place in his road of danger. And on the sixth day he was

nigh to have perished with his army in a deep snow that fell upon

him through the might of the Deevs. But he prayed unto God in his

distress, and by the favour of Heaven the snow vanished from under

his feet. Then on the seventh day he came nigh to perish in a flood

of waters but Isfendiyar overcame them also, and stood before the

castle of Arjasp. Now when he beheld it, his heart failed within him,

for he saw that it was compassed by a wall of brass, and the thickness

thereof was such that four horsemen could ride thereon abreast. So

he sighed and said-