"I charge thee, O my steed, that thou seek no strife during my slumbers.

If an enemy cometh before thee, come unto me and neigh beside mine

ear, and verily I will waken and come to thine aid."

And Rakush listened, and when he saw that Rustem slumbered, he gambolled

and grazed beside him. But when some watches of the night were spent,

there came forth an angry dragon whose home was in this spot, a dragon

fierce and fiery, whom even the Deevs dared not encounter. And when

he beheld Rakush and Rustem he was astonished that a man should slumber

softly beside his lair. And he came towards them with his breath of

poison. Then Rakush, when he saw it, stamped his hoofs upon the ground

and beat the air with his tail, so that the noise thereof resounded

wide, and Rustem was awakened with the din. And he was angry with

Rakush that he had wakened him, for the dragon had vanished, and he

could see no cause for fear. And he said-

"It is thy fault, O unkind steed, that slumber is fled from me."

Then he turned him to sleep once again. But when the dragon saw it

he came forth once more, and once more did Rakush wake Rustem, and

once more did the dragon vanish ere the eyes of Rustem were opened.

And when Rakush had thus awakened the hero yet three times, Rustem

was beside him with anger, and wisdom departed from its dwelling.

He piled reproaches upon the horse, and hurled bitter words upon his

head, and he sware that if he acted thus again he would slay him with

his arm of power, and would wander on foot unto Mazinderan. And he

said-

"I bade thee call upon me if dangers menaced, but thou sufferest me

not to slumber when all is well."

Then Rustem drew his leopard-skin about him and laid him down again

to sleep. But Rakush was pained in his spirit, and pawed the ground

in his vexation. Then the dragon came forth yet again, and was about

to fall upon Rakush, and the steed was sore distressed how he should

act. But he took courage and came beside Rustem once more, and stamped

upon the ground and neighed and woke him. And Rustem sprang up in

fury, but this time it was given unto him to behold the dragon, and

he knew that Rakush had done that which was right. And he drew his

armour about him and unsheathed his sword, and came forth to meet

the fiery beast. Then the dragon said-

"What is thy name, and who art thou that dost venture against me?

for verily the woman that bore thee shall weep."

And the Pehliva answered, "I am Rustem, of the seed of Zal, and in

myself I am an host, and none can withstand my might."

But the dragon laughed at his words, and held them to be vain boasting.

Then he fell upon Rustem, the son of Zal, and he wound himself about

his body, and would have crushed him with his writhings, and you would

have said that the end of this hero was come. But Rakush, when he

beheld the straits of his master, sprang upon the dragon from the

rear, and he tore him as he had torn the lion, and Rustem pierced

the beast with his sword, and between them the world was delivered

of this scourge. Then Rustem was glad, and he praised Rakush, and

washed him at the fountain, and gave thanks to God who had given unto

him the victory. And when he had so done he sprang into his saddle,

and rode until they were come unto the land of the magicians.