Then he sent Zengueh before Afrasiyab with a writing. And he told

therein all that was come about, and how that discord was sprouted

out of their peace. And he recalled unto Afrasiyab how he had not

broken their treaty though Kai Kaous had bidden him do it, and he

said how he could not return unto the King his father. Then he prayed

Afrasiyab that he would make a passage for him through his dominions,

that he might hide him wheresoever God desired. For he said-

"I seek a spot where my name shall be lost unto Kai Kaous, and where

I may not know of his woeful deeds."

And Zengueh set forth and did as Saiawush desired, and he took with

him the hundred men of Turan, and all the gold and jewels that Afrasiyab

had sent. And when he was come within the gates Afrasiyab received

him right kindly, but when he had heard his message he was downcast

in his spirit. Then he called for Piran, the leader of his hosts,

and he took counsel with him how he should act. And Piran said-

"O King, live for ever! There is but one road open unto thee. For

this Prince is noble, and he hath done that which is right, for he

would not give ear unto the evil designs of Kai Kaous, his father.

Wherefore I counsel thee, receive him within thy courts, and give

unto him a daughter in marriage, and let him be to thee a son; for

verily, when Kai Kaous shall die, he will mount upon the throne of

Iran, and thus may the hate of old be quenched in love."

Now Afrasiyab, when he had listened to the words of Piran, knew that

they were good. So he sent for a scribe, and dictated a writing unto

Saiawush. And he said unto him how the land was open to receive him,

and how he would be to him a father, and how he should find in Turan

the love that was denied of Kai Kaous. And he said-

"I will demand of thee nought but what is good, neither will I suffer

suspicion against thee to enter my soul."

Then he sealed the letter with his royal seal, and gave it unto Zengueh

the messenger, and bade him depart there with speed. And Saiawush,

when he had read it, was glad, and yet he was also troubled in his

spirit, for his heart was sore because he was forced to make a friend

of the foe of his land. Yet he saw that it could in nowise be altered.

So he wrote a letter to Kai Kaous, and he told him therein how it

seemed that he could not do that which was right in his eyes, and

he recalled unto him the troubles that were come upon him from Sudaveh,

and he said how he could not break an oath he had made. Then he confided

this writing unto Bahram, and he bade him take the lead of the army

till that Tus should be come forth from Iran. And when he had chosen

out an hundred warriors of renown from out the host, he departed with

them across the border.