Then Human said, "Men had told unto me that Rehham was a knight of

courage, but now I know that he is afraid." And he turned away his

steed and rode until he came nigh unto Friburz, and he challenged

him also in words of pride, and he said-

"Thou art brother unto Saiawush, show now if there live within thee

aught of valour."

But Friburz answered, "Go forth before Gudarz and demand of him that

I may fight, and verily if he listen unto thy voice, it will be a

joy unto my soul."

Then Human said, "I see that thou art a hero only in words." And he

turned his back upon him also, and he rode till that he came before

Gudarz the Pehliva. And he raised his voice and spake unto him words

of insolence, and he defied him to lead forth his army. But Gudarz

would not listen unto his voice. Then Human turned him back unto the

camp of Turan, and he said unto the army how that the men of Iran

were craven. And when the army heard it they raised shouts of great

joy.

Now the shouting of the men of Turan pierced even unto the cars of

the Iranians, and they were sore hurt thereat; and the nobles came

before Gudarz and laid before him their complaints, and they entreated

of him that he would lead them forth that they might prove their valour.

And Byzun, when he heard what had been done, came before his grandsire

like to a lion in his fury, and he craved that he would grant unto

him that he might reply unto the challenge of Human. Now when Gudarz

beheld that all the nobles were against him, he listened unto the

ardour of Byzun, and he gave to him leave to go forth, and he accorded

to him the armour of Saiawush, and he blessed him and bade him be

victorious. Then Byzun sent a messenger unto Human, and the place

of combat was chosen. And when the sun was risen they met upon the

field, and Human cried unto his adversary, and he said-

"O Byzun, thine hour is come, for I will send thee back unto Gew in

such guise that his heart shall be torn with anguish."

But Byzun answered and said, "Why waste we our time in words, let

us fall upon one another."

Then they did as Byzun desired. And they fought with swords and with

arrows, with maces also and with fists, and sore was the struggle

and weary, and the victory leaned unto neither side. And they strove

thus from the time of dawn until the sun had lengthened the shadows,

and Byzun was afraid lest the day should end in doubt. Then he sent

up a prayer unto Ormuzd that He would lend unto him strength. And

Ormuzd listened unto the petition of His servant. Then Byzun caught

Human in his arms and flung him upon the ground, and he beat out his

brains, and he severed his head from off his trunk, that the murder

of Saiawush might be avenged. Then he gave thanks unto God, and turned

him back unto the camp, and he bore aloft the head of Human. And the

army of Iran, when they beheld it, set up a great shout, but from

the ranks of Turan there came the noise of wailing. And Piran was

bowed down with grief and anger, and he commanded the army should

go forth and fall upon the Iranians.