Then Gew did as Kai Khosrau bade, and when he had crimsoned the earth

with the blood of Piran, they mounted him upon a charger fleet of

foot and bound him thereon, and caused him to swear unto them that

none other but Gulshehr his wife should release him from these bonds.

And Piran sware it and went forth, and his mouth poured blessings

upon Kai Khosrau.

Now while these things were passing Afrasiyab grew impatient, and

set forth himself at the head of a great army that he might learn

tidings of Kai Khosrau. And when he heard that the armies had been

beaten at the hand of one man, his cheeks grew pale with fear; but

when he met Piran his Pehliva tied upon his charger, his anger knew

no bounds, so that he cried aloud, and commanded Piran that he depart

from out his presence. Then he sware that he would himself destroy

this Gew, and lay low the head of Kai Khosrau and of his mother. And

he made great haste after them, and he urged upon his men that they

must find Kai Khosrau before he should have crossed the Jihun and

have entered upon the land of Iran; yet before ever he was come nigh

to them, the three were come unto its banks.

Now, a boat was lying ready, and a boatman slumbered beside it; and

Gew roused him, and said that he should bear them across the river.

But the man was greedy of gain, and beheld that Gew was in haste.

So he said-

"Why should I carry thee across? Yet, if thou desire it, I demand

that thou give unto me one of four things: thy coat of mail, or thy

black horse, yon woman, or the crown of gold worn by this young man."

Then Gew was angry, and said-

"Thou speakest like a fool; thou knowest not what thou dost ask."

Then he turned unto Kai Khosrau, and said-

"If thou be Kai Khosrau indeed, thou wilt not fear to enter this river

and cross it, even as it was crossed by Feridoun thy sire."

Now the river was swollen with the rains, but the young King regarded

it not. He entered upon its surge with Behzah his steed, and the horse

of his father bare him across the boiling waters. And Ferangis followed

after him and Gew the bold. And when Kai Khosrau was come unto the

other side, he dismounted and knelt and kissed the ground of Iran,

and gave thanks unto God the mighty.

Yet scarce were they come to the other side than Afrasiyab came up

with his army. And Afrasiyab demanded of the boatman wherefore he

had borne them across, and when the man told him how it was come to

pass, the King was bowed down with anguish, for he knew now that that

which was written would be accomplished. So he returned him right

sorrowful unto his house.

Now when Kai Khosrau came nigh unto the courts of the Shah, Gew sent

a writing unto Kai Kaous and told him all that was come to pass. And

Kai Kaous sent forth riders to lead before him his son; and the city

was decked to give him welcome, and all the nobles received him joyfully,

and Kai Kaous was glad at the sight of him, and all men regarded Kai

Khosrau as the heir, and only Tus was sorrowful at that which was

come to pass. But Tus was angered, and said that he would pay homage

only unto Friburz, and to none other. And he came before Kai Kaous

and said-