DRAMATIS PERSONAE

APU OLLANTAY.—General of Anti-suyu, the eastern province of the empire.
A young chief, but not of the blood-royal. His rank was that of a
Tucuyricuo or Viceroy. The name occurs among the witnesses examined by
order of the Viceroy Toledo, being one of the six of the Antasayac
ayllu.

PACHACUTI.—The Sovereign Inca.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.—Sovereign. Inca, son and heir of Pachacuti.

RUMI-ÑAUI.—A great chief, General of Colla-suyu. The word means
‘Stone-eye.’

UILLAC UMA.—High Priest of the Sun. The word Uma means head, and
Uillac, a councillor and diviner.

URCO HUARANCA.—A chief. The words mean ‘Mountain Chief.’ The word
huaranca means 1000; hence, Chief of a Thousand.

HANCO HUAYLLU AUQUI.—An old officer, of the blood-royal.

PIQUI CHAQUI.—Page to Ollantay. The words mean ‘fleet-footed.’

ANAHUARQUI.—The Ccoya or Queen, wife of Pachacuti.

CUSI COYLLUR ÑUSTA.—A Princess, daughter of Pachacuti. The words mean
‘the joyful star.’

YMA SUMAC.—Daughter of Cusi Coyllur. The words mean ‘How beautiful.’

PITU SALLA.—A girl, companion of Yma Sumac.

CCACCA MAMA.—A matron of Virgins of the Sun. Jailer of Cusi Coyllur.

Nobles, captains, soldiers, boys and girls dancing, singers,
attendants, messengers or Chasqui.

ACT I

SCENE 1

An open space near the junction of the two torrents of Cuzco, the
Huatanay and Tullumayu or Rodadero, called Pumap Chupan, just outside
the gardens of the Sun. The Temple of the Sun beyond the gardens, and
the Sacsahuaman hill surmounted by the fortress, rising in the
distance. The palace of Colcampata on the hillside.

(Enter OLLANTAY L. [in a gilded tunic, breeches of llama sinews, usutas
or shoes of llama hide, a red mantle of ccompi or fine cloth, and the
chucu or head-dress of his rank, holding a battle-axe (champi) and club
(macana)] and PIQUI CHAQUI coming up from the back R. [in a coarse
brown tunic of auasca or llama cloth, girdle used as a sling, and chucu
or head-dress of a Cuzqueño].)

OLLANTAY.
Where, young fleet-foot, hast thou been?
Hast thou the starry Ñusta seen?

PIQUI CHAQUI.
The Sun forbids such sacrilege
’Tis not for me to see the star.
Dost thou, my master, fear no ill,
Thine eyes upon the Inca’s child?

OLLANTAY.
In spite of all I swear to love
That tender dove, that lovely star;
My heart is as a lamb[6] with her,
And ever will her presence seek.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Such thoughts are prompted by Supay[7];
That evil being possesses thee.
All round are beauteous girls to choose
Before old age, and weakness come.
If the great Inca knew thy plot
And what thou seekest to attain,
Thy head would fall by his command,
Thy body would be quickly burnt.

OLLANTAY.
Boy, do not dare to cross me thus.
One more such word and thou shalt die.
These hands will tear thee limb from limb,
If still thy councils are so base.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Well! treat thy servant as a dog,
But do not night and day repeat,
‘Piqui Chaqui! swift of foot!
Go once more to seek the star.’

OLLANTAY.
Have I not already said
That e’en if death’s fell scythe[8] was here,
If mountains should oppose my path
Like two fierce foes[9] who block the way,
Yet will I fight all these combined
And risk all else to gain my end,
And whether it be life or death
I’ll cast myself at Coyllur’s feet.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
But if Supay himself should come?

OLLANTAY.
I’d strike the evil spirit down.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
If thou shouldst only see his nose,
Thou wouldst not speak as thou dost now.

OLLANTAY.
Now, Piqui Chaqui, speak the truth,
Seek not evasion or deceit.
Dost thou not already know,
Of all the flowers in the field,
Not one can equal my Princess?

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Still, my master, thou dost rave.
I think I never saw thy love.
Stay! was it her who yesterday
Came forth with slow and faltering steps
And sought a solitary[10] path[11]?
If so, ’tis true she’s like the sun,
The moon less beauteous than her face.[12]

OLLANTAY.
It surely was my dearest love.
How beautiful, how bright is she
This very moment thou must go
And take my message to the Star.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
I dare not, master; in the day,
I fear to pass the palace gate.
With all the splendour of the court,
I could not tell her from the rest.

OLLANTAY.
Didst thou not say thou sawest her?

PIQUI CHAQUI.
I said so, but it was not sense.
A star can only shine at night
Only at night could I be sure.

OLLANTAY.
Begone, thou lazy good-for-nought.
The joyful star that I adore,
If placed in presence of the Sun,
Would shine as brightly as before.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Lo! some person hither comes,
Perhaps an old crone seeking alms;
Yes! Look! he quite resembles one.
Lot him the dangerous message take.
Send it by him, O noble Chief!
From me they would not hear the tale;
Thy page is but a humble lad.

(Enter the UILLAC UMA, or High Priest of the Sun, at the back, arms
raised to the Sun. In a grey tunic and black mantle from the shoulders
to the ground, a long knife in his belt, the undress chucu on his
head.)

UILLAC UMA.
O giver of all warmth and light
O Sun! I fall and worship thee.
For thee the victims are prepared,
A thousand llamas and their lambs
Are ready for thy festal day.
The sacred fire’ll lap their blood,
In thy dread presence, mighty one,
After long fast[13] thy victims fall.

OLLANTAY.
Who comes hither, Piqui Chaqui?
Yes, ’tis the holy Uillac Uma;
He brings his tools of augury.
No puma[14] more astute and wise
I hate that ancient conjurer
Who prophesies of evil things,
I feel the evils he foretells;
’Tis he who ever brings ill-luck.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Silence, master, do not speak,
The old man doubly is informed;
Fore-knowing every word you say,
Already he has guessed it all.

(He lies down on a bank.)