Apu Ollantay

A Drama of the Time of the Incas

Sovereigns Of Peru

About A.D. 1470

Contents

 INTRODUCTION
 MS. TEXTS
 ACTS AND SCENES
 DRAMATIS PERSONAE

 ACT I
 SCENE 1
 SCENE 2
 SCENE 3
 SCENE 4
 SCENE 5

 ACT II
 SCENE 1
 SCENE 2
 SCENE 3

 ACT III
 SCENE 1
 SCENE 2
 SCENE 3
 SCENE 4
 SCENE 5
 SCENE 6
 SCENE 7

 FOOTNOTES

First Reduced To Writing By Dr. Valdez, Cuba Of Sicuani A.D. 1770

The Original Manuscript Copied By Dr. Justo Pastor Justiniani

This Justiniani Text Copied At Laris, In April 1863, By Clements R.
Markham

A Free Translation Into English By Sir Clements Markham, K.C.B. [1910]

INTRODUCTION

The drama was cultivated by the Incas, and dramatic performances were
enacted before them. Garcilasso de la Vega, Molina, and Salcamayhua are
the authorities who received and have recorded the information given by
the Amautas respecting the Inca drama. Some of these dramas, and
portions of others, were preserved in the memories of members of Inca
and Amauta families. The Spanish priests, especially the Jesuits of
Juli, soon discovered the dramatic aptitude of the people. Plays were
composed and acted, under priestly auspices, which contained songs and
other fragments of the ancient Inca drama. These plays were called
‘Autos Sacramentales.’

But complete Inca dramas were also preserved in the memories of members
of the Amauta caste and, until the rebellion of 1781, they were acted.
The drama of _Ollantay_ was first reduced to writing and arranged for
acting by Dr. Don Antonio Valdez, the Cura of Tinto. It was acted
before his friend José Gabriel Condorcanqui[1] in about 1775. Taking
the name of his maternal ancestor, the Inca Tupac Amaru, the ill-fated
Condorcanqui rose in rebellion, was defeated, taken, and put to death
under torture, in the great square of Cuzco. In the monstrous sentence
‘the representation of dramas as well as all other festivals which the
Indians celebrate in memory of their Incas’ was prohibited.[2] This is
a clear proof that before 1781 these Quichua dramas were acted.

The original manuscript of Valdez was copied by his friend Don Justo
Pastor Justiniani, and this copy was inherited by his son. There was
another copy in the convent of San Domingo at Cuzco, but it is corrupt,
and there are several omissions and mistakes of a copyist. Dr. Valdez
died, at a very advanced age, in 1816. In 1853 the original manuscript
was in the possession of his nephew and heir, Don Narciso Cuentas of
Tinta.

The Justiniani copy was, in 1853, in the possession of Dr. Don Pablo
Justiniani, Cura of Laris, and son of Don Justo Pastor Justiniani. He
is a descendant of the Incas.[3] In April 1853 I went to Laris, a
secluded valley of the Andes, and made a careful copy of the drama of
_Ollantay_. From this Justiniani text my first very faulty
line-for-line translation was made in 1871, as well as the present free
translation.

The first printed notice of _Ollantay_ appeared in the _Museo Erudito_,
Nos. 5 to 9, published at Cuzco in 1837, and edited by Don José
Palacios. The next account of the drama, with extracts, was in the
‘Antiguedades Peruanas,’ a work published in 1851 jointly by Dr. von
Tschudi and Don Mariaiao Rivero of Arequipa. The complete text, from
the copy in the convent of San Domingo at Cuzco, was first published at
Vienna in 1853 by Dr. von Tschudi in his ‘Die Kechua Sprache. It was
obtained for him by Dr. Ruggendas of Munich. The manuscript was a
corrupt version, and in very bad condition, in parts illegible from
damp. In 1868 Don José Barranca published a Spanish translation, from
the Dominican text of von Tschudi. The learned Swiss naturalist, von
Tschudi, published a revised edition of his translation at Vienna in
1875, with a parallel German translation. In 1871 I printed the
Justiniani text with a literal, line-for-line translation, but with
many mistakes, since corrected; and in 1874, a Peruvian, Don José
Fernandez Nodal, published the Quichua text with a Spanish translation.

In 1878 Gavino Pacheco Zegarra published his version of _Ollantay_,
with a free translation in French. His text is a manuscript of the
drama which he found in his uncle’s library. Zegarra, as a native of
Peru whose language was Quichua, had great advantages. He was a very
severe, and often unfair, critic of his predecessors.

The work of Zegarra is, however, exceedingly valuable. He was not only
a Quichua scholar, but also accomplished and well read. His notes on
special words and on the construction of sentences are often very
interesting. But his conclusions respecting several passages which are
in the Justiniani text, but not in the others, are certainly erroneous.
Thus he entirely spoils the dialogue between the Uillac Uma and Piqui
Chaqui by omitting the humorous part contained in the Justiniani text;
and makes other similar omissions merely because the passages are not
in his text. Zegarra gives a useful vocabulary at the end of all the
words which occur in the drama.

The great drawback to the study of Zegarra’s work is that he invented a
number of letters to express the various modifications of sound as they
appealed to his ear. No one else can use them, while they render the
reading of his own works difficult and intolerably tiresome.

The last publication of a text of _Ollantay_ was by the Rev. J. H.
Gybbon Spilsbury, at Buenos Ayres in 1907, accompanied by Spanish,
English, and French translations in parallel columns.

There is truth in what Zegarra says, that the attempts to translate
line for line, by von Tschudi and myself, ‘fail to convey a proper idea
of the original drama to European readers, the result being alike
contrary to the genius of the modern languages of Europe and to that of
the Quichua language.’ Zegarra accordingly gives a very free
translation in French.

In the present translation I believe that I have always preserved the
sense of the original, without necessarily binding myself to the words.
The original is in octosyllabic lines. Songs and important speeches are
in quatrains of octosyllabic lines, the first and last rhyming, and the
second and third. I have endeavoured to keep to octosyllabic lines as
far as possible, because they give a better idea of the original; and I
have also tried to preserve the form of the songs and speeches.

The drama opens towards the close of the reign of the Inca Pachacuti,
the greatest of all the Incas, and the scene is laid at Cuzco or at
Ollantay-tampu, in the valley of the Vilcamayu. The story turns on the
love of a great chief, but not of the blood-royal, with a daughter of
the Inca. This would not have been prohibited in former reigns, for the
marriage of a sister by the sovereign or his heir, and the marriage of
princesses only with princes of the blood-royal, were rules first
introduced by Pachacuti.[4] His imperial power and greatness led him to
endeavour to raise the royal family far above all others.

The play opens with a dialogue between Ollantay and Piqui Chaqui, his
page, a witty and humorous lad. Ollantay talks of his love for the
Princess Cusi Coyllur, and wants Piqui Chaqui to take a message to her,
while the page dwells on the danger of loving in such a quarter, and
evades the question of taking a message. Then to them enters the Uillac
Uma, or High Priest of the Sun, who remonstrates with Ollantay—a scene
of great solemnity, and very effective.

The next scene is in the Queen’s palace. Anahuarqui, the Queen, is
discovered with the Princess Cusi Coyllur, who bitterly laments the
absence of Ollantay. To them enters the Inca Pachacuti, quite ignorant
that his daughter has not only married Ollantay in secret, but that she
is actually with child by him. Her mother keeps her secret. The Inca
indulges in extravagant expressions of love for his daughter. Then boys
and girls enter dancing and singing a harvest song. Another very
melancholy yarahui is sung; both capable of being turned by the
Princess into presages of the fate of herself and her husband.

In the third scene Ollantay prefers his suit to the Inca Pachacuti in
octosyllabic quatrains, the first and last lines rhyming, and the
second and third. His suit is rejected with scorn and contempt.
Ollantay next appears on the heights above Cuzco. In a soliloquy he
declares himself the implacable enemy of Cuzco and the Inca. Then Piqui
Chaqui arrives with the news that the Queen’s palace is empty, and
abandoned, and that Cusi Coyllur has quite disappeared; while search is
being made for Ollantay. While they are together a song is sung behind
some rocks, in praise of Cusi Coyllur’s beauty. Then the sound of
clarions and people approaching is heard, and Ollantay and Piqui Chaqui
take to flight. The next scene finds the Inca enraged at the escape of
Ollantay, and ordering his general Rumi-ñaui to march at once, and make
him prisoner. To them enters a _chasqui_, or messenger, bringing the
news that Ollantay has collected a great army at Ollantay-tampu, and
that the rebels have proclaimed him Inca.

The second act opens with a grand scene in the hall of the
fortress-palace of Ollantay-tampu. Ollantay is proclaimed Inca by the
people, and he appoints the Mountain Chief, Urco Huaranca, general of
his army. Urco Huaranca explains the dispositions he has made to oppose
the army advancing from Cuzco, and his plan of defence. In the next
scene Rumi-ñaui, as a fugitive in the mountains, describes his defeat
and the complete success of the strategy of Ollantay and Urco Huaranca.
His soliloquy is in the octosyllabic quatrains. The last scene of the
second act is in the gardens of the Convent of Virgins of the Sun. A
young girl is standing by a gate which opens on the street. This, as
afterwards appears, is Yma Sumac, the daughter of Ollantay and Cusi
Coyllur, aged ten, but ignorant of her parentage. To her enters Pitu
Salla, an attendant, who chides her for being so fond of looking out at
the gate. The conversation which follows shows that Yma Sumac detests
the convent and refuses to take the vows. She also has heard the moans
of some sufferer, and importunes Pitu Salla to tell her who it is. Yma
Sumac goes as Mama Ccacca enters and cross examines Pitu Salla on her
progress in persuading Yma Sumac to adopt convent life. This Mama
Ccacca is one of the Matrons or _Mama Cuna_, and she is also the jailer
of Cusi Coyllur.

The third act opens with an amusing scene between the Uillac Uma and
Piqui Chaqui, who meet in a street in Cuzco. Piqui Chaqui wants to get
news, but to tell nothing, and in this he succeeds. The death of Inca
Pachacuti is announced to him, and the accession of Tupac Yupanqui, and
with this news he departs.

Next there is an interview between the new Inca Tupac Yupanqui, the
Uillac Uma, and the defeated general Rumi-ñaui, who promises to
retrieve the former disaster and bring the rebels to Cuzco, dead or
alive. It after wards appears that the scheme of Rumi-ñaui was one of
treachery. He intended to conceal his troops in eaves and gorges near
Ollantay-tampu ready to rush in, when a signal was made. Rumi-ñaui then
cut and slashed his face, covered himself with mud, and appeared at the
gates of Ollantay-tampu, declaring that he had received this treatment
from the new Inca, and imploring protection.[5] Ollantay received him
with the greatest kindness and hospitality. In a few days Ollantay and
his people celebrated the _Raymi_ or great festival of the sun with
much rejoicing and drinking. Rumi-ñaui pretended to join in the
festivities, but when most of them were wrapped in drunken sleep, he
opened the gates, let in his own men, and made them all prisoners.

There is next another scene in the garden of the convent, in which Yma
Sumac importunes Pitu Salla to tell her the secret of the prisoner.
Pitu Salla at last yields and opens a stone door. Cusi Coyllur is
discovered, fastened to a wall, and in a dying state. She had been
imprisoned, by order of her father, Inca Pachacuti on the birth of Yma
Sumac. She is restored with food and water, and the relationship is
discovered when Cusi Coyllur hears the child’s name, for she had given
it to her.

Next the Inca Tupac Yupanqui is discovered in the great hall of his
palace, seated on his _tiana_ or throne, with the Uillac Uma in
attendance. To them enters a _chasqui_, or messenger, who describes the
result of Rumi-ñaui’s treachery in octosyllabic quatrains. Rumi-ñaui
himself enters and receives the thanks of his sovereign. Then the
prisoners are brought in guarded-Ollantay, Hanco Huayllu, Urco
Huaranca, and Piqui Chaqui. The Inca upbraids them for their treason.
He then asks the Uillac Uma for his judgment. The High Priest
recommends mercy. Rumi-ñaui advises immediate execution: The Inca seems
to concur and they are ordered off, when suddenly the Inca cries
‘Stop.’ He causes them all to be released, appoints Ollantay to the
highest post in the empire next to himself, and Urco Huaranca to a high
command. There are rejoicings, and in the midst of it all Yma Sumac
forces her way into the hall, and throws herself at the Inca’s feet,
entreating him to save her mother from death. The Inca hands over the
matter to Ollantay, but this Yma Sumac will not have, and, the Uillac
Uma intervening, the Inca consents to go with the child.

The final scene is in the gardens of the convent. The Inca enters with
Yma Sumac, followed by the whole strength of the company. Mama Ccacca
is ordered to open the stone door and Cusi Coyllur is brought out. She
proves to be the sister of the Inca and the wife of Ollantay. There are
explanations, and all ends happily.

Of the antiquity of the drama of Ollantay there is now no question.
General Mitre wrote an elaborate paper on its authenticity, raising
several points to prove that it was of modern origin. But every point
he raised has been satisfactorily refuted. At the same time there are
many other points, some of them referred to by Zegarra, which establish
the antiquity of the drama beyond any doubt. The antiquity of the name
Ollantay-tampu, applied to the fortress in memory of the drama, is
proved by its use in the narratives of Molina (1560) and of
Salcamayhua.

An able review of the literature connected with the drama of Ollantay
was written by Don E. Larrabure y Unanue, the present Vice-President of
Peru, who considers that Ollantay would make a good acting play with
magnificent scenic effects.