MS. TEXTS.

1. The original text of Valdez. In 1853 the property of Don Narciso
Cuentas of Tinta, heir of Dr. Valdez.

2. The Justiniani text. In 1853 at Laris. Copy of the Valdez text.

3. Markham’s copy of the Justiniani text (printed 1871).

4. Rosas copy of the Justiniani text.

5. Copy in the convent of San Domingo at Cuzco (the Dominican text).

6. Von Tschudi’s copy of the Dominican text (printed 1853).

7. Text of Zegarra (printed 1878).

8. Second text of von Tschudi.

9. Text of Spilsbury.

10. Text of Sahuaraura _penes_ Dr. Gonzalez de la Rosa.

There is light thrown upon the name _Ollantay_ by the evidence taken
during the journey of the Viceroy Toledo from Jauja to Cuzco, from
November 1570 to March 1571. He wanted information respecting the
origin of the Inca government, and 200 witnesses were examined, the
parentage or lineage of each witness being recorded. Among these we
find six witnesses of the _Antasayac ayllu. Sayac_ means a station or
division, _Anta_is a small town near Cuzco. The names of the six _Anta_
witnesses were,

ANCAILLO; USCA; HUACRO; MANCOY; AUCA PURI; ULLANTAY;
Besides ANTONIO PACROTRICA and PUNICU PAUCAR, Chiefs of _Anta_.

We thus find that the name of _Ollantay_ belonged to _Anta_. Now the
Incas were under great obligations to the chief of Anta, for that chief
had rescued the eldest son of _Inca Rocca_ from the chief of
_Ayamarca_, and had restored him to his father. For this great service
the chief of _Anta_ was declared to be a noble of the highest rank and
cousin to the Inca family. Moreover, the daughter of the _Anta_ chief
was married to the _Inca Uira-cocha_, and was the mother of Pachacuti.
Assuming, as seems probable, that _Ollantay_ was a son of the chief of
Anta, he would be a cousin of the Inca, and of very high rank, though
not an agnate of the reigning family. This, I take it, is what is
intended. _Pachacuti_ desired to raise his family high above all
others, and that, consequently, there should be no marriages with
subjects even of the highest rank; and his excessive severity on the
transgression of his rule by his daughter is thus explained.

OLLANTAY

ACTS AND SCENES

ACT 1.

Sc. 1.—Open space near Cuzco.
Ollantay, Piqui Chaqui, Uillac Uma.

Sc. 2.—Hall in the Colcampata.
Anahuarqui, Cusi Coyllur, Inca Pachacuti, Boys and Girls, Singers.

Sc. 3.—Hall in the Inca’s palace.
Pachacuti, Rumi-ñaui, Ollantay.

Sc. 4.—Height above Cuzco.
Ollantay, Piqui Chaqui, Unseen Singer.

Sc. 5.—Hall in the Inca’s palace.
Pachacuti, Rumi-ñaui, and a Chasqui.

ACT II.

Sc. 1.—Ollantay-tampu Hall.
Ollantay, Urco Huaranca, Hanco Huayllu, People and Soldiers.

Sc. 2.—A wild place in the mountains.
Rumi-ñaui’s soliloquy.

Sc. 3.—Gardens of the Virgins.
Yma Sumac, Pitu Salla, Mama Ccacca.

ACT III.

Sc. 1.—Pampa Maroni at Cuzco.
Uillac Uma and Piqui Chaqui.

Sc. 2.—Palace of Tupac Yupanqui.
Tupac Yupanqui, Uillac Uma, Rumi-ñaui.

Sc. 3.—Ollantay-tampu, Terrace.
Rumi-ñaui, Ollantay, Guards.

Sc. 4.—House of Virgins, Corridor.
Yma Sumac, Pitu Salla.

Sc. 5.—House of Virgins, Garden.
Yma Sumac, Pitu Salla, Cusi Coyllur.

Sc. 6.—Palace of Tupac Yupanqui.
Tupac Yupanqui, Uillac Uma, a Chasqui, Rumi-ñaui, Ollantay, Urco
Huaranca, Hanco Huayllu, Piqui Chaqui, Chiefs and Guards, then Yma
Sumac.

Sc. 7.—House of Virgins, Garden.
All of Scene 6, and Mama Ccacca, Cusi Coyllur, Pitu Salla.

SCENE

In Cuzco and its environs, and Ollantay-tampu