CHAPTER II.
THE FIGHT AT KATSUURA .

     As it grew light they saw several of the red banners of the Heike flutteri ng in the breeze.
"Now listen," said Yoshitsune, " the best way we can proceed is this. If we disembark our horses
when we are close to the shore we shall only be a mark for the enemy's arrows, so while we are
still at some distance, heel the ships and put  the horses overboard and let them swim tethered to
the ships. As soon as their feet touch ground and the water is shallow enough to ride, get into the
saddle and gallop to shore." Though five ships had stores and weapons on board, they had also
found room  for fifty horses. So, according to the Hōgwan's orders they put the horses overboard
when they were some little distance from the shore, and when the water was shallow enough
they sprang on to their backs, and as Yoshitsune rode up on to the shore at the head of his fifty
horsemen with loud shouts of triumph, a band of some hundred horse of the enemy, who were
waiting on the shore, did not stay to meet their onset, but retired about two cho inland.

     Then, when his men and horses had rested a while on the shore to get their breath, Yoshitsune
said to Ise Saburō Yoshimori : "There is one of those horsemen who looks important. Go and
fetch him here, for I have some things I want to ask him." In obedience to the Hōgwan's
command Yoshimori rode off alone into the midst of the hundred horsemen of the  enemy, and
what he said I know not, but he soon came back bringing with him as his prisoner a man of about
forty, clad in armour laced with black leather, who had removed his helmet and loosened his
bowstring in submission. "Who are you ? " asked the Hōgw an, to which the warrior replied: "
Hanzai -no-KondōRoku Chikaie of this province." "Well, whoever he may be keep your eye on
him, men, and don't let him take off his

[p. 226]

armour, for he will be a good guide to Yashima ; if he tries to run away, sho ot him." Then,
addressing Kondō Roku he asked him the name of the place where they were. "It is called
Katsuura," he replied. "Oh, no flattery;" said the Hōgwan, laughing. "It is certainly called
Katsuura," declared the warrior, "the servants may pronounce  it in their dialect as „Katsura,‟ but it
is written with the two characters, „Katsu,‟ (victory) and „Ura,‟ (shore)." Yoshitsune was highly
delighted at this good omen. "Listen to that, my lords," he cried. "Is it not lucky that when I start
on a campaign I should land at Katsuura ? And now are there any of the supporters of the Heike
round here ? " " There is Sakurama -no-suke Yoshitō, the younger brother of Awa -no-Mimbu
Shigeyoshi," replied Kondō. " Well, then let us go and kick him out of our way." And taking the
best thirty of the men and horses of the hundred men of Kondō's band, he added them to hi s own
force and rode off to attack Yoshitō's castle. When they arrived in front of this fortress they
found that it had a swamp on three sides and a moat on the other. Shouting their war -cry, they
made a vigorous attack on the moat side, whereupon the sold iers within shot at them as fast as
they could draw their bows; but the Genji paid no heed to them, pushing on across the moat
with their neck -plates sloped to ward off the shafts, and attacking with loud shouts, so that

Yoshitō, thinking further resistanc e of no avail, after leaving his retainers behind to hold out as
long as they could, jumped upon a fleet horse that he had, and was fortunate enough to be able to
make his escape. The Genji took the heads of some twenty of the defenders who were thus left
behind, after which they held a celebration in honour of the God of War, cheering loudly in their
joy at such an auspicious inauguration of their campaign.



[p. 227 ]