CHAPTER XVII.
THE ACCESSION FESTIVAL.

On the twenty -eighth day of the same month there was another appointment of officials at
Miyako, and Kurō Hōgwan Yoshitsune was promoted to be Go -i-no-Jō, being then known as
Kurō Taiyū -no-Hōgwan. And so the tenth month began, and at Yashima the wind blew  strongly
so that the waves rolled up high on the beach, wherefore no army was able to attack it.
Merchants too came but seldom, so there was little communication with the Capital. The sky
was overcast and hail fell, so that all were gloomy and dispirited.  Now as the Daijōe, or Accession
Festival, was to be held in the Capital, on the third day of the tenth month the new Emperor
went in procession for the Ceremony of Purification, Tokudaiji Dono acting as Naiben. On the
occasion of the same ceremony being p erformed two years before for the Emperor Antoku, now
in Yashima, the Heike Naidaijin Munernori Kyo had officiated, and the stateliness with which he
walked behind the Dragen Banner, and the harmony with which he wore his robes, the set of his
Kammuri with  his long sleeves, down to the skirts of his Hakama, was most magnificent. And
what could have been finer than the dignity of the Imperial Guard of the Konoe -tsukasa, under
the command of  Sammi -no-Chūjō Tomomori and Tō -no-Chūjō Shigehira, as they manned the
traces of the Imperial Car ? On this occasion Kurō Taiyū -no-Hogwan Yoshitsune commanded
them, and though by comparison with Kiso Yoshinaka he was quite an accomplished Courtier,
yet he was far inferior to the dregs of the Heike.

On the eighteenth day the Daijōe Festival was celebrated, but in form only ; for, compared with
the periods of Ji -shō and Yō -wa, when Takakura Tennō was on the Throne, the farmers and
people of the present era w ere so harassed and destroyed by both the Heike and Genji, that they
could neither sow their seed nor reap their harvest, so how was it

[p. 220]

possible to celebrate such a great festival in more than a formal way?

Now if the Tai -Shōgun Noriyori had continued to prosecute his attack on the Heike, he could
have easily destroyed them, but instead of that he remained with his army at Murotsu and
Takasago, amusing himself with a lot of courtesans and harlots that he had got together, and
wasting the resou rces of the country as well as troubling the people to no small extent; and
though there were many lords of the East Country with him, both great and small, as he was in
supreme command they could do nothing. And in this way the year ended.

VOLUME XI.