CHAPTER XV.
KOREMORI RENOUNCES THE WORLD.

"I am forever undecided, like the birds on the snowy peaks of India that are always crying, "to -day
we will build our nest, or to -morrow " ; declared Koremor i, weeping. Tanned by the salt breezes,
and wasted by continual anxiety, he no longer looked like his former self, but even now he was
far more comely than most men.

That night he return -d to the cell of Takiguchi Nyūdō, and there they talked of many thin gs both
past and present. As the night grew on and he watched the deportment of the Nyūdō he
perceived that he was indeed as it were polishing the jewel -6f Truth on the floor of profound
faith, and at the boom of the bell at the Hour of the Tiger, (4. a.m. ) he came to understand the
unreality of this world of illusion. Early the next morning he called Chigaku Shonin of Tozen -in
and intimated to him that he wished to become a monk. He also summoned Yosōbyoye
Shigekage and Ishidō Maru, and addressed them thus : "As for me I am overwhelmed by
unspeakable anxieties, and my way has become straitened so that I cannot escape, but whatever
may become of me there is no need for you to throw away your lives. Many others are still living,
so after I have met my fate, do  you make haste to the Capital and help them, both cherishing my
wife and children, and praying for my happier rebirth." On hearing this the two were for a while
choked by emotion so that they could utter no word, but by and by Shigekage controlled his
feelings and said . "At the time of the rebellion of Heiji my father

[p. 201]

Yosozaemon Kageyasu followed our lord Shigemori, and at Nijō Horikawa engaged Kamada
Hyoye and fell by the hand of Akugenda. I also might have done some such deed, but at that t ime
I was hardly two years old and so remember nothing of it. When I was seven years old my
mother followed my father, and I was left alone with none to care for me, when your late father
took compassion on me, saying that, as I was the son of one who had given his life for him, I
should always be brought up in his house; and so, when I was nine years old, on the same night as
you performed Gempuku, I also, to my great pride, was permitted to bind up my hair. As the
character „mori‟ is the sign of your hous e, your father gave it to you the fifth generation, and to
me he gave the first character of his name, and called me Shigekage, my name before this being
Matsuo. And concerning this my youthful name Matsuo also; on the fiftieth day after my birth
my father  took me in his arms to our lord, and he said: "The name of my house is Komatsu, so let
him be called Matsuo in commemoration." Indeed my father having died thus was a great blessing
to me, for among the other retainers my equals I was perchance even too m uch favoured by our
lord. So, when he was dying, and had already put away all thoughts of the things of this world, he
sent for me and said: "Alas! You regarded me as your father, and I looked on you as a memento of
Kageyasu. At the next appointment of off icials I intended to raise you to be Yukie -no-jō, thus
giving you the same rank as your father bore, but now it is all in vain. But I beg you to be mindful
always to keep on good terms with Koremori." And so I thought it natural to look forward to
giving m y life for yours some time or other, and it seems a great shame to me that you bid me run
away and save myself in this fashion. Many may survive, as you say, but as things now are they
will all be retainers of the Genji. And after you have departed this li fe, what pleasure can I have
in living longer? And if one lived for a thousand, or ten thousand years, would not one have to


[p. 202]

die in the end ? I can see no greater wisdom than this." And so saying he cut off his hair himself,
and then received the tonsure from Takiguchi. When Ishidō Maru saw this, not to be outdone, he
too cut off his hair. He had been with his master since he was eight years old, and his gratitude
was no less than that of Shigekage, so he also had his head shaved by Takiguchi N yūdō. When
Koremori saw what they had done he felt inexpressibly sad, and exclaimed : " Ah ! I had thought
to see my dear ones once again in my former state, but now I have nothing more to hope for."
Andy' so, as it must be, repeating three times the Buddh ist text, "Ryūten sankai -chū, On -ai-funō-
dan, Kion nyū -mu-i, Shinjitsu hō -onsha ", he submitted his head to the tonsure. Both Koremori
and Yosōbyōye were twenty seven years old at this time, while Ishidō Maru was eighteen. By and
by he called the Toneri Ta kesato and said: "You are not to go up to the Capital now. In the end it
can not be concealed, but if my wife were to know what I have done now, no doubt she too
would renounce the world. But go to Yashima and tell them that, as they can see, the world is in
a sad plight, and those who are tired of existence are many; perhaps they may not have heard that
Hidan -no-Chūjō Kiyotsune fell in the Western Provinces, and Bitchū -no-kami Moromori was
killed at Ichi -notani, while my chief regret is that they may think  me recreant on account of my
present behaviour. Moreover, as to this armour of Chinese leather, and the sword Kogarasu Maru,
which have been handed down as heirlooms from Taira Sadamori, and have come to me after
nine generations, in the event of fortune favouring our house again so that we are able to return
to the Capital, you must take them and give them to my son Rokudai." Takesato, overcome by
emotion, could make no reply for some time, but after a while he restrained his feelings

Ryūten,  etc. "Whosoever is continuously reborn in the Three Worlds, it is because he cannot
sever the bonds of affection. Whosoever renounces affection and enters Nirvana, he it is who in
truth requites affection."

[p. 203]

and said: "Not till I have s een what is to befall will I leave my master, but when all is ended I will
go to Yashima." Whereat Koremori allowed him to go with him. Then, taking Takiguchi Nyūdō
with them as a guide to salvation, they set out from Kōya in the guise of Yamabushi, and so on
arrived at Santo in Kii. After worshipping at the (shrine of Prince Fujishiro and others, before the
shrine of Prince Iwashiro to the north of Senri -ga-hama they met seven or eight horsemen in
kariginu. Thinking they might be in danger of being captured , each of the party laid his hand on
his dirk to cut open his belly, when the others, respectfully, dismounting without any trace of
suspicious conduct, made a deep obeisance and passed on. After this encounter, fearing that they
might meet some others who  knew them in these parts, Koremori and his men quickened their
steps and hurried on. The horseman whom they had met was one Yuasa -no-Shichirōhyōye
Munemitsu, the son of Yuasa -no-Gon-no-kami Muneshige, and when his retainers asked him
who it was he replied : "That is Sammi Chūjō Koremori the eldest son of Komatsu -no-Daijin
Shigemori. He has escaped from Yashima somehow or other, and has already shaved his head and
become a monk. Those with him were Yosōbyōye and Ishidō Maru, who have also renounced
the world  with him. I would have stopped and enquired of him how he did, but I thought he
would be embarrassed and so passed .on. How pathetic indeed is his fate! "And he pressed his
sleeve to his face and wept: and of his retainers there was none who did not moist en the sleeve of
his kariginu.