CHAPTER I.

THE CHANGE OF CAPITAL.

It was decided that the Emperor should proceed to Fukuhara on the third day of the s ixth month
of the fourth year of Jisho. People thought that the change of capital was likely to take place
about this time, but as they had not expected that it would be fixed so soon, there was a great
uproar in Kyoto among all classes. Then, after having  been arranged for the day, it was anticipated
by one day and finally settled for the second. At the hour of the Hare (6 a.m.) on the second day
the Imperial Palanquin was in readiness; the Emperor was now three years old and owing to his
tender years coul d not but acquiesce in anything. When the Emperor was a child it was the
custom that the Dowager Empress should go with him in the Palanquin, but this time the
precedent was not followed and the Imperial Nurse Sotsu -no-Suke alone went with him. The
Empress  press Dowager, the Retired Emperor and the former Emperor Takakura also went in the
procession. They were accompanied by the Sessho, the Dajo -daijin and all the Court Nobles, and
all the Heike house headed by the Dajo Nyudo himself went with them. On the following day
they arrived at Fukuhara, and the Emperor proceeded to the country seat of Ike -no-Chunagon
Yorimori, the younger brother of the Nyudo, and took up his abode there. On the fourth day the
Upper Second Rank was conferred on Yorimori as a reward for the services of his house, so that
he was promoted over the head of the Udaisho Yoshi -michi -no-Kyo the son of the Udaijin
Kanezane, this being the first time that the second son of an ordinary subject was, advanced over
the son of the house of a Sessho  Kwampaku. Now the Lay -priest Chancellor, though he had
changed his

[p. 212]

mind and brought back the Ho -o to the Capital from the Toba Palace, enraged by the rebellion of
Prince Takakura, had His Majesty again moved to Fukuhara, and, building a wooden chamber
eighteen square feet , surrounded by a foursquare wooden fence having only one opening in it, he
confined him there, and appointed Harada -no-Taiyu Tanenao to keep guard over him. As it was
by no means easy for anyone to gain access to it the young men nicknamed it "Ro -no-Gosho," or
"The Prison Palace." An abominable and pathetic thing even to hear of. "As for me," quoth the
Ho-o, "I have not the least desire to take any part in the government; all I wish is that I may be
allowed to wander at will fr om temple to temple for consolation." But there seemed altogether
no end to the evil deeds of the Heike; ever since the period Angen they had gone on sending
Courtiers and Ministers into exile or putting them to death: they had banished the Kwampaku
and pu t the Nyudo's son in law in his place, and shut up the Ho -o in the Seinan Detached Palace,
and then they had even dared to put to death Prince Takakura, so that people said that changing
the Capital was the only thing left for them to do. But to change the  Capital was by no means
without precedent. Jimmu Tenno, who was the fourth son of Hiko -nagisa -take-ugaya -fuki-aezu-
no-mikoto [2] the fifth Earthly Deity, and whose mother was Tama -yori-hime the daughter of the

Sea God, being the descendant of twelve genera tions [1] of Gods and the ancestor of a hundred
earthly sovereigns, in the year of the cock in the cycle Kanoto [3] succeeded to the Imperial
Throne in the district of Miyasaki of the province of

[p. 213]

Hyuga, and in the tenth month of the fifty ninth ye ar, the year of the ram of the cycle Tsuchinoto,
subduing the East, he took up his abode in Toyo -ashi-hara-no-naka-tsu-kuni[4], giving it the name
of Yamato. Then, having viewed the mountain of Unebi, he made there his Imperial Capital, and
clearing and su bduing the land of Kashihara, he built therein his Royal Palace, calling it the
Kashihara Palace. Since this age generation after generation of Sovereigns have removed their
Capitals to many sites in various provinces to the number of more than thirty time s, yea even
unto forty. From Jimmu Tenno to Keiko Tenno twelve generations of Sovereigns made their
Capitals in the provinces of Yamato and did not remove to another province, but in the first year
of Seimu Tenno [5] the Capital was changed to the province of Omi and set up in the district of
Shiga. In the second year of Chuai Tenno it was changed to the district of Toyoura in the
province of Nagato, and while the Capital was in this province the Emperor died and his Consort
the Empress Jingo succeeded to th e Throne and reigned as Empress, subduing the lands of Kikai,
Korai and Keitan [6] and receiving the submission of the foreign armies. Then, returning to her
country she gave birth to a Prince in the district of Mikasa in the province of Chikuzen,
wherefore  that place was called Umi -no-Miya, and this Prince, we speak it with reverence, is the
god Hachiman, and when he succeeded to the Throne he was known as Ojin Tenno. Afterwards
the Empress Jingo removed to the province of Yamato and abode in the Palace of Iware -no-
waka -zakura, while Ojin Tenno resided at the Palace of Akari in Karushima in the same province.
In the second year of Nintoku Tenno it was again removed to Namba in the province of Settsu
and the Emperor abode in the Palace of Takatsu. In the seco nd year of Richu

[p. 214]

Tenno the Capital was again changed to the province of Yamato, and established in the destrict
of Tochi. In the first year of Hansei Tenno it was removed to the province of Kawachi and the
Palace was built at Shibagaki. In the f orty second year of Iingyo Tenno the Capital was once more
changed to Yamato and the Palace was established at Asuka in Tobutori. In the twenty first year
of Yuryaku Tenno it was again moved to Asakura in Hase of the same province. In the fifth year
of Kei tei Tenno it was changed to Tsutsuki in the province of Yamashiro, and twelve years
afterwards the Palace was built in Otokuni. In the first year of Senkwa Tenno it was removed
again to Yamato and the Palace was established at Iruno of Hinokuma. In the fir st year of the
Great Reform of Kotoku Tenno it was changed to Nagara in the province of Settsu and the
Emperor dwelt in the Palace of Toyosaki. In the second year of Saimei Tenno it was again
removed to Y amato and the Palace set up at Okamoto. In the sixt h year of Tenchi Tenno the
Capital was made again in t Omi and the Palace built at Otsu. In the first year of Temmu Tenno
it was brought back to Yamato and the Emperor dwelt at the South Palace of Okamoto and it
was called Kiyomihara -no-Mikado. The two Emp erors Jito and Mommu dwelt in the Palace of
Fujiwara. From Gemmyo to Kwonin Tenno seven generations had their abode at Nara, but in the
time of Kwammu Tenno, on the third day of the tenth month of the third year of Enryaku, the
Nara Capital was removed fro m the village of Kasuga to Nagaoka in Yamashiro, and on the first
month of the tenth year the Dainagon Fujiwara -no-Oguromaro, and the Sangi Sadaiben Ki -no-
Kosami, sent the Dai Sozo Genkei and others to inspect the village of Uda in the district of

Kadono i n the same province. Then they both made the following report to the Emperor: "
Having inspected the condition of the locality, we find that it is a most convenient site for the
Capital, for it has on the four quarters suitable place. for the four deities,  Shoryu [7] on

[p. 215]

the left, Byakko on the right, Shujaku in front and Gembu behind." Therefore, having reported
this to the deity Kamo Daimyojin who dwelt in the district of Otagi, on the twenty first  day of
the eleventh month of the thirteenth yea r of Enryaku the Capital was removed from Nagaoka to
this site. And from this time to the present day there have been thirty -two generations of
Sovereigns during a period of three hundred and eighty years.  Since that time many Sovereigns
have changed the Ca pital to many places, but  no other spot is so excellent as this, and Kwammu
Tenno, deeply convinced of this fact, ordered his Ministers and all the able men of the country to
have an image  of clay 8 feet high made to stand perpetually, and to attire it in  helmet and armour
of iron and put a bow and arrows of iron in its hand, adjuring it to protect the capital if in ages to
come any one  should try to change it to any other province. It was buried, the top of
Higashiyama in a standing position looking toward  west, and this mound, whenever any great
event was to   happen, would stir and give forth sounds. It is called Shogun -zuka and is there to
this day. And this Capital he gave the name of Heianjo, that is the city of peace and security. It
ought  to have been  greatly revered by the Heike, for Kwammu Tenno was the sovereign from
whom their house had its origin, and it was very foolish of them, without any good reason, to
remove  to another province the Capital that their Imperial Ancestor so much respected. Once in
the time of of Saga Tenno, his predecessor on the Throne, the Emperor H eijo, persuaded by the
Naishi -no-kami, Fujiwara Kusuri, attempted to change it, but as  the Ministers and Courtiers and
all the people were opposed to  it he did not carry out his plan , so how impious was it of this  Lay-
priest Chancellor, a mere subject, to dare to remove the  Capital that the Sacred Sovereign would
not change. Most  splendid  and auspicious was the Ancient Capital; above it rose Hieizan its
tutelary deity making soft the sunlight; on all sides the great temples ranged their roofs, protecting
it with their holy influence  while around a the farmer s and  townsfolk lived  in

[p. 216]

peaceful security on the Imperial Domains. But now few wagons plough their way over the
desert ed roads, and but an occasional passer -by is to be seen in some lowly equipage. The houses
of the city that formerly jostled each other for room are now daily becoming fewer and more
ruinous; broken up and made into rafts they float down the Kamo and Katsu ragawa, and the
furniture and possessions of their owners are piled up on boats and brought down to Fukuhara.
Ah ! how sad to see the Flower Capital thus turn into an expanse of rice fields. Who wrote them
I know not, but these two stanzas were found affix ed to a pillar of the deserted Palace.

"Here for four hundred years has stood our loved city unchanging,
When we regard it now --  Ah! what a desolate waste."
"Leaving Miyako behind, the city where flowers ever blossom,
Now, on this wind swept shore [8], what are the perils we face?"