CHAPTER XVI.
FUJITO.

Now when the scanty tidings whic h the wife of Koremori had been accustomed to receive from
her husband ceased altogether, for she had always heard from him about once a month, she
continued waiting and hoping, but when the spring lengthened into summer, and there were
rumours that he was  no longer in Yashima, she became exceedingly anxious and sent a messenger
to Yashima to enquire. For some time the messenger did not return, and the summer became
autumn, when, at the end of the seventh month, he carne back at last, and in answer to the
question of his mistress told her that Koremori had started from Yashima at dawn on th e
fifteenth day of the third month with Yosōbyōye and Ishidō Maru, had proceeded to Kōya and
become a monk, after which he had made pilgrimage to Kumano and drowned himself in the
offing of Nachi, which news he had heard from the Toneri Takesato. On hearin g this the lady,
confirmed in her worst fears, cast herself to the ground in an excess of grief, while her young

[p. 214]

children joined the voices of their lamentation to hers. Then the lady who was milk -nurse to her
young son, controlling her emotio n, spoke thus: " This is truly no matter for weeping. To be taken
alive like Hon -sammi Chūjō Shigehira, and exposed to the disgrace of being taken to Miyako and
Kamakura is indeed painful, but it ought to be a source of joy in the midst of your sorrow to
know that our mast er was able to proceed to Koya and renounce the world, and then go to
Kumano, and after making all proper preparations for the next life, to put an end to himself in
the waves of Nachi. Now you must also become a nun and say prayers for the happy
enlighten ment of our departed lord. So the lady forthwith forsook the world and devoted herself
to praying for her deceased husband. But when the news of the death of Koremori was reported
to Yoritomo he was very grieved and said : "Ah, what a pity he did not throw  himself on my
mercy ; I would certainly have spared his life, for it was his father Shigemori alone who, at the
request of the late Ike -no-Zenni, got my sentence remitted to banishment, and in remembrance
of this great kindness I will never deal harshly w ith his children. Since he had become a monk I
would have taken no further steps with regard to him."

Now after the Heike had crossed over to Yashima, they heard that a force of many tens of
thousands of horsemen had arrived at the Capital from the East C ountry to advance against them,
and moreover that the parties of Usuki, Hetsuki and Matsuura had banded together and were
about to cross front Kyūshū to attack them. And as these various rumours cache to their ears
they could not help being dispirited and discouraged ; and all the Court Ladies, from the Consort
of the late Emperor, Kenreimon -in, the Mother of the late Emperor, and the Nii Dono
downwards mourned and lamented together, wondering what fresh evil tidings they would have
to hear, or what new adv ersities they would have to meet, And seeing that so many of the Nobles
had been killed

[p. 215]

and more than half of the best of the retainers also lost at Ichi -no-tani, Awa -no-Mimbu
Shigeyoshi and his brother and the other men of Shikoku remarked ho w their strength had
lessened, but still they thought they would be safe trusting to the mountains and the sea. On the

twenty fifth day of the seventh month the ladies came together saying that it was just a year since
they had left Miyako, and wondering h ow soon the time had passed; and so, bewailing the
vicissitudes they had met, and talking of reminiscences of the past, some gave way to tears and
some to laughter.

On the twenty eighth day the ceremony of accession of the new Emperor was held. This is sa id to
have been the first time that an accession ceremony was held without the imperial Seal, the
Sacred Sword and. the Sacred Mirror, in all the line of eighty two human Emperors who had
reigned until now. On the sixth day of the eighth month an appointme nt of officials was held and
the Tai -Shōgun Kaba -no-Kwanja Noriyori was made Mikawa -no-kami, while Kurō no-Kwanja
Yoshitsune was made Saemon -no-Jō. As he received appointment to the office of Kebiishi -no-
Hangwan by edict of the Hō -ō, he was afterwards know n as Kurō Hōgwan.

It was now autumn, and the wind began to blow in the stalks of the hagi, while the dew hung
heavy on its lower leaves. The resentful hum of the insects, the rustling of the rice -stalks and the
failing of the leaves, all bring sad thought s, and the quickly darkening skies of the short days of
autumn always cause gloomy feelings, so we can well imagine how much more melancholy must
those of the Heike have been. In former days they used to divert themselves with the spring
flowers in the Pal ace gardens, but now they languished under the autumn moon by the shore of
Yashima. While they composed verses to the bright moon, the evenings of Miyako were ever in
their thoughts, and so they consoled themselves with tears in their eyes. The

[p. 216]

following verse made by Sama -no-kami Yukimori well expresses their feelings:
"Though the Palace is in the place where our Sovereign is dwelling,
Yet is Miyako still dearer than ever to me."
Meanwhile the Commander -in-Chief Mikawa -no-kami Noriyori set fo rth on the twelfth day of
the ninth month for the Western Provinces to subdue the Heike. With him also in command
went Ashikaga -no-Kurando Yoshikane, Hōjō no Koshirō Yoshitoki, Sai -in-no-Jikwan Chikayoshi,
and as Commanders of the Samurai, Doi -no-Jirō Sane hira, his son Yataro Tōhira, Miura -no-suke
Yoshizumi, his son Heiroku Yoshimura, Hatakeyama -no-Shoji Shigetada, Hatakeyama no-Nagano -
noSaburo Shigekiyo, Sahara -no-Juro Yoshitsura, Wada -no-Kotaro Yoshimori, Sasaki -no-Saburo
Moritsuna, Tsuchiya -no-Saburo Mun eto, Amano -no-Tonai Tokage, Hiki -no-Tonai Tomomune, I -
liki no -Toshiro Yoshikazu, Yada -no-Shiro Musha Tomoie, Anzei -no-Saburō Akimasu, Ogo -no-
Saburo Sanehide, Nakajono -Toji Ienaga, Ippin -bo Shogen and Tosabo Shoshun. The force under
these leaders numbered a bout thirty thousand horsemen, and they rode out of Miyako and
proceeded as far as Murotsu in Harima.

On the side of the Heike the commanders were Komatsuno -Shin-sammi Chūjōo Sukemori,
Komatsu -no-Shōshō Arimori and Tango -no-Jijū Tadafusa, while as Command ers of the Samurai
were Etchū -no-Jirōhyōye Moritsugu, Kazusa -no-Gorōhyōye Tadamitsu and Akushichihyoye
Kagekiyo, who with about five hundred ships of war rowed out as far as Kojima in Bizen. When
the Genji heard this they also left Mum and took up their po sition at Fujito at Nishikawajid in
the province of Bizen. Thus the two armies were only separated by a distance of twenty -five chō,
and though the Genji were eager to attack, as they had no ships they could do nothing, but had to

remain waiting idly where  they were. On the twenty -fifth day at the Hour of the Dragon some of
the

[p. 217]

more impetuous spirits of the Heike rowed out in small boats and waved their fans at the Genji,
beckoning to them and shouting: "Why do you not come over here? " Now whi le the warriors of
the Genji were wondering what they could do, on the evening of the twenty -fifth day Sasaki -no-
Saburō Moritsuna of Ōmi sought out a native of the place and presenting him with a hitatare, a
wadded silk robe, a short hakama and a silver -mounted Sayamaki, asked him if he could show
him a place where it was possible to cross over to the other side of the sea on horseback.
"Though very few of the people about here know of such a place, I can show you one ", said the
man. " There is a place lik e the shallows of a river, about ten chō wide : at the beginning of the
month it is to the east, and at the end of the month it is to the west, and there you can easily
cross over on horseback." "In that case", said Sasaki, " let us cross over and see." So  both he and
the man stripped naked and crossed over the shallow that the man pointed out, and indeed it was
not very deep. In some places it was up to the knee or waist, and there were some where they
wet their hair, but they swam the deep parts and waded  in the shallow. " From the south ", said
the man, " it is shallower than from the north, but the enemy are lying there with their bows
ready, so it won't do to go any nearer; let us go back again." So Sasaki returned again with the man,
but as he was afra id that he might tell someone about it, or show them the way, as there was no
way of keeping him quiet otherwise, and he wished to be the only one to know about it, he
stabbed him to death on the spot, cut off his head and threw it away.

On the next day, at the Hour of the Dragon (8 a.m.), the Heike rowed out again and repeated
their provocation of the previous day. Then Sasaki -no-Saburō Moritsuna of Omi, attired in a
hitatare with dyed figures, and a suit of armour laced with scarlet, riding a pie -bald wa r-horse
accoutred with a gold -mounted saddle, accompanied only by seven of his family

[p. 218]

retainers, rode out against them by the way that he had just learned. When the Commander
Noriyori perceived this, he called out to stop him, and Doi -no-Jirō Sanehira spurred his horse on
with whip and heel, shouting out: "Ho there! Sasaki Dono, what has taken you that you are so
rash? The General forbids it! Come back at once! "But Sasaki rode on as though he heard nothing,
and Doi, unable to stay him, followe d on after him and crossed also. In some places the water was
up to the horse's chest, in others up to the edge of his harness or his girth, and in some parts it
reached to the middle of the saddle, but by swimming in the deep places and wading in the
shallow at length they got over safely. When Noriyori saw this he shouted out : " Sasaki has got
the better of us! The water is shallow, after him and cross!" And so, at his order, the whole army
of thirty thousand men rode into the water crossed over. The Hei ke on their part, launching all
their ships, drew their bows and shot at them with all their might, but the Genji paid no heed,
sloping the neck -pieces of their helmets to avoid the arrows, and grappling the ships with iron
rakes and bill -hooks, shouting a nd fighting with the utmost fierceness All day long the fight raged,
and when night came on the ships of the Heike were out in the offing, while the Genii had
crossed over to Kojima and landed there to breathe their horses.

The next day the Heike had reti red again to Yashima, and the Genii, though eager to follow them

and renew the battle, were unable to do so on account of their lack of ships. From ancient times
there have been many warriors who have crossed over rivers on horseback, but, however it may
be in India or China I know not, in our country to cross the sea on horseback was regarded as a
very extraordinary feat. Therefore the fief of Kojima in Bizen was given to Sasaki, and the record
of this deed was inscribed in the annals of Yoritomo.