CHAPTER II.
THE IMPERIAL RETURN JOURNEY.

On the twenty -eighth day of the same month the Emperor arrived at Itsukushima and was lodged
in the mansion of the Naiji most beloved by the Lay -priest Chancellor, spending the days there
while the Sutras were chanted and Bugaku dances were performed. At the consummation of the
vow the hierophant Kogen Sojo, ascending the high seat, beat on a gong and cried out the words
of introduction in a loud voice thus: "How awe -inspiring is the will of our Lord, leaving the Nine
Gated Palace to brave the eightfold sea -road to this distant shore!" And both the Emperor and all
his subjects shed tears of joy. Then they went round worshipping at all the shrines in succession,
beginning with the great shri ne of Amida, Fugen and Miroku [1] and the lesser one of Tamonten [2];
going round the mountain five -cho from the great shrine they went to the water -fall shrine of
Nyo-i-rin Kwannon. Then Koken Sojo fastened to the pillar of the Haiden the following verse:

"As with the snow -white cord of the cascade that falleth
from heaven.
So does His Majesty here bind his appeal to the God."

[p. 167]

The shrine official Saiki -no-Kagehiro was promoted to the Lower Fifth Rank, and the Kokushi
Fujiwara -no-Aritsuna to the Lower Fourth, and at the same time permitted to attend the Court
of the Retired Emperor. The Zasshu Sonei was made Hogen. Thus it was hoped that by the
favour of the god the anger of the Nyudo would be calmed.

On the twenty -ninth day the ship was again ma de ready and His Majesty started on his
homeward journey, but as the wind and the waves rose somewhat, they rowed the ship back
again and stopped that day at a place called Gi -no-ura in Itsukushima. Then the Emperor ordered
someone to make a poem expressin g his regret at parting from the Daimyojin, the god of the
island, and Takafusa -no-Shosho composed the following:

"Full of regret at parting, again we return to this haven;
Surely these white waves are as a blessing divine."

About midnight the wind dropp ed and the sea became calm, so they rowed away again. That day
they reached the harbour of Shikina in Bingo.

Here there was a mansion built in the period Oho by the Kokushi Fujiwara Tamenari to
accommodate the Ho -o when he had journeyed that way, and Kiyo mori he had it repaired for the
Emperor's use, but His Majesty did not go there. This being the first of the month of the Hare

(the fourth month) it was the day of the ceremony of Changing Clothes at the Court, and
remembering this they all spoke of the af fairs of the Capital, and as they were singing snatches of
song they caught sight of a deep purple wistaria abloom on a pine branch on the cliff, and the
Emperor, noticing it, ordered someone to go and bring it to him. Thereupon Omiya -no-Dainagon
Takasue -no-Kyo, respectfully receiving the command, bade Sashisho Nakaham -no-Yasusada, who
was rowing in a small boat in front of His Majesty, break it off and bring it. When the Emperor
looked at the wistaria as it grew on the pine branch, he was much affected by

[p. 168]

emotion and asked for a poem to be composed on it, when Takasue -no-Kyo made the following
verse:

 "Full ten centuries long may the life of our Lord be extended;
Ev'n as the Fuji flower clings to the evergreen pine."

On the second day they reac hed Kojima in Bizen. On the fifth day the weather became clear and
the sea calm, so they put forth again, the Imperial vessel going first and the accompanying ships
rowing after. Breasting the head seas that burst in foam like clouds and smoke, the same da y they
reached the port of Yamada in Harima, and from thence His Majesty entered his palanquin and
proceeded to Fukuhara. The sixth day was spent there in visiting various sights, and His Majesty
went and inspected the country seat of Ike -no-Chunagon Yorim ori at Arata. On the next day the
Emperor conferred promotions in rank on Kiyomori's family, to wit, the Nyudo's adopted son
Tamba -no-kami Kiyokuni was given the Upper Fourth Rank, Lower Grade, and his grandson
Echizen -no-Shosho the Lower Fourth Rank, Uppe r Grade. The same day they came to Terai. On
the eighth day all the Courtiers and Nobles came to Toba to meet the Emperor. On the return
journey His Majesty did not go to visit the Ho -o at the Toba Palace, but proceeded straight to the
Nyudo's mansion at N ishi Hachijo. On the twenty -third day of the same month, the Accession
Ceremony of the New Emperor took place. It should have been held in the Daikyoku -den, but as
it had been destroyed by fire a year ago it was not yet rebuilt. Therefore a Council of Cour tiers
was held, and it was suggested that it might be held in the Dajokwan, but Kujo Dono said that
the Dajokwan was only a place that might be called a record office in the case of an ordinary
person's house, and that it ought to be held in the Shishin -den. It was held therefore in the
Shishin -den. Formerly on the eleventh month of the fourth year of Koho, the Accession
Ceremony of Reizei -in was held in the Shishin -den because the

[p. 169]

Emperor caught cold and could not go the Daikyoku -den. As in the case of Go Sanjo -in in Enkyu,
people said that this Accession Ceremony ought to have been held in the Dajokwan, but no one
could do anything in the face of the opinion of Kujo Dono. It was called the Accession of the
Crown Prince, it is true, but it was th e Empress Ken -rei-mon-in who went from the Koki -den to
the Ninju -den and sat on the Throne. All the Heike family were present; only the retainers of the
late Komatsu Dono, who were in retirement owing to the death of their lord the year before, did
not app ear.