CHAPTER V.
THE FIGHT OF NOBUTSURA.

Now on the fifteenth ev ening of the fifth month, as Prince Takakura was gazing at the beauties of
the moon in a cloudy sky, with -no-thought of anything that might happen, a messenger came
post-haste from Gensammi Nyudo with a letter, which his foster brother Rokujo -no-Suke-no-
Daiyu Munenobu at once brought to him. It ran thus: "The plot is already revealed, and you are
to be banished to Tosa: the officials of the Kebiishi have orders to take you, so leave the Palace
quickly and go to Miidera. I myself am shortly coming to the Cap ital." The Prince was dumb -
founded at this news, and at a loss how to act, when one of his samurai who was always in
attendance on him, Chohyoye -no-jo Hasebe Nobutsura by name, spoke out saying: "There is
nothing difficult in that; it is easy to escape in woman's attire." This counsel seemed good, so the
Prince let his hair loose, donned a female costume, and put on his head a wide straw hat such as
the townswomen wear, while Rokujo -no-Suke-no-Daiyu

[p. 175]

Munenobu went with him to carry his umbrella, a nd a youth named Tsuru Maru accompanied
them, carrying some articles in a bag on his head. Thus imitating the appearance of a young
retainer escorting his mistress, they slipped out of the Palace toward the north. Coming to a
rather wide ditch, the Prince leaped across it so lightly that some passers by remarked to one
another: "How strange to see a woman jump a ditch like that." This made the fugitives quicken
their pace and hurry on quickly, fearing to attract more notice. They left Chohyoye -no-Jo Hasebe
Nobutsura behind as warden of the Palace, and he at once proceeded to hide the few women of
the establishment who remained, and to put away everything unseemly that there might be,
when he happened to notice his master's much prized flute called 'Koeda,' t hat the Prince had
forgotten in his hurry and left it by his pillow in his own apartment, a treasure that he would
wish to recover even if he had to come back for it. "Ah," exclaimed Nobutsura, "what a pity! It is
my master's favourite flute." And running after them, he came up with them within five cho. The
Prince, overjoyed at having it again, exclaimed: "When I die, see that you put this flute in my
coffin." And then added: "Pray come along with us now." But Nobutsura replied: "When the
officials come to  the Palace they must not find it abandoned. Moreover everyone knows that I am
in the Palace, and if they did not find me there to -night they would know that you had just now
escaped, and that must not be. A samurai must live up to his reputation even in t he smallest
matters. So I will go back and deceive the officials; then I will eat my way out through them and
rejoin my master." So he returned alone. That night be girded on under a light blue 'kariginu' a
body armour, or 'Haramaki' of bright green colour  that grew fainter towards the bottom, and an
'Efu tachi,' and then, opening the great gate of the Palace that fronted on Sanjo and the smaller
one that fronted on Takakura, he awaited the Heike officers. As he expected, about the hour of

the Rat (12 p.m.) . Gendaiyu -no-Hangwan

[p. 176]

Kanetsuna and Deiva -no-Hangwan Mitsunaga, with about three hundred men, came riding up to
the gate. Gendaiyuno Hangwan, knowing the circumstances, stayed outside the gate, but Dewano
Hangwan rode through the gate and stoppe d in the courtyard, crying out with aloud voice: "The
Prince's plot is already known; by order of the Betto of the Kebiishi we have now come to send
him into exile to Tosa. I pray you come forth!" Then Nobutsura, standing above on the floor of
the Palace, replied: "His Highness is not here: he has gone to visit some shrine. What is all this?
Pray give a fuller explanation." "Why is he not here?" replied Dewa -no-Hangwan, "and where has
he gone? Here, men, enter and search the Palace!" "Ho!" returned Nobutsun a, "what rudeness is
this of an insolent official? To enter the gate on horseback is strange conduct indeed, but to order
your men to search the Palace as well, what do you call such behaviour? I am Chohyoye -no-jo
Hasebe Nobutsura. Come on at your peril!" Then a strong and brave man named Kanetake,
unsheathing his sword, glared at Nobutsuna and sprang up on to the floor of the Palace, seeing
which fourteen or fifteen of his companions followed him. Then Nobutsura, stripping off his
'kariginu,' drew his swor d, which, though but a light Eifu -tachi [3], was a blade of fine make and
temper, and flourished it. His opponent carried a huge blade and a great halberd, but Nobutsura
at once cut him down with his slender weapon so that he fell suddenly back into the cou rtyard as
a leaf is blown down by a puff of wind. It was the fifteenth evening of the fifth month, and the
moon shone out brightly in the rifts of the clouds. The Palace buildings were quite unknown to
the Heike soldiers, whereas Nobutsura knew every inch of them, so he struck them down at his
pleasure, now springing out on to the verandah to cleave one through, now driving another into a
recess to cut him down, punctuating his blows with the fierce

[p. 177]

shouts of the swordsman. "How dare you treat t hus the bearers of an official order?" exclaimed
one of the intruders. "Who talks of official orders," returned Nobutsura springing back and setting
his bent sword under his foot to straighten it, after which he again slew some fifteen or sixteen
stout men  at arms in the courtyard. But three inches had now been broken off his sword, so
throwing it away, he felt for his dirk to cut open his belly. His dirk, however, had fallen from his
belt in the fight, so opening the front gate he made to flee from the pos tern fronting on Takakura.
One of the Heike warriors, however, sprang forward to intercept him with a huge halberd.
Nobutsura attempted to jump over it, but missing his leap, the halberd caught between his legs
so that he fell to the ground, when, bold as he was, he was overpowered by the weight of
numbers and secured alive. Then bursting in, they searched the Palace, but finding that the Prince
had escaped, they bound Nobutsura and took him away to Rokuhara. There Munemorino Kyo,
standing on the verandah, had him brought into the courtyard beneath, and passed sentence;
"Because you have attacked the officials of the Kebiishi, and paid -no-heed to a government order,
and moreover have killed and wounded many of our men, you shall be tortured until you give

full information, and then taken away to the river bed and beheaded." Then that bold and fearless
warrior Nobutsura stood erect and laughed in Munemori's face. "So far I have paid -no-heed," said
he, "to people who came spying round the Palace every night, th inking they were of no
importance, but when at midnight two or three hundred armed men appeared, and on my
enquiring what they wanted, replied that they had an official order, I remembered that I had
constantly heard that b ands of robbers and thieves and p irates of all kinds are accustomed to say
that they are the train of a Courtier or that they have an official order, so I asked what official
order it was, and attacked them at once: and if I had been in full armour and had a good heavy
sword, not one of t hese precious officials should have

[p. 178]

come back here alive. Moreover when the Prince my master will return I do not know, and if I
knew, a samurai does not reveal what he has once determined to conceal, whatever torture he
may be made to suffer." When he had finished speaking, all the Heike men at arms who were
ranged round him exclaimed, "Ah! a stout fellow indeed. Truly he is a match for a thousand."
And as they were discussing him one said: "This is not the first famous combat he has fought: las t
year at a certain place he pursued six robbers single -handed, whom the Palace guard could not
arrest, and slew four of them at Nijo Horikawa, taking the other two alive, and it was for this
bold deed that he was made Chohyoye -no-Jo. What a pity to put su ch a man to death. As
therefore they were loath to do him to death, whatever the Nyudo might think, they spared his
life and he was banished to Hino in the land of Hoki. Afterwards, when the Heike had been
overthrown and the Genji had come to their own, he  went down to the Eastern Country, and on
his relating the whole affair to Kajiwara Heizo Kagetoki, Yoritomo praised him highly and
rewarded him with a fief in Noto.