CHAPTER IV.
THE SIX PATHS. *


" Since you have renounced the world," said Awa -no-Naiji, " what does it matter about your
appearance ? I pray you come and greet His Majesty, for he will soon return." So t he former
Empress repressed her emotion and entered her cell, "Before my window in prayer I await the
coming of Amida ; and at my lowly door I look for the Saviour of mankind ; but Your Majesty's
gracious visit I did not expect," she said, and the Ho -o, looking upon her, thus replied : " Even
those who live for eighty thousand kalpas in the highest heaven of the World of Formlessness
must surely die, and the denizens of the Six Celestial Worlds of Desire cannot escape the Five
Changes. The wondrous bliss of  the city of delight of the heavens of Indra, and the passionless
serenity of the high pavilions of the mid -Dyana world of the heavens of Brahma, even these, like
the rewards of dreamland or the pleasures of a vision, eternally change and dissolve, turning  and
revolving like the wheels of a chariot. And since the Celestial Beings are subject to the Five
Changes, how shall men escape ? But I hope that you still hear tidings from your old
acquaintances, for you must think much of old times." " There are none from whom I hear
anything now," replied the Empress, " except from the wives of Nobutaka and of Takafusa, who
continually send me help ; but in former days I never even dreamed of being assisted by people
such as they." And as she spoke het tears flowed, a nd her lady companions also hid their faces in
their sleeves.

After a while she controlled her emotion and continued : "Though I need not say that being
reduced to such a condition has been a great grief to me, yet I feel gladness on account of my
enlight enment in the next world. By the help of S'akya Muni, reverently relying on the Great
Vow of Amida, I may
------------
*Six Paths. Hell, Pretas, Beasts, Asuras, Men and Heaven.

page 318

escape the troubles of the Five Hindrances and the Three Obediences,  and in this latter age purify
the Six Senses, so that, fixing my hopes on the highest heaven, and fervently praying for the
enlightenment of our whole family, I may await the coming of the Saving Host. But the thing that
I can never forget is the image of  the late Emperor, and even though I try to bear his loss with
patience, I cannot, for truly there is nothing that wrings the heart like parental affection, And so I
pass both day and night in ceaseless prayer for his enlightenment, and this will be my gui de also in
the True Way." " Verily this our Empire is but a petty country," answered the Ho -o," but since
by observance of the Ten Virtues he became its Emperor, everything must be in accordance with
his will. And though all who are born in an age when the  Law of Buddha has been widely spread,
if they have the desire to practise the Law, without doubt will be hereafter reborn in bliss, yet
when I regard your present condition, though it is in accordance with the vanity of human affairs,
I cannot but be over come with grief." And as he spoke His Majesty burst into tears. " Born the
daughter of the Taira Chancellor," continued the former Empress, " and having become the

mother of the Emperor, the whole Empire lay in the hollow of my hand. Clad in my varied robe s
of state, from the New Year Festival to the Year End Ceremonies I was surrounded by the Great
Ministers of State and the Courtiers in brilliant throng, even as above the clouds the Six Heavens
of Desire and the Four Dhyana  Heavens are encircled by eight myriads of lesser heavens.
Dwelling in the Seiryoden and the Shishinden behind the Jewel Curtain, I gladdened my eyes in
spring with the blossoms of the Imperial Cherry Tree. In the hot months of summer I refreshed
myself wi th crystal streams, and in the autumn I viewed the moon in the midst of my ladies. In
the cold nights of winter soft bed -quilts were heaped up to warm me, and I thought that I had
only to wish for the draught of immortality, and the magic potion of eternal  life and youth
brought from Horai the Elysian isle, for it to be immediately

page 319

forthcoming. So full was my life of joy and happiness, both by day and by night, that perchance
even in heaven nothing could surpass it.

Then in the autumn of Ju -ei, when Yoshinaka came up to attack us, after setting fire to their
ancient homes, our family fled from the Capital where they had lived so long, looking sadly back
at the Imperial Palace. Going down to the shore of Suma and Akashi, of which I before knew
only the name, we set sail on the boundless ocean, and so from island to island and from shore to
shore, our sleeves wet with the salt spray by day, and the cry of the sea -birds mingling with our
sobs by night, we rowed about seeking some favou rable refuge, b ut never forgetting our ancient
home. Left thus with none to help us, the anguish of the Five Changes of our dissolution came
upon us. We speak of the ' Pain of the Grief of Parting' and the ' Pain of the Regret of Meeting,'
and both of these in one I have  known to the full. For when we came to Dazaifu in the island of
Kyushu, thinking that there we might find safety for a while, Koreyoshi drove us out again, so
that we could find no rest for our foot throughout all the length and breadth of the land. And s o
the next autumn arrived, and we who had always been wont to view the moon from the sacred
enclosure of the Nine -fold Palace, now spent our nights watching it on the eight -fold sea -road.
And in the tenth month, seeing that the Genji had driven us from the  Capital, and we had been
expelled from Kyushu by Koreyoshi, so that we were like a fish in a net having no place whither
to escape, the Chujo Kiyomune, hating to live any longer, threw himself into the sea in despair.
And this was but the beginning of our  afflictions. Tossing on the waves by day, and spending our
sleepless nights in the ships, we had no tribute of rice with which to prepare the Imperial Food,
and sometimes, when we wished to prepare it, we had no water with which to do so. Afloat on
the va st ocean we could not drink its salt water, and thus we underwent all the suffering of the
Preta world. Then, after we had won two fights at Muroyama and

page 320

Mizushima, the spirits of our family were revived, and building a fortress at Ichi -no-tani in the
province of Settsu, all the Courtiers and Nobles doffed their court robes and clad themselves in
armour for the fight, and the din of battle was incessant both by day and night, even like unto the
battle of the Asuras with Indra and his Devas. Then in our flight after the defeat at Ichino -tani,
parents were left behind by their children and wives separated from their husbands, and if we
saw a fishing boat in the offing we trembled lest it should be a ship of the enemy, while a flock of
white herons i n the pine -trees threw us into panic lest it should be the white flag of the Genji.
And at last, when in the fight at Moji, Akama and Dan -no-ura she saw that our doom was sealed,

the Nii -no-Ama weeping exclaimed : " Now it seems our last hour has come, and  in this fight
there is little hope of any of the men surviving. Even if any of our distant relations are left alive
they will scarcely be able to perform the services for our departed spirits, but from of old time it
has been the custom to spare the women , so you must live to pray for the spirit of the Emperor,
and I beg you also to say a prayer for my future salvation." And as in a dream we listened to her
words, of a sudden a great wind blew, and the drifting mist came down upon us, so that the
hearts of  the warriors were confounded, and in the face of heaven they could do nothing. Then, as
the Nii -no-Ama took the Emperor into her arms and went to the gunwale of the vessel, with a
look of anxiety on his face he enquired of her : " Where is it that you are  going to take me, Ama -
ze ? " Turning to her youthful Sovereign with tears streaming down her cheeks, she answered : "
Perchance Our Lord does not know it, but though through the merit of the Ten Virtues practised
in former lives you have been reborn to th e. Imperial Throne in this world, yet, by the power of
some evil karma, destiny now claims you. So now turn to the east, and bid farewell to the deity of
the Great Shrine of Ise, and then to the west, and say the Nembutsu, that Amida Buddha and the
Holy On es may come to welcome you to the Pure Western

page 321

Land. This land is called small as a grain of millet, but yet is it now but a vale of misery. There is a
Pure Land of happiness beneath the waves, another Capital where no sorrow in Thither it is th at
I am taking Our Lord. " And thus comforting him, and binding his long hair up in his dove -
coloured robe, blinded with tears the child -Sovereign put his beautiful little hands together, and
turned first to the east to say farewell to the deity of Ise and  to Sho -Hachimangu, and then to the
west and repeated the Nembutsu, after which the Nii -no-Ama, holding him tightly in her arms,
leaped with her Sovereign into the sea. My eyes darkened and my heart stood still, and it is a
thing I can never forget or bear  to think of. And at that moment from all those who still lived
there went up so great and terrible a cry, that the shrieks of all the damned burning amid the
hottest hell of Avichi could not exceed it. And so, after being roughly dragged out of the sea by
the soldiers, as I was being sent back again to the Capital, I came to the shore of Akashi in the
province of Harima. And as I chanced to fall asleep there for a space, I saw in a dream as it were
our former Palace, but of greater and more surpassing beau ty, and there sat our Former Emperor
with all the Courtiers and Nobles of our house ranged about him in all their ceremonial grace and
dignity ; such a sight as I had not seen since we left our ancient Capital. And when I asked where
this place might be, t he Nii -no-Ama answered and said : " This is called Ryugu, the Palace of the
Dragon King of the sea." " Ah, how blessed ! " I replied, " and is it then a land where is no more
sorrow ? " " In the" Ryu -chiku Kyo * you may read," she said, " and never neglect to pray fervently
for our future happiness." And as she said this I awoke, and since that time I have done nothing
but read the Sutras and say the prayers for their future bliss. And all this, I think, is nothing else
but the Six Paths." " In China," said the Ho -o,
-----------
*Ryu-chiku -kyo. This reference is obscure.
Nichizo Shonin . A famous Shingon priest who lived in the period En -ki.
Genzo Sanzo . The Chinese priest Hiuen Tsiang.

page 322

" *Genzo Sanzo saw the Six Paths before he received enlighten ment, and in this country *Nichizo
Shonin, by the power of Zo -o Gongen *, is said to have seen them. That you have been permitted
to have gazed on them with mortal eyes is a blessing indeed."