CHAPTER VI.

ENEMIES OF THE MIKADO.

Thus were the Heike soon rudely awakened from their plea sant diversion of removing the capital.
The younger among  the Nobles and Courtiers exclaimed with apprehension: "Ah it seems that
some crisis is at hand, let us then prepare to fight at once." Now at this time Hatakeyama Shoji
Shigeyoshi, Koyamada -no-Betto  Arishige and Utsu -no-miya-no-Saemon Tomotsuna were in the
capital taking their turn as Imperial Guard, and Hatakeyama said: "We all know that Hojo is
friendly with Yoritomo and likely to plot with him, but it is difficult to think that the others
have thu s opposed the Throne." Whereat many others agreed with him, though there were others
who dissented, murmuring: "No, no, a great crisis is upon us." The Lay priest Chancellor on his
part flew into a great rage: "This Yoritomo," he exclaimed, "ought to have been executed when
his father Yoshitomo rebelled in the twelfth month of the first year of Heiji, but the urgent
entreaties of the late Ike -no-prevailed and hr was sent into exile. Now he is so far

[p. 226]

wanting in any gratitude as to draw his bow aga inst our house. How can the gods and the Three
Sacred Things pardon such iniquity? Surely he will suffer the punishment of heaven."

Now the first example of an opponent of the Throne was in the fourth year of the reign of Iware
Hiko -no-Mikoto (Jimmu Tenno ), when in Takao village in the district of Nagusa in the province
of Kishu there was a certain spider, long of legs and short of body, whose strength was greater
than that of the a strongest man, that wrought great damage to the people. The Imperial Army
went forth to meet it, and when they had read the Imperial Decree, made a net of wild vines
with which they caught it and killed it. Since that time the following persons have attempted
treacherously to overthrow the Imperial Authority. Oishi -no-Yamamaru, Prince Oyama,
Yamada -no-Ishikawa, the Minister Moriya, Soga -no-Iruka, Otomo -no-Matori, Bunya -no-Miyada,
Tachibana -no-Hayanari, Hikami -no-Kawatsugi, the Imperial Prince Iyo, Dazai -no-Shoni,
Fujiwara -no-Hirotsugu, Erni -no-0shikatsu, Prince Sahara, Igami -no-Hirokimi, Fujiwara -no-
Nakanari, Taira -no-Masakado, Fujiwara -no-Sumitomo, Abe -no-Sadato, Muneto, the former
Tsushima -no-kami Minamoto -no-Yoshichika, Akusafu, and Akuemon -no-kami, more than
twenty in all, and of all these there was not one that attained his d esire, but all of them left their
carcasses on the mountain or plain, while their heads were exposed on the public scaffold. In the
present generation the Throne is held in light esteem, but in former days when the Imperial
Decree was read withered herbs a nd trees would straightway put forth flowers and fruit, and the
birds of the air would obey. Not so very long ago, when the Mikado of the Engi era (Daigo
Tenno), was proceeding to Shinzen -en, a heron was seen by the brink of a pond, and the Emperor
ordered  an attendant of the sixth rank to catch it. The Courtier wondered how he was to do so,
but as it was the Imperial Mandate, he went towards it, when the heron at once prepared to fly
away. "The Mikado Commands," cried the Courtier, whereupon the bird crouc hed down and did
not

[p. 227]


move, so that he caught it and brought it to the Emperor. "How admirable indeed," said His
Majesty, "that this heron should thus obey the Imperial Behest; let the fifth rank be hereby
conferred upon it." Moreover the Emperor  with his own hand bound round its neck a tablet
declaring that from that day it should be promoted to be the King of the herons, after which it
was set free. This heron was not; intended to be taken to make sport for His Majesty, but to
show the power of the Imperial Authority.