CHAPTER IX.
YO KOBUE.

Now though the body of Komatsu -no-Sammi Chūjō Koremori was in Yashima, yet his heart was
ever in Miyako,  for never for a moment was his mind free from anxiety about his wife and little
ones whom he had left in the Capital. Unable at last to bear the suspense, on the fifteenth day of
the third month of the third year of ju -ei, he slipped out of his house at Y ashima at dawn and
departed, accompanied by Yosōhyōye Shigekage, his page Ishido Maru, and a Toneri named
Takesato, who was included because he understood ships. With these three he took ship at Yuki -
noura in the province of Awa, and after passing by the offing of Naruto, they shaped their course
towards Kii, passing on their way the shrines of Tamatsu -shima Myōjin, (who is worshipped as
the god of Waka, Fukiage and Sotōri -hime), Nichizen and Kokken, and arriving at last at Minato
in Kii. Thence he thought  to go by the hills to Miyako and meet his wife and children, but when
he remembered how his uncle the Chūjō Shigehira had been taken alive, and exposed to the
shame of being carried thus to Miyako and Kamakura, he feared to heap shame on his father's
gave if he also were taken, and though his feelings naturally dragged him in that direction, he
fought them down and proceeded to Kōya.

Now in Kōya there was a certain saintly priest whom he had formerly known: He had been a
retainer of Komatsu Dono, and his name was Saito Takiguchi Tokiyori, the son of Saitō Saemon
Mochiyori. When he was thirteen years of age he had gone to the Palace to take up his duties, and
there he fell deeply in love with a girl named Yokobue, a maid -in-waiting on the Imperial
Consort K enreimon -in. When his father heard of this he remonstrated with him very strongly, for
he had intended that his son should make a good match through which he might be able to
obtain a good position at Court. Thereupon Takiguchi exclaimed: In ancient times in China

[p. 196]

there lived one named Seō -bo who is alive no longer, and Tōbō -saku also is now but a name and
nothing more. Fleeting are the limits of youth and age; for as a flash of fire they pass and are gone.
If we speak of long life, it is but seventy or eighty ye ars, and of these the prince of life is no more
than twenty. So in this world of dreams and illusions why be burdened with one we dislike, even
for a moment? But if I look on the one I love it is disobedience to my father. By this lesson I will
learn virtu e. I will renounce this passing world and enter the way of Buddha." And at the age of
nineteen he shaved his head and entered the temple of Ojo -in in Saga. When Yokobue heard this,
she said: " That he should give me up is quite natural, but why be so fooli sh as to become a monk?
And if he meant to retire from the world, why did he not first come and tell me of it? So thinking
that however strong his resolve might be, he might have come and expressed his regret, she left
the city one evening and set off for Saga in anxious mood.

It was now past the tenth day of the second month, and the spring breeze of Umezu wafted her
the grateful scent of many blossoms, while the moon, half -hidden by the drifting mist, reflected

itself dimly in the Ōigawa, but how sad and troubled was her heart as she searched for her lover.
All she had heard was the name of the temple, but she knew not in what part of it he was living,
and so she wandered about distractedly hither and thither, trying to find it in g reat distress. Then
she heard proceeding from a rough and poor cell the voice of someone reciting the Sutras, and she
knew it for the voice of Takiguchi Nyūdō. So she told the maid who was with her to go and take
this message: " Even though you have thus c hanged your condition, I, Yokobue have come so far
to see you once more." Takiguchi was greatly amazed and agitated to hear this, and peeping
through a hole in the shoji, saw her standing outside, the skirts of her garments soaked with dew,
and her sleeves  wet with tears. Her face had grown thinner in

[p. 197]

the meanwhile, and she looked weary with her search, truly a sight to melt the heart of the most
fanatic devotee. But Takeguchi only sent someone out to say: " The person whom you seek is not
here. You must have come to the wrong place." And so there was nothing for Yokobue to do but
to swallow her tears and wend her way back to Miyako, sad and bitter of heart.

By and by Takiguchi said to the monk who dwelt with him: "This is a quiet place, and th ere is no
interruption to one's prayers, but now that girl knows my whereabouts, and though once I was
able to steel my heart, if she should follow me again I might melt. Farewell." And he left Saga and
betook himself to Mount Kōya, where he entered the te mple of Shojo -shin-in to practise the
religious life. There after a while he heard that Yokobue too had left the world and become a nun,
and he sent her this stanza:
" Till you forsook the world your heart was filled with resentment,
Surely your soul must rejoice, now you have entered the Way."
To this Yokobue answered:
" Where is the need for regret when once we have entered the cloister ?
There is no turning back, when we have entered the Way."
Afterwards she entered the temple of Hokkeji at Nara, but sh e was unable to forget the past, and
brooded over it until before long she fell sick and died. When Takiguchi Nyūdō was told of it he
redoubled his religious austerities, and his father forgave his unfilial conduct, so that he became to
be known to all who  were acquainted with him as the Saint of Kōya. Now when Koremori met
him after a long while he remembered him as attired in Hariginu and Tate -eboshi, his hair
carefully dressed and his whole appearance rich and gay,

[p. 198]

but the man he now beheld was dressed in a priest's robe anti stole of sombre colour, and though
he was not yet thirty years old, he looked like an emaciated old monk. His person exuded an
odour of incense smoke, and his whole demeanour was that of a sage sunk in profound and pious
meditations, so much that his condition seemed to Koremori a most enviable one. Perhaps the
Seven Sages of Shin who dwelt in the Bamboo Grove, or the Four Greybeards of Kan who lived
in Shozan, did not look more venerable than he.