CHAPTER II.
NATORA.

     On the tenth day Kiso Yoshinaka was appointed Sama -on-kami, and was presented with the
fief of the province of Echizen, beside having the title of Asahi Shōgun, or Rising Sun General,
bestowed on him by Imperial Edict. Jūrō Kurando Yukiie was present ed with the province of
Bingo and entitled Bingo -no-kami at the same time. As Yoshinaka, however, disliked the province
of Echizen he was given that of Iyo instead, and Yukiie also, being dissatisfied with Bingo,
received Bizen in its place. Moreover some ten more of the Genji were appointed captains of the
Kebiishi and Imperial Guard of the Efu and Emon. On the sixteenth day the former Naidaijin
Munemori and all his family, a hundred and sixty in all, were deprived of their offices and' their
names erased from the Court List. Among them, however, the names of Hei Dainagon Tokitada -
no-Kyō and his two sons, Kura -no-kami Nobumoto and Sanuki -no-chūjō Tokizane were not
erased, and this was because orders were being frequently sent to these three officials to bri ng
back the Emperor and the Three Sacred Treasures to the Capital.

[p.75]

     On the seventeenth day the Heike reached Dazaifu in the district of Mikasa of the province of
Chikuzen. Kikuchi -no-Jiro Takanao, who had gone down with them from the Capital, now,
under the pretext of going on in front to open the barrier at Otsuyama, crossed over the province
of Higo and retired into his own stronghold, from which he did not come forth in space of
repeated injunctions. Beside this, of all the men of the two. i slands of Kyūshū who were bidden
to join the Heike, not one appeared with the exception of Okura Tanenao of Iwado. On the
eighteenth day the Heike arrived at Anrakuji, where the Courtiers spent the whole night in
composing poems and Renga. On this occasion  Hon-sammi Chujō Shigehira made a verse that
brought tears to the eyes of all:

     " One of the gods * once knew the longing we feel for Miyako,
     Parted like us from the land where for so long lie had dwell."

     On the twentieth day, by an Imperial  Edict of the Hō -ō, the Fourth Prince was proclaimed
Emperor in the Kan -in Palace. The Sesshō remained as before, for Motomichi continued in office,
and the Chiefs of Departments and Kurando also returned to their posts. The milk nurse of the
Third Prince shed tears of regret, but it was of no avail.

     " In heaven there are not two suns, and in a country there are not two sovereigns; " is an
ancient saying, but now, through the evil deeds of the Heike, there were two Emperors
one in the Capital and one in the country. In ancient times Montoku Tenno, who died in twenty
third day of the eighth month of the second year of Ten an, had many sons who wished to
succeed to the Throne, and who offered up prayers in secret to that effect. The eldest, Prince
Koreta ka, who was
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*One of the gods . i.e. Tenjin, the deified Sugawara no Michizane, exiled to Kyūshū and died there.

In heaven, etc. From the Li Chi  禮記

[p.76]

also called Prince Kinohara, was an exceedingly wise prince, learned in all matters of importance
to one who would govern a country, and therefore seemed to all worthy of succeeding to the
Throne, but the second, Prince Korehito, was the son of the L ady Some dono, the daughter of the
Kwampaku Fujiwara. Yoshifusa, and so had the support of the whole of the Fujiwara family. It
was thus a very difficult question to decide. On the one side was a wise and learned Crown Prince;
on the other a Minister most potent in all the affairs of state. Both were much to be pitied, and
everybody was greatly perplexed. The priest who prayed for Prince Koretaka was Kaki -no-moto
Ki-Sōjō-Shinzei, the greatest man in the temple of Tōji, and a disciple of Kōbō Daishi, while o n
the side of Prince Korehito was Eiryō Kwashō of Hieizan, the chaplain of the Kwampaku
Yoshifusa, a priest by no means inferior to him in any way. Everyone said it would be difficult to
settle the matter, and when the Emperor died and a Council of Courtie rs was held to say who
should succeed him, as all the Ministers maintained each his own opinion and refused to listen to
anyone else, the deliberation became a mere wordy warfare, and at last it was decided to settle it
according to the result of a horse r ace and a wrestling match; the Throne to go to the side that
was successful. So on the second day of the ninth month both the Princes proceeded in state to
the race course of Ukon -no-baba, and all the Courtiers gathered there apparelled in their gayest
costumes, making a scene of unimaginable brilliance and splendour. In two long lines on either
side of the course the supporters of each Prince were drawn up, with beating hearts and hands
clasped tightly together, anxiously awaiting the result of this most u nparalleled contest.' Nor must
the priests and their prayers be passed over. Shinsei Sōjō set up his altar at Tōji, while Eiryō
Kwashō set up his at the temple of Shingon in within the Palace, and thinking that if it was
reported that he had died, Shinsei would relax his zeal somewhat, Eiryō put it about that he was
dead, while he

[p.77]

applied himself to his orisons with redoubled vigour. Then the horse races began, and out of ten
races the first four were won by the elder Prince Koretaka, but the next six fell to the party of
Prince Korehito. After this the wrestling match was held, and a certain Natora Uemon -no-kami, a
doughty champion who possessed the strength of sixty men, stood forth on behalf of Prince
Koretaka. On the side of the younger Prince a ppeared Yoshio Shōshō, a small and delicate looking
man, who looked as if the other might throw him with one hand. He was chosen, however,
because the Prince had had a supernatural dream in which he was bidden to select him. So
Natora and Yoshio faced each  other, and after feinting a little retired. Then they engaged again
and Natora, gripping Yoshio, lifted him off his feet and flung him a distance of twenty feet away.
But he came down on his feet and did not fall to the ground. Then Yoshio in his turn spr ang at
Natora and tried to throw him, but owing to the great size of his opponent he was in danger of
being borne down from above, and seemed about to be overcome. On seeing this, a crowd of the
retainers of Some dono, the mother of the second Prince, rush ed to the Palace in a throng thick as
the teeth of a comb, and cried out: " Our side is like to lose; what shall we do? " Then Eiryo
Kwasho, who was repeating mystic prayers and incantations of mighty efficacy, frenzied at their
failure, seized his Tokko *, and, dashing his head open with it, took some of his brains, pounded
them and mixed them with milk, and putting them in the sacred „Goma‟  fire, raised a thick black
smoke, wrestling so mightily in prayer that at last Yoshio won the contest. Thus did the s econd

Prince Korehito succeed to the Throne, to be known thenceforth as Seiwa
---------------
Tokko . The Vadjra or mace of Indra. Emblem of the power to destroy evil, used by Shingon priests in
their ritual.
Sou-i. Zasshu of Hieizan who appeared the wrath of the god Tenjin, which tie manifesto striking the
Palace with lightning in the eighth year of En -cho.

[p.78]

Tenno, and afterwards also as Mizu -o-no-Tenno. And so thereafter the priests of Hieizan would
often sa y; "When Eiryō dashed out his brains the second son was made Emperor, and when Sou -i
wielded the sword of wisdom the curse of Tenjin was overcome." Thus we may understand the
power of the Law of Buddha, but beside that everyone considered that it was accor ding to the
will of Tensho -daijin.