CHAPTER X.

THE IMPERIAL CONSORT OF GION.


But the old men who remembered the former days said that Kiyomori was not as other men
because he was really the son of the Emperor Shirakawa. And the reason was this. In the period
Eikyu there was a lady, who was much beloved by the Emperor, who lived near Gion at the foot
of Higashiyama, so that she was known as Gion -no-Nyogo; and the Emperor used to visit her
there continual ly.

One evening, it was the twentieth day of the fifth month, His Majesty went to see her privately,
attended only by one or two Courtiers and a few Palace Guards. As it was the season of heavy
rain the night was dark and gloomy, and no moon shone through  the clouds. Now there was a
temple near the house where the lady was living, and as they approached it they saw something
that shone strangely come forth from the side of the buildings. Its head seemed to be covered
with needles of burnished silver that g littered as they stood erect, while in one hand it carried
what looked like a hammer, and in the other a shining object. The Emperor and Courtiers were
panic -stricken; "See," they cried, "it is without doubt a demon! They always carry a hammer in
their han d! What is to be done?" At this time Tadamori, the father of Kiyomori, was there as one
of the lower Palace Guards, and the Emperor called him and said; "You are the boldest of all my
attendants; go shoot that thing to death or cut it down before it falls upon us." Tadamori
immediately advanced towards the creature in obedience to the Imperial Command, but when he
considered it closely it did not seem such a terrible object. "If it is nothing but a fox or a badger I
should look rather a stupid fellow if I s hot at it or cut it down," he thought, so he

[p.8]

determined to take it alive if possible. As he crept nearer he noticed that the light flashed and
then went out intermittently, and after watching this two or three times he sprang upon it and
grappled  with it. Immediately a voice cried out in alarm, and he found that it was no monster but
a man.

Then they all kindled lights and looked, and found that it was a priest about sixty years old,
whose business it was to look after the temple, and he was goin g to light the lamps before the
Buddhas, so he carried in one hand a vessel of oil and in the other an earthenware lamp, and as
the rain was falling heavily he had thrown a kind of cape made of wheat straw over his head, and
it was this that glittered in t he light and had the appearance as of steel needles.

Thus when they discovered this, they perceived how foolish it would have been to have shot or
drawn sword on him, and the conduct of Tadamori was proved to have been most reasonable and
prudent. "How ge ntle can a samurai be on occasion;" said His Majesty, and as a reward he
bestowed on him the lady of Gion whom he so greatly loved. Now the lady was at this time
pregnant, and the Emperor said; "If it be a girl that is born, I myself will take it, but if i t be a boy,
then it shall be given to Tadamori and be educated as a samurai." In due time the lady gave birth
to a son, and though nothing was said about it in public they treasured him with the greatest care.

Tadamori greatly wished to report the matter t o the Emperor, but could not find a suitable
opportunity. After a while, however, when His Majesty was on his way to the Shrine of Kumano,
it chanced that the Imperial Palanquin was set down at a place called Itogasaka in the province of
Kii that the Emper or might rest, when Tadamori gathered some shoots of 'Nukago'  [2] that was
growing profusely in the bamboo thicket, put them into his sleeve and showed

[p.9]

them to the Emperor with an obeisance, at the same time reciting this line:

 "See this plant that creeps and crawls like a child in the woodland; "

Immediately His Majesty, understanding the reference, added the second line of the couplet, thus:

"Then let Tadamori cheri sh and nurture it so."

So he brought him up as his own child. The Emperor happening to hear that the baby cried very
much at night made another stanza, and sent it to Tadamori.

"If he cries at night you have only to get up and nurse him,
In the future a ge, pure and successful he'll shine."

Whereupon they gave him the name Kiyomori or Pure Success.

When he was twelve years old he came of age, and was appointed Hyoye -no-suke, and at the age
of eighteen he was promoted to the third rank, so that people wh o did not know these things said;
"Indeed! he is treated like the son of a great noble," whereat the Emperor Toba, who was aware
of origin replied: "He is inferior to none of the noble families."

In former ages too, Tenchi Tenno presented one of his conso rts who was in the same condition to
the Taishokkwan Kamatari, telling him that he would adopt the child if it were a girl, but that if
a boy were born the Minister should bring it up; and a boy was born who eventually became Joei
Kwasho the founder of the  temple of Tabu -no-Mine. Considering this precedent in ancient days,
so in these latter days also it was not strange that Kiyomori, being really the son of the Emperor
Shirakawa, should plan such great political changes as the change of capital.