CHAPTER XII.
THE DESCENT OF  THE HILL.

Thereafter the battle became general and the various clans of the Gen and Hei surged over each
other in mixed and furious combat. The men of the Miura, Kamakura, Chichibu, Ashikaga,
Noiyo, Yokoyama, Inomata, Kodama, Nishi, Tsuzuki and Kisaichi clans charged against each
other with a roar like thunder, while the hills re -echoed to the sound of their war -cries, and the
shafts they shot at each other fell like rain. Some were wounded slightly and fought on, some
grappled and stabbed each other to d eath, while others bore down their adversaries and cut off
their heads : everywhere the fight rolled

p. 149

forward and backward, so that none could tell who were victors or vanquished.

Thus it did not appear that the main body of the Genji lead been su ccessful in their attack, when
at dawn on the seventh day Kurō Onzōshi Yoshitsune with his force of three thousand horsemen,
having climbed to the top of the Hiyodori -goe was resting his horses before the descent. Just then,
startled by the movements of hi s men, two stags and a doe rushed out and fled over the cliff
straight into the camp of the Heike. "That is strange ", exclaimed the Heike men -at-arms, for the
deer of this part ought to be frightened at our noise and run away to the mountains. Aha ! it mu st
be the enemy who is preparing to drop on us from above!" And they began to run about in
confusion, when forth strode Takechi -no-Mushadokoro of the province of Iyo, and drawing his
bow transfixed the two stags, though letting the doe escape. Thus ", he c ried, " will we deal with
any who try that road and none are likely to pass it alive ! " "What useless shooting of stags is this?
" said Etchū Zenji Moritoshi when he saw it; " one of those arrows might have stopped ten of the
enemy, so why waste them in t hat fashion ? "

Then Yoshitsune, looking down on the Heike position from the top of the cliff, ordered some
horses to be driven down the declivity, and of these, though some missed their footing half -way,
and breaking their legs, fell to the bottom and w ere killed, three saddled horses scrambled down
safely and stood, trembling in every limb, before the residence of Etchu Zenji. " If they have riders
to guide them", said Yoshitsune, "the horses will get down without damage, so let us descend, and
I will s how you the way "; and he rode over the cliff at the head of his thirty retainers, seeing
which the whole force of three thousand followed on after him. For more than a hundred yards
the slope was sandy with small pebbles, so that they slid straight down i t and landed on a level
place, from which they could survey the rest

p. 150

of the descent. From thence downwards it was all great mossy boulders, but steep as a well, and
some fifty yards to the bottom. It seemed impossible to go on any further, neither  could they
now retrace their steps, and the soldiers were recoiling in horror, thinking that their end had
come, when Miura -no-Sahara Jūro Yoshitsura sprang forward and shouted: " In my part we ride
down places like this any day to catch a bird; the Miura  would make a re -course of this "; and

down he went, followed by all the rest. So steep was the descent that the stirrups of the hinder
man struck against the helmet or armour of'the one in front of him, and so dangerous did it look
that they averted their  eyes as they went down. " Ei ! Ei ! " they ejaculated under their breath as
they steadied their horses, and their daring seemed rather that of demons than of men. So they
reached the bottom, and as soon as they found themselves safely down they burst fort h with a
mighty shout, which echoed along the cliffs so that it sounded rather like the battlecry of ten
thousand men than of three.

Then Murakami no Hangwan -dai Yasukuni seized a torch and fired the houses and huts of the
Heike so that they went up in sm oke in a few moments, and when their men saw the clouds of
black smoke rising they at once made a rush toward the sea, if hopefully they might find a way of
escape. There was no lack of ships drawn up by the beach, but in their panic four or five hundred
men in full armour and even a thousand all crowded into one ship, so that when they had rowed
out not more than fifty or sixty yards from the shore, three large ships turned over and sank
before their eyes. Moreover those in the ships would only take on boa rd those warriors who were
of high rank, and thrust away the common soldiers, slashing at them with their swords and
halberds, but even though they saw this, rather than stay and be cut down by the enemy, they
clung to the ships and strove to drag themselv es on board, so that their hands and arms were cut
off and they fell back into the sea, which quickly reddened with their blood. Thus, both

p. 151

on the main front and on the sea shore did the young warriors of Musashi and Sagami strain every
nerve in t he fight, caring nothing for their lives as they rushed desperately to the attack. What
must have been the feelings of Noto -no-kami Noritsune, who in all his many battles has never
been vanquished until now ? Mounting his charger Usuzumi, he galloped away toward the West,
and taking ship from Takasago in Harima, crossed over to Yashima in Sanuki.