CHAPTER XV.

BANISHMENT OF THE DAIJIN.


Hoin, returning from Rokuhara, reported the speech of the Nyudo to the Ho -o, and His Majesty,
thinki ng there was much right on his side, said nothing further. On the sixteenth day the Nyudo
carried out his intentions by depriving the Kwampaku and forty -three other Courtiers of their
offices. The Kwampaku Motofusa, on hearing in addition that he was trans ferred to the office of
Dazai -no-Sotsu and was to depart to Kyushu, remarking that in an evil world like this it did not
matter what happened, retired to his house at Furukawa near Toba and became a monk, his age
being thirty -five. "He was an unclouded mir ror of courtesy," said everyone, and regret at his loss
was extreme. As when one sentenced to exile becomes a monk, they do not send him to the
province decided on, though it had been decided to send him to Hyuga at first, since he became a
monk he was sen t to a place called Yuazama near Kofu in Bizen. (Former examples of the exile
of ministers are the Sadaijin Soga no Akae, Udaijin Toyonari, tile Sadaijin Uona and the Udaijin
Sugawara [44], I mention him with great respect for he is the present Tenjin of Kitano, besides the
Sadaijin Komei Ko and the Naidai -jin Fujiwara -no-Ishu Ko. Six in all, but this was the first
example of the exile of a Sessho Kampaku.) The son of the Naka Dono Nii Chujo Motomichi,
son-in-law of the Nyudo, then became Daijin and Kwampaku. In the time of the late Enyu -in, on
the first of the eleventh month of Tenroku, Ichijo -no-Sessho Kentoku Ko died, and his younger
brother Horikawa Kwampaku Chugi Ko was then Juni -i Chunagon and another younger brother
Ho-ko-in Dai Nyudo Kaneie Ko was Dainagon -no Udaisho: of

[p. 151]

these two Chugi Ko had been passed over by his brother in rank and office, but when he in turn
stepped over his brother and became Sho -ni-i Naidaijin a nd obtained a private intimation of this
from the Emperor, everyone said it was the most extraordinary promotion they had heard of. But
a much more extraordinary case was it when one who was only Ni -i-no-Chujo and not a
Councillor of State, passing over th e office of Dainagon [45], became Daijin and Sessho in one leap.
Fugenji Dono (Motomichi) was the first one who ever did so. The Councillors (Shokei), the
Ministers (Saisho), the Chief  Secretary and the officials under them were all dumbfounded. The
Dajo-daijin Moronaga was deprived of office and exiled to the eastern provinces. As the
reflection of the guilt of his father the evil Sadaijin of Hogen, he with three of his brothers went
into exile. His elder brother the Udaisho Kanenaga, the younger brother Hidari -no-Chujo
Takanaga, and Hancho Zenji did not live to return to the capital but died at their place of
banishment, but Moronaga, after nine years spent in Tosa, was recalled in the  eighth month of the
second year of Chokwan, restored to his original rank, and the following year raised to Shoni -i
(Upper Second Rank). In the tenth month of the first year of Nin -an he rose from being
Chunagon to the office of Gon Dainagon: the office o f Dainagon not being vacant at this time, he
was added as supernumerary. It was the first time there had been six Dainagons at the same time.
Also promotion from former Chunagon to Gon Dainagon, with the exception of Uji -no-Dai

nagon Takakuni -no-Kyo who af terwards became Yamashina -no-daijin Minori Ko, was never
known before. He was skilled in music and very accomplished in other arts, so his progress was
rapid until at last he became Dajo -daijin. Then as the result of some fault in a previous existence
he w as again sent into exile. In former times in Hogen he was sent to Tosa by the southern

[p. 152]

sea, and now in Jisho he was again, it seemed, to go to Owari beyond the eastern boundary. But
being guiltless as before, and as a man of taste, only wishing to gaze at the moon in his place of
banishment, the Daijin made light of it. Recollecting how of old Haku -raku-ten, when guest of
the Crown Prince of China, used to wander about the bay of Jinyo, in like manner he leisurely
passed his days, gazing at the d istant sea scenery of the bay of Narumi and viewing the clear
moon, whistling to the sea breeze and chanting songs to the accompaniment of his biwa. Once he
made a pilgrimage to the shrine of Atsuta Myojin in that province, and in the evening performed
a recitation on his biwa to please the deity. It was a place where there were none but unlettered
people living, and there were none with any elegant taste; but the village people, young and old,
girls, fishermen and farmers, came out with bent head and inten t ear to listen, though they knew
nothing of time or rhythm. So it is said that, when Koba played the biwa, the fish would dance in
the water, and when Kuko sang, the dust on the beams would skip about. When a genius
performs, then emotion is invoked spont aneously. So the hair of his audience stood on end at the
wonder of his playing, and as it gradually grew later, while he sung a piece called 'Fuko' or
'Fragrance', the flowers poured forth their scent, and when singing of the 'Flowing Water' the
moon shed  its pure clear white light over the scene; until at last the god unable to contain his
feelings any longer, caused the sanctuary to tremble greatly. Whereat the Daijin shed tears of joy
saying: "If it had not been for the evil conduct of the Heike, I shou ld not have seen such a blessed
sign."

Azetsu -no-Dainagon Sukekata -no-Kyo and his son Ukone -no-Shosho Sanuki -no-kami Minamoto -
no-Suketoki were both deprived of their office, as also were the three officials Gondaiyu Uhyoe
no kami Fujiwara Mitsuyoshi, Coun sellor of the Empress Dowager, Okura -no-Kyo, Ukyo -no-
Daiyu, Iyo -no-kami, Takashima -no-Yasutsune, and Kurando -no-Sashoben, Chugu -no-Gondaishin,
Fujiwara -no-Motochika, Azetsu -no-Dainagon Sukekata

[p. 153]

his son Ukonye -no-Shosho and his grandson U -shosho Masakata were moreover expelled the
same day from the capital. Thereupon the Dainagon remarked: "The three worlds are wide, but
there in no room for my five foot length; though life is short it is difficult to live for a single day.
If you go out of the Ni nefold Imperial Court by night, you have got to go beyond the Eightfold
Clouds." So, going by Oeyama and the way of Ikuno, first he came to a place called Murakumo in
Tamba where he stayed some time, then at last going on from thence he is said to have rea ched
Shinano.