CHAPTER III.

SUZUKI.


Tadamori's children all had the title, of "Ei -no-suke," and when they attended at Cour t they were
welcomed by everyone. On one occasion when Tadamori went up to the Capital from Bizen and
the Retired Emperor Toba augustly deigned to to enquire of him about the scenery of Akashi, he
answered thus:

[p.7]


"Ariake no tsukimo,
Akashi no u rakaze ni;
Nami bakari koso,
Yoru to mieshi ka.
"When the morning breaks o'er the wind swept sand of Akashi,
Only the moon on high casts its faint beams on the waves.

The ex Mikado was pleased to admire this verse and ordered it to be preserved in the c ollection
entitled " Kinyo -shu." [2]

There was a fair lady -in-waiting in the Sendo Palace of the ex -Midado much beloved by
Tadamori, whom he was wont to visit every evening. And it chanced that one night, after so
doing he left in her room a fan painted wi th the rising moon; the other ladies seeing it were much
amused, saying: " Oh how doubtful is the place where the moon has risen!"   to which the lady
replied :
Kumoi yori tada mori [1]
Kuru tsuki nareba,
Oboroge nite wa
Iwaji to zo omou.

If the moon ind eed has drifted down from the heavens,
Surely then the sky must be a little obscure.

Thus showing that her wit was not at all shallow, This was the mother of Satsuma -no-kami
Tadanori ; as people are drawn to each other by similar dispositions, Tadamori 's taste was
matched by her elegance. Then Tademori becoming Gyo -bu-kyo [3] afterwards died at the age of

fifty eight on the fifteenth day of the first month of the third year of Ninpei. His eldest son
Kiyomori followed in his footsteps. In the first year of Hogen, when the Sadaijin of Uji brought
the realm into disorder, he put himself at the head of the Imperial party and

[p.8]

was rewarded for his services. At first he had the office of Aki -no-kami, then he was promoted to
be Harima -no-kami, and in the  third year of the same era he became Dazai -no-dai-ni. In the
twelfth month of the first year of Heiji, at the time of the rebellion of Nobuyori and Yoshitomo,
he beat down the rebels in the Imperial cause, and the rewards bestowed on him for many
meritori ous deeds by the August kindness were very great. In the next year he received the
Senior Third Rank, and succeeded to the titles of Saisho Eifu -no-kami, and Kebi -ishi-no-Betto
one after the other, and passing over the ranks of Chunagon and Dainagon, took rank as a
Minister of State. He did not even become Minister of the Left or Right, but rose straight from
Naidaijin to be Dajodaijin of the Lower First Rank. Though not a commander of armies, he went.
armed and surrounded by retainers, and by special permi ssion of the Retired Emperor, entered
and departed from the Court riding in state in ox -wagon or palanquin, acting as one who holds
alone the whole power of administration. Since it was the function of the Dajodaijin to be a
pattern and example of virtue t o the whole country, to consider which was the right course in
ruling, and to tranquillize the universe by his government, if such an one could not be found, the
office was to be declared vacant, for except it were held by such an one, the office would sur ely
be polluted. Now that this lay -monk of a Governor should hold the Heaven and the Four Seas in
the hollow of his hand, verily there is no need for further speech.

Now the reason for this great prosperity of the Heike was said to be the favour of Kumano
Gongen. And this was the manner of it ; when Kiyomori was yet only styled Aki -no-kami, he
went to worship at Kumano by ship from Anonotsu in Ise,

and a large "Suzuki" fish sprang up into his vessel, as it is related in former times that a white fish
leaped into the ship of Bu, king of Shu, and however it may have been he attributed it to the
favour of the Gongen. As we have said, he was on religious pilgrimage, so that he was observing
the ten prohibitions, abstaining from animal food and making purificat ions, yet departing from
these, he cooked the fish himself and ate of it and gave also to his children who were with him.
And afterwards nought but good fortune attended him and he at last became Dajodaijin. His
posterity too attained high office more quic kly than a dragon ascends the clouds, greatly excelling
in happiness the nine generations of their ancestors.