CHAPTER IV.
EXILE OF THE TAIRA DAINAGON.

     On the twenty third day of the ninth month a message came from Kamakura to the Court
that all the Heike who were still left in the Capital should be exiled to various provinces. So t he
Taira Dainagon Tokitada was sent to Noto, Kurando -no-kami Nobumoto to Sado, Sanuki -no-
Chūjō Tokizane to Aki; Hyōba -no-Shōyu Masaakira to Oki, Nii -no-Sōzu Zenshin to

[p. 283]

     Awa, Hōshōji -no-Shugyō Nō -en to Kazusa, Kyōjū -bō-Ajari Yū -en to Bingo an d Chūnagon -no-
Risshi Chūkai to Musashi. And so they set out on their various journeys with hearts full of
sadness at parting, some for the waves of the Western Sea, some for the mists of the Eastern
Barrier, knowing neither whither they were going nor when  they would meet again. Then the
Taira Dainagon Tokitada -no-Kyō betook himself to Yoshida to the former Imperial Consort
Kenrei -mon in and said:

" I have obtained leave from the officials to come and bid you farewell. I would have wished to
have been able  to remain near you in the Capital that I might look after your affairs, but today I
must start for my place of banishment, and how anxious do I feel in thus going away to be
uncertain henceforward of what will happen to you." And he wept bitterly. " Indee d," replied the
ex Empress, also in tears, " you are the only one who is left from our sad past, and when you are
gone who will there be to whom I can look for sympathy ? "

    Now this Tokitada -no-Kyō was the son of Zo -Sadaijin Tokinobu Kō, and the grandson of
Dewa -no-Zenji Tomonobu. He was the elder brother of the late Kenshun -mon in, the maternal
uncle of the late Emperor Takakura an d the younger brother of Hachijō -no-Nii Dono, the wife of
the Lay priest Chancellor Kiyomori. All ranks and offices were at his disposal, so he quickly rose
to be Dainagon of the Upper Second Rank. and three times held the office of Kebiishi -no-Bettō.
Whil e he held this office he arrested all the thieves and robbers and bandits and pirates of all
provinces, and without any enquiry cut off their arms at the elbow, so that he was given the
nickname of Aku -Bettō ; and when Hanakata, the Groom of the Chamber, c ame with the Edict
of the Ho o demanding the return of the Emperor and the Three Sacred Treasures, it was this
Tokitada that had the characters „Namikata,' branded on his face. For the sake of his late beloved
Consort Kenshun mon in the Hō -ō had wished to show him favour, but this insult angered him
greatly. The Hōgwan too, on account of their intimate rela -

[p. 284]

tionship, did all he could for him, but it was of no avail, and so he was banished. His son Jijū
Tokiie, who was then sixteen years old, esc aped banishment and was luring with his uncle Saishō
Tokimitsu, but the day before his father went into exile he went to his residence, and with his
mother Sotsu -no-suke clung to his father's sleeve in his sorrow at being separated from him. " We
must part  at last anyhow; " said the Dainagon coldly, though indeed he was much affected. And
so, growing old and feeble as he was, he had perforce to part from his beloved wife and son, and

start out from the Capital he knew so well, looking back longingly at the Court as he began his
journey to the Northern Provinces, of which as yet he knew but the name. And so he went on
past Shiga and Karasaki, the bay of Mano and the beach of Katada ; and here the Dainagon with
tears in his eyes composed these lines ;

     " Hardly again shall I see them casting the nets at Katata,
     Dripping with shining drops, like to the tears in my eyes."

Yesterday tossing in a small boat on the waves of the Western Sea with his load of anguish and
resentment, today, buried under the s nows of the North Country, his sorrow at parting piling up
high as the clouds of his native Capital.