CHAPTER V.
THE PASSING AWAY OF THE FORMER EMPRESS .

But the boo m of the bell of Jakko -in proclaimed the closing day as the evening sun began to sink
in the west, and His Majesty, full of regret at saying farewell, set out on his return journey with
tears in his eyes. The former Empress, her mind occupied in spite of h erself with thoughts of her
bygone days, and shedding on the sleeve of her robe the tears she could not restrain, stood
watching the Imperial Procession until she could see it no more, and then, again entering her cell,
she prostrated herself before the Bu ddha to pray that the Sacred Spirit of the former Emperor
might attain complete Buddhahood, and that the departed spirits of all the Heike might quickly
enter the Way of Salvation. In former days she turned to the east and prostrated herself before
the dei ty of the Great Shrine of Ise and Sho -Hachimangu to pity ; " That the Precious Life of the
Emperor may be prolonged a thousand and ten thousand ages ; " but now she sadly turned to the
west and prayed : " That the Departed Spirit may be reborn in one of th e Buddha Lands."

To express the regret and affection she still felt for her past life, the Empress wrote these verses
on the shoji of her cell :

" When shall I learn once more, what I now for so long have forgotten,
Raw things go in the Court, scenes tha t I long to review ?" " Now that the things of the past have
vanished away into dreamland,
So from this brushwood cell, soon may 1 too disappear."
------------
*Zo-o Gongen . Kongo Zo -o, a deity of Mt. Yoshino in Yamato.

page 323

Moreover Tokudaiji -no-Sadaisho Sanesada Ko, one of the Courtiers who accompanied the Ho -o,
also wrote these lines on one of the posts of the cell :

" Once our Sovereign's face shone forth as clear as the
moon -beams,
But in the mountain vale, hid is the light of the moon."

And w hile the former Empress was weeping and meditating on the past and the future with pain
mixed with pleasure, the cry of the mountain cuckoo sounded twice or thrice as the bird flew by,
and suggested to her these lines :

" Cuckoo, why do you come to measur e your plaint with my anguish ?
So in this fleeting world, what am I too but a voice ?"

Thus of the twenty survivors of the Heike who were taken alive, some were paraded through the
streets and beheaded, and some were exiled to distant provinces, far from  their wives and
children : with the exception of Ike -no-Dainagon there was not one left living in the Capital. Of

the forty and more ladies who were left nothing is known. They were taken in by their kinsfolk
and looked after by their relations. With thei r hearts full of concealed regrets they spent their
days in lamentation. Those in high places, up to the Emperor within the Jewel Curtain, were
filled with disquiet, while the common people, down to the dweller in the hut of brushwood,
could find no rest. Husband and wife were parted and far remote from the Palace, while parent
and child knew not each other's abode. And all this was because of the many evil deeds of the
Lay-priest Chancellor Kiyomori which he continually committed, in condemning people to d eath
and banishing them, and dismissing them from office and appropriating their emoluments,
without either regard for the Emperor on his Throne, or pity for the people beneath him. So
certain is it that the good or evil deeds of the fathers will descend u pon the heads of the children.

But the former Empress continued to live on vainly for some years, till at length she fell ill and
took to her bed. She

page 324

had been awaiting it for a long time, and so now she took in her hand the cord of five colour s that
was fastened to the hand of the Buddha, and repeated the Nembutsu ; " Namu Amida Nyorai,
Lord who guidest us to the Paradise of the West, in remembrance of thy Great Vow, I beseech
thee receive me into the Pure Land." And as she thus prayed, Dainago n-no-suke-noTsubone and
Awa-no-Naiji, standing on each side of her couch, lifted up their voices in lamentation at their
sad parting. And as the voice of her prayer grew weaker and weaker, a purple cloud of splendour
grew visible in the west, and an unknow n scent of wondrous incense filled the cell, while celestial
strains of music were heard from above, and thus, about the middle of the second month of the
second year of Ken -kyu, the former Empress Kenrei -mon-in breathed her last.

The two ladies, who had never left her side since the day that she had been chosen as Imperial
Consort, were plunged into the depths of despair at this parting from their mistress, and as their
relations and connections had all disappeared, and there was none to help them, they h ad nothing
left but the performance of the Buddhist services. And at last they too, like the Dragon girl * who
attained enlightenment, and like the lady Idaike *, also departed this life to be reborn in bliss.
-----------
*the lady Idaike.  The queen Vaidehi,  wife of Bimbisara king of Magadha, and mother of Ajatsattru who
imprisoned her. At her earnest desire to hear the doctrine, Buddha miraculously flew to her prison and
preached to her.
*Dragon girl or Naga maiden. Another example of a woman obtaining enlig htenment, a thing that was regarded
as difficult on account of the Five Hindrances, i.e. that woman cannot become either Brahma, Indra, Mara, a
Tchakravartti or a Buddha.

[p. 325]
THE BOOK OF SWORDS.

    Hai-ko* received the sword Zoku -rō of Kibo *, and therewith slew the white serpent, and
gained the Imperial Throne and a famous name.  Shi-Kō* took the dirk of Kei -ka*, and with it
slew the Emiss ary of Yen, thereby fulfilling a brilliant destiny. The authority of the White
Standard and the Golden Axe *, the might of bow and horse and arrow and stone, the Five Rules
of Strategy and the Four Kinds of Benevolence, these are the methods of ruling a cou ntry and the
foundations of a lasting sway. But swords are the weapons worthy of the highest praise. *

     Now in Nippon there are many famous swords. There are the Sacred Swords Totsuka -no-
Tsurugi, the Ten -handbreadth Sword, Hige -kiri, the Beard -cutter,  Hiza-maru, the Knee -cutter,
and Kogarasu, the Little Crow. And concerning the origin of Hige -kiri and Hiza -maru, it is thus
related. Seiwa Tennō, the fifty sixth Earthly Sovereign, had many sons, and of these Princes the
sixth, named Sadazumi Shinnō, had a son Tsunemoto Roku -Son-Ō, whose eldest son Tada no
Mitsunaga Kazusa -no-kami was the first to take the name of Genji. Being appointed by Imperial
Edict to protect the Empire, Mitsunaga exclaimed ; " How can I protect the Empire unless I have
a good sword ? " So he procured iron and had smiths summoned, but when they had forged the
swords, there were none that he found to his
---------------------------------------
*Hai-ko, Peh-Kung, afterwards known as Kao -tsu of Han, (Kan -no-Ko-so).
*Kibo   貴坊. Unknown.  One text has 貴防  perhaps read 鬼防  Demon -repelling , Dr. Okada.
*Kei-ka. Cf. Vol V, Ch.7
*Shi-ko. She-Huang -Ti.
*The White Standard and Golden Axe. Insignia of a Chinese General.
*This first paragraph, which is written in Chinese prose, is not found in many cop ies, and seems to be a late
addition.

[p. 326]

liking. While he was wondering what to do, someone told him that there was a smith who had
come from abroad, who had been working for many years at Tsuchiyama in the district of Mikusa
in the province of Chi kuzen. So he ordered that he should be summoned, and they brought him
to the Capital, but though he also forged many swords, not one of them found favour in the eyes
of Mitsunaga, so there was nothing for him to do but to return with his purpose unfulfille d. "
Alas," said he, " if I go back thus, after having made this long journey from far -off Tsukushi to no
effect, what will be left of my fame as a craftsman ? From ancient days those who have desired
anything of the Gods and Buddhas have had recourse to p rayer to obtain it." And he betook
himself to the shrine of Hachiman and prayed : " Kimyō -chōrai Hachiman Dai -Bosatsu ! Grant
that I may make a sword such as I wish, and I will become a vessel at thy disposal." This vow he
wrote and offered in the deepest ,incerity, and when seven days had passed, a divine answer came
to him in the night, saying: " I have had compassion on you in respect to your desire. Go now
forthwith, and forge the iron for sixty days, after which you will snake two swords of the finest
quality." Greatly rejoiced at this signific ant dream, the craftsman went forth from the shrine, and
carefully selecting and fusing the iron, he worked at it and forged it for sixty days, so that at
length he produced two swords of the finest quality, two feet seven inches long, comparable even
to the three foot blade of Kō -sō of Kan.


     Mitsunaka was greatly pleased with them, and had them tried on two criminals, whereat one
cut through to the beard, so he named it Hige -kiri, or Beard -cutter, while the other cut through
the knees also, and this h e named Hiza -maru or Knee -divider. So with these two blades he ruled
the Empire, and the very trees and herbs inclined before him. And so in due time he was
succeeded by his eldest son Yorimitsu, in whose time many extraordinary things happened. And
one of  these strange things was the disappearance of many people.

[p. 327]

     They did not die, but while in a room surrounded by many others, without being seen to get
up or depart, they would suddenly vanish as if blotted out. And as none knew whither they  had
gone, or could hear where they were, fear seized on all, and from the Sovereign to the common
people everyone was in indescribable confusion and panic. On enquiring more closely into the
matter, it transpired that in the days of the Emperor Saga Tennō , the daughter of a certain
Courtier of high rank was so overcome by jealousy that she went to the shrine of Kibune, and
secluded herself there for seven days, praying thus: " Kimyō - chōrai, Kibune Daimyōjin ! In
answer to my seven days prayer and seclusio n, grant that living I may be changed into a demon,
that so I may be able to kill the woman of whom I am jealous." Then the Myojin had compassion
on her and answered : " I am indeed sorry for your condition. If in truth you wish to become a
demon, you must  change your appearance and go and bathe yourself in the Ujikawa from the
third to the seventh day." Then the lady returned rejoicing to the Capital, and secluding herself in
an unfrequented spot, divided her long hair into five tresses, and made it into f ive horns. She put
vermilion on her face, and reddened her body, on her head she placed a tripod, to the legs of
which she fastened torches, holding also in her mouth another torch flaming at both ends. In this
guise she rushed out through the Yamato highw ay to the south after dark when people had
retired, and when they saw her thus with face and body red and eyebrows painted thick and
black with dye, while five jets of flame flared out from her head, they never doubted that she was
a demon, and fell down i n the streets beside themselves with fear, some even dying in the excess
of their terror. Then she went to the Ujikawa and bathed herself in its waters between the third
and seventh day, whereupon, according to the promise of the Kibune Myōjin, she was
transformed living into a demon. And she it is that is known as Uji -no-Hashi -hime, or the Lady of
the Bridge of Uji. And thus she was able to seize and slay not

[p. 328]

only the woman of whom she was jealous and the man who had spurned her, but all their
relations and connexions, high and low, male and female. And when she wished to seize a man
she would change into a woman, and if she would take a woman she would become a man, so
that all the people of the Capital of all ranks shut the doors of their house s after the Hour of the
Monkey, (4. p.m.) and would neither go forth nor allow anyone to come in.

     Now at this time Settsu -no-kami Yorimitsu had four famous retainers who were as his four
Deva Kings, and they were Tsuna, Kintoki, Sadamichi and Suetake  ; and of these the mightiest
was Tsuna. As he was born at Yoshida in the province of Musashi he was also called Yoshida
Genji. Now it chanced that Yorimitsu had some small matter to be done at Ōmiya in Ichijō, and
he sent Tsuna as his messenger. As it was after dark he gave him the sword Higekiri and bade him
take one of his horses. And so he went and made enquiry at

the place, and was on his way back again with the reply, when, as he was crossi ng the bridge once
more at Ichijō Horikawa, he saw at the eastern end a girl who seemed to be about twenty, with a
skin as white as snow and a most graceful figure, dressed in a robe of a plum -red colour with an
amulet bag hung round her neck, and a volume  of the Sutras carried in her sleeve. She was quite
alone and unaccompanied, and was going along to the south as Tsuna passed the western end of
the bridge and rode clattering across. " Whither are you going," she called confidingly to him, " I
am going to  Gojō, but as it is getting so dark, I feel frightened, so will you not see me on my way?
" Take my horse, then, " replied Tsuna, immediately springing to the ground ; and as she seemed
pleased at the offer, he took her up in his arms and set her in the sa ddle. Thus they went along
the eastern end of Horikawa to the south until they came within a couple of tan of Ogimachi,
when the maiden turned back, saying; " I really have no particular business at Gojō
I live outside the city; so will you not be kind eno ugh to

[p. 329]

accompany me thus far?" "Indeed I will escort you wherever you wish," replied Tsuna ; when
suddenly she changed her beautiful form into the shape of a hideous demon, and crying out: "The
place I am going to is Otagi -yama ; " she seized hi m by the queue and flew off with him through
the air toward the north west. Tsuna, without the least trepidation, at once drew Hige kiri and
slashed upward with it, cutting clean through the arm of the demon; and thus released fell
headlong until he alight ed on the roof of the gallery of the shrine of Kitano, while the demon,
with its arm cut off, flew away towards Otagi. Then Tsuna jumped down from the gallery and
pulled off the demon's hand that was still gripping his queue, and lo! it was changed from it s
snow white hue and was now of an exceeding blackness, covered everywhere thickly with white
hairs that looked like silver wire. When he brought it and showed it to Yorimitsu, he was
exceedingly astonished, and thinking it a very strange happening, he sum moned the diviner
Harima -no-kami Abe -no-Seimei, and asked him what was to be done. "Let Tsuna strictly seclude
himself in his house for seven days," he advised, "and let him keep the hand of the demon
carefully shut up and guarded, while he occupies himsel f with reading the Niō Sutra." Tsuna did
so, and when six days had already passed, at dusk someone came knocking at the door of his
house, and when he enquired who was there, the voice of his foster mother replied that it was
she who had come from her home  at Watanabe to see him. Now this foster mother was the aunt
of Tsuna. Knowing that it was not, right to talk at such a time, he went to the gate and said: " I
am glad to see you after such a long time, but I am now undergoing a religious seclusion for sev en
days, and today is but the sixth day, so until tomorrow is over I cannot see anyone soever. I pray
you stay somewhere until, the day after tomorrow, and then I will gladly see you." At this she
burst into tears; "What am I to do?" she exclaimed ; ' "Is it for this that I took you in as soon as
you were born, and brought you up? My rest. was often broken at

[p. 330]

night, and I chose the damp places to sleep on myself that you might rest in the dry ; and so, until
you were four or five years old no bit ter wind was suffered to blow upon you, and day and night
I prayed that I might live to see you grow up to be preeminent among men. And now my prayers
are answered, and in the house of our lord Settsu -no-kami Dono there is none to equal you. And
as your fa me is in the mouths of all, both high and low, I have rejoiced greatly, but until now I
have never been able to traverse the long country road to see you. But there is no pain like that
caused by parental affection, and of late I have many times had bad dr eams about you, so fearing

that some evil might have befallen you, I have come all the way from Watanabe to see you, and
now you will not allow me even to enter your gate. How could I have loved such an ungrateful
son ? " Then Tsuna, unable to withstand he r arguments any longer, opened the gate and brought
her in. At this she was very glad and for some time they talked about her journey and about what
she meant to do henceforth, after which she asked him what was the reason of his seven days'
seclusion, and  as he could hardly conceal it, he told her everything as it had happened. When she
had heard it all she declared that he had been quite right to take every precaution, and regretted
that she had been angry owing to not having known it, "But" she continued ," parents are like
protecting deities to their children, as the proverb goes, so I will think no more of it. But what
kind of a thing is a demon's hand ? I should much like to see it." " I would willingly show it to
you," replied Tsuna, "but I must keep i t shut up until the seventh day is over, so after tomorrow
is past I will let you see it." " Oh, very well; it doesn't matter at all ; " I don't want to see it," she
answered shortly, " for I intend to start home again before dawn." Seeing her displeasure,  however,
Tsuna opened the box and brought it out and showed it to her. " Ah, how horrible! " she
exclaimed, looking at it again and again, " and so that is what a demon's hand is like." And
suddenly standing up, she

[p. 331 ]

became transformed into a ho rrible demon, and, crying out:

" That is my hand ; I will take it;"' she kicked out the gable of the roof and flew up into the sky,
flashing fire as she went. And that is the reason that the Watanabe clan always build their roofs
without any gable, and ma ke them like a garden -house. Now though Tsuna thus lost the demon's
hand, and his seclusion was made of none effect, yet by the power of the Niō Sutra he was
preserved from harm. And after cutting off the demon's hand, the name of the sword was
changed fro m Hige -kiri to Oni -maru (Demon queller).

     During the summer of that year Yorimitsu fell sick of an ague, from which he could get no
relief by any means; and after some time it recurred every day with burning heat and pains in the
head, and thus he la y, sorely tormented, as it were between heaven and earth ; and so he
continued for the space of thirty days. Now it happened one night that he was a little better and
the fever had abated somewhat, so that the four faithful retainers, who had been nursing him, had
retired to the guard room to sleep a while. As it grew somewhat late, Yorimitsu saw, from the
shadow of the dim light in his chamber, the form of a tall priest, some seven feet high, coming
stealthily up towards him, holding a rope to throw over h im. Yorimitsu sprang up in surprise,
crying out: " Who are you, you rascal, who dares to take a rope to Yorimitsu ? " And as he did so
he caught up the sword Hiza -maru, that stood by the side of his pillow, and made a cut at him.
Aroused by the noise, the Four Deva Kings came running in with all speed to enquire what it was,
whereupon Yorimitsu told them what had taken place, and when they looked beneath the
lampstand there was blood spilt there. Searching further with lights in their hands, they saw that
there was a trail of blood from the doors of the chamber out on to the verandah, and when they
followed this up, they found that it led to a mound at the back of the shrine of Kitano, and there
stopped. So they dug into the mound, and there was a great spid er, four feet across, which they
seized

[p. 332]


and brought back with them. " Ugh ! " exclaimed Yorimitsu when he saw it, "how strange to
have been tormented by a horrible thing like this for thirty days! You had better expose it on the
highroad." So th ey stuck it on an iron spit and took it to the river bed and there left it : and from
this time Hizamaru was known as Kumo -kiri (Spider -cutter), and after the days of Yorimitsu it
passed into the hands of Dewa -no-kami Yorimoto.

     In the fifth year of t he period Tenki, Iyo -no-kami Yoriyoshi, the eldest son of Kawa chi- no-
kami Yorinobu, the younger brother of Yorimitsu, was appointed Mutsu -no-kami and ordered to
undertake the subjection of the brothers Kuriyagawa -no-Jirō Abe -no-Sadato, and Tori -no-Umi-
no-Saburō Muneto of Mutsu, who had made insurrection, and on this  occasion Yorimoto was
bidden by the Emperor to hand over to him Ōni-maru and Kumo -kiri, the two treasure swords of
the Genji. " But these blades have been handed down as ancestral heirlooms for three generations
from my grandfather Tada -no-Mitsunaka," rep lied Yorimoto," and ought to be passed on to my
son, so I feel very loath to part with them." But as his remonstrance was not listened to, at last he
had to give up the swords to Yoriyoshi. Then Yoriyoshi set out for Mutsu, and after fighting for
nine year s he has victorious, taking the head of Sadato and bringing Muneto back as a prisoner to
the Capital.  Sadato was nine feet five inches in height and Muneto six feet four, so, when he was
brought to the house of Yoriyoshi, all the Nobles and Courtiers went  there to divert themselves
with the sight of the strange Eastern Barbarian, and one of them in jest broke off a twig of plum
blossom, and asked Muneto what it was. Immediately he replied in these lines:

     " This is what in our land is called the flowe r of the plum tree ;
     What ,to you call it at Court ? Seemingly you do not know."

Whereupon they went away again crestfallen. Muneto

[p. 333]

was eventually banished to Kyūshū, where there are many of his descendants still living at the
present day. They are the Matsuura clan. The two swords passed from Yoriyoshi to his son
HachimantarōYoshiie, and he, hearing that Takehira and Munehira in the province of Dewa had
fortified themselves at Yamakita and Kanazawa and rebelled, hastened thither to put them down,
but though he was a daring and courageous warrior, it was three years before he was able to
conquer them. So, adding the nine years campaign  of Yoriyoshi to this, these swords did battle for
twelve years, and always, by reason of the virtue that was in them, the enemy was defeated.

    Yoshiie had many children, but his eldest son Tsushima -no-Kami Yoshichika was sent to
Izumo to quell a rebel lion there, and was slain by Inaba -no-kami Masamori, and neither his
second son Kawachi -no-Hangwan Yoshitada  nor his third Shikibu - no-Taiyū Yoshikuni received
the two swords, but they were given. to the fourth son Rokujō -no-Hangwan Tameyoshi. When
he was fourteen years old his uncle Mino -no-kami Yoshitsuna revolted, and he was sent to attack
him. When Yoshitsun a. heard that his own nephew Tameyoshi was marching against him, he cut
off his queue and surrendered. This also was through the virtue of the swords. Again, when he
was eighteen years old, some rebel priests of Nara made a confederacy against the Throne a nd
marched on the Capital, many myriads strong, whereupon Tameyoshi with only sixteen
horsemen rode out against them to Kurikoyama, and by the might of the two blades, drove them
back again. On this occasion a certain Yamahoshi composed this comic verse:



     " Down cane the Nara monks as far as Kurikoyama. ;
     There a few soldiers appeared: rapidly captured the lot."

This satire irritated the monks of Nara, and while they were considering what answer they could
make to it, they heard that some monks of Hieizan had been tricked by a certain Awa -no-Jōsa
and put into prison, so they commemorated it in these lines:

[p. 334]

     " Why thus easily duped by the wiles of Awa -no-Jōsa ;
     Foolish monks of Hid, how do you find it in jail ? "

     So, as a  reward for thus having made his uncle prisoner at the age of fourteen, Tameyoshi was
appointed to be Sakon -no-Shokan, and for his loyalty in having repelled the Nara monks at the
age of eighteen he was made Hyōye -no-Jō : at thirty eight he became Saemon, and at thirty nine
Kebiishi. Afterwards he set his heart on becoming Governor of Mutsu, but this province was a
place of ill -omen for him, since his grandfather Yoriyoshi had been fighting there for nine years,
and his father Yoshiie for three ; so that it  was thought that the people would still feel enmity
against the family, and if Tameyoshi were appointed to govern it disorder might ensue, so they
asked him to take another province instead. But he replied that if he could not have his ancestral
province he did not want any at all, and so the matter ended by his receiving none.

     Now Tameyoshi had forty six children by various mothers, and he had a consort also at
Kumano, who had a daughter called the maid of Tatsutahara. And it happened once that the Hō-
ō Go -Shirakawa made a pilgrimage to Kumano and enquired if there was a Bettō there ; and
when they told him that there was not, he said that this was not as it should be, and bade them
elect one.

     Now there were two clans at Kumamo called Ui and Su suki, whose ancestors had come over
to this country as the right and left wings of the Gongen when he flew over from Magadha in
India, and they had taken possession of Kumano and behaved themselves as they pleased without
regard to anyone. And the Susuki p lanned to make a certain Yamabushi, who came there to pray
and offer flowers before the shrine, the Bettō. He protested that he was not fit for the office, but
they constrained him, and this was the origin of Kyōshin Bettō. Then they said that a Bettō must
be hereditary, so that he must not live as a priest, but take a wife. Looking about to find one for
him, they thought that Tameyoshi's daughter, the Maid of

[p. 335]

Tatsutahara, would do very well, so they married her to him. When Tameyoshi heard of i t he was
displeased, at it, saying:

“The man who becomes my son -in-law ought to be a warrior of distinction among the Taira or
Minamoto clans. Those who hold the office of Bettō or Shugyō of temples and shrines may be
good men or not; I hear they are chos en from the crowd on account of their religious merit, but I
think it very strange conduct that she should allow herself to be mated with such a fellow who
has no future before him, and send me no word of it: she is a most unfilial daughter." Then the

two swords that had been handed down to Tameyoshi made noises all night long; and the noise
made by Oni -maru was like the roaring of a lion, while that made by Kumo -giri was like the
hissing of a snake. So they changed the name of Oni -maru to Shishi -no-ko (Lio n cub), and that of
Kumo -giri to Hoe -maru (Roarer). At this time it was noised abroad that the Genji and Heike had
taken up hostile positions, and there would be a battle, so within the Capital there was great
confusion. As the news soon penetrated to the remotest mountain and province, it was not long
before Kyoshin Bettō heard it. " I may be unfilial," said he, " but at a time like this I will cast in
my lot with him. and perhaps he will pardon my neglect." So he gathered all the priests of all
ranks who were living at his shrine, and who could bear arms, and rode up to the Capital with
some ten thousand horsemen. When people saw them they exclaimed:

" What kind of a man is this ? In the provinces of Kii and Izumi we do not remember to have
heard of a gre at leader like this." But when they enquired more closely, they heard that it was
Tameyoshi's son -in-law, Kyoshin, the Bettō of Kumano. When his father in law heard that he had
come to join him, he declared that he was a very worthy fellow, though he knew nothing about
his name or lineage.  And when he afterwards ascertained that he was the youngest grandson of
Sanekata Chūjō, and by birth by no means beneath himself, he was sorry he had not troubled to
meet him till now. So he forgave him

[p. 336]

and re ceived him, and in recognition of his good will towards himself, presented him the ancestral
sword Hoe -maru as a wedding gift. But Kyoshin Bettō, declaring that such an one as he was not
worthy to possess the hereditary blade of the Genji, offered it to th e shrine of the Gongen. And
Tameyoshi, thus bereft of one of his swords, felt as though he had lost a hand, so he summoned
his favourite sword smith from the province of Harima, and bade him forge a blade that should
be the exact counterpart of Shishi -no-ko. The smith made one of the finest temper, and
Tameyoshi was exceedingly pleased with it, and as he fitted it with „menuki ' made in the shape
of crows, he named it Ko -garasu, or „Little Crow.' So he treasured these two blades, Shishi -no-ko
and Ko -garasu,  as being of equal worth, but Ko -garasu was two bu longer than the other. And it
happened one day that he drew both of them and placed them up against the shoji of the room
where he was, when, without anyone touching them, they fell down with a great clatt er, and
when he took them and looked to see why they had fallen, and if they were damaged, he
perceived that Ko -garasu, which had erstwhile appeared to be longer by two bu, was now the
same length as Shishi -no-ko. " Strange ! " he thought, " how can this b e? " But when he examined
the point to see whether it was broken or cut off, there was no sign of either thing. Still
wondering, he looked at the hilt, but the menuki were not disturbed, so he removed the blade
from the hilt and behold! two bu of the tang inside it had been newly cut away, while, when he
pushed out the menuki, they seemed to be lower down. Concluding, therefore, that Shishi no ko
had cut the piece off, he changed its name to Tomo -kiri, or Comrade -cutter. Thereafter, being
advanced in years and infirm, and considering that the swords could be of no further use to him,
he handed them on to his heir Shimozuke -no-mi Yoshitomo. Then, when the war of the Hogen
period began, Yoshitomo was summoned to the Emperor's Palace, while Tameyoshi went to th at
of the Retired Emperor with his six other sons. On

[p. 337]

the eleventh day of the seventh month of the year of Hogen the battle began at the hour of the

Tiger, (4. a.m.) and at the hour of the Dragon, (8. a.m.) it ended ; for in three hours the army  of
the Retired Emperor was shattered and defeated. Then Tameyoshi fled to Hieizan, and becoming
a recluse changed his name to Gi -hō-bō while his son Yoshitomo, anxious to save his father's life,
sought earnestly to obtain his pardon ; but since he was an enemy of the Throne it was of no avail,
and after a while, to his infinite sorrow he received the news that he had been put to death.
Yoshitomo himself, as a reward for his services on this occasion, was promoted to be Sama -no-
kami, but of his six brothers  who had been summoned by their father, five were slain, and one
only, Tametomo, escaped. He, after some time had elapsed, was brought from Tane in Kyūshū
and banished to the province of Izu, but in the end he too was executed, and his four sons with
him.

     Thus Yoshitomo alone survived, but in the first year of Heiji he was persuaded by Aku -
Uemon -no-kami Nobuyori to raise a rebellion. He had many sons, but of them all he singled out
the third, Uhyōye -no-suke Yoritomo, to succeed him as the head of the house in the next
generation, and at the age of thirteen he clad him in a suit of armour called Suzushi, and girt on
him the sword Tomo -kiri, giving him the preeminence over all the others. But he was defeated in
the battle that ensued, and being an enemy of the Throne he fled from the Capital and took
refuge at Hira in the west of the province of Ōmi, and there all night he murmured against the
god Hachiman -Dai-bosatsu ; " In former days with this blade I smote my enemies and laid them
low as grass in the wind, but now the virtue has gone from it, and the Dai -bosatsu has surely
forsaken me, else sh ould I not have been thus impotent in the battle. My grandfather Yoshiie
became as the son of the Dai -bosatsu, and was called after him Hachimantarō, receiving a
promise that he would not abandon his family for seven generations; whereas I Yoshitomo am
but the third." Then the god answered him in

[p. 338]

a dream and said: " I have not forsaken you, and the sword Tomo -kiri which was suddenly given
to Mitsunaka would not have lost its efficacy if it had still kept its early name Hige -kiri or Hiza -
maru ; bu t as its name has been changed several times it has gradually grown weaker, and when at
last it received the name of Tomo -kiri, it cased to smite the enemy and turned against its own
possessor. That Tameyoshi was slain in Hogen, and that all his children p erished with him, was
solely on account of this name, and since it is also because of it that you have been defeated now,
it is not against me that you must make complaint, but if you restore the sword its ancient name
your family will again be prosperous. " When the deity had thus made it all clear to him,
Yoshitomo awoke, and perceiving how unwise he had been to give the sword so ill -omened a
name, he again changed it to its ancient style of Hige -kiri. So they left Hira and passed through
Takashima, and Yo ritomo became drowsy in the saddle as they rode on, and lagged behind his
father some way. Then some of the men of those parts, to the number of about seventy or eighty,
rode up and set on him to take him alive, but Yoritomo, at once awakened, drew forth H ige-kiri
and laid about him with it, whereby some were wounded and very many killed : a sign that the
blade was itself again. That night they abode at Shiotsu, but at midnight, having obtained a guide,
they departed to the east of the province of Ōmi. Hearing that the barrier at Fuwa -no-seki had
been closed, and that a force had set out from the Capital to seize them, Yoshitomo turned aside
and plunged into the snow -covered mountains, but Yoritomo, who was yet but a child, could not
make his way th rough the thick snow, so he stayed behind at the entrance of the defile.
Akugenda Yoshihiro, the eldest son, fled away by himself to the province of Hida, and
Yoshitomo with the second son Tomonaga escaped to Mino and stayed in the house of a harlot at

Aohaka, after which he with one retainer went round by the coast and sought refuge with Osada
Shōji Tadamune, who lived at Utsumi -in-Noma in the province

[p. 339]

of Owari, and who fell on them and slew both lord and retainer in the early morning of the fir st
day of the first month of the second year of Heiji. This Tadamune was a vassal of Yoshitomo, and
was also the father in law of the retainer Masakiyo, and that a man should slay both his hereditary
lord and his son -in-law is an act that appears the more base the more it is considered. Tadamune
then sent the heads of the two, together with the sword Kogarasu, to the Capital for the
inspection of the Heike. Yoritomo was lef t behind at the entrance to the mountain pass, but was
rescued by one Kusano Shōji from eastern Ōmi. He was quite small enough to be concealed in
the ceiling, but being very shrewd he carefully considered and carne to the conclusion that he was
sure to be discovered in the end, and though he thought little of his own life, he felt very dejected
at the prospect of the treasured sword of the Genji being taken by the Heike. Wondering how he
could conceal it, he said to Shōji; "Your caring for me thus must be t he result of some connexion
in a former life, and I now look on you entirely as a parent. Now the chief priest of the shrine of
Atsuta in Owari is my maternal uncle; I pray you go thither and take this sword and say to him;
Yoritomo is in strict hiding at such a place, but will surely be discovered at last ; but though
he be taken and put to death this blade must not be given up, so do you deposit it in the shrine."
So Shōji went down to Atsuta and brought the message of Yoritomo to the chief priest, and he
bestowed the sword in the treasure house of the shrine.

     Now Kiyomori's younger brother Mikawa -no-kami Yorimori had been made Governor of
Owari as a reward for his merit in the fighting of Heiji, and he appointed Yayobyōye
Munekiyo his Mokudai or Dep uty, and he, when he was going up to the Capital, having heard
where Yoritomo was concealed, arrested him and took him with him. Being kept for a while in
the house of Munekiyo, he would have certainly been put to death but for the entreaties of Ike -
no-Gozen, the wife of Yori.

[p. 340]

mori, but was only banished to Hiru -ga-kojima at Hōjō in the province of Izu. Twenty one years
later, in the summer of the fourth year of Ji -shō when he had reached the age of thirty four,
having raised a revolt at the bidding of Takakura -no-miya and als o according to the Imperial Edict
of the Hō -ō he sent to the shrine of Atsuta for the sword Hige -kiri and once more girded it on,
and so it was that he was able to subdue the whole Empire to his will.

     Now at the time of the wars of Heiji Tokiwa had a  child who was then called by his youthful
name of Ushiwaka, and who afterwards at the age of nine entered the temple of Kurama, and was
instructed by the priest Kakuen -bō Ajari Enjō the disciple of Tōkō -bo Ajari Ennin, and thereafter
changed his name to S hanaō. In the spring of the fourth year of the period Shō -an, at the age of
sixteen, he set out for the East Country in the company of a gold merchant of Gojō named
Kitsuji Sueharu, and on the way underwent the ceremony of Gempuku, taking the name of Kuro
Minamoto Yoshitsune. Then he was received by Gontarō   Hidehira of Mutsu, and while
sojourning there he heard that Yoritomo had begun his rebellion, and in great joy rode away to
join him, At a place called Kanazawa he met his brother, and amid mutual rejoi cing they related
to each other all that had befallen them up to that time. Then Kiso -no-kwanja Yoshinaka of

Shinano, also in obedience to the order of Takaku a -no-miya, rose in rebellion, and beginning
with Shinano and Kobuke, subdued all the seven provin ces of the Hokurikudō, after which he
advanced on the Capital, and after driving out the Heike, for a while did as he pleased with the
whole Empire. But riot satisfied with this he must needs attack the Hōjūji -den, the Palace of the
Hō-ō and without paying  any heed to the Nobles and Courtiers burn and destroy it, even going so
far as to shut up the Ho o in the Gojō Palace, and dismiss from office and imprison his Courtiers.
Therefore was a messenger sent from the Court to Kamakura to complain of all these o utrages,
and Yoritoimo in great indignation sent an army of sixty

[p. 341]

thousand horsemen under the command of his two brothers Kaba -no-Kwanja Noriyori and Kuro -
no-Kwanja Yoshitsune.  On the twentieth day of the first month of the first year of Gen -ryaku
they entered the Capital, when Kiso Sama -no-kami was defeated and driven out, and his head
was taken at Awazu in Ōtsu. Then, when they were about to press on to Ichi -no-ani in Settsu to
destroy the Heike, Tanso the Bettō of Kumano came to the Capital. Now concerning him, it had
come to pass that the five sons that the Bettō Kyōshin had were appointed each to one of t he
shrines of Kumano, to Hongū, Shingū, Nachi, Wakada and Tanabe, and the one who was the
most distinguished was to succed him as Bettō according to his command which he left behind;
and since Tanso of Tanabe was the greatest of them all he was chosen to b ecome Bettō after his
father. And Tanso spoke saying; " The Genji are my maternal relations, and I am rejoiced to see
them gain the supremacy, moreover with Yoritomo I am on terms of friendship, and I hear that
he has sent down his brother as his represent ative to smite Kiso and to overthrow the Heike ;
therefore will I bring forth the ancestral sword of the Genji, that was first called Hiza -maru and
then Kumo -kiri, and .which is now known as Hoe -maru, which Kyōshin received from
Minamoto Tameyoshi and laid  up before the Gongen, and restore it to the Genji that they may
with it subdue the Heike." So he received the sword from the Gongen and went up to the
Capital and presented it to Kurō Yoshitsune, who rejoiced beyond measure and gave it the name
of Usu -midori or Light -green. And this was because it came forth from the spring mountains of
Kumano ; for in summer the hills of that place are of a deep -green colour, but in spring they are
light green: And from the time that he possessed this sword the men of the  San-in and San -yō
districts and the warriors of the Nankai -do and Sankai -do, who had up till this time been on the
side of the Heike, renounced their allegiance and came over to the Genji.

     Then on the third day of the second month the Genji went

[p. 342]

forth from the Capital and marched to Ichi -no-tani, and there the army was divided into two
parts, and Noriyori with fifty thousand horsemen advanced into Settsu, while the reserve under
Yoshitsune set out from Mikusayama. From the hour of the Har e (6 p.m.) until the hour of the
Snake (10 a.m.) of the seventh day both armies fought fiercely with one accord, and victory rested
with the Genji, the Heike fleeing as best they might. Their Commander Echizen -no-Sammi
Michimori and eight others of their n obles were slain, and on the thirteenth day their heads were
carried through the streets of the Capital and fixed on the gibbet. As a reward for their success in
this battle, on the sixth day of the eighth month Kurō Onzōshi became Saemon -no-kami, and
soon afterwards by a special Edict of the Hō -ō he was promoted to Go -i-no-Jō, being known as
Taiyu Hōgwan, while Kaba no -Onzōshi was made Mikawa -no-kami. On the eleventh day of the

second month of the second year they again set out against the Heike, and when the ships were
about to start at Watanabe and Kansaki, Kurō Hōgwan and Kajiwara Heizō fell into a dispute as
to whether a back -water oar should or should not be fitted, and enmity arose between them. But
Yoshitsune, not at all in fear of the violent gale t hat blew, crossed over with but fifty ships and
fifty horsemen, whereas Kajiwara, who feared the storm, did not arrive until the day after. With
the help of a guide Yoshitsune attacked and burned the buildings at Yashima, and on the twenty
second day of th e third month he reached Akamagaseki in the province of Nagato. Noriyori with
the warriors of Kyūshū headed for Moji -no-seki in the province of Buzen, so that the Heike host
was taken between them arid the last desperate fight began. The Heike were at leng th defeated,
and the Nii Dono, taking the Emperor in her arms, sprang with him into the sea, while the
former Naidaijin Munemori and thirty eight others were captured alive. The Hōgwan fought in
many battles but never even received a wound, and in every on e he was victorious, making a
great name for himself throughout the whole Empire;

[p. 343]

and all this was solely on account of the might of this ancestral blade. Thus he subdued all the
Nankaidō and Saikaidō and returned to the Capital carrying with hi m the captive leaders of the
Heike, and restored the Three Sacred Treasures to the Imperial City. Only of the Three Sacred
Treasures he brought back but the Mirror and the Jewel, for the Sacred Sword was
lost in the sea.

     Now the Jewel, the Sword and the Mirror are the Three Sacred Treasures of our Imperial
Throne, and the jewel has been handed down from the age of the gods, and is kept in a marked
casket as a talisman to protect each generation of Sovereigns. And this casket is never opened, so
that n o one has seen what is in it. The Emperor Go -Rei-zei-in for some reason or other tried to
open the casket, but when he took off the lid immediately a white cloud rose from within it.
After a while the cloud returned again as it was, and Kii -no-Naiji replac ed the lid and tied it
down again. Nippon is a small country, but in this thing it surpasses even great ones. If the
Emperor himself, Lord of the mightiest powers, was not permitted to see it, how should ordinary
people do so, much less any others of lesse r rank still ?

     Now this Sacred jewel has on it letters showing it to be the seal of a god. And how it was that
the seal of a god came to become the Sacred Treasure of the Imperial House is not clear, but if
we search carefully into the matter, it may  be revealed in the origin of our country.  Kunitoko -
tachi-no-Mikoto the first of the seven generations of Heavenly Deities, let down his Celestial
Spear to see if there was any country beneath, and sounded to the bottom of the ocean, but
finding no land d rew it up again, when a drop that fell from the point of it congealed and
hardened and became an island. And as a presage of the birth of our country there appeared
floating on the waves of the sea the characters Dai -Nichi ; and as it was on these characte rs that
the drop from the spear stood and became an island, the name of Dai -Nippon was given to the
country. And it was the

[p. 344]

island of Awaji that was the origin of Nippon. From Kunitoko -tachi-no-Mikoto the next three
generations were male deities ; there were no female ones. In the following three generations from
U-hiji-ni-no-Mikoto of the fourth generation to Omo - daruno -Mikoto of the sixth there were

both male and female deities, but they did not marry. In the seventh generation Izanagi and
Izanami-no-Mikoto descended to the isle of Awaji and there married. Then they planted the
mountains, rocks, herbs and trees, and created the great Land of Eight Islands, after which they
created many countries, and since there was as, yet no master in the worl d, they bore one
daughter and three sons, Hi -no-kami, Tsuki -no-kami, Hiruko and Susa -no-o-no-Mikoto. Hi -no-
kami, the Deity of the sun, that is Ten -shō-dai-jin the Deity of the Dai -jingu or Shrine of Ise; and
Tsuki -no-kami, the Moon Deity, is Tsuki -yomi -no-Mikoto, who is called Takano Niu Daimyojin.
As for Hiruko, since this deity was not able to stand on his fee t for three years, he was put into a
celestial boat of camphor wood and set adrift on the ocean, whereupon he floated till he came to
the province of Settsu, becoming the Deity of the Sea, and revealing himself as Ebisu Saburō
Dono whose dwelling is at Nis hi-no-miya. Susano -o-no-Mikoto was a deity of uproarious temper
and was banished to the province of Izumo, where he afterwards became the deity of the Great
Shrine. Thus Izanagi and Izanami -no-Mikoto gave this country to Tenshōdaijin, and the
mountains to Tsuki -yomi -no-Mikoto, while Hiruko received the sea as his domain, but Susa -no-
o-no-Mikoto got nothing, and so he often fought with his brethren, and for this unfilial conduct
he was banished to the land of Izumo.

     But though Tensho daijin had thus re ceived the land of Nippon she was unable to govern it
according to her will, for Mara of the Six Devalokas, the, Lord of Evil who dwelt in the
Paranirmita Vas'avartin, held possession of the Six Devalokas to do as he would therein. And
since the land of Ni ppon was beneath the Six Devalokas, he claimed that it fell within his

[p. 345]

sphere and should be under his authority. But seeing that this country was an island that had its
birth on the characters Dai Nichi, it must be a land devoted to the Law of B uddha, and in that
case its inhabitants would be able to escape from the circle of birth and death, so he wished to
keep it entirely in his own power, so that no people should be suffered to live there, and so
Buddhism might be prevented from spreading. An d as he would not allow her, Tenshō -daijin
could do nothing, and so three hundred and fifteen thousand years passed. So after this long
period the Deity sought out Mara to obtain permission and said to him; " If you will grant me to
take possession of the land that has been given to me, I will not let the Buddhist Law or
Priesthood come nigh it." And when Mara heard this he opposed her no further and permitted it
on this condition ; and when 'this permission was given, the Deity sealed it in token of agreem ent.
And this seal is the Sacred Jewel.

     With regard to the Sacred sword, it appears that there were two Divine Blades handed down
from the Age of the Gods, and these are Ame -no-murakumo -no-tsurugi and Ame -no-haha- kiri-
no-tsurugi. Of these it is the first, Ame -no-murakumono -tsurugi, which is the Sacred sword or
Divine Talisman of the Sovereigns. In the sixth month of the first year of the era Shu -cho, during
the reign of Temmu Tennō, it was deposited in the shrine of Atsuta in the province of Owari.
Ame-no-haha- kiri-no-tsurugi was formerly called Totsuka -no-tsurugi, or the Ten -handbreadth
sword, but after the slaying of the great serpent it was re named Ame -no-haha- kiri-no-tsurugi.
This was because the serpent's tail was called „haha.' It was also ca lled 'orochi.' And this sword
was afterwards deposited in the shrine of Iso -no-kami -furu in the province of Yamato. In ancient
days, when Susa -no-o-no-Mikoto resided in the province of Izumo, a great serpent lived in the
mountains about the upper waters of  the River Hi in that province, and it had eight heads and
tails, and its eight tails filled eight valleys. Its eyes were like the sun and moon, and on its back

moss grew, and all

[p. 346]

manner of trees and herbs sprouted. Year by year it swallowed up men, so that children mourned
their swallowed parents and parents lamented for their swallowed children, and from the villages
on the south and north the sound of wailing went up continually. So the whole population of the
land was destroyed, and two Mount ain Deities, Te -nazu-chi and his wife Ashi -nazu-chi alone
were left. They had an only daughter named Inada -hime, aged eight, and placing her between
them they mourned and wept without ceasing. Susa -no-o-no-Mikoto felt compassion for them
and asked what the  matter was, whereupon the Deity Te nazu -chi answered and said: We weep
for our dearly loved only daughter Inada -hime, who will be devoured this night by the eight
forked serpent. " Will you give the maiden to me if I slay the serpent ?" answered he, takin g pity
on them. Then Te -nazu- chi and Ashi -na-zuchi rejoiced greatly and replied; " If you will kill the
great serpent we will gladly give you our daughter." Then the Deity made a plan to slay the great
serpent. Making up a lofty bed, he dressed Inada -hime  in splendid attire and sticking a Yuzu -
tsuma comb in her hair, stood her thereon. On all four sides he kindled fires around it, and
beyond the fires he placed jars full of sake on eight sides. At midnight came the eight forked
serpent to devour Inada -hime , and saw her on top of the bed, but as the fires were burning all
round her he could not approach. Then, as he stood gazing at her, he saw her reflexion cast into
the jars of sake, and in great jubilation he thrust all his eight heads into the eight jars and drank
hard and long, after which, overcome by his load of liquor, he sank down prostrate and oblivious
of all about him. Then the Deity drew his sword and hewed him to pieces, but when he came to
the tails his sword was stopped by something. Looking in  surprise he saw that the edge of the
sword was turned, and when he tore the tail open, behold! there was another sword within it. As
it was a very excellent blade lie presented it to Ten -shō-daijin. It was called Ame -no-murakurno -
no-tsurugi, and the reaso n for this name was that when it

[p. 347]

was in the tail of the serpent black clouds always covered it, and so it was called “cloud -cluster”
sword. Now wind went forth from the tail of this great serpent and rain fell from its head. It was
the Dragon -king of the winds and waters that descended to the earth. Then Tenazuchi, rejoicing
that his daughter's life was saved, gave her in marriage to the Deity, and presented him with a
mirror three feet six inches in circumference, and when Inada hime went to him  she threw
behind her the comb that was stuck in her hair: and this is what is called „the comb of parting.' So
Susa-no-o-no-Mikoto built a Palace in the land of Izumo and lived there with Inada -hime as his
wife, and feeling remorse for the trouble he had caused his elder brethren, he gave to
Tenshodaijin the sword Ame -no-murakumo -no-tsurugi which he had taken from the tail of the
great serpent, the blade Ame -no-haha-kiri-no-tsurugi, and the mirror which he had received as a
bridal gift from Te -nazu-chi, an d so his unfilial conduct was forgiven. And it is this mirror that is
the Naiji -dokoro, or Sacred Mirror.

     In the reign of Itoku Tennō, the fourth earthly Sovereign, three mirrors fell from heaven ; one
was this bridal mirror, the other two were those  which Ten sho daijin made when she shut
herself into the Heavenly rock dwelling, that the reflection of her features might be preserved
therein, and that when her descendants looked on them they might see as it were herself. The
first that was made was sm all, and so another was made. And the first is that which is

worshipped in the shrine of Hi -no-kuma in the province of Kii, while the second is attached to a
rock about one ri off the coast of Futami -no-ura in the province of Ise; and when the tide rises i t
comes up upon the rock, and when it ebbs it falls again ; and formerly they used to go over
thither in a boat, when the sea was calm, and worship it. And the bridal mirror is the Sacred
Mirror which is kept in the Palace as the Imperial Talisman. But in the days of Sujin Tennō, the
tenth Sovereign, the hall where it was kept became unsuitable, so a new one was built and a new
mirror cast, the old one being given back to Ten -sho-daijin. And this newly cast

[p. 348]

mirror, as well as the sword which was re-made were not at all inferior to the original ones in
Divine Virtue. But in the fortieth year of Kei -ko Tennō the twelfth Sovereign, many of the
Eastern Barbarians rebelled against the Imperial Rule, and the Eastern Provinces were disquieted,
so the sec ond Imperial Prince Yamato -take-no-Mikoto, who was a most intrepid warrior of great
strength, was sent to bring them to subjection. In the tenth month of the winter of the same year
he set out, and going first to the shrine of Ise he told the priestess Yam ato-hime -no-Mikoto that
by the Imperial Command he was going to smite the Eastern Barbarians, and she brought forth
the sword Ame -no-murakumo which had been given back in the days of Sujin Tennō. Yamato
take girded it on and went on his way down to the Eas tern Provinces, but as he was on the road a
strange thing happened; the great eight forked serpent that had been injured by Susa -no-o-no-
Mikoto in the land of Izumo came down from heaven and rudely sought his life. His wrath at
having been deprived of the sword had not abated, so he determined to stop Yamato -take-no-
Mikoto, who had just girded it on to march against the Eastern Provinces, and take it from him,
and with this intent he became a poisonous serpent and lay in wait for him at Fuwa -no-seki. But
the Prince paid no heed to him, but sprang over him and went on to the province of Owari,
where he stayed in the house of a certain Gendaiyū at a place called Matsuko -no-shima. And
Gendaiyū had a daughter whose name was Iwato -ime, a maiden of graceful form a nd lovely face,
whom the Prince summoned to his presence, and who found favour with him so that they spent
that night in mutual love. So deep was their affection that they would have desired to stay
together, but since the Prince felt that it would not be right to allow such dalliance with a lady to
interrupt his expedition against the Barbarians, he soon started off again, promising to meet her
again on his return. Coming to the slopes of Mount Fuji in the province of Suruga, some evil
fellows of the men o f that country met him and invited him to

[p. 349]

hunt the stags which were very plentiful in the moorland, but when he went forth to do so, these
rascals fired the moor with intent to burn His Augustness to death. Then the Prince drew the
sword Ame -no-murakumo -no-tsurugi and with it mowed down the grass, so that the fire caught
the swathes and menaced his enemies. Moreover he had with him also two stones, called the
stone of fire and the stone of water, and he straightway cast the latter, whereupon wate r issued
from it and put out the fire; after which he threw the stone of fire, which vomited forth flames
and consumed these worthless fellows. And by reason of this matter that moor was called Ame -
no-yakesome -no, or the Moor -of-the-Burning, while Ame -no-murakumo -no-tsurugi was re -
named Kusa -nagi-no-tsurugi, or Grass -mowing sword. Now the Prince could not forget Iwato -
hime whom he had left behind, and wished to let her know the state of his feelings at whatever
cost : so he flung the stone of fire and the s tone of water from the slopes of Fuji to Matsuko -no-
shima in the province of Suruga, and they fell, the one on the northern part and the other on the

southern part of the rice -fields cultivated by a certain Kidaiyū. And during the one night that they
rested here, the southern part on which the stone of water fell became a wood covered with
thick trees, while on the northern part, however great floods might appear, no water was ever
seen; but on the other part water was never lacking even in the greatest dro ught. These things
were owing to the virtue of the two stones.

     Then His Augustness the Prince Yamato -take journeyed on into the country and subdued all
evil-doers, pacifying also the bad deities of all these places, after which he returned to the
province of Owari in the fifty third year of his father's reign, and once more rejoiced in the love
of Iwato -hime. But as this could not last forever he again set out for the Capital, leaving her the
sword Kusa -nagi as a memento of him. "But as I am a woman,"  she said, "of what use can a sword
be to me?" As. however the prince still urged her to take it, thinking there

[p. 350]

was some reason, she hung it on the branch of a mulberry tree, and His Augustness departed for
the Capital.

     Now the eight -forked great serpent Ibuki Daimyōjin, resentful that the Prince had jumped
over him before and escaped, came forth on the road in greater bulk than ever to intercept him,
but His Augustness paid no more heed to him than on the former occasion, and sprang clear  over
him and passed on. This time, however, the tip of his foot touched the serpent as he leapt, and
before long he was seized with a fever that spread through his whole body, and though enduring
it with difficulty, so stubborn was his spirit that he woul d by no means lie down, but in great
suffering continued his journey as far as the province of Ōrni. Sitting down on a stone by the
roadside where a cold, clear spring of water was flowing forth, the Prince bathed his foot in the
stream, and as he thus sto od in it, the coolness of the water caused the fever to abate. Therefore is
the name of this stream called Samegai, or The Well of Cooling.  But though the fever subsided,
his sickness was still heavy upon him, so after dedicating the captive Barbarians to  the great shrine
of Ise and sending Takehiko to announce it, unable to do more, he lay down at Sen -no-matsubara
in the province of Omi. Meanwhile at Matsuko -no-shima Iwato -hime felt so lonely after his
departure that at length she could contain herself no  longer, and started out for the Capital to
seek him, and on the way came to Sen -no-matsubara. As the Prince lay on his sick -bed, he was
thinking of her and longing to see her, so when his eyes, fell on her once again, in a transport of
joy he exclaimed; " Aah Tsuma! Oh, my wife!" and since that the Eastern Provinces are called
Azuma. But as time went on the Prince's condition became worse, and at last he died, and was
changed into a white bird which flew away toward the south. Iwato -hime mourned and lamente d
in the utmost grief at the death of His Augustness, but as all was unavailing she returned weeping
to Owari. The Prince's followers, in their grief at parting from their master, followed him as he
went, and

[p. 351]

after coming down to rest a while in  the district of Nagusa in the province of Kii, this place
seemed not to please him, and he flew back again toward the East and came to Matsuko -no-
shima in the province of Owari. When he was flying in the form of a white bird, he appeared like
two white ba nners ten feet long; and the place where he alighted in the province of Owari was
called Shira -tori Tsuka, or the Mound of the White Bird, while from the appearance of the

banners falling there is a place called Hataya, or House of Banners, and it was no d oubt because
Hyoye -no-suke Yoritomo was to become the chief of the Genji in the future that he was born in
this place.

     Now Iwato -hime took down the sword Kusa -nagi which she had hung on the branch of a
mulberry tree, and stood it against a sugi tree of the shrine in the wood that had grown up in a
single night on the field of Kidaiyū, and every night fire flashed forth from it so that the sugi tree
was burned down, and as this turned cedar fell into the ricefield, the field also became hot,
therefore is the name of it called Atsuta or Hotfield. And Yamato -take-no-Mikoto flew thither in
the form of a white bird and alighted, and became a god; and he is the present Atsuta Daimyojin.
Iwato -hime, thus parted from her ever -beloved lord, became manifest as a  deity too, while
Gendaiyū and Kidaiyū became gods also. And they built a shrine and deposited the sword Kusa -
nagi-no-tsurugi therein, and every night a light flashed forth from it. But none save virtuous men
learned in the Law might see it. Moreover a cer tain priest of Shiragi, a S'ramanera of high rank
named Dogyō, seeing the light that flashed from this sword in Nippon, told the Emperor of his
country, which when the Emperor heard he bade him get the sword and present it to him. So the
priest crossed ove r to Nippon and went as a pilgrim to Atsuta, where, after worshipping for
seven days, he contrived to steal the sword, and wrapping it in the folds of his kesa of five
breadths, fled away with it. But the sword cut its way out of the kesa and went back to the shrine.
Again he returned and stayed in the, shrine yet another

[p. 352]

seven days, and took the sword and wrapped it in a kesa of seven breadths and went off.  But
again the sword tore its way out of the kesa and returned to the shrine. Once more h e went back
and stayed another seven days, and on this occasion he took a kesa of nine breadths of stuff, and
this time the sword could not get out, and he carried it off as far as Hakata in Tsukushi. Then the
Deity of Atsuta, incensed at his presumption, sent down the Sumiyoshi Daimyōjin to smite him,
and he kicked Dōgyōto death and recovered the sword. At this the Emperor of Shiragi gave seven
swords to a certain general named Ike Fudō and sent him to Nippon. Ike Fudo fought his way as
far as the province  of Owari, when the Deity of Atsuta kicked him also to death in his
indignation, and taking the seven swords added them to Kusa -nagi and laid them up in the shrine,
and thus it is that he is now called Yatsurugi -no-Daimyōjin, or the Deity of Eight Swords. Then,
after many generations had passed, the Heike took one of these other sacred swords in which no
divine spirit resided, and went forth from the Capital, and the Nii -Dono girded it on and leaped
into the sea. Greatly grieving that what had been preserve d from such ancient days should now
be lost in this generation, they procured divers to search for it, but skilled as they were they could
not find it. This was because the Dragon Sea -god had taken it and laid it up in his Palace beneath
the waves. But a c ertain person had a dream concerning this Kusa -nagi-no-tsurugi to the effect
that the Dragon King of the Winds and Waters, since when in the form of the Eight -forked
Serpent he had been attacked by Susa -nō-o-no Mikoto and the sword taken from him, being
really Ibuki Daimyōjin, again took the form of a serpent at Fuwa -no-seki and tried to stop
Yamato -take-no-Mikoto, who had received it from the Great Shrine of Ise, but could not, and so
made another attempt when the Prince was returning to the Capital, but w as there killed.
Afterwards he again appeared under the guise of Ike Fudo and also in the form of the eight -year
old Emperor, but was unable to get the real sword, and only

[p. 353]


obtained the later one, with which he sank down to the bottom of the wat ers of the Western Sea,
and as he deposited it in the Palace of the Dragon Sea -god it could not be found.

     Now Kurō Hōgwan Yoshitsune proceeded to the Eastern Provinces with the Heike captives,
but owing to the slanders of Kajiwara he was not allowed to enter Kamakura, but stayed outside
at Koshigoe. Greatly regretting this estrangement, he wrote a letter vowing his good faith, but
though he sent it many times it was of no avail, and so, as there was nothing more to be done he
started back towards the Capital, but on the way he went to the shrine of the Hakone Gongen
and offered the sword Usumidori, entreating the Deity to bring about a reconciliation with his
brother. Then Tosa -bō Shoshun came up to the Capital and plotted to take his life, but the
Hōgwan discovered it, and Tosa -bō fled into the recesses of Mount Kurama to Sojō -go-dani. But
the monks of Kurama remembered their ancient friendship, and seized him and handed him over
to Yoshitsune, who gave orders to Nakatsukasa -no-jō Tomokuni that he be p ut to death at
Rokujō to the west of Shujaku. Then, hearing that another force was coming up against him from
the East, Yoshitsune put out in a ship with five hundred horsemen on the Western Sea, but
meeting with a great storm he was carried to the shore o f Naniwa, and accompanied only by a
Shirabyōshi named Shizuka he fled to the mountains of Yoshino. Afterwards, making for the
north, he escaped as far as Mutsu, and spent three or four years there under the protection of
Hidehira Nyudō, but on the twenty n inth day of the fourth month of the fourth year of Bun -ji,
Yasuhira came against him with five hundred horsemen, when, after fighting to the last, he, then
aged thirty one, with his wife aged twenty two, and a little son and daughter both four years of
age, put an end to their lives and died. Thus by his giving the sword to the shrine of the Gongen,
even though he had not been reconciled with his brother we might know that his fate was sealed.

     Now on the night of the twenty eighth day of the fifth

[p. 354]

month of the fourth year of the Kenkyū era, the two brothers Soga -no-Jūrō-Sukenari and Soga -
no-Gorō Tokimune of Sagami received from Yukizane, the Bettō of the Hakone shrine, a sword
called Hyogo -kusari -no-tachi, that they might take vengeance on t he enemy of their father, and
were enabled thus to carry out their plan as they intended. And this sword was none other than
the blade Usu -midori which Yoshitsune had presented, and which was originally known as Hiza -
maru. And that they were able to accomp lish their vengeance on their father‟s foe, and thus win a
great name and renown through the whole Empire, was solely through the virtue of this sword.
After this Hiza -maru was given to Yoritomo, so that the two blades Hige -kiri and Hiza -maru, the
heredita ry treasures of the Genji family, which Tada -no-Mutsunaka had received from Hachiman
Dai-bosatsu, though for a while separated from each other, at last came together again, as a most
auspicious omen, in the possession of the Lord of Kamakura.





ERRAT A.

Vol. VII. ChapXII, P. 51. lka ni sen, etc. Note. The meaning of this verse would seem to be that
the deity was warning them not to follow the  Heike into exile.

Appendix.
 P. 3. Juzen. 十善          Dasa Kusalani.
 P. 8. Ko -Ka  黃河        Hwang -ho.
 P. 10. Tai-so, (To)   大宗




APPENDIX

CORRIGENDA TO VOL. 1.

Vol. I.
Chap. III. p. 9. 1. 8. For 'children' rd. ' retainers.'
Chap. VI. p. 23. I. 4. For 'I am unable ........   life ;' rd. 'even though I escape from the endless circle
of births and deaths.'
Chap.  VIII. p. 29. 1. 22. For 'Even the sun' etc. rd 'even as the sun shines, it pours unceasingly
down.'

VOL III.
Chap. I. p. III. I. 18. 'the illness of Shoyoden' etc. rd. 'whose illness in the Shoyoden was of like
nature.
For 'Chapter III' rd. Chapter IV. o n p. 120.
Chap. VIII. p. 135. I. 8. insert after 'crime,' I in receiving the emoluments of office without
teaching the Law,'

Vol. IV.
Chap. I. p. 163. I. 13. for 'Haku tei' rd. 'Boku Tei.'
Chap. XII. p. 193 I. 22. for 'rode down etc.' rd. 'fell from his h orse six times between Uji and
Mildera because he had no sleep the previous night, so they etc.'
Chap. XV. p. 207. I. 17. the first verse should rd.
'How does the cuckoo too wish to make your name known in the heavens.' and the second, I. 22.
'Only I drew the bow, leaving the arrow to fly.'

Vol. V.
Chap I. p. 214. note. after 'Shoryu etc.' insert, 'the Four Quadrants or Divisions of the Twenty
eight Constellations. The Azure Dragon, The Sombre Warrior, The Vermilion Bird, The White
Tiger.'
Chap. V. p 224. note two. For 道 rd. 通

Vol, VI.
Chap. IV. P. 271.I, 3. For 'Kujo' rd. 'Rokujo.'