CHAPTER XI.
SHISHI NO TANI.


Owing to this incident the Emperor's Gempuku was postponed to the twenty fifth day of the
same month, and was fixed take place at the Palace of the Retired Emperor, and as the Sessho's
presenc e would be then required, he received an Imperial communication appointing him Dajo -
daijin on the fourteenth day. Soon after, on the seventeenth day, he paid a visit of thanks to the
Retired Emperor, but still the condition of things generally seemed unset tled.

Thus this year ended and the third year of Ka -o began. In the fifth day of the first month the
Gempuku of the Emperor took place, and on the thirteenth day he visited the Retired Emperor
in state. The Ho -o and his Consort received him. His Majesty l ooked splendid indeed wearing the
Kammuri for the first time. As Imperial Gonsort he received one of the daughters of the Lay
priest Chancellor, and at the age of fifteen he was adopted as step son by the Ho -o.

Now Myo on in den, (Fujiwara Moronaga) was s till at this time Naidaijin -no-Sadaisho, and on his
resigning this office, one Tokudaiji -no-Dainagon Jittei -no-Kyo aspired to it in his stead ; Kwazan -
in-no-Chunagon Kanemasa -no-Kyo also wished for it; and [1]Shin-Dainagon Narichika -no-Kyo,
the third son o f the late Naka -no-Mikado To -Chunagon Kasei -no-Kyo also greatly desired it. This
Dainagon, being high in favour with the Retired Emperor, began to offer many prayers for it. He
stationed a

[p. 37]

hundred priests before the shrine of Hachiman to read the  [2]Dai-Hannya Kyo from beginning to
end for seven days, and while this was taking place, three doves flew forth from Oto -koyama to
the Tachibana tree which was before Koura Daimyojin and fought one another to the death.
Now doves are the well known messen gers of [3]Hachiman Dai -Bosatsu, and in a shrine or temple
such a thing was an extraordinary portent. The [4]Kengyo of that time, Kyosei -hoin by name,
reported it to the Imperial Court. This was no ordinary matter, so the omens must be consulted,
and a soo thsayer among the Shinto priests, on being referred to spake thus ; " This is a portent of
great weight, but it is not one that concerns the Emperor, but one of his subjects."   Then the
Dainagon, not at all perturbed thereat, since in the daytime people wo uld see him, went out
every night from his Palace at Naka -no-Mikado Karasu -Maru to the shrine of Kamo on foot seven
nights in succession. On the last night of the seven, on his arriving home again tired out, he fell
asleep for a short time and dreamed that  he went to the shrine of Kamo and opened the door of
the Holy of Holies, whereupon a very majestic voice sounded forth with these words; " O cherry
flowers, do not hate the river breeze of Kanzo, for it will not stop the flowers falling. " Then the
Dainago n, not at all afraid, set up an altar in a hollow cedar tree behind the sanctuary of the
Yashiro of Kamo and put there a saintly priest and had prayers offered according to the [5] Dakini
rite for a hundred days. 'Then it happened that suddenly the sky clo uded over and it thundered
exceedingly, a thunderbolt striking the great cedar tree and setting fire to it so that the shrine

seemed in danger.

[p. 38]

All the priests ran together to put it out, moreover they wished to drive out the holy priest who
was praying there, but he said ; " I intend to stay praying in this shrine for a hundred days, and is
now the seventy fifth day, so I cannot depart now," and he :d not move. This was reported by the
Shrine to the Imperial Palace, but the Emperor bade them do n othing that was not in accordance
with the law. Then the priests took white rods in their hands and struck the holy priest on the
neck so that at last they drove him out from the street Ichijo to the southward. The gods do not
accept discourtesy, and this Dainagon had fished to become Taisho, a thing quite unsuitable to his
rank, hence this strange happening. Now at this time the appointment of officials was not in
accordance with the will of the Ho -o, nor, with that of the Sessho -Kwampaku, but lay solely i n
the power the Heike. Even Tokudaiji Kwazan -in did not get this nice, but Komatsu Dono
Shigemori, the eldest son of the Nyudo, who was then Dainagon -no-Udaisho, changed over to
"Sadaisho, while the second son Munemori, who was Chunagon, passing over the h eads of others
his superiors, became Udaisho his stead. It is quite needless to say that Tokudaiji Dono, who was
a Dainagon of high lineage and of distinguished literary attainments and moreover head of his
family, felt great chagrin at being thus passed o ver in favour of Munemori, who :, as only second
son of the Heike family.

Although it was at first rumoured that he would become a priest, Tokudaiji Dono, wishing to see
how affairs would turn it, merely resigned his office of Dainagon and went into retir ement. Now
the Shin Dainagon Narichika -no-Kyo would naturally come after Tokudaiji Kwazan -in, but how
great was his wrath at the elevation of such a person as Munemori, second on of the Heike family.
So he went to the length of saying that would attain his  long sought goal through the destruction
of the Heike. His father had only been Chunagon when he was his age, but his youngest son had
become Dainagon of the upper second rank, and had received a great province as his fief, while

[p. 39]

his sons and r etainers also basked in the Imperial favour. What then was lacking to him that he
should plan such a thing ? It seems like the action of a demon. In the period of Heiji, when he
was Echigo -no-Chujo, he had taken the part of Nobuyori and ought properly to h ave lost his
head then, but his neck was saved by the intercession of Komatsu Dono. Now however,
forgetting all gratitude for this, even when no one was his enemy, he was spending all his time in
preparing weapons and collecting soldiers and practising mil itary activities to the exclusion of all
else. Now Shishi -no-tani on Higashi -yama, having Miidera behind it was a very fine strategic
position, and there was the mountain seat of Shunkwan Sozu, so he was always repairing thither
to plot the overthrow of th e Heike. One evening the Ho -o went also and with him went Joken -
Hoin the son of the late Shonagon Nyudo Shinsai. During the evening banquet they talked about
this matter, and Hoin said; " What a foolish thing ; many people may overhear it and it will soon
leak out and a crisis will ensue in the country." Then the Dainagon, changing his countenance,
stood up suddenly, and knocked over with the sleeve of his ' Kariginu ' a jar (heiji) that stood
before the Ho -o. His Majesty asked what he meant by it. The Dain agon returning to his seat
replied; " The overthrow of the Heishi." The Ho -o thereupon smiled with satisfaction and said, "
Let someone advance and dance the Sarugaku." Hei Hangwan Yasuyori came forth and said; "
There are too many jars (heiji) here and so  we are all intoxicated." Shunkwan Sozu replied, "

Then what shall we do with them ? " " It is best to take off their necks," interjected Saiko Hoshi,
as he took of the necks of the jars. [6]  Hoin, considering this all great folly, said little. However we
consider it, it was a terrible thing. Now who are those who were in favour of it? Omi -no-Chujo
Reiyo, commonly called Narimasa, Hosshoji -no-Shugyo Shunkwan Sozu , Yamashiro -no-kami
Motokane, Shikibu -no-taiho Masatsuna, Hei

[p. 40]

Hangwan Yasuyori, So Ha ngwan Nobufusa, Shin Hei Hangwan Sukeyuki. Among the retainers
Tada -no-Kurando Yukitsuna was the foremost : among the Court Guards (Hokumen) also many
were affected.