CHAPTER XI.
COMBINED PETITION OF TAE HEIKE.

Now the Heike Lords never even dreamed of such a thing as this. Kōfukuji  of Nara and Onjōji of
Miidera no doubt harboured resentment against them, so that, if they addressed

[p.45]

them it was unlikely that they would respond, but with Hieizan they had had no quarrel, neither
had its priests ever up to the present been disloyal to them. So ten of the Courtiers of that family
bethought themselves to write a petition and send it to the mountain, t o solicit the help of the
priests and invoke the divine aid of their gods and Buddhas. And these were the words of it :

"Regarding Enryakuji as our family temple and the god of Hiyoshi as our tutelary deity, reverently
worshipping the Buddhist Law of the T endai Sect. we, members of our one family, do here
respectfully offer a petition. And the reason is this. Ever since in the reign of Kwammu Tennō
Dengyō Daishi went to China and again returned to this land, and in this temple preached the
original Law of T endai and expounded the Sutras of the Mahayana, it has flourished greatly as a
sacred dwelling -place of religion and a source of peace and protection to our Empire. Now
Minamoto -no-Yoritomo, who was in exile in Izu, showing no repentance of his fault, on t he
contrary has set at nought the laws of the country and hatched evil plots, with which Yoshinaka,
Yukiie and many other of the Genji are associated, and has seized many provinces both near and
far, appropriating all their property and collecting their re venues. Therefore, relying on the
meritorious deeds of our ancestors and the skill and prowess of our soldiers, and bearing
moreover the Imperial Commands, we have taken in hand the punishment of these rebels and
the subduing of the traitors. Up to this ti me, however, the far -flung hosts of the Imperial Army
have not prevailed, but victory has, in some sort, rested with the impetuous and thronging forces
of the rebels. Without the aid of the gods and Buddhas how can we overcome the traitors?
Moreover, when we speak of the ancestors of our house, it was they who first founded your
venerable fanes, and from age to age have their descendants added their tribute of worship and
adoration. Now and henceforth will all our house rejoice in the joy of

[p. 46]

your temples, while the enemies of your shrines shall be counted as our own. Thus will we do
and thus will we instruct our descendants, that the memory of it may never perish. The house of
Fuji-wara hold the god of Kasuga as their tutelary deity and Kōfukuji as their family temple,
revering the Mahayana doctrine of the Hossō Sect; and so also are the fortunes of the Heike house
bound up with the shrine of Hiyoshi and the temple of Enryakuji, and the perfect teachings of its
Holy Law. It has been our l egacy from old time to consider the glory of our house, but now it is
for the sake of our Sovereign that we pray for the punishment of the rebels. We beseech ye, O
deities of the Seven Great Shrines, and Ye gods of the far -ranging shrines of the whole moun tain,
and thy twelve sacred promises, O Yakushi Nyorai; pour upon us the beneficent light of thy
kindly truth, and come to meet us with thy gracious aid. That the hands of these evil plotters may
be bound at the gate of our camp, and that we may bring thei r heads in triumph to the Capital.
This is the united petition of our whole house. Jū -sammi Echizen -no-kami Taira -no-Ason

Michimori, Jūsammi Ukonye -no-Chujō Taira -no Ason Sukemori, Shō -sammi Ukonye -no-Chujō
Iyo-no-kami Taira -no-Ason Koremori, Shō -sammi Sak onye-no-Chujō Harima -no-kami Taira -no
Ason Shigehira, Shō -sammi Uemon -no-kami  Ōmi Tōtōmi -no-kami Taira -no-Ason Kiyomune,
Sangi Shō -sammi Kōtaigō -gū-no-Gon-no-taiyū Shūri -no-taiyū Kaga Etchū -no-kami Taira -no-
Ason Tsunemori, Jū -nii Chūnagon Sei -i-taishōgun S ahyōye -no-kami Taira -no-Ason Tomomori,
Jū-nii Gon Chūnagon Hizen -no-kami Taira -no-Ason Norimori, Shō -nii Gon -Dainagon Mutsu
Dewano -Azechi Taira no -Ason Yorimori, Jū -ichii Zen -no-Naidaijin Taira -no Ason Munemori.
Fifth day of the seventh month of the second  year of Ju -ei.

When the Zasshū of Hieizan received this latter he was deeply grieved, and did not show it to the
other priests at once, but retired and spent three days in prayer before the Jūzenji

[p. 47]

Gongen, after which he showed it to them. On h is opening the petition, this verse, which he had
not noticed before, fell out of it:

Tairaka ni hana saku yado mo toshi fureba,
Nishi ye katamuku tsuki to koso mire.

"Peaceful the years we have passed in this spot
where tire flowers ever blossom,
"Now  is the moon, like our fate,
waning to sink in the west."

The Chief Priest of Hiyoshi was also very sad, and bade the three thousand monks lend their aid,
but, as for long the deeds of the Heike had been contrary to the will of the gods as well as
unpop ular among the people, prayers were of no avail and no one would pay any heed. The
priests were indeed sorry that things had come to such a pass, but, as they had already sent the
letter promising help to the Genji, as to their lightly changing their mind,  there were none ready
to consent to it.