CHAPTER I.
THE EXECUTION OF SHI GEHIRA.

     Now Hon -Sammi Chūjō Shigehira had been living since the last year in the province of Izu in
the charge of Kano -no-suke Muneshige, but as the monks of Nara were always demanding him,
orders were at last sent to Izu -no-Kurando Taiyū Yorikane, g randson of Gen -sammi Nyudo
Yorimasa, to escort him thither. On this occasion they did not enter the Capital, but turned off at
Ōtsu and took the Daigo road by Yamashina, thus passing near Hino.

     Now the wife of Shigehira was the daughter of Torikai -no-Dainagon Korezane, who had been
adopted by Gojō -no-Dainagon Kunitsuna ; she was the foster mother of the late Emperor and
was known as Dainagon -no-Suke-no-Tsubone. After the Chūjō had been capturned at Ichi no
tani she had remained with His Majesty, and h ad jumped into the sea at Dan -no-ura, but was
roughly dragged out by the soldiers and sent back to the Capital, whereupon she took up her
abode with her elder sister Taiyū - no-sammi at a place called Hino. When she heard that her
husband's life, though tre mbling to its fall like the dewdrop on the end of a leaf, was not yet
extinguished, she felt a great longing to see his face once more, but as she could not, there was
nothing left her but to spend her days weeping and bewailing him.

     So the Chūjō Shi gehira said to the samurai who were escorting him: " I am greatly beholden to
you for your consideration and kindness to me so far, and I have just one last boon to crave. As I
have no child, I feel no regret at leaving this, world, but as I hear that my w ife, to whom I have
been

[p. 275]

long wedded, is now living at Hino, I should much like to see her to speak with her about the
hereafter." And as the guards were not wood or stone, with tears in their eyes they readily gave
him the desired permission.

     Shigehira, greatly delighted, forthwith sent word to the lady saying : " Is Dainagon -no-suke-no-
Tsubone within ? Honsammi Chūjō, who is on his way to Nara, waits without to see her." "
Where is he then ? Where is he ? exclaimed the lady, running out w hen she received the message,
when she saw a thin, sunburned figure, clad in a hitatare of dyed blue material and a folded
eboshi, standing by the verandah of the residence. " How is this ? How is this ? Is it a dream or is
it real? But come in! " exclaime d his wife, advancing to the edge of the curtain. As she heard his
voice again tears anticipated all else, and with blinded eyes and sinking heart for a while she
found no word to utter. Then the Chūjō, raising the curtain and leaning half -way through it, thus
addressed her in a voice broken by sobs : " In the spring of last year, after many perils, as a penalty
for my great guilt, I was captured alive at Ichi -no-tani in the province of Settsu, and after being
publicly disgraced in Miyako and Kamakura, I am  to be delivered into the hands of the priests of
Nara to be put to death. So on my way thither I wished to see your face again, and now there

nothing more that I have to live for. I had thought to shave my head here and leave my hair as a
keepsake, but as  I have come in this condition I cannot bear to do so." And pulling a lock of hair
from this forehead, he bit off a piece where it touched his mouth and handed it to her, saying: "
Keep this in memory of me." His wife, who had been full of anxiety about hi m before, was now
quite overwhelmed by her grief, and fell forward with her robe about her face in an agony of
tears. After a while, recovering herself somewhat, she said ; " It was my intention to drown myself
like the Nii Dono and Kozaishō, but indeed wh en I heard you were still alive I greatly wished to
see you again, and so I have lived till now in this wretched

[p. 276]

state. Only in the hope of seeing you have I lived so long, and now this is to be last time." And as
they spoke of things both past and present tears were the only thing that seemed to have no end.
" As you look so languid, will you not change your garments," she said, producing a wadded silk
under garment and a white kariginu. So the Chūjō put them on, and giving her those that he had
just taken off, said : " Keep these too as a memento of me." " Not only that," replied the lady, but
I pray you write me at least a line, that I may treasure it till the end of my life; and she brought
him an inkstone. So the Chūjō, weeping bitterly, took  a brush and wrote these lines:

     " Laying aside this robe I leave it here as a keepsake,
     Wet as it is with my tears, pent in my bosom till now."

And the lady also wrote this verse:

     " Ah, this robe you have worn, what use can it be to you f urther ?
     Tis a memento for me that I shall see you no more."

"Since we are bound to each other, we shall surely be reborn together in the next life," said the
Chūjō ; " pray that it be upon the same lotus. The times grows late, and I must haste to Nara; I
must not keep the guards waiting." And he made to do forth, but the lady clung to his sleeve and
held him back, crying: " Why so soon; stay a little longer! " " You can guess what I feel in my
heart," replied he, " but my time on earth grows short; " and with firm resolution he turned to
depart. Indeed, when he tho ught that this would be the last time in this world, he could with
difficulty refrain from turning back once more, but unwilling to show any weakness, he
conquered his feelings and went on his way.

     The lady, rolling herself right outside the curtain,  lifted up her voice and wept aloud, so that
the sound of it could be heard far beyond the gate, and the Chūjō blinded by his tears and unable
to see the road, for some time did not quicken his pace. " A pitiable meeting indeed ! " he
thought regretfully, His wife

[p. 277]

at first started to run out after him, but seeing that it was of no avail, threw herself down with
her face buried in her robes.

     Now the monks of Nara, as soon as they had got possession of Shigehira, held a council to
decide what  they should do with him.  Shigehira, they declared, was the worst kind of criminal,

beyond even the three thousand varieties of the Five Punishments. Since, under the influence of
the most evil and malignant karma, he was an outlaw and enemy of Buddha and  the Law, he
must certainly be paraded round the walls of both the Tōdaiji and the Kōfukuji and then be
buried alive and have his head cut off, or else have it sawn off. But the older priests took
objection to this decision, saying that it was too severe a  sentence for men of religion, and that he
should be handed over to the samurai to be beheaded on the bank of the Kozu -gawa. And in the
end this counsel prevailed, and he was delivered over to the samurai, who led him out to the
bank of the Kozu -gawa, wher e countless myriads of people, including thousands of priests,
besides his guards and other spectators, had assembled to see him put to death.

     Now there was a former retainer of the Chūjō named Muku -no-Uma -no-jō Tomotoki, and he
was also in the service of the Hachijō -no-Nyo-in, who greatly wished to see the last of his master,
so he rode his hardest to the Kozu -gawa and arrived just as he was about to be beheaded.
Springing from his h orse he pushed his way through the thronging multitudes till he reached his
master's side, and called out: " Here am I, Tomotoki, come to see the last of my master! " "How
admirable is your devotion," replied to Chūjō, "and now, Tomotoki, since my guilt is  so great I
should like to worship a Buddha before I die. Can it be done ? " " That will not be difficult,"
replied Tomotoki, and after consulting with the samurai on guard, he went off to a neighbouring
hamlet and brought back an image of Buddha, most for tunately one of Amida. Setting it down on
the sand of the river bed, he drew out the cord from the sleeve of his kariginu and fastened one

[p. 278]

end of it to the hand of the Buddha, giving the other to the Chūjō. Holding it in his hand the
Chūjō turned toward the Buddha and said : " I have heard that though Devadatta committed the
Three Transgressions, and burned eighty thousand collections of Su tras, it was foretold that he
should at last become a Tennō Nyorai ; and though his crimes were indeed heinous, yet by virtue
of the Holy Sutras his sinful karma was blotted out, and they became the cause of his entering the
way of salvation. So, that I sh ould have committed this great sin was by no means a purposeless
happening, but was in accordance with the principle of things. Who that is born in this world can
disregard an Imperial Command, or who among men can be disobedient to a father's will ?
Buddh a is witness of right and wrong. Therefore is my crime requited on the spot, and my doom
has now come upon me. However boundless and deep my repentance, yet it is not enough. But
the World of the Three Precious Ones is a world of compassion and mercy, and many are the
paths that lead to salvation.  YUI-EN-KYŌ-I, GYAKU -SOKU ZE -JUN. * This text is graved on
my heart. Fixing my whole mind on Amida Buddha, who blots even the greatest iniquities , I pray
that he may change my rebellious affinity into right affinity, and so, as I repeat the last Nembutsu,
according to his promise I may be reborn in the Pure Heavenly Land." And as he spoke these
words he stretched out his neck and the blow fell ; an d though his former deeds had been so evil,
yet when they saw his demeanour at the last, even the thousands of priests and the soldiers of the
guard could not refrain from bedewing their sleeves. His head was then nailed up over the gate of
the Hannyaji ; and this was done because it was here that he stood during the battle in the period
Jishō when the temples were
----------
*Yui-en, etc .  The meaning of this is that though there may appear to be things which are opposed to each
other such as Buddhas and d evils, good and evil people, yet in reality they all work together in harmony. „Verily
all is in harmony; that which opposes it is that which obeys.‟


[p. 279]

burned. When his wife heard what had been done; " If they have cut off his head," she said, " t hey
will have thrown his body away somewhere; so go and bring it that the Sutras may be recited
over it." And she sent a litter for it. And as she had said, they found that his body had been cast
away into the river bed, and they took it up and put it into  the litter and brought it back to Hino.
Until the day before it had remained unchanged, but as the weather was hot it had now become
unsightly, so the feelings of the lady when she saw it can be imagined. The head also was
afterwards recovered by the good  offices of Shunjō -bō, a priest of the Dai -butsu, who obtained
the permission of the monks and sent it to Hino. So they brought both the head and body to a
neighbouring mountain temple called Hōkaiji, and burned them there, after which they sent the
ashes to Kōya. They also set up a tomb for him in Hino, and his wife became a nun and put on
black robes to pray for his happy rebirth in Paradise.