CHAPTER XII.

THE DESTRUCTION OF HIEIZAN.

Now the Ho -o, having become the disciple of Kogen Sojo of Miidera, was studying the esoteric
doctrines of Shingon : and having re ad the three secret Sutras called Dai -nichi Kyo, [21] Kongo -cho
Kyo[22] and So -shitsuji -Kyo,[23] on the fourth day of the ninth month was to undergo the
ceremony of Kwancho or Baptism. When they heard this the priests of Hieizan were wrath and
said ; " From  ancient days it has been the custom that the ceremony of Kwancho should be
performed by our temple, and it is for the especial purpose of admonishing and baptizing the
Emperor that our god manifests himself in this mountain. If therefore the ceremony is t o be
performed at Miidera there is nothing for it but to burn our useless temple. Therefore the Ho -o,
considering his idea unprofitable, gave up his intention of receiving Kwancho, and only requested
that the purification ceremony be carried out. But in or der to carry out his original intention, he
summoned Koken Sojo and went to Tennoji where he built a temple called Gochiko -in, and
decided on the well of Kame -i as his sacred water of baptism. Then, finishing his study of the
Sutras, he received baptism at  the original sacred spot of Buddhism in Japan. But though the

[p. 97]

Kwancho was not performed at Miidera in order to pacify the wrath of the monks of Hieizan, yet
at that temple differences of opinion between the Doshu (lay brothers) and the Gakusho
(student priests) led to pitched battles between them in which the Gakusho were defeated ; so
that the destruction of Hieizan and a great disaster to the Imperial family seemed likely. These
Doshu were either youthful attendants on the Gakusho who had becom e priests, or else priests
who did menial work in the temples, and at the time when Kakujin Gon -Sojo, the Zasshu of
Kongo -ju-in was the head of Hieizan, they were called Geshu and lodged in the three pagodas,
being employed in offering the flowers before t he Buddhas. Of late years however they were
called Gyonin, and, setting at nought the higher priests, they got the upper hand by force. So
when these Doshu, disobeying the orders of the higher priests, planned a revolt, their superiors
appealed to the Cour t nobles for an order to punish them and asked the samurai to carry the
order into execution. Then the Nyudo, at the order of the Ho -o, sent Yuasa -Gon-no-kami
Muneshige of the province of Kii with about two thousand men of the Kinai district to attack the
Doshu in cooperation with the Taishu or upper priests. Now the Doshu were at this time lodging
in the building called Toyobo, but when they heard of this they came down to Sanga no shorin
Omi and gather ed a large force with which they returned to Hieizan,  where they built a
fortification at Sobisaka and took up their position in it. On the twentieth day of the ninth month
and the first part of the hour of the Dragon (8 a.m.), three thousand of the Taishu or upper
priests with two thousand men of the Imperi al army, five thousand in all, made an attack on
Sobisaka, shouting their war cry vigorously. Those in the fort however shot arrows and cast stones
upon them so that their united forces were shot down to a man. As the Taishu tried to get before
the Imperia l forces while the Imperial army strove to outstrip the Taishu, this vying with each
other divided their councils and they were not able to fight effectively. Moreover the band of
ruffians who composed


[p. 98]

the Doshu were made up of thieves, brigands,  mountain robbers and pirates, all consumed with a
lust for booty and fighting each for himself, reckless whether they lived or died ; so that on this
occasion also the Gakusho had the worst of the battle.

After this Hieizan gradually fell into dilapidati on. Except the twelve branches of the Zen sect,
few priests were left to live there ; the lectures in the valley were gradually abolished, the
religious ceremonies were performed no more, the academies of learning were closed, and the
floor for Zen meditat ion became deserted. No longer was the flower of the Tendai fragrant, and
the moon of its clear doctrines was clouded. There was none of light the sacred lamps that had
never gone out for three hundred years ; the smoke of the perpetual incense ceased. No longer do
the vast buildings tower aloft, cleaving the blue heavens with their three storied bulk, with their
crossbeams of immeasurable height and their rafters that are scarcely discerned amid the white
mists. The Buddhas are adored but by the mountain b lasts; their golden statues are wetted by the
muddy raindrops: the moonbeams streaming through the chinks of the roof are their sacred lamps,
and their lotos seats are encrusted with the diamond dew of dawn. In this unhallowed and
degenerate age the Buddhi st Law that was supreme in the three countries declined. Consider the
remains of Buddhism in far off India; the Chiku -rin Shoja [24] and the Gitsu -kodoku -on[25], where
of old the Lax was preached, are they not the haunt of wolves and foxes, their foundation s alone
remaining ? The waters of the lake of Hakuro have dried up and the tall grasses have grown up
within it. The Taibon and Gejo [26] pillars are moss -covered and leaning to their fall. In China also
Tendaisan, Godaisan, Hakubaji and Gyokusenji are now dilapidated and forsaken, and the sacred

[p. 99]

volumes of the Mahayana and Hinayana are rotting at the bottom of their boxes. In our country
too the seven great temples of Nara are laid waste: the eight sects, yea the nine have left no race.
Of old at Atago and Takao the sacred halls and pagodas raised on high their ranging roofs, but in
one night they we: utterly ruined and became a place for Tengu to dwell in. So also may it not be
that the noble law of Tendai has been abolish d in this era of Jisho? There were none among the
men of understanding who did not fail to lament it. Who wrote it we ):now not, but upon a pillar
of one of the monasteries this verse found:

" See this mount of prayer returns to its former condition ;
Now becomes once more a lon ely and desolate peak."

Was he not thinking of the prayer [27] of Dengyo Daishi when first he established these temples: "
O unexcelled [28] perfect intelligence of Buddha, show forth thy Divine help on this mount
whereon I build." It was indeed most touchi ng. How admirable was the writer of it.

The eighth day is the feast of Yakushi, but there was no sound of the invocation to be heard. The
fourth month is the month of the incarnation of Sakya Muni, but there was none to make the
offerings of silk and mone y. The red fence of the brine is hoary with age, nothing is left but the
straw rope of the Gods.