CHAPTER IX.
KISO SENDS A LETTER TO HIEIZAN.

Now Kiso Yoshinaka was at Kofu in Echizen, and he summoned all his relations and retainers and
held a cons ulation saying: "If I march on Kyoto by way of  Ōmi, those priests of Hieizan are sure
to try to stop me. It will not perchance be difficult to break through them, but because the Heike
have paid no respect to the Law of Buddha, but have destroyed temples and killed priests and
done all manner of evil t hings, if I, who am going up to the Capital to protect it, have to begin by
fighting with these priests, my conduct will appear not a whit diffrent from theirs, but merely
another dance to the same tune. This is no easy matter; what is to be done?" Then Ta iyū- bō
Kakumei, who had written the former letter, stood forth and said: "There are some two thousand
priests on Hieizan, and it is certain that they will not be of the same opinion; some will be on the
side of the Heike and others will favour the Genji: if you send a letter to them you will see, for
their answer will show their disagreement." "That is well said," replied Yoshinaka; "write them a
letter forthwith." So Kakumei indited a letter to the priests, and the words of it were as follows:

"I, Yoshin aka, have well considered the evil deeds of the Heike house. Ever since the time of
Hogen and Heiji they have forgotten their duty as subjects and have set up and pulled down
Emperors as they please, while high and low could do nothing,

[p.41]

and priest  and layman were treated with contempt. They have seized provinces at their will, and
without right or reason have imprisoned men of standing and authority; putting to death prince,
minister, vassal or subject, though their guilt or innocence was yet unpro ven. They have taken
away their goods and given them to their retainers; they have confiscated their manors and
improperly curtailed their descendant's possessions. Moreover in the eleventh month of the third
year of Jishō they removed the Hō -ō to the Seinan Detached Palace, and exiled the Kwampaku to
a lonely and far off coast. The roads have eyes, though all the people kept silent. Again in the
fourth year of the same era they laid seige to the Palace of the s econd son of the Hō -ō, so that the
very dust of the Palace Courts was astonished at such an outrage; and when, in order to escape
such undeserved injury, he fled in secret to Onjōji, I, who had received intimation beforehand,
was exceeding eager to ride at  once to his rescue, but the highroads were full of the enemy
everywhere, and I was unable to arrive in time.

As the Genji who were near at hand did not go, how much less could those who were far off.
Then, as Onjōji could not protect him, he sought to g ain the South Capital, and in the fight that
ensued on the bridge at Uji, Sammi Nyūudō Yorimasa and his sons, counting their lives as nought
in their loyalty, after one last glorious battle, unable to prevail against numberless foes, left their
bones to bl each on the moss of the shore. Their names were washed away like the waves of the
river, but their Lord's commands were engraved on their harts, and with sorrow at their loss his
life was extinguished. Therefore the Genji of the North and East Country have  assembled
together to overthrow the Heike, and in the autumn of last year, when I took sword in hand and
raised my banner with that purpose, on the day that I went forth from Shinano, Jō -no-Shirō
Nagamochi opposed me with many tens of thousands of horseme n and a battle was fought at
Yokotagawa.

[p.42]


There with but three thousand men behind me I routed an d destroyed that mighty host, and the
fame of my victory spread everywhere in the land. At this the Heike sent a great army of a
hundred thousand horse men into the North Country, and in Echizen and Kaga, at Tonami,
Kurosaka, Shiozaka and Shinohara many battles were fought. "Wrapping up my plans in a curtain
I won my victories in a stone's throw" as it is said. Whenever I struck the foe gave way, and
when ever I attacked he was always defeated. As the blasts of autumn level the reeds, and as the
winter hoar -frosts wither the grasses, so they gave way before my onset. Such victories were not
gained by my power, but were due to the aid of the gods and Buddhas . Now that the Heike
armies have been thus defeated, I intend to advance upon the Capital, and in order to enter into
its streets I must pass beneath the foot of your Holy Mountain; but as yet I am in doubt which
side you favour, whether you incline to the  Heike or will help the Genji. If you are in league with
that evil faction then surely I must do battle with your temples, and in that case the destruction
of Hieizan will follow without delay. Ah, the pity of it! Because the Heike leave caused great
grief to the heart of the Emperor, and have made the Law of Buddha of no account, I have raised
up a loyal army to subdue their evil ways, and now how painful will it be if I must fight an
unlooked for battle with the three thousand priests of Hieizan. If, from  respect to Yakushi
Nyorai and to the god of Hiyoshi I should hesitate to advance, I shall be culpable as a negligent
subject of the Emperor and a disgrace to the warrior caste. Thus in this state of uncertainty I
await your esteemed communication, O most reverend brethren of the Tendai sect; and I beseech
you, for the sake of the gods and Buddhas, of the Throne and of the Country, that you make
cause with the Genji and punish these rebels, that we may all rejoice in the beneficent rule of our
Sovereign, an d the abundance of his gracious favour.

I thus address you in all respect. The tenth day of the

[p.43]

sixth month of the second year of Ju -ei. Minamoto Yoshinaka, to the Venerable E kobo Risshi.