CHAPTER XII.
THE FIGHT AT THE BRIDGE.

Now the Prince rode down to Rokutabi between Uji and Miidera, and because he had no sleep
the previous night they tore up about six yards of the planking of the bridge at Uji and he entered
the temple  of Byodo -in and rested there awhile. The men of Rokuhara, learning that he was
fleeing to Nara, at once started off in pursuit to take him and put him to death. The leaders of
their force were Sahyoye -no-kami Tomomori, To -no-Chujo Shigehira and Satsuma -no-kami
Tadamori, while as commanders of the samurai there were Kazusa -no-kami Tadakiyo, his son
Kazusa -no-Taro Hangwan Tadatsune, Hida -

[p. 194]

no-kami Kageie, his son Hida -no-Taro Hangwan Kagetaka, Takahashi -no-Hangwan Nakatsuna,
Kawachi -no-Hangwan Hide kuni, Musahi -no-Saburo Saemon Arikuni, Etchu -no-Jirohyoye
Moritsugu, Kazusa -no-Gorohyoye Tadamitsu, and Akushichi -hyoye Kagekiyo with about twenty -
eight thousand men in all. Crossing over Kobatayama they pressed on to the bridge head of Uji.
Perceiving tha t the enemy were at Byodo -in, they raised their warcry three times, when they
were answered by that of the Prince's men. The vanguard, seeing the danger, raised a cry of alarm:
"Take care! they have torn up the bridge!" But the rearguard paid -no-heed and p ushed them on
with cries of "Advance! Advance!" so that some two hundred horsemen of the leading company
fell through into the river and perished in the stream. Then the warriors of both sides, taking their
stand at each end of the bridge, began a duel of archery, and on the side of the Prince, Oya -no-
Shuncho, Gochiin -no-Tajima, Watanabe -no-Habuku, Sazuku, and Tsuzuku -no-Genda shot so
powerfully that their shafts pierced the enemy through both shield and armour. Gensammi
Nyudo Yorimasa, knowing in his heart  that this fight would be his last, went forth in a suit of
amour of blue and white spots worn over his long -sleeved Court hitatare, purposely wearing no
helmet on his head, while his son Izu -no-kami Nakatsuna wore a suit of black armour over a
hitatare of  red brocade, he also leaving his head bare for greater ease in drawing the bow. Then
Gochiin -no-Tajima, throwing away the sheath of his long halberd, strode forth alone on to the
bridge, whereupon the Heike straightway shot at him fast and furious. Tajima , not at all
perturbed, ducking to avoid the higher ones and leaping up over those that flew low, cut through
those that flew straight with his whirring halberd, so that even the enemy looked on in
admiration. Thus it was that he was dubbed "Tajima the arr ow cutter." Another of the soldier
priests, Tsutsui -no-Joinyo Meishu, wearing armour laced with black leather over a hitatare of
dyed cloth, and a helmet of five plates, a sword in a black lacquered sheath at his side and a

[p. 195]

quiver of twenty -four black feathered arrows on his back, his bow being also of black lacquer,
gripping his favourite white handled halberd in his hand, also sprang forward alone on to the
bridge and shouted in a mighty voice: "Let those at a distance listen, those that are n ear can see; I
am Tsutsui Jomyo Meishu, the priest; who is there in Miidera who does not know me, a warrior
worth a thousand men? Come on anyone who thinks himself someone, and we will see!" And
loosing off his twenty -four arrows like lightning flashes he slew twelve of the Heike soldiers and

wounded eleven more. One arrow yet remained in his quiver, but, flinging away his bow, he
stripped off his quiver and threw that after it, cast off his foot gear, and springing barefoot onto
the beams of the bridge, he  strode across. All were afraid to cross over, but he walked the broken
bridge as one who walks along the street Ichijo or Nijo of the Capital. With his naginata he mows
down five of the enemy, but with the sixth the halberd snaps asunder in the midst and flinging it
away he draws his tachi, wielding it in the zig -zag style, the interlacing, cross, reversed dragonfly,
waterwheel, and eight -sides-at-once styles of fencing, and cutting down eight men; but as he
brought down the ninth with an exceeding mighty blow on the helmet, the blade snapped at the
hilt and fell splash into the water beneath. Then seizing his dirk which was the only weapon he
had left, he plied it as one in the death fury. Now a retainer of Joen -bo-no-Ajari Kyoshu, Ichirai
Hoshi by name, a  man of great strength and courage, was fighting behind Jomyo, but as the beams
were so narrow he could not come alongside him, so placing a hand on the neckpiece of his
helmet, he shouted: "Pardon me Jomyo, this is no good," and springing over his shoulde r to the
front fought mightily until he fell. Ichirai Hoshi being killed, Jomyo -bo crawled back again and
retired to the Byodo -in, where he sat down on the grass before the gate, and stripping off his
armour, counted the dints of the mows that had struck h im. There were sixty -three in all, but of
these only five had pierced through, and none of the wounds

[p. 196]

being very severe, he treated them with cautery; then, covering his head and changing his clothes,
using his broken bow as a staff he went down  on foot to Nara. Following the example of Jomyo -
bo, the soldier monks of Miidera with the Watanabe clan of Gensammi Nyudo's men vied with
each other in pressing forward over the beams of the bridge, and fought till sundown some
returning with spoil, and s ome, after being wounded, cutting themselves open and jumping into
the river.

Then the commander of the samurai, Kazusa -no-kami Tada -kiyo came to the commander in
chief of the Heike forces: "See here," he said "the battle on the bridge is very fierce; we ought to
ford the river, but after the rains of the fifth month neither man nor horse can live in the stream;
shall we go round by Yodoi, Moarai or Kawachiji? What is to be done?" Then Ashikaga -no-
Matataro Tadatsuna, a young man in his eighteenth year, spo ke saying: "Why not leave the
samurai of India or China to go to Yodo, Moarai or Kawachiji, for that is not our way. If we don't
rout the enemy that confront us here, the Prince will get away to Nara, and then you will have all
the forces of Yoshino and To tsugawa to deal with and that will be no light affair. On the
boundary of Musashi and Kozuke there is a great river called the Tonegawa and there the
Ashikaga and the Chichibu are always fighting each other, and on one occasion, when the front
were attacki ng at Nagai ford and the rear at Kogasugi ford, a certain Nitta Nyudo of Kozuke, who
was coming to the help of the Ashikaga from the Sugi ford, being told by them that the Chichibu
had destroyed all the boats that had been provided to cross, exclaimed: "If  we do not ford the
river here it will be a disgrace to our reputation as samurai; to be drowned is but to die; Forward
then!" and using their horses as a raft they forded the river. As the samurai of the East Country
say: "Keep your face to the enemy, and  when separated by a river, shun the swift rapids by the
bank. This river is neither more nor less swift and deep than the Tonegawa, so come along sirs,"
and he plunged into the stream. Ogo, Omuro, Fukasu, Yamakami,

[p. 197]


Nawa -no-Taro, Sanuki, Hirotsu na, Shirodaiyu, Onodera -no-Zenji Taro, Heyako -no-Shiro, and
among the younger men Ubukata -no-jiro, Kirifu -no-Rokuro, and Tanaka -no-Sota immediately
bed in after him with some three hundred men behind them, shouting the Ashikaga warcry. "Put
the heads of th e weaker horses downstream, those of the stronger upstream!" he shouted "if the
horses keep their feet give them the rein and let them walk, but if they get off their feet let them
have their heads and swim them; if you are washed downstream stick the butt  of your bow down
into the bottom; join hands and go across in line if your horse's head gets down, pull it up, but
don't pull it too far or you will fall off backwards; sit tight in the saddle and keep your feet firm
in the stirrups; where the water is sl ow and deep get up over the horse's tail; don't shoot while in
the water; if the enemy shoots don't draw bow in return; keep your head down and your neck -
piece well sloped upwards, but not too far or you will be shot in the crown of the helmet; be
light on  the horse and firm against the stream; don't go straight across you will be washed away,
keep obliquely to the stream." Thus advising and encouraging them he brought the whole three
hundred rapidly across without losing a man.