CHAPTER VI.
THE HOGWAN LEAVES THE CAPITAL.
     Now there was an inferior retainer named Adac hi-no-Shinsaburō, whom Yoritomo had sent
to Yoshitsune saying: " He is only a common servant, but he is a very clever fellow; so please
employ him." And this was in order that he might see all that Yoshitsune did, and report it to
Yoritomo. So when he saw how Tosa bo had been executed, he fled with all speed to Kamakura
and told the news. Then Yoritomo, greatly surprised, sent for his younger brother Mikawa -no-
kami Noriyori and bade him lead an expedition against Yoshitsune, and he, though he declined
many times, and pleaded that he was not capable of the undertaking, was at last fain to consent,
and after making hasty preparations presented himself before Yoritomo to say farewell. " You too
had better be careful not to behave like Kurō ; " said Yoritomo to him, and this so alarmed him
that he returned to his residence and took off his armour, and changed his mind about going to
the Capital. In order to convince his brother of his innocence of any disloyalty, he wrote every
day ten oaths to that effect, and r ead then out every evening in the courtyard before Yoritomo's
mansion ; so in a hundred days he wrote a thousand oaths, but all to no purpose, for Yoritomo
had him put to death at last.

     Then Yoritorno sent a force of sixty thousand horsemen under the  command of Hojō -no-
Shirō -Tokimasa against Yoshitsune in the Capital, and when the Hōgwan heard of it he at

[p. 289]

first thought of destroying the bridges at Uji and Seta and resisting their advance, but instead of
that he asked Ogata -no-Saburō Koreyos hi, who had commanded a sufficiently large force to
prevent the Heike from entering Kyushu, to permit him to take refuge in that island. " If you will
hand over to me for execution my old enemy Kikuchi -no-Jirō Takanao, who is now in your
house, I will glad ly do so ; " replied Ogata, and upon the Hōgwan readily consenting, he took him
out to the Rokujō -kawara and beheaded him, after which he agreed to serve Yoshitsune.

     So on the second day of the eleventh month Kurō Taiyū Hōgwan Yoshitsune proceeded to
the Palace of the Hō -ō and presented this petition by the hand of Okura -no-Kyō Yasutsune
Ason : " Owing to the slanders of his retainers Yoritomo has given orders that I am to be put to
death, and I had at first thought of destroying the bridges at Uji an d Seta and holding out against
him, but to act thus would cause a tumult in the Capital, and that would be a very great
misfortune. So I wish to retire for a while to Kyushū, and beg of His Majesty a Letter of
Permission to do so." At this the Hō -ō was muc h troubled to know what to do, so he enquired of
all the Courtiers what they thought. " If Yoshitsune remains in the Capital," they said, " we shall
have a great army from the Eastern Provinces breaking into the city and despoiling; it, and there
will be n o end to the confusion ; but if he retires for a while to Kyushū we shall not have this to
fear." So a Letter was issued from the Hō -ō's Court to Ogata -no-Saburō Koreyoshi, and also to the
clans of Usuki, Hetsuki and Matsuura, that they should all place th emselves at the disposal of
Yoshitsune ; and on the third day at the Hour of the Hare (6 a.m.), without causing the least
trouble or disturbance in the Capital, he rode away with a force of some five hundred horse.


     Now when Ōta-no-Tarō Yorimoto of th e Settsu Genji heard this he said to himself: " If I let
one who is at variance with him pass by my gate quite freely, it will not be well for me when

[p. 290]

Yoritomo hears of it, so I had better draw bow against him." And lie rode out with the sixty
horsemen of his force to a place called Kawarazu to attack the Hōgwan. Then the Hōgwan's men,
turning and enveloping Ōta and his sixty horsemen in their midst, set upon them with all their
might, determined to let none escape, and when most of his men were slain, and he himself
wounded and his horse shot through the belly, Ōta himself was forced to seek safety in flight. So
Yoshitsune's men cut off the heads of the twenty or so who had been left to hold the rear, and
made a celebration in honour of the God o f War, raising a joyous shout in their pleasure at such
an auspicious beginning to their journey. That day they arrived at Daimotsu -no-ura in the
province of Settsu, and on the next day they took ship from thence, but the west wind blew with
such violence that the Hōgwan's ship was driven on to the shore of Sumiyoshi, and from there he
fled and concealed himself in the mountains of Yoshino. There he was attacked by the monks of
that place and again fled to Nara, but as the Nara monks were also hostile he re turned again to
the Capital and eventually sought refuge in the province of Mutsu.

Now the ten ladies whom the Hōgwan had brought with him from the Capital had had to be
abandoned on the shore at Sumiyoshi, and they threw themselves down in despair on the  sandy
beach under the pines, and as they lay there pillowed on their long sleeves and with their
hakamas all in disorder, the priests of the Sumiyoshi shrine took compassion on them, and putting
them into litters sent them back to the Capital. As for the ships in which Ogata -no-Saburō
Koreyoshi, on whom Yoshitsune chiefly relied, Shida -no-Saburō Zenjō Yoshinori, Bizen -no-kami
Yukiie and the rest embarked, they were cast hither and thither on various shores and islands, so
that none knew what had become of the others. And this west wind that blew so fiercely was
said to be caused by the angry spirits of the Heike.

     On the seventh day of the same month Hojō -no-Shirō Tokimasa arrived at Capital, and on the
following day he proceeded

[p. 291]

to the Pala ce of the Hō -ō and petitioned : " Yoritomo begs that an Imperial Rescript he issued for
the smiting of Iyo -no-kami Minamoto Yoshitsune, Bizen -no-kami Yukiie and Shida -no-Saburō
Zenjō Yoshinori." And His Majesty was not long before he complied.

     Thus o n the second day, at the request of Yoshitsune, a Letter was issued by the Court in
opposition to Yoritomo, and on the eighth day, at the request of Yoritomo, an Imperial Edict was
issued to smite Yoshitsune. One thing was done in the morning and another a t night, and the
Empire was in a lamentable state of suspense.