CHAPTER V.

THE SENDING ROUND OF LETTERS.

But this Lay -priest Chancellor, seeing the Ho -o thus overwhelmed by his troubles and wishing to
comfort him, sent him a daug hter that he had had by a certain Naiji of the shrine of Itsukushima
in Aki, a beautiful girl of eighteen, that he might console himself with her; and as all the Heike as
well as the other Courtiers brought her to the Palace in state it was

[p. 272]

quite as festive as the procession of an Emperor's Consort; but as this took place twenty -seven
days after the death of the Emperor everyone thought it most unseemly.

Now there was in Shinano a certain Minamoto called Kiso Jiro Yoshinaka. He was the second so n
of the late Tatewaki Senjo Yoshikata, and when his father was killed at Kamakura on the twelfth
day of the eighth month of the second year of Kyuju by Akugenda Yoshihira, he was but a child
of two years old. His mother, in her grief, fled with him to the  province of Shinano to Kiso
Chuzo Kaneto, and begged him to take the child and bring him up. So Kaneto granted her request
and took him and reared him, and now he had grown up to be a young man, distinguished among
all for his beauty and noble bearing as well as for his matchless boldness and mighty strength. So
powerful and skilled in the use of all weapons of war was he that people ranked him with the
great warriors of old, with Tamura Maru, Fujiwara Toshihito, Taira Koreshige, Taira Muneyori,
Fujiwara Y asumasa, and his own ancestors Minamoto Yorimitsu and Yoshiie. At the age of
thirteen when his Genpuku took place he went to the shrine of Hachiman and spent the night
there as the custom was, and offering his queue of hair before the god he prayed: "As my  ancestor
in the fourth generation, Yoshiie Ason, became the son of this Deity and was called
Hachimantaro Yoshiie, so may I also follow in his footsteps;" and he took the name of Kiso Jiro
Yoshinaka.

As he often used to go up to the Capital with his fost er-father he observed the proud behaviour
of the Heike and meditated over it. So it happened that one day he said to Kaneto: "I hear that
Hyoe -no-suke Yoritomo has gone up from the Tokaido with eight of the eastern provinces to
smite the Heike; now let me haste and join him with the men of the Tosando and Hokurikudo,
and when they are destroyed we two will be the greatest leaders in all the land of Nippon."
When he heard this Kaneto was overjoyed: "It was for this" he said "that I have brought you up
these twenty years, and

[p. 273]

when I hear you speak thus I know you will be a worthy scion of Hachimantaro." Thus
Yoshinaka started to stir up a rebellion, and sent round letters instigating his neighbours to rise,
and, as in the province of Shinano Nei -no-Koyata and Shigenono Yukichika were persuaded to
support him, all the rest of the warriors of that province came in on his side. The samurai of the
district of Tago in Kozuke also, because of their good will to his father Yoshikata, hastened to

offer thems elves. Thus it seemed that the hour of the doom of the Heike had come, and the
Genji were about to accomplish their long cherished desire.