CHAPTER XIV.

THE PETITION OF YASUYORI.

Now the three who were exiled to Kikaigashima did not particularly value  their lives, which
trembled in the balance like dew on the tip of a leaf, but food and clothing were provided

[p. 101]

for Tamba -no-Shosho from the domain of his father -in-law Taira -no-Saisho Norimori at Kase in
Hizen, so that Shunkwan and Yasuyori also  managed to support themselves from it. Moreover
Yasuyori on being exiled on his way had become a priest at Murozumi in Suwo, and was
henceforth known by the religious name of Shōshō. He had originally intended to do this before,
so he made this couplet:

" Now that the way of the world has gone so entirely against me;
How very foolish I was not to have left it before."

As Tamba -no-Shosho and Yasuyori had always been believers in the god of Kumano, they wished
to build a temple to supplicate the three Gong en in this island that they might be delivered and
return to the eapital. Shunkwan, however, being by nature a sceptic, took no part in it at all. So
the two, being agreed, went round the island searching for a place like to Kumano [33]. One spot
they found  with a wooded bank, its cliff covered with creepers like red embroidery ; another a
wondrous peak hidden in the clouds with variegated scenery below it like green damask
outspread, the mountain landscape and splendid groves surpassing all they had so far seen.
Looking to the southward the sea spread out far as the eye could reach, its distant waves
dissolving into clouds and mist. Northward from the lofty precipice a waterfall leaped out a
hundred feet down with an eternal roar of sound. Since the age of t he gods the wind had sounded
in the pines. It was a spot that greatly resembled Nachi with its waterfall sacred to the Gongen.
So they gave it the name of the mountain of Nachi, and the peaks they also named Hongu and
Shingu, giving the names of the differ ent gods to various places. Then Yasuyori Nyudo, taking
Tamba -no-Shosho with him, went round them every day after the style of the worship of
Kumano, praying for their safe return to the

[p. 102]

capital: " Namu [34] Gongen Kongo Doji, send down thy pity upon us, we beseech thee, that we
may once more return to the capital and see again our wives and children." As the days went on,
having no change of clothes, they put on hempen ones, end purifying themselves in the water of
the marsh. they feigned it to b e the pure streams of Iwata in Kumano ; climbing up a hill there as
though it were the Hosshin -mon [35]. Whenever Yasuyori Nyudo made his pilgrimage to the
Sansho Gongen and recited the sacred 'norito," having no paper for ' gohei ' he would wave
flowers al oft in his hands with these words: " On this the first year of Jisho, the year of the cock,
and the second day of the tenth month thereof, being the three hundred and fiftieth day of our
sojourn, choosing a favourable day and a propitious hour, we, Urin Fu jiwara Naritsune and the

priest Shōshō, faithful worshippers of the Sansho Gongen of Kumano, roost efficacious in all
Nippon, and the Holy Law of the great Bosatsu of the waterfall, fervently and truly with whole
heart, with body, mind, and speech in full accord, humbly make petition. :. Oh, Shojo Dai -Bosatsu,
Lord of the Law who givest help to those struggling in the painful sea of this world, Wise King
and Perfect in the Three Manifestations, and thou Pure Ruby who dwellest in the Eastern
Quarter, Divine Physician, Nyorai who healest all sickness, and thou who dwellest in the south,
Kwannon the exhorter who art manifested in the Fudaraku [36], Great Master of Nyuju -gen-mon,
Prince who art the Chief Lord of this Benevolent Master [37], show thy face to us in the world,
thou who grantest the petitions of all creatures. Thou to whom the Emperor and all his subjects
pour out evening and morning the pure holy water, washing away the filth of this world ; that
they may have peace in this world and happiness in

[p. 103]

the world to come, turning every evening toward thy mountain and calling on thy jewel Name,
for thy mercy never faileth. Thy goodness is boundless as the lofty mountains and thy pity deep as
the valleys; so will we climb to the mists above and stiff er the dews beneath. How should we
tread these rough paths unless we relied on them as a place in which is thy spirit, and unless we
could look on the goodness of the Gongen how could we go to this remote mountain? Therefore
O Shojo Gongen and Hiryu [38] Dai satta [39], turn toward us thy lotus eyes of grace and incline
thine all -hearing ears to listen ; behold our burning zeal and grant all our petitions. Guide when in
need those who are enlightened in the Law and save those who are yet in ignorance; leaving  thy
jewel abode and hiding thy eighty four thousand beams of light, show thyself in the dust of the
Six Ways [40] and the Three Regions. Earnestly we lift up our hands together in prayer for the
removal of retribution of our sins in a former existence and for the required blessing of long life,
waving the ' gohei ' without intermission, clad in the garments of purification and offering the
flowers that symbolise knowledge of the way, making the sacred floor to vibrate with our zeal,
and offering pure water with earnest mind that it may fill the lake from which flow thy benefits.
Thus mayest thou receive our petition and fulfil all our desires. Thus looking upward we petition
the twelve Gongen, that with salvation in their wings, oaring over the sky of this S ea of Pain, they
may restore us to our former rank, and speedily and at a near time grant our petition to return to
our homes.