CHAPTER IX.
THE DEATH OF SENO.

     When Kiso heard of this defeat he was filled with anxiety and at once rode off to the province
of Bitchū with ten thousand horsemen. Now Seno -no-Taro Kaneyasu of Bitchū, a partizan of the
Heike and a famous warrior, had by ill luck been taken prisone r by Kuramitsu -no-Jirō Narizumi
of Kaga in the fighting of the fifth month in the North Country, and would have been put to
death but for the intervention of Yoshinaka, who told hill) that it was a pity to slay such a brave
fellow. Narizumi accordingly put  him in charge of his younger brother Saburō Nariuji, and as
Seno was a man of fine character and easy manners he was very well treated.  Still, as we read
that even the men of old fretted their hearts when in exile in a far country, so his grief was not
unlike that of So -shi-kei when he

[p.94]

was imprisoned in the land of Ko, or of Ri -sho-kei when he was unable to return to the Court of
Kan. Even as these Chinese warriors passed their days among the barbarians, " satisfying their
hunger and thirst with sour milk and raw flesh ", so Kaneyasu, abstaining even from sleep, spent
his nights and days in continual planning how he might take his enemies by surprise and slay
them and return to his former lord. At last h e said to Kuramitsu -no-Saburō : " Since you have
spared my worthless life and treated me thus, for whom beside should I have any thought ? In the
next battle it is on the side of Kiso that I will risk my life. Moreover, on my estate at Seno in
Bitchū there  grows fine fodder for horses in great abundance, and if you wish I can guide you
there to take it." On this being told to Kiso he exclaimed: " Ah, I am sorry for that fellow; but go
down and get the fodder at once." So Kuramitsu -no-Saburō taking thirty me n with him went
down to Bitchū accompanied by Senō. But Seno's eldest son Kotarō Muneyasu, also a supporter
of the Heike, hearing that his father had been set free by Kiso, gathered about a hundred
horsemen from among his younger retainers and set out to w elcome him, meeting the party at
Kōfu in the province of Harima. From thence the two bands went on together until
they came to Mitsuishi in Bizen where they stopped for the night, and as the friends of Senō had
brought a quantity of sake with them, they al l sat down to a drinking bout in which the thirty
retainers of Kuramitsu soon became heavily intoxicated, so that they could by no means stand
upright whereupon Senō's men fell upon them and put them all to death. After this they set off
to Kofu, the resid ence of the Deputy Governor of Bizen, who had been appointed by Juro
Kurando Yukiie, to whom Bizen had been given in fief, and attacked and slew him. Then said
Seno : " I have obtained my freedom from Kiso Yoshinaka and come back home again; now let all
who are on the side of the Heike prepare to give battle to Yoshinaka when he comes down here
against us." So

[p.95]

all the men -at-arms of the Provinces of Bizen, Bitchū and Bingo armed themselves and came with
their horses and men to the support of the Heike, and even the old men who had retired from
active life put on again their faded yellow hitatare and shortened t heir linen kosode, girding on
their worn out and damaged body armour and providing themselves with homemade quivers of
bamboo that held but few arrows. So there gathered to Senō's mansion a force of some two
thousand men, and these made a fort amid the bam boo thickets and narrow field -paths at

Fukuryūji in Bizen, digging a moat twenty feet wide and the same number of feet deep, fortifying
it with barricades and defences of felled trees and building a high tower within.

     Now when the Deputy Governor of Bizen was slain, his men fled toward the Capital, but at
Funasakayama on the boundary of Bizen and Harima they met Kiso and his army and told him
what had occurred. " Ah ", exclaimed Yoshinaka in great wrath, " it was after all a pity that I did
not put hi m to death." " Indeed ", replied Imai Shirō -Kanehira, " you can see by his face he is no
ordinary man, how many times did I not urge you to put such a daring and formidable foe out of
the way; at any rate let me go after him and see what he is about to do now " ? So Imai galloped
off to Bizen with three thousand men. Now the path that led to Seno's stronghold at Fukuryūji
was only about seven feet wide, while its length was one ri as computed in the Western
Provinces. On each side of it were deep rice -fields where horses could get no foothold, so that,
although Imai's force pressed on hotly, their pace was hindered by the crowding of their mounts.

     Senō-no-Tarō, seeing Imai himself push forward at their head, hasted to the top of the tower
and cried out  in a loud voice : " Pray receive this as some slight return for your care of me while I
was with you! " and he emptied his whole quiver of twenty four arrows at them. Paying no heed
to this, however, Imai -no-Shirō, Miyazaki Saburō, Umeno, Mochizuki,

[p.96]

Suwa,   Fujisawa and other valiant warriors, each worth a thousand ordinary men, spurred forward
to the onset and held grimly on though many fell pierced by arrows, both men and horses. One
taking the place of another who fell, they bent low over their horses heads, shielding themselves
with the neck -pieces of their helmets, and plunging recklessly through, the rice -fields till they
sank to the bellies of their steeds, heaving them up by the breast -strap of their harness, and caring,
nothing for the deep est morasses. So they pressed on, shouting their war -cry and fearing nothing,
till of the followers of Senō, few in number as they were and unsupported, very many received
mortal wounds.

     When night came, as the fortress on which he relied had been br oken through, Senō, unable
to make further resistance, retired to the river Itakura in the extremity of Bitchū and threw up a
barricade to await the enemy . Imai soon followed and renewed the attack, and the Heike
retainers s fought as long as their supply of arrows lasted, but when these had been all used and
they could hold off their foes no longer, they scattered and fled in all directions. Senō himself,
with the only two of his retainers who were left, retired to the hills that skirted the Itakuragawa.

     Now Kuramitsu -no-Jirō Narizumi, who had captured Senō on the former occasion, bitter at
the thought of his younger brother who had been killed, and wishing to avenge him, pressed hard
on his heels to take him again. Coming up alone to within one cho o f his enemy, for he had
outdistanced all the others, he called out in a loud voice : " Ho there ! Senō ! Turn back ! it is not
for a Samurai to show his back to a foe." Senō was just at this moment crossing the river, but
when he heard this he drew back ag ain and faced his enemy.
Kuramitsu in great joy spurred his horse and charged upon him, grappling him with such force
that they both rolled over; and as they where both men of great strength neither would give way,
but they rolled over and over, first one on


[p.97]

top and then the other, until, coming nearer in their struggles to the brink of the river, they rolled
over the edge and fell in. Kuramitsu was not able to swim while Senō was exceedingly expert, so,
pressing his foe against the bottom, he drew the dagger  from his side, and pulling up the skirts of
his armour, stabbed him so deeply with it three times that the hilt and his hand sank in also. This
done, as his own horse was overridden, he mounted that of Kuramitsu and rode off to the west
with his enemy's h ead.

    Senō's eldest son Kotarō Muneyasu was only twenty years old, but as he was very fat he had
only managed to get to the distance of one cho, while his father had ridden on more than twenty.
His father noticing this said to one of his retainers." Ma ny times before have I faced a host of foes
and fought with a light heart, but to day, as I have left my son behind, my mind is oppressed with
gloom. Even if I escape alive and once more join, my friends, I am over sixty years old and know
not how much lon ger I have to live, and what will my companions say of a samurai who leaves
his only son behind to save his life ? "  " Then," said the retainer, “ it were best to return; I will go
back also and see what, has befallen your son." So they rode back and foun d Muneyasu fallen by
the roadside, for his feet were so swollen that he could go no further.

    Then Senō alighted from his horse and said to his son . "'See, I have come back again to stay by
you whatever may happen." " As I can do no more;" answered Ko tarō weeping bitterly, " I shall
now put an end to my life, for it would be as one of the Five Iniquities if you were to risk your
life on my account: I pray you hurry on." To This request his father would not listen, and
moreover, just at that moment abou t fifty fresh soldiers of the Genji came riding up to where he
was resting. Then Senō -on-Tarō drew from his quiver the eight arrows that he had left, and fitting
them to his bow, brought down eight men from their saddles, though whether they lived
or died I know not. Then, drawing his sword, he swept off

[p.98]

the head of his son first, after which he dashed into the midst of the Genji and fought desperately,
swinging his blade downwards, sideways, crosswise and in a circle, until at last he fell, overco me
by weight of numbers. His two retainers also fought around him with equal courage till they were
badly wounded and taken prisoner, dying eventually the day after. The heads of all three were
then taken and exposed at Sagi -ga-mori in the province of Bize n. " He was a valiant warrior
indeed," said Kiso, when they told him; " how I wish he were still alive."