CHAPTER XVII.
THE FIGHT ON THE SHORE.

Kurando -no-taiyū Narimori, the youngest son of Kadowaki Dono was slain by Tsuchiya -no-Gorō
Shigeyuki of Hitachi, and Kōgō -gu-no-suke Tsunemasa also fell by the hand of Kawagoe -no-
Kotarō Shigefusa of Musashi, while Owari -no-kami Kiyosada, Awaji -no-kami Kiyofusa, and
Wakasa -no-kami Tsunetoshi charged headlong into the midst of the foe, an d after fighting
valiantly for a while, at last fell gloriously together.

Shin-Chūnagon Tomomori -no-Kyō, who was in command at Ikuta no mori, after all his men had
either fled or been slain, rode off toward the beach with his son Musashi -no-kami Tomoakira  and
a faithful retainer named Kenmotsu Tarō Yorikata, when ten horsemen of the Kodama clan,
carrying a fan as their standard, put their steeds to a gallop and gave chase. Kenmotsu Tarō, a
famous archer, turned and let fly an arrow at the standard -bearer w ho rode in front, and pierced
him through neck and backbone so that he fell dead from his horse. Then the leader of the band
bore down on Tomomori to come to close quarters, but his son Tomoakira, anxious to save his
father, sprang in between them and grap pled with the enemy, throwing him to the ground and
then springing down on him and cutting off his head. No sooner had he done this, however, than
his opponent's page sprang down also, and taking him at a disadvantage, succeeded in despatching
him. Then Ke nmotsu Tarō, falling in his turn on the retainer who had slain Musashi -no-kami,
killed him also, after which, having shot away all his arrows, he drew his sword to continue the
conflict, but, after being severely wounded in the left knee' by an arrow, unab le to stand up any
longer, he was overcome and killed.

Shin-Chūnagon Tomomori, taking advantage of the confusion of the fighting, spurred on his horse
and escaped,

p. 160

and, plunging into the sea, after swimming his horse, which was renowned for its l ong wind, more
than a mile, he managed to reach the ship of the Daijin Munemori. As the ship was crowded with
men, there was no room to bring the horse on board, and so they drove it off back to the shore.
Then Awa -no-Mimbu Shigeyoshi took an arrow in his hand, saying; "Let me shoot it so that it
may not fall into the enemy's hands "; But Tomomori forbade him. " That must not be ", he said,
" for it has just saved my life." So Shigeyoshi did not shoot. The horse was very loath to leave its
master, and kept close to the ship for a while, swimming right out into the offing, and it was not
until it was at some distance from the shore that it reluctantly turned round and swam back to
the beach, and even then, as soon as its feet touched the ground, it turned aga in and looked after
the ship, neighing loudly three times.

Afterwards, as it was rest ing on the shore, Kawagoe -no-Kotarō Shigefusa caught it and brought it
to the Hō -ō. It had originally been the most prized animal in the Hō -ō's stables, and had been
presented to Munemori the year before on the occasion of his becoming Naidaijin, and he ha d
given it to Tomomori, and so much did he prize it that he had prayers offered to Taisanfukun,
the god of longevity, on its behalf on the first day of every month. And that is why it was so long

winded, and was enabled to save its master on this occasion.  It was reared in the province of
Shinano at a place called Inoue, and so was called Inoueguro, but now, as Kawagoe had caught it,
its name was changed to Kawagoeguro.

Then Tomomori entered the presence of the Daijin Munemori, and with tears running down his
face, spoke thus:

" How sad am I to be alive when my son Musashi -no-kami is gone, and my retainer Kenmotsu is
slain also. What is to be thought of a father like me, who cannot help his son when he turns the
attack of the enemy on to himself to rescue his father, but leaves him to his fate and saves himself
thus? In the

p. 161

case of another I should think that he grudged his life, and now in my own what shame must I
feel to merit a like reproach? " And he hid his face in the sleeve of his armour and  sobbed aloud. "
Indeed it was a splendid thing that Musashi -no-kami thus gave his life for his father; skilled in
fight and valiant of heart, how great a captain he was! He was even now the same age as
Kiyomune here; just sixteen this year." And looking a t his own, son Uemon -no-kami Kiyomune,
he too burst into tears. And none of those present, even the most hard -hearted, could refrain
from moistening the sleeves of their armour.