CHAPTER I.

THE EXPEDITION TO THE NORTHERN PROVINCES.


At the beginning of the third month of the second year of Ju -ei there arose some ill  feeling
between Kiso -no Kwanja Yoshinaka and Hyoye -no-suke Yoritomo, so that Yoritomo despatched
a force of a hundred thousand horse to the province of Shinano to attack Kiso. Yoshinaka was at
this time at his stronghold of Yoda, but when he heard the new s he went forth with some three
thousand men and camped at Kumasaka --yama on the borders of Shinano and Echigo. Then, as
soon as Yoritomo had come as far as Zenkoji in Shinano, he sent a message to him by the hand of
his foster -brother Imai -no-Shiro Kanehi ra, saying:

"As you have now subdued the Eight Eastern Provinces you can now attack the Heike from the
East Sea Road and drive them out of the Capital. I also, after occupying the Eastern and Northern
Hill Provinces, can fall on them from the Northern Hig hway, so now, when we both ought to
haste and make an end of them as soon as possible, why do you give them occasion to mock by
allowing some estrangement to arise between us? It is true that our uncle Juro Kurando Yoshiie,
who has no love for Your Excelle ncy, has thought fit to come here, but his presence is
exceedingly troublesome to me; yet what can I do? Though he is here I myself have no feeling of
animosity toward you at all." To which communication Yoritomo replied thus: "Though you
speak thus now, I  have received information that there is a plot to raise a rebellion and attack me,
and that is not all I rely on." So when Kiso heard that an army of many tens of thousands of
horsemen under Doi

[p.20]

and Kajiwara was advancing against him, to show t he sincerity of his intentions, he sent his heir,
Shimizu -no Kwanja Yoshishige, a boy of eleven, escorted by Umeno, Mochizuke, Suwa, Fujisawa
and others, who were reckoned among the most doughty of his warriors, as a hostage to
Yoritomo.

Then Yoritomo, ac knowledging that his suspicions were false, and that Yoshinaka was quite loyal
to him, as he had no grown up son of his own, adopted Shimizu -no-Kwanja as his son, and taking
him with him, went back again to Kamakura.

Now when Yoshinaka had coerced the dis tricts of the east and north, he was ready to make an
attack on Kyoto, and as the Heike had announced during the winter of the previous year that
they would probably move in the spring, the levies from the Sanin, Sanyo, Nankai and Saikai
districts came pou ring in like mist and clouds. As for the Tosan or Eastern Hill district, the men
of Omi, Mino and Hida came in, but on the Tokaido none joined them from eastward of Omi.
All the western districts sent their men, but from the Hokurikudo not one arrived from  north of
Wakasa. After a Council of Courtiers had been held, the Heike leaders decided to proceed against

Kiso Yoshinaka first, and then to attack Yoritomo, and with this purpose their army set out for
the north. The Commanders in Chief were Komatsu no Sa mmi Chujo Koremori and Echizen -no-
Sammi Michimori, while the Vice -Commanders were Satsuma -no-kami Tadanori, Kogo -gu no -
suke Tsunemasa, Awaji -no-kami Kiyofusa and Mikawa -no-kami Tomonori. Six generals were
appointed to lead the samurai, Etchu -no-Jirohyoye M oritsugu, Kazusa -no-taiyu Hangwan
Tadatsuna, Hida -no-taiyu Hangwan Kagetaka, Kawachi -no-Hangwan Hidekuni, Takahashi -no
Hangwan Nagatsuna and Musashi -no Saburosaemon Arikuni, beside whom there were three
hundred and forty other valiant warriors apt to comma nd. The forces under them were about a
hundred thousand horsemen, and at the hour of the Dragon (8. a.m.) on the seventeenth day of
the fourth month they left Kyoto for the north

[p.21]

country. As their supplies were insufficient, as soon as they had cr ossed the pass of Ausaka
outside the Capital, they began to seize and appropriate anything they wanted from the estates
and houses that lay by the way, not sparing even the government property. As they went along by
Shiga, Karasaki, Mikawajiri, Mano, Takas hima, Shiozu and Kaizu, the inhabitants of these places
could not endure it and fled to the mountains.