CHAPTER XIII.

THE BATTLE OF YOKOTAGAWAKA.

On the seventh day of the eighth month a recitation of the Nio Sutra was held in the Hall  of the
Dajokwan in memory of the subduing of Taira Masakado, and on the first day of the ninth month
a suit of armour and a helmet was presented to the Daijingu Shrine at Ise in memory of the
quelling of the insurrection of Fujiwara Sumitomo. The Imperial  Envoy to the Shrine Saishu -no-
Jingi-no-Gondai -fuku Onakatomi Sadataka, fell ill at Koga in the province of Omi soon after
leaving Kyoto, and on the third day he passed away in the Detached Palace at Ise. Moreover they
held a recitation of the Sutras

[p.15]

before the Five Great Buddhist Deities to pray for victory over their enemies, and one of the
priests called Dai -Ajari, who was officiating before the image of Gosanze, became unconscious
and died before the altar. It was a manifest sign that neither  the gods nor Buddhas would accept
their supplications. Again, a service was held before the image of Daigen Myo -o, and Jikken Ajari
of the Anjoji came and brought many volumes of the Holy Sutras and opened and read them, but
all he could prophesy was the downfall of the Heike. When they asked him the reason he replied:
" The enemies of the Emperor must be subdued, and when we consider the present condition of
affairs, it appears that the Heike are the enemies of the Emperor, therefore they must be
overthro wn." On account of this ominous prediction they proposed to put the Ajari to death or
banish him, but as everyone was so busy with things both great and small, it happened that he
escaped. After the Heike had fallen and the Genji had taken their place, thi s priest went down to
Kamakura and told his story there, whereupon Yoritomo was pleased to raise him to the rank of
Sojo as a reward for his boldness.

On the twenty fourth day of the twelfth month the Consort of the late Emperor became a nun
and took the title of Kenrei -mon-in, and as the Emperor was quite an infant at the time, this was
the only name by which he ever knew her. And so this year came to an end and the second year
of Yo -wa began. The Court Festivals of the New Year were held as usual. On the  twenty first day
of the second month the planet Mars invaded the territory of the Pleiades; and it is written in the
astronomical books that if this happens the barbarians will rise, and also that a General will
receive the Imperial Commission to march be yond the frontier. On the tenth day of the third
month an investiture of officials was held, and most of the Heike received promotion. On the
fifteenth day of the fourth month the former Gon -sho Sozu Genshin held a service at the shrine
of Hiyoshi, when th e Hokke Sutra was recited ten thousand

[p.16]

times according to the rule, and the Ho -o attended it to acquire merit.

Who it was that began it I know not, but a rumour went forth that the Ho -o had bidden the
monks of Hieizan attack the Heike, and in c onsequence of this bands of soldiers marched on the

Palace and camped about it on all sides. The Heike hastily assembled at Rokuhara, and Hon -
sammi -no-Chujo Shigehira with a force of three thousand horse set out for the shrine of Hiyoshi.
When it was repor ted at Hieizan that their temples were in danger of being attacked, the monks
went down to Higashi Sakamo o and held a council to find out the reason. The Ho -o meanwhile
was in a state of consternation at these things, and the Courtiers and Nobles turned p ale with
agitation, while most of the Ho o's Guards could not contain themselves in their flurry. Both in
the Capital and in the temples the trepidation was extreme. Then Shigehira Kyo met the Ho -o
near Anabu and accompanied him back to Kyoto, and it was f ound that the stories of His
Majesty's inciting the monks to attack the Heike, and the Heike being about to march against the
temples, were both groundless falsehoods, upon which there were not wanting those who put
them down to supernatural malevolence. " I suppose I mint not go on any more pilgrimages at my
pleasure in future;" quoth the Ho -o.

On the twentieth day an Imperial Envoy was sent to the twenty -two shrines round the Capital;
this was on account of the famine and pestilence. On the twenty -fourth day of the fifth month
the era was changed to Ju -ei, and on the same, day an investiture of officials was held, at which
Jo-no-Shiro Sukemochi of Echigo was made Echigo -no-kami. After the death of his elder brother
Sukenaga he rather wished to avoid the il l-omened honour, but as it was the Imperial Order there
as nothing to be done. He then changed his name to Nagamochi.

So on the second day of the ninth month Jo -no-Shiro

[p.17]

Nagaimochi assembled the men of Echigo, Dewa and Aizu, about forty thousan d horsemen, and
went forth to the province of Shinano to attack Kiso. On the ninth day he pitched his camp at
Yokotagawara in that Province, and Kiso, who had been lying in the fortress of Yoda, issued out
with three thousand horse and rode to meet him. No w the Genji of Shinano, by the stratagem of
Inoue -no-Kuro Mitsumori, divided two thousand of their men into seven parties, each bearing a
red flag, the colour of the Heike, and when the warriors of Echigo saw these emerging over the
rocks and winding out o f the defiles they set up a shout of joy, thinking that many were for their
side in this province also. But as the different bands approached, at a given signal the whole seven
drew together into one, and, throwing away their red banners, suddenly replaced  them with
white ones and advanced to the onset. When the men of Echigo saw this manoeuvre panic seized
them and they cried out; " Ah ! we have been deceived! The enemy swarms everywhere! We
shall be surrounded!" And thus thrown into confusion they were dr iven into the river and
stampeded into deep gorges, so that most of them perished, and but few survived. Jo -no-Shiro,
when his most redoubtable champions Yama -no-Taro of Echigo and Jotanbo of Aizu, on whom
he especially relied, had been slain, and himself badly wounded, escaped with his bare life and
fled back to his province by way of the river. When he reached Echigo he at once sent
messengers to Kyoto to inform the Heike of his. mishap, but they carelessly paid no heed. On the
sixteenth day Munemori -no-Kyo was again appointed Dai -nagon, and on the third day of the
tenth month he became Nai -daijin. On the seventh day of the same month he proceeded to the
Palace to offer thanks attended by a brilliant train, including twelve Court Nobles headed by
Kwazan -in Chunagon, and sixteen of lesser rank led by Kurando -no-To Chikamune. Among
them there were four of the rank of Chunagon and three of that of Sammi Chujo. So, though the
Genji of the north and west

[p.18]


countries were swarming forth everywhere like b ees, and were reported to be even now about to
burst in upon the Capital, the Heike, heedless of the impending storm that was to break upon
them, continued to spend their days in luxury and extravagance. Thus this year also came to an
end and the second ye ar of Ju -ei began. The New Year Festival was as usual. On the fifth day of
the New Year the Emperor went on a Visit of Ceremony to the Palaces of His Imperial Relations.
There was a precedent for this, for the Emperor Toba made a like visit at the age of s ix years. On
the twenty first day of the second month Munemori -no-Kyo was raised to the Lower First Rank,
and on the same day he resigned the office of Naidaijin: this he was said to have done on account
of the revolt. Then the monks of Nara and Hieizan an d the priests of Kumano and Kinbusen, as
well as the chief of the Daijingu Shrine at Ise and all his officials rebelled against the Heike and
transferred their allegiance to the Genji, and though an Imperial Decree was issued to all the four
quarters of th e Empire, and the Ho -o also published an Order to the whole country, yet as all
concluded that this was but a device of the Heike, there were none who paid any attention.

NOTES:  VOLUME VI.

[1] Hatsune . Kiku tabi ni mezurashikereba hototogisu
                Itsumo hatsune no kokochi koso tsure.
[2] Mu. First syllable of  無間  mugen, without intermission.


VOLUME VII.