CHAPTER XIII.
 THE DEATH OF MORITOSHI.

 Now Shin -Chūnagon Tomomori -no-Kyō was in command of the Heike at Ikuta -no-mori, and as
all his mind was bent on the east ward, a messenger from the Kodama clan came riding up to him.
" Your lordship was Governor of Musashi last year," said he, "and because of that connexion the
Kodama clan has sent me to warn you. Look to your rear! " Then the retainers of Tomomori
turned an d saw the clouds of black smoke ascending behind them, and crying out that all was lost
and the western army had given way, they were stricken with panic and broke and fled in wild
confusion.

Etchu Zenji Moritoshi was the leader of the samurai on the clif f side, and when he saw all the
others take to flight, disdaining to follow them, he reined in his charger to await the foe, when
Inomata no Koheiroku Noritsuna, rejoicing to meet so redoutable an antagonist, urged on his
horse and bore down upon him. Rush ing upon each other, they grappled fiercely so that both fell
from their horses, and though Inomata was famous for his great strength in all the eight provinces
of the East, and was said to have tern oft the upper branches of a stag horn with ease, Etchū Z enji
had the strength of twenty or thirty ordinary men, and indeed so powerful were his limbs that he
could haul up or down a heavy ship that it took sixty or seventy men to move, and so he gripped
his adversary and

page 152

pinned him down so that he could not rise. Thus prostrate beneath his foe, try how he would to
shift him or draw his sword, he could not so much as stir a finger to the hilt, and even when he
strove to speak, so great was the pressure that no word would come forth. Spite of all this ,
however, he was yet undaunted, and after a short breathing space he managed to ejaculate : "
When a samurai takes the head of an enemy it is the custom that he first enquire his name and
also declare his own. It is great merit to take a head, but of what  value is one without a name?"
Thinking this most reasonable, Moritoshi then declared himself: " I am Etchū Zenji Moritoshi,
formerly a Courtier of the Heike house, but now only worthy to be an ordinary samurai. I pray
you tell me your name also." " I am I nomata -no-Koheiroku Noritsuna ", replied the other faintly,
" and if you will spare my life I will obtain yours as a reward for my share in the victory, and so
you may escape the doom of your house." " What disgraceful speech is this ? " cried Moritoshi in
great wrath. " Unworthy though I may be, I am yet a Taira, and never will I stoop to ask or grant
favours to any of Genji blood! " And he was just about to cut off his head when Inomata pleaded
again: " Who is so unchivalrous as to cut off the head of a s urrendered foe ?" Whereupon
Moritoshi relented and spared his life.

Now the place where they had fought was solid ground in front, but behind them lay deep and
swampy ricefields, and on a narrow path between these the two sat down to rest and recover
their breath, when a single horseman rode up, clad in scarlet armour and mounted on a cream
coloured horse with saddle decorated with gold. Moritoshi glared at him suspiciously. "That is
Hitomi Shiro, a friend of Inomata; he has come to see what has happened, but I will deal with
him too "; and he sprang up and prepared to grapple with him as soon as he came near enough.

Now Etchū Zenji kept an eye on both his foes at first, but as the other drew nearer, his attention
became more fixed on him, which Inomata per ceiving,

page 153

 he suddenly sprang up from the ground and dealt Moritoshi a heavy blow on the breast plate
with his closed fist. Losing his balance at this unexpected attack, Moritoshi fell over backwards,
when Inomata immediately leapt upon him, sn atched his dagger from his side, and pulling up the
skirt of his armour, stabbed him so deeply thrice that the hilt and fist went in after the blade.
Having thus dispatched him he cut off his head, and as Hitomi Shiro had come up by then, and at
such times  disputes about heads were apt to arise, he stuck it on the point of his sword and held
it aloft, at the same time shouting loudly:  " The head of Etchū Zenji Moritoshi, the famous
demon -warrior of the Heike, slain by Inomata -no-Koheiroku Noritsuna of the p rovince of
Musashi ! " And on the roll of those who died valiantly that day the name of Inomata stood first.