CHAPTER IX.
LONG BOWSHOTS.

     Thus both armies joined battle all along the line, and the roar of their warcries was such as to
be heard even to the highest h eavens of Brahma, and to cause the deity deep under the earth to
start in amazement. Then Shin -Chūnagon Tomomori -no-Kyō, coming forth on to the deck -house
of his ship, shouted to his men in a mighty voice: " Even in India and China and also in our own
coun try, with the most renowned leader and the bravest warriors an army cannot prevail if fate
be against it. Yet must our honour be dear to us, and we must show a bold front to these Eastern
soldiers. Lut us then pay no heed to our lives, but think of nothing  but fighting as bravely as we
may." Hida -no-Saburō Saemon Kagetsune against repeated this proclamation to the samurai. " Ho!
these Eastern fellows may have a great name for their horsemanship," shouted Aku -shichi -byōye
Kagekiyo, " but they know nothing ab out sea -fights, and they will be like fish up a tree, so that
we will pick them up one by one and pitch them into the sea! " "And let their Commander Kuro
Yoshitsune be the special object of your attack," added Etchū -no-Jirōhyōye Moritsugu, " he is a
little fellow with a fair complexion and his front teeth stick out a bit, so you will know him by
that. He often changes his clothes and armour, so take care he doesn't escape you ! " " Who cares
for that wretched little fellow ? " replied Aku -shichi, " Cheer u p, my brave comrades; we'll soon
pick him up under our arms and fling him into the sea! "

     After Shin -Chūnagon Tomomori had thus addressed his men

[p. 246]

he took a small boat and rowed across to the ship of the Daijin Munemori. " Our own men look
well enough," said he, " only Awa -no-Mimbu Shigeyoshi seems doubtful in his allegiance. I pray
you let me take off his head." "But he has served us well so far, " replied Munemori," so how can
we do this only on suspicion ? Anyhow, let him be summoned." S o Shigeyoshi came into the
presence of the Daijin. He was attired in a hitatare of yellowish red colour with a little black in it,
and armour laced with light red leather. "How now, Shigeyoshi? Do you intend treachery?" said
Munemori, " for your conduct to day has a suspicious look. Do you tell your men of Shikoku to
bear themselves well in the fight, and don't play the dastard." "Why should I play the dastard?"
said Shigeyoshi as he retired from before the Daijin. Meanwhile Tomomori had been standing by
with his hand gripping his sword hilt hard enough to break it, casting meaning looks at Munemori
to intimate his wish to cut Shigeyoshi down, but as the latter gave no sign he could do nothing.

     So the Heike divided their thousand vessels into three flee ts. In the van rowed Yamaga -no-
Hyōtōji Hidetō with five hundred ships, and after him came the Matsuura with three hundred
more; last of all came the Heike nobles with two hundred. Now Yamaga -no-Hyōtōji who led the
van was the strongest archer in all Kyūshū , and he chose five hundred men who drew the bow
better than most, though not equal to himself, and placed them in the bows of his ships, shoulder
to shoulder, so that they let fly a volley of five hundred arrows at once.


     The fleet of the Genii was t he more numerous with its three thousand ships, but as their men
shot from various places here and there, their force did not show to advantage. Yoshitsune
himself, who was fighting in the forefront of the battle, was greatly embarrassed by the arrows of
the foe that fell like rain on his shield and armour. So, elated by their victory in the first attack,
the Heike pressed onward, and the roar of their shouting mingled with the booming of their war
drums that continuously sounded the onset.

[p. 247]

     Now on the side of the Genii, Wada -no-Kōtarō Yoshimori did not go on shipboard, but
mounted his horse and sat himself firmly in the saddle with his feet deep in the stirrups, riding
into the midst of the Heike host and letting fly his arrows right and left . A famous archer he had
always been, and no enemy within the space of three chō escaped his arrows, but one shaft he
shot an extraordinary distance on which was a request to return it to the marksman. When it was
withdrawn by order of Tomomori it was seen  to be feathered with white wing feathers of the
crane mixed with black ones of the wild goose, a plain bamboo shaft thirteen handbreadths and
three fingers long, inscribed at the space of a handbreadth from the lashing on the butt with the
name Wada -no-Kōtarō Yoshimori painted in lacquer. Among the Heike too there were some fine
archers, but none who could do a feat like this. After a while however, Nii -no-Kishirō Chikakiyo
of Iyo stepped forward and shot it back again. It flew to a distance of more than t hree chō and
struck deep into the left arm of Miura -no-Ishi Sakon -no-Taro, who was standing about a tan
behind Wada. " Ha ha! " laughed Miura's men as they came crowding round," Wada -no-Kōtarō
boasts no one can equal hint at shooting, and now he has been p ut to shame openly." Then
Yoshimori, angered at this, sprang into a small boat and pressed on into the midst of the foe,
drawing his bore lustily so that very many of his adversaries were killed and wounded.

     Not long afterwards a large shaft of plain  bamboo stuck into the boat in which Yoshitsune
was standing with a similar request that it should be shot back again. It was feathered with the
tail feathers of a copper pheasant and was fourteen handbreadths and three fingers long. At a
distance of one h andbreadth from the butt lashing the name of the sender was painted in lacquer:
" Nii-no-Kishirō Chikakiyo of Iyo." Then the Hōgwan called to Gotōbyōye Sanemoto and
enquired: " Who is there who can return this shaft to the sender ?" " Asari -no-Yoichi of th e Genii
of Kai is the most likely; " answered Gotō.

[p. 248]

" Call him then," replied Yoshitsune. When he came into his presence;" How now, Yoichi," he
exclaimed," can you shoot back this arrow that has just been loosed at us from the offing with a
request that we return it? " " I can but try," replied Yoichi. Then he took the arrow and measured
it. "This shaft is weak and somewhat lacking in length," he objected, " if it is all the same I would
rather use one of my own; and taking a large lacquered shaf t feathered with the black body
feathers of a bird, fifteen handbreadths and three fingers in length, and fitting it to his nine foot
lacquered bow, he drew it with all his might and let fly. This also flew more than four chō, and
hit Nii -no-Kishirō Chikak iyo clean in his middle as he stood on the stern of one of the great ships,
so that he fell headlong to the bottom. This Asari -no-Yoichi had long been famed for his skill
with the bow and could bring down a running stag at a distance of two chō and never m iss.

     After this both sides set their faces against each other and fought grimly without a thought for

their lives, neither giving way an inch. But as the Heike had on their side an Emperor endowed
with the Ten Virtues and the Three Sacred Treasures o f the Realm, things went hard with the
Genji and their hearts were beginning to fail them, when suddenly something that they at first
took for a white cloud, but which soon appeared to be a white banner floating in the breeze,
came drifting over the two fl eets from the upper air and finally settled on the stern of one of the
Genji ships, hanging on by the rope.