CHAPTER VI.

GIO.


Now not only di d this priestly statesman hold the whole country in the hollow of his hand, but,
neither ashamed at the censure of the world, nor regarding the derision of the people, he indulged
in the most surprising conduct. For example, in the Capital there were two f amous " Shirabyoshi
" who were sisters, named Gio and Ginyo, both young girls and very skilled in their art. The elder,
Gio, was beloved by Kiyomori, and her younger sister also was in high favour with everyone. So
they were enabled to build a good house f or their mother, who was granted a monthly income of
a hundred koku of rice; and a hundred kwan in money by Kiyomori. Their family was
consequently rich and honoured, fortunate beyond the lot of most people. Now the origin of
Shirabyoshi in our country was  in the reign of Toba -in when Shima -no-chisai and Waka -no-mae
appeared as dancers. In the beginning the Shirabyoshi wore the " suikan " or silk court robe and "
tateboshi " or black court headdress, with a white dirk in their belt, when they danced, and it  was
like the dancing of a man : but from the middle age the headdress and sword were disused, and
they danced only in the white " suikan," hence they were called Shirabyoshi.

[p. 14]

But among the Shirabyoshi [1] of the capital, when they heard of the g ood fortune of Gio, there
were some who hated her and some who were envious. Those who envied her said: " Ah ! how
fortunate is Gio Gozen, if we do even as she does we too may become prosperous in like manner ;
" so they added the syllable " Gi " to their names to see if they too might not obtain good luck.
Some called themselves Giichi, Giji, Gifuku, or Gitoku. Those who hated her said " Surely it is
not a matter of the name or character with which it is written, fortune is the result of disposition
inheri ted from a previous existence ;" and so few of them took such a name. Now it came to pass
that, three years afterwards, another skillful Shirabyoshi appeared ; and she was a maiden sixteen
years of age, born in the province of Kaga, and her name was Hotoke . And when the people of
the capital, both high and low, saw her, they said that although from of old times many
Shirabyoshi had been seen there, one so dexterous as she had not been beheld ; and she too was in
exceeding great favour with all. And in the c ourse of time Hotoke Gozen said: " Though I have
made sport for the whole Empire, yet this great Taira minister who now is the source of all
fortune and prosperity has not yet deigned to summon me; after the manner of entertainers I will
e'en go uninvited. " So she forthwith proceeded to the Palace in Nishi -hachijo. On her arrival, a
servant entered the presence of the minister and announced : " Hotoke Gozen, now

[p. 15]

so famous in this city is without." Then the lay -priest grew very angry and replied " How then! do
not these players attend only when they arc called ? Why is it that she has come unbidden ?
Whether she be called God or Buddha, (Hotoke) it is not suitable that she come here while Gio
is present. Bid her depart at once." Hotoke Gozen was alr eady retiring at these unkind words,

when Gio said to the Minister " It is surely the usual custom that players should attend unbidden,
and moreover it is because she is still young and innocent that she has thus intruded on you --so it
will be most unkind to speak harshly and send her away --how greatly will she be shamed and
distressed by it ; as I myself have trodden the same path, I cannot but remember these things. If
you will not deign to allow her to dance or to sing, yield, I pray you, so far as to ca ll her back and
receive her in audience: if you then dismiss her, it will be a favour indeed worthy of her deep
gratitude." To this the Priest Minister answered: " Since you wish it to be so, I will see her and
then dismiss her: " and he sent a servant to call her. Hotoke Gozen, having been thus harshly
treated, was even then entering her carriage to return when she was summoned and turned back
again. The Minister met her and granted her an audience. Thus Hotoke, though it seemed
unlikely that she would gai n an audience, yet through the kindness of Gio, who thus importuned
for her, was not only able to enter the Minister's presence, but further it happened that he,
wishing to hear her voice, directed that she should sing a song of the kind called " Imayo: " [2] and
thus she sang:
" When I first enjoyed the sight of your bountiful presence,
T'was like the evergreen pine, flourishing age after age.
Like to the pond on whose rocks is basking the turtle thrice blessed,
Numberless storks beside it happily preen ing their wings."

[p. 16]

And those who heard it were greatly wondering at her skill and her beauty, and pressed her to
repeat it even to three times. The Lay -priest also was greatly diverted and said " Since you are so
skilful at Imayo you must also b e able to dance well; we wish to see one of your dances." Then
the drums were ordered to be beaten and she danced forthwith. Now Hotoke Gozen was
renounced for the beauty of her hair and features, and her voice was no less exquisite ; how then
should she f ail in the dance ? So when she put forth all her skill and charm in dancing, Kiyomori
was enraptured and his heart turned wholly toward her. But when Hotoke Gozen said to him :
"Did I not present myself uninvited, and when almost rejected was I not only br ought back by
the entreaty of Gio Gozen? I pray thee grant me leave that I may return quickly ;" the lay -monk
by no means agreed to the proposal, and thinking that she was only embarrased because of the
presence of Gio, proposed to send Gio away.

But Hoto ke Gozen answered `How can this be? If we were to remain here both together, I
should be most embarrassed, and if your Excellency send away Gio Gozen and keep me here
alone, how ashamed will she not feel in her heart ? Indeed it will be most painful to her . If you
deign to think of me again in the future, I am always able to come at your call. I beg that to -day I
may be allowed to retire."

Kiyomori, seeing how the matter lay, straightway ordered Gio to leave the Palace, and to that end
sent a messenger thr ee times. Although Gio had expected this thing from long before, she did not
think that it would come to pass to -day or to -morrow. But as the Nyudo continually repeated
this unreasonable demand, there was nothing for her but to sweep her room clean and to go.
Even those who meet under the shade of the same tree, or who greet each other by the riverside,
since it is owing to relations in a previous existence, ever feel pain at parting with each other ;
how much more grievous a thing it is, when two have been  together in affection for the


[p. 17]

space of three years. So in regret and grief she shed unavailing tears. Thus as it was a thing that
must be, Gio went forth, but ere she went she wrote on the shoji this verse, thinking to bring
perchance to remembr ance the forgotten image of one who was gone.

“The fresh or fading flowers of the same moor,
In autumn meet with the same hapless fate.”

Then riding in a carriage to the place where she lived, she cast hers if down within the shoji and
wept unceasi ngly. Her mother and her younger sister, seeing these things, asked many questions,
but Gio would by no means give any answer, and only by enquiring of her maid did they come to
know what had happened. Moreover the hundred koku and hundred kwan of monthly allowance
ceased ; it was now the turn of the relations of Hotoke Gozen to taste the enjoyment of this
prosperity. Soon all the people of the capital heard of these matters, and wondered if it were true
that Gio had been dismissed from the Nishi -hachijo pa lace. There were some who went to see
her, some who sent letters, and some who sent their servants, but Gio, since she had no
inclination to amuse anyone now, did not even receive their letters, neither did she treat in any
way with the messengers. She bec ame more and more melancholy and only shed unavailing tears.
Thus the year ended and the next spring came.

Then the Nyudo sent a messenger to Gio asking after her affairs and her health and saying that as
Hotoke Gozen wished for someone to beguile her ted ious hours, would she not come up to the
palace to dance, or it might be sing Imayo, and thus cheer her, but Gio returned no answer, only
she lay down and restrained her tears. Again the Nyudo sent to know why she did not go, and
why at least she did not a nswer ; if she would not go, for what reason was it ? For Jokai himself
wished to confer with her. When her mother heard this, weeping bitterly, she thus admonished
her ; " Why at least do you not deign to

[p. 18]

send an answer? and why do you not go wh en thus rebuked ? At which Gio said, restraining her
tears: " If I thought I ought to go, I would answer, but since I shall by no means go, I know not
what answer I can give. As I do not go when I am thus summoned, he has somewhat to discuss
with me, he sa ys ; and what may this be but perchance to drive me from the city, or it may be to
take my life. Beyond these two things no worse is possible. Even though one go forth from
Miyake, the way is not so sorrowful. Again if one is called away from life, would o ne grudge this
body so much ? Once having known the bitterness of being disliked, shall I look on his face a
second time ? " Now when she did not feel it necessary to reply, her mother again admonished
her, weeping " Among those who dwell in this land, the  commands of the Nyudo ought not to be
disobeyed, and moreover the relation of man and woman is from a former existence, it does not
begin in this life; even though the pledge be for a thousand or ten thousand years, there are many
that soon are parted, an d though some think that it will be but for a little while, yet it may
endure unto the end of life. The thing that has no certainty in this life of ours is the relation
between man and woman. If you do not go now when you are summoned, it is not likely tha t

you will be put to death, but certainly we shall be driven from Miyako. Even if you must leave
the capital, you are both still young, and whatever space there may be between the rock and the
tree it is easy to pass over ; but I am old, and when weak and declining, to go and live in a strange
place, is sad even to think of. Oh that I might be allowed to live and die in Miyako ! " Thus
considering her filial duty both in this life and the next, though Gio had determined that she
would not go, not disobedien t to her mother she stood ready to set out, bathed in tears ; indeed
her feelings were very pitiable. As it would be lonely for her to go alone, her younger sister,
Ginyo prepared to accompany her, with two other Shirabyoshi beside, making in all a company
of four. In

[p. 19]

one carriage they rode together and carne to the Nishi -hachijo palace.

On entering however, she was not called to take the seat she had formerly occupied, a place
much lower down being provided for her. " Alas ! " thought she, " how  shall this be ? Although
there is no fault in me, and although I have come hither, how am I distressed in being given a
lower seat." And not knowing what to do, she said nothing to anyone, but her tears fell plentifully
from beneath the sleeve she pressed  to her face. When Hotoke Gozen saw this, she was greatly
affected and said to Kiyomori, " It would have been better if you had not sent for her ; but now
let her be called up hither, or if not, suffer me to be dismissed and go away."

The Nyudo would not at all consider this and would not permit her to go away, but by and by he
deigned to receive Gio and to greet her and enquire how she did, explaining that, as Hotoke
Gozen was lonely, it would be very pleasant if Gio would comfort her by dancing and singi ng
Imayo. Gio replied, with difficulty suppressing her tears, " Indeed I came wishing not to disobey
your august command," and sang the following verse of Imayo -- :

"Even Buddha himself was once an ordinary person,
I also at last like unto Buddha shall  grow.
Everything on this earth can partake of the nature of
Buddha.
Only to be estranged, this is painful indeed."

Twice she sang it, weeping bitterly, and as she sang all the Princes and Courtiers of the Heike and
the high officers and samurai shed  tears of admiration and sympathy. Kiyomori also
acknowledged the justice of her complaint and frankly confessed it before them all.

So when the dance was finished he intimated that, as at present he had to attend to other matters,
in future she should co me without any especial summons to dance and sing and

[p. 20]

amuse Hotoke. But Gio, repressing her tears, went forth without returning any answer.

Thus Gio, not having intended to go, but thinking it cruel to disobey her mother, a second time

suffered ignominious treatment. How pitiable it was indeed ! Then thinking that if she remained
in this world, she was always liable to meet with such afflictions, she determined to put an end to
her life. Her sister Ginyo, hearing this, also made up her mind to di e with her.

Then their mother, being aware of their resolve, again with tears more gravely admonished them.
" If you have determined to do this, how greatly do I regret that I persuaded you to go ; for in
truth your chagrin is the cause of this, and if yo u indeed take your own life and your sister follow
you, you my two daughters thus dying first, what profit is it to me your mother, who am aged
and declining, if I still live on ? I too with you will cast away my life. Now to cause one's mother,
who has no t yet attained the limit of her years to cast her life away, is it not even as one of the
five great sins ?  [3]This life is but a temporary abiding place, shame upon shame even, what is it
to be accounted ? There is only sadness of heart in the long darkne ss of this world. If in this life
we become attached to things, in the next life we must tread an evil way in sadness.” Thus
melted in tears she persuaded them. Gio, also weeping, admitted that she spoke truth; doubtless
it was as one of the five great sin s that, because of regret at being put to shame, she should
determine to put an end to her life. So it was that she gave up her intention of dying by her own
hand : but since if she should stay in Miyako she would still be liable to humiliation Gio, at the
age of only one and twenty, deserted the capital and became a nun. In a mountain village in the
recesses of Saga, building herself a but of brushwood, she continually murmured her invocations
to Buddha. When her

[p. 21]

sister Ginyo perceived that she d id thus, having made compact to die with her, how much more
when the world has become so hateful shall she not at least accompany her sister. So at the age of
nineteen she changed her condition, and retiring from the world with her elder sister, devoted
herself to prayers for their future happiness. Then their mother, seeing that she was left alone,
aged, grey haired and feeble, since her two young daughters had forsaken the world, despairing of
any future happiness, at the age of forty five shaved her head  ; earnestly giving herself up to
prayer to Buddha, with her two daughters she sought a happier birth in future.

Thus the spring passed by and the summer grew late ; the first winds of autumn began to blow.
Gazing at the Milky Way where the lover stars [4] meet in the heavens, when verses are
accustomed to be traced on the leaves of the " kaji," watching the evening sun hide herself behind
the ridge of the western hills, they likened the sun -set to the Pure Land of the West, [5]wondering
when they should b e reborn in that blessed region and with all desire extinguished abide there for
ever. Thus they continued to meditate on their sad condition, their tears alone being
inexhaustible. But one evening when twilight was passing into darkness they had shut thei r
latticed door of bamboo and lighted their dimly burning lamp, and mother and daughters
together were repeating the " Nembutsu " when there came a knocking on the lattice. The three
nuns were at once overcome by fear : " Ah ! perchance it is some goblin w ho has come to disturb
our prayers and make our Nembutsu of no avail. For what human being will approach such a
brushwood but as this by night to which none comes even by day? Such

[p. 22]

a slight bamboo gate as this, even if we shut it, is easy to brea k through, therefore let us open it
without de'ay. If indeed it be a pitiless one who will deprive us of life, relying on the True Vow

of Amida on whom we now we have called, if we ceaselessly repeat the Nembutsu, surely the
Buddha and the attendant Bosats u hearing our voice will comp and meet us, leading us safely to
the Paradise of the West." Thus earnestly repeating the Nembutsu, admonishing each others'
hearts and holding each the hand of the other, they opened wide the bamboo lattice.

But behold it wa s no evil spirit but only Hotoke Gozen that stood outside. While Gio was
enquiring how Hotoke Gozen had come to visit them, whether in a dream or in her actual person,
Hotoke answered amid her tears. "It is a strange thing to speak of what has happened, bu t if I
speak it not, perhaps I may not be remembered. So I will relate all things as they were from the
beginning in detail. When first I came to the Court uninvited and was about to go away
disappointed after being dismissed, it was at your request that I  was called back again; but a
woman is a person not to be relied on, so that, not obeying my own conscience, I allowed you to
be sent away and even stayed myself in your stead. Now in consequence of this I am
overwhelmed with shame and conscience stricken.  When I saw you go away I felt it to be
through my fault and could not feel at all happy. Moreover when I saw the lines written by your
hand on the shoji, "In autumn meet with the same hapless fate," I thought it was indeed true.
And then when you were onc e more summoned and when you recited the Imayo verse, the
whole matter came to my mind again. But as I did not know where you were, I enquired and
heard that you were together in a certain place absorbed in prayer and meditation. Then indeed I
felt envious  of you, and having zealously begged my freedom since the Nyudo has no further
need of me, when I thought attentively about the matter, the glory of this Shaba -world is a dream
of a

[p. 23]

dream --pleasure and prosperity, of what value are they? Very dif ficult it is to receive a body and
obtain the mercy of the Buddha. If now I go down in sorrow to the underworld I am unable to
obtain rebirth in another life ; yea how difficult will it be to rise up again. In a world of
uncertainty for both old and young how can we rely on our youth ? The day when the breath
enters our body or goes forth we cannot know ; our life is more fleeting than gossamer or a flash
of lightning ; if we boast of the glory that endures for a moment, loss of happiness in the future
life must be our portion. So this morning stealing out unperceived, I have come hither as you see,
putting away my ordinary dress to become a recluse ; thus having changed any condition, I
entreat that you will condescend to pardon my former trespass, that tog ether repeating the
Nembutsu we may sit on one lotus in Paradise together. But if I can not attain my desire, I will
wander away whither I know not, falling down under some tree or on some mossy bank, and ever
zealously repeating the Nembutsu, I will striv e to attain rebirth in Paradise."

So pressing her sleeve to her face she entreated them. Gio answered her, scarce withholding her
tears: "Not even in a dream did I imagine that you would think thus, while I lived according to
the custom of this fleeting w orld ; when I thought of the unhappiness of my condition, often I
felt resentment at your conduct in spite of myself, thus suffering loss in this life and the next. But
as now you have changed your condition, your former faults have passed away like the de w of
morning. Now do I feel extreme happiness knowing that you will without doubt attain your
desire and be reborn in bliss. If people may say that my having become a nun was a difficult thing,
shall I too so consider it ? It was because I hated this world  and wished to put an end to my life
that I did this. But that you, having no resentment or sorrow, and being now but seventeen years
old, should thus despise this world and so earnestly set your mind on the Pure Land, thinking only

of the Noble

[p. 24]

Path, what a happy state of virtuous enlightenment is this indeed !

So the four of them retired from the world together, morning and evening offering flowers and
incense before Buddha's shrine, and with one mind fervently pouring out their petitions; each  one
sooner or later obtaining her desire for rebirth in bliss. And in the register of the temple Cho -ko-
do built by the Ho -o Go -Shirakawa the Honourable spirits of the four are found enshrined.
Indeed it is a very marvellous thing.