CHAPTER XIV.
THE RETURN TO THE CAPITAL.

The removal of the capital to Fu kuhara had displeased everyone from the Emperor downwards,
and all the Courtiers had made great lamentation and complaint, appealing to all the shrines and
temples of Hieizan and Nara and every other place against this arbitrary outrage, so at length even
the Nyudo, who would try to tear paper crossways, had to give way, which he did by issuing a
Court Order to return to Kyoto immediately.

So on the second day of the eleventh month the capital was suddenly changed again. The new
capital was situated in a p lace where the mountains towered up steeply above it on the north,
while the sea washed close up on the south, and the incessant roar of the waves and the salt spray
made it unendurable, so that Takakura Shinin was always ailing and was delighted to leave as
soon as possible, so he quickly departed with the Empress and the Ho -o, while the Sessho, the
Dajo-daijin and the rest of the

[p. 254]

Courtiers eagerly accompanied them. Then the Dajo Nyudo and all the Heike followed, and as no
one wished to remain t here even for a short time, so great was their desire to return to the old
Capital, it was soon quite deserted. Ever since the sixth month the buildings had been falling into
ruins, since they were but frames only, and now, when the order to return to Kyot o was issued,
everyone was so anxious to go away quickly that they left everything standing as it was and
hurried off. On returning both the Retired Emperors proceeded to the Ikedono at Rokuhara,
while the Reigning Emperor took up his abode at the Gojo Pal ace. The Courtiers, as they had
nowhere to lodge, took refuge in the temples and shrines of Hachiman, Kamo, Saga, Uzumasa,
and all the others that were scattered about over Nishiyama and Higashiyama, and even the
greatest of them did not scorn to take up t heir quarters in the corridors of the temple or the
storehouses of the shrines.

Now as to the reason for changing the capital to Fukuhara, it was because Kyoto was so near to
Hieizan, and the slightest thing was sufficient to make the monks bring the sacr ed car of Hiyoshi
or the sacred tree of Kasuga into the city and cause a tumult, so no doubt the Nyudo thought that
the site of the new capital would not be so easy for them to threaten, since it was some distance
away with mountains and rivers between.

On the twenty -third day an expedition was begun against the Genji of Omi, and Sahyoe -no-kami
Tomomori and Satsuma -no-kami Tadanori started for that province with an army of thirty
thousand horsemen, and after having defeated Yamamoto, Kashiwagi, Nishigori a nd other rebel
bands, they crossed over to Mino and Owari.