CHAPTER VIII.
THE FIGHT AT MIZUSHIMA.

     Meanwhile the Heike abode at Yashima in Sanuki, and from that place fought with and
subdued the eight provinces of the Sanyodo and the six of the Nankaidō districts, fourteen in all.
Kiso therefore, feeling uneasy, despatched a force of seven thousand men to the Sanyōdō under
the command of Yada -no-Hangwan -dai Yoshikiyo, the son of Mutsu -no-Shin-Hangwan
Yoshiyasu; Umeno -no-Yaheijiro Yukihiro of Shinano being the leader of the samurai. It was the
first day of the tenth month when they arrived at Mizushima in Bitchū and set about launching
their ships to cross over to Yashima, and as they were thus engaged a small boat came insight,
rowing acros s from the other side. At first they thought it was only a fishing boat, but as they
looked they saw that it was one of the enemy ships coming to spy out their position, or perhaps
to negotiate. Immediately the Genji rushed their five hundred ships into th e water with great
haste and sailed to the attack. The Heike were then coming on to meet them with a fleet of a
thousand vessels. Their commander was Shin -Chūnagon Tomomori -no-Kyō, with Noto -no-kami
Noritsune as captain under him. The Heike ships were made  fast alongside each other by hawsers
from the stem and stern, and between these hawsers other rope were fastened, on which planks
were stretched for walking, so that the whole fleet became like a level surface for the fighting
men. As they were about to b egin the onset, Noto -no-kami Noritsune cried out in a mighty voice:
" Ho! men of Shikoku ! how can you bear the shame of being taken alive by these boors of the
North? Upon them and grapple! " And so, shouting their warcry, they began the fight, drawing
their bows and pouring in a hail of arrows until they came to close quarters, when they drew
their swords and engaged each other hand to hand. Some also plied long iron rakes with which
they pulled t heir opponents into the water, and some,

[p.93]

locked  in the death -grip, stabbed each other and fell into the waves. Thus the battle went on and
there was no gap made in the Heike ships, but after a while Umeno -no-Yahei Yukihiro, who led
the Genji samurai, was smitten to death. Then Yada -no-Hangwan Yoshikiyo , desperate at his fate,
sprang into a small boat with six of his retainers and led a fierce attack on the very forefront of
the battle, but all in vain, for his boat was capsized by the enemy and all in it were drowned.
Now the Heike had brought their hor ses with them in the ships, and as they approached the
shore they pushed them off into the water to swim to the beach. Since they were ready accoutred,
as soon as they found a foothold the riders clambered into their saddles and rode them with a
mighty spl ashing through the shallows to the shore, and five hundred horsemen, led by Noto -no-
kami Noritsune, precipitated themselves on the Genji, who, discomfited by the death of both
their leaders, fled headlong in confused panic. Thus by this victory of Mizushim a the Heike
wiped away the shame of their former defeat.