CHAPTER IV.

KAMURO ; OR BOY ATTENDANTS.


Now Prince Kiyomori, being overtaken by illness on the eleventh day of the eleventh month of
Ninan,  at the age of fifty one, retired from the world and took monk's vows to save his life,
assuming the religious name of Jokai. As the result of this, his sickness departed and he was cured,
fulfilling the decree of destiny. Yet after his retirement from the  world he did not put an end to
his luxurious living. People obeyed him as grass before the wind, and depended on him as the
earth does on the rain that moistens it. If one speaks of the Princes of the house of Rokuhara
dono, they were most noble and illus trious, and none might be considered equal to them.
Moreover as for the brother of the Nyudo's wife, Taira Dainagon Tokitada Kyo, --all those who
did not belong to his house were to be considered people of no position, so that everyone was
wishing to make alliance with him. From the manner of wearing the " eboshi " to the style of the
crest on clothes, everything must be in the fashion of Rokuhara ; so that everyone from one end
of the land to the other studied it.

Now however wisely a king or ruler may go vern or in the

[p.10]

case of the political actions of Regent or Prime Minister, (Sessho Kwampaku) it is a usual thing
that certain worthless fellows will gather together to speak ill of him ; but against this lay -priest
in his prosperity there was not e ven a casual breath of reviling. And for what reason? Even
because, by the device of this monk -regent, about three hundred youths of from fourteen to
sixteen years old, having purified themselves and polled their heads, wearing red robes, were
everywhere p atrolling the streets of the Capital. And if there was anyone who spoke evil against
the Taira house, and one of these chanced to hear it, straightway summoning to him his fellows,
they would violently enter that man's house, seize his treasures and househ old goods and bring
him bound to Rokuhara. So that none were found to open their mouth about the things they saw
or knew. At the very name of the Kamuro of Rokuhara everyone, both pedestrians and those
who rode in carriages, made wide room and passed by on  the other side. Even when entering or
leaving the forbidden gate of the Palace, it was not necessary to declare their name, for the
officials of the city looked with averted eyes where they were concerned.