CHAPTER V.
RECEIVING THE DOCTRINE.

     When the Chūjō Shigehira was informed of the reply that  the Heike had made, he said: "That
is just what I had expected : no doubt the rest of the family have but a poor opinion of me." He
felt some disappointment, it is true, but there was no help for it, and indeed he had not
considered it likely that they wo uld be ready to return the Three Sacred Treasures as the price of
his release. So the purport of the reply caused him no surprise, though naturally, while the matter
was yet undecided, he could not help feeling unsettled, and as, when the answer was receiv ed, it
was resolved to send him down to the Eastern Provinces, he felt great regret at leaving the Capital.
Calling Doi -no-Jirō, he asked him whether they would permit him to become a monk, but when
this request was communicated to Yoshitsune and by him re ported

[p. 184]

to the Hō -ō, His Majesty decided that he could not give his consent until the question had been
referred to Yoritomo. " Then" said the Chūjō, " may I not be allowed to see a priest who is an old
friend of mine, that I may speak with him  somewhat about the after life?" "Who is the priest?"
asked Doi. " Hōnembo of Kurodani", was the reply. " In that case there is no objection ", he
answered, and gave permission.

    The Chūjō much pleased at this, soon called the priest, and on his arriva l, said to him, weeping;
"Though I have been taken alive after many dangers in the Western Provinces, and brought up to
the Capital, yet it is a happy thing for me in that I can thus meet you again. But what will my fate
be in the hereafter? While I had ra nk and place in the world, distracted by many affairs and held
fast in the bonds of the things of this life, my heart was wholly given up to pride, without a
thought for what vicissitudes night happen to me. Still more when misfortune overtook our
house an d we fled the Capital, fighting and struggling here and there, my mind was clogged with
the evil desire of killing others and saving my own life, so that no good thoughts could dwell in
me. As to the burning of Nara, whether we say it was an Imperial Order , or the chance of war, at
His Majesty's Behest, since the way of this world is difficult to escape, on account of the evil
deeds of the monks we marched against them, and the chance burning of the temples that
followed was beyond my power to prevent. Stil l, as I was the Commander at that time, if
punishment is to fall on one person, it must be on my head that it will fall. So whatever shame
may overwhelm me I know that it is but retribution for this deed. Therefore I would shave my
head and go as a mendica nt priest, practicing austerities and seeking only the Way of Buddha. But
even if I could do this in the body, I cannot believe that my heart would be changed; for
whatever austerities I might practice would not be enough to attain salvation. Alas! When I think
over the conduct of my

[p. 185]

past life, my guilt is greater than Mount Sumeru, while all my righteousness is less than a speck of
dust; and if thus in vain I end my life, without doubt I shall be reborn in the Three Ways of
Torment. And so I b eseech you, O Shōnin, of your kindness and compassion deign to help even

such a worthless one as myself, and to show me how to achieve salvation."

     At this melancholy speech the Shōnin, overcome by grief, bowed his face to the ground, and
for a long w hile, choked by sobs, could answer nothing. By and by, however, he raised himself
and spoke as follows: "After with difficulty attaining to birth as man, to fall again into the Three
Ways of Torment is too grievous a lot. But if in disgust at this sinful w orld, you seek rebirth in
the Pure Land, cleansing your mind of evil and turning to good, of a surety all the Buddhas of the
Three Worlds will rejoice and be glad.

     In times of degeneracy and of the Five Corruptions, by faith in the name of Amida we c an
prevail. Thus fixing the whole mind on His Paradise, and concentrating all austerities into the
repetition of the Six Character Invocation, none can be so dull or ignorant but his prayer will be
heard, nor will any be despised, be his guilt never so dee p. If you turn from the Ten
Transgressions and the Five Rebellions, you will attain Paradise, and however small your merit,
your hope will not be disappointed. If with earnest mind you repeat the Nembutsu, surely
Amida will come to meet you. If, with the f ull knowledge that Paradise is to be obtained by the
repetition of the Nembutsu, you wholeheartedly repeat it, then Paradise is yours. If you say that
repeating it means repentance, and thus repeat it, you do indeed repent. If you trust in Amida the
All-Powerful, no evil Karma can approach, and if you have faith in the Nembutsu to cleanse from
sin, all your sins will be washed away. The peculiar advantage of the Pure Land Sect lies in this,
that it sums up the whole doctrine in this one

[p. 186]

sentenc e: "The attainment of Paradise depends on Faith." And if you deeply believe this teaching,
without departing from the ordinary avocations and limitations of daily life, and still observing
the Three Actions * and the Five Dignities *, if you do not neglect t o repeat the Nembutsu with
fervor, when the hour of death approaches, departing out of this world of trouble, you shall
without doubt be reborn into the changeless bliss of the Western P aradise." At this exposition the
Chūjō was greatly rejoiced, and replied: " I pray you straightway let me receive the Ten Precepts;
but is it possible that I can do this without becoming a monk? " "Indeed", said the Shōnin, " it is
quite usual to observe t he Ten Precepts without becoming a monk." And taking a razor he laid it
on his forehead, and made the motions of shaving his head, after which he instructed him in the
Ten Precepts. The Chūjō received his instruction with tears of gladness, and the Shōnin too, being
a man of sympathy in all things, taught him the ordinances in a voice broken by sobs. Then
sending for his inkstone, which he had deposited with the samurai, he handed it to the Shōnin,
saying : " Do not give this to anyone, but please keep it a lways near you; and whenever you look
at it, remember that it belonged to a certain person, and deign to say a Nembutsu. Moreover if
you can spare time, please send me a volume of the Sutras." At this the Shōnin could find nothing
to say, but, putting the inkstone into his bosom, he pressed to his face the sleeve of his black robe,
and weeping bitterly returned to Kurodani. This inkstone was one that the Sung Emperor had
sent as a return gift to his father, the Nyūdō, when the Chancellor had sent a present of gold dust
to China, and was inscribed, "to the Great Minister of the Taira of Wada in Japan." Its name was
Matsu kage.
------------
*Three Actions . Of the Body, Mind and Speech.
*Five Dignities.  Of Walking, Standing, Sitting and Lying.