CHAPTER IX.
THE LETTER TO THE SOUTH CAPITAL.

When the priests of Hieizan read the letter of Miidera they were astonished and said: "How is
this? A temple that is tributary to us writes that we are as tho two wings of a bird or the two
wheels of a cart! This is strange indeed." And the made no reply. Moreover the Lay priest
Chancellor asked the Tendai Zasshu M ei-un Dai -Sojo to calm the priests of Hieizan, and he
hastened to the monastery and succeeded in keeping them quiet. Thus he also intimated to the
Prince that his fate was yet uncertain. Beside this, by the order of the Nyudo, twenty thousand
koku of Omi r ice and three thousand bolts of silk of extra length from the North Country were
given to Hieizan for the right of passing over its highways. This was distributed among the monks
of the various peaks and valleys, but as it was done hastily, there were some  priests who received
too much, while others went empty -handed. Whose doing it was I know not, but someone
scrawled up this lampoon:
"The Yamahoshi's gown is short,
He cannot cover what he ought;
The shame he feels his friends to bilk
For Nyudo Jokai's sca nty silk."
While some who had got none at all wrote,
"The shame on us may lightly sit,
For we have not received a bit.”

[p. 186]

The letter that Miidera sent to Nara ran as follows:

"A petition from Onjoji to Kofukuji to beg assistance that this monaste ry may not be destroyed.
Know that the supreme excellence of Buddhism is to uphold the Monarchy; and the duration of
the Throne therefore depends on the Law of Buddha. Now the Nyudo, the former Dajo Daijin,
Taira -no-Ason Kiyomori Ko, whose priestly name is  Jokai, does his will with the authority of the
country and turns the government upside down, so that there is everywhere resentment and
lamentation. And on the evening of the fifteenth day of this month the second son of the Ho -o
hurriedly fled to our mon astery to escape persecution, and though they have demanded
repeatedly that we give him up, our priests unanimously refuse to do so, Therefore this Lay priest
is collecting an army to enter our monastery, wishing to destroy at one time both Buddhism and
the Monarchy. In ancient times in China, when the Emperor Bu -so in the era of Eisho attempted
to destroy Buddhism by force of arms, the monks of Joryusen joined battle and repulsed him; if
they thus upheld their rights against the monarch, how much more shal l we not chastise this
great rebel, this transgressor of the first of the Eight Disobediences [8]. Nara was the place where
in unprecedented fashion the guiltless Kwampaku was banished. If we do not act now, at what

time shall we able to remove this reproac h? Thus we pray you to lend us aid lest Buddhism be
destroyed, and also that this evil revolt against the Monarchy may be put away. If we are of one
mind we shall attain our object. Given at a council of the Chief Priests; eighteenth. day of the
fifth mont h of the fourth year of Jisho.