CHAPTER XVI.

SOBU.

Now t he Nyudo, being neither wood nor flint, was touched and felt pity, and there was none in
Kyoto among high or low, old or young who did not murmur the stanzas of the exiles of
Kikaigashima, and even though they had made a thousand sotoba, they were very sma ll things, so
that it was very wonder -

[p. 107]

ful that the verses should be carried all the way to Kyoto from the far distant shore of the bay of
Satsuma.

When one comes to consider the matter, there was also a example of this kind in old time in
Chin a. When formerly the king of Han made war on the barbarians, Ri -sho-kei was first made
general and led an army of three hundred thousand horsemen, but his forces being the weaker,
the barbarian army conquered, and Ri -sho-kei was taken alive by the barbaria n king. Then Sobu
set out against them with five hundred thousand horsemen, but again his army proved the
weaker and the barbarians were victorious, capturing six thousand prisoners and amongst them
Sobu himself. Selecting six hundred and thirty of the mos t important of these, they cut off one of
the legs of each and let them go. Of these some died immediately and others some time afterward,
and Sobu was the only one who survived. Having only one leg, he managed to keep himself alive
by eating the fruit of the trees on the mountains and by plucking the 'nezeri ' [45] berries in the
fields or by picking up the gleanings of the rice fields in autumn. So long did he do this. that the
wild geese that abounded in the rice fields ceased have any fear of him, and l ooking on them and
meditating sadly that they would fly over his beloved native land, at last wrote his thoughts on
paper, and having caught one of them he tied the massage to its wing, and, earnestly praying it to
be the document to the king, let it go. F aithfully enough, as was its wont, the wild goose flew
over from the south to the capital and as Sho [46] king of Han chanced to be walking in the
Imperial garden and feeling somehow rather sad, was gazing at the dusky twilight sky, a line of
wild geese ca me soaring overhead and one of them, flying low, bit off a letter from one of its
wings and let it fall,   An official immediately picked it up and brought

[p. 108]

it to the king who opened it and read as follows: " Having spent the first three months of  the year
in a cave in the rocks, now I am cast forth wandering among the narrow paths between the rice
fields, a survivor with one leg among the northern barbarians. Even though I leave my dead body
in the barbarian country, yet shall my spirit surely aga in serve my Emperor." (Now this is the
reason why, since that time, a letter is often called ' Gansho ' or ' Gansatsu,' ' goose script' or '
goosenote !) " Ah! how pitiful,' said the king, " Sobu is still alive; how praiseworthy is this
intimation." Then h e sent out an army of a million horsemen under the general Ri -ko and this
time the forces of Han were victorious and the army of the barbarians was routed. On hearing of

the victory, Sobu came crawling along out of the fields and proclaimed his name and ti tle. With
his one leg, and aged by the frosts of nineteen winters, he was borne in a litter to his former
country. When he had set out against the barbarians at the age of sixteen he had wrapped round
his body the banner presented to him at that time by th e Emperor, and now taking it off again he
presented it once more in the Imperial presence, whereat both Emperor and subjects were filled
with admiration beyond measure. As a reward for his great and meritorious conduct Sobu
received a grant of large territ ories from the Emperor, and was raised to the high office of Ten -
shoku -koku.

Now Ri -sho-kei stayed in the barbarian country and did not return, and though he did nothing
but lament and try to find a way of getting home, the barbarian king would not permit  him and
so he could do nothing. The king of Han however had no idea of this, and thought that Ri -sho-kei
was a disloyal subject, so he had the dead bodies of his parents dug up and beheaded, while his
six nearest relations, father, mother, elder and young er brothers, wife and son, were all treated as
criminals. When Ri -sho-kei heard of this he was extremely grieved, and writing a letter in which
he stated that he was by no means disloyal, but ardently desired to return to his country, he sent

[p. 109]

it to the king of Han. The king having read it, exclaimed ; " Ah ! how sad, he is indeed no disloyal
subject; " and greatly regretted that he had caused the bodies of his father and mother to be
disinterred and desecrated.

Thus just as Sobu of Han fastened a letter to a goose's wing and sent it to his native land, so did
Yasuyori in Japan send his verses home with the waves for bearers: one sending a written message,
the other a couple of stanzas, one in a remote age and the other in these latter days. Thoug h the
one was far away in a barbarian land and the other was but in Yikaigashima, and the times were
so different, yet the spirit of both was the same. How truly worthy of admiration they were.


NOTES ----  VOLUME II

[1] Nyoirin Honzon . Honzon is the pr incipal object of worship. This was a picture or statue of Nyoirin
Kwannon, or Kwannon holding the sacred jewel called Nyoi Hoju.
[2] Tendai Zasshu . Heizan was the chief seat of the Tendai sect, so called from the mountain Tendaisan in
China (T'ien t'ai) a nd founded by Dengyo Daishi, so the head of it was called the Tendai Zasshu.
[3] Mei -un, written 明雲 , shining clouds.
[4] Kowpira Taisho . The first of the Twelve Shinsho or Divine Commanders who led the Yasha (Sk.
Yakcha) or Daring Devils, a kind of Buddhis t Jinn. Sk. Khumbhira, explained as ` a crocodile'
[5] Three contemplations . i.e. of Illusion, Impermanence, and the Madhyamika (dissolving every proposition
into thesis and antithesis, and denying both, e. g. the soul is neither existent nor non existent. )
[6] Memyo  (lit. horse neighing) the patriarch Asvagosha
[7] Ryuju Bosatsu  The patriarch Nagardjuna or Nagasena,chief representative of the Mahayana School and
founder of the Madhyamika School, the greatest Buddhist philosopher.
[8] Five defects . or Hindr ances. According to the Hokke Kyo women are unable to become either Indra or
Brahma or Mara or Tchakravarti or Buddha.
[9] Ryozen . Ghridhrakuta, the Vulture Peak famous for its caves inhabited by ascetics. At its foot was
Radjagriha the city of royal palac es where the Magadha Pr'nces from Bimbisara to A'soka lived.
[10] Gesshi  India.
[11] Mandara . A circular picture in which is depicted a representation of the various heavens and Buddhas
and Bodhisattvas.
[12] Okuchi hakama . Cf, Sanson, Tsurezure Gusa p. 11 7, a variety of hakama or loose trousers.
[13] Meido.  The dark road, the underworld, Sk. Nirika. Here men were j udged by Emma -O or Yama Raja
and his attendants, (Ahora Setsu ) by means of the balance and the mirror that reflected all things.
[14] Shaba.  Sk. Sahaloka. perh. world of suffering. Those subject to transmigration. popularly for this world.
[15] Give the benefit etc. From then 尚書大禹謨 .
[16] Ko sho Ko.  Oe Tomotsuna. The whole verse runs: Those who live; must die; even Buddha cannot
escape the smoke of the sandalwood ; when pleasure is at its height comes pain; even the angels have their
five failings.
[17] Liberated from the passio ns. 解脱  gedatsu. Sk. Vimokeha or Mukti
[18] Mt. Meiro.  Sk. Sumeru, the wondrous mountain in the centre of the universes that supports the
various tiers of the heavens and is the centre round which the heavenly bodies revolve. It is of great height,
one side  is of gold, the second of silver, the third of; lapis lazuli and the fourth of glass.
[19] Five changes , or degenerations. These were supposed to be; first withering of the flowers on their
head ; second, sweating under the armpit; third, extinction of th eir halo; fourth. becoming blind; fifth
becoming dissatisfied with their place in heaven.
[20] Naishi . Title of Ladies of the Court, but here also of the attendants of the Shrine or Miko, the sacred
Dancing a girls.
[21] Dai Nichi. Vairochana, the Buddha o f boundless light, first of the three representations of Buddha,
identified in Japan with Ama -Terasu the Sun -goddess, the central figure of the Shingon System.
[22] Kongo. Vajrapani, a deity much invoked in the Yogacharya Buddhism practised by the Shingon Sect in
Japan.

[23] So shitsuij. The Susiddhikara Sutra, another text of the Tantra School.
[24] Chiku -rin Shoja . The Karanda Venuvana or Bamboo park, given S'akya Muni by Bimbisara, king of
Magadha, who was converted by him.
[25] Gitsu -kodoku -on. The Jeta vana Vihara.
[26] Taibon and Gejo . Two Stupas or memorial tumuli or pillars, set up by S'akya Muni on the road, when
he was staying at Gridhrakuta. cf. Tsurezure Gusa. p. 119. note.
[27] Prayer.  This refers to a famous prayer of Dengyo Daishi, the words ,t  which are echoed in this verse.
[28] O unexcelled . a title of Buddha. Sk. Anuttara Samywk Sambodhi.
[29] Mida.  Amida or Amitabha with Kwannon and Seishi (Mahasthama ) form/this trio of statue, They
are perhapsthe oldest in Japan.
[30] Mokuren Choja . Maham audgalyayana, the left hand disciple of S'akya Muni. Choja, elder. Sk. S'rechthi.
[31] Enbudan. Sk. Djambudvipa. the continent situated south of Mt. Sumeru.
[32] Shae. Sk. S'ravasti, or Kosala, a t ancient city, N.W. of Kapilavastu, which S'akya Muni frequ ented.
[33] Kumano . The famous Shrine in Kii, where Amida, Yakushi and Kwannon were worshipped. The
goddess of the shrine is Izanami -no-mikoto.
[34] Namu . Sk. Nama. I humbly adore.
[35] Hosshin -mon. The gate of Kumano. Urin, Chinese form of Shosho.
[36] Fudaraku . Sk. Putchekagiri. A mountain where Kwannor or Avalokitesvara appeared.
[37] Benevolent Master . Dai Nichi Nyorai.
[38] Hiryu . Spirit of the Waterfall.
[39] Dai- satta. Sk. Mahasattva. a perfected Bodhisattva.
[40] Six ways.  Sk, Gati, Six condition s of sentient existence, viz. devas, men, asuras „ beings in Bell, pretas,
anima's. Three regions, Sk. Trailokya, desire, form and formlessness
[41] Nagi.  Podocarpus Nageia.
[42] Letter  A. 阿 the first letter of the Sanskrit alphabet, much reverenced by Buddhists, especially by the
Shingon sect.
[43] Dragon King of Shakatsura . The third of the Eight Dragon Kings. Sk. Sagara.
[44] The Dragon gods,  Sk. Nags, probably came into Buddhism from Chi na. The daughter of the Dragon
King is well -known in Japanese legend in connexion with the stories of Hohodemi and Urashima.
[45] Nezeri.  Oenanthe Stolonifera.
[46] Sho. 昭帝 , Sobu was captured in the reign of Bu 武, and came back in the sixth year of Sho. Th e
story here differs somewhat from Chinese histories.



VOLUME III.