CHAPTER XIII.
FLIGHT OF KOREMORI FROM THE CAPITAL.

Etchū Jirō hyōye, seizing his sword, tried to stop the Sasshō from running away in this manner,
but he was held back by the others and so was able to do nothing. Among them Komatsu -no-
sammi Chūjō Koremori had long made up his mind that something of this sort was likely to
come to pass, but now that it had actually happened he was none the less grieved. His wife was
the daughter of the late Naka -no-Mikado Shin -Dainagon Narichika -n0-kyō and as her father and
mother had both died, as has been already related, she was an orphan. She was a lady of peerless
beauty; her complexion was like a peach blossom wet with dew, her large dark eyes were soft
and blandishing, and her long black hair sw ayed about her like willow shoots in the wind. She had
two children, a son of ten years old named Rokudai and a little daughter of eight, and they all
clung about Koremori and begged with tears to be allowed to accompany him. "But" explained he,
"I must go  down with the rest of the men to the Western Provinces, and the foe are besetting the
roads so it is not likely we shall get through without danger. If I am killed, however, there is no
need for you to become a nun; it would be better to look out for anot her husband and so bring
up the two children. In this world kind hearted people are not lacking." But though he tried to
comfort her thus, she would not heed, and when the Chūjō was just about to start she clung to
his sleeve crying out; "Alas! I have now no father or

[p.53]

mother in this city, and although you give me permission to marry again after you have left me, it
does not seem kind but hateful. From connexion in the former life it is that people are kind or
that they receive compassion. You often  said that we would never part, but that we should both
melt into the dew of the same moor, or sink to the bottom of the same water. Ah! it was not true,
it was but the babbling of a lover in the night time. If I am left behind here what am I to do? Can
you bear to desert me when you know how I shall suffer? And who is to look after these little
children? Though we may vex you, I pray you, do not leave us thus." "In truth" replied the Chūjō,
in accents of mingled affection and impatience, "ever since you we re thirteen and I fifteen we
have looked forward to being together until death should separate us, until the same fire or water
should enfold our bodies; but now, since we have fallen on these evil days, I must put on my
armour and go forth to battle, and how could I bear that you should accompany me to face the
unknown perils and hardships of a doubtful campaign? But, though there is no place for you with
me now, I will send and fetch you as soon as we gain the security of some favourable coast."
Speaking thus decisively he went out into the verandah by the middle gate and put on his armour,
and calling for his horse was just about to mount and ride away, when his little son and laughter
ran out and caught hold of the sleeves and skirts of his armour, cryin g: "Father! where are you
going? Please take us too! Let us go with you!" As they thus wept and clung round him, he could
not for the moment tear himself away, and while he was meditating over the hampering ties of
this world, his five younger brothers, Sa mmi-no-Chūjō Sukemori, Sa -Chūjō Kiyotsune, Shōshō
Arimori, Tango -no-Jijū Tadafusa, and Bitchū -no-kami Moromori, rode into the courtyard, reined
n their horses, and called out loudly: "The Imperial Train has gone on a long way; why are you so
long in coming "? Then the Chūjō tore himself away and sprang on to his horse

[p.54]

to follow them, but again they called to him, so he drew his horse to the edge of the verandah

and with the tip of his bow pushed up the bamboo curtain that hung before it, disclosing his
children to his brothers outside. "You see how these little ones twine round me; it is this that has
delayed me until now"; and as he spoke his feelings overcame him and the tears ran down his face,
so that those in the courtyard were moved to weep in sympathy till the sleeves of their armour
were wet with tears.

Now there were two samurai in the train of the Chūjō named Saitō Go and Saitō Roku, two
brothers. the eider of who, was nineteen years old and the younger seventeen, and they tools hold
of the bit of the horse on each side and said: "Wherever you may go we  will follow you"; "Ah",
replied the Chūjō, "I remember when your father Nagai -no-Saitō   Bettō Sanemori went to the
North Country you wanted to go with him, but he prevented you and went to his death there
alone. It seems as if he knew beforehand that you would be needed here. Now I have to leave
Rokudai behind, and I have no one but you two with whom to entrust him. So, though it may
seem unreasonable, I must bid you stay behind." The two brothers, therefore, repressing their
tears of disappointment, could  do nothing but comply with the orders of their lord. As Koremori
rode away his lady cried out: "Never till now did I think: that his heart would be so hard"; and she
covered her face and fell pr one on the ground. The children and the ladies of the househo ld,
reaching out beyond the curtain, lifted up their voices and welt aloud, and the sound echoed in
the ears of the Chujō until it was drowned by the roar of the wind and waves of the Western Sea.

When the Heike fled from the Capital they set fire to all their mansions, and Rokuhara, Ikedono,
Komatsudono, Hachijō, Nishi Hachijō and others, in all twenty mansions, beside some forty or
fifty thousand houses of their retainers in the cite and in Shirakawa, went up in flames.