CHAPTER VII.
THE PALACE OF KAN -YO.

To quote a foreign precedent. Tan, Crown Prince of En, was taken captive by the Emperor of
Shin and kept imprisoned for twelve years. Then, weeping, he petitioned the Emperor saying: "I
have an old mother in my native land and I long to see her once more; grant me I pray you
permission to return." But the Emperor only derided him saying: "If horns grow on a horse and a
crow be found with a white head, then I will allow you to return." Then Tan, p rostrating himself
on the ground and looking up to heaven, prayed earnestly that these things might be caused to
happen, that he might return to his country and see his mother once again. Now Myo -on-
Bosatsu [19] went to Ryosen [20] in India to punish the unf ilial, and Koshi and Genkai [21] in China
first taught the people filial piety. So the Three Treasures of the Hidden and Revealed felt
compassion for his filial desire, and there came a horse with horns to the Palace, and a crow with
a white head appeared s itting on a tree in the Imperial Garden. The Emperor was greatly
astonished at such an extraordinary thing and, out of respect for his

[p. 228]

Royal Word, he remitted the imprisonment of Tan [22] and sent him back to his native country.

But afterwards h e repented of his generosity. Now between the countries of En and Shin there
was another country called So, and on its boundary ran a great river over which there was a
bridge called the bridge of So; and The Emperor sent his troops to this bridge to cause  him to fall
into the river when he should have crossed to the middle of it. But though he fell into the midst
of the river, he was so fortunate as not to drown, but going as though on dry land he safely
reached the farther bank. Wondering how this could b e, he looked back and perceived that
innumerable turtles were floating on the water, and that they had ranged themselves in a line on
the surface so that he had been able to cross over on their backs. Tan, filled with resentment,
would not submit to the Em peror so he sent his army to destroy him. Tan, greatly alarmed, sent
for a certain warrior named Kei -ka[23] and made him Prime Minister, whereupon Kei -ka in turn
summoned another soldier called Den -ko to his aid. Then Denko said: "Did you send for me to
assist you thinking I was young and strong? A Kirin may spring a thousand miles it is said, but
when he is old he is worse than a bad horse; so how can I, now that I am old, be of any use to you?
It will be better to find a more vigorous soldier than I am." "Ah," replied Kei -ka, "do not tell
anyone of this affair." "If this thing becomes known," answered Denko, "I shall lose my reputation
in the future, and there is no shame worse than that one lose his good name." So saying he dashed
his head against the plu m tree that stood by the gate and died.

Now there was another warrior named Han -yo-ki, and he was a subject of Shin, but as his parents
and relations had been put to death by the Emperor, he fled to En. Then the Emperor of Shin
sent a proclamation through  the four seas saying:

[p. 229]

Whoever shall bring me a map of En and the head of Han -yo-ki shall receive five hundred

pounds weight of gold." Then Kei -ka went to Han -yo-ki and said: "I hear that anyone who takes
your head to the Emperor of Shin will re ceive five hundred pounds of gold; if then you will give
me your head that I may take it to him, he will certainly divert himself by looking at it. At that
time it will not be difficult for me to draw a sword and stab him to death." When Han -yo-ki
heard th is proposal he was greatly amazed and then drew a sigh of gladness.   "The Emperor has
slain my parents, my uncles and my brethren," he exclaimed, "and I brood over it day and night,
for an unbearable resentment has pierced me to the bone; if therefore you will kill him indeed,
most willingly I give you my head." And he cut off his head and died.

Now there was another soldier named Shin -bu-yo who had fled to the land of En when he was
but a boy of thirteen, after having taken revenge on his enemy; he was a matchless warrior whom
little children would embrace when he smiled, while grown men would faint at his angry frown.
This man Kei -ka took with him as a guide to the capital of Shin and they both set out. One night
as they were stopping at a certain mountai n village they heard the sound of music coming from
another hamlet near by, and made divination from the tune that was being played in order to
determine whether their enterprise would be successful. "The enemy is water and we are fire.
The rainbow cannot pierce the sun. Our aim will be difficult to carry out," was the oracle.
However, as it was not convenient to return now, they went on and in due time arrived at Kan -
yo-kyu the capital of Shin, and announced that they had brought to the Emperor the map of En
and the head of Han -yo-ki. The Emperor sent an envoy to receive their presents, but, as they
refused to deliver them up except to the Emperor himself, he bade that they should be
summoned to be received in audience by the Court. Now the circumference of  the city of Kan -
yo-kyu was eighteen thousand three hundred and eighty miles, and

[p. 230]

the Palace was built up three miles above the level plain. Here was the Hall of Longevity and the
Gate of Eternal Youth: a sun wrought of pure gold adorned it, and  a moon of silver, and it was
strewn with sand of pearls, rubies, and gold. It was enclosed on all sides by a wall of iron four
hundred feet high, and over the Palace was stretched a net of iron to keep away all evil demons
from the under world; and as thi s wall obstructed the wild geese in their flight in spring and
autumn, an iron gate called the Wild Goose Gate was made in it for them to pass through.
Within it was the Palace called the Aho -den where the Emperor was wont to proceed to give
audience for t he affairs of state: it was nine cho in length from east to west and five cho from
south to north, its height being three hundred and sixty feet, while banners fifty feet in height
could easily stand under its floor. It was roofed with tiles of emerald and  shone with gold and
silver below. When the two, Kei -ka carrying the map of En and Shin -bu-yo the head of Han -yo-
ki, had half ascended the jewelled staircase, Shin -bu-yo, overcome by the immensity and
splendour of the Palace, was seized with a fit of tremb ling. The retainers, seeing this, said:
"Common people must not approach our Lord; the superior man does not approach the common
herd, if he does so he risks his life." Then Kei -ka turned and replied: "Bu -yo has no treacherous
intent, but he is a rustic on ly accustomed to the ways of the country, and has no experience of a
Court like this, so he is naturally embarrassed." Thus the retainers were pacified, and they were
permitted to enter the Emperor's presence and exhibit to him the map and the head. Now as  the
Emperor was looking at the head, he caught sight of a gleaming knife at the bottom of the box in
which it was presented, and immediately started back, but as he did so Kei -ka seized his sleeve
and struck at his breast with the knife. At this time, tho ugh the Palace was crowded with scores
of thousands of armed retainers, not one of them dared to lift a hand to help their master; they

only deplored the crime of such a treacherous subject. But the Emperor entreated

[p. 231]

Kei-ka saying; "I pray you a llow me a short respite, for I desire greatly to hear the Empress play
on the Koto once more;" to which request Kei -ka assented. Now the Emperor had three thousand
consorts, among whom the lady Kwa -yo was an unrivalled player on the Koto, so that the wrath
of the fiercest warrior was calmed when he heard her, and the birds would descend from the air,
and the trees and flowers move in harmony with her music, and now that in tears she played to
her Lord for the last time none could resist the spell of her mel ody. Kei -ka bowed his head and
listened, and for a while his fierce and revengeful mood relaxed. Then the lady Kwa -yo began a
second piece and the words that she sung were these:

"Though a seven -foot screen may be high,
Is it not possible to leap over it ?
Though a length of silk gauze may be strong,
If you jerk it will it not tear?"

These words passed unnoticed by Kei -ka, but the Emperor heard and understood, and suddenly
tearing his sleeve, he leaped over the seven foot screen that stood near and ran a nd took refuge
behind a copper pillar. Then Kei -ka sprang up fiercely and hurled the dagger at him, but the
Emperor's Physician in Waiting immediately threw his medicine bag so that it caught the dagger,
which struck and pierced half through the six foot c opper pillar. Kei -ka had no other weapon, so
he could do no more, and the Emperor returning to his place took his own sword and cut him to
pieces, Shin -bu-yo being put to death also. Then the Emperor gathered his army and marched
against Tan of En. Thus if  the blue sky does not permit, the rainbow cannot pierce through the
sun; the Emperor escaped and Tan was destroyed at the last. Yoritomo will also come to an end
in like manner, said those who wished to flatter the Heike.