CHAPTER IV.

KOGO.

As the Emperor was so much grieved by this unhappy love episode the Empress sent one of her
own ladies to him to console him. Her name was Kogo and she was the daughter of Sakuramachi -
no-Chunagon Shigenori Kyo, and not only was s he the greatest beauty in the Palace but she was
also without equal for her skill in playing the Koto. She had been beloved by Reizei -no-Dainagon
Takafusa Kyo, and while he was only Shosho he sent her many poems and letters, but for some
time they only acc umulated without producing any effect, until at last she was moved to take
pity on him and yielded. But now she was summoned to the side of the Emperor they could not
but part, and for long her sleeves were moistened with tears of regret. The Shosho too wa s always
going to the Palace to try if by any means he could see her once again, and used to loiter about in
the neighbourhood of her apartment, but as she was now in the Emperor's household she would
not exchange a word with him, or show, however indirect ly, that she still had any tender feelings
for him. Then the Shosho wrote a stanza and threw it so that it fell within the curtain of the
room where she was. The lines ran as follows:

"Near though I am to my love she is far removed as the Northland:

[p. 266]

Were she in Mutsu indeed, how would it differ from this?"

Though in her heart Kogo would have liked to answer it, yet for the Emperor's sake and to avoid
causing him any pain she did not even touch it, but bade one of her maids pick it up and throw it
out into the courtyard. Takafusa could hardly contain his anger and disappointment at this
treatment, but, remembering that if he were seen the results would be serious, he hastily picked
up the paper, and, putting it in his bosom, returned to his house  and gave vent to his feelings in
these lines:

"Cruel! she designs not even to take my poor verse in her fingers,

Yet however she feels, never my heart can forget."

And he prayed that he might die rather than continue to live on in the world when he cou ld no
longer see her.


But when these things came to the ears of the Lay -priest Chancellor he burst forth: "What a
condition of things is this! The Empress is my daughter and the wife of Reizei Shosho is my
daughter also, and how does this Kogo dare to tak e the husband of both? Let her be put out of
the way forthwith! "Then Kogo, caring nothing about her own fate, but, anxious lest the Emperor
should in any way be troubled, fled away one night from the Palace so that no one knew whither
she had gone. This g rieved the Emperor exceedingly, and he would not leave his bed chamber,
but spent his days moping and in tears. When the Nyudo heard of this he remarked: "Ah, His
Majesty is distressed about Kogo I see, then something must be done," and he gave orders that
none of the Ladies -in-waiting were to be allowed to attend the Emperor, and as he even frowned
on other people who paid visits, no one went to Court at all, since they did not care to risk
offending him, and all the Palace was gloomy and deserted. Now on the tenth day of the eighth
month there was a most beautiful moon without a trace of clouds in the sky, and His Majesty
was gazing at it, but as his eyes were full of tears even the moon looked

[p. 267]

misty, and as the hour grew late he called for one of his attendants, but for some time no one
answered, so deserted was the Palace. But a certain officer of the Palace Guard named Nanjono
Daihitsu Nakakuni, who happened to be on duty that night, though in a remote part of the
Palace, heard his master's vo ice through the silent halls and made reply. Then the Emperor bade
him come near, for he had something to ask, whereupon Nakakuni, wondering what it could be,
entered the Imperial Chamber, and His Majesty enquired of him if he knew where Kogo had
hidden he rself. "How should I know such a thing?" replied the retainer. "I have heard that she is
living in a cottage with a single folding door somewhere near Saga," said the Emperor, "but I do
not know the name of the person with whom she is staying. Do you think  you could find her?"
"If I do not know the name of the master of the house, how can I find her?" replied Nakakuni in
perplexity, whereat the Emperor in despair wept bitterly.

After some further thought Nakakuni remembered Kogo's skill on the Koto and sai d to himself:
"Ah, on a moonlight night like this she will surely be thinking of His Majesty here in the lonely
Palace, and no doubt she will play on the Koto; now when she played in the Palace I used to be
the one to accompany her on the flute, so none kn ows her playing as well as I, and if I go round
about all the houses in the neighbourhood of Saga, why should I not find out where she is?"
"Then" he said at last, "though I do not know in whose house she is lodging, I will go and search
for her in that pa rt, but if I find her and have no letter, perhaps I shall not be believed, so let
Your Majesty write one that I may take it with me." Then the Emperor gave him the letter and
ordered him to take a horse from the Palace Stables, and he started off at a gall op, whipping up
his horse under the clear light of the moon and singing as he rode the verse that begins: " The
mountain village where the wild stag cries," feeling, no doubt, the pathos of the autumn scenery
of Saga. So he rode on, stopping his horse to l isten

[p. 268]

whenever he came to a cottage with a single folding door, and wondering if the lady he sought
was within, but no sound of a Koto broke the silence. Then, wondering whether she had perhaps
retired to some temple, he went to all the temples in that part, but still could find no trace of her.
Thinking it better not to return at all than to return without any tidings, he wondered if there
was anywhere he could flee to, but as every place near was the Imperial Domain, there was

nowhere that he c ould go to hide himself. Thus perplexed and knowing not what to do, he
recollected that the temple of Horinji was not far away, and thinking that perhaps Kogo might
have gone thither to gaze at the moonlight, he turned his horse in that direction. Then in a hamlet
among the pines near Kameyama faintly he heard the sound of a Koto; straining his ears he was
uncertain whether it was not the blasts from the mountain tops, or the soughing of the wind in
the pine trees. Urging on his horse he rode on further and  became aware that the sounds were
indeed those of a Koto, and that they proceeded from a cottage with a single folding door, and
stopping to listen awhile he perceived that without doubt the player was Kogo, and that the
piece she was playing was one call ed 'Sōfūren,' which expresses the longing felt by a wife for her
absent husband. Nakakuni was touched at her tender feeling for His Majesty that prompted her
to select this piece from the many that she played, and drawing his flute from his girdle joined i n
the tune for a few bars, and then knocked softly at the door. The, music immediately ceased,
whereupon Nakakuni called out: "It is Nakakuni who has come from the Palace with a message
from the Emperor;" but though he knocked several times no one answered  from within. After
some time there was a sound as of someone coming to the gate, and as he stood there in joyful
anticipation, the lock was unfastened, and the gate opened a very little and disclosed only the face
of a beautiful young girl. "Have you not mistaken the house?" she asked, "for a Palace Messenger
can have no errand here," whereat Nakakuni, since he feared that if he made

[p. 269]

answer the gate would be shut and locked again, pushed it open by force and entered. Standing
on the verandah of the house he told his story: "Why has she come to live in a place like this?
The Emperor is grieving for her absence and his melancholy may endanger his life, and that it may
not be thought that I speak falsely, see, I have brought you a letter written by His Majesty's own
hand;" and he took out the letter and handed it to her. The girl took it to Kogo, who opened and
read it, and found that it was indeed His Majesty's writing. In a short while she had written an
answer and sent it to Nakakuni with a lady's  suit of Court dress as a present. On receiving the
answer he said: "Although perhaps I ought not to ask for more than this letter, yet as I was
specially sent hither by my Lord, and am not unknown to your mistress, how can I return
without a message from her own lips?" Then Kogo, consenting to his wish, came forth and
excused herself saying "As you know, in fear of the threatening and angry words of the Nyudo, I
fled away secretly one night from the Palace, and as I have been staying in a place like this I  have
not played the Koto at all, but as I am going away tomorrow into the recesses of Ohara, and this
night is my last, the mistress of this house persuaded me to play, saying that it was late and there
would be none to hear, and so I yielded, for the rem embrance of former days stirred within me
and my fingers yearned for my beloved instrument," and as she spoke her tears flowed freely,
while Nakakuni too hid his face in his sleeve. After a while Nakakuni calmed his emotion and
said: "Doubtless your intent ion in going into the recesses of Ohara is to become a nun; this, I
think, is not a proper thing to do, for how will the Emperor feel about it? Nay, I can by no means
allow it?" and turning to his attendant he added; "See that this girl does not leave this  place;" and
leaving him there to guard the house, he sprung upon his horse and rode back again, reaching the
Palace just as the dawn was beginning to break.

Tying up his horse and throwing the lady's dress over the

[p. 270]


Palace doors, he went toward  the Shishinden, thinking that the Emperor would surely be sleeping
by this time, and wondering who to send to him, but as it happened His Majesty was still sitting
as he had left him the night before in melancholy abstraction, as the Chinese poet says:

"Soaring up to the southward and wheeling round to the northward,

Vainly in autumn the goose seeks for the heat or the cold;

Flying forth to the eastward and sweeping round to the westward,

Ever its lonely eye stares at the moon of the dawn."

So Nakakun i came and gave him the letter of Kogo and reported all he had done. The Emperor's
joy was extreme, and; he ordered him to go again that night and bring her back with him.
Nakakuni, though he feared the wrath of the Nyudo if he should hear of it, yet as it  was the
Emperor's order, borrowed an ox car from somebody and went down that night to Saga, and
although Kogo at first refused to accompany him, at last he prevailed on her and brought her
back to the Palace. There she lived secretly in a remote chamber, and used to visit His Majesty
every night, so that in the course of time a Princess was born to her, and this is the Princess who
is known as Bomon -no-Nyoin. Then the matter came to the ears of the Nyudo and he was very
angry, exclaiming: "Then it was all a lie that I was told that Kogo had been got rid of; but at all
events she shall be removed now," and somehow or other they decoyed her from the Palace and
forced her to shave her head and become a nun. She was then only twenty -three years old, and
though she had wished to retire from the world before, how sad a fate was it to be compelled to
do so in this peremptory manner, and to put on black robes and go and live in the wilds of Saga.
It was these painful events that aggravated the illness of the Emperor  so that he died. The Ho -o
had nothing but troubles, one coming fast after the other.

[p. 271]

In the period Ei -man his eldest son Nijo Tenno died, and then in the seventh month of the
second year of Angen his grandson Kujo Tenno passed away. In the sky the Hiyoku, and on earth
the two branches that grow together are proverbial for connubial affection, neither must we
forget the Lover stars by the River of Heaven. Not less deep was the affection that existed
between the Ho -o and his consort Kenshun -mon-in, and one evening in autumn she fell sick and
passed away with the dew of the next mornings; and though months and years had gone by since
then, it seemed to him like a parting of yesterday and his tears were not dry even now. Then in
the fifth month of th e fourth year of Jisho his second son Prince Takakura was killed, and now
that the Emperor Takakura, on whom only he could rely for help in this world and prayers in the
next, had died before him, he had no one left to turn to in his affliction, but could only shed
lonely tears. "The greatest grief to which no other can compare is that of a father left behind by
his son in his old age, and the greatest regret above all others is that of a child deprived of his
parent in his youth," wrote the Prime Minister Tomotsuna when his son Sumiakira pre -deceased
him. So, when the Empire and the Imperial Family suffered such a bereavement, not only the
Ho-o, who had acquired great merit by his study of the Hokke Sutra as well as by his admirable

knowledge of the mysteri es of the Shingon, but all those who dwelt in the Palace, veiled their
brocaded robes.