CHAPTER IV.
THE PRAYER OF KISO YOSHINAKA.


" As the Heike have such a large army they will try to fight a decisive battle," said Yoshinaka,
"and a decisive victory or defeat depends on the number of men; but if a large force is menaced
by a larger one it will feel in dan ger of being surrounded. So, if we deceive them by carrying thirty
white flags and showing them on the top of Kurosaka, as soon as the Heike see them they will
think we have a larger force than we really have, and so, fearing to be surrounded if they move
forward, as their present position is high and rocky, they will consider it the safest plan to stop
there for a while and rest their horses on Tonamiyama. Then I will manage to keep them there
till dusk comes on, and under cover of darkness I will drive th eir whole army over into Kurikara
valley below." So they set up the thirty flags on the top of the hill of Kurosaka, and the Heike, as
they expected, imagining themselves to be confronted by superior force, and fearing they would
be out

[p.26]

flanked, c ried out: "Here is plenty of grass and water for the horses, let us dismount and let them
rest a while." And the place where they rested was Saru -no-baba among the mountains of
Tonami.

Now Yoshinaka was in Hannyu, and as he earnestly scanned the country o n all sides, he saw, far
off amidst the green trees of Natsuyama, what appeared to be a red shrine -fence with the
bevelled cross -beams of the shrine above, and a torii standing before it, and, on asking his guide
what shrine it was, and what deity was wors hipped there, the guide replied that it was the shrine
of Hachiman, and that that place belonged to the god. On hearing this Yoshinaka was glad
beyond measure and calling Taiyu -bo Kakumei, who was a capable writer, said to him "By great
good fortune I now find myself before the august shrine of Hachiman, even as I am about to go
into battle: do you not think it well, both for the sake of future generations, and as a prayer for
my present need, that I offer up a petition before him?" Kakumei, replying that i t would be most
suitable, alighted from his horse to write it. Now Kakumei was this day wearing a hitatare of
'kachi' and armour with black lacing; his sword was of black lacquer, his twenty four arrows were
feathered with black feathers taken from the und erside of a birds' wing, and he carried a bow
bound with rattan and lacquered. Taking off his helmet and slinging it to a thong on his shoulder,
he produced a small ink -stone and a paper -case from the bottom of his quiver, sat down
respectfully before Yosh inaka, and began to write the petition. This Kakumei had been born of a
family of Confucian scholars, and was formerly known as Kurando Michihiro, when he had been
an official of the Kwangakuin, or College of Literature, but later he became a monk under th e
name of Saijobo Shinkyu and dwelt at Nara. The year before, when Takakura -no-Miya had
entered the Onjoji at Miidera and Hieizan had sent a letter to Nara, it was this Shinkyu who
composed the answer; whatever the priests of Nara may have

[p.27]

thought  of it I know not, but it contained the words:" Now Kiyomori is of the very dregs of the
Heike, and but the off -scourings of the warrior caste." And Kiyomori, when he heard of it, was
exceedingly enraged and burst forth: "How does a wretched fellow like th is Shinkyu dare to

speak of me, Jokai, in such an insulting manner? Go and seize him quickly and put him to death.
But Shinkyu got wind of it and fled in haste from Nara and went to the north country, where he
became scribe to Kiso Yoshinaka and changed hi s name to Taiyu -bo Kakumei. And the words of
the petition ran thus:

"Kimyo chorai! Obedient to thy commands and with the deepest reverence, O Hachiman Dai -
Bosatsu! O Lord who guardeth our Sun -descended Realm. Mighty Ancestor of our Heaven -
shining Imperial  Line, reveal thyself in thy Three Buddha Persons to protect the Throne and help
the people, bursting open the mighty gates in thy three divine personalities. For many years now
has this Taira Minister held dominion over the whole Empire and oppressed the people, acting
impiously toward the Law of Buddha and opposing the Throne. I, Yoshinaka, born of a warrior
line, do unworthily follow my ancestors' calling, and can no longer bear to think over these evils,
so, trusting my fate to heaven, I do now offer my  body to my country, raising up a loyal army to
subdue the rebels. Nevertheless, though the two hosts of the Gen and Hei now stand face to face
for battle, while the valour of our soldiers is as yet unconfirmed, and the heart of thy servant is
still touche d with dread, even as we unfurl our banners before the foe, at once we prostrate
ourselves before the altar of thy Three -fold Divine Beneficence. If thy gracious favour be purely
manifested to us, without doubt the rebels will be put to the sword ; and thu s do we eagerly
anticipate thy help with tears of joy. Furthermore, especially since my great -grandfather the
former Mutsu -no-kami Yoshiie Ason dedicated himself to thee by adoption and took the name
of Hachimantaro, his family have ever faithfully served thee, and I Yoshinaka his humble scion,

[p.28]

have for many years bowed my head before thee. If I mention his great merit, it is as a child who
measures the great ocean with a shell, or as a mantis that lifts up its claws against a war -chariot.
Yet, as it is not for my own glory or that of my house, but for the sake of my Sovereign and of
my Country, I would commend it. Very urgent is my desire, but the purpose of the gods is dark :
verily on thee do I rely that thou wilt make me to rejoice. Humbly prost rating myself before thee,
I pray that thou wilt put forth thy power both in the light and in the darkness, and that thou wilt
reveal the might of thy divinity to overthrow our enemies and give us the victory. If thou
deignest to hearken to my supplication  and grantest us thy mighty protection, vouchsafe, we
beseech thee, that we may see an auspicious and manifest omen. The eleventh day of the fifth
month of the second year of Ju -ei. Reverently offered by me Minamoto Yoshinaka."

Then he himself and thirtee n horsemen of his train took each two large turnip -head arrows from
their quivers, and these together with the petition they deposited before the sanctuary of the god.
Neither was this prayer of such rare earnestness without an answer from the merciful Bos atsu, for
he deigned to look upon it from his dwelling afar, and immediately from the midst of a cloud
three wild doves came flying, fluttering and circling round the white banners of the Genji. So, in
old time, when Jingo Kogo went forth to battle with Sh inra, and for a while the foreign foe
prevailed against her armies, the Empress lifted up her voice in prayer to heaven, when suddenly
three sacred doves came forth from a cloud and fluttered over the shields of her men, after which
they again attacked and  the enemy were defeated. So it was too when his own ancestor Yoriyoshi
Ason, fighting against the outlaws Sadato and Muneto of Mutsu, found the enemy too strong for
him, for he cast fire in the face of the rebels, crying out that it was of no earthly kind ling, but
divine fire from heaven. Then there arose a wind and blew straight in the direction of the foe, so
that


[p.29]

their stronghold of Kuriyagawa was burned, whereupon their armies were routed and Sadato and
Muneto were overthrown.   Now, on this oc casion Kiso Yoshinaka, remembering these former
precedents, alighted from his horse, and taking off his helmet, washed his hands and rinsed his
mouth, after which he made obeisance to the holy doves, his heart full of faith in the god.