CHAPTER VII.

DEATH OF THE NYUNO.

On the twenty third day a Council of Courtiers was suddenly called at the Palace of the Ho -o, the
Sento Gosho, and the former Udaisho Munemori addressed  them thus: "The expedition we made
into the East Country did not effect anything very much, so now I myself should like to take
command and lead an army to chastize these rebels in the East and North." This bold speech was
received with applause by all th e rest, and they praised Munemori for his decisive action; the Ho -
o too seemed quite delighted, and everyone who had the least experience of martial exercises,
even though he might be

[p. 276]

a Courtier or Noble, declared himself ready to follow Munemor i.  On the twenty -seventh day
they intended to set out, but as Kiyomori had been taken ill during the night they did not
move.   On the twenty -eigth day it was reported that his condition was grave, and all Rokuhara
and the Capital was in an uproar, every o ne running about and whispering together.   From the
day that the Nyudo was taken ill, he could not drink even hot water, and the heat of his body
was like a burning fire, so that if any one came within eight or ten yards of him the heat was
unbearable.   All he could do was to mutter 'Ata! Ata!' (Hot! Hot!): it was a most extraordinary
sickness.   To relieve him somewhat they brought water from the well of Senshuin of Hieizan and
filled a stone tank with it, into which they lowered him, but the water began to  bubble and boil
and immediately became like a hot bath. When water was pour on him a pipe, it flew off again
hissing in clouds of steam and spray as though it had struck red hot iron or stone, and the water
that did strike him burst into flames so that th e whole chamber was filled with whirling fires and
thick black smoke.   It must have been just such a sight that Hogyo Sozu saw formerly when he
entreated Emma, the King of Hades, to show him the place where his mother was; for Emma
moved by his prayers, se nt his jailers to guide him to the Shonetsu Hell, and when he had passed
through the iron gate he saw the flames shooting up like meteors, thousands of miles high.

Moreover the wife of the Nyudo, Hachijo -no-Nii-dono, had a terribly dream. She dreamed that  a
flaming chariot entered the gate of her mansion without any driver, and in front and behind it
stood two creatures, one with the head of an ox and the other with that of a horse, while on the
front of the chariot appeared an iron tablet inscribed with t he single character MU, [2] signifying
Not.  The Nii -dono, in her dream, asked whither it had com, and the answer was: "Because the
evil Karma of the Priestly Chancellor of the Heike is so great, this chariot has

[p. 277]

come to fetch him front the Palac e of E mma -O the Dread King. " "Then," said she, "what is the
meaning of that tablet?"  "Because of the crime of the burning of the great bronze image
Vairochana a hundred and sixty feet high, it has been decreed  at the tri bunal of  Emma -O that he
shall go dow n to the Avichi  Hell, the hottest of the hot hells where rebirth is unceasing, and  so it
is that the character  Not has been written: but the character  signifying ' Cease' has not yet been

written." Then the Nii -dono awoke,  bathed in a cold sweat; and when s he told what she
had seen the hair of all that heard it stood up with affright. Then  they hastened to offer gold and
silver and all manner of precious  things to the shrines and temples of the gods and Buddhas,
and fetched  thither their horses and saddles a nd armour and swords  and bows and  arrows, and
prayed with might and main, but  no sign vouchsafed them; and the Courtiers and their
wives  assembled  around the bed of the Nyudo and mourned and  lamented  bitterly .

On the second day of the second month, this y ear being  leap-year, the Nii -dono came to the
bedside of the Nyudo, in  spite of the intensity of the  heat, and said; "Though my visits enquire
about you every  day may seem  few, yet perchance , while still you are able, you may tell me of
something that you desire."   Then, Kiyomori, though his  sufferings were  so great, summoned  up
his fast -failing strength and said in a  weak  voice: "Since the  time of Hogen and Heiji my
unworthy  house  subdued the enemies of the Emperor many times and  thereby gained great
rewar ds, for  which we  are most grateful,  and I, having been permitted to become the  maternal
relation of the H eavenly  Sovereign and to reach the office of  Dajodaijin, am about  to hand down
my glory to my descendants, wherefore  in this world I have nothing else left to desire. The only
thing  I have to regret is that I cannot see the head of  Hyoye-no-sukeYoritomo. When I am dead
do not perform any Buddhist  services  or make offerings for  me, or build temples or pagodas ; only
make haste and slay Yoritomo and cut off  his head and lay

[p. 278]

it before my tomb. That will be the best offering you can make  me either in this world or the
next." So deep indeed was his guilt .  Then they put water on a board and rolled  him on it to  ease
him, but it did  no good, and on the  fourth day of the same month he at last expired in great
anguish. When it was known the commotion and galloping to and fro of horses and carriages was
such as to  make the  sky echo and the earth tremble. Even if he had been the Heavenly Sovereign,
the Lord  of ten thousand chariots, it could hardly have been greater.

He was sixty -four years old this year. He cannot be said to have died of old age, for when the
result of man's Karma comes upon him the most potent Sutras have  no efficacy, nor can the
power of  the gods and Buddhas avail anything; yea, all the deities of heaven cannot protect him,
so what can ordinary men do? Even if tens of thousands of loyal warriors, all willing to lay down
their lives for him, were ranged around both  above  and below, they co uld not fight with the
unseen and invulnerable powers of the underworld. And so alone and without a companion he
must go down to the Yellow Springs of Death, across  the Sanzu -no-kawa, the river of Hades, and
ascend the Mountain of Shide whence  no traveller returns. And the evil Ka rma that he has made
will take shape as the jailers that  come  to meet him.

And so, as it must be, on the seventh day his funeral pyre was lighted at Otaki, and Enjitsu Hogen
took his bones and brought them down to the province of S ettsu, where they were deposited at
Kyogashima. Thus though he wielded such great authority that his name was feared through the
whole Empire, his body rose up in smoke to the sky of Kyoto, and his bones mingled with the
sand of the shore .





TRANSACT IONS

OF THE

ASIATIC SOCIETY OF JAPAN

VOL XLIX. -PART I

1921




THE ASIATIC SOCIETY OF JAPAN,
KEIOGIJIKU, MITA, TOKYO








THE HEIKE MONOGATARI

FROM VOLUME VI, CHAPTER VIII TO THE END

TRANSLATED BY

A. L. SADLER



Note: The preceding part o f the translation of the Heike Monogotari  was issued in 1918. It forms Vol.
XLVI, Part 11 of the Transactions .

PREFACE

The present volume completes the translation of the Heike Monogatari from the events that
followed the death of Taira Kiyomori down to  the complete destruction of his house at the battle
of Dan -no-ura, and the fate of those who survived that defeat. With this the main work ends, and
the Kanchō Maki which follows is an appendix describing the after adventures and death of the
Former Empre ss Kenrei -mon-in. Its style seems to be of a later age than the principal work, and
approaches somewhat to that of the No plays of more than a century later.

The Book of Swords is another appendix found only in some MSS of the book, and is, no doubt,
also of comparatively late date. Its inspiration is of Shinto, and not of Buddhism, as is perhaps
natural, and its purpose seems to be to point out how the history of the country was shaped by
the deities through the supernatural power that resided in these sw ords.

The stories of the origin of the name Nippon, and of the Sacred Seal, are interesting examples of
that combination called Ryōbu Shinto. Another object was to show that the sword that was lost
in the sea at the drowning of the Emperor Antoku was not the real Sacred Sword, but a copy,
which deceived the Dragon King of the waters as well as the Heike. The Sea Deity, who has
usually distinct Buddhist characteristics, is here identified with the Orochi in whose tail the
Sacred Sword was found. The derivat ion of place -names from various mythological incidents
found in this book is curiously reminiscent of Old Testament methods. The author seems to
regard the Sacred Treasures as the Urim and Thummim or Tablets of Destiny of his country.

The list of Sanskrit  and Chinese words is added as a further

[p.II]

explanation of the Japanese equivalents used in the text, and to show the direction in which the
literature of the Kamakura age borrowed from these sources.   Eitel's Chin. Sansk. Dictionary and
Rosenberg's  Jap. Chin. Sansk. Dictionary have been used in its preparation as well as Mayer's
Chinese Reader's Manual.

In conclusion I wish to express my thanks to Mr. Fukui, Professor of Japanese Literature, and to
Dr. Okada, Professor of Chinese Literature, in the  Peers' College for their kind explanation of
some obscure passages.

                                              A. L. S.



THE HEIKE MONOGATARI.
VOLUME VI.