CHAPTER I

CARRYING ROUND OF THE HEADS.

     On the twelfth day of the second month of Ju -ei the heads of the Heike that had been cu t off
on the seventh day at Ichino -tani in Settsu were brought into the Capital, and all those who were
related to them were cast into deep dejection and mourned together, wondering what evil tidings
they might hear, or what fresh misfortune they might suf fer. And  among them the wife of
Komatsu -no-Sammi Chūjō Koremori -no-Kyō, who had hidden herself in the temple of Daikakuji,
hearing that most of the Heike had perished at Ichi -no-tani, but that one of them who went by
the title of Sammi Chūjo had been taken alive, was in extreme anxiety to know whether it was
indeed her husband. But soon a woman came to the Daikakuji and said that this was not so, but
that it was Hon -Sammi Chūjō Shigchira who had been taken; whereat her fears were only
increased, lest his head shoul d have been taken with the other.

     On the thirteenth day the officials of the Kebiishi under Taiyū -no-Hangwan Nakayori
proceeded to Rokujō -kawara to receive the heads, and passed on by Higashi -no-Dō-in to the
northward, while Noriyori and Yoshitsune s ent word to His Majesty that they would be exposed
on the public gibbet. At this news the Hō -ō was much perturbed, and sent for the Dajō -daijin,
the Sadaijin, Udaijin, Naidaijin and Horikawa -no-Dainagon Tadachika -no-Kyō to consult with
them about it. The f ive Ministers then said : " From ancient times there is no precedent for
carrying the heads of Ministers and Courtiers through the streets of the Capital : and moreover
these are near relations of the Late Emperor who have for long served at

[p. 171]

     Court. Therefore it is by no means advisable to listen to the demands .of Noriyori and
Yoshitsune."

     The Hō -ō accordingly decided that the heads were not to be exposed, but when this was
reported to the two Commanders they again insisted, saying :  " When we consider the
insurrection of Hogen they were the enemies of our grandfather Tameyoshi, and in the former
days of Heiji they were the foes of our father Yoshitomo. Therefore did we jeopardy our lives to
appease the wrath of the Emperor and to cle anse the stain on our father's memory, by destroying
the enemies of the Throne. If the heads of these Heike be not exposed, how shall we be bold to
subdue rebellion in the future ? " And so, as they thus persisted in their demand, theHō -ō could
not but giv e way, and the exposure took place at last. Among the  innumerable multitudes that
thronged to see them were many who had feared and dreaded them in the days of their
prosperity, but even these were moved to lamentation when they saw their heads thus parade d in
the public street. Then Saitō Go and Saitō   Roku, the two brothers who were in  attendance on
Rokudai Gozen, the young heir of a Sammi Chūjō   Koremori, who was concealed in the
Daikakuji, no longer able to restain their anxiety, disguised themselves as  menials and mingled
with the crowd, looking carefully at all the heads, but to their joy did not find that of the

Chūjō   among them. Unable, however, to control their feelings at the sad sight, they feared the
eyes of the crowd, and hastened to return to the Daikakuji. Immediately the wife of the Chūjō
asked them how they had fared, whereupon they replied:

"Though we looked carefully at all the heads we did not see that of the Chūjō among them.
Among the brothers of our lord, Bitchū -no-Kami Moromori's he ad alone was there; and
beside his there were the heads of so -and-so and so -and-so." But his mistress could bear no more,
and covered her face with her garment and bowed herself to the ground. After a while Saito Go
controlled his feelings and continued: " For these

[p. 172]

two years we have -been here in hiding, and thus have seen no one, but now I have been able to
look round as I wished, and moreover I have found out from one who has an exact knowledge of
everything that the lords of the house of Koma tsu Dono took no part in this battle. And the
reason was that they were stationed at Mikusa -yama on the borders of Harima and Tamba, and
when this line was broken by Kurō Yoshitsune, Shin -Samrrii Chūjō   Sukemori, Shōshō Arimori
and Tango -no-Jijū Tadafusa t ook ship from Takasago in Harima and crossed over to Yashima in
Sanuki. Why it was that lie came to be separated from his brothers I know not, but Bitchū -no-
Kami alone fought and fell at Ichi -no-tani." Then, as they questioned him further about the
matter of the Chūjō Koremori he went on: " They say that it was because he was taken with a
grievous sickness that he was not present at this engagement, but went over to Yashima before
the battle." " Ah " exclaimed his mistress, " it is because of his anxiety ab out us, his anguish of
mind when day and night he thinks of our lot, that he has fallen sick ; when the winds are
contrary how must his heart sink to be at sea, and before the battle how dread the suspense lest it
be his last ! And on his sick -bed who is t here to soothe his uneasy pillow ? Oh, that we could
know these things! " And the young lord an d his sister added their complaint also, saying: " Why
did you not find out what sickness it was?"

     Sammi -no-Chūjō   too was equally tormented by anxious' thoughts: " Alas " he mused, " in
Miyako they will be wondering what has happened to me; for thou gh my head is not there with
the others, they cannot be sure that I have not been drowned or killed by a chance arrow, and so
perchance they think I am no longer of this world." So to let them know that he was still living
he sent a messenger with three le tters, and in that to his wife he wrote : " How sad I am to think
of you living in the Capital surrounded by so many enemies, and with no proper place to go to :
and to have the

[p. 173]

children to look after must be a greater trial still. How much wo uld I wish to have you all here
together with me, but, though I can endure it, it would be a cruel place for you." in this wise he
wrote, and among many other things was this verse

     " These sad thoughts I indite -like sea -weed gathered together,
     As a memento of me, should we meet never again."

     " I fear you must find your days very tedious at present ", he wrote to his children, "   but I

intend soon to come and fetch you."

     When the messenger arrived at Miyako with these letters, and deli vered them to his wife, and
she opened them and saw his writing, she was so overcome by her feelings that she could do
nothing but hide her face in her garments and weep.

After four or five days had passed the messenger came and asked her to write an answ er that he
might start back again with it, and she did so, bedewing the paper with her tears. The two
children too took up their pens to write and asked her: " What shall we say in our letters to our
father ? " " It is best that you write whatever you thin k ", the lady answered, and so the two both
wrote the same reply: " Why leave you not come to fetch us before this? We are both so longing
to see you again. We hope you will come very soon." When the messenger returned to Yashima
with these letters and pre sented them to the Chūjō , and he read those of his children, he was so
affected that he could do nothing: " Even for the Paradise of the West I have little care ", he
declared, weeping; " for so strong are the bonds of affection that bind me to this world  that
Heaven itself has no attraction. If only I could get across the mountains to the Capital and there
see my children once again I should be quite content to die by my own hand."




[p. 174]