CHAPTER VII.
THE FIGHT AT SHIDO.

     When the dawn broke the Heike retired t o the bay of Shido in the same province, and
Yoshitsune pursued them thither with about eighty horse. When the Heike perceived this they
said; "The Genji have but a few men; let us attack and surround them." So a force of a thousand
men landed and advanced  to enclose the Genji and cut them to pieces; but just then the rest of
the Genji, to the number of about two hundred, who had been left behind at Yashima, came
riding up, anxious not to be late for the fight. When the Heike saw this, they cried out : "Ali !
here is the main force of the Genji. Who knows how many tens of thousands there may be. It
will never do to be surrounded ! " And so they gave

[p. 240]

way and retired, and got aboard their ships once more. And so, at the mercy of the wind and tide,
they were carried about aimlessly with nowhere to go; a truly miserable plight indeed. Driven
from Shikoku by Kuro Hogwan, they yet could not go to Kyūshū, so that their condition was like
that of spirits wandering between life and death.

     Now when Yosh itsune had finished the count of the heads of the foe taken at the bay of
Shido, he summoned Ise Saburō Yoshimori and said; "You know that Dennai Saemon Noriyoshi,
the eldest son of Awa -no-Mimbu Shigeyoshi, went to the province of Iyo with three thousand
men to chastise Kono -no-Shirō of that province for not obeying the orders of the Heike, and that
he returned to the Palace at Yashima with the heads of a hundred and fifty of his retainers. Now I
have heard that he will arrive here to -day, so do you go to m eet him and see if you cannot arrange
something." So Yoshimori withdrew after a respectful salutation, and started off with a band of
sixteen of his own followers, all attired in white, carrying a white banner that he had received
from his master.

     Before long Ise Saburō and his men encountered the army of Dennai Saemon, and when they
were about one cho away, both sides flew their flags, the white and the red respectively. Then Ise
Saburōsent a messenger to Dennai saying: "As your lordship may have hea rd, Kurō Taiyū no
Hōgwan Dono, the younger brother of the lord of Kamakura, has received an Imperial Edict from
the Hō -ō to destroy the Heike, and is now on campaign in the Western Provinces. I, Ise Saburō
Yoshimori, belong to his train, but I have not com e to fight, for we have no weapons and carry no
bows, only I have something that I wish to discuss with your lordship, so I pray you allow me to
pass through your army." At this request the three thousand men opened their ranks and let him
through. So Ise Saburō met Dennai Saemon and spoke thus: " As your lordship has no doubt
heard, Kurō Taiyū - no-Hōgwan Yoshitsune, the younger brother of Kamakura Dono, has
advanced

[p. 241]

to this country to destroy the Heike, and the day before yesterday he arrived at  Katsuura in Awa
and took your uncle Sakurama -no-suke and destroyed his fortress. Yesterday he marched on
Yashima and fought a battle there and burned the Palace, after which the Emperor threw himself
into the sea. Munemori and his son were captured alive,  and Noto -no-kami has put an end to his

life. As for the others, some have committed suicide and some have thrown themselves into the
waves. This morning at the bay of Shido all who remained were killed or taken, and among them
your father Awa -no-Mimbu Don o was taken prisoner. He was entrusted to my charge, and all
last night he was lamenting and saying "Alas, my son Dennai Saemon Noriyoshi never dreams of
this, and to -morrow he will give battle and be killed; " and so I took pity on him and have come
thus far to bring you tidings. Why need you then fight with us and die ? For if you will lay down
your arms and surrender, you will be able to see your father once again. The matter is in your
power to decide." When he heard this, Dennai Saemon said "What you h ave told me is just what
I have already heard." And so he laid down his arms and surrendered. And as their commander
thus yielded, his three thousand soldiers also gave up their arms and surrendered without more
ado to Yoshimori and his sixteen men. So Yos himori brought Dennai Saemon to Yoshitsune and
told him all that he had done. " Your plan is not a new one," said the Hōgwan, "but it is most
admirable." and he bade them give Dennai Saemon his weapons and hand him over to Ise Saburō.
He then asked the soldiers what their intentions might be, whereupon they replied: "We are men
of dis tant provinces, and do not care for anyone in particular, but are ready to follow any master
who will pacify the country and rule it." So the Hōgwan, thinking these sentiments very proper,
added the whole three thousand to his own force.

     Now on the s ame day, the twenty second, at the Hour

[p. 242]

of the Dragon (8 a.m.), the other two hundred ships that had remained behind at Watanabe and
Fukushirna arrived at the shore of Yashima under the command of Kajiwara, only to find that the
whole of Shikoku  had been conquered by Kurd Hōgwan, and that there was nothing left for
them to do. "We are like *iris on the sixth day, or flowers after a service, or an agreement after a
battle; " they said laughing.

     Now after the Hōgwan had crossed to Yashima the  priest of the shrine of Sumiyoshi,
Tsumori -no-Nagamori, went up to the Capital and sought audience with the Hō -ō, saying: " On
the sixteenth day at the Hour of the Ox (2 a.m.), the whirring of a Kaburaya proceeded from the
third sanctuary of my shrine, an d went away over toward the West." On hearing this the Hō -ō
was very glad and presented Nagamori with a sacred sword and other treasures to be dedicated to
Sumiyoshi Daimyōjin. In former days, when the Empress Jingō went forth to subdue Korea, the
vengeful  spirits of two deities deigned to proceed from the shrine of Ise to accompany her, and
took up their stations on the bow and stern of her ship, so that by their help she subjected Korea
to her will. When the war in this foreign land was ended and she retu rned to her country, one of
these deities took up his abode at Sumiyoshi in the province of Settsu, and this is Sumiyoshi
Daimyōjin, while the other deigned to go and stay at Suwō in the province of Shinano, and is now
called Suwō Daimyojin. That this deit y should deign not to forget his former expedition, and
should now once again go forth to destroy the enemies of the Throne was a great source of
comfort both to the Emperor and his subjects.
------------
*iris on the sixth day , i.e. too late, the Shobu or  iris festival was held on the fifth day of the ffth month.