CHAPTER X.
THE EXILE OF MONGAKU.

Now it happe ned that at this time the Dajo -daijin Myo -on-in was playing the Biwa and reciting,
while Azechi -no-Dainagon Sukekata -no-Kyo was playing the six -stringed Koto, and his son Uma -
no-kami Suketoki was singing and dancing the Saibara, Morisada, an attendant of t he Fourth Rank,
keeping time meanwhile and singing various Imayo measures, so that the Palace resounded with
musical strains and they were all very merry. The Ho -o himself had deigned to join in the singing
also, when suddenly the loud and strident voice o f Mongaku broke in on their melody, spoiling
the harmony and entirely upsetting the rhythm. "What is this?" exclaimed the Ho -o in great
wrath, "who is this boor who dares to interrupt Our Imperial Pleasure? Strike him down,
someone!" At this the young and impetuous among the samurai in attendance rushed forward,
each trying to be foremost, headed by one, Sukeyuki Hangwan by name, who

[p. 238]

shouted out, "Down with this villain who dares to disturb His Majesty's Amusement." "I don't
move from here until  I receive the grant of a manor towards the cost of my temple on Mount
Takao," replied Mongaku calmly, and then as he saw that they meant to attack him, shifting the
Kanjincho to his other hand, he gave Sukeyuki Hangwan a blow on the head that knocked off his
eboshi, and then doubling his fist struck him another in the chest that sent him flying backwards,
so that he took to his heels and fled into the interior of the Palace. He then drew from his bosom
a dirk with the hilt wound with the hair of a horse's tail, and baring the blade stood waiting,
ready to strike down any who approached. As he sprang round in all directions with the
Kanjincho in his left hand and the blade gleaming like ice in his right, it looked as if he had a
sword in each hand. Nobles an d Courtiers, terrified at such an amazing scene, ran about in all
directions, so that the party of the Ho was quite broken up and the whole Palace was in an
uproar. Then one of the Palace Guard, Ando Musha Migimune by name, drew his sword and
rushed upon M ongaku, who also sprang forward to meet him. Ando Musha, not wishing to shed
blood, turned the edge of his weapon and struck him a heavy blow with the back of his sword -
arm, and then, as he staggered back a little, dropping his sword sprang on him with a s hout to
grapple with him. Mongaku, falling undermost, gripped his opponent's right arm as he did so and
held on tight, but in spite of this Ando managed to seize him by the throat, and so, being about
equal in strength, they rolled about in their struggles , now one being uppermost and now the
other, until the others, who had held back so far, summoned up courage to rush in and
overpower Mongaku and bind him, after which he was dragged out and handed over to the
underlings of the Kebiishi -cho. As they were t aking him away, he drew himself up and glared at
the Palace, crying out in a loud voice, the while he pranced up and down with anger: "So! not
only do I get nothing, but I am treated in this outrageous manner. Know that

[p. 239]

the Three Worlds are to b e consumed by fire, and how shall even the Palace of the Sovereign
escape this fate? Even if one is an Emperor who boasts of the Ten Virtues, will he not descend to
the Yellow Springs of Death and be tormented by the Ox -headed and Horse -headed Jailers of

Hell?" Then the order was given to put this insolent priest into prison and he was led off to be
confined. Sukeyuki Hangwan, covered with shame at the ignominy of having his eboshi knocked
off, did not appear at Court for a longtime. Ando Musha, however, wa s rewarded for boldly
seizing Mongaku by being at once promoted to the position of Uma -no-jo over the heads of
others senior to him.

About this time it happened that Bifuku -mon in died and there was a general amnesty so that
Mongaku was set free, but as s oon as he was let out he set forth again with his Kanjincho to
collect contributions everywhere; and not only so, but wherever he went he proclaimed that the
age was corrupt and that both the Emperor and his subjects would be destroyed, with the result
that, as such disrespectful words could not be permitted, he was not allowed to remain in the
Capital but banished to Izu. Now Izu -no-Kami Nakatsuna, the eldest son of Gensammi Nyudo,
was at this time Governor of Izu, and when this sentence was pronounced he gave orders that
Mongaku should be brought to Izu by ship from the Tokaido, or Eastern Coast, and sent two or
three inferior officials of the Kebiishi to take charge of him. These officers then said to him: "It is
the custom for minor officials like oursel ves to profit somewhat on these occasions; no doubt
your reverence has many friends in various places, so when you are sent into exile to a far
province, they will certainly wish to give you some presents, and food and necessaries for the
journey; will you  not then communicate with them?" "I have few friends of that sort," replied
Mongaku with a laugh, "but there is someone who lives on Higashi -yama who might perhaps do
something for me; I will write a letter." Then they produced some very cheap paper, wher eat
Mongaku became

[p. 240]

very angry, exclaiming: "How do you expect me to write on paper like this" and he threw it back
at them. Then they got some good thick paper and handed it to him, but Mongakut laughed and
said: "Unfortunately I cannot write, s o please write the letter for me." So one of them wrote at his
dictation as follows: "I, Mongaku, having the intention of building a temple on Mount Takao,
have been traveling about the country to raise money by subscription, but the age being such an
one as it is, it has pleased the Emperor not only to refuse me any assistance, but even to banish
me to the distant province of Izu. This being so I am much in need of supplies and comforts for
the long journey, and beg that you will assist me in the matter." When he had written it, he asked
to whom he should address it. "To Kwannon at Kiyomizu," replied Mongaku. "Do you then make
fools of minor officials like us?" they asked indignantly. "By no means," replied Mongaku, "I
always rely on Kwannon of Kiyomizu in need, and indeed now I have no one else on whom to
rely."

Then they took ship from the port of Ano in Ise, and when they came to Tenryu -nada in the
province of Totomi a great tempest rose, and the ship seemed likely to be overturned by the
mountainous wav es. The helmsman and the sailors gave up all hope, and thinking their last hour
had come, fell to praying, some calling on Kwannon and others repeating the Nembutsu of the
dying. Mongaku, however, was all this time lying asleep in the bottom of the ship, s noring loudly,
until aroused by the confusion he suddenly sprang up, went to the side of the ship, and glaring
angrily at the waves, shouted; "Ho! Thou Dragon King of the Waters! What meanest thou by
endangering the ship in which is so holy a sage bound to  accomplish such a great vow. Knowest
thou not, O most worthless of Dragon Gods, that such conduct will receive the punishment of
Heaven?" Then the wind and the waves were suddenly stilled and they arrived safely at the

shores of Izu. Since leaving Kyoto M ongaku had always kept vividly in his mind the hope of
returning to build

[p. 241]

his temple on Mount Takao, and prayed fervently that he might not die until he had carried out
this vow, but if it was impossible that it should be fulfilled, then he woul d die on the way to
exile. With this intention he fasted all the way to Izu, a period of thirty -one days, for as the wind
was not always favourable they had to touch at many havens and islands, but yet in spite of this,
his natural vigour did not fail as h e continued his meditations at the bottom of the ship. Verily
there were many reasons for thinking he was no ordinary person.