CHAPTER VIII.
THE FIGHT AT MIKUSA.

     The commanders on the Heike sid e were Komatsu -no-Shin-sammi Chūjo Sukemori, Komatsu
no Shōshō Arimori, Tango no Jijū Tadafusa, and Bitchū no kami Moromori, while in command of
the samurai were Iga -no-Heinaihyōye Kiyoie and Emi -n- Jirō Masakata with about three
thousand horsemen, who took up their position on the western slope of Mikusayama. That night
at about eight o'clock Yoshitsune summoned to him Doi -no-Jirō Sanehira, and said to him: "The
Heike are only about three ri distant from us: they are encamped on the western slope of
Mikusayama with a large force ; shall we attack them by night or to -morrow? " The Tajiro - no-
Kanja stood forth and said: " We have a great advantage, for our force numbers ten thousand men,
whereas the Heike have only

p. 136

about three thousand. If we wait to fight to morrow their n umbers will most likely have
increased, so let us attack then; at once to night." " Excellently spoken, Tajiro Dono ", said Doi -
no-Jirō, "that is what we all think; so let us make a night attack on them." When this order was
given to the soldiers, however,  they said each to his neighbour: " How dark it is what are we to
do in this darkness? " " How about torches then ? " suggested Voshitsune. " So it must be"; replied
Doi, and they set fire to all the houses of Onohara and then to all the trees and brushwoo d on the
plain and on the mountain slopes, so that it became as bright as day, and so they crossed the hills
for the distance of three ri without any hindrance. Now this Tajiro no Kwanja was the youngest
son of th e Chūnagon Tametsuna, the former Governor of Izu, and was the issue of an amour that
he had with the daughter of Kanono suke Shigemitsu, being brought up to the profession of arms
by his maternal grandfather, so that he was a skilful warrior as well as of high lineage, being
descended in the fifth generation from Sukebito Shinnō, the third son of the Emperor Go -Sanjō.

     As the Heike never dreamed that they would be attacked that night, their leaders bade them
sleep well till morning, for as they would h ave to fight on the morrow, they must by no means be
drowsy, so, though the vanguard kept the usual watch, those in the rear lay stretched out in
careless plumber with their heads pillowed on their helmets or quivers, or the sleeves of their
armour, entire ly heedless of any danger. Then suddenly, at about midnight, the ten thousand
horsemen of the Genji came sweeping down with ringing shouts on the western slope of Mount
Mikusa, and the Heike, taken completely by surprise, rose and fled in wild confusion, l eaving
their weapons behind them in their hurry and excitement, and scattering everywhere in their fear
of being trampled under the horse -hoofs of the enemy. Then the Genji rode right through their
ranks and pursued them and cut them down at their will, so  that at the first onset five hundred
men were slain outright,

p. 137

beside a large number who were wounded. The three commanders, Shin sammi Chūjō Sukemori,
Komatsu Shōshō Arimori, and Tango -no-Jijū Tadafusa, overcome with shame at the rout of
Mikusa, took ship from Takasago in Harima and crossed over to Yashima in Sanuk i. Bitchū -no-

kami alone, accompanied by Heinaihyōye and Emi -no-Jirō, somehow contrived to make his way
back again to Ichi -no-tani.