CHAPTER II.
THE GREAT EARTHQUAKE.

     Thus after the Heike had been overthrown and the Genji had come into pow er, the provinces
obeyed their governors, and the manors were once more at the disposal of their owners, so that
there was peace and security everywhere. Then on the ninth day of the seventh month at the
Hour of the Horse  (noon), there was a very great ear thquake which lasted for some time. Around
the Capital near Shirakawa *the six „Shōji' temples were all destroyed, and the upper six stories of
the nine -storied pagoda of Hosshōji were shaken down, while all but seventeen ken of the
Sanjūsan -gen-dō of Tokuchō -ju in fell down. From the Imperial Palace and the various shrines
and temples to the houses of the common people, all were
---------------
 *The six Shoji temples . Hosshoji, Sonshoji, Saishoji, Enshoji, Seishoji, Enshoji.

[p. 280]

destroyed. The roar of their falling was like thunder, and the dust that rose up like clou ds of
smoke. The sky was darkened, and the light of the sun could not be seen. Old and young went in
fear and trembling, and the Palace officials were at their wits' end. The provinces both far and
near were equally affected. Mountains crumbled down and fi lled up the rivers; the sea surged and
the shores were flooded. The ships rocked about on the waves ; and the horses lost their footing
on the ground. The earth split asunder and water gushed out ; the rocks were rent and rolled
down into the valleys. If t here is a flood, cannot they escape by fleeing to the hills? And if there is
a fire, even if far from a river, it can be avoided. But men are not birds that they should fly in the
air ; neither are they dragons that they should ride on the clouds : so veri ly there is nothing more
fearful than a great earthquake. At Shirakawa and Rokuhara and in the city those who were
buried alive were without number. Among the Four Elements water, fire, wind and rain are ever
harmful, but earth does not usually do men hurt . But now high and low shut themselves into
their houses, thinking the world was coming to an end, and whenever the sky roared or the earth
shook they said the Nembutsu and cried aloud. When people of sixty or seventy, or eighty or
ninety declared that the  destruction of the world was a natur al thing, but they had not expected
it yesterday or to day, the young who heard it were beside themselves with grief.

    The Hō -ō was just then proceeding to Imakumano, for it was the season for the offering of
flowers, but when he saw the dead and injur ed, he hastily got into his Imperial Palanquin and
returned to the Rokujō Palace, and great was the anxiety of the Courtiers and Nobles of his train
as they rode beside him. Setting up a pavilion in the south court of his Palace His Majesty took
up his abo de in it.

     The Emperor summoned his Phoenix Car and proceeded to the edge of the lake, while the
other Princes sought refuge

[p. 281]

in different places, some in their palanquins and some in their cars. Then the Chief Astrologer

came running hastil y to the Palace with the information that a great earthquake might be
expected to take place between the Hour of the Boar and the Hour of the Rat, (10 to 12. p.m.)
that evening, whereupon all were struck with consternation. In former days, in the time of
Montoku Tennō, in the great earthquake of the eighth day of the third month of the period Sai -
ko, it is said that the head of the Buddha of Tōdaiji fell down; and in that of the second day of the
fourth month of Tengyō that the Emperor left his Palace and t ook up his abode in a fifty foot
pavilion that was erected for him in front of the Jōneiden. As these things happened in ancient
days who can tell how it was ? And since then no such thing has been heard of. But since an
Emperor of the Ten Virtues had left  the Capital and been drowned, and his Ministers and
Courtiers had been captured and brought back to Miyako, and been beheaded and exposed in the
streets, or separated from their families and exiled to distant provinces, thoughtful people
mourned and lamen ted, saying that the wrathful spirits of the Heike would be the ruin of the
country.