CHAPTER III.
GATHERING OF THE GENJI.

Now Kurando -no-Saemon -no-Gonnosuke Sadanaga wrote his congratulations on the Accession
Ceremony having been completed without any untoward circumstance, on ten sheets of paper,
and sent it to Hachijo Ni -i Dono , the wife of the Nyudo, who rejoiced greatly with her face
wreathed in smiles. Still, though it was a very brilliant and auspicious occasion, most people were
far from being pleased.

Now the second son of the Ho -o, Prince Mochihito, whose mother was the daughter of Kaga
Dainagon Suenari -no-Kyo, was living at the Takakura Palace in Sanjo and so came to be known as
Prince Takakura. His 'Gempuku' ceremony had been held secretly when he was fifteen years old,
on the fifteenth day of the eleventh month of the first year of Ei -man, at the Omiya Palace at
Konoe Kawara. He was known for the elegance of his calligraphy and his brilliant intellect, and
might have been Crown Prince and ascended the Throne, but owing to the enmity of the late
Ken-shun-mnn-in he had to  live thus secluded. In spring time he would divert himself by writing
poems as he strolled out under the cherry trees, and in autumn by making exquisite melodies on
his flute at the moon viewing banquets. While he thus spending his days, having then reach ed the
age of

[p. 170]

thirty, in the fourth year of Jisho, Gensammi Nyudo Yorimasa, who was then living at Konoe
Kawara, came secretly to his Palace one evening and spoke his mind to him boldly, thus: "Does
your Highness not think it a very miserable th ing that you, who are of direct descent in the forty -
eighth age from Tensho Daijin, and the seventy -eighth generation from Jimmu Tenno, and might
become Crown Prince and ascend the throne, should thus live till the age of thirty in obscurity in
this Palace ? Quickly raise a revolt and overthrow the Heike! Will it not be a most worthy and
filial act to relieve the anxiety of the Retired Emperor, repining at his perpetual confinement in
the Toba Palace, and to ascend the Throne yourself as Emperor? If your Hig hness should deign to
consider this plan, and issue a Royal Order for its execution, all the many members of the Genji
family who are living in the various provinces will gladly flock to your side. In Kyoto, "he
continued," are the son of Dewano Zenji Mits unobu, Iga -no-kami Mitsumoto, Dewa -no-
Hangwan Mitsunaga, Dewa -no-Kurando Mitsushige, and Dewa -no-Kwanja Mitsuyoshi. In
Kumano, Juro Yoshimori, youngest son of the late Rokujo Hangwan Tameyoshi is in hiding. In
Settsu there is Tada -no-Kurando Yukitsuna, but  as he betrayed his allegiance after having taken