CHAPTER VI.
THE BATTLE AT SHINOHARA.


After these victories Kiso Yoshinaka presented lands to all the shrines in that district; to Yahata at
Tada he presented the manor of Choya, to the shrine of Sugabu the manor of Nomi, to the shrine
of Kebi the manor of Hanbara, and to that of Shirayama the two manors of Yokoe and Miyamaru,
while to the  temple of Heizenji he gave the seven parishes of Fujishima.

Now those samurai who had fought against Hyoye -no-suke Yoritomo at Ishibashiyama in the
eighth month of the fourth year of Jisho had all fled to Kyoto and joined the Heike, chief among
whom were  Nagai -no-Saitō Bettō Sanemori, Ukisu -no-Saburō Kagechika, Matano -no-Gorō
Kagehisa, Itō -no-Kuro Sukeuji and Mashimo -no-Shirō Shigenao. As they wished to rest for a
while before fighting again, they were amusing themselves by going round to each other's qua rters
in turn every day and having a drinking -bout. When it was the turn of Saito Betto Sanemori to be
host, and the others had assembled at his house, he remarked: "Judging by the way things are
happening just now, it appears that the Genji are the strong er party and the Heike will get the
worst of it; what do you think about going to join Kiso Yoshinaka?" The rest seemed to have no
particular objection, so the next day, when it was their turn to meet at the house of Ukisu no -
Saburo Kagechika, Sanemori beg an again: "Well, what do you say about carrying out my
suggestion of yesterday?" Then Matano Goro Kagehisa spore out and said: "We are all warriors of
reputation, and well known in the Eastern Provinces; it is a disgraceful thing for samurai to
change from  one side to the other according to the way fortune inclines; as for you others I do not
know what you intend to do, but for myself I have made up my mind to die on the side of the
Heike." Then Saito Betto laughed scornfully and replied

[p.33]

"What I sa id yesterday was only to try you all; I also have determined to go and die in the North
Country, and I have already declared my intention to Munemori, and to others as well." On
hearing this the remainder all stated their resolution to do likewise, and, pi tiful to relate, faithful
to their promise, all these twenty samurai afterwards fell in battle in the Northern Provinces.

Now the Heike had retreated to Shinohara in the province of Kaga to gain time to rest their men
and horses, but Kiso Yoshinaka pursue d after them with fifty thousand horsemen, and on the
twentieth day of the fifth month he again confronted them. Imai Shiro Kanehira immediately
rode forward with five hundred men, and against him from the Heike ranks came Hatakeyama
Shoji Shigeyoshi, Oyam ada-no-Betto Arishige and Utsunomiya -no-Saemon Tomotsuha with three
hundred. These knights were often in Kyoto on guard duty, and as they were veteran warriors
Munemori had sent them to the North Provinces to assist in the campaign with their advice. So
Hatakeyama and Imai detached first five, and then ten of their samurai to begin the contest end
see who would prove the better, after which the two forces attacked each other in mingled
combat. It was at high noon on the twenty first day that they joined bat tle, and both sides fought
fiercely and stubbornly, while the sun shone hot over their heads and there was no breeze even to
move a blade of grass, so that the sweat poured down over their bodies as if they had been
plunged in water. At last, when most of his retainers had fallen, Hatakeyama was compelled to
retire, though on Imai's side also very many men were slain. Then Takahashi -no-Hangwan
Nagatsuna with five hundred men came forth from the Heike, and Higuchi -no-Jiro Kanemitsu

and Ochiai no -Goro Kaneyuk i with three hundred rode out from Kiso's force to meet them, and
for some time both parties fought on the defensive; Takahashi's men, however, being samurai
from various provinces, did not stand the onset, but broke and fled, each for himself heedless

[p.34]

of the orders of their leader. Takahashi himself, though a most valiant fighter, was forced to
retreat for lack of support, and rode away alone to the southward. Then Nyuzen -no-Kotaro
Yukishige of Etchu, burning to overcome so stout an adversary, urg ed on his horse with whip and
stirrup and overtook him. Coming up beside him he closed and grappled with him, but
Takahashi gripped him hard, and pinned him against the front of his saddle so that he could not
move, crying at the some time: "Who are you, s ir! Declare your name and titles!" "I am Nyuzen -
no-Kotaro Yukishige of the Province of Etchu, and my age is eighteen!" replied his assailant. On
hearing this the tears ran down Takahashi's face as he exclaimed: "Ah, how pitiful! If my lad, who
fell last ye ar, had lived till now, he would be just eighteen; I ought to twist your neck and cut off
your head, but as it is I will let you go"; and he released him.

Then Takahashi got off his horse to recover his breath and wait to see if any of his retainers
would  come up, and Nyuzen also dismounted, but, still thinking what a feat it would be to kill
such a famous leader, even though he had just spared his life, he cast about to see how he could
take him unaware. Takahashi, never dreaming of such treachery, was ta lking to him quite
without reserve, when Nyuzen, who was famed for the rapidity of his movements, catching him
off his guard, suddenly drew his sword and aimed a lightning thrust under his helmet. Just then, as
he staggered back from the blow, three of Nyu zen's retainers came up, and Takahashi, stout
warrior though he was, was borne down by superior numbers and slain.

Then Musashi -no-Saburoemon Arikuni of the Heike bore down on his foes with three hundred
horse, and Nishina, Takanashi and Yamada -no-Jiro op posed him with five hundred, and for a
while both parties fought warily, but by -and by Arikuni, having penetrated very deeply into the
ranks of the foe, had his horse shot under him, and then, while he was fighting on

[p.35]

foot, his helmet was struck f rom his head, so that he looked like a youth fighting with his long
hair streaming in all directions. By this time all his arrows were exhausted, so he drew his sword
and laid about him mightily until, pierced by seven or eight shafts, he met his death sti ll on his
feet and glaring fiercely at his enemies. After their leader had thus fallen his retainers gave up the
fight and fled.