CHAPTER VI.
CONCERNING NEKOMA.

     As soon as Yasusada returned to  the Capital lie presented himself at the Palace of the Hō -ō,
and, sitting down humbly in the courtyard, reported all that had taken place in the East. The Hō -
ō was struck with admiration at all he heard, and the faces of all the Courtiers and Nobles were
wreathed in smiles, for this s gallant behaviour of Yoritomo was very different from that of Kiso
Yoshinaka who was now protector of the Capital. He was of fair complexion and handsome
appearance, it is true, but his manners and way of speaking were rough and unpolished in the
extreme. For this indeed there was good reason; for how could anyone be other who had been
brought up from the age of two until over thirty in the wild mountain country of Kiso ? The
following incident may show his rudeness. There was  a certain Courtier called Nekoma -no-

[p.90]

Chūnagon Mitsutaka -no-Kyō, o, who had something to say to Yoshinaka, so he sought him at his
mansion. On his entering a retainer announced: " Nekoma -dono has deigned to arrive." On
hearing this Yoshinaka burst  into a loud laugh; " Do cats (neko) call on people here ? " he asked.
" It is a Courtier named Nekoma -no-Chūnagon -dono, Your Excellency," replied the retainer " Oh,
then admit him," returned Yoshinaka, and after a while, not using his proper name Nekoma,  he
called out in his rough dialect : " It is now the feeding time for Neko -dono, bring in the meal ! "
And although the Chūnagon politely declined, Kiso pressed him, saying: " Oh, but I have some
'unsalted' mushrooms; come along"; thinking, in his ignoran ce that the epithet 'unsalted' meant
'fresh' when used of anything, though it can only be properly applied to fish. Nenoi -no-Koyata
served them at the meal, and large deep bowls piled high with food, such as are used in the
country, were set before them; a nd beside the three side dishes eaten with the rice there were
mushrooms boiled in broth. Kiso seized his chop sticks and began to eat heartily, but the
Chūnagon, whose palate revolted at this coarse rustic food, could not eat anything. " Perhaps you
think  my bowls are not clean," said Yoshinaka, " but these are the ones I use for ceremonially
pure meals, so pray don't be afraid to eat." Being thus pressed, and fearing it would give offence if
he touched nothing, the Chūnagon took up his chop -sticks and pre tended to cat, merely toying
with the food. Kiso, noticing this, laughed boisterously " Neko -dono has a very small appetite;
don't stand on ceremony, have a good 'cat's surfeit.' The Chūnagon, however, was quite upset by
this treatment and left again witho ut even saying what he had intended.

     On another occasion, when Yoshinaka went to the Palace of the Hō -ō, thinking it not
necessary to wear the official hitatare of a Courtier of high rank, he hurriedly put on a ho -i and
went in that, and the set of h is headdress, the way he managed his long sleeves and the hang of his
hakarna were so

[p.91]

awkward and clumsy that his whole appearance was boorish and ridiculous in the extreme. How
extraordinary was the contrast to his imposing figure when on his hor se and clad in complete
armour with his bow and arrows at his back. But this time he must needs ride in an ox car, and

he used one that belonged to Munemori, with his ox -drivers and a very fine yoke of oxen. The
oxen had not been driven for a long time, an d so were exceedingly spirited, and as soon as they
got out of the gate the ox drivers whipped them up so that they started off at a gallop. The
sudden jerk threw Yoshinaka off his balance and he fell on his back inside the car, and as he lay
there with hi s wide sleeves spread out on each side of him, he looked like some huge butterfly.
He struggled to get up again, but somehow he could not manage it, and though he shouted to the
drivers to stop the car, they misunderstood his rustic dialect, and thinking h e was telling them to
hurry on, kept the animals at a gallop for five or six cho. Then Imai -no-Shirō spurred on his horse
and overtook them, shouting out: "What do you mean by driving on in that way ? " " The noses
of the honourable oxen are too strong to stop them," replied the ox drivers, and then, wishing to
help Kiso to right himself, they told him to hold on to the handrail with which the car was
furnished. " Ah, that's a good idea," exclaimed Yoshinaka as he did so, " I wonder whether the
drivers thou ght of it, or whether that is the way their master used to do." In this way he reached
the gate of the Palace,  and when he came to alight h e made to do so from the back of the car, as
he had got in. Seeing this the servants corrected him, saying: " When yo ur Excellency gets into on
ox car it is proper to get in at the back, but when alighting, it is proper to do so from the front."
" It is my car," replied Yoshinaka, " so I shall do as I please;" and he got out at the back. Many
other ridiculous things Yos hinaka did also, but I hesitate to speak of them. The ox -drivers were