CHAPTER VII .
   THE MUSTER AT MIKUSA.

On the twenty ninth day of the first month Noriyori and Yoshitsune proceeded to the Palace of
the Hō -ō to announce thei r intention of marching into the Western Provinces against the Heike;
and after receiving the Imperial exhortation to restore to the Capital the Three Sacred Treasures,
the Jewel, the Sword, and the Mirror, which have been handed down in the Imperial Famil y
since the Age of the Gods, they made low obeisance and withdrew.

     On the fourth day of the second month, being the anniversary of the death of the Lay -priest
Chancellor Kiyomori, the customary Buddhist services were performed at Fukuhara. Thus the
days and months had passed in incessant fighting, and ere they were aware of it the preceding
year had glided 'away and the ill -omened season of spring had begun. Under more happy
circumstances there would have been a great erecting of Sotoba and lavish off erings to the priests
and Budhas, but as it was the Courtiers and Ladies could only assemble for mourning and
lamentation. Soon afterwards an Appointment of Officials was held at Fukuhara and both priests
and laymen received promotion. Among them Kadowaki -no-Hei Chūnagon Norimori -no Kyō
was to be raised to Dainagon of the Upper Second Rank, but on receiving the intimation of his
advancement from the Daijin Munemori he made this stanza:

     " Wondering still how it is I am spared from one day to another,
     This new honour seems as but a dream of a dream ";

in consequence of which his appointment was cancelled.

p.133

     Suwo -no-suke Morozumi, the son of the Secretary of State Nakahara -no-Moronao was made
Secretary of State, and Hyōbu -no-Shō Masaakira  became Kurando of the Fifth Rank, being
therefore known as Kurando -no-Shō. In ancient days when Masakado conquered the eight
provinces of the East and established his capital in the district of Soma in Shimosa, he gave
himself the title of Hei Shinnō, and  created many officials, but among them a Master of the
Records was not found. The present occasion, however, was by no means, the same; for though
the Emperor had gone forth from the Ancient Capital, he yet held the Imperial Authority and
the Three Sacred  Treasures, and so there was nothing irregular in these appointments to rank and
office.

     When they heard that the Heike had succeeded in fighting their way back to Fukuhara, their
relatives who had been left behind in Miyako were filled with joy and encouragement, and Kajii -
no-Miya, the Tendai Zasshu, often exchanged letters with his old friend Nii - no-Sōzu Senshin,
who was in the Heike camp, in which he declared his sympathy with his friend in exile, but
informed him that things were not yet quiet in  the Capital and so forth, and in one of these
letters he sent this verse


     " All unknown to the world nay heart ever yearns for your friendship
     How I long to roam where the moon wanes in the west."

When the Sōzu read this lie pressed it to his f ace and burst into tears.

     Meanwhile, as the days and years passed, the thoughts of Komatsu -no-Sammi Chujō Koremori
dwelt ever on his wife and children whom he had left behind in the Capital and he was very sad.
They could at tines send letters to eac h other by the hands of merchants, and when he heard of
her lonely life in Miyako he felt much inclined to try to bring her to Fukuhara that they might be
together, but when he reflected on the hard life they led there he could only refrain and abandon
himself to his gloomy thoughts.

p.134

     The Genji had intended to begin their attack on Fukuhara on the fourth day of the second
month, but when they heard that Buddhist rites were being performed on behalf of the departed
Nyūdōo they desisted, and as the fifth and sixth days were unlucky , it was not till the seventh day
at six o'clock in the morning that the battle began on both the eastern and western entrances of
Ichi-no-tani.

     On the fourth day, as it was a lucky one, they had divided their army into two parts, the main
body being  commanded by Kaba -no-Onzōshi Noriyori with whom rode the following captains :
Takeda -no-Tarō Nobuyoshi, Kagami -no-Jirō Tomitsu, Kagami -no-Kojirō Nagakiyo, Yamana -no-
Jirō Noriyoshi, and. Yamana -no-Saburō Yoshiyuki, while in command of the samurai were
Kajiwara Heizō Kagetoki, his eldest son Genda Kagesue, his second son Heiji Kagetaka, Kajiwara
Saburō Kageie, Inage -no-Saburō Shigenari, Hangai -no-Gorō Shigeyuki, Oyama -no-Koshirō
Tomomasa, Naganuma -no-Gorō Munemasa, Yuki -no-Shichirō Tomomitsu, Sanuki -no-Shirōdaiyū
Hirotsuna, Onodera -no-Zenji Tarō Michitsuna, Soga -no-Tarō Sakenobu, Nakamura Tarō
Tokitsune, Edo -no-Shirō Shigeharu, Ōkawazu -no-Tarō Hiroyuki, Tamai -no-Shirō Sukekage, Shō -
no-Saburō Tadaie, Shō -no- Shirō Takaie, Shodai -no-Hachirō Yukihira, Kuge Jirō  Shigemitsu,
Kawara -no-Tarō Takanao, Kawara -no Jirō Morinao, and Fujita -no-Saburōdaiyū Yukiyasu with a
force of some fifty thousand horsemen under them.

     On the fourth day of the second month at eight o'clock in the morning they departed from
the Capi tal, and about evening of the same day they arrived at Koyano in the province of Settsu
and pitched their camp.

     The smaller body was under the command of Kurō Onzōshi Yoshitsune and with him were
Yasuda -no-Saburō Yoshisada, Ōuchi-no-Tarō Koreyoshi, M urakami -no-Hangwan dai Yasukuni,
and Tajirō -no-Kwanja Nobutsuna. The samurai of this army were commanded by Doi -no-Jirō
Sanehira, his son Yatarō Tohira, Miura -no-suke Yoshizumi, his son Heiroku

p.135

     Yoshimura, Hatakeyama -no-Shōji Jiro Shigetada, Ha takeyama -no-Nagano Saburō Shigekiyo,
Sawara -no-Jūrō Yoshitsura, Wada -no-Kotarō Yoshimori, Wada -no-Jirō Yoshimochi, Saburō
Munezane, Sasaki Shirō Takatsuna, Gorō Yoshikiyo, Kumagai -no-Jirō Naozane, his son Kojirō

Naoie, Hirayama -no-Mushadokoro Toshishige, A mano -no-Jirō Naotsune, Ogawa -no-Jirō
Sukeyoshi, Hara -no-Saburō Kiyomasu, Tatara -no-Gorō Yoshiharu, his son Tarō Mitsuyoshi,
Watariyanagi Yagorō Kiyotada, Beppu Kotarō Kiyoshige, Kaneko -no-Jurō Ietada, Kaneko -no-
Yoichi Chikanori, Gempachi Hirotsuna, Kataoka -no-Tarō Tsuneharu, Ise -no-Saburō Yoshimori,
Mutsu -no-Satō Saburō Tsuginobu, Satō Shirō Tadanobu, Eda -no-Genzō, Kumai no Taro and
Musashi -bō Benkei, in all about ten thousand men. These also started from the Capital at the
same time as the others, and taki ng the Tamba road, made a two days match in one, taking up
their position at a place called Onohara on the eastern slope of Mikusayama, which is on the
boundary of Tamba and Harima.