CHAPTER IX.

THE ADVENTURE OF THE PRIEST JISHIN.


It was said, as has been related, tha t Kiyomori was not an ordinary man at all, and it was
rumoured that he was an incarnation of Jie Sojo . [1] The reason for this was the following story. In
the temple of Seichoji in th e province of Settsu there lived a certain saintly monk named Jishin
Bo Sonei. He had formerly been attached to Hieizan, where for many years he had meditated on
the Hokke Sutra, but at last his religious zeal drove him to leave that mountain and come and live
in this temple, so that all believed on him and were converted.

On the twenty second day of the twelfth month of the period Shoan, Sonei went as usual to the
altar of Buddha to perform the evening service, and was sitting supported by his arm -rest re ading
the Hokke Sutra, when, it seemed neither in a dream or reality, there entered two men clad in
white Kariginu and Eboshi and wearing leggings and straw sandals, carrying an open letter. When
Sonei, as in a dream, asked them from whom they had brought it, they replied: "From the Court
of Emma -O," whereupon he received it from their hands and opening it read as follows: "To the
Priest Jishin Bo Sonei, residing in the temple of Seichoji, in the province of Settsu, in the Country
of Dai -Nihon which is in t he Djambudvipa. On the twenty sixth day at the Palace of Emma Raja
there will be held a recitation of the ten myriad portions of the Hokke Sutra, and ten myriad
priests from ten myriad countries will be entertained. As you have been included in the number
do you proceed hither as appointed. The above given at his Court, at the command of Emma -O.
Twenty second day of the twelfth month of the second year of Shoan."
As Sonei could by no means refuse the dread command,

[p.4]

he wrote an acknowledgement, afte r which he awoke, and when he related the vision to Ko -ei,
the chief priest of the temple, the hair of all that heard it stood up with affright. Thinking that his
end was near he gave himself up to prayer, repeating the Nembutsu continually, and trusting t hat
Buddha would have compassion on him and receive him into his Paradise. On the twenty fifth
day he went as usual to the altar of Buddha and recited the Sutras, and at the hour of the Rat (12.
p.m.), feeling sleepy, he returned to his room and lay down t o rest., At the hour of the Ox, (2.
a.m ) the two men came again and urged him to start with them, but when Sonei was preparing
to go, he found that he had no proper garments or  begging -bowl. While he was wondering what
was to be done, for it would be a dr eadful thing to disobey the mandate of Emma -O, a priest's
robe suddenly wrapped itself round his body, while a begging -bowl of gold descended from
heaven into his hand; at the same time two attendant priests, two acolytes and ten lower priests
appeared bef ore his apartment with a chariot adorned with the seven precious things. Sonei
joyfully mounted the chariot, which soared away through the sky toward the north west and soon
reached the Palace of Emma. Around it spread on all sides an immense courtyard, an d the
vastness of its spaces within was indescribable. The Palace buildings were all of gold and jewels,
and shone with a brightness scarcely to be borne by mortal eyes. The service of that day had
already been finished and the priests had all departed, so  Sonei stood waiting in the middle gate

on the south side of the Palace, viewing the buildings from far off. While he stood thus, all the
officials and attendants of Emma's realm came to make their obeisance to the Dread King in a
procession of extraordina ry magnificence, and Sonei, wishing to enquire about his sins and his
future life, proceeded in the same direction. As he did so the ten attendants formed into line and
the two priests carried boxes, while the acolytes held up an umbrella over him, and in this way
they approached the presence of Emma; whereupon

[p.5]

the King and all his officials and Courtiers rose up to greet them, for the two priests now
appeared in their real form as Yakuo Bosatsu and Yusei Bosatsu, and the two acolytes as
Tamonten and Jikokuten, the ten attendants being metamorphosed into ten female demons who
ministered to him. "Why have you come thus when all the other priests have departed?" asked
Emma "From my childhood," replied Sonei, "I have never neglected daily to recite th e Hokke
Sutra, but even so I am not sure of my fate in the after life, so it is of that that I wish to enquire.
"Rebirth in Paradise," answered Emma, "is granted according to faith, but the Hokke Sutra is the
straight way for man to attain Buddhahood, for which purpose all the Buddhas of the Three
Worlds appeared on this earth. The merit of earnest faith and understanding of it is greater than
that of practise of the Five Paramitas, while the virtue of preaching it five times is more potent
than eighty year s charity. According to your abounding merit you will be reborn into the highest
circle of the Tuchita heaven." Then, turning to an attendant, the Dread King said; "The deeds of
this man's life are in the casket of good works; go and fetch them, and show h im what is written."
Then the ministering demon went to the store -house on the south side and brought the casket,
and when he opened it and read what was written therein, every act and every thought that he
had done or meditated in his whole life was revea led; not one was lacking. "One request only I
have to make," said Sonei, bursting into tears, "show me, I beseech thee, the way by which I may
escape from the endless circle of births and deaths, and attain to the highest state of
Enlightenment." So, as he  ceased not from his tears, Emma, moved by compassion, instructed him
in these sacred words of doctrine
"Wife and child and kindred, rank and wealth,
Accompany no mortal after death,
But devils formed from the ill deeds he did,
Torment him that he scream  for evermore."

[p.6]

Sonei was exceedingly rejoiced and said: "In the country of Dai -Nihon in the Djambudvipa, at
Wadamisaki in the province of Settsu, the Lord High Chancellor of the Heike has built cells
extending over a distance of ten cho square , and invited many priests to come and recite the
Sutras and pray earnestly, even as it might be at the meeting of today." On hearing this, Emma in
great admiration and gladness exclaimed: "That Nyudo is no ordinary person; he is the
reincarnation of Jie S ojo, and it was because he kept the law of Tendai Buddhism that for a while
he was born again in Japan. Three times a day we pray for him here in these words which you
will remember to repeat to the Nyudo.

"Jie Dai -Sojo greatly we revere,
Protector of the Tendai Buddhist Law.
Revealed on earth as the Great Chancellor,
His evil Karma even will help mankind."
So, being entrusted with these holy words, Sonei went out from the presence of the King of the
Underworld, weeping tears of joy, and when he came to t he middle gate of the south side, his ten
priestly attendants again brought the chariot and soared away with him toward the south -west, so
that he seemed to have returned in the twinkling of an eye, whereupon he awoke as from a
dream. Afterwards, going up to Kyoto, he went to the mansion of the Nyudo at Nishi -Hachijo
and told him all that he had seen. Kiyomori was greatly rejoiced, and after entertaining him
royally, sent him away with many presents, beside raising him to the rank of Risshi. And this is
how it came to pass that all knew that the Nyudo was the reincarnation of Jie Sojo. Jikyo Shonin
was also the reincarnation of Kobo Daishi, while the Retired Emperor Shirakawa was the
reincarnation of Jikyo Shonin. This Emperor accumulated many meritorious ac tions and piled up
many virtuous deeds, and in this degenerate age also Kiyomori, as the reincarnation of Jie Sojo,
both by his evil deeds and his virtuous actions acquired great merit, and thus conferred much
benefit

[p.7]

on himself and mankind. Not otherwise was it that S'akya Muni and Devadatta both greatly
helped the world of men.