CHAPTER XIV.

THE ARGUMENT OF HOIN.


At the hour of the Dog (8 p.m.) on the seventh day of the eleventh month of the same year, the
earth quaked very greatly for a long time, and the chief diviner Abe -no-Yasuchika hur ried to the
Palace and gave his verdict as follows: "According to the books of divination this earthquake is a
very serious portent. Consulting the book called Kongikyo, one of the three books of divination,
we find that it is not a matter of years, months  or days; it points to a very near and urgent affair,"
and he lifted up his voice and wept. The Imperial Messenger too was greatly perturbed, and
when it was reported to the Emperor, His Majesty was extremely alarmed. But many of the
younger nobles and cou rtiers burst out laughing when they heard of it, saying: "What is this
useless Yasuchika weeping about? Is it likely that anything much is going to happen now?" This
Yasuchika, however, had received the traditions of five generations, and was deeply learne d in
astronomy, and as he had always explained the omens accurately up till now without making any
mistakes, he was considered a divinely inspired prophet. On one occasion in a thunderstorm the
sleeve of his 'kariginu' had been scorched by a flash of light ning, without any injury to

[p. 147]

his person ; in whatever age a sign that he was specially favoured by Heaven.

On the fourteenth day the Lay priest Chancellor, for some reason or other, saw fit to return to
the capital with a long train of several t housand horsemen, thereby throwing the city into a
tumult, though there was no special reason for it. Someone started the rumour that Kiyomori had
come up to Kyoto with hostile intentions against the Imperial Court. The Kwampaku Motofusa
also hurried to Co urt, perhaps in consequence of some secret information. "It seems that the
Nyudo has come up to the capital this time to try and overthrow me, and I know not what
affliction I may not have to endure;" said the Kwampaku to his Imperial Master. "Whatever may
happen to you," replied the Emperor, "I shall feel as though the same misfortune had befallen
me:" and the august tears coursed down his Dragon Countenance; we speak it with awe. Though
the government of the country was transacted by the Emperor and the K wampaku, yet none
knew what would happen; the matter was as the will of Tensho daijin or Kasuga Daimyojin. On
the fifteenth day there was no doubt that Kiyomori intended hostilities against the Court, and the
Retired Emperor in great consternation sent Jok en Hoin, son of the late Shinsei Dainagon, to
Rokuhara with this message: "This year the Imperial Family has been troubled and people are
unsettled; the people also are restless and disquieted, all of which causes us much grief. You who
have charge of ever ything, and can entirely pacify the country, do not do so, but come up and
make a commotion in the city and menace the Imperial Court ; what is the meaning of it?" Hoin
proceeded to Nishi Hachijo, but the Nyudo would not receive him, and having waited ther e from
morning till evening, as he could not obtain an audience, thinking it was no use, he transmitted
the Imperial Message to Gendaiyu -no-Hangwan Suesada and went to take his leave, when the

Nyudo ordered him to be called back, and on his returning, thus  addressed him: "Ya -a, priest
Hoin. Is what I say untrue? The death of

[p. 148]

Shigemori is a great blow to our house, and you may guess how deep is my grief. During the
disturbances that followed the era of Hogen, when the peace of the Emperor was dist urbed, I
only administered affairs, while Shigemori also humbly exerted himself to the utmost and
pacified the Imperial wrath. Moreover, whether in emergencies or in ordinary matters of
administration, a more meritorious minister would have been difficult to find. Then consider the
history of former ages, how the Emperor Taiso of China, when his minister Gicho died, was
excessively grieved and wrote this inscription on his tomb, so great was his sorrow: "Inso of old
dreamed that he had a virtuous minister, but I, when I awake know that I have lost a wise one."
In our country also, if I mistake not, when Akiyori no -Mimbu -no-Kyo died, the late Retired
Emperor was excessively grieved, and postponing his visit to Hachiman, refrained from going out.
All the Emper ors, in fact, when their ministers died, mourned for them, but now, when
Shigemori has not yet been dead fifty days, the Emperor goes to the shrine of Hachiman and to
other places, not showing the least sign of regret. Even if you forget Shigemori's loyal conduct,
why do you not sympathise with my grief ? How can you forget Shigemori's loyalty? If both
father and son thus lose the favour of the Emperor, both are put to shame. This is one thing: then,
though the Emperor promised not to change his demeanour e ither to my sons or grandsons, as
soon as Shigemori is dead, he takes back the domain of Echizen which he had held. For what
misconduct was this done? Then again, when the office of Chunagon was vacant and the Nii
Chusho Motomichi earnestly desired it, I r ecommended him for it, but no notice was taken and
the office was given to the son of the Kwampaku. However unreasonable I may be, why is it that
he was thus favoured ? It is much to be regretted that the Emperor should thus pass over one so
suitable in ra nk and birth in so arbitrary a manner. Then again, when the followers and retainers
of the Shin -Dainagon Narichika -no-Kyo met together in Shishigatani to foment a rebellion, that
was

[p. 149]

not done on their own initiative; it was in accordance with th e wish of the Retired Emperor, and
though it is a strange thing to say, though the Emperor ought not to forget the services of my
house for seven generations, yet he planned to take away the little remaining life that is left to me
in my old age of three s core years and ten. It would seem then to be difficult for my descendants
to continue to serve the Court in after generations. Thus bereft of my son in my old age, I am like
a withered tree that has no branches. What then is the use of my wasting my time i n such a case?
What will happen you yourself can guess." As he spoke thus vehemently, alternating between
anger and tears, Hoin was moved both to pity and fear, and the cold sweat stood out upon him.
No one could have made any answer at such a time. Beside  which he remembered that one of his
own retainers had taken part in the conspiracy of Shishigatani, and was apprehensive lest he
might be arrested on that account, feeling rather like one who strokes a dragon's beard or treads
on a lion's tail ; yet thoug h he felt so terrified he showed nothing in his demeanour, but only
replied: "Indeed your services have been very great, and no doubt your anger is not without
reason, but surely both as regards rank and emoluments you have no cause for dissatisfaction.
Moreover your great merits are always remembered by the Imperial House. But to say that the
revolt of the Courtiers was by the design of the Emperor, is it not but a treasonable slander ? But

to believe the ear and to doubt the eye is always the bad habit of  the world at large. To believe
the words of people of no account, putting aside the Imperial favour and opposing the Emperor is,
whether secret or revealed, a very terrible thing. Heaven is wide and immeasureable in extent and
not otherwise is the mind of  the Emperor that the inferior should be disobedient to his superior,
how can such conduct befit a minister? Pray consider this well. This is the purport of what I have
to say." All those who stood by, on hearing this reply, exclaimed: "How bold thus calml y to
answer the Nyudo when he is in such

[p. 150]

a rage." And there was none who did not praise him greatly.