CHAPTER XIV.
KOREMORI DROWNS HIMSELF.

So Koremori, after completing the pilgrimage to the three shrines of Kuman o, took a boat before
the shrine called Hama -no-miya, and launched out to the open sea. There is an island far out in
the offing called Yamanari -no-shima, and to this he rowed and disembarked on the shore.
Weeping bitterly lie cut his name and pedigree on a great pine tree thus: " Sammi -no-Chūjō
Koremori, religious name Jō -en, son of Komatsu -no-Naidaijin Shigemori Kō, religious name Jō -
ren, grandson of the Dajo -daijin Taira -no-Ason Kiyomori, religious name Jō -kai, aged twenty -
seven years; drowns himself in the offing of Nachi, twenty -eighth day of the third month of the
third year of Ju -ei " : after which he again entered the boat and rowed out into the offing.

Though he had made up his mind to end his life, when it came to the point he felt down -cast and
sad. As it was the twenty eighth day of the third month a sea mist was rolling over the waters,
wrapping everything in a dreary pall; but even on an ordinary spring day a melancholy mood
comes over us with the approach of evening, so how much more when toda y is the end, the last
evening we spend on earth. Looking at the fishing -boats as they rose and sank on the waves,
though he had made up his mind to sink likewise, yet his thoughts dwelt on his own fate, and
when he saw a flock of wild -geese he felt as gre at regret and home -sickness for his birthplace as
did Sōbu when he was imprisoned in the land of Ko, and sent back a message by a wild -goose.
Recollecting himself, however, and

[p. 207]

reproving himself for harbouring such vain thoughts of this world,  he put his hands together, and
turning to the west repeated the Nembutsu. But even so the thought came into his mind how his
dear ones in Miyako did not know that this was his last hour, and would keep on waiting and
hoping for some tidings of him, so dro pping his hands and ceasing to say the Nembutsu, he
turned to Takiguchi Nyūdō and said : "Ah, what a thing it is to have wife and children! For not
only are they an anxiety in. this world, but a hindrance to obtaining Enlightenment in the next. I
fear that the obtrusion of these thoughts is because of the greatnes s of my guilt, and I repent of
it."

The sage felt deeply grieved in his heart, but thinking it would not do to show any weakness, he
wiped away his tears and assumed an impassive expression. "Alas"! he said, "tender feelings are
common to all men, and it is indeed as you say. Endless are the karma -relations produced if a man
and woman place their pillows together but for one night, and deep is the connexion in their
after lives. " Those that are born must die; those that meet must part ", is the way of thi s world.
"The last dew or the first drop," one must go before the other, and whether one dies first or last,
all must leave this world at last. The pledge of Gensō to Yōkihi on an evening in autumn at the
Ri-San Palace led but to the bruising of hearts at last, and even the favour of Shozen in the Kan -
sen-den had to come to an end. Even the magicians Sho -shi and Bai -sei did not live for ever,
neither are the highest rank of saints free from birth and death ; so that even if you can boast of
the pleasures of  long life, this resentment cannot be put away for ever. Thus if you live for a
hundred years, the pain of parting will still be the same. And Mara the king of evil in the sixth
Devaloka, who opposes the Way, taking possession of the Six Heavens of Desire,  has made them

his own, and grudging the people of these worlds deliverance from birth and death, becomes to
them wives and husbands to hinder their escape;

[p. 208]

and so all the Buddhas of the Three Worlds, regarding all mankind as their children, i n their zeal
to bring them to the Paradise of the Pure Land, have strictly warned them that from the utmost
antiquity wives and children were fetters to bind them to the Wheel of Birth and Death. B ut do
not lose heart on that account, for Iyo -no-Nyūdō Yoriyoshi, an ancestor of the Genji, being sent
by the Imperial Command to subdue Ando Sadatō and Munetō, the rebels of Mutsu, in the
course of twelve years took the heads of more than sixteen thousand  men, besides which he
deprived of life many millions of the beasts of the field and fish of the rivers, and yet at the time
of his death, as a strong desire for Enlightenment awoke within him, he is said to have attained a
seat in Paradise. So great is th e merit of forsaking the world that all the sins of previous lives are
washed away: even if one should build a Pagoda of the Seven Precious Things reaching up to the
thirty third heaven, his merit would not be as great as that of him who renounces the worl d for a
single day. Or if one should feed a hundred Arhats for a hundred thousand years, he who forsakes
the world for one day would have greater merit. Was not Yoriyoshi able to attain bliss by his
strength of mind? So shall not you, whose guilt is far le ss, be able to be reborn in the Pure Land?
And moreover Amida Nyorai, the Gongen of this shrine, has made forty eight vows to save
mankind, and among these in the eighteenth vow he states that whosoever in true faith shall call
up to ten times on his name,  earnestly desiring to enter Paradise, shall in no wise fail to attain
Enlightenment. So if indeed you believe this doctrine, relying on it in firm faith without any
doubt, and if you repeat the Nembutsu either once or ten times, Amida Nyorai, diminishing to
some sixteen feet his august stature, which is of a height that myriads of Nahutas, many in
number as the sands of the Ganges, only can measure, with Kwannon and Seishi and innumerable
Saints and Bodhisattvas encompassing them about tier on tier, will c ome forth to meet you from
the Eastern Gate of Paradise,

[p. 209]

welcoming your advent with songs of rejoicing. Thus though your body may sink to the bottom
of this ocean, you will ride in glory on clouds of purple. And when you have become a Buddha
and attained liberation, in true enlightenment you may come back to this world, and without
doubt may lead your wife and child into the path of true salvation." And as he spoke thus,
striking his bell the while, and urging him to repeat the Nembutsu, Koremo ri, in sure belief that
he had attained Enlightenment, steadfastly putting aside all vain thoughts, looked towards the
west and clasped his hands, with a loud voice repeating the Nembutsu a hundred times, and then
with the word " Namu " on his lips sprang into the ocean. Yasōbyōye and Ishidō Maru, repeating
the same invocation, also sprang to their death with their master.