CHAPTER III.
EXECUTION OF SAIKO.

When the Ho -o learned that the priests of Hieizan had prevented the Zasshu from being exiled,
he was much perturbed
then Saiko -hoshi said ; " From of old the monks of  Hieizan have been in the habit of making
these disorderly uprisings; this is not the first time, but this time they have gone too far, and if
you do not punish them in an exemplary manner from henceforth the government will always be
unstable." Thus he sp oke, unaware of the prayers for his own destruction, or of the appearance of
the god of the mountain, and confusing the mind of the Emperor. " A subject who advises the
Emperor falsely stirs up confusion in the country." This is a true saying ; even though  one tries to
grow many orchids, the wind of autumn will destroy them, and even when rulers desire to be
clear in their minds a lying minister will speak thus to darken their counsel.

Soon it was rumoured that the Ho -o had ordered ShinDainagon Narichika -no-Kyo to assemble
his retainers and attack Hieizan, and that some of the priests of that mountain thought that as
they were subjects of the Emperor, it was not right to resist the Ho -o's command and secretly
intended to obey them so the ex -Zasshu, living a t Myokobo, hearing that the minds of the priests
were thus divided, was much troubled wondering what fresh misfortune would come upon him;
but still no decision was made concerning his sentence of exile.

Thus the long cherished plan of the Shin Dainagon f or the overthrow of the Heike was delayed
owing to the riotous conduct of Hieizan. Some deliberation and preparations had been

[p. 63]

made, but they were only pretence, and as it seemed that the plot was not likely to succeed, Tada
Kurando Yukitsuna, wh o had been entrusted with the arrangements, thinking apparently that it
was no use going further, used the linen which had been presented to him as material for bow
cases to make ' hitatare ' and 'katabira' for his retainers. Then, on meditating over the a ffair and
seeing the prosperity of the Heike, it seemed a very difficult thing to overthrow them ; and if the
matter chanced to leak out, he himself would be the first to be executed, so he thought it would
be better to betray it before anyone else could d o so, and thus save his own life. So on the twenty
ninth day about midnight he went to the mansion of the Nyudo at Nishi Hachijo saying that he
had important business. As Yukitsuna was not accustomed to visit him, the Nyudo, wondering
why he had come, sent  Shume -no-Hangwan Morikuni to enquire. Yukitsuna however replied
that he could not tell anyone else, whereupon the Nyudo himself came out to the corridor at the
middle gate. " As it is now midnight," he said, " what can you have to any to me at such a time ? "
" In the daytime there are many people about," replied Yukitsuna, " so I have come under cover

of night ; what do you think is the meaning of the warlike preparations now going on at the
Palace of the Ho -o ? " " I understand that the Ho -o has a plan to  attack Hieizan," replied
Kiyomori carelessly. Then Yukitsuna drawing nearer whispered to him: " That is not the reason, it
is against your house that they make these preparations." " Has the Ho -o any knowledge of it?"
asked the Nyudo. " Without doubt he k nows about it ; it is with his authority that Shitsuji -no-
Betto Narichika -no-Kyo is collecting his forces." And he went on to explain what Yasuyori,
Shunkwan and Saiko had, done; after which he retired and the Nyudo called out loudly to
summon his samurai.  Yukitsuna, having said what had better have been left unsaid, fearing that
he might be called on to prove his words, girded up his hakama and fled from the precincts
though no one pursued him, feeling like one who is afraid of being caught in the fire

[p. 64]

that he has kindled. Then the Nyudo, calling Chikugo -no-kami Sadayoshi, cried out. " The capital
is full of traitors who plot to overthrow our house, make haste and report it to all our clan and
assemble the retainers quickly, let all hear! " Soon U daisho Munemori, Sammi Chujo Tomomori,
To-no-Chujo Shigehira, Sama -no-kami Yukimori and others of their kinsmen came up in full
armour with their bows on their backs, together with a multitude of samurai innumerable. That
night there assembled at the Nyudo 's mansion of Nishi Hachijo about six or seven thousand
armed men. The next day was the first day of the sixth month and, while it was yet dark,
Kiyomori called Abe -no-Sukenari and ordered him to proceed to the Palace of the Retired
Emperor, and calling Ta izen-no-Taiyu Nobunari, to say to him as follows; " There is a plot of
Shin Dainagon Nari -chika -no-Kyo and other retainers of the Ho -o to overthrow our fan lily and
throw the empire into confusion: arrest everyone and make enquiry; the Ho -o is evidently aw are
of the plot." Sukenari immediately hastened to the Palace and, calling Nobunari gave him the
message. He, turning pale, straightway went and told the Ho -o. " Ah, someone has revealed the
secret," he remarked, " but even so, how did it come out, I wonde r? " And he gave no direct
answer.

Sukenari, immediately returning, reported this to his master, at which the Nyudo replied that
evidently Yukitsuna had spoken the truth and that if he had not revealed the plot their lives
would have been in danger. Then he gave orders to Chikugo -no-kami Sadayoshi and Hida -no-
kami Sadaie to arrest all who were implicated ; so, taking bands of two or three hundred
horsemen, they went hither and thither and seized them all. He also sent foot soldiers to the
mansion of the Sh in Dainagon at Naka -no-Mikado Karasu Maru with orders that he should come
immediately. The Dainagon, thinking that it was not anything concerning himself, but that
Kiyomori intended to forbid the Ho -o to attack Hieizan, though as the latter was much enrage d it
would be of no avail, gracefully donned a

[p. 65]

costume of delicate material and mounted into an elegant car, accompanied by three of four
retainers, his servants and oxdrivers being more ceremonial than usual ; only to find out soon after
that it  was for the last time. When they came near to Nishi Hachijo for four or five cho they saw
nothing but armed men and he felt a little anxious, wondering why there were so many, but
when they arrived at the front gate and were bidden to enter, they saw that  the inside also was
filled with dense masses of soldiers. At the middle gate many fierce looking warriors were
standing, who, when they saw the Dainagon enter, cried out; " Shall we seize him and bind him ?

" Whereupon the Nyudo, looking out from behind a  curtain, replied; " There is no necessity." So
fourteen or fifteen soldiers, surrounding him on all sides and seizing him by the hand, pulled him
on to the verandah and shut him into a small apartment. The Dainacron, like one in a dream, did
not comprehen d what was happening. The samurai who were with him, separated by
overwhelming forces, were scattered in different directions, and the servants and ox drivers in
consternation abandoned the ox car and took to flight. Then Omi no Chujo Nyudo Renjo, Hos
shoji-no-Shugyo Shunkwan Sozu, Yamashiro -no-kami Motokane, Shikibu -no-Taiyu Masatsuna,
Hei Hangwan Yasuyori, So Hangwan Nobufusa, and Shin Hei Hangwan Sukeyuki were also
arrested and brought in : Saiko -hoshi, on hearing this, fearing that it was a matter conce rning him
also, rode in haste to the Palace of the Ho -o. On the way, however, meeting some soldiers from
Rokuhara they accosted him, saying ; " You are required at Rokuhara, haste thither at once; " but
he replied that he had business at the Palace of the Ho-o and afterwards would do as they
ordered. " What is it that you have to say to him, O most worthless of priests? " they answered as
they dragged him from his horse and carried him bound to Rokuhara. As he was the mainstay of
the plot from the beginning , they bound him firmly and put him in ward in a certain courtyard.
Then Kiyomori. standing on the verandah above, glared

[p. 66]

at him fiercely for a while and then exclaimed ; " This is the way I treat a worthless fellow like
you who makes plots again st m,. Bring him here!" So they brought him to the edge of the
verandah and the Nyudo trampled on his face with his footgear, " You, who were at first a
Courtier of the lowest rank and were advanced by the favour of the Ho -o to a high office that
you did n ot deserve, you and your son, have behaved outrageously, and procured the exile of the
Tendai Zasshu, though he was guilty of no offence, and not only that but you have taken part in a
plot against me and my house. Now confess the whole thing at once and t ell the truth ! " But
Saiko, being by nature a bold fellow, showed no fear, and recovering himself and not at all taken
aback, replied with a laugh; " As I served as a confidential retainer of the Ho -o's Household I
cannot say I took no part in the raising  of forces by the Shitsuji -no-Betto Narichika -no-Kyo.
Indeed I did have a hand in it. Why do you say things that I cannot overlook ? Before other
people it does not matter but in my hearing you shall not speak thus. You are the eldest son and
heir of the l ate Gyobu -no-Kyo Tadamori, and you did not enter the Court at all until you were
fourteen or fifteen years old, and then you were serving in the train of the late To -Chunagon
Kasei -no-Kyo of Naka no Mikado, when even the children of the city called you Tak aheita : but
in the period Ho en you arrested three pirate leaders and were rewarded with the fourth rank;
and when you were called Hyoe -no-suke of the fourth rank, people said it was too high a rank for
you, so it is certainly too much that, being of the line of a men who had not the right of going to
Court, you have raised yourself to be Dajo -daijin. From old time there is precedent for military
families like mine to obtain fiefs and hold positions in the Kebiishi. That is not promotion beyond
one's posit ion." Thus he spoke out boldly without fear, and the Nyudo could neither restrain his
anger nor could he utter a word for rage ; after a while he managed to ejaculate ; " Do not take
leis head off now, examine him well aid find out all the

[p. 67]

plot; then away with him to the river and behead him." There upon Matsuura -no-Taro Shigetoshi
applied torture by squeezing his arms and legs. Saiko did not resist at all and the torture was very
severe : after they had written his confession on four or five shee ts of paper, his mouth was split

open by order of Kiyomori and he was executed at Shujaku on the west side of Gojo.

His eldest son Kaga -no-kami Morotaka, who had been dismissed from his office and banished to
Idota in Owari, was now ordered to be executed  also by Oguma -no-gunshi Koresue of that
province. His younger son Kondo Hangwan Morotsune ,vas also taken out of prison and put to
death. The third son Saemon -no-jo Morohira together with three of his retainers lost his head also.
These men had all been r aised up from humble positions and interfered in matters in which they
had no right to meddle, procuring the exile of the innocent Tendai Zasshu, and thus they met
their fate and were overtaken by retribution as a punishment from the deity of Hieizan.