CHAPTER XVIII.
THE FLIGHT.

Bitchū -no-kami Moromori, the youngest son of Komatsu Shigemori, had just embarked in a small
boat with six of his retainers, when one of the samurai of Tomomori, Seieimon Kinnaga by name,
galloped down to the water's edge and begged them to take him on bo ard, so they backed a little
way to take him in. Hastily he jumped in from his horse's back, and as he was a heavy man and in
full armour, and the boat was small, it rolled over with the shock and capsized. Bitchū -no-kami
was thrown into the water, and as he was struggling in the waves, Honda -no-Jirō Chikatsune, one
of the retainers of Hatakeyama, rode up with thirteen of his men, and quickly dismounting,
dragged him from the water with an iron rake and decapitated him on the spot. He was then
fourteen year s of age.

Echizen -no-sammi Michimori -no-Kyō was also in command by the hillside, and when all his men
had either fallen or fled, and he was cut off from the main body, since his younger brother Noto
no kami Noritsune had already escaped and left him behin d, lie determined to put an end to
himself in peace. .As he was turning to retire to the eastward for this

p. 162

purpose, however, he was suddenly surrounded by Sasaki -no-Kimura Saburō Naritsuna of Ōmi
and Tamii -no-Shiro Sukekage of Musashi with five ot hers, who quickly slew him and cut off his
head. He had with him one retainer only, but when the end came he too deserted him and
escaped.

Thus as the day wore on both Genji and Heike fell in great numbers at the eastern and western
barriers, and before t he towers and beneath the barricades the bodies of men and horses lay in
heaps, while the green grass of Ichi -no-tani and Osasahara was turned to crimson. Countless were
those who fell by arrow and sword at Ichi -no-tani and Ikuta -no-mori, by the hillside a nd by the
strand of the sea. Two thousand heads did the Genji take in this battle, and of the Courtiers of
the Heike, Echizen -no-Sammi Michimori, his younger brother Kurando -no-Taiyū Narimori,
Satsuma -no-kami Tadanori, Musashi -no-kami Tomoakira, Bitchū -no-kami Moromori, Owarino -
kami -Kiyosada, Awaji -no-kami Kiyofusa, Kōgō -gū-no-suke Tsunemasa the eldest son of
Tsunernori, his younger brother Wakasa no kami Tsunetoshi, and his younger brother Taiyū
Atsumori, beside ten others, all fell at Ichi -no-tani.

When their stronghold was thus captured, the Heike were compelled to put to sea once more,
taking the child Emperor with them. Some of their vessels were driven by wind and tide toward
the province of Kii, while others rowed out and tossed about, buffeted by th e waves, in the offing
of Ashiya. Some rocked on the billows off Suma and Akashi, steering aimlessly hither and thither,
their crews weary and dispirited as they turned on their hard plank couches, and viewed the
moon of spring mistily through their tear -dimmed eyes. Some crossed the straits of Awaji and
drifted along by Ejima -ga-Iso, likening their lot to the sad sea birds that fly there seeking by
twilight the mate they have lost, while others still lay off Ichi -no-tani uncertain where to steer.
Yesterday , with a host of a hundred thousand, feared and obeyed by fourteen provinces, they lay

with high hopes but one day's journey

p. 163

from the Capital, and now, after the defeat of Ichi -no-tani they were scattered and, dispersed
along the coast, each unawa re of the fate of his friend.