CHAPTER XVI.
DEPARTURE OF TSUNEMASA FROM KYOTO.

Kōgō -gū-no-suke Tsunemasa, the eldest son of Shūri -no-taiyū Tsunemori, had, as a child, served
as page to the Imperial Abbot of the temple of Omuro Ninnaji, and still felt so  deeply attached to
him that he determined to pay him a farewell visit, even in spite of their great haste; so he took
five or six retainers with him, and, riding off thither at great speed, hurriedly alighted from his
horse and knocked at the gate. "Our S overeign has already departed from the Capital," he said,
"and the doom of our house is at hand, but all I regret in this fleeting world is that I must part
from my lord. Since I first entered this Palace cloister at the age of eight until my Gempuku at
the age of thirteen, except for a slight

[p.59]

interval of sickness, never did I leave my lord's side; but to day, alas, I must go forth to the wild
waves of the Western Sea, not knowing when, if ever, I shall return. So I have come, wishing to
see his fa ce more, though I feel ashamed to enter his presence in this sough soldier's garb." When
ho heard this, the Imperial Abbot, moved with compassion, replied: "Bid him enter as he is,
without changing his dress." Tsunemasa was that day attired in a hitatare o f purple brocade and
body armour laced with green silk. A gold mounted sword hung at his side and a quiver of twenty
four arrows with black and white feathers at his back, and under his arm he carried his bow of
black lacquer with red binding. Taking off l eis helmet and hanging it from his shoulder, he
reverently entered the little garden before the apartment of the Abbot. His Reverence
immediately appeared and bade them raise the curtain before the verandah, on which he invited
Tsunemasa to be seated. When  Tsunemasa had seated himself he beckoned to Tōhyōye -no-jō
Arimori who attended on him, and he brought a bag of red brocade containing his master's Biwa,
which Tsuneniasa laid before the Abbot. "I have brought back this famous Biwa 'Seizan,' which
Your Rev erence presented to me last year, with deep regret, for it is not proper that I should take
such a thing, one of the most precious treasures of our land, into the rude wilds of the country.
May I then deposit it with Your Reverence, that if a happier day s hould perchance dawn again
for our family, and we should return to the Capital I may receive it from your land once more?"
At this the Abbot was much moved and replied with the following stanza:

"So will I keep it unopened, this much regretted memento,
just as though the bag held the affection you feel."

Tsunemasa, borrowing his master's inkstone, then wrote the following:

"Though the water way cease to flow from this spout in your garden,
Never will cease my desire her c to remain by your side."

[p.60 ]

When he had said farewell and retired from the presence of the Imperial Abbot, all those who
were living in the monastery, acolytes, monks, and priests of all ranks, flocked round trim,
clinging to his sleeves and bedewing them with their tears, so sad were they at parting with him.
Among them was a certain young priest named Dainagon -no-Hoshi Gyōkei, a son of Hamuro -no-
Dainagon Mitsuyori -no-Kyō, who had been much attached to him ever since his boyhood; and he

was so loath to part with him that he went t o see him off as far as the banks of the Katsuragawa,
where he bade him farewell and returned to the monastery. As he parted with him, weeping he
composed the following verse:

"Ah, how sad is this life, both the gnarled old tree and the cherry,
All must f ade and pass; never a flower is left. "

To which Tsunemasa made reply:

"In this passing world, each night that we lie down to slumber
Is as a traveller goes farther and farther away. "

Then his samurai, who had been waiting in groups here and there, unfur led their red banners and
formed into a company of about a hundred horsemen in all, and as he took his place at their head
they all whipped up their horses and galloped on after the Imperial Procession.