CHAPTER II.

STAMPING OF THE FEET.

The envoy was Tanzaemon -no-jo Motoyasu. Quickly disembarking from the shin he called with a
loud voice on "Hei

[p. 114]

Hangwan Yasuyori N yudo and Tamba -no-Shosho exiled in this place." Now the two were away
as usual praying before their Kumano Shrine; only Shunkwan was there, and he, hearing them, at
first thought it could only be a dream or that he was being deceived by demons or evil spir its.
Then wondering if it might possibly be real, he hurried along so flurried that he fell as he ran, and
so presented himself before the envoy crying out that he was the exiled Shunkwan. Then the
envoy produced from a bag that his servant carried the let ter of pardon which the Nyudo had
sent, and Shunkwan opened and read thus " The crime for which exile was ordered is pardoned
and the persons herein mentioned may return to the capital. In connexion with the prayers for
the safe delivery of the Chugu a spe cial pardon has been granted : the exiles of Kikaigashima
Shosho Naritsune and Yasuyori Hoshi are pardoned." This only was written and there was no
word of Shunkwan. Thinking that perhaps it was written on the envelope, he looked, but there
was nothing the re also. He read it from the beginning to the end and from the end to the
beginning, but two persons only were mentioned, there was nothing said of three. Then the
Shosho and Yasuyori appeared, and, each reading it in turn;, verily it was only they two who se
names stood written and there was nothing of anyone besides. It all seemed indeed a dream, and
when they thought it a dream it was a reality, when they thought of it as a reality it was even as a
dream. Beside this there were many letters for the two fr om Kyoto, but for Shunkwan Sozu there
was nothing at all. It seemed that all his friends and connexions had disappeared from the capital.
" Ah," he cried, " the three of us were exiled for the same offence and to the same place, how
then is it that two onl y are granted .a pardon and I only am left out ? Is it that I have been
forgotten by the Heike, or is it a mistake in the letter, or is there some other reason? " He looked
up to heaven and cast himself down to the earth, weeping and lamenting, but all in vain. Catching
hold of the sleeve of the Shosho, he cried. in tones of

[p. 115]

agonised entreaty: " That I have fallen into such a plight is because of the worthless plot of the
late Dainagon your father, you must not think it was anything else; if I am  not pardoned I cannot
go to the capital, but at least take me in this ship and bring me along with you as far as Kyushu,
for while you were here with me, just as the swallows come in spring and the wild geese of the
ricefields in autumn, so I could get ti dings occasionally of my home, but now I am left alone from
whom shall I hear anything ? " " Indeed that is so," replied the Shosho," and when we witness
your anguish, all our joy at returning is taken away and we feel as though we wish to stay with
you, b ut as to taking you with us in this ship, though we greatly wish to do so, the envoy will not
permit it at all, and if it were found out that without permission three of us had left the island it

would be indeed a serious thing. But when I return to the ca pital I will intercede with various
people and entreat the favour of the Nyudo so that he may send someone to bring you back : be
patient and stay here awhile as before, and as your life has been so far preserved, though you have
been overlooked in this pa rdon, at last you are certain to go free." But though they spoke many
consoling words, yet Shunkwan would not be comforted, and when the ship made to put off
again he tried to embark in it, and falling off jumped up again with the madness of despair. The
Shosho left him his mattresses as a memento and Yasuyori a part of the Holy Sutras. When they
came to cast off the hawser and put the ship off, the Sozu, seizing hold of it, was dragged out up
to his loins and then up to his armpits, following after them as  long as he could keep his foothold
in the water and entreating them: " Comrades, how can you thus abandon me to my fate ? Where
is your former fellow feeling fled ? Since there is no pardon for me I cannot go to Kyoto, but at
least take me with you to Kyu shu." But the envoy from Kyoto would not give permission, and
they pushed away his hands as he clutched the vessel and at last rowed away, while Shunkwan,
giving himself up to despair, flung himself down

[p. 116]

on the beach and stamped his feet on the sand like a little child that has lost its nurse or mother. "
Take me with you ! Let me go with you! " he shrieked and cried, but it was all of no avail, and
soon, as the ship rowed away, nothing was left but the white waves. The ship was not yet so far
distant, but his eyes were blinded with tears so that he could not see it. Then, running up to a
high place, he kept on calling to mind the pathetic story of how in former days Matsuura -no-
Sayohime  [5] waved her long sleeves, calling back the Chinese ship that bore away Otomo
Sadehiko.

Thus the ship rowed away till it was seen no more, and though the sun set Shunkwan did not
return to his poor hut, but spent the night lying where he was wetted by the spray and dew. The
Shosho, being a man full of pity, when he returned did everything he could for him and indeed
grieved that he had not drowned himself on that shore. Thus we can understand the grief of So -ri
and Soku -ri [6] of old when they were abandoned on Kaiganyama.