CHAPTER IX.
HASE ROKUDAI.

     Mongaku's thus appearing an d declaring : "The young lord is reprieved," was indeed a brave
sight. " When Yoritorno at first declared that, as his father the Sammi Chūjō Dono had been in
command in many battles, he could not pardon him, Whoever might ask it," said Mongaku, " I
reproa ched him again and again for his heartless ingratitude, and demanded to know why I had
lost his favour, but it was all in vain, and he went off to hunt at Nasuno. But I followed him to
his hunting -ground, and at last prevailed on him to grant my request. T hat was why I was so late."
" When the twenty days that we agreed upon had passed," replied Hojo, " I concluded that
Kamakura Dono was unwilling to spare him. How fortunate it is that I brought him with me and
met you here, and so was saved from error." An d he provided Saitō Go and Saitō Roku with
spare saddled horses that he had, and sent them back to the Capital. After he had gone some
distance with them to see them on their way, he took leave of them saying: "Since I have many
weighty matters to report a t Kamakura, I will now say farewell." And so he resumed his journey
to the eastward. He was a very gentle warrior indeed.

    So Mongaku Shonin of Takao took charge of the child Rokudai and travelled day and night
towards the Capital, so that

[p. 303]

when he reached the vicinity of Atsuta in Owari the year had already come to an end, and it was
the evening of the fifth day of the new year when they arrived in the Capital. Making their way
to a residence that Mongaku had in Nijo Inokuma, they stopped the re that the child might rest
awhile, and it was midnight when they reached the Daigakuji. They knocked at the gate, but no
one came, and there was no sound. Only the little white dog that Rokudai had kept came running
out through a hole in the plastered wa ll, wagging its tail in its joy at seeing him again.  “Where is
my mother ? " he asked it pathetically, whereupon Saitō Go and Saitō Roku climbed over the
wall and searched everywhere, but it did not seem as though anyone had been there recently. " It
was only to see my mother again that I wished to live," exclaimed the child, bursting into tears
unmindful of everyone, " but what is the use of my living now ? "

     The rest of the night they spent there, and at dawn they enquired of one who lived near, wh o
told them : " Last year they went to the Dai -Butsu, but since the new year we hear they are living
at Hase -dera. So Saitō Roku hastened at once to Hase and told the lady what had happened,
whereupon, without a moment's delay she started for the Capital a nd came to Daigakuji. " Ah,
Rokudai Gozen," she exclaimed when she saw him, " is this indeed real, or is it a dream ? But do
you quickly renounce the world." But Mongaku, thinking it a pity, did not make him a monk, but
took him to Takao and built a little  cell where his mother could live with him also. In former
days also there are like examples of the great mercy and compassion of Kwannon that succours
both sinners and righteous alike. It was indeed a wondrous blessing.