CHAPTER X.
THE DEATH OF  NOTO -NO-KAMI.

     Now when the Imperial Consort Kenrei -mon-in saw what had come to pass, she put her
inkstone and warming s tone into each side of the bosom of her robe and jumped into the sea. But
Watanabe -no-Gengo Umanojo Mutsuru rowed up in a small

[p. 252]

boat, and cutching her long hair with a rake, dragged her back. Dainagon -no-suke-no-Tsubone,
the wife of Shigehira, s eeing this, cried out: " Alas! How cruel! How can you treat one who was
an Empress in such a way?" So they informed the Hōgwan and he came in haste to the Imperial
Vessel. This Dainagon -no-suke had been just about to leap into the waves with the casket
containing the Sacred Mirror, when an arrow pinned the skirt of her hakama to the side of the
ship and she stumbled and fell, whereupon the Genji soldiers seized her and held her back. Then
one of then wrenched off the lock of the casket to open it, when sudd enly his eyes were
darkened and blood poured from his nose. At this, Taira Dainagon Tokitada -no-Kyō, who had
been captured alive, and was standing by, exclaimed: "Hold! That is the Holy Naishi -dokoro, the
Sacred Mirror that no profane eye must behold !" Wh ereat the soldiers were awestricken and
trembled with fear; and the Hōgwan bade Tokitada -no-Kyō put away the casket as it was before.

     Meanwhile Kadowaki Taira -no-Chūnagon Norimori and Shuri -no-Taiyū Tsunemori placed
heavy anchors on their armour and hand in hand leapt into the sea. Konratsu -no-Shin sammi
Chūjō Sukemori, his brother Komatsu -no-Shōshō Arimori, and their cousin Sama -no-kami
Yukimori, also followed their example and did likewise. But though the other members of the
family thus leapt into the waves, the Daijin Munemori and his son did not, but stood on the
gunwale of the ship looking round to see what would happen. Seeing them thus hesitate, some of
the Heike samurai, under pretence of pushing by hurriedly, thrust Munemori over into the sea ,
and his son, Uemon -no-kami Kiyomune, seeing this, sprang in after him. Now the others had put
heavy objects on their shoulders and held on to each other so that they might be sure to sink, but
these two did not do any such thing, but, being good swimmers , they swam about hither and
thither, the Daijin willing to sink or be rescued whichever his son night do, when Ise -Saburo -
Yoshimori chanced to come

[p. 253]

up in a small boat and drag Kiyomune out with a rake, after which Munemori allowed himself to
be pulled out also. Seeing this, Hida -no-Saburōemon Kagetsune, foster brother of Munemori,
jumped into Yoshimori's boat and aimed a blow at him with his sword, shouting: "Who are you
to take my lord captive?" But Yoshimori's page, perceiving his master's dan ger, thrust himself in
between to intercept the blow, which fell full on his helmet and split it open. A second blow cut
off the faithful page's head, and Yoshimori was again in great peril, when Hori -no-Yataro in the
next boat drew his bow and shot an arr ow full in Saburoemon's face, and as he staggered back for
a moment, Hori boarded the boat and grappled with him. As the two were struggling together,
one of Hori's men, who had followed his master close, stooped and drew Saburoemon's dirk, and,

lifting up  the skirts of his armour, stabbed him so deeply three times that his hand and the hilt
went in also, after which he cut off his head. How must Munemori have felt to see his foster
brother thus slain before his eyes.

     Now, as we have said, none could face the arrows of Notono -kami -Noritsune and live; and he
had resolved to fight to the last this day. He was brilliantly attired in a hitatare brocaded on a red
ground, and a suit of armour laced with Chinese silk; he wore a helmet decorated with lofty
horns, and a sword mounted in gold and silver. In his quiver were twenty four arrows feathered
with black and white feathers, and with his Shigetō bow in his hand he shot them hither and
thither, killing and wounding many of the foe. Then, when all his shafts  were spent, he seized a
great black -lacquered two handed sword in one hand and a white handled halberd in the other,
and cut and slashed on all sides with reckless valour. The Shin -Chūnagon Tomomori -no-Kyō
dispatched a messenger to him saying:" Why add to  your sins by slaying so many men of little
repute? Can you find no famous adversary? " " True," replied Noto -no- kami," I will try a fall
with some great Captain." And shortening his halberd in his hand he cut his way through the

[p. 254]

ships, dealin g blows vigorously on every side, but as he did not recognize the Hōgwan he took
another splendidly armed warrior for him and sprang across to engage him. Now Yoshitsune was
fighting close by, but somehow or other did not turn to attack Noritsune. The latt er, however,
having thus chanced to spring on board the Hogwan's ship, suddenly espied him and made at him
to grapple. Yoshitsune, feeling himself unable to meet his onset, stuck his halberd under his left
arm and leaped nimbly over to one of the ships of his own side, a distance of full twenty feet.
Noto -no-kami, less skilled in such tricks, was unable to follow him,, and seeing that there was no
more to be done, he tore off and flung away the sleeves and skirts of his armour, keeping only the
breastplate,  and, standing on the deckhouse of the ship with his hair all loose and disheveled, he
flung out his arms and shouted loudly: " Let any of the Genji who thinks himself somebody come
forth and grapple with me and take me prisoner! I should like to go down t o Kamakura and have
a word with Yoritomo! Who'll come and try?" But there was none who answered his challenge.

     Now there was a warrior named Aki -no-Tarō Sanemitsu, the son of Aki -no-Tairyō Saneyasu
of Tosa, who possessed an estate in a district of Ak i, and he was so strong that he was said to
possess the strength of twenty or thirty men. He had a retainer who was no less powerful than he,
while his brother Jiro was also no ordinary warrior. " What is Noto Dono that we should fear
him," they said; " he  is no doubt a mighty warrior, but what of that? If he were a devil a hundred
feet high, we three could settle him." And they got into a small boat and drew alongside the ship
where Noritsune was, and boarded it and sprang at him together with their swords  drawn.
Noritsune on his part sprang forward also, and seizing Aki -no-Tarō's retainer who was foremost,
kicked hire into the sea; then, taking Aki -no-Tarō himself under his left arm, and his brother Jirō
under his right and gripping them tight, he sprang o ver into the waves, shouting: "Come along,
both of you, to the

[p. 255]

Mountain of Shide ! " And he was twenty six years old that year.