CHAPTER VIII.
THE AUSTERITIES O F MONGAKU.

Now this Yoritomo had been spared and banished to Hiru -

[p. 232]

ga-kojima in Izu in the domain of Hojo on the twentieth day of the third month of the first year
of Eiryaku only through the urgent pleading of the late Ike -no-zenni, when his f ather Sama -no-
kami Yoshitomo was executed in the twelfth month of the first year of Heiji for the rebellion
that he made. He was at that time fourteen years of age, and having spent some twenty autumns
in exile was now of mature years; and if one should wo nder why he stirred up a revolt in this
year, it was because of the exhortation of Mongaku Shonin of Takao.

This Mongaku was formerly known as Endo Musha Morito and was the son of Watanabe -no-
Endo Sakon -no-Shogen Mochito, having been a retainer of Josei -mon-in, a consort of Toba -in, but
at the age of nineteen, possessed by a desire to enter the Way of Buddha, he shaved his head and
started to practise mortification of the flesh. With the intention of proving how much he could
endure, he stripped himself na ked and lay dawn on his back in a bamboo thicket in the depth of
the mountains under the scorching sun during the hottest days of the sixth month, when there
was no breath of wind, and the horse flies and mosquitoes and wild bees and ants and every kind
of poisonous insect came and settled on his body and bit and stung him; but in spite of this he did
not move a muscle. Thus he remained for the space of seven days, but on the eighth day he arose
and asked whether religious asceticism demanded as much as thi s or not. "If it was so severe" was
the reply, "how could people, survive it?" Thus reassured, he began his austere life by going to
Kumano, intending to live in retirement at Nachi. Now at Nachi is a famous water fall, and
Mongaku determined to bathe in i t as a religious exercise. It was past the tenth day of the twelfth
month when he arrived there and the snow had fallen thickly; the river that ran through the
valley was silent in its icy shroud; the freezing blasts blew fiercely from the mountain -tops an d
the water -fall was a mass of crystal icicles, while the

[p. 233]

twigs were everywhere hidden under their heavy coat of snow. Mongaku, invoking the magic
power [24] of Fudo Myo -o[25], immersed himself up to the neck in the pool of the water -fall and
remained thus two, three, then four days, but on the fifth, unable to endure any longer, losing his
senses he was washed away by the mighty volume of the falling water, and carried some six or
seven hundred yards down stream, his body dashing against the shar p-edged rocks as it rose and
fell in the swirling current. Then suddenly there appeared a beautiful boy who seized his hand
and drew him safely up on to the bank. The bystanders, seeing his dangerous plight, soon kindled
a fire and warmed him so that he re covered consciousness, for it was not his fate to perish, but as
soon as he again drew his breath and opened his eyes, he glared about him in great anger, crying
out with a loud voice: "I am under a vow to stand under the water -fall for thrice seven days a nd
repeat the magic invocation of Fudo three hundred thousand times, and to day being only the
fifth day, who has dared to pull me out? " On hearing these words the hair of their heads stood

up and they could say nothing. Then he plunged again into the wat er fall and stood as before for
two days, and on the second day eight boys appeared and grasped both his hands to draw him
from the water, but he resisted them strongly and would not move. On the third day he again
became as one dead, whereupon, that the w ater fall should not be polluted, two heavenly youths,
with their hair bound up tightly, descended from above the fall, and rubbed the whole body of
Mongaku from head to foot with their warm and perfumed hands, so that he breathed again as
one in a dream, and asked who it might be that thus had compassion on him. "We are Kongara
and Seitaka [26], the messengers of Fudo Myo -o,"

[p. 234]

replied the two youths, "and we have come in obedience to the command of the Myo -o.
Mongaku has made a sublime vow and is now undergoing unparalleled austerities; go ye and
succour him." Then Mongaku cried with a loud voice; "Where is the abode of the Myo -o?" "His
abode is in the Tosotten, the fourth Heaven of Desire," they replied as they ascended far aloft
above the clouds.  Mongaku clasped his hands and exclaimed fervently: "Now am I full of hope,
for even Fudo Myo -o knows of my austerities;" and he again took up his position in the water fall.
But from henceforth he was favoured by most gracious signs of divine assistance; the bitter wind
no longer pierced his body, and the falling water felt warm and soothing, and so he completed the
three weeks of his vow and afterwards spent a thousand days in retirement at Nachi. Then he
started to travel round the whole country as a pil grim, ascending Omine three times, Katsuragi
twice, and then proceeding to Koya, Kogawa, Kinbusen, Hakusan, Tateyama, the peak of Fuji, Izu,
Hakone, Togakushi in Shinano, and Haguro in Dewa, until at last, feeling a longing for his native
province, he retu rned to the Capital, hardened like a well tempered blade by his privation, and
wise enough to pray down a flying bird from the sky.