CHAPTER XIV.
 THE DEATH OF TADANORI

Satsuma -no-kami Tadanori the Commander of the western army, clad in a dark -blue hitatare and
a suit of armou r with black silk lacing, and mounted on a great black horse with a saddle enriched
with lacquer of powdered gold, was calmly withdrawing with his following of a hundred
horsemen, when Okabe -on-Rokuyata Tadazumi of Musashi espied him and pursued at full ga llop,
eager to bring down so noble a prize. " This must be some great leader! " he cried. " Shameful ! to
turn your back to the foe! " Tadanori turned in the saddle; " We are friends! We are friends! " he
replied, as he continued on his way. As he had turn ed, however, Tadazumi had caught a glimpse
of his face and noticed that his teeth were blackened. " There are none of our side who have
blackened teeth ", he said, " this must be one of the Heike Courtiers." And overtaking him, he
ranged up to him to grapp le. When his hundred followers saw this, since they were hired
retainers drawn from various provinces, they

p. 154

scattered and fled in all directions, leaving their leader to his fate. But Satsuma -no-kami, who had
been brought up at Kumano, was famou s for his strength, and was extremely active and agile
besides, so clutching Tadazumi he pulled him from his horse, dealing him two stabs with his dirk
while he was yet in the saddle, and following them with another as he was falling. The first two
blows f ell on his armour and failed to pierce it, while the third wounded him in the face but was
not mortal, and as Tadanori sprang down upon him to cut off his head, Tadazumi's page, who had
been riding behind him, slipped from his horse and with a blow of his sword cut off Tadanori's
arm above the elbow, Satsuma -no-kami, seeing that all was over and wishing to have a short
space to say the death -prayer, flung Tadazumi away from him so that he fell about a bow's length
away. Then turning toward the west he repea ted: " Kōmyō Henjō Jippō Sekai, Nembutsu Shujō
Sesshu Fusha; O Amida Nyorai, who sheddest the light of Thy Presence through the ten quarters
of the world, gather into Thy Radiant Heaven all who call upon Thy Name! " And just as his
prayer was finished, Tad azumi from behind swept off his head.

Not doubting that he had taken the head of a noble foe, but quite unaware who he might be, he
was searching his armour when he came across a piece of paper fastened to his quiver, on which
was written a verse with thi s title; " The Traveller's Host, a Flower."
" Seeking where I may lodge a on my weary way, in the evening
Under a tree I lie; now is any host but a flower."
Wherefore he knew that it could be none but Satsuma -no-kami.

Then he lifted up the head on his swo rd's point and shouted with a loud voice: " Satsuma -no-
kami Dono, the demon -warrior of Nippon, slain by Okabe -no-Rokuyata Tadazumi of Musashi ! "
And when they heard it, all, friends and foes alike, moistened the sleeves of their armour with
their


p. 155

 tears, exclaiming: "Alas! what a great captain has passed away! Warrior and artist and poet; in all
things he was preeminent."