CHAPTER XIX.
THE HEIKE AT FUKUHARA.

When the Heike arrived at their former capital of Fukuhara Munemori called together the most
trusty retainers,  old and young, to the number of several hundred, and addressed them thus:
"Since the results of the good deeds of our house are now exhausted and those of its evil actions
predominate, we have thus been abandoned by the gods and compelled to flee the Capi tal, to
wander like homeless vagrants, deserted even by the Hō -ō. On whom then can we rely? Even
when people take shelter under the same tree, it is from some connexion in a former life. and
when they stoop to drink from the same stream their Karma relatio n is not slight, so you are not
mere casual dependants, but hereditary retainers of our house; some bound by the ties of close
relationship, some by gratitude for the bounty of many generations. Let each of you consider how
many were the benefits he receiv ed in the days gone by, in the time of the prosperity of our
house, and will you not now repay this favour? Moreover, seeing that we are escorting the
Sovereign possessing the Ten Virtues, and carrying with him the Three Sacred Treasures, must
we not stand  by His Majesty to the last, to the most inaccessible mountain or the remotest
plain?" Then his hearers, controlling their emotion, replied with one voice: "When birds and
animals know how to repay kindness, how should we rational men forget it? It is the part of the
warrior to be ashamed of double dealing, and it is but by the favour of the Taira house that for
the last twenty years we have supported our families. Therefore will we follow our August Lord
the Emperor even beyond the confines of this Realm o f Nippon, yea, even to Kikai, Korai, or
Keitan, to the farthest boundaries of sky and sea." At these words Munemori and all the Heike
felt some confidence return to them.

That night the exiles spent at Fukuhara. The sky was clear and calm, and the bow sha ped new
moon of autumn

[p.68]

shone brightly. As they lay on their grassy couches, in doubt whether they should ever again
behold this scene, their pillows were damp with both dew and tears. When they looked round
upon the many buildings of the new capit al that the Lay priest Chancellor had erected, the
pavilion on the hill for flower viewing in springtime, the mansion by the sea for the moon
viewing of autumn, the mansion of the bubbling spring, the pavilion of the pine tree shade, the
resort for horse r acing, the lofty palace of two stories, the snow viewing palace, the houses of the
various retainers, the newly built Imperial Palace which had been designed by Gōjō -Dainagon
Kunitsuna -no-Kyō with its glistening tiles and mosaic pavements, in the short spa ce of three years
the roads were all thickly mossed and the gates closed by the autumn grasses, while on the tiles
the pines were sprouting and ivy clustered thickly on the walls. Over the mossy terraces only the
pine breeze blew; the curtains were gone an d the bed chambers lay open to view, but only the
moon beams cared to enter. The next day, after setting fire to the Palace of Fukuhara, they
escorted His Majesty to his ship and all set sail. Though not as painful as when they left the
Capital behind, thi s parting also wrung their hearts with grief. The smoky torches that were
kindled by the fisherman; the calling of the deer at dawn at Once; the sound of the waves beating
on the shore; the shadows of the moon on their long sleeves; the shrilling crickets among the
grasses; every sound and sight that fell on their eye and ear was melancholy, and there was
nothing that did not deepen their sorrow. Yesterday they stood at the eastern frontier with ten

myriads of horsemen; to -day they weigh anchor on the weste rn sea with but seven thousand
followers. Calmly the clouds float over the waves, and the blue sky slowly darkens; the evening
mist drifts over the lonely islets and the moon comes up over the waters, and so the ships plough
their way over the boundless oc ean toward their far distant haven. As the days pass the Capital
recedes farther and farther from their vision and

[p.69]

has become as it were beyond the clouds. Even thoughts of their far off home did but cause fresh
tears, the one thing that seemed to  have no end. When they saw a flock of white seabirds
swooping over the waves, they remembered the question of Arihara -no-Narihira that he asked at
the Sumida river, and the beloved name Miyako -dori, or Bird of Miyako, held a melancholy
interest for them. It was on the twenty fifth day of the seventh month of the second year of Ju -ei
that the Heike fled from the Capital.

VOLUME VIII