CHAPTER XVI.

THE CASE OF YUKITAKA.


Now among the retainers of the former Kwanpaku Mototusa was a samurai named Ko -no-Taiyu
Hangwan Tonari, who was not favourable to the Heike. Hearing that he was to be arrested by
Rokuhara, he took his s on Ko Saernon -no-jo Ienari with him and fled to the south country.
Ascending Inariyama and dismounting from their horses, father and son took counsel together
saying: "We had hoped to flee to the east and find refuge with the former Uhyoe -no-suke
Yoritomo,  but he has been excommunicated and is himself in jeopardy, and there hardly seems
any other place in Nippon that is not a Heike fief. As therefore we cannot escape, and it is a
disgrace to let our ancestral home fall into strange hands, let us go back aga in, and when the
Rokuhara retainers come, we will set fire to the house and cut open our bellies and die in the
flames." So they went back again to their mansion at Kawarasaka and, just as they had expected,
Gendaiyu -no-Hangwan Suesada and Settsu -no-Hangwa n Morisumi carne against them with three
hundred horsemen, shouting their warcry exultantly. Then Ko -no-Taiyu Hangwan came forth on
to the verandah and shouting in a loud voice: "See that you tell this at Rokurara!" set fire to the
house, and cutting himse lf open with his son, both perished in the flaming pile.

[p. 154]

Now the reason why all these misfortunes fell on so many people was the rivalry for the office of
Chunagon between the former Kwampaku's son Sammi -no-Chujo Moroka and Ni -i-no-Chujo
Motomic hi who became Kwampaku. How ever much the former Kwampaku suffered for it did
not so much matter, but how about the justice of the forty three others? And the Nyudo did not
stop at these things only, so that people said an evil spirit had entered into him and he had lost all
self-control, so that the city was troubled thereat. In spite of the title of Sutoku Tenno being
given to Sanuki -no-in, and Fujiwara -no-Yorinaga, the evil Sadaijin, being promoted in rank and
office, still there was no tranquillity.

Now there was a certain former Sashoben Yukitaka, the eldest son of Nakayama -no-Chunagon
Akitoki -no-Kyo, who had been made Shoben in the time of the Retired Emperor Nijo, and was a
very energetic official, but for the last ten years or so had been retired fr om his office and was
living in such straitened circumstances that he had not sufficient food or clothing. To him the
Nyudo sent a message to make haste and repair to Rokuhara, as he had some matter to discuss
with him. Yukitaka on hearing this was greatly  perturbed, thinking that, in spite of his having
held no office or appeared in society for some ten years, someone had slandered him to Kiyomori
with intent to bring about his complete destruction. His wife and children, also terror stricken,
uttered loud  lamentations; however, as repeated messages came from Rokuhara, Yukitaka, seeing
that he must obey, borrowed a car from someone and set out. Quite contrary to his supposition,
the Nyudo immediately came forth and received him cordially; "Your noble father ," said he, "did
me various services, and I will not be negligent toward his son. I have felt very sorry for your long

exclusion from office, but in face of the Ho -o's decisions I had no power to remedy it: but now I
bid you resume your duties and will giv e orders about your new office." On his return home his
family received him, weeping for joy, as one that has returned from the

[p. 155]

dead. Afterwards, by the hand of Gendaiyu -no-Hangwan Suesada, estates and fiefs were granted
him as emolument, and as  a convenience besides, he was presented with a hundred pieces of silk,
a hundred ryo of gold, and abundance of rice. As accessories of his office he was also granted a
liberal allowance of servants, ox -carts and drivers. Yukitaka was so overcome with joy that he
hardly knew where he was going or what he was doing, it was so like a dream. On the
seventeenth day he was made Kurando of the fifth rank and again resumed his former office of
Sashoben. He was then fifty -one years of age, but appeared to have sudd enly become young again.
It was however a transient prosperity.