CHAPTER V.

THE SPLENDOUR OF KIYOMORI.


Not only did Kiyomori himself live in splendour and luxury, but all his house likewise shared his
prosperity. His eldest son Shigemori was Naidaijin and Sadaisho, his second son Munemori was
Chunagon and Udaisho, his third son Tomomori was Chujo of the third  grade, his eldest grandson
Koremori Shosho of the fourth grade ; sixteen of his house in all held offices of the higher grade
(Kugyo), while thirty had right of entry to Court. The whole number of his family who drew
revenues from the provinces as militar y officials were about sixty persons. All others appeared as
of no account in the world. Since long ago in the era of Nara no Mikado the office

[p. 11]

of Nakae -no-Taisho was first instituted in the fifth year of Shingi, and Nakae was changed to
Konoe in  the fourth year of Daido, only on three or four occasions have brothers occupied the
offices of the Right and Left together. In the time of Montoku Tenno, on the Left was Yoshifusa
as Sadaijin -no-Sadaisho, on the Right, Yoshisuke as Dainagon no Udaisho; t hey were the sons of
Fuyutsugu, the retired Sadaijin. In the time of Shujo -in, Saneyori Ono no -miya dono was Minister
of the Left and Morosuke Kujo dono of the Right ; they were sons of Teijin Ko.  [2] In the time of
Go-Rei-zei-in, Norimichi O -nijo dono was  Minister of the Left and Yorimune Horikawa dono of
the Right ; they were the sons of the Kwampaku Mido. In the time of Nijo -in, Motofusa Matsu
dono was Minister of the Left, and Kanezane Tsuki -no-wa dono of the Right; they were the sons
of Hoseiji dono.  [3] All these were the sons of Regents. Among the sons of ordinary people there
is no precedent. As for the grandson, of a man whose presence at Court was barely suffered,
wearing the forbidden colours  [4] and costume, going clothed in silk gauze and brocade and
holding the offices of Daijin and Taisho, his sons being at the same tune Ministers of the Left and
Right, it is indeed an extraordinary thing fo r future generations to hear of. Beside this he had eight
daughters, all of whom severally achieved fortunes to be envied. One of them was to have
become the wife of Shigemori no Kyo, Chunagon of the Emperor Sakurarnachi, and was
betrothed to him at the ag e of eight, but after the revolt of Heiji the matter was altered and she
became the wife of the Sadaijin of Kwazan -in, to whom she bore many princes. Now this
Shigemori Kyo was called the Chunagon of Sakuramachi for the following reason. Being a man of
very delicate taste, he exceedingly loved the scenery of Mount Yoshino ; and planting

[p. 12]

there tiny cherry trees, he built a house in the midst of them and dwelt in it ; so that people who
went there in the spring of every year to see them gave him th e nickname of Sakuramachi (cherry
town). Being very grieved that these cherry blossoms should fall within seven days after flowering,
he prayed to Ten -sho-daijin and they remained on the tree for a period of three times seven days;
the goddess displaying h er august kindness owing to the great virtue of the Emperor, and the
flowers also requiting his affection by living on for twenty days.


To resume, another of Kiyomori's daughters became Consort of the Emperor, and bore a Prince
at the age of twenty two. O n this child attaining the rank of Crown Prince, she retired from the
world and was known by the name of Ken -rei-coon-in. Concerning this daughter of the Lay -
priest Chancellor, since she has risen to the rank of Mother of the Emperor, there is no need of
further description. Another daughter became the wife of the Regent Rokujo. [5] She it was who,
during the reign of the Retired Emperor Takakura, became Imperial Foster mother, and gained
the title of Jun -san-go by Imperial Edict. She went by the name of Sh irakawa den, and was a
personage of exceeding importance. Yet another daughter had become the wife of Fugenji donom
[6] ; another of Reizei -no-Dainagon Ryubo -no-Kyo, and another of Shichijo Shuri -no-Taiyu
Nobutaka -no-Kyo. One daughter also he had by a lady -in-waiting of the shrine of Itsukushima in
Aki, and she had the honour of becoming attendant on the Retired Emperor Go -Shirakawa.
Beside her also a Palace -attendant at Kujo -no-in named Tokiwa bore him a daughter who became
lady-in-waiting to Kawazan -no-in dono, and was styled Ro -no-on-kata (Unofficial Empress). Now
Nippon Akitsushima has but sixty six provinces; and of these the domains of the Heike were
thirty ; almost half the land. Beside these the manors, rice fields and gardens that they possessed

[p. 13]

were without number. In the multiplicity of their gorgeous costumes they were resplendent as
the flowers of the field ; the noble and illustrious crowded before their. gates like a throng in the
marketplace : the gold of Yoshu, the jewels of Keishu,  the damask of Gokun, the brocade of
Shiyyokko of the seven rarities and the myriad treasures not one was lacking. For poetry and
music, fishing and riding, perchance even the Mikado's Palaces were not more renowned.