CHAPTER X.
THE REPLY of HIEIZAN.

When the priests of  Hieizan read this letter, as Kakumei had said, some were in favour of the
Heike and some of the Genji. All of them expressed different opinions. Then the senior priests
held a council and argued thus: "These temples have ever devotedly prayed for the long  life and
prosperity of our Heaven -descended Sovereign, and the Heike are the maternal relations of our
present Ruler, so that it is our duty to pay them especial respect. Nevertheless, as they have
grown lawless beyond measure, the people have rebelled ag ainst them, so that they have sent
armies to put down the rebels, but these have been destroyed by the insurgents. Of late the Genji
have been many times victorious and their prospects are ever growing brighter; why then should
we alone espouse the waning fortunes of the Heike and resist the rising tide of the Genji? Let us
therefore turn away from our connexion with the Heike and ally our forces with the Genji."
Thus the three thousand priests decided, and they wrote their answer and sent it. When he
received it, Yoshinaka again summoned his family and his retainers, and bade Kakumei read the
letter. It ran thus "Your letter of the tenth day of the sixth month, being received by us on the
sixteenth day, we respectfully perused, and for many days were posses sed by great perplexity,
which has in one hour been resolved. The evil deeds of the Heike have for many years caused
trouble to the Imperial House as the proverb says, "Actions remain in people's mouths; they
cannot be lost." Our mountain of Hieizan, whose  shrines stand on the north east of the Imperial
Capital, is especially bound to pray for the peace and quietness of the Empire, but

[p.44]

since the Throne has been menaced by this calamity, the whole Realm has been disquieted. It has
been as though the  protecting power of the Nyorai had ceased to encircle us, and the might of
the tutelary deities had been taken away. You, born of a family of generations of warriors, have
been providentially chosen at this crisis. By brilliant tactics you have raised up a trusty and loyal
army, and in the face of a thousand dangers have won a glorious victory. Moreover, as this is but
the second year of your conquering career, ere long your fame will be known through all the land.
Very greatly do we rejoice at these tidin gs. With all our hearts do we admire your valour and
martial exploits on behalf of our country and people and we hear with gladness that your
petitions to the high gods have not been in vain, for that they tarried not in coming to the aid of
the Empire. An d especially do we rejoice that the Buddhist doctrine of these and all other
temples, and the bright deities of our shrines both small and great, shall again return to their
former prosperity, and once more be revered as in former days. Moreover may the Tw elve
Warrior Gods, who attend on our Lord Yakushi Nyorai, go with your brave armies to smite the
rebels, while we, the three thousand priests of these temples, leaving for a while our sacred
studies, will lend our aid to punish the malefactors. May the pur e blasts of the Tendai doctrine
sweep away the wicked from this peaceful Realm, and the might of the Three Mystic Doctrines
of our Holy Law pour down as rain moistens a thirsty land. Given by us in council: second day of
the seventh month of the second yea r of Ju -ei.