CHAPTER XI.
ENTRY OF THE SACRED MIRROR INTO THE CAPITAL.

      Then Shin -Chūnagon Tomomori -no-Kyō, who had been wa tching how the day was going, at
length saw that nothing remained but to put an end to his life, and calling his foster -brother Iga -
no-Heinaisaemon Ienaga, he said: " Is it not time to fulfil the promise we made? " " Certainly; "
replied Ienaga. And he ass isted Tomomori to don two suits of armour, afterwards doing the same
himself, and the two leaped into the sea clasped in each other's arms. Some twenty samurai who
were with them at once followed them into the waves; but Etchū -no-Jirōhyōye Moritsugu,
Kazus a-no-Gorōhyōe, Akushichi -byōye Kagekiyo and Hida -no-Jirōhyōye managed to elude the
enemy somehow and escape. And now the whole sea was red with the banners and insignia that
they tore off and cut away, so that it looked like the waters of the Tatsuta -gawa when it is
flecked with the maple leaves that the wind brings down in autumn, while the white breakers
that rolled up on the beach were dyed a scarlet colour. The deserted empty ships rocked
mournfully on the waves, driven aimlessly hither and Hither by th e wind and tide.

     The former Udaijin Munemori Ko, Taira Dainagon Tokitada, Uemon -no-kami Kiyomune,
Kura -no-kami Nobumoto, Sanuki -no-Chūjō Tokizane and Munemori's eight year old son Hyōbu -
no-Shō Masaakira, were captured alive, beside the priests Nii -no-Sōzu Senshin, Hosshoji -no-
Shugyō No -en, Chūnagon -no-Risshi Chūgai and Kyōju -bō-no-Ajari Yuen, and the samurai
Gendaiyū -no Hangwan Toshisada, Settsu -no-Hangwan Morizumi, Tonaisaemon -no-Jō Nobuyasu,
Kitsunai -saemon -no-Jō Toshiyasu, and Awa -no-Mimbu Shigeyos hi and his son; thirty eight in all.
Kikuchi -no-Jirō Takanao and Harada -no-Taiyū Tanenao had

[p. 256]

already laid down their arms and surrendered before the battle. Forty three Court Ladies were
taken also, including the Imperial Consort Kenrei -mon-in, the foster -mother of the Emperor
Takakura and wife of Rokujō Motozane, Ro -no-Onkata another daughter of Kiyomori, Dainagon -
no-Suke, Sotsu -no-Suke, Jibu -Kyō-no-Tsubone and others; forty three in all. Thus by the fall of
spring in the second year of Genryak u,---date of ill -omen indeed --- the Emperor rested beneath
the waves, while his Ministers and Courtiers tossed on the billows; the Imperial Consort and her
Ladies were delivered into the hands of the Eastern barbarians to return to the Ancient Capital
with all the Courtiers and Nobles as captives in the midst of myriads of foes, and their anguish
must have been as deep as the regret of Shu -bai-shin at not wearing brocade, or the resentment of
Ō-shō-kun when she set out for the land of Kō.

     On the third day of the fourth month Kurō Hōgwan Yoshitsune despatched Genpachi
Hirotsuna as a messenger to the Hō -ō with the tidings that: " On the twenty fourth day of the
third month at the Hour of th e Hare, at Ta -no-ura and Moji -ga-seki in the province of Buzen, and
at Dan -no-ura and Akama -ga-seki in the province of Nagato, the Heike have been completely
annihilated, and the Sacred Mirror and Sacred Seal will forthwith be returned to the Capital."
Whe n the Hō -ō heard this news he was exceedingly pleased, and calling Hirotsuna into the
courtyard, demanded to be told all details of the battle, in his joy conferring on hire the title of

Sahyōye on the spot. On the fifth day His Majesty ordered To -Hōgwan N obumori, one of the
Imperial Guard, to go and see that the two Sacred Emblems were properly brought back; so he
took one of the Imperial Horses and set off at full speed for the Western Provinces without even
delaying to go back to his lodging.

     So Ku rō Hōgwan Yoshitsune started on his way to the Capital, bringing with him the
captured Courtiers and Ladies of the Heike, and on the fourteenth day they arrived at the shore

[p. 257]

of Akashi in the province of Harima. It is a place famous for its beau ty, and when the moon rose
bright as the evening grew late, it seemed no less beautiful than the moon of autumn. Little had
the Ladies of the Court imagined that this would be their fate when they passed by a year ago,
and when they thought of it they wept  softly. Sotsu -no-suke Dono, the wife of Tokitada, gazing
long at the moon and pondering deeply over all her sad experiences, was dissolved in tears, and
expressed her feelings in the following verse:

" As I gaze on the moon it rests in any sleeves that a re moistened;
Yell me, I prithee, O Moon, tales of the Palace of yore."
" Here the moon is the same as that which shone o'er the Palace.
Bart though it still shine bright, how can it lighten our
pain? Sang Jibu Kyo no Tsubone, while Dai -nagon no Suke no Ts ubone added
" Exiles, but for a night do we camp by the shore of Akashi,
But how constant the moon ever looks down on this strand."

     And, stern warrior though the Hōgwan was, when he saw how painful were their
reminiscences of their former happy days, has heart was moved to its inmost depths.

     On the twenty fifth day of the same month, when they heard that the two Sacred Tre asures
had arrived at Toba, Kageyū -no-koji-no-Chūnagon Tsunefusa -no-Kyū, Kebiishi -no-Bettō
Saemon -no-kami Saneie, Takakura -no-Saishō Chūjō Yasumichi, Gon -no- Uchūben Kanetada,
Enami -no-Chūjō Kintoki and Tajima -no-Shōshō Noriyoshi of the Court Nobles, and I zu-no-
Kurando Taiyū Yorikane, Ishikawa -no-Hangwan dai Yoshikane and Saemon -no-Jō Aritsuna of
the Samurai, went forth from the Palace to meet them; and the same night, at the Hour of the
Rat (12. midnight.), the Sacred Mirror and the Sacred Gem were handed over to the keeping of
the Dajōkwan. The Sacred Sword was lost, but the Sacred Gem in its casket floated on the waves,
and was recovered by Kataoka -no-Tarō Tsuneharu.

[p. 258]