CHAPTER XIII.
THE LETTERS OF THE TAIRA DAINAGON .

     Now as the Taira Dainagon Tokitada -no-Kyō and his son drew near to the residence of the
Hōgwan they had given themselves up for lost, but the Dainagon, wishing if possible to save his
life, called his son Sanuki -no-ChujōTokizane and sai : " The Hōgwa n has taken a box of our
secret letters. If Yoritomo sees them, not only ourselves, but a lot of other people will lose their
lives in consequence. What is to be done? " " The Hōgwan is an inflexible warrior, it is true,"
replied Tokizane, " but they say t hat he can never refuse any request, however great, if it is made
by a woman. You have many daughters, so why not let one of them go to him, and when they
become intimate she can ask him this favour." " Alas! " exclaimed the Dainagon, bursting into
tears, " to what have we fallen? In the days of our power my daughters would have become
Court Ladies or Imperial Consorts, and I would never have dreamed of allying them with any
ordinary person." "But now," replied his son, "you must not dream of such ideas. Ho w about the
one who is now seventeen, the daughter of your present wife?" But the Dainagon could not bring
himself to this, and so presented his elder daughter, the child of his first wife, to the Hōgwan. She
was a little old, it is true, but was exceeding ly beautiful and of a very sweet disposition, so that
Yoshitsune was very pleased with her, and as he had a wife already, the daughter of Kawagoe -no-
Tarō Shigefusa, he put her away in a separate residence and took the daughter of the Dainagon
into his own mansion. So the lady made her request to him concerning the letters, and he sent
them to the Dainagon forthwith without even opening the box. Tokitada -no-Kyōwas exceedingly
glad and immediately burnt and got rid of them. What kind of letters they were is u nknown.

[p. 262]

     Seeing that the Heike had been thus overthrown, and all the provinces quieted so that all
could travel about again without let or hindrance, and that there was no more disorder in the
Capital, people began to declare that Yoshitsune  was the greatest man in the Empire, and that
Yoritomo had done but little in comparison. So by and by it came to the ears of the Lord of
Kamakura that it was noised abroad that Yoshitsune could do what he liked with the Empire. "
What sayings are these? "  he exclaimed. " Was it not owing to the plans I laid and the armies that
I sent that the Heike were so quickly conquered? How could Kurō have set the Empire in order
alone? What does he mean by growing thus arrogant and thinking he can do as he pleases? A nd
were there no other people available that he must become the son -in-law of this Taira Dainagon
and behave himself like a Court Noble? Moreover it was a shameless thing of this Dainagon to
give his daughter thus. The next thing Yoshitsune will do is to c ome down and domineer here in
Kamakura."