CHAPTER VIII.

'THE PINE OF AKOYA.


The Shin Dainagon was not the only person who was thus punished, for many of his companions
suffered likewise. It was decided that Omi -no-Chujo Nyudo Renjo should be banished to Sado,
Yamashiro -no-kami Motokane to Hoki, Shikibuno -taiho -Masatsuna to Harima, S o Hangwan
Nobufusa to Awa, and Shinkei -no-Hangwan Sukeyuki to Mimasaka. At this time the Nyudo was
staying at his villa at Fukuhara. On the twentieth day his messenger Settsu -no-kami Morizumi
reached the Kadowaki mansion, the residence of the Saisho Taira Norimori, and ordered him to
bring quickly Tamba -no-Shosho whom he had

[p. 88]

in charge as he intended to do something in regard to him. To this the Saisho replied ; " It is very
sad that I should again be grieved about this; it had been better that som ething had been done
before: " but he bade the Shosho hasten to Fukuhar:   The Shosho started on his way weeping, and
his wife and ladies -in-waiting begged him to ask for the Saisho's good offices once more, since all
else was unavailing. " As for me, I hav e said all I can," replied the Saisho," there is nothing else left
for me but to forsake the world. What can I say more? Anyhow to whatever place you may be
sent I will come and see you as long as I live." Now the Shosho had a child of three years old, but
as he was himself young, he had not paid any special regard to his children; now however when
he found himself in this situation they became somewhat dear to him and he thought that he
would like to see him once more. The milk nurse therefore brought him,  and the Shosho, taking
him on his knee, stroked his hair and wept. " Alas, when you were seven years old I wished to
bring you into the Imperial Household, but now that is all in vain. If by chance you should live to
grow up you must become a priest and p ray for my happiness in a future life." The child naturally
could not comprehend these words, but when his father finished speaking, he nodded his head, so
that the Shosho and the child's mother, beside the milk nurse and others who were in attendance,
even the most unfeeling, were fain to burst into tears.

The messenger from Fukuhara bade him start for Toba that evening, but the Shosho asked that,
as he had not long to stay, at least he might stop that night in the capital : this was not however
permitted  and so, abandoning hope, he went to Toba that night. The Saisho was so grieved that
he did not accompany him, and on the twenty -second of the same month he arrived at Fukuhara,
whereupon the Nyudo gave orders to Seno Taro Kaneyasu who dwelt in Bitchu to t ake him to
that province. Kaneyasu, fearing that the Saisho would hear of it, did not treat him at all harshly
but was very kind to him on the way. The

[p. 89]

Shosho, in spite of this refused to be comforted, but night and day called on the name of Budd ha,
praying and interceding for his father.


Now the Shin Dainagon Narichika -no-Kyo was yet in Kojima of Bizen, but as this was considered
to be an unsuitable place, being near to a port, he was removed to the village of Niwase on the
confines of Bizen and  Bitchu and lodged in a mountain temple named Ariki -no-Bessho in Kibi -
no-Nakayama, so that he was not more than fifty cho distant from Seno in Bitchu where the
Shosho was, and the Shosho yearned toward that quarter for tidings of his father. Calling
Kaneya su therefore, he enquired of him how far it was to Ariki -no-Bessho, but Kaneyasu,
thinking it was not wise to inform him, told him that it was twelve or thirteen days journey. The
Shosho weeping replied; " Of old Nippon had thirty three provinces and now i t is divided into
sixty six, so that what is now called Bizen, Bingo and Bitchu were formerly all one country: Dewa
and Mutsu in the eastern quarter also formed one province consisting of sixty six districts, but
now twelve districts of it have been separa ted and called Dewa. When Sanekata Chujo was
banished to Mutsu and wished to see the famous pine of Akoya, he went round the whole
province, but was returning again without having found it, when he met on the road an old man
whom he addressed as follows; " I see you are an old man, so can you tell me where the pine of
Akoya in this province may be ?" "It is not in this province " replied the old man, " but in the
province of Dewa." "Then you do not know where it is either;" replied the Chujo ; " in this evil
age people even forget the famous places in their own province; " and he was making to pass on,
when the old man caught his sleeve and said ; "When you asked for the pine of Akoya in this
province, you were thinking of the verse:

" Hid by the Akoya pine  t'zat stands in the province of
Mutsu ;

“though the moon would rise, yet its beams cannot appear."

But those lines were written when the two provinces together

[p. 90]

were known by the one name; when the twelve districts were divided from it they w ere given
the name of Dewa." So Sanekata Chujo went to the province of Dewa and saw the pine of Akoya.
" From Dazaifu to Tsukushi," continued the Shosho, " is only a fifteen days' journey for the
courier who carries fish to the Emperor, so that fifteen day s' journey from here will take one as
far as Kyushu, will it not ? Even at the farthest the distance between two places in Bizen, Bitchu,
and Bingo cannot be more than a three days' journey, and that you thus call near far is only
because you will not tell  me where my father the Dainagon is lodged." After this, though still
longing to see him, he asked about him no more.