CHAPTER V.
NASU NO YOICHI.

     Now as those warriors of A wa and Sanuki who wished to throw off their allegiance to the
Heike and join the Genji began to emerge from their caves and mountains in small bands o f
fifteen and twenty, and ride in to join him, the Hōgwan soon found himself in command of a
force of some three hundred horse.

     By this time the sun was sinking and both armies were preparing to retire, as no decision could
be reached that day, when from the offing a small boat, with no special decoration, was seen to
come rowing to the shore. When it had reached a distance of seven or eight „tan‟ from the water's
edge, it swung round broadside on, and while the Heike wondered what it would do, a girl , some
eighteen or nineteen years

[p. 234]

old, wearing a five -fold robe of white lined with green, and a scarlet hakama, took a red fan with
a rising sun on it and hung it up on a pole fastened to the gunwale of the boat. Calling Gotōbyōye
Sanemoto, the Hōgwan asked him what was the meaning of it. "It is to shoot at, no doubt,"
replied Gotō, " I expect it is a plan of theirs to get you to come an d look at this charmer * and
entice you out in front into bowshot and shoot you ; but at any rate we ought to shoot it away."
"Who is the best archer we have?" asked the Hōgwan. "There are several good shots, but the best
is Yoichi Munetaka, the son of Nasu  no Tarō Suketaka of Shimozuke. He is a small man, but a
most skilful archer." "What proof have you ? " asked Yoshitsune. "He can shoot two or three
birds on the wing with anybody." "Then call him," said the Hōgwan.

     Yoichi was then barely twenty year s old. He was wearing a hitatare of greenish blue with the
collar and edges of the sleeves ornamented with brocade on a red ground. His armour was laced
with light green and the mounts of his sword were of silver. He carried twenty four arrows with
black a nd white feathers, or rather dark grey, in which hawks' wing feathers were mixed. A
turnip -headed arrow pointed with staghorn was also stuck in his quiver. Carrying his Shigeto bow
under his arm, and with his helmet slung to his breastplate, he came into t he presence of the
Hōgwan and did obeisance.

" How now, Yoichi," said Yoshitsune, " can you hit that fan right in the middle, and show the
enemy how we can
-------------------
*Charmer.   Jap. Keisei 傾城 The expression comes from the verse in the Shi King. ' A wise man builds a castle,
but a wise woman overthrows it. Cf. also the description of the lady Li, ( one glance from whom could
overthrow a castle, aad two a province.‟
*Seven or eight tan . A tan is said to be usually 6o ken ( 1 ken =6 feet ) so it would  be about 450 feet, which the
commentator considers too far. In these ancient war chronicles a tan is reckoned as one jo or ten feet, but this is
too little. But to hit the rivet of a fan at seventy feet would not be easy, and the shorter, distance seems m ore
likely.

[p. 235]


shoot?" " I cannot say that I can for certain," replied Yoichi, " and if I should miss, it would be a
lasting reproach to the skill of our side. So it would be better to entrust it to someone who could
be quite sure." This reply grea tly angered Yoshitsune. "Those who came from Kamakura with me
on this campaign must obey my orders," he exclaimed, " those who do not had better go back
there again! " Then Yoichi, thinking it would not do to refuse again, replied : " I may not succeed
in hitting it, but as my lord commands, I will try." And retiring he mounted a fine black horse
with saddle ornamented with gold, and taking a fresh hold on his bow, he gripped the reins and
rode into the sea. Those on his own side, looking after him, exclaim ed: "Ah, that young fellow is
sure to bring it down ! " And the Hōgwan also thought he had not misplaced his trust. As it was a
little beyond bowshot he rode about one tan into the water, but still the fan seemed about seven *
tan away. It was the eighteenth day of the second month, and the Hou r of the Cock (6 p.m.). The
wind was blowing rather strongly from the North, and the waves were running high on the beach.
Out in the offing the ships were rising and falling as they rode on the swell, and the fan was
fluttering about in the breeze. The He ike had ranged their ships in a long line to see better what
would befall, while on land the Genji lined the shore in expectation. The whole of both armies
were watching the scene.

     Then Yoichi closed his eyes and prayed: " Namu Hachiman Daibosatsu, a nd especially the
deities of my homeland, the Gongen of Nikko, Yuzen Dairnyōjin of Nasu of Utsunomiya, I pray
you grant that I may strike the centre of that fan. For if I fail, I will break my bow and put an end
to my life, showing my face no more among me n. If therefore you will that I see home again, let
not this arrow miss its mark." After praying thus silently he again opened his eyes, and the wind
had abated a little so that the fan looked easier to hit. Taking a Kaburaya he drew his bow with
all his s trength and let fly. He was short

[p. 236]

of stature, it is true, but his arrow measured twelve handbreaths and three fingers, and his bow
was a strong one. The shore echoed to the whirr of the arrow as it flew straight to its mark.
Whizzing it struck t he fan an inch from the rivet, so that it flew up into the air as the arrow fell
into the sea. Once and again the spring breeze caught it and tossed it up, then suddenly it
dropped down into the water. And when they saw the scarlet fan gleaming in the rays  of the
setting sun as it danced up and down, rising and falling on the white crests of the waves, the
Heike in the offing beat applaudingly on the gunwales of their ships, while the Genji on the shore
rattled their quivers till they rang again.