CHAPTER XIX.
KOZAISH Ō.


Now Kenda Takiguchi Tokikazu, a retainer of Echizenon -Sammi Michimori, fled in haste to the
ship in which was then wife of Michmori, and said to her : " This morning my lord was
surrounded by seven h orsemen at the Minatogawa and fell fighting, and among them were Sasaki -
no Kimura Saburō Naritsuna of Ōmi, and Tamai -no-Shirō Sukekage of Musashi. I too would have
stayed with him to the end and died, but he had strictly charged me before, saying that if
anything should happen to him I must at all costs escape to look after my mistress ; and so it is
that I have saved my worthless life and come to you." On hearing these tidings his mistress
uttered no word, but covered her face and fell prostrate. Though sh e had already heard that he
was dead, she had not at first believed it, but for two or three days had waited as for one who had
gone out for a short time and would soon come back, but when four or five days had passed, her
confidence was shaken and she fel l into deep melancholy. Her feelings were shared by her foster -
mother who alone accompanied her and shared the same pillow.

From the seventh day, on which the news was brought to her, until the evening of the thirteenth
she did not rise from her bed. At d awn on the fourteenth day the Heike were starting to cross
again to Yashima, and until the evening before she still lay on her couch. Then as night drew on
and all was quiet in the ship, she turned to her foster -mother and said:

"Though I had been told it , until this morning I did not realize that my husband was dead, but
now; this evening, I know it is true. Everyone says he was killed at the

p. 164

Minatogawa, and after that there is none who says he has seen him alive. And what grieves me
most is th at when I saw him for a short while on the night before the battle he was sad and said
to me : " I am certain to be slain in to morrow's battle, and I wonder what will become of you
after I am gone." As there have been so many battles I did not pay any spe cial heed to it, but if I
had thought that it was the last time indeed, I would have promised to follow him to the after
world. Then, fearing that he might think me too reserved, I told him what I had up till that time
concealed, that I was 'not -alone.' He  was extremely pleased to hear it and said : " Ah, I have
reached thirty years of age without having any children; I hope you will make it a boy if you can,
for that will be a good memento of myself to leave behind in this fleeting world." Then he went
on to ask me how many months it was, and how I felt, and bade me keep as quiet as was possible
in this ever -rolling ship that the birth might be easy. Ah, how sad it all is! If women die at that
time it is a most shameful and melancholy end that they suffer, and yet, if I bear this child and
bring it up so that it may recall to me the features of him who is gone, every time I look on it will
bring back the memory of my former love, and that will cause me grief without end. Death is the
road that none may avoid . Even if I should by good luck pass scatheless through these dangerous
times, can I trust myself to escape the common fate of being entangled in some other passion ?
That too is a melancholy prospect. To behold him in my dreams when I sleep, and to awake only

to look on his features! Better to drown in the depths of the sea than to live on thus bereft of my
love. My heart is full of sorrow at leaving you thus alone, but I pray you send to Miyako this
letter which I have written, and take my robes to some p riest, that his prayers may hasten the
Enlightenment of my husband, and may assist me too in the after world." When she had made an
end of speaking, the older woman, repressing her tears, replied: "How can you thus resolve to
forsake

p.165

your little one and leave your mother, alone in her old age ? Is your loss any greater than that of
the other wives of the nobles of our house who have fallen at Ichi -no tani ? Though you may
think you will sit on the same lotus as your husband, yet after rebirth you must both pass though
the Six Ways and the Four Births, and in which of these can you be sure of meeting? And if you
fail to meet, of what use is it to cast away your life? So be brave and calm your mind until your
child is born, and strive to bring it up,  whatever hardships may threaten. Then you may become a
nun and spend your days in prayer for the happy rebirth of your departed husband. Moreover, as
for Miyako, who is there who can carry such a letter? " Then the lady, wishing to comfort and
reassure he r weeping parent, replied: " If I seem strange, you must remember that wider the stress
of misfortune or the pain of parting to think of ending one's life is a natural thing, though really to
nerve oneself to do so is not so easy; and if I should indeed re solve to carry out this intention I
will be sure to let you know. But now it is late and I would sleep." Now her foster -mother, seeing
that the lady had not even taken a bath for the last four or five days, concluded that her mind was
indeed made up, and h ad herself determined that if she did so she would follow her even to the
bottom of the sea, for she did not wish to live a day longer if her daughter was dead, so for some
time she remained awake watching by her side, but at last she fell asleep, whereupo n the lady,
who had been awaiting this opportunity, slipped out quietly and ran to the bulwarks of the ship.
Gazing out over the wide expanse of waters, she was uncertain in which direction lay the
western quarter, but turning toward the setting moon as it  was sinking behind the mountains,
calmly she repeated the Nembutsu. The melancholy cry of the sea -birds on the distant sand -spits
and the harsh creaking of the rudder mingled with her voice as she repeated it a hundred times.
"Namu Amida Nyorai, Saviour w ho leadest us to the Western Paradise, according

p. 166

to Thy True Vow unite on the same lotus flower an in, separable husband and wife ! " And with
the last invocation still on her lips she cast herself into the waves. It was about midnight of the
day on which they were to start for Yashima, and all aboard the ship were sleeping soundly, so no
one perceived her. But as she plunged into the waves she attracted the attention of the helmsman,
who alone of the crew was not asleep, and he cried out loudly that a woman had gone overboard
from the ship, whereon the foster -mother, suddenly awaking, felt by her side, and finding nothing,
was overcome by sorrow and amazement. Then, though all did their utmost to get her out of the
water and save her life, as usu al in spring, the sky was cloudy and the moon obscured so that they
could not see where she was, and when at last they did discover her and pull her out of the water,
her life was already departing. Thus they laid her on the deck with the salt water stream ing from
her white hakama and the thick double layers of her Court costume, and dripping from her long
black hair, arid her foster -mother, taking her hands in hers and pressing her face to her cold
features, exclaimed; " Why did you not let me know your re solve, and let me follow you to the
bottom of the sea ? Woe is me, now I am left here all alone! At least will you not speak to me

once more.? " But though she thus addressed her daughter in tones of agonized entreaty, she was
already destined for that oth er world, and her breath, which until now had just barely fluttered in
her body, at last departed for ever.

     Then, as the moon of the spring night was sinking in the sky, and the glimmer of dawn was
just beginning to break. through the clouds, grieved  to the heart at her loss, as it must be, they
bound a suit of her husband's armour to her body that it might not rise again, and committed it
again to the waves. Her mother, unwilling to be left behind, tried to leap in after her, but being
prevented by t he others, she shaved her head and was afterwards received as a nun by Chūnagon -
no-

p. 167

Risshi Chūkai, the younger brother of the late Michimori, observing the ordinances of Buddha
and pray for the happiness of the deceased. From ancient times it he  been a common custom for
women to forsake the world on the death of their husband, but those who have put an end to
their lives have been few indeed. Still, as there is the injunction, “A loyal retainer does not serve
two masters, nor a chaste woman have two husbands ", such things did sometimes happen:

     This lady was the daughter of Tō -no-Gyōbu Kyō Norikata, and was the greatest beauty of the
Court, where she was formerly known by the name of Kozaishō, being in attendance on
Joseimon -in. In the sprin g of the period Angen, when she was about sixteen years old, she
accompanied her mistress to Hōsshōji to view the cherry -blossoms, and Michimori -no-Kyō, who
was also in attendance as Chūgū -no-suke, then first saw her and fell in love with her. From this
time he continued to send her poems and letters, but she only put them by without taking any
notice.

     After this had gone on for three years Michimori wrote her a letter which he determined
should be the last, and sent it to her by a messenger. It happe ned on this occasion that the lady
was not to be found, and the servant was returning again with the letter, when he met Kozaishō
proceeding from her residence to the Court. As he did not wish to go back to his master without
delivering the letter, he made  as though to pass close by her carriage and threw it in through the
curtain. Being asked by her companion who was riding with her who had sent it, she said that she
did not know, but on opening it she found that it was from Michimori. As she could not lea ve it
in the car, and it was not a thing that could be thrown out on to the road, she thrust it into the
band of her hakama and so entered the Court. Thereafter it chanced that, while
----------
A loyal retainer,  etc. from the  史記囘單傳。

p. 168

engaged in her duties of lady -in-waiting, though the Palace was exceedingly wide, she happened
to drop it right in front of her mistress. The Princess at once picked it up and put it into the
sleeve of her dress, after which she called her ladies and said to them: " Here is a strange thing
that I have found; to whom does it belong? " All the other ladies swore by the gods and Buddhas
that they knew nothing about it, and only Kozaishō blushed furiously and said nothing. Then the
Princess; perceiving that the letter was  from Michimori, opened it to scan the contents. It was
heavily scented with incense and the writing was extremely elegant. " Although you are very

 hard-hearted, I am very delighted……. " it began, and when she had read it through to the end,
she found app ended the following verse:

" Like is my love to a bridge that is built of the
 slippery pine -logs,
 If you trample it down, surely my sleeves will be wet."

     " This is a very strong letter ", said the Princess, " and I fear, if, you are too hard -heart ed, this
love may turn into hate. Ono -no-Komachi was famous for her beauty, but she did not know what
pity was, and so in time everyone came to hate her. So, though loved by many, her stony heart in
the end brought her to such a sorry plight that she had n ot even the wherewithal to keep off the
wind and rain, and was driven to live like a vagrant in the open fields with nothing but the moon
and stars to gaze at through her tear -dimmed eyes. At any rate an answer must be sent to this
letter." And the Princes s called for her ink -stone and wrote a reply with her own august hand.

" If the bridge of logs on which he relies be down -trodden,
Will nod size who breaks it certainly fall in the stream? "

     Love smoulders in the bosom like the smoke of Fuji, and th e tears that moisten the sleeve are
like the waves of Kiyomigaseki ; so in the end Michimori obtained this lovely lady,

p. 169

and their affection for each other was most profound. So she followed him even to the wind -
tossed waves of the Western Sea, a nd in death their path was not divided.  Kadowaki -no-
Chūnagon, thus bereaved both of his eldest son Echizen -noSammi Michimori and his youngest
son Narimori, had now none to rely on save Noto -no-kami Noritsune and the priest Chūnagon -
no-Risshi Chūkai, so th e death of this lady, who was the only legacy of his late son, could only
add still more to his grief.

[p. 170]
VOLUME X.