CHAPTER XIII.
THE PILGRIMAGE TO KUMANO.

Thus proceeding on their way at length they came to the Iwatagawa. And of this river it is said
that whosoever crosses it is cleansed of all evil karma and hindrances to right conduc t,

[p. 204]

and inherited sins. As he offered up his prayers with a calm mind before the Shōjōden of the
main shrine, and throughout fiat night contemplated the bulk of the stately temple, his cart was
filled with thoughts too deep for utterance. A mist of boundles s mercy and protection hovered
over the mountain of Yuya, and the matchless spiritual power of the deity manifested itself in the
Otonashigawa. The moon of the all -embracing efficacy of the doctrine shone clear and without
pot, and no dew of evil thoughts collected in the garden of repentance for the Six Roots of
wickedness. Everything around spoke to him of help and salvation.

As the night grew on and he meditated in the silence, he pondered sadly over the remembrance
of how his father Shigemori had come to this shrine and entreated the deity to shorten his days
and grant him happiness in the after life. And as the Gongen of this shrine is Amida Nyorai, he
prayed that, in accordance with his vow to save all mankind, he would bring him safe to the Pure
Land , and also that his wife and children in Miyako might find peace and safety: for even when
one has forsaken the world and entered the True Way, these blind attractions are not wholly
absent.

The next day h e took ship and went from the Hongū to the Shingū and worshipped the deity
there. On its cliffs the pine trees tower aloft; its breezes sweep all vain thoughts from the mind;
while its clear flowing waters wash away the dust rind mire of this evil world. W orshipping at
the shrine of Asukai, and passing by Sano -no-Matsubara, he came to the shrine of Nachi. There is
the famous three -fold waterfall that soars up thousands of yards to the sky, where upon the top
of the cliff there stands a figure of Kwannon, a spot that might be called Fudaraku -san : and as the
sound of many voices chanting the Hokke Sutra came out of the mist it might be considered like
the peak of Gridhrakuta. So since the time that the Gongen became reincarnate in this mountain
all the people  of our country from highest to lowest have come on

[p. 205]

pilgrimage to bow their heads and pray at this shrine, and therefrom have received great benefits.
Hence are the temple roofs so many, and the courts crowded with priests and laymen. In the
summer season of the period of Kwan wa the Hō -ō Iiwazan, an Emperor possessing the Ten
Virtues, came to pray for rebirth in the heaven of Amida, and on the site of the cell where he
stayed an ancient cherry tree in bloom still recalls his memory.

Now among  the priests who were staying at Nachi there were many who remembered the Chūjō
Koremori in Miyako, and when some of them asked who was this who had come to worship,
another replied: "This is Sammi Chūjō Koremori, the son of the Daijin Shigemori ; when he was

only Shosho of the Fourth Rank, in the spring of the period Angen, there was a celebration of the
fiftieth birthday of the Hō -ō at the Hōjūjiden, and his father Komatsu Dono, who was then
Naidaijin -no-Sadaishō, and his uncle Munemori, who was Dainagon -no-Udaishō, attended at the
Palace. Besides these came also Sammi -no-Chūjō Tomomori, To -no-Chūjō Shigehira, and all the
Courtiers and Nobles of their house, then in the height of their prosperity, and from among them
as they stood by the curtain of the dan cing-stage, advanced this youthful Shigehira, crowned with
a wreath of cherry -blossoms, and danced the measure called Seikaiha. Most gracefully his sleeves
floated out on the breeze, and his mien was brilliant as dew -sprinkled flowers, brightening the
earth and illumining the sky. Then the Imperial Consort sent him a robe of honour as a present
by the hands of the Kwampaku, and his father the Daijin, leaving his seat, came forth to receive it,
placin g it on his left shoulder while he did obeisance to the Hō -ō. It was an honour that few
could equal, and his fellow courtiers could not but be envious; while some of the ladies of the
Court in their admiration compared him to a plum -tree among the trees of  the forest. When we
consider how brilliant lie then was, ere long to rise to the high position of Daijin -noTaishō, who

[p. 206]

would have thought ever to see him in this sad and emaciated condition. Though we speak of
change and impermanence, it s a  painful thing to see such a thing." And among all the priests of
Nachi there was none who did not press his sleeve to his eyes.