CHAPTER II.
THE FORMER EMPRESS GOES TO OHARA.


Now as her former poor abode was ruined in the great earthquake of the ninth day of the seventh
month, and its outer wall fell down, the F ormer Empress had nowhere to live. How had the days
altered from when the green -clad Palace Guards stood continually before her gate, for now the
tumbledown wall, more bedewed with moisture than the outside moorland, seemed as if it
understood the change o f times, and resented the incessant shrilling of the insects. So though the

page 310

nights grew longer and longer, the Empress could not sleep, but brooded continually over her
melancholy condition, and this, added to the natural sadness of autumn, bec ame almost too much
for her to bear. In this changed world there was none to feel sympathy for her, and all those of
her affinity were gone, so that none were left to cherish her in her need.

Only the wife of Reizei -no-Dainagon Takafusa -no-Kyo and the wif e of Shichijo -no-Shuri -no-
Taiyu Nobutaka -no-Kyo used to send and assist her secretly. " Ah," she exclaimed, " in former
days who would have ever dreamed that I should have come to accept anything from such as
these ? " And as she wept afresh at the thought , the ladies who accompanied her could not refrain
from moistening their :sleeves. Since her present dwelling was too near the Capital, and attracted
the eyes of curious passersby, she thought she would like to go to some place far away in the
depths of th e mountains to spend her days remote from all sound of unrest, but for some time
she was unable to hear of any. Then a certain lady came to Yoshida and said to her : " There is a
place northward from here, in the mountains of Ohara, called Jakko -in, and it  is very quiet." " A
mountain abode is very lonely, it is true," she answered, " but it is good to live in, for. it is remote
from the troubles of this world." So, as she desired it, the matter was settled, and the wives of
Nobutaka and Takafusa sent a pal anquin to fetch her.

Thus at the end of the ninth month she proceeded to the temple of Jakko -in. As they went along
she gazed at the beauty of the autumn tints, while the sun sank gradually behind the mountains.
The dreary boom of the evening bell of the wayside temple, and the thick -lying dew on the grass
as they passed drew tears from her eyes, while the fierce gale whirled the leaves from the trees in
all directions. Suddenly the sky grew dark and the autumn drizzle began to fall ; the cry of a deer
sounded faintly and the shrilling of the insects was incessant. Nothing was wanting to add to the
sum of her afflictions, which seemed indeed such as few had been made to

page 311

suffer. Even when she was driven about from shore to shore and from island to  island her
melancholy was not to be compared to this. The place she had chosen to dwell in was ancient
and surrounded by mossy rocks ; the reeds in the garden were now covered with hoar -frost
instead of dew, and when she gazed on the faded hue of the with ered chrysanthemums by the

wall, she could hardly fail to be reminded of her own condition. Entering before the Buddha she
prayed : " For the Sacred Spirit of the Emperor, that it may attain perfect Buddhahood, and for
the departed spirits of all the Heike , that they may quickly enter the Way of Salvation." But still
the image of the late Emperor was impressed on her mind, and wherever she might be, and in
what world soever, she thought she could never forget it. So they built for her a small cell ten
feet square beside the Jakko -in, and in it were two rooms, in one of which she put her shrine of
Buddha, and in the other she slept ; and there she spent her time continually repeating the
Nembutsu and performing the Buddhist services, both by night and by day.  And it happened that
once, on the fifth day of the tenth month, that she heard the sound as of someone treading on the
oak leaves which had fallen and covered the garden. " Who can it be," she exclaimed, " that
comes to disturb one who has thus renounced the world ? Do you go and see ; for I will conceal
myself if it be anyone I do not wish to meet." So one of the ladies went to look, and it was only a
young stag that had passed that way. " Who is it ? Who is it ?" asked the Empress, whereupon the
lady Dai nagon -no-suke-no-Tsubone composed these lines in reply :

"Who is the stranger whose steps are heard so nigh to our dwelling?
'Tis but a stag whose tread rustles the leaves of the vale."

And the Empress was so much affected by this verse that she wrote i t on the shoji of the window.

And as she thus passed her tedious hours, even in this dreary spot she found many subjects for
comparison. The trees

page 312

that grew by the eaves of her cell she likened to the Seven Precious Trees of Paradise, and the
water that collected in the hollows of the rocks she compared to the Lake of the Eight Virtues in
the Pure Land. Impermanence is as the flowers of spring that so quickly fall when the wind blows,
and Worldly Illusion like the moon of autumn so easily lost b ehind the clouds. She thought how
she had diverted herself with the flowers in the Shoyoden, and how on, the day after they had
been scattered by the wind, and how in the Choshuden they had made poems to the moon, and
its light had been hidden by the cloud s. Formerly she had lived delicately in the Jewel Halls, and
couches of brocade had been spread for her in the Golden Palace, but now she dwelt in a hut of
brushwood and thatch, and the sleeves of her robe were dishevelled and tear -stained.