CHAPTER VIII.

THE QUARREL ABOUT THE TABLETS.


Now about the spring of the first year of Ei -man, His Augustness the Mikado fell sick, and in the
beginning of the

[p. 28]

summer of the same year his disease became exceed ingly severe. Now the daughter of the
Minister of the Treasury, lki -no-Kanemori had a son by His Majesty who was two years old, and
it was expected that he would be made Crown Prince; [1] but on the twenty fifth of June scarcely
had a decree been published  appointing him Crown Prince than he was immediately that same
night placed on the Throne : whereat everyone was much astonished. Those learned in such
matters said that if investigation be made into the Imperial Line, Seiwa Tenno inherited the
Throne of M ontoku Tenno at the age of nine : at this time Chu jin Ko (Fujiwara Yoshifusa)
assisted his young Lord in the government, just as in China Shu -kodan administered all the affairs
of state in behalf of Sei -O, and this was the beginning of the office of Sessh o (Regent).

Toba -in came to the Throne at five and Konoe -in at three years of age, but even if these be
quoted, the present Prince was only two years old : still even if without precedent, it is foolish to
be disturbed about it. On the 27th, of July of th e same year the Retired Emperor departed this life
at the age of twenty two like the untimely falling of a flower in bud, and within the Jewel
Curtain and the Brocade Vail all were choked with tears. That same night he was borne to Funa -
oka Yama behind Ren dai-no to the North East of the Temple of Ko -ryu-ji. After the August
Obsequies, many priests from the En -ryaku -ji temple of Hiei -san and the Ko -fuku-ji at Nara
came to blows about the question of putting up their tablets.

It was the custom after the deat h of an Emperor that he should be borne to the place of burial
attended by the monks of the South and North Capitals, (Nara and Kyoto,) and as they went in
procession round the tomb, they put up the tablets of their repective temples. When there was
no tem ple endowed

[p. 29]

by Shomu Tenno to dispute it, the tablet of To -dai-ji was put up, and next came that of Ko -
fuku-ji founded by [2] Tan-kai-Ko. Of the Northern Capital, opposite to that of Kofuku -ji the
tablet of En -ryaku -ji was to be put up, after tha t the tablet of En -jo-ji, the foundation of Tem -mu
Tenno begun by Chisho Daishi. But on this occasion the priests of En -ryaku -ji, respecting what
precedent I know not, fixed up the tablet of their temple after that of To -dai-ji and before that of
Ko-fuku-ji, and while the priests of the South Capital were taking counsel with one another what
they should do, there stood forth two very worthless priests of the Sai -kon-do of Ko -fuku-ji,
called Kwannon -bo and Sei -shi-bo; Kwannon -bo was attired in a hara -maki, o r body armour,

corded with black silk, and held a white hilted naga -maki or short halberd, grasped in both hands ;
Sei-shi-bo was in armour laced with green thread and carried a huge tachi in a black lacquered
scabbard. Both of these ran up, and cutting do wn the tablet of En -ryaku -ji, broke it in pieces and
threw them hither and thither. ,

Then, shouting out the words of a song, which run thus:

" How gaily flows the water
Hark to the sound of the waterfall,
Even the sun in shining ,
By no means depar ts its rule."

they disappeared again among the monks of the South Capital.