CHAPTER XI.

THE TOKUDAIJI DAINAGON GOES TO ITSUKUSHIMA.

Now as the Tokudaiji Dainagon Sanesada -no-Kyo was passed over by Taira Munemori, the
second son of the Nyudo, in the matter of the office of Taisho, he retired from his office of
Dainagon a nd lived in seclusion, watching to see what turn things might take; but when he was
inclined to become a priest, all his house grieved and lamented greatly. Among them was one
who had the title of Shodaibu, To Kurando -no-Taiyu Shigekane by name, a man capa ble in all
matters. One moonlight night Tokudaiji Dono had his lattice drawn up on the south side and was
singing to the moon, when this To -no-Kurando came

[p. 94]

up to him. " Who is there? " enquired the Dainagon. " Shigekane " was the answer. " It is now
moonlight, what is your purpose incoming here?" "Tonight the moon is very clear and so I have
come to calm my spirit by contemplating it."

" It is most admirable that you have come," replied the Dainagon, " for tonight I feel melancholy
beyond measure  and the hours are very tedious." After, a while, when they had spoken of, various
things both present and past, the Dainagon said ; " Consider the prosperity of the Heike ; the
eldest son Shigemori and the second son Munemori have become generals , if the  right and left;
and still there is the third son Tomomori and the grandson Koremori : if both of these take their
turn, it does not seem as if anyone of another family will ever become Taisho at all. That is the
end of things for me. I will become a reclu se." To -no-Kurando weeping replied; " If you become a
monk all of your family will be without anyone to guide them. I have lately thought of a novel
plan: you know that Itsukushima, in Aki is exceedingly revered by the Heike family. Do you go
and visit it.  In that shrine there are many elegant dancing -girls who have the title of 'Naishi ' [20]
or Imperial ladies -in-waiting, and they will entertain you in a most interesting way." "But what
shall I pray for? " enquired the Dainagon. " Tell them the real state of affairs," replied Shigefusa, "
and when you leave, bring one or two of the chief of these Naishi back with you to the capital,
and then they will certainly go and pay a visit at Nishi -Hachijo, and when the Nyudo asks the
reason, they will relate the who le circumstances to him, and as he is easily interested in such
things it will be a very suitable occasion to obtain his favour." " I had not thought of such a thing,"
replied the Dainagon, "but I will certainly act on your advice immediately : " and strai ghtway he
purified himself and set out for Itsukushima. On his arrival there he found that there were indeed
many beautiful dancing girls there, and they declared

[p. 95]

that though the Heike lords were accustomed to visit the shrine, other courtiers se ldom came,
and so his pilgrimage was very interesting to them. So ten of the principal Naishi kept him
company continually day and night and entertained him very agreeably. When these Naishi
enquired the reason of his coming, he replied that it was because  he had been passed over in the
appointment to the office of Taisho in favour of another person, and had come to pray about it.

So he tarried there seven days, and they performed the sacred music and dance called Kagura as
well as many local sacred songs a nd dances, while the entertainment called Bugaku was given
three times. Then, when he started on his return journey, the ten chief Naishi prepared boats and
went with him a day's journey to see him off, and Tokudaiji, regretting to part with them, first
persuading them to come another day, and then two, at last brought them right to Kyoto, and
taking them to his mansion, entertained then splendidly and made them many presents. The
Naishi, declaring that as they had come from such a distant place to the capi tal they must
certainly visit their patrons the Heike lords, proceeded to Nishi Hachijo with that purpose. The
Nyudo, who came forth and received them, enquired for what reason they had journeyed all the
way to Kyoto, whereupon they explained that Tokudaij i Dono had visited their shrine, and that
having prepared ships and decided to come with Min one day's journey, to see him off and then
to return, he had persuaded them to come farther and farther until at last they had come to the
capital with him. Then t he Nyudo asked why Tokudaiji had gone to Itsukushima, and they told
him that it was to pray about being passed over in the election to Taisho. Hearing this the Nyudo
nodded his head and said to himself; " How admirable a thing it is that he has made a pilg rimage
to the distant shrine of Itsukushima that I revere above all others, instead of going to the many
influential and potent shrines and temples in the capital. If his desire is so earnest, then I will see."
So he made Shigemori the Naidaijin retire fro m the office of Sadaisho and elevated

[p. 96]

Tokudaiji Dono to it in his place over the head of his second son Munemori the Udaisho. What a
clever device this was indeed! How sad that the Shin Dainagon did not adopt such a plan as this
instead of making  a useless rebellion which led to the destruction of himself and his descendants.