CHAPTER VII.
THE DEATH OF SANEMORI.



Now among the retreating Heike retainers was Nagai -no Saitō Bettō Sanemori of Musashi,  and he
had a certain intention in his mind. He was clad in a red brocaded hitatare over armour with
green lacing, and on his head was a helmet surmounted by lofty horns. He wore a gold mounted
sword and a quiver of twenty four arrows with black and white feathers, and his bow was of
black lacquer bound with red rattan. He rode a grey horse with black spots and his saddle was
richly ornamented with gold. Though his companions kept on retiring, he alone continued to turn
back and engage the enemy to protect their rear. Then one of Kiso's men named Tezu ka-no-Tarō
rode forward and shouted to him; "How splendid! Though all your side are in flight, you only,
one single knight, dare to face us alone in such gallant fashion; I pray you declare your name."
"Who then are you that ask?" replied Sanemori. "I am T ezuka -no Tarō Kanesashi no Mitsumori
of Shinano," answered the other. "Then", replied Sanemori, "you will suit me well; and I too shall
not disgrace your arms, though for a certain reason I cannot declare my name. Come on Tezuka!
A grapple!" But as he rush ed upon him, one of Tezuka's retainers, fearful that his master might be
slain, thrust himself in between and received the onslaught. "Ho! who are you that wishes for the
honour of being sped by the greatest warrior in Nippon?"

[p.36]

cried Sanemori, as he caught him in his arms and pressed him tight against the front of his saddle
so that he could not move, the while he twisted his neck round and cut off his head. Tezuka
himself, seeing his retainer thus fall, slipped round to the left side of his oppone nt, and lifting the
skirts of his armour, stabbed him twice and then pulled him from his horse, weakened as he was
from the wounds. Thus, spite of his great strength and valour, fell Saitō Sanemori, for he was
wearied with his long struggle, besides being well advanced in years.

Then Tezuka, giving the head to one of his men who ran up, came into the presence of Kiso
Yoshinaka and bowed low. "I have brought your lordship," said he, "the head of a strange fellow
whom I have fought with and slain. He might b e a great leader, but he had no following; he might
be a simple samurai, but he wears a hitatare of brocade. When I bade him declare his rank, he
demanded mine but would not give his own. His speech is that of one of the warriors of the
Kwantō." "Ah," excl aimed Yoshinaka, "this must be Saito Bettō. Indeed? I remember seeing him
once when I went over to Kōzuke; I was only a small boy then but I think his hair was nearly
white, so he must be over seventy now, and ought to be quite white haired; but this hair and
beard is black. Ho, there! summon Higuchi -no-Jirō Kanemitsu; he is about the same age as
Sanemori and knew him well." Higuchi, answering the summons, entered, and after a single
glance at the head, burst into tears: "Alas!" he exclaimed, "it is indeed Saito Bettō." "Then," said
Yoshinaka, "how is it that his hair is still black, for he must be more than seventy?" Higuchi,
repressing his tears, replied: "Ah, that the pitifulness of his fate should have moved me to these
weak tears; still, we warriors are  apt to be touched by the recollection of even these trifling things.
I remember when we were talking together, as we were often went to do, that he said to me; "I
am over sixty now, but if I go to fight again I

[p.37]


shall dye my hair black and become young once more, for I will not be pitied as a decrepit old
knight, or look foolish if I strive for place among the youthful blades." Verily his hair is only dyed,
and if you have it washed my words may be proved." So Kiso ordered the head to be washed
forthwith, and the hair turned white even as Higuchi had said.

With regard to Sanemori's wearing a hitatare of brocade the reason was this. When he went to
take leave of the Daijin Munemori he said to him: "There is one request that I wish to make, and
it concerns me alone. Last year, when I went down with our men to the Eastern Provinces, I was
startled by the noise of the water -fowl and fled in panic from Kambara in Suruga without so
much as shooting one arrow, and that was a disgrace to my old age. Now I a m going on the
campaign in the North and there I intend to die. It was in that land that I was born, in Echizen,
and it is only of late years that I have lived in Nagai of Musashi, the domain that your bounty has
bestowed upon me. According to the proverb;  "Wear brocade when you return to your birth
place," I beg your lordship, if it is not too much to ask, to allow me the favour of wearing a
hitatare of brocade." Munemori, touched by the gallantry of his address, gave him permission
forthwith. As in China Shu-bai-shin flaunted his brocaded sleeves at Kwai -kei-san, so Saito Bettō
Sanemori would make a name in the North Country. Imperishable, though vain, is the reputation
he made, while his corpse mingles with the dust of the Northland. Thus of the ten thous and men
of the Heike who set out from the Capital on the seventeenth day of the fourth month, ready to
confront any foe, barely twenty thousand returned at the end of the fifth. "If you fish out all the
rivers, you will get a lot a fish, but next year ther e will be none; if you burn the cover to hunt you
will catch a lot of beasts, but next year there will be none"; it would have been wiser to have
taken thought for the fixture and kept some behind,"  was the opinion of most people