CHAPTER X.

THE ARGUMENT ABOUT PHYSICIANS.

In the summer of the same year Komatsu Dono, feeling melancholy and distressed about these
and other matters, made a pilgrimage to Kumano, and spent the whole night before the Shojoden
of the ma in shrine, calmly making his offerings and humbly praying thus: "My father the Lay
priest Chancellor, acting in a worthless and immoral fashion, is likely to trouble even the Imperial
Throne. Seeing this, even the prosperity of this generation seems endang ered. I, being the eldest
son, continually tender him advice, but being a stupid fellow, he does not adopt my
recommendations, so that it will be difficult to honour our ancestors and exalt the name of our
family. At this time I find myself very incompeten t, and thus I, unworthy des -

[p. 139]

cendant of my line, cannot act as a good minister and wise son to guide the fortunes of my house.
Better were it to give up my name, and, forsaking all hopes in this life, to try to attain
enlightenment in the future . But an ignorant and ordinary person like myself surely will go astray
in making choice; so I cannot do as I would. Namu Gongen Kongo Doji, I beseech thee, let the
prosperity of our line continue, that we may still be favoured with the gracious friendship  of our
Sovereign, and that the evil mind of my father may be softened, and that the Empire may be
peaceful in our days. But if our house is to be prosperous in this one generation only, and shame is
to fall on our posterity, then I pray thee cut short eve n now the life of Shigemori and deliver him
from the wheel of sorrow [34] in the life to come. I look to thy mystic aid in both these petitions."
And as he prayed earnestly thus, a lig ht as of a lamp issued from the body of the minister and
then suddenly disappeared as though extinguished, and though there were many who saw it, yet
for fear none said anything about it. When the minister returned to Kyoto and while he was
crossing the Iw ata-gawa his eldest son Gon -no-suke Koremori and some other Courtiers, who
were wearing a violet coloured under -dress beneath their white hemp costumes, it being the
hottest time of summer, for some reason or other went into the water and were sporting the re, so
that the violet showed through their wet upper garments and it looked like a single garment of
mourning colour. Chikugo -no-kami, seeing this, called out: "A dress that suggests mourning is
very ill -omened; I pray you haste and change it quickly." Bu t Shigemori replied: "There is no need
to change it; it is a sign that my petition is to be fulfilled." And from Iwata -gawa he sent offerings
to Kumano with a thankful heart. The others present thought it strange, but he did not deign to
enlighten them at all. (But these Courtiers, strange to say, soon had to put on the

[p.140]

colour in real earnest.) After Shigemori returned to Kyoto, a few days passed and he became ill.
Thinking that the Gongen had soon accepted his petition, he applied no remedy, neit her did he
pray for recovery. About that time a famous physician came from the Sung Court of China and
was staying in Japan. Now the Nyudo was at this time stopping at his country mansion at
Fukuhara, and sent Etchu Zenji Moritoshi as a messenger to Shigem ori, saying: "I hear that your

ailment is severe: as a very distinguished physician has lately come from the Sung Court, it is a
fortunate thing, so pray call him and try his skill." On hearing this, the minister, having himself
raised in bed, called Morit oshi into his presence and said: "With regard to this offer of the
physician, I am much obliged to you, but as you doubtless know well, that even such a wise ruler
as Daigo Tenno, in the era of Enki, should have allowed a foreign physiognomist to be introd uced
into the capital is to be considered a wise Emperor's mistake and a shame to our country ever
after. Far greater disgrace then would it be to our land that a common person like Shigemori
should bring a foreign physician into the capital. When Koso of Kan, in administering his country,
struck down Keifu of Wai -nan with the three foot sword that he carried, and was struck and
wounded by a stray arrow, the Empress Dowager Ro called a skilful physician who said: "To heal
this wound fifty pounds of gold wil l be required." Then Koso answered; " As I have been strong
in defending myself, I have fought many battles and received many wounds; they have not
disabled me for my time has not come. Our lives are in the hands of Heaven, and even if one had
such a famou s physician as Henjaku [35], it would be no use." But as he did not wish to appear to
grudge the money, he gave fifty pounds of gold to the doctor but did not receive the treatment.
This is a precedent with which I am quite satisfied. I, Shigemori, though of no account, rose to be
numbered among those of the

[p.141]

first three ranks, and further was advanced to be one of the three great ministers. [36] My destiny
therefore is in the hands of Heaven why should I question Heaven's will and hanker after
physicians? If my illness is destined to be fatal, of what use is a physician? But if it is not so
destined, withou t a physician's help I shall recover. Without availing himself of the skill of
Kiba, [37] Shaka Muni declared his entry into Nirvana by the Batsu -dai river. [38] Since this was a
disease that was destined to be fatal it was to show that it could not be cured. Only Buddha can
heal completely, Kiba can but alleviate sickness. If a fatal disease can be cured by physici ans, why
then did Shaka die? It is quite clear that medicine is of no value for a fatal disease. But my body is
not the body of a Buddha, so that distinguished doctors or even Kiba are not necessary. If we
judge by the Four Books, [39] how can even the best of an hundred remedies save this vile mortal
body of ours? Is it not also written in the Five Volumes [40]: "Though one can cure ordinary
diseases, how can one cure that which is caused by the Karma of a "previous existence?"
Moreover if I should live as the result of this physician's treatment, it would seem as though there
were no skilful doctor in Japan. If hi s treatment is unavailing, it is not necessary for me to see him;
and if one holding the position of one of the first three ministers of Japan comes to ask an
interview of a wealthy foreign guest, it is both a disgrace to the country and also a degradation  of
his morality. So that though I may lose my life, yet I must not for a moment think of disgracing
my country." Having heard all these words, Moritoshi weeping returned to Fukuhara and
repeated everything to Kiyomori. "From of old time" said the Nyudo, " I have never heard of a

[p.142]

minister who would consider the disgrace of his country, and neither did I think there was one in
these degenerate days. Shigernori is too good a minister: I fear that he may probably die." So he
hastily returned to the c apital.

On the twenty -eighth day of the seventh month, Shigemori became a priest, taking the name Jo -
ren, and on the first day of the eighth month, having said the death prayers, he passed away at the

age of forty three. In such a prosperous time how sad an end indeed. Though the Lay priest
Chancellor would try to tear paper across [41] the grain, yet Shigemori was always there t to
smooth things over ; so that the Empire remained pea ceful until this time. But now all classes of
society were lamenting and wondering what would happen in times to come. But tae, friends of
the former Udaisho Munemori were rejoicing greatly, thinking that now the control of everything
would fall into leis hands. Parents love for their children is often a cause of sadness to them, but it
is doubly sad when they die before their parent.. He was the pillar of his house and the wisest
man of his a e ; the loss of his kindness and affection and the decline of hi s house cannot be too
much deplored. The Empire lost a good minister, and his house had to lament the loss of his
counsel in the field. Moreover he was a man versed in letters, loyal to the Emperor, talented and
accomplished and a man of virtuous conversat ion.