CHAPTER  II.
THE CROSSING OF THE UJIKAWA.

     On the eleventh day of the first month Kiso -Sama no -kami Yoshinaka proceeded to the Palace
of the Hō -ō and announced

p.112

that he was about to start for the Western Provinces to subdue the Heiki, and on the thirte enth
day he was just setting forth from the Capital when word was brought to him that Uhyōhe -no-
suke Yoritomo had despatched a large force of many myriads of horsemen under the command of
Noriyori and Yoshitsune to chastize him for h s outrageous conduct, and that they had already
reached the provinces of Mino and Ise. Much astonished at this news, Kiso at once ordered the
bridges at Seta and Uji to be destroyed and his forces to be divided to meet the foe. Since he had
not many men left by this time, he se nt eight hundred horsemen under Imai -no-Shirō Kanehira to
the bridge at Seta as his main army, while a smaller force of five hundred under Nishina,
Takanashi, and Yamada -no-Jirō was ordered to march to that at Uji. His uncle Shida -no-Saburō
Yoshinori also rode off to Imoarai with three hundred men.

     Now the main body of the Eastern forces was under the command of Kaba -no-Onzōshi
Noriyori, while the lesser army was led by Kurō Onzōshi Yoshitsune, while ranking after these
were thirty six great Nobles, t he whole army numbering some sixty thousand horsemen.
Yoritomo had at this time two famous horses named Ikezuki and Surusumi, and KajiwaraGenda
Kagesue greatly coveted Ikezuki and asked that it might be given him for this campaign, but
Yoritomo answered th at he was keeping it in case he might wish to ride it himself, and presented
him with Surusumi instead. A little while afterwards Sasaki Shirō Takatsuna of the province of
Ōmi came to bid him farewell, acid Yoshitomo gave Ikezuki to him, saying: " Remember  that
'there are many who desire this horse, so look well to him." Sasaki bowed low in obeisance and
replied: " On this horse 1 will be the first to cross the Ujikawa; , if you hear that I am dead, you
will know that someone else has crossed before me, but  if you learn that I still live, then rest
certain that Takatsuna has crossed before all the rest." " These are strong words ", muttered all the
Nobles,

p.113

both great and small, who were in attendance, as Sasaki retired.

     So, leaving Kamakura beh ind, this great host started for the West, some crossing over Ashigara
and some over Hakone, according to the will of their leaders, and Kajiwara Genda Kagesue,
drawing aside a little, ascended to a high place at Ukishima ga hara in the province of Suruga,  and
viewed all their horses as they passed by, each with its varying saddle and trappings, both in
profile and head -on. As he thus scrutinized' the seemingly endless procession of steeds Kajiwara
was greatly pleased that he saw none that could compare wit h his own mount Surusumi, when
his eye fell on a splendid horse that he recognised at once as Ikezuki. His saddle was inlaid with
gold and his crupper gaily decorated with many tassels, and he foamed at the mouth as he

champed the bright polished bit. He h ad many grooms to lead him, but even so his mettle could
not be entirely curbed, for he reared and caracolled as he advanced. Kajiwara came forward and
asked the attendants whose horse he was. " It is the horse of Sasaki dono "; they replied" Which
Sasaki does it belong to ", he continued; "Saburō or Shirō ? " " It is the steed of Shirō Dono ";
answered the attendants as they passed on. At this Kagesue felt bitter resentment, for it was most
mortifying to be thus passed over in favour of his fellow retainer  Sasaki. First he thought he
would rush on to the Capital and engage in mortal combat with Kiso's Four Deva Kings, Imai,
Higuchi, Tate and Nenoi, or else die fighting with one of the famous champions of the Heike in
the Western Provinces, but this seemed, on second thoughts, a vain revenge, and so, he stood
muttering and raging and waiting for Sasaki, pondering the while what a loss it would be to
Yoritomo should two of his stoutest retainers thus fall on each other and do each other to death.
Meanwhile Sas aki himself came along quite unsuspecting, and Kajiwara, uncertain whether to
ride at him headlong or to come up alongside and grapple, thus addressed him : " How is it,

p.114

Sasaki Dono, that our lord has come to present you with Ikezuki ? " Whereupon Sasaki,
perceiving that Kagesue too had coveted the horse, replied thus: " When I set out on this
campaign I felt quite sure that the enemy would destroy the bridges at Seta and Uji, and that I
should want a good horse to swim the river; but as I had not s uch an one, I greatly desired
Ikezuki. Hearing, however, that you had asked for him and been refused, I knew that a fellow
like myself would have no chance, and so, in spite of the risk of our lord's anger afterwards, I won
over the grooms and stole his pr ecious steed. What do you think of that, Kajiwara Dono ? "
Disarmed by this retort, Kajiwara burst into a laugh and replied : " Ah, I See, I too ought to have
stolen him." Now this horse that Takatsuna had received was of large and powerful build, four
shaku eight sun in height, and its colour was a dark chestnut, and as it was fierce and would bite
anyone, man or horse, who came near it, it had been named Ikezuki (Quick -biter). Kajiwara's
horse was also large and strong, no whit inferior to the other, and on account of its very black
colour had been named Surusumi (Ink -black).

     From the province of Owari the army was divided into. its two parts, and the larger body,
consisting of some thirty five thousand horsemen under Noriyori, pitched their camp at Noji
Shinohara in Ōmi. With Noriyori were also Takeda noTarō, Kagami -no-Jirō, Ichijō -no-Jirō,
Itagaki -no- Saburō Inamo -no-Saburō , Hangai -no-Jirō, Kumagai -no Jirō, and Inomata -no-
Koheiroku. The smaller force of twenty five thousand men under Yoshitsune, wi th whom were
also Yasuda -no-Saburō, Ōuchi-no-Tarō, Hatakeyama -no-Shōji Jiro, Kajiwara Genda, Sasaki Shirō,
Kasuya -no-Tōda, Shibuya -no-Uma -no-suke and Hirayama -no-Mushadokoro, passed through the
province of Iga and pressed upon the bridge at Uji. Now after destroying the bridges at Seta and
Uji, the enemy had planted sharp stakes in the riverbed and made fast a great hawser in the
stream together with a floating boom of tree trunks to obstruct the crossing. It was

p.115

now the twentieth day of the first m onth and the snow had melted on the slopes of Mount Hira
and Shiga, while the ice of the valleys below mingled with it and rushed down in torrents of
water. The Ujikawa rose high in spate, and its white capped waves surged tumultuously as the
boiling flood  rushed down between its banks with a roar like a waterfall. As the chilly dawn
broke the river mist hung heavy over the water, so that tone could clearly discern the colour

either of the horses or the armour of their riders. Then the commander Yoshitsune rode up to the
bank of the river, and wishing to try the courage of his men, with a glance at the foaming torrent,
called out : " Shall we turn off to Yodo or Imoarai, or shall we go round by Kawachiji ? Or what
do you think of waiting till the flood abate s ? " Then Hatakeyama Shōji Shigetada of the province
of Musashi, who was then but twenty -one years old, stood forth and said : " This river is one that
we have often spoken of at Kamakura, and is no unknown stream to baffle us ; and moreover, as
it flows out directly from the lake of Ōmi, its waters will not quickly subside, however long you
may wait, and as for building a bridge, who is there who can do such a thing ? In the battle that
was fought here in the era of Jishō, Ashikaga Matataro Tadatsuna cros sed over, and he was but a
youth of seventeen years, so here is no matter for god or devil. I, Shigetada will be the first in the
flood. And as lie and his band of five hundred followers were pushing together into the waves,
two warriors were seen to gallo p forth from the point of Tachibana -no-kojima at the north -east
of the Byōdō -in : they were Kajiwara Genda Kagesue and Sasaki Shirō Takatsuna. Each had made
up his mind to be the first across, though no sign of their determination was visible to the
onlook ers: Kajiwara was about three yards in front of Sasaki. " Kajiwara Dono ! Your saddle girth
seems to be loose; this is the greatest river in the Western Provinces, so you had better tighten it
up." Thus warned, Kajiwara dropped the reins on to his horse's mane, kicked his feet from the
stirrups,

p.116

and, leaning forward in the saddle, loosened the girth arid tightened it afresh. While he was thus
engaged, however, Sasaki rode on past him and leapt his horse into the river. Kajiwara, thinking
he had been  tricked, immediately sprang in after him. " Ho ! Sasaki Dono ", shouted Kajiwara,
"take care if you want to be famous; there is a great hawser at the bottom of the river. Look out!
" At this Sasaki drew his sword and cut through the rope as it caught his horse's feet, and in spite
of the strength of the current, as he was mounted on the finest horse in the land, he rode straight
through the river and leapt up on to the farther bank. Kajiwara's horse, Surusumi, however, was
swept aside by the rush of the wa ter. and his rider reached land some distance farther down -
stream. Then Sasaki, rising high in his stirrups, shouted with a loud voice: " Sasaki Shirō
Takatsuna, fourth son of Sasaki Saburō Yoshihide of Ōmi, descended in the ninth generation from
Uda Tennō , is the first over the Ujikawa ! " Hatakeyama, who was leading his five hundred men
across, had not gone far when his horse was struck deep in the head by an arrow shot by Yamada -
no-Jirō from the other bank, and reared violently, upon which, using his bow  as a staff, he slid off
into the stream. only to find the rushing waters sweep right over his head. Nothing daunted by
this he vigorously breasted the current, and diving through the waves swam across; but just as he
was about to scramble up the bank he f elt someone drag at hint from behind. " Who is that? " he
called. " Shigechika!" was the answer. " Ōgushi ? " "The same." Now Hatakeyama had been
sponsor at the Gempuku of Ōgushi Jirō Shigechika. " The current is so strong that my horse has
been washed awa y and I have no strength to go any farther." " Ah, I always have to help you
fellows"; replied Hatakeyama, as he gripped Ōgushi and flung him by main force it on to the bank.
The young man, immediately recovering himself, sprang erect, and drawing his swor d, laid it to
his forehead, shouting loudly : " Ōgushi -no-Jirō Shigechika of

p.117

Musashi is the first to cross the Ujikawa on foot! " Whereat all who heard it, both friends and
foes, burst out into a roar of laughter. Hatakeyama, mounting another horse , shouted his war cry

and spurred fiercely against the ranks of the foe, when to meet him there came a single horseman
clad in an embroidered hitatare and a suit of armour laced with scarlet, ling a dappled horse with
a gold mounted saddle. In answer t0 Ha takeyama's challenge he gave his name title as Nagase -no-
Hangwan -dai Shigetsuna, a retainer of Kiso Yoshinaka."

" Thinking to make him the first sacrifice to the god battles that day, Hatakeyama rode up
alongside him and grappled, pulling him from his hor se and squeezing him against pommel of his
saddle, where he twisted his head and cut it off without more ado, passing it over to Honda -no-
Jirō, who fastened it to the left side of his saddle. After this Kiso's men who were guarding the
bridge kept up a def ensive fight for a while, but when all the Eastern army had crossed over and
advanced to the attack, they gave way and fled toward Kobatayama and Fushimi. At Seta also, by
the strategy of Inamo -no-Saburō Shigenari, the other army passed over the river at t he ford of
Gugo at Tagami.