CHAPTER X.
A COLLISION OF GRANDEES.


    On the sixteenth day of the seventh month of the first year of Ka -o the Retired Emperor Go -
Shirakawa became a priest, b ut as, even after this, he continued to direct the administration as
before, there was no difference between the Retired Emperor and the Reigning one : so that the
Courtiers of the Retired Emperor and the Military Guards (Hokumen) of both upper and lower
ranks received rank and emolument in abundance

[p. 33]

Still, as is the way of man's heart, they were not contented, but would say to their intimate
friends when they met;

" Ah, if that man loses his position then that demesne will be vacant;" or "if tha t fellow could be
done away with, then I should get his office." The Ho -o himself murmured in secret; "From of
old there have been many who have subdued the enemies of the country, but never before have
they been so rewarded. When Sadamori defeated Masakad o and when Yoriyoshi put down
Sadato and Muneto, when Yoshihide conquered Takehira Yoshihide and Iehira a reward was
given them, but it was nothing more than a demesne ; so that this arbitrary conduct in rewarding
them is not according to reason. This is b ecause the times are degenerate, and the principle of
monarchic government is no longer observed." He could find no opportunity to utter any open
reproof however. The Heike, on the other hand,, bore no special ill -will to the Imperial House.

The primary c ause of all the disturbance that was to follow was that on the sixteenth day of the
tenth month of the second year of Ka -o,  Shinsammi no Chujo Sukemori, second son of Komatsu
dono, a young man of thirteen years old who was then Echizen -no-kami, wishing to  see the
beauties of the snow scenery at Karino, the snow having fallen in patches here and there, went
out with a train of thirty youthful retainers on horseback to Rendaino, Murasakino and Ukon -no-
baba, and Hew many hawks at the quails and skylarks from morning till evening, returning to
Rokuhara about twilight. Now just at this time the Sessho Motofusa was proceeding from the
Palace of the Ho -o at Higashi -no-do to the Imperial Palace, and going to enter at the Yuho gate,
he went southward from Higashi -no-do, and turned to the East at Oi -no-Mikado, so that
Sukemori met I him face to face between Oi -no-Mikado and I -no-kuma. Immediately the
Minister's retainers shouted peremptorily," Who goes there? Dismount! Dismount ! It is His
Excellency who passes! But S ukemori, being too proud and careless of his behaviour, his retainers
too being all youths of under twenty

[p.34]

who understood little of courtesy, spite of it being a Minister who passed, did not dismount
according to custom, as etiquette demanded : on  the contrary they threatened to break through

his train. As it was dark perchance the Minister's retainers were not aware that it was Kiyomori's
grandson, or if they were they made as if they were not, but anyhow they pulled Sukemori and all
his retainers  from off their horses and put them to exceeding shame. Sukemori could do nothing
but make his way back to Rokullara and relate all these circumstances to his grandfather the Lay -
priest Chancellor. The Nyudo was extremely wrath; " Even a Minister," he said , " must respect
my family, and it is a most hateful thing that he should insult such a young man; for a thing like
this our house maybe despised. Thus I cannot help letting the Minister know these things and
indeed I hope to make him rue it." But Shigemor i said ; " We are not affected by such a thing ; if
we be mocked by men like Yorimasa or Matsumoto of the Genji, then we should indeed be put
to shame, but it was exceedingly discourteous of my son. not to alight when he met the
Minister." Then he called t he samurai who had been in attendance during the incident and said ; "
From henceforth take great care lest you should by mistake insult a Minister." But afterwards the
Nyudo, without saying anything to Komatsu dono, collected about sixty men, led by Namba  and
Seno, all rustic samurai of exceeding bad manners who heeded nothing except the commands of
the Nyudo, and bade them go and wait for the Minister when he went out on the twenty first
day, and cut off the front hair of his outriders and retainers as a revenge for the insult to Sukemori.
The samurai respectfully assented, and went forth. The Minister, never dreaming of such a thing,
went out with more state than usual, owing to his having to stay in the apartments of the Sessho
to fix the time for the Em peror's coming of age ceremonies, (Gempuku, Assuming the [2]
Kammuri,

[p. 35]

and Reception of Officials) to be held next year. On this occasion he had to enter by the
Taikenmon, and as he was going to the west of Naka -no-mikado, at Inokuma near Horikawa , he
met about three hundred retainers of Rokuhara all armed to the teeth, who surrounded him on
all sides with shouts of exultation : then, chasing his retainers and outriders this way and that,
they treated them with contumely and cut off their front hai r. Among his sixteen retainers,
Takemoto, a retainer of the Udaijin also had his haircut off. When they cutoff the top knot of To
Kurando -no-Taiyu Takanori they said; " You must not consider this as your own top knot but as
though it were your master's."

Then poking the ends of their bows into the car, they broke the curtains, cut the harness and
trappings off the oxen and drove them hither and thither, finally returning to Rokuhara with
shouts of glee, whereupon the Nyudo praised them for carrying out his  orders so well. But the
two retainers who rode next to the Minister's car, Inaba -no-Saizukai and Toba -no-Kunihisa -Maro,
though of quite low rank were very shrewd fellows, and putting the car in order again they
brought their master to the palace of Naka -no-Mikado. He, wiping away his tears with the
sleeves of his dress of ceremony, returned home again in a truly pitiful state. It is not necessary to
speak of Kamatari and Fuhito of the Fujiwara house, but since the time of Yoshifusa and
Mototsune to this da y no such insult as this outrage of the Heike has ever been known to befall a
Sessho Kwampaku.

When Komatsu dono heard of it he was greatly disturbed in his mind, and all the samurai who
had taken part in it were dismissed from their posts. " However stra nge a thing the Nyudo
ordered you to do, why did you tell me nothing of it," he said, " this is Sukemori's fault : the
[3]Sendan is fragrant even from the time when it has but two leaves; so even a boy of twelve or
thirteen years knows what courtesy is and  ought to


[p. 36]

practise it. He is guilty of unfilial conduct in bringing the name of the Nyudo into disrepute by
such ill manners and must bear he responsibility." So Shigemori removed him to Ise -no-kuni a
discipline. He was indeed a leader to be admi red both by lord and vassal.