CHAPTER IX.

THE OLD HORSE.


      Forthwith the Daijin Munemori dispatched Aki -no-Umano suke Yoshiyuki with this messag e
to all the chiefs of his house. " We hear that Kurō Yoshitsune has attacked and broken through
our outpost at Mikusayama so that the hillside on our flank is threatened : can you come to our
assistance ? " But they all declined. Then the Daijin called on ce more on Noto -no-kami Noritsune,
saying: " Many times before have you aided us; may we reply on your help once more? " “War "
replied Noritsune, "is just like fishing or any other sport; he who always chooses the comfortable
positions and refuses the unf avourable ones will never win a victory. As for me, have no fear, for
I am ever ready to hasten where the greatest danger threatens. Trust me to deal with the forces of
Yoshitsune." When this was reported to Munemori, he was exceedingly glad, and at once p ut an
army of ten thousand men, led by Etchū Zenji Moritoshi, at the disposal of Noritsune.

     Then Noritsune, taking with him his elder brother Echizentir -no-sammi Michimori, set out
for the hills. And these were the hills that lay at the foot of the p ass called Hiyodori -goe, behind
Ichi-no-tani. Michimori, however, called his wife to the camp of Noritsune in order that he might
take a tender farewell of tier before the expedition, and when this came to the ears of
Noto -no-kami he was greatly enraged an d rebuked him: " The position `we are to hold in one of
great peril", said he,' "and

p. 138

matters are now most critical, for if the enemy should succeed in descending on us over these
hills, disaster stares us in the face. To take a bow and not lay an arrow on the string is bad enough,
but to lay an arrow on the string and not to draw it is worse still; so what is the use of wasting
time in this soft talk ? " Then Michimori, feeling the truth of his words, dismissed his wife and
put on his armour,

     About dusk on the fifth day the Genii started from Koyano and pressed on to attack the wood
at Ikuta, and as the Heike looked out over Suzume -no-matsubara, Mikage -no-matsu and Koyano,
they could see them pitching their camps everywhere, while the glow of their thousand watch
fires reddened the sky like the moon rising over the mountains. The fires that the Heike kindled
also showed up the dark outline of the wood of Ikuta, and twinkled as they flared up like stars in
the brightening sky; reminding them too  of the glimmering fire -flies on the river bank, so often
the subject of their verse in the happy days gone by. So, as they beheld the Genii thus
deliberately pitching their camps here and there, and feeding and resting their horses, they
watched and wonde red when they would be attacked, their hearts filled with disquiet.

     At dawn on the sixth day Kurō Onzōshi Yoshitsune, dividing his ten thousand men into two
companies, ordered Doi -no-Jirō Sanehira to make an attack on the western outlet of Ichi -no-tani

with seven thousand, while he himself with the remaining three thousand horsemen went round
by the Tango road to descend the pass of Hiyodori -goe to take them in the rear. At this his men
began to murmur to each other:

" Everyone knows the dangers of t hat place; if we must die, it were better to die facing the foe
than to fall over a cliff and be killed. Does anyone know the way among these mountains ? ''

" I know these mountains very well "; exclaimed Hirayama -no-Mushadokoro of Musashi, in
answer to these muttering. " But you were brought up in the Eastern Provinces, and this is the
first time you have seen the mountains of the West ",

p. 139

objected Yoshitsune. " so how can you guide us? " " That may be even as your Excellency says",
replied Hiray ama, " but just as a poet knows the cherry -blossoms of Yoshino and Hatsuse
without seeing them, so does a proper warrior know the way to the rear of an enemy's castle ! "
After this most audacious speech, a young samurai of eighteen years old named Beppu -no-Kotarō
Kiyoshige of Musashi spoke up and said: " I have often been told by my father Yoshishige Hōshi,
that whether you are hunting on the mountains or fighting an enemy, if you lose your way you
must take an old horse, tie the reins and throw them on hi s neck, and then drive him on in front,
and he will always find a path." "Well spoken", said Yoshitsune, " they say an old horse will find
the road even when it is buried in snow! " So they took an old, grey horse, trapped him with a
silver plated saddle a nd a well -polished bit, and tying the reins and throwing them on his neck,
drove him on in front of them, and so plunged into the unknown mountains.

     As it was the beginning of the second month, the snow had melted here and there on the
peaks and at t imes they thought they saw flowers, while at times they heard the notes of the
Uguisu of the valleys, and were hidden from sight in the mist. As they ascended, the snow -clad
peaks towered white and glistening on either side of them, and as they descended a gain into the
valleys, the cliffs rose green on either hand. The pines hung down under their load of snow, and
scarcely could they trace the narrow and mossy path: When a sudden gust blew down a cloud of
snow flakes, they almost took them for the falling p lum-blossom. Whipping up their steeds to
their best pace they rode on some distance, until the falling dusk compelled them to bivouac for
the night in the depth of the mountains.

     As they were thus halted, Musashi -bō Benkei suddenly appeared with an o ld man he had
intercepted. In answer to the to the questions of Yoshitsune lie declared that he was a hunter

p. 140

who lived in these mountains, and that he knew all that country very well. " Then ", said
Yoshitsune, " what do you think of my plan of ri ding down into Ichi -no-tani, the stronghold of
the Heike ? " " Ah ", replied the old man, " that can hardly be done. The valley is a hundred yards
deep, and of that about half is steep cliff where no one can go. Besides, the Heike will have dug
pitfalls an d spread caltrops inside the stronghold to make it impossible for your horses." "Indeed?"
returned Yoshitsune, " but is it possible for a stag to pass there?" "That stags pass there is certain",
replied the hunter, "for in the warm days of spring they come  from Harima to seek the thick
pasture of Tamba, and when the winter grows cold they go back towards Inamino in Harima

where the snow lies lighter." " Forsooth ! " ejaculated Yoshitsune, " then a horse can do it, for
where a stag may pass, there a horse ca n go also. Will you then be our guide? " " I am an old man
now; how can I go so far? " replied the hunter. " But you have a son? " " I have." And Kumaō
Maru, a youth of eighteen soon appeared before the Genji leader. Then Yoshitsune performed
the ceremony of Gempuku for the young man, giving him the name of Washio Saburō Yoshihisa,
the name of his father being Washio Shōji Takehisa, and he accompanied them, going on in front
to guide them down into Ichi -no-tani. And after the Heike had been overthrown and t he Genji
obtained the supremacy, and his lord Yoshitsune fell into disfavour with his brother and fled to
Mutsu and fell there, Washio Saburō Yoshihisa was one of those who followed him to the death.