CHAPTER III.
THE CROSSING OF OSAKA.

     Yoshitsune next asked Kondō Roku how many men the Heike had at Yashima, to which he
replied that the number was not more than a thousand horsemen. "How is it that there are so
few ? " said the Hogwan. "Because they have stationed bands of fifty or a hundred men at every
creek a nd island round Shikoku, and also because an army of three thousand horse under the
command of Dennai Saemon Noriyoshi, the eldest son of Awa -no-Mimbu Shigeyoshi, has gone
over to Iyo to attack Kono Shiro of that province, because he would not join them wh en they
summoned him." "Ah, that's a fine opportunity! I have them. And how far is it to Yashima from
here?" "About two days march," replied Kondo. "Then let us hurry up and get there before they
get wind of us." And so they started off, sometimes running and sometimes marching, making as
great a speed as they could, until by night they came to the mountain pass of Osaka on the
borders of Awa and Sanuki, and began to cross it.

     About the middle of the night as they were pushing on over the mountain, th ey came up with
a man carrying a letter. As it was dark he had not the least idea that they were enemies, but
thought they were Heike soldiers going to Yashima, and began to talk to them quite freely. "You
seem to be going to Yashima, so I suppose you know  the way," said Yoshitsune. "Can you guide
us? " "Certainly," replied the man, "I often go there, so I know the road very well." "Who is that
letter from, and who is it for ? " asked Yoshitsune. “It is from the Ladies in Miyako, and I am
taking it to the D aijin Munemori in Yasfiima," was the reply. "What is it about? " "The Genji
have already got as far as Yodo and Kawajiri, so no doubt it is to send him tidings of it." " Ah, no
doubt that is so," exclaimed the Hōgwan, "seize that letter, men! " "But don't kill him,"

[p. 228]

he added as they took the letter, "for that would be a useless crime." So they bound the man to a
tree in the mountains and passed on. When Yoshit sune opened the letter and read it, he found
that it was indeed from the Ladies in Miyako. "Kurō is a shrewd fellow," he read, " and will -not
fear to attack however rough the weather may be, so take care not to scatter your force, and be
very much on the a lert." "This letter is godsend to me," said Yoshitsune, " we must keep it and
show it to Yoritomo." And he stowed it away very carefully.

     On the following day, the eighteenth, at the Hour of the Tiger (4 a.m.), they came to a place
called Hikida in t he province of Sanuki, and rested there to give breathing -space to the men and
horses. Thence, passing through Shiratori and Nibuno ya, they arrived before the fortress of
Yashima. Calling Rondō Chikaie once more, the Hōgwan enquired: "What sort of a road is it
from here to the Palace of Yashima ? " "Ali, you may well ask, but it is really quite shallow," he
replied, "at low tide the w ater between the mainland and the island is not up to a horse's belly."
"Then we must attack before they know we are here," said Yoshitsune ; and setting fire to the

houses of Takamatsu, they began their attack on the castle of  Yashima.

     Now at Yashim a Dennai Saemon Noriyoshi, the eldest son of Awa -no-Mimbu Shigeyoshi, had
ridden i nto the province of Iyo with three thousand horse to chastise Kono -no-Shirō for not
coming to join them when he was summoned, but Kono himself had escaped him, so he cut off
the heads of some hundred and fifty of his retainers and marched back with them to  the Palace.
But as he thought it was not proper to bring the heads of rebels to the Palace for inspection, he
took them to the headquarters of the Daijin Munemori, when suddenly his men began to shout
out that the houses of Takamatsu were on fire. "As it is daytime it is not likely to be accidental,"
he cried. "It must be the enemy who is here and has set them on fire. They are sure to be in great
force, so we can do nothing. Come! Come ! Into

[p. 229]

the boats! " And in great hurry and confusion they  scrambled aboard the ships that were moored
in rows along the beach in front of the main gate. In the Imperial Ship were the Imperial Consort
Kenreimon -in, the mother of the late Emperor and the Nii Dono with their Ladies -in-waiting,
while the Daijin Mune mori was in another with his son, and the others got on board any ship
they could find, and all the ships immediately rowed out a cho or thirty or forty yards from the
shore. Scarcely had they done so when the seventy or eighty horsemen of the Genji, all a rmed
alike, galloped smartly up to the beach in front of the main gate. As the tide was at its lowest ebb
in the tidal bay, the water came up to the horses' chests, or knees, or girths in some places, and in
others it was shallower still, and so as they da shed through the waves, kicking up a mist of foam
and spray all round them, out of which their white banners appeared fluttering here and there, it
was no wonder that the Heike, doomed as they were, should imagine that a great army was upon
them. Especiall y was this so in that the Hōgwan, not wishing that the enemy should see the
smallness of his force, had divided it up into small groups of from five to ten horsemen each. The
Hogwan was attired that day in a hitatare of red, and armour of shaded purple, an d wore a helmet
surmounted by golden horns, a gold -mounted tachi, and a quiver of black and white feathered
arrows, twenty four in number. Grasping his rattan -bound bow in the middle he glared fiercely at
the enemy out in the offing, and shouted with a lo ud voice: " I am Kebiishi Go -i-no-jō Minamoto
Yoshitsune, Envoy of the Hō -ō." After him the rest of the leaders of the Genji proclaimed their
names and titles : Tajiro -no-Kwanja Nobutsuna of Izu, Kaneko -no-Jūrō Ietada of Musashi,
Kaneko Goichi Chikanori, Ise -noSaburō  Yoshimori, Gotōbyōye Sanemoto, Gotō Shinbyōye -no-Jō
Motokiyo, Satō Saburōhyōye Tsuginobu of Mutsu, Satō Shirōhyōye Tadanobu, Eda -no-Genzō,
Kumai -no-Tarō, and Musashi -bō Benkei, all of them worth a thousand men. As they came riding
up, shouting their war -cries, the Heike seized their bows and

[p. 230]

began to shoot from far and near, but the Genji took but little heed of them, ducking to left and
right to avoid the shafts, and taking the opportunity to rest and breathe their horses under the lee
of tho se ships that were in shallow water, all the while shouting and fighting furiously.