CHAPTER VI.

THE COURIERS.

Now Kiso was in the extreme south of Shinano on the boundary of Mino and so was very ne ar to
the Capital, and great fear came upon the Heike, for they wondered what they should do now
that the North had rebelled as well as the East.

But Kiyomori was not perturbed: "Even if all the men of Shinano do follow Kiso," said he, "in
Echigo there ar e the two brothers Jo -no-Taro Sakenaga and Shiro Sukeshige, the descendants of
Taira Koreshige, who can muster no small force between them, and if I give the order they will
soon fall on Kiso and destroy him." Some of his family were satisfied at this, but  others still
maintained that the situation was critical.

On the first day of the second month an investiture of officials was held and Jo -no-Taro Sukenaga
was appointed Echigo -no-kami. This was done with a view to his attacking Kiso Yoshinaka. On
the sev enth day all the families of the Ministers and Courtiers assembled and wrote out and
offered the Sonjo Darani and the Fudo Darani, most potent litanies to overcome evil, by which
they trusted to subdue the revolt. On the ninth day news was brought that Mus ashi-no-Gon-no-
kami Nyudo Yoshimoto, of the district of

[p. 274]

Ishikawa in Kawachi, with, his son Ishikawa -no-Hangwan -dai Yoshikane had renounced their
allegiance to the Heike and were going down to the east to join the Genji. The Heike Generals
Gendai yu-no-Hangwan Suesada and Setsu -n0-Hangwan Morizumi immediately set out against
them with a force of three thousand horses, and caught them in their stronghold with only about
a hundred retainers, and in the fight which ensued, lasting from early morning t o late at night,
Yoshimoto was killed and his son wounded and captured. On the eleventh day the head of
Yoshimoto was paraded through the streets of the Capital. The precedent for exposing the head
of a rebel during a time of National Mourning was taken fr om the time when, after the death of
Horikawa Tenno, the head of the former Tsushima -no-kami Minamoto Yoshichika was thus
treated.

On the twelfth day a courier came from Usa -no-Daiguji Kinmichi of Kyushu with the news that
all that country; from Ogata Sab uro Koreyoshi to the men of Usuki, Hetsuki and Matsuura, had
revolted and thrown in their lot with the Genji. These tidings caused the greatest surprise and
consternation among the Heike, for now that the West Country had forsaken them, as well as,
the sou th and North, they were at a loss how to act, and smote their palms with rage and
perplexity.   On the sixteenth day another courier arrived from Iyo in Shikoku, telling how that,
since during the last winter Kono -no-Shiro Michikiyo of that province had ren ounced his
allegiance and made common cause with the Genji, Nuka -no-Nyudo Saijaku of Bingo, a strong
adherent of the Heike, had crossed over to Iyo and attacked him in his stronghold at Takanao on
the boundary of Dogo and Dozen.   In the fight, Kono Michiki yo had been killed, and his son

Kono -no-Jiro of Aki, who was his uncle on the mother's side, and stayed there awaiting an
opportunity to kill Saijaku and thus avenge his father's death.

After putting down this outbreak in Shikoku, Saijaku crossed over to Tomo in the proivince of
Bingo on the fifteenth day of

[p. 275]

the first month of the new year, where he called together a number of singing girls and strumpets,
and proceeded to make merry and carouse with them.   Then Kono -no-Shiro Michinobu too with
him a hundred men -at-arms, and suddenly burst in on him as he was drinking and revelling, and
though Saijaku had some three hundred retainers, they were so surprised at this unexpected
attack that they lost their heads and were quickly shot or cut down.   Saijaku was thus taken alive
and Michinobu brought him back to Takanao in Iyo, where his father had been slain, and there
put him to death.   And some said that his head was sawn off and others that he was
crucified.   After this the men of Shikoku submitted to Michinobu and followed him.   Then too
Tanso, Betto of Kumano in the province of Kii, forgot his great obligations to the Heike and
suddenly changed his front and went over to the Genji.   Thus did the South and East Sea districts
follow the example of th e East and the North Country, and men's ears were assailed continually
with reports of fresh defections, and as these hordes of savage rebels swarmed out on all sides like
angry bees, and the dominion of the Heike began to totter, all serious people, even those outside
the ruling family, lamented at the gloomy prospect.