CHAPTER VII.

THE SHOSHO'S RETURN TO KYOTO.

In the last decade of the first month Tamba -no-Shosho Naritsune and Hei Hangwan Yasuyori
Nyudo left Kase in Hizen and started for Kyoto with all speed, but as the cold was still severe  and
the sea rough, crawling from harbour to harbour and from one island to another, it was the tenth
of the second month before they reached Kojima in Bizen. Thence they went to see Ariki -no-
Bessho where the Dainagon, the father of the Shosho, had lived. Here they found various writings
on the bamboo

[p. 128]

pillars and on the shoji that the Dainagon had left. " Ah," he said, " there is no better memento
than a person's handwriting. If he had not written this here how could we have seen where he
was? " And the two of them read and reread it again and again with tears. " On the twentieth day
of the seventh month of the third year of Angen, became a priest; on the twenty sixth day of the
same month Nobutoshi came from Kyoto." was written. Thus they learned  that Gensaemon -no-
jo Nobutoshi had been to visit him. On the wall near by was incribed : " If we trust to the Three
Holy Buddhas [27] to receive us, surely we shall be reborn in Parad ise." Whereat, seeing that he
had hoped to be reborn in the Pure Land, they felt somewhat comforted amid their limitless grief.

When they enquired for his tomb, alas, there was no mound raised over it, only a place where the
earth was a little higher than  usual. Adjusting his sleeves respectfully, the Shosho spoke as to a
living person, weeping as he addressed him. " The tidings that you had passed away to the world
beyond were indeed brought to me in the island where I was living, but not being free I cou ld not
hasten hither. Since I was exiled to the island I was so melancholy that life was unbearable even
for a day : but I sustained my frail life and existed for two years, and am exceeding joyful to
return thus far, and if I could have found my honoured father alive how blessed it would have
been. As it is now, length of days has become but vanity. Thus far I have made great haste hither,
but from to day there will be no need for hurry." Thus he spoke weeping, and had his father been
living how much would  he have found to say in reply; but with those in the grave, there dwells
no regret: who is there that can smile when under the moss? The wind in the pines was the only
answer. That night the two spent in vigil at the grave, and when day broke they made a new
tomb, fencing it about with stakes and building in front a temporary but where they stayed seven
nights, repeating the Nembutsu and reading

[p. 129]

the Sutras. Then erecting a great sotoba. they inscribed thereon these words : "The deceased, a
pure spirit, delivered from the wheel of birth and death, now surely entered into the great
enlightenment; " with the date of the year and month and beneath it, " Naritsune, a filial son."

Surely no wood -cutter or lowly peasant, however ignorant, could help wee ping at this proof of a
child being the supremest treasure on earth. As the years roll on, nothing is more unforgettable
than gratitude for a kind bringing up, like a dream it is and like a vision; yea, and difficult to end
are the present tears of love. T he countless Buddhas of the Three Worlds [28] and Ten
Quarters [29] must have deigned to grieve, and the revered  spirit of the departed, how must it
have rejoiced. Then, though wishing to stay longer to say the Nembutsu, yet knowing the anxiety
of those awaiting them in Kyoto, they took their leave of the late Dainagon, promising to return
again, and departed weepin g. Even from those beneath the shadow of the grass it is hard to part.
On the sixteenth day of the third month at dawn the Shosho reached Toba, where was the
country residence of the late Dainagon, called the Suhama mansion. On coming to the mansion
they f ound it all ruinous, the fence without a roof and the doors gone from the gate. In the garden
there was no trace of anyone, and the moss had grown thick over everything. Walking round
beside the pond, the spring breeze of Aki -no-yama was rippling its surfa ce with white waves, the
purple duck and the white sea gull swimming hither and thither. When could they cease weeping
and longing for him who had made it all ?

The mansion still stood, but the entrance was broken in and the shutters and doors had
disappe ared. The Shosho could do nothing but fondly linger over everything associated with his
father, referring to him in words such as these : " Here it was that the Dainagon did so and so ;
here is the gate by

[p. 130]

which he used to enter ; that is the tr ee that he himself planted." It was the sixth day of the third
month, and some flowers were still remaining in bloom; the willow, the plum, the peach, and the
apricot, recognizing the season by their flowering twig: " Though their former master was gone,
yet the flowers forget not the spring." The Shosho, standing beneath the blossom.; murmured to
himself the ancient verses:

  " Peach and apricot cannot record the seasons that vanish
There is no smoke to be seen; was it lined here of old. "
" Ah, if the flowers could speak that grow in the home
childhood ;
Would I not ask them to tell all they remembered of you ?"


Yasuyori too, on hearing this was affected by melancholy feelings and could not but moisten his
black sleeves with tears. They wished to s tay there much longer and, loath to leave, they
remained until the evening: as it grew dark the moonbeams, as is their wont in ruined houses, fell
through the ancient eaves and flooded the mouldering chambers with light. Even when the dawn
began to break o n the mountains they did not haste hasten homewards, but as he could not
remain there for ever, the Shosho sent for the palanquin, since it had not waited for them, and
reluctantly left the Suhama mansion in tears, going on towards Kyoto rejoicing and sorr owing by
turns. A palanquin, had also come to meet Yasuyori Nyudo, but being unwilling to part from his
companion yet, he did not use it, but getting into the back of the Shosho's vehicle, went with him
as far as Shichijo Kawara, where their ways divided, but still they did not wish to part. Those

who spend half a day together under the cherry -blossoms, friends who look at the moon together
for an evening, travellers who stand under the same tree out of a sudden shower until it is over,
all these feel regre t at parting ; how much more those who have lived a life of misery in the same
island, on the same ship and in the same storms ; since they have the same Karma must not their
relation in the former life have been most deep?

[p. 131]

The Shosho's mother, who was living at Ryozen, had come the day before to the house of the
Saisho to await her son, and when she but caught sight of him as he entered, in her emotion at
seeing him alive, she covered her face and lay prostrate. His wife too, who had been in the  flower
of her beauty when he left, had become so emaciated with anxiety about him that he hardly
thought her the same person, while the black hair of his nurse Rokujo had become snow -white.
His child, who was three years old at the time of his exile, had now grown old enough to bind his
hair. Seeing another child of three beside him, the Shosho enquired who it might be, but Rokujo
could only falter: " Ah, that one indeed.... " when she was overcome by t ears. Then the Shosho
remembered with sorrow that his wife had been about to give birth when he was exiled and that
this must be the child that she had brought up safely. The Shosho then visited the Ho -o as he had
formerly been accustomed to do, and was promoted to the office of Saisho -no-Chujo. Yasuyori
Nyud o retired to a country seat that he had at Sorinji on Higashi -yama and there lived quietly.
His sentiments he thus expressed:

  " Thickly the moss has grown on the eaves of the roof of
my home place;
Through the opened chinks filter the beams of the moon ."

And so, living a secluded life, he pondered on his former unhappy days, and diverted himself by
writing a work called ' Hobutsu -shu ' or 'Treasury.'