CHAPTER XII.
FUJIKAWA.

Now when it was rumoured that Yoritomo had raised the standard of revolt, a council of
Courtiers was held at Fukuhara, and it was decided to attack him immediately, before he could
gather more of his adherents. The Commander in chief was

[p. 244]

Komatsu -no-Gon-no-suke Shosho Koremori, and the second in Command Satsuma -no-kami
Tadanori, while Kazusa -no-kami Tadakiyo was Chief of the Samurai, the force numbering some
thirty thousand horsemen in all. On the eighteenth day of the ninth month they set out from
Fukuhara, and on the day after they arrived at Kyoto, from whence they started out on the
twentieth day to go down to  the eastern provinces.

The Commander Gon -no-suke Koremori was at this time twenty -three years old, and his
costume and bearing were beautiful beyond the power of brush to depict. His general's armour,
an ancestral treasure laced with Chinese leather, was  carried in an armour box before him, and on
the road he wore a hitatare of red brocade with a light green body armour. He rode a dappled
grey horse and his saddle was mounted in gold. Satsuma -no-kami Tadamori wore a hitatare of
blue brocade and armour lac ed with black, and rode a large and powerful black horse with a
saddle ornamented with powdered gold lacquer. With their horse trappings and armour and
helmets, and even their swords and bows flashing and glittering as they rode, they were a splendid
and m artial spectacle.

This Satsuma -no-kami Tadanori was accustomed to pay visits to a certain lady, the daughter of a
princess, and it happened one night when he went to see her that a guest, a distinguished lady of
the Court, had chanced to come also and did  not go away until late. Tadanori, standing waiting
under the eaves of the roof, fanned himself vigorously. Hearing this the lady in the room hummed
softly to herself the line; "Ah, how loudly sounds in the field, the voice of the insects;" whereat he
ceased his fanning and returned home again. Afterwards, when he happened to go again, she
asked him why it was he had ceased fanning himself, and he answered: "Oh, it was because I
thought that you meant to imply that the noise was troublesome to you." When th is lady heard
that Satsuma -no-kami was departing for the eastern provinces she sent him a suit of silk clothes
and the following stanza, to show her grief at parting:

[p. 245]


"Tis not the garment that brushes the dew from the grass of the Eastland,
But my stay -at-home sleeve, that is the wettest of all."

To which Satsuma -no-kami replied:


"Surely it is not meet to show such regret at our parting,
Is not the road that I take that which my ancestor trod?"

Thus referring no doubt to the expedition of hi s ancestor Taira Sadamori, who went down with
Tawara Toda Hidesato to subdue the rebel Masakado. Formerly, when a General went forth to
subdue an enemy of the Throne, he was received in audience and received a Sword of
Commission. The Emperor used to proce ed to the Shishinden, the Bodyguards taking up their
position at the foot of the Throne, while the Courtiers of the Inner and Outer Council ranged
themself in order as for a Festival of the second grade. Then the Commander -in-Chief and the
Second in Comman d, according to the prescribed ceremony, would approach and receive the
Sword. But as it was now difficult to follow the precedents of Shohei and Tenkyo by reason of
their antiquity, in this case they followed the procedure of the time when Sanuki -no-kami Taira
Masamori set out for the land of Izumo against the former Tsushima -no-kami Minamoto
Yoshichika, and a Courtier's Bell only was given. This was put in a leather bag and carried after
the General, hung round the neck of a retainer. In ancient times whe n a General went forth from
the Capital to subdue the enemies of the Emperor, there were three things he had to forget: his
family on the day when he received the Sword of Commission; his wife and children when he
departed from the Capital; and himself whe n he engaged the enemy on the field of battle. So now
doubtless the two Generals Koremori and Tadanori must have borne these three things in mind,
ill fated as they were.

Thus leaving the Imperial Capital behind, they set forth by the highway that goes by  the eastern
sea. Even returning in peace by this road is not without danger, for the traveller must be soaked
by the dew of the open plain, and make his bed on the mossy

[p. 246]

mountain peaks, crossing the passes and fording the rivers by way. So afte r many days, on the
sixteenth day of the tenth month they arrived at Kiyomi -ga-saki in the province of Suruga. When
they left the Capital their forces consisted of thirty thousand horsemen, but as other troops had
joined them on the way they now had an arm y of seventy thousand, of which the vanguard
reached as far as Fujikawa and Kambara while the rearguard was yet at Tegoshi and Utsunoya.

Then the Commander Gonnosuke -no-Shosho Koremori summoned the Chief of the Samusai
Kazusa -no-kami Tadakiyo and said: "I t is my opinion that we had better cross over Ashigara and
there give battle; what do you think?" "When we left Fukuhara," replied Kazusa -no-Kami, "His
Excellency the Lay -priest Chancellor bade that all military matters should be entrusted to me,
and thoug h the forces of Izu and Tsuruga ought to have joined us by now, so far none of them
have come up, and although we have an army of seventy thousand horses yet all our forces, both
horses and men, are tired out; moreover as all the eastern provinces have tak en the side of the
Genji the last man, it is impossible to say how many tens of thousand they may muster. I think it
wisest therefore to draw up an army on this side of the Fujikawa with the river in front of us and
wait to see how matters turn out." And s o, as there was nothing else to be done, he consented.

Now Hyoye -no-suke Yoritomo pushed on, and, after crossing Mt. Ashigara, came to the
Kisegawa, where the Genji of Kai and Shinano came hurrying up to join him. At Ukishima -ga-

hara in the province of Su ruga he drew up his forces in battle array, numbering in all some two
hundred thousand horsemen. At this time Satake Taro of the Hitachi Genji sent a letter to one of
his retainers to Kyoto, but the messenger was intercept by Satsuma -no-kami's men and the letter
taken from him, but when they came to read it, it was only a letter to his wife, so there was no
harm in it, they restored it to him. Then Tadaki asked him how many men the Genji had,
whereupon he replied:

[p. 247]

"I have knowledge of only from f our or five hundred to a thousand of them, but for these last
seven or eight days they have been coming in, so that everywhere on plain, mountain, sea and
river there is nothing to be seen but armed men, and yesterday at the Kisegawa they said that the
whole force of the Genji amounted to some two hundred thousand men." "Ah," exclaimed
Kazusa -no-kami, "if only I had not advised the Commander in Chief to delay! That is indeed
regrettable; even if I had attacked a day sooner. But why do not the Oba brothers a nd
Hatakeyama come up? If they join us all the forces of Izu and Tsuruga will come with them." But
his regret now availed him nothing.

Then Gon -no-suke Shosho Koremori summoned to him Nagai -no-Saito Betto Sanemori, who
was their guide to the eastern provi nces, and asked him: "Are there many samurai in the eight
eastern provinces who are as mighty archers and as bold as you are?" "Do you then consider me a
mighty archer?" answered Sanemori with a scornful smile, "I only draw an arrow of thirteen
handbreadth s, and in the eastern provinces there are any number of Bushi who can do that.. One
who is really a famous archer never draws a shaft of less than fifteen, and his bow is so strong that
it needs four or five ordinary men to bend it. When these shoot they c an easily pierce two or
three suits of armour at once. Those who have the title of Daimyo never ride with less than five
hundred horsemen, and they are bold riders who know not how to fall, neither do their horses
stumble even on the roughest ground. Moreo ver when they fight they do not heed even if their
own parents or children are killed, but ride on over their bodies and continue the battle. The
samurai of the western provinces are quite different. If their parents are killed they retire and
perform Budd hist rites for the repose of their souls, and make the customary mourning; if their
children are slain they are overcome with grief and can fight no more. When they grow the rice
for the soldiers' rations they plant the fields in the spring and reap them i n the

[p. 248]

autumn and then go out to fight; they dislike the summer because it is hot and grumble at the
cold of winter. This is not the way of the warriors of the eastern provinces.

Moreover the Genji of Kai and Shinano, as they know the ground wel l, will most likely come
round the plains at the foot of Mt. Fuji to take us in the rear. Perhaps you may think that I speak
thus with the intention of causing apprehension in the mind of the General, but that is not so, for
an army does not depend on the number of its men, but on the strategy of the Commander."

Now the hour of Hare (6 a.m.) on the twenty -fourth day was the time fixed for the beginning of
the fight between the two armies, so on the preceding evening the outposts of the Heike went
forth to observe the disposition of the enemy. But the farmers and inhabitants of Izu and Suruga,
in terror at the movements of the armies, had fled away, some to the moorland, some to the hills,

and some in boats on the sea and river, and had kindled their cooking  fires everywhere, so that
the Heike, seeing them on all sides, were struck with consternation, exclaiming "Ah, see! the
camp fires of the Genji are without number! Truly the mountains and sea and river and plain are
all full of warriors. What is to be don e? "Also about the middle of the same night the water fowl
of the marshes of Mt. Fuji were startled by something or other, and rose suddenly all together
with a whirring of wings like the sound of thunder or a mighty wind, and the Heike soldiers
hearing it  shouted out: "It is the army of the Genji coming on to attack us! Saito Betto warned us
yesterday that the men of Kai and Shinano would come round the foot of Fuji to take us in the
rear. There are hundreds of thousands of them. We must fall back to the O wari river at
Sunomata or we shall be cut off." So, panic -stricken, they abandoned their positions and fled
precipitately without even taking their belongings with them, for so great was their haste that
some snatched up their bows without any arrows, or a rrows without any bow, springing on to
each other's horses, and even

[p. 249]

mounting tethered animals and whipping them up so that they galloped round and round the
post to which they were tied. There were some too who had procured some singing girls a nd
courtesans, and were banqueting and making merry with them when the alarm took place, and
these women were hustled and thrown down and trampled on in the confusion, so that they
were injured in the head or body and added their cries to the uproar.

Then  on the twenty -fourth day at the hour of the Hare, the Genji, numbering two hundred
thousand horsemen, advanced to the Fujikawa and shouted their war cry three times so that the
heavens reverberated and the earth shook, but on the side of the Heike there w as nought but
silence. When the vanguard approached their camp there was not a man to be seen, whereupon
they raised a shout that the enemy had fled, while some went and gathered up the armour they
had left behind, and others bore away in triumph the curta ins of the camp that had been left
standing. "There is not so much as a fly stirring in the Heike camp," they reported to their
Commander.

Then Hyoe -no-suke Yoritomo alighted from his horse, and, taking off his helmet, washed his
hands and rinsed his mout h. Turning toward the Imperial Palace he reverently made obeisance
and said: "It is not through any merit on my part that this victory has been gained, it is owing to
the favour of Hachi man Dai -bosatsu and none other."

Then the provinces that were captur ed were assigned, Suruga to Ichijo -no-Jiro Tadayori, and
Totomi to Yasuda -no-Saburo Yoshisada, and as it was not advisable to extend the attack further,
owing to the uncertainty of the situation in his rear, the leader of the Genji withdrew his forces
again to Kamakura. At this time the singing girls and courtesans who dwelt by the sea shore
mocked the Heike saying: "Ah, what a disgusting General to run away and avoid a battle; how
mean spirited are these Heike, not only do they but look at the enemy and ru n away, they listen
to our songs and run away without paying!" Besides this several lampoons were

[p. 250]

written on the Heike leaders, Munemori the Commander in the Capital, and Gon -no-suke who
lead their armies in the field, Heike being read 'Hiraya':


"Hiraya naru Munemori ika ni sawagurammu
Hashira to tanomu suke wo otoshite."

"How will Munemori, the roof of the structure, be shaker,
Now Gon -no-suke falls, pillar on whom he relied."

and also:

"Swift flowing over the rocks runs the foaming flood of  the Fuji;
Swifter the Ise Heishi scamper away in their flight."

These two also deride Kazusa -no-kami Tadakiyo for leaving his armour behind him at the
Fujikawa:

"Fujikawa ni yoroi wa sutetsu sumisome no
Koromo tada kiyo nochi no yo no tame."

"Leaving h is armour behind by the banks of the river of Fuji,
Only remains the black gown meet for a happier re -birth."

"Tadakiyo wa nige no uma ni zo norite keru,
Kazusa no shirigai kakete kai nashi.

"Tadakiyo's grey steed has fled like the wind with his master,
Nought in the hour of need Kazusa's crupper avails.



Note the wordplays on the different meanings of Heike  平家  read 平屋  a one-storied house, and
Munemori  宗盛 , reading  棟 roof. Suke means assistant or help, hence as a title, adjutant, Gon -no-
suke=Assistant adjutant. In the third stanza Tadakiyo  忠清  suggests  只 tada only and kiyo  着よ 'only
wearing.' The reference is to the black robe of a priest, for Tadakiyo will have no more use for the
garments of this world in future. Nige in the fourth stanza may be read  逃 flee, or  鼠毛  mouse -
coloured ; there is also a play on shirigai  章秋  crupper, i.e. presenting the back  of his horse to the enemy,
and 甲斐 advantage. The commander , carried away on his flying horse, is of no use to his men.