CHAPTER IV.
THE ANSWER.

     The purport of the Imperial Edict was forthwith communicated by the Daijin Munemori to
the Taira Da inagon Tokitada -no-Kyō. Then the Nii Dono opened the letter of Shigemori, which
ran as follows: " If you wish to see me

[p. 180]

again alive, see to it that the Three Sacred Treasures be sent back again to the Capital ; if this be
not done consider th at you will never see me again " ; and when she read these words she was so
affected by them that she pushed the doors that led to the next room where all the Courtiers
were assembled, and with the letter pressed to her face, threw herself down before Mune mori,
quite unable to utter a single word. After a short space, however, she arose, and controlling her
emotion addressed him thus: "See here, Munemori ! How pitiful is the message I have re ceived
from the Chūjō at Miyako! Anxious indeed must be the thoughts of his heart. Allow me then to
have the Three Sacred Treasures sent back to the Capital." " I also", replied Munemori " might
wish to do this thing, but to exchange the Three Sacred Treas ures of our Realm for Shigehira
would be a most improper act. Moreover with respect to Yoritomo I think it would avail nothing.
And the maintaining of the Sovereign Power of the Empire depends on the presence of the
Sacred Mirror alone. And how can you con sider the welfare of one child, when all the others and
our friends will suffer detriment on account of it? Even affection for children must be according
to circumstances. By no means can this thing be done." But the Nii Dono, reluctant to give up her
wish, still persisted : " For myself I did not desire to live a day or an hour after the death of the
late Chancellor, my husband, and it is only that I would see his Sacred Majesty again come to his
own, after tossing so long on the waters of the Western Sea,  that I have survived to this day.
When I heard that the Chūjō had been captured at Ichi -no-tani, my breast was straitened and my
throat obstructed so that I could not even drink hot water, and if I hear that he is no longer of
this world I also will depart with him, so pray kill me at once that I may be tro ubled no more."
And she cried and groaned aloud, so that all the assembly cast down their eyes in embarrassment.

[p. 181]

    Then the Shin -Chunagon Tomomoi -no-Kyō delivered his opinion as follows: "Even though we
should send back the Three Sacred Trea sures to the Capital, it is doubtful whether they would
return Shigehira to us. Is it not well then to send a reply to that effect?" To this counsel all
assented, and the Daijin set about composing the reply, while the Nii Dono, who was so
overcome that sh e could scarcely hold the pen, yet, nerved by her great affection for Shigehira,
also began to write an answer. Dainagon -no-Suke, the wife of the Chūjō, could say nothing, but
only covered her face and wept.

     Then Taira -no-Dainagon Tokitada ordered th e Imperial Envoy Hanakata to be summoned,
and thus addressed him: " Since you have thus braved the perils of the waves, and have made this
long journey to this far -off island, I will give you a souvenir of your exploit that you will carry

with you all your  days." And he had the two characters „Namikata‟ branded on his face with a hot
iron. When he returned  to the Capital and the Hō -ō saw it, he asked him, "Are you Hanakata ?"
"I am," was the reply. "Then," said the Hō -ō with a laugh, " we must call you „Namikata‟ in
future"; after which he read the answer, which ran as follows:

     " The Imperial Edict da ted the fourteenth of this month has arrived here at Yashima in Sanuki
on the twenty eighth day, and has been respectfully perused by us, and thus do we think
concerning what is written in it. Michimori -no-Kyō and many others of our house have already
been slain at Ichi -no-tani : what then have we to rejoice at if Shigehira alone is pardoned ? Our
Sovereign, having received the succession to the Throne of the late Emperor Takakura -in, was
only four years old when he began to reign, and while he was learnin g the way of benevolent and
virtuous government, Yoritomo, the barbarian of the East, and Yoshinaka, the rebel of the North,
plotted together, and gathering their forces entered the Capital, thus causing grievous affliction to
the youthful Sovereign and hi s

[p. 182]

August Mother, and no small indignation to the Courtiers and Ministers their relations. For a
considerable period they retired to the isles of Kyushu, and until they return to the Capital how
shall the Three Sacred Treasures be separated fro m his August Person? As the Chinese Classic
says, " The Subject considers the Sovereign as his mind, and the Sovereign considers the subject as
his body." If the Sovereign be demeaned, so will the subject be also, and if the subject be
demeaned, so also wi ll the country be too. If the Sovereign above mourns, how can the subject
below rejoice? And if the heart within be filled with grief, how can the body without be glad?
Since the time that our ancestor Taira Sadamori subdued the rebel Soma -no-Kojiro Masaka do,
pacifying the eight provinces of the East, the tradition has been handed down to his sons and
grandsons, so that they have put down rebellious subjects, and through succeeding ages have
loyally guarded the Sacred Destiny of the Throne. Thus it was that  our late father the Dajō -daijin
Kiyomori, in the periods of Hogen and Heiji held in great respect the Imperial Wishes, but paid
little regard to his own life; thus acting entirely on behalf of his Sovereign, but for himself not at
all. And as for this Yo ritomo, though when, on account of the treason of his father Sama -no-kami
Yoshitomo in the twelfth month of the first year of Heiji, many were constantly demanding his
execution, the late Chancellor out of the kindness of his heart was pleased to pardon hi m, yet he
forgets all this former obligation and is entirely unmindful of any gratitude. Straightway gathering
together hordes of rebels, in traitorous wise he wrought exceeding folly beyond description. Soon
may they invite the punishment of heaven, and t he hour of their ruin and defeat be privily
ordained. The sun and moon darken not their light for one thing, neither does the Buddha alter
the Law for one man. One evil deed should not cancel many virtuous acts, neither
-------------------
Chinese Classic  禮記  ， 臣軌

[p. 183]

should a small blemish cover up great merit. If the faithful service of our house for many
generations, and the many loyal deeds of our late father, had not been forgotten what need would
there have been for our Sovereign to proceed to Shikoku? Let an Imperial Edict then be issued
that we may return once again to our ancient Capital, and our former shame be put away. For if
not we shall go to Korea, or China, or India, or the uttermost confines of the demon -world. What

a calamity! Are th e Sacred Treasures of our Imperial Realm, handed down through eighty one
generations of Earthly Sovereigns, to become but the vain ornaments of an alien land? Let this our
meaning be brought plainly before His Majesty. Given with the utmost respect and obe isance on
the twenty eighth day of the second month of the third year of Ju -ei. The answer of Taira
Munemori Ason, former Naidaijin of the Lower First Rank."