CHAPTER I.

THE FORMER EMPRESS BECOMES A NUN.

The Former Empress Kenrei -mon-in went to Yoshida at the foot of Higashi -yama, and entered the cell of a monk of
Nara called Chūnagon -no-Hoin Keiei. It was old and dilapidated, with the garden overgrown with weeds, and
shinobu -grass clustering thickly on the roof. The curtains were gon e and the bedchamber exposed, and there was
nothing to keep out the wind and rain. Though there were many kinds of flowers, there was none to care for them,
and though the moon streamed in every night, no one was there to gaze at it. She, who had formerly spent her time
in the Jewel Halls and within the Brocade Curtain, now suffered the unspeakable hardships of dwelling in this
mouldering cell, bereft of all her old companions, like a fish on the dry land or a bird torn from its nest, and she
yearned fondly  for the times she had spent tossing on the heaving billows. As the poet says: * " She longs for the far -
off waves of the ocean, and the clouds of the limitless Western Sea ; the moss grows thick on the reed -thatched hut ;
tears fall as the moon shines in t he garden on Higashi -yama."

So on the first day of the fifth month of the first year of Bun -ji, the Former Empress cut short her hair and was
instructed in the Way by Ashobo -no-Shonin Insei of Chorakuji, and for the customary offering she presented him
with the robe of the Emperor Antoku, which he had worn up to the time of his death, so that the perfume yet clung
to it. She had brought it with her to the Capital from the far -off Western Provinces,
-----------------------
*as the poet say s. Tachibana Chokk an, in the Ro -ei-shu.

page 308

intending to keep it as a memorial of him and never let it leave her person, but now, as she had nothing else to offer,
and thinking moreover that it would be an aid to his Enlightenment, weeping bitterly she handed it to h im. The
Shonin was so affected that he could utter no word, but pressing the sleeve of his black robe to his face, he retired
weeping from the Imperial Presence. And this robe was afterwards woven into a banner and suspended in front of
the Buddha of the C horakuji.

This Empress was appointed Imperial Consort at the age of fifteen, and at sixteen was raised to the rank of Empress.
She was ever by the Emperor's side, helping him in the government by day, and the only sharer of his love by night.
At the age o f twenty two she bore a Prince who was named as the Heir to the Throne, and when he assumed the
Imperial Dignity she became Retired Empress and took the name of Kenrei -mon-in. She was the daughter of the
Lay-priest Chancellor Kiyomori, and as she had thus become the mother of the Emperor she was held in great
reverence by all the people. She was twenty nine years old this year, and the beauty of her fair face was not yet
dimmed, neither was the elegance of her slender form impaired ; but what now availed th e loveliness of her hair ?
So she renounced this world and became a nun, but even when she had entered the True Way her grief was not
assuaged. Ever she seemed to see before her the figures of the Emperor and the Nii Dono and the others as they sank
in the  waves, and never in this life could she forget those melancholy scenes, so she wondered why she had
remained alive to bear such sorrows, and her tears were never dried.

Even in the short nights of the fifth month, it was not easy to keep awake, but if sh e did not fall asleep she did not
dream of those who had passed away. Faintly the shadow of her single light fell on the wall outside, and all night the
dismal drumming of the rain sounded on the lattice of the windows. Surely the Imperial Consorts who wer e shut up
in the Joyo Palace in China were not more wretched. And how did it

page 309

remind her of the beloved past, this orange tree in blossom by the eaves, that the former tenant had brought and
planted there. As its heavy perfume was wafted into her  chamber, and the note of the cuckoo was borne once and

again to her ears, this ancient verse came into her mind, and she wrote it on the lid of her inkstone :

" Hark ! the cuckoo seeks the fragrant scent of the orange,
Where are those that I loved P Whi ther, departed?
 he cries."

The rest of the Court Ladies, who had thrown themselves into the sea, but had not drowned themselves with the
same determination as the Nii Dono and the wife of Echizen -no-sammi Michimori, had been roughly dragged out by
the Ge nji soldiers and brought back to the Capital, as has been before related. And these, both young and old, all
became nuns and were living in concealment in far -away valleys and dells in the mountains, wretched and
emaciated in appearance and quite unrecogni sable as their former selves. The places where they lived have gone up
in smoke, and the empty site is all that remains. They have all turned into overgrown moorland, and no former
intimate ever comes nigh them. All is as unfamiliar as his home to one who is bewitched by fairies and returns to it
after seven generations.