CHAPTER III.

AOI-NO-MAE.

Another story that has a certain pathetic interest is this. There was a certain little maiden w ho
served one of the Empress's ladies in waiting, who was much beloved by the Emperor, and it was
no ordinary passing fancy but a true

[p. 264]

and deep affection, so that her mistress no longer allowed her to wait on her, but rather treated
her as her s uperior and paid her great deference and attention. An ancient poem says; "Do not
rejoice when a son is born, and do not despair when you have a daughter, for a son does not
always become a Prince, while a daughter may become Imperial Consort and Empress."  What a
happy future might be before this little maid. She might become Nyogo and Imperial Consort,
then Mother of the Emperor and at last Retired Empress. Her name was Aoi -no-mae, but the
ladies of the Court already spoke of her confidentially among thems elves as Aoi -no-Nyogo.

But when the Emperor heard of this he ceased to summon her to his presence: this was not
because he had become tired of her, but because he feared the censure of the world, and being
naturally of a brooding disposition he lost all t aste for food, and falling sick became unable to
leave the Imperial Bedchamber. Then the Kwampaku Matsudono, hearing that His Majesty was
thus depressed, hastened to the Palace to comfort him. "Why does Your Majesty thus fret about
this affair?" he said, " for there is nothing to worry about. Let the maid be summoned again; her
low rank need be no obstacle, for I will make her my adopted daughter and then she need fear no
comparisons." "Ah no," replied the Emperor, "that cannot be; after I have retired from the Throne
such a thing might be done, but the actions of a Reigning Emperor must be above the criticism of
posterity." So, as his Master would not at all entertain the idea, the Kwampaku could do no more,
but with tears in his eyes retired from the Palace . Afterwards the Emperor wrote this verse on a
sheet of paper tinted in light green:

"Plain indeed is my love, for though I try to conceal it,

All my friends enquire what I am brooding about."

This was an old poem written by Taira Kanemori, but as it ex pressed his feelings the Emperor
gave it to Reizei -no-Shonagon Takafusa to convey to Aoi -no-Mae, who, when she had received it
and read it, blushing deeply put it away in her her bosom and

[p. 265]

then, overcome by the violence of her feelings, immediat ely left the Court and returned to her
home, where she took to her bed and died after about a week. Very applicable to a case like this

are the lines of Haku -raku-ten; "The hand -maid will rue one day of her lord's favour for a
hundred years," and everyone said that the Emperor's feeling was just like that of the Emperor
Taiso of To who wished to introduce the daughter of Tei -jin-ki into the Genkwanden, but when
Gicho reproved him, and told him that she was already betrothed to Rikushi, he gave up his
intent ion.