CHAPTER XVI.
THE BURNING OF MIIDERA.

The priests of Hieizan who had formerly behaved in a disorderly manner were now peaceful and
quiet, whereas Nara and Miidera, since they had received and lent their support to the Prince, had
put themselves in the po sition of enemies of the Throne. Therefore it was resolved to proceed
against both monasteries, but, with the intention of attacking Miidera first, Sahyoye -no-kami
Tomomori with Satsuma -no-kami as his Lieutenant marched against the Onjoji with about ten
thousand men. At the monastery about a thousand soldier -monks, arming themselves, made a
shield barrier, threw up a barricade of felled trees and awaited them. At the hour of the Hare (6.
a.m.) they began to draw their bows, and the battle continued the whol e day, until when evening
came on three hundred of the monks and

[p. 209]

their men had fallen. Then the fight went on in the darkness, and the Imperial forces forced their
way into the monastery buildings and set them on fire.

The main temples of Honka ku-in, Joki -in, Shinnyo -in, Keon -in, Daiho -in, Joryu -in, Fugendo and
the Hall of the Kyodaikwasho with the Honzon -do, the sixteen yard Great Hall, the Bell Tower,
the Baptismal Hall, the Shrine of the Tutelary Deity, the new Shrine of the Deity of Kumano, the
Halls, Residences, Pagodas and Shrines to the number of six hundred and thirty seven, together
with one thousand eight hundred and fifty three houses of Otsu, not to speak of seven thousand
volumes of the Holy Sutras, called the Issai Kyo [13], which Ji to had brought from China, and two
thousand Buddhist statues, were suddenly reduced to ashes. It seemed as if the Five
Pleasures [14] of Heaven had departed from the world and the Three Hot Torments [15]of the
Dragon were at their height.

Now Miidera had or iginally belonged to the Governor of Omi, but afterwards became the
chantry temple of Temmu Tenno. The principal Buddha of this temple was that which this
Emperor himself specially worshipped, and which the Kyodai Kwasho [16], said to be the living
Miroku, who for a hundred and sixty years worshipped it, had given over to Jito Daishi. This
image is said to have come down to earth from the jewel Palace

[p. 210]

of the Toshita Heaven, the fourth of the Six Heavens of Desire, and to here await the far off tim e
of the revelation of Miroku under the sacred Dragon Flower. Indeed a most extraordinary matter!
As the Daishi here established the three symbols of a well, flowers, and water, as holy memorials
that it was a place efficacious in teaching and baptism, it was called Miidera (Temple of the
Three Wells). Such a holy place it was and now it has come to nothing. In an instant, the Law of
Tendai and Shingon was destroyed, no trace is left of its stately buildings, the Halls of the Law are
done away, the sound of  the bell is heard no longer, the flowers of the summer preaching have
vanished and the splashing of the holy water sounds no more. The aged and virtuous teachers
preach the Law no longer, and the multitudes of disciples have forsaken their studies. The Lo rd

Abbot Enkei Shinno is dismissed from his office of Betto of Tennoji and thirteen other chief
priests must vacate their posts, and all are committed to the Custody of the Kebiishi, while thirty
priests, including Tsutsui Jomyo Hoshi, are sent into exile.  Such an upheaval and disorder in the
Empire was no ordinary matter and all considered it a portent of the fall of the Heike supremacy.


NOTES

 [1] Miroku .  Sk.  Maitreya, a Bodhisattva, the Messiah of Buddhism. cf. p. 212.
[2] Tamonten . or Bishamon, Sk . Vais'ramana, one of the Four Deva Kings.
[3] Eifu-tachi. A light ornamental weapon carried by the officials of the Eifu or Imperial Guard as
a badge of office.
[4] Tenno of Kiyomihara.  Temmu Tenno, so called from his place of residence.
[5] Keisei . Name of some favourite courtesan. Lit. 'Ruiner of castles' significant of their character
and habits.
[6] Kenjo . Name of a dance in which the dancer held a snake in a bamboo curtain (sudare) in his
hand while he danced and afterwards slipped it into his sleeve.
[7] Shinra Daimyojin . A god that was revealed to So -en-chin on his way back from China and
introduced by him to Miidera.
[8] Eight Disobediences .  Rebellion, Great Disobedience, Irreligion, Unfilial conduct, Great unfilial
conduct, Undutifulness, Wicked d isobedience, Faithlessness.
[9] Deavdatta . (Jap. Chodatsu.) the rival and enemy of S'akya Muni.
[10] Ninnaji . A temple to the N.W. of Kyoto, whither Uda Tenno retired; had a special
connexion with the Court, as its abbot was a Royal Prince.
[11] Toji. or the Eastern Temple. So called because it lay east of the Shujaku Gate of the Palace.
[12] Picking up acorns . (shii) there is a word play on the double meaning of 'shii' oak, here
referring to its fruit, and Shi -i Fourth Rank, so that it would then mean "as  one who has only
picked up the Fourth Rank."
[13] Issai Kyo also called the Daizo Kyo, the Tripitaka with commentaries.
[14] Five Pleasures . The five melodious sounds of the Palace, Trade, Horns, Levies and Wings.
[15] Three Hot Torments . The Dragon is sa id to plunge into boiling water three times a day.
[16] Kyodai Kwasho . Apparently a famous priest of this temple. (Kwasho is the Sk. Upadhyaya, a
Buddhist priest, as dist. from other priests; sometimes it signifies the head of a monastery.) This
priest was  perhaps considered to be an incarnation of Miroku, or it may be revered as much as
Miroku Bosatsu or Maitreya. This Bodhisattva is to come as successer of S'akya Muni after a lapse
of fifty thousand years, to usher in the golden age. Kobo Daishi, the patr on saint of Mt. Koya is

said to be asleep there awaiting his advent. He will come and preach under the Dragon Flower
Tree.



VOLUME V.