CHAPTER XIV.
THE IMPERIAL HAUNT S.

Thus the places that the Emperor used to frequent were reduced to ashes, and nought but the
foundation stones was left of his residences; the Imperial Car was his only refuge, of the gardens
of the Princesses but the site remains, and on the place of their elegant chambers the dew falls
like tears and the blasts whine mournfully. The splendid apartments where the ladies tired
themselves behind the long curtains, the hunting lodges and fishing pavilions, the residence of the
Sesshō, the mansions of the Courtiers, the labour of many years made vain in an hour, what now
remains of them but charred logs? How much more the lodging of their retainers and the houses
of the common people? In all the area that the fire devoured was a score of cho and more. Not
otherwise, when the power of Go was overthrown, the terraces of Kosō were suddenly
abandoned to the thistles and dew, and when the might of Shin was at last laid low, the smoke of
the palace of Kanyō obscured the land. Though the slopes of the pass of Kwank oku were made
strong, the northern barbarians broke through, and though they relied on the deep waters of the
Yellow river the eastern marauders took possession of it. What then are we to think of it? Thus
driven out of their elegant Capital and forced to seek refuge in an unknown shore; it is as if the
Dragon God, who yesterday rode in triumph on the clouds, commanding the rain, should to -day
lie like a fish out of water beside the storehouses. So can all see that adversity and prosperity take
the same roa d, and rise and fall are as a turn of the band; and who is there who does not grieve?
Though in the former days of Hogen they flourished like the flowers in spring time, in this era of
Ju ei they have fallen like the leaves of autumn.

At this time Hatlkey ama Shōji Shigeyoshi, Oyamada Bettō Arishige and Utsunomiya Saemon
Tomotsuna, who had

[p.56]

been in the service of the Heike from Jishō to Ju -ei, were lying under sentence of death in the
Capital, but Shin Chūnagon Tomomori -no-Kyō gave his opinion as fo llows: "It will hardly make
any difference to the fate of our house if the heads of a hundred or a thousand men are cut off, so
why cause bereavement to the, wives and children of these men who are waiting for them at
home? It may be against reason to say so, but if our fortunes should again revive, they may come
up to Kyoto and enter our service again to show us some gratitude for our clemency." "Then let it
be as you say"; said the Daijin Munemori, and he set them free. Overjoyed at their unexpected
release, they raised their heads and put their hands together, crying: "Let us share the fortunes of
your house to the end"; but Munemori replied: "Your hearts are in the East Country with your
families; why should you go with us to the West, empty handed as we  are? Return, then, to your
homes." And they went out, finding it hard to restrain their tears when they thought of those
whom they had served for twenty years.