CHAPTER II.

AUTUMN LEAVES.

While Takakura Tenno was on the Throne everybody declared that his consideration for others
surpassed even that of the Mikados of the periods Enki and Tenryaku, and though ge nerally
speaking it was after he had attained to years of discrimination that he obtained his reputation for
wisdom and benevolence, yet his disposition was kind and gentle from his earliest childhood.

During the period Shoan, when His Majesty was only ab out ten years old, being extremely fond
of the tinted leaves of autumn, he had a little hill -garden made in the north enclosure of the
Palace, and planted it with maple and 'haze' trees

[p. 262]

that redden beautifully in that season, calling it 'The Hil l of Autumn Tints' and from morning till
evening he never seemed to tire of looking at it. But one night a late autumn gale blew violently
and scattered the leaves everywhere in confusion, so the next morning, when the Palace servants
went round early as u sual to clean the grounds, they swept up all the fallen leaves and the broken
branches as well, and as it was a bleak and cheerless morning they made a fire with them in the
court of the Nuidono, and heated some sake to warm themselves. Soon afterwards the  Kurando
in waiting, hastening to inspect the garden before the Emperor should see it, and finding nothing
there, enquired the reason and the servants told him. "What?" he exclaimed, "how could you dare
to treat the garden that the Emperor is so fond of in  such a way? You deserve to be imprisoned or
banished at least, and I too may very likely incur the Imperial displeasure." Just then the Emperor,
coming out to see his favourite trees as soon as he had left his bed chamber, was surprised to find
they had a ll disappeared, and the Kurando told him what had happened. To his surprise His
Majesty was not at all angry, but only laughed and quoted a Chinese poem by Haku -raku-ten
about warming sake in the woods by burning maple leaves. "I wonder" he said, "who can have
taught it them. Really they are quite esthetes."

Again in the period Angen, one night when the Emperor was sleeping in a strange part of the
Palace according to the advice of the diviners, being naturally wakeful, he could not get to sleep.
Perchance  it may be that, as the poem says, the voice of the Palace watchman makes a Monarch
wakeful, or as the night was very cold he may have been thinking of the occasion when Saga
Tenno, on just such a frosty night, feeling compassion for the suffering of his p eople, stripped off
his own bed clothes and exposed himself to the cold, and regretting that he himself could not
emulate the virtue of such an Emperor. Thus being more wakeful than usual, he heard late at
night the sound of someone crying out some distanc e away, and im -

[p. 263]

mediately summoned an attendant and ordered him to go and find out what it was. When the
Courtier on guard went out and searched, he discovered a poor girl in one of the lanes near
carrying the lid of a clothes -chest and weeping bitterly. On his enquiring the cause, she told him

that she was carrying home some clothes which her mistress, who was a lady -in-waiting at the
Palace of the Ho -o, could barely afford to have made, when two or three ruffians suddenly
robbed her of them, an d that her mistress could not continue to serve unless she had the proper
clothes, and she did not know anyone who could help her, and so she was crying. On hearing this
the Courtier brought the girl back; with him and reported the whole affair to the Empe ror, who
was moved to tears at the story. "Alas! how cruel" he exclaimed," who could do such a thing? In
the days of the Emperor Gyo in China the people reflected the goodness of their Ruler and were
good too, but now in this age the people have only me to  imitate and so they are very wicked.
When wrong is done in the Empire, ought I not to be ashamed?" Then he asked what kind of
garment it was, and on being told, he bade the Imperial Consort Kenreimon -in give her one of
same kind, whereupon they brought a dress far more beautiful than the former one and gave it to
the girl. Then the Emperor, fearful lest she might again be molested, as the hour was so late,
ordered several of the Imperial Guards to escort her as far as the house of her mistress. It was not
strange then that everyone, even the poorest and meanest of his subjects, should pray for the long
life of this virtuous Sovereign.