CHAPTER VI.
SIX BATTLES.

     But after the Heike crossed over to Ichi -no-tani the men of Shikoku  became disaffected, and
especially the subordinate officials in charge of Awa and Sanuki brok e into open rebellion and
wished to go over to the Genji, but as they had been on the side of the Heike right up to this
time, they doubted whether the Genji would believe in their sudden change of face, and decided
to prove their hostility to their former  allies by a deliberate act of war. Learning therefore that
Kadowaki -no-Hei Chūnagon Norimori and his two sons Echizen -no-Sammi Michimori and
Noto -no- kami Noritsune were at Shimotsue in the province of Bizen, they set sail thither with
ten ships of war to  attack them. Noritsune's wrath was great. "These are the fellows," he
exclaimed, "who have been living on our pasture right up till yesterday, and now they have
turned traitor ! Kill them all, let none escape ! " And he put to sea with his men in a number  of
small boats, and attacked them fiercely. Now the Shikoku men had only intended to shoot a few
arrows at them, as a proof of their rebellion, and then retire, so when they found themselves
attacked thus vigorous ly they at once gave way and beat a hasty retreat to the port of Fukura in
Awaji. In this island of Awaji were two Genji chiefs; they were the youngest sons of the late
Rokuj ō no Hangwan Tameyoshi, Kamo -no Kwanja Yoshitsugu and Awaji -no-Kwanja Yoshihisa,
and under their leadership the rebels threw  up a stronghold and awaited the foe. This availed
nothing under the impetuous onslaught of Noritsune, and Kamo no Kwanja was killed and
Awaji -no-Kwanja wounded and captured, while the remaining two hundred and thirty men who
still resisted were taken and beheaded, their heads being

[p.130]

labelled with the names of their captors and sent to Fukuhara, whither Kadowaki Norimori also
proceeded. His two sons then crossed over to Shikoku to deal with one Kawano -no-Shirō of Iyo,
who had not obeyed the Heike summons, the elder brother Michimori soon after arriving before
the stronghold of Hanazono in Awa.

     Now when Kawano -no-Shirō Michinobu of Iyo heard that Noto -no-kami Noritsune had
arrived at Yashima in Sanuki , he went over to the province of Aki to join his maternal uncle
Nuta -no-Jirō who lived there, and as soon as Noritsune heard it he started from Yashima without
delay, and reaching Minoshima .in Bingo the same day, on the next he was already before the
fortress of Nuta. He immediately delivered a violent assault on the two rebels, with the result
that Nuta laid down his arms and surrendered. Kawano, however, resisted stubbornly, and when
his five hundred men had been reduced to fifty, he sallied forth from the walls to make his escape.
Being surrounded by a band of two hundred men under Heihachi hy ōye Tamehisa, one of
Noritsune's samurai, he fought until but six of his men were left, and as they were retreating
along a narrow path to gain the shore and evade their foes by boat, Sanuki -no-Shichir ō Yoshinori,
son of Heihachi -hyōye, a very fine archer,  shot down another five so that only himself and one
retainer remained. Then Yoshinori, taking the retainer for his lord, sprang upon him and grappled,
with him and would have slain him, when his master turned, swept off his head as he bent over
his retain er, and flung it into a ricefield. Then he shouted loudly: " I am Kwano -no- Shirō Ochi -
no-Michinobu of Iyo, aged twenty one, and this is the way I fight .  Stop me now, any of you who
thinks himself someone! " And thus eluding them, he escaped with his reta iner to Iyo. Noto -no-
kami, though he had been unable to capture Kawano, then returned to Ichi -no-tani with his

prisoner Nuta -no-Jirō.

     Ama no Rokurō Tadahisa of the province of Awa also

[p.131]

rebelled and went over to the Genji, setting sail for t he Capital with two large warships fully
loaded with men and provisions. As soon as this came to the ears of Noto -no-kami in Fukuhara
he set off in pursuit with many small and swift ships, and overtook Tadahisa off Nishinomiya.
Ordering his men to let none  escape, he attacked them fiercely, but Tadahisa, fearing destruction,
fled to Fukehi in Izumi. Then Sonobe -no-Hyōye Tadayasu, who was not well disposed to the
Heike, when he heard that Ama -no-Rokurō had been thus roughly handled by Noritsune and was
in Fu kehi, went thither and joined him with a hundred horsemen, and the two allies built a
fortress there to resist  attacks. Noritsune soon assaulted it, however, so seeing no chance of
stemming his vehement onset, they made their escape to Miyako, leaving a hu ndred and thirty of
their followers behind, whose heads were duly taken and sent to Fukuhara

     Soon after, Usuki -no-Jirō Koretaka and Ogata -no-Saburō Koreyoshi of the province of Bungo
joined themselves with Kawano -no-Shirō Michinobu, and assembling two  thousand fighting men,
crossed over to Bizen and established them selves in the fortress of Imaki in that Province. News
of this soon r eached Noritsune at Fukuhara and filled him with wrath and apprehension, so that
he was soon on the march to Bizen with three thousand horsemen. "The rascals are in some force
there, so we must send a larger army," quoth he at Fukuhara, and when this speech was reported
to the rebels, they thought that many tens of thousands of horsemen were being sent against
them, and the soldiers in the fortress declared that, as they had already had their fill of fighting
and won much fame  and booty, it would be a shame if they were surrounded and annihilated by
overwhelming numbers, so that it would be better to retire to some safer plac e and rest
themselves awhile. Usuki -no-Jirō and Ogata no Saburō   accordingly hastened back to Bungo,
while Kawano recrossed the sea to Iyo, and Noto -no-kami, seeing that there was no longer any
enemy to fight,

[p.132]

made his way back to Fukuhara, to be  greatly praised by Munemori and all the Heike Courtiers
for his many successful expeditions.