CHAPTER VIII.
CONCERNING ROKUDAI.

     Now Hōjō -no-Shirō Tokimasa was made Warden of Miyako to represent Yoritomo there, and
in order that none of the male posterity of the Heike should escape him, he made proclamation
that anyone, high or low, who could give him any information as to the ir whereabouts, should
receive whatever he might wish. And, regrettable to say, many in the Capital, anxious to gain
rewards, made search and gave information, so that many were discovered. So much so that they
seized upon even the children of the lowest s ervants, if they were handsome and of fair
complexion, declaring : " This is the son of such and such a Chūjō, or: " This is the heir of such
and such a Shōshō : " and when the mother or father wept and lamented, they would say: " The
foster -mother has sai d so ;" or : " His nurse has told us : " and

[p. 293]

if they were quite young children they would be thrown into the water or buried alive, or if they
were older they would be strangled or stabbed, so that the grief and lamentation of their mothers
and foster -mothers was beyond compare. Hojō himself was pained at this wholesale slaughter,
but as he had to obey orders he could do nothing.

     Among these descendants was Rokudai Gozen, the heir of Komatsu -no-sanmi -no-Chūjō
Koremori -no-Kyō, who was now g rowing up, and as he was the grandson and heir, he searched
everywhere to try and find him 'and put him to death, but all to no effect, and he was just about
to return to Kamakura with his purpose unfulfilled, when a certain woman came to Rokuhara
and said : " Westward from here, at a place called Shōbu dani, to the north of the mountain
temple of Daigakuji which lies behind Henjōji, the wife and children of Komatsu -no-sammi -no-
Chūjō Koremori are in hiding." Hōjō was exceedingly pleased to hear this, and imm ediately sent
someone to spy out the place. Going thither he found that in a certain temple building there
were several women and children carefully concealed, and as he peeped through a chink in the
fence he saw a white puppy run out, followed by a very h andsome boy; then a woman who
looked like his foster -mother came out hurriedly and drew him in again, exclaiming : " How
terrible if anyone should see you! " This is certainly he, thought the spy, as he hastened back and
told what he had seen, and the next  day Hojō surrounded Shōbudani with soldiers and sent a
messenger to the temple saying :

" I have heard that Rokudai Gozen, the son of Komatsu -no-sammi Chūjō Koremori, is in this
place, and Hōjō -no-Shirō Tokimasa, the representative of Kamakura Dono, wish es to see him, so
please bring him forth at once." When his mother heard this her senses reeled so that for a while
she knew nothing, and Saito Go and Saito Roku, the child's two faithful retainers, tried to find
some way to escape with him, but when they saw the soldiers surrounding them on all sides, they
knew it was no use.

[p. 294]

    Then his mother, holding the child in her arms, wept and lamented aloud, crying: "Kill me too!

" And the foster -mother and the other ladies, falling down in front of he r, added their voices to
the sad chorus. For a long time they had kept quiet and had not raised their voices above a
whisper for fear of discovery, but now all in the house wept and wailed loudly with one accord.
Now Hōjō was neither wood nor stone, and te ars rose to his eyes as he stood waiting within
hearing of the scene. Repressing his emotion he sent another messenger saying : " As the land is
not yet quiet and safe, some violence might befall you, so Tokimasa himself has come to fetch the
child. There is nothing to fear, so I pray you let him come at once." At this the child said to his
mother : " As there is no help for it, it were better to send me at once, for otherwise the soldiers
will break in to search for me, and that will be much worse; and eve n if I do go, I can soon ask
leave of this I Hōjō to let me come back again.  So do not grieve so much." And while he tried to
comfort her thus, as it must be, his mother dressed him and smoothed his hair, weeping as she
did so, and just before he started she put into his hand a beautiful little rosary of black wood,
saying : " " Take this, and be sure you repeat the Nembutsu as often as you can, that you may
to Paradise." " Since I must part with you to -day, " replied the boy as he took it," I wish if
possible to go where my father is." At this his younger sister, who was about ten years old, cried
out also : " I too want to go and see my father; " and she ran out after him, so that the foster -
mother had to hold her back. Rokudai Gozen was twelve years old,  but looked more grown up
than most boys of fourteen or fifteen, and was very handsome and charming in his disposition.
He tried hard to show a bold front to the enemy, but his tears ran down under the sleeve that he
pressed to his face as he got into the  palanquin, which then moved off surrounded by soldiers on
all sides. Saito Go and Saito Roku walked on each side of their young master, and though Hōjō
made two of his men

[p. 295]

get off their horses for them to ride, they declined, and walked barefoo t all the way from
Daigakuji to Rokuhara. His mother and the other lady flung themselves on the ground, gazing up
to heaven in an agony of longing.

     Presently his mother said to the nurse : " They say that the children of the Heike are being
sought ou t and put to death in various ways, some being drowned, and others buried, or strangled,
or stabbed. I wonder how they will deal with our boy. As he is rather grown up I think they will
certainly behead him. I have often seen children put out to nurse with  foster -mothers, and even
then parental affection is still strong ; how much more when we have always kept our child with
us ever since he was born, and never let him out of our sight for a minute, but his father and I
have brought him up ourselves, regard ing him as quite different from other children, and so when
I was thus untimely bereft of his father, I had these two left to comfort me ; and now, alas! I have
only one. Ah, what shall I do ? For these last three years I have never been free from anxiety,
even for an hour, and though it was what I was expecting yet I did not think it would come thus
yesterday or to day. You know how I have always relied on the power of Kwannon of Hase ; and
yet I must suffer his being snatched ,may from me like this. And t hey will not suffer him to live
long! " And so she continued her plaint, pressing her sleeve to her face and sobbing incessantly.
Even when night came her grief choked her throat and prevented her even from dozing, but after
a while she said to the nurse :  "Just now I fell to sleep for a moment and in a dream I saw my boy
coming to me, riding on a white horse, and he came to my side and sat down respectfully, saying
that he had got leave to come as he longed to see me so much ; but then, to my great regret I
started up suddenly, and when I searched beside me there was no one there. How short is a
dream indeed, and how painful is the awaking." And the tears ran down her cheeks as she related

it.

[p. 296 ]

Thus the long night dragged by, and she ceased not to  moisten her couch with her tears. But as all
things must come to an end, at last the night watchman proclaimed the opening dawn, and as it
broke, Saitō Roku came back, and in answer to the anxious enquiry of the lady, told her that the
child was quite saf e and had sent her a letter. Opening it she read as follows: "Thus far I am quite
safe, but still I fear you must be very anxious. Please give my love to everybody." And when she
read his words, written in such a manly style, she pressed the letter to her face without a word,
and then cast herself on the ground with her head in her robe. As she remained thus for some
time without stirring, Saitō Roku said : " Things are uncertain, even for an hour, so pray give me
an answer that I may go back." So the lady,  weeping, wrote a reply and gave it to him, and he
bade her farewell and departed.

     Then the foster -mother, impelled by restlessness of spirit, wandered out of the Daigakuji and
was walking about aimlessly in the vicinity, weeping as she went, when sh e met someone who
told her that behind there dwelt a priest of the mountain temple of Takao, called Mongaku -bō,
who was very much trusted by Yoritomo in all matters, and that he wished to find a son of some
Court lady to become his disciple. At this she wa s overjoyed, and at once making her way to
Takao, she begged to see Mongaku and thus addressed him, weeping bitterly the while: " My
young lord, whom I have carried in my arms since he was born, and who is now twelve years old,
was yesterday carried away b y the soldiers. Could not your reverence beg his life, and bring him
up as your disciple?" And she fell down before the monk, weeping unrestrainedly, so that he
knew not what to do.

     Feeling compassion for her distress he asked her who the boy was. " It is the beloved child of
the wife of Komatsu -no-sammi Chūjō Koremori -no-Kyō," she replied, " and we were bringing
him up, but somebody must have said that he was the

[p. 297]

son of the Chūjō, so yesterday the soldiers came and took him." "Who was the warrior who took
him?" asked the priest. " He said his name was Hōjō -no-Shirō Tokimasa ; " replied the lady. "Well
I will go and see him; " declared Mongaku, and he went off there and then. At this the lady,
though she did not entirely trust in the monk, f elt somewhat relieved from the intense anxiety
that had possessed her since the child was taken, and immediately hurried back to Daigakuji.  " I
thought you had gone somewhere to drown yourself," said the child's mother, "and I too was
thinking I would lik e to throw myself into some river or other ; " and then, in answer to her
questions the nurse told her in detail all that she had done, and what the priest had said. " Ah, if
the priest could beg his life, and bring him here so that I could see him once ag ain! " she
exclaimed, and her unceasing tears were this time tears of joy.

     So the priest went to Rokuhara and asked about the matter. " It is the order of Kamakura
Dono," said Hōjō, " that every one of the male descendants of the Heike should be soug ht out
and put to death, and among them is Rokudai Gozen, son of Komatsu -no-Chūjō Koremori. As he
is growing up, and is moreover the last of the Heike line, his mother being, it is said, the daughter
of the late Naka -no-Mikado Shin -Dainagon Narichika -no-Kyō I had special orders to take him

and put him out of the way, but though I managed to find others of the family I could not find
him by any means, and was going back to Kamakura empty handed, when unexpectedly I
received news of him the day before yesterd ay, and yesterday went and brought him here ; but
indeed he is such a beautiful child that I am sorry I did not leave him where he was."  "Well, may
I see him ? " asked Mongaku, and when he was taken to where the child was, he found him
dressed in a double  embroidered hitatare, holding in his hand the rosary of black wood. Such was
the beauty of his hair and the elegance and nobility of his form and bearing, that he hardly looked
like a creature of this

[p. 298]

world at all. Though his face was a little thin, and he had perchance not slept much that night, yet
he looked indeed very lovable.

When the child caught sight of the priest his eyes filled with tears for some reason or other, and
Mongaku too moistened the sleeve of his black robe. " However great  an enemy he might
become in the future," he thought " how could anyone put him to death now ? " Then, turning to
Hōjō, he said : " It is no doubt a matter connected with a previous existence, but when I consider
this child I am filled with a great pity fo r him. Will you not grant him a reprieve for twenty days,
while I go down to Kamakura and obtain a pardon for him ? When I went up to the Capital in
former days to procure an Imperial Edict to establish the position of Yoritomo, as I travelled all
night th rough the plains around the Fujikawa, I lost my way and was nearly washed away and
drowned, and then after that I met with robbers in Mount Takashi, and barely escaping with my
life managed to effect an entrance into the „Prison Palace' of Fukuhara and rec eive the Edict from
the Hō -ō. In recognition of this service Yoritomo promised that whatever request I might make
of him at any time, he would surely grant it, and moreover I have done him many important
services since then. It is no new thing that I say, but as I have valued my duty more than my life,
Yoritomo will not forget it, unless his high position has puffed him up." And he set out for
Kamakura at the dawn of that day.

     Saitō Go and Saitō -Roku, regarding the monk as a living Buddha indeed, pres sed their hands
together and wept. They then returned to Daigakuji and acquainted the child's mother with all
that had happened, to her very great joy. With regard to the decision of Yoritomo, they were in
suspense as to what it would be, but were cheered by his life being spared for twenty days, and
ascribing it to the power of Kwannon of Hase, they put their trust in that deity.  So things went
on, and the twenty days sped by like a dream, but the monk did not come back. " How can this
be ? " they said wi th sinking hearts, and all their

[p. 299]

grief and anxiety assailed them once again. Hojo also, as the twenty days that he had agreed to
wait had passed, thought that Yoritomo had probably refused the pardon, and fretted impatiently
at the delay, for he  wished to start immediately for Kamakura.  Saitō Go and Saitō Roku wrung
their hands in despair, but as the monk had not returned, neither had he sent any messenger, they
knew not what to think. So they went out to Daigakuji and reported, with tears strea ming down
their cheeks, that the monk had not come back and that Hojo was to start at break of day. The
two ladies, who had felt very much cheered when the priest started out so hopefully, and who
had also relied on the help of Kwannon, now began to lose h eart again, as was but natural. " Is

there not some virtuous old man, "said the mother to the nurse," who could be found to take him
to meet the monk on the road ; for how terrible if he were to come back with the pardon after
the child had already been pu t to death. What will they do ? Do they mean to kill him soon ? "
"It looks as though they would do so at dawn," replied one of the " owing to the behaviour of
Hojo's retainers in his residence. For in their pity and reluctance for such work some of them are
weeping and some repeating the Nembutsu." "And how is the child looking ? " asked his mother.
" When anyone goes to see him, he seems quite unconcerned, telling his rosary, but when no one
is looking he presses his sleeve to his face and weeps ; " repl ied the retainer. " That is just like
him," said his mother, " he is still young in years, but he has the heart of a man already ; if there
had been time I would have asked Hojo to live him leave to come back here once again, but
today is already past the twentieth day, so I shall not be able to come to him or he to me. And I
know not when I shall see him again ; so how wretched must he be, thinking that tonight will be
his last. And you, how will you fare ? " "We will stay with him to the last, and if the worst
happens, we will take his bones and bring them to the Holy Mount of Kōya, and then we will
renounce the world and follow the Way, that we may pray for

[p. 300]

his happiness in the future life." And they sank down on the ground choked with tears. T hen as
the time grew late his mother said : " As matters are so uncertain, I pray you go back immediately;
" so, weeping bitterly, they took leave and went.

     So at dawn on the seventeenth day of the twelfth month Hōjō -no-Shirō Tokimasa took the
child Rokudai Gozen and departed from Miyako.  Saitō Go and Saitō Roku went with him,
walking on each side of the palanquin. Again Hojo bade two of his men dismount that they might
ride, but they declined saying: " As it is the last time we are quite content ; "  and so they went
their way barefoot, weeping tears of blood. Thus pitifully parted from his mother and nurse,
looking back on the Imperial City as it lay beyond the clouds, as for the last time he set out on
the road to the far -off Eastern Provinces, the state of the child's feelings can well be imagined. If
one of the samurai quickened his pace, his heart sank, thinking he was coming to cut off his head ;
and if one of them chanced to speak to him:  "Now is the end," he would guess in dismay. He
thought i t might be at Shi -no-miya- kawara, but they passed on through Sekiyama and came to
the beach of Ōtsu. He wondered if it would not be at Awazu -no-hara, but by that time the dusk
had already fallen. And so they went on, station by station and province by pro vince until they
came to the province of Suruga, where it seemed that his fleeting life would end.

     At a place called Sembon -no-matsubara the palanquin was set down and the young lord
ordered to get out, a leather mat being spread for him to sit on. T hen Hojo hastily sprang from his
horse, and approaching the child spoke as follows: " I have brought you thus far because I thought
we might meet the monk on the way, but if I take you over the Hakone mountains I know not
what Kamakura Dono would say. So I  shall say that I executed you in the province of Omi. As
this was fore ordained from a previous life, how is it possible anyhow to escape it ? " To this
Rokudai made no reply, but calling Saitō Go and Saitō

[p. 301]

Roku he said : " Ah, do not go back t o Miyako and tell them that I have been beheaded by the
way. They will find it out in the end, but if they hear it now their grief and lamentations will be a

hindrance to me in the after life. So tell them you have accompanied me as far as Kamakura."
And a s they listened to his words, the two of them were dissolved in tears.  By and by Saitō  Go
overcame his feelings and replied: "After our lord has become a god or Buddha we shall never
again in this life return to Miyako." And repressing his tears he bowed  to the ground.

     Then the young lord, seeing that his time was come, pulled back with his beautiful little hand
the long hair that hung about his shoulders, whereat the soldiers of the guard exclaimed
" See how he is yet master of himself; " and they all moistened the sleeves of their armour. Then,
looking toward the west, he joined his hands together, and repeating the Nembutsu in aloud
voice ten times, stretched out his neck for the blow. Then. Kano -no-Kudō -Saburō Chikatoshi,
who had been chosen as t he executioner, seized his sword and moved round behind him from
the left, and was just about to strike, when his eyes darkened and his senses reeled, so that he
could not see where to aim his weapon.  "I cannot do it," he exclaimed, hardly knowing what he
did : " pray choose someone else; " and he threw down his sword and withdrew.

     Then as they cast about to find someone to take his place, there appeared a priest in black
robes, riding a cream coloured horse which he was whipping up furiously; and as  the people
round about called out to him: " See the handsome young lord whom Hojo Dono is just
beheading in the pine wood," and ran thronging to see the sight, he waved his whip at them
anxiously, and in his excitement and suspense pulled off his hat and beckoned to them with it.

     Then, as Hojo stood waiting to see what was the reason, the priest rode up, sprang down from
his horse and exclaimed " The young lord is reprieved ; here are instructions from

[p.302]

Yoritomo. "Hojo took the document and read: " Concerning Rokudai Gozen, the son of
Komatsu -no-sammi Chūjō Kore -mori- no-Kyō whom you have arrested: he is reprieved at the
request of Mongaku -bō, the priest of Takao ; let there be no mistake. To Hojo -no-Shirō Dono.
Yoritomo."  Hojo read it throu gh several times, ejaculating : " Marvellous! Marvellous! " and then
put it away.  Saitō Go and Saitō Roku, it is unnecessary to say, and even Hojo's own retainers,
shed tears of joy and relief.