CHAPTER I.
GION SHOJA.


The sound of the bell of Gionshoja [1] echoes the impermanence of all things.   The hue of the flowers
of the teak [2] tree declares  that they who flourish must be brought low. Yea, the proud ones are but
for a moment, like an evening dream in springtime.   The mighty are destroyed at the last, they are
but as the dust before the wind.

If thou ask concerning the rulers of other countri es far off; Choko [3] of Shin, Ono [4] of Kan,
Shui [5] of Ryo, Rokuzan [6] of To, all these, not following in the paths of the government of all
the King and Emperors who went before them, sought pleasure only ; not entering into council
nor heeding the d isorders of their Country, having no knowledge of the affliction of their people,
they did not endure, but perished utterly. So also if thou enquire concerning our own

[p.2]

country, Masakado [7] in the period Shohei, Sumitomo in Tenkyo, Gishin in Kowa, Shinrai in
Heiji, all were arrogant and bold of heart in divers manners, yet if we consider what is told of the
former Prime Minister Prince Taira no Ason Kiyomori, the Lay priest of Rokuhara, of a more
recent time, neither in their words nor their intenti ons were they his equal.

As to his ancestry he was the eldest son of Ason Tadamori chief of the department of justice ;
grandson of Masamori Sanuki no Kami, who was descended in the ninth generation from
Katsurabara Shinno, Prince of the first rank and ch ief of the department of Ceremonies, the fifth
son of the Emperor Kwammu. This prince's son Takami no O had died without either office or
rank and it was his son Takamimochi -no O who first received the surname of Taira, and before
receiving the office of K azusa -no-suke he suddenly gave up his royal rank and became a subject.
His son Chinjufu Shogun Yoshimochi. afterwards changed his name to Kunika and from this
Kunika to Masamori : these six generations, though always receiving government stipends, yet
had not such rank as permitted them to appear at Court.