CHAPTER IX.

TILE CONFLAGRATION AT KIYOMIZU.


Now the faction of En -ryaku -ji, in the matter of resisting the violence that had been done, very
carefully watched for an occas ion, but said no word. After the decease of the Mikado everything,
even the trees and flowers, was grief stricken and of sorrowful appearance, and after this
undignified wrangle, all, high and low, dispersed to the four quarters crestfallen and

[p. 30]

abashed.. . On the same 29th, clay, at the hour of the Horse, hearing that a great company of the
priests of En -ryaku -ji was going clown to Kyoto, Bushi and Kebi -ishi went out to Nishi Sakamoto
to prevent them, but in spite of this they burst through, and a  great tumult arose. Then the
Retired Emperor Go -Shirakawa, how it happened is not certain, sent orders to the En -ryaku -ji
faction, and, thinking that the Heike were to be attacked, sent soldiers to the Palace to strengthen
all the guard houses for protect ion. The Heike all gathered together at Rokuhara, and the Retired
Emperor also betook himself thither in haste. Kiyomori was at that time only Dainagon no
Udaisho, and was in a very great state of agitation. Komatsu dono, wondering what all the mater
was a bout, tried to pacify them, but there was much tumult and reviling among the soldiers. The
monks of Hiei -san did not go to Rokuhara, but casually proceeded to press on to Kiyomizu,
where they burned all the temple buildings and monastery. This was to reven ge the insult they
had received on the night of the Imperial Funeral ; since Kiyomizu was a branch temple of Ko -
fuku-ji. The day after their burning Kiyomizu, they wrote the text: " By Kwannon's aid [1] the
cave of fire will become a lake," and affixed it to the great gate, but the next day another tablet
was substituted bearing the text " Her wondrous power is without equal for all ages." When the
crowd returned, the Retired Emperor came back hurriedly from Rokuhara, and Shigemori Kyo
alone went to meet hi m.

The Chancellor his father did not go ; this was out of precaution. When Shigemori returned his
father the Dainagon spoke thus to him : " I am rather afraid of this visit of the Retired Emperor;
he has been thinking of doing something or other, and some times he has even expressed it, and
for that reason be has come, so I cannot altogether rid my mind of suspicion." You

[p. 31]

must not show any such suspicion either in word or deed," replied Shigemori, " it is not a good
thing to reveal one's thoughts to people. . You must submit entirely to the will of the Ho -o: . If
you show sympathy you may secure the protection of both 'Kami' and   'Hotoke.' If you do thus
there will be no need to fear about your person." " Indeed Shigemori is most generous," said hi s
father.

When the Ho -o returned, those retainers who were most intimate with him remarked: " What a

strange thing is .this that is said ! The Ho -o has not the least idea of such a thing.." Now a man of
influence in the Ho -o's Palace named Saiko Hoshi was  there at this time, and he came forward
and said: " Heaven alone cannot say anything, man must say it. The Heike have now exceeding
great power and I think it is Heaven's will that someone should protest." But the others said one
to another:   "This is not  a good thing to say. Walls have ears. Take care ! " whispering in
trepidation. Now as this year was a year of mourning, the ceremonies of 'Gokei' (purification of
the new Emperor), and 'Daishoei' (presentation of new rice to the Imperial Ancestors) were n ot
performed.

Now Ken -shun-mon-in, while yet she was called Higashino -Onkata, had conceived a son by the
Ho-o, and this Prince was now five years old and there was a rumour that he was to be
nominated Crown Prince. So it was that on the twenty -fourth day of the twelfth month he was
suddenly given the title of Shinno. On the advent of the New Year the era was changed to Nin -an.
On the eighth clay of the tenth month of the same year the Prince who had been raised to be
Shinno the year before was proclaimed C rown Prince at Higashi Sanjo Palace. Thus the Crown
Prince was an uncle of six years old, and the Emperor was his nephew three years old, their
relation and age being quite abnormal and improper. Yet in the second year of Kwan -wa-Ichijo
had become Emperor at the age of seven and Sanjo Crown Prince at eleven ; it was, therefore not
without precedent. The Emperor (Rokujo) had come to the

[p. 32]

throne at two years old and was dethroned when barely five, becoming a priest on the 19th day of
the second month  and taking the title of Shin -in before he had attained the age of Genpuku. Both
in China and in our own country this is the first time that such a thing has happened. On the
twentieth day of the third month of the third year of Nin -an, the new Emperor was  enthroned in
the Daikyoku den. When this Emperor came to the throne the fortunes of the Heike family stood
at their zenith, for his mother Kenshun -mon-in was the younger sister of Hachijono -Ni-i-Dono
the wife of the Lay -priest Chancellor, while Taira Dain agon Tokitada was her elder brother and
so the Imperial Uncle, so that he assume] the position of Regent in matters both within and
without the Court, all appointments of officials both in spring and autumn being in his hands
alone. His position was just l ike that of Yokoku -chu, while his younger sister Yokihi was the
favourite of the [2] Emperor of China. How very enviable was his prosperity and popularity. As
the Nyudo consulted him about all political matters both great and small, the people of the time
called him Hei -Kwampaku. (i.e. K responsible to Kiyomori, not, as usual, to the Emperor.)