CHAPTER I.

DEATH OF THE RETIRED EMPEROR TAKAKURA.

On account of the rebellion in the eastern provinces and the burning of the temples of the South
Capital, the customary ceremonies of the f irst day of the New Year were not performed in this
fifth year of Jisho, so that the Emperor did not hold any reception, there was no music or Bugaku,
the envoys from Yoshino did not come, and not one of the Courtiers of the Fujiwara family
appeared. This was because of the burning of their tutelary temple. On the second day no
banquet was given at the Court and no one either of the Courtiers or Ladies -in-waiting was to be
seen; the whole Palace was deserted and forlorn. It was most grievous to see that bot h the Law of
Buddha and the Throne had quite lost their influence. "There are four generations of Emperors
now living at the same time," complained the Ho -o bitterly, "and since they are all deprived of
any hand in the administration, there is nothing else  for them but to pass their lives uselessly."

On the fifth day the high ecclesiastics of Nara were all relieved of their official rank and
prohibited from entering the Palace, both their place and office being sequestrated. Now as it was
necessary that so me of these priests should take part in one of the Services held at this time of
year, and all those of Nara had been degraded, it was proposed that the priests of Kyoto should
act instead, but after the Courtiers had discussed it they discovered a certain  priest of the Sanron
Sect experienced in the required procedure, who had escaped and concealed himself in
Kwanshuji, and him they summoned to go through the bare form of the ceremony. Now there
was not a single priest to be found in Nara, for the very few  that had

[p. 260]

escaped being killed with arrow or sword or burnt to death or suffocated in the smoke had fled
to the mountains and woods. Among these was the Betto of Kofukuji, Gerin -in-no-Sojo Yoen,
who was so overcome at seeing all the precious sta tues and holy books go up in smoke that he
fell ill and eventually died. This Yoen was a person of very delicate taste, and once, on hearing the
cuckoo, he made this verse:

"Charming always it is to hear the voice of the cuckoo,

Every time it is heard, a lways it seems like the first."

Therefore he was ever after called 'Hatsune -no-Sojo' (first note Sojo) [1].

Now the trouble of the last few years, that is, the confinement of the Ho -o in the Toba Palace

the year before last, the execution of Prince Takaku ra the year after, and the troubled and critical
state of the Empire generally, not to speak of the changing of the Capital, so wrought on the
health of the Retired Emperor Takakura that he sickened and become very ill, and now, when he
heard of the destru ction of Todaiji and Kofukuji, his condition grew serious, and at length on the
fourteenth day of the same month he passed away at the Ikedono of Rokuhara, to the intense
grief of the Ho -o, after a reign of twelve years. His virtuous rule raised up the way s of
benevolence and justice that had been abandoned, and continued the way of equity and happiness
that had been interrupted, and although in this world of vicissitudes and impermanence death is a
thing that cannot be avoided, even by an Arhat who possess es the Three Clear Conceptions and