CHAPTER III.
THE HO -O PROCEEDS TO OHARA.

Thus in the spring of the second year of Bun -ji the H ō-o expressed a wish to go to Ohara and see
the place where Kenrei -mon-in was living in retirement, but the second and third   months were
stormy and the cold still lingered,  neither did the snow melt on the mountains nor the icicles
thaw in the valleys. Thus the spring passed and the summer came, and the festival of Karoo was
already over when His Majesty proceeded to the recesses of Ohara. Though the visit was
incognito, the  Sadaisho Tokudaiji, the Dainagon Kwazan -in and the Gon -Chunagon Tsuchi -
mikado accompanied His Majesty, with six of the higher Courtiers and eight of lower rank,
beside several of the Imperial Guards. As they went by way of Kurama, His Majesty was able to
visit the temple of Fudarakuji, built at Fukayabu at Kiyohara, and the place where the Consort of
the Emperor Go -Reizei -in had formerly lived in retirement at Ono, after which the Imperial
Palanquin proceeded on its way. The white clouds on the distant mou ntains reminded them of
the cherry

page 313

blossoms that had fallen, while the green leaves. on the twigs seemed to regret the passing of
spring. It was past the twentieth day of the fourth month, so the summer grasses had grown up
thickly, and as they  parted them on the little -trodden road, His Majesty, who had never been
there before, was much affected by the lonely uninhabited look of the place.

At the foot of the western mountains they came to a small temple. This was the Jakko -in. It
might be well  described by the lines : " Its roof -tiles* were broken and mist was its only incense ;
the doors had fallen from their hinges and the beams of the moon were its sanctuary lamps." But
the pond and trees of its ancient garden were dignified ; the young gras s had grown thick, and the
slender shoots of the willow were all hanging in confusion, while the floating water -plants on the
pond might be mistaken for spread out brocade. On the island the purple hue of the flowering
wistaria mingled with the green of th e pine -tree, while the late -blooming cherry among the green
leaves was more rare than the early blossoms. From the eight -fold clouds of the yamabuki that
was flowering in profusion on the bank came the call of the cuckoo, a note of welcome in honour
of His  Majesty's visit.

When the Ho -o saw it he composed these lines :

" When on the pond's clear waters the cherry -tree scatters its blossoms,
Thick on the limpia wave ripple the clusters of flowers."

Pleasant was the sound of the water as it fell from the c lefts of the time -worn rocks, and the ivied
walls and beetling crags would have defied the brush of the painter. When his Majesty came to
the cell of the former Empress, ivy was growing on the eaves and the morning -glory was climbing
up them ; the hare's -foot fern and the day lily mingled together, and here and there was a useless

gourd -plant ; here was the grass that grew thick in the path of Gan -en, and the white goose foot
that keeps men at a
----------------------
* Its roof -tiles, etc. An unknown quota tion.

page 314

distance, and here too was the rain that moistened the door of Gen -ken. The cedar boards of the
roof were gaping, so that the rain, the hoar -frost, and the dew of evening vied with the moon
beams in gaining entrance, and the place appeare d well -nigh uninhabitable. Behind was the
mountain and in front was the moor, and the bamboo grasses rustled loudly in the wind. As is the
way with those who have no friends in the world, she seldom heard any news from Miyako, but
what she did hear was the  cry of the monkeys as they sprang from tree to tree, and the sound of
the wood -cutter's axe, for few people there were that came there.

Then the Ho -o called to the inmate, but there was no answer, but after a while a withered -
looking old nun appeared of whom he enquired : " Whither has the former Empress deigned to
go ? " " Over there to the mountain to pick some flowers," was the reply. " How hard it is," said
His Majesty, " that since she has thus renounced the world, she has no one to perform such
services for her." " Since this fate has come upon her in accordance with the Five Precepts and the
Ten Virtues," replied the nun, " why should she spare herself the austerities of mortifying her
flesh ? In the Ingwa Kyo it is written : " If you wish to know t he cause in the former life, look at
the effect in the present life ; and it you wish to know the effect in the future life, look at the
cause in the present one." And if she knows the cause and effect of both past and future lives,
there is nothing at all  for her to lament. In former days Prince Siddartha at the age of nineteen
went forth from Gaya and dwelt at the foot of Mount Dantaloka ; covering himself with the
leaves of trees, going up the peaks to get firewood and down into the valleys to draw water , by
the merit of his austerities and mortifications at last he attained to perfect Buddhahood." Looking
at this nun the Ho -o noticed that she was clothed in pieces of silk and cotton put together
roughly anyhow, and thinking it strange that one of such an  appearance should speak thus, he
asked her who she was. For some time she could answer nothing, but only wept, but after a while
she

page 315

controlled her feelings and replied : " I am ashamed to say so, but I am Awa -no-Naiii, daughter of
the late Sho nagon Nyudo Shinzei, and my mother was Kii -no-Nii. As your Majesty was formerly
so kind to me, the reason why you do not now recognise me must be that I have become old and
infirm." And she pressed her sleeve to her face, unable to control herself any long er : a sad sight
indeed. " Can it be so ? " -exclaimed the Ho -o ; " and you are truly Awa -no-Naiji ? I did not
recognise you, but however one may think, it all seems like a dream." And his voice became
choked with sobs, while the Courtiers who accompanied h im were moved also, some saying that
what she said was very strange, while others thought it quite natural. And the Ho -o looked about
him hither and thither, and the plants of the garden, heavy with .dew, fell against the boundary
wall, and the surface of the rice -fields was covered with water so that there seemed not even
room for a snipe to perch ; and His Majesty went to the cell of the former Empress and opened
the shoji and looked in. In one chamber were the images of the Three Bosatsu, Amida, Kwannon
and Seishi, and in the hand of Amida, who stood in the middle, was a cord of five colours. On the

left was a picture of Fugen, and on the right of Zendo Kwasho, beside which hung a portrait of
the Late Emperor. There were also eight rolls of the Hokke Kyo and nine volumes of the Amida
Kyō. Instead of tht perfume of orchid and musk, the smoke of incense filled the air. The merit of
Jomyo Koji *, who in a nine foot square cell ranged in order thirty two thousand floors and invited
all the Buddhas of the Ten Quarters, could hardly have been g reater. On the shoji were stuck
texts from all the Sutras, written on coloured paper, and among them was one written at
Shoryosen in China by Oe -no-Sadamoto, which ran thus : " Sounds of celestial melody are heard
afar off, and from the regions of the sett ing sun Amida comes to save mankind." A little removed
from
-------
*Jomyo Koji . Vimalakirtti ; for this miracle see Dickens, note on the same subject in his translation of the Ho -jo-ki, p.
28.

page 316

these was a verse that seemed to be from the forme r Empress's own pen:

" Who would have dreamed that from here I should view the
moon of the Palace ?
Far from the haunts of men, lone in the depths of the hills."

Then on the other side he saw what appeared to be her bed -chamber. On a bamboo pole hung
her robes of hempen cloth, besides some bed -quilts of paper, and when he thought of the
countless beautiful robes of silk gauze and rich brocade, wrought of the stuffs both of China and
of her own land, that she had worn in the dream -like days of her dominio n, the tears coursed
down His Imperial cheeks, and the Courtiers of his escort also could not help moistening their
sleeves at these evidences of her altered condition.

Presently two nuns clad in dark robes were seen making their way slowly and painfully down
through the rough rocks of the mountain side, and on the Ho -o enquiring who they were, the old
nun replied : " The one carrying a basket of mountain -azalias on her arm is the former Empress,
and the one who has the load of bracken for firewood is Dain agon-nosuke -no-Tsubone, the
daughter of Torikai -no-Chūnagon Korezane, and adopted daughter of Gojo -no-Dainagon
Kunitsuna, who was nurse to the late Emperor." As she spoke she burst into tears, and the Ho -o
and his Courtiers also applied their sleeves to th eir eyes.

The former Empress, since she was living apart from the world in this way, was so overwhelmed
with shame at seeing them that she would gladly have hidden herself somewhere to avoid them,
but she could not. Every evening she girt up her long slee ves to draw the water for the offering,
and early every morning they were wet and bedraggled with the mountain dew. So, as she could
not again retrace her steps to the mountain, neither was she able to get into her cell, the old nun
came to her as she stoo d dumbfounded and took her basket from her hands.