CHAPTER XI.
THE SECOND ASSAULT.

Meanwhile Nar ita Gorō had come up also, and the seven thousand men of Doi no -Jirō Sanehira,
shouting their warcries, came on to the attack under the banners of their different leaders. Now
among the fifty thousand horsemen of the main force of the Genji; who were beset ting the other
entrance at Ikuta, were two brothers, Kawara Tarō and Kawara Jirō, of Musashi; and the elder of
these, Kawara Tarō, called to the younger and said to him: " Though a Daimyō may win renown
without fighting himself, through the deeds of his re tainers, that reputation is not one that I covet,
for I cannot bear to take no part in the battle. To wait here with the enemy before our eyes
without drawing bow on him makes the courage fail, so I have determined to get within the
defenses and let fly at  them there. As I am not likely to come forth alive, do you stay here to bear
witness to my posterity." Bursting into tears the younger brother replied: " For two brothers like
ourselves how inglorious is it that one should die thus and the other still sur vive? Let us not then
die separately but fall together in one place " : and calling their retainers and

p. 146

bidding them bear the tidings of their end to their wives and children, they dismounted and put
on straw sandals, and then carrying their bows only, they climbed over the barricade under cover
of darkness. Standing within the stronghold, though the colour of their armour could not be
distinguished in the star light, they shouted loudly : " Kawara Tarō Kisaichi Takanao, and his
brother Jirō Masana o, first in the attack on Ikuta -no-mori ! "Hearing this the Heike within were
astonished and said to one another " : How terrible are these warriors of the East! See how these
two brothers have ventured alone into the midst of our great host! " Tis a pity to touch them."
And for a while none lifted a hand against them. But the two brothers were both exceedingly
skilful archers, and now they drew their bows and let fly their shafts with the greatest rapidity, so
that the Heike cried out to spare them no long er but to cut them down. Now among the
Western samurai there were two brothers also who were archers of renown, men of Bitchū,
Manabe -no-Shirō and Manabe -no-Gorō by name, and the elder brother Shirō was with the force
at Ichi -no-tani, while Gorō the younge r was posted at Ikuta. Coming forward he drew his bow to
the arrowhead, and taking careful aim, let fly his shaft at Kawara -no-Tarō, who staggered forward
pierced through the breastplate. As he tried to support his failing strength on his bow, his brother
Jirō ran up, and taking him on his back, made to climb the barricade once more, when Manabe,
fitting a second arrow to the string, shot him under the skirts of his armour, so that both brothers
fell dead together. His retainers then ran up and cut off both  their heads, which they brought and
showed to the commando Shin -Chūnagon Tomomori." Ah, the pity of it, " said he, that two such
valiant men at arms should die. Would that their lives could have been spared, for they were each
worth a thousand men."

Then  the retainers of Kawara hasted and told Kajiwara Heizō that the two brothers had scaled
the walls of the strong

p. 147


hold and had died within it. " That the two brothers Kawara have fallen is indeed a dire loss for
the Kisaichi clan ", said Kajiwara, " but the time is now ripe for the attack, so let us advance," So
the five hundred men under Kajiwara swept forward to the defences to fight their way into the
stronghold. Then Kajiwara Heizo, seeing that his second son Heiji had already far outstripped hi s
men, sent a retainer after him saying : " Those who ride on so that their men cannot follow will
be held culpable. It is the order of the Commander." When this was communicated to Heiji he
drew in his horse a space while he made the following verse
"If the warrior's bow be once well bent for the arrow,
 Who is the foolish wight who will unbend it again? "

After which he rode on again, shouting loudly. " See that Heiji is not killed ! After him, all of you!
" cried his father, as, with his eldest son Ge nda and his third son Saburō, he led his force in a
charge into the Heike ranks, where, cutting and slashing in all directions they bowed a way for
themselves, and then turned and as quickly withdrew. His son Genda, however, did not emerge
with the rest, a nd in answer to his father's question the retainers declared that they had not seen
him for some time, and imagined him to have penetrated too deeply, so that he had been
surrounded and slain. " Ah! " exclaimed Heizō, bursting into tears, " it was to save my son that I
made this charge, and now to think that Genda is dead and I, his father, am still alive! Back again!
At them once more! " And he rose in his stirrups and shouted loudly: " Ho! I am Kajiwara Heizō
Kagetoki, descended in the fifth generation fr om Gongorō Kagemasa of Kamakura, renowned
warrior of the East Country, a match for any thousand men! At the age of sixteen I rode in the
van of the array of Hachimantarō Yoshiie at the siege of the fortress of Sembuku Kanazawa in
Dewa, and receiving an arr ow in my left eye through the helmet, I plucked it forth and with it
shot down the marksman who sent it, thereby gaining honours and leaving

p. 148

a name to posterity! Come on now, all you who think yourselves somebody, and we will see! "
At this proud defiance the defenders shouted : " This is one of the greatest warriors of the East!
Strike him down! Don' t let him escape! " and they rushed upon him from all sides to cut him
down. Heizō, caring nothing for his life, dashed through their midst looking everywhere for signs
of his son Genda, and soon found him, as he expected, dismounted and fighting on foot, for his
horse had been shot under him, with his helmet struck off from his head and his long hair flying
in the wind, his back against a rock twenty feet high, and two of his retainers on his left and right,
fighting desperately with five soldiers of the H eike. As Genda was thus fighting, as he thought, his
last fight, his father, overjoyed at finding him still alive, sprang from his horse and shouted: " Ho!
Genda ! Kagetoki is here! Let us die together and not show our backs to the foe! " Then, after
they had killed three of the enemy and wounded the other two, Heizō exclaimed : " Warriors
advance or retreat according to circumstances. Come Genda ! " And they made good their escape.
Thus was the second assault made by Kajiwara.