CHAPTER XIII.
THE DECISION ABOUT THE GOSETSU FESTIVAL.

On the eighth day; of the eleventh month the Commander in Chief Gon -no-Shosho Koremori
returned to Fukuhara. The

[p. 251]

Lay-priest Chancellor was exceedingly angry, and immediately ordered him to be exiled to Kikai -
ga-shima and Tadakiyo to be put to death. On the next day the Heike retainers to the number of
many hundred of all ages assemble d to discuss whether the death sentence ought to be carried
out, and Shume -no-Hangwan Morikuni stood up before the assembly and said: "I certainly do not
consider Tadakiyo to be a man wanting in courage; for when he was only eighteen years old, and
the two  most desperate bandits of the whole Kinai took refuge in the treasury of the Toba Palace
and no one dared to go in and seize them, alone he climbed over the wall in broad daylight, and
after killing one brought the other out alive, an exploit that is cele brated to this day. So I think
there was something mysterious about this disaster. We must at any rate consider this disorder
among the army with great care." On the tenth day there was an investiture of officials and Gon -
no-suke Shosho Koremori was promot ed to be Ukonye -no-Chujo, whereat everyone wondered
what the reason might be; since his expedition to the eastern provinces had not been exactly
meritorious.

Long ago, when Taira Sadamori and Tawara Toda Hidesato started for the east country to subdue
Masakado, and did not find the task at all easy, after a council of Courtiers it was decided to send
another expedition under Uji -no-Mimbu Kyo Tadabun and Kiyohara -no-Shigefuji, and they,
having been granted the rank of Gunken or Director of Operations, at on ce set out for the east.
When they arrived at Kiyomi -ga-seki in the province of Suruga, Shigefuji, looking out over the
surging billows of the sea at night, softly hummed to himself the Chinese poem of Hakurakuten:

"The flares of the fishing boats throw a  warm glow on the billows;
The jingling of the Courtier's bell sounds over the hills at eve."

so that Tadabun was moved to tears by the feelings it evoked. Then the first two leaders, having
in the meanwhile at last

[p. 252]

overcome Masakado, met the o ther two Generals there as they were returning with his head, and
all went up to the Capital together. Sadamori and Hidesato were rewarded, and many thought
that Tadabun and Shigefuji should also receive rewards, so the Courtiers held a council, at which
Kujo Ujo -no-Sho Morosuke Ko spoke as follows: "As the expedition of last year was not able to
overcome the enemy, Tadabun and Shigefuji were appointed to do so, but just as they had
arrived at the eastern boundary he was at last taken, why then should they not be rewarded also?"

But his elder brother Ono -no-Miya Saneyori, who presided, opposed it saying: "If there is any
doubt, let the matter rest; everything must be according to the written precedent." And so
nothing was done, whereupon Tadabun, greatly dis appointed, swore that the descendants of Ono -
no-miya should become servants. but that he would protect the family of Kujo Dono for ever;
after which he starved himself so that he died. And to this day the family of Kujo Dono has
enjoyed great prosperity, w hile none of the descendants of his elder brother are now to be found
among the higher nobles, for they are wholly extinct.

On the eleventh day of the same month the fourth son of the Nyudo, To -no-Chujo Shigehira was
promoted to be Sakonye -no-Gon Chujo. O n the thirteenth day the palace at Fukuhara was
finished and the Emperor moved into it. The ceremony of Daijoe or Accession to the Throne
should now have been held, but it was fixed for the end of the tenth month, and His Majesty
proceeded to the eastern r iver for the Ceremony of Purification. The place for the Daijoe was a
plain to the north of the Palace where the Imperial Vestures and other objects to be used in the
ceremony were arranged. In front of the Daikyokuden at the foot of the dais in the enclos ed path
called Ryubi -do, or the Way of the Dragon's Tail, the Kairitsuden, in which the Emperor bathed
and robed, was set up. By the side of the same dais was erected the Daijogu in which His Majesty
made the offerings to the Im -

[p. 253]

perial Ancestor s, where the Deities were feasted and entertained. In the Daikyokuden also a great
ceremony was held, not to speak of the Kagura, the Sacred Dance in the Seishodo, and the
Imperial Banquet in the Burakuin. But in this new capital of Fukuhara there was no D aikyokuden,
so that the ceremony could not be performed; there was no Seishodo, so that the Kagura could
not take place, and there was no Burakuin for the Banquet, so it was decided to celebrate only the
Shinjosai, or Offering of the New Rice, and the Gose tsu this year, but after a council of Courtiers
it was decreed that this also should be performed by the Shrine officials in the old Capital. Now
the origin of the Gosetsu dance is that in the time of Temmu Tenno, one night, when there was a
keen breeze an d a clear moon, they were playing the Biwa in the Palace of Yoshino to calm the
mind of the Emperor, when a Celestial Maiden came down from Heaven and waved her sleeves
five times.