CHAPTER V.
THE FLIGHT FROM DAZAIFU.

Thus though the Heike proposed to establish a capital in Tsukushi and build there a n Imperial
Palace, and a Council of Courtiers was held to consider it, yet, on account of the hostile attitude
of Ogata Koreyoshi, the plan could not be carried out. Then the Chūnagon Tomomori gave his
opinion thus:

" Seeing that this Ogata Koreyoshi was a retainer of the house of Shigemori, if one of that family
were to go and see him something might be arranged." In accordance with this advice, which,
they considered reasonable, Shin sammi Chūjo Sukemori set forth with five hundred horsemen,
and, crossin g the Province of Bungo, entered into negotiations with Koreyoshi ; but, in spite of all
his persuasions Ogata paid no heed, but on the other hand drove them away again, saying: " I
ought to seize you all and make you prisoners, but in great matters small things are nothing, so
you had better go back to Dazaifu and do what you please." A short time afterwards he

[p.83]

sent his second son Nojiri Jirō Koremura to Dazaifu with a message, saying : " If the Heike were
on the side of the Emperor, we would certainly doff our helmets and loose our bowstrings in
submission, but the Hō -ō has ordered that you are to be expelled f rom Kyushu at once." Then.
Hei Dainagon Tokitada -no-Kyō, clad in a hakama laced with scarlet thread and a hitatare of grass -
cloth, and wearing a lofty eboshi on his head, advanced to meet Koremura and spake thus : " Our
Emperor is descended in the direct l ine from forty nine generations of heavenly posterity, being
the eighty first Earthly Sovereign since Jimmu Tennō, therefore will Tenshō -daijin and Hachiman
Bosatsu protect our Lord from all his enemies. Moreover our house has from Hogen and Heiji to
this day put down many rebellions, keeping the peace of the Realm, and by our favour were all
the officials of Kyūshū appointed to their authority : but now, forgetting all the gratitude they
owe us, they have believed the promises of the rebels of the East and  North, Yoritomo and
Yoshinaka, that, if they drive us out, they will receive many provinces and manors as a reward,
and so have meanly acted according to the instructions of that „big nose Bungo' *. (Now it was
because Gyobu -Kyō-Sammi Yorisuke, who held th e fief of Bungo, had such a large nose, that he
was thus spoken of). Koremura then returned and reported their answer to his father, who
replied:

" It may be so, but old times are old times and the present is the present, so now we must drive
them out of Kyūshū." Then, hearing that Koreyoshi was gathering his forces, Gendaiyū Hangwan
Suesada and Settsu Hangwan Morisumi, exclaiming; " Now we are hindered even by our friends;
let us go and smite them "; took with them three thousand horsemen and, crossing ov er the
prov:nce of Chikugo, met the enemy at Honjō of Takano and fought with them for a day and a
night, but at last, owing to the great number of Koreyoshi's men, were forced to retire.
----------------------------
*big-nose.  Bungo. Jap. Hana -Bungo.

[p.84]


Then the Heike, hearing that Koreyoshi was advancing to attack them with thirty thousand men,
fled in a panic from Dazaifu, without stopping to take anything with them. Bidding a reluctant
farewell to the hospitable shrine of Tenjin, they hurried away,  and as there were no proper
bearers for the Imperial Phoenix Car, the Emperor was borne in an ordinary palanquin which was
dignified with the name only. His Imperial Mother and all the noble ladies of her train had
perforce to gather up the long skirts of  their hakamas and wall: barefoot, as did also the Daijin
Munemori and all the Courtiers and Nobles, lifting high their loose silk costumes.

     And so they set out once more and made for the port of Hakozaki, while the rain fell in
torrents and the gust s of wind blew the sand in all directions, and the rain -drops mingled with
and simulated their tears. Praying to the deities of the shrines of Sumiyoshi, Hakozaki, Kashii and
Munakata, they made supplication that the Emperor might again return to his own C apital. After
enduring the steep and dangerous climb over the cliffs and rough rocks of Tarumiyama and
Uzurahama, they emerged on to the wide sandy plain, and the blood that flowed from their feet,
so unaccustomed to any toil, dyed the sand, deepening the colour of the scarlet hakamas of some,
while it reddened to a scarlet hue the white skirts of others. Even the trials of Genzo *, when he
travelled over lofty mountains and shifting sands from China to India to seek the Holy Pitakas,
were not more severe, b ut as he was in quest of the Sacred Sutras he endured them for his own
benefit and that of mankind; this was but the way to the trials of battle that they trod, the
melancholy road to the other word.

     Now Harada -no-taiyū Tanenao had accompanied, them from Miyako with a force of two
thousand men, but when Hyotoji Hideto came forth from his hold of Yamaga to meet them with
a large force, since there was bitter enmity between
----------------------------
*Genzo.  Chin. Hiuen Tsiang.

[p.85]

the two, Tanen ao left them and turned back again. As they were proceeding on their way they
passed through a village that went by the name of Ashiya, and as this was the name of a place
between Miyako and Fukuhara that they all knew well, it pleased them more than other  places,
thoug h it made them the more homesick. So, though they had declared themselves ready to go to
Shinra, Keitan, Kōrai, and other distant regions beyond the sea, yet meeting this wild weather
they were glad to take refuge in Yamaga, the stronghold of Hyotoji Hidet o. Hearing again,
however, that the enemy was advancing on them there also, they fled once mere, and, embarking
In small boats, voyaged all night till they came to the port of Yanagi -ga-ura in Buzen. Here again
they meditated on fixing their new capital, a nd a Council of Courtiers was held about it, but as
their mans would not permit of building a Palace, and also because they heard tidings that the
Genji were threatening them from Nagato, they again put to sea in fishing boats to be tossed
hither and thith er on the ocean. Now the third son of Shigemori, Sa -Chūjō Kiyotsune, was of a
meditative nature and much given to deep thought; and as he stood by the gunwale of the ship
one moonlight night of the tenth month, playing the flute and reciting verses, he ref lected how
the Capital was in the hands of the Genji, and now they had fled to Kyūshū they had been driven
away by Koreyoshi, so that they were like fish caught in a net. If they were thus to be shunned
wherever they went, of what profit to live any longer  ? So, calmly he chanted the solemn words
of the Sutras and repeated the Nembutsu, after which he dropped from the ship and sank in the

waves. Deep though unavailing was the lamentation among the Courtiers, both men and women
alike.

     As Nagato was the  fief of Shin -Chūnagon Tomomori, the Mokudai Kii -no-Gyōbu -no-taiyū
Michisuke, hearing that the Heike had nothing but small fishing boats, presented them with

[p.86]

a hundred large vessels in which they re -embarked and sailed to Shikoku. There by the inv itation
of Awa -no-Mimbu Taiyū Shigeyoshi, on the seashore of Yashima in Sanuki, they built in rough
timbers a representation of the Imperial Court and Palace; but, as they shrank from permitting
His Majesty to inhabit such a common structure, it was decide d that the real Palace should be a
ship. Munemori and the Courtiers had to spend their days in the thatched huts of the fishermen,
while they passed the nights on shipboard. Thus the Imperial Vessel floated like a dragon on the
waves, a moving Palace that knew no rest. Plunged in sorrow deep as the tide, their lives were
frail as the frosted grasses. At dawn the clamour of the sea birds on the spits increased their
anguish, and at night the grating of the ships on the beach tormented them. When they saw the
flocks of herons in the distant pines, their hearts sank, wondering if they were the white flags of
the Genji; and when the cry of the wild geese were wafted from the offing, they trembled lest it
might be the oar beats of the foe by night. The keen breez e lashed their blackened eyebrows and
painted faces, and the salt spray penetrated their delicate eyes, which home sick longing filled so
oft with tears. For their green -curtained chambers of scarlet they had exchanged the earthen walls
of the reed -hung co ttage, and instead of the scented smoke of their braziers rose the briny fumes
of the fisherman's driftwood. The features of the Court Ladies, bereft of cosmetics and swollen
with continual weeping, were so altered as hardly to be recognised.