CHAPTER XI .

THE UNDECORATED SWORD.


The character of this minister being thus remarkable, may it not be that he could forsee the
future? For before his death, on the seventh day of the fourth month, he had a dream. He seemed
to be walking a long d istance on the shore when he saw a large torii near him; wondering what
torii it was, someone said that it was that of Kasuga Daimyojin.

[p.143]

Then a crowd of people came thronging to the place. and one of them held up the head of a big
priest on the p int of a sword. Shigemori asked whose head it was. "It is the head of the Dajo
Nyudo Dono of the Heike," was the reply, "for the enormity of his sins the Daimyo -jin of this
shrine has ordered it to be taken."   Then he awoke. "Ah," he thought, "our house ha s subdued the
enemies of the Emperor many times since Hogen and Heiji and, being greatly rewarded, has come
to, produce a Dajo -daijin who is grandfather to the Emperor. In our clan more than sixty men
have received great advancement, and in twenty years th ere is none in all the Empire who can
compare with us in rank and office, and now, through the manifold evil deeds of the Nyudo, the
fall of our family draws nigh;" and he wept bitterly. Just at this time there was a great knocking at
the door of his apart ment. On enquiring who was there, they told him that Seno -no-Taro
Kaneyasu, having just had a very extraordinary dream, in spite of the lateness of the hour, begged
leave to relate it to him, and also requested that everyone should be sent from the apartme nt.
When all had left him alone, Shigemori gave him audience, and he related with full detail exactly
the same dream as the Daijin himself had just had. Then, thought Shigemori, the god has revealed
these things to Kaneyasu also.

The next morning, as his eldest son Gon -no-suke-no-Shosho Koremori was preparing to go to the
Palace of the Retired Emperor, his father called him and said: "For a parent to say such things is
perhaps rather conceited, but you are a very clever son. Ho, there! serve the Shosho wit h a cup of
sake!" Chikuga -no-kami Sadayoshi poured out a cup and offered it to the Shosho, but as he
would not drink before his father, the Daijin drank three cups and afterwards the Shosho drank
thrice. Then Shigemori ordered what he intended for the Shos ho to be brought, and they brought
a sword in a bag of red brocade. The Shosho, thinking that it was the sword called

[p.144]

'Kogarasu,' [42] the famous heirloom of the Heike, look ed greatly delighted, but how did his face
fall when he saw that it was only the plain black sword worn at the funeral of a minister. Then
his father said, weeping, "This is no mistake of Sadayoshi; it is the black sword without
decoration to be worn at a minister's funeral. The Nyudo thought I should wear it to accompany
him to the grave, but now, as I shall certainly die before him, I present it to you." The Shosho
made no answer, but, retiring to his apartment in tears, he covered his face and lay down a nd did

not go out that day. It was after this that Shigemori went to Kumano and soon after he returned
was taken ill and died. Truly indeed he must have known.