CHAPTER XI.

ASSEMBLING OF THE MONKS.

The monks of Miidera, after receiving the Prince within their temple, proceeded to fortify
themselves by constructing walls round it and then held another council, saying: "Hieizan will not
act with us and Nara has not yet come up. It will not do to continu e thus. Let us go down and
attack Rokuhara tonight: in that case, dividing our force into two parts, the veterans and the
younger men, the elder must go down from Nyoi -ga-mine against the back gate of Rokuhara,
while they detach some swift runners to fire the dwelling houses of Shirakawa, so that the people
of the capital and the soldiers of Rokuhara will run out in surprise to see what has happened.
Then, when their attention is thus distracted, we must act on the defensive from the direction of
Iwasaka an d Sakuramoto, while the main force under the leadership of Izu -no-kami, comprising
the younger men and the fiercest fighting monks, must attack the front gate of Rokuhara from
Matsusaka and set fire to the buildings from the windward side. Then in the mele e and confusion
of the onset it ought not to be difficult to burn out the Dajo Nyudo and take his head." At this
point a certain monk called Ichi -nyo-bo no Ajari Shinkai, who did priest's services for the Heike,
bringing about ten others who lived with him , came forward into the courtyard where they were
holding consultation and gave his opinion as follows: "If you think of acting thus, one must think
you are partisans of the Heike. A plan like that will not do at all. Surely we must consider the
reputation  of our temple as well as the interests of the priests. In former days the families of Gen
and Hei vied with each other in upholding the Imperial Family by their might, but of late the

[p. 190]

fortunes of the Genji have declined and the Heike have becom e supreme in the land, having now
stood firm for twenty years like a tree that no gale can bend. How then can you hope to succeed
in attacking their mansions with so trifling a force? Consider the matter very carefully. Is it not
better to assemble a large  force and proceed with the attack at a later time?" And he continued to
argue thus with them for a long tine in order to delay the expedition. Then Joen -bo no Ajari
Kyoshu, wearing under his robes a body -armour of light green colour, and a great sword thr ust
through his girdle in front, and brandishing a white handled halberd in his hand, burst into the
council. "There is no need of further argument," he exclaimed, "the founder of our temple,
Temmu Tenno, while he was yet Crown Prince, being attacked by Pr ince Otomo, issuing from
the mountains of Yoshino, passed over the district of Uda, and making his way across Iga and Ise,
with a band of only seventeen men, being joined by the forces of Mino and Owari, overthrew
Prince Otomo and eventually ascended the T hrone. There is a saying that a man will have pity on
a distressed bird that takes refuge in his bosom. I don't know about the rest, but as for me and my
followers we go down to attack Rokuhara tonight and die there!" Enman -in no Taiyu Genkaku
too broke in  exclaiming: "Enough of this discussion; the hour grows late, haste and advance!" So
Gensammi Nyudo Yorimasa took command of the elder monks who were to attack the back
gate of Rokuhara and with him Joen -bo no Ajari Kyoshu, Rissho -bo no Ajari Nichiin, Sots u-no-
Hoin Zenji and his disciples Giho and Zenyo, with about a thousand men, holding torches in their
hands, started off towards Nyoi -ga-mine. The leader of those attacking the front gate was Izu -no-

kami Nakatsuna, eldest son of Gensammi Nyudo, and with hi m was the second son Gendaiyu -
no-Hangwan Kanetsuna, Rokujo -no-Kurando Nakaie, his son Kurando -no-Taro Nakamitsu and
the soldier monks Enman in -no-Taiyu Genkaku, Rissei bo -no-Iga-no-kimi, Horin in -no-Oni Sado,
and Joki in -no-Aratosa, all

[p. 191]

arms car rying bow and arrows, swords and halberds, everyone of them worth a thousand ordinary
men, caring not whether they met god or devil. From Byodo in came Inaba -no-Risshi Kodaiyu,
Sumi -no-Rokuro Bo, Shima -no-Ajari, Tsutsui Hoshi, Kyo -no-Ajari and Aku Shonagon . From
Kita-no-in were Kongo -in no Roku Tengu, Shikibu Daiyu, Noto, Kaga, Sado and Bingo, Natsui,
Higo, Chonan -in no Chikugo, Kaya -no-Chikuzen, Oya -no-Toshinaga, Gochi -in-no-Tajima, and
among the sixty disciples of Kyoshu, Kaga Kojo, Gyobu Shunsha, Ichiran  Hoshi, Tsutsui Jomyo,
Myoshu, Okura -no-Songetsu, Sonei, Jikei, Rakuja, Kanako -bushi no Genei, and among the
samurai, Watanabe -no-Habuku, Harima -no-Jiro Sazuku, Satsuma -no-Hyoye, Choshichi Tonau,
Kiou Takiguchi, Atae -no-Umanojo, Tsuzuku Genda, Kiyoshi and Susumu with about fifteen
hundred men -at-arms. These all set out from Miidera, but as, after the Prince had entered, they
had made a rampart and moat and set up fences and palisades, and thrown obstacles of trees
across the road, the moat had to be bridged  and the obstacles removed, so that the night had
passed and the cock crow of approaching dawn was heard before all was finished and the way
was clear. "If it be now cock -crow," exclaimed Izu -no-kami, "it will be morning light when we
reach Rokuhara. What then is to be done?" Then Enman -in no Taiyu Genkaku, coming forward
as before, said: "Of old King Sho of Shin put Mosho Kun into bonds, but he managed to escape
with three thousand soldiers by the help of one of the consorts of Sho. Coming to the barrier a t
Kan, however, he found that, as is the custom in foreign countries the gate was not accustomed
to be opened until cock -crow. Now among the three thousand soldiers of Mosho was one Denko,
who was so skilled in imitating the crowing of cocks it he was nick named 'Keimei' (cock -crow),
and he, running to a high place, imitated the cock crow so well that all the cocks at the barrier
hearing it at once crowed in concert. Then barrier guards, deceived by the sound, at once opened
the gate and they passed through.  So perhaps this cock -crow is

[p. 192]

only a ruse of the enemy: let us then advance." But as he finished speaking the dawn began to
break mistily, for it was the time of the short days of the fifth month. Then Izu -no-kami replied:
"A night attack cannot  be made now, and we dare not provoke a battle with them in broad day,
so give the order to retire." So the attackers of the front gate retired from Matsusaka and those of
the back gate from Nyoi -ga-mine. The young and turbulent priests, declaring that it was the fault
of Ichi -nyo-bo who had prolonged their consultations till daybreak, clamoured for him to be put
to death at once, and attacked and wounded him, and his disciples and followers who strove to
defend him were all wounded also. He, wounded as he was, managed to crawl away and get to
Rokuhara, though when they heard his tale there, since there were many tens of thousands of
armed men assembled, they were by no means perturbed.

Then the Prince, seeing that Hieizan had turned against them, and Nara had not yet sent their
men, since Miidera alone could do nothing, on the twenty -third day of the same month left that
temple and started for the Southern Capital. The Prince had with him two flutes of Chinese
bamboo called 'Semiori' and 'Koeda.' Of these ' Semiori' was made of a bamboo with joints like a

living Cicada (semi), which had been sent from China as a return gift when in the reign of Toba -
in much gold dust had been sent as a present to the Emperor of the Sung dynasty. Wondering
how such a rare trea sure could be well -carved, it had been sent to Daisei -in no Sojo Kakuso of
Miidera and placed on the altar while prayer was offered for seven days, after which it was carved.
On one occasion Takamatsu -no-Chunagon Sanehira -no-Kyo came to the temple and play ed on it,
but forgetting it was no ordinary flute, he dropped it to the ground from his knees, and the flute,
feeling the reproach, broke at the joint like a Semi; so that ever after it was called 'Semiori.' As
the Prince excelled so greatly at flute playi ng he had inherited it. But now, thinking that his end
was nigh, he

[p. 193]

deposited it in the Kondo Hall before Miroku Bosatsu. How sad the thought that it was because
he wished to seek the way of Miroku Bosatsu and forsake the world. The Prince gave all the elder
priests leave to stay behind, but the young and high -spirited monks went with him. The
following of Gensammi Nyudo, the clan Watanabe and the monks of Miidera made up in all a
force of about fifteen hundred men. Then Joen -bo-no Ajari Kyoshu, leaning on an old man's staff,
came into the presence of the Prince with tears streaming from his eyes: "I had wished to
accompany you always," he said "but my years are now four -score and so it is very difficult for
me to march, but I am sending my discip le Gyobu Bo Shunshu; he is the son of Yamanouchi Sado
Gyobu -no-jo Toshimichi of the province of Soshu, who at the time of the fighting in Heiji served
the late Sama -no-kami Yoshitomo and was slain at Rokujo Kawara. Having some slight
connexion with him I b rought him up so that nothing that is in his heart is hidden from me. Take
him therefore and let him serve you always." Then the Prince overcome by his feelings, could not
refrain from tears and exclaimed: "What have I done that he should show me such grea t
kindness?"