CHAPTER XVII.
CONCERNING 'SEIZAN.'

It was when h e was seventeen years old that Tsunemasa was presented with the Biwa 'Seizan,'
and about the same time he was sent as Imperial Envoy to the shrine of Hachiman at Usa. When
he arrived there he played certain secret pieces of great beauty on it before the ab ode of the deity,
and all the

[p.61]

assembled priests were so touched that the sleeves of their ritual garments were wet with their
tears. Even those without any discrimination, who had never had any opportunity of hearing good
music, were delighted, th inking it sounded like showers of rain. And the story of this Biwa is that,
when in the time of Nimmyō Tennō, in the third month of the third year of the period of Ka -shō,
Kamon -no-kami Sadatoshi went to China, he learned three styles of playing from Rensh ō-bu, a
very renowned master of the Biwa, and before he came back to Japan he was presented with
three Biwas called 'Genshō,' 'Shishi -maru,' and 'Seizan.' But while he was returning over the sea,
the Dragon god "of the waters was moved by envy to raise a g reat storm, so they cast 'Shishi
maru' into the waves to appease him, and brought back only two to this country, which were
presented to the Emperor.

Many years after, in the period  Ō-wa, the Emperor Murakami Tennō was sitting in the Seiryōden
one autumn at midnight, when the moon was shining brightly and a cool breeze was blowing,
arid was playing on the Biwa called 'Genshō', when suddenly a shadowy form appeared before
him and began to sing in a loud and sonorous voice. On the Emperor asking him who he w as and
whence he had come, he answered thus. "I am Renshō -bu, that master of the Biwa who in China
taught the three secret styles of playing to Fujiwara Sadatoshi; but in my teaching there was one
tune that I concealed and did not transmit to him, and for this fault I have been cast into the
place of devils. Having this night heard the wondrous beauty of your playing, I have come to ask
Your Majesty if I may transmit the one remaining tune to you, and thus be permitted to enter the
perfect enlightenment of Buddha." Then, taking 'Seizan' which was standing before His Majesty
also, he tuned the strings and taught the melody to the Emperor. And this is that which is called
'Jogen' and 'Sekijo.'

[p.62]

After this apparition the Emperor and his Ministers feared  to play on this Biwa, and it was
presented to the Imperial Temple of Ninnaji, and Tsunemasa received it because he was so much
beloved by the Imperial Abbot. The front of it was made of a rare wood called Shito, and on it
was a picture of the moon of dawn  coming forth from among the green foliage of summer
mountains, hence its name 'Se izan' (Green Mountain). It was a most precious treasure not at all
inferior to 'Genshō.'