CHAPTER XV.
KOSHIGOE .

     On the seventh day of the fifth month of the second year of Gen -ryaku Kurō Taiyū -no-
Hōgwan Yoshitsune set out from th e Capital with the Daijin Munemori and his son. When they
came to Awata -guchi, the Palace was far away among the clouds, and when he beheld the clear
streams of the barrier at Ausaka, the Daijin, weeping bitterly, composed this verse:

     " Here today by  this spring .T look any last on Miyako,
        Grant that once more any face mirror itself in its wave."

     Yoshitsune, noticing how sad and despondent was Munemori, with his accustomed kindness
tried to cheer him." I pray you, if it be possible, save  my life." entreated the Daijin. " Anyhow I do
not consider your life in any danger," replied the Hōgwan, " but if it were, I would claim it as a
reward of my merit in this campaign. Perchance however, you will be banish -

[p. 266]

ed to some distant prov ince or far off island." "Let me be banished even to Chishima in Ezo,"
pathetically pleaded Munemori, " so long as my life is preserved." It was a pitiable exhibition.

     So the days passed and on the twenty third day it was reported that the Hōgwan was  about to
arrive at Kamakura, but Kajiwara Heizō Kagetoki, who had preceded him, spoke to Yoritomo
saying: " Now all Nippon is subject to your lordship's will, and your brother Kurō Taiyū -no-
Hōgwan Yoshitsune is the only enemy you have to fear. A straw wil l show how the wind blows.
He declared that if he had not ridden down the mountain behind Ichi -no-tani, we could not have
broken the eastern and western defenses. And then be had everyone, alive or dead, brought to
him for inspection, and not to Noriyori w ho was of no account at all. He ordered the Chujō
Shigehira to be brought before him, and said he would come and take him if he were not, so,
thinking the consequences might be serious, I considered well, and with the assistance of Doi
himself, committed t he Chujō to the keeping of Doi -no-Jirō Sanehira and so saved the situation."
Yoritomo, quite convinced by these things, ordered Kajiwara to take every precaution to prevent
Yoshitsune approaching him; and the feudal lords, both small and great, came hurryi ng up to his
aid, so that he soon mustered several thousands of horsemen. When he saw that he was thus
protected; " Kurō is a very clever fellow," quoth he, " cunning enough to get in under these floor
mats; but I have out -witted him this time." So he fixe d a barrier at Kane -araizawa and there took
over Munemori and his son, ordering Yoshitsune to retire to Koshigoe. When Yoshitsune
understood this he was very indignant. " What is the meaning of this?" he exclaimed," between
the spring of last year when he defeated Kiso Yoshinaka and this spring I have utterly destroyed
the Heike and without delay restored the Sacred Mirror and the Sacred Gem to the Capital. I
have, moreover, captured alive the Daijin Munemori, the Commander -in- Chief, and his son, and
broug ht them thus far

[p. 267]


with me as prisoners; so whatever suspicion Yoritomo may harbour about me he ought at least to
receive me in audience. I had thought at least that I might have been appointed Sotsuibushi of
Kyūshū, or put in charge of the San -in, Sanyō, or Nankai -dō to consolidate them for him, but
instead of that I have merely been made Governor of the province of Iyo; and then instead of
being received into Kamakura I am made to go back to Koshigoe. Was not the subduing of the
whole land of Nip pon the work of Yoshinaka and myself? Of the sons of the same father he that
is born first is treated as the elder brother, and those who are born afterwards as the younger, so
that none can deny that it is he that rules the Empire. Who could doubt it?"

     But as all his complaints were unavailing, in tears of despair Yoshitsune wrote this letter and
sent it to Ōe Hiromoto:

     " With the deepest respect Minamoto Yoshitsune pleads his cause. Having been appointed to
represent your lordship, I have successfully fulfilled the Imperial Edict in subduing the enemies of
the Throne and wiping out our former disgrace.  Far from receiving any reward for these deeds, on
account of some malignant slander all my great merit has been forgotten, and I have been blamed
where I have committed no crime. Though my great achievements are known to all, yet I am
thus rebuffed and le ft here many days to weep bitter tears in vain and while the truth of the
slanders has not been proved, I am unable to come to Kamakura to say anything in my defense.
Long is it now since I have been permitted to behold your face. Can it be that our former
fraternal relations have now been severed, that in the destiny that brings them to none effect I am
reaping the reward of the evil karma of a former life? Wretched that I am! For then, except the
revered spirit of our father were to return to this life, w ho is there to hearken to my unavailing
lamentation, or who will show me any pity? Irrelevant as it may seem to refer to such things,
since I was born and my father's early death left me an orphan, so that my mother

[p. 268]

travelled with me in her arms  to Uda in Yamato, up till this moment I have never known an hour
of ease. What use to describe the risks of my sojourn near the Capital, hiding myself here and
there, and fleeing to this and that refuge far removed from the haunts of men, subject to the v ery
hinds and peasants? But when, in the new harmony of our brotherly affection, it was arranged
that I should go forth in the campaign against the Heike, since Kiso Yoshinaka was overthrown
and I set forth to destroy the whole family, what hardships are t here both by land and sea that I
have not undergone? At times spurring my steed over the towering crags heedless of all danger, at
times braving the perils of the winds and waves of the boundless ocean; careless whether my
body should be lost in the depths  of the sea to be a prey for the great fishes. Moreover my helmet
and armour were my only pillow, the bending of the bow my only business, while I put away all
thought of aught but appeasing the wrath of our ancestral spirits, the object of my long cherish ed
desire. Therefore it was no more than suitable to the importance of our house that Yoshitsune
should be appointed Go -i-no-Jō. But now my grief is sore and my lamentation extreme. Except I
turn for aid to the gods and Buddhas, to whom can I look to hear my petition? Still, if I had all
the holy amulets of all the shrines and temples in Nippon, and took all the gods and Buddhas of
the whole land to witness that I held no treachery in my heart, however many oaths I might
swear he would not forgive me. Our c ountry is the land of the gods; and the gods will not tolerate
impropriety. There is none else on whom I can rely, so I throw myself on your great charity. I
pray you therefore to bring these things before Yoritomo at a suitable time, and to take such
meas ures that he will perceive that I am guiltless and pardon me. So shall your house acquire

great merit, and good fortune and prosperity shall follow you from generation to generation. Thus
will my former sadness be done away, and for a while I shall enjoy t ranquility. I cannot say all I
would in this letter, but must perforce here bring my few

[p. 269]

words to an end. Yoshitsune respectfully addresses you. The fifth day of the sixth month of the
second year of Gen -ryaku. To Inaba -no-kami Dono.