CHAPTER VIII.
THE LETTER TO HIEIZAN.

Now at Miidera they rang the bell and blew the conch to summon the priests to council. "Of late,
when we consider the tendency of the time, the decline of the Buddhist Law and the languishing
of the Monarchy are especial ly evident. If we do not now chastise the Nyudo for his evil doings,
when will another opportunity occur? Is it not through the protection of Hachiman and the help
of Shinra Daimyojin [7] that Prince Takakura has come hither Shall it not be then that the Hosts
of Heaven and Earth will pour down their favour, and the power and might of the Gods and
Buddhas bend him to our will? Heizan is a place where also the Tendai -shu is devoutly studie d,
while at Nara, the South Capital, are many who are zealous in meditation and holy attainments: if
then we send an appeal to them, surely they will join us in a league together." Thus they decided
with one accord and sent an appeal to Hieizan and Nara. T hat to Hieizan ran as follows:

"Appeal of Onjoji to Enryakuji for co -operation to save us from destruction. Since the Nyudo
Jokai wishes to destroy Buddhism and overthrow the monarchy at his will, to our great grief the
second son of the Ho -o fled secret ly to our monastery on the fifteenth day of this month to
escape persecution. And though we have been repeatedly bidden by a so -called Imperial Order to
yield him up, yet we cannot consent. So we are threatened with the despatch of an official army
against  us.  Therefore the overthrow of our monastery is now imminent and all our brethren are
in great trouble. Now Enryakuji and Onjoji, though their buildings are separate, yet both revere
the one

[p. 185]

Law of Tendaishu, even as the two wings of a bird or  as the two wheels of a cart they are to each
other. So that if one be wanting, will not the other feel the loss? If therefore you will unite your
strength with us, and save us from destruction, our former animosity will be forgotten and we
shall again dwe ll in good fellowship together. Given by us, the chief priests, at council held on the
eighth day of the fifth month of the fourth year of Jisho.