CHAPTER III.
CONCERNING THE DYER.
     On the twenty second day of the eighth month, Mongaku Shōnin of Takao, having discovered
the real skull of the late Sama - no-kami Yoshitomo, hung it round his neck and set out for the
Eastern Provinces, bringing with him also the head of Kamada Hyōye hung round the neck of one
of his disciples. In the seventh month of the fourth year of Jishō he had brought some skull or
other wrapped in white linen and showed it to Yoritomo, saying that it was his father's skull, in
order to incite him to rebellion, a nd he had believed it was truly 10, and had risen and obtained
the supremacy. The real one

[p. 282]

which he had now brought was found thus. A certain dyer, to whom the late Yoshitomo had
showed kindness, employing him for a long time, had begged the hea d from the Kebiishi, when
he saw it buried in front of the prison with no one to say the death prayers over it, and thinking
that Yoritomo, though now in exile, might very likely emerge and become powerful in future,
and make enquiries about it, he hid it in the temple of Engakuji on Higashi -yama. So when
Mongaku heard of this he came down with it to Kamakura, bringing the dyer with him.

     When Yoritomo heard that he was approaching the city he went out as far as the Katase -gawa
to meet him, and then re turned with him to Kamakura clad in mourning garb. Placing the priest
on the floor above him, he stood in the courtyard below to receive the head, weeping bitterly the
while. And all the feudal lords, both great and small, who witnessed the scene, moistene d their
sleeves with their tears. Then he cut out a certain steep cliff and built a temple there, that prayers
might be said for the spirit of his father, and he gave it the name of Shōchōji -in, And when the
Court heard of it, Sashōben Kanetada was sent as  Imperial Envoy to Kamakura to confer on the
late Sama -no-kami Yoshitomo the title of Naidaijin of the Upper Second Rank. Thus the warlike
prowess of Yoritomo not only exalted himself and his house to high honour, but obtained rank
and title for the spirit  of his departed parent.