CHAPTER IV.

EVIL SPIRITS.

Since the Heike removed the capital to Fukuhara, people were much troubled by evil dr eams,
and many strange occurrences took place. One night, when the Nyudo had retired to his bed,
suddenly the whole room was filled with faces innumerable, peering at him. Kiyomori was not at
all perturbed but looked up and glared at them in return, whereu pon they all faded away and
vanished. And in the Oka Palace which was then being built, though there were no especially
great timbers, yet one night there was heard a crashing sound as of great timbers falling, and then
a great shout of laughter up in the air as though two or three thousand people were all laughing at
once. Verily, it was considered, this must be the work of the Tengu [14], so a guard was stationed,
fifty men by day and a hundred by night, called the guard of the whizzing arrows. For when th ey
shot these whizzing arrows toward the direction where a Tengu was, there was no sound, but if it
was shot at a place where there was none, then there was a burst of laughter. Also one morning
when Kiyomori went out of his chamber and passed through the wicket gate to view the garden,
at once the garden was filled with a heap of skulls of dead men without number that rolled and
writhed one over another, up and down and in and out, rattling and clattering as they moved. The
Nyudo called to his attendants, but it chanced that there was no one to answer. Then all the
skulls came together and united into one huge skull like a mountain in size, that seemed to fill
the whole garden, perhaps a hundred and forty or fifty feet high, and in this great skull appeared
millions of great eyes like the eyes of a man, that glared at the Nyudo with an unwinking stare.
The Nyudo on his part was quite unmoved, and stood his ground glaring at them in return for
some time, when as the dew or hoar -frost that melts in the sun, th ey vanished away leaving not a
trace

[p. 222]


behind. Also it happened that this Lay -priest Chancellor had in his stables a horse that he was
especially fond of, so that he appointed many attendants to look after it night and day, and one
night a rat ma de a nest in its tail and produced young ones therein. As this was a very strange
phenomenon, the Imperial diviners were consulted about it, and they declared it to be portent of
grave significance. Now this horse had been presented to the Nyudo by Oba Sab uro Kagechika of
Sagami, and renowned as the finest horse in all the eight eastern province. It was black with a
small patch of white on its forehead and was named Mochizuki. It was afterward given to Abe -
no-Yasuchika chika, Chief of the Diviners. Now in f ormer times, in the days of Tenchi Tenno, a
rat made its nest and brought forth young in the tail of a horse of the Imperial Stables, and
thereupon there followed an insurrection of bandits in Korea. It recorded in the 'Nihon Shoki'. It
happened also that a young retainer of Gen Chunagon Masayori -no-Kyo had a very ominous
dream. He dreamed that he was in the Imperial Department Rites in the Palace and that a
number of Lady Officials of the Court, clad in the stately robes of ancient ceremony, had
assembled there as for a council. She who sat in the lowest seat, and who seemed to be a
supporter of the Heike, was driven out the assembly, while an old man of dignified bearing, who

sat in the highest place, declared that the Sword of Commission [15] that was depo sited with the
Heike should be returned and given to Yoritomo the former Uhyoye -no-suke, now in exile in the
province of Izu; upon which another elder who sat by his side demanded that afterwards it
should be given to his grandson. On the young samurai ask ing in his dream what was the meaning;
this, yet another old man told him that the Lady Official who sat in the lowest place and was a
partizan of the Heike was Itsukushima Daimyojin, while he who said that the Sword

[p. 223]

should be given to Yoritomo was Hachiman Daibosatsu, and the other who wished it given to his
grandson was Kasuga Daimyojin, at the same time informing him that he himself was Takeuchi
Myojin. When he awoke, the young man told this dream to someone, so that it came to pass that
the N yudo heard of it, whereupon he immediately sent a messenger to Masayorino Kyo bidding
him send the young samurai who had had this dream that he might question him further about it.
The young samurai, fearing some evil consequences, ran away, and Masayori h imself went to the
mansion of the Nyudo and denied the whole story; after which  no more was heard about it. It
was a r emarkable thing too that the silver -mounted halberd that had been given to the Nyudo in
a divine dream by Itsukushima Daimyojin after he h ad worshipped at her shrine when he was
Aki-no-kami, suddenly disappeared one night in a strange manner. How sad it was that though
the Heike had guarded the Imperial House and protected the Empire up till now, they should
disobey the Imperial Order and be  deprived of their Sword of Commission.