CHAPTER XIV.

CARRYING DOWN THE SACRED CARS.


Thus, though the priests of Hieizan had many times petitioned the Emperor for the banishment
of the Kokushi Kaga -no-kami Morotaka and the imprisonment of the Mokudai Kondo Hangwan
Morotsu ne, yet no answer was given them, so, without celebrating the festival of Hiyoshi, on the
thirteenth day of the fourth month of the third year of An -gen at the first hour of the Dragon, (8.
p.m.) they set out with the Mikoshi or sacred cars of the three sh rines of Juzenji, Marodo, and
Hachioji at their head, while with them went the priests of the gods and Buddhas from
Sagarematsu, Kiretsuzumi, Kamo -no-kawara, Tadasu, Umetada, Yanagihara, Tohoku -in, and
others with their monks and followers, an innumerable host. As they entered Ichijo from the
western side, people wondered if the sun and moon had not fallen from heaven. Thereupon the
Emperor ordered the generals of the houses of Gen and Hei to secure the four quarters of the
Palace enclosure and to protect t he city against the priestly multitude. Then Komatsu Naidaijin
Sadaisho Shigemori with about three thousand horsemen secured the three gates of the Palace
called Yomei, Taiken, and Yubo, while his younger brothers Munemori, Tomomori and Shigehira,
with his  uncles Yorimori and Tsunemori held the south western gates. Of the Genji, Gensammi
Minamoto Yorimasa the Warden of the Palace with his retainers the Watanabe father and son,
and about three hundred horsemen held the Nuidono Palace at the north gate. This position
being an extensive one and the troops few, they presented a very scattered appearance, so that

[p. 49]

the priests, perceiving this to be the weakest point in the defences, determined to try and bring in
their sacred emblem by the north gate. Th en Yorimasa quickly leapt from his horse, and taking
off his helmet and rinsing his mouth with water, made humble obeisance before the sacred
emblem, all his three hundred retainers likewise following his example, after which he sent
Watanabe Choshichi Ton au as an envoy to the priests. He was attired that day in a `'hitatare' of
light green, and body armour ornamented with cherry blossoms on a yellow ground, and wore a
sword with mounts of red copper; in his quiver he carried twenty four arrows feathered wi th
white and under his arm was a bow lacquered in black and bound with red bands. Taking off his
helmet he slung it over his shoulder by the thong, and standing reverently before the sacred car,
spoke thus : " Be silent a while, I pray you, and hear my mes sage from Gensammi Dono. The
appeal of Hieizan to the Throne was certainly justified, and we also regret the slowness of the
decision, so that not without reason do you bring hither your sacred car: Yorimasa however has
but few men wherewith to hold this g ate, and if you decide to force your way in at such an
unguarded place you will he a laughing stock to the children of the city and it will be
remembered to your shame in days to come. If we open the gate to you we shall be disobedient
to the Imperial Orde r and if we try to defend it, I, who have always revered the god of Iozan, can
no longer follow the way of the warrior. Truly either path is beset with difficulty. The eastern
side is held in strong force by Komatsu Dono, so it is there that you ought to t ry and enter."


On hearing this the priests hesitated and were undecided as to what to do, when some youthful
and worthless ones among them cried out : " Wherefore do ye thus delay ; push on through the
gate." As many took up this cry, an aged priest calle d Setsu -no-Rissha Ko -un, the wisest of all in
the three halls, stood forth and said: " This request is very reasonable. If we break through the
strongest place with our sacred car it will be greatly to our credit in time to come ; and moreover
this Yorimas a is

[p. 50]

of the purest line of the Genji, descended from the sixth Imperial Grandson, having no equal in
martial arts, and renowned not only as a warrior but also as a poet; for while Konoe -in was on the
Throne, it happened that a verse -party was pro posed at which the subject suggested for
composition was, " Flowers in the recesses of the mountains; " and this theme embarrassed the
verse -makers very much, but Yorimasa won great admiration from the Emperor by his famous
improvisation ;
 " Cherry bough s do not show 'mid the trees in the depths of the mountains ;
But at the time of bloom, beauteous the flowers appear."
Do not then let us put to shame one who has merited the Imperial admiration on an occasion like
this. Let us carry in the sacred car el sewhere." Moved by this advice, thousands of the monks
from front to rear shouted assent, and, forthwith carrying the sacred car round to the eastern side,
made to enter the Palace through the Taiken gate. Here a struggle ensued, for the samurai drew
their bows and shot at them so that many arrows struck the sacred car of Juzenji and some of the
priests were killed, many of their followers being wounded, the noise of the shouts and groans
ascending even to the Bonten Paradise, [1] while Kenro -Chijin, the mi ghty Earth deity, was struck
with consternation. Then the priestly bands, leaving their sacred cars behind at the gate, fled back
lamenting to their temples.