CHAPTER  V.
KURIKARA .

Now the two armies of the Genji and Heike faced each other in battle array, the distance
between them being scarcely three cho, but for a while neither side advanced. Then, after a while
fifteen picked horsemen came forth from the host of the Genji, and  taking up a position between
the two forces, each man loosed a turnip -headed arrow at the Heike. At this fifteen picked men
of the Heike also advanced and shot their arrows at the Genji in turn: then the Genji sent forth
thirty more horsemen, and the Heik e replied with a like number. Fifty again rode forth from the
Genji and shot their arrows, and another fifty of the Heike appeared to meet them. When both
had sent forth a hundred men, and the two bands engaged each other between the two armies to
try a de cisive contest, the Genji sent no more men to join them and purposely avoided a decision.
While they were thus engaged in holding them in check until the sun should set and the night
approach, so that they could drive their whole army into the valley of Ku rikara beneath, the
Heike, never dreaming of such a piece of strategy, continued to fight on until nightfall. Then the
flanking force consisting of some ten thousand men, who had gone round by the way of the Fudo
shrine of Kurikara, suddenly beat vigorousl y on their quivers and shouted their war cry. The
Heike, turning to look behind them at the sound, immediately

[p.30]

perceived the white flags of the Genji like a cloud in their rear, and, as they had thought
themselves safe against any flanking attack  owing to the precipitous cliffs on all sides of the
position, the sight threw them into a panic and they knew not how to act. At this moment Kiso
Yoshinaka himself, with his force of ten thousand men, shouted his war cry, and immediately the
other bands w ho were concealed on the slops of Tonami, at Yanagihara and Kinbayashi, about
ten thousand in all, together with the six thousand under Imai Shiro who lay hid at Miyabayashi,
also shouted in unison, so that with the roar of their forty thousand voices it s eemed as if the
mountain and the river would be shaken from their seats. Then, as it grew darker, the Genji
rushed to the attack on both front and rear, and though. many adjured their fellows to come back
and not to disgrace themselves by flight, when once  panic seizes a great army it is not of easy to
stop it, so the Heike stampeded in a pell -mell flight into the valley of Kurikara. As those behind
could not see those in front, they thought there must be a road at the the bottom of the valley,
and so the w hole army went down one after another, son after father, brother after brother and
retainer after lord, horses and men falling on top of one another and piling up in heaps upon
heaps. Thus did some seventy thousand horsemen of the Heike perish, buried in t his one deep
valley: the mountain streams ran with their blood and the mound of corpses was like a small hill;
and in this valley, it is said, there can be seen the marks of arrows and swords even to this day.
Kazusa -na-taiyu Hangwan Tadatsuna, Hida -no tai yu Hangwan Kagetaka and Kawachi -no-
Hangwan Hidekun, who were in command of the samurai, perished with their men at the
bottom of this valley, while Seo -no-Taro Kaneyasu of Botchu, a warrior of great renown, deserted
by fortune on this occasion, was taken a live by Kuramitsu -no-Jiro Narizumi of Kaga. Heizenji -no-
Chori Saimei -i-Gishi, who had been so loyal to the Heike at the fortress of Hiuchi in Fchizen,
was also taken, which when Yoshinaka heard. he exclaimed:

[p.31]

" Let that most worthless priest be pu t to death immediately;" whereupon they fell on him and

beheaded him. The Commanders -in Chief, Koremori and Michimori, strange to relate, escaped
with their lives and fled to the province of Kaga, but out of the whole army of seventy thousand
men, barely t wo thousand horsemen survived.

On the twelfth day of the same month Yoshinaka received a present of two splendid horses from
Fujiwara Hidehira of Mutsu : one was cream -coloured and the other was grey with black spots.
These he caparisoned with richly deco rated saddles and dedicated to the shrine of Shirayama as
sacred steeds. Yoshinaka now felt no anxiety about his position, but was in some doubt how his
uncle Juro Kurando Yukiie had fared in the battle at Shiho, so, choosing twenty thousand picked
horseme n from his army of forty thousand, he rode off thither. On the way they came to the inlet
of Himi which must be crossed, but as the tide was high at the time, they did not know whether
the water was shallow enough to ford, so Yoshinaka took ten saddled hor ses and drove them into
the waves, and as they reached the further bank without more than wetting the saddles, they all
rode in after them and crossed without difficulty. When they got to the other side, as they had
expected, they found that Yukiie had ret ired after being hard pressed by the enemy, and was
resting his men and horses. Immediately the fresh twenty thousand men of the Genji rode
forward and dashed into the thirty thousand of the Heike with such a shock as caused fire to fly
forth as the two op posing hosts crashed together in the melee. Mikawa -no-Kami Tomonori, the
Commander of the Heike was killed: he was the youngest son of the Lay priest Chancellor. Beside
him many other warriors fell, and the rest sought safety in flight and retired to the p rovince of
Kaga. Yoshinaka then crossed the mountain of Shiho with ten thousand men, and pitched his
camp before the barrow of Shino at Odanaka in the province of Noto.