CHAPTER IV.
THE ORACLE OF THE WEASELS.

Now the Ho -o was apprehensive lest he should share the fate of Narichika and Shunkwan and be
banished to some distant province or remote island, but this did not come to pass, and the fourth
year of Jisho found him still confined in the Toba Palace. Thus it happened that o n the twelfth
day of the fifth month of that year, at the hour of the Horse (12 noon) many weasels made a great
noise by running about the Palace, and the Ho -o, wishing to consult a diviner about it, called
Omi-no-kami Nakakane, who was then entitled Tsuru -no-Kurando, and ordered him to go to
Abe-no-Yasuchika and ask him, after due consideration of the portent, to send a pronouncement
on it. Nakakane, respectfully assenting, went to the residence of Yasuchika, but it happened that
he was away at that time, and being informed that he was at Shirakawa, he proceeded thither,
and gave him the mesage of the Ho -o, whereupon Yasuchika after a short time handed him the
pronouncement he desired. Nakakane immediately hastened with it to the Toba Palace, but
when he ca me to enter the gate, the guards on duty there would not admit him. As he knew the
buildings very well however, he climbed over the wall and then creeping under the floor of the
Palace, managed to insert Yasuchika's prognostication through a loose board in  the Ho -o's room.
When the Ho -o opened and read it, he found this oracle; "Within three days you will have cause
both for rejoicing and lamentation." "In this condition," quoth His Majesty, "I may indeed rejoice,
but what further misfortune can befall me, I wonder?"

On the thirteenth day, owing to the continued petitions that the former Udaisho Munemori -no-
Kyo made on behalf of the Ho -o, the Nyudo at last relented and ordered that His Majesty should
be brought back to Kyoto from the Toba Palace and lodged in the Palace of Bifuku -mon-in at
Hachijo Karasu Maru the cause of rejoicing that Yasuchika predicted

[p. 174]

within three days. Now just at this time Tanso, the Betto of Kumano, sent a courier to Kyoto
with the report, of the rebellion of Prince Takaku ra, and Munemori was thrown into great
consternation thereat. The Nyudo was at his residence at Fukuhara and when the news was sent
to him, he flew into a great rage and ordered Prince Takakura to be immediately arrested and
banished to Tosa. The carrying out of this order was entrusted to Nijo -no-Dainagon Sanefusa,
with To -no-Ben Mitsumasa under him, the samurai under them being Gendaiyu -no-Hangwan
Kanetsuna and Dewa -no-Hangwan Mitsunaga with three hundred fully armed men, and these
proceeded at once to th e Takakura Palace. This Gendaiyu Hangwan was the second son of
Gensammi Nyudo, and the fact that he was included proved that the Heike did not yet know
that his father was implicated in the plot.