CHAPTER VIII.
THE FIGHT AT DAN NO URA .

     Meanwhile Yoshitsune, after his victory at Yashima, crossed over to Suwo to join his brother
Noriyori, and, strange

[p. 243]

to say, the place whic h the Heike next reached was called Hikushirna in the province of Nagato,
while the Genji went to Oitsu in the same province. Just at this time Tanso, the Bettō of
Kumano, of the province of Kii, who was under great obligations to the Heike, suddenly chang ed
his mind and hesitated as to which side he should support. So he went to the shrine of Ikumano
at Tanabe and spent seven days in retirement there, having Kagura preformed, and praying before
the Gongen. As a result of this he received an intimation from  the deity that he should adhere to
the white banner, but, being still doubtful, he took seven white cocks and seven red ones, and
held a cock fight before the Gongen, and as none of the red cocks were victorious but were all
beaten and ran away, he at las t made up his mind to join the Genji. Therefore, assembling all his
retainers to the number of some two thousand men, and embarking them on two hundred ships
of war, he put the emblem of the deity of the shrine on board his ship and painted the name of
Kongō Dōji on the top of his standard. Accordingly when this vessel with its divine burden
approached the ships of the Genji and Heike at Dan -no-ura, both parties saluted it reverently,
but when it was seen to direct its course towards the fleet of the Genji,  the Heike could not
conceal their chagrin. Moreover, to the further consternation of the Heike, Kono -no-Shirō
Michinobu of the province of Iyo also came rowing up with a hundred and fifty large ships and
went over to the fleet of their enemies.

     Thus  the forces of the Genji went on increasing, while those of the Heike grew less. The
Genji had some three thousand ships, and the Heike one thousand, among which were some of
Chinese build; and so, on the twenty fourth day of the third month of the second year of Gen -
ryaku, at the Hour of the Hare (6 a.m.), at Ta -no-ura in the province of Bungo, at Moji -ga-seki,
and at Dan -no-ura in the province of Nagato, at Akama -ga-seki began the final battle of the Gen
and Hei.

     On that day the Hōgwan and Kajiwara were on the point

[p. 244]

of open warfare with each other. Kajiwara came to the Hōgwan and requested that he might be
allowed to lead the Genji fleet. "Certainly," replied Yoshitsune, " if I am prevented." " That is not
proper," answered Kajiwara, " for  your lordship is Commander -in-Chief." " By no means," replied
the Hōgwan, " Yoritomo is the real Commander -in-Chief, and I am only a Marshal of the forces,
so I am equal in rank to you."" H'm "grumbled Kajiwara, disappointed of his expectation of
leading the army, " his lordship is not naturally suited to leadwarriors." " Your lordship seems to
me the biggest fool in Nippon," retorted Yoshitsune, laying his hand on his sword hilt. "This to
me! " exclaimed Kajiwara, also laying his hand on his sword, " I, w ho have no other lord but
Kamakura Dono ! "At this his eldest son Genda Kagesue, his second son Heiji Kagetaka and his
third son Saburō, Kageie, numbering with their retainers, fourteen or fifteen in all, sprang forward

with bared weapons to support their father, while Ise SaburōYoshimori, Satō Shirōhyōye
Tadanobu, Eda -no-Genzō, Kumai -no-Tarō, Saitō -bō Benkei and the rest of the Hōgwan's men
made haste to surround them, each eager to cut them down.  At this point Miura -no-suke
restrained the Hōgwan and Doi -no-Jirō caught hold of Kajiwara, beseeching them: " If you fight
each other thus in the face of such a crisis, we may be overpowered by the Heike, and when
Kamakura Dono hears of it there will be trouble." So the Hōgwan calmed his anger and Kajiwara
also r egained his composure, but from that time Kajiwara nursed his enmity against Yoshitsune,
and spoke evil of him, so that at last he got him put to death, as is elsewhere recorded.

     Now the two hosts of the Genji and Heike faced each other scarcely thi rty cho distant on the
water; and as the tide was running strongly through Moji, Akama and Dan -no-ura, the Heike
ships were carried down by the current against their will, while the Genji were naturally able to
advance on them with the tide. Kajiwara with his sons and retainers to the number of

[p. 245]

fourteen or fifteen, stuck close to the shore, and catching on with rakes to some ships of the
Heike that went astray, they boarded them and sprang from one ship to the other, cutting their
men down both a t bow and stern and doing great deeds.

And their merit that day has been specially recorded.