CHAPTER I.

THE LETTER OF RELEASE.

On the first day of the New Year of the period Jisho the ceremony of New Year greeting took
place in the Palace of the Retired Emperor, and on the fou rth day the Emperor himself proceeded
thither in state. These ceremonies did not depart in any way from the usual precedent, but as in
the summer of the preceding year the Shin -Dainagon Narichika -no-Kyo and other of his retainers
had been banished or execu ted, the Retired Emperor still felt much resentment and could not
give himself to affairs of state with a quiet mind, and was in an unsettled condition about things
in general. Kiyomori Nyudo also, since the revelations of Tada Kurando Yukitsuna, felt unea sy
about the Ho -o, and though outwardly appearing unaffected, beneath his apparent calmness he
took precautions and wore always a cynical smile.

On the seventh day a comet appeared in the eastern quarter that is called in China ' Shiyuki,' [2]
of evil omen; it is also called ' Sekiki '. On the eighteenth day its light increased. Kiyomori's
daughter Ken -rei-mon-in, who at this time bore the title of Chugu or second consort of the
Empero r, falling ill, there was lamentation both at Court and throughout the country. In all the
temples the holy Sutras were recited and envoys were sent to all the shrines, divination was
performed and the physicians concocted their medicines, using all the re sources of their art both
exoteric and esoteric, but still the sickness did not pass away. Then she was found to be pregnant.

The Emperor was now eighteen years old and the Chugu twenty two, and so far neither son nor
daughter had been born to His Majesty , so that if a son should how be born to the

[p. 111]

Chugu it would indeed be fortunate. The Heike rejoiced loudly together, declaring that a son
would surely be born, and other noble families also, seeing how fortune now favoured the Heike,
did not dou bt that so it would turn out. When she was decided to be pregnant, the Nyudo,
summoning all the priests of high rank and saintly reputation, bade them use all their knowledge
both open and secret in bringing his star before the Buddhas and Bodhisats and pr aying with all
fervour that a son might be born.

On the first day of the sixth month was held the ceremony of assuming the belt of pregnancy,
and Kaku -ho Shinno the Lord Abbot of Ninnaji hastened to the Palace with the Kujaku Sutra [1]
and performed the incantation ceremony of the Shingon sect. The Tendai Zasshu Kakukai -ho
Shinno and the Lord Abbot of Miidera, Enkei -ho Shinno also came up and recited the prayers for
obtaining a male he ir.


Now as the months passed the Chugu suffered more and more severely, just as was the case with
the lady Ri [3] in Han, whose one smile contained a hundred charms ; the illness of S ho-yo-den
too was of a like nature. Yo -ki-hi in China also was said to have suffered more and more through
the three seasons, as the branch of blossoming pear [4] held the spring rain,  as the lotus blossom
withered, and as the dew fell heavy on the ' Ominaeshi'. Considering the season of this illness it
seemed likely that some evil influences might be the cause, and on enquiring by divination by
means of a medium from Fudo Myo -o, it was  declared to be owing to evil spirits, especially those
of Sanuki -no-in Uji -no-Akusafu Yorinaga, the departed spirit of the Shin Dainagon Narichika -no-
Kyo, the evil spirit of Saiko Hoshi and the living spirits of the exiles of Kikaigashima.

[p. 112]

So in order to placate both the living and the departed spirits, first of all Sanuki -no-in was given
back his former title of Sutoku Tenno, and Uji -no-Akusafu was raised posthumously in rank and
office, being made Dajo -daijin of the upper first rank. Shonaiki Korekata was appointed
Imperial .Envoy to proclaim these things.

Now the tomb of Uji -no-Akusafu was at Gosan -mai in Hannyano in the village of Kawakami in
the district of Sou -no-kami in Yamato, and as in the autumn of Hogen it had been dug up and
the body  thrown out on the roadside, since then the grass had overgrown it more every year.
How joyful must his departed spirit have been when the Imperial Envoy arrived and read his
message. Then the deposed Crown Prince Sagara was given the title of Sudo Tenno a nd thus
Princess Igami was restored to the rank of Empress. All this was done to appease their angry
spirits, for from ancient times angry spirits have been considered very terrible. The madness of
Rei-zei-in and the deposition of the Retired Emperor Kwaza n were said to be owing to the angry
spirit of Motokata -no-Mimbu -no-Kyo : there was also the matter of the eye disease of the Retired
Emperor Sanjo ; it was said to have been due to the spirit of Kwanzan the Imperial Chaplain.

Now when the Kadowaki Saisho  heard of these things, he sought Komatsu Dono at his residence
and said : " I hear that there is to be a very great pardon of offences beyond all precedent in
connexion with the prayers for the birth of a son to the Chugu, and that such a virtuous and
meritorious act as the recall of the exiles of Kikaigashima is contemplated." On hearing this the
Naidaijin at once went to his father and said " It is indeed pitiable how Kadowaki -no-Saisho
laments for Tamba -no-Shosho, and especially with regard to the sickn ess of the Chugu it is said
that it is due to the angry spirit of Narichika -no-Kyo, and if you intend to placate the departed
spirit of the Dainagon you will perhaps also recall the living Shosho : for if you can thus allay
peoples' anxiety, if it is thus according to

[p. 113]

your will to accomodate the wishes of others, you will obtain. your own desire in that the
delivery of the Chugu will be easy, and she will bear a prince, and so will the glory of our line
increase greatly." The Lay -priest Chancello r, chancing to be more soft -hearted than usual replied :
" Then what is to be done with Shunkwan and Yasuyori Hoshi ? " "Surely they too should be
recalled; " replied Shigemori, " for if one of them be left behind it will be an evil deed." " That
may be so  with Vasuyori, but as for Shunkwan, he is a fellow who rose through my
recommendation, and this is the man who, though he had other places besides, held meetings at
his villa at Shishi -ga-tani on Higashiyama for his audacious designs against me. Him I wil l certainly

not pardon." So Shigemori returned and calling his uncle the Saisho told him that the Shosho
would be pardoned, that he might set his mind at rest. The Saisho, without waiting to hear more,
clasped his hands together and wept with joy. " Ah how  pitiable it was when he went into exile
to see his wistful eyes full of tears whenever he looked at me, wondering how it was I could not
obtain his pardon." " Indeed so you must have felt," replied Shigemori, " for a child is dear to
anyone. I will see fu rther to the matter." And he went out. Thus it was settled that the exiles of
Kikaigashima should be brought back again, and the Nyudo issued the letter of pardon. An envoy
was entrusted with this and immediately left Kyoto. The Saisho in his joy sent a me ssenger of his
own to accompany the official envoy. Though they made haste both by night and day, since the
sea will yield to none, and they must brave the waves and wind, though they left Kyoto during
the last decade of the seventh month, it was not until  about the twentieth day of the ninth
month that they reached Kikaigashima.