CHAPTER VI.
YORITOMO PROCLAIMED OUTLAW QUELLING SH ŌGUN.

     To continue; since the martial reputation of Hyōye -no-suke Yoritomo of Kamakura seas now
supreme, the title of Sei -i Shōgun was conferred upon him by Imperial Edict, and Sa -shisho
Nakahara Yasusada was appointed as Envoy to

[p.87]

convey it. On the fourth day of the tenth month Yasusada arrived at Kamakura. " Since it is in
acknowledgement of my reputation for military prowess that I receive this title," declared
Yoritomo, "it is well that I receive it at the shrine of the god of battles, Hach iman Dai -Bosatsu.
Now the shrine of Hachiman at Tsuru -ga-oka is, as to its site, exactly as that of Iwashimizu in the
Capital, and is built with long galleries and a two -storied gate, while the paved avenue that leads
up to its lofty seat is more than ten chō in length. As to who should receive the Imperial Edict, it
was decided, after a consultation, that the privilege should be given to Miura -no-suke Yoshizumi.
He was of the stock of Miura -no-heita Tametsugu, famed as a mighty warrior in all the Kwantō,
and as his father Ōsuke had fallen in battle for Yoritomo, this honour would shed lustre on his
spirit in the gloom of the Yellow Springs of death. With Yasusada came two of his house and ten
retainers, and Miura took also the same number of followers. Thos e of Miura's household were
Hiki-no-Toshirō Yoshikazu and Wada -no-Saburō Munezane, while his retainers were all great
lords, each fully equipped for the occasion. He himself was arrayed in a hitatare of dark blue and
armour laced with black silk. His sword  was mounted in black lacquer, and in his quiver were
twenty four black and white feathered arrows; he carried his Shigetō bow under his arm, and
hung his helmet over his shoulder and bowed low as he received the Imperial Edict. To the
formal enquiry of th e Envoy: "Who is it who is present to receive this Edict ? Let him declare his
name and. titles "; Miura, seemingly abashed to proclaim his master's name, gave his own: "
Miura -no-Arajirō Yoshizumi." He then received the Edict in a casket and presented it to
Yoritomo, who returned it again after a short interval. Yasusada thinking it rather heavy, opened
it, and found that it contained gold dust to the value of a hundred ryō. Yasusada was then
entertained at a banquet in the Haiden of the shrine, and waited  upon by officials of high rank.
He was also

[p.88]

presented with three horses, one of which, fully apparelled, was led forward by Kudō Ichirō
Suketsune. A special lodging, built in ancient style, thatched with rushes, was provided for him,
with a cloth es chest containing two suits of bedding of thick cotton and ten sets of lined garments.
He received, moreover, a thousand rolls of white linen with patterns of indigo. The cups and
dishes that he used were also of the most rich and beautiful description.

     The next day he paid a visit to Yoritomo in his own mansion, which was guarded within and
without by samurai. Outside were ranged his own household retainers on bended knee, while
within, on the upper dais, sat all the Genji lords, succeeded by all t he lords of the Kwantō, great
and small, in the lower seats. Yasusada was seated among the lords of the Genji, and, after a while,

was introduced into an inner chamber lard with fine mats with borders of Korai brocade of black
and white, the adjoining vera ndah being also laid with similar mats with an edging of purple.
When the Envoy had taken his seat there, a curtain was raised, disclosing Yoritomo himself. He
was attired in a plain Court robe and a high eboshi. His stature was small, though his face was
large; his features were handso me and his speech clear and distinct. " The Heike," he began, " in
fear of my might have fled from Miyako, and now, strangely enough, Kiso Yoshinaka and Jurū
Kurando Yukiie have forced their way into the city receiving Court Rank and choosing provinces
for themselves in virtue of my exploits. Moreover Hidehira of Mutsu has been appointed Mutsu -
no-kami, and Satake -no-Kwanja leas been made Hitachi -no-kami, by no means according to my
will. I wish therefore that an Imperial Edict be issued giving me authority to subdue them ". "For
that I will go surety ", replied the Envoy, " and though now I am only carrying out the Imperial
Command, when I return to the Capital I will see that it is done. My younger brother, Shi -no-
Taiyū Shigeyoshi will also assist me ". “In  the position I now am ", replied Yoritomo,

[p.89]

with a contemptuous smile, "sureties are hardly needed, but I shall know if you do as you say ".
Yasusada had declared that he wished to start back again for the Capital on that very day, but he
was pers uaded to remain until the morrow. The next day he again repaired to the mansion of
Yoritomo. He was then presented with a body armour laced with green silk, a sword mounted in
silver, a Shigetō bow of red and black lacquer with a set of arrow, and thirteen  horses, three of
them saddled. His twelve followers also received a complete equipment each, comprising,
hitatare, kosode, okuchi hakama, horsy and weapons. The number of the horses that he received
amounted in all to three hundred. Moreover from the time  that they left Kamakura until they
reached the boundary of Ōmi, at each stopping -place they were provided with ten koku of rice,
an amount that was not only more than sufficient for their own use, but enabled them to give
generously in charity.