CHAPTER IV.

THE LESSER ADMONITION.

The Shin -Dainagon, being thus confined in a small chamber, was in such a state of terror that a
cold sweat broke out all over him and he thought to himself; " Ali, this is the result of someone
letting out our secret. W ho can it be that has turned informer ? It must be one of the Ho -o's
Palace Guards." While he thus continued turning over everything anxiously in iris mind, he heard
a loud footfall approaching from behind and thought it was the soldiers coming to put him to
death. It was however the Nyudo himself who came tramping loudly over the Wooden floor and
abruptly opened the shoji of the apartment. Dressed in a somewhat short costume of white silk
and striding .long in an [12]o-kuchi -hakama, wearing a sword without  any decora -

[p. 68]

tion loosened in its scabbard, Kiyomori, in wrathful mien, glared fiercely for a space at the
Dainagon. " You ought to have been executed at the time of the revolution of Heiji, but
Shigemori saved your neck. That kindness you have f orgotten. What is your grievance that you
wish to overthrow our house ? To understand gratitude is the part of a man, but he who forgets it
is merely an animal; as however our family is not yet doomed to fall, I have had you brought here
so that I may find  out what has been going on lately." "You are entirely mistaken," replied the
Dainagon," someone must have surely slandered me, so pray make close enquiry into everything."
At this Kiyomori interrupting   him called , " Ho! there. "   When Sadayoshi immediat ely
appeared,   " Bring the confession that fellow Saiko has made" ordered the Nyudo, and on its being
produced read it through loudly several times to the Dainagon, " Now you villain, what have you
to say to that? " he shouted, as, flinging the document in to his face, he slammed the shoji to and
went out. His anger was not yet appeased however, so he called to Tsuneto and Kaneyasu and
bade them throw the Dainagon down into the courtyard. At this they demurred saying that
Komatsu Dono might not approve of su ch treatment.

" What? " demanded Kiyomori, " do you regard the orders of Shigemori, and pay no attention to
mine ? It seems I can do no more." But they, thinking it inadvisable not to obey after all, seized
the Dainagon by both his hands and threw him dow n into the courtyard. Then the Nyudo,
exulting in his revenge, ordered them to throw him to the ground and beat him till he cried out,
whereupon the two, wishing to spare him, whispered : to the Dainagon's ear that he should cry
out quickly, and so threw h im down and he cried out several times. It looked just like a scene in
the [13]Meido when those who have sinned in this

[p. 69]

[14]Shaba world are tortured by the devils after being weighed in the balance and their misdeeds
examined in the mirror of cle ar crystal. Thus in China also Sho and Han were thrown into prison,

and Kan and Ho were slain with their families to the third generation ; Choso also was executed
and Shugi was punished . Of these men the first four were all loyal subjects of the Emperor Koso,
but through the slanders of worthless fellows they were innocently disgraced.

On this misfortune happening to the Shin -Dainagon his first thought was about the fate of his son
Tamba -no-Shosho Naritsune and the other younger children. As it was now t he sixth month it
was extremely hot, and as he could not loosen his dress of ceremony, his condition became
unbearable so that he gasped for breath and sat bathed in tears and sweat. Though he thought
that Komatsu Dono would not forsake him, there was none  to bring him any tidings.

After some hours had passed, Komatsu Dono, undisturbed as usual either by good or ill, arrived
at Rokuhara with his eldest son Gon -no-suke Koremori riding at the back of his car. He had four
or five guards in attendance and two or three retainers but no military escort, and his bearing was
entirely calm and unmoved. The Nyudo and his family were somewhat surprised to see him
come thus, and on his alighting at the middle gate Sadayoshi came forward and said; " Why do
you go withou t an armed escort seeing that the times are so critical?" " Critical is a word that
should only be used of the affairs of the nation," replied the Minister, " we cannot use it of our
own private quarrels." On hearing this the crowd of samurai who stood by armed to the teeth
looked somewhat uncomfortable. Shigemori then proceeded to search through many rooms to
find where the Dainagon had been confined, and at last came to a shoji over which was an
arrangement of beams and ropes like a spider's web. Ordering  these to be removed he discovered
the Dainagon within. He, sitting choked with tears did not at first look up, but on being greeted
kindly by Shigemori his face

[p. 70]

lighted up like that of a sinner in Hell who sees the approach of jizo Bosatsu. " I know not what is
the reason," he said, " but this morning I have fallen into this evil plight ; as however you Nave
deigned to come to me, I am not without hope that you will be able to deliver me. When in the
period of Heiji I was about to be executed, it  was your compassion that saved my life and since
then I have advanced to be Dainagon and obtained the second Court Rank, being scarcely more
than forty years old Although I can never repay your kindness, I pray you to save my worthless
life once more. If that be granted I will retire from the world, and entering the way of Buddha
retire to some hamlet far remote, where I may give my whole mind to attain enlightenment as a
Buddha in the future life." "Even so " replied Shigemori, " I think they will not go so far as to put
you to death, and should they wish to do so, I myself will go surety for your life, so set your mind
at ease." Then seeking out his father Kiyomori, he addressed him thus; " I pray you consider most
carefully what you do in putting the Dai nagon to death, for since his ancestor Shuri -no-Taiyu
Akisue, who was Courtier of the Retired Emperor Shirakawa, he has been the only one of his
family to be promoted to Dainagon of the upper second rank: he is, besides, extremely high in
favour with his m aster the Ho o,. wherefore it is not good to put him to death. It will be quite
sufficient to expel him from the capital. Kitano Tenjin, owing to the slander of the Minister
Tokihira, spent his remaining days in sorrow and exile across the western sea, and  the Minister
Nishino miya, owing to the traduction of Tada no Manchu, spent his days in bitterness amid the
misty mountains of the Sanyo, both being innocent of any crime. All this was luring the righteous
era of En -ki, and tradition calls it the injustic e of the Mikado of An -wa ; so if even in great
antiquity such things happened, how much more in an evil age like this? Even a wise ruler makes
mistakes; how much more an ordinary person Since you have already arrested him, there is no

more cause for anxiet y, even if you spare his life.

[p. 71]

The Chinese sages have said ; " [15]Give the benefit to the accused where guilt is in question, but
give him the credit where merit is in question." Moreover, to consider another side of the matter,
I have married t he younger sister of this Dainagon, while my son Koremori has married his
daughter, and being bound by such intimate ties, perhaps you may think that is the reason I speak
thus. That however is not the case, but it is for the sake of the Emperor, of our co untry, and of
the time, that I entreat you. Remember what an extreme measure it was considered when the
late Shonagon Nyudo Shinsei, when he was regent, revived the death sentence, which had not
been imposed since Uhyoe -no-kami Fujiwara Nakanari was condem ned to death, in the time of
Saga Tenno twenty five generations ago, and had the body of Uji -no-Akusafu (Sadaijin Yorinaga)
dug up and the head cut off : and though people may have said in old times if the ringleaders
were executed, rebels would cease out of the land, yet, only two years after Hogen there was the
rebellion of Heiji, when the body of Shinsei which had been buried was dug up and the head cut
off and exposed ; truly a salutary example that the deed which he did in Hogen should so soon be
paid back on his own head. Now as this man is not a rebel against the. throne, you ought to
hesitate to put him to death. I do not think that our family is at the summit of its prosperity yet,
but I hope that its present glory will continue for many generations  : yet, as the good or evil acts
of the sires are visited on their descendants, we see that " the accumulation of good deeds
produces happiness whereas misfortune waits at the gate of him who piles up evil ones." So at all
events he must not beheaded this evening." So the Nyudo, admitting the reasonableness of this
speech, gave up the intention of executing him.

Then Shigemori went out to the middle gate and thus addressed the samurai ; " You must by no
means put the Dainagon to death even if you are order ed to do so, for when the

[p. 72]

Nyudo is angry he is apt to do rash things which he afterwards regrets; so do not make mistakes
that you will be sorry for afterwards." At these words all the men at arms trembled with
apprehension. Shigemori continued ;  " this morning Tsuneto and Kaneyasu treated the Dainagon
harshly and violently: this was a very ruffianly deed; why did they not fear lest I should hear of it?
Rustic samurai are all of this kind." Then Namba and Seno also quaked with fear, while
Shigemor i, having thus admonished them, returned again to the Komatsu Palace.

The retainers of the Dainagon had hurried back to their lord's mansion at Naka -no-Mikado -no-
Karasu -Maru, and related all that had passed, whereupon their mistress and her ladies lifted up
their voices and wept. Then the retainers, telling them of the arrest of the heir and other younger
members of the family, advised them to hide themselves quickly. " Having come to this," replied
the wife of the Dainagon, " even if we live unmolested, w hat hope have we for the future? All
that I wish now is to die with my husband like dewdrops that melt on the same evening. Alas!
that I did not know that this morning's meeting would be our last." And casting her clothes about
her she threw herself on the  ground in despair. After a while however, as there was a rumour that
the soldiers of the Heike were approaching, and not wishing them to behold her wretched
condition, taking a daughter of ten years old and a boy of eight with her, she got into her carria ge
and fled away, going she knew not whither. As she could not continue thus without any aim,

going up to Omiya and reaching the U -rin-in, a temple on the northern hills, she alighted before
one of the buildings, when those who had so far accompanied her, fearing for their lives, took
leave of her and returned again to the city. What a sad plight it was for her, left with only these
young children, and with no one to help her with sympathy or advice. As she saw the shades of
night falling, and reflected tha t her lord's life might pass away like the dew that very evening, she
wished that she might give up the ghost.

[p. 73]

At the Dainagon's mansion many retainers and ladies were left, but they were too apprehensive
even to take any food and did not so much  as shut the gates, and though there were many horses
in the stables there was none who gave them any food. Formerly from early dawn there would be
rows of carriages at the gate and innumerable guests coming to spend the day in dancing and
merriment, as th ough the cares of life did not exist, while their inferiors who approached them
dared not so much as raise their voices in their presence. This haughty state continued until
yesterday, but in one short night all was changed. How are the mighty brought low!  Now can we
appreciate, the saying of [16]Ko-sho-ko, " Pain comes when pleasure is at it height."