CHAPTER VII.

THE EX ILE OF THE SHIN -DAINAGON.

On the second day of the sixth month they brought forth the Shin Dainagon Narichika -no-Kyo
into the reception chamber of the mansion and entertained him with a repast, but his heart was
too full even for him to touch a morsel. Th en his guard Namba no jiro Tsuneto ordered his car
and bade him enter it, whereupon the Dainagon reluctantly did so. He expressed a wish to see
Shigemori once more, but unhappily was not permitted to do so. Looking round on the escort
that surrounded him, he could not see one of his own men, "Ah," he exclaimed, " even one exiled
for a great crime ought to be allowed at least one of his own retainers." When the guards heard
this their tears flowed even on to their sleeves of mail. Thus going along the west s ide of the
Shujaku to the southward, he only saw the buildings of the Court from a distance, who had so
long been in attendance there, whereat everyone even to the servants and oxdrivers he knew so
well buried their faces in their sleeves and wept. How muc h more sad must be the state of his
wife and children left behind in the cite. On passing by the Toba Palace,

[p. 86]

he called to mind how he always accompanied the Ho -o when he visited there. Farther on he saw
his own country seat, Suhama, in the dista nce. Passing out through the south gate of Toba den,
they hurried to take the ship. He then expressed the wish that he might at least be executed at a
place like this that was near the capital. On enquiring the name of the retainer who was to
accompany him , the samurai told him it was Namba -no-jiro Kaneyasu. Then the Dainagon asked
if any of his own retainers were present, as he had something to say before: he embarked, but
when Tsuneto went round and searched, there was not one to be found. Then the Dainag on
weeping exclaimed; " Ah, in the time of my prosperity I had two or three thousand retainers, but
now there is not one who comes to see the last of me even from afar off ; " whereat the rough
soldiers were again moved to moisten the sleeves of their armo ur. A copious flood of tears indeed
was all that followed him. Formerly when he went to visit the shrines of Kumano or Tennoji, he
used to go in a state barge of great magnificence accompanied by twenty or thirty other ships, but
now he had to embark on a rough vessel with nothing but a large tent on it, escorted by strange
soldiers, and today as he leaves the capital for the last time, to sail far off across the sea, his
wretched fee!ings can only be imagined. It was only owing to the urgent pleadings of K omatsu
Dono that his death sentence was lightened to one of exile. That day they reached the coast of
Daimo -tsu in the province of Settsu. The next day, that is the third, a messenger from Kyoto
came hurrying to this place, whereupon the Dainagon thought h e was to he executed there, but
the messenger had only brought news that he was to be exiled to Kojima in Bizen. There was also
a letter from Shigemori in which was written; " I bad thought to get you sent to some country
place near the capital, but alas, it cannot be ; so I have no further use for this world : however I
have at least managed to save your life, therefore set your mind at ease." To Namba -no-jiro he
also sent a message, adjuring him to pay great respect

[p. 87]


to his charge and to take car e not to oppose his wishes, adding also directions in detail about
preparations for the journey. Ah ! whither does he go, leaving the Ho -o to whom he owes so
much, and parting from his wife and children who have never left his side before even for a
moment ? Never again will he return and see his family. Once before at the appeal of Hieizan he
had been exiled, but the Ho -o, taking compassion on him, recalled him again from Nishi Shichijo :
so his present punishment was not by the Imperial will. "Why has this  happened?" he gasped,
looking up to heaven and down again to earth: however much he wept it was in vain. As soon as,
the dawn came the ship put out and as they journeyed he did nought but weep and seemed not
to wish to survive any longer: still his fleeti ng life did not come to an end. As the white waves
dropped away in their wake the capital receded farther and farther. As the days went by one after
another, the distant goal came nearer and nearer. When they arrived at Kojima in Bizen, they
brought him to  a rude farmer's house roofed with brushwood; the mountains were behind him
and the sea before, for it was an eland ; the sounding waves and pine breeze on the shore,
everything gave him a sad and lonely feeling.