CHAPTER XII.

THE HOARSE VOICE.


Now Jo -no-Taro Sukenaga of the province of Echigo had been appointed Echigo -no-kami, and
out of gratitude for the Imperial Fav our he set out with an army of thirty thousand   to the
province of Shinano to attack Kiso Yoshinaka. On the fifteenth day of the sixth month he was to
start, but about the middle of the night before, the sky suddenly clouded over, and there was a
mighty cl ap of thunder and a great downpour of rain, and then, when the heavens had cleared, a
hoarse voice shouted in terrific accents from mid -air: "Here is a supporter of the Heike who
burned the copper -gilt image of Vairochana Buddha a hundred and fifty feet hi gh, that was in the
Djambudvipa ; go ye and seize him! " At this fearful portent the hair of Jo -no-Taro and his men
stood on end with terror, and some of the retainers exclaimed; "How can we go on against this
sign from Heaven?" But as it was not the way o f samurai to heed such things, they set forth, and
had only gone about the distance of twenty cho when a mass of black clouds appeared, and hung
over the head of Sukenaga and covered him, and immediately his limbs were cramped and his
brain was palsied, so  that he fell from his horse. His men took him up and carried him in a
palanquin to his mansion, where he lay prostrate for about three hours and then expired. When a
messenger was sent with the news to the Capital the Heike were struck with consternation.

On the fourteenth day of the seventh month the name of the era was changed to Yo -wa. On this
day also an investiture of officials was held, and Chikugo -no-kami Sadayoshi was appointed Higo -
no-kami, receiving jurisdiction over both the provinces of Chikuz en and Higo, and being ordered
to quell the insurrection in Kyushu, he set out thither with a force of three thousand. A great
amnesty was also proclaimed on the same day, and all those who had been exiled in the third

[p.14]

year of Jisho were recalle d to Kyoto. The former Kwampaku Matsu -dono came back from Bizen,
the Dajo -daijin Myo on -in from Owari, while Azechi -no-Dainagon Sukekata -no-Kyo hurried
back from Shinano.

On the twenty eighth day Myo -on-in Dono had an audience with the Ho -o. When he was
recalled in the era of Chokwan he took his biwa and played in the Imperial verandah the pieces
called Gao -on and Kenjo -raku, and now when he returned again in the period Yo -wa he played
that called Shufu - raku in the Sento Palace, for he had always that hap py and tactful delicacy of
feeling that prompted him to do an elegant thing at the proper time. On the same day Azechi -no-
Dainagon Sukekata -no-Kyo also went to the Palace of the Ho -o, and His Majesty asked him to
sing, saying that, as he had been living fo r some time in an uncongenial and remote country place,
he had no doubt forgotten all his popular ditties, so perhaps he would sing an Imayo. Then the
Dainagon sang the Imayo verse beginning: " There's a river in Shinano called Kisojigawa, 'tis said, "
and t his apposite song gained him a great reputation for wit, seeing that he must have seen and
heard of this river so often.