CHAPTER  XII.
THE FIGHT AT THE H ŌJŪJIDEN.

     " If I have been appointed to protect the Capital ", continued Yoshinaka, " my men must at
least have a horse to ride, so why should the Hō -ō object in this unreasonable way to their getting
a little fodder from the fields ? If the young me n go into the country districts of the eastern and
western hills round the city and take some rice for their rations, what is the harm in that ? They
don't go to the Palaces or the mansions of the Courtiers for it. But I know the cause of it : it is
that T suzumi Hangwan who has been slandering me to his Majesty. Go and beat that „Tsuzumi '
until you break it! This may be the last fight of Yoshinaka, and without doubt it will come to the
ears of Yoritomo; so quit yourselves well, men! "

Now the Northern for ces had formerly numbered fifty thousand horse, but so many had deserted
that only some six or seven thousand were left.

According to. Yoshinaka's usual strategy these were divided into seven companies, of which one
of some two thousand men was put under the command of Higuchi -no-Jirō Kanemitsu to lead
the attach from the direction of Imakumano, while the rest were ordered to be ready, each in the
avenue or street where they were quartered, so as to be able to unite in Rokujō -kawara. As a sign
of recogniti on they all wore a badge of pine leaves.

[p.102]

     It was the morning of the nineteenth day of the eleventh month that the fight began. Hearing
that twenty thousand men were posted in the Hō -ō's Palace of the Hōjujiden, Kiso rode round by
the western gate to see what was doing, and there he perceived Tsuzumi Hangwan Tomoyasu,
who appeared to be in command there, standing on top of the west wall of the Palace, wearing
nothing else but a hitatare. of red brocade and a helmet on his head, on which were wr itten the
names of the Four Deva Kings. In one hand he carried a short halberd and in the other a kind of
sistrum such as is used by Yamabushi, and this he kept on shaking, posturing and capering as he
did so. This caused much amusement among the Nobles an d Courtiers, who thought his
behaviour not quite dignified, and remarked: " Tomoyasu seems possessed by a Tengu." When he
perceived Kiso, he called out in a loud voice: " In the good times of old, when the Imperial Edict
was read, even the withered plants and trees immediately burst into flower and bore fruit, while
the birds of .the air fell from the sky and all evil spirits and demons trembled and obeyed; and,
even in this present worthless time he who dares to draw bow and shoot an arrow against His
Sacred Majesty shall find his arrow fly back against his own body, and the sword that he draws
turn back on himself." " Such talk needs no reply ", said Kiso laconically as he shouted his warcry
for the onset.

     At the same time Higuchi -no-Jirō and his two thousand men rushed to the attack with loud
shouts from the direction of Imakumano, and Imai himself, putting fire into the head of a turnip -

headed arrow, shot it so that it stuck in the roo f of the Hōjujiden Palace, and as the wind was
blowing strongly, the flames immediately shot up high into the air and the sky was filled with
sparks. When he saw the Palace suddenly enveloped in black smoke, the commander Tomoyasu
was the first to take to his heels, and when his army of twenty thousand men perceived the flight
of their leader, panic. seized .them and they turned and fled with one accord. Such indeed was
their haste

[p.103]

that some took their bows without any arrows, and some their arrow s without any bow; while
others; dropping their halberds upside down in their flurry pierced their own legs with the sharp
blades; some too there were who, catching the tips of their bows in some obstacle, left them as
they were that they might flee the fa ster. When they came to the end of Shichijō in their flight,
however, another misfortune awaited them, for this quarter was strongly guarded by another
band of Settsu Genji who had joined the Hō -ō's party, and who had been ordered to fall upon
any of Kiso' s men who might flee from the Hōjujiden, so that they had taken up positions on the
house tops and put up their shields there, providing themselves with heavy stones and missiles to
throw down on the heads of the enemy. When therefore their own men came al ong in headlong
flight, they immediately began to hurl their stones at them, whereupon the fugitives cried out
that it was a mistake, for they were of the party of the Hō -ō. "That cry won't do "; replied the
other Genji "; we have the Imperial Order; " kil l them! kill them! " and they continued to pelt
them with their missiles until many were killed, and others, with their heads or backs crushed,
fell from their horses and managed to crawl away to some place of refuge.

     The end of Hachijō was held by t he warrior monks of Hieizan, but when the bolder among
them were killed, the more cowardly who were left also took to flight. Here Mondo no kami
Chikanari, attired in. a light blue kariginu worn over a body armour laced with green silk and
mounted on a moo n white steed, was ascending the river bank to make his escape, whom when
Imai-no-Shirō Kanehira perceived he drew his bow with great strength and let fly an arrow at
him. Whirring it flew straight at his skull, piercing it through so that he fell backward s from his
horse. He was the son of Seidai -geki, Yorinari, and was a learned doctor of the Academy
it was first time that he had ever put on armour. Ōmi-no-Chūjo Tamekiyo, Echizen no Shōshō
Nobuyuki, Hōki -no kami

[p.104]

Mitsutsuna and his son. Hōki -no-Hangwan Mitsutsune were also shot through and their heads
taken.  Murakami -no-Saburō Hangwan dai of Shinano, who had deserted Kiso's camp and gone
over to the Hō -ō, was killed also, and the grandson of Azechi -no-Dainagon Sukekata no Kyō, U -
Shōshō Masakata, who went forth to the battle in armour and a high eboshi, was taken alive by
Higuchi -no-Jirō Kanemitsu. Both the Tendai Zasshu Mei -un Dai -Sōjō, and Enkei -no-Shinnō the
Abbot of Miidera had gone to the Hōjujiden, but when it began to go up in smoke they mou nted
their horses and hastened away, only to fall victims to the fury of Kiso's samurai, who shot them
down from their horses and cut off their venerable heads.

     The Hō -ō himself, at this disaster, entered his Car to make an Imperial Progress to some safer
Palace, but the northern samurai, not knowing who he was, continued to shoot their arrows at it.
Then Bungo -no-Shōshō Munenaga, who, clad in a yellowish -red hitatare with a high. eboshi on

his head, was accompanying the Imperial Car, cried out to the m: "Make no mistake! It is His
Majesty! " whereon all the samurai sprang from their horses and did obeisance. On His Majesty's
enquiring who they were, one of them stood forth and gave his name and title as Yashima -no-
Shirō Yukishige of the province of Shi nano, after which they escorted the Imperial Car to the
Palace in Gojō, keeping strict guard over it.
Gyōbu -kyō Sammi Yorisuke no Kyō, the before mentioned Governor of Bungo, had also been in
the Hōjujiden, and when it took fire he escaped and fled toward the river, but on the way he was
stripped of all his rich garments by some of the lesser samurai, so that he had to go on stark naked,
and as it was the morning of the nineteenth day of the eleventh month the cold wind from the
river cut him to the bone. H is elder brother Echizen -no-Hōkyō Shō -i who had gone out to see
the battle, noticing his brother in this plight, and feeling sorry for him, straightway ran, to his
assistance. As he was wearing two white ' kosode ' under his koromo or priestly garment, he took

[p.105]

off one of them and gave it to his brother, after which he parted with his koromo also; so that he
was left with one kosode only. His appearance in this guises without any sash, seen from behind
was truly ridiculous and as the two hurried al ong the streets; accompanied by some lower priests
in white robes, enquiring at his house and that where they could find a lodging, the passers -by
clapped their hands in glee and laughed inordinately. The baby Emperor was put in a boat and
launched on the waters of the lake in the grounds of the Hōjujiden, and as the opposing samurai
shot arrows at this also, Shichijō -no-jijū Nobukiyo arid Kii -no-kami Norimitsu, who were with
His Majesty, called out to them to stop lest the Emperor be harmed. On learning wh o it was they
dismounted and did obeisance. Soon after His Majesty was accompanied to the Kanin Palace in
Nijō, but, sad to relate, the Imperial Procession was of a pitiably attenuated kind.

     Now Gen -no-Kurando Nakakane was holding the western, gate o f the Hōjujiden with fifty
horsemen, when Yamamoto -no-Kwanja Yoshitaka of the Ōmi Genji spurred up to him and
shouted : " Who is it you are guarding here? The Hō -ō and the Emperor have both proceeded
elsewhere." On hearing this Nakakane rode off and precip itated himself into the battle and fought
hard until his force was reduced to eight in all. Among these was a certain warrior priest of the
party of Kūsaka named Kaga -bō, who was riding a cream coloured horse with a very hard mouth.
" My horse's mouth is s o hard that I can hardly manage him "; he cried, whereon Nakakane
replied: '` Take mine and give him to me instead; and mounted hirn on his own horse, a, chestnut
with a white tail, Then they charged at full speed into a party of two hundred hostile samura i
who were waiting at Kawarasaka under the command of Nenoi -no-Koyata. and fought until but
five of the eight were left alive. Kaga -bō, although he was mounted on his master's horse, met his
fate here and fell fighting at last.

[p.106]

     Now one of th e retainers of Nakakane named Jirō Kurando Nakayori, seeing the chestnut
horse with the white tail galloping wildly along riderless, asked his servant whether that was not
the horse of his master, and on his answering that it was, he further enquired from what direction
it had come. " As our master rode into the enemy at Kawarasaka," replied the man, " it is from
that fight that his horse has come." Then Jirō Kurando, bursting into tears, exclaimed; " Ah ! how
wretched that he has fallen thus; ever since we  played together as children we have pledged

ourselves to die together, and now, unhappy, we must die separate." Taking farewell of his wife
and children he rode off alone and dashed into the fight at Kawarasaka. Rising high in his stirrups,
he shouted lou dly: " I am Jirō Kurando Nakayori of Shinano, twenty seven years old, the second
son of Shinano -no-kami Nakashige, and a descendant in the ninth generation of Atuzane Shinno;
come! anyone who thinks himself somebody and let us see ! " And he swung his sword abo ut him,
cutting and slashing in all directions until at last he fell, borne down by the weight of numbers.

     His master Gen -no-Kurando, quite unaware of all this, had escaped and ridden off toward the
south with his brother Kawachi -no-kami Nakanobu and  another retainer. And it chanced that, as
the Sesshō Motomichi, taking fright at the war in the Capital, was on his way to take refuge at
Uji, the two overtook him at Kobatayama. Dismounting from their horses they saluted him, and
on his enquiring who the y might be, they declared themselves as Nakanobu and Nakamichi. The
Sesshō was greatly rejoiced to hear this, for he had feared that they might be some of the Kiso
samurai, and requested them to accompany him, which they did, and escorted him as far as the
Fuke mansion at Uji. Thence they parted and the two fled to the province of Kawachi.

     On the next day, the twentieth, Kiso Sama -no-kami Yoshinaka proceeded to the Rokujō
kawara to count and identify the heads of those who had been killed the day befo re,

[p.107]

and which were there exposed to view, and behold, their number was six hundred and thirty; and
among them were the heads of the Tendai Zasshu Meiun Dai -Sōjō and Enkei -hō Shinno the
Abbot of Miidera; and of those who looked on these there were  none who did not shed tears.
Then Kiss Sama -no-kami, ordering his seven thousand men to turn their horse's heads toward the
east, bade them shout their war cry three times, whereat the heaven echoed and the earth
trembled. At this there was a great uproar  in the city, but it was only a shout of joy.

     Now the Saishō Naganori, son of the late Shōnagon Nyūdō Shinsai, went to visit the Hō -ō at
the Gojō Palace, but was refused admission by the soldiers on guard at the gate. Stepping aside
into a small hous e near by that he knew, he cut off his hair and put on a black koromo and
hakama, after which he demanded admission, again, pleading that in such a habit there could be
on objection, upon which the samurai gave way and admitted him. Weeping bitterly he ent ered
the Imperial presence, and when he told the  Hō-ō of all those who had been done to death in the
fighting, His Majesty burst into tears also, saying: " Ah that Mei -un should have been thus
innocently put to death; it seems a s though he had sacrificed his life for mine."

     On the twenty third da y Sanjō -no-Chūnagon Tomokata -no-Kyō and forty nine other
Courtiers beneath him were removed from their offices and put in prison. Under the rule of the
Heike forty three had been dismissed at once, but this present treatment was worse than their 's
for the  number was greater. Having also taken the daughter of the Kwampaku Motofusa and
made her his wife, he assembled his retainers and gave his opinion thus: " I, Yoshinaka, have
confronted the Sovereign Lord of this Empire in battle and have conquered. If I w ould, I might
become Emperor or I might become Hō -ō : but I don't want to become Hō -ō, for I must become
a shaven priest; and how can I become Emperor, for I should

[p.108]


have to be a child. Very well then, I will become Kwampaku." At this his official  scribe, Taiyū -
bō Kakumei, stood up and said : " A Kwampaku must be of the princely house of Fujiwara, of
the stock and lineage of the great Kamatari; Your Excellency is of the Genji line, and therefore
cannot hold such office." So it ended by Kiso consoli ng himself with the title of Groom of the
Stables to the Retired Emperor, and appropriating the province of Tanba as his fief. That a
Retired Emperor was called Hō -ō if he became a monk, and that the Emperor looked like a child
because he had not yet pefor med Gempuku, were things that unfortunately Yoshinaka did not
know.

     Now the former Uhyōye -no-suke Yoritomo of Kamakura had ordered his brothers Nori -yori
and Yoshitsune with an army of sixty thousand men to march against Kiso and subdue him, and
they had already started, but when they heard that war had broken out in the Capital, and that
the Palaces of the Emperor and the Retired Emperor had been burnt, and the whole country was
plunged in gloom, they thought it inadvisable to begin more fighting at present, and halted their
men near Atsuta in the province of Owari. Then Kunai Hangwan Kintomo and Tonai Hangwan
Tokinari, members of the bodyguard of the Retired Emperor, came down to Owari to report all
that had happened in the Capital, and when Noriyori  and Yoshitsune heard their tidings, they
advised them thus: " It were better that Kintomo should go down to Kamakura to report the
matter direct to Yoritomo, for with a messenger, who does not know all the details of the matter,
trouble is likely to arise ."

     As all his retainers had been killed in the recent fighting and he had none else left, Kintomo
hastened down to Kamakura accompanied by his young heir Kunaidokoro Kinnari, a boy of
fifteen. " This is all owing to the folly of Tsuzumi Hangwan; ' pr onounced Yoritomo, " and it is
through him that the Emperor has been thus grieved, and. so many venerable priests have been
put to death. If such worthless

[p.109]

fellows as this are employed as messengers, disturbances will never cease in the Empire."  When
this was reported to Tomoyasu, he hurried to Kamakura with the utmost speed, and argued his
case most persistently with Kajiwara Heizo Kagetoki, begging him to intercede with Yoritomo;
but Yoritomo refused to see him, however often he begged an audie nce, so that at last he
returned in disgrace to Miyako, where, somewhat in danger of his life, he lived in obscurity
somewhere near Inari. Kiso Yoshinaka, thus at open war with Yoritomo, immediately sent
messengers to the Western Provinces inviting the Hei ke to return again to the Capital, that both
together might make common cause against Kamakura. On hearing this both M unemori and all
the Heike were much rejoiced, but Shin -Chūnagon Tomomori gave his opinion to the contrary: "
Even when things have come to such a pass," he said, "how are we to join with Kiso Yoshinaka?
If we should return to the Capital with our Emperor a nd the Three Sacred Treasures, should we
not have to lay down our arms and make humble surrender? " So Munemori rejected the
advances of Yoshinaka, but Kiso, on his part, did not believe it final.

     One day the Kwampaku Motofusa called Yoshinaka and sa id to him: " Kiyomori Nyūdō was a
man of evil conduct, it is true, but in him there was at the same time some extraordinary virtue,
through which he was enabled to govern the Empire peaceably for twenty years. Bad conduct
alone cannot rule the Empire, so i t would be well if you were to pardon those Courtiers whom
you have put in prison." Yoshinaka, even though he was savage Eastern Barbarian, saw the

wisdom of this and acted accordingly.

     Motofusa's son Moroie, who was at that time only Chūnagon of the  lower third rank, was, by
the plan of Yoshinaka, made Daijin and Sesshō, but, as at that time there was no office of Daijin
vacant, he borrowed the rank fromTokudaiji -dono, who was Naidaijin and Sadaishō, in conse -

[p.110]

quence of which people called the new Sesshō, „Kari -no-Daijin' or ` the Minister of Borrowed
Rank.' On the tenth day of the twelfth month the Hō -ō left the Gojō Palace and proceeded to the
residence of Daizen -no-taiyu Naritada in Rokujō. On the thirteenth day a recital of the Shingon
Sutras was held in the Palace, and on that day also an appointment of officials was held, the
nominations being made entirely at the will of Kiso. So the Heike held the Western Provinces
and the Genji the Eastern, while Kiso lorded it in the Capital; just a s Ōmō seized the supremacy
and ruled the country for eighteen years between the former and latter dynasties of Kan in China.

     As all the barriers were closed no taxes could be paid, and as their yearly revenues were cut
off, everyone in Miyako was as un comfortable as a fish in shallow water. And so the year ended
in anxiety, and the third year of Ju -ei began.

VOLUME IX.