CHAPTER XIII.

THE VOW.


Formerly, on the second day of the third month of the second year of Ka -ho, Mino -no-kami
Minamoto Yoshitsune Ason had slain En -o, a veteran priest of Hiei, for depriving him of his
newly obtained fief, whereupon the chief priest of Hiyoshi and the heads of Enryakuji, about
thirty in all, came down with a crowd of retaine rs and presented a petition demanding satisfaction.
On account of this, the Kwampaku of Go -Nijo (Fujiwara Moromichi) ordered Yamato Genii
Nakatsukasa Gon -no-Sho Yoriharu to take measures of defence, with the result that his retainers

[p. 45]

shot arrows at the monks, killing eight of them on the spot and wounding more than ten, so that
the chief priest and the rest fled in all directions. Then the superior priests of Hieizan flocked
down in great numbers to report the matter to the Emperor, but were met a t Nishi -Sakamoto by
samurai and Kebiishi and driven back again: therefore, while the Emperor was hesitating about
his decision, they brought the sacred emblem of Hiyoshi to the Komponchudo and chanted
through the six hundred volumes of the Dai -Hannya Sutra  before it to lay a curse on the
Kwampaku of Go -Nijo. And the manner of the petition was this; Chu -in Ho -in, who presided,
(at that time he was only Chu -in Gubu) [1], taking the upper seat, rung the bell and with
reverence addressed the god thus, praying w ith a loud voice; " O thou Gongen [5]of Hachioji, who
hast nurtured us and cared for us from our youth up, do thou, we beseech thee, shoot a whizzing
arrow at the Kwampaku of Go -Nijo." Thereupon ensued a strange portent ; someone dreamed
that the whirring sound of a Kaburaya [2]was heard to proceed from the shrine of Hachioji and go
over toward Kyoto, and the next day, when they opened the lattices of the mansion of the
Kwampaku they saw a branch of 'Shikimi' [3]wet with dew as if it had just come from the
mountain, and that night the Kwampaku was stricken with a sore disease because of the anger of
the deity and took to his bed. His mother O -Dono -no-Kita-no-Mandokoro [4]in great grief went
to the shrine of Hiyoshi, clothed scantily like a very low menial, a nd prayed for seven days and
nights, offering for the success of her petition these gifts to be dedicated to the god; a hundred
performances of the dance

[p. 46]

called Shiba Dengaku, a hundred horse races, a hundred courses of equestrian archery, a hund red
bouts of wrestling, a hundred priests to chant the Nio Sutra, the same number to chant the Sutra
of Yakushi, [6] a hundred statues of Yakushi half a hand high, one life size figure of the same
deity together with similar statues of Shaka and Amida. Bes ide this she had in her heart three
other vows and, though there was no reason for anyone to know what was in the depth of her
mind, yet wonderful to relate, at the close of the seventh night at the shrine, it happened that a
boy-priest, who had come with many others from the remote province of Mutsu, died suddenly
at midnight. When they carried him out from the shrine and offered prayers, to the amazement

of the onlookers he stood up and danced, and after dancing for the space of about half an hour,
the go d entered into him and uttered this awe inspiring oracle: "Give ear O ye people : for seven
days of this month the mother of the Kwampaku has prayed in retirement before me : in her
heart are three vows. She asks that the life of her son may be spared : if  this be granted, first she
will serve the shrine among the lowest mendicants for a thousand days. I am moved with
compassion that the mother of the Kwampaku, who is so great that she regards all the world as of
no account, is so affected by her care for h er son that, forgetting the squalor of these people, she
deigns to serve the shrine among the lowest menials for a thousand days. Secondly she will build a
corridor from the Hashidono of the main shrine to the shrine of Hachioji. How blessed a thing it
is that such a corridor should be built, for I feel pity for the three thousand priests who must go
across to the shrine whether it rain or shrine. In the third place she will endow a Hokke
Mondoko  [7] to be held in perpetuity every day. All these vows are by  no means foolish, for
though the first two might perhaps be foregone, the Hokke Mondoko is most desirable. Now the

[p. 47]

appeal that the priests made to the Emperor was very proper, but no answer was given, only they
were shot at and killed; wherefore  they came and called on me with tears so that I was moved to
compassion and felt that it was a thing I could never forget; moreover the arrows that were shot
at them injured my body in its Buddha manifestation. See here whether I speak truth or falsehood;
" and the medium, doffing his clothing, displayed under his left armpit a hollow like the mouth of
a cup. Then he continued : " indeed this is so grievous to me that however much she vows I
cannot prolong his life to the natural span, but if the Hokke Mon doko be endowed I will allow
him to live for three years longer. If this be thought too little, I can do no more." With this the
god ceased and withdrew himself.

Now the mother of the Kwampaku had not said anything to anyone about her vow so that it
never  entered her mind that it could be known, and she was deeply impressed that the secret
thoughts of her heart should thus become the subject of an oracle ; and especially was she
thankful that the life of her son should be prolonged for a day or even for ha lf an hour, how
much more that three years should be granted him. Thus, restraining her tears, she departed
homeward. Afterwards she presented her son's domain of Tanaka -no-Sho in the province of Ki -i
to the shrine of Hachioji for ever, and so it is that w e hear that to the present day the Hokke
Mondoko is held every day without ceasing at the shrine of Hachioji.

Thus the sickness of the Kwampaku of Go -Nijo was healed and he was restored whole as before
to the great joy of his family, but alas, the three y ears flew by like a dream, and in the twenty -first
day of the sixth month of the second year of Ei -cho a boil broke out at the edge of his hair, so
that he took to his bed, and on the twenty seventh day of the same month he passed away at the
age of thirty -eight. Though he was brave, strong -minded and valiant in his actions, when his
illness became critical he could not bear to die. Indeed it was a sad case, and sadder too that he
should die before his father before reaching

[p. 48]

the age of forty. Ther e is no reason why a father should die before his children, but even Buddha
the perfection of virtue, or the most enlightened Bosatsu have no power to change the decrees of
life and death. A god who is really just and merciful cannot fail to punish for the  good of mankind.