CHAPTER XVII.

THE EXILE OF THE HO -O.

On the twentieth day of the same month the forces of the Heike surrounded the Palace of the
Ho-o, and all the ladies -in-waiting and male and female s ervants, thinking that they would burn
the Palace and put all in it to death as Nobuyori had done when he attacked the Sanjo Palace in
Heiji, forgetting all but their own safety, fled in wild panic without even waiting to garb
themselves. Then the former U daisho, Munemori -no-Kyo, gave orders to bring the Imperial Car
and to make all haste, whereat the Ho -o, much perturbed, exclaimed: "Am I to be banished to
some far country or distant island like Narichika or Shunkwan? I am not aware of having done
anything  wrong except perhaps that since the Emperor is so young I have occasionally given
advice on affairs of state; if however this is not desirable, I will do so no more in future."
Munemori, shedding tears of sympathy, replied: "Far be it from me to do such a  thing; it is only
my father's wish that while things are in this unsettled state, Your Majesty should go and stay for
a while at the North Place at Toba." "Then," replied the Ho -o, "please deign to attend me
thither." But Munemori, fearing his father's an ger,
[p. 156]
did not accompany His Majesty, his conduct in this respect being greatly inferior to that of his
late brother Shigemori, who the year before in such a case had at his own risk prevented the Ho -
o suffering so great a dishonour and secured his safety until now. But now there was none to
reprove the Nyudo, and so this affair had come to pass. There seemed little hope for the future,
and the Ho -o thinking of these things wept bitterly. Then, entering his Car, unattended by any of
his nobles or Cou rtiers, with only a few guards of low rank and an attendant priest named
Kongyo, he set out. At the back of the Imperial Car rode a nun, who had been the Ho -o's milk
nurse, called Kino -Ni-i. As the Car passed along Shichijo toward the west and then along S hujaku
toward the south, the bystanders exclaimed: "Ah! the Ho -o is going into exile;" and there were
none among the common people who did not moisten their sleeves with their tears at the sight.
Everyone said that the earthquake on the seventh day was a p ortent of this, and that it was
because the Earth Deity who responds even to a thousand million depths had raged furiously.
When the Ho -o had come to the Toba Palace there was not a single retainer to wait on him; but
Daizen -no-Taiyu Nobunari, having someh ow managed to escape notice, came and presented
himself before His Majesty. "I think it is likely that I shall be put to death soon, so I wish to have
the Holy Water prepared. How do you think? " asked the Ho -o. On hearing this Nobunari, who
had been extre mely anxious all that morning, was dumfounded, but girding up the sleeves of his
'kariginu,' and pouring water into a cauldron, he broke down a small fence for firewood, and
splitting up some small beams of the corridor, heated the water in due form.

Then Joken Hoin went to the Nyudo at Nishi Hachijo and urged that, the Ho -o having gone to
the Toba Palace the night before, it was too severe treatment that he should have not a single
person in attendance, so he himself wished to go and attend on His Majesty.  The Nyudo replied
that it as he was a
[p. 157]
trustworthy priest he might go ; whereupon Joken was exceedingly delighted and immediately
hastened to the Toba Palace. Alighting from his car at the entrance, as soon as he entered within
the gate, he heard the voice of the Ho -o chanting the Sutras, and it had indeed a very melancholy
sound. When Hoin hastily entered he saw the Ho -o sitting and shedding tears upon the Sutra that
he was reading, and in his grief at the sight, he too pressed the sleeve of his w hite costume to his
eyes and thus came into his presence weeping. Only the nun was in attendance. " Ah, Hoin," said
the Ho -o," since you had breakfast yesterday morning in the Hojuji den neither last night nor this
morning have you taken any food. Neither have you slept at all through the night : indeed I fear
some danger to your life." Hoin, controlling his feelings, replied : " Everything in this world has an
end; the Heike have held the Empire in their hands for twenty years, but their evil deeds have
gone on piling up and verily their end too will come. And surely Tenshodaijin and Sho
Hachimangu will not forget you, while there is also the deity of Hiyoshi on whom you rely, and
who will surely vouchsafe his sure protection. The oft read eight books of th e Hokke Sutra will
guard you, and then once more the rule will return into your Imperial Power and all the offenders
will vanish away like foam on the water." The Ho -o, on hearing these words was somewhat
comforted.
The Emperor was much grieved at the exi le of his Kwampaku and the loss of so many of his high
officials, but when he heard of the banishment of the Ho -o to the Toba Palace, he would take no
food, and becoming sick, he entered his august sleeping apartment and would not come forth.
The ladies in  waiting and the Imperial Consorts were at their wits' end to know what to do. After
the Ho -o had gone to the Toba Palace special worship was held in the Imperial Palace; a dais of
mor-[46]
[p. 158]
tar was made in the Seiryoden where the Emperor worshipped Ise -no-Daijingu every night. These
prayers were offered for the Ho -o. The Retired Emperor Nijo was a wise ruler, but since in his
opinion an Emperor [47] has neither father nor mother, he was always opposing the Ho -o and did
not carry on the Imperial Line successfully. Therefore his son the Retired Emperor Rokujo, after
having ascended the Throne, unfortunately d ied on the fourteenth day of the seventh month of
the third year of Angen at the age of thirteen.