CHAPTER XVI.

KWANJINCHO.

Thereafter Mongaku retired to the mountain recesses of Takao to meditate. In this mountain was
a temple called Shingoji, which Wake -no-Kiyomaro had built in the time of Shotoku Tenno, and
which had not been repaired for a long time. In spring the mists filled it, and in autumn the fog
was its only occupant; the doors had been blown down by the winds  and lay rotting under the
fallen leaves. The rain and dew had despoiled it of tiles, and the altar of Buddha stood bare to the

[p. 235]

sky. No priest abode there to read the Sutras, only the sun and moon shone betimes into it.
Mongaku, having made a vo w to rebuild this temple, drew up a roll for donations and went
round in all quarters to seek supporters, and in the course of his wanderings he came to the
Hojuji -den where the Ho -o was residing, and requested His Majesty to make a contribution. But
it chanced that the Ho -o was at the time engaged in some amusement and paid no attention, so
Mongaku, who was naturally a bold and uncompromising character, knowing nothing of the Ho -
o's disinclination, but only thinking that the attendants had not told him, fo rced his way through
into the Imperial Garden and shouted out loudly: "Oh most merciful Lord, how can it be that
you pay no heed to such a matter as this? And forthwith he spread out the roll of Kwanjincho[28]
and lifting it up high before him began to rea d;

"Contribution roll of the novice Mongaku, who, desiring to obtain the great blessedness of
happiness in this world and in the world to come, respectfully begs the assistance of all, high and
low, priest and layman, in building a temple on the holy site  of Mount Takao. When we consider
it, all -embracing is the Eternal Mind [29]. Though we use the appellations of Buddha and Mankind,
albeit there is no distinction between these things, yet, since the clouds of Illusion accompanying
the Buddha nature spread thick over the mountain of the Twelve Causes of Existence [30], the
Moon of the Pure Lotos of the mind is obscured and does not appear in the Great Abyss of the
Three Poisons [31] and Four

[p. 236]

Prides [32]. Alas! how pitiable! The sun of Buddha quickly set, and dark and gloomy is the way of
the revolving wheel of births and deaths. So men give themselves up to passion and wine. Who
will be grateful for the delusion of the raging elephant and the capering monkey [33]? How can
they who hate mankind and the Law hope to escape the torments of Emma and his jailers? I,
Mongaku, though I have put away the dust of this world and donned the robe of the recluse, find
evil Karma still mighty in my heart; day and night it arises, and the virtue that sprouts up within
me becomes unpleasing to my ear and is cast away. Alas! how painful! Returning again to the fire
pits of the Three Ways [34], I must revolve through the grievous wheel of the Four Births [35], so
that, through the ten thousand times ten thousand volumes of t he Sakya Sage, revealing in every
volume the affinity of the Buddha seed, even the most true Law of Cause and Effect, it may not
be impossible to attain to the Farther Shore of Perfect Enlightenment [36]. Thus I, Mongaku,

weeping at the gate of this life of  impermanence, to encourage priests and laymen, high and low,
to make connection with the Paradise of the highest Lotus Throne, am intending to build a holy
place for the Buddhas and Bodhisats. Takao -zan is a mount of high peaks, thick wooded like the
Vulture Peak of Ghridrakuta, and of quiet valleys and mossy retreats like those of Shosando in
China. The mountain streams gurgle and fall in foamy cascades, the apes scream in the crags and
sport in the branches. Remote from the haunts of man, free from the d ust and noise of the world,
there is nothing to disturb our devotions: it is a very excellent site, most suitable for worshipping
Buddha. The contributions are small; who is there who will not assist? Whoever gathers a little
sand for a

[p. 237]

pagoda a cquires merit in his Karma relation, how much more he who contributes even a small
amount of money or property? So shall all both in city and country, far and near, rustics, priests,
and laymen, sing of the Sovereign and this age and its contentment as the  golden age of the rule of
Gyo and Shun [37] in China, and smile as those who meet after a long parting. And if these sacred
rites and mysteries are performed in their entirety, all shall attain to the Terrace of the True Gate
of the One Buddha, and enjoy. the immeasurable and innumerable blessings of the Three Buddha
persons [38]. The above composed by me Mongaku with the purpose of obtaining subscriptions as
stated. The third month of the third year of Jisho.