CHAPTER X.
THE REPLY FROM NARA.

The monks of Nara, when they read this letter, also held a council and after a while made answer
as follows:

[p. 187]

"From Kofukuji to Onjoji, greeting. According to your communication, t he Nyudo Jokai wishes
to overthrow your temple and its Holy Law. Now though divided into two branches, both our
temples are derived from one Pure source, the golden discourses of the Sutras of Tendai -shu.
Thus, both North and South Capitals being equally d isciples of the same Buddha, our temples
together can surely overthrow even a mighty enemy of the Faith, be he even as malign as
Devadatta [9] himself. Now Kiyomori is of the very dregs of the Heike, and but the off -scourings
of the warrior caste: His grand father Masamori was a retainer of a Kurando of the fifth rank and
was at the service of the provincial governors of any fief. Long ago, when Okura -no-Kyo Tanefusa
was governor of Kaga, he was employed by the Kebiishi, and when Shuri -no-Daiyu Akisue was
lord of Harima, he held the office of Groom of the Stables. When his son Tadamori, father of the
Nyudo, was granted the privilege of attending Court, he was universally regarded as an outsider of
low birth, and though he thus became a Courtier, people still d espised him as an upstart. No
Courtier who valued his reputation would have cared to enter such a family. However, in the
twelfth month of the first year of Heiji, since the Emperor, in gratitude for his services in one
battle, bestowed on him an unparalle led reward, his family have gone on rising until Kiyomori has
made himself Chancellor, at the same time wielding all the military power of the country, his
sons becoming Ministers and Commanders of the Imperial Guard and his daughters Imperial
Consorts or Empresses, while his relatives and even the children of his concubines have been
made Courtiers, and his grandson and nephews raised to high office. In addition to this he has
appropriated all the fiefs that he desired, and appoints and dismisses governors  at his pleasure,
making them no better than his slaves and vassals. If anyone provokes his anger in the least, be he
Prince or noble, he is immediately

[p. 188]

arrested, and if anyone speaks anything against him, be he Courtier of the highest rank, he is put
in bonds at once; so that in order to escape death or disgrace even the Sacred Emperor is forced
to flatter him, while those of the noblest lineage must make low obeisance. Even if his family
property held for many generations is taken from him, non e dare open his mouth for fear of
worse happening, and if even the privileged estates of a Prince are confiscated, for fear of the
tyrant's power he holds his pace. Presumptuous in his overweening strength, in the eleventh
month of last year, in the winter , he dared to attack the Palace of the Ho -o and send the
Kwampaku into exile. Verily such a heinous crime has never been heard of from ancient days. At
that time we certainly should have set out against this rebel, but in accordance with the will of
our De ity and as the result of consideration we repressed our anger for a season. But now that,
again raising an army, he has compassed about the Palace of the second Imperial son of the Ho -o,
the Divine aid of Hachiman and Kasuga Daimyojin, overshadowing him wi th their bright radiance,

has protected him and guided him to the protection of the Shinra Gongen, thus clearly
demonstrating that the Monarchy can never be overthrown. Therefore what men of
discrimination are there who will not rejoice to hear that you ar e risking your lives to protect him?
We, on our part, though dwelling so far away, feeling great pity at the news you secretly convey
that Kiyomori is raising forces to attack you, assure you of our readiness to come to your
assistance. On the eighteenth d ay at the hour of the Dragon, after we had roused our monks and
informed all the other temples, and called on the tributary temples to send their men, just as we
had assembled our forces, you sent by a swift messenger an invitation to join you and in one h our
dispelled the doubts of many days. If the monks of the monastery of Shoryo in China could drive
off the soldiers of Bu -so, how much more can the monks of the North and South Capitals of
Yamato do away with the villainies of this Minister? Do you theref ore guard well the residence of
the Prince and we

[p. 189]

will await your sign to advance. Consider our letter and do not doubt us. Given on the twenty -
first day of the fifth month of the fourth year of Jisho."