CHAPTER X.
THE FIGHT AT MUROYAMA.

      Meanwhile Kiso was collecting his forces at Manju -on-Shō in the province of Bitchū, with
the intent of movin g agoinst Yashima, when Higuchi -on-Jirō Kanemitsu, whom he had left
behind to represent him in the Capital, sent him a letter stating that, while his master was away,
Juro Kurando had obtained great influence with the Hō -ō and was telling many slanderous t ales
about him; so that it would be well that he should leave the campaign in the west for a time and
come back immediately to Miyako. Yoshinaka immediately started off for the Capital without a
moment's delay, and Yukiie wishing to avoid an open quarrel w ith his nephew, started off by way
of Tamba for the povince of Harima with fifty thousand men. Kiso travelled to the Capital
through the province of Settsu.

     The Heike, on the other hand, now entered the province of Harima with an army of twenty
thous and to attack Kiso. It was commanded by Shin - Chūnagon -Tomomori and Honsammi
Chūjū Shigehira, and in command of the samurai were Etchū -on-Jirōhyōye Moritsugu, Kazusa no
Gorohyoye Tadamitsu, Akushichi -hyōye Kagekiyo, and Iga noHeinaizaemon Ienaga. Jurō
Kura ndo Yukiie, thinking to regain

[p.99]

favour With Kiso by attacking the Heike, advanced to Muroyama where they were encamped
with a force of five hundred horsemen. Now the Heike had arranged their men in five separate
camps. Iga -no-Heinaizaemon Ienaga wi th two thousand men occupied one; Etchū -on-
irōhyōye   Moritsugu with two thousand another; Kazusa -no-Gorōhyōye Tadamitsu, and
Akushichi hyōye Kagekiyo held the third with another three thousand; Hon sammi Chūjō
Shigehira with three thousand held the fourth;  while Tomomori -no-Kyō with ten thousand
commanded the fifth. They had, moreover taken counsel together and settled that each of these
four smaller forces, beginning with that of Ienaga, should engage the enemy in turn and break
through his centre, after w hich they would move round his rear and flanks to surround him and
smite him on all sides at once; and so, in accordance with this plan, they advanced vigorously on
Yukiie's small army.  Jurō Kurando. finding himself thus outdone and surrounded, yet did no t
blench or fly, but fought where he was to the last without taking any account of his life.
Kishichiemon, Kihachiemon, and Akushichiemon, three of the most trusty and brave of
Tomomori's guards fell by his single hand; and then, when his five hundred men had been
reduced to but thirty, breaking forth through the Genji, who rolled about them like clouds of
mist, himself unhurt, though most of his retainers were wounded, they took ship from Takasago
in Harima and crossed over to Fukei in Izumi, from whence t hey fled for refuge to the stronghold
of Nagano in Kawachi. As the Heike had now triumphed in the two battles of Muroyama and
Mizushima, their forces grew continually greater.