CHAPTER XV.
THE THREE DAY's HEISHI.

The Toneri Takesato was also about to follow his master into the water, when Takiguchi Nyūdō
prevented him and said: "However grievous it may be, you must not depart from your lord's last
behest. It is miserable to be left thus without a master, but you must live on to pray for the soul."
"In my grief at being left behind ", replied Takesato, " I had quite forgotten my obligations." And
casting himself down in the bottom of the boat, he cried and lamented aloud, just as did
Tchandaka when he took the horse Kanthaka from S'akya Muni at the time of his flight to Mount
Dantaloka, and returned with it to t he palace. For a while they rowed about to see if the others
would reappear or not, but they had sunk deep and came up no more. As they rowed they
repeated the Sutras and the Nembutsu for their happier rebirth. And so the evening sun went
down in the west,  and all the sea grew dark, and though they could not bear to leave, yet as it
must be, they rowed back the now empty boat to land, tears and oar -drips mingling

[p. 210]

indistinguishably on the Nyūdō's sleeve. Takiguchi returned to Kōya, and Takesato went on
weeping to Yashima, where he delivered his lord's letter to his younger brother Shin Sammino -
Chūjō Sukemori. "Alas!" said he when he opened it, "I had not thought he would act thus. Would
that I had gone too and met my death with him, for it is grievous to die thus separated. Both
Munemori and the Nii Dono thought that he was going back to Miyako by the favour of
Yoritomo, and meant to desert us, but now how sad tha t he has drowned himself thus in the sea
of Nachi. Did he give you any message for us besides?" Then the Toneri related in detail ail that
Koremori had told him to say to them, about the deaths of his brothers and his sorrow at leaving
them in this way, fi nishing with his request about the armour and sword. When he had heard it
all he pressed his sleeve to his face, exclaiming: " Now I too have no wish to live any longer." And
all the samurai who stood round, noticing the great resemblance he bore to the la te Chūjō, could
not forbear from moistening their sleeves. Munemori and the Nii -no-Ama also, when they heard
that he had not entreated the favour of Yoritomo as they had thought, were terribly pained at his
untimely death.

On the first day of the fourth m onth the era was changed and the subsequent one was called
Gen-ryaku. On the same day an appointment of officials was held, and the former Uyōye -no-suke
Yorimoto of Kamakura was raised to the lower grade of the Upper Fourth Rank from the lower
grade of the  Lower Fifth, thus passing over five grades at once. On the third day the Fmperor
Sutoku -in was raised to be a god, and a shrine was dedicated to him at Ōi-noMikado, the ancient
battle field of Hogen. This is said to have been done by order of the Ho -o alone, the Imperial
Court knowing nothing about it.

On the fourth day of the fifth month Ike -no-Dainagon Yorimori set out for Kamakura, for
Yoritomo had always been

[p. 211]


kindly disposed to him, having sworn, many times : " I will treat you with every  care and
attention, and give you the same welcome that I would have done to your respected mother Ike -
no-Zenni ; by Hachiman Daibosatsu I swear it" : but though he did not doubt that Yoritomo
himself thought thus, he was not so sure about the other Genji,  and had so far hesitated ; but
lately a messenger had come from Kamakura, saying : " Come down hither without delay, for I
wish to see you ; I will receive you just as the late Ike -no-Zenni ; " and so he started at once. Now
among his retainers was one Ya heibyōye Munekiyo, the most faithful of all the hereditary vassals
of the Heike, and he would not accompany him on this occasion. On being asked the reason he
replied : "My lord is thus able to go down in safety, but I cannot rest for thinking of the other s of
our house who are tossed about on the waves of the Western Ocean; so when I have calmed my
mind somewhat I will follow on afterward." Abashed and pained by this speech the Dainagon
replied: "Indeed I felt it hard to be left behind here when the rest o f our family fled, but life is
precious and I was loath to throw it away, so I reluctantly stayed. And now that I must go down
to Kamakura, why can you not escort me on such a long journey? When I stayed behind, why did
you not offer any remonstrance? Was there anything, great or small, in which I did not consult
you ? " Shifting his position, Munekiyo replied with a respectful obeisance: "Alas ! Nothing is
more dear than life to all men, both high and low; and so it is said that one will leave the world
sooner than give up his life. I did not think it a bad deed that you should stay behind here; and it
is only because the life of Yoritomo himself was spared that he has reached his present happy
condition. Moreover he has not forgotten my services, in escort ing him, at the bidding the late
Ike-no-Zenni, as far as Shinohara in Omi at the time of his exile; and if I accompany you to
Kamakura he will certainly entertain me bountifully and make me presents. Therefore it

[p. 212]

is that, when I think of my fr iends and the Courtiers of our house cast upon the waters of the
Western Sea, I feel ashamed to receive such preference. And as to your going on a long journey, I
indeed feel anxious, and if you were going to attack the enemy I would not fail to be among t he
first to go, but in this case I think it no wrong to refuse." As he ended his speech it was not easy
for him to control his emotion, and all the other samurai likewise pressed their sleeves to their
eyes. The Dainagon also was greatly displeased, but as  there was no help for it now, he soon after
started.

On the sixteenth day of the same month he reached Kamakura, and Yoritomo immediately
received him in audience. When he enquired where Munekiyo was, the Dainagon answered that
he was sick just then and could not come. " How can that be? " replied Yoritomo, " I was
formerly committed to his charge, and so I feel very grateful to him, and was looking forward
with great pleasure to seeing him again. It is indeed a pity that he has not come with you." And as
he had already prepared a grant of manors and many presents for him, he was very disappointed.
The lords of the Eastern Country also, who had prepared similar presents and striven against each
other to do him honour, also expressed their regret at his abs ence.

On the ninth day of the sixth month the Dainagon Yorimori started on his return journey to the
Capital, for though Yoritomo pressed him to stay longer, he feared that those in Miyako would
be anxious about him, and so begged leave to depart. Yoritom o then sent a request to the Hō -ō
that Yorimori should be confirmed in the possession of all his fiefs and land, and that he should
hold his office of Dainagon as heretofore. Besides this he presented him with thirty saddled horses
and thirty unsaddled, an d thirty long chests full of gold, rolls of silk, and dyed stuffs. Moreover

besides what Yoritomo gave him the lords of the Eastern Country vied with each other in making
him presents, so that the horses alone

[p. 213]

amounted to three hundred. So tha t Ike-no-Dainagon Yorimori -no-Kyō not only returned to
Miyako with his head on his shoulders, but with great store of riches besides.

On the same day Hirata -no-Nyūdō Sadatsugu, uncle of Higo -no-kami Sadayoshi, headed the
troops of Iga and Ise and led them  against the province of Ōmi, but some offshoots of the Genji
rode out to encounter them, and on the twenty second day, unable to hold out any longer, the
men of Iga and Ise were beaten and routed. Pathetically heroic was the loyal conduct of these
heredit ary retainers of the Heike house in remembering their ancient obligations, but their plan of
campaign was quite beyond their strength. This was what is called "The three days Heishi."