CHAPTER V.
THE EXECUTION OF TOSA BO.
     Now there were ten Daimyos who had been accompanying Yoshitsune by the orders of
Yoritomo, but when they found  he was under suspicion, they took counsel together and one by
one left him and returned to Kamakura. Since he was the younger brother of Yoritomo and the
son of the same father, and had overthrown the Heike from Ichi -no-tani to Dan -no-ura, and
restored th e Sacred Mirror and the Sacred Gem without delay to the Capital, bringing peace and
tranquillity to the whole realm, the Hōgwan expected to be granted some reward for his merit,
and wondered what could be the reason that he was thus sus -

[p. 285]

pected,  and consequently distrusted everybody from the Emperor to the common people, until
he afterwards learned that it was owing to the continued slanders of Kajiwara, who hated him on
account of the ridicule he had sustained in the matter of the oar that sprin g at Watanabe in Settsu.

     Now Yoritomo wished to strike at Yoshitsune quickly before he could gather any force
together, but thought that if he sent his Daimyos with an army, the Hōgwan would certainly
destroy the bridges at Uji and Seta, and then the  Capital would be thrown into an uproar once
more, which would be no good thing. So, after long consideration he summoned Tosa -bō
Shōshun and said; " Do you go up to the Capital as if on pilgrimage, and smite him privily." So
Tosa-bō made obeisance and imm ediately started off for Miyako, without even returning to own
residence. On the twenty ninth day of the ninth month he arrived there. But as by the day after
he had not visited the Hōgwan's residence, Yoshitsune, who had heard that he had come to the
city, sent Musashi -bō-Benkei to fetch him.

When he was brought into his presence Yoshitsune enquired : " How now, Tosa -bō ? Have you
no letter from Kamakura Dono ? " I have brought no letter with me," replied Tosa -bō, " but the
lord of Kamakura gave me this m essage by word of mouth. Tell Yoshitsune that, since he is in
Miyako, everything is quiet and there is nothing special to be done, but he must take every care
to keep a strict guard." " That is not likely," retorted the Hōgwan. " You have been sent here to
assassinate me. If he had sent his Daimyos with an army he thought I should have destroyed the
bridges at Uji and Seta, and that would have caused an uproar in the Capital, which would have
been a very bad thing; so he sent you as if on a pilgrimage to sm ite me privily, did he not ? "
"Why does your lordship speak in this way ? " replied Tosa -bō, greatly astonished, " it is because
of a trifling vow that I have at Kumano that I have come up to the Capital." " What do you think
of my not being permitted to enter Kamakura on account of Kagetoki's

page 28 6

slanders, and then being driven back here, Tosa -bō ? " continued Yoshitsune. " About that affair I
have no knowledge," replied the priest, " but I have not the least evil design against your
lordship." An d he offered to take a written oath that he meant no harm. " Whatever you do," said

the Hōgwan, " I know you are in favour with Yoritomo." So, as things looked very black against
him, to avert the present danger Tosa -bō then and there wrote seven oaths, an d some of these he
burned and drank mixed with water, and some he deposited in the sanctuary of a shrine, after
which he went back and gathered together samurai from various provinces who had come up to
the Capital on guard duty, with the intention of maki ng his attack on the Hōgwan that very night.

     Now there was a girl named Shizuka, the daughter of a Shirabyōshi called Iso -no-Zenji, whom
Yoshitsune greatly loved, and she did not depart from his side either by night or day. And she
now warned Yoshits une saying: " The streets are full of soldiers, and there seems no reason for the
city guards to be in this commotion, for they have not been mustered by your orders. I think it
must be the work of that priest who swore his oaths here today; would it not b e well to send
someone to find out ?" So the Hōgwan sent two of the three or four boy attendants of the late
Lay-priest Chancellor, whom he had retained in his service, to see what was toward, but though
he waited some time they did not return. Then, think ing that it would be safer to send a woman,
he bade one of his maid -servants go and see, and after a while she came running back saying: "
Two youths who look like the boy attendants are lying dead in front of the gate of Tosa -bō's
residence, and a lot of horses are standing there ready saddled, and a war pavilion has been
pitched there, in which a number of warriors are mustered, helmeted and in full armour, with
their bows bent and arrows ready on their backs, all prepared for an instant attack. They do n ot
look at all like peaceful pilgrims." At this the Hōgwan snatched up his sword and ran out, while
Shizuka seized his armour and

[p. 287]

flung it over his shoulders, but without waiting till it was more than half buckled on, he ran out
to the middle ga te, where his horse was standing ready saddled. Springing on to it; " Open the
gate;" he shouted, and as it was opened and he stood expecting the foe every moment, at
midnight Tosa -bō rode up to the front gate with fifty horsemen, all similarly accoutred, shouting
their war -cry. Rising in his stirrups the Hōgwan shouted in aloud voice: "Let us see who there is
in all Nippon who can best Yoshitsune in battle either by night or by day! " And he rode at them
right and left, so that, fearing to be ridden down, they parted asunder and let him through.

     Then Ise -no-Saburō Yoshimori, Mutsu -no-Sato Shirō -byōye Tadanobu, Eda -no-Genzō,
Kumai -no-Tarō, Musashi -bō-Benkei, and the rest of the Hōgwan's men, all matchless in battle,
hearing that an attack was being mad e on their master's residence, came running from their
lodgings in all directions, and soon formed a band of some sixty or seventy horsemen, so that,
though Tosa -bō and his men attacked fiercely, they were quickly routed without difficulty and
many slain. Tosa-bō himself, seeing that all was lost, managed to escape somehow or other to the
recesses of Mount Kurama ; but as Kurama was an old haunt of Yoshitsune, he was soon caught,
and brought to the Hōgwan's residence the next day. He had hidden himself in a  place called
Sōjō-ga-tani. He was clad in a hitatare of dyed cloth, and wore a suit of armour laced with black
leather, with a Tokin or cowl on his head. Standing on the verandah, the Hōgwan thus addressed
him as he was led into the courtyard beneath: "Ho w now, Tosa -bō ! You have not been long in
going back on your oath." " As I swore it to suit my convenience, indeed I have not ; " replied the
priest. " That you should regard your lord's behest so loyally, and your own life so lightly, is truly
admirable;  " replied the Hōgwan, with tears streaming down his face ; look here, sir priest, if you
care for your life I will spare it and send you back to Kamakura." " This is indeed an unlooked for
kindness." replied Tosa -bō, making a low obeisance, " but


[p. 288 ]

even if I should be willing, would my lord allow me to live? Since I am one of his priests, from
the time that he specially chose me for this mission my life has been forfeit to him, and I know
not if he will give it back to me. So the best kindness you  can do me is to take off my head at
once." So they took him out to the Rokujō -kawara and there beheaded him: and there was none
who did not praise his conduct.