CHAPTER III.
THE EMPEROR PROCEEDS TO USA.

When the Heike in Tsukushi heard of this, they all exclaimed : " Ah, if we had only brought the
third and fourth Princes with us also! " " Even if we had done so," said Hei Dai nagon Tokitada -
no-Kyō, " there is the son of Prince Takakura whom his guardian Sanuki -no-kami Shigehide made
a monk and brought to the North Country; for Kiso Koshinaka has had his vows revoked and
brought him with him to the Capital with the intention of placing him on the Throne." But the
others objected, saying: "How is it possible for a Prince whose vows have been revoked to
succeed to the Throne ? " " Of a surety it is possible," replied Tokitada, " for in other countries
there are precedents for it, a nd in this country also, when Temmu Tennō was Crown Prince, he
was attacked by Prince Ōtomo and cut off his hair and retired to Mount Yoshino; but after Prince
Ōtomo had been overthrown lie came back again and ascended the Throne. Kōken Tennō also
was move d by the Buddha -mind to lay aside his dignity and become a recluse, changing his name
to Hokini, but afterwards he resumed the Throne as Shōtoku Tennō. Therefore there is no reason
why Kiso should not make this Prince Emperor in spite of his revoked vows."

On the third day of the ninth month an envoy was sent to Ise from the Court. He was the Sangi
Naganori. There have been three examples of Retired Emperors sending envoys

[p.79]

to Ise, namely the Emperors Shujaku, Shirakawa and Toba; but in their case it was done before
they became recluses; so that this is the first example of sending one after retirement.

The Heike thought to establish a capital in Tsukushi, and a Council of Courtiers was held, but
they could not decide the matter. The Emperor was th en residing at the house of Okura -no-
Tanenao of Iwado, while the others lodged among the fields and farms: though they did not wear
garments of hemp, as the poet says, yet they certainly lived in a rustic way. As the Palace was
thus in the wilds, it was bu t a Log -Palace, but even so there was something about it that was
most dignified. So the Emperor again proceeded to the shrine of Usa. Here the apartments of the
Dai guji served as the . Imperial Lodging, while the Courtiers lived in the main building of t he
shrine, and the officials of the fifth and sixth ranks in the side galleries. Around them in the
courtyard were encamped the samurai of Shikoku and Kyūshū in serried ranks of mail -clad
warriors. The ancient vermilion of the shrine fence seemed to renew its youthful brilliance at the
unwonted honour. After sleep:ng seven nights in the shrine the Daijin Munemori had a dream.
The doors of the Inner Shrine opened and in a mighty voice these words boomed forth

" Are not these painful misfortunes a sign of th e anger of heaven?
Why then do you thus earnestly pray to the gods? "

Munemori, confounded and cast into the depths of gloom and anxiety, murmured to himself the
words of the ancient verse:


Thinking of this my heart, in tune with tire voice of the insect s,
Feebler and feebler grows; autumn is waning indeed.

So they returned to Dazaifu. It was now about the tenth day of the ninth month. The evening
blasts howled over the Hagi leaves, and as they slept in their day garments their

[p.80]

sleeves were wet with tears, so hard to endure was this rough journey in the dreary days of fading
autumn. The moon of the thirteenth day of the ninth month was the famous moon of autumn,
but as they thought of their present state, and remembered the moon as it shone on th e Court in
their Ancient Capital in the days of their grandeur, their eyes grew blurred so that they could
only behold it through a mist. On this occasion Satsuma -no-kami Tadanori, Shūri -no-taiyū
Tsunemori, and Kōgō -gū-no-suke Tsunemasa made these three st anzas:

" Those with whom last year we viewed the moon at Miyako
On this self -same night, fondly are thinking of us,"
" This is the moon that last year we gazed at together, beloved
Recollections of you hover about me to -night."
" Here the dew never dries on these sad fields of our exile.
On what undreamed of shore come we to gaze on the moon."