CHAPTER XVIII.
THE HEIKE ABANDON KYOTO.

Now Ike -no-Dainagon Yorimori -no-Kyō set fire to the Ikedono Palace and set out from the city,
but when he came to the south Toba gate with his following of some three hundred horsemen,
they tore the red badges off their armour and returned to the city on the pretext that they had
forgotten something. When Etchū -no-Jirō-hyōye Moritsugu perceived this, he galloped off to
Munemori  with his bow in his hand and said: "See there! A party of samurai, following the
example of Yorimori, has returned to the city, and their designs look suspicious. I would respect
the person of Yorimori, but let me draw bow against these fellows." "Under p resent conditions,"
replied Munemori, "I think it would perhaps be as well to pay no heed to such a pack of runagate
knaves; but have you seen or heard aught of the men of Komatsu dono?" "So far" answered
Yorimori, "none of them has yet come up." "It is no  good omen if people begin to desert us when
we have but left the Capital a single day;" reflected Munemori. "I said it would be better to stay
in the Capital, when every other place is so uncertain; " said Shin Chūnagon Tomomori -no-Kyō,
casting a resentfu l glance at Munemori.

Now the reason why Yorimori stayed behind in Kyoto was because Yoritomo had sent him many
letters, swearing by

[p.63]

Hachiman that he would always regard him with the same feeling as he had his late mother Ike -
no-Zenni, and had gi ven special orders to his army not to attack the samurai of Ikedono; and so,
though all the Heike family were fleeing its despair from the Capital, he alone remained behind,
trusting the good will of Yoritomo. As Saisho dono, the wife of this Yorimori, was  the foster
mother of the Princess Hachijō -no-Nyoin who had taken refuge in the Tokiwa mansion of the
temple of Ninnaji on account of the uproar in the Capital, Yorimori also fled there for safety; for
though he trusted to Yoritomo to help him, the Nyoin w as not entirely assured, saying that in a
world like the present no one knew what might happen; for even if Yoritomo was friendly the
attitude of the other Genji was uncertain, and as they had thus rashly separated from the rest of
their family they were i n a perilous position, neither in the waves nor on shore.

So when the Courtiers of Komatsu -dono, the six sons of Shigemori and their retainers, about a
thousand men in all, came up with the Imperial Procession by Matsuda -kawara at Vodo, the
Daijin Munemor i was greatly rejoiced, and enquired of them why they were so long in coming.
"It is because I was so long delayed by the affectionate pleadings of my little ones," replied
Koremori. "Then why did you not bring Rokaudai with you? You are a hard hearted fat her to be
able leave him behind"; said Munemori. "But when our future is all uncertain like this" said
Koremori, while the tears ran down his face at such an unfeeling cling question.

Those of the Heike who fled from the Capital were; The former Udaijin M unemori, Hei
Dainagon Tokitada, Hei hunagon Norimori, Shin Chūnagon Toaiomori, Shūri -no-taiyū
Tsunemori Uemon -no-kami Kiyomune, Ion sammi Chūo Shigehira, Komatsu sammi Chūjō
Koremori, Shin sammi Chūjō Sukemori, Echizen -no-sammi Michimori; and among the Cou rtiers;
Kura -no-kami Nobumoto, Sanuki -no-Chūjō Tokizane, SaChūjō -Kiyotsune, Sa - Shōshō Arimori,
Tango -no-jiju


[p.64]

Tadafusa, Kōgō -gūno -suke Tsunemasa, Sama -no-kami Yukimori, Satsuma -no-kami Tadanori,
Musashi -no-kami Tomoaki, Noto -no-kami Noritsune, Bit chū-no-kami Moromori. Owari -no-
kami Kiyosada, Awaji -no-kami Kiyofusa, Wakasa -no-kami Tsunetoshi, Kurando -no-taiyū
Narimori, Tsunemori -no-Otogo -taiyu Atsumori, Hyōbu -no-shōyu Masaaki; and of the priests;
Nii-no-Sozu Senshin, Hoshoji -no-Shikkū Noen, Chūnagon -no-Risshi Chūkai, Kyōjūbō -no-Ajari
Yuen, while of the Bushi, of Lords of manors, Kebiishi, Efu, and those in various offices in the
government, there were a hundred and sixty. The total number amounted to some seven
thousand men, this being all that was l eft after the wars of the last few years in the various
provinces of the North and East. Hei Dainagon Tokitada -no-kyō, stopping the Imperial Car at
Yamasaki Sekito -no-in, prostrated himself in the direction of Otokoyama and prayed thus:
"Namu Kimyō -chōrai Hachiman Dai -Bosatsu, we beseech thee that thou wilt grant that Our Lord
the Emperor and all our family may again return to the Capital; " a most pathetic prayer indeed!
And now, as they looked back toward the city, nothing was to be seen but the clouds of  smoke
from the burning buildings rising into the sky like mist; in truth a melancholy sight. Hei
Chūnagon Norimori and Shūri -no-taiyū Tsunemori each composed a stanza on this occasion,
which run thus:

"Ah! this fleeting life! Our Sovereign far from his P alace,
sees it go up in smoke, rising aloft to the sky. "
"When we look sadly back at the blackened plains of our homeland,
'tis as if we rode over an ocean of smoke. "

Indeed we can imagine the sadness they felt when at the same time they saw their homes r educed
to ashes and smoke and contemplated the long road they must travel. Higo -no-

[p.65]

kami Sadayoshi, hearing that some of the Genji were at Kawajiri, rode off with five hundred men
to drive them away, but, finding that the report was false, he was returning again to the city when
he fell in with the Imperial Procession near Udono. Hastily alighting from his horse he sought the
presence of Munemori. After the customary obeisance he burst forth: "What wretched plan is
this? Whither are you intending t o go? If you are proceeding to the Western Provinces, everyone
will reproach you for taking to flight, and it will be a disgrace to our family. It would be far better
to remain and await events in the Capital." "Perhaps you are not yet aware," replied Mune mori,
"that Kiso Yoshinaka is now advancing on the Capital with My thousand men, and that the
priests of Hieizan have occupied Higashi Sakamoto, and that moreover the Ho -o has disappeared
during the night: we were all ready to fight to the end in the Capit al, but, wishing to avoid all risk
of danger to the Imperial Mother and the Nii dono, we thought it well to escort them into
retirement for a while in the Western Provinces until the danger is past." "In that case," answered
Sadayoshi, "I will ask your lea ve to return to the city and see what can be done;" and, ordering his
force of five hundred men to join the retainers of Koremori, he rode back to Kyoto with only a
small band of thirty horsemen. Somehow or other the rumour spread that Sadayoshi was
return ing to take vengeance on the Heike who had stayed behind in the city, and when Ike -no-
Dainagon Yorimori heard it, he was greatly terrified for his own safety.

So Sadayoshi went and encamped on the burnt ruins of Nishi Hachijō, and spent the night there,

but not one of the Heike Courtiers returned to bear him company. As solitude and desolation
reigned everywhere and the future seemed ominous, he went to the grave of his master
Shigemori and dug out the bones that they might not be trodden under foot by the  horse hoofs of
the Genji. Taking his place before the bones as if they had been a living person, in a voice choked

[p.66]

with tears he addressed them thus: "Alas! how pitiable! Behold the fate of your august house!
Though it has been said from of old t ime that the living must surely die, and that at the height of
pleasure comes pain, yet hard it is to behold this doom with our own eyes. How happy that my
lord, knowing before what was about to take place, prayed to the gods and Buddhas to shorten
his lif e; and would that I, Sadayoshi, had then accompanied him to the other world; for now I
have vainly lived thus long only that this affliction might come upon me. I beseech you that,
when I come to die, you, my master, will come to meet me and guide me to th e same Buddha
land." Thus weeping he communed with his master in the far off land, and then, sending the
bones to Kōya -san, he threw the earth of the tomb into the river Kamo, after which he took his
way in the opposite direction toward the Eastern Provinc es, thinking he could rely on
Utsunomiya to assist him in return for the kindness shown him by the Heike in former years.
Now all the Heike lords of high rank from Munemori downwards, with the exception of
Koremori, had taken their wives and children with them, but as this was not possible with those
of lower rank, they had had to leave them behind in the city, not knowing when they would see
them again. Whenever people leave their family, even when the day and the hour of their return
are fixed exactly, th e parting is always sad; how much more on an occasion like this, when they
took leave of each other for perhaps the last time, were the sleeves of both those who went and
those who stayed moistened with their tears. So old and young were fain to set forth,  looking
backwards always with longing eyes, for how could they forget the intimate ties of their ancestors
or the benefits themselves had enjoyed in later days? Some made the journey by sea, braving the
dangers of the troubled waves, while others went by land; some on horseback and some rowing in
boats, each than leaving his Home in the way he thought best.