CHAPTER I.
IMPERIAL PROGRESS TO ITSUKUSHIMA.

At the beginning of the New Year of Jisho, since Kiyomori would not give his permis sion and the
Ho-o feared to gainsay him, the usual visits of ceremony were not made at the Toba Palace
during the first three days, with the exception of Sakuramachi Chunagon Shigenori -no-Kyo, son
of the late Shonagon Nyudo Shinsei, and his younger brother  Sakyo -no-daiyu Naganori, who were
allowed to go.

On the twentieth day were held the ceremonies of the first investiture of the Crown Prince with
the 'hakama' and the first serving of fish to him; it was a very auspicious occasion but the Ho -o
only heard about it by rumour in the Toba Palace. On the twenty -first day of the second month
the Emperor, spite of his not having any particular illness, was removed from the Throne and the
Crown Prince suceeded him. This also showed how the Nyudo did as he pleased in everything,
and everyone excitedly chorussed: "Now are the palmy days of the Heike." The Imperial Gem
and the Sacred Sword were taken to the Naijidokoro and the Court Nobles all assembled at the
camp of the Imperial Guard, everything being done accordin g to ancient precedent, while the
Sadaijin also went out to the camp. On hearing of the resignation of the Emperor, all those who
understood the circumstances could not refrain from weeping. When an Emperor in the Retired
Palace meditates on having resigne d the Throne to the Heir of his own accord, the future seems
dark and wretched, but when as now his wishes are not consulted, but he is forced to resign, his
state of mind must be truly pitiable.

The Sacred Treasures were handed over and taken to the

[p. 163]

Gosho Palace, where the New Emperor was to reside. When the call of the watchman who gave
the fire alarm was heard no more in the Kan in Palace of Takakura Tenno, and Palace Guards no
longer kept watch and ward, but all was silent and still, melanch oly fell upon the older Courtiers
even amidst the rejoicings at the Imperial Accession, and they were affected even to tears. The
New Emperor was but three years old this year, and people whispered to each other: "Ah, he too
will retire sometime;" but as T aira Dainagon Tokitada -no-Kyo was the husband of the Imperial
wetnurse, Sotsu no suke, who was there who could depose this one ?

In foreign countries we find Sei -o of Shu aged three years,  and Haku -tei of Shin aged two. In our
country Konoe -in was three y ears old and Rokujo -in two,  all of them in long clothes and none
able to adjust his own dress, but carried in the arms of the Kwanpaku or nursed by their mother
they went through the Accession Ceremony. Afterwards Kosho, Emperor of Kan, succeeded to
the Th rone at the age of a hundred days. These are the precedents for ascending the Throne both
in China and Japan, but the learned men of the time grumbled together saying: "Ah, how terrible!
Say nothing about it; are these precedents good ones, I wonder?" Sinc e the Crown Prince had
come to the Throne  the Nyudo and and his wife were now grandfather and grandfather to the

Emperor, and, having obtained an Imperial Decree for the three ranks of Empress, Dowager
Empress and Grand Dowager Empress, he distributed rank  and emolument, received and directed
the ministers in attendance, had ladies -in waiting dressed in flower -embroidered robes, and in fact
deported himself exactly like a Retired Emperor. With the exception of the O -Nyudo of Hokoin,
Kaneie Ko, this was the first time that one who had become a priest had received the Decree of
the Three Ranks.

During the first decade of the first month, the Emperor Takakura made a pilgrimage to
Itsukushima.   As it is the custom for an Emperor who has relinquished the Throne first of all to
visit

[p. 164]

Hachiman, Kamo and Kasuga before going elsewhere, people thought it very strange that His
Majesty should go to the far distant shrine of Itsukushima. Some say that the Retired Emperor
Shirakawa went to Kumano and that Go -Shirakawa went to Hiyoshi, but I know not. The reason
that the Emperor went to Itsukushima was because he had an important petition to make there,
and moreover as it was the shrine most highly venerated by the Heike, on the one hand he would
comply with thei r wishes, while on the other there was the example of the Ho -o shut up in the
Toba Palace before his eyes, so that no doubt he went to pray that the heart of the Nyudo might
be softened.

Now this thing caused Hiezan to be angry, for they argued that if th e Emperor did not first visit
Hachiman, Kamo and Kasuga on his abdication, he certainly ought to come to their temples, and
wondered why he should go to such a distant shrine as Itsukushima in Aki. "Let us go down to
the capital with our sacred emblem and prevent it;" they clamoured. So the Emperor postponed
his visit for a while until Kiyomori managed to pacify the indignation of Hieizan. Then on the
seventeenth day His Majesty started out on his pilgrimage to Itsukushima by visiting the Ni -i
Dono, the wif e of the Nyudo, at her residence at Hachijo Omiya. That night the festival of the
Deity of Itsukushima began. The Kwampaku Motomichi presented a car of Chinese style with
changes of horses to the Emperor. On the next day, being the eighteenth, His Majesty went to the
mansion of the Nyudo and in the evening, summoning the former Udaisho Munenori -no-Kyo,
said to him: "On the occasion of my going to Itsukushima I wish to go to the Toba Palace to visit
the Ho -o, do you think I ought to inform the Nyudo or not ? " Munemori replying that he
thought it did not matter, the Emperor asked him to go that night to the Toba Palace and inform
the Ho -o of his intention, and Munemori forthwith hastened thither. The Ho -o, on hearing the
news was highly delighted, thinking it too good to be true. So on the next day,

[p. 165]

the nineteenth, Omiya no Dainagon Takasue no Kyo arrived while it was yet dark, and the
Imperial Progress to Itsukushima was at last begun from the Nyudo's residence at Nishi Hachijo.
The third month was not yet half over, but the moon of the dawning day shone half obscured
and beclouded in mist, and the cry of the wild geese flying back from Echizen and Echigo
sounded melancholy in their ears. While it was yet dark they approached the Toba Palace, and
the Emperor, descending from his  car before the gate, entered to find only a deserted mansion in
the shade of the thick trees: a dismal scene indeed.


The spring was almost over and the summer foliage was appearing, the cherry blossoms were
fading on the boug hs and the song of the 'uguisu' was growing old. His Majesty thought how he
had visited the Ho -o at his Palace of Hojujiden on the sixth day of the first month of last year,
when the musicians had greeted him with sweet refrains, while the nobles were all in waiting,
and with the serried ranks of Guards the Ho -o's own Courtiers had opened the curtained gate,
and the attendants of the Kamon spread matting on the ground, the whole ceremony going
smoothly and without fault: to day it all seemed like a dream.

Sakuramachi Chunagon Shigemori -no-Kyo now advanced and announced the Imperial visit. The
Ho-o immediately came forth into the vestibule of his sleeping apartment to await His Majesty.
The Emperor was twenty years old this year and his countenance was brigh t like the moon of
dawn. His figure also was very beautiful. He was exceedingly like his mother, the late Kenshun -
mon-in, and the Ho -o, being reminded of his departed Consort, could not refrain from tears.
Then the two Retired Emperors seated themselves cl ose together and, so that their conversation
might be private, the old nun alone remained in the Imperial Presence. So Their Majesties
remained long in converse until the sun rose high in the heavens, when the Emperor Takakura
took leave of his Imperial Fa ther and embarked in his ship at Kusatsu in Tuba. The Emperor felt
deeply grieved to

[p. 166]

see the silent and lonely condition of the Ho -o's Detached Palace, and the Ho -o on his part felt
very uneasy when he thought of the Imperial journey and the per ilous voyage over the waves.
Indeed His Majesty's putting aside the claims of the shrines of Ise, Hachiman and Kamo and
making this pilgrimage to far -off Aki was most praiseworthy; how can it be without acceptance
before the gods? Doubtless the August Peti tion will be granted.