CHAPTER XV.

THE BURNING OF THE PALACE  .


That night the Retired Emperor gave orders to Kurod o-no-Sashoben Kanemitsu that a council of
the Courtiers should be held immediately. At the time that they brought down the sacred cars
before in the fourth month of the fourth year of Ho -an, the Emperor had ordered the Zasshu to
take it into the

[p. 51]

shrine of Sekizan : also in the seventh month of the fourth year of Ho -en, he had ordered the
Betto of Gion to bring it into the shrine of Gion ; now, according to the precedent of Ho -en, he
ordered Gondai Sozu Choken, Betto of Gion, to bring it again to t hat shrine at nightfall, and this
being done the arrows that stuck in it were pulled out by the priests. From of old, reckoning from
the period of Ei -kyu, until now the priests of Hieizan have brought down their sacred car six
times, but, though every time  the samurai were ordered to restrain them, arrows had never been
shot until this occasion. The people of the capital were greatly terrified, fearing that the anger of
the god would bring calamity on the city.

On the fourteenth day at midnight the monks of Hieizan again flocked down into the city, so the
Emperor, ordering his palanquin in the middle of the night, went to the Retired Emperor's Palace
at Hojuji -den, while the Imperial Consort and the other Ladies of the Palace went in their cars to
some oth er palace, the Kwampaku and Dajo -daijin and other inferior Courtiers precipitately
following them in a panic. The Naidaijin Komatsu Dono attended them wearing ordinary dress
with a quiver of arrows on his back, his heir Gon -no-suke Koremori going with him in
ceremonial costume carrying a flat quiver. Both in the Palace and in the city, high and low, rich
and poor, all were in a state of confusion and tumult.

Now at Hieizan three thousand priests met in council, clamouring that as their sacred car had
been shot at and many of their company killed and wounded, they must burn all the temples
from Omiya and Ninomiya to Kodo and Chudo as a protest against the indignity, and go forth
and take up their abode on the mountain and moor. At this point it appeared that  the Ho -o
wished to propose something with regard to the matter, and the senior priests of Hieizan in
Kyoto went to ascend the mountain to inform the others, but these came down in great numbers
as far as Nishi -Sakamoto and drove them back again. Now Taira  Dainagon Tokitada -no-Kyo, who
at this time held

[p. 52]

the office of Saemon -no-kami, had been appointed one of the siding ministers (Jokei), and he was
sent as an envoy to the monks ; these however assembled in the courtyard of the Daikodo and
cried ou t; " let us seize Tokitada, pull off his 'Kammuri' and then bind him and throw him into

the lake." On seeing this, Tokitada begged them to listen quietly to what he had to say, and taking
a small ink -stone and paper from his bosom, he wrote a few words and  gave it to them. What
they read was this ; " The lawless violence of the priests is the work of a devil: a righteous
monarch restrains it by virtue of his enlightened birth." Abashed by this reproof the monks
forbore to lay hands on him, but admitting the  truth of his statement with one accord, they all
dispersed in silence to their cells and valleys. Thus did Tokitada -no-Kyo win the admiration of
everyone by calming the wrath of the three thousand priests of the Three Halls by writing a few
words on a pie ce of paper, and thus averting insult from the Emperor and himself. The monks
too, who had hitherto been regarded as only wishing to stir up disorder, were now respected for
their reasonable conduct.

On the twentieth day an Imperial Mandate was issued thr ough Kwazan -in-Gon Chunagon
Tadachika -no-Kyo the Jokei that the Kokushi Kaga -no-kami Morotaka should be dismissed and
banished to Idota in Owari and that his Brother Kondo Hangwan Morotsune should be
imprisoned : also on the thirteenth day six samurai who had shot at the sacred car were also
imprisoned ; they were all retainers of Komatsu Dono.

On the evening of the twentieth day at the hour of the Dog (8. p.m.), a fire broke out at Higuchi
Tomi -no-koji and a great part of Kyoto was burned. A south -east wi nd was blowing strongly at
the time and the flames swept across the city diagonally like a great wheel and burned through to
the south -west, the distance of from three to five cho : a very terrible sight deed. Guhei Shinno's
palace at Chigusa, the Kobai pa lace at Kitano Tenjin, Ritsu Issei's palace at Haematsu, the Oni
palace, the Takamatsu palace, the Kamoi palace, the Kanin palace of

[p. 53]

Higashi Sanjo Fuyutsugu -no-Otodo, the Horikawa palace of Fujiwara Mototsune, beside thirty
other palaces famous f rom ancient days. Sixteen palaces belonging to Court Nobles of the highest
rank were burned, beside those of other Courtiers and high officials without number. At last the
fire reached the Imperial Palace, and starting from the Shujaku gate, the Oten gate,  the Kaisho
gate, the Daikoku -den, the Buraku -in, the eight offices [1] of the Palace administration and the
Office of Records were all reduced to ashes in a moment ; the annals of families and the
documents of many generations beside many treasures of gre at worth were all burnt to cinders.
No one could estimate the damage. Several hundred people were burnt to death and cattle
without number. Moreover it was no ordinary event that there were some who dreamed of two
or three thousand great monkeys coming dow n from Hieizan with torches to set fire to the city
as a punishment from the god of that place.

The Daikyokuden was burned for the first time in the age of Seiwa Tenno in the eighteenth year
of Jokan, and on the third day of the first month of the ninetee nth year the Coronation
Ceremony of the Emperor Yosei took place in the Buraku -in. On the ninth day of the fourth
month of the first year of Gwankyo they began to rebuild it, and it was finished on the eighth day
of the tenth month of the second year. In t he reign of Go -Reizei -in, on the twenty sixth day of
the second month of the fifth year of Tenki it was again burned and on the fourteenth day of the
eighth month of the fourth year of Jiryaku they again began to rebuild it, but the Emperor Go -
Reizei died before it was finished. In the reign of Go -Sanjo -in on the fifteenth day of the fourth
month of the fourth year of Enkyu it was finished, and the Imperial Court removed to it, the

literary men dedicating many compositions and the musicians making melody. A s the present age
was a degenerate one and the strength of the country was exhausted, it has not yet been rebuilt.

NOTES
[1] Gion Shoja .
 Sk. Djetavana Vihara. The monastery of Djeta, situated in a park,
bought and presented to S'akya Muni by Anartha pin daka, in which many of his sermons were
preached.
[2] Teak tree . Shorea Robusta, a large tree under which S'akya Mani entered Nirvana. Sk. Sala. Jap.
Sharasoju

[3] Choko .
 Prime Minister of Shin during the reigns of the first two Emperors, throw the
coun try into confusion and was put to death while the third was a child.
[4]Ono.
   Father of the Empress of Sei Tei
 , seized the administration as Regent but
was put to death by the nobles shortly afterward.
[5] Shui.
 perhaps a mistake for
 Minister of Bu T ei
 who was the cause of his
country's ruin.
[6] Rokuzan , the famous An -Rokuzan
 , Minister of Genso
 who also ruined his
country.
[7] Masakado etc, famous Japanese rebels.
[1] dirk. 'sayamaki' a short sword without a guard, perhaps so called because the s cabbard was
bound round like a bow. Cf. illus. in Jo'y and Inada, Sword and Same, P. 37.
[2] Go-Sechi .五節  So called became Five Princesses danced at it. The banquet was given on the
day after Nii namesai or the offering of the new rice harvest to the gods.
[3] Kariginu . For this and other Court dress cf, Sansom, translation of Tsurezure Gusa T.A.S.J. vol.
39. P. 117.
[4] Tachi . The slung sword of curved shape always worn by warriors and also by Courtiers up to
Ashikaga times after which it was only worn by c ommanding officers and Courtiers who still
wear it when in Japanese dress of ceremony. That of Bushi differed in shape from that of civil
officials. Cf, Joly and Inada as above, P. 312.
[5] Kurando . The office in the Court that had charge of certain state documents and had authority
to decide matters of litigation.
[6] Ise Heishi . Cf. Sansom. Tsurezure Gusa, p. 66, where another pun on the same name is
explained. Heishi 平氏  and Heishi 瓶子  wine bottle,
saga-me 索瓶  squint -eyed , and su -game 酢瓶   vinegar -bottle, o r 索瓶  unglazed bottle as some
MSS read.
[7] Tonomo . The department of the Palace that had charge of the Imperial carriages, bath, torches,
and cleaning of the Palace courts.
[8] White paper etc. intended to suggest metaphorically the dances of women.
[9] Courtiers . Kugyo Denjobito. Kugyo were the Sessho Kwampaku and the great Ministers (Ku),
and the Danagon and Chunagon of above the third Runk:. Denjobito were all who had, the right
of attending the Court. Kyo is a title meaning Lord, Court Noble
[1] Ei- no-Suke. Officer of one of the Imperial Guards, the Konoe -fu or Saeimon or Ueimon.
[2] Tadamori . pun on his name read 只 'only,' and  泄 'leak,' for  忠盛。
[3] Kinyoshu  A CoIlection of poems made in the time of Sutoku Tenno.
[4]Gyobukyo . Chief of the Department of justice, (Gyobasho)

[5] Eifu-no-Kami . Captain of the Imperial Guard.
[6] Kebiishi -no-Betto. Chief of the Police. B etto, High Steward, also of Shinto Shrine, e. ;. Kumano -
no-Betto ; now fallen to be used only with tic meaning 'groom.' Cf. Eng. Constable, Comes
Stabuli (Jap. Samano -kami) formerly Commander of an Army, now only of Police Constable.
[1] Mido dono.  The Kwa mpaku Fujiwara Michinaga.
[2] Taijin Ko Fujiwara Tadahira.
[3] Hoseiji dono.  Fujiwara Tadamichi.
[4] Forbidden Colours.  Purple and Vermilion were only allowed by special permission, as were the
material damask and brocade.
[5] The Regent Rokujo.  Fujiwara Motozane.
[6] Fugenji Dono. Fujiwara Motomichi.
[1] Shirabyoshi.  Cf, Sansom, note on Tsurezuregusa. p. 128. and for illus. of Suikan, p. 127. Yoshida
Kenko says here; ` O no Hisasuke says that Michinori no Nyudo selected certain dances that were
amusing, a nd taught a woman named Ise -no Zenji to dance them. She wore a white robe, with a
sword, and an eboshi, and thus they were called Otoko -mae, or men's dances. Zenji's daughter,
who was called Shizuka, followed her in this profession. This is the origin of S hirabyoshi. They
sang the songs of Gods and Buddhas. Later Minamoto -no-Mitsuyuki composed a great number of
others, and there are also some that are the work of the Emperor Go Toba, which His Majesty
was pleased to teach to Kamegika. Sansom's trans.
[2] Imayo. A verse of eight or twelve lines of seven and five syllables alternating, fashionable from
the middle ages.
'Kimi wo hajimete, miru toki wa,
Chiyo mo henubeshi hime komatsu,
Mimae no ike naru kame oka ni
Tsuru koso mure ite asobu mere.'
[3] Five grea t sins.  Sk. Pantchanantarya. i.e. five rebellions. Matricide, parricide, killing an Arhat,
causing divisions among the priesthood, shedding the blood of a Buddha.
[4] Lover Stars.  Orihime, or the Star Vega who is supposed to meet her lover Hikoboshi on the
Festival of Tanabata, the seventh day of the seventh month. Of Lafcadio Hearn, The Milky Way.
[5] Pure Land of the West.  Saiho Jodo. The paradise of Amida in the West, from which the Jodo -
shu or Pure Land sect derives its name. Sk Sukhavati.
[1] Retired E mperior. Go-Shirakawa Ho -o. The Emperor at this time was Nijo Tenno.
[2] Ten Virtues . In Buddhism, not committing the ten wicked deeds, i.e. killing, theft,, adultery,
lying, exaggeration, abuse, ambiguous talk, covetousness, malice and unbelief. The expre ssion
`Emperor of Ten Virtues' is to be explained by the saying that one who accumulated merit by
practising the ten virtues may be reborn as an Emperor in his future existence. The Emperor is
unique and has not the limitations of ordinary people.
[3] Shishinden . The hall in the Palace where ceremonies were performed. On its sliding panels
were painted the portraits of thirty two Chinese sages.
[1] Crown Prince . It was the custom to proclaim the succession of the Crown Prince immediately
the Emperor died (S enso), and the proper ceremony of accession (Sokui) was performed some
time afterwards. This Child Emperor was Rokujo Tenno.
[2]Tankai -Ko. Fujiwara Fuhito.
[1] By Kwannon's  aid. This teat as well as the reply is a quotation from the Hokke -Kyo. By faith in
Kwannon even the most difficult things can be accomplished. Here it is cited as an ironical taunt..
[2] New Emperor . Takakura Tenno.
[1] Yokihi . The favourite consort of Genso Emperor of To. Proverbial in Chinese and Japanese
literature as the fascination  that destroys kings.

[2] Kammuri.  Ceremonial head dress worn by Emperor and Nobles.
[3] Sendan.  S. Tchindana. Sandal Wood.
[1] Shin Dainagon.  Newly created Dainagon, of whom there were many at this time.
[2] Dai-Hannya Kyo.  Sk. Maha -prajna -paramita Sutra.  or the Sutra of Intelligence by which
Nirvana may be reached. It is the great text of Mahayana and is in six hundred volumes.
[3] Hachiman Daibosatsu . Hachiman, the deified Ojin Tenno, is a Shinto deity, but regarded as an
avatar of Buddhism and so worshi pped with Buddhist rites.
[4] Kengyo . XX the superintendant of a temple.
[5] Dakini.  A mystic rite of the Shingon sect.
[6] Jars. Here main the pan or; Heishi referring to the Heike family is introduced.
[1] Shugyo.  or Shitsuji, Chief Steward or Administra tor of the temple.
[2] Hoku -men. Guards at the Court of the Retired Emperor.
[3] Urashima . The tradition is that Urashima went to the Horai or Palace of the Dragon Sea god in
the twenty second year of the Mikado Yuriaku, the twenty first Emperor, and came  back to the
coast of Tamba in the second year of Tencho, during the age of the Emperor Junwa.
[4] Son of Buddh a. Rahula, (Jap. Ragora son) son of Siddhartha and Yas'odhara, who only met his
father after the latter had become a recluse.
[5] Sugoroku.  A gam e played with dice, backgammon,
[6] Go no Sotsu.  Oe Masafusa.
[7] Sacred Emblem.  The car or Mikoshi in which is the emblem of the deity, the Japanese 'ark of
the covenant.'
[1] Gubu . Priest attendant on the Mikoshi.
[2] Kaburaya . Turnip headed arrow, havin g a bulb like a turnip, preforated with holes and making
a whizzing sound as it flew.
[3] Shikimi.  Illicium religiosum. A sacred tree.
[4]  O Dono. Fujiwara Morozane. Kita -no-Mandokoro. Title of the wife of Kwampaku or of a
noble of one of the five familie s from which this dignitary was chosen, (Go -Sekke).
[5] Gongen.  a Buddha Incarnate, a Shinto deity who is so regarded.
[6] Yakushi. Buddha the Healer. Sk. Bhechadjya.
[7] Hokke Mondoko . A Catechism of the Hokke -kyo or Saddharma pundarika Sutra.
[1] Bonten Paradise. Sk. Brahmaloka. The Heavens of Brahma. Here perhaps means the third of
the Three Worlds, (Sankai) which consist of the Worlds of Desire (Yokukai) The Worlds of
Form (Shikikai), and the Worlds of No Form (Mushikikai) after which comes Nirvana. Sk.
Kamadhatu, Rupadhatu and Arupadhatu.
[1] The eight offices.  i.e. Nakatsukasa, Shikibu, Jibusho, Mimbusho, Hyobusho, Gyobushio,
Okurashio.


[p. 54]
VOLUME II.