CHAPTER VII.
KIOU.

On the next day, the sixteenth, when it was known that since Takakura had plotted a rebellion
and had fled to Miidera, there was -no-small commotion in the Capital.

Now p erchance it may be wondered why this Gensammi Nyudo, who had been living quietly for
a long time past, should suddenly start this revolt. The reason was the extraordinary things done
by Munemori -no-Kyo. Therefore in this world people should very carefully consider how they
inconsiderately say things that ought not to be said, or do things that ought not be done. For
example; Izu -no-kami Nakatsuna, the eldest of Gensammi Nyudo, had a famous horse called
Konoshita that was renowned in the Palace, and was the most peerless of chestnut steeds, and of
its speed and gentle disposition none was ignorant. And Munemori -no-Kyo sent a messenger
saying that he wished this horse to be sent to him, for he had a mind to inspect it: to which Izu -
no-kami answered that he had  the horse indeed, but as he had ridden it much lately it was weary
and he sent it to the country to rest. This being the case, nothing could be done, but afterwards
many of the Heike retainers spoke saying: "Oh, that horse was there the day before yesterd ay; "I
saw it yesterday:" or "it was being ridden in the courtyard this morning." On hearing this,
Munemori exclaimed; "Oh, he grudges it. Indeed? What hateful conduct! Here!" And he sent his
retainers with letters to demand it five or six, or seven or eig ht times in one hour. When
Gensammi Nyudo heard this, he said to his son: "Even if it were a golden horse,

[p. 180]

if anyone desire it so much, one must not grudge him, so send it without delay to Rokuhara. Then
lzu-no-kami, seeing that there was -no-other way, sent the horse to Rokuhara with this stanza:

"How can one bear to part with a creature so dearly
beloved? If it attracted you so, could you not visit one here?"

Munemori did not answer this, but exclaimed: "Ah, it is indeed a fine horse; but as h e was so
loath to part with it, brand its master's name on it." So they made a branding iron with
'Nakatsuna' on it and branded the horse therewith. Then, when anyone came to visit him and
asked to see the famous horse, he would call out: "Ho there! Put th e saddle on Nakatsuna. Bring
him out! Mount him! Whip him up!" and so forth. When Izu -no-kami heard of this, he was very
angry and said: "His using his authority to take away a horse I valued as my life is -no-small thing,
but how can one remain quiet when one is made a laughing stock in addition?" Gensamnu Nyudo
also exclaimed: "What is this that the Heike think to treat everyone with contumely and to do
such folly? In that case we must risk everything and watch for a suitable opportunity." He himself
did n ot make the plot, but persuaded Prince Takakura to carry it out. This was learned afterwards.

In this connexion people discreetly quoted a story of Komatsu Dono. Once when he had been to

Court he went to visit the Empress, when a snake of some eight feet in length got inside the left
leg of his hakama. Shigemori, thinking that if he made any fuss the Court ladies would be terrified
and the Empress too would be perturbed, gripping its tail with his left hand and its head with his
right, put it into the slee ve of his 'naoshi' without making the least sign of confusion; then,
turning round, he called for an attendant of the sixth rank. Then Izuno -kami Nakatsuna who was
then only Eifu -no-Kurando, being called by name, came forward and was ordered to take the
snake.

[p. 181]

Taking it he passed though the Yubaden and went forth into a small courtyard of the Palace,
where he beckoned to one of the younger attendants of the Imperial Storehouses to take it away ;
but the man, shaking his head, ran away. Then Izu -no-kami, calling one of his own retainers, Kiou
by name, gave it to him to throw away. The next day he received a fine horse and trappings from
Shigemori with the message: "In recognition of your exceeding courteous behaviour yesterday I
offer you this exce llent horse; please make use of him when you hurry off to meet Keisei [5] after
your official duties are over." Izu -no-kami, on receiving it, made reply as follows: "In answer to
the gracious gift of your excellency, I am delighted to accept it respectfully : allow me to
congratulate you on your feat of yesterday, which was indeed just like the Kenjo [6] dance."
Inasmuch as the demeanour of Komatsu Dono was so considerate and courteous, Munemori
appeared the more lacking, and moreover his coveting another's fa vourite horse and seizing it
thus brought great calamity on the country.

So, on the evening of the sixteenth day of the same month Gensammi Nyudo Yorimasa, with his
eldest son Izu -no-kami Nakatsuna, his second son Gendaiyu -no-Hangwan Kanetsuna, ,Rokujo -no-
Kurando Nakaie, his son Kurando Taro Nakamitsu and three hundred armed men, after firing
their mansion, proceeded to Miidera. Now there was a samurai of about the same age as
Gensammi Nyudo named Watanabe -no-Gensan Kiou, a Takiguchi or Palace Guard, who,
happening to come late.   He was left behind and summoned to Rokuhara in consequence. "Why
is it," they enquired, "that you have not followed your ancestral lord Gensammi Nyudo, but have
stayed behind here?" Kiou respectfully made reply: "If it had been an ordinary affair I

[p. 182]

would have been the first to ride forth and risk my life, but I do not know how this affair will
turn out and so I have hesitated to go! "You have some connexion with us too," said Munemori,
"so consider, in view of the past an d future supremacy of our house whether you will follow
Yorimasa, the enemy of the Throne, or take service with us." Kiou, bursting into tears, replied:
"Spite of my relation to my lord, how can one agree with an enemy of the Throne? I will then
take servi ce with you." "Do so then," replied Munemori, "and your recompense shall be -no-less
than with Yorimasa." And he re -entered the mansion. But that day from morning till night,
Munemori, not quite reassured, kept on asking where Kiou was, and was always told that he was
still in the mansion.

When the evening came Munemori once again appeared and Kiou respectfully addressed him
thus: "Since Gensammi Nyudo has gone to Miidera, I think he will certainly try to attack us by
night; he will have with him my clan, t he Watanabe, and also the priests of Miidera, and they are
not enemies to be despised, so I pray you let me go and find him and slay him. If I had a good

horse I could easily get in by stealth, as I know them all." Munemori, thinking the plan a good one,
straightway presented him with a valuable grey horse called Nanryo and a splendid saddle and
trappings. Having received it, he immediately went to his own mansion and cried loudly: "Ho! the
night comes on: I go to Miidera to die fighting before my lord Gens ammi Nyudo." It was almost
sunset when, having hidden his wife and children and set fire to his mansion, he set out for
Miidera. His heart was heavy as he rode off, but he made a gallant and glittering spectacle, clad in
a brocaded kariginu profusely embro idered with chrysanthemums, and wearing a general's armour
of scarlet; its name was Kisenaga, and it had been a treasured heirloom for many generations. On
his head was a helmet shining with silver stars, and a splendid sword hung at his side. In his quive r
were twenty four arrows barred with black on their white feathers, not to speak of the special

[p. 183]

arrow, feathered with a hawk's wing, always carried by the Imperial Guard of the Takiguchi. His
bow was a 'shigeto' of black lacquer with red bindin g. He rode on Nanryo, while one of his
retainers followed with a remount and another bore his shield under his arm.

Now as soon as Rokuhara saw the flames go up from his mansion they were greatly excited. "Ha!"
exclaimed Munemori, "that fellow has deceive d us. After him and shoot him down before he gets
farther!" But Kiou was a warrior surpassed by few in strength and valour, and of great skill in
archery; and he shouted to the pursuing samurai to come on at their peril, for with each of his
twenty four ar row he would account for one of them, whereat there was none found to engage
him and he procceded on his way unharmed. Now at Miidera where the Watanabe clan was
assembled, they were discussing him and saying to one other: "Verily it is greatly to be hoped  that
Kiou will not forsake us:" when Gensammi Nyudo, who knew the mind of Kiou very intimately,
replied: "Certainly he will not be taken alive or fail us, his feeling for me is exceeding deep. See
he will soon be with us." And even as he spoke Kiou appear ed. "Lo! it is even as I have said:
"exclaimed Yorimasa. Then Kiou, making his obeisance, handed over the horse he was riding:
"See," he said, "I have brought Izu -no-kami Deno the famous Nanryo from Rokuhara in the Place
of Konoshita that he lost." Izu -no-kami, greatly rejoicing, immediately cut short its tail, and,
branding it also, sent it back to Rokuhara. At about midnight it came back and entering the stable
began to eat with the other horses. Then the grooms of the stable exclamed in astonishment: "Se e!
Nanryo has come back again; "whereupon Munemori, hurrying out to see; perceived on its back
the branded words: "Formerly Nanryo, now called Munemori Nyudo." "Ah," he exclaimed in
wrath," If only I had cut off his head before he had time to fool me thus.  When we attack
Miidera, see that this rascal Kiou is taken alive, and then I will have his head sawn off." But
though he continued to

[p. 184]

dance with rage, Nanryo's tail grew no longer, neither did the branded sentence grow less
conspicuous.