CHAPTER VIII.

KYONOSHIMA


After the funeral of Kiyomori a strange thing happened. His Palac e of Nishi -Hachijo with all its
splendid adornment of precious stones and fretted work of gold and silver suddenly went up in
flames the same night; and though it was no uncommon thing for houses to catch fire, it was
rumoured that it was the work of incen diaries. Also on the south side of Rokuhara there was
heard the sound as of some twenty or thirty men, if they were men, dancing and singing the
refrain:

"Hurrah! the water ! Hark to the sound of the waterfall!" mingled with bursts of uncanny
laughter. As  the Retired Emperor had passed away in the first month of this year and the Empire
had been plunged into mourning, and now within scarcely a month or so the Nyudo had died also,
even the common people without understanding were overcome with apprehension and gloom.
Some of the bold spirits among the Heike retainers, declaring these strange occurrences to be the
work of Tengu, set out in a band of about a hundred to investigate this weird laughter, and found
that it proceeded from the Hojujiden, the Palace of the Ho -o. As the Ho -o had not been in
residence there for some three years, a certain Motomune, former Governor of Bizen, had been
sent there to look after it, and some of his friends had repaired thither that night, bringing liquor
with them to carouse  on the sly, and although they started their banquet with the intention of
making no noise, seeing the nature of the occasion, yet before long they all became drunken; so
that their discretion forsook

[p.2]

them, and they began to sing and dance withou t restraint.   When the Heike samurai perceived
this they rushed in on them and seized and bound the whole twenty or thirty of them, inebriated
as they were, and brought them into the courtyard of Rokuhara. Then the former Udaisho
Munemori came out on to th e verandah, and they related the whole matter in detail, but he only
said : " There seems no need to execute a lot of drunkards like this," and dismissed them.

It was the custom for all, high and low, to have the bell rung after a death, and the proper pr ayers
and offerings Made at stated hours, but after this Lay -priest died no one made the least offering
either to priests or Buddhas, but all were occupied day and night with nothing but preparations
for iwar. The painful manner of his death too was repuls ive, but this also inclined many to thin'
that he was not as other men. When his family went to the Shrine of Hiyoshi accompanied by all
the other families of Court Nobles, people used to say how much grander was the procession

than that of the Kwampaku wh en he went to worship at his family shrine of Kasuga.


Concerning the making of the island called Kyonoshima at Fukuhara ; it was ,a very successful
undertaking, for even unto this day all kinds of vessels are able to enter the harbour without
mishap. The  work was begun in the early days of the second month of the first year of the period
Oho, but on the second day of the eighth month a great tempest suddenly rose and the mighty
waves swept it all away, Then toward the end of the third month of the third y ear Awa -no-
Mimbo -no-Kyo was entrusted with the work of rebuilding it, and a Council of Courtiers was
held to consider the question of following the ancient custom of exposing someone in the sea as a
sacrifice to the sea -gods, but they decided that such a w icked thing should not be done, and so
texts from the Holy Sutras were cut on the face of the stones instead, and this is why it is called
Kyonoshima (Sutra Island).