CHAPTER VI.

THE ADMONITION.


    The Lay -priest Chancello r, though he had had so many people arrested, , still seemed
unsatisfied. Coming forth to the middle gate of his mansion with a menacing aspect, he called in a
loud voice for Sadayoshi. He was dressed in a red embroidered ' hitatare ' worn over a black sui t
of armour with the breastplate ornamented with silver, and gripped under his arm the short
halberd with silver mounted handle that he had received many years before from the god of
Itsukushima when he was favoured with a divine message in a dream, while he was yet only
known as Aki -no-kami, and which he always kept by his pillow.

Chikugo -no-kami straightway stood before his lord. He was attired in ' hitatare ' of yellowish red
hue and his armour was of scarlet. "What do you think, Sadayoshi ? In the peri od of Hogen, Taira
Uma -no-suke Tadamasa and more than half our family   came to the help of the Newly Retired
Emperor (Sutoku

[p. 78]

Tenno) and Ichi -no-miya (Shigehito Shinno) was the adopted son of the late Gyobu -no-Kyo
Tadamori my father, so that it wa s most difficult for me not to support him ; in spite of these
things however, following the instructions of the late Emperor (Toba Tenno), I assisted the party
of the Emperor (Go -Shirakawa Ho -o). This was one service that I did for the Imperial House.
Then at the time of the rebellion of Nobuyori and Yoshitomo in the twelfth month of the first
year of Heiji, when the Palace was seized and the Court entered, the country therefore falling into
disorder, at the risk of my life I drove out the rebels and arres ted Tsunemune and Korekata.
Many times therefore have I put my life at the disposal of the Imperial Court, so that whatever
people may say against us the Imperial House ought not to forsake our family even to the seventh
generation. Still the Ho -o has list ened to such a pair of worthless rascals as Narichika and Saiko.
This plan of destroying us, which the Ho -o seems inclined to, must by no means be carried out. I
suppose that hereafter, if any accuse us falsely, the Emperor is likely to issue a mandate for  our
destruction, and if we are once proclaimed enemies of the Emperor, however much we regret it,
we cannot redeem ourselves again. Formerly for a time until the country was quiet again the Ho -
o was removed to the North Palace of Toba; what then do you th ink about bringing hire here to
Rokuhara now ? If this be done perhaps some of the Imperial Guard may make armed resistance;
so order our retainers to make ready, I will serve the Ho -o no longer. Saddle my horse and bring
out my general's armour! "

Then S hume -no-Hangwan Morikuni rode hard to the mansion of Shigemori and hurriedly told
him what was happening. Without waiting to hear all the Naidaijin exclaimed, " Ali, now they
have taken off the head of Narichika -no-Kyo." " That is not so " replied Morikuni , " but the
Nyudo has assumed his general's armour and is going to lead his retainers to the Ho -o's Palace at

Hojuji, declaring that until peace be restored he will remove the Ho -o to the North Palace of
Toba, or if not will

[p. 79]

bring him to Rokuhara  ; but we think his real intention may be to banish him to the western
confines of the country. Then the Naidaijin, doubting if this was really so, but judging from his
father's demeanour of the morning that he was quite beside himself, hastily got into hi s car and
proceeded to Nishi Hachijo.

When he alighted at the gate and entered, he saw the Nyudo in his body armour with scores of
Courtiers and nobles of his family all in armour and 'hitatare' of various descriptions and colours,
sitting in two rows alo ng the verandah by the middle gate, besides a crowd of provincial lords and
bodyguards and officials of all ranks overflowing into the courtyard beneath: their standards were
marshalled and their horse -girths and helmet thongs tightened so that they looked  as if
immediately about to set forth.

Komatsu dono, clad only in ' naoshi ', with his ' hakama ' of large pattern girt up, and an ' eboshi '
on his head, entered with a peaceful rustle of his silk garments, making a striking contrast to them
all. Kiyomor i, casting down his eyes in embarrassment, thought in his heart, "Ah, how calmly does
this minister deport himself as one detached from the world; it seems I must rebuke him.   "  Still,
even though it was his own son, in the presence of one who kept the Fi ve Prohibitions and did
not offend in the matter of the Five Virtues, who was charitable, courteous and polite in all his
dealings, he felt ashamed to be found in warlike attire, so, slightly closing the shoji, he drew on
hastily over his armour a white pr iestly garment, the bosom of which he continually pulled
together to conceal the shining metal of the breastplate.

The Naidaijin then took his seat one above that of his younger brother Munemori, neither he nor
the Nyudo saying anything. After some time t he silence was broken by his father. " A rebellion of
Narichika is a thing of no account, but this affair has been planned by the Ho -o," said he, " so
what do you think about bringing him to the North Palace of Toba, or if not, making him
proceed hither un til matters have quieted down?

[p. 80]

Not waiting to hear any more the Naidaijin burst into tears." '` What is the matter then? "
enquired the Nyudo in surprise ; whereupon Shigemori, repressing his tears, replied. " If I am to
judge by your words I mus t suppose that the prosperity of our house is drawing to its close, for it
is when people are on the downward path that they always commit some crime. Your
appearance in this guise seems to me but as an illusion, for though this our land is a remote and
narrow realm, yet since under the sovereignty of the descendants of Ama -Terasu -Omi-Kami the
stock of Ama -no-Koyane -no-Mikoto have administered it, those who have held the office of
Dajo-daijin have never been accustomed thus to appear in warlike attire. More over you, a lay
priest, putting off the garments sacred to the Buddhas of the three worlds that are the garb of
those who are [17]liberated front the passions, do suddenly assume armour and gird on bow and
arrows, thus not only transgressing the Five Prohi bitions and being guilty of shameless crime, but
disregarding entirely the hive Virtues. It is not pleasant to speak thus, but I cannot hold back
what is in my mind. In this world there are four obligations, that to Heaven and Earth, that to the

Emperor, t hat to Father and Mother, and that to one's fellow men, and of these the most
important is that to the Emperor. All the land is the Emperor's dominion; we know the example
of those two sages in China, he who washed his ears in the waters of Eisen and he wh o ate the
bracken on the mountains of Shuyo, how they teach the difficulty of opposing the Emperor. How
much more must it be so with one who has advanced to the high office of Dajo daijin, from a
family in which such an office is without precedent ? I too,  an ignorant and stupid person, have
become minister, and more than half the country is subject to our ordinances. Is not all this the
reason for a rare obligation to the Emperor ? But you, unmindful of all this great obligation, are
about to treat the Ho -o's person in a violent manner, a

[p. 81]

thing quite contrary to the will of Hachiman and Ama -Terasu. Nippon is the land of the Gods
and the Gods will not permit discourtesy. Thus the Emperor's plans cannot be without reason.
That our house has for seve ral generations subdued the foes of the Emperor and pacified the
angry waves of the four seas may be indeed great patriotism, but to boast of it is only
inconsiderate to others. In the seventeen, articles of the constitution of Shotoku Taishi it is
written ; " Every man has a mind, and every mind has self will; some say one thing is good and
some another, so who can decide which is right? There is wisdom and folly in both, it is like a
circle having no end; this being so, when one is angry he must first cond emn himself." But as the
fall of our house is not yet destined this plot has already been revealed : moreover we have
already taken Narichika into custody, so there is no need for anxiety about anything the Emperor
may do; after suitably punishing these pe ople you must explain the matter to the Ho -o. Thus
serving the Emperor and cherishing the people with sympathy you will receive the protection of
the gods and not disobey the will of Buddha. If you are favoured by the gods and Buddha, the
Emperor will chan ge his opinion of us.   If I compare the Emperor and yourself, there is no
distinction between the affection I have for both, but when comparing what is right and what is
wrong one must of necessity prefer the right. Since then right is on the side of the E mperor, I will
protect the Ho -o's Palace to the best of my ability, seeing that my having risen. to my present
high position of Daijin -no-Taisho from a low rank is entirely due to the Imperial favour. When I
consider the greatness of this favour, it is mor e than ten thousand times ten thousand clusters of
jewels, yea deeper than the double dyed purple. Therefore I must go to the Ho -o's Palace, and my
samurai who have vowed to lay down their lives for me at any time will doubtless go with me
and if I gather them together and go to protect the Hojuji den, a great crisis will come about.
How unhappy am I ! For if I remain loyal to the Emperor I must

[p. 82]

forget the gratitude I owe to my father, which is higher than the peaks of [18]Mt. Meiro. Verily
my pit h is a hard one; for if I avoid unfilial conduct then I shall be a rebellious subject and
undutiful to the Emperor. I know not which way to take, for it is difficult to decide on one or the
other. I beseech you then, order me to be beheaded, for then I can  neither go with you against the
Ho-o, nor can I be on his side to protect him. In China Shoka attained merit beyond ordinary
men and became Prime Minister, being permitted to attend at the Court wearing shoes and with
his sword girt on, but on one occasio n he was disobedient, and the Emperor Koso punished him
severely. Considering this precedent, even if a man attain to great wealth, rank and prosperity,
Imperial favour and the highest office, it is not so difficult to fall. If a wealthy and noble house
like ours accumulate stipend and rank too easily it is like a tree that bears too much fruit and is

injured in its roots. Alas! I care to live no longer to see my country in such disorder. Born in a
degenerate age to encounter such misfortunes, what an evil destiny indeed! How easy it would be
to order one of your samurai to take me out into the courtyard there and strike off my head.
Consider these things all of you ! " And wiping his tears with the sleeve of his ' 'naoshi ', he wept
bitterly, and all the He ike, as they sat row upon row, lifted up their voices and wept also.

The Nyudo, hearing Shigemori, in whom he put all his trust, speak thus, felt his heart fail him, as
he answered; "Indeed I have never even contemplated such a thing, but I only fear as t o what
may happen if the Ho -o adopt the plans of these rascals." " Whatever mistake may be
perpetrated," replied the Naidaijin, "how can we lift a hand against the Ho -o ? Then, suddenly
standing up in the middle gate, he addressed the samurai; " I think

[p. 83]

you have heard everything that I have said.   I was present from this morning and tried to calm
this disturbance, but it is beyond my power, so I must return home; do not march against the Ho -
o while my head is on my shoulders! Then calling his reta iners he returned to the Komatsu den.
On arriving there he summoned Shume -no-Hangwan Morikuni and instructed him thus; " I have
this morning learned that the country is in a critical condition, so let those who consider
themselves dutiful retainers arm the mselves and follow." At this all thought that such a summons
from one usually so little moved by rumour must be of great import and hasted to obey. The
retainers came pouring out from the villages of Yodo, Hatsukashi, Uji, Okanoya, Hino, Kwanjuji,
Daigo, O gurusu, Mamezu, Katsura, Ohara, Shizuhara, and Serifu, some in armour but without
helmets, some with arrows and no bow, some with one foot only in the stirrup and some with
neither, so great was their haste and disorder. Now when they heard of the activity  at the
Komatsuden, the horsemen, who were at Nishi Hachijo to the number of several thousand,
hastened thither without the knowledge of the Nyudo, so that not a single warrior was left in the
household Chikugo -no-kami who alone remained was summoned by Ki yo-mori : " Why has
Shigemori called away everyone thus, can it be that he intends to attack me as he said this
morning ? " Sadayoshi weeping replied ; " Such things depend on a man's character ; he is not
likely to do it, for he will already regret what h e has said here this morning." Kiyomori however
thought that it was not advisable to fall out with his son, the Naidaijin, so he modified his violent
intentions towards the Retired Emperor. Hurriedly stripping off his armour, he donned the robe
and scarf o f a priest and betook himself to his prayers, which, however, by no means arose from
his heart. Meanwhile at the Komatsu den Morikuni was ordered to make a roll of the retainers
who had mustered, and it was found that their number was more than ten thousan d horsemen.
After inspecting this muster -roll, Shigemori came forth to the middle gate and thus

[p. 84]

addressed the assembled samurai. " I am greatly moved at your rallying here so quickly without
regard for your own affairs. In China there is an examp le of this kind; Yu -o of the Shu dynasty
had a favourite consort named Ho -ji, and she was the greatest beauty in the kingdom, but in one
thing she did not please Yu -o ; she never laughed, never at all did she even smile. Now it is the
custom in China that when a rebellion breaks out in the army they light beacon fires and beat
drums to assemble the soldiers, and it happened that a revolt took place at this time so that the
beacons were lighted; and when this consort saw them she exclaimed; " Oh ! what a lot  of them
there are," and smiled for the first time. And when she smiled her expression was very winsome,

and Yu -o was highly delighted, so that many times after he had beacons lighted without any
special reason, and when the generals came and found there w as no revolt they had nothing to do
but to go away again. This happening many times, at last they did not even come, and then it
chanced that an enemy from a neighbouring country made a raid and attacked the capital of Yu -o,
but though he had beacons light ed, thinking it was only for the consort's amusement, no soldiers
responded, so that the capital fell and Yu -o himself was killed: whereupon the consort changed
herself into a fox and ran away. This being so, whenever I summon you, come hither quickly as
you have done today, for I called you together because this morning I heard that there was a great
crisis, but afterwards when I investigated more fully I was convinced that the report was
mistaken: so you may return again to your quarters." On this the ret ainers retired. Now .it seems
that Shigemori had not really believed that there was any crisis, but after rebuking his father that
morning he wished to find out whether the soldiers would be on his side or not, and that he did
not intend to attack Kiyomori , but only used this device to prevent any inclination on his part of
interfering with the Emperor. As Confucius has said ; " even if the Emperor does not behave as
Emperor, the subjects must behave as subjects ; and

[p. 85]

even if a father does not beh ave as a father, a son must behave as a son: loyalty to the Emperor is
like filial piety in a son."

When the Ho o heard of these things, he exclaimed : " It is not the first time that I feel ashamed
to face the Naidaijin, for he repays enmity with kindnes s." His contemporaries also praised him,
declaring that it was a most fortunate thing that such a man had become Daijin -no-Taisho who
was superior to all in courtesy and etiquette, beside being supreme in intellect and ability: " If
there is a minister who  dares to advise the Emperor, then the country will be at peace; and in the
family if there is a son who advises his father, that house will stand firm. Happy is the country
that has such a minister both in ancient and modern times."