CHAPTER VIII.
GENBO.


Now Kazusa -no-kami Tadakiyo and Hida -no-kami Kageie had both become recluses the year
before last, when the Nyūdō departed this life, and when they heard that all their sons had been
killed in the Northern Provinces, their grief was so sore that at length it  terminated their lives and
they died.    And beside them the multitude of parents who mourned the loss of their children,
and wives who bewailed their slain husbands, was without number. In the Capital every door was
shut, and night and day could be heard the sound of the ringing of bells and the chanting of the
Nembutsu, and weeping and lamentations. And in all the provinces round about, both near and
far, it was no  different.

On the first day of the sixth month Saishu -Jingi-no-Gonno -Taiyū Onakatomi Chikatoshi was
summoned to the lower gate of the Palace and informed that the Emperor would proceed in state
to the Great Shrines of Ise to pray that the rebellion might  be pacified. This was the Shrine of the
Sun-Goddess who descended in ancient times from the Plains of High Heaven, and in the third
month of the twenty fifth year of the reign of the Mikado Suijin Tennō removed from Kasanui in
the province of Yamato, and deigned to be worshipped by the banks of the Iusugawa in the
district of Watarai in the province of Ise, " making stout the shrine pillars to the nethermost rock -
bottom "; incomparable and preeminent among the three thousand seven hundred and fifty
greater  and lesser shrines of the sixty provinces of Nippon. But from this time until the reign of
Shōmu Tennō, the Mikado of Nara, no Emperor had gone there to worship. Then in the tenth
month of the fifteenth year of Tempyō, when Sakonye -no-Shōshō Dazai no Shōn i Fujiwara
Hirotsugu, son of Sangi Shikibu no Kyo Umagai and grandson of the Sadaijin Fuhito, raised an
army of many myriads of men in the district of Matsuura in

[p.39]

the province of Hizen, and menaced the peace of the Empire, the Mikado proceeded in state to
Ise for the first time to pray for his downfall. Now this Hirotsugu possessed a horse of wondrous
swiftness, that could complete the journey from Matsuura in Hizen to the Capital in one single
day; and it is said that, when his army was defeated a nd fled, he mounted this horse and rode into
the sea, and that afterwards his wraith appeared in that province and did many terrible things.
And there was a certain Genbo Sōjō who was priest of the temple of Kwannonji in the Dazaifu
in the district of Mika sa of the province of Chikuzen, and it happened that on the eighteenth day
of the sixth month of the eighteenth year of the era of Tempyō, as he was sitting on his high seat
and striking the bell in the service, that the sky suddenly clouded over and there  was a heavy
thunderstorm, and a bolt struck him and took off his head, carrying it away into the clouds. And
this was because he had invoked a curse on Hirotsugu when they marched to overthrow him.
This Sōjō went to China with the Da jin of Kibi and broug ht back with him the Sutras of the
Hossō Sect, and the men of China laughed at the name Genbo, saying that it sounded like the
word for 'Destruction', and indeed, when he came back to his own country it was prophesied that
some misfortune would happen to h im. Afterwards, on the eighteenth day of the sixth month of
the nineteenth year of Tempyo, a skull, inscribed with the name Genbo, fell into the courtyard of
the Kofukuji, while at the same time there was a sound as of the loud laughter of some two or
three hundred men from the sky. It was no doubt because Kofukuji was a temple of the Hossō
Sect. Then his disciples took the skull and made a mound over it, and it is known as the Skull

Mound and can be seen there to this day. On the place where the spirit of Hirotsugu is
worshipped is the Shrine called 'Kagami no miya' at Matsuura in Hizen. And in the time of Saga
Tennō, when the retired Emperor Heijō, at the instigation of his consort, tried to seize the
Throne and

[p.40]

trouble the Empire, the Emperor sen t the third princess to Kamo as Sai -in or Imperial Priestess to
offer supplication. And this was the first appointment of a Sai -in. Again, in the reign of Shujaku
Tennō, a special festival was held in honour of Hachiman to pray for the subjection of the re bel
Sumitomo. So now, on account of these precedents, many prayers were offered by the Imperial
House.