CHAPTER IX.
THE DROWNING OF THE EMPEROR.

     When he saw this, Yoshitsune, regarding it as a sign from Hachiman Dai -bosatsu, removed his
helmet,  and after washing his hands, did obeisance; his men all following his example. Moreover a
shoal of some thousands of dolphins also made its appearance from the offing and made straight
for the ships of the

[p. 249]

Heike. Then Munemori called the divine r Ko-hakase Harunobu and said: " There are always
many dolphins about here, but I have never seen so many as these before; what may it portend ?"
" If they turn back," replied Harunobu, " the Genji will be destroyed; but if they go on then our
own side wil l be in danger." No sooner had he finished speaking than the dolphins dived under
the Heike ships and passed on.

     Then, as things had come to this pass, Awa -no-Mimbu Shigeyoshi, who for three years had
been a loyal supporter of the Heike, now that his  son Dennai Saemon Noriyoshi had been
captured, made up his mind that all was lost, and suddenly forsook his allegiance and deserted to
the enemy. Great was the regret of Shin -Chūnagon Tomomori -no-Kyō that he had not cut off the
head of 'that villain Shige yoshi,' but now it was unavailing.

     Now the strategy of the Heike had been to put the stoutest warriors on board the ordinary
fighting ships and the inferior soldiers on the big ships of Chinese build, so that the Genji should
be induced to attack the  big ships, thinking that the commanders were on board them, when they
would be able to surround and destroy them. But when Shigeyoshi went over and joined the
Genji he revealed this plan to them, with the result that they immediately left the big ships al one
and concentrated their attacks on the smaller ones on which were the Heike champions. Later on
the men of Shikoku and Kyūshū all left the Heike in a body and went over to the Genji. Those
who had so far been their faithful retainers now turned their bo ws against their lords and drew
the sword against their own masters. On one shore the heavy seas beat on the cliff so as to forbid
any landing, while on the other stood the serried ranks of the enemy waiting with leveled arrows
to receive them. And so on t his day the struggle for supremacy between the two houses of Gen
and Hei was at last decided.

     Meanwhile the Genji warriors sprang from one Heike vessel to the other, shooting and cutting
down the sailors and helms -

[p. 250]

men, so that they flung themselves in panic to the bottom of the ships unable to navigate them
any longer. Then Shin -Chūnagon Tomomori -no-Kyō rowed in a small boat to the Imperial Vessel
and cried out: " You see what affairs have come to! Clean up the ship, and throw everything
unsightly into the sea! " And he ran about the ship from bow to stern, sweeping and cleaning and

gathering up the dust with his own hands. " But how goes the battle, Chūnagon Dono ? " asked
the Court Ladies. " Oh, you'll soon see some rare gallants from the  East," he replied, bursting into
loud laughter. " What ? Is this a time for joking?" they answered, and they lifted up their voices
and wept aloud.

     Then the Nii Dono, who had already resolved what she would do, donning a double outer
dress of dark g rey mourning colour, and tucking up the long skirts of her glossy silk hakama, put
the Sacred Jewel under her arm, and the Sacred Sword in her girdle, and taking the Emperor in
her arms, spoke thus: " Though I am but a woman I will not fall into the hands of the foe, but
will accompany our Sovereign Lord. Let those of you who will, follow me." And she glided softly
to the gunwale of the vessel. The Emperor was eight years old that year, but looked much older
than his age, and his appearance was so lovely th at he shed as it were a brilliant radiance about
him, and his long black hair hung loose far down his back. With a look of surprise and anxiety on
his face he enquired of the Nii Dono: " Where is it that you are going to take me, Ama -ze ?"
Turning to her y outhful Sovereign with tears streaming down her cheeks, she answered:
"Perchance our Lord does not know that, though through the merit of the Ten Virtues practised
in former lives you have been reborn to the Imperial Throne in this world, yet by the power of
some evil karma destiny now claims you. So now turn to the east and bid farewell to the deity of
the Great Shrine of Ise, and then to the west and say the Nembutsu that Amida Buddha and the
Holy Ones may come to welcome you to the Pure Western Land. Thi s land is called

[p. 251]

small as a grain of millet, but yet is it now but a vale of misery. There is a Pure Land of happiness
beneath the waves, another Capital where no sorrow is. Thither it is that I am taking Our Lord."
And thus comforting him, and binding his long hair up in his dove coloured robe, blinded with
tears the child -Sovereign put his beautiful little hands together and turned first to the east to say
farewell to the deity of Ise and to Shō -Hachimangū, and then to the west and repeated the
Nembutsu, after which the Nii -Dono, holding him tightly in her arms and saying consolingly
" In the depths of the Ocean we have a Capital" sank with him at last beneath the waves.

     Ah, the pity of it! That the gust of the spring wind of Impermanence should so suddenly
sweep away his flower form. That the cruel billows should thus engulf his Jewel Person. Since his
Palace was called the Palace of Longevity, he should have passed a long life therein; its gate was
called the Gate of Eternal Youth, the ba rrier that old age should not pass; and yet, ere he had
reached the age of ten years, he had become like the refuse that sinks to the bottom of the sea.
How vain it was to proclaim him as one who sat on the Throne as a reward of the Ten Virtues! It
was lik e the Dragon that rides on the clouds descending to become a fish at the bottom of the
ocean. He who abode in a Palace fair as the terraced pavilions of the highest heaven of Brahma, or
the paradise where S'akya Muni dwells, among his Ministers and Nobles of the Nine Families
who did him humble obeisance, thus came to a miserable end beneath the ocean waves.