CHAPTER VIII.

THE VISIT OF ARID TO THE ISLAND.

Thus two of the exiles of Kikaigashima were recalle d and returned to the capital, and now only
one was left, a pitiful guardian of the isle. Now Shunkwan Sozu had a servant called Ario whom
he had taken pity on and brought up from hi childhood. This Ario, hearing that the exiles of
Kikaigashima were return ing to the capital, had gone as far as Toba to meet

[p. 132]

his master, and not seeing him had enquired and been told that, as his crime was most heinous, he
alone had been left behind on the island. Grief -stricken at the news, he took to frequenting
Rokuhara, and as he did not hear that a pardon was likely to be granted, he went to the daughter
of the Sozu where she was living in retirement and said : " This time he has been left behind and
has not come back ; now I must go anyhow to the island and find  out how he is faring: so I pray
you write me a letter that I may take it." The lady was overjoyed at this and immediately wrote
as he had suggested. He would have wished to take leave of his parents openly, but fearing they
would not agree, he went off wi thout telling anyone. As the China ships used to sail on the fourth
or fifth month, thinking that to set out in the summer would be too late, he started from Kyoto
at the end of the third month, and, after suffering a hard sea passage, arrived at last in S atsuma
Bay. At the port whence he tried to cross over to the island, however, he was suspected and
trapped and search but, nothing daunted, he secreted the letter he was carrying his top knot and
in the end managed to get a passage in a merchant ship and r each the island. He had heard some
slight account of it in Kyoto, but it was nothing to what he actually found. No ricefields, no
gardens, no houses, no village. There were some inhabitants, but he could not understand their
speech, and thus when he went t o enquire of them: " Where is Shunkwan Sozu, the Shugyo of
Hosshoji, who has been exiled to this place? " whether they understood the words ' Hosshoji ' or '
Shugyo,' or not, they answered nothing, but only shook their heads. There was however one who
knew  that there had been three men on the island and that two of them had gone back to the
capital, leaving one behind who wandered about hither and thither as though beside himself, but
lately he had not been seen. On hearing this Ario plunged deep into the u ncertain mountain paths,
climbing the peaks and descending into the valleys. Losing the track in the mists, he could not
find his way until the golden sunset found him still on the hills and

[p. 133]

there he lay down and slept, but never once did he see  the figure of his master. Then, not finding
him on the mountains, he searched along the shore, but there was none who answered his cries
but the sea gulls, whose footprints he saw on the sands or the chidori that flocked on the beach.
But one morning he s aw a figure creeping along by the rocks on the shore, searching for drift
wood and thorns, emaciated as a dragon fly, looking like a priest whose hair had grown long and
bristling up on his head. Over his skinny wrinkled frame a few rags were hanging, whet her of silk
or cotton could not be discerned. In one hand he had some 'arame,' and in the other a fish that
someone had given him. He was trying to walk, but could scarcely get along and staggered like
one drunken. Ario had seen many beggars in Kyoto, but never yet had he seen one like this. " All

the Asuras [30] dwell by the ocean; the Asuras and the Three Evil Things [31] dwell in the depths
of the mountains and by the ocean; " say the Buddhist Sutras, and he thought for an instant that
he had unwittingly entered the Gaki -do (Preta [32]-world).  But as he approached he wondered if
even such a creature might perchance know something of his master, and going up to him
repeated the question that he had put to the islanders the day before: " Can you tell me where I
can find Shunkwan Sozu the Shugyo o f Hosshoji?" The servant did not recognise his master, but
how could Shunkwan forget Ario? And crying out " Here! here he is," the things that he was
carrying fell from his grasp and he sank down senseless on the sand. And thus it was that Ario
found his m aster. Then taking his dying master on his knees Ario cried: " Alas! after having
braved the rough seas and come so far, it is of no avail. Thus to find my master in such distress! "
As he thus lamented in

[p.134]

tears, the Sozu, coming to himself and s itting up, said: "Indeed you are beyond praise thus to dare
the dangers of the sea and come so far a journey. Day and night I have never for a moment ceased
to think of home, and the faces of my dear ones were ever before me both in dreams and in
illusions . Since I have become so ill and weak I cannot tell dream from reality.   Even now I
wonder if your coming is not a dream. If it be indeed a dream, what shall I do when I awaken?"
"Indeed it is real," replied Ario, " but when I see your condition, it seems a miracle that you can
have lived to see me."   "Not , only so," answered the Sozu, "but last year, when they cam to fetch
the Shosho and the Hangwan Nyudo, I scarcely refrained from dying by my own hand. Foolishly I
relied on the consoling words of the fai thless Shosho that he would send someone hither when he
arrived at Kyoto, but though not willing to live in this island there is no food; so, while I had the
strength, I used to go up into the mountains and collect the sulphur that is found there. This I
would barter for food with the merchants who come from time to time from Kyushu, but
growing gradually weaker, I became unable to do so, and row when the weather is fine. I can but
mange to creep out to the beach and beg a little fish from the fishermen, or , when the tide is out,
pick up some shell fish or edible sea weed. Thus holding on to my dew like existence by the
moss of the sea, I lave managed to keep alive in wretchedness until now; and I wonder 'what
reason there is for me to continue longer in thi s fleeting world? But let us go to my house, for
there are many things I wish to say." Then Ario, thinking it strange that one in such a state should
possess a house, took him on his back and went towards a place that the Sozu pointed out. It was
in the mi dst of a pine wood, a hut made with bamboos for pillars and bundles of reeds for cross -
beams, thickly covered inside and out with pine -needless: too frail it seemed to keep off rain and
wind. How strange a place is this for one who of late was Bursar of Ho sshoji, and had eighty
manors in his charge, who had in

[p.135]

his gate houses four or five hundred servants and retainers at his beck and call! Indeed there are
various kinds of Karma that which reacts in the present life, that which reacts in the next  life, and
that which will continue for many lives. This Sozu had all his life been occupied with nothing but
the business of great temples and the affairs of Buddha, but while thus professing the Way of
Buddha, having committed a shameless crime, the resu lt of this Karma fell upon him thus quickly
in this world.

The Sozu had now perceived that Ario was no apparition and enquired; "Last year when they

came for the Shosho and the Hangwan there were no tidings for me; have you also no letters
from anyone?" A rio, choked with sobs, pressed his face to the ground and for some time could
answer nothing. Then raising himself again, restraining his tears he replied: "After my lord went to
Nishi Hachijo the Nyudo's officials came and confiscated all our property, an d after arresting all
the retainers they examined them with respect to the revolt and then put them all to death. Our
lady fled with her youngest daughter and went into retirement on Mount Kurama. I alone went
sometimes to see them and found them ever in a  sorrowful state. The child, as she missed you so
much, would always embarrass me by asking: "Please take me to Kikaigashima." But in the second
month, being taken with small pox, she died. Our lady mistress, unable to bear this added blow,
then sank into melancholy and took to her bed, and on the second day of the third month she
also departed this life. Only the elder daughter is now living safely in retirement with her aunt at
Nara, and it is from her that I have brought this letter." The Sozu opened and  read it and therein
was written all that Ario had said, to which was added: " Ah ! why is it that when three were
exiled two have returned and one only is left, and so far you have not come back ? Alas ! high or
low there is none so useless as a woman ; i f I had been a man I would have come to the island
whither you have gone. Pray come back again

[p. 136]

soon with this youth. "Ah," said Shunkwan, "see, Ario, the pathetic simplicity of this girl, writing
that I should soon come back with you. If I had b een free to please myself should I have stayed
three years in such a place? She must now be about twelve years old; how will such a simple
child be able to marry? Perchance she may be able to keep herself by serving in some great
household," and he burst i nto tears afresh. How does this remind us of the saying: "Even a wise
parent goes astray in considering his own children."

"Since I came to this island," he continued, "as there was no calendar I have had no knowledge of
the days and months only by the bl ossoming and falling of the flowers do I know that three
springs and autumns have passed, and the voice of the cicada alone tells me that wheat harvest is
over and summer is come. The piling up of the snow tells me that it is winter ; by the waxing and
waning of the moon I perceive that thirty days have gone by and by counting on my fingers I
know that my little boy will be six this year. Has he too preceded me to the other world? When I
went out that fateful day to Nishi Hachijo, he wanted me to take him w ith me, and to console
him I said I would soon be back. It seems indeed but yesterday. When I think of all these things
the future is nothing to to me. The relation of parent and child, husband and wife is not for this
world only; now it is only about my d aughter that I am anxious, and if she be alive she may
continue to live, even though it be in wretchedness. But as for me, if I continue to live thus the
sight of my misery must pain you greatly."

So from this time he steadfastly refused all food and earn estly gave himself up to invoking Amida
and saying the death -prayers, and on the twenty -third day from the coming of Ario, the Sozu
expired in his hut at the age of thirty -seven. Ario, clasping the lifeless body, looked up to heaven
and cast himself on the  ground, weeping unrestrainedly: "Ah, how gladly would I follow you to
the other world, but for my young mistress's sake who is left behind, and because there is no
other to

[p.137]


pray for my master's happiness in the after life, I must continue to liv e and pray that he may
attain enlightenment. So without changing his resting place, breaking down the hut and heaping
up dry pine branches and reeds upon it, he lighted the pyre, and the smoke ascended heavy with
brine. Then, the cremation being finished, he gathered up the whitened bones and, hanging them
round his neck, awaited the coming of a merchant ship and returned to Kyushu. From thence
returning home he sought out the place where the Sozu's daughter was dwelling and related
everything in detail fro m beginning to end. "Very much I had hoped to have brought you a
letter," he said "and your father thought much about it, but in that island there was neither
inkstone nor paper, so that it was not possible to write one: we live not only in this world but
throughout many worlds to come, and in another world in the far future we may hear his voice
and see his face, so let us earnestly pray that he may receive enlightenment." Thus he spake, but
ere his young mistress had heard him to the end she fell forward on her face and wept bitterly.
Though but twelve years old she straightway became a nun and lived a holy life in the Hokkeji at
Nara, praying for the happiness of her parents in the hereafter.

Ario, taking with him the bones of Shunkwan Sozu, went up to M t. Koya and deposited them
before the inmost shrine called Oku -no-in where Kobo Daishi sleeps. Then, becoming a priest at
Renge -dani, he made a pilgrimage seven times round the whole country, saying prayers for his
master in the next world. Now all these m iseries accumulated to bring a terrible end on the
Heike house.