CHAPTER XI.
EDICT OF THE HO -O AT IZU.

After this Mongaku was ordered to live in the inner recesses of Nagoya under the care of Kondo
Shiro Kunitaka, a native of that part, and as Hiru -ga-kojima, the place where yoye -no-suke
Yoritomo was exiled, was not far off, he led often to go there and talk over many things. On one
of these occasions he said: "Among the Heike Komatsu Daijin is  a man of strong mind and
sagacious in counsel, but the downfall of that family seems to be approaching, for he was buried
in the eighth month of last year. Now among the Genji and Heike there is no leader as
distinguished as yourself, so now quickly raise  a revolt and subjugate the country!" But Yoritomo
answered: "That is not my wish; as you know, I was succoured by the late Ike -no-Zenni, and to
show my gratitude I read through one part of the Hokke -Kyo every day on her behalf. That is all
I can do." "He who will not accept the gifts of Heaven," continued Mongaku, "will be considered
blameworthy, and he who does not act when the time arrives, will be overtaken by misfortune,
as it is written. That you may think I speak thus only to tempt you, see by this h ow deep has
been my regard for your house." And he drew from his bosom a bundle wrapped in white linen
from which he took a skull. "This is the skull of your honoured father, the late

[p. 242]

Sama -no-kami Yoshitomo. After Heiji it was buried in front of  his prison house and there was no
one to say the prayers for him, so I begged his head from the warders, and hanging it round my
neck, went round from temple to temple praying for his happy rebirth, and no doubt he is long
since delivered from all evil. T hus you see that I have been a most loyal servant of your father."
Yoritomo was not quite assured of the truth of all this, but anyhow, when he was told that it was
his father's skull, he was moved to tears. After a while he restrained his tears and said; "How can I
raise a revolt unless I receive the Imperial Pardon?" "That is easy to arrange," said Mongaku, "for I
will go up and get it for you." Yoritomo smiled sarcastically. "Why you yourself are under the
Imperial displeasure; how then do you talk of he lping others? Even for such a wise priest it will
not be easy." At this Mongaku flew into a rage and answered: "If it were my own pardon it might
be so, but as it is for you, where is the difficulty? From here to the new capital of Fukuhara is not
more tha n three days journey, and I shall have to spend a day there to get the Imperial Edict, so
that the whole matter will not take me more than seven or eight days." So saying he took his
departure.

Returning to Nagoya he told his disciples that he was going o n a week's pilgrimage in the
mountains of Izu, and set out. Sure enough in three days he arrived at Fukuhara, and as he had
some connexion with Uhyoye -no-kami Mitsuyoshi, he went to him at once and said: "If I can
obtain an Imperial Edict for the pardon of  the former Uhyoye -no-suke Yoritomo, who is now in
exile in Izu, we can gather together the men of eight provinces, and so overthrow the Heike and
give peace to the land." "Indeed," replied Mitsuyoshi, "I am now in an awkward condition, for I
have been dep rived of my three offices, and as for the Ho -o, he is closely confined, so it may be
difficult to do anything, but I will go and see." And he went and acquainted the Ho -o with the
affair secretly. His Majesty was exceedingly pleased to hear it and granted the Edict forthwith.


[p. 243]

Then Mongaku, greatly rejoiced, hung it round his neck, and after three more days again arrived
at Izu. Now Yoritomo was very anxious about it all, and was wondering what would happen to
the reckless priest as the result of his rashness, when at the hour of the Horse on the eighth day
he presented himself with the laconic remark; "Here is the Edict." Then Yoritomo with great
respect put on a new eboshi and a white robe, and washing his hands and his mouth, took the
Edict and raised it three times to his forehead, after which he opened it and read as follows:

"For several years the Heike have set at nought Our Imperial Influence, and have not scrupled to
govern the country according to their will. This Realm is the Land of the  Gods, and their Virtue
has descended to its Sovereigns from generation to generation. So that, since the establishment of
the Imperial Line, for a thousand years and more, those who have dared to oppose Our rule and
endanger the Empire have all perished w ithout exception. Therefore with the ghostly aid of the
High Gods, and relying on this Our Imperial Edict, do thou quickly destroy the Heike line, and
subdue the enemies of Our House. Thus shalt thou continue the traditions of a warrior family
and surpass the loyal service of thy ancestors, exalting thyself and all thy house. The fourteenth
day of the seventh month of the fourth year of Jisho. Given through the former Uhyoye -no-kami
Mitsuyoshi. To the former Uhyoye -no-suke Dono."

This Edict Yoritomo put in to a bag of brocade and hung it round his neck, and kept it on his
person even at the battle of Ishibashiyama.