CHAPTER IV.
THE DEATH OF KISO.

     Now Kiso had brought with him from Shinano two beautiful girls named Tomoe and
Yamabuki, but Yamabuki had fallen sick and stayed behind in the Capital. Tomoe had long black
hair and a fair complexion, and her face was very lovely; moreover she was a fearless rider whom
neither the fiercest horse nor the roughest ground could dismay, and so dexterously did she
handle sword and bow that she was a match for a thousand warriors, and fit to meet either god or
devil. Many times had she taken the field, armed at all points, and won matchless renown in
encounters with the bravest captains, and so in this last fight, when all the others had been slain
or had fled, among the last seven there rode Tomoe. At first it was reported that Kiso had
escaped to the North either through Nagasaka by the road to Tamba, or by the Ryūge pass, but
actually he had turned back again and ridden off toward Seta, to see if he could hear aught of the
fate of Imai Kanehira. Imai had long valiantly held his position at Seta ill th e continued assaults of
the enemy reduced his eight hundred men to but fifty, when he rolled up his banner and rode
back to Miyako to ascertain the fate of his lord; and thus it happened that the two fell in with
each other by the shore at Ōtsu. Recognizin g each other when they were yet more than a
hundred yards away, they spurred their horses and came together joyfully.

     Seizing Imai by the hand, Kiso burst forth: " I was so anxious about you that I did not stop to
fight to the death in the Rokujō Kaw ara, but turned my back on a host of foes and hastened off
here to find you." " How can I express my

p.122

gratitude for my lord's consideration? " replied Imai; " I too would have died in the defence of
Seta, but I feared for my lord's uncertain fate, a nd thus it was that I fled hither." " Then our
ancient pledge will not be broken and we shall die together," said Kiso, " and now unfurl your
banner, for a sign to our men who have scattered among these hills." So Imai unfurled the banner,
and many of thei r men who had fled from the Capital and from Seta saw it and rallied again, so
that they soon had a following of three hundred horse. " With this band our last fight will be a
great one ", shouted Kiso joyfully, " who leads yon great array ? " " Kai -no-Ichijō Jirō, my lord." "
And how many has he, do you think? " " About six thousand, it seems." " Well matched! " replied
Yoshinaka, " if we must die, what death could be better than to fall outnumbered by valiant
enemies? Forward then! "

     That day Kiso w as arrayed in a hitatare of red brocade and a suit of armour laced with Chinese
silk ; by his side hung a magnificent sword mounted in silver and gold, and his helmet was
surmounted by long golden horns. Of his twenty four eagle feathered arrows, most had been shot
away in the previous fighting, and only a few were left, drawn out high from the quiver, and he
grasped his rattan bound bow by the middle as he sat his famous grey charger, fierce as a devil, on
a saddle mounted in gold. Rising high in his stirr ups he cried with a loud voice: " Kiso -no-Kwanja
you have often heard of; now you see him before your eyes! Sama -no-kami and Iyo -no-kami,
Asahi Shōgun, Minamoto Yoshinaka am I ! Come ! Kai -no- Ichijō Jirō ! Take my head and show
it to Hyōye -no-suke Yoritom o ! " " Hear, men! " shouted Ichijō -no Jirō in response; " On to the

attack! This is their great Captain! See that he does not escape you now! " And the whole force
charged against Kiso to take him. Then Kiso and his three hundred fell upon their six thous and
opponents in the death fury, cutting and slashing and swinging their blades in every direction
until at last they broke through on the farther side,

p.123

but with their little band depleted to only fifty horsemen, when Doi -no-Jirō Sanehira came up t o
support their foes with another force of two thousand. Flinging themselves on these they burst
through them also, after which they successively penetrated several other smaller bands of a
hundred or two who were following in reserve. But now they were re duced to but five survivors,
and among these Tomoe still held her place. Calling her to him Kiso said: " As you are a woman,
it were better that you now make your escape. I have made up my mind to die, either by the
hand of the enemy or by mine own, and ho w would Yoshinaka be shamed if in his last fight he
died with a woman? " Even at these strong words, however, Tomoe would not forsake him, but
still feeling full of fight, she replied : " Ah, for some bold warrior to match with, that Kiso might
see how fin e a death I can die." And she drew aside her horse and waited. Presently Onda -no-
Hachirō Moroshige of Musashi, a strong and valiant samurai, came riding up with thirty followers,
and Tomoe, immediately dashing into them, flung herself upon Onda and grappli ng with him
dragged him from his horse, pressed him calmly against the pommel of her saddle and cut off his
head. Then stripping off her armour she fled away to the Eastern Provinces. Tezuka -no-Tarō was
killed and Tezuka -no-Bettō took to flight, leaving Ki so alone with Imai -no-Shirō. " Ah ",
exclaimed Yoshinaka, " my armour that I am never wont to feel at all seems heavy on me today."
" But you are not yet tired, my lord, and your horse is still fresh, so why should your armour feel
heavy? If it is because you are discouraged at having none of your retainers left, remember that I,
Kanehira, am equal to a thousand horse -men, and I have yet seven or eight arrows left in my
quiver . :.o let me hold back the foe while my lord escapes to that pine wood of Awazu t hat we
see yonder, that there under the trees he may put an end to his life in peace." " Was it for this
that I turned my back on my enemies in Rokuj ō-kawara and did not die then ? " returned
Yoshinaka; " by no means will

p.124

we part now, but meet our fate together." And he reined his horse up beside that of Imai towards
the foe, when Kanehira, alighting from his horse, seized his master's bridle a nd burst into tears: "
However great renown a warrior may have gained ", he pleaded, " an unworthy death is a lasting
shame. My lord is weary and his charger also, and if, as may be, he meet his death at the hands of
some low retainer, how disgraceful that  it should be said that Kiso Dono, known through all
Nippon as the „Demon Warrior ' had been slain by some nameless fellow, so listen to reason, I
pray you, and get away to the .pines over there." So Kiso, thus persuaded, rode off toward the
pine wood of A wazu. Then Ima -no-Shirō, turning back, charged into a party of fifty horsemen,
shouting: " I am Imai Shirō Kanehira, foster -brother of Kiso Dono, aged thirty -three. Even
Yoritomo at Kamakura knows my name so take my head and show it to him, anyone who can!  "
And he quickly fitted the eight shafts he had left to his bow and sent them whirring into the
enemy, bringing down eight of them from their horses, either dead or wounded. Then, drawing
his sword, he set on at the rest, but none would face him in combat  hand-to-hand: " Shoot him
down! Shoot him down! " they cried as they let fly a hail of arrows at him, but so good was his
armour that none could pierce it, and once more he escaped unwounded.


     Meanwhile Yoshinaka rode off alone toward Awazu, and it w as the twenty third day of the
first month. It was now nearly dark and all the land was coated with thin ice, so that none could
distinguish the deep ricefields, and he had not gone far before his horse plunged heavily into the
muddy ooze beneath. Right up  to the neck it floundered, and though Kiso plied whip and spur
with might and main, it was all to no purpose, for he could not stir it. Even in this plight he still
thought of his retainer, and was turning to see how it fared with Imai, when Miura no Ishi da Jirō
Tamehisa of Sagami rode up and shot an arrow that struck him in the face under his

p.125

helmet. Then as the stricken warrior fell forward in his saddle that his crest bowed over his
horse's head, two of Ishida's retainers fell upon him and struc k off his head. Holding it high on the
point of a sword Ishida shouted loudly: " Kiso Yoshinaka, known through the length and breadth
of Nippon as the 'Demon Warrior', has been killed by Miura -no-Ishida Jirō Tamehisa." Imai was
still fighting when these wo rds fell on his ears, but when he saw that his master was indeed slain
cried out: " Alas, for whom now have I to fight? See, you fellows of the East Country, I will show
you how the mightiest champion in Nippon can end his life! " And he thrust the point o f his
sword in his mouth and flung himself   headlong from his horse, so that he was pierced through
and died.