CHAPTER IV.
THE DEATH OF TSUGINOBU.

     Now Gotōbyōye Sanemoto, a veteran warrior, did not stop to take part in the fight on the
beach, but went on and burst into the Palace and set it on fire, so that it went up in flames in a
moment. The Daijin Munemori, seeing this, turned to his retain ers and enquired: "How many
men have the Genji ? " "Not more than seventy or eighty horsemen, it seems," was the reply. "Ah,
so few?" exclaimed Munemori ; " if the hair of their heads was counted one by one, they would
not equal our force! Why did you lose  your heads and run away to the ships, and let them
through without a blow to set fire to the Palace ? Is not Noto Dono here ? Let him land and give
battle to these fellows !" At this order Noto -no-kami Noritsune landed with some five hundred
men in small boats, under the command of Etchū -no-Jirōhyōye Moritsugu, and took up a
position on the beach in front of the burnt -out main gate. The Hōgwan also drew up his eighty
horsemen opposite them, about a bowshot away. Then Etchū -no-Jirōhyōye came forth on to the
deck-house of his boat and shouted in a loud voice: "Ho, there! You may perhaps have declared
your name and titles once already, but as it was far away over the sea, we could not hear. So who
is the leader of the Genji with whom we have to do to -day ? " " It is needless to repeat it,"
shouted Ise Saburō in reply, "but here is the Taiyū Hōgwan Dono, the younger brother of
Yoritomo, lord of Kamakura, descended in the tenth generation from Seiwa Tennō!"  “Oh !”
retorted

[p. 231]

Moritsugu," then that is the wretched little stripling, who was left an orphan when his father was
killed in the Heiji fighting, and who became an acolyte at Kurama temple, and ran away to Mutsu
carrying baggage in the train of a gold merchant." "Why show off your eloquence in such talk
about our lord," replied  Yoshimori, drawing nearer, "I fancy you are one of those who got
yourself well beaten at TonaMiyama in the North, and just escaped with your life, to beg your
way home all the way from t he Hokurikudō, aren't you ? " "What need to be a beggar when one
has a bounteous lord to depend on ? " said Moritsugu, "I didn't get my living and keep my family
on robbing and thieving in Suzugayama in Ise, and being a low retainer, as you did." At this p oint
Kaneko -no-Jurō came forward and interrupted them. "What's the good of all this useless talk ?
Calling one another names is a thing anyone can do. These lords know what our young warriors
of Musashi and Sagami can do from what they saw at Ichi -no-tani last spring." And as he spoke
his younger brother, who had so far stood by his side without a word, took an arrow twelve
handbreadths and three fingers long, fitted it to his bow and drew with all his might, so that the
arrow flew straight at Moritsugu and  stuck in his breastplate with such force as if to pierce it
right through, thus putting an end to the wordy warfare.

     Now Noto -no-kami Noritsune was attired as for a sea -fight without hitatare and full armour,
but in a short under -robe dyed in varieg ated colours, and armour laced with Chinese silk. His
sword was mounted in gold and silver, and he carried a „Shigeto‟ bow and a quiver of twenty four
arrows feathered with hawk's tail -feathers. He was the most redoubtable archer in the Imperial
Camp and i t was said of him that he never missed anyone he ai med at. With the intention of

putting an end to Yoshitsune at a single shot he stood watching his mark, but the Genji perceived
this, and Ise Saburō, Satō Saburōhyōye Tsuginobu, Satō Shirōhyōye

[p. 232]

Tadanobu, Eda -no-Genzō, Kumai Tarō and Musashi -bō Benkei rode up in a line close together in
front of the Hōgwan to protect him from the arrows, so that it was impossible for Noto -no-kami
to hit him. "Get out of the way of the arrows, you fellows! " he shouted, and drawing his bow
again and again with gre at speed and accuracy he shot down ten of the Genji soldiers, among
whom Satō Saburōhyōye, who was in the forefront, received an arrow that pierced him through
from the left shoulder to the right armpit, and no longer able to sit his horse, fell headlong t o the
ground. Then one of Notono -kami's young men named Kikuo Maru, a very strong fighter,
wearing a body armour of green colour and a helmet of three plates, drew his sword and ran out
to take the head of Tsuginobu. At this his younger brother Tadanobu, w ho was standing beside
him, drew his bow and shot Kikuō Maru under the skirts of his armour, so that he sank down on
to his knees. When Noto Dono saw this, still holding his bow in his left hand, with his right he
seized Kikuo Maru and flung him back into his own ship. Thus he prevented the Genji from
taking his head, though he died later from the wound. This youth had formerly been the page of
Echizen -no-Sammi Michimori, but after his death he had followed his younger brother Noto -no-
kami. His age was then  eighteen years, and Noto Dono was so grieved at his death that he fought
no more that day.

     Then the Hōgwan, ordering them to carry Tsuginobu to the rear, sprang down from his horse
and took him by the hand, saying: "How do you feel, Saburohyoye ? " "It is the end, my lord,"
answered Tsuginobu. "Is there, anything you would wish for in this world ? enquired Yoshitsune.
"What is there that I should want ? Only that I regret that I shall not live to see my lord come to
his own. For the rest, it is the d estiny of one who wields the bow and arrow to fall by the shaft of
an enemy. And that it should be told to future generations that I, Satō Saburōhyōye Tsuginobu of
Mutsu, died

[p. 233]

instead of my lord at the fight on the beach of Yashima in Sanuki, in the war of the Genji and
Heike, will be my pride in this life and something to remember on the dark road of death." And
so he died. Stout warrior as Yoshitsune was, he was so overcome with grief that he pressed the
sleeve of his armour to his face and w ept bitterly. He then asked if there was any reverend priest
in those parts, and when they had found one he said : "A wounded man has just died; I wish you
to recite the Sutras for him for one day," and he presented him with a stout black horse with a
fine set of trappings. This was the horse that the Hōgwan, when he received the Fifth Rank, also
raised to the Fifth Rank and gave the name of Taiyū Kurō. It was the one on which he had
descended the Hiyodori -goe pass behind Ichi -no-tani. When the other samura i, and especially
Tsuginobu's younger brother Tadanobu, saw this, they were moved to tears and exclaimed: "For
the sake of a lord like this, who would consider his life more than dust or dew ? "