CHAPTER XI.
THE BOOK OF KŌYA.

When Takiguchi Nyūdō saw that it was Koremori, he exclaimed: "Can it be that you are not an
illusion? Then how is it that you have managed to escape from Yashima ? " When I left the
Capital for the Western Provinces ", replied Koremori, " I did not think much of it, but
afterwards I could not rest for a moment for anxiety about those I had left behind there, and
though I said nothing my feelings were apparent, and both Munemori and the Nii Dono were
uncertain whether Yoritomo would extend to them the  indulgence that he had to Yorimori for
the sake of Ike -no-Zenni, and so, unable to bear the suspense any longer, I was impelled to come
thus far. Here I thought to renounce the world, and yield up nay life by fire or water, but I have a
great desire to go  to Kumano," "The affairs of this world of dreams are of little matter ", replied
Takiguchi Nyūdōo, "but to spend long ages in the hells is indeed painful."

Then Takiguchi led him round to pray at all the monasteries and pagodas, coming at last to the
Oku-no-in. Mount Kōya is two hundred ri from the Imperial Capital silent and far from the
habitations of men: untainted are the breezes that rustle its branches, calm are the shadows of its
setting sun. Eight are its peaks and eight are its valleys, truly a s pot to

[p. 199]

purify the heart: beneath the forest mists the flowers blossom; the bells echo to the cloud -capped
hills. On the tiles of its roofs the pine -shoots grow; mossy are its walls where the hoarfrost lingers.

In ancient times in the period E nki, in answer to a request in a dream from Kobo Daishi, the
Mikado Daigo Tenno sent a dark coloured robe to Koya; but when the Imperial Messenger
Chunagon Sukezumi -nu-Kyo ascended the mountain, accompanied by the Sojo Kwangen of
Hannyaji, and opened the d oors of the holy tomb to put the new robe on the Daishi, a thick mist
arose and hid his figure from their eyes. Bursting into tears Kwangen exclaimed: "Why are we not
permitted to see him? This is the first time since I was born that I have received such a  rebuke."
And casting himself on the ground he wept bitterly. Then the mist gradually melted away, and
the Daishi appeared like the moon from the clouds, and Kwangen, weeping now for joy, clothed
him in the new garment and also shaved his hair which had gr own very long.

Though the Imperial Messenger and the Sōjō Kwangen were able to see .and adore the Daishi, the
Sojo's acolyte, Naigu Shunyu of Ishiyama, who had accompanied them, was unable to do so on
account of his youth, and was greatly grieved in conse quence, so the Sojo took his hand and
placed it upon the knee of the Daishi, and ever after this hand had a fragrant odour all his life. It
is said too that instruction for making incense of a similar scent is still handed down at the temple
of Ishiyama. N ow this was the reply that the Daishi sent to the Mikado: "In former days I met a
Sattva, and from him learned all the secret tradition of Dharani and Mudra. In everlasting pity for
the people of the world I took upon myself an unparalleled vow, and trusti ng in the great pity of
Fugen, exhibiting in myself perfect tranquillity in these far -off confines, I wait the coming of
Miroku." Not otherwise did Maha Kas'yapa retire to the cave in Mount Keisoku to await the
coming of universal peace. It was on the twen ty first day

[p. 200]


of the third month of the second year of Shō -wa, at the Hour of the Tiger, that Kobo Daishi
entered Nirvana, and that is now three hundred years ago, so that he has yet five billion six
hundred and seventy million years to wait for the rebirth of Miroku  and the salvation of the
world.