http://e -asia.uoregon.edu






TRANSACTIONS

OF THE

ASIATIC SOCIETY OF JAPAN

VOL XLVI. -PART II

1918




THE ASIATIC SOCIETY OF JAPAN,
KEIOGIJIKU, MITA, TŌKYŌ


AGENTS

KELLY &   WALSH, L'd. , Yokohama, Shanghai, Hongkong
Z. P. MARUYA Co., L'd., Tokyo
KEGAN PAUL,TRUEBNER & Co., L'd., London









TRANSACTIONS

OF THE

ASIATIC SOCIETY OF JAPAN

VOL XLVI. -PART II

1918




THE ASIATIC SOCIETY OF JAPAN,
KEIOGIJIKU, MITA, TŌKYŌ


AGENTS

KELLY &   WALSH, L'd., Yokohama, Shanghai, Hongkong
Z. P. MARUYA Co., L'd., Tokyo
KEGAN PAUL,TRUEBNER & Co., L'd., London





INTRODUCTION.


Subject and Structure  .---The Heike Monogatari, one of the masterpieces of Japanese literature,
and also one of the main sources of the history of the Gempei period, is a poetic narrative of the
fall of the Heike from the position of supremacy it had gained under Taira Kiyomori to almost
complete destruction. The Heike, like the Genji, was a warrior clan, but had quickly lost its hardy
simplicity under the influence of life in the Capital, and identified itself alm ost entirely with the
effeminate Fujiwara Courtiers whose power it had usurped, so that the struggle between it and
the Genji was really more one between courtiers and soldiers, between literary officials and
military leaders. Historically this period stan ds between the Heian era of soft elegance and the
Kamakura age of undiluted militarism. The Heike were largely a clan of emasculated Bushi, and
their leader Kiyomori, though he obtained his supremacy by force of arms, assumed the role of
Court Noble and st rove to rule the country by the same device of making himself grandfather to
the Emperor as the Fujiwara family had previously done. Hence his rule bears more affinity to
theirs than to that of Yoritomo, of the Genji, who made his headquarters in the Kwant o, well
removed from Kyoto influence and enervation, and relied entirely on a purely military form of
government by and for samurai.

In its construction the book may be divided roughly into two parts according to Mr. Utsumi, the
first half in which the g reatness of the Heike is depicted and in which Kiyomori is the chief figure,
and the second which describes their overthrow, in which Yoshitsune holds the centre of the
stage. Mr. Yamada, however, thinks it falls naturally into three sections; the first, B ks. 1-5 ; the
prosperity of the Heike with Kiyomori as the central figure. The second, Bks. 6 -8 ; the wandering
of the Heike, Kiso Yoshinaka being the principal character. The third

[p. ii}

section, Bks. 9 -12 ; their destruction, the central figure being Kuro Hangwan Yoshitsune.
Whichever division be adopted, the work has a regular dramatic form quite unlike that of the
Gempei Seisuiki or Taiheiki which are simply historical chronicles.

Of the Heike the two prominent characters are Kiyomori and his son Sh igemori, the former rash
and turbulent, yet a man of original ideas and at times sympathetic and sensitive, the latter law -
abiding, calm and wise, considerate to his neighbours, and showing respect to religion and the
Imperial House. The fall of the Heike is ascribed to the rash and impious folly of Kiyomori, but
the writer introduces Shigernori into the narrative most skilfully as a means of exciting the

sympathy and admiration of the reader for his conduct as well as his indignation at his father's
violen ce, leading to satisfaction that retribution will at last overtake his clan. Shigemori seems to
hold back this retributive destiny as long as he lives, but when he dies the clouds gather over his
house. After his death the headship of the family falls to h is brother Munemori, a rather timid
and hesitating character in a crisis, though insolent and overbearing at other times, and apparently
much inferior to his two younger brothers Tomomori and Shigehira.

The first of the Genji ,to come on the scene is the veteran Yorimasa, whose premature revolt and
gallant end after the fight at the Ujigawa form a memorable episode in Japanese history. Then
Kiso Yoshinaka appears and for a while carries all before him. A vigorous and brilliant leader, he
seems to have lack ed wisdom and sagacity and soon fell a victim like Yukiie to the jealousy and
guile of Yoritomo. The leadership of the Genji forces then devolves on Yoshitsune and the
narrative goes on to relate his victories and final destruction of the Heike. Yoshitsune  is the ideal
type of attractive character in Japan. Youthful and dashing, cunning graceful and elegant, quite
unlike the solid and worthy Shigemori with his placidity and rather narrow -minded piety,
Yoshitsune might be put in the same category with Nelson  or Coeur -de-Leon, with allowances

[p. iii]

for period and nationality, while Shigemori mightily suggests Aeneas. The whole drama is
represented from a Buddhist standpoint as an example of cause and effect working itself out in
action, the evanescence of all prosperity and dominion being strongly insisted on.

Authorship and Date.  ---The authorship and date of the Heike Monogatari, as well as its
relation to the other literature of the Kamakura period, have been the subject of much discussion
among Japanes e scholars of the present time, and no exact pronouncement can be made. Mr.
Utsumi says in the 'Heike Monogatari Hyoshaku : ' " As to the various statements that it was the
work of Shinano -no-Zenji Yukinaga, or Hamuro Tokinaga, or Minamoto Mitsuyuki, one c annot
adopt any one of them with certainty, but the following conclusions have been reached by the
Society for the Investigation of the National Literature, in their monograph on this work: (a), that
the Heike Monogatari was originally composed in three vo lumes which were afterwards
increased to six, and that these were again altered to twelve; (b), that it was composed sometime
before the period Shokyu (1219) and enlarged during the time of the Fujiwara Shoguns (1219 -
1252) ; (c) that the Kancho volume was not originally separate from the rest of the work ; (d) that
there was one original source of the work, but that as it circulated it became altered and added to,
and that these additions and alterations are the work of different hands at different periods. "

The most explicit statement about the authorship is contained in the Tsurezure Gusa of Yoshida
Kenko, (1281 -1350) Section 226, which is considered by most scholars likely to be correct. It runs
as follows : " In the time of the Retired Emperor Go -Toba, Shinano -no-Zenji Yukinaga was
renowned for his knowledge of musical matters, so that he was once summoned to take part in a
discussion about them, but forgetting two of the Shichi Toku no Mai, Dances of the Seven
Virtues, lie was nicknamed ` Go Toku no Kwa nja' or 'The Young Master of Five Virtues,' and
this he took so much to heart that

[p. iv]

he forsook his studies and became a recluse ; but the priest Jichin, who would take in anyone,

however low his rank, if he had any artistic gift, felt sympathy for  him and provided him with
what he needed. It was this lay priest Yukinaga who wrote the Heike Monogatari and taught a
certain blind man named Jobutsu to recite it. He wrote especially well about the affairs of
Hieizan, and his detailed knowledge of Kuro H angwan (Yoshitsune) enabled him to describe him
graphically. Of Kaba -no-Kwanja (Noriyori) he does not seem to have had so much information,
for he omits much concerning him. For matters pertaining to the Bushi and their horses and arms,
Jobutsu, who was a native of the East Country, was able to tell him what he had learned from
asking the warriors themselves. And the Biwa -hoshi of the present time learn to imitate the
natural voice of this Jobutsu."

This Yukinaga appears to have been the son of the Yukitak a mentioned in this work (vol. 3.
Yukitaka no Sata no Koto) who was steward to the Sessho Kanezane, whose younger brother the
priest Jichin may have been. In this case he is to be identified with the Yukinaga, former
Governor of Shimozuke, who is mentioned  in the Gyokuyo Meigetsuki as having ability in
literary affairs. The priest Jichin was the Tendai Zasshu Jien Dai -Sojo, afterwards known as Jichin
Daishi Zasshu of Hieizan, which would account for the writer's accurate knowledge of that
monastery. With re gard to Jobutsu 生佛  , of whom nothing is otherwise known, the name is
conjectured to be a mistaken reading for Shobutsu 正佛  , the religious name of Mina moto
Suketoki. This Suketoki was born in the family of Ayakoji, which was noted for its musical
tradition s, and himself became the best musician of his tune, eventually retiring from the world
and taking up his abode with the priest Jichin. This attribution of the authorship to Yukinaga
certainly gains much force when we note that the chapter concerning Yukit aka is quite
unconnected with the main story and would be very well explained as an incident related by the
author about his father

[p.v]

which he thought worth preserving as an example of the fickleness of fortune.

Another statement is found in the Dai go Zassho to the effect that Mimbu -no-Shosho Tokinaga
wrote the Heike Monogatari in twenty four volumes, and yet another that Suketsune wrote it in
twelve volumes. The first may refer to a later redaction of the work of Yukinaga or be merely a
mistaken rea ding of his name, whereas concerning the latter, it is not improbable that he may
have been one of the redactors, for there is a chapter in the 12th vol., entitled Yoshida Dainagon
no Sata, relating to his grandfather Tsunefusa, which also seems to be inse rted without any special
reason. Thus it is quite certain that the work as originally composed not long after the events of
which it treats took place was not the same as that which is now current. The oldest known
manuscript of it is one of the period Enk ei, (1308 -11), and while its contents are rather less than
those of the Gempei Seisuiki, it is about twice as long as the ordinary current editions. By a
critical comparison of this with other known MSS, the six books it contains may be divided fairly
easily so as to give twelve volumes.

As the Heike Monogatari was intended for recitation to the accompaniment of the biwa, it is not
surprising that there should be in existence a large number of variant editions as used by the
different schools of Biwahoshi,  each of which had its own traditions and version, and therefore
the work has been peculiarly liable to change and corruption of the text as well as addition to it
at various periods. Among these variant versions there are two main sources, one known as th e

school of Ichikata from its originator Akashi Kenko Kyoichi, and the other as the Yasaka school
from its founder Yasaka Kenko Kigen. The characteristic difference between them is that the
former combines the incidents of the entry of Kenrei -mon-in into O hara and the visit of the
Emperor to the same place into a separate volume called the Kanjin Maki, whereas the other
does not.

One of the best MSS of the Heike Monogatari belongs to

[p.vi]

the school of Kyoichi and is a National Treasure kept at Koryo J inja, a shrine in the province of
Chikugo. It is dated O -an (1368) and is the oldest MS of the Ichihata school : it is taken as the
basis of the edition of Yamada and Takagi. It does not contain the story of Giyo and Ginyo or the
Saisho Minage.

Buddhist T endency of the Heike.  ---One of the most noticeable characteristics of the Heike
Monogatari is its strong religious atmosphere, the continual moralizing on the events described
from the standpoint of Buddhist philosophy, with its insistence on the vanity a nd impermanence
of the things of this Shaba world, and the desirability of retiring from its turmoils to prepare for
the blessed rebirth in the world to come. So much is the work pervaded by this tendency that
many have maintained that it was written for t he purposes of propaganda, and that the religious
element in it is the main motive.

This view, however, seems to be much too extreme, as there is no reason to suppose that the
inclination to quote Buddhist sentiments is any greater than might be expected in an age when
Buddhism was so potent an influence everywhere. The Gempei period was essentially the time
when the emotional aspect of Buddhism was most marked, and when, under the pressure of
affliction and wretchedness, of which a very vivid picture is g iven in the 'Hojoki' of Kamo
Chomei, the former ritual and esoteric cults of Tendai and Shingon gave place to the simple and
evangelical sects of Jodo and Shinshu, developed respectively by Honen and his disciple Shinran.
Consequently we find the expressio ns 'raisei ojo,' 'saiho jodo,' and others used by these sects, of
very frequent occurrence in this work and this fact has led some critics to describe it as a Jodo
sermon, taking the Heike as its text. When we consider, however, that the writer does not by  any
means confine himself to such phrases, nor to the adoration of Amida Buddha, the special object
of Jodo worship, but shows respect and reverence for many other Buddhas, beside the national
Kami, and the deities of the great shrines, there seems no suf ficient reason for such a view. It is

[p.vii]

quite natural that the tragic story of the sudden rise and fall of the Heike house should call forth
reflections on the impermanence of worldly affairs, seeing that these ideas formed the
background of the th ought of the age, and that the author was a recluse in a Buddhist monastery,
as were almost all the men of letters of the time. Moreover, no doubt Buddhist phrases were
considered to lend dignity and sonority to the narrative, as well as being a mark of th e author's
learning and taste, just as the continual citation of instances from Chinese history with which the
book abounds served to edify those acquainted with it.

These details correspond to the religious phraseology and classical references to be foun d in an

English medieval writer like Chaucer, whose age was not, perhaps, very dissimilar. Thus not the
least interesting part of the Heike Monogatari for European readers is the detailed description of
Japanese Buddhism at this, its most flourishing perio d, and not only of Buddhism but of the many
other cults that the excessively superstitious Courtiers and Buke feared to leave unobserved. The
Heike chiefs seem to have left nothing to chance in these matters, as may be especially noted in
the elaborate con sultations and ceremonies connected with the birth of the son of Ken -rei-mon-
in. So far as can be noted all these things were merely ritual and ceremonial and did not
necessarily produce any more effect on ordinary conduct than Christianity did on that of
Benvenuto Cellini, but like it they gave occupation to many artists and craftsmen and afforded a
solace in times of adversity, which might, in such a period, suddenly befall even those apparently
most secure, and were not unknown to the Mikado himself. So the stately opening words of the
first chapter seem most appropriate:

" Gion Shoja no kane no koe,
Shogyo mujo no hibiki ari ;
Sharasoju no hana no iro,
Shosha hissui no kotowari wo arawasu.
Ogoreru mono hisashikarazu,

[p. viii]

Tada haru no yo  no yume no gotoshi ;
Takeki hito mo tsui ni wa horobinu,
Hitoe ni kaze no mae no chiri ni onaji."

The mighty are indeed put down from their seats, but those who are exalted are neither humble
nor meek.

The Heike Monogatari and Other Works of the Per iod.---There has been much discussion
among scholars as to the connexion between the Heike Monogatari and the Gempei Seisuiki,
some considering that the former work was composed first and the latter adapted from it, while
others adopt the converse view, su pposing that the Heike consists of such passages selected from
the Seisuiki as are most suitable for recitation. Yamada Toshio in his edition of the Heike thinks
however that the two books are simply different recensions of the same original and cannot be
said to be really two different works. " The Gempei Seisuiki seems," he says, " to be a work to be
contrasted, not with the Heike Monogatari, but with the version of the Yasaka school." Mr.
Utsumi in his notes considers this is not quite in accordance with  the facts, for the material,
construction, and treatment of the subject is quite different in the two works, but agrees that the
Gempei Seisuiki was probably taken from the other book and not vice -versa, thus assigning the
priority to the Heike, and this view seems the prevalent one among the best modern critics. The
late Dr. Fujioka however, in his 'Literature of the Kamakura and Muromachi periods', takes the
opposite view and considers that as the Gempei Seisuiki is arranged according to chronological
order and is principally concerned with the collection of facts, whereas the Heike represents

rather an arrangement according to subject matter, having literary elegance as its main object, it
follows that the former cannot be derived from the latter, but th at the Heike must be the result
of a digestion of the material of the Gempei Seisuiki. This argument is not however acquiesced in
by most scholars, seeing that the Gempei Seisuiki is the most ornate and profuse of the two, and
seems by no means likely to h ave been anterior in time.

[p. ix]

Moreover there appear to be many instances of mistakes in the Seisuiki which could only have
arisen from a misunderstanding of words or expressions in the Heike.

Another work of the same period having some relation to t he Heike is the Hojoki of Kamo
Chomei. In this little book of reflections are related the incidents of the Great Fire, (Heike, Vol. I.
Nairi Yakiage no koto. Seisuiki Vol. 4.) ; The Great Typhoon, (Heike Vol. 3.) ; The Migration of
the Court to Fukuhara ; The Great Earthquake, (Heike Vol. 12.) ; the description being very
similar, while that of the cell of Kenreimon -in on Oharayama in the Kancho Maki or appendix to
the Heike, and also in the Seisuiki, bears a strong resemblance to Chomei's hut on Hinosan. I n
this case also opinions differ as to which has borrowed from the other, but the Heike Monogatari
Ko, published by the Kokugo Chushakai, states that the plagiarism is on the side of the Heike,
and the Hojoki is the prior source. Now the Hojoki is dated th e second year of Kenryaku, 1212
A.D., so this, if correct, would give a terminus a quo  for these parts at least. Dr. Fujioka, however,
considers the Hojoki a compilation of later date and not the work of Kamo Chomei at all.

Style of the Heike Monogatari .---A critic has said of the three works that have always been
regarded as the finest representatives of the War Chronicle (Senki -bun) literature, namely, the
Heike Monogatari, the Gempei Seisuiki, and the Taiheiki, that 'the style of the Heike is elegant
and that of the Seisuiki is grand, but as that of the Taiheiki combines both qualities, it must be
regarded as the perfect War Chronicle.' Mr. Utsumi, however, does not agree with this
pronouncement, and considers that though it may be conceded that the Taih eiki 1s perhaps the
most perfect type of this kind of literature, it certainly does not contain the characteristics of the
other two. It may be true to some extent that elegance is a feature of the Heike, but this aspect
has been rather over -emphasized by the critics, and he considers that it is more to be admired for
the

[p. x]

soberness and restraint of the writing combined with the skilful construction of the narrative.

He would consider the Heike as surpassing the other two works, first in its general  construction
and dramatic plan, secondly in the handling of the material, and again in the skill in word -painting,
but especially so in its narrative style, in which the Taiheiki is its closest rival. This difference
between them is rather to be explained  as follows. The Gempei Seisuiki has many shortcomings
in its narrative, but at the same time it occasionally rises to heights of eloquence that are
unequalled by the other two. It may be compared to a .landscape composed of a dreary plain
through which on e plods on till one is suddenly confronted with a lofty mountain soaring up to
the heavens or a vast extent of sea stretching out to the horizon, whereas the impression made by
the Taiheiki and the Heike is rather that of a well watered and wooded series o f hills and valleys,
relieved by flowers and foliage of varied hues, from any point of which a pleasing outlook may be

obtained, and which diverts the mind by its retrospect as well as by its promise of what is to
come. Such fine writing as, for instance, the description of the advance at the Ujigawa or the
Hiyodorigoe, is not to be found in the Heike, but on the whole this kind of description in the
Seisuiki is of a somewhat theatrical nature, and the writer is apt to make mistakes owing to an
inclination to appear learned and knowing in all things. The narrative of the Heike is written
lightly and easily and depicts the condition of things both internally and externally with a few
touches. Though lively and vivid, it avoids harshness. The Taiheiki, though using much detail and
taking great pains to describe a scene with care and the proper sentiments, is a little heavy and
lacking in taste by comparison. The special accomplishment of the latter work is its coining and
use of Chinese expressions which are wo rked into the Japanese language with much skill and
sonorous effect, though this is at times perhaps slightly overdone. Thus the excellencies of the
Taiheiki rather lie open for anyone to see, whereas those of the

[p. xi]

Heike are not so obvious and requ ire some literary taste for their appreciation.

Again, though the material of these works consists mostly of details of war and strife, yet in the
handling of this material the Heike Monogatari differs widely from the other two, in that, though
not so pre -eminent in describing the actual clash of arms, 'the thunder of the captains and the
shouting:,' it emphasises the underlying motives and incidental circumstances, pathetic or
humorous or otherwise, in a manner that the others do not attempt. Beside being  an age of strife
it was, as for that matter all ages are, a period of transition, and thus we see portrayed the clash of
ideas accompanying it, and the struggle between the views of the age that was passing away and
of that which was taking its place. The  writer seizes on the collision of the elegant and effeminate
ideals and way of life of the Heian period with the comparatively rough and rude manners of the
sterner Bushi who were henceforth to predominate in the administration of the country, as a
means of touching the feelings of the reader by a recital of the pathetic stories of its victims.
These victims were always young people, and especially young women, and the narrator
evidently has much sympathy with their sad fate. Examples of this kind are the narratives
entitled :   Gio ; Twice an Empress; Aoi -no-Mae ; Kogo ; The Wife of Koremori; Kosaisho ; Dairi -
Nyobo ; Senju ; Yokobue, etc., and especially delicately drawn is the scene entitled Moon -viewing,
in the fifth volume. The same contrast is emphasize d in the case of Kiyomori, the founder of the
new era, and the younger nobles of his house who rather favour the elegant style of the former
age.

The texts used for this translation are those of Utsumi, Heike Monogatari Hyoshaku, and
Umezawa, Heike Monoga tari Hyoshaku. I wish to express my gratitude to Profs. Hara Sakae,
Okano Gisaburo, and Shida Masahide for their kind assistance in archeological and Buddhist
matters.
A. L. SADLER.
Okayama.










































THE HEIKE MONOGATARI.

VOLUME 1.