CHAPTER IV.
THE BALL OF THREAD.

The province of Bungo was the fief of Gyōbu -kyō Sammi Yorisuke, and he had installed his son
Yoritsune Ason in it as Deputy, but he sent messengers from the Capital to Yoritsune informing
him that the Heike had been forsaken by the powers of heaven and ab andoned by the Emperor,
so that they had fled the city and were now exiles tossed hither and thither by the waves of the
sea. It was best therefore that the people of Kyūshū should neither receive them, nor have any
dealings with them, and the province of Bungo should cast off its allegiance and join the Genji of
the East and North, driving them away from the islands of Kyūshū. This order Yoritsune
-------------------------------
There is a variant of the story of this Japanese Cupid and Psyche in the Kojik i, where it is told of the deity
of Miwa, Ōkuni-nushi -no-mikoto, from whom it is said the family of Ogata derived their descent.
Takachiho is the mountain in Hyuga upon which Ninigi no mikoto alighted when he came down to Japan
from the Takama -ga-hara.

[p.81]

made known to Ogata Saburō Koreyoshi; now of this Koreyoshi's ancestry a fearsome story was
told. In a certain mountain village of the province of Bungo, there lived in ancient days a man
who had an only daughter, and though she was not yet married, someone used to visit her every
night, so that in the course of time she became pregnant Her mother, thinking this strange, asked
her what kind of a person it was that came to her. ` I only see him come, " said the maiden, but I
never know when he returns. " "In that case " replied the mother, " fasten something to him, and
tie a thread to it that we tray know." So the damsel, in obedience to her mother's behest, stuck a
needle into the collar of the light bloc Kariginu that her lover wore, to which was affi xed the end
of a ball of thread. Following this to see where it led, the girl and some companions crossed right
over the province of Bungo until they camp to the borders of Hyūga. There they found that it
went into the mouth of a great cave at the foot of a peal; called Uba -ga-take. Then the girl,
standing at the mouth of the cave, cried out with a loud voice to the inmate:

" It is I, who have come thus far that I might look on your face." At this, from the cave came
forth the response:

" My form is no hu man shape, and if you saw it your senses would depart with amazement The
child you will bear will be a son, and in the two islands of Kyūshū there shall be none to equal
him; with sword or bow." The girl, however, was, not convinced, and again addressed hi m : "
Whatever form you mad have ", she pleaded, " if you have not forgotten our long attachment, I
pray you let me see you this once at least." Then from out of the cave in an answer to her request
there crawled forth a monstrous snake, fourteen or fiftee n feet long, swaying and quivering as it
carne. The damsel swooned with horror and surprise on seeing it, and the companions who had
accompanied her shrieked with fear and fled in all directions, The needle that she had stuck in
the collar of her lover was  seen to stick out from the windpipe of the snake.

[p.82]


The girl returned to her home and not long after was delivered of a son, who was given to her
grandfather to bring up, and who grew so fast that before he was yet ten years old he was huge of
body  and long of face. At the age of seven he made his Genpuku, and was called Daida on
account of his grandfather whose name was Daidayu. As during both winter and summer his
hands and feet were covered with chaps, he was nicknamed Chapped Daida. And this Dai da was
the ancestor of Koreyoshi in the fifth generation; and since Koreyoshi was the descendant of such
a formidable hero, when he sent round the order of the Governor, saying that it was an Edict of
the Retired Emperor, all the chief men in Kyūshū obeyed  him. And the monstrous serpent is said
to be the manifestation of the deity of Takachiho who is worshipped in the province of Hyūga.