CHAPTER X.
THE FIRST AND SECOND ASSAULTS.

Until midni ght of the sixth day Kumagai and Hirayama had ridden with the party of Yoshitsune,
when Kumagai called his son Kojirō and said : " This party of ours is to attack on difficult ground,
so there will be little chance of being the

p. 141

first in the onset.  Let us join the army of Doi and see if we can be first in the assault on Ichi -no-
tani. " That is a good plan ", replied Kojirō, " and I think there are others of the same opinion, so
let us make haste." " That is true " answered Naozane, " there is Hiraya ma; he does not care to be
one of the crowd; keep your eye on him "; he added to one of his men. As he had expected
Hirayama soon showed signs of leaving the camp and was heard to mutter to himself : " I must
get away unseen; it won't do for me to appear t o run away." " This beast is a long time over its
feed," exclaimed his groom, as he gave it a crack with the whip. "Let it alone "; said Hirayama, "
for this night may be its last." Kumagai's retainer, hearing all this, hastened to tell it to his master,
and he too left the camp with all speed. Kumagai was clad in a hitatare of dyed cloth and armour
laced with red leather, with a red Horo, or arrow guard, on his back, and bestrode a splendid
horse called Gondakurige. His son Kojirō Naoie wore a hitatare orn amented with a design of
water plantains and armour laced with blue and white leather, and rode a cream coloured horse
called Seiro. His standard -bearer wore a hitatare of light green with yellow designs, and armour
laced with yellow and green leather; he bestrode a grey horse with dark yellow spots. Thus the
three retraced their steps, and leaving the valley they were to descend to the left, they turned off
to the right and rode along an old path, that had long been untrodden, called Tai -no-hata, which
brought them out hard by the beach at Ichi -no-tani.

     Now Doi -no-jirō Sanehira had withdrawn to a place called Shioya near Ichi -no-tani to spend
the night with his forces, and Kumagai, making a circuit round them, passed them by in the
darkness and approache d the western entrance of the Heike stronghold. It was yet dark and there
was no sound from within the place. "This is a hard place to attack", said Kumagai to his son, "and
you may be sure that there will be many who will strive to be first in the assault . Doubtless

p. 142

some are already here waiting for the dawn, so we must not suppose we are alone. I will
challenge them with our name and titles " ' and riding close up to the enemy's breastwork, he
shouted out with a loud voice: " Kumagai -no-Jirō Naozane of the province  of Musashi, and his
son Kojirō Naoie ! First in the assault on Ichi -no-tani ! " In answer to this the enemy were heard
to shout within the barricade: " Pay no heed, let them tire out their horses and shoot away their
arrows ! " And so none came forth from  the stronghold to meet them. After a while, hearing two
horsemen come up behind them, Kumagai hailed them, enquiring who they were. " Hirayama
Sueshige "; was the reply; " and who is it that calls ? " " Naozane." ', All. Kumagai Dono, how long
have you be en here ? " "All night." " I also should have been here before ", said Hirayama, " but I
was tricked by that fellow Narita Gor ō, for he got me to take him with me on the plea that he

had sworn to die with me, but on the way he persuaded me not to ride on so fast, saying that if
we left all our own men a long way behind, and rode into the enemy alone to be killed, nothing
much wou ld be gained thereby, and I listened to his words and halted my horse on a little knoll
from which I could see our men coming up, thinking that Narita was following me, but instead of
that he rode on past me. When I saw I had been tricked, I whipped up my horse and rode on
after him, and as he had only gone on about twenty yards, and his mount was rather tired, I soon
caught him up, and after reproaching him for thus deceiving me, I rode on and left him behind so
that he is not yet in sight."

     The dawn  was now growing grey, and Kumagai and Hirayama with their retainers were still
alone before the Heike Stronghold, and though Kumagai had already challenged the enemy once,
as this was before Hirayama had come up, he bethought him to do so once more, so ri sing again
in his stirrups he repeated his name and titles.  At this there was a stir within the barricade, and
thinking to take Kumagai and

p. 143

his son alive, Etchū -no-Jirōhyōye Moritsugu, Kazusa -no-Gorōhyōye Tadamitsu, Akushichihyōye
Kagekiyo and Gotōnai Sadatsune with twenty retainers issued forth from the entrance to give
them battle. Then Hirayama also lifted up his voice find declared himse lf: " Hirayama -no-
Mushadokoro Sueshige of Musashi, who has won great renown by his prowess in the fighting of
Hogen and Heiji ! " He was attired in a hitatare of patterned brocade and armour laced with
scarlet, having at his back a Horo with two wide stri pes, and rode a splendid horse that was
dappled about the eyes. His standard -bearer was in armour laced with black leather, and rode a
cream -coloured horse: his helmet was thrown back so as to expose his face. Thus the fight began,
and Kumagai and Hirayama  both bore themselves most valiantly, one charging forward when the
other gave back, and neither yielding to the other in strength and boldness, hewing at the foe
with loud shouts while thie sparks flew from their weapons, till at last the Heike retainers,
wounded and battered by the fierce onslaughts of the two champions, retreated within their
barricade and shut the enemy outside.

     Kumagai's horse had been shot in the belly, so he Dismounted and stood leaning on his bow,
while his son Naoie, who was only eighteen years old, and had been ever foremost in the fighting,
had received an arrow in the left forearm, and alighting also, stood beside him. " How is that,
Kojirō, are you wounded ? " he asked. " Ah, you should shift your armour about well so that  the
arrows don't go through it. Keep your neck guard well sloped, and don't get shot in the face."
Naozane then pulled out the arrows that were sticking in his own mail, and turned and glared
fiercely at the Heike behind the wall. " When Naozane left Kama kura last winter ", he shouted,
"he pledged his life to his lord Yoritomo, and swore that his bones should whiten on the sands of
Ichi-no-tani. So  much for Etchū -no-Jirōhyōye, Kazusa -no-Gorōhyōye, and Akushichihyōye, the
famous victors of Muroyama and

p. 144

Mizushima ! Is not Noto Dono within there? Here we stand, father and son! Come forth and
meet us, any who dare! " At this defiance Etchū -no-Jirōhyōye, Moritsugu glared at the pair and
advanced towards them. He was clad in a hitatare of purple and a suit of armour with red lacing,
and wore a helmet adorned with lofty horns. His sword was mounted in gold, and his saddle

inlaid with the same metal , while on his back he carried a quiver of arrows with black and white
feathers. His black lacquered bow was bound with rattan, and he rode a horse of dappled gray.
Side by side, without yielding a pace, the two Kumagai met him, and drawing their blades pr essed
on him without shifting either to the right or left. At this bold front Etchiū -jirō felt his courage
fail him, and straightway retreated whence he had come. " What ", shouted Naozane, " does
Etchū -no-Jirōhyōye refuse our challenge? In what do we fail  him? On to the attack ! " But
Jirōhyōye refused to be enticed and continued his progress toward the stronghold. " How
cowardly is the conduct of you fellows ", cried Akushichihyōye when he perceived this , retreat,
"there is none who dares to close with t hem or come to grips!" And he was riding out to attack
them himself, when Jirōhyōye seized the sleeve of his armour and held him back saying: "Your
life is too precious to risk it here; forbear ! forbear ! " And being thus restrained he did not
venture.

     Then Kumagai, mounting a fresh horse, again rode to the assault, and Hirayama, who had
rested his charger while Kumagai was fighting, now came on to his support. Seeing this the Heike
drew their bows with might and main and rained their arrows on the l ittle band, but so crowded
were they and so small was their mark that none of their shafts took effect, and when they tried
to charge them, as the Heike steeds were badly fed. and over -ridden, and had been long cooped
up on shipboard, they would by no mean s obey the hand of their masters; whereas the horses of
Kumagai and Hirayama were stout and well fed animals that in the shock of battle would

p. 145

overthrow and trample down both horse and rider, so that one of the Heike were found willing
to face the m. Just then it happened that Hirayama's standard -bearer, for whom he would have
given his life, was slain, and his master, driven to desperation at his loss, made a rush into the
stronghold and cut off the head of the enemy who had killed him, emerging ag ain safely once
more. Kumagai. had taken much spoil and had been the first to arrive before the entrance, but as
the gate was shut he was unable to enter, whereas Hirayama, who had come up later, charged
within the gate when it was opened, so that it was d ifficult to decide which had the honour of
being the foremost.