CHAPTER III.

THE VISIT OF THE COURTIERS.

The wife of the former Udaisho Munemori had been chosen as the milknurse for the child, but as
she had died in labour on the seventh month, the wife of Taira Dainagon Tokitada -no-Kyo was
appointed in succession, and she was afterwards known by

[p. 121]

the title of Sotsu -no-suke. After a while the Ho -o made his August return journey to his Palace,
and when his car came to he gate of Rokuhara to receive him, the Nyudo in an excess of joy
offered a thousand pieces of gold and two thousand ryo in weight of Fuji cotton as a present. And
this was surprising ;o people and they said it was not fitting.

There were many things too that people thought laughable in the lying in of the Chugu. For
instance, the Ho -o acting as a soothsayer; and in the second place, as it is the custom at the lying -
in of an Imperial Consort that a rice -vessel (koshiki [21]) shoul d be rolled dawn from the ridge of
the Palace roof, if a Prince is born it is to be rolled down the south side, and if a Princess down
the north side, this was done as usual ; but by mistake it vas rolled down the north side [22],
whereat there was a great uproar, end it was brought up again and rolled down once more in the
roper manner. This was an ill -omened event in the opinion of host people. What appeared
ridiculous was the flurry and agitation of the Lay Priest Chancellor, in contrast to the conduct of
Shigemori, which was much admired. Much to be regretted was it that the former Udaisho
Munemori -no-Kyo, having lost his much -beloved wife, resigned both his offices of Dainagon and
Taisho and retired into seclusion : how happy had it been if both elder and younger brothers had
been there. Then came seven astrologers to perform a thousand exorcisms and among them

[p. 122]

was an old man named Kamon no kami Tokiharu. He was a man of s mall property and office,
and as so many people came thronging there like the bamboo shoots that stand thick together,
yea even like rice sprouts, flax, bamboos and reeds, he cried out: "I am an official. Make way!"
and pressing through the midst of the cr owd, what a sight he presented! Having trodden off his
right shoe, he was resting for a moment when his headdress also got knocked off, and at such a
time to see a dignified old man in ceremonial court costume, with his hair in disorder, pacing
along was m ore than the younger courtiers were able to endure, and they burst forth into
uncontrollable mirth. For the astrologers say that their peculiar gait must be most punctiliously
observed. A strange thing too was that he knew nothing about it : all at the tim e, though
afterwards when he came to think bout it he remembered everything. Now at the time of the
August lying -in the following notables visited Rokuhara. The Kwampaku Matsu Dono (Fujiwara
Motofusa), the Dajodaijin Myo -on-in (Fujiwara Motonaga), the Sada ijin Oi -no-Mikado (Fujiwara
Tsunemune), the Udaijin Tsuki -no-wa Dono (Fuji Kanezane), the Naidaijin Komatsu Dono, the
Sadaisho Sanesada, the Gen -Dainagon Sadafusa, Sanjo -no-Dainagon Sanefusa, Gojo -no-Dainagon

Kunitsuna, To Dainagon Sanekuni, Azechi Sugekat a Naka no Mikado Chunaagon Muneie,
Kwazan Chunagon Kanemasa, Gen -Chunagon Kanemasa, Gen Chunagon Masayori, Gon -
Chunagon Sanetsuna, To Chunagon Sukenaga, Ike -no-Chunagon Yorimori, Saemon -no-kami
Tokitada, Betto Tadachika, Hidan -no-Saisho -no-Chusho Saneie, U -no-Saisho -no Shusho
Sanemune, Shin Saisho -no-Chusho Michichika, Hei Saisho Norimori, Rokkaku -no-Saisho -Iemichi,
Horikawa -no-Saisho Yorisada, Sadaiben -no-Saisho Nagakata, Udaiben -no-Sammi Toshitsune,
Sahei -no-kami Shigenori, Uhei -no-cami Mitsuyoshi, Kotaig o-gu-no-taiyu Tomokata, Sakyo -no-
taiyu Naganori, Dazai -no-daiji Chikanobu, Shinsammi Sanekiyo and t thirty three others. Except
the Udaiben they wore   ' naoshi.' Among those that did not come were the former Dajo -daijin

[p. 123]

Kwazan -in Tadamasa Ko, Om iya-no-Dainagon Takasue -no-Kyo and about ten others of lesser
rank. Some time afterwards wearing ' hoi,' these went to visit the Lay priest Chancellor his
mansion at Nishi Hachijo.