CHAPTER V.
HIGUCHI IS PUT TO DEATH.

     Imai's elder brother, Higuchi J irō Kanemitsu, had gone to the stronghold of Nagano in
Kawachi with five hundred horsemen to take Jurō Kurando Yukiie and put him to death, but not
finding him there, and hearing that he was at Nagusa in the province of Kii, he was following him
to that pr ovince, when he learned of the fighting in the Capital and immediately retraced This
steps thither. When he came to the bridge of Owatari at Yodo there met him one of the retainers
of his brother Imai, who greeted him thus: " Whither then is it that your E xcellency is going?
There is war in the Capital and our lord has been slain. Imai also has fallen by his own hand."
When Higuchi thus heard that all was lost, he burst into tears, and then turned and addressed his
men: " Hearken to me, sirs! All of you who  have a mind to repay the gratitude you owe our lord,
make your escape to whatever place you may, and as begging pilgrims pray that he may

[p.126]

obtain enlightenment in the world to come, As for me, I go to die in Miyako, and once more to
attend our lo rd on the Dark Road, for it is my wish to be with Imai in that world." And with that
he rode on again, and as his followers withdrew hither and thither by the way, his force of five
hundred men melted away so that when he passed the south Toba gate, scarce ly twenty were left.
Now when the enemy heard that Higuchi Jirō Kanemitsu was just about to enter the city, all
their great captains of noble lineage rode out with their men to Shichijo, Shujaku, Tsukurimichi
and Yotsuzuka to meet him. Then one of Higuchi' s men, Chigo -no-Tarō Mitsuhiro, spurring his
charger against a great mass of foemen who were waiting at Yotsuzuka, rose in his stirrups and
shouted; " Are there any of the retainers of Ichijo Jirō Dono of Kai present among you ? " At this
a great laugh ros e from the other side. " Will you fight with none but the followers of Ichijō Jirō
then ? " they returned; " take all comers! don't pick your men! " " It was not that I might choose
my opponents that I spoke," replied Mitsuhiro, declaring his titles in ans wer to their laughter; " I
am Chino -no-Tarō Mitsuhiro, son of Chino -no-taiyū Mitsuie of Kaminomiya in Suwo of the
province of Shinano, and I have left my two children behind me at home; and that they might be
taught what a death their father died, whether good or ill, I wished to meet my fate before the
eyes of my younger brother Shichiro who serves in the train of my lord Ichijō -Jirō of Kai. There is
none that I fear! " And riding at one after another he cut down three men, and grappling with a
fourth, bot h fell together and stabbed each other to death.

     Now Higuchi had many friends among the party of Kodama, and some of them came to him
and persuaded him thus: " It is but natural that the friendships that we warriors bear to each
other should at times  result in our sparing one another's lives, and so now for the sake of our
former intimacy we would save you from death. Though among Kiso's

[p.127]

captains there are none to equal his Four Deval Kings Imai, Higuchi, Tate and Nenoi, yet take it
not to h eart that Kiso has been slain and Imai has taken his life, for if you will now give yourself
up, as a reward for our recent prowess we can plead for your life." So, tempted by this promise,
bold veteran as Higuchi was, in accordance with the decree of dest iny and unm indful of the
dictates of chivalry, he shamelessly surrendered to the Kodama clan. When this came to the ears

of the Commanders Noriyori and Yoshitsune they forthwith sent a petition to the Hō -ō on his
behalf, but all the Courtiers and Nobles and Ladies in waiting even to the maidens  of tender years
opposed it with one accord, crying out that when Kiso had stormed the Hōujiden and burnt it, thereby causing
the death of many venerable priests of high rank, Imai and Higuchi were the names that they had heard
shouted everywhere, and that it was a great mistake to spare the life of such a fellow.  And as in face of this
nothing more could be done. Higuchi was at last condemned to die.

     On the twenty second day the new Sesshō was removed from office and the f ormer one restored to his
place : that he should have held the office for the transient period of but sixty days must have seemed like a
dream from which he had not yet awakened; though in former days there was the case of the Kwampaku
Michikane who was in  office for but seven days before he died. Still, as during even this short period of sixty
days both the Setchie Festival and also an Appointment of Officials had been held, he had something to think
about in after years.

On the twenty fourth day the hea ds of Kiso -Sama no -kami and four others were brought into the Capital and
carried through the streets. Though Higuchi had yielded himself as a prisoner, yet as he begged to be allowed to
accompany them, permission was given, and he escorted the heads of hi s companions clad in a dark blue
hitatare and high eboshi. He was put to death on the next day, the twenty fifth; for though

[p.128]

Noriyori and Yoshitsune many times interceded for his life, all felt that to spare one of Kiso's
Four Deva Kings was as d angerous as keeping a tiger at large. We have heard how in China, when
the power of Shin declined and all the Princes rose in rebellion like a swarm of bees, Haikō
though he entered the Palace of Kanyō, did not waste his time in dalliance with the fair Cou rt
Ladies, or stop to seize gold or treasure, but calmly secured the pass of Kwankoku, after which he
was able to destroy his enemies at leisure and thus become supreme in the Empire. So this Kiso
Sama -no-kami, if he had obeyed the orders of Yoritomo after  he entered the Capital, might have
become no less powerful than Heike.

     Now the Heike had departed from the coast of Yashima in Sanuki the winter of the year
before, and crossed over to the bay of Naniwa in Settsu and took up a position between Ichi -no-
tani on the west, where they built a strong fortification, and the wood of Ikuta on the east, where
the entrance to the fort was made. Between these points, at Fukuhara, Hyogo, Itayado and Suma
were encamped all the forces of the eight provinces of the Sanyōdō and the six provinces of the
Nankaidō, a total of a hundred thousand men in all. The position at Ichi -no-tani had a narrow
entrance with cliffs on the north and the sea on the south, while within it was very spacious. The
cliffs rose high and steep , perpendicular as a standing screen, and from them to the shallows of
the beach a strong breastwork was erected of wood and stone, well protected by palisades, while
beyond it, in the deep water rode their great galleys like a floating shield. In the towe rs of the
breastwork were stationed the stout soldiery of Shikoku and Kyūshū in full armour with bows
and arrows in their hands, dense as the evening mists, while in front of the towers, ten or twelve
deep, stood their horses, fully accoutred with saddle a nd trappings. Ceaseless was the roll of their
war drums; the might of their bows was like the crescent moon, and the gleam of their blades
was as the shimmer of the hoar frost in autumn, while their myriad

[p.129]

red banners that flew aloft in the sprin g breezes rose to heaven like the flames of. a conflagration.