CHAPTER VII.
YOSHIDA DAINAGON.
     So the former Uhyōye -no-suke Yoritomo of Kamakura, having now become Sotsui -bushi of
the whole land of Nippon, sent a request to the Court that he might levy a tax of so much rice
on every tan of land in the country for the rations of his soldiers. " From of old," replied the Hō -ō,
" we see it written in the *Muryō -gi-kyō that whosoever should subdue the enemies of the
Throne should receive half the country, but even so it is not easy to grant it. Yoritomo's demand
is excessive." But when he gathered t he Courtiers and they held a council about the matter they
decided thus: " What Yoritomo Kyō says is half right." So, as all the Courtiers were unanimous,
the Hō -ō could do nothing, and after a while gave his consent. Then Shugo or Wardens were
placed in a ll provinces, and Jitō or Lords in all manors, and in this way no one was able to conceal
so much as a single hair.

     Now, though he had many adherents among the Courtiers, Yoritomo entrusted this matter
and other such things to Yoshida -
-------------- --
*Muryō gi -kiyō. Part of the Hokke -kyō. But it is doubtful if such a statement is to be found in it.

[p. 292]

no-Dainagon Tsunefusa -no-Kyō. And this Dainagon was said to be a very fine character. For
when the Genji came into power, those of the Court w ho had been closely connected with the
Heike sent letters and messengers, and in various ways tried to curry favor with them, but this
Dainagon alone did no such thing. And in the days of the Heike, when the Hō -ō was confined in
the Seinan Detached Palace,  it was this Dainagon and Hachijō -no-Chūnagon Nagakata -no-Kyō
who were appointed Bettōs of the Palace. He was the son of Gon -no-Uchūben Mitsufusa -no-
Ason, and when he was but twelve years old his father died and left him an orphan, but he rose
in rank and office without any check, being Kurando of the Fifth Rank, Emon -no-kami and
Benkwan at once, after which he became successively Kurando -no-kami, Sangi, Daiben, Dazai -
no-Sotsu, Chunagon, and then Dainagon. He passed over the heads of many others, but was ne ver
himself passed over. People's good and evil deeds cannot be hid, as a gimlet goes through a bag.
He was indeed a greatly respected Dainagon.