CHAPTER V.
THE SHOSHO IS PUT IN CHARGE OF THE SAISHO.

Tamba -no-Shosho Naritsune stayed that night in the Hojujiden, the Palace of the Retired
Emperor, an d did not go out at all. The retainers of the Dainagon hurriedly rode up to this Palace
and summoned him forth, and on their relating the arrest of his father to him, he replied: " Why
did not the Saisho (Chief Minister) inform me of an affair like this un til now ? " But hardly had
he finished speaking when a messenger arrived from the Saisho. Now this Saisho was the younger
brother of Kiyomori, and his mansion was by the outer gate (kado -no-waki) of Rokuhara, so that
he was called Kadowaki -no-Saisho ; and he was the father in law of Tamba no Shosho. " I know
not the reason," said the messenger, " but I have been ordered by Nishi Hachijo to bring you
hither at once." On hearing this the Shosho summoned the ladies -in-waiting who always attended
him and said: " Last night I heard

[p. 74]

some uproar outside and thought it might be the priests of the mountain coming down into the
city ; but it seems to be something connected with my affairs. As the Dainagon is to be put to
death this evening, I also shall be i ncluded in the same condemnation : I should like to visit the
Ho-o once more, but as this misfortune has happened to me, I must refrain." The ladies then
went to the Ho -o and reported the matter to him. The Ho -o, understanding from Kiyomori's
messenger tha t morning that the secret plot had been revealed, intimated that he wished The
Shosho to visit him, whereupon the latter did so. The Ho -o , weeping said nothing, while the
Shosho, also choked by tears, was silent likewise. So, after a short space, he retir ed from the
Presence and the Ho -o saw him off at some distance, saying, " How sad is this degenerate age!
This is the last time I shall see him: " and he could not restrain his tears. When the Shosho retired
from the presence of the Ho -o, all the Courtiers  and Court Ladies were much grieved at parting
with him, pulling him by the sleeves and shedding tears, so that no one was dry -eyed.

When he arrived at the house of his father -in-law the Saisho found that his wife was just on the
eve of her confinement, a nd that, as the result of the shock of the morning's upset, it seemed as if
she were about to expire. Now since his departure from the Ho -o's Palace he had not ceased to
weep, and now, seeing the condition of his wife, he gave way completely to his despond ency.
Also the milk -nurse of the Shosho, named Rokujo, came to him in tears and said, " Since I came
here as nurse I have brought up my lord until now, and since I brought him up I did not grieve at
my increasing years but only rejoiced seeing my lord grow  up; and though not yet quite full
grown, has this year attained the age of twenty -one. Never for even half an hour have I been
parted from him; when he went to the Palace of the Ho -o I was always anxious if he came back
late, gad now at last what misfortu ne has he met with ?" Then the Shesho tried to comfort her,
assuring her that as the Saisho was


[p. 75]

there he would most probably escape with his life. But she would not be consoled and gave
herself up to violent weeping in spite of the presence of ot her people. Meanwhile several
Messengers came from Nishi Hachijo and the Saisho decided that there was nothing to be done
but to go, whatever might happen, and started forthwith, the Shosho taking his seat at the back
of his car. Since the age of Hogen and  Heiji the Heike family had nothing but prosperity, and no
misfortune came their way, save only to this Saisho who suffered through his unhappy son in law.

When they came to the Nishi Hachijo mansion and enquired what they were to do, they were
told that the Shosho must not enter within the gate, so leaving him in the care of some samurai,
the Saisho entered by himself. Then Kiyomori's men surrounded the Shosho on all sides and
guarded him strictly, and being thus parted from the Saisho on whom he so much r; lied, his heart
failed him and he felt very forlorn.

The Saisho went in to the middle gate but the Nyudo did not come out to meet him, so after a
while he sent word by Gendaiyu -no-Hangwan Suesada saying. " I much regret that I am related to
this troubl esome fellow but it cannot be helped ; his wife is now ill and this morning misfortune
has fallen upon him so that she is now at the point of death. If he is in my hands I will not permit
him to do anything improper, so I pray you give him into my charge f or the present." When
Suesada reported this to the Nyudo, Kiyomori only answered ,   " This unfortunate Saisho has no
discrimination", and gave no decision about the request. Some time afterward however he said to
Suesada,   " The Shin Dainagon Narichika -no-Kyo and other Imperial retainers intended to destroy
our house and disturb the peace of the land, and this Shosho is the eldest son of this man.
Whether he is deeply implicated in it or not I cannot overlook it. If this rebellion had been
carried out would  you have been likely to be unharmed ? " When the Saisho heard this he looked
entirely crestfallen and replied ; " Since Hogen and Heiji I have

[p. 76]

many times risked my life in battle on your behalf and hereafter also I will ward off from your
person  the strong wind of adversity. Though I am an old man I have many young children and
they too may become a strong protection, yet when I ask you this one thing namely to put the
Shosho in my charge, you do not willingly accede. That must be because you thi nk that I too
have some treasonable design. If I am thus doubted it is of no use my living any longer in the
world, so I will retire and become a monk, dwelling in seclusion in Koya or Kogawa and praying
earnestly for a rebirth in a better world. Verily th e relationships of this world are of no avail.
When one is in the world one has hope, but when the object of hope cannot be attained, spite
arises. Nothing is better than, despising this fleeting world, to enter the way of Buddha." Then
Suesada repeated to  Kiyomori the words of the Saisho, adding that his mind seemed to be made
up and begging the Nyudo to grant his request. " Truly it would be a foolish thing for him to
retire from the world, so I will place the Shosho under his charge, " replied Kiyomori, and
Suesada returned and informed the Saisho.

" Ah " he exclaimed, " it is not good to take the responsibility for the child of another ; if he was
not thus related to my daughter I should not be so distressed " and he went out. The Shosho who
was waiting  for him enquiring how the matter had gone, he replied." The Nyudo was very
wrathful and would not receive me, repeating that he would not grant my request, but when I

threatened to become a monk, then he consented to put you in my charge; but I fear it is  only for
a time." " Then I shall at any rate obtain a reprieve for a while by your favour," replied the Shosho,
" and, by the way, have you heard aught of the fate of my father the Dainagon ? " " Truly "
answered the Saisho, " I could only put in a word o n your behalf, I could certainly go no further."
Thereupon the Shosho, bursting into tears " I fear for my own life, it is true, but how much do I
wish to see my father again. This night the Dainagon is to be put to

[p. 77]

death, so what use for me to l ive longer ? I wish to share my father's lot whatever it may be, so
do you please inform the Nyudo of my desire." The Saisho, much troubled at this prospect,
replied ; " I spoke of your affair indeed, but farther than that I did not go; I have heard howeve r
that Shigemori the Naidaijin advised his father this morning not to put him to death, so probably
his circumstances will not be so unfavourable." Without waiting to hear any more the Shosho
clasped his hands together and wept for joy. Who but a child wou ld be able to forget all anxiety
for himself and thus rejoice at his father's safety ? Indeed the strongest bond of relationship is that
of father and child. How necessary a thing it is to have children. Then the Saisho and the Shosho
returned to the mansi on of the Saisho in the same carriage just as they had gone forth: and the
ladies in waiting and the retainers wept and rejoiced on their arrival as over those who have come
back from the dead.