CHAPTER XII.
THE HEIKE PARADED THROUGH THE STREETS.

     When he heard that Pr ince Morihito, the second son of the late Emperor Takakura, was
returning to the Capital, the Hō -ō sent a car to meet him. Both his mother and his foster mother
Jimyo -in-no-Saisho had been much grieved when he was taken away against his will by his
relatio ns the Heike Courtiers, and exposed to hardship with them on the waves of the Western
Sea, and they were now overjoyed to receive him back again. On the twenty sixth day the Heike
captives arrived at Toba, and without delay were brought into the Capital on  the same clay and
paraded through the streets. In a car with both the front and rear blinds drawn up, and the side
windows open, sat the Daijin Munemori, attired in a white Kariginu. In former days he had had a
fine figure and a fair complexion, but now, thin and worn and burned black by the salt breezes,
he did not look the same person. But he gazed curiously all around him as the car passed on, and
did not seem particularly dejected. His son Uemon -no- kami Kiyomune rode in the back of his
father's car, w earing a white hitatare. Choked with tears and with down cast head, he did not
raise his eyes from the ground, and seemed to be sunk in the deepest melancholy. In the next car
rode Taira Da inagon Tokitada -no-Kyō, and Sanukino -Chujo -Tokizane should have been with
him, but on account of sickness he was excused. Kura -no-kami Nobumoto also entered the city
by a side street, for he had been wounded.

     And to see this spectacle the people came  from far and near, from every shrine and temple
round about the city, while from the Capital itself, high and low, young and old came thronging
out in countless myriads, lining the road all the way from the south gate of the Toba Palace, by
Tsukuri -michi and Yotsu -kado; and so great was the press that the wheels of the cars could not
turn, neither could the sight -seers look back -

[p. 259]

wards. In the famine of the periods of Ji -shō and Yowa, and in the campaigns in the East and
North Provinces, more men perchance were slain, but the number of the survivors was greater;
and as it was not yet a year since the Heike had fled from the Capit al, the days of their splendour
were so recent that none could forget them, so that those who had formerly gone in fear and
trembling of them could scarcely be certain whether their present condition was dream or reality.
And as the very lowest kind of peo ple who had no particular concern with them were affected to
tears by the sight, the feelings of those who had had intimate and friendly relations with them can
be imagined. Though for fear of their lives most of their hereditary vassals, who for generatio ns
had lain under heavy obligations to them, had gone over to the Genji, yet they could not at once
forget their ancient friendship, and there was not one who was not moved to tears, while most
did not even raise their eyes. The ox driver who drove Munemor i's car was Saburō Maru, the
younger brother of that Jirō Maru who had been put to death by Kiso Yoshinaka for improper
driving. This Saburō Maru had accompanied the Heike to the Western Provinces and done other
work there, and at Toba he had petitioned Yo shitsune: "Though Toneri and ox drivers are the
lowest kind of servants and have no claim to consideration, yet, as I have served my master many
years and am greatly attached to him, I pray you grant me the favour of driving his car for the last
time." And  the Hōgwan, touched by the request, gave the required permission. So Saburōo Maru,

greatly delighted, took from the bosom of his dress a driving -rope that he kept about him, and,
though his eyes were so blinded with tears that he could not see where he wa s going, he let the
oxen find their own way, and so drove his master.

     The Hō -ō watched the procession from his car at Rokujō Higashi -no-Dōin, and all his
Courtiers and attendants drew up their cars alongside the Imperial Car, but as the Heike nobles
had until lately also been in attendance on him, His Majesty

[p. 260]

was now moved to pity at their fate. Who would have dreamed that these haughty potentates,
from whom all but lately sought a word or a glance, could have fallen to their present condit ion?
And there were few who were dry -eyed at the thought. But a year before Munemori had come in
procession to the Hō -ō's Palace to pay his respects on being raised to the position of Naidaijin,
and then he was accompanied by twelve Courtiers of the highes t rank, headed by Kwazan -in-no-
Chūnagon Kanemasa -no-Kyō, while sixteen others of lower rank, led by Kurando -no-kami
Chikamune, walked before him in the van, the procession including four of the rank of Chūnagon
and three of that of Sammi Chujō. All the Cou rtiers and Nobles were in festal array to do honour
to the day, and Tokitada -no-Kyō was summoned into the Imperial Presence and entertained
magnificently and sent away with many presents. Today not a single Courtier accompanied them,
and the twenty old sam urai, who were taken with them at Dan -no-ura, were led along behind
them clad in white garments and tied up to the front of their saddles.

    Passing along Rokujō to the east they were led to the river bed, and from thence back again to
the Hōgwan's resi dence in Rokujō Horikawa, where they were put under a strong guard. Food
was set before the Daijin, but his throat was choked and he could not eat; and when night came
he did not even loosen his clothes, but lay down just as he was, wrapped in the sleeves of his robe;
but when his guards noticed that he covered his son Uemon -no-kami with his sleeve, they
exclaimed: " Ah, among both high and low there is nothing so pathetic as parental affection. The
spreading of a sleeve is nothing in itself, but even that shows the depth of his care;" and their tears
dropped on to the sleeves of their armour.

[p. 261]