CHAPTER III.

THE AUGUST LYING IN.

Thus the two exiles left Kikaigashima and came to Kase in Hizen, And since the messenger
whom the Saisho sent urg ed them not to proceed to Kyoto that year, as the weather was rough
and the passage dangerous, but to wait till spring, the Shosho spent the rest of that year in Kase.
Now from the hour of the Tiger (4. a.m.) on the twelfth day of the eleventh month of the  same
year the Chugu began to be in travail, and Rokuhara and all the

[p. 117]

capital were in an uproar. The place of lying in was the Ikedono [7] mansion at Rokuhara and the
Ho-o himself made an august visit of ceremony : after him all the Courtiers  [9] from the
Kwampaku [8] and Dajodaijin d ownwards, everyone who could be considered anyone at all, and
everyone without exception who held emolument or office and hoped for place and promotion
in future, came and presented themselves at Rokuhara. When we refer to former cases of the
lying-in of C onsorts and Empresses there was always a great pardon. On the first day of the ninth
month of the second year of Daiji, when Tai -ken-mon-in [10]was brought to bed, a great pardon
was proclaimed, and on this occasion things were done according to that precedent and a very
extensive pardon was issued, so that among those guilty of serious offences Shunkwan Sozu was
unhappily the only one who did of share in it. A vow was made that there should be an Imperial
progress of the Empress and Crown Prince to the shrines of Hachiman, Hirano and Oharano if the
birth was easy and a prince was born. This vow Sengen Hoin respectfully heard : we speak of it
with reverence. Prayer was also made at twen ty shrines of the Kami beginning with Ise Daimyojin,
and the Sutras were read at the temples of Todaiji and Kofukuji beside sixteen others, those who
read the Sutras being chosen officials among those who served the shrines. Retainers wearing
kariginu of o rnamented brocade and girt with swords walked in procession, carrying various
sacred vessels and the Imperial sword and The Imperial Vesture, crossing over from the Higashi -
no-dai to the southern court and going forth from the middle gate. A most auspiciou s and
beautiful scene. Komatsu Dono, as was natural to his calm and unmoved nature, came long after
the others with his eldest son Gon -no-suke Shosho Koremori

[p. 118]

and many nobles of lesser rank in a procession of cars bringing presents; forty change s of garments
of various kinds, seven silver ornamented swords borne upon large trays, and twelve horses. This
was according to the precedent of the Kwampaku Fujiwara Michinaga, who sent horses when his
daughter Joto -mon-in, Consort of Ichijo Tenno, was br ought to bed in the era Kwanko.
Shigemori was the elder brother of the Chugu and since his relation was especially paternal there
was reason why he should send these horses. Gojo -no-Dainagon Kunitsuna -no-Kyo also sent two
horses, and people wondered if thi s was because of his great desire for a prince to be born or
because of his great virtue. Moreover horses were presented to seventy shrines from Ise even to
Itsukushima in Aki, and very many sets of decorations for the horses in the Imperial Stables. The

Lord Abbot of Ninnaji, Kakuho Shinno, read the Kujaku Sutra, while the Tendai Zasshu
Kakwaiho Shinno chanted the Sutra of the Seven Buddhas.  [11]  The Lord Abbot of Miidera,
Enkei Shin no, chanted the Sutra of Kongo Doji, beside which Godaikoguzo, [12]the Six Kwannon,
[13] the Ichiji Kinrin   Godan Sutra [14], Rokuji Karin, [15] Hachiji Monju,  [16] and the Fugen [17]
of long life were all invoked and recited from beginning to end. The smoke of incense filled the
whole Palace and the sound of bells echoed to hea ven, while the sonorous chanting of the Sutras
made men's hair stand up. Whatever evil spirits there might be, and in whatever direction they
might turn, they were put to flight. Then too a life -size

[p. 119]

statue of Yakushi Nyorai and the Five Wondro us Kings [18] was begun for the chapel of Buddha.

Now though all these things were done and the pains came continually upon the Chugu, yet she
was not quickly delivered, and the Nyudo  and the Ni -i-no-dono his consort, pressing their hands
to their breasts in perplexity, continually ejaculated: " What is to be done? What shall we do? "
And ever when anyone enquired something of them, all they replied was: " Do as you please; Do
as you l ike: " the Nyudo adding, " Ah, if I were with my army in the field I should not feel
anxiety like this." All the while the diviners, the two Sojo, Hokaku and Sho -un, Shunkei Hoin,
and the two Sozu, Kozen and Jissen, were chanting the Sutras and incessantly  telling their rosaries
and praying, invoking the Three Treasures of their temples and all their ancient and venerated
statues and books and holy pictures. Indeed it was a most blessed sight. And amid all this
sanctification, the Ho -o, who was just at this  time engaged in purification ceremonies preparatory
to making a pilgrimage to Kumano, sat in a chamber near the brocade curtain behind which the
Chugu was, and recited the Sutra of Kwannon of the Thousand Hands.

Now at this moment a change came. Though t he holy mediums who were wildly dancing went
into a trance, for some time they were silent. " Ah," quoth the " Ho -o whatever evil spirit there
may be, how can it come near when I am present? Beside which all these hostile influences have
been granted Our I mperial Benevolence and restored to mankind, and even though they are not
grateful "yet how can they now hinder us? Let them quickly be put to flight! " (When women
have difficult labour and there is some obstacle hindering them, however troublesome and
difficult it may be, if a mighty spell be chanted earnestly then the demon will depart and the
birth become easy

[p. 120]

and successful.) So they all applied themselves diligently to their crystal rosaries with the result
that not only was the Imperial Co nsort safely delivered but a Prince was born. Then Hon -Sammi
Chujo Shigehira -no-Kyo, who was then acting as Chugu -no-Suke, came forth from behind the
curtain and announced in a loud voice : " The august labour is safely ended and a Prince has
deigned to be  born."

The Ho -o was the first to offer his congratulations; then the Kwampaku Matsu Dono and the
Dajo daijin and all the courtiers below him and all the assistants and acolytes, the chief astrologers,
chief physicians, and all the diviners high and low, shouted aloud their joy in concert so that the
sound reverberated even to without the gates and did not subside for some while. The Nyudo too,
in the excess of his joy, lifted up his voice and wept: these were tears of joy indeed.


Komatsu Dono immediately  hurried to the Palace of the Chugu bringing ninety nine mon in coin
to place beside the pillow of the baby Prince saying: " Heaven is father and Earth is mother. May
your life be as long as that of To -ho-saku and Hoshi [19] : may your mind be as that of Ten -sho-
ko-daijin." And taking a bow of mulberry and six arrows of 'yomogi,' [20] he shot them toward
heaven and earth and the four quarters of the world.