CHAPTER VII.
SENSHU.

So Sammi Chūjō was brought into the presence of Hyōyeno -suke, and Yoritomo thus addressed
him: " To appease the Imperial displeasure, and to wipe away the stain from my father's memory
I have undertaken to overthrow the Heike family, and it will not be di fficult to accomplish; but
verily I did not at all expect to see you here under these circumstances. As it is, perchance I may
have the honour of receiving the Daijin Munemori as well. But concerning the burning of the
temples of Nara, whether it was done by the command of the late Nyūdō Kiyomori, or whether
it was ordered by you on the spur of the moment, I know not; but anyhow it was an exceeding
heinous crime." " It was done neither by the command of the Nyūdō, nor by my own design ",
replied the Chūjō, " but it happened accidentally in the course of the operations we undertook to
suppress the violence of the monks. I beg your indulgence to speak of a fresh subject, but, as you
know, in former days the Genji and Heike families stood together in rivalry to  support the
Throne, and after that the fortunes of the Genji house declined, and our family alone, since the
days of Hogen and Heiji, has many times subdued the Imperial enemies, and been .rewarded for
its services, even, I speak it with reverence, so far  as to be permitted to become Imperial
Relatives, and to hold the office of Dajo -daijin ; while no less than sixty members of the family

[p. 191]

have been promoted to high office, so that for twenty years there has been none to equal it in all
the lan d for rank and authority. Now it is said that he who fights the battles of the Emperor shall
not be bereft of the Imperial Favour for seven generations; but this I think is quite false, for
though the late Nyūdō hazarded his life for the Throne many times,  it was his generation only
that was fortunate and happy, and his children have come to this state that you behold. Our fate
has come upon us and our rule is overthrown : fugitives from the Capital, our corpses bleach on
mountain and plain, and men would s pread our shame far over the waves of the Western Ocean.
That I should thus be taken alive and brought down hither is a thing of which I never dreamed,
and I can but regard it as the result of the misdeeds of a former life. It is related in history how in
China king In of Tō was captured at Ka -dai, and how king Bun was held prisoner at Yū -ri ; and if
there were such examples in antiquity, how should the men of this age fare better ? It is not
really such a disgrace for a warrior to fall into the hands of hi s enemy and be put to death, so I
pray you of your favour grant me a speedy execution." As he thus finished speaking, Kajiwara
exclaimed in admiration: " Ah ! There is a great leader indeed! And both he and the samurai in
attendance could not refrain from pressing their sleeves to their eyes. Yoritomo too was not
unaffected by his bearing: " Far be it from me to regard the Taira house as my personal foes ", he
exclaimed in reply ", it is only that I carry out the Imperial Order: as for the burning of the
temples of the South Capital, Iet that be settled by the decision of the monks themselvess." And
he ordered that the Chūjō should be placed in charge of Kanō -no-suke Munemochi of the
province of Izu. A treatment that seemed just like the handing over of the sinners of the Shaba -
world to the Ten Kings for seven days each. But this Kanō -no-suke was a merciful man and did
not treat the Chūjō at all severely, but was very kind to him in all things. And first of all he led
him away to take a hot bath. Now the


[p. 192]

Chūjō thought he could meet any fate calmly if he could wash away the dust and grime of the
road, and make himself clean again, and was just taking his bath, when after a little while the door
of the bath -room was opened and there entered a beauti ful girl of about twenty year's old, with a
fine white complexion and very lovely hair. She was wearing a bath -robe of unlined material
dyed in colours, and was attended by a little maid of fourteen or fifteen with short hair, dressed in
an unlined garment  of white, dyed with a blue design here and there, and carrying some comb s in
a small wash -basin. This lady assisted the Chūjō in his bath for some time, and then, after she had
washed her hair, made to depart again, but as she was going out she said to him : " I am one of
these who have access to Yoritomo, so if there is anyth ing you wish, please tell me, and I will ask
him; this may be difficult for a man, but a woman can manage these things." " In this condition,
what can I want ? " replied the Chūjō, " there is only one thing that I could desire, and that is to
be allowed to  become a monk." This request the lady repeated to Yoritomo, but he replied : "
That cannot be. If he were my own enemy, it might be, but as he is an enemy of the Throne it is
not possible." When the lady brought this answer to the Chūjō, after she had ret ired again he
asked his guard what might be the name of this very elegant visitor. " She is the daughter of the
Chōja of Tegoshi ", said Kanō -no-suke, " and she is equally winsome in face and figure and
disposition; she has been in attendance on the lord H yōye-no-suke for some two or three years,
and her name is Senshū -no-Mae."

That evening was somewhat rainy, and everything was very dreary, when the lady again appeared
bringing a biwa and koto. Kanō -no-suke also came in with ten of his attendants and brou ght wine
before the Chūjō, which Senshū -no-Mae served to him. Shigehira -no-Kyō took a little, but
seemed rather indifferent to their attentions, whereupon Kanō -nosuke spoke as follows: "I am a
man of the province of Izu, and

[p. 193]

am only a sojourn er in Kamakura, but I will do anything I can to serve you; and Hyōye -no-suke
Dono has ordered that we accede to any wishes you may have, so please command us. So let sake
be served." So Senshū -no-Mae brought him saké and recited once aid again the piece en titled: " I
am angry with the weaving -woman for the heaviness of my silken robe." "Though Kitano Tenjin
swore that he would hasten three times a day to protect him who sings this verse ", said the
Chūjō, "seeing that I am one forsaken and without hope in t his world, of what avail is it to join in
the singing; still, if it will at all lessen my guilt, I will do so." Then Senshū sang the refrain entitled:
"Even the Ten Transgressions, they shall be taken away", and then sang four or five times the
Imayo measu re: "Let all who desire Paradise call on the name of Amida." Then the Chūjō drained
his cup, and Senshū took it and gave it to Kanō -nosuke, and while he was drinking she played the
biwa. "This melody is usually called Gojo -raku ", said the Chūjō in jest; "but now it seems to me
like Goshō -raku (songs of the next world); so I will sing the piece called Ōjō-no-kyū (hastening
to heaven) : and he took the biwa and tuned it, and sang the melody Ōjō-no-kyū.

And so the night grew on, and his heart became free of  care, and he said: " Who would have
thought to find such grace in the Eastern Provinces ? Let us have another song." So Senshū -no-
Mae sang several times with great feeling the Shirabyōshi refrain: " Those who find shelter
beneath one tree, or those who sn atch a draught from the same stream; it is naught but the

promise of a former life." Then the Chūjō also sang: " The tears of Gu -shi when the light grew
dim." And the meaning of this song is as follows: when in old time in China the Emperor Kōso of
Kan str ove with Kō -u of Sō, Kō -u triumphed in seventy -two battles, but at length he was beaten
and his army routed. Then, springing on to his horse Sui, famous for its wondrous strength and
swiftness, he

[p. 194]

made to escape with his consort Gu -shi, when s trange to say the horse set both his feet firm and
refused to move. Shedding tears of chagrin Ko -u exclaimed: " My power is already gone, and for
the attacks of the enemy I care nothing, all that grieves me is the parting with this lady." It is the
scene o f Gu-shi weeping in the waning light, as the troops of the enemy came shouting down on
all sides, that Kisshō -kō has represented in this poem, and it was a sign of the Chūjō's artistic
feeling that he chose it to sing on this occasion.

So they went on unt il the day was about to break, when Kanō -no-suke took leave of the Chūjo,
and Senshū -no-Mae returned also. That morning it chanced that Yoritomo was reading the
Hokke Sutras in the Jibutsu -dō when she came ok, and he turned to her with a smile and
remarked : " No doubt the entertainment last night was very amusing?" At this Sai -in-no-Jikwan
Chikayoshi, who was writing something his presence, asked what he meant. " For the last two or
three years the Heike have experienced nothing but hardships and fighting " , said Yoritomo, " and
yet so charming was the eying and singing of Sammi Chūjō that I stood all night outside listening
to it. He is indeed a fine artist." " I too should have liked to hear it ", replied Chikayoshi, " but I
had some other business last ni ght and so I could not; but I will take the first chance of doing so
henceforth. The Heike have always produced many talented muscians and artists, and a while ago
when they were comparing each other to various were, they decided that Sammi -Chujo was the
peony among :m." At any rate his playing the biwa and singing so pressed Yoritomo that he never
forgot it.

When Senshū -no-Mae afterwards heard that the Chūjō had been sent to Nara and put to death
there, the tidings so affected her that she retired from the world and became a nun, entering the
temple of Zenkōji in Shinano, there to pray for his happy rebirth in Paradise.


[p. 195]