CHAPTER I.

On the twenty fourth day of the seventh month of the second year of Ju ei at midnight, the Hō -ō,
accompanied only by Uma no kami Suketoki, the son of Azechi no Dainagon Sukekata no Kyō,
fled secretly from the Palace and escaped to Kurama; but as the pries ts of the temple thought it
was rather too near to the Capital to be safe, he again removed, and, after braving the hard and
dangerous path over the mountains by Shino no mine and Yakuō saka, he arrived at the small
temple of Jakujo bo at Gedatsu dani at Y okogawa. When the priests of Hieizan heard of this,
they pressed him to proceed to the Hall of the Eastern Pagoda of Enryakuji, so His Majesty took
up his abode at Minamidani Enyū -bō, which was forthwith designated the Imperial Palace, and
strictly guarded  by their monks and samurai. Thus the Hō -ō fled from his Palace and went to
Hieizan, and the Emperor left the Palace of the Phoenix Gate for the Western Ocean, while the
Sesshō took refuge in the recesses of Yoshino, and the Imperial Ladies concealed thems elves at
Hachiman, Kamo, Saga, and Uzumasa, and other remote places in the hills to the east and west of
the city. As the Heike had fled and the Genji had not yet entered, the Capital was thus without a
Lord, a thing that had never been known from the begi nning of time. In the book of the
Prophecies of Shōtoku Taishi, wonderful to relate, these things are written.

As soon as it was known that the Hō -ō was holding his Court on Hieizan, all the former
Courtiers and officials came flocking round him: the form er Kwampaku Motofusa, the Sessho
Motomichi, the Dajō daijin Moronaga, the Sadaijin and

[p.71]

Udaijin and Naidaijin, the Dainagon and Saishō, all the Courtiers of the Third, Fourth, and Fifth
Ranks; everyone who was anyone, and who desired place, office,  or promotion, presented himself;
none were wanting. So great was the number of those who crowded to the Enyū -bō that neither
in the upper or lower chambers, nor within or without the gate was any vacant space at all to be
found. Great was the prosperity o f Hieizan through the presence of this Imperial Abbot.

On the twenty eighth day of the same month the Hō -ō deigned to return to the Capital. He was
escorted by Kiso Yoshinaka with fifty thousand horsemen, and Yamamoto no Kwanja Yoshitaka
of the Ōmi Genji rode at the head of the procession bearing the white banner of the Minamoto.
It was indeed a strange sight for the people of Miyako to see again the white banner in their
streets, where for more than twenty years it had not waved. Juro Kurando Yukiie with many
thousand horsemen crossed the Uji bridge and entered the Capital, while Yada -no-Hangwan dai
Yosihikiyo, son of Mutsu -no-Shin Hangwan Yoshiyasu, entered it from Ōyeyama. Besides these
the Genji of Settsu and Kawachi came in also from that direction, so that the Capital was filled to
overflowing with the Genji warriors.

Then Kade -no-koji Chūnagon Tsunefusa -on-Kyō and Kebiishi -no-Bettō Saemon -no-kami Saneie
called Yoshinaka and Yukiie to the verandah of the Hō -ō's Palace. Kiso was wearing a suit of
armour laced with Chinese brocade over a hitatare of red silk, and a sword exquisitely
ornamented with gold and silver. His quiver held twenty four arrows with black and white
spotted feathers, and he carried a bow of black lacquer with red binding, and he took off his
helmet and hung it from his shoulder cord as he knelt down and made low obeisance. Jurō

Kurando Yukiie wore a hitatare of dark blue brocade and his armour w as laced with black, while
his sword was decorated in lacquer of the same colour. He

[p.72]

carried a quiver of twenty four arrows with white feathers having a black bar across them, and his
bow was lacquered black over the binding.. He too doffed his he lmet and hung it from his
shoulder as he made his obeisance. Having been bidden to subdue the former Naidaijin
Munemori and all the Heike family, they both again made obeisance and retired. As they both
intimated to the Court that they had no place to lodg e, Kiso was given the Nishi -no-dōin in
Rokujō, the residence of Daizen -no-taiyū Naritada, while the Southern Hall of the Hojijiden
called the Kaya Palace was appointed for Yukiie. The Hō -ō was exceedingly grieved that the
Emperor should have been thus rapt  away by his maternal relations the Taira Nobles, and that he
should be tossed about on the waves of the Western sea, and therefore sent his Imperial
Command to the West that they should immediately send him back with the Three Sacred
Treasures safe to the  Capital. But the Heike paid no heed.

Now there were three Princes, sons of the late Emperor Takakura, beside the Emperor, but as the
Heike had also taken the middle one with them in order to make him Crown Prince, there were
only two remaining in the Cap ital. So on the fifth day of the eighth month the Hō -ō proceeded to
the Palace where they were being brought up. On his calling to him the third Prince, aged five,
the child began to cry in a fretful manner so that the Ho o bade them take him away again, b ut
when the fourth son, who was then four years old, was brought into the Imperial Presence, he
immediately got upon the knees of the Hō -ō and nestled up to him affectionately. The eyes of
the Hō -ō became filled with tears as he said: " See how he comes af fectionately to an old monk
like me that he does not know! He is my grandson indeed; he is just. like the late Emperor when
he was a child; I have never had such a charming remembrance of him till now." Then Jōdōji -no-
Nii-dono, who was then known as Tango -dono, being in attendance on His Majesty asked : " Is it
then decided that this Prince shall be appointed

[p.73]

to succeed to the Throne ? " To which the Hō -ō replied that it should certainly be so. The oracles
were then consulted privately and the resp onse was given that if the Fourth Prince should
succeed to the Throne his descendants would rule Nippon for a hundred generations. The mother
of this Prince was the daughter of Shichijiō Shūri -no-taiyū Nobutaka -no-Kyō, who was one of the
Ladies in waiting of the Empress, and had been much favoured by the late Emperor, so that she
had borne him many children. This Nobutaka no Kyō had many daughters and greatly wished
that one of them might become an Imperial Consort, and having heard that if anyone kept a
thousand white fowls he would certainly have a daughter who would become Imperial Consort,
lie provided himself with a thousand white birds forthwith, and perhaps this was the reason that
his daughter bore so many Princes. Nobutaka was extremely pleased in h is heart, but as he feared
the Heike and was anxious about the Empress he did nothing about them, but Hachijō -no-Nii-
dono, the wife of Kiyomori, reassured him, saying that there was nothing to fear, and that she
would herself see to their bringing up and w ould make one of them Crown Prince. So she
provided many milk nurses for them and had them under her care. So it happened that this
Fourth Prince was adopted by the elder brother of the Niidono, Hōshōji -no-Shugyō Nōen Hoin,
and this Hōin went down with the  Heike to the Western Provinces, leaving his wife and the

child in the Capital.

Soon afterwards, however, he sent a messenger from thence asking her to bring the little Prince to
him, and his wife, much rejoiced, started out with him and had gone as far a s West Shichijō,
when her elder brother, Kii -no-kami Norimitsu, stopped her, saying that it was a foolish thing to
do, for now fortune was likely to favour the little Prince; and it was on the next day the Hō -ō
came to see him. On this account Norimitsu ex pected that he would be appointed to some office,
but time went on and his wishes were

[p.74]

not realized, so at last in his disappointment he wrote these two verses and sent them to the
Court:

" Does not the cuckoo sing at least one note of remembranc e, of the midnight glade where he was
nurtured of old?"
" Pity the poor tomtit, for lonely if free in the mountains, much he envies the day when he was still in
his cage."

The Emperor, who had not till then thought of the condition of Norimitsu, was touch ed by his
case and promoted him to the Upper Third Rank.