CHAPTER I.
SAKARO.

     On the tenth day of the first month of the second year of Gen -ryaku Kurō Taiyū -no-Hōgwan
Yoshitsune proceeded to the Palace of the Hō -ō, and addressed this petition to His Majesty
through Ōkura KyōYasutsune Ason : "Forsaken by the go ds and renounced by Your Majesty, the
Heike have fled from the Capital and are now fugitives tossed hither and thither on the waves.
Yet for the space of three years they have remained at large and unsubdued, and have occupied
many provinces, which is a ma tter for great regret. Therefore have I sworn that I will never
return to this Capital until I have utterly destroyed them, even if I have to pursue them to Korea
or China, or Devils' Island, even to the uttermost confines of the sea or sky." At this the H ō-ō was
greatly rejoiced, and replied: "Be sure and spare no efforts to obtain a decisive victory." Then
Yoshitsune returned to his quarters and spoke thus to the warriors of the Eastern Provinces: " By
virtue of an Imperial Edict of the Hō -ō, and as the r epresentative of Yoritomo, I am about to start
for the Western Provinces to subdue the Heike, neither will I desist from attacking them
anywhere either by sea or land till my purpose is accomplished. Therefore if anyone has any
objection, let him now leave  us and go back at once to Kamakura."

      Meanwhile at Yashima the time had passed by swiftly as the seasons waxed and waned, until
it came to be the third year of their sojourn, and the Heike were continually disturbed by the
rumours of a new army sett ing out against them from the Capital, and of the coalition of the
Kyūshū leaders to attack

[p. 222]

them, so that their spirits sank lower and lower, and the Imperial Consort and the Nii Dono, and
the Mother of the late Emperor and all their Ladies di d not cease from their mournful
prognostications of what was likely to happen to them in the future. " When the rebels of the
East and North disregarded the great obligations they were under to our house, and threw off
their allegiance to follow Yashinaka and Yoritomo, " said Shin -Chūnagon Tomomori -no-Kyō," I
thought it quite likely that the Western Provinces might do the same, and said that it would have
been better to stay in Miyako and await a decision there. But my opinion alone did not prevail,
and so we fled in this timid fashion, and the result is that we have come to this pass." And truly
his words were very reasonable.

     Now on the third day of the second month Kurō Hōgwan Yoshitsune started from Miyako
and proceeded to Watanabe and Fukushima in  Settsu to get his ships in order, with the intention
of attacking Yashima immediately. On the same day his brother Mikawa -no-kami Noriyori left
the Capital also, and he too went to Kanzaki in Settsu to prepare his ships for a campaign against
the Sanyōdō.  On the tenth day of the same month the Hō -ō sent an Imperial Envoy to the shrines
of Ise and Iwashimizu, and gave orders that all the chief priests of all shrines should offer up
prayers for the speedy return of the Emperor and the Three Sacred Treasures to the Capital.


    On the sixteenth day, just as the ships that had been prepared at Watanabe and Fukushima
were about to loose their hawsers and set sail, a most violent tempest arose, and the ships were
damaged so that they could not put out, so that d ay was spent in repairing them. Then the leaders
of the Eastern Provinces, great and small, came together at Watanabe and said "We have so far
had no experience of war at sea, so what shall we do?" "I think we ought to have a „Sakaro‟ fitted
on these ships ," put in Kajiwara. "A „Sakaro?‟ What is that ?" asked Yoshitsune. "When you ride a
horse," replied Kajiwara, "you can gallop forward or back at your pleasure, because it is

[p. 223]

quite easy to turn either to the right or the left, but it is a prett y difficult matter to swing a ship
round ; so if we fit oars at both bow and stern, instead of only at the stern as usual, and insert a
rudder in the middle, then we shall be able to turn about easily just as we like." " What an ill -
omened thing to propose  at the beginning of a campaign," exclaimed Yoshitsune, " you know
armies always set out with the intention of never retreating, and it is only if they meet with a
disaster that they retire, so what is the meaning of these preparations for running away ? Y ou
lords may fit a hundred or a thousand pairs of „backing -oars‟ or „turn -back-oars‟ or whatever you
like to call them, to your ships, but I shall go with no more than the usual number." " A good
general " returned Kajiwara, " is one who advances at the pr oper time, and retreats at the proper
time, thus saving his own life and destroying the enemy ; that is what is called a good general : but
a man of only one idea is called a „wild -boar-warrior,‟ and is not thought much of." "Wild boar or
stag, it's all on e ; the best way to conquer in battle is to attack the enemy's front, and attack again
and again." Then the chiefs of the Eastern Provinces, as they did not dare to laugh openly at
Kajiwara, showed their feelings in their features, and muttered under their  breath to each other.
Yoshitsune and Kajiwara were on the point of drawing their weapons on each other that day, but
fortunately the incident was concluded without any actual quarrel. " Now the ships are repaired
and ready," said Yoshitsune, " let us have  a bite and a cup in celebration ; " and while this was
being done the stores and weapons and horses were got on board, and all being prepared he gave
the order to set sail. The captains and crews murmured at this, however, crying out: " We have
the wind b ehind us, it is true, but it is a little too strong, and the sea will be very rough outside."
This angered Yoshitsune exceedingly. " Do you think I am going to stop putting to sea for a little
wind?" he cried. " Whether you die on the sea or on land, it is  all the result of the karma of a
former life ; and if I told you to put out in the teeth

[p. 224]

of a head -wind you might blame me with some reason, but with the wind behind us, even if it is
a little fresher than usual, not to put out at a critical time like this . . . . ! Ho! Men -at-arms! Shoot,
these fellows if they won't move! " Then Ise Saburō Yoshimori, SatōSaburō Tsuginobu and Satō
Shirōhyōye Tadanobu of Mutsu, Eda -no-Genzō, Kumai -noTarō, Musashi -bō Benkei and others,
each equal to a thousand ordinary men, at once sprang forth. " At our lord's command! " they
shouted, "Off with those ships, or we shoot every one of you! " So when the captains and sailors
saw them running up with their bows in their hands they cried out: "Whether we drown out
there in the sea or are shot here, it is all the same, so put off ! " And so of the two hundred odd
ships five at last got away. These five were, first the Hōgwan's ship; then Tajirō -no-Kwanja's ship ;
then that of Gotōbyōye and his son ; then that of the br others Kaneko, and that of Yodo -no-
Gonai Tadatoshi, who held the office of Funa -bugyō, or Marshal of the Ships. The rest of the
ships, whether from fear of Kajiwara or the weather, did not put out. " There's no need to stop

for the others," said Yoshitsune , " at ordinary times the enemy would be afraid and on the alert,
but on a stormy day like this we can land at a place where he won't be expecting us; thus we can
attack him to advantage. And take care to cover your lights. If the enemy sees many lights he  will
take alarm. Follow my ship by keeping your eye on my head and stern lights." So they sailed on
all night, and in six hours covered a distance that usually took three days. It was about two
o'clock in the morning on the sixteenth day of the second mon th that they set sail from
Watanabe and Fukushima in Settsu, and they arrived off the coast of Awa the next morning
about seven.



[p. 225]