CHAPTER VII.

TWICE AN EMPRESS.


From ancient times to the present day, since the families of Gen and Hei were both called in to
assist in the government, if there were any who, making light of the constitution of the land, did
not obey the Imperial laws, they were correcte d by the other party, and thus any disorder was
prevented. But after Tameyoshi was killed in Hogan and Yoshitomo in Heiji, some of the Genji
went into exile and others lost their lives, so that now only the Heike were flourishing and no
one else dare raise  his head ; and it seemed as if this state of things would last for ever. But after
the death of the Retired Emperor Toba wars ensued, and murders, banishments, vacant offices
and suspensions were continually occurring, so that the whole country was disqui eted and society
was not able to rest in peace, Especially from the period Ei -ryaku and O -ho when some personal
retainers of the Retired Emperor were punished by the Imperial Court and conversely some of
those of the Imperial Court were chastised by the Re tired Emperor ; so that high and low were
afraid, and no one felt at ease, but all were as though looking into a deep pool or walking on thin
ice. And the relations between the Emperor and the Retired Emperor, however estranged they
night be, were remarkab le for their extraordinary circumstances. According to the way of a

[p. 25]

degenerate age like this, people tried to anticipate each other in cunning. Though the Emperor
was continually contradicting the orders of the Retired Emperor, yet one thing espe cially there
was that caused great astonishment to all, and many found fault with his Majesty: it was as
follows : --The Consort of the late Retired Emperor Konoe, who was entitled to be styled Taiko -
tai-kogu or Grandmother of the Emperor, was the daughter of Prince Kinyoshi the Udaijin of Oi -
no-mikado. After the former Emperor had pre -deceased her she moved to the detached palace of
Konoe, called Kawahara, outside the Court precincts, and about the period Ei -ryaku, having come
to the age of about two or thr ee and twenty, she was a little past her prime. But as she still had
the reputation of being the first beauty in the land, the Emperor fell deeply in love with her and
secretly ordered several of the bravest of his retainers to go to the detached palace, a nd privately
sent love letters to her. She however, did not presume to assent to his August suit. So straightway
showing his affection openly, His Majesty deigned to intimate to the Udaijin's family that he
wished to bring her into the Palace as official E mpress. Now as this was a decree unprecedented
in the country, the courtiers took counsel together about it, and all uttered different opinions.
There is, it must be regretfully admitted, an example in a foreign country, in that of Soku -ten
Kogo of China, the Consort of Taiso of To, and thus step mother of the Emperor Ko -so, who
after the death of Taiso became the Consort of Koso. This having happened in a foreign country
is a different matter, but in our country from the time of Jimmu Tenno, in all the sev enty or
more generations of mortal Emperors we have heard of no such thing as becoming Empress for
the second time. The courtiers having expressed their decision unanimously, the Retired Emperor
[1] declared to the Emperor that this thing must not be but H is Majesty answered: " The Emperor
has neither father


[p. 26]

nor mother ; we sit on the Jewel Throne by merit of the Ten Virtues. [2] Such a thing as this
must be, entrusted to the Imperial Will."

As the date of the official entry of the new Empress wa s soon communicated by Imperial
Edict, .the Retired Emperor could do nothing more. When the lady heard it she was overcome by
tears. " If " she said " I had not out -lived my former Lord, but at the beginning of the autumn of
the period Kyu -ju I had termina ted my dew -like existence with his, or if I had become a nun and
retired from the world, I should not have had to hear such unhappy tidings." But the Minister her
father spoke as follows : " One who resists the Emperor's will is no more than a madman;. alr eady
the Imperial. Edict has been published, so there is nothing more to be said ;. only you must go
quickly. If a Prince should be born you will be styled " Kokubo, Mother of the country, and I too
shall become the grandfather of an Emperor ; truly an aus picious thing. If thus you will help your
father it.will be indeed an extremely filial act." To these. words the Empress Dowager made no
answer.

Somehow or other in the course of her writing practise she had written this verse:

" Better by far it had b een to have died when in my
bereavement ; _
Than to live on and hand down a name unexampled
like this."

How this thing will be published in the world, a pitiful and sad case will people consider it!

Soon the day for the State Entry into the Palace ar rived.

[p. 27]

The Minister her father and the Courtiers attendant on the Emperor hastened on the ceremony
of departure from the Palace with all speed, but as she was very reluctant, evening came on and
she had not yet started. Thus it was past midnight when she entered her carriage. After making
her State Entry into the Palace she was conducted into the Reikei -den, and then straightway
assisted in the morning ceremony of government administration. In the Imperial apartments of
the  Shishin -den [3] were t he shoji painted with the figures of the Chinese Sages I -in, Tei -ko-rin,
Gu-sei-nan, Tai -ko-bo, Ro -ku-ri Sensei, Riseki and Shi -ba. There were also shoji with paintings of
long-armed people, long -legged people, and horses. The Oni -no-ma, or Devil's Room, h ad shoji
painted with a lifelike figure of the Chinese general Ri. There is reason to suppose that the shoji
of the seven Sages were painted by Owari -no-kami Ono -no-Tofu. Moreover is it not among the
paintings of the shoji of the Sei -ryo-den th .
at there i s to be seen one by Kanaoka of the moon at down on the distant hills? When the retired
Emperor Konoe was a child, he had in the course of his play made some marks on the paper, and
when his former consort looked, they were there all unchanged : and she tho ught fondly of his

memory and made this verse:

"Ah! to think of the sorrows that note have fallen zip, oil me
When I look at the moon, lining again I'll the Court."

And during this second intimacy with the Emperor her unspeakable sadness affected her  so much
that she fell, sick.