CHAPTER II.

THE ASSASINATION AT COURT.


Now Tadamori, while holding the office of Bizen no Kami, by the request of the retired Emperor
Toba, had built the temple Toku -cho-juin and the Sa -ju-san-gen-do, or hall 33 ken long, within
which were one thousand and one, Buddhas; its first festival being on the thirteenth day of the
third month of the first year of Tensho. As a reward he was honoured by receiving the territory
of the province of Tamba, which  then happened to be unappropriated. Moreover the Emperor of
his bounty graciously permitted him to attend the Court ; which Tadamori did for the first time
at the age of thirty six. But

[p.3]

the higher Courtiers were furious with jealousy and plotted t o assassinate him on the evening of
the festival of Go -Sechi [2] Toyo -no-akari-no-setchie, on the 23rd day of the eleventh month of
the same year. Tadamori, who was not a civil official, being born of a line of warriors, on hearing
of this was troubled in his heart for himself and his house at this unexpected shame that was
come upon him, but finally, as he was in duty bound to serve his August Master under all
conditions, he made his preparations beforehand. Before entering the Court he provided himself
with a long dirk [1] which he girt on under his long court dress, and turning aside to a dimly lit
place, slowly drew the blade, and passed it through the hair of his head so that it gleamed afar off
with an icy sheen, causing all to stare open -eyed. Moreove r a retainer of Tadamori, by birth of the
same family, a grandson of Taira no Mokunosuke Sadamitsu and son of Shinno Saburodaiyu
Iefusa, Sahyoe -no-jo Iesada by name, wearing a body armour laced with bright green under a light
green "kariginu" [3] or loose overdress, and carrying under his arm a "tachi" [4] with a bowstring
bag attached, was waiting in the "koniwa," the small court by the Seiryoden.

Now the Kurando -no-to [5] or Chief of the Record Office and some underlings of his, thinking it
strange that one wearing

[p.4]

unsuitable costume should be within the balustrade of the steps of the Court near the bell -rope
of the library, and wondering if he was not some disorderly fellow, an official of the sixth rank
ordered him to depart quickly. But Iesada thus replied :

"Because I have heard that to -night they will try to kill my Lord Bizen -no-kami dono have I come
hither"; and he remained there and did not depart. And they saw that there was nothing more to
be done ; and thus the attempt did not take plac e.

But when Tadamori danced in the August presence of the Mikado at his Imperial wish, the

others mocked at him, changing the words of the music and singing " Ise heiji wa sugame nari,"
("the winepot of Ise has turned into a vinegar jar.") In thus mention ing the vessels of his province
they punned on his title of Ise -heishi; and since Tadamori had a squint in one eye (sugame) they
also alluded to this in the lampoon. Tadamori. not being able to do anything, left the Presence
before the entertainment had en ded, and going behind the Shishinden, a place that could be seen
by everyone, deposited the sword that he was carrying at his side in the hands of the Tonomo -no-
tsukasa. Iesada, who was waiting for his lord, immediately asked him what had happened , but he ,
though greatly wishing to tell him, seeing in his face the expression of one who would even do
violence in the Palace itself should he tell him the truth, merely answered that nothing out of the
common had taken place.

In the Go -setchie festival only su ch pleasing things as, for instance, white paper, Shuzenji paper,
wrapped up writing

[p.5]

brushes, or writing brushes having a " tomoe" on the stem, had been accustomed to be mentioned
in the songs that accompanied the dance, but there was a certain Daz ai Gon -no-sotsu Suenaka no
Kyo who was of so dark a complexion that the people of his time called him "kuro -sotsu " (or "
black sotsu,") and while he was holding the office of Kurando -no-to, when he danced before the
August Presence, they changed the words  to:

"Oh what a black, black head ; someone must have painted him with lacquer." Also the former
Prime Minister of Kwanzan -no-In, Prince Tadamasa, who was left an orphan when only ten years
old owing to the death of his father Chunagon Tadamune no Kyo, w as received as son -in-law by
the To -Chunagon Kasei -no-Kyo in the time of Go Naka no Mikado, when he held the office of
Harima no kami, and it was an exceedingly gorgeous bridal, so that at the Go -sechie of this time
they japed at him with the refrain; "The  rice of Harima, the scouring rush and the "muku" leaves,
they polish up people's fine raiment."   Though long ago such things had happened, nothing had
been done, and now people said that what was to be done was doubtful. As he had expected
after the concl usion of the festival, all the courtiers [9] and officials together appealed against him ;
for coming to a Court entertainment wearing a sword and bringing military retainers within the
Court Precincts were things strictly regulated according to rank : for  this there was Imperial
Order and ancient precedent, But Ason Tadamori had stationed a soldier wearing common dress,
said to be a retainer of his family, in the small court of the Palace, and had coe to the Go -Sechie
wearing a sword by his side, and both these counts were acts of disorder such as were seldom met
with heretofore. Indeed it was one crime piled on another, a charge he would find it difficult to
escape. All the Court Nobles together petitioned that his name should be erased front the list of
Courtiers and that he herewith be deprived of rank and

[p.6]

 office.   His Majesty the Mikado, greatly surprised, ordered Tadamori into his Presence to make
examination into the affair. In his reply he stated that as to the presence of his retainer in the
Palace, he certainly knew nothing about it : but if his retainers had heard of the designs that
people were plotting against him lately, and in order to help him against such dishonour had
come hither secretly without informing him, then he had no power t o prevent it. "But if there be
any blame, do I not yield my body herewith as for the matter of the sword, I deposited it in the

Tonomotsukasa, and if it be brought out from thence, it may be seen if it be a real sword or not."
As this seemed quite plausibl e, they hastened to bring forth the sword and exhibit it. Its outside
was that of a dirk in a black lacquer sheath, but within was only a wooden blade covered with
silver. Although he had displayed the appearance of a sword to avoid dishonour, his substitu tion
of a wooden blade as a precaution against an after accusation was exceeding praiseworthy. A plan
like this is very commendable in a warrior. That his retainer should have been in attendance in
the court of the Palace this too is an example for retaine rs of the "bushi." So no fault was found in
Tadamori, but, on the contrary, his conduct was greatly admired, and he was pronounced guiltless.