CHAPTER XV.
SHIGEHIRA IS TAKEN ALIVE.
Hon-sammi Chūjō Shigehira was second in command at Ikuta -no-mori, and he was attired that
day in a hitatare of dark -blue cloth on which a pattern of rocks and seabirds was embroidered in
light yellow silk, and armour with purple lacing deepening in its hue  toward the skirts. On his
head was a helmet with tall golden horns, and his sword also was mounted in gold. His arrows
were feathered with black and White falcon plumes, and in his hand he carried a 'Shigetō ' bow.
He was mounted on a renowned war horse c alled Dōji -kage, whose trappings were resplendent
with ornaments of gold. With him was his foster -brother Gotō Hyōye Masanaga in a hitatare of
dyed brocade and a suit of armour with scarlet lacing, and he too was mounted on a splendid
cream -coloured charge r named Yome -nashi As they were riding along the shore to take ship and
escape, Shō -no-Shirō Takaie and Kajiwara Genda Kagesue, thinking they looked a fine prize,
spurred on their horses and bore down upon them. Now there were many ships ranged along the
shore, but the enemy pressed on them so hard from behind that there was no Opportunity to
embark, so the two, crossing the Minatogawa and the Karumogawa, and leaving Hasu -no-ike on
the right and Koma -no-hayashi on the left, rode hard through Itayado and Sum a and endeavoured
to make their escape to the west. As Sammi Chūjō was mounted on such a famous charger as.
Doji-kage it seemed unlikely that any ordinary horse would overhaul him, and the pursuers
mounts were already weakening, when Kajiwara drew his bow to the head sent an arrow
whizzing after   then. Though a long venture the shaft flew

p. 156

true to its mark, and buried itself deeply in the hind -leg of the Chūjō's steed, just above the root
of the tail. Seeing its pace slacken his foster -brother Morin aga, thinking that the Chūjō might
demand his mount, whipped it up and made good his escape. " Ah! " exclaimed the Chūjō, " why
do you desert me thus? Have you forgotten all your promises? " But he paid no heed, and tearing
off the red badge from his armou r, thought of nothing but saving himself by flight. Then the
Chujo, seeing that his horse could go no farther, plunged headlong into the sea to die by drowning,
but the water was so shallow that there was no time, and as he started to cut himself open, Sho
no Shiro Takaie rode up, and springing from his horse, called out to him: "Desist I pray you; allow
me to take you with me." And placing him on his own horse, he bound him to the pommel of his
saddle and escorted him back to the Genii camp.

The Chūjō's f oster-brother Morinaga, who had ridden away and deserted him, fled to seek refuge
with Onaka Hōkyō, one of the priests of Kumano, but after his death returned again to the
Capital with his widow, when she came up on account of a lawsuit that she had. There  he was
recognised by many of his associates who had know him in past times, and they pointed the
finger of scorn at him saying: "How disgraceful! There is Gotō Hyōye Morinaga, who deserted the
Chujo in his need and refused to aid him. He has come back aga in with the widow of the
Hōkyō." And Morinaga, when he heard it was so ashamed that he hid his face with his fan.