CHAPTER III .
THE FIGHT AT THE RIVER KAMO.

After he had gained this victory, Yoshitsune at once sent messengers to Kamakura with an
account of the battle, and as soon as they arrived in his presence Yoritomo put the question
" How is it with Sasaki? " " He was the first across the Uji river; " was the answer: then unrolling
his despatch the messenger read forth : " First across the Uji river, Sasaki Shiro Takatsuna; second,
Kajiwara Genda Kagesue."
When he saw that both these po sitions at Uji and Seta were lost, Kiso Yoshinaka rode off to the
Ho-o's Palace at Rokujo to say farewell for the last time; but having arrived at

p.118

the gate, he found that he had nothing particular to say, so he turned back again, and as a lady,
with whom he had lately fallen in love, happened to live at Takakura in Rokujo, he went in to
see her, and as he was very loath to part from her, he did not emerge at all quickly. Seeing this, a
new retainer of his, named Echigo no Chuta Iemitsu, called out t o his master:  " Why does your
Excellency thus deign to waste time in this dalliance when the august enemy is even now pressing
on the river hard by? That way lies a dog's death; so hasten, I pray you." As his master still paid on
heed to his warnings, how ever, Chuta at length made up his mind to put an end to his life, and
cut open his belly there and died, with these words on his lips: " Since it must be, I, Iemitsu, will
go on before, and on the Mountain of Shide will I await my master."

Then Kiso, at l ast noticing that his faithful retainer had laid down his life to enforce his warning,
tore himself away from his lady and left the house. At this time the whole force that he could
muster consisted of not more than a hundred men under Naba no Taro Hirozum i, and as they
rode out to the river by Rokujo to reconnotire, they saw about thirty horsemen of the enemy
coming to meet them, with two warriors spurring forth in front. These two were Shioya -no-Gorō
Korehiro and Teshikawara -no-Gosaburō Arinao. Seeing the m Shioya at once shouted: "Let us
wait until the main body come up! " " By no means ", said Teshikawara, " when the front is
broken the rest will soon give way; forward!, " and so both parties rode at each other and the
fight began, for the soldiers of Yor itomo aimed at enveloping Kiso in the midst of their ample
forces, if he would stay and fight to the last. Yoshitsune himself, leaving the conduct of the battle
to his subordinates, rode off with five or six retainers to the Palace of the Ho -o in Rokujo, t o
guard it against any further perils. Here Daizen -no-Taiyū Naritada had mounted up on to the
eastern wall and was surveying the turmoil outside, his whole body shaking in the extremity of
his terror, when he saw the

p.119

small band approaching with their helmets hanging loose from the fight, their bow hand sl eeves
flying loose in the wind, and the white colours of the Genji displayed. " Alas! how terrible! " he
shrieked, " it is Kiso who has come again! " Whereat all the Courtiers and Nobles and Ladies in
waiting within, thinking that now at last their hour ha d come, ran about wringing their hands and
making vows to every god and Buddha they could think of, when the voice of Naritada was heard

again : " It may be the warriors of the East who are just entering the town, for the insignia they
wear are different."  Then the Eastern Commander Kuro Onzoshi Yoshitsune, rode up to the gate
and knocked, shouting loudly: Kuro Yoshitsune, younger brother of the former Uhyōye -no-suke
Yoritomo, who has broken through the enemy at Uji, has arrived to protect the Palace! " Whe n
he heard this, Naritada was so overcome with excitement that, as he hastily scrambled down
from the wall he slipt and hurt his back, but so great was his joy that he did not trouble about the
pain, but went on limping into the Palace and reported the fac ts to the Ho -o, who was also
overjoyed to hear it, and immediately ordered the gates to be opened.

Yoshitsune was clad that day in a hitatare of red brocade, and armour of shot purple, while his
helmet was surmounted by upstanding horns. By his side hung a gold mounted sword, and twenty
four black and white arrows were stuck in his. quiver: the upper half of his bow was wound
leftwise with a strip of paper about an inch wide, which was at this time the sign of a General
Commanding. Then the Ho o went out t o the middle gate, and viewed them through a lattice
window, exclaiming: " Ah, what a brave show they make! Let us hear their names and titles."

Then the six captains declared themselves; Tai Sh ōgun Kurō Yoshitsune, Yasuda Saburō
Yoshisada, Hatakeyama Shōji Jirō Shigetada, Kajiwara Genda Kagesue, Sasaki Shirō Takatsuna,
Shibuya Umanosuke; and through they may have

p.120

differed in their armour and trappings, in bearing and courage none was inf erior to the others.
Then, after a low obeisance Yoshitsune spoke as follows: "In order to punish the lawless conduct
of Kiso, the former Uhyoye no suke Yoritomo of Kamakura has sent out an army of sixty
thousand men under the command of Noriyori and mysel f, but as Noriyori is advancing by way
of Seta, as yet none of his men have entered the Capital. I, having overcome the forces of the
enemy at Uji, have straitway hastened to protect this Palace, while my men are even now
engaged with Kiso to cut him off a s he is trying to flee up the river, and I doubt not have already
seized him." At these straightforward and informal words the Ho -o was much gratified and
relieved " See that you guard this Palace well ", he directed, " lest Kiso return again and commit
more violence." Yoshitsune bent low in assent, and ere long his men had come up to the number
of ten thousand horsemen, who were drawn up to keep watch on all four sides of the Palace.

Meanwhile Kiso with twenty of his stoutest followers was waiting for an opportunity to seize the
Ho-o and flee with him to the West to join the Heike, but when he saw that his designs had been
anticipated by the strict guard that Yoshitsune had placed round the Palace, he started off up the
river Kamo to escape, and between Ro kujō and Sanjō he was many times almost surrounded and
slain. Then the tears ran down his cheeks as he exclaimed: " Ah, if I had only known this, I would
never have sent Imai to Seta, for from our earliest days when we played together as children we
swore tha t when we came to die it should be together; and now, alas! it seems we are to fall
separated from one another." So riding up the river to see if he could hear any tidings of Imai, the
enemy rolled down on them like the evening mists, and five or six times  did Kiso and his little
band fling them back between Rokuj ō and Sanjō until at last he cut through them and reached
Matsusaka at Awataguchi. Last year he rode forth from Shinano with

p.121


fifty thousand horsemen, now he flees along the river bed with but six retainers, already half lost
in the melancholy twili ght where lies the nether world.