CHAPTER XIV.
THE YOUNG PRINCE BECOMES A MONK.

The Heike soldiers, sticking the heads of the followers of Prince Mochihito and Gensammi
Nyudo, the Watanabe and the monks of Miidera, about five hundred in all, on the points of t heir
swords and halberds, returned to Rokuhara towards evening, flourishing them in the air and
shouting exultantly. The head of Gensammi himself could not be found, for it had been sunk in
the waters of the Ujigawa by Choshichi Tonau, but after searching hither and thither all those of
his sons were recovered. As to that of the Prince, it could not be identified, since there was no
one there sufficiently familiar with him to recognize it. The Chief Court Physician Tenyaku -no-
kami Sadanari, having been call ed to attend the Prince when he was sick the year before, could
have identified him, but illness prevented him from

[p. 202]

answering the summons. Then one of the Prince's favourite consorts was sent for to Rokuhara,
and as she had borne him several chi ldren and they were much attached to each other, she could
not well make a mistake. Thus it was that, after only one glance, she buried her face in her sleeve
and burst into tears, so that they knew that it was indeed the Prince.

Now this Prince had many children by different consorts and among them he had a son of seven
years old and a daughter of five by a lady called Sarnmi -no-Tsubone, daughter of Iyo nokami
Morinori, who was living with her children at the Palace of the Princess Hachijo -no-Nyoin, and
Kiyomori ordered his brother Ike -no-Chunagon Yorimori to tell her to send the little Prince to
him at once, though the daughter might remain. To this Hachijo -no-Nyoin replied that the child's
nurse had fled away with him in a panic that very morning and he was nowhere to be found. On
this being reported to Kiyomori he ordered soldiers to be sent to the Palace to search. Now the
wife of Yorimori was a lady called Saisho Dono, the foster sister of this Hachijono Nyoin, and
they had been very friendly with each  other, but it happened that shortly before this they had
become somewhat estranged. Then the little Prince said to the Nyoin: "It seems that great trouble
may befall you on my account, so pray send me back quickly." "Ah!" exclaimed the Nyoin
weeping, "how  very sad it is that a child of seven or eight year who knows nothing of the world
should be so affected by this calamity as to say such a thing. Alas, in vain have I brought him up
this six or seven years that this fate should now befall him," and she wep t unrestrainedly; but as
Norimori -no-Kyo kept on repeating his demand, at last, as nothing else could be done, she
delivered him up. His mother Sammi -no-Tsubone too was greatly grieved to think that she was
parting from him for ever, but, as it was inevita ble, weeping bitterly she put on his clothes and
parted and arranged his hair before sending him away, feeling the while like one in a dream, while
all the household from the Nyoin to the ladies in waiting and the maidservants buried their faces
in their

[p. 203]

sleeves and wept in concert. Yorimori -no-Kyo, taking the child with him in a car, brought him to
Rokuhara: then the former Udaisho Munemori -no-Kyo when he saw him spoke thus to his father

the Nyudo: "Surely this is the retribution from a previous  existence; just to look on the young
Prince makes one feel how pathetic is his case; if there be no objection, grant him his life and
hand him over to my keeping." "In that case," replied the Nyudo, "he must be put away in a
monastery." Then Munemori -no-Kyo sent a report of this sentence to Hachio -no-Nyoin, and she
made -no-objection but bade them do so: without delay. So the little Prince retired from the
world and entered the way of Buddha, becoming a disciple of the Abbot of Ninnaji [10]. In after
days he  was known as Yasui -no-Miya -no-Daisojo Toson, chief priest of the temple of Toji [11] in
Kyoto. Prince Takakura had also another son in Nara, and he also was made monk by his guardian
Sanuki -no-kami Shigehide, who accompanied him to the North Country. But K iso Yoshinaka,
when he came down to the capital, had his priestly vows revoked and brought him with him to
make him Emperor, so that he was called 'the Kiso Prince' or 'the Prince of the revoked vows',
and also, because he lived at Yorino in the vicinity o f Saga, he was known as the Prince of Yorino.

In old times, there was a physiognomist named Tojo who prophecied that both Fujiwara
Yorimichi and his younger brother Norimichi who were Kampaku under three Emperors would
live to the age of eighty, and so it  happened. Also that Sotsu -no-Uchi-no-Otodo (Fujiwara
Korechika) had the face of one who would be exiled, and so it turned out. Moreover Shotoku
Taishi declared that the physiognomy of Shushun Tenno was that of one who would die a violent
death, and he was  killed by the minister Umako. Though what the physiogno -

[p. 204]

mists predicted did not always come to pass, yet it seems that those in former ages were the more
accurate. (This because people said: "Has not the Physiognomy Shonagon made a mistake?")

At a later period too, though Kenmei Shinno and Guhei Shinno were both the sons of wise and
pious Emperors, yet they did not succeed to the Throne, but still they made no rebellion. Also in
the case of Sukehito Shinno, the third son of the Retired Emperor  Go-Sanjo, an exceedingly
clever and distinguished Prince, who was nominated by his father in his will to succeed him on
the Throne when the Retired Emperor Shirakawa was only Crown Prince, and yet, on account of
some decision of Shirakawa he did not succe ed; and the son of this Sukehito Shinno, taking the
surname of Genji, rose from having no rank at all to the third rank and became Chujo, being
known as Sammi Chujo. Except in the case of Yosei -in-Dainagon Sadatnu -no-Kyo, son of Saga
Tenno, this is the fir st time that a member of the Genji family has thus risen from nothing to the
third rank. This was Hanazono Sadaijin Arihito Ko.

Now the priests who had made special prayer for the crushing of this rebellion of Prince
Takakura were well rewarded for their pains, the Chamberlain Kiyomine, son of the former
Udaisho Munemori -no-Kyo, being raised to the third rank at the age of twelve years. At the same
age his father Munemori had been only Hyoye -no-Suke, and with the exception of the son of the
Kampaku there w as-no-precedent for a boy of twelve holding such high rank. And the record of
it ran: "These are rewards for the putting to death of Minamoto -no-Mochihito and Gensammi
Nyudo Yorimasa and his sons." Not only were they impious enough to shoot a real son of t he
Senior Retired Emperor, but they had the effrontery to describe him by the name of an ordinary
subject. For this 'Minamoto no Mochihito' meant Prince Takakura.