CHAPTER V.

BUILDING OF A GREAT PAGODA.

Now as the result of the great  efficacy of their prayers, rewards were given to the various temples.
The eastern temple of Ninnaji was repaired. Afterwards seven days' prayer was ordered to be
made, beside the reading of the Law of Daigen and the ceremony of Kwancho or baptism. Enryo
Hogen was raised to be Hoin while the Imperial Zasshu was given the second rank of Princes of
the Blood and allowed the privilege of proceeding to Court in an ox car. As Ninnaji resented this
Kakusei Sozu was raised to the rank of Hoin, besides which other rewards were bestowed too
numerous to mention.

After some time had elapsed the Chugu returned from Rokuhara to the Palace. Since the
daughter of the Lay priest Chancellor had become Imperial Consort, monthly pilgrimages had
quickly been begun to Itsukushi ma the greatly venerated, to pray that a prince might be born to
her, and that he should soon ascend the Throne in order that the Nyudo and his wife might
become Imperial Grandparents, and the Chugu had soon become pregnant and been safely
delivered of a P rince to their great joy.

Now the time that the Heike family began to revere the shrine of Itsukushima in Aki was when
Kiyomori only held the office of Aki -no-kami, and with the income he derived from Aki repaired
the great pagoda at Koya. This work was f inished in six years, having been entrusted to the
steward Watanabe -no-Endo Rokuro Yorikata, and when it was finished Kiyomori himself
proceeded to Koya and worshipped before the great pagoda after which he visited the Oku -no-
in.  Whereupon

[p. 124]

from  somewhere or other there suddenly appeared an old priest with white hair and hoary
eyebrows, his forehead furrowed with many wrinkles, leaning on a cross handled staff, who
addressed him thus: "From ancient days this holy mountain has yielded place to non e as a home
of the Shingon doctrine; and now our great pagoda has been repaired there is none like it in the
land. Now Kebi in Echizen and Itsukushima in Aki are the two shrines where our doctrine of the
Two Worlds [23] is revealed. Keki is very prosperous but Itsukushima is in a very dilapidated
condition: do you therefore report this to the Throne and repair it in like manner, and if this be
done you shall rise to high office so that t here shall be none in the whole country to equal you."
Having spoken thus, he departed, and where he had been standing a wondrous fragrance of
incense arose; and when Kiyomori went to look and see whither he had gone he could see him
but for a distance of three cho, and then he disappeared. " This was no mere man; it was the
Daishi [24] : " he thought, reverently pondering over the vision, and as a remembrance in this
Shaba -world he pai nted two Mandaras in the Kondo of Koya. The western Mandara he had
executed by a painter named Jomyo Hoin, while the eastern one he painted himself. And for
what reason I know not he painted the crown of Dai -Nichi Nyorai, the central figure, with blood
which he took from his own head.


Afterwards he went up to Kyoto and reported this to the Retired Emperor, whereat, the
Emperor and the Court being greatly moved, he was again appointed Aki -no-kami and bidden to
restore the shrine of Itsukushima. So he rebuil t it, raising up its torii and renovating its many
shrines, constructing also a

[p. 125]

gallery measuring three hundred and sixty yards in length. When all the work was finished,
Kiyomori went to worship at the shrine, and, in a dream which came to him while spending the
night in worship, he saw the doors of the Holy of Holies open and a beautiful youth with tightly
bound hair come out and say: " I am the messenger of the Daimyojin of this shrine; do thou take
this blade and make secure therewith the Thr one of this Imperial Realm; " handing him a short
halberd ornamented with silver bands. On his awaking and reflecting on the dream lo! it was a
reality, for there was the halberd beside his pillow. Moreover he received also this oracle from the
Daimyojin :  " Whether you remember or forget, I know not, but the words of the sage of Koya
will stand ; if however your actions be evil, your r preeminence will not be transmitted to your
descendants.