CHAPTER XV.
DEPARTURE O F TADANORI FROM KYOTO.

Satsuma -no-kami Tadanori, who had already le ft the Capital, wishing to see Gojō -no-sammi
Shunsei -no-Kyō once again, rode back again to the city with a small train of five retainers and a
page, all, like himself, in full armour. When he came to the gate of the mansion, however, he
found it shut fast,  and even when he called his name, it was not opened, though there was a
sound of people running about within crying out that one of the fugitives had returned. Then
Satsuma -no-kami hastily dismounted from his horse and himself cried out with aloud voice: "It is
I, Tadanori, who have come; I have something to say to Sammi dono; if you will not open the
gate, at least beg him to come forth here that I may speak with him." "If

[p.57]

it is indeed Tadanori," relied Shunsei -no-Kyō, "you need have no fear, but admit him." Then they
opened the gate and he entered, and the meeting between the two was most moving and pathetic.
"Ever since I became your pupil in the art of poetry years ago," said Tadanori, "I have never
forgotten you, but for the last few years the disorder of the Capital and the risings in the
provinces have prevented me from coming to see you. Now the final scene in the fall of our
house hurries on apace, and the Emperor has  already departed from the Capital. But there is one
thing that I very greatly desire. Some time ago I heard that an Anthology of Poems was to be
made by the Imperial Command, and I wished to ask if you would condescend to submit one of
my poor verses for consideration, that my name may be remembered in time to come; and I felt
great regret when the Collection was postponed owing to the unsettled state of the country. If,
however, at some time in the future, when peace is restored to the Empire, this Anthol ogy
should be made, I would beg your favour for one of the stanzas in this scroll, that my spirit may
rejoice under the shade of the long grass, and from that far off world may come and aid you." And
with these words he drew out from beneath the sleeve of his armour a scroll containing a
hundred verses that he considered to be the best he had so far composed and handed them to
Shunsei -no-Kyō. "Truly does this memento show that you have not forgotten me," replied
Shunsei as he opened and perused it, "and I f ind it hard to keep back my tears when I think of
the manner of your coming. Verily the sadness of it is unutterable and your affection to me most
deep." "Whether my bones will bleach on the hills or my name be echoed by the billows of the
Western Sea, I c are not," answered Tadanori, "for I feel no regret for this fleeting world; and so, as
it must be, farewell; "and he sprang up in his horse, and, replacing his helmet on his head, rode
away to the westward. Sammi -dono stood looking after him a long while u ntil lie was out of sight,
and as he looked the words of

[p.58]

the following Chinese verse were borne back to his ears in the voice, as it seemed, of Tadanori:

"Far is the road I must travel; so do I gallop
into the evening mists of Ganzan. "

Overcome  by his melancholy thoughts, Shunsei controlled his feelings with difficulty as he slowly
returned to his mansion.


In after days, when the Empire was once more at peace, an Imperial Order was issued to make an
Anthology called the Senzai -shū and Shunsei r emembered the request of Tadanori and his
conversation, but though there were many verses worthy of immortality in the scroll that he had
written, as at that time he and all the Heike had been declared to be rebels against the Throne, all
that he could do for the memory of his unhappy disciple was to include one of them under the
title of "A flower of my native land," by "An unknown author." The stanza runs thus:

"Though desolation has stricken the City of rippling wavelets,
Still does the cherry tree put forth its blossoms of yore. "