CHAPTER XIII.

THE FATE OF  THE PRINCE.

Then Ashikaga Matataro, wearing armour with red leather lacing over a hitatare of russet gold
brocade, with a helmet ornamented with lofty horns, a gold -mounted tachi by his side, a twenty -
four black and white spotted arrows on his back, carr ying a black lacquered bow lashed with red
bands, and riding a light brown horse with a gold -mounted saddle on which is the crest of an owl
on an oak bough, stood up in his stirrups and shouted loudly: "I am Ashikaga Matataro Takatsuna,
aged seventeen, son  of Ashikaga -no-Taro Toshitsuna of Shimotsuke, descended in the tenth
generation from Tawara Toda

[p. 198]

Hidesato, the renowned warrior who gained great fame and reward for destroying Masakado the
enemy of the Emperor, and though it may be at the risk of divine anger that one without rank or
office should draw bow against a Prince of the Royal House, yet as I owe deep graditude to the
Heike for many favours, here I stand to meet any on the side of Gensammi Nyudo who dares to
face me." And he made an ons et and fought his way within the gate of the Byodo -in. Then the
commander Sahyoye -no-kami Tomomori, seeing this, ordered his forces to cross over, and about
twenty -eight thousand horsemen plunged into the river, so that the rapids of the Ujigawa were
damme d and stayed by the mass of men and horses, and the footsoldiers crossing below the
horsemen were hardly wetted above their knees. But everything is carried away, by the natural
force of water, so the men of Ise and Iga, to the number of six hundred horsem en, were washed
away through their ranks being broken by the force of the current, and their armour of various
hues, green, scarlet and red, rising and sinking as they were washed hither and thither in the
stream, looked like the maple leaves on Kannabiyam a, when in late autumn they are blown by
the mountain blasts into the Tatsuta river and collect in masses where the flood is dammed.
Among them three gallants, clad in the scarlet armour of a leader of armies, stuck helplessly in a
fish decoy, and Izu -no-kami, watching them as they struggled in the rapids, composed this stanza:

"Lo! the bright scarlet hue of the mail of the warriors of Ise;
Now they are stuck like fish, struggling in Uji's decoys."

They were Kuroda -no-Gohei Shiro, Hino -no-Jiro and Otobe -no-Yashichi, all men of Ise, and
Hino -no-Juro, a veteran soldier, wedging the butt of his bow into a cleft of the rock, scrambled
out by its aid and then pulled out his two companions, thus saving their lives.

Now when the whole force had reached the other  side they advanced and fought their way in
through the gate of the Byo -

[p. 199]


do-in and in the confusion the Prince attempted to escape town; Nara, while Gensammi's men
the Watanabe and the warrior priests of Miidera strove to hold back the foe with their bows and
arrows. The veteran warrior Gensammi, now more than three score years and ten, was soon
wounded in the right elbow by an arrow and was about to retire within the temple to die calmly
by his own hand, when a band of the enemy threw themselves  in his way, whereupon his second
son Gendaiyu -no-Hangwan Kanetsuna turned to counter them and let his father escape. His
armour laced with Chinese silk was worn over hitatare of dark blue brocade, and he rode a cream
colour horse with a saddle mounted in gold. Then Kazusa -no-Taro Hangwan shot an arrow that
struck him beneath the helm, and as he staggered at the blow, Kazusa -no-kami's son Jiro Maru, a
strong and valiant fighter, clad in green armour with a helmet of three plates on his head,
unsheathed his sword and sprang upon him. They both grappled immediately and fell together,
when Gendaiyu Hangwan, who was a powerful man, gripped Jiro Maru, pressed him down and
cut off his head, but just then fourteen or fifteen of the Heike horsemen came up and Kanets une
was overpowered at last by numbers and slain. Izu -no-kami Nakatsuna too, after fighting with
reckless bravery, covered with wounds, retired to the Tsuridono of the Byodo and there put an
end to himself, his head being taken up by Shimokawabe -no-Tosabur o Kiyochika and thrown
under the verandah. Rokujo -no-Kurando Nakaie and his son Nakamitsu also fought valiantly until
they were slain. This Nakaie was the eldest son of the late Tatewaki Senjo Yoshikata, and when
father was killed, being an orphan, he was adopted by Gensam -mi Nyudo out of pity, and now,
faithful to their long compact, they both died together. Gensammi Nyudo, calling Watanabe
Choshichi Tanau, bade him strike off his head, but he refused, overcome by the thought of
cutting off his master's he ad while alive, but offered to do so after he had committed suicide.
Then Gensammi Nyudo, turning to the West, put his hands together

[p. 200]

and repeated the Nembutsu ten times in a loud voice, after which he composed this sad stanza;

"Like a fossil t ree from which we gather -no-flowers
Sad has been my life, fated -no-fruit to produce."

And with these last words he thrust the point of his sword into his belly, and bowing his face to
the ground pierced himself through and died. It was not a time when peo ple usually make poems,
but as he' had been extremely fond of this pastime from his youth up, so even at the hour of
death he did not forget it. Choshichi Tonau took his head, and fastening stones to it sunk it in a
deep part of the Ujigawa. Now though the  Heike samurai had been strictly ordered to take the
Takiguchi Kiou alive, yet he, after fighting with great bravery, being very severely wounded, at
last cut himself open and died. Enman -in-no-Taiyu Genkaku, thinking that the Prince had by this
time got f ar away, gripping his sword in one hand and his halberd in the other, cleft his way
through the midst of the foe and leaping into the river, without relinquishing any of his arms,
dived beneath the water and emerged safely on the other side. Then ascending  to a high place he
shouted with a loud voice: "Ho! how now, my lords of the Heike, see I have got thus far!" after
which he returned to Miidera. Now Hida -no-kami Kageie, a veteran soldier, suspecting that the
Prince would certainly attempt to flee to Nara  under cover of the fighting, rode hard on his track
with four or five hundred men in full armour, and as he expected, overtook him in front of the
torii of Komyozan with his escort of about thirty horsemen. As the arrows flew like rain -no-one

could tell w hose it was, but one of the arrows of the Heike struck the Prince in the side so that
he fell from his horse, whereupon they killed him and cut off his head. Oni Sado, Aratosa,
Kodaiyu, and Gyobuno Shunshu who accompanied him, not wishing to live after the ir master,
threw themselves upon the enemy and died fighting together. Among them his foster brother,
Rokujo -no-suke-no-Taiyu Munenobu, jumped into the pond at Niino, and hiding his face among
the waterweed, lay

[p. 201]

there trembling. Soon after the H eike came riding back again to the number of four or five
hundred horsemen, laughing and shouting as they rode, and peeping out he could see in the midst
of them a headless corpse in white clothing born on a shutter. It was the Prince without doubt,
for in  his girdle was the flute ' Koeda ' which he had bidden them bury with him in the coffin if
he died. He earnestly wished to rush out and throw himsel f on the body, but fear restrained him,
and after the enemy had half passed by he came out of the pond, and  wringing out his wet
garments returned weeping to the capital, where there was none who did not hold him in
aversion.

Now about seven thousand soldier priests of Nara in full armour had gone forth to meet the
Prince, and while the vanguard reached as far  as Kozu and the rearguard was still surging out of
the southern gate of the Kofukuji, they heard that the Prince had been slain before the torii of
Komyozan, alas! but fifty cho distant from Kozu. So, unable to do any more, they halted,
lamenting that the y had not come up in time.