CHAPTER XV.
NUE.

Now this Gensammi Nyudo Yorimasa was the fifth generation from Settsu -no-kami Raiko, the
grandson of Mikawanokami Yoritsuna and son of Hyogo -no-kami Nakamasa. At the time of the
fight of Hogen he was on the side of the Imperial Army, but received -no-reward: also in the
rebellion of Heiji he forsook all his kinsmen and fought on  the same side, but his recompense was
small. For long he only held the title of Daida Shugo or Guard of the Palace, and had not the
privilege of entry to Court, but after he was old, he obtained the privilege by composing the
following verse:

"Standing f ar off outside as guard to the Holy of Holies
How can I see the moon, hid in the shade of the trees?"

For this he was granted the lower grade of the Upper Fourth rank, and so he remained for some
time until, wishing to proceed to the Third Rank, he made a nother stanza, thus:

"So I go through the world as one who is picking up acorns [11],
Under the boughs of the oak, doomed not to rise any higher."

Some time afterwards he retired from the world and was known as Gensammi Nyudo Yorimasa,
(Minamoto Third Ran k), being seventy -five the same year. Among the many deeds of renown
that Yorimasa performed in the course of his life the most remarkable was in the Ninpei period
when the Emperor Konoe -in was on the Throne. Every night the Emperor was frightened by
somet hing, and though he summoned the most celebrated of the priests and had them chant
those Sutras most potent for exorcism it was all of no effect. The time that the Emperor was thus
troubled was about the hour of the Ox (2 a.m.), when

[p. 206]

a black clo udy mass used to come up from the direction of the wood of Higashi Sanjo and hover
over the Palace, and it always affrighted him. So a Council of Courtiers was held about it. Now in
former days in the period of Kwanji, when Horikawa in was on the Throne, t his Emperor was
terrified in the very same way, and Yoshiie Ason, who was Commander of the Guards at that
time, took up his position on the verandah of the Shishinden, and at the usual time of the
apparition twanged his bowstring three times and declaimed in a loud and terrible voice: "I am
Minamoto Yoshiie formerly Mutsu -no-kami," so that the hair of those that heard it stood on end,
whereat the distress of His Majesty was relieved. So according to this precedent Yorimasa was
chosen from among the warriors  of the Taira and Minamoto families. He was at this time only
Hyoye -no-kami, and on being informed of it he said: "From former times samurai have been

stationed at the Palace to drive away rebels and to smite those who disobey the Imperial
Commands, but it  is the first time that I have ever heard of their having apparitions to deal with."
But as it was an Imperial Order he went.   He took with him his most trusted retainer I -no-Hayata
of Totomi, who carried an arrow feathered with the underfeathers of an eag le's wing, while he
himself, wearing a double kariginu, carried his lacquered bow and two barbed arrows and
proceeded to the verandah of the Shishinden. The reason for his taking two arrows was that one
Masayori -no-Kyo, who was at that time Sashoben, had s uggested that he be chosen to deal with
the monster, and so Yorimasa had determined that if he failed to kill the creature with the one
arrow he would shoot the other straight at Masayori's neck. After awhile, as has been described,
at the time when the Em peror was always wont to be alarmed, a mass of black cloud came from
the direction of the wood by Higashi Sanjo and floated over the top of the Palace. Yorimasa,
looking up, saw a strange shape in the midst of the cloud and determining not to live if he mi ssed,
took an arrow, and earnestly, repeating, invocation to the god of war 'Namu

[p. 207]

Hachiman Dai -Bosatsu!' drew the bow mightily and let fly. The arrow flew straight to the mark
and Yorimasa gave a loud shout of triumph as I -no-Hayata came running  up, seized the thing as it
fell and, pressing it down with might and main, pierced it through nine tunes with his sword.
Then many others ran up with torches, and when they came to inspect it they found it was a
most horrible monster with a monkey's head,  the body of a badger, the tail of a snake and feet
like a tiger, its voice being like a Nue bird. The Emperor, out of his great gratitude to Yorimasa,
presented him with a famous sword called 'Shishio' or Lion King. This was handed to the Sadaijin
Yorinag a to give to Yorimasa, and as His Excellency proceeded to come half -way down the steps
of the Palace, it being then the tenth day of the fourth month, the voice of a cuckoo that chanced
to fly overhead echoed twice or thrice, whereupon the Sadaijin exclaim ed:

"How does the cuckoo too wish to make a name in the heaven."

But Yorimasa, sticking out his right knee and spreading out his left sleeve, looked up at the
crescent moon in the sky and replied:

"Then let the bow -shaped moon let fly a shaft at the bir d."

Then he received the sword and retired.

This Yorimasa -no-Kyo, beside being a peerless warrior, was also a distinguished poet and much
admired by his contemporaries. The bird they put into a boat and set it adrift. In the period Oho
also, in the reign  of Nijo in a monstrous bird called Nue was heard to cry in the Palace, so that the
heart of the Emperor was troubled, and so as had been done before he summoned Yorimasa. It
was the evening of the twentieth day of the fifth month. The Nue only flew once o ver the Palace
and its voice was not heard a second time. It was so dark that nothing could be seen and therefore
there was nowhere to aim, so Yorimasa took a great whirring arrow and shot it over the roof of
the Palace at the place where the cry had been heard.


[p. 208]

The Nue, alarmed at the sound of the arrow, sprang up into the sky, when Yorimasa, quickly
seizing a smaller whirring arrow, let it fly. It struck and brought down the creature, whereupon
all those in the Palace came rushing out shouting confusedly. On this occasion Yorimasa received
a robe of honour from the Emperor. This time it was Oi -no-Mikado no Udaijin Kinyoshi who
received it to present to Yorimasa. "In ancient China," said he in admiration, "You shot a wild
goose beyond the clouds,  but now Yorimasa has shot a Nue in the rain:

"Famous the deed site the dark in the rainy season of springtime."
"Nay at the time it seemed twilight had scarcely gone by,"

[p. 209]

replied Yorimasa as he received the robe and retired. Then, having recei ved the fief of Izu, he
appointed his eldest son Nakatsuna as its Governor, and having attained the Third Rank was
living at ease on his estates in Tamba and Wakasa, when he started this vain revolt and perished
with the Prince and his sons and grandsons.