CHAPTER III.

MOON -VIEWING.

The ninth day of the sixth month was fixed for the commencement of the new Palace, the tenth
day of the eighth month fo r the celebration of the raising of the roof -beams and the thirteenth
day of the eleventh month for the Imperial Entry. The Ancient Capital was now falling into ruin,
but the new one was full of life and bustle. Thus sadly did the summer pass and the autum n had
already come on. When the autumn was almost half over, those who were in the new capital of
Fukuhara went out to the places famous for moon -viewing. Some went along the shore from
Suma to Akashi, recalling the ancient memories of the romance of Princ e Genji, and some crossed
over the strait to the Isle of Awaji to gaze at the moon at Ejima -ga-iso. Others made their way to
Shiraura, Fukiage, Waka -no-Ura, Sumiyoshi, Naniwa, Takasago, or Onoue and stayed to view the
moon at dawn before returning. Those w ho had stayed behind in the Ancient Capital went to
Hirosawa at Fushimi for moon -viewing.

Now Tokudaiji -no-Sadaisho Sanesada -no-Kyo, being greatly devoted to the moonlight scenery of
the Ancient Capital, after the tenth day of the eighth month went up thi ther from Fukuhara. Ah !
how changed did he find everything. Before the front gate of the few remaining houses the grass
had grown thickly, and in the dew -laden courts was a tall undergrowth of mugwort and rushes,
while the chirp of the insects shrilled ev erywhere, and the chrysanthemum and purple orchid
grew wild as in the plains. Only the Omiya Palace at Konoe Kawara still recalled the grandeur of
former days. The Sadaisho proceeded to this Palace with his retainers and knocked. at the outer
gate. From

[p. 219]

within the voice of a woman called reproachfully. "Who is it that brushes the dew from the
weeds of such a neglected place?" "It is the Sadaisho who has come up from Fukuhara," was the
reply. ' Ah, in that case, since the great gate is locked, I p ray you enter by the postern on the
eastern side," she answered. So the Taisho entered by the eastern postern. Now the occupant of
the Palace, the Senior Dowager Empress, Consort of Konoe Tenno, finding time hang heavy on
her hands, had opened the lattice on the south side of her apartment and was solacing herself by
playing on the biwa, reviving the while her memories of former days, when unexpectedly the
Sadaisho entered. His appearance greatly surprised the Empress, who laid aside her biwa and
exclaimed:  "Ah ! is it indeed reality or am I in a dream? But pray enter." In the volume of the
Genji Monogatari called 'Uji' [12] it is written how the daughter of the Lay -devotee Prince [13],
oppressed with melancholy at the passing of autumn, spent the night playin g the biwa to calm
her troubled spirit, and becoming impatient at last for the moon of dawn to appear, her feelings
overcame her and she beckoned to it with the plectrum of her biwa. By this we can understand
something of the Empress' feelings.

Now in thi s Palace was a waiting damsel who went by the name of 'Eve awaiting Maid,' and the
reason of this nickname was that once the Empress had asked which was the most affecting, the

awaiting a lover in the evening or the parting from him in the morning, and the  girl had replied
with the verse:

"Sadder the bell at eve when we wait in vain for his coming;
Nought is the cry of the bird, hast'ning the parting at dawn."

[p. 220]

Calling this lady, Sanesada -no-Kyo conversed with her about many things past and prese nt, and
then he made the following song in the Imayo style about the ruined state of the former capital;

"When we now view the capital of yore,
How is it wasted like a reed -grown plain;
Through all its chambers pours the moon's pale light,
The blasts of a utumn pierce me to the bone."

This strain he sang three times clearly, and the Empress and all her lady attendants were so
moved that they buried their faces their sleeves and wept.

Meanwhile the dawn broke and the Sadaisho took leave of them and returne d to Fukuhara. On
the way he called a certain Kurando of his company and said to him: "I think that lady -in-waiting
seemed very much pained at parting, I pray you go and say something suitable to the occasion."
So the Kurando hurried back again at his bidd ing and improvising this stanza recited it to her as
though from his lord:

"Though you said it is nought, the cry of the bird at the dawning;
Now at this very dawn, why is your countenance sad?"

Without hesitation the lady replied:

"Though we are pained  at the bell when at eve we grow weary of waiting;
Yet when at dawn he returns, hateful the cry of the bird."

Then the Kurando hastened back again and related the whole affair to his lord, whereat the
Sadaisho praised him saying that vas well said indeed;  and ever after th is Kurando was known
Mono -ka-wa-no-kurando, after the first words of his poem.

The three couplets of the lady and the Kurando run thus:


Matsuyoi no fukeyuku kane no koe kikeba,
Kaeru ashita no tori was mono ka wa.

Mono ka wa to kiki g a iikemu tori no ne no,
Kesa shimo nado ka kanashikarurammu.

Mataba koso fuke yuku kane no tsurakaramme
Kaeru ashita no tori no ne zo uki .