CHAPTER X.
THE EXECUTION OF ROK UDAI.

     So Rokudai Gozen grew up thus until he was fourteen or fifteen years old, when he was so
beautiful that he shed as it

[p. 304]

were a radiance all about him. But that his mother should have said in admiration: " If we were in
power he would n ow be an officer of the Konoe," was too outspoken. At a favourable
opportunity Yoritomo sent to Mongaku saying: " What kind of youth is Rokudai Gozen, son of
the Sammi Chūjō Koremori whom you have in charge? Do you think of him as you did of me
formerly, t hat he is one able to subdue the enemies of the Throne, or avenge his father's shame ? "
" Do not trouble yourself about him," replied Mongaku, " for he is a spiritless and stupid fellow."
Still Kamakura Dono was not quite satisfied.  "If there were a rebe llion that priest would be for
it," he remarked ominously; "and though it is not likely in my lifetime, I don't know about my
posterity." When this reached his mother's ear she again urged him to become a monk without
further delay.  So; about the spring o f the fifth year of Bun -ji, cutting off his beautiful hair short at
the neck, and attired in a robe and hakama of drab colour, with his travelling -box on his back, he
started out on a pilgrimage; and Saitō Go and Saitō Roku accompanied their master in simi lar
garb. First ascending Mount Kōya, he visited Takiguchi Nyudō the virtuous priest who had
helped his father to attain enlightenment and instructed him in the Way, and from him heard all
particulars of his father's becoming a monk, and his subsequent dea th. Then, wishing to retrace
his father's steps, he went on to Kumano, and looking across at the island of Yamanari which is in
front of the shrine called Hama -no-miya, to which his father had rowed, he greatly desired to
cross over to it, but on account o f the contrary wind he was not able. As he stood gazing over at
it he wondered in what place it was that his father had sunk, and felt as though he wished to ask
the white crested waves that came rolling in on the shore.  Regarding the sand of the beach
tenderly, as being perchance the bones of his parent, his sleeves were bedraggled with tears, and
ever moist like those of the sea damp garments of the fishermen. Passing all that night on the
beach, he spent his time reading the

[p. 305]

Sutras and repeat ing the Nembutsu, drawing with his finger the likeness of a Buddha in the sand;
and when dawn appeared, summoning a priest, he dedicated all the merit he had acquired to the
enlightenment of his father's spirit, and returned to the Capital with his heart f ull of sadness.

    Now the Emperor at this time was Go -Toba -no-in, and he thought of nothing but pleasure, so
that all the affairs of state were in the hands of the mother of the Empress, and people lamented
greatly at it. Because the King of Go loved Ke nkaku, those who suffered hurt in the kingdom
were not few;

and because Sai -yu captivated the King of Go, many ladies of the Court died of starvation. And
because those of lower rank will always imitate the pleasures of those above them, all those of
under standing loudly lamented the danger to the Empire. But the second Imperial Prince Go -
Takakura -in was much devoted to statesmanship, and very diligent in intellectual, matters, and
Mongaku, shrewd priest that he was, was very fond of meddling in the managem ent of affairs, so
that he was extremely anxious to set this Prince on the Throne; but while Yoritomo was alive, he
did take any steps.

     Then, on the thirteenth day of the first month of the tenth year of Kenkyū, Yoritomo died at
the age of fifty thre e, and Mongaku raised a revolt forthwith ; but it was immediately discovered,
and officers were sent to Nijō Inokuma to arrest Mongaku, who was then more than eighty years
of age, and banish him to the province of Oki. As they were leading him away from th e Capital
he burst out: "What does that Ball -loving Youth mean by letting them take an old man like me,
who does not know whether he will live from one day to the next, and send him under Imperial
Chastisement to a place like Oki, far away from the Capital . You had better see that someone is
sent there to bring me back pretty quickly! " And so, dancing with rage and reviling strongly,
Mongaku was sent into exile. It was because this Emperor was so fond of playing ball that
Mongaku called him by this contemp tuous name. It

[p. 306]

was very strange that afterwards, in the period Shō -kyū, on account of his many rebellions,
though there were many other provinces, this Emperor should have also been banished to the far
off isles of Oki. And it is said that the a ngry ghost of Mongaku wrought many evil things there;
continually appearing in the Emperor's Presence, and saying all kinds of things to him.

     Now Rokudai Gozen, who was now styled Sammi -no-Zenji, had continued to live in
retirement in the recesses of  Takao. " The son of such a man, and the disciple of such a man,"
quoth Yoritomo, " though he may have shaved his head, is not likely to have shaved his heart."
And he sent a petition to the Court that he might be taken and executed, and An -Hōgwan
Sukekane arrested him and sent him down to the Eastern Provinces, where Okabe -no-Gon-no-
kami Yasutsuna of the province of Suruga was ordered to take him and behead him at Tagoe -
gawa in the province of Sagami. That his life was spared from his  thirteenth year to beyond his
thirtieth was solely through the mercy of Kwannon of Hase. And with the death of Sammi -no-
Zenji there   perished the last of the Heike.

KANCHO MAKI.