CHAPTER X VI.
THE EXECUTION OF MUNEMORI.

     So the Daijin Munemori was brought before Yoritomo. He was placed in a room separated by
a courtyard from the one where the Lord of Kamakura was seated, and opposite to it, so that
Yoritomo could scrutinize him from beh ind his curtain. Through Hiki -no-Toshirō Yoshikazu he
greeted him thus: " Far be it indeed from Yoritomo to regard the Heike family as his personal
enemies, since if it had not been for the favour of the late Nyudō Kiyomori he would not have
been alive tod ay. But some twenty years have passed since then, and seeing that the Heike have
been declared enemies of the Throne and an Imperial Edict has been issued for their chastisement,
it was not possible for me to disobey the Imperial Command, and so it is that  I have the honour
of your presence here. I am indeed pleased to see you before me thus alive and well." When
Yoshikazu brought this message to Munemori it was regrettable that he prostrated himself in
obeisance.

     Now among all the lords of all provin ces, who were sitting there in order, were many from
the Capital, besides some who had formerly been retainers of the Heike house, and there were
none who did not consider this behaviour contemptible. " Ah," said one, " it is this spirit that has
brought h im to his present plight. But this low obeisance is hardly likely to save his skin. If one as
great as he was in the Western Provinces is thus captured alive, it is quite natural he should be
brought down here." And many agreed with these sentiments, thoug h many also shed tears of
pity. " A fierce tiger when in the mountains is a terror to all the beasts," observed one of these, "
but when it is in a cage it will wag its tail and beg for food; and so

[p. 270]

however brave a general may be, when all is lo st his courage will fail him: and so it is with this
Daijin."

     Now, though the Hōgwan made many representations, yet Owing to the slanders of Kagetoki.
Yoritomo paid no attention to them, but only gave orders that he should immediately return
again, t aking Munemori and his son with him: and so, on the ninth day of the sixth month he
once more set out with them for the Capital. Pitiable to relate, Munemori was glad to hear this,
for he thought his life would be prolonged, if but for a day or two. And so , as they went along,
wherever they stopped he wondered if he was to die there. In this way they passed through
several provinces till they came to Utsumi in Owari, and as formerly Sama -no-kami Yoshitomo
had been executed here, he expected to meet the same  fate, and when they passed on he felt
greatly relieved, hoping that he was permitted to live after all. His son Uemon -no-kami, however,
did not share these hopes, but thought their execution was only being postponed till they were
near the Capital in orde r that the heads might not putrefy, seeing that the weather was hot. Out
of pity for his father he said nothing of this to him, but occupied himself with silently repeating
the Nembutsu.

     On the twenty third day they arrived at Shinohara in the provin ce of Omi. Until the day

before the father and son had been kept together, but on the morning of this day they were
separated. Yoshitsune, who was ever considerate towards others, had sent on a messenger three
days before to summon a certain holy man famou s for his sanctity, named Honjō -bō Tankō of
Ōhara. On his arrival Munemori enquired of him: " Where is Uemon -no-kami? If we are to be
executed I should like our bodies to fall on the same mat. Why do they part us, while we are still
alive, for seventeen ye ars we have never been separated even for an hour? The reason why I
chose to live and not die in the Western Provinces, and to expose myself to the shame of being
brought thus to Miyako and Kamakura, was only for the sake of being with my son." And he
burst into

[p. 271]

tears as he spoke. The priest too was much affected, but thinking it would not do to break down,
wiped away his tears and composed himself, saying : " Alas, since parental affection is the same
both among high and low, it is natural that your lordship should feel thus. Since you were born
into this world you have attained to such heights of glory and happiness as have not been
paralleled even in the days of old; rising to be Chief Minister and Maternal Relative of the
Heavenly Sovereign, a nd thus draining the cup of earthly greatness: and now that you have fallen
to your present plight, since it is the result of the karma of a former life, you must feel no
resentment against either the world, or men, or gods, or Buddhas. Even the pleasures of the
profound tranquility of the heaven of Maha -brahma leaves something to be desired; what then
shall we say of this life, evanescent as a flash of lightning or a drop of dew? Even the hundred
million and a thousand years life of the heaven of Indra is but as a dream, so the thirty nine years
of your life till now are but as a moment. Who is there who can taste the elixir of eternal youth,
or wh o can prolong his days like Sei -ō-bō and To -bō-saku? Great was the glory of Shi -kōtei of
Shin, but he lies buried in his tomb at Risan: Butei of Kan was loath to die, but now he rots under
the moss of Toryō. All who live must surely die; even S'akaya Muni could not escape the smoke
of the sandal wood. When pleasure is at its zenith then comes pain; and even the angels are not
exempt from the Five Failings. And as Buddha says in the Hannya Kyō: " When the mind is
entirely empty, desiring neither evil nor goo d, then there is no more hindrance of phenomena; "
so if we regard both good and evil as unreal, we shall verily be in accord with the mind of Buddha.
And inasmuch as Amida Nyorai, after meditation lasting five kalpas, was at last, after overcoming
all dif ficulties, able to made the Great Vow, is it not most stupid and regrettable if we still
continue to spend countless myriads of ages bound to the revolving wheel of births and deaths,
seeing the treasures of salvation spread out before us without

[p. 272]

lifting a hand to grasp them? Concentrate your whole mind on these things now." And thus
admonishing him, the priest urged him to repeat the Nembutsu, so Munemori, perceiving that he
was indeed a saintly priest, suddenly putting all earthly thoughts from  his mind, turned to the
west, and putting his hands together, in a loud voice repeated the Nembutsu. As he did so Kitsu
Uma -no-suke Kinnaga drew his sword and moved round behind him from the left side to cut off
his head, when Munemori suddenly stopped th e Nembutsu and enquired: " Is Uemon -no-kami
already dead?" At this painful interruption Kinnaga thought the head might fall backwards, but it
fell to the front. At the sad scene both the priest and also the rough soldiers of the guard could
not refrain fro m weeping. Now this Kinnaga had been a hereditary retainer of the Heike, and was
one of the samurai always in attendance on the Shin -Chūnagon Tomomori -no-Kyō, and however

much people might flatter those who were in power, he was held in contempt as a samur ai who
was quite devoid of fine feeling.

     Then the priest proceeded to give the same spiritual comfort to Uemon -no-kami, and to urge
him too to repeat the Nembutsu, whereupon he enquired of him how his father had met his end.
" His end was happy," rep lied the priest, " and so I pray you set your mind at rest." " Then I have
no more concern with this fleeting world," said the young noble," so cut off my head at once."
And stretching out his neck he awaited the blow, which has struck this time by Hori -no-Yatarō
Chikatsune. By the order of Kinnaga the corpses of father and son were buried in the same grave.
And this was done because Munemori so earnestly requested it, worldly attachment though it
was.

     On the twenty fourth day of the same month the he ads of the Daijin Munemori and his son
were brought into the Capital. The officials of the Kebiishi proceeded to Sanjō -kawara to receive
them, and then, carrying them along Sanjō to the westward, and Higashi -no-Dō-in to the
northward, they fixed them

[p. 273]

to a sandal -wood tree on the left of the prison gate. In other countries there may be an example
of the head of one above the Third Rank being carried through the streets, but in this country I
have never heard of one. In the period of Heiji the e vil deeds of Nobuyori -no-Kyō were such that
his head was cut off, but it was not exposed in the streets. The Heike were the first to be treated
thus. When they were brought up from the Western Provinces they were paraded along Rokujō
to the east while they  were alive, and when they were sent back from the Eastern Provinces they
were carried along Sanjō to the west when dead. Disgraced while alive and dishonoured when
dead, everywhere they were degraded.

[p. 274]
VOLUME XII.