CHAPTER II.
OF A COURT LADY.

     On the fourteenth day of  the same month Hon -Sammi Chūjō Shigemori -no-Kyō who had
been taken prisoner was brought into the Capital and paraded through the streets. The front and
back curtains of the car in which he rode were lifted and the windows on each side were opened,
while D oi-no-Jirō Sanehira, clad in a hitatare of yellowish -red hue and half armour, rode in
command of thirty men -at-arms who surrounded the car on all sides. "How sad!" cried all the
people of the Capital on beholding the spectacle, " that of all the Heike Cour tiers such a fate
should befall this one. He who was the especial favourite of the Nyūdō and his Consort, the most
respected of all their house, and even when he went to the Court of the Hō -ō all, both old and
young, would make way in his honour. Surely it  is because he burnt the temples of Nara that the
Buddhas have brought this punishment upon him." Thus they brought him along Rokujō to the
eastward until they came to the river, and from there returning brought him to the mansion of
the late Naka -no-Mikad o-no Tō Chūnagon Kasei -no-Kyō in Rokujō -kawara, where he was kept
in solitary confinement.

     Then an envoy was sent to him from the Court of the Hō -ō. He was Kurando -no-Saemon
Gon-no-Suke Sadanaga, and he proceeded to Hachijō Horikawa in robes of dark red and carrying
sword and shaku. Shigehira was in robes of white clouded with blue with a folded eboshi on his
head, and regarded Sadanaga, of whom he had formerly thought nothing, with the same feeling as
sinners regard the jailers in Hell.

     " It is  His Majesty's decision " quoth Sadanaga, " that if you wish to return to Yashima, that
you send a message to the Heike Courtiers that they forthwith send back the Three Sacred
Treasures to the Capital, in which case you will be permitted to go." " I do no t think it at all
probable ", replied

[p. 175]

Shigehira, " that the chiefs of our house will send back the precious Sacred Treasures in exchange
for my person, though the Niino -Ama, since she is a woman, might possibly wish to do so ; still,
as it wou ld not be proper to reject the Imperial Message without further consideration, I will
communicate with them forthwith." One of the retainers of the Court named Hanakata was sent
with the Imperial Edict, which was addressed to the Daijin Munemori and the Ta ira Dainagon
Tokitada, while Shigehira's letter to the Nii -no-Ama was dispatched by the hand of Heizaemon
Shigekuni. As he was not allowed to send any private letters beside this, he could only send
messages to various people by word of mouth, and the one he sent to his wife, Dainagon -no-Suke
was worded, thus: "Even on a journey to be separated from those we love, and who love us, how
sad indeed! but as our promise to each other cannot be dissolved we will surely be reborn to
meet again in the after life " : and as he gave the message his feelings overcame him, so that

Shigekuni also could not restrain his tears. Now there was a certain samurai named Muku
Umanojō Tomotoki, who had long served Shigehira, and was also in attendance on the lady
Hachijō -no-Nyoin , and he sought out Doi -no-Jirō Sanehira and said to him: " I am an old retainer
of the Sammi Chujō, and to -day I saw him in the streets, a spectacle too pitiful to look at.  May I
not then be allowed to go to him and comfort him by speaking of old times? Though I am a
samurai, I was not one of those who accompanied my lord to battle, but was only accustomed to
wait on him morning and evening. If you suspect me of doubtful designs, I will willingly lay aside
my weapons if permission be granted. So Sanehira,  feeling compassion, saw no harm in his request,
and he put away his weapons and was. brought to the Chujō.  Overjoyed at his success Umanojō
hurried to his master's presence; but when he saw how sad and broken down was his bearing, and
thus understood what  he must feel, he could no longer restrain himself, bit broke down

[p. 176]

and wept. The Chujō also, feeling as though it were a dream within a dream, could for a while
find nothing to say.

     Presently, however, they began to talk of past and pres ent affairs, and then the Chūjō enquired
of him whether a certain lady, to whom Umanojō used to take letters from him, was still at
Court. On the retainer answering that he thought so, Shigehira continued: " As I have written
nothing to her since I went do wn to the Western Provinces, and indeed there was nothing to
write, no doubt she thinks I am altogether faithless, and this grieves me. Could you not take a
letter to her if I write? " " Indeed that would not be difficult ", replied Umanojō, and the Chūjō,
greatly rejoiced, penned the letter. The retainer took it and was going forth, when he was stopped
by the guards, who called out, " What letter is that? Show it to us! " " Show it to them, then! "
said the Chūjō. " It is of no matter," replied the warders  when they had examined it, and
Umanojō received it again and passed out. Hastily making his way to the Palace, he feared to be
seen by people while it was yet day, and stood waiting in a little hut nearby until the twilight,
when he slipped in as far as t he door of the woman's apartments and listened. There he heard a
sound of weeping and a voice that he thought was that of the lady he sought exclaiming: " How
pitiful! That he of all the nobles should be treated thus. They all say that it is because he bur ned
the temples of Nara, and the Chūjō himself says that so it may be, for though it was not his wish
that they should be burned, some disorderly soldiers of his army started the fire that destroyed
many halls and pagodas, so, as the saying is ", the dew -drops on the topmost leaves all run down
on the trunk ", he must bear the blame for their deed ; and indeed so I too think." Then
Tomotada, much touched by her sorrow, called out to her, and on her asking what he wished, he
told her that he brought a letter  from the Chūjō. Then the lady, who at ordinary times was
ashamed to show her face to anyone, ran out hurriedly and took it from him

[p. 177]

with her own hands, and immediately tearing it open, read all that he had written to her of how
he had been ca ptured in the West, and was now living in uncertainty of his life from day to day.
In the letter he had inserted these lines:

     " Though in a river of tears my name is sunk and dishonoured,
     Happy yet should I be, if I could meet you again."


     When she read this the lady could bear no more, but folded her face in her robe and sank
down weeping. After a while, however, as time was pressing, Tomotoki requested that she give
him an answer to take back, and so, weeping bitterly, she wrote how lonel y and sad she had been
for the last two years while she had heard nothing from him, and with the letter she sent this
verse:

     "Nought do I also care if with you my name is dishonoured,
     carried away like waste drifting along on the stream."

    Tomotoki took it and returned, and as before he was stopped by the guard, who demanded to
see the letter, but when they examined it they made no objection, and he delivered it safely to
Shigehira. On reading it the Chūjō was greatly affected, and by and by  sought an interview with
Doino -Jirō, saying: "For the many kindnesses you have shown me I am deeply grateful, and now I
would entreat of you yet one more favour. Since I have no child, I have nothing to leave behind
with regret in this fleeting world; but  there is a lady whom for long I have held in tender regard,
and if I might see her again and speak somewhat about the hereafter, it would be a great
comfort." " There is nothing impossible in that request ", replied Doi -no-Jirō, who was not
wanting in com passion, and the Chūjō, overjoyed at having obtained permission, at once
borrowed a car and sent it for her. The lady, without even stopping a moment for any
preparation, immediately got into it and set out, and as soon as they told the Chūjō that her car
had arrived at the entrance of the

[p. 178]

mansion he ran out to her, and exclaiming; " Do not alight or the guards will see you!" he drew
the curtains of the car, and the two continued sitting there for a long time, hand in hand and with
their faces pressed together, speaking no word and doing nought but weep. After a while
Shigehira restrained his emotion and said: "When I went down to the Western Provinces I wished
to see you again, but owing to the confusion of those days I had no one to send, and after that I
greatly wished to send you a letter and to hear from you in return, but the hardships of our
homeless life, and the perils of war both by night and day left me no leisure; and that I have
suffered myself to be captured alive and brought up to the Capital - it was only that I might be
able to see you once more." And he covered his face again and wept. How melancholy to think of
their mutual sorrow! Thus the time passed and it began to grow late, whereupon the warders
appeared again and urged the  return of the lady, as the streets might be perilous after dark, so the
Chūjō was fain to let her go, but as her car was about to depart he caught her by the sleeve and
extemporized these lines:

" Now, let try fleeting life like this our -meeting be ende d,
 Never more shall we meet, this is the last time on earth."

To which the lady immediately responded :

" Though it we bid adieu ere long to this fleeting existence,
I may have gone before, ere my beloved expires."


     So she returned to the Pala ce and afterwards, as the warders did not allow them to meet again,
they exchanged letters from time to time. Now this lady was the daughter of Mimbu -no-Kyō
Nyūdō Shinhan, and was extremely beautiful, beside being of a most loving disposition, and when
she heard that the Chūjō had been handed over to Nara and executed, she straightway became a
nun, cutting off her hair and putting on black robes, to pray for his happy rebirth in the after life.




[p. 179]