part in the plot of the Shin Dainagon Narichika -no-Kyo, he is not to be relied on, but his younger
brother Tada -no-Jiro Tomozane, together with Teshima -no-Kwanja Takayori, and Ota -no-Taro
Yorimoto will cert ainly come. In Kawachi are Musashi -no-Goro -no-Kami Nyudo Yoshimoto,
governor of the district of Ishikawa, and his son Ishikawa -no-Hangwan Dai Yoshikane. In Yamato,
the sons of Uno -no-Shichiro Chikaharu, Taro Ariharu, Jiro Kiyoharu, Saburo Nariharu, and Shi ro
Yoshiharu. In Omi, Yamamoto, Kashiwagi and Nishigori, in Mino and Owari, Yamada -no-jiro
Shigehiro, Kawabeno Taro Shigenao, Izumi -no-Taro Shigemitsu, Urano -no-Shiro Shigeto, Ajiki -
no-Jiro Shigeyori and his son Taro Shigesuke, Kido -no-Saburo Shigenaga, Ka iden-no-Hangwan

Dai Shigekuni, Yashima -no-Senjo Shigetaka, and his son Taro Shigeyuki. In

[p. 171]

Kai, Hemmi -no-Kwanja Yoshikiyo, and his son Taro Kiyomitsu, Takeda -no-Taro Nobuyoshi,
Kaganu -no-Jiro Tomitsu, and Kojiro Nagamitsu of the same house; Ichij o-no-Jiro Tadayori,
Itagaki -no-Saburo Kanenobu, Hemmi -no-Hyoye Ariyoshi, Takeda -no-Goro Nobumitsu, and
Yasuda -no-Saburo Yoshisada. In Shinano, Ouchi -no-Taro Koreyoshi, Okada -no-Kwanja
Chikayoshi, Hiraga -no-Kwanja Moriyoshi and his son Jiro Yoshinobu, Kiso -no-Kanja Yoshinaka,
second son of the late Tatewaki -no-Senjo Yoshikata. In Izu, the former Uhyoye -no-Suke
Yoritomo, in exile. In Hitachi, Shida -no-Saburo Senjo Yoshinori, Satake -no-Kwanja Masayoshi,
and his sons Taro Tadayoshi, Saburo Yoshimune, Shiro Taka yoshi, and Goro Yoshisue. In Mutsu,
Kuro Hangwan Yoshitsune, youngest son of the late Sama -no-Kami Yoshitomo. All these are
descendants of the Sixth Imperial Grandson, and the posterity of Tada -no-Shimpachi Mitsunaka.
The two warrior families of Gen and He i, whose only duty is to quell the enemies of the Throne,
have till now been equal in power, but at the present time they are wide asunder as Heaven and
Earth; indeed it is not too much to say that their relations are those of servant and master. The
provi nces are oppressed by the Governors and the fiefs are abused by the commissioners; people
are harried in all matters and there is no peace. Consider carefully the state of things at present.
Outwardly all submit, but inwardly there are none who do not disl ike the Heike rule. If therefore
Your Highness will agree to issue an Order, the Genji from every province will pour in night and
day, and the destruction of the Heike will soon be completed. In that case, though I myself am an
old man, I have many young s ons and will bring them to fight against the Heike." The Prince was
greatly perplexed to know what to do, so that for some time he did not consent. There was,
however, a certain Shonagon Korenaga, grandson of Ako Maru Dainagon Munemichi -no-Kyo, and
son of Bingo -no-Zenji Suemichi, who was famous for his skill in physiognomy, so that people
called him 'Physiognomy Shonagon', and he came and visited the Prince.

[p. 172]

and told him that by his features he was predestined to ascend the Throne, and that there fore he
ought not to abandon the attempt to attain his object. Gensammi Nyudo also kept on urging him,
and suggesting that the plan was an inspiration of Tensho Daijin herself, so that at last he made
up his mind to act Calling Shingu -no-Juro Yoshimori, he  appointed him Kurando, and changing
his name to Yukiie, sent him as bearer of his Royal Order to the Eastern Country.

On the twenty -eighth day of the fourth month he left Kyoto and went first to Omi, and then to
Mino and Owari to rouse the Genji residing  there. On the eighteenth day of the fifth month,
arriving at Hokujo Hiru -ga Kojima, he communicated his message to the former Uhyoye -no-Suke
Dono who was in exile there; after which he went to the island of Shinda to his brother Shinda -
no-Saburo Yoshimori , and then crossed over to the highlands of Kiso to warn his nephew Kisono
Kwanja Yoshinaka. Now Tanso the Betto of Kumano somehow or other had got to know of the
matter, and he was an official under great obligations to the Heike. "So Shingu -no-Jiro Yoshi mori
is out with a Royal Order from Prince Takakura to raise a revolt," said he, "then Nachi and
Shingu are sure to take the side of the Genji: how can I, who have received such great benefits
from the Heike, forsake them at such a time? I must surely draw  bow in their defence before
hastening to Kyoto to give all information."   Whereupon he marched against Shingu with a
thousand men fully armed. At Shingu were Torii -no-Hogen, Takabo -no-Hogen, and their samurai

Ui, Suzuki, Mizuya and Kamenoko, and at Nachi Shugyo Hogen and his men, their whole force
together numbering about fifteen hundred men. Shouting their warcry, both Genji and Heike
drew their bows and the battle began. For three days it raged furiously, the arrows whizzing
without cessation, and the hu mming arrows continuing their whirring, until at last Tanso, when
most of his own retainers had been killed and himself wounded, barely escaped with his life and
fled back lamenting to his shrine.