CHAPTER VI.
THE SEA ROAD.
Now since Hyōye -no-suke Yoritomo had given repeated orders to that effect, there was
nothing for it but that Shigehira should go down to Kamakura. and so he was handed over by
Doi-no-Jirō Sanehira and sent to the quarters of Kurō Onzōshi Yoshitsune, and on  the tenth day
of the third month he set out, accompanied by Kajiwara Heizō Kagetoki. It was a sad fate for him
to be taken alive and sent to Miyako after all the hazards of the Western Provinces, but how
much worse was it now to have to travel even beyond  the Eastern Barrier. When they came to
Shi-no-miya Kawara, he remembered how formerly the fourth Imperial Prince of Enki called
Semi -Maru * had calmed his mind amid the Eastern tempests by playing his biwa in this spot, and
how Hakuga -no-Sammi *, perseveri ng for three years both on gusty days and calm, on rainy nights
and fine, pacing up and down and standing to listen, received from him the three secret melodies.
In those days too, he thought, it was hard to live in a straw thatched hut. Passing over Ausak a-
yama the hoofs of their horses echoed as they rode over the Bridge of Seta, and the sky -lark rose
in the heavens. The village of Noro and the waves of Shiga were shrouded in the mist of spring,
and leaving Kagami -yama and the lofty peak of Hira on the no rth, the hill of Ibuki drew nigh.
Though not of much interest, the crumbling wooden eaves of the barrier of Fuwa had a certain
charm, while the ebbing tide of the bay of Narumi suggested sad forebodings of the future that
moistened his sleeve with tears. A s they came to Yabase in Mikawa thev thought - of Ariwara -no-
Narihira, and the famous stanza that.
------------
*Semi-Maru , In the Konjaku Monogatari he is said to have been theservant of prince Atsuzane,
the eighth son of the Emperor Uda. Enki, Signifies the Emperor Daigo.
*Hakuga.  Or Minamoto Hiromasa, grandson of the Emperor Daigo.


[p. 188]

he made there, beginning, " Karakoromo kitsutsu nare ni shi" ; and as they watched the parting of
the waters, this too caused them sad reflections. As they passed over the bridge of Hamana, the
wind was blowing in the pines, and the sound of the waves sm ote on their ears at Irie ; but even
without these mournful sounds the journey would have been melancholy enough.

As evening drew on they came to Ikeda in Tōtōmi, and at this station the Chūjō lodged at the
house of a certain Lady -in-waiting who was the daughter of one Yuya, a wealthy man of that
place. When the lady perceived the Chūjō, she said: " How strange that such a personage should
come to a poor place like this, of which he has not even thought": and she sent him the following
verse:
" When on a journey you rest in a lowly ana smoke -begrimed cottage,
Then your Miyako home dearer and fairer appears."

The Chujo replied
" On such a journey as this what boots it to wish for Miyako ?
Since I can call it he me never again in this life."

After a while the Chūjō summoned Kajiwara and enquired of him: " Who is the author of that
verse? It must be a person of some elegance." " Perhaps your lordship does not know ", replied
Kagetoki, " but this lady is one who was greatly beloved by the Daijin Munemori when  he was
Governor of this province, and was summoned to Miyake, by him, but as she had left an old
mother in this place, she was always asking permission of him to return, which he would not
grant; and in the early part of the third month she made this well -known stanza and sent it to
him:
" Sad though I feel to miss the beauties of spring in Miyako,
In my loved Eastern land haply the flowers may fall."

[p. 189]

And so he at length allowed her to depart. In all this Tokaido district there is none other l ike her."

Some days had now passed since they left the Capital, and the third month was half over. The
flowers on the far -away mountains they sometimes mistook for the late -lying snow, and over the
bays and islets the mist slowly drifted, and as the Chūjō  rode on he brooded over his past life and
what was to befall. By what karma -relation in a former life had this misfortune come upon him?
Verily the only abiding thing was tears! His mother the Nii Dono and his wife Dainagon -no-Suke
had often regretted tha t he had no child, and had prayed fervently to the gods and Buddhas to
grant them one, but with no effect. "Perhaps it is as well," quoth Shigehira, "for where there is no
child there is the less to regret."

 When they came to Sayo -no-Nakayama and thought  that they had to pass over it, they felt the
more grieved, and again their sleeves were wet. Utsu -no-Yamabe, with its ivied Path, though it
depresses them is passed too, and they go on throgh Tegoshi, when afar off to the north a snow -
clad peak appears, a nd on asking, the Chūjō is told it is called Kai -no-Shirane, the white peak of
the province of Kai. Repressing his tears he makes this verse:
" Little reck I of life indeed, but to -day for the first time
Clear before my eyes looms the White Peak of Reward. "*
Passing by Kiyomi -ga-seki they entered the plain at the foot of Mount Fuji: on the north lay the
steep green slope of the mountain with its pine -trees rustling in the breeze, and on the south lay
the wide expanse of blue sea with its waves for ever roll ing up on the shore. They then passed
over Ashigara -Yama, the Myōjin of which place is recorded to have made this verse concerning
his wife: " If you love, your body
----------
*Peak of Reward.  The word Kai has also this meaning.


[p. 190]

becomes waste d, and as it is not, you do not love." Then they cane to Koyurugi -no-mori and
Mariko -kawa, and the shore of Koiso and Oiso, and after passing Yatsuma, Togami -ga-hara and
Mikoshi -ga-saki, having spent many days  on the way, though they had not seemed to hur ry, they
came at last to Kamakura.