CHAPTER XII.
DEPARTURE OF THE EMPEROR FROM THE CAPITAL.

On the fourteenth day of the seventh month Higo -no-kami Sadayoshi with three thousand men
under Kikuchi, Harada and Matsuura, returned to Kyoto after having  put down the rebellion in
Kyushu. But though the revolt in Ky ūshū had been quelled, that in the North and Fast Country
was by no means subdued. On the twenty second day at midnight a very great tumult arose at
Rokuhara. Horses were saddled, girths were ti ghtened, and people were running in all directions
carrying goods to hide them, while cries of: "The enemy are upon us! They are entering the
city!" arose on every side. When the dawn broke the reason was found to be as follows. There
was a certain warrior  of the G enji of Mino named Sado -no-Emon -no-jō Shigesada, who in the
war of Hogen had

[p.48]

captured Chinzei Hachiro Tametomo when he fled after the fight at the Palace of the Retired
Emperor, and had as a reward been raised from his office of Hy ōye-no-jō to that of Uemon -no-jō.
As the result of t his he was disliked by the rest of his family, and lately had been making,
advances to the Heike, and now he came riding to Rokuhara with the news that Kiso Yoshinaka
was advancing on the Capital at the head of fifty thousand horsemen, and Tate -no-
Rokur ō Chikatada, one of his captains, with Taiy ū-bō Kakumei, the ready writer, had ridden
hotfoot to Hieizan, where the three thousand monks had made common cause with them, and
that the whole force was now pressing on the Capital itself. When they heard this the  Heike were
thrown into state of great confusion and sent out bodies of men in all directions. A force of three
thousand horsemen under the command of Shin Ch ūnagon Tomomori -no-Kyō and Honsammi -
no-Chūjō Shigehira -no-Kyō at once rode out to take up a positi on at Yamashina, while Echizen -
no-sammi Michimori and Noto -no-kami Noritsune went to hold the bridge at Uji with two
thousand, and Sama -no-kami Yukimori and Satsuma -no-kami Tadanori guarded the highroad at
Yodo with about a thousand. Meanwhile it was rumou red that J ūrō Kurando Yukiie with several
thousand men had crossed the bridge at Uji and entered the city; that Yada -no-Hangwan
Yoshikiyo, son of Mutsu -no-Shin Hangwan Yoshiyasu had crossed over  Ōyeyama; and that the
Genji of the provinces of Settsu and Kawachi had also risen in revolt and were marching on the
Capital from that direction. Then the Heike, abandoning all hope of saving the city, recalled the
forces that they had sent out and all crowded together in one place, quite at a loss to know what
do no next.

As the Chinese saying goes; "The Imperial Capital is a place ever busy with fame and gain; after
cockcrow it has no
--------------------------------------------------------
The Imperial Capital is a place, etc. A quotation from Haku -raku-ten (Po -Chu-I)

[p.49]

rest." If this is so when it is quietly governed, what must it when all is confusion. Doubtless they
would have liked to flee, to the innermost recesses of Mount Yoshino, but their enemies were in

possession of all the highroads and all the provinces were hostile, so that they could only find
refuge by the sea.   As we read in the golden words of the Hokke Sutra; "In the Three Worlds
there is no rest; it is even as a house that had taken fire." Not otherwise was the state of the
Capital at his time. On the twenty fourth day at dusk the former Naidaijin Munemori -no-
Kyō went to the Ikedono at Kokuhara where Kenrei -mon in was staying and said: "Kiso
Yoshimaka is coming up to attack the Capital with fifty thousand horsemen, and has already
arrived at Higashi -Sakamoto in  Ōmi where the monks of Hieizan have joined him; we must stay
here at all events, but as it would be most unfortunate if either yourself or your august mother the
Nii-dono came to any harm, we think it best that you, with the Emperor and the H ō-ō, should for
a while retire to the Western Provinces." "As affairs now are," replied the Empress "that will be
perhaps the best plan"; and as she spoke her feelings overcame her and she sobbed unrestrainedly
into the sleeve: of her Imperial Robe. The Nai daijin also moistened the sleeve of his Naoshi with
his tears.

Now when the H ō-ō heard privately of this design of the Heike to take him away to the Western
Provinces, he departed secretly from his Palace at midnight, attended only by Uma -no-kami
Suketoki , the son of Azechi -no-Dainagon Suketaka -no-Kyō, and made an Imperial Progress by
himself to some place the whereabouts of which remained augustly unknown. And one was
aware of it.

But among the Heike samurai was a certain shrewd fellow named Kitsunai -no-jō Sueyasu, who
was accustomed to serve at the H ō-ō's Palace, and on this night Also he was on guard there, and
although he was at some distance from the private apartments, he became aware, from

[p.50]

the sound of subdued weeping of the Ladies -in-waiti ng, and other signs of agitation, that some
extraordinary and distressing event had occurred. On his enquiring what it was, they told him
that the H ō-ō had disappeared suddenly, and must have taken his august departure somewhere or
other, whereupon he went  off in great haste to Rokuhara and reported the matter to Munemori -
no-Kyō. The Minister at first thought he must be mistaken, but on himself going to the Palace he
learnt that the Ho -o was indeed not to be found. The Ladies in attendance on His Majesty, t he
Nii-dono, Tango dono and others, were all aghast and helpless with consternation, and there was
not a single one of them who knew whether he had gone, so Munemori could do nothing but
return weeping to Rokuhara.

When it was known that the H ō-ō was no l onger in the city the excitement was extraordinary,
and the flurry and confusion of the Heike was such that it seemed that it could have hardly been
greater if the enemy had actually been entering the houses of the Capital. As they had thus made
preparatio ns to send the Emperor and the H ō-ōto the Western Provinces and then found that their
plan was already upset, they felt like one who takes refuge, under a tree that does not keep off
the rain. However they determined to carry out their design in the case of the Emperor at least, so
at the hour of the Hare (6 a.m.) the Imperial Palanquin was made ready, His Majesty being at this
time a child of six years old, and knowing nothing of what was taking place. His Imperial
Mother Kenrei -mon in rode also in the same Palanquin. Hei -Dainagon Tokita da-no-Kyōhad
given orders that all the Treasures of the imperial House should be taken with them, the Sacred
Jewel, the Sword, the Mirror, the Imperial Seal and Key, the Tablet for marking the hours, and

the Imperial Biwa and Koto, but
---------------------------- ----------------------------
Tablet for marking the hours. Used for announcing to the Emperor the time of day, which was
calculated by a water -clock

[p.51]

such was the flurry and excitement that many of them were left behind. His Majesty's own sword
was also, forgotten in the hurry. Tokitada -no-Kyō and his two sons Kura -no-kami Nobumoto and
Sanuki -no-Chūjō Tokisane accompanied the procession in full court robes, while the Imperial
Guard of the Konoe -tsukasa and the Mitsuna -no-suke escorted them in armour, carrying their
bows and quivers. So they pr oceeded along the Shichij ō to the west and the Shujaku to the south.

Thus the dawn began to break on the twenty fifth day of the seventh month; the light of the stars
faded out, and the clouds spread shelving over the eastern hills as the cocks crowed
clamourously. Of such a departure from the Capital as this they had never even dreamed, though,
when they thought of it, the rash and has y change of the capital the year before seemed like a
precedent. The Sessh ō also followed the Imperial train, and when th ey came to Shichij ō Ōmiya a
beautiful youth with bound up hair was seen to speed along in front of the Imperial Car. On the
left sleeve of his dress were the characters 'Haru -no-hi ' or 'Spring day'; and as these two
characters are also read 'Kasuga', it s eemed to them that Kasuga Daimy ōjin, the Divine Guardian
of the Hosso Sect had come to protect the descendant 9f Fujiwara Kamatari the great founder of
his shrine. As they were giving thanks for this supernatural aid, it seemed that the divine youth
spoke the following verse:

"Ika ni sen Fuji no Uraha no kare yuku wo,
Tada haru no hi ni makasetara nan,"

"Though we cannot prevent the leaves of the Fuji from fading,
Let then fade at any will, in the bright sunshine
Of spring"

Then the Sessh ō Motomichi cal led Shin -dozaemon -no-jō Takanao who was in attendance on him,
and said in a low tone:

"This may be called an Imperial Progress, but when we consider the state of affairs it is no
Imperial Progress but a

[p.52]

pitiful Imperial Parting, and what hope is there for the future?" At this Takanao made a sign to
the ox drivers, and they, understanding, whipped up their animals so that their car dashed along
the Ōmiya highroad at a great speed, and at length they entered the temple of Chisoku in at the
foot of t he northern hills.