CHAPTER II.

THE NEW CAPITAL.

On the ninth day of the sixth month the new capital was begun. Tokudaiji -no-Sadaisho Sanesada -
no-Kyo and Tsuchi  Mikado -no-Saisho -no-Chujo Michichika -no-Kyo with the former Sadaiben
Yukitaka, tak ing many officials with them, went to Wada -no-No to plan the nine avenues of the
new city, but on so doing they found that, though there was sufficient space for five avenues,
there was none left for any beyond. On their returning and reporting this to the  Throne, a
Council of Courtiers was held to consider the matter, and though some suggested Innamino in
the province of Harima as a better site, and others Koyano in the province of Settsu, yet in the
end nothing was

[p. 217]

decided. As the thoughts of all still lingered about the old capital, and the new one was not yet
fixed, everyone felt unsettled and distracted. The old inhabitants of the district were distressed at
losing their land, while those who migrated to it were troubled by the difficulties of building;
indeed it all seemed like an evil dream. Then the Saisho -no-Chujo Michichika said : "In China
there appears to have been a capital built with three wide avenues and twelve gates, so why can
we not build the Palace in a city of five avenues? At any rate let us build a temporary Palace."
Thereupon the Nyudo, after a Council of Courtiers had been held, ordered Gojo -no-Dainagon
Kunitsuna to use the income of the province of Suwo and build the Palace. Now this Kunitsuna
was a noble of exceeding great  wealth, so that he would not be at all embarrassed by having to
build the Palace, but in using the income of the province it seemed hardly likely that the people
would escape hardship.

On account of all these critical happenings the Ceremony of the Acces sion of the Emperor was
put off; indeed when the land was thus in confusion owing to the change of capital and the
building of a new Palace, the time was highly unsuitable . In ancient times, in the days of a certain
most revered Sovereign [9], the Palace wa s built with a thatched roof without even any eaves, and,
noticing that little smoke went up from the houses of the people [10], the Emperor remitted the
taxes, thus showing mercy to his subjects and succouring the land. So also we find an example of
the sa me kind in China  where in So  the flowery terraces of the Shokwa Palace devastated the
people, and in Shin the building of the splendid halls of A -ho[11] threw the country into disorder,
while how different was the case of Tai -so of To, who built his palace  of Rinsan of undressed logs
and roofed it with a thatch of untrimmed reeds, who used  no decorated boats or  chariots,  and
spent  no wealth on gorgeous dresses, fearing there -

[p. 218]

by to impoverish his subjects, so that he made  no royal processions, an d the pine -shoots grew on
the tiles of his roof and the ivy clustered thickly on the walls of his palace.