CHAPTER V.
OBA RIDES HARD TO FUKUHARA.

Now when the Saisho Nyudo Seirai heard these things in his retirement at Koya, he exclaimed:
"Truly the end of the supremacy of the Heike draws nigh. That Itsukushima Daimyoj in should
favour the Heike is quite natural, and as that deity is the third daughter of the Dragon King
Shakatsura, she will be a  female deity; moreover it is also not without reason that Hachiman
Daibosatsu [16] should speak of giving the Sword of Commissi on to Yoritomo, but I do not at all
understand why Kasuga Daimyojin should ask for it to be given to his grandson

[p. 224]

afterwards. Can it be that after the Heike have been destroyed and the Genji have succeeded to
their power the Courtier Ministers of the line of Kamatari will become rulers of the country?"
Then a certain priest who was with him answered: "Verily the Glorious Deities deign to put
away their effulgence and descend to earth to become incarnate in divers manners, at times
appearing as f emale deities and sometimes again as ordinary mortals, and seeing that this
Itsukushima Daimyojin indeed possesses the Three Enlightenments [17] and the Six Supernatural
Powers [18], it is not difficult for her to appear as a mortal. Thus though a man may we ary of this
fleeting world and enter the True Path, and devote himself with a single mind to the Future
Enlightenment so that all else is nothing to him, yet when he hears of good government he will
rejoice, and when he learns of trouble he will be moved. This is indeed the way of all men.

Now on the second day of the ninth month it came to pass that Oba Kagechika of Sagami rode
hard to Fukuhara with these tidings: "On the seventeenth day of the eighth month the former
Uhyoye -no-nuke Yoritomo who was exile d to Izu, in league with his father in law Hojo -no-Jito
Tokimasa, attacked the residence of the deputy governor of Izu, Izumino Hangwan Kanetaka, by
night and slew him, after which with some three hundred horsemen under Doi, Tsuchiya,
Okazaki and others, h e retired on the defensive to Ishibashiyama. I then, having got together
about a thousand horsemen of our partizans, at

[p. 225]

once pressed on and attacked them and drove them headlong, so that Yoritomo after making a
desperate stand with seven or eig ht horsemen who were left, fled to Sugiyama of Doi for refuge.
Then Hatakeyama on our side gathered together some five hundred horsemen and attacked
Miura Osuke of the Genji who mustered about three hundred. The fight took place on the shore
of Kotsubo at Yui, and Hatakeyama was defeated and retired to the province of Musashi. After
this Hatakeyama gathered his whole clan with Kowagoe, Inake, Koyamada, Edo and Kasai, seven
parties of soldiers in all, and numbering about two thousand, and besieged Miura in h is castle of
Kinugasa. After attacking it was taken and Osuke was slain, the survivors of his force taking boats
at Kuri -ga-hama and fleeing to Awa and Kazusa."