CHAPTER XI.

THE DEATH OF THE SHIN DAINAGON.


Meanwhile Hoshoji -no-Shugyo Shunkwan Sozu, Tamba -no-Shosho Naritsune, and Hei Hangwan
Yasuyori were all exiled to the island of Kikai -ga-shima in the bay of Satsuma. This is a place that
can only be reached from the capital after many hardships and the crossing of stormy seas. It is a
place that even sailors cannot find unless quite certain o f the way, and it is an island in which few
men live. There are some people there it is true, but as they wear no clothing, they are not like
ordinary folk of the mainland ; neither can they understand our language. Their bodies are
covered with hair and b lack like oxen, and the men do not wear 'eboshi ' neither do the women
have long hair. As they have nothing else to eat they must kill animals for food ; they do not
cultivate the fields and so have neither rice nor corn, nor do they grow mulberry trees, a nd so are
lacking in silk. In this island there is a high mountain that burns with eternal fire and the land is
full of sulphur, so that the island is also called Io -ga-shima (Sulphur Island). Thunder rolls
continuously up and down the mountain and at its foot rain falls in abundance. It is not possible
for anyone to live there for a moment. The Shin

[p. 91]

Dainagon was feeling more calm in his mind now, but hearing that his son Tamba -no-Shosho
Naritsune was exiled to Kikai -ga-shima in Satsuma bay with t wo others, thinking that there was
now nothing more to wait for, he informed Shigemori by messenger of his desire to shave his
head and become a priest; and this being reported to the Ho -o, he also gave his assent. Thus
putting off the bright -sleeved dress  of prosperity, he forsook this fleeting world and came down
to wear the black costume of a recluse.

Now the Dainagon's wife, having retired to the vicinity of Un -rinji in the northern hills, not only
found such an unaccustomed life grievous to her, but h ad nothing to occupy her days and so felt
extremely miserable. In her former residence she had had many ladies -in-waiting and retainers,
but now they were either afraid or ashamed to visit her, all except one retainer named
Gensaemon -no-jo Nobutoshi, who t ook pity on her and came to see her continually. One day she
called this Nobutoshi and addressed him thus; " My lord has been so far staying at Kojima in
Bizen, but lately I have heard that he has been removed to Ariki -no-Bessho. Ah ! how much I
should lik e to send a letter to him and to receive an answer in return." "Since I was a child,"
replied Nobutoshi, bursting into tears," how many are the benefits I have received from you, and
never yet have I been parted from you. Your commands I have always obeyed  and I have always
heeded your advice. When my lord went down to the western province I would have
accompanied him, but Rokuhara would not allow it, and so I could not, but now whatever
hardships I may encounter I will surely bear your august message to hi m." His mistress was
overjoyed at these words and forthwith wrote the letter. Her little son and daughter also wrote a
message, and Nobutoshi taking them proceeded to go down to Ariki -no-Bessho in the far off
province of Bizen. Making enquiries of the guar d Namba - no-jiro Tsuneto, that warrior,

respecting his dutiful conduct, soon brought him to where his lord was. His master the Dainagon
Nyudo, now, as

[p. 92]

always, occupying himself with sadly musing about his home in the capital, on seeing Nobutoshi
arrive from Kyoto, hardly understanding whether it was dream or reality, sprang up and bade him
enter immediately. Nobutoshi advanced, but on seeing the condition of his lord, his lowly
dwelling and his black priestly garments, his heart sank within him an d he could not restrain his
tears. Then, controlling himself somewhat, he related all that his lady had said to him, and
presented the letter. The Dainagon, on opening it and seeing the writing all blurred with tears,
and reading how much his children sorr owed for him, not to speak of his wife's unbearable grief
and anxiety, felt that his former longing was as nothing to his present anguish.

Thus four or five days passed and Nobutoshi requested that he might stay with his master till the
end; but this the soldier who guarded him could by no means allow, and the Dainagon himself
dissuaded him saying; " As you cannot stay any longer please return at once; I feel that my end
will not be long in coming and when you hear of my death I beg you pray for my welfare  in the
world to come." So Nobutoshi received an answer to his letter and took his leave, promising to
come again soon. " Ah," replied the Dainagon, " I think there will be no need for that: you will
never see me again; " and in his grief and regret at par ting, he called Nobutoshi back again and
again; but as there was nothing else to be done, the retainer, restraining his grief, returned again to
the capital and delivered the letter to his lady. When she opened it she immediately perceived his
change of st ate, for inside the packet there was a lock of his hair that he had shaved off: She could
read no farther but exclaiming: " Ah! how grievous is such a memento ! " covered her head and
threw herself to the ground. Her children also lifted up their voices an d wept aloud.

Now on the nineteenth day of the eighth month of the same year the Dainagon was at last put to
death at Ariki -no-Bessho in Kibi -no-Nakayama in the village of Niwase in the province of Bizen.
And of the manner of it, it is said that first, th ey put

[p. 93]

poison in his wine, but as this had no effect, planting tridents in the ground under a cliff about
twenty feet high, they pushed him over it and he was pierced through by them so that he died.
What a pitiful death it was! When his wife hea rd of his death she exclaimed ; " Until now I have
not changed my condition and become a nun because I thought I might see him again, but now it
is of no avail ; " and retiring to a temple called Bodaiin, she became a nun and devoted herself to a
religious  life. Now this lady was the daughter of Yamashiro -no-kami Atsukata, and she had been
loved by the Ho -o Go -Shirakawa, being of exceeding great beauty ; and as this Dainagon was
beloved by the Ho -o she had been given to him afterwards. So his young sons and  daughters
passed their days bringing flowers and drawing water for the offerings to Buddha and praying for
the welfare of their father in the world to come. And thus the events of the time went on
changing just like the five changes [19] of the angelic bei ngs.