CHAPTER XI.
TSUZUMI HANGWAN.

     The soldiers of the Genji swarmed everywher e in the Capital, and entered any place at their
will to plunder. Not

[p.100]

excepting even the sacred precincts of Kamo and Yahata, they reaped the crops for their use and
broke into people's storehouses to take what they wanted; "they even waylaid the  citizens in the
street and robbed them. In fact they were a much worse plague than the Heike had been before
them, for, as the people of the city said; the men of Rokuhara did not steal the clothes from off
your back. Therefore the Hō -ō sent a message to Kiso Sama -no-kami to put an end to this
violence, and Iki -no-Hangwan Tomoyasu was appointed to bear it. As he was an exceedingly
good player on the drum (Tsuzumi) he was commonly called Tsuzumi Hangwan. When Kiso
met him, without giving any reply to the Hō -ō's communication, he enquired: "Why is it that you
are called Tsuzumi Hangwan ? Is it because you are accustomed to be beaten or drummed on by
everybody?" Tomoyasu immediately left in disgust without giving any answer, and returning to
the Hō -ō's Palace,  declared: " Yoshinaka is a presumptuous fool and must be put down at once.
He is certainly disobodient to the Throne." To this the Hō -ō agreed, but those whom he
entrusted with his order to attack Kiso were not warriors of repute, but the chiefs of Miider a and
Hieizan, who accordingly assembled their bands of unruly monks, and the Nobles and Courtiers,
who could not muster anyone better than a motley crowd of begging priests and prowling
streetloafers to their standard. On the other hand Murakami -no-Saburō  Hangwandai of the
Shinano Genii forsook the side of Kiso and adhered to the Hō -ō. As soon as the men of the five
provinces of the Imperial Domains saw that Kiso was out of favour with the Hō -ō, they too
abandoned the allegiance they had previously proffer ed him and adhered to the side of the
Throne. Then Imai -on-Shirō gave his advice to Kiso as follows: " Seeing that matters have now
assumed a very serious aspect, how can you put yourself in opposition to our Sacred and
Blameless Emperor? There is nothing to be done but humbly doff your helmet and lay aside your
weapons in submission." At this speech Kiso flew into a great

[p.101]

rage: “Ever since I came forth from Shinano," he exclaimed, from my first battles at Ōmi and Aida
I have never once turned my back to the foe : at Tonami, Kurosaka and Shinohara in the North,
and at the strongholds of Fukuryuji arid Itakura in the West everywhere I have conquered; why
then should I lay down my arms and surrender, even to an Emperor of the Ten Virtues ?”