CHAPTER V I.
THE DROPPED BOW.

Unable to restrain himself in his excitement over the enjoyment of this feat, an old warrior of
some fifty years of age, in armour laced with black leather, sprang up on one of the ships just in
the place where the fan had been and beg an to dance, twirling a white handled halberd in his
hand.

     Seeing this, Ise Saburō Yoshimori came up behind Yoichi and said : " It is our lord's command
that you bring down that fellow too." So Yoichi took one of the middle arrows of his quiver,
drew  his bow and let fly. The arrow flew straight to the mark, hitting the dancer right in the
middle of his body so that he fell back into the bottom of the boat. There were some who
applauded this shot also, but most showed their disapproval by shouting: "To o bad! Too bad !
That was a cruel thing to do." Silence now ensued on the side of the Heike, though the Genji still
continued to rattle their quivers.

     Then from the Heike side, still disinclined to rest under their discomfiture, there came three
warriors, one armed with a bow, the second carrying a shield, and the third a halberd. Springing
on shore they dared the Genji to come on, whereat

[p. 237]

the Hōgwan called out to know who of the younger of his best horsemen would try conclusions
with these  insolent fellows. Then there rode forth Mionoya Jurō of Musashi, and his two brothers
Shirō and Tōshichi, Nibu -no-Shirō of Kōzuke and Kiso -no-Chūji of Shinano, five warriors in all.
As they charged forward shouting to the onset, however, the archer behind  the shield loosed a
great lacquered shaft, feathered with black wing feathers, which pierced the horse of Mionoya
Jūrō in the left breast right up to the notch, so that it collapsed like an overturned screen. The
rider at once threw his left leg over the animal and vaulted down to the right, drawing his sword
to continue the fight, but when he saw the warrior behind the shield come to meet him
flourishing a huge halberd, he knew that his own small sword would be useless, and blew on a
conch and retreated. The other immediately followed him, and it looked as though he would cut
him down with the halberd, but instead of doing so, gripping the halberd under his left arm, he
tried to seize Mi onoya -no-Jūrō by the neckpiece of his helmet with his right. Three times
Mionoya eluded his grasp, but at the fourth attempt his opponent held on. For a moment he
could do nothing, but then, giving a sudden violent wrench, the neckpiece parted where it joi ned
the helmet, and Mionoya escaped and hid behind his four companions to recover his breath. The
other four, wishing to spare their horses, had taken no part in the combat, but stayed a short way
off looking on. The Heike warrior on his part did not follo w him any further, but sticking the
neckpiece on the end of his halberd, shouted out in a loud voice : "Let those afar off listen; those
who are near can see. That's the way we fellows of the Capital declare ourselves. I am
Akushi chibyōye Kagekiyo of Kazusa ! "And having thus delivered himself he retired again behind
the shield.

     The Heike, encouraged at this, cried out: "Don't let Akushichibyōye be killed! To the rescue
of Kagekiyo! Come on, men!" And some two hundred of them  hastened to


[p. 238]

land and set up their shields in a row in hen's wing style, defying the Genji to came on. The
Hōgwan, incensed at this, with Tajirō -no-Kwanja in front, Ise Saburō behind, and Gotōbyōye
father and son and the brothers Kaneko on his l eft and right hand, put himself at the head of
eighty horsemen and charged down on them shouting, whereupon the Heike, who were mostly
on foot and few mounted, thinking they could not stand against horsemen, quickly retired and re -
entered their boats, leav ing their shields kicked about here and there like the sticks of a fortune
teller.

     Elated with victory, the Genji rode into the sea in pursuit till they were up to their saddles in
water and fought among the ships, while the Heike with rakes and bill hooks tried to seize
Yoshitsune by the neckpiece of his helmet. Two or three times their weapons rattled about his
head, but his companions with sword and halberd warded off the attacks from their master as
they fought. In the course of this fighting the H ōgwan somehow or other dropped his bow into
the sea, and leant out of the saddle trying to pick it up again with his whip. His companions cried
out to him to let it go, but he would not, and at last managed to recover it, and rode back
laughing to the beac h. The older warriors reproached him for this saying: "However valuable a
bow it might be, what is that in comparison with our lord's life ? " "It was not that I grudged the
bow," replied Yoshitsune, " and if my bow were one that required two or three men to bend it,
like that of my uncle Tametomo, they would be quite welcome to it, but I should not like a
weak one like mine to fall into the hands of the enemy for them to laugh at it and say, " This is
the bow of Kurō   Yoshitsune, the Commander in Chief of the Genji; and so it was that I risked
my life to get it back." And this explanation drew expressions of approval from all.

     When the night fell after the day's fighting the Heike were still cruising abou t off the shore,
while the Genji made their way inland and took up a position on some high ground

[p. 239]

by Mure Takamatsu. For three nights they had had no sleep, for the night before last they had
been at sea and the weather was too rough even for a doze, while last night they had been
crossing over the pass after the fight at Katsuura in Awa, so after fighting all of this day both men
and horses were tired out, and fell asleep where they were, caring for nothing, pillowing their
heads on their helmet s or quivers or the sleeves of their armour. But the Hōgwan and Ise Saburō
did not sleep. Yoshitsune went up to a high place from which he could see if the enemy
approached, while Ise Saburō concealed himself in a little hollow and lay in wait, so that if an
enemy horseman should come near he could shoot his horse in the belly. The Heike had made
preparations for an attack that night, under the command of Noto -no-kami Noritsune, but as
Etchū no Jirōhyōye and Emi no Jirō could not agree as to which of the tw o should lead it, the
morning broke without anything being done. If they had made one, how could the Genji have
sustained it ? And that they did not make it sealed their fate.