CHAPTER XI.

THE BATTLE OF SUNOMATA.


On the twentieth day of the same month Gojo -no-Dainagon Kunitsuna Kyo departed this life, He
had been on particularly intimate terms of friendship with the Nyudo, so that it was strange that
he should have been taken ill on t he same day, and have died in the same month. On the twenty
second day Munemori paid a visit to the Ho -o and informed him that his Palace was to be moved
back to the Hojujiden. This Palace had been built on the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the
first year of Oho, and His Majesty had personally directed the laying out of the gardens with
landscapes of trees and hills and ornamental water according to his taste, as well as having new
shrines constructed near it to the deities of Hiyoshi and Kumano. In consequence of the ill -
treatment of the Heike, however, he had not lived there for the last few years, and so it had fallen
into disrepair, so now they proposed to have it put into order before he returned there to reside.
But the Ho -o was so pleased at th e thought of going there again that he did not wish to wait for
this, and insisted on moving immediately. He at once went to see the apartments of his late
consort Kenshun -mon-in, and found that in this short time the pine -tree by the bank and the
willow t hat grew by the edge of the lake had both become quite big trees; and when he looked at
the mallow tree by the pond, and the willow at the palace eaves, that stood opposite to them, the
remembrance of old times overcame him so that he was affected to tears .

On the first day of the third month all the priests of Nara were pardoned and restored to their
offices, and a proclamation was made that they should be confirmed in the possession of their
tributary temples and manors as before. On the third day was he ld the ceremony of inauguration
of the rebuilding of the Dai -Butsuden, and the former Sashoben Yukitaka was appointed to direct
it. This Yukitaka had made a pilgrimage

[p.11]

 to Yahata the year before and spent the night praying in the shrine, where h e had a dream in
which he saw the doors of the inner sanctuary open and an angelic messenger with hair tightly
bound up come forth and announce: "I am the messenger of Hachiman Dai -Bosatsu; when you go
to direct the inauguration of the rebuilding of the Da i Butsuden take this with you;" and he
handed him a Courtier's baton. Afterwards when he awoke he found the baton by his pillow,
whereat he was greatly astonished, wondering what was likely to happen that he should have to
undertake such an office, but as it was a supernatural dream he put the baton in his bosom and
took it home with him, where he put it away most carefully. Soon after it came to pass that the
temples of Nara were burnt through the wickedness of the Heike, and Yukitaka had the good
fortune to be chosen from many officials of the same rank to preside at the inauguration of their
rebuilding: a most auspicious connexion for him.

On the tenth day the governor of the province of Mino rode hard to Kyoto with the news that
the Genji had pressed th eir attack as far as the province of Owari, where they had blocked the
roads so that none could pass, and the Heike chiefs determined to set out against them. The

Commander -in-chief on this occasion was Sahyoye -no-kami Tomomori, and with him were
Sachujo K iyotsune, Shosho Arimori and Tango -no-Jiju Tadafusa, while in command of the
samurai were Etchu -no Jirohyoye Moritsugu, Kazusa -no-Gorohyoye Tadamitsu and
Akushichihyoye Kagekiyo, and these marched against Owari with a force of some thirty thousand
horsemen .  As it was only about fifty days since Kiyomori died, everything was in a sad state of
confusion. On the side of the Genji Juro -no-Kurando Yukiie with Yoritomo's younger brother
Gien and about six thousand horsemen pitched camp by the Owari river, so tha t both armies
faced each other on opposite sides of the stream. Then, during the night of the sixteenth day the
Genji force crossed over and made a sudden assault with the  intention

[p.12]

of taking the Heike by surprise, but the latter, quite undismay ed, allowed them to penetrate
deeply with their small force, and then closed in and surrounded them, and as they were all
dripping with water after fording the river this served to distinguish friend from foe. The fight
began at the hour of the Tiger (4. a .m.) and continued till day broke, when Juro -no-Kurando
Yukiie, finding that Gien had met his death among the foe, and that most of his retainers too had
fallen, after fighting bravely gave way and fled back eastward of the river. Then the Genji,
crossing the river in their turn, took the remnant of the enemy in the rear and shot them down
from behind, so that, though a few here and there stood on the defensive and made some
resistance, in a short time the whole force was destroyed. All condemned this attac k of the Genji
as foolish, and contravening the well -known maxim, "Never fight with water or swamp behind
you." Yukiie fled to the province of Mikawa where he destroyed the bridge over the Yahagigawa,
and threw up a breastwork of shields on the further sid e in an effort to hold the enemy, but the
Heike pursued him vigorously and dislodged him. Thus keeping up the pursuit, the men of
Mikawa and Totomi would certainly have come in on the side of the victors. when at this
juncture the Commander Sahyoye -no-kami  Tomomori fell sick and retired with his army to the
Capital. As he had only driven the enemy out of one position and had not been able to complete
the destruction of the remainder, he could not be said to have done great things.

Now since Komatsu Shigemo ri had died the year before last, and the Nyudo Kiyomori this year,
it appeared to all that the doom of the Heike house was drawing on apace, and so there were few
who would support them except those whose fortunes had been linked with theirs for many
years, while in the eastern provinces even the grass and trees inclined to the will of the Genji.