CHAPTER III.
THE BATTLE AT HIUCHI.


Now, though Kiso Yoshinaka himself remained in Shinano, he built a strong hold at Hiuchi in
Echizen and stationed there Heizenji -no-Chori Saimei -i-gishi, Togashi -no-Nyudo Bussei, Inazu -
no-Shinsuke, Saitoda, Hayashi -no Rokuro Mitsuakira, Ishiguro, Miyazaki, Tsuchida, Takebe,
Nyuzen, and Sami with some six thousand men. The situat ion was naturally strong, surrounded
by towering crags, and with mountain peaks on all sides.   A mountain rose before it and another
behind, while in front of it flowed the Nomigawa and the Shindogawa. At the confluence of
these two rivers they piled up ro cks and drove in stakes and made a large dam, so that the water
came right up to the hills on the north and south and spread out like a lake. As the Chinese poet
says; "Shadows steep the southern hills; wide and blue and vast are the waters; the waves melt
into the western sun; the waters redden and look like damask." The bottom of this cool lake is of
sand pure as gold or silver, and by its brink there float most graceful ships. But the lake of Hiuchi
in our country was dammed up so that its waters were da rk and deceive the eye.

As they had no boats the Heike force could not easily cross over it, and so they encamped on the
mountain in front and spent some days idly doing nothing. But Heizenji -no-Chori Saimei, who
was within the fortress, was a partizan of  the Heike, and he went round the foot of the mountain,
and, writing a letter, stuck it to the head of an arrow, which he shot into their camp. The soldiers
found it and took it to their Commander, who opened it and read thus: "The river was not
formerly a s you see it now; it is a mountain stream that has been dammed up so that it may look
muddy and deceive the eye. If you send men under cover of darkness and cut the dams, the water
will quickly run off, and then you can cross over at once; thus you can tak e the place at a
disadvantage.

[p.24]

Given by me, Heizenji -no-Chori Saimei -i-gishi." The Heike were overjoyed at this, and when
night came they sent men who cut the dykes, whereupon it turned out that the water was indeed
only a mountain stream and quic kly drained away. Without losing any time they at once crossed
over, and although the six thousand men of the garrison made a stout resistance, it was of no avail.
Thus Heizenji -no-Chori Saimei showed his loyalty to the Heike ; but Togashi -no Nyudo Bussei,
Inazu -no-Shinsuke, Saitoda and Hayashi -no-Rokuro Mitsuaki, seeing that nothing more could be
done, retired to Kaga and took up positions at Shirayama and Kawachi. The Heike, however,
immediately pursued them into the province of Kaga, and burned the two s trongholds of Togashi
and Hayashi, then, as there seemed no force anywhere to oppose them, they sent messengers
from the several provinces and stopping -places to convey the news to Kyoto. These tidings, when
they reached the Capital, greatly encouraged and  rejoiced the Naidaijin and all his house. On the
eighth clay of the fifth month the Heike reached Shinohara in the province of Kaga, where they
divided their army into two parts. a main body and a .smaller force. The main body consisted of
some seventy th ousand men under the command of Komatsu Sammi -no-Chujo Koremori, and
Echizen -no-Sammi Michimori, with Etchu -no-Jirohyoye Mori tsugu as Commander of the
Samurai, and they set out towards Tonamiyama, at the boundary of Kaga and Etchu. The lesser
force consis ted of about thirty thousand commanded by Satsuma -no-hami Tadanori, Kogo -gu-no-

nuke Tsunemasa, Awa ji -no kami Kiyofusa and Mikawa -no-kami Tomonori, with Musashi -no-
Saburosaemon Arikuni in command of the Samurai. They were to march on Shiboyama, which
bound ed the provinces of Noto and Etchu. At this time Kiso Yoshinaka was at Kofu in
Echigo,  [3]  but when he heard of this he marched on Tonamiyama with fifty thousand
men.  After a stratagem that

[p.25]

had succeeded before, he divided his force into seven p arts, of which one, consisting of ten
thousand horsemen, marched against Shiboyama under the command of his uncle Juro Kurando
Yukiie, while two others, under Higuchi no -Jiro Kanemitsu and Ochiai -no-Goro Kaneyuki, of
about seven thousand each, were sent ou t to Kitakurosaka. Three other companies of seven
thousand horse, under Nishina, Takahashi and Yamada -no-Jiro rode towards Minami Kurosaka
while about ten thousand were concealed in ambush round the slopes of Tonamiyama at
Matsunaga -no Yanagihara and Gumi -no-Kibayashi. Imai -no-Shiro Kanehira with six thousand
horse crossed over the Washinose and took up his position at Hino -Miyabayashi. Kiso Yoshinaka
himself crossed over the Oyabe and marched to Hannyu a little to the north of Tonamiyama.