CHAPTER II.
CHIKUBUSHIMA.


 Now the Generals Koremori and Michimori pressed on their way, but Tadanori, Tsunemasa,
Kiyofusa and Tomonori tarried a whil e at Shiozu and Kaizu in Omi. Of these Kogogu -no suke
Tsunemasa had excelled in poetry and music from his youth up, and it happened that one
morning, wishing to calm his mind in the midst of these alarms and disorder, he went out to the
edge of the lake to  enjoy the scenery. As he looked out into the offing he saw an island in the
distance, and calling to Tohyoye -no-Jo Arinori who had accompanied him, he asked what island
it was. "That is the famous island called Chikubushima;" replied Arinori, whereupon Ts unemasa
expressed a wish to go out to it, so they got a small boat and escorted by Arinori and Anemon -
no-Jo Morinori with six retainers, he crossed over to Chikubushima. It was the eighteenth day of
the fourth month, but still the song of the 'Uguisu' of t he vale lingered among the green twigs and
recalled the favours of spring, and the ever charming early notes of the hototogisu answered it,
while the clusters of wistaria hung heavy on the pines. The scene filled Tsunemasa with ecstasy,
and he quickly alig hted from the boat and climbed up on to the island, gazing at the beauty of the
landscape with a heart too full for words. Not fairer it seemed was that magic island of Horai,
whither Shiko of Shin sent many fair youths

[p.22]

and maidens, and Butei of K an despatched a magician, if happly they might find it and bring back
from thence the water of youth and immortality, but not finding it, and fearing to return to China,
age overtook them in their ships while they were still vainly searching the boundless ocean. And
in one of the Sutras it is written: "In the Djambudvipa is a certain lake ; and in the midst of it,
proceeding from the bottom of the world, there is an isle, formed all of crystal, where fairy
maidens dwell." And this, they say, is the island.

Then Tsunemasa, respectfully approaching the Myojin, the deity of the place, prayed thus; "O
thou goddess Benzaiten, who wert known of old under the title of Nyorai, and dost deign to
manifest thyself here in a spiritual body as a saviour; for though we m ay address thee by the
names of Myo -on-ten and Benzai -ten, yet in this place thou art united in one body to save
mankind; grant, we beseech thee, the petitions and desires that we offer before thee." And as he
was still kneeling before the shrine the dusk fell over the lake, and the waiting moon rose over
the water so that it turned into silver, and the white beams bathed the steps of the shrine with
light. Then the priest who lived there, knowing Tsunemasa's skill in music, brought him a biwa,
and he playe d and sang the melodies called Jogen and Sekijo, so that the liquid notes rang clear
through the silent shrine. So exquisite it was that the Myojin could not restrain her emotion, but.
appeared over the shoulder of Tsunemasa as he played, in the form of a white dragon. Tsunemasa,
overcome by reverential awe, laid aside his biwa and composed the stanza;
"Lo ! a manifest sign that my humble prayer will be answered,
Since from tire depth of the waves, awful the goddess appears."



And so, not doubting that the  enemies of the Throne would soon be subdued and the insurgents
put to flight, he embarked in the boat and returned to the mainland in great joy