CHAPTER XIV.
FUKU -SHŌ IS PUT TO DEATH.

 On the sixth day of the fifth month of the second year of Gen -ryaku Kurō Taiyū -no-
Hōgwan Yoshitsune decided to set out for the Eastern Provinces with the Daijin Munemori and
his son. Muneinori therefore sent a messenger to him saying: " I have heard that we are to start for
the East tomorrow, and I have a request to make. If the boy of eight years old; who is written
down among the prisoners, is still alive I should much like to see him again once more." Truly, "
said Yoshit sune," that is very natural, for who can be unmindful of parental affection ?" And he
immediately sent orders to Kawagoe -no-Kōtaro Shigefusa, in whose charge the boy had been
placed, to take him to Munemori at once; and Kawagoe, borrowing a car from someon e, put the
child and two lady attendants into

[p. 263]

it, and went off without delay. As the child had not seen his father for so long, his joy knew no
bounds, and when Munemori called to him: " Ah, Fuku -shō ! Come along! " he rushed up to him
and climb ed up on his knee. " Listen, all of you," said Munemori, stroking the boy's hair and
weeping over him, " this child has no mother; for though he wasp born without any trouble, soon
afterwards his mother took to her bed and after a while died. And while she  lay sick she said to
me: “Whatever other children you may in future have by some other wife, do not forsake this one,
but look on him as a memento of me. Do not send him away to be brought up by some faster
mother.”  So when I gave him the name of Fuku -shō, (Vice -Commander), saying that when we
marched against the enemies of the Throne Uemon -no-kami would be the Commander -in-Chief,
and I wished him to be under him as Vice -Commander, she was overjoyed, and continued to call
him by this name right up to the time that she died, seven days after. So whenever I see this child
it always recalls her to memory." And when he finished speaking, all the guards, and Uemon -no-
kami and the child's nurse hid their faces in their sleeves and wept.

     After a while Munem ori said: " Now Fuku -shō, it is time for you to go back again; " but the
child did not go: so Uemon -no-kami, pitying him, comforted him by saying: " Come Fuku -sho;
we have some people coming today; but you must come again tomorrow." But still he would not
go, weeping and clinging tight to his father's sleeve; and so he remained some time, till at last, as it
began to grow dark, his nurse drew him away in her arms, and the two ladies got into the car
with him and returned home.

    Munemori stood looking af ter him a long while, sadly reflecting that his former affection for
the child was as nothing to what he felt now. Out of tender regard for his mother's wishes he had
kept the child always beside him, and hats not sent him away to anyone to be brought up. At the
age

[p. 264]

of three he had put on the Kammuri and received the name of Yoshimune, and as he grew older
the beauty of his face and figure increased also, while his disposition became the more loveable.

So Munemori became more and more attached t o him, and took him with him everywhere, so
that they were not parted for a moment even on shipboard on the waves of the Western Sea; and
this was the first time t hat they had met since the defeat.

     Then Shigefusa enquired of the Hōgwan what was his pleasure concerning the child. " We
cannot take him with us to Kamakura," replied Yoshitsune, " so you had better do as you will
with him." So Shigefusa returned to  his residence and said to the two ladies: "The Daijin will start
for the East tomorrow, but the child must stay here in Miyako. He is to be handed over to Ogata -
no-Saburō Koreyoshi, so bid him come forthwith." So they again put him into the car, and he
went off joyfully with the two ladies thinking he was going to see his father as before. When
however the car drove along Rokujō to the eastward and  came to the river bed, the ladies were
thrown into the greatest anxiety and consternation, suspecting that so mething terrible was going
to happen. In a few moments a troop of some fifty or sixty horsemen rode down to the river bed,
and stopping the car bade thin set down the child, spreading a fur rug on the ground for them to
alight. With a surprised and trouble d expression on his face the little lord enquired: " Where are
you going to take me then ? " But the two ladies could make him no answer, and only burst out
into loud lamentations. Then one of Shigefusa's men, holding his sword ready to draw, was just
stepping round behind him from the left side to sweep off his head, when the child perceived it
and ran and threw himself into the nurse's arms in an endeavor to escape; whereupon the two
ladies, clasping him in their arms, entreated the soldiers to kill them instead, raising their eyes to
heaven and throwing themselves on the ground in an unavailing agony of grief.

Then Shigefusa, choking down his emotion, exclaimed:

[p.265]

" It is too late to do anything now; " and dragging the child from their arms, stru ck him down
with his dirk and cut off his head, which he straightway took away to show to the Hōgwan.
Barefoot the two ladies followed him and begged earnestly that they might be given the head, for
they wished to recite the Sutras for him; and the Hōgwan,  who was not devoid of pity, granted
their request. So the two, receiving it with deep gratitude, bestowed it in the bosom of one of
them and returned weeping to the city.

     About a week afterwards it was reported that two ladies had drowned themselves  in the
Katsura -gawa, and one, who had cast herself into the water with a child's head in her bosom, was
this nurse of Munemori's son. The other, who was found clasping the dead body in her arms, was
her maid in waiting. Seeing that her mistress had determ ined to end her life, her unhappy
companion could not bear to survive her, and so had followed her in death.