CHAPTER XV.
THE BURNING OF NARA.

Now Nara was regarded as a rebel against the Throne because it had sided with Miidera and
received Prince Takakura when he led the revolt, and when the priests o f the Kofukuji heard that
an attack on them was being considered, they rose like a swarm of angry bees, and when the
Kwampaku sent them a message by Ukwan -no-Betto Tadanari to the effect that he would report
to the Emperor anything that they had to say, th ey tore the messenger from his palanquin, threw
him down, and cut off his hair, so that he fled back to the Capital pale and terrified. Then
Saemon -no-kami Chikamasa was sent a second time, whereupon they treated him in the same
way, while two retainers of  the University of the Kwangaku in had their queues cut off at the
same time.

Beside this the priests of Nara made a great wooden head which they struck and kicked about,
calling it the head of the Nyudo. Now the rapid spreading of rumour is a thing that invites
misfortune, and want of caution in speech is the way that leads to destruction, and this Lay -priest
Chancellor, we speak it with the deepest reverence, was the maternal grandfather of the Reigning
Emperor, so that these things that the priests of N ara did seemed to everyone like the acts of
devils. Now the Nyudo had attached Seno -no-Taro Kaneyasu to the Kebiishi of the province of
Yamato with the intent to calm the turbulence of the priests, and Kaneyasu rode off thither with
five hundred horsemen. Kiyomori charged him, however, on no account to display any force, and
not to use arms even if they offered violence, but the monks, unaware of this, seized some sixty
of his men, cut off their heads and stuck them up all round the Pool of Sarusawa. On hea ring this
the Nyudo declared in great anger: "Now I will certainly attack the South Capital," and forthwith
ordered To -no-Chujo Shigehira and Chugu -no-suke Michimori to set out thither with an army of
about forty thousand horsemen. At Nara about seven thou sand monks, young and old, without
distinction, put on their armour and took up their position at Narasaka and Hannyaji, digging
ditches across the road and making breast works and palisades. The Heike, dividing their forces
into two, raised their warcry a nd attacked both these

[p. 256]

places. The monks fought on foot while the Imperial Army fought on horseback, and as they
kept on riding up continuously to the attack, the ranks of Nara were thinned and they began to
give ground, so that by nightfall, af ter fighting from early morning, both of their positions were
broken through. Now among the retiring priests was a warrior -monk named Saka -no-shiro
Yogaku, who for strength and valour was equal to all the temples of Nara put together: he wore
two suits of armour one over the other, a black body -armour over another suit with lacings of
light-green silk, and two helmets likewise, one of five plates over a steel cap, while he brandished
a white -handled halberd, curved like a reed, in one hand and a huge tachi with black mounts in
the other. Gathering some ten of his comrade of the same temple round him, he held the enemy
at the Tengai gate for some time and slew very many, but as fast as they fell others came on, so at
last when his comrades had all fallen thou gh his heart was still undaunted, being in danger of
being surrounded, he escaped by flight to the south country.


Then the Commander To -no-Chujo Shigehira, standing in front of the gate of Hannaji, as it had
now become dark, ordered fires to be lit, when a certain lower provincial official of Harima
named Jirodaiyu Tomokata split up his wooden shield into torches and set fire to the houses near
by. It was the hour of the Dog (5 p.m.) of the twenty -eighth day of the twelfth month and the
wind was blowing st rongly, so that although only one place was set on fire, owing to the wind
veering about in all directions, the flames spread hither and thither and most of the temple
buildings were soon in a blaze. By this time all the warrior monks who scorned to surren der for
fear of dishonour had fallen fighting at Narasaka and Hannyaji, and those who remained fled
towards Yoshino and Totsugawa. Those who were too old to flee, and the unattached laymen,
children and girls, thinking to save themselves, went up into the upper story of the Daibutsu -den
or fled into the interior of Yamashinadera in their panic. About a thousand of them crowded into
the Daibutsu -

[p. 257]

den and pulled up the ladders behind them so that the enemy could not follow, but the flames
reached t hem first, and such a great crying arose as could not be surpassed even by the sinners
amid the flames of Tapana, Pratapana and Avitchi, the fiercest of the Eight Hot Hells.

The Kofukuji, alas ! the ancient tutelary temple of the Fujiwara house, founded b y Prince Fuhito,
was burned; the Tokondo with its famous statue of S'akya Muni the Founder of the Buddhist
Doctrine, the Saikondo with its Kwannon of the Bubbling Springs, the Emerald Gallery, the
Vermilion Hall of Two Stories, the two Pagodas that lifted their shining spires to heaven, all were
consumed to ashes in a moment. The Todaiji, which was built by Shomu Tenno himself, who
was considered as one who on this earth had entered into the domains of the third and fourth
Buddha -fields, was destroyed also,  and the colossal statue of Vairochana Buddha of copper and
gold, whose domed -head towered up into the clouds, from which gleamed the jewel of his lofty
forehead, fused with the heat, so that its fullmoon features fell to the pavement below, while its
body  melted into a shapeless mass. The myriad beauties of his Buddha Presence were hidden in
the smoke like the autumn moon among the clouds, and the jewelled ornaments of the Bodhisat
shone fitfully like the drifting stars on a stormy night. The whole sky was  filled with smoke, and
the flames roared upward continually. Those who stood looking on averted their gaze, and even
those who heard it related felt faint with awe. Of the Holy Sutras of the Hosso and Sanron sects
not one volume survived; surely never bef ore had there been such a destruction of Holy Writ,
not only in our country but even in India or China. Even the statue of Buddha that Udayana Raja
made of fine gold, and that which Vis'varkarman carved from red sandal wood, were scarcely life -
size, much l ess likely did it seem then that this, the greatest Buddha in all the Djambudvipa,
would thus fall to ruin. Now, mingled with dust and smoke, it lies low, an abiding sorrow to all.
How

[p. 258]

must the Four Deva Kings, the Eight Dragon Sea -gods, and the  Judges and Custodians of the
Underworld have been struck with amazement, and what must have been the concern of Kasuga
Daimyojin, the Tutelary Deity of the Fujiwara house? Even the dew of Mt. Kasuga changed its
hue and the wind howled mournfully on Mt. Mi kasa. Of those that perished in the flames there
were seventeen hundred in the Daibutsu den and eight hundred in the Yamashinadera; in another

temple there were five hundred and in yet another three hundred; in all some three thousand five
hundred souls. A  thousand monks fell in the fight, some of whose heads were stuck up on the
gate of the Hannyaji, while some were carried back to Kyoto. The Nyudo alone was greatly
rejoiced at the news, for the Empress, the Ho -o and the Retired Emperor all sorrowed
exceed ingly at the destruction of so many temples, though willing that the turbulent monks
should be exterminated. The Courtiers had decided in council that the heads of the monks
should be carried through the streets and exposed on the public gibbet, but concer ning this
deplorable destruction of the Todaiji and Kofukuji nothing was determined. The ruins lay as they
were scattered everywhere in the moats and ditches. Now in the Imperial writing of Shomu
Tenno is this sentence: "When my temple of Kofukuji is prosp erous the whole Empire shall be
prosperous, and when my temple falls to ruin the Empire will decline also." And now it seems
that we are indeed to behold the fall of the Empire. Thus this ill -omened year came to an end and
the fourth year of Jisho began.

NOTES :  VOLUME V.
[1] Twelve generations . I.e. seven generations of Heavenly Deities and five of Earthly.
[2] Hiko-nagisa . The fifth generation from Ama -Terasu, who was considered the first of the
Earthly Deities.
[3] Kanoto . cf. also Tsuchinoto, two of th e ten expressions used for naming days and years in the
ancient Japanese calendar, taken from the five elements, ki, wood; hi, fire; tsuchi, earth; kane,
metal; mizu water; kinoe kinoto, hino hinoto, tsuchinoe tsuchinoto, kanoe kanoto, mizunoe
mizunoto.
[4] Toyo-ashi hara , The Middle Country of fertile Reed Plains, appar. Mid -Japan.
[5] Seimu Tenno . This happened in the reign of Keiko Tenno, and seems to be a mistake of the
author.
[6] Keitan . The northern part of Korea. This is somewhat exaggerated, for Ji ngo Kogo did not
reach so far.
[7] Shoryo  etc. a Chinese idea quoted from Goshi. 青龍  Shoryo means a great river, the
Kamogawa,  白虎  Byakko, a great road, the Shujaku road, 朱雀  Shujaku a marsh land, the fields
near Toba, 玄武  Gembu a high mountain, Hieizan.
[8] Wind -swept -shore . Kaze fuku hara, a word -play on the name Fukuhara 福原  Luck -field.
[9] A certain most revered Sovereign . Nintoku Tenno is referred to.
[10] The people  黎民  lit, the black or black headed people.
[11] A-ho. the famous palace built by the first Emperor of Shin.
[12] Uji. This passage occurs in the volume entitled 'Agemaki!'  It is thus referred to because the
section of which it forms a part is called 'Uji -jitcho'.
[13] Lay-devotee Prince . Ubasoku -no-Miya. Ubasoku is the Sansk -Upasaka, a layman who
promises to keep the principal commandments, but without becoming a monk.
[14] Tengu . A flying demon, half man, half bird; the Japanese Harpy.
[15] Sword of Commission . Setto 節刀  The sword presented by the Emperor to a general with
which to subdue the enemies of the Thron e, and thus the sign o f the supreme military authority
in the Realm.

[16] Hachiman Daibosatsu . Tutelary deity of the Minamoto family, as Kasuga Daimyojin was of
the Fujiwara. After the line of Yoritomo became extinct a prince of the Fujiwara family was
made Shogun, and as this passage is doubtless a 'vaticinium post eventu,' it gives a terminus a quo
for the date of this part of the work.
[17] Three enlightenment s. 三明  Sk. Trividya, or Three clear conceptions i.e. as to (a) the
impermanence of all existence, (b) the wretchedness of all beings, (c) the unreality of bodily
existence.
[18] Six supernatural powers . 六道  Sk. Abhijina. Acquired by S'akya Muni on the night bef ore he
became Buddha, and which all Arhats possess. They are (a) The power to see instantaneously any
object in the Universe, (b) Power of understanding every sound of the Universe. (c) Power to
assume any shape or form and to be exempt from the laws of gr avitation and space. (d)
Knowledge of all forms of preexistence of oneself and others. (e) Intuitive knowledge of the mind
of all other beings. (f) Supernatural knowledge of the finality of the stream of life.
[19] Myo-on Bosatsu . Sk. Gadgadasvara. A ficti cious Bodhisat who resides in the fabulous universe
called Vairotchana Ras'mi Pratimandita, and appeared in thirty eight different transformations to
save mankind.
[20] Ryosen . v. sup.
[21] Koshi, Genkai . Confucius and Yen -hui.
[22] Tan. 円 En. 燕 Emperor o f Shin 秦の始皇帝
[23] Keika 荊軻  Denko. 田光  . In the original Chinese history it is Denko who is first summoned
and who recommends Keika.
[24] Invoking the magic power . Lit. the Mantras or magic words of the Dharani practised by the
Shingon Sect.
[25] Fudo Myo -o. One of the Five Mystic Kings, represented with a ferocious expression, and
surrounded with a halo of flame; he holds a sword in one hand and a rope in the other with
which to subdue evil influences.
[26] Kongara Doji and Seitaka Doji stand at the left and  right hand of Fudo Myo -o.
[27] Tosotten . Sk. Tuchita, the fourth Devaloka, where all Bodhisattvas are reborn, there to
promote the Way until they are reborn as Buddha.
[28] Kwanjincho . A book in which contributions for religious purposes were recorded.
[29] Eternal Mind . Shinnyo, the Eternal Reality that underlies the Universe. As this is the only
reality, it follows that the difference between phenomena is only apparent, and the enlightened
person knows that it does not exist.

[30] Twelve Causes of exis tence. Ju-ni-Innen. Sk. Nidana.
[31] Three Poisons . Lust, Anger, and Folly.
[32] Four Prides . Usually Seven are mentioned, perhaps four of these are meant; another reading
here gives, the Three Mysteries and the Four Mandaras.
[33] Elephant and Monkey , Prob. Anger and Folly.
[34] Three Ways . Hell, Pretas and Animals.
[35] Four Births . Sk. Tchaturyoni, i.e. (a) Placental birth, as man or animal, (b) from an egg, as
birds, (c) from moisture, as fish or insects, (d) by transformation, as Bodhisattvas.
[36] Farther Shore . i.e. Nirvana, which is reached across the 'great ocean of births and deaths'
[37] Gyo and Shun . The golden age in China.
[38] Three persons , Sk. Trikaya. i.e. Nirmanakaya, Buddha in human form, Sambhogakaya, Buddha
as a personification of some virtue; Dharmakaya, Buddha as the Eternal Reality.


VOLUME VI.