CHAPTER I.

EXILE OF THE ZASSHU.


On the fifth day of the fifth month of the first year of Jis ho the Tendai Zasshu Mei -un Dai Sojo
was prohibited from attending Court, and the [1]Nyo-i-rin Honzon, the tutelary Buddha of the
Court, being brought back by an official of the Kurodo -dokoro, he was also deprived of his office
of Chaplain -in-waiting. This  was because the Kebiishicho had been ordered to hand over the
ringleader of the bands of priests who had lately brought down the sacred car to the Palace. Now
the Ho -o had heard a slanderous tale from Saiko -hoshi and his son to the effect that the Zasshu
had some fiefs in Kaga and that when the Kokushi Morotaka confiscated them, in his resentment
at it he had got the priests to make their petition so that it might trouble the Court, and this
made His Majesty exceedingly angry so that he ordered him to be p unished severely. So, as the
Ho-o was thus ill -disposed to him, Mei -un relinquished his seal of office and resigned his position.
On the eleventh day of the same month Kakukai -ho Shinno, the seventh son of Toba -in, was
made [2]Tendai Zasshu : he was the pu pil of Gyo -ken the Dai -Sojo of Shoren -in. On the twelfth
day, in addition to depriving him of office and emoluments, two officers of the Kebiishi -cho were
about to apply the examination by fire and water, putting "a cover on the well and throwing
water on the fire; whereupon,

[p. 55]

fearing that the priests would again descend on them, the people of the city made a great outcry.

On the eighteenth day thirteen Courtiers below the Dajodaijin assembled in council to
pronounce sentence on the ex -Zasshu. The n Hachijo -no-Chunagon Nagakata -no-Kyo, who was
then only Sadaiben -no-Saisho and took the lowest seat, arose and said ; "Though according to the
advice of the lawyers we ought to abate the death penalty one degree and pass sentence of exile,
yet, seeing tha t the ex -Zasshu Mei -un Dai -Sojo is not only learned in both the Tendai and
Shingon doctrine, but is a man of pure and holy life who has taught the Mahayana Sutras to the
Courtiers and instructed the Ho -o in the Buddhist commandments, it is indeed difficult  to pass a
severe sentence on such a teacher of the Sutras and the Law : it were better if we mitigate the
sentence of exile."   When he had thus spoken his opinion unreservedly, all the other Courtiers
agreed to his suggestion, but as the resentment of the  Ho-o was so deep, in the end they passed
the sentence of exile. Kiyomori Nyudo also, when he heard of it, proceeded to visit the Ho -o to
persuade him to remit the sentence, but the Ho -o being indisposed with a cold and unable to see
anyone, he had to retu rn without effecting anything. In the case of a priest committing a crime it
is the custom that he should render up his orders and become a layman, and in accordance with
this rule the ex -Zasshu took the civil title of Dainagon -no-aiyu Fujii Matsueda. This  Mei-un, we

speak it with all reverence, was the son of Kuga -no-Dainagon Akimichi -no-Kyo, a descendant in
the sixth generation of Guhei Shinno seventh son of Murakami Tenno, and the most revered and
virtuous ecclesiastic in the land, respected by both Empe ror and subject : he was also the Betto of
Rokushoji, one of temples of Tennoji. Now the chief of the Court Diviners, Onyo -no-kami Abe -
no-Yasuchika, had said of him ; " It is incomprehensible to me that such a wise man as this
should take the name of

[p. 56]

[3]Mei-un, for thought the sun and moon are shining (Mei) above, yet unfortunately clouds (un)
are below." He became Zasshu on the twentieth day of the second month of the first year of Nin -
an, and was deposed on the fifteenth day of the third month o f the same year.

It is related that, on opening the treasury of the Chudo as the custom was, among various other
treasures there was a box about a foot long wrapped in white linen, and when this faultless
Zasshu opened it and looked therein he found a rol l of yellow paper on which Dengyo Daishi had
written the names of all the Zasshu who should be in time to come, and he read as far as his own
name, but after that, reading no more, he rolled up the scroll again and put it back as it was
before. It was very  sacs that even such a venerable priest as he could not escape the results of the
karma of his previous existence. On the twenty first day it was decided that he should be exiled
to Izu. Many people said different things about the cause of it, but really i t was owing to the
slander of Saiko hoshi and his son that this thing was done. As he was to be expelled from the
capital immediately, the officials who were entrusted with this duty went to his residence at
Shirakawa : the Zasshu left his residence weepin g and went to a place where the holy Sutras were
kept near Awataguchi. At Hieizan they came to the conclusion that their opponents were none
other than Saiko -hoshi and his son, and writing their names on a paper they put it under the left
foot of [4]Kompir a Taisho, the first of the twelve Shinsho, in the Kompon -chudo and cried aloud
with many imprecations on the twelve Shinsho and the seven hundred Yasha to take away the
life of Saiko -hoshi and his son without delay. Only to hear them was a terrible thing. On the
twenty third day the Zasshu went out from the Hall of the Sutras to his place of exile. How
pitiful to behold one of the high rank of Dai Sojo, being expelled by

[p. 57]

these officials, about to cross the eastern boundary on this his last day in the capital! When he
came to the shore of Uchide near Otsu and saw the white eaves of the Monju -ro shining in the
sun, without taking a second glance, burying his face in his sleeve, he was choked with tears.
There were many aged and virtuous priests at Hi eizan but among them Choken -hoin, who was
only Sozu at that time, was the most renowned, and he felt so much regret that he went as far as
Awazu to see him on his way. On taking leave of him there the Zasshu, out of gratitude taught
him the theory of conce ntration and the [5]three contemplations, a doctrine that he had kept
stored up in his mind for many years and that was originally possessed by Shaka himself and
handed down through [6]Memyo the Bikkhu of Benares and [7]Ryuju Bosatsu of southern India. It
is most praiseworthy that though our country is on the confines of the world, small and scattered
like grains of millet, and was at this time most degenerate, yet Choken, on possessing this doctrine,
wept for joy as he returned to the capital. Then at Hiei zan the priests again assembled and took
counsel together saying;" Since the time of Gishin Osho who first held the office of Tendai
Zasshu, for fifty five generations until now no Zasshu has ever been sent into exile; and when we

consider that, since the period En ryaku when the Emperor founded the Imperial Capital, and
Dengyo Daishi ascended this mountain, where woman who possesses the [8]Five Defects has
never set foot and taught us according to the Doctrine of the Four Enlightenments, three
thousand hol y

[p. 58]

priests have taken up their abode on this peak, where the Hokke -Kyo is chanted continuously,
while at its foot the Spirit of the god is daily revealed to men ; and that just as [9]Ryozen the
sacred mountain of [10]Gesshi, where is the sacred ca ve of Shaka, is situated on the north east of
the Imperial city, so is this mountain of Hieizan also placed at the north east of Kyoto, as a sacred
site to protect the land : seeing that generations of revered sovereigns and wise ministers have
elected to worship therein, why, even in a degenerate age like this, do they dare to offer us so
great an insult ? " So all the priests of the mountain with their followers again came down to
Higashi Sakamoto and held a council before Juzenji Gongen saying : "Let us go to Awazu and
bring back our chief, but as he is guarded by the officials who have expelled him, it will not be so
easy to take him away: thus we have no other refuge but the deities of our mountain. If we are to
rescue him without any untoward event let  us first obtain a favourable omen." To this end the
elder priests betook themselves vigorously to prayer.

Now there was a youth of eighteen named Tsuru -maru, a servant of Yo -en Risshi a priest of
Mudoji, who suddenly fell into a trance, both body and min d being in travail, so that the sweat
ran from his limbs, for the Juzenji Gongen had entered into him, and he spoke saying : " Even
though this is a degenerate age, how do they dare to send my priest into exile to a far country ?
My heart is cast down, the refore there is no reason why I should stop at the foot of this mountain
from henceforth : " and he pressed his sleeves to his eyes and wept. Astonished at this portent the
priestly multitude exclaimed. " If this be indeed the' oracle of Juzenji Gongen, le t this be a sign ;
restore each of these to its rightful owner : " and four or five hundred of the elder priests threw
down the rosaries which they held in their

[p. 59]

hands on to the verandah of the shrine of Juzenji Gongen. Then the possessed youth, running
round and gathering them up, without an error distributed them each to the one who owned it.
Then all the priests wrung their hands and wept for joy at this miracle that the deity had
manifested anew. " Let us go and take him from them ; " they sho uted as they rose up and swept
on like a great cloud, while on the shore road toward Shiga and Karasaki another multitude came
trooping, and yet another took ship on the lake toward Yamada and Yabase.

When they saw this the officers who were charged with the expulsion of the Zasshu scattered
and fled in all directions. The multitude them came on to Kokubunji, whereat the ex -Zasshu was
greatly astonished and exclaimed: " I have heard that one who is exiled by the Emperor cannot
see the shining of the sun an d moon, how much less can I, whom the Retired Emperor has
ordered to depart immediately, remain in this place: return I beseech you to your temples." Then
advancing to the edge of the temple verandah, he addressed them thus "Since I left the princely
mansi on of my father and entered the school of the Tendai sect, I have studied widely the
ordinances thereof, learning the doctrines of both Tendai and Shingon, being only concerned for
the prosperity of Hieizan, not neglecting to pray for the welfare of the na tion and deeply

considering the education of the monks: to this the deities of both Koya and Hieizan will testify.
There is no fault on my part, but innocent of any crime I have received this heavy sentence of
exile. I have no enmity toward either the worl d or man or gods or Buddhas; indeed for your good
intention in coming thus far to see me my gratitude is past expressing; " and he wrung the sleeves
of his garment wet with tears. The priests also wept into the sleeves of their armour, but on their
bringin g up the palanquin and urging him to enter it, the ex -Zasshu refused and continued ;
"Formerly I was the chief of three thousand priests, but now I have become a mere exile, how
shall I be carried on the shoulders of such noble disciples and deeply learned  monks ?

[p. 60]

Even if I come back again I ought to walk shod in straw sandals like any common priest." Now
there was a certain disorderly priest of the Saito Hall named Kaijo -bo-no-Ajari Yukei, a huge
fellow who stood seven feet high, dressed in armou r of black leather and metal loosely laced,
with very long thigh pieces ; removing his helmet he gave it to one of his fellow priests, and
leaning on the white handle of his halberd and pushing aside the crowd on either side, he stood
before the ex -Zasshu.  Glaring at him with wide open eyes for a while, he said peremptorily : " It
is because you are of such a mind that this misfortune has befallen you. Now get in immediately!”
Then the Zasshu in fear of him straightway entered the palanquin.

In their joy a t recovering him only the noblest of the priests his disciples and none of those of low
rank took turns in carrying his chair, but Yukei continued without being relieved, going on in
front gripping both the pole of the palanquin and the handle of his halbe rd with such vigour that
it seemed they would break asunder. Thus they traversed the eastern slope of the mountain as
though they marching over level ground. Putting down the chair in the court of Daikodo, they
once more held a confabulation, debating thus ;  "Now we have gone even to Awazu and brought
back our Zasshu, but how can we appoint as our head one who is under sentence of exile by the
Emperor ?" Then Kaijobo Ajari Yukei again came forward and said; " This our mountain is a holy
place unequalled in Nippon, a place of holy doctrine that protects our nation, the power of
whose gods is very mighty. Buddha is equal in authority to the Emperor, so that men do not hold
in light esteem the opinion of even the lowest priest; how much more then that of the mo st
noble chief of three thousand priests, the holy and virtuous head of our whole mountain. That he
should be punished without fault, does it not call for the wrath both of Hieizan and the capital
that we should thus be made a derision to Kofukuji and Onjo ji ? How sad to lose the greatest
master

[p. 61]

of the law of Tendai and Shingon, and 'that our students should for long have to neglect their
studies. Make me the leader of your hosts and though I be imprisoned or exiled or lose my head,
it will be a g ood memorial in this world and the next." Thus he spoke, weeping vehemently, and
the assembled thousands assented to his words. Since this time Yukei was called 'Ika -me-bo' (the
wrathful priest) and his pupil Eikei Risshi the people also nicknamed Ko -Ikame -bo, (the lesser
wrathful priest).