CHAPTER XV.

THE FLOATING SOTOBA.

Thus these two, continually praying before the Three Gongen, at times spent the whole nigh t
before them; so that it hap -

[p. 104]

pened that one night when they had thus stayed until morning singing ` Imayo ' and dancing,
toward dawn they allowed their eyes to close for a moment with weariness, and in a dream they
saw a small ship with white sails rowing in from the offing, and twenty or thirty court ladies in
scarlet hakama coming on shore from it, beating drums and chanting in chorus, " Better than
prayer to ten thousand Buddhas is the vow to Kwannon of the `Thousand Hands; straightway the
withered herbage will put forth flowers and fruit." Repeating this chant three times they vanished.
Then Yasuyori Nyudo, awaking from his dream, thought it a wondrous sign : indeed it must have
been sent by the Dragon God ; for seeing that one of the Three Gongen of Kumano called Nishi -
no-Gozen was the Kwannon of the Thousand Hands in India, and the Dragon God of the sea is
one of the twenty eight servants of this Kwannon, no doubt they would obtain their desire.

Another night the two spent there also, and in a dream they saw two leaves blown in by a breeze
from the offing and wafted into their sleeves, and when they looked at them, lo! they were leaves
of the ' Nagi ' [41] tree at Kumano. On the leaves of the Nagi these lines had been bitten in by
insects:
" Since your prayers to the god have been so long and
incessant ;
Surely you are allowed soon to return to your home."
So much did Yasuyori desire to return that as one method of consoling himself he made a
thousand Sotoba ' and wrote on them the charact er A [42] in Sanscrit, with the clay of the month
and his name and priestly name, adding these stanzas also:

" That I am here in au isle of the bay of Satsuma dwelling ;
Prithee O salt sea breeze, tell to my parents afar." and
" Dear is his native land t o him who is not so far distant ;
Feel then more pity for me exiled so lone and so far ."

[p. 105]

Then taking them down to the shore he cast them into the white sea waves one by one with this
invocation: " Namu Kimyo chorai, O Shaka Nyorai and Four Grea t Heavenly Kings and Ye God

of Heaven and Earth, and all the deities who protect this Imperial land, especially the Gongen of
Kumano and the deity of Itsukushima in Aki. May it please you to grant that one of these may
reach the capital." As he went on mak ing them and casting them into the sea thus, as the days
passed the number of the sotoba increased with them, and whether the winds assisted him or the
gods and Buddhas sent it, one of the thousand sotoba was cast up on the shore before the shrine
of Itsuk ushima Daimyojin. It chanced moreover that a priest who had some connexion with
Yasuyori Nyudo had just come to Itsukushima in the course of a pilgrimage to the western part
of the country, and this priest had the intention of going to the island if he cou ld find occasion, to
enquire the whereabouts of the Nyudo. There a servant came out from the shrine dressed in a
kariginu and looking like an ordinary person, and in the course of their talk the priest said : " It is
true that the gods appear in the world in divers guises to save mortals, but in what connexion
does the god of this place appear as a sea dragon? " [43] "Because the third daughter of the Dragon
King of Shakatsura  [44] is manifested here as Taizokai (the mandara of wisdom)," replied the
shrine servant. (Since the goddess appeared in this place she has continued to help mortals until
the present day and many miraculous events have taken place, so that these eight shrines stand
raising their lofty roofs by the sea shore, the moon shining on the eb bing and flowing tide: when
the tide flows the great torii and the red shrine -fence shine like emerald, and at the ebbing tide
even in the summer night the sand before it is covered with frost.)

[p. 106]

Then the priest, wondering at these marvels, offer ed gifts to the shrine with peace of mind, and as
the moon rose and the tide came in at dusk he saw the sotoba come floating among the seaweed
that drifted in from the offing, and idly picking it up he saw the verse upon it, and as the
characters were cut in the wood they were not washed off by the waves but stood out clearly.
Thinking this very strange, he stuck it on the side of his pilgrim's box and went back to Kyoto.
On arriving there he showed it to the old mother of Yasuyori and his wife and children  who were
living in retirement at Murasakino north of Ichijo. " Ah! " they said sadly, " why should this have
come here, instead of going across to China which lies nearest, to renew our grief by the sight of
it ? " Then the matter came to the ear of the H o-o, and when he looked on it he exclaimed,
weeping
" Ali, how cruel that the wretched man should still be living." It was sent on by him to Komatsu
Dono, and he in turn sent it to his father.

Of famous verses there is the stanza that Kaki no moto Hitomar o made about ' the ship
disappearing among the islands,' thinking fondly of his native laud, and that of Yamabe -no-
Akahito in like case celebrating ' the storks among the reeds.' So the god of Sumiyoshi also spoke
of 'the shingled roof of his shrine,' and the Miojin of Miwa of ' the cedar trees of his shrine gate,'
when afar from his home. Since Susa -no-o-no-mikoto first made the verse of thirty one syllables,
even the gods and Buddhas have thus expressed their feelings in it.