CHAPTER VI.

RAIGO.

When Shirakawa in was on the throne, the  daughter of the Kwampaku Fujiwara Morozane of
Kyogoku became Imperial Consort, and being a clever lady, was much beloved by the Emperor,
so that His Majesty, wishing to have a son by her, summoned a priest of Miidera named Raigo
Ajari, who was renowned fo r the efficacy of his supplications, and promised him that if he could
successfully intercede with the Buddhas to grant him a son by this lady, he should be given
whatever he might wish. Raigo respectfully assented and, returning to Miidera, applied himsel f to
his prayers with all his might to such effect that the Chugu soon became with child, and on the
sixth day of the twelfth month of the first year of Shoho was safely delivered of a Prince. The
Emperor, greatly overjoyed, again summoned Raigo and asked him what reward he wished for,
whereupon Raigo replied that he wished that a ceremonial dais should be built at Miidera. Now
the Emperor, thinking that he would

[p. 126]

probably ask to be made Sojo at one step, was greatly astonished at this unexpected request, for
this ceremonial dais for the ordination of priests was only allowed at Hieizan. " Now this Prince is
born," replied the Emperor, " we hope that lie will succeed to the Throne and that the land will
remain in pace and quietness, but if your req uest be granted Hieizan will be wroth, the Empire
will be disturbed, war will break out between your two temples and the Tendai sect may be
destroyed." So that his desire was not granted.

Raigo, greatly disappointed, returned to Miidera and determined to die by starvation. The
Emperor on hearing of this was greatly amazed, and calling Oe Masafusa, who was then
Mimasaka -no-kami, said to him. " Since you have been a pupil of Raigo, go and see what you can
do about this affair." Oe hastened to Miidera and fou nd that Raigo Ajari had retired to his cell to
ponder over the Imperial decision. Following him thither he discovered the Ajari sitting in a small
smoke -blackened oratory from which he shouted in a voice of thunder: " The word of the
Emperor is no joke: an  Imperial speech [25] is like sweat. If I cannot obtain my request I will carry
away the Prince that my prayers have made and take him with me to the Meido : " and without
another word  he retired to his cell. Mimasaka -no-kami returning reported his experience to the
Mikado, whereupon His Majesty was exceedingly grieved. Eventually Raigo died by starvation as
he had said, and thereupon the little Prince fell sick and took to his bed, and  although many
prayers were said for him it seemed of no avail. Always a white haired priest holding a ' shakujo
'[26] appeared to stand at the little Prince's pillow, and this not on ly in peoples' dreams but in the
reality of broad daylight, and on the sixth day of the eighth month of the first year of Sho -ryaku
the Prince at last expired at the age of four years. He was known as Atsubumi


[p. 127]

Shinno. The Emperor's grief was ext reme, but at that time, hearing that there was a priest at
Hieizan, the chief priest of the Saito Hall named Ryoshin Dai -Sojo, who was then only Sozu of
Enyubo, who was reputed to be very potent in prayer, he summoned him to the Palace and asked
him what h e could do. " The Imperial Wish," he answered, " can certainly be accomplished by
the power of our sect, for was not a Prince born to the Mikado Rei -zei-in by the effective prayers
of Jie Dai -Sojo, when requested by the Udaijin Kujo Morosuke Ko ? It is not  a difficult thing. So,
returning to Hieizan for a hundred days he gave himself up to earnest prayer, and within this time
the Chugu conceived, and on the ninth day of the seventh month of the third year of Sho ryaku
she was safely delivered of a Prince wh o afterwards became the Mikado Horikawa Tenno. So
even in ancient times evil spirits were terrible things.

At the time of this most auspicious lying in of Ken -rei-mon-in, it was a pity that, in spite of the
amnesty that was granted, Shunkwan Sozu alone sh ould have been omitted. On the eighth day of
the twelfth month of the same year the Prince was nominated heir to the Throne, the Naidaijin
Shigemori being appointed Instructor and Ike -no-Chunagon Yorimori appointed Daiyu. This year
having ended it became t he third year of Jisho.