CHAPTER XII.
THE FIGHT AT THE UGAWA.

    Now this Hosshoji -no-Shugyo [1] Shunkwan So zu was the grandson of Kyogoku -no-Gen-
Dainagon Gashun -no-Kyo and the son of Kidera Hoin Kwanga. The house of his grandfather the
Dainagon was not a military one, but he, being a man of violent nature, did not easily let anyone
pass before his house near th e Sanjobo Gate in Kyogoku, but usually would stand at the middle
gate grinding his teeth in a menacing manner. Being therefore the grandson of such a formidable
person, this Shunkwan also, though a priest, had a pugnacious and proud nature so that he was
just the person to take part in such an unreasonable rebellion. Shin -Dainagon Narichika -no-Kyo,
calling Tada -no-Kurando Yukitsuna, appointed him leader of one of the forces saying; " If you
accomplish this affair successfully, you shall have as much as you wish of fief and domain." And
he gave him fifty 'tan' of white silk for bow bags as a gratuity.

On the fifth day of the third month of the third year of An -gen Myo -in-den became Dajodaijin,
and Komatsu Dono, passing over Gen -Dainagon Sadafusa -no-Kyo, beca me Naidaijin, , so that
soon after there was a great banquet to congratulate him on becoming both Daijin and Taisho.
The guest of honour was Oi -no-Mikado Udaijin Tsunemune Ko. The Sadaijin ought to have
taken the upper seat, but as his father was Uji -no-Akusafu (Fujiwara Yorinaga), there was some
fear about such a precedent.

There were no [2]Hoku -men (Imperial Guards) in ancient rimes, but they were first established
from the time of Shirakawa -

[p. 41]

in, and many of the Eifu obtained these posts. Tamey oshi and Morishige, who were in their youth
pages called Inumaru and Senshumaru, and many other unimportant people also became Hoku -
men. During the time of Toba -in, Sueyori and Suenori, father and son, were both serving in the
Court, and though sometimes a cting as Courier from the Ho -o to the Imperial Court, always
behaved in a manner suitable to their rank, but the Hoku -men of this time had too much power
and did not respect Kugyo and Denjobito at all. Passing from lower Hoku -men to upper, from
that many w ere allowed to enter the Court, and as they could achieve this they became puffed
up and even went so far as to join in this foolish rebellion. Among these were Moromitsu and
Narikage, who served the late Shonagon Nyudo Shinsai. Moromitsu was in the govern ment office
in Awa and Narikage was a man of the capital: he was born in a very low station, being a '
Kondei -warawa,' or foot -soldier or perhaps a kind of table page. As he was sagacious he came to
be employed by the Ho -o. Moromitsu became Saemon -no-jo and Narikage Uemon -no-jo, then
both of them became Yukie -no-jo. Once when. something happened to Shinsai they both
became priests, taking the titles of Saemon -no-Nyodo Saiko and Uemon -no-jo Saikei ; but still
after this they continued to hold the office of M aster of the storehouses to the Ho -o. This Saiko
had a son Morotaka, who also became powerful and rose to be Keb i -ish Go -i-no-jo. Furthermore

on the nineteenth day of the twelfth month of the first year of An -gen, at the appointment of
officials at Tsuina , (year end ceremony) he became Kaga -no-kami.

While he was on duty in his province of Kaga he behaved in a lawless and barbarous manner,
seizing the domains of shrines and temples and influential families, and doing always what was
disorderly in everythin g. Now even if there is no virtuous governor, peaceful government may
still continue, but among his arbitrary actions, during the summer of the second year of the same
era, this Governor Morotaka brought his younger brother Kondo Hangwan Morotsune to act a s
Mokudai (Deputy).

[p. 42]

Now there was a certain mountain temple called Ugawa near the official residence of the
Governor, and just as the Mokudai arrived from the capital, the priests happened to be bathing,
whereupon he broke in among them, drove th em off and bathed in their stead, driving away
those of lower rank who were bathing near them so that his horse might be washed in their place.
Thereupon the priests became very angry and cried out; " From of old this temple has been a
sacred place where o fficials cannot enter, so let us defend our privilege and stop this invasion."
Then the Mokudai replied angrily, " The former Mokudai were all fools, so the present one has
no reason to follow their example : Obey the law ! " But while he was speaking the priests began
to drive out his men, and they on their part tried to force their way in, so that one of the legs of
the favourite horse of the Mokudai Morotsune got broken in the struggle. Then with their
weapons they shot and hacked at each other for sever al hours.

At length when night began to fall, the Mokudai, seeing that he could not overcome them,
discreetly drew off his men. Afterwards the officials of the province, gathering together about a
thousand men, came out to Ugawa and burnt down all the bui ldings of the monastery. Now
Ugawa was a branch temple of Hakuzan and thither the chief priests went to appeal for help,
namely Chishaku, Gakumyo, Hodaibo, Shochi, Gakuon, and Tosa -no-jari. Hakuzan consisted of
three shrines and eight temples, and all of t hese came out together, a great multitude about two
thousand men. On the ninth day of the seventh month of the same year in the evening they made
for the official residence of the Mokudai Morotsune. " Today is already past; tomorrow we will
fight," they sa id and only went thus far that day. The dew -laden wind of autumn blew out the
tough sleeves of their bow bands; the lightning flashing in the sky gleamed on the stars of their
helmets. The Mokudai, fearing that he could not hold his own, fled by night to K yoto. At the
hour of the Hare (6. a.m.), the enemy rushed to the assault,

[p. 43]

fiercely shouting their war cry. From within the castle there is no sound. When they send men to
explore, they report that all have vanished. Then the multitude, seeing tha t attack is needless,
draw off their forces, and, carrying with them the sacred emblem of the middle shrine of
Hakuzan, go off to appeal to Hieizan. At the hour of the Horse (12. noon.), they brought it to
Higashi Sakamoto on Hieizan : from the northern pr ovinces the thunder rolled ceaselessly toward
the capital ; snow fell and covered the land on the mountain and in the city: all was white even to
the twigs of the evergreens on the mountains when they brought the sacred emblem to the shrine
of Marodo. This  shrine was the Myori Gongen of Hakuzan, the relation of the two gods being
that of father and child. Though it was uncertain whether there would be any response from the

deity, it was a great pleasure to the two gods to meet thus ; greater even than that of [3]Urashima,
when he met his descendant of the seventh generation, or than that of the [4]son of Buddha at
meeting his yet unknown father at Ryosen. So this multitude of three thousand priests from
seven shrines each following close on the heel of the o ther, sleeve by sleeve continually chanted
the holy Sutras ; it was indeed a sight that defied description. Then the priests of Hieizan
appealed to the Emperor for the banishment of the Kokushi Kaga -no-kami Morotaka and the
imprisonment of the Mokudai Kond o Hangwan Morotsune, but no answer was made to the
appeal. Seeing this some of the influential nobles of the Court complained to one another: " Alas!
Why does not the Emperor decide the affair quickly? From old times appeals from Hieizan have
been differen t from all others. Okura -no-Kyo Tamefusa and Dazai Gon -no-Sotsu Suenaka -no-
Kyo were very important Court

[p. 44]

Officials but they were banished by appeal of Hieizan, how much more Morotaka who is a man
of little account; the thing ought to be done prop erly." But, as the Chinese saying goes: " The high
officials fear for their emoluments and do not advise the Throne, while the lower ones fear to
make a mistake and so keep silent." So in this case everyone kept his mouth shut in council.

" The waters of Kamogawa, the dice of Sugoroku [5] and the monks of Hieizan are things quite
beyond my control," quoth the Ho -o Go -Shirakawa. In the time of Toba -in too the gift of the
monastery of Heizenji in Echizen to Hieizan showed no small confidence in that temple; for
when Hieizan had pressed the Emperor to give it to them he had answered that it was doing evil
that good might come, whereupon they appealed to the Ho -o, and Go -no-Sotsu [6] Kyobo -no-
Kyo enquired, " If the monks of Hieizan bring down the sacred emblem [7] of Hiyoshi and make
an appeal, what had better be done ? " to which the Ho o replied: "How difficult it is to resist the
appeals of Hieizan," and complied.