CHAPTER V
THE LIFE BEYOND
MANNER in which life beyond the grave was
X regarded appears plainly from the burial ceremonies.
The Lapps say that they fit out the dead with provisions and
various implements " so that these may satisfy their hunger,
go fishing, or chop wood, as they did before, while alive." l
The " ancient Cheremiss " till and sow their fields over there,
practise cattle-raising, hunt, fish, keep bees, marry and go
visiting each other. As in their former life, the dead can
suffer from cold and hunger.2 To help protect them from
cold, the Voguls, when they have warmed themselves in the
open at a fire of logs, leave a few pieces of wood behind in
order that the dead may also be able to warm themselves.3
The dead may even find themselves in situations of mortal
danger in the life beyond. The Mordvins and Cheremiss
believed that the dead, having lived for a certain period in the
underworld, could die a second time.*
A general belief is that the life beyond is lived under the
earth. The passage occurs in a Vogul song: " The dead
people go to the land below "j also, in Ostiak folk-poetry we
read: "We arrive at the sea belonging to the man living in
the underworld."B In its nature this underworld resembles
the world we live in in everything, with the exception that,
seen with our eyes, everything there would appear inside out
or upside down. The Lapps believe that the dead walk
there with the soles of their feet against ours. According to
the Samoyeds the same rivers and streams exist there, but
flow in opposite directions. The tops of trees there grow

THE LIFE BEYOND 73
downward; the sun rises in the west and sets in the east. The
life of those over there runs also contrary to ours; they be-
come younger and grow smaller with the years, until they
disappear and become nothing or are born into the family
again as children. In this way, the " shade " lives as long in
the underworld as its predecessor on the earth.* The Ostiaks
say that the dead dwindle in the end to a little beetle.7
The belief that everything is topsy-turvy in the under-
world, appears also in the worship of the dead. From this
springs the custom of washing the dead, or sacrificing to them,
with the left hand. When the Mordvins reap the portion
of the dead, they hold the sickle by the blade, throwing it
backwards over their heads.8 To sacrifice backwards, contrary
to the sun's motion, with clothes inside-out, or to place the
offering upside-down on graves, is characteristic of the Finno-
Ugrian cult of the departed. The idea of an inverted world
seems to have been derived from the reflection seen in the
water.
Just as the villages were formerly family-villages and the
graveyards contained only members of the same family in
their ground, it is believed that the dead live together in
villages, the coffin of each of their inhabitants forming their
private " houses." The Volga Finns call the first one to be
buried "the graveyard ruler"; he is supposed to keep order
in the graveyard-community, and at commemoration feasts
a special candle is lit for him and food is sacrificed. That
discipline is actually upheld in the underground village is
shown by the Votiaks1 belief that the dead receive very un-
willingly into their ranks newcomers who have been noted
in life for evil ways and quarrelsomeness.8 To meet with
death in a strange district is regarded as a great calamity, be-
cause the " shade " of the dead one, according to a prevalent
belief, is forced to dwell where the body lies, or at any rate
in its immediate neighbourhood, and is therefore prevented
from joining its relatives. When such a death occurs, certain

74 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
tribes, including the Voguls, perform a mock burial to entice
the dead to the burial-place of its home.10
The Finns called the " world beyond" under the earth
Manala (orig. maan-ala = " underground " ) or Tuonela
("the home of Tuoni" ). Tuoni, which occurs also in the
language of the Norwegian Lapps as Duodna, means " the
dead one," later, also " death " and the " life beyond," and is
probably a Scandinavian loan-word (cf. Swedish dana-arf> " an
inheritance falling to the State" ). In Tuonela everyone has
his own " house," as pictured by a Finnish folk-song in the
following words: " Of the finest turf the roof, of fine sand
the floor is made, a fathom long is each side-wall, the hinder
one a yard in length." That this " house " in Tuonela is the
grave itself appears plainly from lines in which the " house "
is described as being " carpeted with women's hair, supported
by men's bones." In an IngrJan weeping song w Manalan
vanhimmat" (" the elders of the underworld " ) are men-
tioned, which " elders " appear to hold some governing rank,
as they were not always inclined to permit the dead to pay visits
to the world of the living.11
In folk-poetry Tuonela seems to be regarded as a common
underworld for all. On the way there, one had to cross the
" black river " of Tuonela, on which neither sun nor moon
shines and over which leads " a bridge " (Tuonen or Manalan
silta). These beliefs, probably of later origin, remind one
of the Scandinavian river of death, over which one also crossed
by means of a bridge. It is probable that they are part of the
mediseval views met with also in the literature of the time.
Gregory the Great relates how a person being near to death,
saw a bridge under which a gloomy, black stream flowed.
On this bridge a judgment took placej should any of the un-
righteous attempt to pass over it, they fell down into the
dark evil-smelling waters. Besides the Christian peoples, the
Mohammedans also are acquainted with this originally Persian
ideaj from these it has reached the Volga Finns. The Chere-

THE LIFE BEYOND 75
miss believe that the poor dead, in order to reach " the place
of light," must travel slowly along a narrow pole over (< the
place of darkness," also called the " resin-cauldron," as there
the souls of the wicked are tortured in burning resin. Only
the righteous come luckily over with the help of the " Prince
of Death," Kiyamat-tora (Arabic klamat, " the resurrection of
the dead"j torat "judge") or Tamek-vui (Turco-Tatar
tamykt " the world beyond "j Cheremiss vui, " head ") and his
assistant Kiyamat-saus.12
A more widely-spread idea in Finnish folk-poetry is, how-
ever, that the dead are transported over the river of Tuonela
in a boat. In one song, it is related that, when Wainamoinen
was on his way to the underworld, the daughter of Tuoni came
with a boat and ferried him over the river. Among the folk-
beliefs the view is expressed that the evil one makes a boat
out of finger-nails clipped on Sundays, in which he carries
the dead off with him to his own place. An identical boat
was called the " corpse-boat" by the Icelanders. Doubtless
all these beliefs about the crossing of a river of death in a
boat are derived from Greek mythology. The furiously-
barking Manalan-rakki (" the underworld's hound") re-
minds one of the Greek Cerberos. To the mediaeval ideas
belong also Tuonen-portti (" the underworld's gate ") which
corresponds to the Helgrindr in Icelandic poetry.
The common dwelling-place of the dead is called Yabme-
aimo (" the home of the dead ") by the Scandinavian Lapps,
and is governed by Yabme-akka (" Old woman of the dead ").
The Lapps sacrifice to her, and to the dead in general, black
animals, which must be buried alive in the earth. The most
common are said to have been black cats or cockerels. During
the Christian period they believed that the dead, according
to their deeds, could come from Yabme-aimo to God in
Heaven (Radien-aimo, the " Ruler's home") or to the
" gloomy " Rut-aimo or Ruta-aimo, where the evil Rutu or
Rota tortured the dead. This Rutu was not originally re-

76 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
garded as a devil, as it was often the custom to make offerings
to him, especially during epidemics. The sacrificial animal
itself, a slaughtered horse, buried entire within the earth or in a
fissure among the rocks, points to a borrowing from the
Scandinavian. According to Randulf, Rutu appeared some-
times to the Lapps as a man dressed in blue. The wolf was
called " Rutu's hound." Originally Rota or Rutu (from Old
Scandinavian throte, " an ulcer ") may have been the spirit
of the plague."
A mutual belief of both Scandinavians and the Lapps living
as their neighbours is, further, the idea that the dead dwelt in
certain " holy mountains,"14 where, according to the Lapps,
they existed happily, living in tents, keeping themselves in
the same way and speaking the same language as the Lapps.
They describe the inhabitants of the mountain, who seem to
have composed a closed family, and paid visits to one another,
riding from mountain to mountain with reindeer, which were
sacrificed to them by the Lapps. These " mountain spirits "
were the protectors of the livingj the Lapps having often
many such mountains to which they came when in need.
Forbus says that these mountains were not equal in regard
to the assistance they could give, " one holy mountain might
be of greater help than another, its inhabitants more ready to
listen and quicker to act than those of the other." u The
Lapps inherited these tutelary spirits from their forefathers,
or came into possession of them through marriage, and could
even raise them themselves by offerings, becoming the more
powerful and respected as the number of their " spirits " grew.
These spirits would sometimes attempt to take life; by calling
the " soul " of a Lapp to themselves before his time had come,
they caused sicknesses that could be cured only by the shaman
appeasing the " spirits," and leading the sick one's " soul"
back to his body again. Leem relates that while a shaman lay
in a fit, those present tried to guess which " holy mountain "
his soul was at the moment visiting." After death, the Lapps

THE LIFE BEYOND 77
hoped they would be received into the mountain, the inmates
of which had protected them most during life. " There they
became spirits themselves, and could keep death away from
their relatives and friends for some time." 1T In the more
southern districts, these " mountain spirits," there called
" Saivo man " and " Saivo maiden " (originally a loan-word
from Old Scandinavian sjo)9 have borrowed their character-
istics from the Huldre-folk of their southern neighbours.18
In West Finland, also, traces of a belief in " mountains of
the dead " may be found. In certain districts the people tell
how the gods have borne away the dead man from the grave
to an adjacent forest-hill, in which he must reside as a penance
for some crime committed during his life. This belief is found
lurking in some Finnish magic-songs, in which the name hiisi
(originally " forest" and " hill") appears with apparently
the same meaning, for example: " I call for help from hiisi,
I seek for folk from the hill." Hiiden vaki (« Hiisi's folk ")
means often the same as the Swedish Huldre-folk.
The night being the time chosen by most spirits for moving
about in, the thought arises easily, that the underground world
of the dead lies towards the sunset, or towards the dark north.
In these directions offerings are generally made to the dead.
The Northern Ostiaks and the Voguls are of the opinion, like
many other North Siberian tribes, that the land of the dead
lies hidden somewhere in the Northern Arctic Ocean. Accord-
ing to the Voguls, the land of the dead is under the earth, but
the entrance to it lies far away in the north, where the waters
of the River Ob flow into the sea. Arrived at the entrance,
the road divides itself into three branches, at the mouth of
each of which are signposts, telling which way, according to
the deeds done in life, each soul must take. The ruler of
the land of the dead, who is greatly feared, is called Khul-
ater (" the Ruler of the dead "). In the same place is situ-
ated the underworld of the Northern Ostiaks, in which there
are three storeys j in the lowest, said to be of the height of a

78 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
dog's tail, live those who have sinned most. The journey
to the " world of the dead " appears to be across water $ songs
relate how the dead are placed sitting in the boat of Khin-ort's
("Prince of sickness") son. In the sagas, a world of the
dead is also mentioned, from which the Prince sends his
assistants to bring over the dead on a boat. Although the
view that the dead are treated in the underworld according
to their deeds in life, is unquestionably of later origin, it is
still probable that the Ob itself, with its " downward-running "
waters, has suggested the idea of a chasm in the dark, mys-
terious north, where the waters of the river are swallowed
up and the underworld opens its gloomy portals. The journey
there in a boat receives in these circumstances its natural ex-
planation.18
As among the Scandinavians, where the road to Hel led
" downward and northward," Finnish poetry tells of Pohjola
(" northern home ") as being the home of the dead. A cor-
responding idea to it is the Norrhem of Swedish magic-songs.
Where this " gloomy" and " dark" place, as such called
Pimentola (pme'd =ct dark ") was supposed to be situated,
is made clear by another name, Sarajas (from which Sarantola,
etc.), meaning originally "sea" and denoting the Northern
Arctic Ocean. The Esthonians called it Maksameri (— the
Lebermeer of the medieval German sagas) and believed it
to be a gathering-place for sorcerers, witches, etc. As in
Tuonela, so also, according to Finnish folk-poetry, in Pohjola
flowed a gloomy riverj both names occurring in the same song,
and meaning, obviously, one and the same place. This death-
river is also envisaged as a turbulent rapid, and is then gen-
erally called Rutja's or Turja's rapids, the name of the place
denoting a mystic neighbourhood far away in the north. From
the songs themselves it would appear that this " awful stream,"
that " swallows up all waters," where " the trees sink down-
ward their crowns," and where "the reeds fall downward,"
being therefore of the nature of a vortex, has its origin in

THE LIFE BEYOND 79
the idea of the Maelstrom. Sometimes these " rapids" are
said to be a "flaming whirlpool," a name perhaps connected
closely with the Aurora Borealis, explained by the Finns as
being " the Fire of the Arctic Ocean." Pohjola, to which a
" gate" gives entrance, is described in the magic songs as a
place breeding sickness and death, or " the man-eating village "
where the evil Pohjan-akka or -emanta ("mistress"} cf.
Lapp Jabme-akka) ruled.20
Mingled with beliefs from Greek mythology, the paradise
of the eastern lands, through the medium of the Russian
Orthodox Church, has crept into the views of the Russian
Karelians concerning the life beyond. In a " death-song "
taken down in the Olonetz Government, and sung the moment
the "soul has flown," the journey of the dead to the other
world is described in detail. In the opening lines the dead is
asked: "Who were they who took thy soul? Were they the
Archangels Michael and Gabriel with their angels and apostles?
Did they meet thee bearing candles of white wax? Did the
chief apostles, Peter and Paul, meet thee bearing golden plates
and golden eggs? Did Abraham and Isaac meet thee bearing
the keys from Abraham's time with which to open the doors
of that distant time? Hadst thou during life (by good deeds)
redeemed for thyself the guides to that world? Did they
escort thy soul over lands rich with berries, over highly beauti-
ful heaths? Couldst thou with thine own hands pluck the
berries? Surely they refreshed thy soul with them, wert thou
not over reluctant to give away of thine own berries to others
during life? " The song goes on to tell that the way to the
other world leads over roaring rapids and swiftly-moving
streams: " Did an escort come to take thee over these with
oaken boats and oars of gold? Did they come without thy
calling, or hadst thou to shout with thy tired voice to them? "
Over the river a dense forest grows: " Hadst thou during life
redeemed the services of ' the woodcutters, the roadmakers'? "
After that come very, wide bubbling marshes: "Hadst thou

80 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
during life redeemed * the guide over the marsh J ? " In the
marsh creep the ever-watchful serpents: " Hadst thou during
life caused them to sleep? " From the edge of the marsh three
pathways lead: " Hadst thou during life redeemed the right to
the one on the utmost right? " On that road the soul comes
to the blue bridge with parapets of reed, at the end of which
is a spring of water with a golden ladle for the cleansing
of the besmirched soul. There is also " the bed of fishbone "
in which to rest the weary limbs: " Hadst thou redeemed
also those during the days of thy life? " " After these,
very great stretches of lush grass and wide fields open out
before thee. On the grass a table is decked from 'the air to
the edge of the air.J On the table many foods of which thou
needst not even eat, only to breathe in their direction to satisfy
thy stomach. Along the table run c rivers of milkJ and at
the place of each soul, a tree has grown giving fruits sweet
as honey. At the eastern end of the table is a balance, in which
the events of thy life are weighed. Didst thou in life redeem
the weighers in thy favour? "21
Here we thus meet, in the same song, ideas already known
to the ancients. The honey-tree and the " rivers of milk"
have prototypes in the tree and rivers of life in paradise.
During the pagan period, separate worlds for the good and
the bad dead were unknown. But, already at that time, there
seem to have been views that the dead attained to different
worlds, not on account of their deeds during life, but accord-
ing to that which had been the cause of their death. Those
who died in battle or as the result of some accident did not
go to the underworld but peopled another world up in the
heavens. The Cheremiss say that " those who die in battle
or are killed by lightning go to heaven." " In an old ac-
count of the Ostiaks* religion, we read the following words:
" If the beasts of the forest tear one asunder, or he is shot
in battle, his soul goes upward, but the souls of those dying a
natural death at home go downward." In the same manner,

THE LIFE BEYOND 81
Strahlenberg relates: " those who meet with a violent death or
are killed in a fight with the bear, go immediately to heaven,
but those dying a natural death in their beds or elsewhere
must worship for a long time a stern god under the earth,
before they can go up to heaven." 2a Similar ideas are met
with in the folk-poetry of the Ostiaks. In a song from the
Irtysh it is told how the soul of a hero who, in the clash of
battle, has received a blow on the head rendering him un-
conscious, leaves the body to climb by a narrow stairway to
heaven, and how he is met by three red-legged squirrels who
say to him: " This is our word: we eat our food in the midst
of human blood, we drink our drink in the midst of human
blood, go back!" When the soul of the hero returned, con-
sciousness returned also to him. In another story a hero in
heaven is accorded permission by the Heaven god to return
to earth to help his comrades who are in a great difficulty.2*
According to the Finnish Lapps the Aurora Borealis is " the
dead in battle, who, as spirits, still continue battling with one
another in the air." The Russian Lapps also declare the Au-
rora Borealis to be " the spirits of the murdered." These live
in a house, in which at times they gather together and begin
stabbing one another to death, covering the floor with blood.
" They are afraid of the sun, hiding themselves from its
rays." The Aurora Borealis appears " when the souls of the
murdered begin their slaughter." Hence the Lapps fear it.25
The Esthonians also see in the Northern Lights a heavenly
war, "Virmalised taplevad" (" Virmalised fight"). On the
island of Osel they say that during the holy nights when the
heavens open, one may see two armed fighting-men, eager
to give battle to one another, but God will not allow it, and
separates them.28 Most probably the Finns also possessed a
similar belief j in certain Karelian magic songs Pohjola is
sometimes mentioned as the residence of those who " were
killed without sickness" and where the inhabitants are
said to have " blood-dripping garments." 27 In a variation

82 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
on the " song of the Great Oak " that grows so high that
neither the sun nor the moon could shine on the earth, and
was therefore chopped down " with its crown towards the
south and its trunk towards the north," it is further re-
lated that the giant tree fell "straight across Pohjola's
river " as " an everlasting bridge " for those " killed without
sickness," 28 The author is inclined to believe that in this last
we meet again the idea of the Milky Way, regarded by some
Arctic tribes as being the trunk of a great tree, along which
those killed in battle wander. To the same folk-belief may
ultimately be traced the Scandinavian belief in Valhall, where
the souls of the dead in battle dwell, and, according to Gyl-
ja^inningy " take on their accoutrements, go out into the yard
and fight and kill one another." Other Arctic peoples also
have had similar ideas of the Aurora Borealis. The Chukchee
in the north-east corner of Asia believe that " the Northern
Lights is a dwelling chiefly for those who have died a violent
death," Z9 and even the Tlingits in North America, according
to Veniaminov, the Russian missionary, believe that the souls
of the dead dwell, not only in the " underworld " far away
in the north, but also up in the sky, where only the souls of
those killed in battle may go, and where, as the flames of the
Northern Lights, they battle with one another, predicting
bloodshed on the earth.30
All the dead, however, do not attain to the Life Beyond,
wherever this may be regarded as being situated. The souls,
especially, of little children, killed and hidden by their
mothers, remain as ghosts in the worlds of the living. The
Lapps called these Apparas (Finnish aparii, "bastard") and
the Ostiaks Vylep or Patshak. The Finnish Liekkio (" the
flaming one ") was probably originally a similar spirit, who,
according to Agricola, " ruled over grass, roots and trees."
All those lost in forests or drowned in the water, and who
were therefore denied the opportunity of resting peacefully
in a grave, became similar homeless, restless spirits.