CHAPTER VII
THE SEIDES OF THE LAPPS
A
LREADY in the sixteenth century the stone gods of the
Lapps are mentioned in literature. Such gods of stone
were kept by the Fell Lapps on the mountains, by the Fisher
Lapps on the shores of the fiords, on capes reaching into the
sea, on islands, or near rivers and rapids. These stones, called
" Seides" by the Lapps, were to be found everywhere in
Lapland.
According to accounts by missionaries these Seides had not
been fashioned by human hands, but were natural stones,
often hollowed out by water, having, as such, often a peculiar
form, resembling human beings or animals. Those regarded
as the most valuable were the stones resembling human beings.
In some places, many Seide stones were placed together in the
same sacred place and were then believed to represent a family.
Even immovable rocks were at times regarded as Seides. As
late as the summer of 1908, a holy place was discovered at
Lulea (Vidjakuoika), containing several small mounds about
a foot in height, and around these ten Seide stones. When
the stones had been put back in their places, it was seen that
each mound had had one larger stone on it and several smaller
ones around it. These small ones were sometimes not more
than two decimetres in height.1 The Seides of the Fisher
Lapps might, at times, be stones altogether surrounded by
water.2
The Lapps gave a devoted attention to these sacred stones.
Wherever possible they were placed on green ground, where
the grass grew thick and lush in the summer-time. In addition,

! THE SEIDES OF THE LAPPS 101
the place where the Seide stood was decorated in the summer
with birch-leaves and in the winter with branches of fir. The
foundation on which the Seide was placed had always to be
kept green, and whenever the leaves
; or pine-needles withered, they had to
- be renewed.3
When the Lapp wished to ask for
something from his stone god, or to
inquire into the future, he went to the
holy place, and baring his head, took
the god in his hand and spoke to it.
While he was relating all kinds of
' wishes, he would keep on attempting
. i-jv ,1 TT .1 • j • FIG. 4. LAPP SEIDE STONE
t to lilt the stone, li this proved im-
possible, and the stone grew steadily heavier, it was regarded
as an answer in the negative. Even the very smallest stone,
said the Lapps, became heavy when the god was not willing to
give a positive answer. When the Lapp received what he had
wished for, he made an offering as a sign of thankfulness to
the stone, the nature of the offering being inquired after also
' in the above-mentioned manner.*
This method of turning to the gods was, however, not pos-
sible when the Seide was a great rock or a stone embedded in
the earth. Consulting these, the Lapp laid his hand on the
rock and began his questions in the unshakable belief that
his hand would stick to it and not be loosened until he chanced
to hit on the exact event that would happen to him.5
The place where the Seide stood and its nearest surround-
f ings were " holy " (-passe) to the Lapps. The mountain on
which the stone gods were placed, was called in general " the
Holy Mountain " (Passe-vara). In the same way, the Fisher
Lapps called the rivers and lakes by which their Seides stood,
" the Holy River " or " the Holy Lake." Names such as
these are met with in Lapmark even today.
The fear felt for these holy places forced the Lapps to

102 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
observe great caution. According to Leem, they only ap-
rroached them dad in their festival clothes, beginning to make
genuflections at a distance, as they walked. Every year they
journeyed to them, and if it was impossible to make new
offerings, the bones of former offerings had, at least, to be
moved. Dwellings were erected very unwillingly near these
places, for fear of disturbing the gods by the crying of chil-
dren or other noises. When they travelled by a holy moun-
tain they dared not fall asleep as that was regarded as a sign
of irreverence. Neither would they speak loudly or shoot
birds or any other game within their precincts. If they were
wearing anything blue in colour, they would remove this as
they approached a holy place. Women had to hide their faces
or turn their heads in passing them. Even men were not
allowed to wear any garment that had been at some time worn
by a woman, not even foo<. ir that had lain in the same
soaking-vessel as the women's moccasins.6 Hogstrom adds
that it was dangerous for a woman, even at a distance, to go
round a holy place. If during any journey she had passed to
the right of one of these places, she had, on returning, to
pass by on the same side, though it might mean a detour of sev-
/eral leagues.7 Mallmer relates further, that when a Lapp went
aside to make an offering, he tied up all his dogs very care-
fully, as should one of these cross his track, misfortune might
befall himj the wolves, for example, might worry his reindeer
to death. When coming out of or going into his tent on
these errands, the Lapps never used their ordinary doors,
but crept in through a little backdoor which was regarded as
so holy that no woman might either leavex>r-enter through it.8
Even, today these beliefs persist in the more^ remote dis-
tricts. In Kola Lapmark there is a holy place, situated near
the Finnish frontier and composed of the narrow and steep
spur of a mountain, which is the object of the Lapps' super-
stitious reverence. When rowing past the place in the sum-
mer-time, one must be careful to make as little noise as possible,

THE SEIDES OF THE LAPPS 103
wetting the rowlocks lest these should creak. In the winter
one drives by, step by step. One may not glance aside,
but must look straight ahead. Having reached a spot about
three hundred yards past the place, one must get up out of
the sleigh, and — at least when passing that way for the first
time — drink spirits in the god's honourj earlier, one should
also have spilt a little on the ice as an offering. Not until
then may one let one's reindeer run. Should one neglect
these precautions or in any other way insult the god, he would
cause a fateful blizzard to arise as a punishment, or, as has
sometimes happened, bind the culprit with his reindeer and
everything to the place so that he was unable to stir from the
spot.8
By the Mutenia River in the Finnish Lapmark there is
also a Seide, of which the people relate that in earlier times,
when passing this holy stone, women were not allowed to sit
in the boats, but must travel by it along the shore on foot.
Near the stone they had in addition to dress themselves in
trousers.10 The Russian Lapps believed, that women on near-
ing the holy places invariably were stricken with " a certain
illness " by means of which, even in strange districts, they
could tell the nearness of such places.11
One of the best known holy mountains in Finnish Lapmark
is the Rastekaise in Utsjoki, on the top of which there are two
large stones, and which even today is regarded by the super-
stitious people with awe. When a storm arises on the moun-
tain they regard it as a sign of the wrath of the god.ia Travel-
lers relate that the Lapps say this mountain will not willingly
show itself to strangers, hiding itself instead in mists.
The Lapp turns to his Seides in all his different needs, for
good luck on his journeys, to obtain plentiful fish or game, to
ensure the health and increase of his reindeer, but especially
when sickness or other misfortunes befall him. At first prom-
ises are made of offerings, the promises being then redeemed
when the sick become well again. If, in addition, one re-

104- FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
members that the Seides had the power of raising storms, one
can understand how powerful and many sided these spirits
were.
Whence arose the power of these dumb Seide stones, spread-
ing as it did a reflection of awe even over the ground on which
they stood? The Lapps themselves hardly longer knew at
the close of their pagan period. Signs are to be found, how-
ever, that the Seide-cult has its root in the worship of ancestors.
A significant feature is that the Seide is the protecting spirit
of a certain family or clan. A report made use of by Schefferus
says that "every family and clan has.in the land wherein it
moves and dwells," its own.Seide.13 A Seide worshipped by
a larger clan seems to have been mightier than the Seide of
a separate family. Hogstrom relates concerning this, that
" the power of these stones is adjudged according to the
number worshipping and offering up to them." In another
place, he tells of a Seide that had " long been worshipped by
a whole village." 14 Family worship — for the Lapp-villages
were family-villages — is also pointed to in an account by the
missionary Tornaeus: "So many households, one can almost
say so many as there were Lapps, so many gods were there to be
found, situated in different places by the sea. But one was
always the highest and mightiest, and this alone was wor-
shipped by the whole population of a village. It was situated
on some hill, or other high place, so that it could be well seen
of all, and honoured j but other house and family gods were
placed in lower places,"18 The duty of making offerings was
bequeathed by father to son. The missionary S. Kildal says,
that " when the parents died, the children inherited the holy
mountains and the mountain gods." lfl
Among the Scandinavian Lapps, this Seide-cult is connected
with their beliefs in holy mountains with underground in-
habitants, as described in another chapter. Jessen says ex-
pressly that sacrifices to the Saivo spirits were made near a
stone." But these spirits were originally the ancestors wor-

THE SEIDES OF THE LAPPS 105
shipped by the Lapp families or clans as guardian-spirits.
Tr^at also in the Swedish Lapmark a dim idea of the origin
of the Seide-cult has remained behind, is shown by the follow-
ing words of the missionary Rheen: "These stones were set
" up on the mountains, in clefts between the rocks, or by rivers
and seas, on places where they at some time or other had heard
ghostly noises." 1S The Finnish Lapps have also preserved
certain interesting knowledge. A man, who happened to sleep
the night near a holy place, saw in his dreams " all kinds of
ghosts, animals and human beings." It is also worth mention-
ing, that near these places one must never speak ill of the
dead, as otherwise those underground become angry.19
The Lapps believe also that the Seide can appear to its
i worshipper in human form. In the account of a sacrifice in
1 the eighteenth century, it is stated: "Then a being in human
| form, like a great ruler, extremely good to look at, dressed in
: expensive garments and trinkets, appears and sits down to take
\t in their meal, speaks with them and teaches them new arts,
( and says that he lives in the stone or mountain to which they
sacrifice." 20 To the Lule Lapps the Seide appeared in the
, form of a well-built, tall man, dressed in black like a gentle-
• man, with a gun in his hand.21 Also among the Finnish
! Lapps Fellman heard a story about a man who was about to
• destroy his Seide because of his poor luck at fishing, but de-
j sisted when it appeared before him in human form.22
I The matter is still further illustrated by the belief that the
; Seide is a human being turned to stone.23 The following
; account was written down in Russian Lapmark. Near the
i Puljarvi Lake lived an old woman, whose husband, after his
! death, would visit her in the night. The old woman, who
• would have nothing to do with the dead, locked her door
| and smoked out her house, but got no peace from the deceased
J in spite of these precautions. She related her troubles to a
| shaman who happened to visit her house. He tried to soothe
\, promising to remain overnight. In the evening he tidied

io6 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
the bothie, placing all the woman's belongings on one side
and sweeping the other side clean j in the comer he placed a
few fish-bones. Soon, both heard the deceased examining the
fishing-net outside, after which he came into the bothie, plac-
ing himself on the place that had been swept clean, where he
commenced to gnaw at the fish-bones. Then the shaman got
up and taking the dead by the hand, led him into the yard.
Having remained for some time outside, the shaman came
back, telling the woman that the deceased would no longer
trouble her. " Look up at the sky tomorrow morning," he
said when he had finished, and went away. When the woman
went out into the yard the next day, she saw something black
moving in the sky, and sinking down to the opposite shore of
the Puljarvi Lake. The visits of the deceased ceased from
that day, but at a slight distance from Puljarvi a Seide had
appeared.2*
The Russian Lapps have generally speaking had the same
views of their Seides as of their dead. According to their
ideas, they live a similar life to the Lapps, keeping reindeer
and dogs, building houses, preparing sleighs, etc. The Lapps
say they have heard how the Seide spirits hunt, how their
dogs bark and how the snow creaks as they travel on their
Lapp sleighs. They believe that the Seides are born and die,
and even, at-times, celebrate weddings.25 They are invisible
spirits, but have the power, like the dead, of appearing in
animal form, especially as birds. Thus, they relate how a
Seide often flew up out of a chasm in the mountains in the
shape of a raven. With this view of the Russian Lapps may
be compared the similar one of the Swedish Lapps that the
Seide is a bird, turned into stone as it sank down out of the
air; on this account one could often make out the general
outlines of a bird in these stones.28
If we, finally, remember that many of these Seides might
be found together, forming a family, we need not be at all
uncertain as to the origin of this ancient cult. It is possible

THE SEIDES OF THE LAPPS 107
that some of these Seide places were former dwelling or
burial places, but that this is not always the case appears, for
example, from the following account from the Swedish Lap-
mark: " They believe that the Seide spirits live in some places,
to which on account of the height of the mountain they can-
not reach; they, therefore, smear a stone with the blood of the
reindeer sacrificed in honour of the Seide and throw the stone
high up on the mountain, where the Seide spirit dwells." "
How closely connected were the " spirit" and the stone,
one may see from the belief of the Lapps, that the Seide
stone could move about and that it was dangerous for a human
being to pass over the <c wander-path " of the holy stone.
The stone was also supposed to be impressionable and .capable
of feelingj when necessary it could be punished by striking it
or by hammering out pieces from it. If it began to be re-
garded as a dangerous neighbour, the Lapps would destroy
it altogether by shattering, burning, or throwing it into the
water. This was the death of the Seide.28
According to an inherited tradition, the Lapps near the
Sompio Lake were " so modest and easily satisfied in the
choice of their gods, that they worshipped that which first met
their glance on going out from the tent — a stone, or the
stump of a tree. The next morning the Lapp would have a
new god should his first glance in the morning happen to fall
on some other object." 2* According to this report, the only
one of its kind, the Lapps thus also worshipped the so-called
" accidental gods," which certain investigators believe that they
have found among a few primitive peoples.
Besides the Seides of stone, the Lapps had also wooden
ones. They were either tree-stumps embedded in the ground,
or posts driven into it. The wooden Seides do not appear to
have possessed any definite shape. It is stated, however,
that on an island in the foaming Darra rapids in the Tarne
River certain posts resembling human beings have been
found. They stood in a line one after another, the first of the

108
FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
height of a man, the other four somewhat smaller; each had
something resembling a hat on its head.30 Among the Finnish
Lapps the method of preparing Seides of wood has been pre-
served. A growing tree was chopped off about a yard or two
yards from the ground; the upper end was then shaped into
the resemblance of a funnel, and covered with a slab of stone;
in this way the tree was prevented from rotting. Pillars of
this description are said to have been formed by the Lapps
" to the honour of the water," near waters rich in fish.31
FIG. 5. LAPP SACRIFICIAL POSTS
According to Appelgren
The " sacrifice-stumps " of the Swedish Lapps were from
two to three yards high. They were shaped roughly to re-
semble a human being, with " head and neck," which were
then smeared over with blood. The " sacrifice-stump " was
used only once, but " in spite of this, It was never destroyed."
For this reason, a missionary might at one and the same place
see " a legion of wooden gods." The relations between these
and the stone gods is made clear in a note by Hogstrom: " Un-
doubtedly, they make some definite difference between the
times of sacrifice to the different gods; but this I have not
been able to ascertain. However, as far as I do know, they

THE SEIDES OF THE LAPPS 109
worship the stone gods when in the neighbourhood of these,
but otherwise gods of wood." 3Z It would appear, therefore,
that the wooden pillars were set up only as occasion arose,
perhaps to represent some spirit dwelling in a more distant
place. The stone Seides were regarded by the Lapps, accord-
ing to Hogstrom, as being much more holy than those of
wood.33 These wooden Seides are not, however, to be con-
founded with the wooden images fashioned to represent
Nature gods.
, Sacrifices to the Seides were naturally not offered up in pre-
cisely the same manner over the whole of the wide Lapland
area, but one may observe general main forms of an archaic
kind among them.
One of the very best accounts of a sacrifice, which has been
preserved for posterity, dates from the seventeenth century
and is from the Lule Lapps. When these had decided to
make an offering, they bound fast the sacrificial animal behind
the tent, thrust a knife into its heart and carefully gathered its
heart's blood. The horns and the bones from the head and
neck, together with the hoofs, were carried to the holy place
in which their Seide stood. When the Lapp had come to the
Seide, he took off his hat, bowed low to the idol and smeared
it with blood and fat from the sacrifice. The horns were
piled in a great pyramid behind the stone, the pile being called
the " horn-yard" and containing sometimes as many as a
thousand horns. Of the meat of the sacrifice which was eaten
by those making the offering themselves, a small piece was
cut from every quarter, threaded on to a switch of birch and
hung on to the front of the horns. At times the slaughtering
might take place at the holy place, the meat being then pre-
pared and eaten there. Besides the bones, the hide of the
reindeer was also left on the holy mountain; the head was
hung on a tree, where such were to be found in the vicinity
of the idol.84
The Kemi Lapps had a custom of cutting down a tree near

no FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
the Seide stone, calling it the luete-muor ("sacrifice tree").
Before the sacrifice the god was asked, by lifting him, what
he wished in return for giving assistance in some matter or
other. The animal chosen for the offering was bound fast to
the tree and slaughtered " after a long speech." Both the
stone and the tree were besmeared with blood, and when the
meat was prepared, small strips were cut out of it, threaded
on to a ring made of young pliable branches and hung up in
the sacrifice tree. After which, the sacrificial meal was begun.
Should anything be left over, it could not be taken home but
must be left at the place together with the animal's hide and
horns.88
The Norwegian Lapps, before the slaughtering, cut a small
piece out of each ear and the tail of the animal and placed
them before the god as a preliminary taste. The sacrificial
animal was killed by stabbing, and flayed in such a manner
that the horns and the hoofs remained fast to the hide. There-
after, several small sticks were prepared, lines and figures
being cut in them. The sticks were called " the sacrifice tree "
and were placed smeared with blood near the godj their func-
tion was to represent " wax candles." We see from this that
the Lapps at that time tried to ape Scandinavian customs. When
the meat was carved, a piece from every quarter was cut out
for the idol. The fire was made in a fixed spot, near which
there had to be, where possible, a spring or brook; the whole
of the flesh of the sacrifice was cooked at once. With the fat
that rose in the cauldron and with the blood, the sacrificial
priest smeared certain curiously-shaped stones, placing them
afterwards near the god. Then, with his followers, he finished
off the whole of the carcase, taking due care not to spread the
bones about, but to leave all on the place of offering, where
the hide also was left. During the performance of the sacri-
fice, the Lapps sang their songs, which they call luete (= Fin-
nish luote, "magic song," Scandinavian blot} "offering").38
Slightly differing from the foregoing was the sacrificial

THE SEIDES OF THE LAPPS in
custom of the Russian Lapps, as described by Genetz. Cer-
tain features of the performance seem to point to a sacrifice
in honour of Nature gods. The sacrifice had to be begun
early in the morning and the gods prayed to with the face
turned towards the east. After the flesh had been devoured,
the hide with horns and hoofs attached was built up with
branches of birch and fixed to a pole in a position resembling
that of a live reindeer.87 Up to a few score years ago these
Lapps sacrificed as many as twenty-four reindeer at a time.
A great sacrificial feast of this description was not, however,
celebrated every year, nor were the reindeer killed all at once,
but during the space of several days, a few at a time. All
the participants in the feast had to cleanse themselves and
put on clean garments. The sacrificial food was regarded as
being so holy, that one might not spill any even on one's
garments. During the ceremony the shaman stood alone, at
one side, with his face turned to the east. The reindeer hides
that were stuffed with birch-twigs were also placed with their
heads to the east. After the ceremonies the priests had to
cleanse themselves again,38
Besides reindeer, the proper time for sacrificing which was
in the autumn, the Lapps also slaughtered other animals in
honour of their Seides, such as birds and other game, occa-
sionally also strange domestic animals procured from their
neighbours. Sometimes a dog might be offered up entire to
the Seide, or living animals, which were imprisoned in chasms
in the mountain or grottoes, or were left alive on some solitary
island as a gift to the gods. There are even reports of chil-
dren being sacrificed.89
In like manner as the Mountain Lapps sacrificed their rein-
deer, the Fisher Lapps fed their Seides on fish. When a
fisherman went out to fish, he generally went first to the stone,
kissed it three times and said: " If I now succeed in catching
fish in the sea or the river, I promise thee their intestines and
livers." After making a catch, the promise was fulfilled.

FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
Even as late as the middle of the last century, the Norwegian
Lapps are said to have sometimes smeared their stones in secret.
As sacrifices to the Seides in later periods, there are reports
of money being offered up, both in Finnish and Russian Lap-
mark; also rings of brass, tobacco, etc., all of which objects
^were placed in small hollows in the stones.40
. If we follow the development of religious beliefs and cus-
toms among other related peoples, we can observe that the
Seides worshipped by the Lapps under the naked sky, contain
two different classes of spirits, of which the one, the so-called
house or family gods, little by little, are generally moved into
the dwelling-house of the worshipper; while to the other, to
whom might be given the Greek name " heroes," many people
began to build special small bothies.