CHAPTER VI
DESTRUCTION OF THE WORLD
B
ESIDES the destruction caused by the subsidence of the
pillar supporting the sky, other dangers also are be-
lieved to threaten the earth peopled by men. To the idea that
the earth is situated on the bosom of a great cosmic ocean is at-
tached the fear that the foundations of the earth may give way
or that it may become inundated. The Asian tales of the dif-
ferent periods of the earth relate how a great flood once de-
stroyed all life on it, and how a human being who escaped
became the ancestor of a new race of men. Tales of this
description are met with also among the Altaic peoples.
Whether these are founded on ancient borrowings, and whether
they contain any direct remainders of such loans, is difficult to
conclude} in their present state, as known to us, they would
seem to represent later currents of civilization. One may as-
sume, however, that later arriving legends have been prone to
sweep aside the more ancient forms of this tale.
A very common modern form is found in the following
Buriat tale: Before the flood arrived, Burkhan advised a cer-
tain man to build himself a great ship. Following the advice
of God, the man went to the forest, where he worked through-
out the days. At last his wife, becoming curious, wished to
know what her husband worked at so industriously in the
forest. To keep his intention secret, the man replied that he
chopped wood there. While the man was away, the devil,
Shitkur, came to the woman explaining that her husband had
deceived her and that he was building a great ship in the forest.
And in the end the devil begged the woman to help him,
saying: "The ship will soon be ready and thy husband will

362 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
invite thee to enter it, but do thou refuse, and when he be-
comes angry and strikes thee, say to him: 'Why, dost thou
strike me, Shitkur? ' When thou enterest the ship after this, I
shall accompany thee." The woman promised to follow the
advice of the devil. Soon a great flood threatened to destroy
the whole earth and the builder of the ship exhorted his
family to enter his vessel, but the wife resisted so long that
the man became angry and began to beat her. The wife then
said, as the devil had taught her: " Why, dost thou strike me,
Shitkur? " When she finally went on board, the devil was
enabled to accompany her. The tale tells in addition how,
with the help of Burkhan, the man gathered specimens of all
the animals into his ship with the exception of the Prince of
animals (Argalan-Zon), which deemed itself so large that no
flood could drown it. Having entered the vessel, the devil
changed himself into a mouse and began to gnaw holes in the
bottom of the vessel, until Burkhan created the cat to catch
the mouse. As the flood was so great that it destroyed all the
animals left on the earth, the Prince of animals, whose bones
may be found in the earth today, was also drowned.1 Ac-
cording to other tales the animal which failed to survive the
flood was the mammoth.2
In a tale recorded among the Sagaiyes, in which the builder
of the ship is called Noj, the devil tempts his wife to inquire
what he is building in the forest, and having found out, begins
to destroy by night what Noj builds during the day. Thus,
when the flood begins, the vessel is not yet completed, and
God is forced to send down to the man a vessel of iron, in
which Noj with his wife and family and all kinds of animals
are saved.3
In both tales, our attention is called to the part played by
the devil j otherwise they resemble the Bible story of the flood.