CHAPTER XIII
THE STARS
T
HE NOMADS of the Altaic race, like most other peoples
of the earth, early turned their attention to the stars and
believed that they, in some mysterious way, occasioned the
changes of season and weather. The stars were also most im-
portant guides for travellers on the prairies, in the forests, and
on the tundra. For a thousand years the Great Bear, regularly
moving round the Pole Star, that ever-stationary " pole " of
the sky, and never disappearing below the horizon, has played
an important part in the lives of all the peoples of the Northern
Hemisphere. Not only the Altaic race but innumerable other
peoples have used it, in addition to the sun and the moon, for
measuring time. The ancient Finns are also said to have gone
to " see the moon, to learn of the Great Bear." In Central
and East Asia the Great Bear even determined the seasons.
" When the tail of the Great Bear points eastward it is spring
over all the world, when it points southward it is summer,
when westward, autumn, but when it turns to the north it is
winter over all the world." Some peoples foretell changes in
the weather by this constellation. The Ostiaks on the Ob,
who call it " the stag," say that when " the stag shrinks," i.e.,
when the stars of the Great Bear seem to draw together, there
will be frost, but contrariwise, or when "the stag expands,"
mild weather and snowfalls may be expected.1
The greatest changes in the weather are believed, however,
to be the work of the Pleiades. Even in other countries, such
as America and the South Sea Islands, the rising and the
setting of this constellation are considered as signs of the com-
ing of cold or warm weather, a rainy or a dry period. In the

4i 8 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
beliefs of European peoples also, the influence of the Pleiades
on the climate plays a certain part. In the question-forms
which were used by Forbus as guides in gathering Lapp folk-
lore there is a question: "Have you worshipped the Pleiades
that they might give warm weather? "2 The Turkish peoples
believe the Pleiades to be chiefly the causers of cold. The
Yakuts say that they " bring the winter." 3 The foundation
of this thought is naturally to be found in the fact that a colder
period follows the appearance of the Pleiades, whereas their
setting takes place at the beginning of the warm season. The
Yakuts say that the winter in former days was much colder
and drearier than it is now, but since a shaman hacked in twain
the binding-rod of the Pleiades, they have been able to move
more quickly and thus the winter has become shorter. When
the shaman struck, splinters flew into the air, which are now the
innumerable stars,4
The idea of the Pleiades as the cause of cold weather is fur-
ther reflected in the old name of this constellation, which is
the same in several languages of Turkish origin: Urker, Orgel,
etc. Gorochov says that in Yakut Crgel means " air-hole." 8
Further weight is given to this idea by a Yakut tale. This tells
how a hero once gathered together thirty wolf-leg hides and
from them made himself a pair of gloves with which to stop
the Orgel, as it " blew upon him endless frost and wind." *
The Votiaks and even the Lithuanians and the Baltic Finns
called this constellation " the sieve."
The Siberian peoples seem to have considered it impossible
to solve the question of what the innumerable stars of the sky
really are. The belief of the Yakuts that they are small holes
through which heavenly light shines is easy to understand.
In other places they are declared to be ",the reflection of the
heavenly ocean." T

THE STARS 419
THE SUN AND THE MOON
The Altaic peoples speak of a time when there was no sun
and no moon. They say that people, who then flew in the air,
gave out light and warmed their surroundings themselves, so
that they did not even miss the heat of the sun. But when one
of them fell ill God sent a spirit to help these people. This
spirit commenced by stirring the primeval ocean with a pole
10,000 fathoms long, when suddenly two goddesses flew into
the sky. He also found two metal mirrors (toli), which he
placed in the sky. Since then there has been light on the
earth.8
This tale is doubtless grounded on a previously-mentioned
conception, that people living before the fall in paradise were
a kind of luminous beings. The Kalmucks distinctly say that
at the time of paradise there was yet no sun and no moon.
It was only when the people, by eating of the forbidden
fruit, fell into sin, and the world around them became dark,
that the sun and moon were created.9
The idea of the sun and moon as metal mirrors in the above
tale is also to be found in beliefs and customs connected with
the prophesyings of Central Asian shamans. It is commonly
supposed that everything that takes place on the earth is re-
flected in the sun and the moon and from these again in the
magic mirrors of the shamans. There is a story of how a cer-
tain hero holds his magic mirror toward the sun and the moon
in order to see in their reflections where the colt which he is
seeking has disappeared.10 This manner of finding out things
has spread among the peoples of North Siberia. Even in
Ostiak countries the sun is an important means of prophesying
by sight; by watching it the magician can tell the life and the
fate of a person far away.11 Possibly the Siberian shaman's
custom of fixing metal objects representing the sun and the
moon on his dress originates in this belief. It is another ques-
tion whether this belief and this custom are original with the

4.20 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
Altaic race, or whether they have wandered there from lands
where prophesying from the stars has long been known and
common.
Besides those tales which say that the sun and the moon
were created comparatively late, there are others according to
which the lights of the sky already existed when the vast
primeval ocean yet covered all. In Mongolian tales the sun
and the moon are called sisters, of whom the former says to
the latter: " Travel thou in the day, I will travel in the night."
The moon remarked: " There will be so many people about
in the day, I shall be ashamed to walk abroad then." The
sisters finally agreed, but the sun regretted that the earth was
so smooth and that there were no hillocks or mounds above
the water for the people to live on. The tale does not go on
to tell how the earth on which the people dwell came to exist.
We might suppose the moon to have had her share in its
creation, the ebb and flow of the tide which she causes having
early attracted the attention at least of coast-dwellers. A tale
of the Votiaks says that the god of Heaven, Inmar, sent two
people out during the flood to find earth and to scatter it on
the surface of the ocean. The first went out in the day, where-
fore he made the earth smooth, but the second, going out in
the night, sowed the mountains and valleys on the earth.
In Central Asia tales have been taken down according to
which there were three or four suns in primeval times. At
that time it was unbearably hot upon the earth. The Buriats
tell how a hero named Erkhe-Mergen shot three suns down
into the sea with his bow so that only one remained to light
and warm the earth.12 In a legendary tale of the Torgouts
it is said that the devil (Shulman) created three suns in order
to burn the earth made by God (Burkhan-Bakshi). In answer,
God covered the earth, on which there were as yet no dwellers,
with a flood, so that the devil was forced to submit. Only one
sun remained in the sky, the others God plunged later into
the bottomless pit given to the devil for his dwelling-place.13

THE STARS 421