CHAPTER III
THE PILLAR OF THE WORLD
' • AHE REGULAR diurnal movement of the stars round
A an axis at the North Star, the reasons for which never-
ending rotation were earlier unknown, gave birth to an idea
that this apparent centre of the universe was formed by some
object which could be represented in concrete form, and which
was, in addition, believed to support the roof of the sky. This
belief we have seen to be held by the Lapps, etc., and relics of
a similar belief are to be found among most of the peoples of
the Northern Hemisphere.
From this belief spring the curious names given by the Altaic
stocks to the North Star. The Mongols, Buriats, Kalmucks,
and the Altai Tatars and Uigurs call the star in question " The
golden pillar "5 the Kirghis, Bashkirs and certain other Siberian
Tatar tribes call it "The iron pillar"; the Teleuts "The
lone post," and the Tungus-Orotshons " The golden post."
From the similarity of the names given it by these widely
separated peoples we may conclude that the conception of a
sky-supporting pillar reaches back among the Altaic race to a
comparatively early period.1 In a tale of the Yakuts in which
the world is regarded as having gradually developed from a
small beginning, this " iron tree " boasts: " When the heavens
and the earth commenced to grow, I grew with them."2
Although none of the available sources mention directly
that the peoples of the Altaic race made images of this great
world-pillar, we can still be reasonably certain that they did
so from the fact that several of the more northern peoples
have kept up this custom even to our days. These peoples
were under Turco-Tatar influence, and even offered up blood-

1
334
SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
sacrifices to these pillars. The Ostiaks call these wooden
images of the pillar, " town-pillars " or " the strong pillars of
the town's centre." Those more simple in construction are
erected by being slightly sunk into the earth, and are hardly
ever observed to be shaped at all in any way. The pillar of
the village of Tsingala is about two fathoms in height, a
squared, slender log, not very old. Nowadays these pillars,
as the objects of reverential ceremonies, are here met with
only in a few of the coast villages of Irtysh, those of the other
villages having been swept along with landslides into the river.
The " town pillar" of the village of Tsingala, although it
stands among the buildings on a site incapable of awakening
respect, is worshipped with offerings like a god. Karjalainen
relates that " the inhabitants of this and other villages of the
same district, gathered together for the paying of taxes, buy
mutually a cow or a bull and sacrifice it at the foot of the
pillar in order to obtain prosperity in their work and additions
to their families." This pillar of Tsingala, which the Ostiaks
of that place regard as a deity, is called by them " The iron
FIG. 13. DOLCAN SHAMAN-PILLARS WITH FIGURES OF BIRDS
pillar man," a similar name being given to the post of another
village of Irtysh, resembling greatly the afore-mentioned
" Iron pillar" of the Tatars. It is therefore obvious that

THE PILLAR OF THE WORLD
335
" the strong pillar of the town's centre " of the Ostiaks, which
a certain tale describes as " the tree planted by God," cannot
be, as Karjalainen assumes, intended merely for the tying of
sacrificial animals and the hanging-up of offerings, but is a
representation of the pillar supporting the sky.3 This appears
also from the prayers read at the post.
Some peoples in North-West Siberia, who have a similar
custom, place on the world-pillar a wooden figure of a bird,
which sometimes has two heads. What this bird, which is
spoken of by the Dolgans as the " lord of the birds," and which
hangs on the breast of the Yenisei Ostiak shaman-dress, is
FIG. 14. TWO-HEADED BIRDS OF IRON WHICH HANG ON THE
DRESS AND DRUM OF THE YENISEI-OSTIAK SHAMAN
intended to represent, the people themselves do not knowj but
it is probable that this bird has flown here from the mythology
of the ancient peoples. The pillars, on which these birds are
placed and which have sometimes cross-pieces like branches,
are, according to the Dolgans, a symbol of the " never falling
props" before the dwelling of the Supreme God. On the
cross-pieces, so it is said, dwell the sons of God.*
It would be interesting to know what the sky, which this
wonderful pillar was supposed to support, was originally be-
lieved to be. We can hardly be mistaken if we suppose it to
have been pictured as some kind of a roof, the purpose of

336 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
which was to protect the earth and life on the earth. To this
points also the view still prevalent in some places, viz., that
the sky is a kind of great tent-roof stretched over the earth.
The Yakuts say that the sky consists of several overlapping
tightly stretched skins. The Buriats see in the Milky Way " a
stitched seam," and a certain being says with pride: "Long,
long ago, when I was young, I sewed the sky together."B
Sometimes the gods open slightly the sky-cover to see what is
happening on the earth. In this way the Chuvash, among
others, explain the flight of meteors. Lucky the one who sees
this " crack in the sky," as he obtains what he at that moment
wishes or begs of God.6 Similarly, the Ostiaks believe that
God grants everything desired of him while " the door of
Heaven " is open.7 The same phenonemon is also meant by
the Buriats when they, speak of the " door of Heaven," which
the gods sometimes open for an instant. When this " door "
is- open, which lasts only for a second, " a wonderful light
shines from the sky, which makes the whole world glow in a
strange fashion."8 This childish idea of the light-phenome-
non which follows the flight of a meteor through the belt of
air, has earlier been very general both in Asia and Europe.
Quite as general has been the habit of expressing at such times
some wish, which it is believed will be fulfilled.
The sky having thus been regarded as a kind of tent-roof,
which, stretched from a great post or pillar, covered the earth,
it is comprehensible that the stars should then have been only
a kind of hole in this cover. The worst hole was the Pleiades,
from which winds and cold were believed to stream over the
earth.9
This conception of the sky as a kind of roof, is, without
doubt, of extreme age and the product of an extremely early
culture. Obviously, the primitive dwelling-house of man him-
self gave direction to his imagination, when he attempted to
create for himself a picture of the surrounding world. In
some of the descriptions in the Old Testament the sky appears

THE PILLAR OF THE WORLD 337
tent-like, e.g., in the 4<Dth chapter of Isaiah, in which God is
described as: " He who stretcheth out the heavens as a curtain
and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in."
Besides the above conception, in which the world-pillar ap-
pears as the supporter of the sky, another is met with, accord-
ing to which it is the tethering-post of the stars wandering in
the sky. The fact that, seen from the earth, the stars seem
to be eternally revolving round the sky-post, awakened the
idea of bonds attaching these to one another. As the peoples
related to the Turks sometimes imagined the stars to be a
great drove of horses, we can understand why, in the tales of
these people, the world-pillar is often called a mighty tether-
ing-post for horses. As such the Yakuts call it " the horse-
post ruler."1" The Buriats have tales of the nine sons of a
spirit named Boshintoi, living in the sky; these sons, as skilful
blacksmiths, taught men to prepare iron, and are therefore
worshipped and praised in the following words: "The nine
white smiths of Boshintoi... made of the North Star a horse-
post and of the golden lake a race course."11 In the same
way as the Nomads of Central Asia have a post for the tether-
ing of their steeds before their buildings, the gods are said
to fasten theirs to the heaven-post. Certain Siberian Tatar
tribes believe the gods to live in a tent in the sky, in front of
which is a " golden horse-post."12 As Karjalainen remarks,
the Ostiaks of Vasyugan, in their tales, have also adopted
from the Tatars " the Iron post, the Stone post, on the side of
the sun, created by Torem (the god of Heaven), in which there
is an iron ring large enough to admit a sleeved arm," and to
which the driving-reindeer is bound. Similarly, the Voguls
speak of " The holy iron pillar of God erected for the tether-
ing of the holy animal with many-coloured thighs," erected
before the dwelling of the god of Heaven.18
In the folk-lore of the Ostiaks, as seen from the above,
a " stone " pillar is also mentioned. A strange, rectangular,
transparent pillar of stone, three fathoms in height, appears

338 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
in the centre of an area of iron in the tales of the Yakuts.14
Probably such world-pillars are hidden also among
the stone pillars on the prairies of Central Asia. At any
rate, traces have been found of high four-sided monu-
ments which were erected upon the back of the world-bearing
tortoise.
But especially interesting is the fact that many of these holy
pillars of the Ugrians were imagined to be seven-storeyed.
This was also true of the pillar at Tsingala, as although the
object itself had no signs pointing to the fact, the words in the
prayer, in which the god of Heaven is closely connected with
the pillar god, run as follows: " My seven-divided high man-
father thou art, a six-divided high man thou art. My iron
pillar man-father, to the foot of the holy tree, my metal
pillar man-father, to the foot of the holy tree, to partake of a
generous dish of head-meat, to partake of a generous dish of
breast-meat, we called thee." The word " six-divided"
or " six-marked " is here only a poetic reiteration. Another
prayer noted down in which a Heaven god called Sanke is
addressed in addition to the post runs: " Seven-divisioned high
man, Sanke, my father, my, in-three-directions-watching man-
father, my in-three-directions-protecting man-father. To the
holy, ground of my iron pillar man-father, to the innocent
ground, at the foot of the holy tree erected by him, I stand my
blood-animal blood-sacrifice."1S
The significance of the number seven in the beliefs connected
with the pillars of the Ugrians is especially apparent. The
Ostiak tales relate how a person setting out on a courtship has
to sacrifice at the foot of this " God-faced holy tree," or " to
hold up there the sacrifice o£ seven reindeer-bulls tied to one
rope," and to make " seven good bows of the head at the foot
of the god-faced holy tree." The seven animals are mentioned
also in certain advice given to a hero setting out on a danger-
ous journey: " Call together the village full of thy many
men, the town full of thy many menj bring the seven animals

THE PILLAR OF THE WORLD 339
bound to one rope and tie them to the strong town-pillar." "
In the Yakut tales the seven reindeer at the " iron tree "
are also mentioned.17 Most probably these "seven ani-
mals " bound to one rope, like the pillar itself, have their
counterpart in the sky, and in this connection our thoughts
turn to the Great Bear, the " seven animals " of which are
imagined as being bound to the North Star " by one
rope."
But the number seven appears also in the names of the god
— " the seven-divisioned or seven-marked man," which points
possibly to the fact that the pillar itself was imagined to be
seven-storeyed- And examples for this are not lacking. Thus,
in sacrificing to a spirit called " the Roach lake old man " at
the sources of the SaJym, the Ostiaks of that district erect on
the lake a pillar of fir-wood about a fathom in height, on
which they cut with a knife "seven marks at seven places."
To the head of the post they fix coloured cloths and place the
sacrificial runes before it, the sacrificial animal being also bound
to it for the duration of the prayers and genuflexions. In
slaughtering, a stream of blood has to be directed on to the
post.18 Similar pillars were erected in earlier times by the
Yenisei Ostiaks on the banks of their rivers to give luck in
fishing. Nowadays, to our knowledge, none are met with in
practice, although the older people still speak about them. In
the museum at Krasnoyarsk several are preserved, these being
thin posts about two fathoms in height, on which seven deep
cuts have been made one above the other. In the place of
these cuts, it was the custom in some districts to leave the
stumps of seven branches. In the same way it is related of the
Irtysh Ostiaks that when sacrificing at a hole in the ice they
erected a post beside it on which seven branches had been left.19
Karjalainen assumes this to have been only an artificial sacri-
fice tree, but even these temporarily erected posts can probably
not be separated from the world-pillars. In any case, the
seven-divisioned " iron pillar man " has a heavenly counter-

340 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
part, as the Vogul tales tell of a " seven-divided pure silver
holy pillar" to which the son of God ties his steed when
visiting his father.20
On studying the Asian cosmography we find no difficulty in
explaining what these seven divisions or stumps of branches
signify. Without doubt, they represent the seven storeys of
the sky, an idea general also among the Ostiaks. The " divi-
sions " appear also in the shaman rites of the Altai Tatars,
although here the storeys of Heaven are regarded as being
nine in number. When about to shamanize, a special tent is
erected on the Altai, in the centre of which a birch is erected
so that the crown of the tree sticks out of the air-hole in the
middle of the roof. Nine divisions are cut into the trunk of
the birch, and are described as being the symbols of the nine-
storied heavens. Rising by means of the tree into the highest
Heaven the shaman has to travel through all the different
storeys. This is done in such a manner that while exercising
his magic the shaman climbs division by division upwards.
When he places his foot on the lowest notch he has reached
the first Heaven, and so on until he rises into the ninth.21
The tree, along which the Altai shaman rises into Heaven,
though furnished with divisions, is not really a post, but a leaf-
crowned birch-tree. Thus, we find here an intermediate stage
between the above mentioned world-pillars and the branched
world-tree supposed to rise from the centre of the earth. As
the holy pillars of the Ostiaks had either seven divisions or
seven branches, so an Abakan Tatar hero-poem tells of " the
white, seven-branched birch-tree on an iron mountain in the
centre of the earth."22 But before describing in detail this
mighty tree reigning over the earth's centre, we must first
turn our attention to the mountain in thjs same region, from the
summit of which, according to many tales, the tree arises.