CHAPTER IX
THE ORIGIN OF THE MOSQUITO
A
QUESTION of special interest to the Northern Siberian
peoples is the origin of the myriads of mosquitoes,
which during the light summer of the north are an unbearable
plague for both men and animals.
The Yenisei Ostiaks declare that a cannibalistic demon
woman, Khosadam, living in the farthest north, created the
mosquitoes.1 Many other Siberian peoples have a special
myth to explain their origin.
The Ostiak Samoyeds tell of a hero named Itje, whose
parents had been devoured by a man-eating giant named
Piinegusse. He himself succeeded in escaping and making his
way to a desert, where he was brought up by his relations.
When he had grown to be a strong and heroic youth, he
decided to free his people from this demon from the north.
He succeeded in killing it, but the demon kept on being born
again. He resolved therefore to burn up the carcase of the
man-eater, but even in the fire the demon continued to exist.
Its jaws ground against each other when the fire had burnt
out, and its voice cried out that even when burnt up it would
continue to plague mankind. The wind would scatter its
ashes into the air, whence they would everywhere suck the
blood of men. From these ashes the innumerable mosquitoes
of Siberia arise each summer.2
In a Samoyed variant a small black bird is born of the
flesh of Punegusse. This bird is called " a bit of Punegusse's
flesh."'
Among the Ostiaks of the river Vach this story runs briefly
as follows: A great bird once caught a great pike and gave
it to its sister to cook. The latter prepared instead a meal

THE ORIGIN OF THE MOSQUITO 387
of dog's offal, which so enraged the bird that it flew away
until at last it came to the man-eater. Finding the hut empty,
the bird ate its fill out of a large kettle of fat, but was
caught by the man-eater. To save its own life the bird prom-
ised its sister in marriage to the giant and was set free. It
then hurried home and to save its sister, fastened the door
so that only a small hole was left. The man-eater, coming
for his bride, tried to get through this hole, but stuck fast
there. The bird then killed him with a great knife and set
fire to the house. The body of the man-eater was burnt to
ashes, but here also the spirit spoke, foretelling that its ashes
would each summer be born anew as mosquitoes and would
continue to live on the flesh of men.*
Corresponding myths, apparently of Indian origin, are to
be found among the Altai Tatars. The evil Erlik created a
water-giant named Andalma-Muus, who put out his long
tongue to seize men, whom he then swallowed. Three of
Clgen's heroes, Mandyshire, Tyurun-Muzykay, and Maidere,
decided to kill this demon. Tyurun-Muzykay declared him-
self to be the strongest giant-killer. Having said this, he
came down from heaven, was given birth to by, a virgin, and
became a man. While he was still quite young he was run-
ning about once on the sea-shore when he saw the giant stick
out his long tongue to seize him and drag him into the depths.
The young hero, however, was not helpless in this danger,
but grasped the demon's tongue and pulled so mightily that
the earth was in danger of sinking under the water. To
avoid this the hero drank so much of the sea that the water
sank until he could see the feet of the demon. The youth
then grasped his feet, pulled the giant out of the sea and
beat him against the rocks so that his blood squirted out
and his entrails were scattered over the rocks. From this
originates the mixed colouring of rocks. After this, the hero
cut the body into little pieces, out of which certain insects,
including also mosquitoes, were born.6

388 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
According to a Yakut cannibal myth, the nun-eating giant
was burnt up, and from the fragments of his bones all kinds
of destructive insects, and also frogs and snails were born.*
Similarly, in Mongol tales it is related how a hero named
Karaty-Khan vanquishes a demon, grinds it into fragments
and throws these into the air, thus giving birth to mosquitoes
and other insects/
Far away to the east, among the Goldes, tales of a similar
character are met with. These tell of two sisters who lived
in the same hut. While one of them was away, the man-
eater came to the other, enticed her from her hiding-place and
tricked her into putting out her tongue, which the man-eater
at once plucked out of her mouth. When the other sister
came home, she found out what had happened in her absence
and derided to avenge her sister's death. She sought a long
time for the home of the man-eater, and at last she found
four store-houses, of which one was full of human hands,
another of human feet, a third of heads, and in the fourth
numerous human tongues hung from the roof. Among these
she discovered the still warm tongue of her sister. She
wrapped this in a clean cloth and went on, until, in the depths
of the forest, she found the man-eater's dwelling hidden
away. The demon was away, but his sister, who was a good
person, was at home and promised to help in killing him.
In the evening he came home, bringing a human body with
him and devouring this for supper, after which he went to
sleep. The women now came forward and broke the demon
into pieces with hammers, scattering the pieces in all direc-
tions. While doing so, they said: " Man-eater, thou fedst
thyself on human flesh, may the pieces of thy flesh and thy
bones change into small insects, which like thee shall eat
human blood. Of the smallest fragments may gnats be born,
of those a little larger mosquitoes, and of the largest flies,
beetles, etc." Immediately great clouds of insects arose, which
spread over the earth.8

THE ORIGIN OF THE MOSQUITO 389