CHAPTER II
DEATH AND BURIAL
A
MONG all the Finno-Ugric peoples, the customs and
beliefs connected with death, though varying locally,
will be found to possess certain general affinities.
The most significant ceremonies arise out of a desire to do
everything possible for the departed on their last journey,
and from precautionary measures by the living against the
dead, as these are believed to seek companions with whom to
enter the other world.
Immediately the " breath had departed," the Finns opened
the smoke-outlets, in Russian Karelia the boards forming the
roof of their chimneyless houses even being lifted three
times, so that the soul might quicker fly away. The Estho-
nian custom was to open the doors. If a wind arose while
someone lay dying, it was called " the wind of the dead." *
The Permian peoples believed that on the death of a shaman,
a storm was sure to arise,2
When a death occurs, the relatives of the deceased gather
round the body. Forgiveness is implored of the dead one.
The Cheremiss say: " Forgive me, be not angry with me if
I have used hard words against thee."8 Probably after a
Russian custom, the Mordvins and the Ingrians, etc., im-
mediately life has departed, place a bowl of water on the
window-sill, "so that the soul can cleanse itself."4 More
general is the custom of cutting the throat of a hen when
death occurs. When this is done by the Chuvash, they say:
" soul for soul and body for body " or also " this hen shall
lead thy soul." The Eastern Cheremiss slaughter the fowl
first at the gate, as they follow the dead to its grave, and they

18 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
observe whether the hen remains within the courtyard or flies
headless out into the road. The former is accounted a sign
that a new death will soon occur in the house. At the spot
where the hen is killed, it is believed that the deceased meets
with the spirits of his departed relatives, which come forth to
meet the new arrival. The reason for the actual act of
slaughtering has been interpreted in different ways. Some
say that the hen gathers together in the other world the
nails of the departed, which have been scattered about in this.
In other places, it is the custom to say to the dead at the
slaughtering: " Save with this blood thine own blood from
death! " With the first drops of the hen's blood, the Chere-
miss paint the eyebrows of the dead. The fowl is not pre-
pared for food, but is left lying on the road for dogs to feast
on.8 A later custom is the preparing of the flesh of the
fowl, slaughtered at the moment of death, for the funeral
repast. A relic of the hen-sacrifice is found among the Finns
in Savolax, who, when the coffin is being borne away, cast a
living hen on to it, to prevent the dead from taking the
" poultry-luck " away with it."
The dead must be escorted as soon as possible to the peace
of the grave. The first service consists of the washing of the
body of the dead, a practice followed by all the tribes, though
it cannot be regarded as a purely Finno-Ugric custom. The
person carrying out the washing is often chosen during the
lifetime of the deceased. In some places, the left hand only
is used during the performance. If any one of the persons
engaged in the washing is displeasing to the deceased, the
latter holds himself stiffly, clenches his fists, etc. Where the
body remains soft and plastic, the washers are all agreeable
to the dead. The corpse must be clad in clean garments, even
down to its underclothing. The Volga Finns, like the Baltic
Finns, accoutre their dead as for a long journey. A hat is
placed on the head of the corpse of a male, and clean foot-
wrappings are wrapped round its feet, which are fitted with

DEATH AND BURIAL 19
lime- or birch-bark shoes; other clothes are placed with it
also. The Votiak wife lays a clean suit of undergarments
by her dead husband to enable him to change when necessary.
The husband gathers into his wife's coffin kerchiefs for the
head, towels, and trinkets worn on the breast. Many gar-
ments and kerchiefs of all descriptions are placed in the
coffin of a young girl, " as the men who have died unmarried
are thought to be quicker in proposing marriage to girls with
a bountiful marriage portion." A staff is placed in the hand
of an old man. Naturally, all the tribes fit out their dead
according to their scale of living, means and opportunities.
The more northern peoples appear to have used very simple
wrappings in which to swathe their dead. To conclude from
remains dug up, the Lapps, in olden days, used only wrappings
of birch-bark. In certain districts, both Lapps and the North-
ern Ostiaks were accustomed to swathe their dead also in rein-
deer- or bear-skins.
In addition to clothing or protective swathings, the dead
had to be supplied with provisions for the journey, and with
money, weapons, and all kinds of implements and household
articles. Among the objects laid with the dead may be men-
tioned fire-tools, bow and arrows, an axe, a knife, fishing-
gear, skis, a sickle, pots, dishes, wooden spoons, boats and
vehicles, etc. The corpse was supplied with everything it was
supposed to need. With women, distaffs, pieces of cloth,
scissors and needles were laid; with children, toys. The lame
received their crutches, a shaman his drum, a hunter his dog
and his spear. Above all, the Volga Finns never forget to
give the dead for their last journey the tools needed for the
making of bast shoes. Smaller objects were laid in the coffin
of the dead, larger ones were placed around the grave. In
some places among the Cheremiss it was further deemed
necessary to place a rod in each hand of the corpse, so that in
the underworld it could protect itself against attacking hounds,
serpents, or evil spirits.

20 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
Among the articles and coins laid in the dead man's coffin
by the Ostiaks were also some which were sent along with the
deceased to some relative who had died earlier. It is said of
the Cheremiss, that some o£ them poured nuts into the pocket
of the dead man, saying while this was being done: " Greet
our kinsmen when you arrive; we send sweets to their chil-
dren; when you meet them, divide the sweets amongst
them."7
A noteworthy custom among all the Finno-Ugric peoples
is the breaking-up of all the objects which the dead receive
with them. That a like usage was followed in Finland, ap-
1 pears from a report from Savolax, according to which, on the
placing of the corpse on the sleigh, some object from among
the most valuable in the house had to be dashed in pieces,
with the remark: "This you may have, but nothing else."
In this way the spirit of the dead was prevented from return-
ing after the burial with any demands for his property.
Similarly, in Ingria, when the master or mistress of the house
was borne out, the spoon of the deceased was carried three
times round the coffin, after which the spoon was broken and
the pieces thrown after the coffin, with the words: "There
hast thou thy portion, more thou shalt not receive." This
was done that the dead might not appear afterwards and de-
mand more at the division of the inheritance.8 Apparently
it was believed that by " killing" an article, its " soul" or
" shadow " was released to follow the deceased into the world
of shadows.
An important part in the burial ceremonies is played by all
kinds of protective measures, performed by the survivors ob-
viously with a view to protecting themselves against dangers
which the dead are believed to be able to cause. The belief
of the Lapps that the dead wishes to take along with him
" his family, his children, and his dependants " is common to
all the Finno-Ugric peoples.* A very widespread measure of
protection is to cover, immediately death occurs, the eyes and

DEATH AND BURIAL 21
mouth of the deceased. To prevent the dead from doing
harm to its own with its glance during the time the corpse lies
in the house, the Samoyeds cover its eyes with copper-coins or
with small stones. The Ostiaks cover the face of the deceased
with a cloth, in addition to covering the eyes, nose, and mouth
with silver or copper coins, or with brass buttons.10 The
Cheremiss close the eyes and mouth of their dead, and cover
the eyes, ears, and nostrils with little bunches of thread. The
Chuvash act in the same way, saying: "If the dead over there
ask of thee if there are others to come after thee, answer
them: ( My ears heard none, my eyes saw nothing, my nostrils
knew no scent.1" " Missionaries relate that when the Lapps
covered up their dead in shrouds, they were very careful to
cover up the body completely.18 This was most likely done
for fear that the soul of the deceased, which was supposed to
dwell in the body even after death, would otherwise leave its
dwelling-place and come to frighten those left at home.
The Cheremiss are so cautious that as soon as signs of im-
minent death are forthcoming, they remove the sick from
their beds to a litter of straw. According to the Hill-
Cheremiss the person dying on a bolster of down must reckon
up the number of feathers in the coming life, and similarly,
those dying on hair-mats must count the hairs of the same.18
Obviously, the removal of the sick to the litter of straw has
its origin in the fear that death contaminated a bed.
As a means of protection articles made of metal have been
used widely. The Finns cast a copper coin in the water in
which the corpse is washed. It was believed in some places,
that unless one gave a copper coin to the person who washed
the corpse, his hand would become diseased.14 Among the
Scandinavian Lapps, the one washing and covering up the
dead had to bear, on his right arm, a ring of brass, given to
him by some relative of the deceased " so that no evil could
befall him."15 In Russian Lapmark the coffin and the grave
of the deceased are prepared by such men whose womenfolk

22 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
are not pregnant, or have ceased to suckle their children;
otherwise, the child might be smitten with a mortal illness.1'
A further very widely spread custom was that no one, often
not even the neighbours, might go about his ordinary occupa-
tions while the corpse was still in the village, but that every-
one had to be prepared, if necessary, to serve the dead.
According to the Samoyedic idea, it is extremely reprehen-
sible to go hunting or fishing during a similar period; they
forbid even the crossing of a stream.17 Among the Estho-
nians it is strictly forbidden to chop wood, to heat the bath-
house, to wash clothes, to sweep the floor, and to comb
one's hair while the body is in the house. Neither is it suit-
able to visit friends or to receive visitors. Even to sell, or
give away anything from the house is forbidden during this
period.1*
If the corpse is kept over night in the house, no one may
undress, but must, instead, watch by the body, as " if one were
to lie down and sleep, it would be easier for the deceased to
take one's soul along with him to the kingdom of the dead."
Singing and shouting are also forbidden while the dead is in
the house. The Cheremiss declare that the relatives and
neighbours of the dead must sit silently watching by the dead,
in order to see if the spirit of the deceased should return to its
dwelling-place. If there is a mirror in the room, it must be
turned round or covered, in order that the dead may not, by
means of the mirror, look out a comrade for itself among
those present.19
To prevent the dead from visiting their old home, many
means of leading them astray are used. The Lapps and the
Samoyeds do not bear out their dead through the door, but
directly out under the canvas tent from the spot where they
were stricken by death; in order that the dead and the living
may not come in each other's way. The Lapps declare that
were they to bear out their dead through the door, a new death
might be expected soon after.20 The Ostiaks removed their

DEATH AND BURIAL 23
dead through the windows.21 The Votiaks attempt to deceive
their dead by removing the door through which the corpse is
carried from its hinges and passing it through- an opening on
the side of the hinges." The Volga Finns were in the habit
of placing the coffin on the end of a log and spinning it round
three times in a contrary direction to that of the sun. Often
the footmarks of the funeral procession are swept away."
The most general protective or cleansing measure is the strew-
ing of ashes: thus both the Lapps and the Baltic Finns used
to throw ashes and fire after those following the hearse.2*
In some places, all tables, benches, etc., in the house were
thrown down on their sides at the removal of the coffin.85
Against infection from death, articles of steel, axes and knives,
or heated stones, glowing cinders, ashes, salt, flour, etc., were
placed on the spot where death had stricken its victim.28 A
custom of the Baltic Finns is to hammer in a nail in the place
where death occurred, or where the corpse was washed, often,
also, into the threshold over which the coffin was borne. The
people say, that if a nail has been driven in where a death has
taken place, no sickness need be feared if one happened to
receive a shock there.87
The Russian Lapps leave their homes open and empty
after the death of a member of the family. In earlier times,
the nomad families would remove altogether to some other
place. A mark, such as for example, a stone, would be left
to mark the place of death.28 A more prevalent custom is to
smoke a room, or to beat the walls with branches. When the
Voguls smoke out their homes, they create a din at the same
time, shriek, jingle sleighbells, and pound in every corner to
drive away death. Among the Ostiaks the fire may not be
allowed to go out for five nights when a male dies, and four
nights when a female.8* The dread felt for death is increased
by the belief that the relatives of the dead man who have died
earlier come to take him away. The Lapps declare that they
have actually seen these with their own eyes in the twilight.

24 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
Generally, however, these spirits of dead relatives are in-
visible to human beings, but animals can see them.80
When the Lapps transport their dead for burial the corpse
is always placed in the last sled,81 and among the Ostiaks at
Tremyugan the escort never goes after the coffin, but before.32
The escort may not in any circumstances look behind it.
Neither may the other inhabitants of the village look at the
funeral procession through their windows. The Cheremiss go
so far as to hide their windows with coverings in order " not
to follow the dead one."&a
Measures of protection are carried out also on the return
from the burial. To prevent the dead from following the
trail of the escort, all footprints are swept over at the burial
mound." According to Lehtisalo, the Yuraks, on their return
from a burying, are in the habit of going three times round
the grave in widening circles. In addition, a gateway is erected
"towards the night," or towards the north, with the saying:
" Here is thy way, wander thine own way." Returning from
a burial, one may not look back. To cleanse oneself utterly
from the contact with the body, a gateway of two sticks is
erected before the door of the tent. Through this the rela-
tives of the dead must pass, taking with them all their
belongings.88 The Votiaks strike at one another at the
cemetery gate with branches of fir, saying to the dead: " Go
to thy home, do not remain with us." Or a branch of juniper
is waved with the cry: "Come not with us, go to your
home! "*8 In some places, a channel is cut by dragging an
axe or some other sharp instrument across the way or round
the escort of the dead. When the house is reached again, a
fire is usually made, over which one must jump, or the hands
are rubbed with ashes, or a bath is taken. In Finland the
coffin was sometimes carried to the cemetery between two
fires of straw " so that the soul should not return home to
disturb the sleep of the living." 3T
The sleigh, or carriage, in which the corpse is transported,

DEATH AND BURIAL 25
is either left at the cemetery, or must stand for at least three
days in the village street before it can be used again."
The Eastern Cheremiss have a custom, according to which
they fell a tree on their return from a burial, leaving a
stump about a yard high. This is generally done about
half-way between the cemetery and the village, " so that
the dead, when looking around, may notice the stump, and
realize that his old home is still far away, and so return to
his grave." B9
About half-way between the cemetery and a village, one
sees very often among the Volga Finns, a place by the way-
side where all kinds of objects, clothes, etc., have been placed
on the ground or hung up in the trees. To this place the
clothes worn by the deceased at his death, the bark-sponge
used in washing him, the shavings from his coffin, and ob-
jects regarded as having become infected with death have been
carried. The Cheremiss say that were one to burn up the
shavings gathered after the making of the coffin the deceased
would break out in blisters or an eruption on his face. At
these widely-feared places, the Votiaks sacrifice at times of
serious illness. Also after certain memorial-feasts held at
home, the bones of the sacrificed animal are taken to the above-
mentioned place, where they are hung up in the trees. Thus,
in some districts, sacrificial gifts have been laid down at this
place instead of at the cemetery, where they really should be,
and in many places even to this day, are laid. In the District
of Mamadysh the Votiaks have erected little posts with a
small table in front, to the memory of such dead as have died
in strange places, "so that their souls may return to their
native village." On the table, sacrificial food is placed on
the anniversary of such deaths.*0
Among the Finns in Savolax and Karelia, a tree, the
karsikko, on the road leading to the cemetery, was stripped of
its lowermost branches as a memorial of the dead. Often, a
cross would be carved on the tree together with the initials of

26 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
the dead, and sometimes also the year of death. Or these
might be cut on a piece of board which was then fastened to
the tree. The practice of carving a cross for each corpse
borne -by was carried out with the intention of preventing the
dead from coming any nearer to their former home. Offer-
ings were also made, or at least, everyone had to drink spirits
to the memory of the dead. Strips of clothing, bindings,
etc., were also often hung here/1
A similar custom prevailed amongst the Esthonians. In
some districts the crown of a young tree was chopped off, in
others a cross was carved in a tree by the way, or a nail
hammered in, so that the soul of the dead should not
approach any nearer home from the cemetery."
It is said to have been the custom in Savolax for a settler
to mark out near his home a suitable thicket of firs to the
memory of the dead. In a thicket of this description, which
was called karsikko, a tree was denuded of its branches at
each death of a dependant of the house, whether an adult or
a child. Immediately such a tree was found in the thicket,
offerings were made there to the dead. This statement, the
origin of which is to be found only in K. H. Hornborg*s de-
scription, is not supported by actual folk-custom. Hornborg
seems to have confused the karsikko of the dead with the
so-called elattipuu (Swedish vardtr'dd), a tree planted in the
vicinity of the house when first built, and to which sacrifices
of first-fruits were offered, and every autumn that of a sheep.
From this tree no branches were ever cut.** A growing fir
or pine in Finland has its branches removed so that only the
top remains in honour of one who for the first time is about to
begin a long journey or some more important enterprise, such
as hunting or fishing; and in Russian Karelia this is done also
in honour of a bride. But to this karsikko-tres no sacrifices
were offered.
Some kind of protective measure is probably also at the
root of many customs, regarded nowadays merely as signs

DEATH AND BURIAL 27
of mourning. The Ostiaks regard it as not correct for the
relatives to go barefooted during the first week after a death.
According to another report, Ostiak women wear their linen and
head-kerchiefs inside out for five months (or fifty days) if
the deceased is a man, and four months (or forty days) if a
woman.**
A custom now regarded as a mark of mourning is the
Ostiak's refusal to gird his belt around him for five or four
days, the time depending on the sex of the deceased. In
some districts this is done " so that the dead shall feel itself
lighter and freer." The Lapps have the same custom during
the trance of the shaman and child-birth. Probably, the
thought behind this Ostiak custom is that the journey of the
dead to the other world will be unhindered by knot or band.
For a similar reason, perhaps, the Samoyed and Ugrian
women allow their hair to fall unbound during a burial.*5
A method of expressing sorrow among the Ostiaks was to
scratch wounds that bled on one's own face. Novitskiy writes
of this (1715): " When anyone's father or mother, a husband
or a wife, or any other member of a family dies, the relatives
following the corpse to the grave seek to express their sorrow
by tearing their hair, and, as far as is in their power, scratch-
ing wounds on their faces} the bleeding locks of hair are
thrown by them on to the corpse." *8 Among the Mordvins
also the wounding of one's face was regarded as a means of
expressing sorrow.47 These last, like the Orthodox Finns and
the Siryans had the custom of singing " weeping-songs " to
the memory of the dead. In the villages were often to be
found women who made a profession of weeping at graves.
The singing of special weeping-songs seems with these to be
derived from the Russians, amongst whom the custom is
general. The " weeping" at the grave is, however, ap-
parently of older origin. In an old source it is written of
the Voguls: "They wail and cry greatly after the dead."
The Ostiaks customarily use the relatives of the dead as

28 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
" weepers." The dead man is praised very greatly at the
same time, and his works are admired/8
A strange custom of inquiring from the dead, who shall
be the next to die, is often connected with the burial cere-
monies. When the coffin has been borne out of the house
into the yard, the Cheremiss place on it a bunch of pieces of
thread of varying lengths, from which each of the partici-
pants in the ceremony draws out a thread, saying: " Although
thou perhaps didst die too early, do not take me with thee,
see how long my thread is, let my life be equally long."49
After burning the straw on which the dead has departed this
life, the Esthonians look among the ashes for footmarks from
which to make out whether a human being or an animal will
be the next to die from the same farm.60 The Finns kept an
eye on the horse that drew the hearse j if it lifted its left foot
first, it was a sign that someone from the village would soon
follow the dead.61 The Ostiaks attempt to obtain answers
from the corpse to certain questions, by lifting the lid of the
coffin in which the dead lies. Before they transport the dead
to the graveyard, they tie a rope round the coffin at the place
where the head of the corpse should be, and by the grip thus
formed one of the persons present tries to lift the coffin, each
time he does so directing a question at the deceased, for ex-
ample: "Was it a spirit, that took thee? " or " Shall we all
live to the next year? " and should the answer to this last
question be in the negative: "Tell me, who will be the
next to die? " after which the names of all present are called
out at each attempt to lift the coffin. Should the coffin appear
to be heavy, it is regarded as an answer in the negative j if
the contrary, as assent.82
It is, further, the duty of the survivors to take care of the
dwelling-place of the dead. According to the most wide-
spread custom now, the dead are buried in a coffin in the
ground. The coffin, called the " house " of the dead, is made
of boards; at each side the Karelians, Volga Finns, etc., make

DEATH AND BURIAL 29
a little square hole, the " window," " through which light
reaches to the house of the dead," and " through which they
can observe what happens around them." When the Chere-
miss makes the coffin, he says: "Now do I make thee a
house, be not angry if it please thee not." "
When the Cheremiss lift the corpse into the coffin, they
speak a few words to the memory of the deceased and wish
him a happy destination: "Farewell (with the name of the
deceased)! Over there may you enjoy a light, happy, good
and warm existence. Leave us not, but come and inform us
in our dreams, how joyful and pleasing thy life beyond the
grave has become! " Other wishes are also expressed: " Let
us not die too early, return not to us, make friends for thyself
among the other dead] "5*
To an unmarried young man the parents say: " In this
life we had not time to give thee away in marriage j choose for
thyself a good wife over there." In certain districts the un-
married dead are escorted to the cemetery with the ceremony
attaching to a wedding. The horses are harnessed in gleam-
ing harness, a large bell is fixed to the bent bow of wood over
the horses* necks, all the comrades and friends of the youth-
ful dead follow them to the graveside. When a young
virgin dies, the Cheremiss lay away with her, her needlework
and decorations, and in addition a charpant the headgear of a
married woman, w so that the deceased, when she celebrates
her wedding beyond the grave, will be able to array herself
as a married woman." While the relatives fit her out, they
say with tears in their eyes: "Here you had not time to be
wedded, marry an honourable man over there! " "
In some Districts (Urzhum, etc.,) a thread is snatched
from the garments of the deceased, or they merely take hold
of the coffin, with the remark: " Take not the house, the
cattle, the seed, the fortune with theej leave thy luck with
us!"6a The Eastern Votiaks have a custom according to
which one of the relatives of the dead tears a white cloth,

30 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
which he has brought with him to the cemetery, into two
piecesi the part remaining in the left hand, he leaves on the
breast of the dead, the piece in the right hand is taken home
and bound fast to one of the rafters or attached to the wall,
in which places it is allowed to hang a year. With the act
of tearing, they say: " In the same way as a part of this
cloth' remains here while the other part goes home with us,
mayst thou not altogether depart from us."
A custom of the Volga Finns, met with also among the
Ostiaks, is that when the face and the whole body of the dead
have been covered with cloths brought by the friends of the
deceased, a thread, of the length of the deceased's body, is
laid from its head to its feet, or at times, even three threads
of different colours, " along which the dead can climb up to
heaven." By some, this is called the "swing" of the dead.
Sometimes a thread of the length of an adult is laid by a
childj " so that it may in the other world grow to the length
of the thread."58
The Cheremiss regard it as essential that the persons watch-
ing by the body through the night should also follow it to
the grave. On the way to the cemetery all who meet the
procession must wish the dead a happy existence, warmth
and light. While the body is being lowered into the grave,
the coffin is lifted up three times, with the saying: "Fear
not! " The grave is thereafter filled in again, during which
process the relatives of the dead in turn wish it a happy ex-
istence and a calm dwelling-place, and beg that it will not
frighten those near to it, but will protect its former home,
its family, and its herds. In a Karelian " weeping-song " for
the graveside, the wish of the dead is expressed, that when
the grave is filled in, a tiny crack, like the way of a mole,
will be left for the soul to move through.59 When the Volga
Finns return from the graveside each one present sweeps a
little more earth on to the grave from its sides, saying:
"May the earth be light over thee! " In both ends of the

DEATH AND BURIAL 31
grave a little branch is stuck into the earth, and threads for
the dead are bound to these. For young girls kerchiefs are
bound to a pole planted in the grave, or to the surrounding
trees. A three-branched candle is lit on the grave.*0
The coffin in which the dead is borne to the grave is, how-
ever, of comparatively late origin. The Eastern Votiaks and
Cheremiss prepare the dwelling-house of the dead first at
the grave, to which the dead is escorted in full panoply, on a
sleigh in the winter, and on a carriage in the summer.
During the journey the widow of the dead sits or lies along-
side it. At the cemetery a low grave is dug, twigs of fir or
birch-leaves being strewn at the bottom; at the sides and ends
a couple of stout boards are then placed, between which the
dead is intended to be laid on its back. As a roof to this
" house," in one side-wall of which a window is introduced,
two boards are used.61 Formerly and in many places at the
present time, especially dur-
ing the winter, the Sam-
oyeds and the most North-
ern Ostiaks had a custom
according to which the dead
were not buried in the
earth, but in a dwelling-
place erected over the
ground. Among the Os-
tiaks and Voguls a tomb of
this description built over
the ground resembles a
little low house. The roof, sloping on both sides, is made
of birch-bark and narrow logs; often this house of the dead is
furnished with a window.62 Among the Lapps burial-houses
are also found, the roofs of which rise above the ground;
the dead being bedded in them on a layer of moss, reindeer-
hair, etc.68
A further relic of the times when the above-mentioned cus-
FIG.
i. OSTIAK GRAVE-HOUSE WITH
COFFIN OF THE DECEASED

32 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
torn of burial over the ground was prevalent among the Finno-
Ugric peoples, is the custom, met with among the Finns in Ka-
relia, of building, even after the dead had begun to be buried
in the earth, a little house of thin, round logs, carpentered
together, and furnished with a roof and windows. This
building would seem to have little actual meaning for the
dead, since these are buried in the earth, and it must there-
fore be connected with the old method of disposing of the
dead. Perfectly clear examples show how the method of
burial has gradually passed from the erection over the ground
to burial within it; an intermediate form being the low grave
which is not filled in again, but only covered with boards and
birch-bark.64
The development of the dwelling-place of the dead to the
coffin is shown also by the old burial customs of the Finns.
In his work on the Iron Age in Karelia, Schwindt mentions
regarding the ancient burial-places examined by him, that an
erection resembling a house over the ground, joined together
with wood, with jutting-out corners, was lowered into the
grave; it was at times even fitted with a floor of boards, over
which skins were spread. The dead were laid in this building
clad in festive costume, covered most often with birch-bark
and supplied with all kinds of necessary articles. The build-
ing was covered with a roof of boards. A grave of this
description was filled in and covered with one or two layers
of stones.05 Noteworthy also is the Volga Finns' custom,
mentioned earlier, of furnishing their coffins with a win-
dow.
Of early origin would seem to be a custom, preserved
among the Ugrians and the Karelian Finns, of burying their
dead bedded in a boat or punt. Even at the present time the
coffin is called the " punt" (ruuhi) in some parts of Karelia.
Munkacsi has assumed, that the Ugrian custom of using an
oaken punt as a coffin, is a direct outcome of the belief which
they held regarding the world of the dead, and especially of

DEATH AND BURIAL
33
the journey there over water. It is argued against this by
Karjalainen, that the belief in a land of the dead to be reached
over water is not an original belief of the Ugrians. According
to this last investigator, the custom of supplying the dead with
a boat for their last journey, depends solely on the fact that
the dead were regarded as needing a boat in the world beyond,
with which to procure their means of existence.08 In Russian
Karelia, remains of boats have been found which had not
been used as coffins for the dead, but lie capsized, often
shattered into two parts, over the grave.87
FIG. 2. GRAVEYARD IN RUSSIAN KARELIA
According to Blomstedt
In the same way as the Ugrians buried their dead in boats,
Lapp sleighs were used by the Lapps as coffins. In more
remote districts the Lapps, even to the present time, continue
to bury their dead in this way: laying sods of earth and
stumps of trees around them, as a protection against beasts of
prey. It is even related that the dead, on occasion, have been

34 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
buried in a sitting position in a sleigh to which a reindeer was
harnessed."8
A very old custom, which seems to have been general in
earlier times and of which traces can be found among most of
the Finno-Ugric stocks, is the use of a coffin made by hollow-
ing out the trunk of a tree, or a trough, as the protective
covering of the dead. Most of the dead were buried between
two hollowed logs, of which the lower formed the coffin and
the upper one the lid.89 Among the Siberians such a coffin is
erected over the ground upon two or four pillars.
The oldest method of burial of the Finno-Ugrians is also
made clear by a word, meaning in Samoyed " corpse " (kaltner,
kamelo, etc.), in Mordvin "grave" (kalmo, kalma), and in
Finnish " grave " (kalma) and also " death " and " the scent
of death." In an explanation of this word Setala says: " On
the grounds of the meaning of the word both in Finnish and
in Samoyed, we can assume that its original meaning was
(corpse,1 * the dead one.' The oldest method of burial un-
doubtedly consisted merely in the laying-out of a body, a
habit prevalent, and followed even now, among many peoples,
which habit would explain why the same word can have the
two meanings * corpse * and * grave.'" T0
Reliable reports on the burning of bodies are to be found
solely among the Baltic Finns. In certain ancient remains in
Finland, burnt bones have been found in graves. Henry the
Lett relates in his Chronicle how the Esthonians, when they
returned to their old beliefs during the unsettled period of
the Crusades, " took back their wives, whom they had forsaken
during the time they stood under the influence of Christianity,
exhumed their dead, whom they had buried in cemeteries, and
burned them in their old heathen way." The other Finno-
Ugric peoples seem to have burned bodies only when the
dead were supposed to be dangerous to those surviving. We
may concur fully with Varonen, who says: "As, therefore,
no reliable proofs exist concerning the cremation of the dead

DEATH AND BURIAL 35
among the Finno-Ugric stocks, except in those branches, which
continuously, and for the longest period, have been under
Germanic influence, we may conclude that the burning of
the dead did not originally form part of the burial-customs
of the Finno-Ugrians, and, where it may occasionally be found
among them, is merely in the nature of a temporary loan from
other peoples."71
The Finno-Ugric peoples bury their dead in certain burial-
areas, which, among the agricultural tribes, are often fenced
in. Every village has its own cemetery, or several villages
lying closely together may have a common one. This comes
from the fact that from the original mother-village, newer
ones have been formed in the course of time, the inhabitants
of which continue to use the burial-area of the original village.
In the same way as the old villages were family-villages, the
old cemeteries were family-cemeteries. That it was not the
custom to bury strangers in them is shown, among other proofs,
by the custom of the Votiaks, who besides their village-
cemetery, sometimes have a special one, often situated by the
main road, for the burial of wandering strangers, stricken by
death during their sojourn in the village.72
Usually, the cemetery is a consecrated thicket or wood,
where possible, of firs (Finnish, kuusikko)) where the Votiaks
and the Cheremiss hang up on the trees all kinds of garments,
cloths, kerchiefs, etc., presented to the dead, "so that they
should not, lying on the ground, be turned to earth." At
times, even the solitary graves are ringed round. According
to Rytschkov this was done " so that the dead should not
leave their dwelling-place and trample down the surrounding
fields." ™ The Eastern Cheremiss have, further, a custom of
placing on their graves a cuckoo made of wood, and fastened
to the end of a long pole." What the meaning attached to
this bird may originally have been, the present generation no
longer knows. Some say the cuckoo sounds its note for the
edification of the dead. Certain, Siberian tribes have also a

36 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
custom of setting up figures of birds on the graves of their
dead.
Whether the use of special cemeteries had its origin already
in Finno-Ugric times is doubtful. According to tradition, the
Lapps, in their earlier periods, did not possess special burial-
places, because their dead were buried at any spot. In the
summer, when it is extremely difficult, and even, at times,
impossible, to transport the corpses to the remote burial-
places, the Lapps have to our day buried their dead in the
forests and on the uplands, wherever they happened to be
dwelling, and then with the arrival of winter removed them
to the churchyard.76