CHAPTER XXI
SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM
A
MONG nearly all primitive peoples, it is held that the
chief cause of sickness is a temporary absence of the soul
from its material envelope and that the only cure is the success-
ful recovering of the soul. Connected with this is a belief
in the existence of persons furnished with certain extraordinary
powers, who, by different means and in different ways, gen-
erally, however, in a condition of ecstasy, can come into imme-
diate touch with the spirit-world. Such persons are given
different names by the separate peoples of Siberia. The Mon-
gols and the Buriats nearly related to these, call them " bo,"
the Yakuts " ojun," the Altai Tatars " kam," and the Tungus
" shaman." Through Russian ethnography the Tungusian
name has been adopted by the literature of the science of reli-
gion. As the shaman is of the greatest importance in the
nature-religion of the Siberian peoples, this form of religion
has generally begun to be called shamanism.
It is not possible to become a shaman only by education or
practice, a shaman having to possess special shamanic talents,
which appear in varying forms with different individuals, often
in early youth. The Tungus say no one can " take " this talent,
but that it is " received" or, in other words, that " one is
called " to the profession of shaman. A common idea is that
a shamanic talent is " a difficult burden " for a beginner.
Dr. Sternberg, who, during his stay in East Siberia, made
many interesting observations among the Giliak shamans, says
that the preparation for the office of shaman forms a crisis in
the life of the chosen, a crisis followed by extremely compli-
cated psychic manifestations. A shaman of his acquaintance

SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM 497
related that before he became a shaman he was ill for over
two months, lying motionless and unconscious for this period.
He was convinced that he would have died if he had not be-
come a shaman. After the severe trials of these months he
was reduced to complete exhaustion. During the nights, he
started to dream that he sang shaman songs. Once a white
owl appeared to him and placed itself close behind him, while
a human being stood a little further off and said: "Make
thyself a drum and everything a shaman needs, and sing songs,
Thou wilt never more succeed in being an ordinary individual j
but if thou acceptest the calling of shaman, thou wilt become
a real shaman." He was unaware how long he had slept, but
when he awoke, he saw that he was being held over a fire,
his relatives believing that the spirit had killed him. He then
commanded his relations to give him a drum and started to
sing. During this singing he felt intoxicated but not as one
dead.1
According to the Tungus a deceased shaman appears to the
member of his own family whom he has chosen as his successor.
This visit may take place in a dream, or during a severe ill-
ness. Anyone refusing to follow this call is tormented by the
spirit to the verge of death. When the spirit has appeared to
a shaman candidate, the latter begins to withdraw from the
company of his fellows, has difficult nerve-attacks and fits of
hysteria and epilepsy, behaving at times as though his mind
were unhinged. The Tungus of the Turukhansk District call
a shaman-spirit Khargi.2
A Yakut shaman describes his experiences as follows: " At
the age of twenty I became ill and began to see and hear what
other people do not see or hear. For nine years I resisted
the spirit and told no one what was happening, for fear of
being misunderstood or insulted. Finally, I became so ill
that death was very near. It was then that I began to
shamanize, recovering immediately. Even now, if 1 refrain
from shamanizing for a long time, 1 become indisposed and

498 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
fall ill." The spirit, which appears to the chosen, is said to
be the soul of a dead shaman, and is called Amagat by the
Yakuts. The Amagat of the shaman, which advises and pro-
tects him through life, is pictured in metal on his costume as
a little man-like figure.3
Common to all the Siberian peoples is the view that only a
member of a family or clan that has earlier contained shamans
can become a shaman. The calling goes thus in inheritance.
But individuals with shamanic talents do not appear in every
generation. The Tungus at the Yenisei explained to the
author, that if a shaman is buried in the earth and not on an
erection in the air, the " loom " (Cavia- lumma, a soul-bird of
the shaman) of the deceased will return no more to his family.
Often the " loom " appears first after a longer period. It is
held that this " loom," the reappearance of which in the family
is regarded as a great honour, is the wandering soul of the
deceased shaman. When the " loom " has appeared to anyone,
that is to say, when shamanic gifts become apparent in any
individual, a wooden image is made of the bird and a reindeer
sacrificed to it. This " loom " becomes the protective spirit of
the new shaman. Here we meet with a conception, peculiar to
shamanism, that besides the ordinary souls common to all men,
the shaman possesses a special shaman-soul, lacking to others.
From the beliefs connected with death it appears that this
shaman-soul is immortal in a much higher degree than other
souls. For this reason, special ceremonies are necessary at the
burial of a shaman. Not even a chief, however many herds
of reindeer he possesses, can compare in matters of religion
with the poorest shaman, who, on account of his " loom " is
honoured and feared already during his life, but still more
after his death.
The Yakuts sometimes call the shaman-soul sur, which in
other Turkish languages signifies soul in general. Its seat is
said to be in the head of the shaman. It is related in a tale,
how a great shaman received his head " in the Heaven of

SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM 499
Manariks " (manarik, " nervy," " insane w; man'drii, " to lose
one's sense").* According to the Buriats, a person who has
been scared out of his wits by violent thunder receives a special
shamanic talent.5 The Yakuts say such persons have received
stir from Ulu-Tojon, the god of thunder.6
Besides male shamans, female shamans are also met with,
though these can in no way be compared with the male in
power and importance. Generally, they are called also by a
different name from the male shamans (Yakut, Altai-Tatar,
Buriat, Mongol, " udagan," " utagan," etc.). There have
been, however, especially among the Buriats, many famous
female shamans, worshipped after their death by their rela-
tives. Each place, each family, and each tribe has, according
to the Buriats, its individual Zajans or protective spirits of
deceased shamans, both male and female, who after death
were buried on adjoining heights, where their images (ongott)
were also placed. At times even ordinary Buriat men or
women become Zajans after death, and special ceremonies are
gone through in their honour; but these are said to become
Zajans " by the power of their shamanic origin and the pro-
tective powers springing therefrom for the survivors." T
It is extremely important for each person to remember his
shamanic origin, called Utkha by the Buriats. Each family,
or clan, has its own Utkha, which imposes special duties on its
members. It is said of the family Sartul, which dwells east
of the Baikal, " that they do not devour the blood of animals,
as their shaman-Utkha forbids this, and especially must they
refrain from devouring the blood of the Sartul-family's
shaman animals." An animal or a bird, regarded as pro-
tecting the shaman, is called khubilgan by the Buriats. In
their opinion, each shaman has his own protectors, some a
snake, some a vulture, some a frog, etc.8
Closely connected with the family, Utkha are also the house-
hold spirits or household Ongons. These household spirits,
worshipped by the members of the family and preserved in the

5oo SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
tent, generally consist of a sheepskin on which tinplate figures
of human beings and other things are fastened, or these figures
may also be painted on the sheepskin or on a cloth. These
Ongons are inherited with the tales and traditions attached to
them. Among the Buriats of the Khangin clan one may see
an Ongon, called Borto, in nearly every dwelling, and of this
it is said that the forefather of the clan, Khorton, a great
shaman, had borne it on his back from Mongolia. Prayers
to this Ongon begin: " Utkha of the thousands of Khangins,
Sen-Serel bird (sen, a Siberian swan), Utkha of the Serel Mon-
gols, Khun-Khorel bird (khunt a Siberian swan)."9
Animals, and especially birds, which play some part in
shamanic beliefs, may not be killed or even molested, other-
wise sickness or some other misfortune will result. Among
the Tungus, as among many other North Siberian peoples,
certain birds, water-birds in particular, such as the loom, sea-
gull, swan, crane, etc., are sacred. One may not even point
a finger at them. Further, one tries to avoid mentioning their
names. A Buriat tale tells how a swan, whose nest had been
damaged, flew with a burning brand in its beak and dropped
it on a house, so that the whole village was burnt up. Among [
the Yakuts and Buriats, the eagle is treated with extraordinary
respect and dread. The Yakuts say that it is not a sign of
good luck if an eagle flies over a village. The Buriats round
the Baikal call the eagle " Olkhon island's master " or " the'
son of the god living on Olkhon island." Often the great
shamanic powers of the eagle are praised, some myths calling
it "the first shaman." There are countless tales of misfor-
tunes which befell people who ill-treated this bird. A man
once saw how an eagle plucked at the carcase of his cow, which
had been killed on the steppes by a wolf. The man became
angry and started to drive away the bird with a bough. Shortly
afterwards he became seriously ill, and received the knowledge
in a dream that his illness had been caused by his treatment
of the eagle. The Buriats throw milk or kumiss into the air

SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM 501
each time a swan or an eagle flies over their village.10 If a
Yakut finds a dead eagle or the skeleton of one, he regards it
as his duty to bury the bird on a special erection of wood, or
in a tree, in the manner in which human beings, particularly
shamans, were earlier buried. While doing this, he utters
the following words: "Lift up thyself, fly to thy birthplace,
come not down on the earth. Thy bones of copper I have
placed on the grave-erection, thy bones of silver have I lifted
up." ll With similar respect do the Tungus also treat shaman
animals.
It is not always easy to define the difference between shaman
animals and such as are regarded as the forefather or mother
of a clan or a people. The myths, of the Altaic peoples tell
also of the latter. Among the Buriats tales have been recorded
of three swans which once came down from the sky to bathe
in a lake. They took off their swan-garments and became
changed into three fair women. A hunter, who had hidden
himself on the shore, took one of these swan-garments and
hid it. When the swan-women had bathed for a time, they
hurried to the shore to clothe themselves again, and when the
others were ready to fly away the one who had lost her gar-
ment had to remain behind on the earth. The hunter mar-
ried her later and she bore him eleven sons and six daughters.
Once, after a long time, the wife remembered her former
garment and inquired of her husband where he had left it.
The man was so certain that she would not now leave him and
her children that he decided to return the wonderful garment
to her. With his consent, the woman then put it on to see
how she would look in it. But no sooner had she got the
swan-garment on, than she flew up through the smoke-hole
and, floating high above her home, shouted to those left be-
hind: " Ye are earthly beings and remain on the earth, I am
from Heaven and fly back to my home." She added: " Each
spring and autumn, when the swans fly northward and return,
ye must carry out certain ceremonies in my honour." She then

502 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
blessed her children, hoping that they would live happily on
the earth, and disappeared in the sky. It is further related
how one of the swan-woman's daughters tried to hinder her
mother from flying by grasping her feet, which, as the daugh-
ter had dirty hands, became black and have remained so to
this day-12
Tales related to the above, are met with also in Europe,
having probably come there from Asia, but it should be noted
that among the Buriats, certain ceremonies are connected with
this belief. Generally speaking, tales of the supernatural
origin of certain tribes and clans are not scarce among the
Altaic peoples. According to the notes made by Potanin in
the Altai territory the forefather of the Bersit clan was a wolf,
which lived in the forest near a ,lake together with a deer
(Cervus ela-phus). Of these a son was born who became the
ancestor of the said clan.13 Regarding the origin of the Mon-
gols there are several myths. In some it is related that their
ancestor was a dog, or that he was given birth to by a tree and
nourished by a dog. It is also related how two Khans warred
together and destroyed all the people until only one woman
was left. This last woman met with a bull by whom she had
two children. From these the whole race of the Mongols was
born. A variant of this tale describes how a woman gave
birth to the son of a bull, the child walking on all fours.
When the forefeet had been cut off this ancestor of the Mon-
gols began to live like a human being, and ate meat in the
place of grass.14 The Kirghis believe themselves to be de-
rived from a wild boar, and for this reason do not eat pork.
According to one tale Jenghiz Khan's son lived at Gobi to-
gether with a wild boar, the latter bearing him several sons.
Thus arose a great people, i.e., the Kirghiz"
Several myths have been recorded among the Buriats re-
garding their ancestor Bukha-Nojon (" Bull Lord "). South
of the Baikal lived a king, Taizhi-Khan, who had a mottled
bull. This, an exceptionally large and powerful animal, once

SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM 503
said in its pride: "Whoever in the world dares to measure
his strength against mine, may come and try." Then Bukha-
Nojon was changed to a blue-grey bull and went to the king-
dom of Taizhi-Khan to wrestle with the mottled bull. Dur-
ing the day-time he wrestled as a bull, but in the night he
Kept company as a fair youth with Taizhi-Khan's daughter.
After a time the latter became enceinte and told Bukha-Nojon
that she would soon give birth to a child. Then Bukha-
Nojon ripped the child from her stomach and cast it with his
horns over the Baikal. After he had vanquished the mottled
bull, Bukha-Nojon swam over the lake, found the child on
the shore and began to nourish it. A shaman woman found
the child later sucking at a blue-grey bull, adopted it and
called it Bulagat. This Bulagat, who had two sons, the an-
cestors of two clans, Khori and Buriat, of which the shamans
sing that they are derived from " the resting-place of the
blue-grey bull," found a playmate on the shore of the Baikal,
Ekerit, also an ancestor, of whom it is said that " the burbot
{Lota lota} was his father, the shore his mother."16
According to another myth, the forefathers of the Buriats
came down from Heaven and were nourished by a wild boar.
It is further related that Khurmusta's daughter, who became
enceinte from some unknown cause, came down to the earth in
the form of a goat and gave birth to two sons and a daughter.17
What appear to be relics of totemism were found in Siberia
among the Yakuts in the eighteenth century-. Strahlenberg
says: "Otherwise, each family regards a particular creature
as sacred, such as the swan, the goose, the raven, etc., and such
animals as are held sacred by a family are not eaten among
its members, though others are free to do so."1S Similarly, in
an appendix " Concerning the Yakuts," which is said to be taken
from " two old manuscripts " and which appeared in a Russian
book published in 1844, A Journey to Yakutsk^ each clan has
its own particular protector or mediator, represented by an
image of a stallion with white lips, a raven, a swan, etc.

504 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
These animals were never used as food.19 According to a
third source such animals are the eagle and the crane.2C>
Probably the family-names derived from the animal king-
dom and the ownership-marks of certain North Siberian
peoples denoting animals, are connected with these totemistic
ideas. But during the centuries and thousands of years of
their use, the original significance of these matters has faded
from the consciousness of the people.
Certain investigators have attempted to trace the rise of
totemism from an old custom, known over nearly the whole
world, of giving names taken from nature to children, often
from the animal kingdom. The most northern peoples of
Siberia give their children even today names taken from some
object which, at the moment when the soul was believed to
have taken possession of the child, awakened the interest of
the mother or those around her. The Yenisei Ostiaks give
their children the name of the object "on which the shadow
(ulvet) of the child fell first." 21
Further, it has been pointed out that in early times the
difference between man and the animals was not regarded
as unsurmountable. In countless Siberian tales it is related
how certain animals were once men and vice versa. The
Buriats say of the bear that it was formerly, a hunter or a
shaman, which was later changed into a bear. Should the
animal so wish, it could regain its human form. The Tungus
say that when the beaver was a human being, it was a skilful
archer. According to the Altai Tatars the owl was a great
shaman. The Yenisei Ostiaks told me that the swan was
originally a woman, and from that time the bird has retained
menstruation. Even certain fish, such as the burbot, are, ac-
cording to the Buriats, human beings drowned in the water.
The Buriats tell of a land m the north-east, where the men are
born as dogs, larger, however, than ordinary dogs, while the
opposite sex are born as ordinary women.23
Just as there are tales describing the origin of ancestors

SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM 505
from certain animals, so it is related that the " power " of
the first female shamans was derived from an animal or a bird.
According to a Buriat myth the gods, when they created the
first people, sent a vulture to protect them against evil spirits.
But when the people did not understand its sacred mission,
and started to shoot at it, it returned to the gods complain-
ing: " I cannot protect mankind as they wish to kill me."
The gods then answered: "Go back and give thy wonder-
ful power to some one of the earth's inhabitants." The
vulture flew down and saw a girl herding sheep. The bird
enticed her at once into a forest where it gave her its magic
powers. After this the girl began to see spirits and to keep
company with them. She received also a marvellous power
of foretelling both good and evil. When, after a time, she
returned home, her brother scolded her for having ^en out
so long with the sheep. The girl became angry and threatened
her brother, who shortly afterwards fell ill. The sister, who
had become a great shaman, was able, however, to cure him.53
According to another Buriat tale men knew nothing of sick-
ness or death in the beginning, but were liable to these mis-
fortunes through evil spirits. The gods then sent down an
eagle from heaven to protect the people. The eagle was
thus " the first shaman." The people did not, however,
understand the duty of the bird, so that it was forced to
return to heaven. The gods told the eagle to give its shaman
nature to the first person it should meet on the earth. The
eagle then approached a woman sleeping under a tree, who
had left her husband, and she became enceinte by the eagle.
The woman now returned to her husband, lived in complete
harmony with him, and gave birth to a son, who became later
"the first shaman." A variant of the same tale gives the
woman as " the first shaman." By receiving the eagle's powers,
she could see spirits and practise the profession of shaman,24
Among the Buriats one meets thus with two conceptions,
which might possibly throw light on the problem of totemism.

506 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
One is that the forefather of a clan originated from an animal;
the other, that the magic powers of the first shaman woman
or ancestress of the clan were obtained from some animal.
Which of these should be regarded as the older conception?
Judging from the Buriat myths, both are closely related.
The " animal " which inspires the " first shaman woman "
of the clan is also looked upon as a possible cause of her
pregnancy. In this manner tales might arise of the animal-
like ancestors of a clan. As the " animal's powers," accord-
ing to an old belief, then go down in inheritance in the " first
shaman woman's " clan (Yakut ija-usay " mother-clan "), or,
in other words, lie dormant within the family, appearing only
in its shamans, it becomes obvious that knowledge of their
Utkha ("origin") is of importance to each clan and that it
imposes certain duties on the clan. The animal whose
" powers " or nature lie latent in a shaman clan becomes a
special soul for the shaman. The Tungus conception of the
" return of the (loom'" points to a kind of migration of the
soul. The Buriats call an animal of this description khubtlgan
(" metamorphosis," from khubilkhu^ " to change oneself,"
" to take on another form "). In a variant of the myth of
the " ancestor" of the Buriats, Bukha-Nojon (" Bull
Master")? it is related that when this people still dwelt in
the land of the Khalkha Mongols, a very large blue-grey ox
appeared in their midst, the people accepting it as their khMl-
gan.K The conceptions of an " ancestor " and a khubilgan
have thus been united in this myth.
One of the shaman's protective spirits in animal form is
commonly regarded as being intimately connected with the
shaman himself. Among certain Samoyeds in the Turukhansk
District the shaman spirit has the shape of a reindeer which is
bound by an invisible leather band to the shaman. This
leather band can stretch to any length when the reindeer is
sent out on a journey. It may happen, sometimes, that the
spirit-reindeer of two shamans engage in warfare together

SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM 507
(cf. the bull-fighting in the Buriat myth). Should one of
the reindeer be killed in the conflict, the shaman owning the
same dies.26 That the " reindeer " is here a transformation
of the shaman's soul, appears from a custom of the Yurak
Samoyeds, after the death of a shaman, of preparing a wooden
image of a reindeer, which is kept by the relatives wrapped up
in the hide of a reindeer calf.
The Yakuts call a shaman animal of this description i/a-
kyl ("mother-animal"). These may be of varying species.
The mightiest shaman animals are said to be the stag, the
stallion, the bear, the eagle, etc. Unlucky the shaman whose
ijd-kyl is a wolf or a dog. The dog, it is said, never leaves the
shaman in peace, but " gnaws with its teeth at his heart and
tortures his body." When a new shaman has appeared, the
others know this through having noticed the appearance of
a new ij'd-kyl. Only shamans can see these animals. When
they quarrel, their " animals " fight together. An " animal
war " may go on for several months or years. The one whose
" animal " wins the fight emerges whole from the struggle,
but, as said before, if one of the " animals " dies, its shaman
owner dies too. The sickness of a shaman is often said to
depend on a grave battle between shamans.27
Among the Dolgans standing under the influence of the
Yakuts the same shaman spirit is met with under the same
name. Although the shamans have many helping spirits in
the shapes of different animals, each shaman has only one
ij'd-kyl upon which his life and death depend. This spirit-
animal is said to appear to the shaman at the most three
times in his life, viz., at his call to the office of shaman, in
the middle of his shaman activity, and immediately before his
death, when the spirit dies also. Should the animal die of
any accidental cause, the death of the shaman follows soon
after. The " mother animal " keeps always to the same place,
for which reason it may happen that a strange shaman sees it
while shamanizing. If the latter is an enemy of the animal's

508 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
owner, he frightens the animal so that it dies, .with fatal
consequences to its owner (cf. similar beliefs of the Scandi-
navian Lapps).88
A further proof that the shaman's " animal," which is
regarded as his necessary escort and means of conveyance to
the other world, is intimately connected with his soul, is to be
found in the description of the last journey of the Goldes,
where the " reindeer " ridden by the soul of the deceased is
the shaman himself.29
The forbidding of the killing of certain animals and the
custom of burying them with ceremony where the body of
one is found, would seem to depend on the fact that the
animals in question are soul-animals of the types described
above. For though sou^-animals are often regarded as being
invisible to the ordinary eye, they are most often connected
with the corresponding material animals. This appears also
from a Buriat tale about a great shaman and his nine sons.
The father, who was blind, once sent his sons to a river to
fish. " Ye will see there," he said, " seven fish, one of which
is blind and is not to be touched, as it is my soul." The sons
caught all the fish, however, but when they returned home,
their father was dead.30
That all the " animals " regarded as helping the shaman
are not khubilgans^ but that there are numerous other help-
ing-spirits is shown, further, by the following Buriat prayer:
" Grey hare our runner, grey wolf our ambassador, bird Khon
our khubilgan, eagle Khoto our messenger."31
Some light is thrown on the ideas of the different peoples
regarding their shaman animals by the images prepared by
them, those cut out of wood or, later, hammered also of iron,
are more common than those which are drawn or painted. In
the museum at Krasnoyarsk there is a Tungus shamanic object
— a long chain of iron — the end of which is attached to a
reindeer or deer made of ironplate, with birds' wings sticking
out of its sides. On this animal sits a human being represent-

SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM
509
ing a shaman, with a square iron plate on his head, over which
a bird surrounded by nine small human-like objects is fastened.
The iron chain, to which, in addition, a bird and a reindeer
are attached, and which branches out into three thinner chains
with bells at their end, represents the spirit-journey of the
shaman.
When a Golde shaman intends to travel to the other world,
he must have the assistance of a mystic bird Koori and his
protecting spirit Bucu. The bird resembles a crane, its image
Fie. 19. KOORI AND Bucu, SPIRIT-BIRDS OF A GOLDE SHAMAN
of wood being covered with the skin of a wild goat so that
only the head is uncovered. Bucu is a human-like image with
a crooked leg and wings. The body and the wings of this
also are covered with wild-goat skin. Both these objects are
hung by the shaman in a shed erected specially for the occa-
sion, the former in a horizontal, the latter in a vertical posi-
tion. In these positions the spirit-animals are supposed to
make their journeys when they travel with the shaman. Koori
is said to carry the shaman's soul, while Bucu is only an escort.
Even if the shaman could reach the world of the dead with-

5io SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
out Koori, it would, as the people point out, be impossible
for him to return without it.32
The Dolgans and the Tungus use a great many wooden
images when shamanizing, which are prepared for one occasion
only and which are regarded as being necessary helpers and
protectors on the shaman's difficult spirit-journeys. Accord-
ing to the task and plans of the shaman, different images are
made. When the Tungus on the Yenisei begin their shaman
ceremonies, they always erect a special tent, in the middle of
which a fire is lit. The shaman with his drum then takes up
his position at the back of the tent, his face towards the fire,
and before him, on the ground, a row of wooden objects is
placedj on the right side a fish (Stenodus leuclchthus nelma)y
a snake, a snail, and a bear; on the other side a fish (H-ucho
faimen), an otter, a wolf, and still another fish (Lota lota).
The heads of these are pointed towards the fire. In addition,
a snail is placed before him with its head towards the left.
Outside the tent, on long poles erected round it, similar
wooden figures are placed in the following order from the
right: "the sun," a bird intended to represent the thunder,
a cuckoo, and a swan. From the door opening to the left: a
crane, " the moon," a loom and a duck. Each object has its
special duty and all are necessary for each appearance of the
shaman. During his song he lifts up in order the animals laid
on the ground before him, drawing certain conclusions from
the weight of each. For special tasks other images are also
used, e.g., when the shaman has to escort the soul of some one
deceased to the other world, he binds the " soul," that is to
say, the image of a man, to a curious erection which would
seem to be fitted with wings, and is erected behind the tent.
The Dolgan shaman sometimes makes an image of his
" mother-animal," ija-kyl. Even at the sacrifices a wooden
image is made both of the reindeer and the sacrificing shaman,
who is to lead the sacrificed animal's soul to the gods. On
the graves also of the Tungus, Dolgans and Yakuts, one

SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM 5x1
FlG. 20. DOLCAN SHAM AN-ATTRIBUTES AND THE WORLD-TREE WITH THE
TWO-HEADED LORD OF THE BlRDS

5i2 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
may see images of birds, looms, etc., on long poles, set up,
probably, as refuges for the homeless soul.83 It is, however,
a great pity that the varied shamanic beliefs of North Siberia
and the countless ethnographic objects connected with these
are almost wholly unexplored.
In the place of wooden images the Buriat shaman has many
little animal-hides in his house. The animals said to help
him in his shamanizing vary in the different tribes. Often
they are small forest animals, such as the fox, the hare, the
ermine, marten, sable, etc. These helping or serving spirits
in the shapes of different animals are not to be confused with
the khubilgan of the shaman.
When a shaman intends to make a spirit-journey after sun-
set, he must, as a rule, according to a general idea, be furnished
with a special costume and a drum. The " Black Tatars " in
the Minusinsk District sometimes use masks of birch-bark on
their eyebrows and moustaches of squirrel tails.8* Shaman
objects are regarded as so sacred that they are transported
during removals among the more northern peoples by a sepa-
rate reindeer, which is never used for profane purposes. The
Buriats consecrate the person called by the spirits to the office
of shaman with special ceremonies, before he is regarded as
being worthy to take charge of shamanic instruments. In
addition he must have undergone a special training with some
older shaman, and have taken part, as the assistant of the
latter, in shamanic seances and ceremonies.36
Shaman costumes are to be found even to-day among most
of the Altaic peoples dwelling in Siberia, although in many
places they no longer enjoy their former reputation. Even
amongst peoples, with whom the shaman continues his activity,
the costumes are nowadays often extremely incomplete. At
times one sees shamans carrying out their duties in ordinary
peasant dress, decorated perhaps for the occasion with a few
ribbons or other objects from the real shaman costume. Some-
times only the shaman head-dress has been retained. The

SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM
FIG. 22. HEAD-DRESS Op
THE Soror SHAMAN
(BIRD TYPE)
Fie. 21. HEAD-DRESS OF A YENISEI-
OSTIAK SHAMAN (REINDEER OR
STAC TYPE)
Fie. 23. TUNGUS SHA-
MAN-BOOT (BIRD TYPE)

5H SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
complete costumes, best preserved among the most northern
peoples, consist of several garments, viz., a long frock or tunic
hanging down below the knees, a smaller breast-covering
fastened under the chin, a cap or a crown, top-boots and
gloves. All these garments are prepared of softened rein-
deer or other skin, and are generally profusely decorated with
objects made of copper or iron. Besides a " sun " and a
" moon," which in most costumes hang on the back, a number
of human-like and bird-like spirit images are used. Further,
in all the garments composing the costume, curious objects in
beaten metal are sewn fast, corresponding in form and in the
ideas of the people to the different parts of the skeleton. If
one compares the shaman costumes from different districts,
valuable collections of which are to be found in the museums
of Siberia (Krasnoyarsk, Minusinsk, Irkutsk and Yakutsk)
and, above all, in Petrograd (Academy of Science and Alex-
ander III museums), it will be noticed that the costume, if
complete, forms, from head-dress to boots, a whole, or in
other words, represents some animal, mostly either a bird or
a horned animal (a deer or a reindeer). Costumes repre-
senting both these types have been obtained in plenty from the
Tungus. The bird type is most common among the Yakuts
and many of the peoples at the Altai. The Buriats, who no
longer seem to use shaman costumes of this description, pos-
sessed them at an earlier time, a fact proved by graves opened
in their region, in which metal objects belonging to the deer
type of shaman costume were found.
The costumes of the bird type differ from those of the deer
type, partly in the long fringes, the so-called " feathers,"
which are much longer on the back of the costume than on the
front. Similar leather fringes hanging from the arms are
said to represent " wings." Small, long, sharp-ended and also
pipe-formed metal objects hanging in several rows on the
back, are explained to be "bird's feathers." Naturally, the
head-dress also is fringed with these. In the head-dress of

SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM 515
FIG, 24. TATAR SHAMAN (BIRD TYPE) IN MINUSINSK DISTRICT

516 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
this type in the Altai district one may at times even see the
head of a bird. The round brass buttons on the front of the
head-dress are " bird's eyes." The boots bear the same signs.
Tungus shaman boot of this type are decorated with bird's
feet sewn with yellow glass pearls, and having three or five
toes.
Specially characteristic of the deer or reindeer type is the
head-dress or crown with its high, upright, iron horns. The
fringes on the tunic are missing, or where these occur, are
shorter j the arms are altogether without them. Among the
Yenisei Ostiaks and the Dolgans the tail of the tunic ends
behind in a sharp point. Little pieces of iron sewn on to the
costume are called " hairs."
In the garments of each type, as may be seen from the
illustrations, there are numerous "bones" beaten in metal.
The skeleton plays, as is known, an important part in the
primitive soul-beliefs. On both sides of the front of the
tunic are seen " ribs " and, under the throat, " collar-bones."
Along the gloves, arms and boots the parts of the skeleton
belonging here are sewn. Naturally, the bird-type costume is
fitted with " bird's bones," the deer type with the deer
skeleton.
More difficult is the question, what bird the different bird-
costumes attempt to represent. It appears probable that al-
though the dress represents an invisible spirit-bird, the people
see in it the counterfeit of some actual, living bird. A Yakut
shaman costume, described by Prildonskiy, is said to repre-
sent a vulture."8 A Teleut shaman head-dress was covered
by the skin of an owl on which the head, wings and feathers
had been left intact.37 Certain costumes bear also the identi-
fication marks of the hawk, eagle, etc.
Among the Yenisei Ostiaks, the shaman boots, the long
uppers of which reach over the thighs, are furnished with the
complete " bones " of the bear. This would seem to point to
a shaman costume representing a bear.88 The crowns, how-

SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM
517
FIG. 25. LEFT BOOT OF YENISEI-OSTIAK SHAMAN (BEAR TYPE)
WITH ALL THE BONES OF BEAR'S LEFT LEGS

5i8 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
ever, where such are found, are generally fitted with " horns."
Are we to assume that different types of costume have be-
come mixed, or did the costume originally consist of a mixture
of bear and reindeer? The complete shaman costumes repre-
sent as a rule one single animal. That all manner of altera-
tions might have arisen at a later time, especially as the
original significance of the costume has been forgotten by the
people in many places, is clear without further argument.
Often, one may notice, for example, that certain parts of the
skeleton have been sewn on in the wrong place. Where the
iron objects, which are generally taken away for future use
from the costume at the death of the shaman, are preserved
for a longer period by the survivors, it is easy for even the
objects belonging to different types to be put wrongly together.
It should be observed further that, according to Schrenk, the
head of a bear was sometimes placed upon the head-dress
of the Siberian shaman.39 It must, however, be remembered
that the spirit-animal of the shaman, in the fancy of the
people, may also have taken on a form which did not corre-
spond to any actual animal.
A comparative examination of the shaman costumes among
different Siberian peoples will show that, for the most part,
and especially in the metal objects sewn on to the costume,
they are extremely like one another. It is therefore beyond
doubt that at least the Buriats, Yakuts, Tungus, Dolgans,
Yenisei Ostiaks, Samoyeds and certain Tatar tribes around
the Altai, have in this respect been under the influence of a
common shamanic culture. The influence of this culture can
be seen even among the Ugrian Ostiaks in the west and as
far away as the Giliaks in the east. Probably, the shaman
costumes of the Mongols and of other Turkish peoples were
earlier of a similar character. Among the Finno-Ugric stocks,
archaeological finds have not been able to show metal objects
which could prove the existence of similar shaman costumes
among these peoples. Even in Siberia, however, shaman

SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM 519
costumes seem to have existed at an earlier time, which in place
of the metal objects were decorated with natural objects from
the animal world. Thus, for example, among the Tatars of
Minusinsk the wings of the owl have been seen on the back
of a shaman costume and on the head-dress, and among the
Yenisei Ostiaks the shamans formerly bore on their top-boots
the natural paws of a bear instead of iron claws, and on their
head-dress real horns.40 Further, among the older types one
may find costumes with " images" prepared in part from
leather and bones. It would therefore seem probable that the
shaman costumes of the Altaic race had practically the same
form and purpose in a more primitive period,
But why should the shaman dress himself in the form of an
animal for his mysteries? The answer to this question is given
by the primitive peoples themselves. The Yakuts say that
when the shaman takes on his bird-costume he himself re-
ceives the power of flying everywhere in the world. Accord-
ing to the Tungus, the costume of the shaman is his " shadow,"
or in other words, in this shape his soul travels on its spirit-
journeys. Golde myths relate how a great bird came flying
and alighted on a tree, and how by shaking its wings these
became transformed into the iron feathers of the shaman
costume.41 The Yenisei Ostiaks call the shaman costume and
the objects hanging on it, the " power " of the shaman. When
the shaman puts on the long boots representing the feet of the
bear, he believes himself to have acquired the " power" of
the bear. While shamanizing he sometimes imitates the bear,
regarded by the people in question as an extremely sacred
animal.
It is probable that the shaman costume, which, at least re-
garding its form, goes in inheritance in the shaman's family
and which is sometimes called " god" (Tangara) by the
Yakuts, originally represented the shaman's soul-animal or ij'd-
kyl
In his songs the shaman often calls his drum some animal,

52O
SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
on which he says he is travelling. Some call it their " horse "
or their " deer," some their " loom " or their " eagle." The
Karagass shaman from the Sayan mountain, who covers his
drum with the skin of the Siberian deer, sings: "I am a
shaman and ride on the wild
deer." In certain myths it is
said that the shaman " flies on
his drum " or " rides " on it.
The Yenisei Ostiaks, who use
reindeer-calf skin for the
cover of their drums, fasten
iron " reindeer ribs" to the
open side, adding to these
each time a new cover has to
be procured for the drum. In
the inside of the wooden
frame of the drum one may
often see a picture of a rein-
deer, painted in alderbark
juice, or carved with a knife.
It is on the whole an interesting feature of the art of the
Siberian peoples, that objects in which the hide of some ani-
mal has been used, are often decorated with pictures of the
same animal. Thus, for example, the end of a drumstick or
the handle of a shaman hammer is engraved with the nose
of the forest animal whose skin has been used for the cover
of the hammer.
Like the shaman costume the inside of the drum is furnished
with all kinds of spirit-pictures, among others, with small
human- or bird-like images of metal, the number of which
depends on the visions of its owner, becoming more numerous
as the shaman becomes older. Certain peoples, such as the
Abakan and Altai Tatars, also paint pictures, intended to rep-
resent the Heaven and the underground, with shaman animals,
hunting trips, etc., on the skin of the drum." The Buriat
FIG. 26. SHAMAN-DRUM WITH BIRD-
SHAPED HAND-GRIP

SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM
521
FlG. 27. HOBBT-HORSE OF A BURIAT FtC. 28. RELICS OF A BUKIAT SHA-
SHAHAN MAN FOUND IN THE EARTH

522 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
shamans, who no longer use drums, make use of two sticks
instead, the upper end of which is formed into a horse's head
and the lower into a horse's hoof. At times one may also
make out a " knee " in the middle of a stick. The sticks of
the shaman, called his " horses," are decorated with small
skins, metal bells, etc.*3 The shamans of the peoples dwelling
on the Yenisei sometimes use, besides the drum, a staff made
of iron and furnished with cross-branches on which the spirits
called by the shaman to his assistance are believed to alight.4*
It seems probable that this object was originally a symbol of
the world-tree, in which all manner of spirits dwell and to
which the shaman, according to the Dolgans, escorts the souls
of the dead. As related earlier the Altaic shaman rises by
means of this tree up to the Heavens.
The shaman's implements are thus regarded as mysterious
means of communication, which, by stimulating his fancy,
make it possible for him to " fly and travel " by their help.
A long iron chain hanging from the crown of the deer type
costume and a leather band on the back of the bird costume are
explained as being necessary for the shaman soul to grasp on
its rapid flights so that it may feel itself safe on the " animal's
back." *B The Tungus on the Yenisei have an image cut out of
leather on the point of the skirt of the shaman costume, which
image represents the shaman's soul. A similar image of thin
copper-plate can be seen on the same place in the Yenisei
Ostiak shaman costume. The significance of this human-like
figure, called the shaman's " shadow" by the last-named
people, becomes apparent from a tale of their " first shaman,"
Doh. Once when Doh shamanized, flying high towards the
sky, he had the misfortune to let fall his " shadow " (ulvei)
from its place on the skirt of the tunic. The evil spirits
captured it at once and took it to the land of the dead. There
the female ruler of the dead, Khosadam, attempted to devour
the soul according to her custom, but the soul of the great
shaman was not so easy to destroy, and Khosadam broke a

SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM 523
tooth in trying. This made her angry and from spite she
nailed the soul by its hands and feet to a tree, making it
thus impossible for it to return to the shaman's body.*6
With the assistance of the many objects already described,
the shaman's soul is regarded as being able to move with the
greatest ease anywhere on the earth, in heaven, and in the
underworld. By its rapid journeys, it can procure super-
natural knowledge, hidden to ordinary mortals. The latter
are, therefore, in a very great degree dependent on the knowl-
edge and power of the shaman. When they are going out to
hunt or fish, the shaman has to find out what the weather will
be like and where the fish or game are hiding just then.
When an enemy draws near, he must discover beforehand the
intentions of the latter. One of his most difficult tasks, how-
ever, is said to be the seeking after and recovery of the souls
of the sick, which have too early left their suffering bodies.
He must then undertake the difficult journey to the under-
world, in order to propitiate the spirits and save the soul.
Thither he must also, when fate has so decreed, escort the
soul of the dead to the circle of those who have died at an
earlier time.
In his songs, of which up to the present too few have been
recorded, the shaman describes to those present the strange
sights and adventures, the trials and dangers which he must
experience and win through on his difficult journeys in the
world of spirits. With tense attention the spectators follow
his wild, fantastic song, when, as though drunk with the in-
termittent rattle and thunder of the drum, he dances and hops
in the flickering light of a hearth-fire in the dark and mystic
night of the primeval forest. These wild ceremonies, stimu-
lated by a diseased imagination, form the most characteristic,
though at the same time the least known and the most sub-
jective part, of the mythology of these primitive peoples.



NOTES



FINNO-UGRIC
Citation by author's name or by title of a work refers to the same
in the various sections of the Bibliography. Where an author has
written several works, they are distinguished as [a], [b], etc. Where
Roman numerals precede these letters they refer to the sections of the
Bibliography.