the creation tales gives us reason to assume that they all have
a common root, in whatever variants they may appear. To
this common root both the devil as spoiler of the people whom
God had created, and the dog which guards them, have be-
longed. The strictly dualistic conception of this original root,
a conception which appears early in the religion of the Iranians,
where also the dog, that originally sacred animal, the expeller
of evil beings, and the creation of Ahura Mazda, had a very
important place, raises the assumption that our tale, as Dahn-
hardt has indicated, is the outcome of an Iranian mental at-
mosphere, originating probably among the Syrian Christians,
and from them wandering both to Eastern Europe and to
Central and North Asia. The access into Western Europe
for this, as for later oriental-syncretistic legends, was more
difficult.
Our tale about the seven men continues by relating how
Maidere inquires of these, which of them will take the woman
to whom the devil has given life for his partner. Three of
them at once refuse absolutely and escape to the golden moun-
tain where they become assistant spirits to God, or Burkhans.
The other four remain on the earth, and Ulgen takes two ribs
from each side of one of them, Targyn-nama, and of them
makes him a wife.23
An earlier mentioned Yakut tale also tells of the seven first
men whom the devil marred before God had given them life.
This tale also has a continuation in which the numbers three
and four are specially noticeable. It tells how God gave a
wife to four only, wherefore the other three were dissatisfied.
They complained to God and, as he took no notice, adultery
came into the world. These three got wives in the end when
the daughters of the first four women grew up. One of the

SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
daughters, however, could find no husband and became there-
fore a prostitute.
More ancient than the fancies in these creation tales of the
origin of man's deficiencies are those tales in which man first
succumbs to evil suggestions after God has given him life.