CHAPTER I
WORLD PICTURES
T
HE VARIOUS streams of civilization, coming at dif-
ferent times and from different sources, which have
crossed and recrossed Central Asia, have brought with them
differing conceptions of the world we live in and the universe.
The newest arrivals, usurping as they, do the supreme authority,
have either altogether brushed aside the old beliefs, or, rinding
in them some point of contact, have assimilated them. Matters
being thus, it is often extremely difficult to decide which fea-
tures represent older views, and what the original world pic-
ture of the Altaic race was like.
To obtain some idea of how primitive peoples form their
idea of the world, we will examine the strange, but to them
quite natural, conception of the world of the Yenisei Ostiaks.
According to their ideas, the world is divided into three parts:
Above, the sky; in the middle, the earth peopled by menj
below, the kingdom of the dead; but all these parts are united
by the "Holy Water," which, beginning in Heaven, flows
across the earth to Hades. This water is the great Yenisei
River.1 The Samoyeds also, who have learned to speak of
different storeys in the sky, declare the Yenisei River to flow
from the lake in the sixth storey of Heaven. In their tales,
the Yenisei Ostiaks describe how the shaman rows his boat in
Heaven and how he returns along the river at such terrific
speed that the wind whistles through him.8 It may be diffi-
cult for us to understand these pictures, but to the Yenisei

3o8 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
Ostiak nothing can be more natural. Do they not know from
experience that the earth is slanting, that the rushing river
which is the dwelling-place of this fisher tribe comes from
" above " and flows " down " into the depths of Hades? The
south, like many other North Siberian peoples, they call " that
above," the north " that below." The Yenisei is to them
the centre of the world, as on its banks or tributaries they place
all the peoples known to them, and thus would they draw a
map of the world, had they a Ptolemy amongst them.
The peoples living in Central Asia imagine the world some-
times as a circular disc, sometimes as a square. In an Altaic
tale in which a Lama creates the earth with his staff, the world
is said to have been originally circular but later to have altered,
so that it is now square.8 Thus do the Yakuts also imagine
the world. In their folk-poetry the four corners of both
Heaven and Earth are often mentioned. The winds, for ex-
ample, are said to arise in the four corners of the sky.* Georgi
relates how the Tungus made a picture of the earth which
was in the form of a little square of iron plate.5 This idea,
common to many peoples, is closely connected with the four
cardinal points. Even in the world pictures of the civilized
peoples of Southern Asia it is quite general. In a certain Yakut
tale, which speaks of the octagonal earth, the points of the
compass have been doubled.*
Side by side with this idea of a square world, the idea
of a circular one is equally, common. It is often pictured
as round, and as such it appears also to the eye. Similarly
shaped is the sky stretching over the earth. In the hero
tales of the Yakuts the outer edge of the earth is said to
touch the rim of a hemispherical sky. A certain hero rode
out once to the place where earth and sky touched. Simi-
larly, in some districts, the Buriats conceive the sky to be
shaped like a great overturned cauldron, rising and falling in
constant motion. In rising, an opening forms between the
sky and the edge of the earth. A hero, who happened at such

WORLD PICTURES 309
a time to place his arrow between the edge of the earth and
the rim of the sky was enabled thus to penetrate outside the
world.7
Between Heaven and Hades, the earth peopled by men
forms the centre of the universe. Often the earth is called
" The Middle Place." Sometimes this " Middle Place " is,
in a more confined sense, the country of the people using the
term. Mongolia, among other regions, is a world-centre of
this description. The Chinese also call their country " the
Central Empire." Examples of this belief, born in the begin-
ning from the anthropocentric view of the world peculiar to
man, are to be found also among the ancient civilized peoples.
From the fact that Mongolia is a plateau in which number-
less rivers flowing in different directions have their sources,
the Mongols derive their belief that they live on the peak of a
world, imagined to be like a great mound, other peoples liv-
ing on its sides below them.
In addition to the simplified idea that the world is three-
storeyed: Heaven, Earth and Hades, Altaic folk-poetry
speaks often of a many-storeyed world. Especially is the
sky believed to contain hemispheres, one higher than another;
generally three, seven, or nine are spoken of, but sometimes
even more. Most common is the conception of a seven-
storeyed Heaven, obviously derived from the Babylonian pic-
ture of Heaven, in which the sun and the moon and five planets
are situated in hemispheres placed one over the other. As
the complement to these seven heavens, an equal number of
storeys are pictured down below. Where the sky is regarded
as nine-storeyed, Hades is also divided into nine gradually de-
scending parts. That a belief of this description has actually
sprung from a belief in layers of stars, appears from an Altai
Tatar tale, in which the sun and moon are placed in different
storeys of the sky. The Moon old man lives in the sixth and
the Sun mother in the seventh Heaven.8 The primitive
peoples of Siberia do not, however, know the reasons for this

310 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
division, neither can they explain the significance of any
Heaven. The most northern peoples place in the different
storeys of Heaven, landscapes from the earth — mountains,
lakes, tundras, snowfields, etc. The Samoyeds relate in their
shaman tales that there is a lake in the first storey of Heaven,
a flat plain in the second, the third is covered with numerous
heights like little volcanoes, the fourth is formed like a roof
of little icicles, the sixth contains a great lake, from which
springs the Yenisei. Of the remaining storeys, of which there
are in some districts altogether nine, they have very little
knowledge.9 The Yakuts believe that in the lower regions of
the sky there are also animals, kept by the inhabitant spirits
as food. \h the conception of fixed storeys in the sky, among
the primitive peoples of Siberia, bears without doubt the im-
press of foreign influence, we cannot with any certainty declare
that the conception of higher and lower storeys in the sky
might not also originate amongst a people living in a state
of nature. The Chukchee speak of several Heavens, placed
one above the other, so that the floor of the highest is the
roof of the next. All these worlds are joined by holes situated
under the Polar Star.10
Whatever the original idea of the edge of the earth may
have been, later the idea became general that the earth is sur-
rounded on all sides by an ocean. This is an essential feature
in all the world pictures of the Asiatic peoples. The Greek
Oceanos corresponds to it, and in Snorri's Edda we read: " The
earth is circular in shape and outside it is the deep sea."
But if the fiat earth has around and under it the deep,
mysterious, primordial ocean, what is it that prevents the earth
from sinking into the depths? To this question also, the folk-
tales attempt to give an answer.
When the mighty Clgen, so say the Altaic peoples, created
the earth on the waters, he placed under the disc of the earth,
in order to support it, three great fish, one in the centre and

WORLD PICTURES 311
one at each side. The head of the middle fish is directed
towards the north and thus, when it presses its head down,
floods occur in the north. Should the fish sink too low, the
whole earth will be inundated. A rope is attached to the gills
of the fish, the end reaching to Heaven, where it is attached
to three posts. In this way, whenever desired, the head of the
fish can be lowered or raised. This is the special duty of
the Bodhisattva Mandishire. When he takes the rope from the
first post, the earth slants towards the north, causing floods
there, but were he to slip the rope from the third post, the
flood would reach over all the earth.11
In certain Buriat districts, one large fish only is mentioned
as the supporter of the earth. When for any reason it changes
its position, earthquakes occur.12
The idea of one or more giant fish as supporters of the
earth is general also in East European legends,13 while in
Jewish myths the fish-shaped Leviathan bears the foundations
of the earth. This belief, as the name Mandishire (= Man-
jucri) hints at, has come to Central Asia from India, where a
similar belief has prevailed for ages.
- Probably with a current of civilization from India through
China, tales have reached Central Asia of a world-supporting
frog, which animal here takes the place of the unknown turtle.
If its " finger " even moves the earth quakes. This belief has
spread even to the Tungus beyond the Baikal.14
In the tales of the Kirghis, and among the West Siberian,
Volga, and Caucasian Tatars, it is related that the world is sup-
ported by a great bull. This idea has spread even among the
Finnish tribes along the Volga. Under this bull there is often
a support on which the bull stands. The Crimean Tatars say
that in the world-ocean there is a great fish, and on the fish
a bull which carries the earth on its horns.15 A similar belief
is found among the Votiaks of the Jelabuga District.16 The
world-bull is known also to the Votiaks of the Sarapul Dis-
trict, who believe that earthquakes are caused by the bull some-

312 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
times starting to move. It is said to be afraid of sunlight, as
the light rays kill it." The Kirghis relate that the world-bull
stands on a stone arising out of the dense fog on the cosmic
ocean.18 According to the Cheremiss at Ufa, there is a giant
crab in the ocean on which stands the bull, supporting the earth
on its horns. Earthquakes are believed to occur when the bull
shakes its head. The Cheremiss say that on account of the
weight of the world, one of the bull's horns is broken and that
when the other breaks, the end of the world will come.10
It is extremely probable that the idea of this world-support-
ing bull has reached the Tatars with Islam. In the tales of
the Jews a bull-shaped Prince of the Depths is also spoken of.
The primitive peoples of North-East Siberia believe the
underground mammoth to cause earthquakes and landslides.
In the winter it is even supposed to break the ice of the rivers.20
The local Tatars say that as the earth was not strong enough
to bear the mammoth, God ordered this animal to bear the
earth.21 Possibly the "'bullM has here changed into the
" horned " mammoth.
For the sake of comparison it may be mentioned how the
inhabitants of North-East Siberia, where earthquakes are com-
mon, explain these phenonema. The Kamchadales say that
the dog of Tuila, on which this spirit rides under the ground,
makes the earth tremble when it shakes the snow off its back.2*
According to this view, therefore, the actual supporter of the
earth is not the causer of earthquakes.
In Central Asia the idea of a world-supporting being is gen-
erally connected with the belief in a cosmic ocean. Those tales,
which seek to explain in a popular manner the origin of the
earth, seem also to have been formed out of a similar world
picture.