CHAPTER X
HOUSEHOLD SPIRITS
anthropomorphic household spirit of many Euro-
JL pean peoples was unknown to the forefathers of the
Finno-Ugric race. Even now it is rare or unknown among the
Ostiaks and Voguls. A later spirit is the Russian Lapland
Kyode jielle ("the One who dwells in the tent") or Port
hozjin ("Household ruler"). Of this latter, it is related
that he lives under the fireplace, and may sometimes appear
in the shape oj a dog. To appease him the Lapps offer up
sacrifices to him and are glad when he leaves the house. By
the fireside where he dwells, there is a spot where women are
afraid to go or to step over. This household spirit is without
doubt borrowed from the Russians (horzjin= Russian Aoz-
yain). Through the Finns, the Lapps have made the ac-
quaintance of the Tonto (Finnish Tonttu = Swedish Tomte).l
The spirit dwelling in the house is called by the Votiaks
Korka-murt (" House man") or Korka-kuzo (" House
ruler "). His chief dwelling-place is under the floor, for which
reason he is sometimes called " the Ruler dwelling under
the floor." As may be concluded already from the word murt
(" man ") this spirit has the outward form of a man. The
" House man " shows himself very seldom j when this happens,
it is a forewarning of death or other misfortunes. When he
does appear he resembles sometimes the master of the house.
Generally speaking, he is a kindly and useful spirit, pro-
tecting the inhabitants of the house from strange spirits and in
every way looking after the interests of the house. He may
even at times take part in the household duties. The Votiaks

160 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
relate that he sometimes spins in the night, if for some reason
or other, the womenfolk have been hindered from finishing
their day's task. When the " House man " is given cause
for anger, he annoys sleepers in the form of the nightmare,
tangles hair and beards in the night, and hinders the success-
ful conclusion of tasks. Little children are never left alone in
the house, as it is believed that the " House man " can substitute
changelings for them.2
Whenever the " House man " in one way or another shows
signs of being offended, he must be appeased by sacrifices.
The sacrifice, which with the Votiaks generally takes the form
of a black sheep, must be killed under the floor, where the
spirit dwells. In the ceremony, in which the master of the
house plays the part of the sacrificing priest, only members of
the family may take part, as the flesh of a sacrifice may not
be offered to strangers. Pieces of the meat and the bones
of the sacrificed animal are buried in a hole dug under the
floor, into which the victim's blood is also allowed to run
during the slaughtering. The flesh of the sacrifice is cooked
and eaten, as a rule, in the house itself. Besides occasional
offerings, regular sacrifices are made at certain times to the
" House man." Usually, the Votiaks sacrifice to him in the
autumn, after the conclusion of agricultural work, a goose or
duck and also porridge; the bones of the bird together with
the porridge and a spoon are placed under the floor. The
person carrying out the sacrifice reads out the following prayer:
" Thus do I sacrifice to Thee, O Spirit dwelling under the
floor, a goose. Do not frighten us. Be pleased to accept the
sacrifice offered. Give to me and my family and dependants
peace and happiness." In some places offerings are also made
during the summer, at the time when the sheep are driven in
to be clipped. Where a suitable victim is not to be found in
the flock, the ceremony is postponed to a later date, and at
the time a promise only is given along with the porridge,
part of which must be buried under the floor.3

HOUSEHOLD SPIRITS 161
Above all, the Votiaks regard it as a duty to sacrifice to the
" House man " when they first establish themselves in a new
house. We find Georgi already relating that the Votiaks, on
moving into a new house, sacrifice a black sheep.* The re-
moval into a new house has in certain Votiak territory acquired
a festival character — the "house-wedding" (korka-suan).
All the relatives and friends gather in the house, bringing
gifts. The most important ceremony is the killing of the
sacrifice under the floor of the new dwelling. In the Sarapul
District it is the custom for the master of the house, accom-
panied by his wife, to step under the floor, bearing pancakes
and home-distilled spirits and a young fir about a yard high,
and there deliver a promise of sacrifice. The master of the
house sets up the green fir tree in a corner, takes a branch of
the tree in his hand and kneels down beside it. His wife
spreads a tablecloth before him on which she places a pancake.
She then pours spirits into a goblet and offers it to her hus-
band. The latter, with the goblet in his right hand and the
branch in his left, reads out a prayer, in which he prays that
the dwelling now completed may be comfortable to live in
even until old age and death, and he promises to sacrifice
a black sheep. After the prayer he drinks up the spirits and
tastes also of the pancake. The promised sacrifice is made
later. While its flesh is being cooked, the master of the
house prays on his knees for happiness, riches, and everything
that is good for the new home, pointing out that he is now
fulfilling the promise given. At times even a bull may be
sacrificed. On the day of the sacrifice, nothing may be given
away from the homestead, and the animal to be sacrificed may
not be killed on the bare earth, but on twigs of fir.6
Besides the " House man," the Votiaks sacrifice also to the
" Cattleyard man " (Gid-kuzo). This also is an anthropomor-
phic, kindly spirit, which, in the sheds, looks after the cattlt
and sees that they duly increase, protecting them from beasts
of prey and sickness. The " Cattleyard man " also looks after

162 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
the provender of the cattle, as the Votiaks believe that he
drives away strange spirits of like kind, when these come to
their neighbours' sheds to steal provender. He dwells chiefly
in the stables. The horses that please him are cared for and
fed by him; he will even, at times, plait their manes and
tails j but others which he hates, he tortures by riding them to
exhaustion during the night. A folk-tale relates how a farmer
spread resin on his horse's back, and in the morning, coming
into the stable, saw a little old man, about half-a-yard long,
sitting stuck fast there.8 As in the case of the " House man,"
both occasional and regular sacrifices are offered up to the
" Cattleyard man." The Eastern Votiaks are in the habit
of sacrificing a capercailzie in the cattle sheds when a cow is
sick, and a brace of pike for horses. In some districts it is
customary to offer up once for each foal the above fish-sacri-
fice, so that these may, as horses, shine like the pike. The fish,
however, is not cooked, but burned as it is in the cattleyard.
The yearly sacrifices in honour of the " Cattleyard man "
occur both in the spring, when the cattle are let loose to pas-
ture, and in the autumn, when they are shut up in the cattle-
folds again. In most places, it has now become the rule to
give only a promise of sacrifice together with bread or porridge
in the spring, the promise being fulfilled in the autumn if the
cattle have been healthy out in the pastures and have in-
creased. The sacrificial ceremony, in which only members
of the family may take part, greatly resembles the ceremony
under the floor, described earlier, the only difference being
that the sacrifice intended for the " Cattleyard man " is burned
in the cattleyard. Even the animals used are the same as in
the sacrifice under the floor. In the prayers, the appeal is
for fat horses and milch-cows, enough to fill the whole yard,
or one may also say: " Be vigorous and strong, drive out the
strange spirit, protect the cattle and banish all evil from the
yard! "7
The bath-house spirit is called the " Bath-house man "

HOUSEHOLD SPIRITS 163
(Munt'so-murt) or the " Bath-house ruler " (Munt'so-kuzo).
He lives in a dark corner of the bath-house and resembles
in appearance a tall, middle-aged man, clad in a white shirt
and shoes of lime-bark, or he may also be tall and have only
one eye. Sometimes this being speaks and cries like a suckling
babe. He appears to human beings only before some mis-
fortune.
The c( Bath-house man" plays pranks with the bathers,
sometimes hiding their underclothing, at times binding together
the sleeves of their shirts or turning them inside out, in this
way hindering their dressing. His nature is more evil than
that of the spirits described above. It is not advisable to go
alone into the bath-house, neither is it wise to quarrel there or
speak loudly. Like the " House man," the " Bath-house man "
can also substitute changelings in the place of rightful infants.
In both the foregoing cases, a piece of iron or some other
metal is used as an amulet. This spirit is rarely sacrificed to."
In the threshing-barn lives the " Threshing-barn man"
(Obiri-murt). Sacrifices are offered up to him in the autumn,
so that he may refrain from becoming angry and frightening
folk, but instead protect the threshing-barn from fire and
storm. For these sacrifices a goose or a duck is chosen, or,
at times, a sheep, which is killed by the head of the family in
the threshing-barn, or on the threshing-floor,-on to which the
blood is also allowed to drip. The flesh of the sacrifice is
cooked at home, after which all return to the scene of the kill-
ing for prayers, the food being also brought there. In the
end, the remains of the sacrifice and the bones are buried under
the threshing-barn. Besides blood-offerings a sheaf of grain
is often left on the beams of the threshing-barn after the
conclusion of the threshing, for the use of the " Threshing-
barn man."8
If one compares the household spirits of the Votiaks with
the corresponding ones of the Russians, one cannot detect any
difference even in the nature of the sacrifices. The " Korka-

164 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
murt" of the Votiaks is identical with the Domovoy of the
Russians. Sometimes he is also given the Russian name
Susetka, which is used especially by the Siryans, whose folk-
lore has generally adapted itself to the Russian. The Siryan
Susetka dwells under the floor, like the Votiak " House man,"
where sacrifices in his honour must be placed. Like these he
is a kindly spirit, which looks after and protects the prosperity
of the house. If he becomes angry, all kinds of misfortunes
are met with, manual labour turns out badly and the cattle
grow thin, as the Susetka neglects to feed them. Sometimes
he attacks human beings in the shape of a nightmare or kisses
them in their sleep so that painful blisters appear on their lips.
At times, he spins and makes a noise as though he were building
something, but this is never a good sign, being followed by
death, fire, or other misfortunes. When the Siryans remove
into a new house, they also endeavour to appease the house spirit
with sacrifices. Rogov relates that at a removal, the master
of the house takes a picture of a saint from the corner of his
old dwelling, goes down with this under the floor and calls
to the house spirit in the following words: " Susetka, my
brother, let us dwell also in the new. Love my cattle and my
family." In the new home, the picture is placed in a corner,
and the house spirit is bidden to take up its dwelling under
the floor. According to a general belief among the Siryans,
the household spirit does not move into the new house until
the fireplace is ready.10
As with the Votiaks' " House man," foreign models are
to be found for their " Cattleyard man," " Bath-house man "
and " Threshing-barn man " among the Russians, from whom
the Siryans also here have borrowed their spirits. The
" Threshing-barn man " of the Votiaks corresponds with the
Siryan Rynys olysa (" the one who lives in the threshing-
barn ") or the Rynys-aika ("Threshing-barn man"), the
" Bath-house man" of the former with the Pyvsan olysa
(" The one who dwells in the bath-house ") or the Pyvsan-

HOUSEHOLD SPIRITS 165
aika (" Bath-house man " ) of the latter.11 As the buildings
themselves inhabited by these spirits are not originally Finno-
Ugric, the spirits also must be of later origin. The dwelling-
place of the " House man " under the floor points to the
assumption that the Votiaks cannot have worshipped this spirit
at the time when they still lived in the old koala-dwellings,
where there was no floor. It is worth mentioning in this
connection, that the " House man " has never had the kuala,
in which the Finno-Ugric family gods are considered to dwell,
ascribed to it as a dwelling-place.
The anthropomorphic spirit dwelling in the house is called
Port-oza (" House ruler ") by the Cheremiss, but when pray-
ing to it, two names are used, Pb'rt-kuguza (" House man ")
and Port-kuva ("House woman"). The spirit appears at
times, especially before some important event, in the form of
a man or woman clad in the old Cheremiss fashion. If, for
some reason, it becomes angry, it can bring about many kinds
of misfortune among the family or in the homej thus it may
cause illness. The Cheremiss sacrifice to it, so that it will
not be angry or bring troubles upon the house. When ap-
peased, or otherwise contented, it protects the home from
robbers, fire, and spirits of sickness, and brings happiness and
prosperity to the family. For this reason the Cheremiss pray
very often to it. Every evening, when their women retire
for the night, they offer up, in the name of the family, the
prayer: "c House man,J * House woman,' give success and
health! " Besides those made for accidental reasons, annual
sacrifices are offered up to the household spirit. In some dis-
tricts it is the custom to go under the floor every autumn, bear-
ing beer, porridge, bread or pancakes, to beg for happiness
for the home from the spirit, or a sheep may also be annually
sacrificed. Sometimes, a black ram is sacrificed to the male
spirit, and a black sheep to the female.
Above all, the " House man " and " House woman " are
worshipped with bread and pancakes at the removal into a

166 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
new house, when they are implored to make the new house
happy, to give children, and to bring riches and other good
things. They are also often prayed to for happiness when the
first layer of logs is laid in its place. Even at the grove-
sacrifices, when all the gods and spirits are remembered, a
drink-offering is presented to the household spirits.
An evil household spirit of Tatar origin is the Suksendal,
which is believed to disturb the peace of the people of the
house. It creates disturbances in the night, troubles people in
the guise of nightmares, and has sexual intercourse with people
in their sleep, appearing in the form of a man to women, and
in the form of a woman to the men. Further, it deposits
changelings in the place of children left alone in the house.
To protect the latter from harm, the Cheremiss mother places
a pair of scissors or some other iron object in the cradle. The
Suksendal can not only do harm in the house, but can also
molest human beings in the bath-house, where it may even kill
a person paying a late visit there.
The cattleyard spirits are the Vit'sa-kuguza (" Cattleyard
man "), and the Vit'sa-kuva (" Cattleyard woman "), believed
by the Cheremiss to protect the cattleyard. They can appear
to the inhabitants of the house in human form. If the
" Cattleyard woman " likes the cattle, she causes them to in-
crease, but where the cattle are displeasing to her, she refuses to
protect them, neither does she cause their increase, but is instead
cruel to them in many ways during the night. Thus, she
drives them from place to place and prevents them from
grazing in peace. In order to cause her to care for the herds,
and refrain from molesting them, the Cheremiss offer up a
hen to her. According to their statements, the cattleyard spirit
is an old woman, who appears clad in white in the folds among
the cattle in the evenings.
A spirit who feeds some animals and worries others —
especially horses — by riding on them the whole night
through, so that these appear quite worn-out and limp in the

HOUSEHOLD SPIRITS 167
morning, is called by the Cheremiss generally Vit's'a-oza
("Cattleyard ruler"). The name is, however, never men-
tioned by the Cheremiss in their prayers, who turn instead to
the " man " and " woman."
The "Bath-house spirit" (Mot'sa-oza), most often re-
garded as an evil spirit which disturbs the bathers, is not wor-
shipped by the Cheremiss. Only when a new bath-house is
heated for the first time, do they set a little butter on the
benches, " so that the bath shall be good." The person offer-
ing up the butter utters during the ceremony: "£ Bath-house
man,' eat up the butter! "
The watermill spirit is the Vaks-oza (" Mill ruler "), which
has also the power to appear in human form, sometimes as a
man, at others as a woman. This last is decorated over the
breast with silver coins. The mill spirit lives in the mill under
the floor, or behind the water-wheel, and is friendly to the
miller, whom it helps. Old millers, notably, are in league
with the mill spirit. When the mill spirit is angry and the
grinding goes badly, the miller sets out a dish of porridge as
a sacrifice under the floor of the mill or in some other suitable
spot. In the porridge-offering a pat of butter must be placed
and a spoon given along with it. The Cheremiss declare that
from the nature of the difficulties that beset him, the miller
can interpret the present needs of the mill spirit.
A spirit in the shape of a human being dwells also in the
threshing-barn. The " Threshing-barn man " (Idem-kuguza)
or "woman " (Idem-kuva) shows itself early in the morning,
disappearing when one approaches it. In the ritual in the
sacred grove a drink-offering is made to the " Threshing-barn
man " and " woman," and they are remembered also in the
harvest-festival ceremonies. A blood-offering may even be
made to them at the threshing-barn.12
These Cheremiss household spirits bear also plain marks of
Russian influence, which is equally evident in the correspond-
ing beliefs of the Turco-Tatars in East Europe, Another

168 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
anthropomorphic spirit is the Kardas-sarko (" Yard-sarko ") of
the Erza Mordvins, which lives beneath a stone situated in the
courtyard and is generally represented as a male, though some-
times also as a female. But coincidently with these beings who
clearly possess human characteristics, certain more primitive
beliefs are found among both the Cheremiss and the Mord-
vins, which may perhaps throw some light on the origin of the
household spirits. These peoples had animated the buildings
themselves. This appears plainly in Mordvinian folklore;
while the parting words of a newly-married girl are: " Dear
house, I have sojourned long in thy warm shelter." The
household spirit Kud-ava (" House mother") or Kud-
azerava (" House mistress") is originally the house itself,
although these terms may at times be also used with a similar
meaning to that of the Russian Domovoy. The more primitive
meaning is discernible in the following examples: In a Mok-
sha magic prayer the passage occurs: " House mistress, pardon
him who built thee and heats thee." And in an Erza petition
of a similar character we read: "House mother, above
is thy lime-bark (thfe roof is thatched with this material),
beneath are thy beams." The dwelling-place as a whole, i.e.,
with the adjoining buildings, designated as jurt by the Mord-
vins, has a special spirit of its own, the Jurt-ava (" Dwelling-
place mother"), known also among the Moksha as Jurt-
azerava (" Dwelling-place mistress"). In addition, they
speak of the " Bath-house mother," the " Mill mother," etc.
The protectress of a whole village is the Vel'-ava (" Village
mother").13 The Cheremiss, amongst whom the dwelling-
place and all objects connected with it are also regarded as
animated beings, impressionable and capable of feeling, believe
that the kudo, their ancient dwelling-house, and the more
modern fort, are fitted like human beings with a " soul"
(on) which can depart from its habitation. If one quarrels,
shouts, smokes too much tobacco in the house, or keeps the
place untidy, the " soul " disappears. " You drive away the

HOUSEHOLD SPIRITS 169
soul from my house," say the Cheremiss when anyone disturbs
the peace of their homes. Has the soul departed, then the
house is no longer " happy,11 " life begins to be wearisome in
it," and " the building has received hurt." When the building
creaks in the night, the Cheremiss say " the building's (soul'
moves." In empty dwellings, which have been deserted for
some time, there is no " soul," as they no longer " live." The
soul of the building cannot in this primitive state take on any
definite appearance, but is, as the Cheremiss say, merely
the " prosperity," the " happiness," or the " comfort " of the
house. An equally indefinite soul have the cattleyard, the
• threshing-barn, etc. As the " soul " of buildings was believed
to be able to deliver itself from its material dwelling-place,
it is hardly to be wondered at that gradually the thought
arose, that these, like other souls, might at times become
visible, e.g., in the shape of some domestic animal, a cat or a
dog.14 Later, the " soul" of buildings may have become
identifiable with those of departed human beings or family
. gods, and thus have borrowed from these last also their human
characteristics.
Among the Cheremiss and the Mordvins the bee-garden has
also its special tutelary genius. The former call this the
Muks-ort ("Bee-soul"). The Moksha Mordvins worship
the Neskeper-ava (" Bee-garden mother ") as the protective
spirit of the beesj the Erza Mordvins use the name Neske-pas
("Beehive god").10
The Baltic Finns, who form a group by themselves, call
the household spirit "the Ruler" (Finnish Haltia, Esthonian
Haldja). Without doubt, this " Haltia," which according to
the Ingrians was " not made nor brought, but was in and
through itself," has the same origin as the on of the Chere-
miss." Like this last, the Finnish Haltia needs no food. But
one must do honour to him in every way. When settling in
a new dwelling, and even when staying anywhere for the night,
permission must first be begged of this " Ruler." If any

170 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
rapping sound be heard in the house, it is regarded as a sign
of permission to do so. Similarly, when entering a room for
the first time that day, one must always remember to say:
" Good morning, Ruler." In this case, also, the answer is
a rap.17
Every room with a roof-tree had its own Haltia, as this
last was supposed to live in the roof-tree. According to
another report, he took possession of the house as soon as
three logs had been crossed, and when the building was de-
molished and the logs laid in a pile, the Haltia cried with
fear lest he became homeless. But if even one log was taken
into use, he removed with this into the new house. " In order
that the Haltia should not feel lonely in the new house,"
the ashes from all the hearths were taken over to the new
fireplaces.18
According to the prevalent view, the Haltia could become
visible at times, but he appeared only before some misfortune.
In Ingria the Haltia is said to have appeared at such times in
the shape of a dog or a mottled or striped cat. This was a
sign of fire.1* The Haltia of a house was also pictured as a
human being. According to a belief prevalent in Finland,
the person who died first in the house, or the one who lit the
first fire there, became the Haltia of the house. Especially
was it supposed to appear in the shape of the first departed
master or mistress of the house. As such, it was generally
kind to everyone, and had special care, in particular, of the
provisions. The male Haltia was of higher rank than the
female, just as in life the master had stood above the mistress j
but children grew up better where the Haltia was a woman.
Both the male and female Haltia were better at the tasks
which they had carried out while alive j under the care of a
male Haltia the horses flourished, and similarly, cows, sheep,
pigs and poultry under that of the female. Other buildings
also, and even vessels, had their Haltia. That of the latter
was intimately connected with the keel of the vessel. The

HOUSEHOLD SPIRITS 171
Haltia of a church was sometimes regarded as being of equal
height with the church.20
The Baltic Finns have to a very great extent been under
the influence of the Scandinavians. The Finnish Haltia and
all the beliefs now connected therewith find their counterpart
in the Swedish Ra or Radare (" ruler "). Of Swedish origin,
as may be seen from its name, is the Finnish Tonttu (Swedish
Tomte) with human characteristics, concerning which Bishop
Agricola says, that he " guided the house." In some districts
a special, clean room was furnished for the Tonttu. The
room had to contain a table laid with untouched food, which
was renewed a few times each week. With the exception of
the person who looked after the food, no one was allowed to
live in this room."
Of the outhouses, the Tonttu occupied the bathhouse,
stables, mill, and above all, the threshing-barn. Every thresh-
ing-barn had its Riihitonttu (= Swedish Ritomte) who stole
grain from the neighbours' fields and carried it to his own
threshing-barn. The threshing-barn Tonttu looked after the
threshing-barn, but if he was offended, he began to carry away
grain from the house or would soon burn up the whole thresh-
ing-barn. He was wished a good-morning in the mornings,
and in the evenings, when the fires were lit there, the Tonttu
was begged to keep an eye on them, and wished good-night.
Should one desire to stay overnight in the threshing-barn, one
had to request permission of the Tonttu, and on no account
could one lie down near the hearth. He appeared sometimes
in grey clothes and wearing a grey hat on his head. Porridge
and milk were offered up to him behind the threshing-barn
fireplace.
According to some beliefs, the threshing-barn Tonttu was
born of the last sheaf of grain that was cut in the fields. The
sheaf was placed on the rafters of the barn for the whole
year. At times, it was left for many years j and " during this
period the spirit was supposed to come forth." When it was

172 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
desired to ask on Christmas Eve what the next year's harvest
would be like, the master of the house had to proceed to the
threshing-barn and ask: " Good Tonttu, say what kind of year
we may expect." If the threshing-barn creaked in reply, a
good year might be hoped for.22
Among the household spirits may also be included a being,
which gathers all kinds of good things from other places for its
owner. The Votiaks, who perhaps have appropriated this spirit
from the Russians, call it the " Bearer." It is said to resemble
a cat, and assists its owner by bearing grain to him from other
people's granaries. The animistic character of this being is
shewn by the belief that if the " cat " is killed, the owner of
the same dies likewise.23
The Finns call this spirit the Para, after the Swedish Bjara
or Bara ("Bearer"). In Ingria there are Money-, Bread-,
and Milk-Paras. In some districts in Finland also, the Para
has brought its owner money and rye, and even, at times,
manure from the fields of neighbours. Generally, however,
the Para is regarded as the bearer of milk, cream and butter.
As such, it was usually believed to have the shape of a cat."
The " Butter-cat" of the Scandinavians is identical with the
Smierragatto of the Lapps.25 Anyone who desired to own
such a spirit, could, according to the Finns, create one for
himself. Its material body was fashioned, for example, out
of cast-off female garments, the head of a thread-ball, and the
foot of a spindle. Each of these objects had to be stolen.
The milk, or other commodities brought by the Para to the
house, was carried by it either in its mouth or in its intestines.
If the door of the milk-closet was left open during the night,
empty milk and butter dishes would be found full in the
morning. The Seed-Para left a narrow track through the
fields from which it had stolen grain.26
The same spirit is called Puuk by the Esthonians (Platt-
deutsch Pukj Latvian Puhkis). The Money-Para of the
Ingrians, which flies through the air like a meteor, is identical

HOUSEHOLD SPIRITS 173
with the Esthonian's Tulihand (" fire-tail"), or Kratt (ancient
Scandinavian skratti, "ghost"). The Esthonian Kratt, which,
like the Finnish Para, could be manufactured of certain ma-
terials, carried money, etc., in a sack. Food was offered up to
it — generally porridge and milk. If, during its flight through
the air, one succeeded in unloosing all the bindings and buttons
of one's garments, the Kratt fell down upon the ground with
all its treasures.27 In Finland also the Kratti was known,
where, as Bishop Agricola relates, it " had the care over
property."
A spirit flying through the air like a " fire-worm " — a
meteor — the Votiaks call by a Tatar name, Ubyr. It is en-
tirely evil in its ways, drinking the blood of sleeping persons j
where this has happened blue marks are left on the body.
The Ubyr may be either the soul of a living sorcerer, or that
of an evil dead person. It can be brought to the ground in
the same way as the Kratt of the Esthonians.28
On the boundary between the property of two neighbours,
dwelt, according to the Finns, Raja-aija (" Boundary man ").
In West Finland they have a saying: " shouts like the Bound-
ary man." It is believed that when the " Boundary man w
shouts, there is no echo in response, and that he appears when
boundary lines are dishonestly moved. In East Finland, ac-
cording to ancient report, the people sacrificed on the boundary
stones.29
The treasures hidden away in the earth had also their
" Ruler " (Finnish Aarnion Haltia), and over them, on cer-
tain holyday nights, Midsummer's Eve in particular, one
could see blue flames.30
All the above mentioned beliefs have their counterpart
among the Teutons and Slavs.
The Esthonians in Krasna, who have continuously wor-
shipped their old " land gods," sacrifice to the " Father of
the home " (Kodojeza) in a corner of their orchards. This
holy or " purified " spot could be entered by women once

174- FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
only in their lives, i.e., after their wedding ceremony. It
was the duty of the master of the house to look after the place
and offer up sacrifices there, choosing as assistant a " pure "
person. Besides occasional offerings for some reason or other,
the ceremony of the " family-beer" ($erekaht) was per-
formed every autumn. A portion of all the flesh cooked in
the house from sacrifices, would be taken over to the " puri-
fied spot." B1
In order to understand the genesis of the " pure spot" of
the Esthonians, it is necessary to glance at a similar custom
among peoples related to them. The Votiaks, who no longer
possess their older dwelling-house, kuala, have the same sacri-
fices in a corner of their yards as the other Votiaks in their
kuala. The site of the old kudo is also regarded as " holy"
by the Hill Cheremiss.83 May one assume that the family-
sacrifice of the Krasna Esthonians to the " father of the
home" (a " village god," Kulajumal, is also known) is
identical with the autumn sacrifices of the Volga Finns to their
family gods? In that case one could understand also the Finns'
habit of offering up all kinds of first-fruits at the root of a
holy tree or a holy stone in the vicinity of the home. Old
sacrificial ceremonies often continue to exist under changed
circumstances.
In the offerings to household spirits by the Finno-Ugric
peoples it would appear that they, most of all felt the need of
appeasing the underground spirits. Traces of an old Indo-
European custom of sacrificing a human victim under certain
buildings, are to be found among the Volga Finns, who sacri-
ficed children under a new watermill." The Mordvins are
said to have expressed the following wish at this ceremony:
" Be the Ruler of the mill, the Mill mother! "" But from
this the conclusion can by no means be drawn that the house-
hold spirits of the Finno-Ugric peoples, the majority of which
spirits are direct loans from neighbouring peoples, were
originally human beings sacrificed under their buildings.