CHAPTER XX
THE REALM OF THE DEAD
MANNER in which life beyond the grave is im-
JL agined appears plainly from the burial ceremonies, in
which the dead are furnished with food, clothes, implements
of labour, weapons and domestic animals. The most northern
peoples of Siberia have a custom of stabbing to death or bind-
ing reindeer and dogs alive to the grave. The rulers of the
Yakuts in earlier times received with them on their last jour-
ney, besides their horse, one of their slaves to serve his master
in the other world. " His servant followed him," say the
Yakuts even now, when a poor person dies soon after the death
of a wealthy man.1 And even now sacrifices of slaves are said
to occur among certain Tungus tribes.
" In the other world," the Altai Tatars say, " we shall sow
our seed, herd our cattle, drink kumiss and eat beef, with this
difference only, that we shall live better there, as we shall
enjoy not only the possession of the cattle we owned on the
earth, but also of all the domestic animals that have died
earlier."s According to the tales of the Buriats, the dead have
food, raiment, etc., to the degree in which they were supplied
with these on their burial-day. Thus, depending on the prop-
erty the relatives were able to present to the deceased, some
souls have to walk on foot, others to ride on horseback, the
most fortunate in carriages. The celebrating of weddings and
other merry festivals among the dead is also spoken of. The
dead shaman, who is supplied with his costume, his drum and
other sacred implements, continues his important calling in
the other world. In general, the dead are regarded as going
on with the work which each had done in this world. The

484 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
Buriat " manual labourer does not after death forget his skill,
the scribe lives by his pen, and a woman who has been a
skilful sempstress on earth, continues to work with her
needle." Specially skilful workers are said to be short-lived,
because the ruler over the dead needs their help.8 The
northern peoples, like the Tungus here, live in the world
beyond the grave in tents of birch-bark, hunt and fish, and
practise reindeer-keeping in the great, underworld, primeval
forests.
That the world of the dead was originally a reflection of the
earthly one is shown, further, by the scenes in the shaman
ceremonies, when the latter escort the soul to the underworld.
The Tungus believe this last journey to resemble in detail the
difficult journeys of these nomads over mountains and valleys
in their great forests. Those who drive here with reindeer,
ride also to the underworld on the back of a reindeer j those,
again, who use dogs, travel there behind dogs.
The shaman's business is to know the difficult path; the soul
itself finds it difficult to reach its goal. Many dangers also
threaten it on the way. Evilly-disposed spirits are often in
motion, seeking to tempt the soul from its path; cannibal-
spirits lie in wait to devour it. The Goldes say, that the road
to the underworld goes through certain particular places, which
are many in number. At the commencement, the road is the
same for all the dead, but later a point is reached where as
many roads branch off as there are families among the Goldes.
From here the road leads to the " steep slope " and then to the
" river's crossing-place." This crossing is said to be so diffi-
cult, that the soul nearly falls down with exhaustion. Still
a few more places, and then from tracks and newly-chopped
living branches and the barking of dogs, one may conclude that
the village of the dead is near. In the underworld each
family has its own village, where the members of the
family dwell together, continuing to live as on the earth.
Life in the underworld is said, however, to be better and

THE REALM OF THE DEAD 485
happier than here. All the dangers and difficulties of the
journey end at the village. Should the soul go under on its
last journey, the fault lies with the shaman, who has not been
clever enough in his calling, and then the services of a better
shaman must be called in, the latter, by his shamanmng, find-
ing the point where the soul has succumbed, waking it to life
again, and escorting it to the village of its earlier deceased
relations. For some families the last journey is said to be
more difficult than for others.
Such of the Goldes as live by keeping reindeer, are escorted
to the underworld by nine reindeer, eight of which bear the
property of the deceased, the deceased himself riding on the
ninth. The saddle is constructed so that the soul cannot fall off
though the reindeer moves rapidly. As the shaman is said
to take the form of this reindeer, or to represent its soul, he
can carry the dead safely by avoiding and going round danger-
ous places. All the districts passed during the journey are
described by the shaman in his songs and ceremonies. He
leads the soul first to the source of the river, by which the clan
in question dwells, then to the high range of mountains, and
down this again into a primeval forest until another high
mountain is reached. Beyond this comes a great swamp which
has to be crossed. Further the road leads to a mountain tor-
rent, on the open banks of which a level and beautiful forest
grows. Gradually, one begins to notice that the surroundings
are populated, as the forest has been felled and there are
marks of newly-timbered boats. Finally one arrives in the vil-
lage of the dead, where smoke rises, tents stand in rows, and
reindeer feed as among the living Reindeer-Tungus.*
Such also the Yakut realm of the dead would seem to have
been originally. The spirits living there in similar circum-
stances to those of their earthly life are divided into six clans,
according to information from one district. In certain tales,
the way to this realm is described as exceedingly difficult to
travel. The soul has to go in at the throat of a snake-like

486 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
monster, pass through its body, and come out from its tail,
thus reaching the other world. The way is both painful and
dangerous, as the gullet and the intestines of the monster are
said to be covered with great, sharp spikes. For this reason
the soul has to be provided with clothes and shoes, otherwise
it would bleed to death. The custom of supplying the dead
with a horse is said to have originated in the wish to make the
journey through this dangerous pass as swift as possible.
Especially in the shaman songs the way to the underworld is
said to go through many dangers, over " stormy rivers " or
" bloody streams," through " burning forests" or " icy
winds."6
A very common idea among the Yakuts is that " the other
world " lies beyond the " death-sea."8 Most of the peoples
of North Siberia consider the realm of the dead to lie some-
where in the north, most often at the mouths of rivers flowing
into the Arctic Ocean. The point of the compass of the dead
is said to be " towards the night " or " downwards." Down
in the north, according to Yakut tales, lives the stern ruler over
the dead, Arsan-Duolai, in a great chasm with winter frozen
fields and cold summer-dwellings, where black chimneys arise
from gloomy huts. This dreaded ruler is said to have his
mouth in the middle of his forehead and eyes at his temples.
The spirits serving him (Abasy) come sometimes to the vil-
lages of the living on depredatory raids, carrying off or
swallowing people's souls, spreading sickness, etc. By appeas-
ing them with bloody sacrifices, the shamans cause them to
return to their dismal dwelling-place.7
Like the Yakuts, the Ugrians and the Yenisei Ostiaks speak
also of an evil Prince of the dead living in the north, who
carries off or devours souls. According to the latter, certain
naked rocks in the Arctic Ocean are the dwelling-place of the
dead. Side by side with this, another belief is met with
among them, viz., that under the earth there is a great grotto,
or seven grottoes under one another, in which the souls of the

THE REALM OF THE DEAD 487
dead dwell, and where in the place of the sun and moon, only
rotted trees give out a dim light. Strange fishes live in the
underground rivers.8 A third description noted down by the
author among them relates how the underworld is a complete
reflection of the Yenisei District. The underground Yenisei
is said however to flow in the opposite direction.
The above seven grottoes are obviously closely connected
with the seven or nine underground storeys, which according
to the Altai Tatars and others are situated horizontally under
the " middle place " or the earth and correspond to a similar
number of planes of Heaven above.9 The Central Asian
people generally regard the underworld as populated by evil
beings, ruled over by the stern Erlik-Khan, who is said to sit
on his black throne, surrounded by a court consisting of evil
spirits. At the command of their lord these spirits often make
excursions, more especially in the night-time, to the world of
the living, where they seize some poor soul and carry it off
with them to their home. Extremely common is also the idea
that this ruler over the dead has power only over those who
were wicked in this life. Those mortals again, who have done
more good than evil, are taken after death to the heavenly
dwelling-places.10 The path to both the underground dwell-
ings and those above is believed to go through a hole in the
middle of each plane, and according to this idea the Ostiaks
call the seven-storeyed sky " seven-holed,"1T the Chukchee ex-
plaining that each hole is perpendicularly under the North
Star.12 As the hole leading to the underworld, which is often
used by the shaman, is, of course, also in the centre of the
earth, one may often see among his magic things a disc repre-
senting the earth, in the midst of which is a round hole. In
travelling to the heavens, the Altai shamans use also a world-
tree furnished with divisions, the Dolgans explaining that the
shamans escort the souls of the dead to the tree in question,
where they continue their life in the shape of a little bird.18
In Heaven also, life resembles that on the earth. According

488 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
to certain tribes living in the District Turuhansk, the souls
in Heaven resemble little people, who catch little fishes in the
lakes there.14 The Buriats say that the souls living in heaven
have cattle and houses, wives and children there. They even
pay visits to one another, drink spirits and get intoxicated.10
According to the Chukchee the heavens are peopled with spirits
which live there in families and, like the people of the earth,
exist by fishing and hunting. Often, however, the game they
seek is human souls, which they carry with them to some storey
of the sky, whence only a clever shaman can save them.*8
How far these ideas of Heaven as the dwelling-place of the
dead have originated among the above peoples, is hard to
decide. In any case they are extremely old as they are con-
nected with so many shamanistic customs. On the other hand
the belief held by many peoples that those who have met their
death in war or through an accident go to Heaven — a belief
found among the most varying peoples all round the earth —
is most probably of great antiquity. Like the Ugrians and
certain Tatar tribes, the peoples of North-East Siberia, such
as the Chukchee and the Gilyaks of the Amur country, believe
that the souls of those who die a violent death go directly to
Heaven, while those who die a natural death, remain on earth
or descend underground. According to the Chukchee the
Aurora Borealis is chiefly the home of those who die a violent
death."
The most original views do not regard the realm of the dead
as a place of restitution, where the soul has to answer for the
sins committed during life. Such Altaic peoples as have come
under the influence of alien and more highly developed teach-
ings, form exceptions in this respect.
In a Buriat tale the hero Mu-monto journeys on a com-
mission from his father through the realm of the dead, to
demand back the horse sacrificed by the latter at the burial of
his father. To arrive there, one must first go due north.
On the way there is a large, black stone. When the traveller

F
i
! THE REALM OF THE DEAD 489
I
f has lifted up this and shouted: "Come here," a fox appears
J in the opening under the stone and says: " Hold fast to my
| tail." If one then obeys this request, the fox will lead him
\o the land of the dead. Mu-monto, travelling further and
; further with the help of the fox, saw many mysterious things.
• First he saw horses that were very fat on a naked rock. Then
i he met very thin and miserable cattle on a rich meadow. In
f another place he met women with their mouths sewn up. In
j a great cauldron full of boiling pitch he saw officials and
\s writhing ceaselessly. On his way he saw, further,
? men whose hands and feet were bound fast, and women who,
, although naked, embraced thorn-bushes. In one place he saw
a woman who, although she appeared to be poor, lived luxu-
\, and another, who, although rich, suffered from hunger.
| Mu-monto soon learned the reasons for the fates of these
i. people. The poor woman had been good during her life, and
^ out of her little had shared with the needy, therefore she had
r everything in plenty nowj but the other, albeit rich, had been
• hard-hearted and parsimonious, and had therefore now to
1 starve. The naked who embraced the thorn-bushes had been
frivolous and betrayed their husbands. The bound men had
•j been thieves. Those who were boiled in pitch had been false
4 in their professions. Those whose mouths were sewn fast had
j been liars during life and spread calumnies. The thin and
i miserable horses on the rich meadow had been so ill-treated by
i their masters during life that they could not even now become
fatter, while the fat horses on the naked rock had been so
well-fed that even without food they were still flourishing.18
; In a Tatar tale, recorded by M. A. Castren from the neigh-
j bourhood of the Sayan steppes, life under the earth is described
i in a somewhat similar manner. The daughter of the ruler of
i the dead, Irlek-Khan, once came to the earth in the shape of a
I black fox and did all kinds of harm to human beings. A hero
] named Komdei-Mirgan was persuaded to hunt the fox, which,
,j however, ambushed him so that his leg was broken. Shortly

490 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
thereafter, a monster (Yelbegen) with nine heads and riding
on a forty-horned ox, arose out of the earth. This monster
cut off the hero's head and carried it off to the underworld.
When the hero's sister Kubaiko came to weep at her brother's
corpse and saw that the head was lacking, she decided to go to
the realm of the dead and seek the head there. The tracks
of the ox of Yelbegen showed her the way. These led to an
underground opening, through which she descended into Irlek-
Khan's kingdom. Here she met with many, marvellous
things. By the wayside she saw seven clay vessels and an old
woman who poured milk from one vessel to another without
ceasing. Further on, a horse fastened with a long halter
stood on a plain of sand where there was neither grass nor
water, but in spite of this the horse was fat and in good con-
dition. Not far off another horse, bound in the same manner,
stood in a green field with running water, but this horse was
lean and wasted. In another place she saw half of a human
body forming a dam for a brook, while in another place a
whole body was not sufficient to dam a similar brook. Kubaiko
rode astonished past all these things and came deeper into the
earth. Gradually she began to hear more and more distinctly
the clang of hammers, and soon she saw forty men beating out
hammers, another forty making saws, and a similar number
making tongs. Following the tracks of Yelbegen's ox she
travelled on without fear, until she reached the bank of a
river running along the foot of a mountain. On the bank she
saw Irlek-Khan's dwelling, a building of stone with forty cor-
ners. Before the entrance stood nine larches, all growing
from the same root. To this tree the horses of the nine
Princes of death were bound, one to each branch, and Kubaiko
also bound her horse to it. While doing this she saw the fol-
lowing inscription on the tree: "When Kudai (God) created
heaven and earth, this tree was also brought forth, and to this
day no man and no animal has come living to the tree." Hav-
ing read this Kubaiko entered the dwelling of the Princes of

THE REALM OF THE DEAD 49!
death and closed the door after her. It was dark inside and
Kubaiko was soon lost in the room. She felt invisible hands
take hold of her, her clothes were torn, she was dragged about
and tormented, but when she tried to grasp her tormentors,
she could not, as they were without bodies. In her dread she
shouted. And then the door opened, the room became light
and the Head (Ataman) of the Princes of death came in. He
noticed Kubaiko, but turned again and went out without a
word. Kubaiko followed closely at his heels. She went first
through many rooms that were empty and waited inhabitants,
but afterwards came many rooms filled with human beings. In
one of them she saw old women sit and spin linen with great
energy. In another room also she saw old women, but these
were without any occupation, except that they appeared to be
continually, swallowing something that would not go down
their throats. In a third room were middle-aged women, with
great stones, which they were unable to move, round their
arms and necks. A fourth room was filled with men who had
nooses round their necks fastened to great logs. In a fifth
room she saw armed men who had been shot through, and who
sprang about shouting and groaning. The same shrieking and
groaning was heard from a sixth room where there were badly
wounded men armed with knives. Coming to the seventh
room, she saw mad dogs and people bitten by them, mad and
raving like the dogs. This was followed by an eighth room
in which husbands and wives lay in couples under their cover-
lets, but although these coverlets had been sewn together of
nine sheepskins, they would only, cover one member of each
of the sleeping couples, and husbands and wives quarrelled
unceasingly over the coverlets. The ninth room also con-
tained husbands and wives under coverlets, made of one sheep-
skin only, which were, however, sufficient to cover both.
Finally, she entered a tenth room, large as a steppe. In this
room sat eight Princes of death and, in the midst of these,
their Chief, Irlek-Khan. Kubaiko bowed to them and asked

492 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
why their servant Yelbegen had cut off and carried away her
brother's head. The Princes replied that this had been done
at their orders, but promised to give back the head if she could
pull up a goat with seven horns which had grown fast in the
earth and lay so deep that only the horns showed. Otherwise,
she would lose her own head. Kubaiko, who was a heroine,
did not hesitate to accept the proposal. The Princes then took
her through nine other rooms, filled with human heads.
Kubaiko burst into tears when she recognized her brother's
head. In a tenth room the goat lay embedded in the earth.
Kubaiko had now to show her strength and, at the third
attempt, lifted the goat on to her shoulder. When the Princes
saw that she was a mighty heroine, they gave her her brother's
head and escorted her back to the larch. Here Kubaiko
mounted her horse, but before riding off she compelled the
Princes to show her the way back to the earth. During the
journey she enquired about everything she had seen. The
Princes gave her all particulars, saying: " The old woman
whom thou sawest pouring milk, mixed water with the milk
she gave to her guests on earth, and as a punishment for this
bad deed has now to separate water from milk, a task she
must keep on doing through all eternity. The half-body thou
sawest damming a brook is not undergoing any punishment, but
belonged instead to a wise man on the earth who could dam
rivers and do anything he wished. Now, half of his body lies
as a reminder to the passer-by that a wise man, even though
bereft of his limbs, can accomplish great things with his will,
while on the other hand, the complete body over which the
brook flows serves to remind one that by strength alone man
can do little. This body belonged formerly to a physically
strong, but stupid man. As the water now runs over his body,
so ran every matter past his understanding, without either
being comprehended or turned to account through intelligence.
The fat horse on the dry sand is a proof that a thoughtful
man can keep his horse in condition even with poor fodder,

THE REALM OF THE DEAD 493
while the thin horse on the rich pasture shows that cattle can-
not thrive on the best pastures unless well cared for." There-
after Kubaiko asked: "Who were the beings that seized me
in the dark room, tore my clothes and tormented me, but were
without bodies? " The Princes replied: " They were our in-
visible serving-spirits that can injure and kill all wicked people,
but can do nothing to the good." Kubaiko continued to in-
quire into the sins of the people held captive in the dwelling
of the Princes, receiving the following answer: "The women
thou sawest spinning in the first room have been given this
work as a punishment for having spun during their lives after
sunset, when it is forbidden to work. Those again who sat
in the second room had been given threads to wind on spindles,
but had left the spindles hollow in the centre and hidden the
thread in their own bosoms. The spindleful which they thus
gathered of stolen wool, they are now doomed to swallow,
which is impossible, so that they must keep the spindle in their
throats through eternity. The younger women in the third
room had sold butter, in which they had hidden stones to
increase the weight. The men in the fourth room have nooses
round their necks, which are continually threatening to choke
them, because they hanged themselves on earth for weariness
of life. The men with shot-wounds are suicides, who shot
themselves on account of quarrels with their wives. Similarly,
the men in the sixth room are suicides, who cut themselves with
knives while drunk. The inhabitants of the seventh room
brought on their punishments by teasing mad dogs in life and
being bitten by them. In the eighth room were married
people who had quarrelled through their lives and looked only
to their own advantage; now they are doomed to bicker eter-
nally over a covering which by good will and harmony would
be more than enough for both. The married people, on the
other hand, in the ninth room are there only as an example
of how even a little property can be sufficient for a family, if
there is harmony between the married couple. They are not

494 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
undergoing any punishment, but have been brought solely
that the wicked, by seeing them, should feel their punishment
more."
Having received all this information from the Princes of
death Kubaiko separated from them, returned to the body of
her brother with the head, and with water of life, procured
from God, awakened her dead brother to life again.19
Alien influence can also be detected in an idea of the Tungus
living near the Baikal, that each mortal will be weighed after
death with a white and a black stone. If the white stone
weighs less than the soul, the latter goes up to heaven, but if
the black one is lighter than the soul, the soul goes to the
underworld. The punishment there is that the soul is first
thrown into a dark pit, where it is tormented by, terrible cold,
and afterwards roasted in never-ending flames.20 The idea,
met with among certain Tatar tribes, of a very narrow punish-
ment-bridge, from which the soul overladen with sins falls
into the depths below, has obviously come from Persia,
To true shamanism these ideas of restitution are completely
alien. Certain terrible places are, however, met with in the
cannibal-myths of the Northern peoples, into which the soul,
regardless of its former life, may fall against its will.
In the cannibal myths of the Goldes, a gloomy, place by a
river is mentioned, on the sand-covered bank of which grows
an enormously high poplar. The leaves of the tree prevent
the rays of the sun by day and of the moon by night from fall-
ing on this deserted place. The spirit-birds, which fly about
in the service of wicked shamans to torment and trouble poor
souls, gather mostly in this tree. On the ground round about
He countless human bones. According to a tale, a girl who
had happened to come there one evening saw two fires in the
sky and heard the rustle of the wings of a great bird. The
bird, which resembled a crane, bore a poor human being on its
back, who pleaded the whole time: " Kill me quickly, why dost
thou torment me." " Soon, soon," answered the bird, " see,

THE REALM OF THE DEAD 4-95
there is my tree! " It then sat in the crown of the tree and
slung the man on to a branch, where he remained hanging.
Again and again he begged: " Kill me quickly, do not torture
me! " When the girl, who was a heroine, saw how the bird
began to tear off the man's garments with its beak, she became
angry,, aimed her bow at the bird and said: " If thou dost not
take on thy shaman costume, I will kill thee." " Wait a
little," said the bird, shaking its wings, which then became
changed into iron feathers. " Shoot now," it said, " now thou
canst not kill me, but thine own hours are counted." The
heroine saw, however, a naked place in the evil being's breast
between the feathers, and aiming her arrow at this shot the
bird, which, falling to the ground, became a flame of fire.21
In its dream-voyages the soul may sometimes happen on
such nests of evil spirits j an idea, the reason for which is prob-
ably to be found in the horrible nightmares and fever-visions
of hysterical persons.