CHAPTER XI
FOREST SPIRITS
A
S IN olden days, hunting was one of the chief means
of existence of the Finno-Ugrian tribes, it is but natu-
ral that they should have peopled the forests with all kinds of
spirits.
Missionaries relate that the Scandinavian Lapps worshipped
a Forest spirit, which was called Leib-olmai (" Alder man ").
The Lapps honoured him " in order that he might give them
luck in hunting." The following description by Randulf
shows that the above mentioned spirit was especially the pro-
tector of bears: " Leib-olmai is a bear-man or bear-god, who
protects the bear, the holy animal, and who also presents it
to the Lapps when they pray and call to him for it." He re-
lates further that where the Lapps had not asked for the as-
sistance of Leib-olmai, they not only lost their prey, but in
addition the god might help the bear, when it would rush
upon its assailants. Therefore the Lapps consult their magic
drums before hunting the bear and pray the spirit not to
take the bear's part.1
The older sources of information do not mention actual
offerings to Leib-olmai nor anything about the manner of
offering. Randulf only states that hunting equipment, bows
and arrows, were offered up to him. According to J. Kildal,
Leib-olmai looks down on the female sex. A woman may not
walk round a tent where there is a gun, this being regarded
as in some way connected with the Forest spirit. Forbus says
further, that the custom of sprinkling extract of alder-bark
on the hunters' faces at the bear-feasts, was carried out in
Leib-olmai's honour.2 The name of the Forest god, " the

176 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
Alder man," has probably been derived from this magic cus-
tom. Judging by this, " Leib-olmai " would seem to be neither
more nor less than the genius or race-soul of the bear.
According to Charuzin the Russian Lapps worship a Forest
spirit which they call Luot-hozjik (hozjik — Russian choz-
yaika, " hostess"). She looks after the reindeer when
they wander in freedom in the forests in the summer, keeping
them together, showing them good pastures, and protecting
them from beasts of prey. From human beings she cannot,
however, protect the flocks. She helps the hunters to catch
the wild reindeer and the Lapps are not afraid of her. When
they drive their reindeer out to pasture in the spring, they
pray to this Forest spirit — "Luot-hozjik, protect our rein-
deer." And in the autumn, should they recover all their
flock, they say: "We thank thee, Luot-hozjik for protecting
our reindeer." This Forest spirit, which lives on a mountain
covered with lichen, resembles a human being in having a
human face and walking on human feet, but the body is hairy
all over like a reindeer's.3
The same Forest spirit may be the one spoken of by Genetz,
Mintys. In one tale a being named Mientus appears which
at times is like a male reindeer, but by casting off its horns is
turned into a human being.4 Originally Mientus meant
" wild reindeer," and is probably their genius as Leib-olmai
is that of the bear. Their reindeer spirit the Russian Lapps
call Pots-hozjin (" Reindeer-master") and Pots-hozjik
("Reindeer-mistress"), who have the same duties as Luot-
hozjik.'1
The Russian Lapps also speak about the tutelary genius of
the wolf j by treating a wolf very roughly, one could scare
this spirit into keeping its wards in check.
Among the Western Lapps the tutelary genius of the migra-
tory birds is the Barbmo-akka (akka = "o\d woman "j cf.
barbmolodde^ "migratory bird"), who brings back the birds
to the northern countries from the warm south. Further, the

FOREST SPIRITS 177
protecting spirit of birds is called " Loddis-edne (" Bird-
mother").6
A Forest spirit resembling the Russian Lesiy is the Eastern
Lapps* Miehts-hozjin ("the Master of the forest") who
according to Genetz is also called Vare-jielle (" Forest-
dweller "). He is a black being with a tail, and does not do
any harm to human beings unless provoked. When anyone
shouts, sings or makes a noise in the forest, he becomes of-
fended, and bewilders the culprit sp that he cannot find his
way out of the forest. The " Master of the forest" loves
silence above all.7
The Western Lapps' belief in " Forest people " has been
influenced by that of the Scandinavians. Leem mentions a
Ganis (according to Friis, Lexicon Lapponica, =" echo,"
" daemon motttanus ") which is probably the same being whom
Randulf, in his records, names Gidne (Pite Lapp Kinej Lule
Lapp Kani). This appears in the forest, and seen from the
front resembles a beautiful maiden, but has a long tail behind.
The Forest maiden serves the Lapps, bringing the reindeer
together when they are spread among the hills and assisting
in the milking of reindeer-cows. Sometimes she will even
wish for sexual intercourse with a Lapp.8 In appearance and
conduct she reminds one of the Scandinavian " Forest maiden."
Alien already in name is the Gufittar of the Scandinavian
Lapps, an underground dwarfish being, who lives in the forest
or on the mountains. At times he appears on the earth with
fine herds of cattle. He will at such times hang a bell round
the necks of the cattle, when one can easily hear where he
wanders. One must then go boldly towards him without
glancing to either side and show him a piece of iron, or else
throw the iron over the cattle, when the Forest spirit will at
once disappear under the earth and the cattle become the
property of the enterprising person. The Lapp Gufittar
corresponds to the Norwegian Go(d)vetter (" a good spirit").*
The Uldda of the Scandinavian Lapps is a similar un-

178 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
derground being, which also appears on the earth with its
cattle. It is said to change children left alone and in va-
rious ways to disturb people who have settled on its ter-
ritory. The Lapps generally pour a drink-offering on the
ground for it, either coffee or spirits. The name Uldda shows
it to be identical with the Swedish Huldra.10
It is uncertain whether the Forest spirits of the Lapps were
the object of a special sacrificial cult. Their custom of pre-
serving the bones of certain kinds of game by burying them
in the earth or hanging them in trees, cannot truly be de-
scribed as being of the nature of an offering. On the other
hand the Lapps made offerings to their Seides to secure good
luck in hunting.
All the Samoyed stocks also know of a Forest spirit, gen-
erally called " the Master of the forest." According to Don-
ner the Ostiak Samoyeds sacrifice, among other things,
peculiarly shaped arrows to the Forest spirit. A human-like
image, often carved on an old tree, is made of the " Master
of the forest." When an offering of anything eatable is made,
the food is rubbed into the mouth of this image.11 That there
was some connection between the " Master of the forest " and
the spirit of the " holy places " appears from the notes made
by Lehtisalo among the ,Yuraks. " The Samoyed may wander
freely in the forest, but when passing a holy place, he must
sacrifice something, as otherwise the ' Master of the forest'
will be offended."
The Ostiaks call the Forest spirit Unt-tongk ("Wood
spirit"), which resembles a human being but is said to be
hairy like a wild animal. A spirit of this kind lives in every
forest. He gives game to those who remember him with
offerings. The usual time for these is in the autumn or in
the early spring, at the beginning of the two hunting periods.
At Vasyugan an image of the Wood spirit is made. The
Northern Ostiaks do not seem to have made offerings to him.
In tales the family and daughters of the Forest spirit are

FOREST SPIRITS 179
spoken of, the latter being able to marry human beings.12 The
Mis-khum (khvmt "man") of the Voguls can appear as tall
as a treej he leads wanderers astray in the forest." A more
evil spirit is Mengk, known to both these related stocks. Of
these there are many, both male and female, in the forests.
Their way of living resembles ours, and they are often re-
garded as people from older times, while tales are told of
their strength.1* Over a wide territory and also among the
Yuraks the evil Parne is known, dwelling deep in the fast-
nesses of the forest, and said to have three fingers on each
hand, and on each foot three toes with sharp nails.18
The Votiaks call the Forest spirit ftules-murt (" Forest
man "). In appearance and customs he is like a human being,
but he is often imagined as one-eyed, and is believed to have
the power of lengthening or shortening his body at will.
Generally he holds his head on a level with the highest tree,
and on account of his great height he is called " Great uncle "
in the Glazov district. In the forest where he lives he has
his household and family, and many treasures—gold, silver
and cattle. He moves from place to place in the guise of a
whirlwind. Forest spirits also celebrate weddings, which are
held twice a year, in the summer and in the winter, the Forest
spirits moving then as whirlwinds so that great trees are up-
rooted. The Forest spirit entices people, more especially
children, into his power. Sometimes he will also entice cattle
to become lost in the forest, or drag them long distances in
the whirlwinds. He is enormously strong, but being a stupid
spirit, he is neither dangerous nor dreaded. Very often he
is even of great help to people, giving game to hunters and
protecting the cattle in the forest.
The Votiaks make offerings to the Forest spirit in the
forest during the autumn, preferably under a fir-tree. All the
hunters take part in the ceremony. As offerings, brandy,
bread, and a bull or a goat are used. In some districts bread
is placed on the branch of a tree for the " Forest man."l* A

180 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
prayer to the Forest spirit discovered by Aminoff runs: "Give
me, * Forest man,' of thy forest-animals, squirrels, wolves,
bears. Give also of thy bees, drive them into my bee-hives.
If thou doest this we shall give thee gifts." 1T
The Votiaks also sacrifice to the Forest spirit in order that
their cattle may thrive and increase. In the spring when the
cattle are driven out to pasture, the head of the family prays
to him: " Great uncle, Forest uncle, now drive we our cattle
out to pasture and begin our ploughing. Therefore, we sacri-
fice to thee. Accept our offering. Protect the cattle from
beasts of prey and evil people. Our cattle go over twelve
rivers, behind twelve meadows. Save and protect them from
disease and from all evil." The porridge prepared as an
offering for the Forest spirit is taken to him in the forest in a
basket made of birch-bark. Also in the autumn when the
cattle return home, another offering is prepared, viz., a goose.
The Forest spirit is thanked for having taken such good care
of the cattle in the forest during the summer.18
Occasional offerings are also made to the Forest spirit,
as when the foresters go out hunting. In the district of Sara-
pul, offerings are sometimes made during stormy weather.
At these times the offering is an animal, generally a duck.
Offerings are further made in cases of sudden illness, accord-
ing to the directions of the magicians. This last reminds one
of the worship of the dead. The number of pancakes, made
specially by the hostess for the occasion, must absolutely be
an odd number, three, five or seven. When going to perform
the offering, it is regarded as a bad omen to meet anyone,
for which reason great care is taken to avoid this. After
the person making the sacrifice has returned from the place
of offering, he must go direct, without speaking, to the fire-
place, where he washes his hands in the ashes, after which
he may approach his family.19
Besides the above mentioned Forest spirits, which are wor-
shipped by the Votiaks, these have still many others to whom

FOREST SPIRITS 181
offerings are not made. One of this latter kind is the Pales-
murt (" Half-man ") known to all the Votiaks. It resembles
a human being, but has only half of a human body. Thus,
it has only one eye, one foot, one hand and one breast, which is
so large that it can suffocate people with it by pressing it into
their mouths. In the twilight it frightens the lonely wanderer
in the forest with its shrieks.20
More evil than the former is a spirit known in the South-
ern Votiak area, called Surali, which is also anthropomorphic,
but naked and hairy. It has only three long fingers on its
hand (cf. Ostiak Parne). It calls all night in the forest,
causes people to lose their way, and entices them to itself.
At times it rushes suddenly upon people, tickles them or dances
with them until they are completely exhausted. Often it will
mount a horse in the meadows and ride it madly round the
fields until the horse nearly falls.21
The Yskal-pydo-murt (" Cowfooted man ") belongs also to
the evil Forest spirits, and from its name one can imagine its
appearance. To the waist from above it is dressed in ordi-
nary peasant costume, but from there downwards the legs,
which are hairy and end in hoofs, are naked.22
Fully coinciding with the Forest spirit of the Votiaks is
the Vorys-mort (" Forest man ") of the Siryans. The Siryans
fear to call him by his correct name, and so all kinds of mys-
terious names are used for him. Generally, like the Russians,
they call him Dyadya (" Uncle ")• Like tnat of the Votiaks,
the Siryan Forest spirit also resembles a human being, having
his house and family in the forest. He is large in size and
taller than the highest tree, for which reason the Siryans often
call him " Tall uncle." He rushes from place to place like a
whirlwind and sometimes carries both people and cattle with
him. Women fear him greatly, as he is believed to seek
amorous adventures with them. The Forest spirits of the
Siryans celebrate weddings, gathering then, as at human wed-
dings, in great companies. On the whole the " Forest man "

182 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
is a good spirit, being often of great use. To huntsmen,
especially, who live on good terms with him, he shows the way
through the wilds, sits by their camp-fires to warm himself,
and drives game into their snares. Wherefore the hunters
now and then make small offerings to himj sometimes a little
tobacco, which they place on a stump in the forest, as " Forest
uncle " is known to like tobacco. But other offerings are also
made to him, such as squirrel-skins and bread and salt, when
the cattle have happened to go astray in the forest.28
On making comparisons, one notices that the Siryan and
North Votiak ideas of the Forest spirits have been borrowed
from the Russians to a very great extent, and resemble the
popular beliefs of these down to details, the Russian names
being also the local ones. Similarly, Tatar influence is per-
ceptible in the Southern Votiak area.. As appears already
from the name, the evil Surali is a loan from foreign sources.
The " Half-man," who seems to have been known also among
the Ostiaks, corresponds to the Chuvash Ar zori, which has
the same meaning, and the " Cowfooted man " to the Tatar
Syiyr-ajak ("Cow-foot")."
An anthropomorphic Forest spirit, who can change his height,
so that he can be as tall as a pine, is also the Cheremiss Kozla-ia
(" Forest spirit") or as he is sometimes called TargeldeS. In
some districts he is said to have only one eye in the centre
of his forehead. Sometimes he appears as a forest-animal, a
dog, an owl, or also as a hay-stack, a stump, etc. He moves
from place to place as a whirlwind. The usual abode of the
Forest spirit is the forest, but often he visits the fields and
meadows. In the forest he shrieks, or roars with laughter,
so that the cattle become frightened. He can speak human
languages and call the traveller by his name, and by pretend-
ing to be his friend, entice him into his power. People be-
lieve him and follow him until they can no longer find their
way again. Thus the Forest spirit causes people to become lost.
When lost in this way in the forest, one must change the right

FOREST SPIRITS 183
boot on to the left foot, and vice versa, to find one's way
home. To fall into the power of the Forest spirit is danger-
ous, as he tickles people to death. When in a good mood he
will go to the huntsmen's log-fires to warm himself, but when
angry he puts the fires out. Often he rides full gallop on
a horse, frightening people who are picking berries or mush-
rooms. In stories we are told that the Forest spirit also goes
to the villages, where he sits down with the people and takes