CHAPTER XVI
THE WIND
L
IKE other phenomena of nature, the wind also was re-
garded as animated. Following the points of the com-
pass, the Central Asian peoples speak of four winds, which
arise at the " four corners of the earth."* A stranger idea
is that the mountains are the home of the wind. The Yakuts
say the winds " sleep " on the mountains, whence they can be
called when needed by whistling.8 The Yakuts and the
Lamutes are said to have avoided loud conversation when pass-
ing by a high mountain, in order that the " Master " of the
mountain might not become incensed and send a storm to
hinder their journey.3 The Goldes believe the winds to come
from caves in the mountains, where the Wind spirit holds them
captive. A shaman can persuade this spirit either to open
these chasms, or keep them closed, according to whether wind
is needed or not.* The Mongols call storms " running-days,"
as they, believe the Mountain spirit runs from mountain to
mountain during these times.6
Elsewhere than in Siberia, this belief is met with in moun-
... .
tainous districts, having probably its origin in observations made
from nature. The Lapps also believe windy and stormy
weather to arise out of the chasms in the fells. A certain fell
at Inari is called Piegga-oaivi (" wind fell"). Possibly, also,
the Finnish " birth of the wind " originates from the same
idea, the wind being said in this poem to have been born
" between two rocks."6
Among the Southern Turkish peoples a mythical idea of a
grey bull has been recorded, the breath of which gives birth

458 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
to the wind.7 The majority of peoples believe some spirit
to wander in the whirlwind.
Differing from ordinary, winds, according to the Buriats, is
the Zada, which has its own spirit, Zada-Sagan-Tengeri. By
Zada they mean a short, intermittent wind, occurring several
times on the same day. Often, it brings with it rain or snow.
Generally, the Zada blows in the spring and the autumn.
Zada-weather may be brought about by men with the help of
a certain root, the Buriats believing that if one of these roots
is pulled or dug up out of the ground, the weather will begin
to change rapidly. Certain hunters, to whom this magic
method is known, make Zada assist them in their hunting.
Certain birds, also, such as hawks and swans, are said to know
the properties of the said root and to conjure forth a so-called
" bird-Zada" when migrating southward in the autumn.
Similarly, some of the bigger inhabitants of the forest, notably
the deer and the fawn, use this means for their own benefit
(" deer-Zada ")• It may also be brought about by the help
of a special red stone, called " Zadan-ulan-shulun " by. the
Buriats. Further, Zada is sometimes born when a thunderbolt
falls into the water, when nine days of this wind follow.8
This peculiar belief, met with also among the Kalmucks
and the Turkomans, has spread to the Yakuts. They say that
among the entrails of an animal a stone is sometimes found,
which possesses the magic power, if taken into the yard on a
calm summer day, of awakening a cold and severe wind.
These stones the Yakuts call Sata (=Buriat Zada).9