CHAPTER II
THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH
T
ROSCANSKIY says that, according to the original con-
ception o£ the Yakuts, the earth has always existed, and
that the question of its creation does not interest them.1 Stories
have, however, been gathered among all the Altaic peoples,
the Yakuts also included, which tell that in the beginning
there was no earth, only a deep and shoreless primordial ocean.
This idea of a primordial ocean is common to most Asiatic
creation myths, although the forming of a flat earth on the
surface of the great water is described in different ways.
The most prolific cycle, possessing many variants, is that
of the tales which relate how some being, diving into the
water, brings up earth-matter from the depths of the ocean.
When the great Yryn-Ajy-Tojon (" White Creator
Lord" ), so runs a Yakut tale, moved in the beginning above
the boundless ocean, he saw a bladder floating on the waters
and inquired: "Who and whence? " The bladder replied
that it was Satan and lived on the earth hidden under the
water. God said: " If there really is earth under the water,
then bring me a piece of it." Satan dived under the water
and returned after a while with a morsel of earth. Having
received it, God blessed it, placed it on the surface of the
water and seated himself on it. Then Satan resolved to drown
God by stretching out the land, but the more he stretched,
the stronger it grew, covering soon a great part of the ocean's
surface.2
The sharp dualism appearing in this tale, God and Satan
as opposites, cannot represent the original beliefs of a primitive
people. Clues showing which way to turn in tracing the ori-

314 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
gin of this myth are found in the name " Satan " and in the
following variant noted down among this people: " Satan
was the elder brother of Christ, but the former was wicked, the
latter good. When God wished to create the earth he said to
Satan:( Thou boastest of being able to do everything and sayest
thou art mightier than I. Good, bring me sand from the
bottom of the ocean.' Satan dived immediately to the bottom
of the ocean, but when he arrived again at the surface he saw
that the water washed the sand out of his hand. Twice the
devil dived without succeeding, but the third time he changed
himself into a swallow and managed to bring up a little mud
in his beak. Christ blessed the morsel of mud, which then
became the earth, at first flat and smooth as a plate. Intend-
ing to create for himself a world of his own, Satan deceitfully
hid a part of the mud in his throat. But Christ understood the
wile of the devil and struck him on the back of the neck so that
the mud squirted out of his mouth and formed the mountains
on the originally smooth surface of, the earth." 3
When comparing these .Yakut tales, in which the names
" Christ" and " Satan " especially attract attention, with the
apocryphal creation tales of Eastern Europe we see that they
coincide in every detail. Knowing, besides, that exactly the
same tales are to be found among the Russians who have
migrated to Siberia, it seems probable that the Yakuts, who
according to statistics are Christians, have learned at least the
above mentioned tales direct from the Russians. Before be-
ginning to prove the fact in detail, we will examine a few
more Central Asian tales belonging to the same cycle, which
contain interesting additions.
When there was no earth and no Heaven, but only water,
Clgen (" the Great"), according to an Altai Tatar tale, de-
scended upon the water to create the earth. He thought and
thought but could not conceive how to begin. Then " Man "
came to him. t)lgen asked: "Who art thou? " "I also
came to create land," answered Man. God became angry and

THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH 315
said: " Even I cannot create, how couldst then thour " Man
remarked: "But I know where to get earth-matter from."
God urged him to get some, whereupon Man dived imme-
diately into the water, finding at the bottom of the ocean a
mountain, from which he wrenched a piece and put it in his
mouth. Arriving again on the surface Man gave God a part
of it. The other part remained in his mouth between his
teeth. When at last he spat it out, the swamps and bogs ap-
peared on the face of the earth.4
A creation tale in which God and the devil work together is
met with among the Alarsk Buriats. When Burkhan
(= Buddha) came down from Heaven to create the earth,
the devil (Sholmo) appeared beside him to give advice how
the earth was to be made from the earth-matter and stones
under the water, offering at the same time to fetch the earth-
matter. God scattered the earth-matter, which the devil had
brought him, on the surface of the ocean and said: "Let the
world be born! " As a reward for his trouble the devil begged
for a part of the land, receiving enough to plant his staff on.
The devil at once pushed his staff into this, and from the hole
there crept forth all manner of reptiles, snakes, etc. Thus
he created the harmful creatures of the world/
In all the above tales, even before the creation of the world,
we meet with two beings of whom one was good, the other
•wicked. This dualistic conception reaches its height in the
teachings of the Persian Zarathustra, in which Ahura Mazda,
the god of light and truth, is the promoter of all good and
happiness, and the devil, Angra Mainyu, of the evil and misery
which mar the good earth created by, Ahura. Thus far back
must we trace the dualistic features of our tales. But for com-
plete coincidence with these we search the sacred books of the
Mazda religion in vain.
Later, we meet with the same antagonistic original beings in
the teachings of the Persian Mani and in the legends of other
semi-Christian sects which have made their influence felt in

3i6 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
Northern Syria, Palestine and Caucasia, and in which, besides
Iranian, old Babylonian fancies and beliefs are also mingled.
In a Yakut tale, Satan, appearing before God, declares that
he lives under the water. This idea also seems to be of great
age among the people of Caucasia and Asia Minor. With
Zarathustra also the Evil One " arose from the depths."
According to the creation tales of a later period, in which the
conception of a primordial ocean has become fixed, the devil
appears on the surface of the water, sometimes in thick foam,
as in a Galician tale, sometimes in a floating bubble, as in the
Yakut. The Voguls explain that this bubble was formed by
God spitting into the water while coughing. The bubble grew
and grew until God heard the voice of Satanael inside it. The
same story is told of the devil in a White Russian creation
tale.8
An Altaic story relates in addition how Olgen saw some mud
with human features floating on the ocean. God gave a spirit
to it, and to the being thus born he gave the name Erlifc. In
the beginning, Erlik was God's friend and brother, but be-
came later his enemy. Mostly, the Altai Tatars call the being
who helps God in creating the world " Man" or " First
Man," but always, this Man develops into the devil, Erlik.7
The reasons for his fall are his most obvious qualities, pride
and boastfulness. On account of these God drives him down
into the depths, where he now lives as the ruler of the spirits
in the kingdom of death. This reflects the old Iranian con-
ception of the first man, who, by falling into sin, was the first
to die, and thus became leader of the spirits of the dead.
In Caucasian tales also, the devil chooses the dead for his
property, and in a Bulgarian creation story he says to God:
" The living be thy, property, the dead mine."8
In the legends of the Bogomil sect, formed in Bulgaria
about the year 1000, God is said to have had two sons, of
whom the elder was Satanael, the younger Christ. It is owing
to this conception, which is met with already among earlier

THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH 317
sects, that in Yakut tales Satan is called the elder brother of
Christ. In the corresponding Votiak, as also in many Russian
tales, God and the devil, Keremet, are brothers. A sect of the
Iranians, the Zervanists, believed that Ormazd and Ahriman
were born of the same mother, in whose womb they took shape
at the same time, but that the latter was brought forth first.8
In all the above creation tales the devil appears in human
shape, only in the Yakut variant he takes on the shape of a
swallow in order to be able to hold mud in his mouth. In an
Altaic tale the swallow is also the earth-bringer.10 Mostly,
however, the devil, in changing his shape, takes on the form
of a water-fowl. A water-fowl is actually better adapted both
for diving and for seeking earth on the bottom of the deep
ocean. Again, in Eastern Europe the devil helps God both in
human shape and as a diver-bird, loon, goose, or some other
water-fowl. He appears in the form of a goose, as does God
himself, in the following Altaic tale:
In -the beginning when there was nothing but water, God
and the " First Man " moved about in the shape of two black
geese over the waters of the primordial ocean. The devil,
however, could not hide his nature, but endeavoured ever to
rise higher, until he finally sank down into the depths. Nearly
suffocating, he was forced to call to God for help, and God
raised him again into the air with the power of his word. God
then spoke: " Let a stone rise from the bottom of the ocean! "
When the stone appeared, " Man " seated himself upon it,
but God asked him to dive under the water and bring land.
Man brought earth in his hand and God scattered it on the
surface of the water saying:" Let the world take shape! "
Once more God asked Man to fetch earth. But Man then
decided to take some for himself and brought a morsel in each
hand. One handful he gave to God but the other he hid in
his mouth, intending to create a world of his own. God threw
the earth which the devil had brought him beside the rest on
the water,, and the world at once began to expand and grow

3i8 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
harder, but with the growing of the world the piece of earth
in Man's mouth also swelled until he was about to suffocate so
that he was again compelled to seek God's help. God inquired:
" What was thy intention? Didst thou think thou couldst
hide earth from me in thy mouth? " Man now told his secret
intentions and at God's request spat the earth out of his
mouth. Thus were formed the boggy places upon the earth.11
This story, in which God and the devil appear as birds, may
be compared with a North Russian creation tale, in which God
and the devil are in co-operation, the former as a white, the
later as a black pochard."
Even when appearing in the shape of a water-fowl, the
devil does not quite lose his human features. Thus, among
other things, his hands are spoken of. In the creation tales
of the Voguls also it is often mentioned that the fetcher of
earth, sometimes the devil, sometimes the son of the first
people, dresses himself for the occasion in water-fowl's garb.
When in one tale the devil makes three unsuccessful attempts
to reach the bottom of the sea in a duck's skin, he winds a
goose's skin about him and at last succeeds in bringing earth."
The Voguls, like the East Europeans, often imagine the earth-
fetcher to be a real water-fowl, for which the bringing of earth
in its mouth is much more natural than for a human-like being.
But mostly, this bird is the antagonist of God, Satanael, who
endeavours to deceive God by hiding a part of the earth in
his mouth, where, like the earth of God's creation, it swells
so terribly that the devil is forced to spit it out, thus forming
sometimes mountains and hills, sometimes swamps and bogs
on the smooth surface of the earth.
When the devil acts altogether in a human-like manner,
the tales sometimes describe the hiding of the earth in a way
more suited to men. Thus in a Buriat story the devil hides it
under his heel and thence scatters it as mountains on the smooth
earth created by Burkhan. To God's question, why the devil
wished to spoil his earth, the latter replies: "When man de-

THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH 319
scends a mountain he is afraid and calls upon Thy name, but
when he ascends he swears in my name. Thus he is ever
mindful of us both." " Similar words are uttered by the
devil in both a Mordvin and a Russian creation tale.15
The devil mars the earth in a human-like manner in the
following Yakut tale: In the beginning, God created a small,
smooth and even earth, but the devil injured it sadly by kicking
it with his feet and tearing it. God urged the earth to grow in
spite of this and so the unevennesses caused by the devil be-
came great mountains, valleys and lakes.16
In the first of the creation tales given, it is said that the
devil intended to drown God, who had seated himself on the
little earth-disc just formed upon the surface of the water.
In a corresponding Bulgarian tale the devil has the same idea.
He tries to coax God to lie down and sleep upon the earth-
disc in order to be able to push him into the sea, and to become
supreme in the world. Although God well knows the inten-
tions of his enemy, he lays himself down and pretends to sleep.
The devil then seizes him and begins to carry him to the edge
of the earth in order to pitch him into the depths. But
when he approaches the shore the earth begins to expand so
that he is unable to reach its edge. He turns towards the other
side but even there he can no longer see the ocean. The third
and the fourth direction give the same result."
This same story, has been added to an entirely different
creation tale in Central Asia. Here the earth is also brought
from under the water and placed on the surface of the ocean,
but the devil takes no part in the creation. The creator is
Otshirvani (= the Buddhist Bodhisattva Vairapani) and his
assistant Chagan-Shukuty. When these mighty beings de-
scended from heaven they saw a frog (= turtle) diving in
the water. Otshirvani's companion raised it from the depths
and placed it on its back on the water. " I shall sit on the
stomach of the frog," said Otshirvani, "dive thou to the
bottom and bring up what thy hand finds." Chagan-Shukuty

320 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
dived twice, and the second time he succeeded in bringing up
some earth. Then Otshirvani told him to sprinkle it on the
stomach of the frog (turtle), on which they sat. The frog
itself sank out of sight and only the earth remained visible
above the surface of the water. Resting- there, the gods fell
asleep and while they were sleeping, Shulmus, the devil, ar-
rived and saw the two friends lying on the earth which they
had just created and which was yet so small that there Was
scarcely room for a third on it. The devil decided to make use
of his chance and drown these beings together with their earth.
But when he attempted to seize hold of the edge of the earth,
he no longer saw the ocean. He took the sleeping friends under
his arm and began to run towards the shore with them. But
while he ran the earth grew. When he saw that his attempt
was vain he dropped his burden and barely succeeded in escap-
ing when Otshirvani awoke. The latter then explained to his
companion- how the devil had meant to destroy, them but how
the earth had saved them.18
But although the devil did not succeed in destroying God,
he was able to mar the earth, as we have seen, and, according
to the Buriats, to create many useless and harmful animals on
it. This last tale has also been recorded in other parts of
Siberia, e.g., among the Voguls. Here the devil makes a
hole in the earth with his staff, from which frogs, lizards,
worms, beetles, gnats, wasps, mice, etc., arise, until God closes
the hole with a fiery stopper. The same description is found
even in East European creation tales.1*
There would thus seem to be no doubt that these Asiatic
stories of the origin of the earth, which correspond in all their
details to the East European creation tales, are closely con-
nected with a common cycle of tales, rich in variants. Outside
the boundaries of the former Russian Empire, with the excep-
tion of certain Balkan States and the Gypsies who have been
influenced by the Slavs of Austria, we do not meet in the west
with this myth, which is unknown on Roman Catholic territory.

THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH 321
In the Greek Catholic Church, on the contrary, and especially
among certain sects, it has been greatly favoured. This fact
can also be proved in Finland, which has been a meeting-
point for the currents of both Western and Eastern culture.
Tales have been recorded only in Eastern Finland, in which
the devil, sometimes with the aid of a diver-bird, fetches earth
from the bottom of the sea, hides a part of it in his mouth,
and adds the stones, rocks and mountains to the surface of the
earth by, being compelled to spit it out when it swells between
his jaws. In one variant, where God sat in the beginning on
a golden pillar in the middle of the seaj the devil is said to
have appeared in the world when God told his reflection, which
he saw in the water, to arise.20 Bulgarian legends also relate
that the devil was born of God's shadow.21
Veselovskiy, who has made comparative researches on a large
scale into the legends of the last-named church, is of the
opinion that this tale is a creation of the Bogomil sect in Bul-
garia. We do not, however, meet with the story of the
fetching of the earth in either the Bogomil literature or in the
teachings of those Armenian Gnostics from whom the Bogomils
inherited their dualistic conception. This tale of the origin
of the earth appears first in a Russian manuscript of the
fifteenth century, but seems already at that time to have been
very widespread. Schiefner, who is acquainted with the stories
of the Russian sectaries, assumes that our dualistic tale has
wandered into Northern and Central Asia with Russian fugi-
tives and settlers from Europe.22 Sumcov doubts, however,
whether the Russian newcomers could have implanted their
tale so deeply into the beliefs of the Central Asian peoples in
such a comparatively short time. He assumes, therefore,
Nestorian influence, this sect having won much territory in
Central Asia before Islam.23 To Persian influence points the
fact that God in one Altaic creation tale calls himself " the
true Kurbystan " (= Ahura Mazda). " But in districts where
Buddhism is common, names derived from this religion, such

322
SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
as Burkhan, etc., are also met with, although the appearance
of the devil here hints at Iranian influence. Might it therefore
be assumed, as Dahnhardt also supposes, that the dualistic tale
of the bringing-up of earth has its origin somewhere in the
vicinity of the Iranians, e.g., among the Syrian Gnostics, whence
it has wandered both to Russia and Bulgaria and through
Persia to Central Asia? As no proof for this assumption can
be found in the literary sources on the subject, we should have
to add a further supposition, i.e., that in addition to the written
teachings, verbal stories corresponding with our tale have also
been handed down. However this may be, it is at least cer-
tain, as we have shown, that many features in this tale have
their origin in the Near East. It is also probable that this
cycle of tales is no single creation, but a collection of ideas
and stories of different content and gathered from various
places.
Especially interesting is the bird which fetches the earth
from the bottom of the primordial ocean. Whence has this
peculiar feature come into our tales and how shall \ve account
for it?
In some Russian legends and also in North-West Siberian
tales the fetching of the piece of earth is spoken of in con-
nection with the story of the flood. The Samoyeds in the
District of Turukhansk relate the following: Seven people had
been saved in a boat and, when they saw that the water rose
and rose and that there was no help, they begged the diver-
bird to fly into the water and seek land there. After seven
days the diver-bird returned bringing a grassy piece of turf
in its beak, and of this they asked God to create for them an
earth.28 Also in a Russian variant God sends the devil to bring
sand from the water when he wishes to make a new earth after
the flood.28
In the flood story of the Samoyeds, the diver-bird reminds
one of the bird sent by Noah from his ark, which brought him
news of the appearance of land in its beak, but from this we

THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH 323
cannot yet be certain that Noah's bird has been the original
of the water-fowl appearing in our tales. For quite simple
reasons, two myths, both treating of great floods and of a bird,
may have become confounded.
In a Vogul creation tale, which mentions several birds, these
have work of two kinds to perform The red- and the black-
throated diver fetch earth, but the raven is sent out to see how
large the earth has grown. On the first day the bird is away
but a short time, on the second it returns toward midday, on
the third not until the evening. Every day its journey takes a
longer time and from this it may be guessed how the earth
grows from day to day." The raven in this tale has thus in
some degree the same duty as the dove in the flood story of
the Bible, but this feature can hardly be traced back to the
Bible.
It is to be noted, in addition, that stories of the creation and
of the flood are often met with separately among the same
people.
Besides the preceding versions, in which God and the earth-
bringer are antagonists, a creation tale without this dualistic
idea is met with in Asia. In this the Creator uses quite simply
an ordinary water-fowl in order to bring up earth from the
waters.
The Yenisei Ostiaks related to me that in the beginning the
water flowed everywhere. The Great Shaman Doh hovered
over the waters in the company of swans, looms, and other
water-fowl. As he could nowhere find a resting-place he
asked the diver-bird to bring him a piece of earth from under
the sea. The diver tried twice before it succeeded in bring-
ing up some earth in its beak. Of this Doh made an island
in the sea.28
According to Buriat tales, at the bottom of the shoreless
primordial ocean, there were black earth and red clay. When
Burkhan decided to create an earth he asked the white diver
to fetch him earth-matter from under the water. The diver

SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
brought both earth and clay in his beak and sprinkled them on
the water. Thus was created a world floating on the waves,
on which trees and grass soon began to grow.29
The Buriats of the District of Balagan have the same story
in the following form. In the beginning when there was yet
no land, Sombol-Burkhan moved over the waters, where he
saw a water-fowl swimming with its twelve young. God then
said: "Water-bird, dive down and bring me earth — black
soil in thy beak and on thy feet red clay! " Having thus ob-
tained earth-matter, God scattered the red clay on the water,
and upon it the black soil. Thus was made the earth which
soon became covered with beautiful vegetation. Thankful,
God blessed the water-bird saying: "Thou shalt have many
young and shalt ever swim and dive in the water." That is
how this bird has such a wonderful ability to dive deep and
remain long under the water.30
In these tales we find no being akin to the devil appearing as
God's opponent. We cannot, however, conclude from this,
as Dahnhardt, who knows only the first mentioned Buriat tale,
does, that this form of creation tale is only a deformed variant
of the dualistic stories. Hardly, again, has the devil any part
in the following story, which was recorded among the North-
ern Yakuts, although the " Mother of God " is mentioned in
it: The Mother of God decided to create a world, but having
no material she first created a diver-bird and a duck, both of
which she commanded to dive under the ocean and fetch
earth. The first to appear was the duck who brought some
mud in her mouth. Then the diver came up, but without
mud, explaining that it was impossible to find earth in the
water. The Mother of God became angry and said: "Thou
deceitful bird, have I not given thee more strength and a
longer beak than the duck? But thou deceivest me and pitiest
the ocean. For this thou shalt never live on the sacred sur-
face of the earth, but shalt ever dive in the waters and seek
all manner of refuse there for thy nourishment." Then the

THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH 325
Mother of God created the earth from the mud the diver had
brought, and placed it upon the surface of the ocean. The
earth did not sink under the water, nor could the waves move
it or wash it asunder, but it remained fixed in a certain place
like a floating island and grew gradually into a great world.81
In the tales of the Voguls also, we sometimes find two
water-birds, the black- and the red-throated diver, acting as
earth-fetchers.
A Burnt variant tells in addition how the water-fowl, which
Sombol-Burkhan sent to fetch earth, met the " crab" in the
depths. The latter inquired of the bird where it was going.
The bird answered that it was diving for earth from the bot-
tom of the sea. Then the " crab" became angry and re-
marked: " I am always in the water and have never yet seen
its bottom, turn back quickly or I shall cut thee in two with my
scissors! " The bird was forced to return to the surface. See-
ing it, Sombol-Burkhan inquired why the bird had not brought
him earth. On hearing how the crab had threatened it, he
gave the bird magic words, by the help of which it at last
succeeded in reaching the bottom.82
This interlude in the diving is mentioned also in the tales
of the Votiaks of the District of Sarapul. God's assistant
meets a crab in the water, who inquires where he is going and
tells him that he, the crab, though a sea-dweller for one
hundred and twenty years, has never yet met with land in
the ocean. The story continues with the fetching of earth, and
how an evil being hides sand in its mouth and then creates the
mountains.83
Comparing these latter tales, we can scarcely remain in
doubt as to which of them represents a more original stage.
The crab as frightener in the dualistic story of the Votiaks is
as unnatural and unnecessary as it is natural in the Buriat tale.
This additional feature, which to the author's knowledge has
not been met with further west, may have been added later
to the dualistic creation story from a simpler and more primi-

326 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
tive creation tale, which has perhaps been known also among
the Votiaks.
If we assume, therefore, that the tales in which a natural
water-fowl and not the Satanael of the Bogomils acts as earth-
fetcher, are more primitive, we can easily, explain the bird-like
features of the devil, often appearing even in stories where
the devil dives into the water in human shape. In this way, the
problem of the fetching of earth, which can be explained in
no other way, would be solved: an old primitive tale has later
become embellished with the dualistic ideas of the sectarians
of the Eastern Church.
All depends thus on whether we can take for granted that
those Asiatic tales in which the devil is unknown, represent
an earlier stage,
A proof of the fact, that the creation tales in this simpler
form are both popular and original, is given by the innumera-
ble stories of similar content gathered among the Indian tribes
of North America. In these it is sometimes a water-fowl,
sometimes a fish or some amphibian that brings up mud from
the bottom of the primordial ocean, which mud is then placed
on the surface of the water and soon grows into a big world for
people to live in."
Sometimes this earth-fetching tale is intertwined with the
flood story even in America, where it is usually a musk-rat
that saves the people floating on the ocean in a boat, on a raft,
or on a tree-trunk, by bringing them mud from the bottom of
the sea, from which mud a new earth then grows. Like the
raven in the Vogul tale given earlier, so in the similar North
American stories some animal, a fox or a wolf, is used for the
purpose of reporting on the growth of the earth. When
Nanabozhu, according to the Winnebago Indians, could no
longer follow the growth of the land with his eyes, he sent a
wolf to run round the earth in order to know its size. The
first time the wolf soon returned, the second journey took him
two years, the third time he returned no more.88

THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH 327
Noticeable, further, is the part played by the turtle in the
tales of the North American Indians. There is a story among
the Sioux Indians of how the turtle and some water-bird swam
about in the primordial ocean with earth-matter in their
mouths, the one with mud, the other with grass. The grassy
earth formed by these was placed on the back of the turtle.
The Hurons also say, that in the beginning there was nothing
but water, until from the depths a turtle appeared and sent,
one after the other, the otter, the musk-rat, the diver, and
other water-dwellers to fetch earth-matter. But only in the
mouth of the frog, the last to be sent, could the turtle find
mud. This was then sprinkled round the edges of the turtle's
shell, and before long formed the earth. When the earth
grew, the turtle remained as its supporter, a duty it carries
out even today.88
The part of the turtle in creating the world is especially
interesting on account of the corresponding idea in the Central
Asian stories.
In the beginning of time, so say the Buriats, there was noth-
ing but water, and a great turtle who looked into the water.
God turned this animal on its back and built the world on its
stomach. In another connection we have already mentioned
how, according to an Altaic story, the heavenly Otshirvani and
Chagan-Shukuty notice a turtle diving in the waters, and how
the latter dives down for earth while the former sits upon the
animal's stomach, and how Otshirvani then sprinkled the earth
on the frog.87 In Central Asian tales we find in addition
Mandishire (=the Buddhist Bodhisattva Manjucri) as
creator of the earth, who changes himself into a large turtle
and supports the earth he has made on the surface of the
water.38
In these Central Asian tales we find an ancient Indian story
in a form coloured by Buddhism. As is known, the Creator
appears already in the ancient Indian tales in the shape of a
turtle. In this form he fetches mud from the bottom of the

328 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
primordial ocean and makes of it a rapidly expanding earth,
which he supports on the surface of the vast surrounding
ocean. In later Buddhist tales a Bodhisattva, mostly Manjucri,
takes the place of the old and more primitive deity.
In Indian tales the earth-fetcher sometimes takes the shape
of some other animal. As the supporter of the earth, as we
have seen, a fish is also mentioned.
Our comparative research has thus at last brought us to
India. This is actually the only country in Asia where the
bringing of the earth from the bottom of the ocean is con-
nected already with the beliefs of an unknown, far-distant
past. The literatures of other ancient cultured Asiatic peoples
do not possess a similar tale. It is also impossible to assume
that the idea of a primordial ocean could have been born
among the Central Asian prairie-dwellers. Although it is
true that we can find among the information relating to India,
no mention of a water-fowl as the bringer of earth, we are
forced in the end to believe that this feature of our tales has
its roots also in that land of countless stories.
Besides the above tales about the origin of the earth, in
which the fetching of earth-matter from under the water is a
common feature, stories have been recorded among the peoples
of the Altaic race, which explain the appearance of the earth
on the surface of the ocean in a different manner.