part in the sacrifice. Following a very old custom, the whole
of the food must be consumed within the sanctuary and at the
same time. The hide and the larger bones are, following an-
other old custom, hung up in the holy tree.23 Nowadays, hides
are not seen in the groves of the Votiaks, as not even the fact
of their being cut into pieces has been able to protect them from
thieves. On the other hand, one can see among the Eastern
Votiaks whole skeletons of animals hung up with ropes of
bark on the tree. The extreme care with which the flesh of
the sacrifice is carved by the Votiaks, who avoid fracturing any
bone whatever, and the care with which they join these together
in their natural order, appear to be a result of a belief, said by
Bechterev to be prevalent among them, that the sacrificed
animal does not die, but passes living to the /W-spirit.24
A noticeable feature in the lud worship of the Votiaks is,
further, the use of wax candles, not found among the more
northern peoples. These candles are often prepared first in the
grove, where the wax obtained in bee-keeping is kneaded be-
tween the hands round strands of flax.
After the meal, the congregation form up in long rows
while the /«*/-guardian prays in a low voice. According to the
oldest custom the prayers, like the slaughtering also, should be
read with the face turned to the west or the north. The con-
tents of the prayer vary in different districts, depending chiefly
on the accidental needs of the sacrificers. The lud-spirit is first

HEROES
asked to protect human beings and animals against sickness and
all other evils, and the fields from hail and storms, etc. After
each prayer, read by the guardian, the kneeling congregation
touch the ground with their foreheads. Sometimes the minds
of the worshippers are uplifted by the tones of stringed in-
struments. While the people are leaving the sanctuary, they
bow low to the lud and say: " Live happily and protect us."25
At times the festival is prolonged in the village at the house of
the " guardian," where the men and women of the village
gather, and where feast-songs are sung in these words: " The
W-spirit has wished us peace and given his blessing." The
festival may even be prolonged for two or three days.29
What the origin of this /«^-spirit was, the Votiaks themselves
do not always know. Many features of the ceremony point,
however, to the worship of the dead. Such features are, e.g.,
the fact that the /W-spirit, often called the " ruler " or " lord "
(lud-kuzot lud-asaba) or merely ludt appears in dreams in hu-
man shape, that he is fixed to a certain place, and that he is
worshipped by families and is sacrificed to in the evenings with
the face turned to the west or the north. The black sacrificial
animals are also a sign pointing to the worship of the deceased.
As Georgi already relates, the Votiaks sometimes worship in
their lud a spirit called Sulton (== Arabo-Turkish Sultan)."
The same epithet is applied by the Chuvashes to a spirit dwell-
ing in their sanctuaries, which is called by them kiram'dt (Pan
Arabo-Turkish word meaning "holy"). To Turco-Tatar
influence points also the belief of the Votiaks that the ludt
when desiring a sacrifice, appears in dreams in the guise of a
Tatar. The lud sacrifices of the Votiaks are, however, not
entirely of foreign origin, for signs that these also worshipped
their ancestors and heroes are not wanting even in our day.
As an example may be mentioned that in Bussurman-Mozhga
(Elabuga District) eleven villages celebrate the memory of the
founder of their line, Mardan. The brave Mardan had in
bygone times come from the north and chosen this village as

152
FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
his dwelling-place. Every third year they sacrifice a horse to
him and a cow to his wife, and annually, in addition, a sheep is
sacrificed. The words of thanksgiving uttered during the sacri-
fice to Mardan, are as follows: "Together we sacrifice a horse
to thee. For the fine children and the fine harvest thou hast
given us, we thank thee, Father Mardan." 28
Further light is thrown upon the lud cult of the Votiaks by
the corresponding sacrificial cult of the Cheremiss. Like the
Chuvashes, the Cheremiss call their fenced-in sanctuaries
keremet. Contrary to their attitude towards the groves of the
Nature gods, in which they say sacrifices are made " upward,"
or " towards the sun," sacrifices are here made " downward,"
or "towards the night." The Cheremiss display great dread of
the groves of the " lower spirits," in which, where possible,
coniferous trees must grow. A peculiar feature is that in the
keremet no foreign tongue may be spoken, as the spirit dwelling
there "hates foreign tongues." They often give to their
sanctuaries names such as " the keremet of our clan." The
same person may, however, belong to two different keremet-
clans. In such cases, the keremet groves are generally con-
secrated to different spirits. At Kurmanaeva (Birsk District)
there is a so-called Sultan-keremet, in the sacrifices of which
the people of about twenty-five villages take part. Some vil-
lages have no keremet at all, while in some places a keremet
may belong to a few separate families only. In the Urzhum
District, where this cult has better preserved its original fea-
tures than among the Eastern Cheremiss, one may see several
sacrifice-trees in the same gloomy fir forest, by each of which
the different families offer up their sacrifices.
Where there is only one keremet in a village this is generally
called after the village. At times, the keremet may be called
after its founder, or after the place in which it is situated.
Every clan takes care of its sanctuary, where the collective
sacrifices are offered up by a member of the clan chosen for
the purpose, but where any single member also may make offer-

HEROES 153
ings on his own account. The Cheremiss make their offerings
late in the evenings, as after a sacrifice one may neither go out
to visit anyone, nor receive visitors. On the way to the grove,
one must, as far as possible, avoid meeting people. The most
usual sacrifice nowadays is a foal or a black sheep, but earlier
it was very often a black bull.
Like the Votiaks, the Cheremiss at times make only a
promise of sacrifice. The usual method is that money, flour,
honey, or a little loaf prepared specially for the occasion, are
placed in a little bundle, and the worshipper prays to the
keremet-spirit to be appeased and to soothe the agony of the
sick; binding himself to carry out the offering on a suitable
occasion. The bundle may be hung up either at home on the
wall of the storeroom, or in the keremet on the branches of the
sacrifice-tree j when the promise is redeemed, the bundle is
burned up. Often the promise is accompanied by the hang-
ing-up of the garments of the sick, or the thrusting in of
some iron implement, an axe, a sickle, or a knife in the wall
of the storeroom, from which they are removed after the
promised animal has been sacrificed. When the Cheremiss
promise a sheep or a bull, they take a little wool or hair from
the promised animal into the grove. If a horse has been
promised, they prepare harness of bark, and hang this on the
sacrifice tree as a guarantee to the spirit. At the same time
a few sticks of wood are piled against the tree. Some who
make promises of sacrifice hang up a wax candle with the
objects already mentioned. The promised sacrifice is
slaughtered, like the others, in the evening, as " should anyone
meet the sacrificer, he would immediately fall ill." By
means of all the objects that follow the making of a promise
of sacrifice, the Cheremiss attempt to assure the spirit that he
need not wait very long for the redemption of the promise.29
Where a poorer Cheremiss cannot in due time fulfil his
promise of sacrifice, he must " renew " the promise by sacri-
ficing some lesser object. Very usual is the sacrificing of a

154 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
goose, a duck, or a hare, in the place of a horse. In the Birsk
District the author had the opportunity of seeing how the
population of a village offered up a smaller sacrifice to the
keremet on account of a cattle-plague. Into the sanctuary
only the sacrificing priest and three assistants entered. These
had first to take a bath and clothe themselves in dean garments.
Immediately when they had arrived at the grove, the assist-
ants made a fire, using for this purpose glowing cinders brought
in a pan from the village. Sacrifice bread was kneaded on
the spot and baked on a wooden fork over this fire. When
the loaf, on which two " noses " had been impressed by three
fingers held together, was ready, it was placed at the root of
the sacrifice tree. The candles were then made and placed in
hollows in the bark of the tree. The actual sacrifice, a duck,
lay with feet bound together near the tree. Swinging a burn-
ing branch and striking the knife against the blade of the axe,
the " priests" prayed side by side, while the others killed
duck by cutting its throat. The sacrificing priest poured
a little of the warm blood into the fire, imploring the keremet
to accept the sacrifice, free the cattle from the plague, and
wait until the autumn for the promised horse. When the
flesh of the duck was cooked the sacrificing priest carried it
to the tree, where he cut off small pieces of the heart, liver,
windpipe, neck, breast, back, wings and feet into two bowls,
the contents of one being given through the fire to the kere-
met, of the other to the medium of the sacrifice, " the Fire-
mother." In each bowl was also laid one of the cut-off
" noses w of the sacrifice bread. Before this ceremony, more
prayers had been read before the tree, accompanied by the
swinging of torches and the clang of the knife against the
axe. After the sacrifice of the contents of the bowls, the rest
of the meat was eaten; the remnants were thrown into the fire.
At the sacrifices, one hears the Cheremiss in the Urzhum
District refer to the keremet-vpirit as the "Old man," the
" Great man," or the " Prince." The best known is a spirit

HEROES 155
called the " Old Man of the Hill" or as he is also called,
after his dwelling-place, Nemda, " the Old man of the Nemda
Hill" or " the Prince of the Nemda Hill." Of this worship,
Olearius relates in the first half of the seventeenth century
that the Cheremiss made pilgrimages to the Nemda brook
and sacrificed there. This holy place, he says, is feared greatly
by them: " Any one going there without an offering, perishes,
as the devil is believed to have his habitation there."30
The sacred place mentioned by Olearius, situated in the
Yaransk District, is spoken of also in certain accounts dating
from the former half of the last century. As the Russian
priests exerted much pressure on the Cheremiss at that time
on account of their pagan religion, they knew that these were
in the habit of making sacrifices at a stone, lying on the bank
of the Nemda near the village Tshembulatova, and, therefore,
they destroyed the stone. The spirit worshipped by the Chere-
miss at the stone, was called by them Tshembulat, from which
the village had derived its name.
Nowadays the people no longer gather at the actual dwell-
ing-place of this spirit, but have prepared groves in his name
at different places. Thus, the same spirit may be worshipped
in the groves of many villages. In the neighbourhoods where
tales of the " Nemda Old man " have been best preserved,
it is said that he lived by the Nemda brook over which a
" bridge " led. Besides a wife he had also officials: a " book-
keeper," an " interpreter," a " guardian of the gate," and a
" bridge man," whose office it was to watch over the bridge.
To each of these it was usual to make a separate offering, a
horse to the Prince himself, a cow to his wife, and to the
others some smaller animal.
Many tales go to prove that this " great man " was a former
Cheremiss chief. He is said to have ridden a white stallion
and fought against enemies: "When he finally succeeded
in re-establishing peace on earth, he called together the Chere-
miss to a stone, and proclaimed the peace to them. He then

156 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
lifted up the stone, and placed himself under it, saying to his
people: ' Should war break out again, some one must bestride
a white stallion, and ride three times round the stone, shout-
ing: " Arise, Chief, there is war on the earth! M* A Cheremiss
did this once out of curiosity, shouted out the necessary words,
and immediately the chief arose, sat himself on his horse and
rode out to the east and west, to the north and the south,
but nowhere could he see signs of war. Then, calling the
Cheremiss together again, he said; (As you have fooled me
and called me without cause, you are hereafter my slaves,
and must sacrifice a foal to me annually.' "
In some districts he is called " the Northern Ruler " and
is said to have command over an invisible army. When sick-
ness is rife among the cattle, the people say: "The Northern
Ruler has sent his warriors to cut down our cattle." Even
now he is said to ride through the land of the Cheremiss at
times, to see how these are progressing. Should anyone meet
him without knowing who he is, and thus not get out of his
way, an immediate illness is the result, and a horse must be
sacrificed to the spirit. The people even speak of his green
cloak and his red head-dress. He is specially sacrificed to in
times of war.
Besides the widely-known and everywhere highly respected
" Nemda Prince " the Cheremiss have other local keremet-
spirits, the fame of which is not so widely spread. The ma-
jority of these have become the objects of worship through
their heroic deeds. The Cheremiss remember their feats even
today. There are many local heroes, especially in the old
dwelling-places of the people. Thus, they make offerings to
" the Old man of the castle-hill" and to the " Hero Aren,"
who fought against the Tatars, but met his death before a
gate, ever afterwards called the " Hero gate." At his death
the hero said: " Remember me, give me a good horse with me
in the grave, and continue the war by slinging stones! " The
Cheremiss did as their leader had advised. The stones, di-

HEROES 157
rected by the dead hero himself through the air, whistled in
a peculiar manner and destroyed the enemy. On the place
where the hero had died, a keremet was established, in which
the Cheremiss sacrifice a foal in cases of sickness, even today.
A strange inherited custom is connected with this sacrifice as
a memory of those times of war: a stone is cast in the air in
the name of the sick person, and by the whining sound it
makes, the possibilities of recovery are made known.
Together with their own heroes, who "hate foreign
tongues," the Cheremiss, like the Votiaks, sacrifice to a spirit
called Sultan. The last named has his own special sanctuaries,
as according to the people's view, he cannot be worshipped in
the same place as a Cheremiss chief. This may be a relic
from the period of power of the Bolgars, when the independ-
ence of the Cheremiss first began to waver. In any case the
keremet cult already described, corresponding with the lud-
sacrifices of the Votiaks, proves that the Finnish stocks on the
Volga have had their own princes at one time in history, the
memory of whom they have been able to preserve through
the centuries.
Under the alien name of keremet the Mordvins also wor-
shipped their heroes and the dwelling-places of these. Their
keremet also seems to have been a fenced-in forest-grove.
Even sacrifice store-houses (kudo) and probably also images
were kept by them in their sacred places.81
That the Mordvins, like the Votiaks and Cheremiss, sacri-
ficed also to the spirits of alien rulers, is shown by the name
mentioned earlier, Soltan, or Salhta. The hero cult of the
Mordvins is further described by Paasonen as follows:
" Among the Erza in the Kazan and Samara Governments,
we find a deity called Staka Pas (" the heavy god ")» who is
honoured with special sacrifices, and entreated not to launch
" his heaviness " (evil generally) upon the people. In some
parts, a divine couple, popularly supposed to be husband and
wife, and bearing many names — e.g., Onto and Bonto —

158 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
are invoked by the epithet of Staka Pas, while elsewhere the
" heavy god " is addressed in sacrificial prayers as Kan Pas,
Kuvan Pas, and regarded as living " in the black earth."
The word Ka»t the signification of which is now unknown to
the people themselves, is simply the Tatar Kan (" prince "),
so that Kan Pas means "god-prince"; Kuvan again is most
probably derived from the Turkish title fcagan, which in Chu-
vash or Bolgar would be pronounced kugan, and in Mordvin
may easily have become kuvan. The Mordvins having been
at one time under the rule of the Volga Bolgars, of whom the
present day Chuvash are a descendant people, it is quite prob-
able that " the heavy god " was originally the spirit of some
Turkish ruler. Similarly, the other heavy gods, Onto and
Bonto, etc., are perhaps the rulers of an earlier age.82
Of a corresponding sacrificial cult among the Baltic Finns
we have no reliable information. We need not doubt, how-
ever, that they also had their heroes whom they worshipped.
The Esthonians and the Finns have preserved a common name
hits*, which originally meant " forest" but later also " sacri-
ficial grove." Hiisi, as the spirit dwelling within these was
also called, is generally regarded as an evil spirit, like the lud
of the Votiaks. An old tale has been recorded in Esthonia,
according to which the " Thunder god " thrived best in a
forest of leaf-trees, but Hiisi best among coniferous trees.
Here the same difference is made between the worship of
the Nature god and the underground spirits, as the Cheremiss
observe today. The old folk-traditions relate further, that
groves of this description among the Baltic Finns were fenced
in. That they even possessed sacrifice buildings in their sanc-
tuaries, is shown by the Papal Bull of Pope Gregory IX in
the year 1229, in which he allows Bishop Thomas to accept
the sacrificial groves and image-houses (lucos et delubra),
presented to him by the converted heathen.83
Doubtless also among the ancient heroes of Finnish song
were many who at one time were worshipped.