part in the expelling of diseases. The Yakuts are said to have
a custom, during an epidemic, of making a fire by rubbing two
pieces of dry wood together, this sort of fire being supposed
to have special protecting powers. The people, however, de-
clare that they have learned this custom from the Russians,
with whom epidemic diseases are also supposed to have come
into their country.11 The Tatars of Eastern Russia and the
Chuvash also use friction-fire as a kind of purifying remedy
during certain plagues either among people or cattle, and even
at other times in the hot summer. On some previously fixed
day the old fire in every home is put out and a great bonfire
is lighted by friction outside the village. Over this the people
spring in order to purify themselves and drive their cattle
through it. Thus cleansed, each peasant carries a brand of
" new fire w home.12
One might suppose this custom, known also to the Finno-
Ugric peoples of the Volga, to have been learned from the
Russians, as the Yakuts declare. But it appears from old
sources that certain Turco-Tatar peoples already in ancient
times used fire as a magic purifier. Byzantine Chronicles tell
that when the messengers of the Emperor Justinian arrived at
the court of the Turkish Great Khan at the springs of the
Irtysh river, the Khan could not receive them until they had
passed between two fires. The Tatars still observed this cus-
tom at the time when the Russians paid taxes to them. All
people, animals, or objects that in some way, e.g., by touching
some dead body, had become unclean, were thus purified.13

452 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
Whatever the origin of these customs may have been, the
mystic, and more especially the heavenly birth of fire, its
wonderful power and the part which it plays in the domestic
life of the most primitive peoples, resulted in the fact that
fire in general is esteemed holy. Many, of the peoples of
Central and Northern Asia have indeed worshipped fire.
When worshipping the fire burning on the hearth the Mon-
gols call it " Mother fire." According to their ideas the
hearth is the sanctuary of the home and may on no account
be desecrated. The Altaic tribes, the Kirghis, the Yakuts and
other Turco-Tatar peoples also worshipped fire. The idea
that fire must be kept pure and adored as a deity is common
to all these and even to other North Siberian peoples.
Nothing unclean or evil-smelling may be thrown into it, and
nothing which could weaken its power or dim its brightness.
For this reason it is wrong to spr into the fire or to extinguish
it with water. It is also inadvisable to step over it unneces-
sarily or to hurt it with any. sharp weapon. Piano Carpini
tells how the Mongolians deemed it a sin to hew wood in the
vicinity of a fire, or to take meat with a knife from a pot
under which a fire was burning; still more to put the knife
into the fire. The Yakuts believe that the fire, which " takes'
as a gift the pine forest, consumes the damp wilderness, and
spends the night in dry trees," understands speech and that it
is therefore not well to scold or speak ill of it.14
Fire is believed to need nourishment as well as tender care.
The pious master and mistress feed the fire on the hearth
every time they begin a meal. The first morsels of food, the
first spoonful of soup, the first cup of drink belong to the
Fire god. Especially at family festivals must the fire on the
hearth be remembered. A fire-sacrifice is a special part of
the wedding rites with most peoples of the Altaic race.18 The
Chuvash bride brings ashes or a fragment of stone from her
parents' hearth to her new home, this custom doubtless express-
ing the thought that the fire on the hearth is to go in heritage

FIRE 453
from parents to children.18 We have already seen that the
Finno-Ugric peoples on the Volga observe rites akin to these,
In worshipping the fire in their new home, a young Mongol
couple sacrifice to it some yellow butter and a yellow-headed
sheep. Yellow as well as red, in sacrifices to the Fire god, is
intended to imitate the hue of the fire itself. The best sacri-
fices are those which intensify the burning of the fire, viz.,
butter, lard, gin, etc.17
A certain wedding-prayer, said beside the hearth, to some
degree explains the beliefs of the Mongols. It begins with
the following words: "Mother Ut (Turco-Tatar word,
" fire "), Mistress of the fire, descended from the elms on
the tops of the Khangai-Khan and the Burkhatu-Khan moun-
tains. Thou, who wast born when Heaven and Earth parted,
who earnest forth from the foot-prints of Mother Otygen
(" Mother earth "), thou creation of Tengeri-Khan. Mother
Ut, thy father is the hard steel, thy, mother the flint, thy
ancestors the elm-trees. Thy brightness reaches the heavens
and spreads over the earth. Fire, struck by the Heaven-
dweller, nursed by the Mistress Uluken. Goddess Ut, we
offer thee yellow butter and a yellow-headed white sheep.
Thine are this brave boy and the beautiful bride, the slender
daughter. To thee, Mother Ut, who art always looking up-
ward, we offer cups full of wine and handfuls of fat. Give
luck to the son of the ruler (the bridegroom) and the daugh-
ter of the ruler (the bride) and all the wedding-folk. For this
we pray."18
If fire is treated in an improper manner or left without food
it is believed to take vengeance by sending a kind of skin-
disease. In the worst case it burns the whole building.
There is no doubting the fact that the peoples of the Altaic
race worship fire in itself. " Mother " and other such words
are only names for the fire itself. Because of its numerous
flames the Altaic shaman calls it the " Thirty-headed mother,
the Forty-headed virgin-mother,"19 In the prayers of the

454 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
Chuvash there appears beside the " Mother fire " a " Father
fire." The Yakuts and the Buriats also worship both a mascu-
line and a feminine Fire god. The former name them " Old
Man Ulalchany and Mistress Sabaga," the latter " Lord Sa-
khadai and Mistress Sakhala." Poetic denominations are fur-
ther " the White-bearded Lord " and " White-haired Lady "
of the Yakuts.20
Most Central and North Asian peoples speak in addition of
the Ruler or Master of fire, who, according to the Yakuts,
" lives right in the flames."21 What they imagine him to be
like appears from their legends which tell that the master of
fire " eats raw wood," that he has " an ashen bed " where " the
pillow is a glowing coal and the coverlet fine ashes " and that
" the smoke is his breath." " They believe, however, that the
Master of fire can extricate himself from the fire and appear
in human shape. The Yakuts say that in a home where he
is often remembered with sacrifices, the Master of fire is fat
and thriving, but the Fire god of a mean and parsimonious
household is thin and withered.88 A Buriat legend relates how
a man who had the power of seeing gods and understanding
their speech once encountered two Masters of fire. One of
them, though the god of a poor house, was well fed and
dressed, but the other, the Fire master of a well-to-do house,
looked very poor and wretched. The latter complained of
having to live without food in the power of a mean master
and mistress who at times even pierced his eyes by, poking the
fire with sharp irons. Because of this he threatened to punish
his master, and very soon the grand house of the rich man
was burnt down to the ground.2*
Such tales, in which the Fire gods of different homes con-
verse together and tell each other of their life, are quite com-
mon. In the tales of the Ugrian Ostiaks every hearth has its
own " Fire maid," her outward appearance being said to show
how the fire has been treated in that home.25 Doubtless, these
tales, some of which have been recorded even in Eastern

FIRE 455
Europe, originate from the conception that the fire on the
hearth must be tended and fed like a living being.
The Master of the fire may also appear to people before
a disastrous fire or any other catastrophe which threatens the
home. Then, also, the Fire god often takes on human shape.
The Yakuts see him in the form of a " grey old man."26 To
a certain Bunat he appeared as a great, red, and therefore
flame-coloured, man.87 The Buriats even make themselves
images of the Master of fire and keep them in a box near the
hearth. In homes in the Balagansk District one may some-
times see two human-shaped figures covered with red cloth,
of which the one represents the " Master," the other the
"Mistress" of the fire. Two glass beads form their eyes;
the headdress, the hands and the hem of the garment are
covered with black sheepskin. The " Mistress " has beads
for nipples and a tin ornament on her breast.28 The red and
the black in the image of the Fire god represent the colours
of the glowing coal and the soot.
Besides the part played by fire in domestic life, most peoples
of the Altaic race have given it another important duty to ful-
fil — the conveying to the various gods of the sacrifices des-
tined for each. Thus every offering which is put in the fire is
not intended to pacify the fire itself. More especially when a
sacrifice is intended for some god of the upper spheres is fire
used as the medium. It is in this capacity of mediator between
man and the gods that fire is considered the most sacred, and
for this reason it is especially worshipped at sacrificial festivals.
The Finnish peoples of Eastern Russia also have this concep-
tion and the rites connected with it are met with among them.
If finally we attempt to compare the beliefs and customs
prevailing in the different districts peopled by the large Altaic
race, we find that these have not developed equally, being
richer and more various in some districts than in others. The
Tungus of the primeval forests of North Siberia are the most
backward in this respect. It is true that these also worship

456 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
fire after a fashion, keeping it clean and refraining from hurt-
ing it, but the offering up of sacrifices to the fire is not deemed
so necessary by them as it is in Central Asia} and its use in
wedding rites, equally with the idea of fire as a conveyer of
sacrifices, is uncommon. We are therefore led to think that
the mighty and much adored Fire god of the other peoples
related to the Turks has developed under foreign influence and
if we further remember that the Indo-Iranian peoples from
ancient times have been zealous fire-worshippers and that their
beliefs and customs coincide exactly with those of the Central
Asian tribes, we cannot be unaware from whom the peoples
of the Altaic race have, at least in its more developed form,
inherited their fire-worship. Seeing that the Mongols, who in
their own language call the Fire god Galai-Khan (" Ruler of
the fire"), or, like their kinsfolk the Buriats, Gali-Edzin
(" Master of the fire "), use in their prayers the Turco-Tatar
name for fire, Ut, we can agree with Banzarov in his supposi-
tion that the Mongols learned to worship fire from the Iranians
through the Turkish tribes.29 This Iranian influence can also
be traced in the fire-worship of the Finno-Ugrians in their idea
of fire as a mediator of sacrifices, which conception does not
seem originally to have been general among the Ugrians or the
peoples of the Altaic race. Even at the present day, side by
side with the later sacrifices by fire we find the older custom,
known almost solely among the Northern peoples, of giving
sacrifices to the gods untouched.

r