CHAPTER V
THE TREE OF LIFE
A
T THE navel of the earth, in the centre of the universe,
according to Altaic tales, the highest tree on earth, a
giant silver-fir, raises its crown to the dwelling of Bai-Ylgon.1
Here we find the world-tree, situated in the earlier tales on
the Sumeru mountain, removed to the navel or centre of the
earth. Generally this tree is also imagined to grow on a high
hill or mountain, especially on the central mountain of the
earth, as appears from the words of a folk-poem already cited:
<( In the centre of the earth there is an iron mountain and on
this iron mountain a white, seven-branched birch." But as
this central mountain of the earth-disc is generally, believed
to hide its summit among the storeys of the sky, the tree itself,
for very obvious reasons, has been raised into the sky, where,
according to different beliefs and tales it continues to exist.
In the beliefs of the peoples related to the Turks this tree,
which with the growth of the universe has grown from a small
sapling to its present height, is intimately connected, like the
world-mountain, with the construction of the universe.2 And
independently of whether it rises from the earth, a high moun-
tain, or some storey in the sky, its position always resembles
that of the world-pillar j like the former, the gods use this
also to tether their horses to. In the fact, also, that it is often
pictured as many-storeyed, it resembles the world-pillar.
Thus, for example, in the shaman songs of the Vasyugan
Ostiaks, which contain images obviously borrowed from the
Tatars, this tree, like the heavens themselves, is said to be
seven-storeyed.8 More often, however, it is regarded as pierc-
ing the different floors of the sky, thrusting at the same time,

350 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
like the central mountain which is its foundation, its roots deep
into the underground depths.
This cosmic tree differs from the world-pillar chiefly in the
fact that it is always regarded as a branched, living tree, an es-
sential and at the same time most peculiar feature of which is
its freshness and sappiness. In most of the tales it is situated
on the brink of some spring, lake or sea, even at times in the
water itself. The Ostiaks speak of " the watery sea of the
heaven-centre " beside which this tree grows.4 The water from
which the tree nourishes itself is described in a Minusinsk
Tatar poem as follows:
" Piercing twelve heavens
On the summit of a mountain
A birch in the misty depths of air.
Golden are the birch's leaves,
Golden its bark,
In the ground at its foot a basin
Full of the water of life,
In the basin a golden ladle. . . ."
In the poem it is mentioned further that this " birch " is
watched over by the forefather of the Tatars, the old Tata,
who was given this post by the Creator himself.5
The same wonderful birch is met with in the tales of East
European people. Thus, the Mordvins tell of a giant birch
growing on a hill in the depths of the forest, the roots of which
ring round the earth and whose branches surround the heavens.
Its leaves are of the size of the palm of a hand, and its buds
as long as the lash of a whip. At the root of the birch is a1
spring, roofed over with carved boards and white sheets, on
its edge a red wooden can, in the can a sweet honey-drink, and
in the liquid a silver ladle, the bottom" of which is decorated
with the sun and the moon, the handle with the smaller stars.
As the sun moves in the heavens, the handle of the ladle turns
with it.6
More interesting is this tree glowing with life in the folk-
lore of the Yakuts.

THE TREE OF LIFE 351
On the yellow navel of the eight-edged earth, according to
one of their tales, there is a dense, eight-branched tree. Its
bark and knots are silver, its sap golden, its cones like nine-
cornered goblets, and its leaves wide as the hide of a horse.
From the crown of the tree runs foaming a heavenly, yellowish
liquid. When passers-by drink of this, the tired among them
are refreshed and the hungry become satisfied.7
This life-giving tree is, according to the Yakut tales, the
dwelling-place of " the First Man "j and therefore some sort
of paradise. When " the First Man," on appearing on the
earth, wished to know why he had been created, he approached
this giant tree, the crown of which " pierces through the three-
storeyed Heaven " and " along the branches of which a light-
coloured liquid flows " bringing blessedness to the one tasting
it, and saw an opening appear in the trunk, from which opening
a female, visible only to the waist, informed him that he had
been created to become the father of the human race.8
A variant of this same tale describes " the First Man n as
" the White Youth." " Above the wide motionless depths,
below the seven storeys, the nine discs of heaven, in the central
place, on the navel of the earth, in the quietest place, where
the moon does not decline, nor the sun sink, where there is
summer without winter and the cuckoo sings eternally, was
the White Youth." He set out to walk to see where he had
appeared, and what his dwelling-place was like. In the east
he saw a wide, lightish plain, on the plain a mighty hill and
on the hill a giant tree. The resin of the tree was transparent
and sweetly perfumed, its bark never dried or cracked, its
sap was silvery, its leaves never withered and its cones were
like a row of reversed goblets. The crown of the tree rose
over the seven storeys of Heaven, being the tethering-post of
the Over-god Yryn-ai-tojon, and its roots went deep down
into the underground depths where they were the dwelling-
pillars of the strange mythical beings there. By means of its
leaves the tree talked with the dwellers in Heaven.

352 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
Walking southward the White Youth saw a calm " lake of
milk " in the centre of a green, grassy plain, which lake was
never rippled by, a breath of wind and on the shores of which
were curdled swamps. In the north was a dark forest, where
the trees rustled day and night and where all manner of
animals moved. Behind the forest rose high mountains, bear-
ing caps that resembled white rabbit-skin j the mountains
leaned against the heavens, protecting these from cold winds.
In the west grew a low tangle of bushes, behind these a high
forest of firs, and behind the forest solitary blunt-headed
mountains were just discernible.
Such was the world, in which the White Youth saw the
light of day. Tired of his lonely existence he approached the
tree of life and said: " Honoured High Mistress, Spirit of my
tree and my dwelling-place, everything living moves in couples
and gives birth to descendants, but I am alone. I wish to travel
and seek a partner worthy of me, I wish to know other people
and measure my strength against them, I wish to live as a man
should. Do not refuse thy blessing, I pray to thee with
humbled, bowed head and with bent knees.*'
Then the leaves of the tree commenced to rustle and a fine
milk-white rain dripped from them upon the White Youth.
A warm zephyr was felt, the tree creaked, and from under its
roots a female being arose up to her waist. This spirit of the
tree and of the place is described by the tale as a grave-eyed,
middle-aged woman with flowing locks and naked bosom. The
goddess offered the Youth milk from her swelling breasts, and
having drunk, he felt how his powers had grown a hundred-
fold. At the same time the goddess promised him every
happiness and blessed him so that neither water, fire, iron nor
anything else could harm him.9
It is obvious that this tale cannot have originated among the
Yakuts in the cold atmosphere of North-East Siberia, but, as
the glowing description of Paradise hints at, in the lap of a
much richer and more fertile nature. With the help of the

THE TREE OF LIFE 353
description of nature in the tale, in which the mountains with
white caps resembling rabbit-skin appearing in the north are
obviously snow-clad mountains, we can endeavour to find the
birthplace of this story, which pre-supposes the knowledge both
of a fertile vegetation and of snow-clad mountains. We turn
naturally then either to India or Nearer Asia. But the para-
dise landscape cannot, however, as such be used as a guide, as
the " lake of milk " and other details belong to the beliefs
connected with the navel of the earth. In addition the land-
scape differs somewhat in the different variants.
Before examining the above tale more minutely, we will
glance at a few additional details throwing more light on the
tree of life, these details being contained in the examples of
the Yakut language published by Middendorff. In these the
first man, " the ancestor of the Yakuts," is called Ar-soghotoch
(" the Lonely Man "). His dwelling also is spoken of, which
is in the centre of the plain and has four silver-gleaming
corners, forty windows, fifty pillars, and thirty roof-treesj
the walls and the golden floor are fourfold and the silver roof
threefold. Altogether this dwelling would therefore seem to
have possessed seven storeys. The tree of life itself is de-
scribed in the following words: " When he comes out of
his dwelling on to the balcony towards the east to see the land-
scape, he has before him the king of trees, which grows among
the grass. This tree over which swings the blue air, is so old
that its age cannot be reckoned in centuries. Its roots stretch
through Hades and its crown pierces the nine heavens. The
length of each leaf is seven fathoms and that of the conea
nine fathoms. From under its roots foams the * eternal water.3
When its aged, starved and weary, white or dark cattle, its
flying or running game, drink or lick the sap and resin which
drip from this tree's branches and cones, gathering and form-
ing a brawling stream, they acquire again their former youth
and overflowingness." It is further related that when the
spirit of the tree, " a white-haired aged goddess," mottled of

354 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
body like a woodcock and with breasts as large as "leather-
bags," appears, the tree creaks and groans, growing smaller,
until with the re-entrance of the goddess it regains its former
size. From this spirit of the tree the Lonely Man receives
the knowledge that his father is the Heaven god Ar-tojon
(" The High Lord ") and his mother Kybai-Khotun (" Kybai
Mistress "), who had immediately after his birth lowered him
from the third heaven to the earth so that he might become
the forefather of the human race. At the same time the spirit
takes water from under the roots of the tree and pours it into
a bladder, which she gives to her ward, saying: " Fasten this
under thy left arm, in the uttermost danger it will save thee."
Later, according to the tale, tjie hero fights a duel on a court-
ship journey with a wicked dragon, receiving a blow in the
heart, but the bladder bursting at the same time and its con-
tents flowing on to the wound, his heart becomes immediately
whole, giving him in addition his powers back ninefold.10
Where and how the tree of life ideas in this Yakut tale
may have originated in the mists of antiquity, related tales are
already met with among the ancient peoples in India, in Iran,
in Mesopotamia, and in Egypt. As is well known, the corre-
sponding beliefs of the ancient Semites are reflected in the
Bible: " And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow
every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for foodj the
tree of life also in the midst of the garden. . . ." As in the
Yakut tale the first man dwells here beside the tree of life.
Similarly the nourishment afforded by the tree gives eternal
life. The same conceptions appear from the following words
from the Book of Revelation: " To him that overcometh will
I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the
paradise of God." And for the belief that the water of life
flows under the roots of the tree we find a counterpart in other
words from the same book: " And he shewed me a pure river
of water of life . . . and on either side of the river was there
the tree of life which bare twelve manner of fruits and yielded

THE TREE OF LIFE
355
her fruit every month: and the leaves of the tree were for the
healing of the nations." Here we find also the health-giving
properties of the tree of life mentioned. It is thus obvious
that the Yakut tale and the images in the Bible are derived
from a common foundation idea. In the former there are
several additional details, such as the milk-breasted goddess,
which are unknown to the Bible and cannot be regarded as hav-
ing sprung from legends formed on the Bible stories, but must
have had some other tale related to this as model.
Just as many of the Central and Northern Asian tales place
the tree of life on a high hill or mountain, even in Heaven it-
self, so the Semitic paradise was imagined to be, sometimes on
the central mountain of the earth, sometimes in Heaven. From
the fact that the ancient Babylonians already in olden times
knew of the paradise-mountain of the gods, the tree, and the
water of life, we may conclude that this belief, relics of which
have come down to us from ancient times, is of extreme age
among the civilized peoples of Nearer Asia.
The corresponding beliefs in Indian mythology are pointed
to further by the above mentioned Central Asian tale in which
the mighty world-tree is situated on the Sumeru mountain.
That this tree was the tree of life, the following tale, likewise
from Central Asia, shows: "In the beginning was no land,
only water out of which rose two great mountains. On the
summit of one were three temples, harbouring thirty-three
Tengeri or gods. At the foot of the mountain was a triangular
plain, from which rose the extremely high Zambu tree, with
its crown higher than the mountain. The Tengeri ate of its
fruit, but the beings living under the tree, the Asuras, shouted
to the Tengeri: ' Why do you eat from the tree growing on
our land?' The Asuras became at last so inflamed that they
commenced to war against the Tengeri j in this war, however,
they lost and were vanquished. The gods then threw down
sand from the mountain, and even gold, and in this way
the earth was created, on to which two gods, male and

356 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
female, descended in order to people the earth with their
descendants." "
In the beginning of the tale, two eternal mountains are thus
mentioned, which appear thousands of years earlier in the cos-
mology of the ancient civilized peoples of Nearer Asia, but
only one is described in detail, the Tengeri dwelling on the
summit of which are the thirty-three gods of the Sumeru
mountain of Indian mythology. Similarly, the beings dwell-
ing at the foot of the mountain are the Asura giants of
India, who were believed to dwell in the bottomless chasms
of Meru, and from there warred against Indra and other gods.
The Zambu tree also, from which the gods were nourished is,
as the name shows, the Indian tree of life, Jambu. According
to Buddhistic mythology this tree has sixteen large branches
but a multitude of smaller ones. Its ruddy-grey leaves are as
fine as the purest silk and its flowers glowing like gold. In
its fruit there are hundreds of sweet lumps, of the size of
goose-eggs, which drive away all diseases. The golden-yellow
sap of the tree drips like melting butter. The beings living
around procure their nourishment from this tree of life.12
It is probable that the idea of a tree of life among the
Indians has its roots in distant ages, as already in the poems of
the Veda the immortality-producing nourishment of Soma,
. which grew on a mountain, is mentioned. Corresponding to
this is the Haoma of Iranian mythology, imagined as a fertile,
golden-flowered tree of life and as such placed on the central
mountain of the world, Hara Berezaiti. The Rauhina tree
of the Indian poem Su-parnadhyaya, from which a mythological
eagle, the Garuda, known as the robber of Soma, breaks off
a branch, is probably also a relic of a tree of life, in which the
said bird, according to earlier ideas, was believed to live. In
the folk-poetry of the Iranians we meet with this mythological
bird in the crown of the tree of life.