CHAPTER XII
THE GREAT MOTHER
A
MONG the eastern Finno-Ugric peoples we have already
met with a mighty goddess of birth, called by the Chere-
miss and the Mordvins the "Great birth-mother," whose
dwelling-place these peoples, like the Votiaks and the Ugrians
living on the Ob, believe to be in the sky. The same goddess
is known to certain peoples of the Altaic race. When cele-
brating their spring-festival at the time when the flowers
break forth, the Altai Tatars, among other deities, remember
a goddess called " The Lake of Milk." In many prayers she
is referred to as the " Milk Lake mother " and worshipped as
the giver of all life.1 That this great goddess was known
earlier over a comparatively wide area among the Turco-Tatar
peoples, is proved by the fact that the " Milk Lake mother n
appears also in the list of deities of the Chuvash living by the
Volga.2 But according to the ideas of the peoples mentioned,
this mythical, deified lake is situated, as we have seen earlier,
beside the tree of life in the centre of the earth. Certain
Altaic tribes, who believe paradise to be situated in the third
Heaven, speak of the " milk lake " to be found there, from
which the god of birth, Jajutsi (" the decreer "), takes " life-
force each time a child Is born into the world." *
A Central Asian tale would also seem to place the fabled
lake in Heaven, describing as it does how a certain mighty Khan
had promised his daughter in marriage to him who would pro-
cure him a wing of the Garuda eagle. To the heroes partaking
in this quest, a youth joins himself, who wishes to know where
this mythical bird dwells. When the heroes have arrived at a
high mountain, they notice how the sky above them begins to

4I4 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
grow white. The youth then asks: " What is behind that
sky? " The others explain that it is the lake of milk. . . .
" But what is the dark thing in its centre? " the youth asks
again, and is told that it is the forest, in which the bird dwells.*
Quite plainly, therefore, the " milk lake " of the story has
been imagined as situated on a mountain reaching to the
heavens, up which mountain the heroes have to climb. The
forest in the centre of the lake of milk answers to the tree of
life, in the crown of which other tales also declare the fabled
bird to dwell.
The conception of a lake of milk, believed to be the source of
all life, and worshipped as a female deity, is not a product of
Turco-Tatar mythology, but has drifted there from elsewhere.
A parallel to this belief is to be found in the ancient Iranian
paradise myths, where the lake of milk is represented by the
lake Ardvisura Anahita, which gleams from under the tree of
life on the Hara Berezaiti mountain, the said lake being re-
garded by the Iranians as a goddess of birth, to whom, in their
poetry, they ascribe anthropomorphic features. Without doubt,
the Yakut Kubai-Khotun, dwelling in the tree of life or under
its roots, is the same deity, and was regarded by them as the
great mother of both men and animals. As such she has
" breasts as large as leather sacks."B Sometimes she is men-
tioned as the wife of the Heaven god, the plenteousness of her
milk being described in a Buriat tale about the origin of the
Milky Way. This phenomenon is explained by them as having
been caused by the overflow of milk from the breasts of the
Heaven goddess (Manzan Gormo).6 A corresponding myth
was known to the ancient Greeks, who declared the Milky
Way to have been formed when Hera snatched her breast
from the mouth of the infant Heracles, whom she hated, so
that drops of milk were scattered over the sky. From this,
the name met with in many European languages — the Milky
Way (cf. ancient Indian Soma-Dhara, " Soma Way ") — has
obviously been derived.

THE GREAT MOTHER 415
In Yakut prayers, the above-mentioned goddess of birth has
most often the name Ajysyt (" Birthgiver," " Procreator ") or
Ajy-Khotun ("Birth-giving mistress")) and children are
prayed for from her, whom she is believed to present at her
fancy to the woman who has gained her favour. As she is
regarded at the same time as birth-giving and nourishing, she is
referred to by a name with these significations, " Birthgiving
Nourishing mother" (Ajysyt-Ijaksit-Khotun).1 In some dis-
tricts the great mother is believed to pour down from Heaven
a white elixir of life to one who is in the throes of death."
Tales relate how a woman during severe birth-cramp directs a
prayer to the Heavens and how, shortly afterwards, two Ajysyts
sink down to the earth, and coming to the woman, give their
assistance, after which she gives birth to a son.* Generally,
however, the people speak only of one goddess, who is said to
bring the soul of the child from Heaven, as according to the
prevalent belief, mortals give birth to the embryo only, life
being furnished by Ajysyt. In one prayer the child-bearing
woman says to her protective genius: " Thou, my mild Crea-
tress, the first day. on which thou didst let down me to the
(central place * — i.e., the earth — thou didst say.: * Be pro-
vided with a ceaseless breathing, with an eternal life. May
the cattle brought up by thee flourish, may the children borne
by thee be many.'"10 Probably connected with this belief is
the conception that the souls of animals also are let down from
the heavens.
Further light is thrown on the foregoing by the belief of
the Ostiaks, that the great Birth-giving mother dwells in
Heaven on a mountain with seven storeys, where she fixes the
fate of all, by writing at the birth of each child in a golden
book or on a " gold-ornamented seven-branch," i.e., the tree
of life, the forthcoming events of its life.11
The Siberian peoples, after a successful delivery, have been
in the habit of preparing a feast to the goddess of birth, in
which only women may take part. The Yakuts usually cele-