The above story, showing that in one and the same kuala

FAMILY GODS 127
there were several family spirits, points also to their human
origin. According to the belief of the Votiaks, the kuala
spirits generally appear as human beings. At times, however,
though rarely, the Vorsud may reveal itself in some other
form. In a story of the Votiaks in the District of GLazov, a
kuala sanctuary is mentioned as having been on the site where
the present town of Vyatka is situated. It is related that
when the Russian settlers, after having driven out the Votiaks
from their then dwelling-places, began pulling down the kualat
a bird flew out of the sanctuary, meeting its death beside the
church just erected, as if stricken by an invisible power.1'
The Votiak, having founded for himself a kuala of his
own, still visits the old kuala, and sometimes even the still
older mother kuala. The first, in comparison with the second,
is a " little kuala" likewise the second in comparison with the
third, while the second, compared with the first, is a " great
kuala" and in the same way, the third in comparison with
the second. According to their kuala worship the Votiaks are
commonly divided into two groups, to both of which the same
person may belong — the family of the " great kuala " and
the family of the "little kuala" To illustrate the present
kuala cult of the Votiaks and the relations of the different
family groups with each other, it may be mentioned that the
same Votiak in the village of Ostorma-Yumya in the District
of Mamadysh, besides visiting the "little kuala," which is
situated in his own yard and in whose sacrifices, besides himself,
the families of his three younger brothers take part, also fre-
quents the "great kuala" situated in the same village and
visited by seventy-three families in all. The other families in
the village, belonging to other clans, go each their own way to
sacrifice. The above mentioned seventy-three families visit
also the kuala in the neighbouring village or Staraya-Yumya,
from which Ostorma-Yumya and certain other villages were
originally formed. The " great kuala " of Staraya-Yumya is
visited, not only by its own villages, but by the seventy-three

128 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
families of Ostorma-Yumya, and, also, by all the persons liv-
ing in the neighbouring villages who belong to the same tribe.
In later days, however, people have more and more ceased
coming from strange villages with their offerings to the " great
kuala " of the mother village.
The relationships among the family groups are, of course,
not the same in every Votiak village. Sometimes a " little
kuala " may be visited by quite a number of families, up to
several score, this depending wholly on the zeal of the Votiak
families in founding new kuala sanctuaries for themselves.
Those Votiaks, who have removed as settlers, and even
those who now remove far from their native place, and who,
therefore, cannot take part in the sacrifices of their native
village, remember, however, the kuala of their ancestors in
their own kualas. Thus for instance, a Votiak family living
in the village of Mozga in the District of Birsk, remembers the
" great kuala " in the native village of the same name in the
district of Yelabuga, because their ancestors had removed
thence, bringing with them mudor. A remarkable feature of
the kuda cult of. the Eastern Votiaks is, further, the circum-
stance that the so-called " little kualas" have come to be
neglected j relatives perform their sacrifices only in the mutual
family sanctuary, several of which may be found in one
village, depending on the number of different families. Un-
der such circumstances, mudor weddings take place only when
Votiaks remove as settlers from the old village to a new
one.
Reverence for the old home has been best preserved in the
oldest native districts of the Votiaks, where, in certain neigh-
bourhoods at present uninhabited, we may see remains of
crumbling huts, which are sometimes visited at the command
of the sorcerer, for the purpose of sacrificing in cases of severe
illnesses. A hut of this nature, which is called " the utter-
most kuala" is most probably the oldest home of the family
that has been retained in memory.

FAMILY GODS 129
General, regular kuala sacrifices are performed by the
Votiaks at somewhat different times in different places, but,
according to the most widespread custom, three times a year
— in the spring, in summer, and in autumn. Later, it has
become customary to sacrifice much oftener in the family kuala,
in some places on every Christian holy day.
On regular holy days, the Votiaks sacrifice in the " little "
as well as in the " great" kuala, representatives being some-
times sent also to the greater sanctuary of the mother village.
The sacrificial ceremonies in the different sanctuaries resemble
each other very much, with the exception of unimportant de-
viations. On the other hand, the times and order of sacrificing
in the kualas of different rank vary, sacrifices being sometimes
carried out first in the " little ktuila " and then in the " great
kuala '* and vice versa. In some places the sacrificial cere-
monies are held late in the evening, in others in the daytime.
At times the festivity lasts for two or three days.
The oldest account of a kuala sacrifice originates from the
province of Ufa and was published by Ryckov in the eight-
eenth century. The author relates that the Votiaks sacrifice,
" near certain branches of fir regarded by them as representing
the family god," a young calf, whose ears they then place on
the shelf on which the fir branches lie. The sacrificial animal
they kill in the sanctuary itself.18
Of the same period is the description by Georgi, who gives
a more detailed account of the sacrifice performed at Easter.
The author states that both men and women partake in the
ceremony, having cleansed themselves first by taking a bath
in the bathhouse. Each one brings with him to the kuala
guardian the objects necessary for the sacrifice. When the
meat is cooked, the officiating priest places a portion from
every dish and also some beer on a table opposite the door.
On the shelf above the table some fir-twigs are laid, and on
these he puts a dish with morsels from the sacrifice. These
he takes after a while, together with the drinking vessel,.in

130 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
his hand, asking from the Vorsud happiness, health, children,
cattle, bread, honey, etc.18
A later, but much more complete account (1838) describes
a sacrifice in the village of Multan. In this account it is stated
that the guests bring with them to the sanctuary, bread, cakes,
boiled eggs, and, for drink, home-made spirits and beer. Hav-
ing accompanied the sacrificial animal to the middle of the
kua-la in front of the " image," they place beside it loaves of
bread with eggs on them. If very many loaves have been
brought, those officiating select three whole ones, but of the
others they cut only a piece, placing these slices together with
the eggs on the whole loaves. At the same time, one of the
Votiaks recites prayers over the victim, and another pours
water on it. The prayer done, they begin killing the animal,
letting the blood flow into a cup or a trough; the skin is
stripped off, the entrails cleaned and the worthless parts buried
in a pit. The sacrificial animal is then cut up, its different
members being severed so that a piece is obtained from each,
the head, the breast, the legs, etc. The meat is boiled in a
pan, into which the blood is also poured. When everything is
ready, the Votiaks begin drinking the gin and tasting the sacri-
ficial food. At the same time, they sacrifice, three times, food
and meat in the fire, pouring into it, also three times, gin
and beer from every vessel. Further, all the bones of the
sacrificial animal are gathered and put into the fire, only those
that will not burn being buried in a pit. The prayer read
during the sacrifice contains invocations to the god to protect
the family, to multiply the cattle and cause the vegetation
to prosper.20
In the southern and eastern Votiak Districts, women gener-
ally do not appear at the sacrifices, and even when allowed to
come, they stop outside the door with their children. This
does not seem to have been the original custom. Among the
Votiaks of the northern parts, where the ancient original cus-
toms have been partly better preserved, women are always

FAMILY GODS 131
present when sacrificing at home. At times they have a rep-
resentative of their own even at the fatal* festivals, such
representatives, besides the ordinary kuala guardian, being
chosen from each sex for the purpose of arranging the festival
ceremonies. These become the host (lord) of the festival and
his wife, who sit each at a different table in different corners.
While officiating, the host keeps his cap on. The guests arrive
m white holiday costume at the sanctuary, where the men take
their places to the left of the fireplace, the women to the right.
Amusements very often follow the sacrifice: music, singing, etc.
The sacrificial priest sings sacrifice songs improvised on the
occasion in question.21
In our days blood sacrifices at the kuala festivals have
begun to be scarce. When sacrificing for some special reason
they are still necessary, but at the regular festivals it has be-
come customary to sacrifice only bread or porridge. Even if
bread only be sacrificed, the Votiaks, in remembrance of the
older custom, must still light the sacrificial fire. Once a year
however, at least, they must still carry out a blood sacrifice
with materials mutually contributed.
At the sacrifices, the Votiaks place one part of the sacrificial
gifts on the shelf, while another part is burnt in the fire. When
sacrificing bread, they always place it on the shelf in the corner,
on which a white cloth is laid for the purpose. Sometimes
there is placed on the regular sacrifice bread, which the wife of
the kuala guardian makes of spring corn, other little pieces of
bread from all the other families taking part in the sacrifice.
Besides bread, the Votiaks also sometimes put butter, honey,
and drink on the Vorsud shelf. On the occasion of the blood
sacrifice, a little meat porridge, or, when the beast is a big
domestic animal, portions of its most important organs, gener-
ally boiled in different pans, are placed there. In most Dis-
tricts it is customary to place the above named offerings on
the shelf only as long as the prayer is being said. There are
circumstances, however, which indicate that formerly the offer-

132 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
ings were also left in their place for a longer time. Thus,
for instance, it is customary in the District of Mamadysh, when
sacrificing a duck, to leave its head on the sacrifice shelf until
after the second or third day after the kuala festival, when it
is eaten up by the priest. At Easter, a cake or a cup of water
is placed on the shelf for the night, sometimes for a whole
week, after which period persons belonging to the family eat
up the offerings. The women, in general, are not in the habit
of eating of the food placed on the sacrifice shelf.
Such portions of the sacrifice as the Votiaks place on the shelf,
have also been sacrificed in the fire. Is this dual sacrificial
custom of the kuala cult to be considered as the original, or
are there two different stages of development reflected in these
customs? Aminoff considers that the placing on the shelf is an,
older form of the kuala sacrifice, and the throwing into the
fire a more recent one.22 That the fire sacrifice in general is of
later date among the Finno-Ugric races is seen clearly from the
sacrificial customs of the Lapps.
Besides the blood sacrifices, the purpose of which was prin-
cipally the feasting of the family gods, the Votiaks, in former
times, also carried gifts to their kuala sanctuaries which were in-
tended to serve the spirits as clothing, ornaments, or other holy
property. We have already mentioned that in the ancient sacri-
fice cases of the Votiaks, all kinds of objects, such as skins,
feathers, coins, etc., have been found, which most likely had
been placed there as offerings. In former times, sacrifices of
this kind were of course much more abundant and of more
value, so that many " great kualas " became quite remarkable
treasuries. For this reason their doors were well closed in un-
settled times, and the services of a special " guardian " were
necessary.
Besides the gift offerings, sacrificial coins are kept in the kuala
sanctuary of the Votiaks, a collection of money being, indeed,
embodied in the sacrificial ceremonies, and generally carried out
after the feast. This is done in such a manner that every guest

FAMILY GODS 133
either puts his mite into the money box or presses it into the
cake that the kuala guardian carries in his hands, after the sacri-
fice. Sometimes the guests bring their money stuck into the
sacrificial bread. This common money, of which much more
was collected formerly than nowadays, is used only for sacred
purposes. With this money they pay for the repair of the
sanctuary and for things necessary at the performance of the
sacrifices, and in addition for the sacrificial animals.
Besides the above mentioned regular sacrificial festivals,
there are others, more or less accidental, celebrated only under
certain circumstances, sometimes in the " great kuala" and
sometimes in the " little kuala." Occasional sacrifice festivals
are celebrated by the Votiaks when such illnesses or other mis-
fortunes have occurred, as are declared by the sorcerer to origi-
nate from the spirits living in the kuala. The sacrifice is not
killed immediately, but a " sacrificial vow " is made first, which,
in case of lack of means, may still be " renewed," before the
true sacrifice is offered up. But on no account may it be for-
gotten or put off to an indefinite future. Particularly is it
obligatory to sacrifice when a young girl in the family is to be
married. It is related that, in the District Sarapul, when a
bride removes to her new home, she is first taken round the
fireplace in her old home, the while her father prays, with a
measure of gin and another of beer in his hand, promising to
sacrifice an ox, a calf, or some other animal to the family
spirit.23 In the District Mamadysh it is customary that, on the
wedding day, the young wife makes a sacrificial vow, but the
sacrifice itself generally takes place first in the following
autumn, when she arrives at her native village with a duck
under her arm. The bird is killed and boiled in the " great
kuala" the sacrifice prayer being said by the "guardian," who
points out to the Vorsud which of the daughters of the family,
having married, has now removed to another family and is
therefore bringing an offering to the family spirits of her native
home. No other person than the sacrificing priest and the

I34 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
sacrificer herself may take part in the performance. Only after
this sacrifice may the wife perform sacrifices in her husband's
family kuala. In case of illness, however, or some other mis-
fortune, she must, on the advice of the sorcerer, sacrifice to the
kuala of her family.
We have earlier pointed out similarities between some fea-
tures of the Vorsud cult and those of the worship of the spirits
of the deceased. The worship of departed ancestors is, above
all, recalled by the close relationship of the Vorsud to the
family worshipping the same, in whose name it is often ad-
dressed in prayer. It is to be noted, also, that the Votiaks turn
to the Vorsud and to the deceased in exactly the same matters,
chiefly in cases of illness, the Vorsud and the deceased members
of the family being sometimes named side by side in the
same prayer.
In comparing the kuala sacrifices and the order in which
they are performed, with the general memorial festivals of
the Votiaks, celebrated in the dwelling-house, we notice that in
these, customs are observed that resemble the kuala ceremonies.
Thus the Votiaks celebrate memorial festivals, besides those
at home, within a greater family circle, or at the home of the
ancestors of the family, on which occasion they recall together
the memory of the deceased members of the family, in particu-
lar that of the most important. This corresponds to the
Votiaks' curious fashion of distinguishing between the family
of the " little kuala » and that of the " great kuala." Thus,
it is no accident that the time of celebrating the regular kuala
festivals and that of the regular memorial festivals fall so near
each other. Evidently, the kuala festivals are only a more an-
cient form of the memorial festivals, in which, instead of
poultry, larger domestic animals were used for the sacrifice.
As the ceremonies at a later time have become altered to some
extent from their earlier form, both have been retained side by
side with each other until our days.
Among other Finno-Ugric peoples, the kuala cult has not

FAMILY GODS 135
been preserved to the same extent as among the Votiaks. Many
of them do not even use the old building, although it bears a
name common among all the tribes of these peoples. Remains
of the kuala cult, have, however, been preserved among the
Cheremiss, amongst whom we may still see, in some parts, in
the background of the hut {kudo) a time-darkened case which
these, like the Votiaks, regard as the dwelling of the kudo-
spirit. Nowadays we see there, besides offerings, only dried
birch leaves which are not even always renewed on the occasion
of sacrificing. Most frequently, however, we no longer find
a sacrifice case in a Cheremiss kudo, but in its former place,
the corner shelf continues to be held sacred. No stranger is
allowed to approach the sacrifice shelf, as the kudo-spmt
(kudo-Vodyz) may take it amiss, nor does it befit women to
approach it, and even the children are afraid of it and avoid
it. In order to shield the sacred back part of the sanctuary
from injurious contact, the Cheremiss in some parts of the
country used to divide the house by a partition.24 In the Dis-
trict of Urzhum I heard the back part called " the little kudo"
At times only one or the other back-corner is separated by
means of a partition of boards. The "little kudo" which is
reached from the " great" one through a small door, is, ac-
cording to the Cheremiss, more sacred than the other parts of
the building. Only grown up men may enter there, and not
even these unnecessarily. In bygone days there were kept in
"the little kudo" besides the sacrificial objects necessary at
divine service, also arms and implements of the chase. Here
were made, besides, their vows of sacrifice, by bringing in the
firewood necessary when sacrificing in the forest, and the pan
in which the victim was to be boiled. Where there is no
longer any kudo, the sacrifice case is kept in the storehouse in
the entrance to the bathhouse.
The £«*/o-Vodyz of the Cheremiss, when requiring sacrifice,
also appears in human form in the dreams of the family mem-
bers. The offering is then placed in the above named case,

136 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
or on the sacred corner shelf. According to the earliest ac-
counts, the Cheremiss slaughtered a black sheep for their god.25
Nowadays they bring for the most part only small sacrifices,
such as hens and ducks, for occasional reasons, mostly on ac-
count of a certain eye disease (trachoma). At first the sacrificial
vow is fulfilled in such manner that a little meal, some honey,
and cakes or other eatables, are placed on the sacrifice shelf.
The sacrifice itself is not executed until after the lapse of some
time. Then the flour and honey used at the sacrificial vow
are mixed into a dough, of which sacrificial bread is made for
all the members of the family. In the sacrificial meal, which
is prepared and consumed in the kudo, only members of the
family partake, strangers not being allowed the tiniest bit.
When beginning the meal, pieces of food are placed on the
sacrifice shelf, near which the head of the family prays, asking
for forgiveness on behalf of the sinner and on that of the
whole family, should any one, unconsciously, in one way or
another, have happened to offend the kudo-spirit, and implor-
ing him to protect and keep the family and home. In some dis-
tricts it is customary to offer up a sacrifice to him at a fixed time,
in the autumn. The bones of the victim are not burnt, but
buried in the earth under the buildingj a portion from every
part of the body of the sheep used for this being placed on the
sacrifice shelf. In the District of Urzhum a curious custom has
been retained of taking the household god to one's neighbours,
when the spirit, by sending an illness, seems to require a sacrifice.
When not inclined to sacrifice to it, they say: " Do not require
any thing of us, we have boiled the last already; we will take
thee to our neighbour's; there is a silver-horned bull and a fine
woolly sheep, there thou shalt have a treat." Thus speaking,
the Cheremiss takes dust from the " kudo-spirits " case and
sets out for his neighbour's. If he is asked to take a seat there,
and is offered bread and salt, all is well, as then " the spirit "
has been kindly received. Unnoticed, the guest throws the
dust from his hand into the corner and goes away without

FAMILY GODS 137
saying good-bye or asking his neighbour to come and see him.
Also among the Hill Cheremiss, amongst whom one very rarely
comes across a kudo, the belief has been preserved that the
kudo-Vodyz, continues to live in the place of the former kudo,
and that he who quarrels in the said place or besmirches it, will
undoubtedly fall ill.26
After marriage, the Cheremiss woman still goes at first for
some time to the kudo of her old home to sacrifice, should she
meet with illness or any other misfortune declared by the sor-
cerer to have been caused by the spirits of the " old place."
Similarly the scattered younger families turn when necessary to
the spirits of older kudo. Thus, the " little family " remains
always dependent on the " great family " in some way or
other."
Georgi speaks also about a material image of the family god,
stating that " in many houses, perhaps in every house, there is
in a corner in a case, a coarse little doll of wood, dressed in
male attire." When describing the wedding ceremonies of the
Cheremiss, he further relates that " when everything is ready
in the wedding house, the family god is placed on the table
and the sacrificing priest (kart) of the village prays in front
of it." Considering that the Cheremiss have not been in the
habit of keeping the sacrifice case in the dwelling-house, there
is reason to suppose that the family god mentioned by Georgi
is the kudo-Vodyz.2*
A similar family cult doubtless existed among the Mordvins,
and even among the Baltic Finns. Among the Esthonians,
remains of it seem to have been preserved, through alien in-
fluence, until modern times. The Vorsud case of the Votiaks
corresponds, with them, to the " Tonni vakk" (vakk =
"case"). On Tonni or Antony's-day (January seventeenth)
one must brew beer or slaughter some animal — the latter
being generally a sheep, though a bull is sometimes mentioned.
At nightfall, the Tonni vakk was taken from its recess, candles
were lighted on the rims of the case, and it was carried all

i3« FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
round the dwelling house, the cattle sheds, and the yard.
From each part of the carcase of the sacrificial animal a piece
of meat was cut as a sacrifice to Tonni, and of the gravy a little
was also sprinkled on the nearest paths. Lastly the people
sat down to eat.
Tonni's case, which had to be made by the sorcerer, was kept
in a place known only by the master, generally in the attic of
the storehouse. In this were placed all the year round, for one
reason or another, various offerings: — when the corn was
threshed, when beer was brewed, when milking a cow that had
lately calved, when shearing the sheep, and when spinning yarn
or weaving cloth. When slaughtering, they sacrificed meat,
blood or fat. The case had to be particularly remembered on
the occasion of illness among either human beings or animals.
Falling ill was considered to be a consequence of the case hav-
ing been damaged or of some one, when passing, having made
a noise, or because the people had forgotten to sacrifice to it.
There is a report even, that the case used to contain a doll-like
image. That the Esthonians also had known both a lesser
family spirit and a greater one, is shown by a tradition, accord-
ing to which not only every family but also every village had its
common sacrifice case.2*
There are no reliable statements regarding the corresponding
family worship of the Finns. Yet, in the social life of the
Karelians there are indications that these belonged to two dif-
ferent families, a smaller and a larger one, the chieftainship
of the last named — where its head was not chosen by election
— descending from a father to the eldest son of the eldest
branch of the family. A result of the worship of the fore-
fathers of the family was most likely the alien position of the
wife in her husband's home, for, as with the Votiaks, the women
in Finnish Karelia kept their own family name even after
their marriage.80