CHAPTER I
THE BELIEF IN SOULS
T
HE BELIEF of the Finno-Ugric people regarding the
soul presents a very primitive concept. According to
the Lapps, life does not cease altogether at death, but in some
form continues as long as the skeleton remains, an example
of this conviction being afforded, for instance, by their bear-
feast j and in like manner they hold that the gods let new
flesh grow on the sacrificial victim's bones, all of which are
preserved with great care.1 If we may draw inferences from
the sacrificial ceremonies, this belief was formerly general
throughout the Finno-Ugric stock. As an instance of the con-
cept which holds that the soul vanishes when the body is an-
nihilated we may cite the Vogul custom whereby, lest the
bear should do grave harm to any one, the injured man,
instead of worshipping the animal, endeavours to free him-
self from it by completely destroying all parts of its body.
Charuzin, who describes this usage, remarks that by it they
purpose " to kill the victim's soul together with its body."3
This concept is likewise found in the cult of the dead. In
his account of the burial rites of the Pite Lapps the missionary
Graan records that for several years after the death of any of
their number they crumbled barley bread into small bits and
strewed it on the graves " until the sinking of the grave-
mound showed that the body had decayed." * Among the
Ostiaks, in like manner, the belief has been found that after

4 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
the body has decayed the dead no longer survive.4 Even at
a very late period the Ingermanland Finns were wont to go
to the burial places to weep and to carry food to the graves
of their tribesmen so long as it was conceivable that the bodies
had not yet crumbledj for after that they believed that "the
soul itself ceases to exist." B If the deceased is supposed to
be dangerous, the corpse is cut in pieces or even burned to
ashes j and in a village in the Circle of Birsk the Votiaks pur-
sued a like course after the lapse of several years in the case
of a death which the sorcerers declared to have given rise to
a severe epidemic. To this day the Ostiak Samoyeds fear
certain corpses which are believed to go about at night and
injure the living, though they become powerless as soon as
the sun rises. A whole host of stories tells of contests be-
tween such corpses and living menj but they may be prevented
from rising out of their graves by being pierced with a stake
and pinned fast to the ground.9
Side by side with this belief in a soul inseparably connected
with the body, the Finno-Ugrians seem to have held that
each limb and organ likewise had its separate soul. Accord-
ingly, at a sacrifice a small portion of all the parts of the vic-
tim's body was taken and dedicated, together with the bones,
to the deity. Souls or (more properly) soul-powers are hid-
den especially in the most important organs, such as the heart,
the liver, and the blood j and the circulation of the blood has
obviously given rise to the Cheremiss belief that the " soul"
or the "life " (tson) can wander about within the body. If
a blow which reaches some part of the body proves to be
mortal, the " soul," according to this view, has been in that
portion just at the fatal instant; but even though a man's skull
were ^fractured, the Cheremiss maintain that death would not
ensue "if the "soul" chanced not to be in the head at the
moment.7 The concept of the material character of the quali-
ties of the soul is also evidenced by the belief that one may
acquire them for his own by devouring the organs containing

THE BELIEF IN SOULS 5
the soul-qualities of another. Gondatti states that the ancient
Vogul heroes ate the hearts and' livers of their slain enemies
" that their strength might be transferred to their own bodies
and that the foe might never again be able to rise from the
dead."8 Beliefs regarding the potencies hidden in the heart
recur in a Chronicle of 889, which states that the Hungarians
cut the captives' hearts in pieces and ate them as some sort
of remedy j and to this day the sacrificial priest of the Cher-
emiss prays God to protect men against " those who cut out
the heart and the liver." The same belief was doubtless held
by the forefathers of the Finns, for among their Esthonian
kinsmen it was still flourishing in the thirteenth century, since
the Sakkala peasants are said to have torn the heart from the
breast of a living Danish Crusader, and after roasting it, to
have divided it among themselves and eaten it " in order to
be brave against the Christians." By drinking another man's
blood the Voguls and others believe that soul-powers pass
from, one body into another/ Even in such insignificant parts
of the body as the hair, nails, and teeth a soul -(or soul-power)
is believed to lie concealed. How else could the means of
guarding the soul against falling into evil hands be explained?
Novitskiy expressly relates that a Vogul sacrificial priest
warned his people against the Russian missionaries in the fol-
lowing words: "Take care, my friends . . . when they start
to cut your hair, they cut off your souls." In this connection,
it may be, mentioned that the Ostiaks believed that by scalping
an enemy they could prevent his ghost from walking.10 Even
those objects which have been in contact with a man sustain a
certain relation to the soul. Among causes of illness the Lapps
recognize the power of a dweller in the underworld to take
to himself some article of attire which has been in contact
with the sick, such as cap, gloves, or boots; " and from this
is deduced the magical theory of 'pars p-o toto which finds
application likewise in rites of sacrifice.
Iij close relation to the remains of the deceased stands his

6 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
shape, or shadow, which can occasionally free itself from the
body even during life. Of a man who is unconscious the
Cheremiss says that his " shape " or " shadow " (on) has left
him; and in like manner, if any one gives him a severe fright,
he declares: " Thou drivest mine ort away." If a Cheremiss
dreams of a city, he is convinced that his ort has wandered
thither by night; otherwise, he argues, he could not have seen
the city exactly as it is. Dreaming is also called " the drt*s
wandering"; and when the man awakes, his ort returns to his
body.12
The ort of the Cheremiss corresponds to the wt of the
Votiaks. If the urt does not succeed in coming back to its
abode before the man wakes, he falls ill, is pale, and begins
to pine away, so that a sleeper must not be aroused suddenly.1*
In general the disappearance of the soul is regarded as a cause
of grave illness, and in such a contingency it is advisable to
have recourse to a magician or shaman in order that he may
seek the lost soul and bring it back to the body. Sometimes
it happens that the " soul" of the dying goes to the nether
world, but returns after a while; and then the man recovers.
Thus an Ostiak song tells of a hero who, in battle, received
a sword-stroke on his head and lost consciousness. For a time
his " shadow " ascended to heaven, only to return when his
dead brother's " shadow" informed him that his hour was
not yet come.1* A very wide-spread belief holds that the
shaman's "shadow" can go to the underworld to seek aid
there.
The closeness of the connexion between a man's body and
his " shadow " is shown by an account of Lapp shamanism
which dates from the thirteenth century. This states, among
other matters, that during a shaman's journey in the nether
world a hostile " shadow" struck out the stomach of his
"shadow," the mishap being clearly visible in the magician's
real body, which was lying in the tent; 1B and several similar
instances will be cited in a subsequent chapter on the shamans.

THE BELIEF IN SOULS 7
Death does not in the least sever the bond of union between
the " soul" and the corpse. When asked why the bones of
the sacrificial victim are not broken, the Finnish Lapps
answered: "On certain nights the victims which we have
offered wander as (shadows' from burial-place to burial-place
together with the folk of the underworld."16 The general
concept is that after death the " shadow " takes up its abode
where the body has been buried.
In Finno-Ugric belief man has also another soul which can
release itself from the body, and which is called " breath."
The source of this concept is to be found in the last expiration
of the dying. At death the Ostiak lilt Vogul lilit Hungarian
lekekt Siryan lolt Votiak lul (" expiration," " soul"), and the
Esthonian leil ("expiration," " soul," " steam," cf. Finnish
loyly, " bath-vapour ") leaves its abode through the mouth
or nostrils; and " the breath's departure " is a common synonym
for death. Obviously the " breath " was originally under-
stood to be simply a vital function which revealed itself as
respiration or vapour; and Nalimov states that, in Siryan
belief, at death the lol evaporates in the air like vapour.
The Finnish stocks are convinced that when the soul
liberates itself from the body, it can appear not only in a
quasi-human shape — which is the form which it most fre-
quently takes — but may also assume some other guise, often
that of an animal. Nalimov has noted a Siryan tradition
which tells how, while a woman slept, her lol came forth
from its abode and in the form of a little mouse danced about
on her breast. For a time her mouth was hidden by the cover-
let j but the soul again transformed itself into vapour and thus
re-entered the body, so that the sleeper could wake up.17 The
Votiaks believe that one of the forms in which the soul appears
during sleep is that of the batj and an old Votiak declared
that the reason why these creatures are never seen by day is
because men are then awake; they appear only at night, when
men are asleep. If a bat approaches any one, it is a sign

8 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
that it is in reality the soul of some kinsman or acquaintance}
and the old man just mentioned even related a tradition that
the bat is, as a matter of fact, a soul-bird. " A man went to
rest, but his companions sat up in the yard. They saw how a
bat flew round certain places j and when the sleeper awoke,
they asked him what he had dreamed. The man declared
that in his slumber he had wandered to the very places where
the bat had flown, and from this his comrades inferred that
the bat which they had seen was the soul of the sleeping
man." Sometimes the soul also appears in the form of a little
grey butterfly. In the Circle of Birsk the present writer
heard it said that when the urt leaves a man's body because
of severe fright, the services of a witch are sought, and she
begins to spy after it with a white cloth in her hand. After
she has hunted everywhere, she finally notices a little grey
butterfly, and when she has caught it in her cloth, she takes
it into the room and at night binds both cloth and butterfly
about the sufferer's neck. On the following morning observa-
tion of the shapes assumed by molten tin dropped into water
determines whether the captive soul-butterfly is really the
sick man's urt.
In like manner the soul of a sleeping man moves about as
a butterfly in a tradition recorded by the present writer from
the Circle of Mamadysh. " Two men went to the forest to
cut down trees, and at midday, while they were resting, one
of them fell asleep, whereupon his comrade saw the lid issue
from his mouth in the form of a butterfly and go to a pail
of water which they had with them in the woods. From
the water it flew to a cavity in a linden, thence back to the
water-vessel, and from there to the sleeper's mouth. Waking
from his slumber, he said to his companion: (I was asleep
and dreamed that I floated over a river on whose farther
shore was a tree in which was a hollow containing many pieces
of gold.' After finishing their work the men returned home,
but a little later the comrade, who had seen where the sleeper's

THE BELIEF IN SOULS 9
soul moved about the tree, went by night to the forest, sought
out the tree, and there found a number of coins."1S
The " souls " of the dead have power of motion like those
of the living. When a little grey butterfly was seen to come
in by the window during the memorial feast in honour of a
Votiak child's father, its mother said to it: "His soul has
come in the form of a butterfly." It is also believed that the
souls of the departed may find concealment in the guise of
other sorts of insects, this explaining the Cheremiss custom
that whenever many caterpillars begin to appear in the grain-
fields, sacrifice is made to such of the departed as have died
without leaving kinsfolk. A belief in soul-mice among this
same people is implied by a similar offering which is given if
many mice begin to be found in the yard.19 According to
the Ostiaks, the deceased transforms himself into a beetle and
is thus revealed to the livingj and a like idea seems to have
been known to the Finns, as is evident from a peculiar custom.
Maidens are wont to take beetles in their hands and ask them
whither they go to wed, hither or thither or "in the swart
earth's bosom." If then the beetle flies to the churchyard, it
is an omen of death. Similar beliefs occur among other
European peoples.
Certain Finno-Ugric peoples are also convinced that the
departed appear as birds, and the Lapps tell how a dead man
who had been buried on a small island and who haunted it
by day flew across the water in the form of a great bird.8*
Like wicked men the dead may likewise manifest themselves
as wolves j and when the Votiaks drive away spirits which
roam about at Easter, one of their cries is: " Go, wolves, go! "
" Souls " may also be seen in other guise than that of ani-
mals, and the belief is very general that a man's soul may
wander around as a whirlwind. In the Circle of Birsk the
present writer heard the Cheremiss tell how a wayfarer hurled
his knife into such an eddy, which, with the knife, immedi-
ately vanished. The man continued on his journey till evening

io FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
came, when he was about to pass the night in a hut along the
road. There, to his amazement, an old man sat with a knife
in his cheek; whereupon the traveller forthwith recognized
his own knife and perceived that the master of the bothie
was the old man who had wandered about as an eddy of wind.
The soul of the living as well as of the dead can likewise fly
around as a " fire-serpent," in other words, as a meteor. Ac-
cording to the Cheremiss its course can be stayed by tearing
.off the wristband of one's shirt or the band of one's lime-
bark ;shoes, or by splitting a wooden pitch-fork, together with
which the meteor falls to the ground and is changed back
into the man who flew about as the " fire-snake." In Siryan
belief the soul (ort) of the departed may even manifest itself
as a blue flame burning on the ground (orf-Af, " ort*s fire ").
Shadow-souls may sometimes lose their original meaning
by being transformed into the Doppel-ganger or tutelary
genius of the person in question. Thus the Siryan ort, in the
form in which the popular mind now most usually conceives
it, recalls the guardian spirit of the man rather than the real
shadow-soul. Every one has an ort which constantly dwells
near its protege, acting as a guardian-spirit; it appears in
dreams, generally in the shape of the person in question, and
occasionally pinches blue spots in one's skin. In some places
its abode is believed to be wholly separate from the man,
whence the assertion is made, for example, that it has its home
in birds. Yet one of the proofs that the ort was originally
nothing else than the man's " shadow " is found in the belief
that, after his death, his soul is blended with his ortt so that
both form one and the same being. It is further believed that
the on of the deceased reveals itself in the form of the
departed for forty days after death, and then vanishes.21 As
a portent of someone's death the ort manifests itself chiefly in
the shape of a bird; and the same belief is found among the
Voguls: " The urt lives in the forest. When a human being
must die, his wt cries out; when a little child comes to his

THE BELIEF IN SOULS 11
last hour, the urt speaks with a child's voice j if an adult
passes away, the «r/*j voice is that of an adult. Its exterior
is parti-coloured, and its wings resemble those of a bat."
Shamans can always see it near them. Should any one hear
its call, he turns to it with the words: " If one of my kins-
folk is to die, draw thou nigh to me." If some relative is
actually the person in question, the urt approaches the inquirer;
but otherwise it withdraws from him. According to Friis,
the Norse Lapps called such a bird, heard by night lamenting
with a human voice, a Suoje-lodde (" Sudje-bird "), the
word Sueje being used in the Swedish Lapmark to denote
the shaman's " tutelary genius," the appellation having
apparently meant primarily " shadow." The spectres of
shamans are especially liable to metamorphosis.22
The tutelary genius of a man is called Haltia (" Ruler")
by the Finns; and each individual has his own, which pre-
cedes him. A man might be blessed with such a potent
Haltia that, for example, it would reach home a little earlier
than the man himself, whose approach it announced with
clamour and crash. A man's Varjohaltia (" Shadow-ruler ")
could inform him beforehand of coming events, as, e.g.,
whether he would reap a good or a bad harvest. It was be-
lieved in some districts that a child made its own Haltia when
it was three days old; before the expiration of that time it
was dangerous to leave the infant alone, for a changeling
might be substituted in its stead. That the Haltia manifested
itself in the form of the culprit is obvious from such phrases
as " it was not he, but his Haltia," or " the dead themselves
do not walk, it is their Haltias which appear as ghosts."
The Saattaja (" guide ") — an expression which is com-
paratively rare — and the Onni (" fortune ") seem to denote
precisely the same being as the Haltia; and a man's " fortune,"
which might be propitious or the reverse, never left him till
death. Like the Haltia the " fortune " precedes the man and
announces his coming. When any mischance happened on

12 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
the road, the " fortune" warned its owner as he returned
homeward, his ears beginning to ring, or his eyes or nose to
itch, etc. The Haltia of the Finns has its analogue in the
Radare or Ra (" ruler ") of the Swedes, and their Saattaja
finds its counterpart in the Fylgja of the Scandinavians.28
The word employed by the Finno-Ugrians and peoples
influenced by them to denote " shadow-soul" often means
originally " shadow," " appearance," and " image." When
the Yurak Samoyeds make images of the sun, moon, or human
beings, they call them "shadows"; and the Vogul term for
a man's "soul" (is, Finnish itse, "self") is also employed
when they speak, for instance, of the " shadow " of a tree or
of a house. The Ostiaks call their " earthly gods " and the
wooden figures of these deities by a name {tongk) which
originally meant " shadow"; and the word haamuy which
signifies " shadow-soul>7 in Finnish, means " form," " figure "
in Lappish and "countenance" in Mordvinianj while in
Cheremiss the Tatar loan-word tys is occasionally employed
to denote the " shadow-soul," though properly it signifies
" countenance " or " image," as when it is applied, for ex-
ample, to the leaden figure representing the sacrificial animal,
as we shall see later. The Mordvinian word for " soul"
(tsopatsa) is also applied to the image of a god.
If " soul" or " image " were thus an identical concept, it
would be natural to infer that the prototype would be inti-
mately affected by whatever happened to the image. Orig-
inally the Finno-Ugric peoples were extremely cautious in
regard to the delineation of themselves, and to this day many
of them are most reluctant to permit themselves to be photo-
graphed or otherwise pictured. A certain anxiety also lurks
in the words which a Cheremiss girl repeats when she sees
herself in a mirror: "Take not from me my appearance or
image "; and this fear is especially associated with showing a
mirror to a small child. By injuring their enemy's image the
Lapps believed that they could cause their foe himself to

THE BELIEF IN SOULS 13
feel pain. In the notes of the missionary Randulf we read
the following account: "When the Lapp wishes to injure a
man with whom he is angry, whether he dwells close by or
far away, he employs for this purpose a little bow made of
reindeer horn, together with the arrows belonging to it, one
blunt and one pointed. If he desires to make his enemy's
hand, foot, or other member useless, he shoots the blunt
arrow into the corresponding part of the body of an image
supposed to represent the person in question} but if his inten-
tion is rather to cause an open wound or a constant subcutane-
ous pain, he shoots the sharp arrow into the relevant portion
of the effigy."24
Generally speaking, persons of superior importance, such
as primal ancestors, shamans, and heroes, survive their bodies
in images or " shadows " which are made after them.
Just as men speak of the " shadow " or " soul" of a human
being or of an animal, so various things are supposed to
possess a "soul," which can free itself from the object to
which it belongs. Thus, for example, everything which grows
has its " soul." According to the Votiaks, the " soul" (««)
of the corn can assume the form of a little butterfly, pre-
cisely like the soul of a manj and the Cheremiss speak,
furthermore, of the " soul" (orf) of the earth, fire, water,
etc. When " souls " vanish out of the earth, it can no longer
produce vegetation} if the "soul" of the water disappears,
it begins to sicken and is turbid and nauseous to the taste; and
if a man drinks of such water, he falls ill. Even the bothie
or hut has its " soul," which flees if men are noisy and quar-
relsome in the room. " You are driving the * soul' of my
bothie away," cries the Cheremiss if any one commits a breach
of the peace in his home. When the " soul" has fled, the
bothie is no longer "happy," and "life is heavy there"}
while no " soul" is found in a deserted, uninhabited house.
In the fantasy of the Cheremiss the " bothie-soul {'port-on)
cannot assume any shape whatsoever. When asked what he

H FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
means by the " soul" of the bothie, he answers that it is not
any distinct entity, but the "luck," "joy," or "health" of
the hut. Both farm-yard and threshing-floor have their
" souls." When the former possesses it, " the cow-yard re-
joices; the cattle thrive and multiply." Of the latter it is
said that " where the (soul * flourishes, even small quantities
of seed yield a blessingj but if it leaves the place, great heaps
of seed wholly lack their proper usefulness." If no seed is
found on the threshing-floor, neither is any " soul" dis-
coverable there.
According to the belief of the Finno-Ugrians, the very
smallest things have a " soul." This explains the custom of
breaking objects intended for the dead, such as wooden spoons
and bowls, clay pots, and the like, " so that the departed may
take them with him to the invisible world." Doubtless this
reflects the concept that even things have an invisible part
which is separated from the visible by being broken j in other
words, an object must be deprived of its life in order that its
" soul" may leave it. Or, as in Mordvinian usage, the ob-
ject which is given to the dead may simply be scraped with a
knife, its " soul" being thus released. At the offerings in
their groves the Cheremiss violently shake the objects em-
ployed for the occasion; and when we recollect that the
sacrificial victim which shivers, like the man who is frightened,
loses its " shadow," we understand what beliefs are connected
with this peculiar custom. Just as there is a " tutelary genius "
of a man's " shadow," so there is a " nature god " of a " nature
soul "j and water, earth, forest, tree, house, and the like
possess a Haltia, just as we have seen the Finns apply the
term to the Dof-pel-ganger of a man.
The name must also be reckoned in the category of belief
in souls, and this explains, among other matters, why the
Votiaks call the rite of choosing a name " the seeking of the
soul" (urt kuton).2* When a child cries a great deal or falls

THE BELIEF IN SOULS 15
ill, or when a " mark " caused by the dead rises on its skin,
this is interpreted to mean that it has chanced to receive a
wrong name. To remedy this, sundry magic ceremonies are
employed to determine what new name the child should re-
ceive in order that it may thrive and recover. From the
names .which are enumerated during these rites, and which
have usually been borne by departed forefathers, the inference
may be drawn that the " soul" or " spirit" which is sought
for the child is the soul of some ancestor. That this was
actually true in the beginning is shown by the corresponding
beliefs and ceremonies of the Lapps. They held that a preg-
nant woman could indicate, either in dreams or through
shamans, which of the kindred dead was willing to live anew
in the child. The name was given by an old woman, who
baptized (a later custom) the child, saying: " I baptize thee
with the name of such and such a departed one. Mayest
thou have the same fortune and happiness that he (or she)
had in this world." In addition they believed that, with the
name, the child received the " guardian spirit" which had
once belonged to the former bearer of the name. " Guardian
spirits" could also appear in visible form, as in that of a fish.
Sacrifice should be offered to the dead whose name was given
to the child. If the right name was not immediately found,
the appellation cf the child might afterwards, in case of sick-
ness, be changed several times.2* According to the Northern
Ostiaks, after a number of years the spirit of the deceased
could be born again to earthly life in a child belonging to his
kindred j and then the name of the dead man must be found
in order that the child might thrive and be strong.87 Side by
side with this custom another is met with among the Eastern
Finno-Ugrian peoples, according to which a name was given
to a child from the first object or phenomenon to attract the
attention of the parents or the midwife at its birth."
That the giving of the name was a custom of immemorial

16 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
antiquity among the Finno-Ugric peoples is shown by the
fact that the word for " name " is common to them all, so
that the Finnish term nitni, is actually used also in Samoyed
(mm). Probably it is the same word which also occurs in the
Indo-European languages (namany Sw/aa, nomett, name, etc.).