The precursors of the Yakut tales have probably been the
paradise ideas of the ancient Iranians, like the beliefs of
the West Siberian peoples, who place this mighty tree on " the

358 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
iron mountain " rising from the centre of the earth-disc. From
ancient Persian literature we see that they also called the cen-
tral mountain of the earth Hara Berezaiti, " the iron moun-
tain," on the summit of which they believed the tree of life to
be. On this mountain where, under the tree of life, is the
spring of the water of life, Ardvisura, and the paradise of the
Iranians, dwells the first man, Gajomartan, as in the Yakut
paradise. Like the latter the Iranians also pictured him as a
" white " being." With the help of these facts we can assume
that the tale in question has spread along with a current of
civilization from the Iranians to the Turco-Tatar peoples, and
with the Yakuts wandered to the distant River Lena, where
their folk-lore was able to preserve it as near the original
as has been shown, and thus to hand down to the present
generation a valuable relic of the paradise ideas of the Iranians
and the whole East, of which ideas only scanty and scattered
fragments are to be found in ancient literature.
With the greater reason, therefore, do we turn our attention
to the Yakut conception of the tree of life. From the pre-
ceding tales we have seen, that besides " the First Man," the
whole of the animals of creation dwell near the tree, and that
it is regarded as the nourisher of them all. But in the begin-
ning the tree would seem to have had a still more marvellous
significance. A variant of the tale describes how the Over-god
and the goddess of Birth and Fate, Kybai-Khotun, the name
also of the spirit dwelling in the tree, gave birth to the first
man in the third heaven, from which he was lowered down to
the earth; but despite this, the other version goes on to details
showing how the ancestor of the human race really appeared
in his life-giving surroundings. His curiosity as to where he
has come from leads him to the conclusion that he has been
born in those very surroundings. This appears, e.g., from his
words: " If I had dropped down from heaven, I should be
covered with snow and hoar-frost, if I had come from the
south or the north, from the east or the west of the central

THE TREE OF LIFE 359
place (the earth), I should bear marks of trees and grass and
I should give out the scent of the windj if I had risen from the
bowels of the earth, I should have the dust of the earth on
me."1S It appears probable, therefore, that the milk-breasted
goddess of the wonderful tree has given birth to him and that
" the First Man " is right in saying to her: " Be my mother,
as though thou hadst given birth to mej be my creator, as
though thou hadst created me." Motherly care is also defined
in the words: " Thou hast brought up me, an orphan, to man's
estate, thou hast suffered me, the little one, to grow up." "
Further, we can hardly be mistaken in assuming that all
the living beings crowded round this tree have the spirit to
thank for their existence. Man at least confesses: " Thou hast
brought up my white cattle, for my black beasts hast thou
cared, protected my, birds and my game, and kept together the
fishes of my black waters."!0
With the Central Asian ideas of the tree of life, as an essen-
tial feature, we have seen the belief connected that under the
roots of the tree is a spring containing the water of life. In
the tales of the Yakuts the tree itself is sometimes said to drip
a sap-like fluid so copiously, that a foaming brook is formed.
Under the Iranian tree of life there is a spring in which all the
rivers of the earth have their source. Even the belief that
the tree of life rises out of a lake or sea of wonderful water
is met with.
Thus, e.g., the Kalmucks tell how the Zambu tree rises out
of the Marvo Sea, which is as deep as it is broad and contains
water of eight different elements. From this sea run four
great rivers. These are said to flow towards the different
points of the compass and, after having made seven turnings,
to return to their source of origin. On their journey, each
river receives the waters of five hundred tributaries. The sea
itself is regarded as a mountain-lake, as each river pierces a
rock, said to resemble some animal. The rivers flowing towards
the east, south, west, and north emerge from rocks which are

360 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
respectively like the mouths of an elephant, a. bull, a horse,
and a lion.21 The animals in this tale represent the points of
the compass, a belief extremely old among the civilized peoples
of Asia, though the animals themselves may vary. Thus,
in the Chinese tale the east is represented by a blue dragon,
the south by a red bird, the west by a white tiger, and the
north by a black turtle. To prevent diseases the Mongols
are said to have built on the site of an old Chinese town a sanc-
tuary (o£o), at the four sides of which they erected wooden
images of the points of the compass, i.e., a tiger, a lion, an
eagle, and a dragon.23
That these four rivers of the Kalmuck tales have their
source at the very centre of the earth, is shown by the
fact that they are believed to carry with them the materials
decorating the sides of the central mountain. The eastern
river contains silver sand, the southern blue jewel sand, the
western red jewel sand and the northern gold sand.
There can be no doubt of the fact that these ideas of the
Kalmucks have come down to them from India along with
the currents of civilization, even though these four rivers of
paradise have, as the Bible shows, been known also to the
Semitic race.