CHAPTER XVIII
THE SHAMAN
I
N THE earlier beliefs of the Lapps, the shaman (noidde)
played a part important enough to justify the application
of the term " shaman religion." Everywhere, and in every-
thing where the wishes of the spirits had to be consulted,
the shaman was a necessary medium. In addition, he filled
at times the post of sacrificing priest. His fame was therefore
great and his position among the people a leading one. The
more powerful shamans possessed titles such as " the ruler
of the mountains " or " the king of the mountains." Their
fame spread wide among the Lapp villages and their names
were preserved from generation to generation.
The high reputation and position of the shaman among
the Lapps appear also in an account from the beginning of the
eighteenth century, in which it is stated that the shaman, on
arriving at the tent of the Lapp, was met by the members of
the family who, with heads bared, came out to meet him and
thank him for the help he had already given them. He was
given a new reindeer-skin to sit on, the best available food and
drink were set before him, and when he remained overnight,
the best sleeping-place was given up to him. It is further re-
lated that the shaman received a tax, paid biannually. Be-
sides this, he received a special reward for each service, its
size depending on whether his aid had been requested for the
finding of some lost object, for the curing of the sick, or to
offer up sacrifice. In addition to money, articles of silver,
or clothes, he was also given reindeer. Were he not served
and looked after in every way, it was believed he could bring
about many kinds of misfortune.1

THE SHAMAN 283
But though the office of shaman brought thus both honour
and riches, it was not open to everybody to take up this pro-
fession, certain psychic qualities being necessary in its service.
The gifts essential for a shaman often ran in the same family,
appearing either early in childhood or also after some severe
illness.2 The Arctic peoples would seem to be specially, in-
clined to nervous diseases. The merest trifle scares them,
they faint on the slightest provocation or become furious,
when they act like maniacs.8 The shaman uses at times arti-
ficial stimulants to assist the coming of a trance. The Lapp
shaman-drink was prepared of soda boiled from birch-wood
ash, or of seal-fat, or from many other materials. By drink-
ing such liquids it was believed that the shaman could harden
his body so that not even the sharpest knife could penetrate
it. Neither could fire or water destroy a great shaman. He
could even" seat himself naked on a glowing fireplace and
scatter fire and burning cinders over his body without the
least danger.4
People with shamanistic talent were believed to be able to
converse with the spirits living under the ground, these last
appearing also in material form to them, in particular on the
occasion of their being first called to the office of shaman.
When these spirits, called noMe-gadse (" shaman people ")
by the Lapps, offered their help to a young shaman, they
laid stress on the fact of having served also his father and his
forefathers. Should he evince disinclination to accept their
services, they would use threats and even force, stories being
related in which spirits pressed the persons in questions to such
an extent that an early decay and even death resulted. Where
the Lapp listened to their call, the spirits were extremely
devoted to him, helping him and teaching him the arts of
shamanism. This schooling generally took place either on
the ground in some lonely place, or the pupil was led to the
underworld to imbibe there the wisdom of former shamans.
At the first call of the spirits, the missionaries relate that the

284 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
Lapp behaved like one mentally afflicted, was unable to bear
his wife, his children, or his servants, but forsaking these
wandered around in the forests or on the mountains."
The shaman could not, however, keep up his practice for
the whole of his life. Generally he became unfit for office in
his fiftieth year and was never employed afterwards in any
important task. But he might lose his position even earlier,
as a body free from any disfigurement was demanded of a
shaman as sacrificer, even the losing of a tooth disqualifying
him for office.6
As soon as a shaman had begun to practise, the spirits began
to live more freely in his company. That these were the
spirits of the dead is shown by the fact that they lived in the
" holy mountains," from which the shaman could at will call
them to his service. When travelling in strange districts they
formed reliable guides. On hunting or fishing trips they were
his trusty protectors, proving their allegiance by giving him
rich hauls. Even his property and herds of reindeer were
looked after by these willing servants. In addition, the shaman
would seem to have possessed a special tutelary genius, as it
is said that when about to proceed to a distant market-place, he
would send a spirit to see whether the buyer had arrived.
After a while this spirit would return and relate the circum-
stances there. In the same way, when the shaman was away,
the spirit would bring news of his family and herds. Coming
events were also foretold by it to its owner. This spirit, which
procured all manner of news for the shaman, was obviously
the shaman's own mobile " soul." T
This tutelary spirit the shaman could also use against his
enemies. When two shamans quarrelled, e.g., at some fair
when both were drunk, they would attempt to show one an-
other which of them owned the more powerful spirit. They
sat down opposite one another and began their arts. It was
believed that their spirits fought with one another in the guise
of reindeer-bulls. The one possessing the strongest " rein-

THE SHAMAN 285
deer-bull" emerged from the contest as the winner. " Sha-
man-birds " were also used in these contests.8
The spirit of the shaman was called sueje (originally
" shadow ") by the Scandinavian Lapps.8 The fact that this
is supposed to be able to take on the shape of a reindeer, a fish,
a bird, or a snake shows that the j#<?;>-animal in Northern Lap-
mark, corresponds with the shaman-animals which, according
to the Southern Lapps, assist the shaman when, during a period
of unconsciousness, he visits the underworld. Such animals
were the " j<mjo-reindeer-bull," the " jawo-bird," the " safao-
fish " and the " wzVo-snake."10 The missionary J. Kildal,
who assumes that these animals lived in the holy mountains,
points out how they differed from the other inhabitants of the
mountain, the shaman possessing several of the latter, but
only one " holy mountain bird," one " holy mountain fish "
and one " holy mountain reindeer."X1 Another missionary
draws attention to the fact that " the (saho-fish ' is not one
of the gods of the underworld, although its services are called
into account when journeying there."12 One can plainly see
that these animals were soul-animals, in the shape of which
the shaman's soul moved during its separation from the body.
Like a reindeer-bull it hurried over the land, like a bird it
flew through the air, like a fish it swam through the water, and
like a snake it wriggled into the earth. The same idea is con-
tained in the following account by J. Kildal: "When two
shamans send their £ reindeer-bulls' to fight together, the re-
sult is that according as the competing * reindeer' win or lose,
the shaman owning the same wins or loses; should one * rein-
deer ' break off a horn from the other, the shaman owning the
injured one becomes illj should one 'reindeer* kill another,
the shaman, whose ' reindeer * is killed, dies. In these combats
it occurs also, that the shamans owning the * reindeer' become
as tired and exhausted as their * reindeer.' n The same author
relates also that when the shaman falls into a trance, "he
journeyed in his * saho-fish * to the underworld, and when

286 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
he wakes from his trance, the * fish' has brought him back
uninjured to his body, again." 13 Jessen is able further to affirm
that " the louder a shaman can sing, the longer is his snake." "
The Finns also relate in their tales how the Lapps fly in the
shape of birds through the airj when one of these is shot
down, the Lapp tumbles to the ground. These soul-animals
were sometimes pictured on the magic drums.
The power of thus taking on different'forms is essential for
the shaman's soul to overcome difficulties particularly in the
underworld, and especially when bringing back the soul of
someone sick, which during the time it moved about without
a body has been carried off to the underworld by the spirits.
These last give back with great reluctance the souls failing
into their power. The Lapps believed them to know before-
hand when the shaman had decided to visit them. On such
occasions they bolted their doors well, but a clever shaman
coulcl always hit upon some little crevice through which his
soul could creep in. Often a severe fight was waged between
the inhabitants of the underworld and the shaman, until the
former, against a fixed sacrifice, were willing to compromise.
When the bargain had been concluded, the shaman's soul
brought the soul in question back to its home " over mountains
and valleys, with such speed that the stones and sand flew
about." in
The shaman must also go to the underworld when accom-
panying the soul of some dead person, and when he had to
bring thence the soul of some departed relative, e.g., to herd
the cattle.10
Besides taking the form of the above mentioned animals,
believed also by the Samoyeds to be the method of super-
natural journeying adopted by their shaman, the Lapps be-
lieved that the soul of the shaman could fly in the form of a
whirlwind, relics of a similar belief having also been noted
in Finland.
Of flying in the form of fire, an interesting report comes

THE SHAMAN 287
from the Norwegian Lapp territory. When two Lapps quar-
relled, they sat down on the ground and began to sing that
their saivo would send them their " light," which was believed
to be a flame of the Aurora Borealis. When these " lights "
met in the sky, they fought with one another, during which
battle the shamans lay on the ground, practising intensely their
art. A terrible noise and crackling in the sky accompanied
these duels. The one whose " light" gradually, faded, fell
\\\j were it totally extinguished, the shaman died.17 From this
method of flying through the air like a flame, the Finnish
term " Fire-Lapp " is derived.
The most important instrument of the shaman was his drum,
the skin of which during the close of the heathen period was
always furnished with numerous drawings and figuress painted
on with the juice from alder-bark or with reindeer blood.
Often, the heaven with the sun and moon and other gods,
the earth with tents and storehouses, forest and domestic
animals, fishing-waters, etc., and the underworld with its in-
habitants were pictured on the drum. The pictures were not
always alike, neither was their order the same on all drums.
In the shape of the drum, not only in regard to size, but also
to construction, dissimilarities may be found. G. Hallstrom,
who has studied Lapp drums in many museums, classifies them
according to their construction into two chief groups, of which
one may be called sieve-shaped, and the other bowl-shaped.18
The sieve-shaped drum, which seems to have been much
more widely used than the bowl-drum, was prepared by
stretching the skin over a band of wood of about the width
of the palm of the hand. The wood had, if possible, to be
without knots, and the ends were bent together and fastened
with wooden plugs or twisted twigs. The form of the sieve-
drum was generally oval, one end being seldom broader than
the other. The handle was a narrow cross-piece of wood
fastened to the back.
The bowl-drum was fashioned out of a hollowed piece of

288 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
wood so that this formed a rounded bowl, over the open
mouth of which the skin was stretched. Two long, narrow
holes were cut in the bottom, leaving a handle between. It
was further decorated with carved figures and small holes,
which strengthened the sound. The body was oval in shape,
of an egg-form. The size of the bowl-drum varied little, as
it was always made of one tree, while the sieve-shaped drums
were at times extremely large.
The variety of these drums appears also in the pictures on
the skin. On the sieve-drum these usually formed a common
circle in the midst of which the sun was placed. The latter
is generally square, four fine rays reaching out from each
corner j only seldom is its shape round. The surface of the
bowl-drum is again divided by horizontal lines into two or
more parts. Over these lines figures stand in a row, the upper
being the Heaven gods. On these drums the sun does not
take a dominating position as it does on the sieve-drums.
Mixed forms are also to be found.
Further, the drums vary in their ornamentation. The sieve-
drum, which resembles the Siberian drums, is, like the latter,
often furnished with small metal-wire belts or chains, on
which various silver, brass, and iron jingles are hung. These
belts and chains are fastened to the back of the drums either
to the wooden band or the handle. The ornaments fastened
to the bowl-drum are generally the claws of wild animals, the
ears or hair of forest animals, etc. Often these decorations
are missing, when they are replaced by the figures cut in the
handle. This last-named drum would seem to be a Lapp
original, and according to our present knowledge, was known
chiefly in Lule and Torne Lapmark.
Besides ornaments and bells, a beautifully carved hammer
with two branches, made of reindeer-horn and often covered
with skin, belonged with the drum, and at least in later times,
also a ring or bunch of rings or another metal object called
arpa (" die ") by the Finnish Lapps.

THE SHAMAN
289
Fie. 12.
SHAMAN HAMMER.
The shaman held his drum in great respect j to prevent it
being looked on by anybody, it was often kept in a case of skin
in the inner part of the tent. According to the Lapps, the
drum was desecrated should a woman touch
it. These last were not even allowed to go
over a road, along which a drum had been
transported, for the next three days. Were
a woman to do this, the Lapps believed death
or some other misfortune would follow.
But, if for some reason or other, a crossing
could not be prevented, the woman must
sacrifice a ring of brass to the drum. As a
matter of precaution, the drum was taken out
through the backdoor and, in removal, it was placed in the last
sleigh. Where possible it was taken along roads never trav-
elled before by anybody. Were the sanctity of the drum
violated in any way, it was regarded as useless. Were it
angered, it was believed to be able to express its dissatisfaction
by weeping or threats. The older a drum handed down from
one generation to another became, the greater the honour ac-
corded it.19
At the close of the heathen period, the magic drum became
general in use. As Christians with the Bible, says Friis, so
nearly every Lapp family possessed a drum. From the Lapps
converted by him, von Westen received over a hundred magic
drums. Yet every Lapp who owned a drum was not actually
a shaman, but used it for purposes of divination, for his own
benefit. Whatever the Lapp was about to engage in, removal,
hunting, fishing, or if he desired to know the whereabouts of
his reindeer lost in the mountains, or the source of some trouble
in his life, or whenever he wished to appease his gods by
sacrifice, he turned always to his drum, asking its advice.20
When a Lapp thus wished to divine the future in some mat-
ter or other, he clad himself as for a feast. He washed,
combed his hair, and put on his best clothes. The same was

290 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
done also by the others taking part in this holy act. The
neighbours came in their red and blue jackets, ornamented with
rings, gleaming neck-chains, etc. When beginning the act
the questioner knelt down on his left knee, holding the drum
horizontally in his left hand, and placed the above mentioned
ring first on the picture of the sun, beginning then to tap
carefully; round it with the hammer so that the ring danced
gently up and down. At the same time he sang a song. If
the ring now moved round in the direction of the sun, it was
regarded as a good sign, the opposite foreboding an accident,
sickness, or other misfortune. From the figure on which the
ring remained for a longer period towards the end, the answer
to the question asked of the spirits was decided. On hunting
or fishing trips a good haul was assured if the ring paused at
the figures of a forest animal or a fishing-water. Where the
ring paused at the drawing of a god, it was a sign that this god
wished a sacrifice. In asking whether a sacrificial animal was
pleasing to a god, a hair from the animal's neck was wound
round the ring. Should the ring not pause now at the figure
of the god in question, it was believed that the god would not
accept the animal. Another was then chosen, and still others,
the same procedure being gone through until the ring showed
the sacrifice to be pleasing. When the ring moved over to
the figures representing the underworld or jumped off the
drum, it meant death or some other great misfortune.21"
The above was not, however, the original purpose of the
drum. Certain of the missionaries relate that when the sha-
man earlier acted as above, he excited himself by banging
violently on the drum with the hammer to such an extent that
at last he would fall into a trance. In a description written
down in Swedish Lapmark it is stated that when a Lapp
wished to know of something happening in a distant neigh-
bourhood, he laid the brass ring on the figure of the sun and
commenced beating the drum with the forked drumstick. As
the ring jumped from one figure to another, backwards and

THE SHAMAN 291
forwards, the shaman sang a peculiar song in which all the
other Lapps present, male or female, joined in. The men
had, however, to sing louder than the women. In the song,
the name of the mountain in which the spirits capable of giving
the desired information were supposed to dwell, was repeated
every now and then; similarly, the name of the district from
which news was desired. As the shaman beat longer on his
drum and sang louder and louder, he became more and more
excited until the ring paused at one spot, the face of the drum-
mer darkened, and he sank on his knees still increasing the
volume of his song, until finally he dropped to the ground
like one dead. At this point care had to be taken that no
article touched the shaman's unconscious body, as, if this
happened, the Lapps believed that the spirit would no longer
return to it. The men and women present had to continue
singing until the shaman returned to consciousness. He was
then reminded of the case in question and the matter concern-
ing which knowledge was required. The shaman was at this
time tired out and perspiring, as though he had performed
some heavy task, and he now began to relate all he had dis-
covered during his trance.22
According to this last description, the Lapps used the drum
for two different purposes at the same time, but generally
the two uses were kept separate. As an instrument of divina-
tion, the drum was used only for unimportant questions, e.g.,
success on hunting or fishing trips. For these, any male
person could make use of his drum, without being an actual
shaman. But in the case of serious misfortunes, such as severe
sickness, the cause of these was sought in an unconscious con-
dition, in the attaining of which the drum was used as an
excitant. Here a real shaman had to be applied to, as he
only could visit the spirits dwelling under the earth, from
whom sickness and misfortunes in general were supposed to
emanate. The cause of an illness was either the desire of
some earlier departed person for the company of a relative,

292 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
or a punishment for some misdemeanour or the omitting of a
duty. The collapse of the sick person was due to the stealing
of his soul by the underground spirits, or the carrying away
of some article in close contact with him, e.g., a shoe, headgear,
or a mitten. It was the duty of the shaman to discover what
the spirits of the departed required, why they were angry,
and by what means they could be appeased, so that the sick
would be left in peace.28
When, in cases of sickness, the shaman was about to under-
take a voyage to the underworld, he called together, according
to Leem, his helping spirits, which latter arrived invisible to
others. It was necessary that two women should be present
in holiday costume, with kerchiefs over their heads but with-
out belts, a man without cap and belt, and a half-grown girl.
When all these were assembled, the shaman bared his head,
opened his belt and unfastened his shoe-strings, covered his
face, and placing his hands by his sides bent his body backward
and forward, shouting: "Harness the reindeer! —Push out
the boat! " Intoxicated with gin he began thereafter to pluck
brands out of the fire with his naked hands, strike himself on
the legs with an axe and swing the latter with both hands
over his shoulders; then running three times round the as-
sisting females with the axe, he sank unconscious to the floor.
In this state, no one might touch him, and he must be watched
over so closely that not even a fly could settle on him. The
soul was believed to be wandering in the underworld, some-
where in the holy mountains, while the body lay unconscious.
The women present whispered together, trying to guess where
the spirit at that moment was. Should they hit on the exact
place while going through the names of the holy places, the
shaman moved either an arm or a leg. At the same time they
tried by intensive concentration to follow all that the shaman
might hear or see. When the latter at last began to awaken
to life and with a weak voice faltered the beginning of the
song, the women also raised their voices and joined in. Fi-

THE SHAMAN 293
nally, the shaman declared the cause of the sickness, and the
deity to whom sacrifice had to be made, and informed them
of the nature of the animal and the place for the sacrifice,
guaranteeing that the sick would recover within a certain
period.2*
Leem does not, however, make any mention of the magic
drum, whereas Jessen expressly says that the shaman used this
instrument as a means of invoking the trance.25 In this way,
the missionary Olsen also describes the Lapp shaman's falling
into a trance, or " diving," as they themselves call it. The
latter further points out that the shaman had always to have
as assistant another person to awaken him out of the trance.
This assistant was a woman, where possible, a virgin. The
duty of the woman was to seek out the soul of the shaman
as it wandered in the interior of the mountains or under the
lakes, and lead it back to the body. Should the awakener be
incapable of fulfilling this duty, the shaman would never
wake again from his trance. Other antagonistic shamans
could also lead the shaman's soul astray during its wanderings
in the underworld and in this way prevent it from returning.
Many shamans are said to have remained on their dangerous
journey. It is not therefore surprising that the shaman, on
his return to life, praised his awakener with many flattering
terms.28
Like the Siberian shaman, the Lapp noidde used his drum
originally only as a medium of excitation. The use of the
magic drum as a method of divination is obviously of later
origin.
In the oldest accounts of the shamanizing of the Lapps
which have been preserved, dating from the thirteenth century,
the magic drum is spoken of solely as a means of excitation.
In these accounts the wonderful manner of the Lapps of
prophesying coming events, of following events in distant
places, of finding hidden treasures, of resisting sickness —
even, at times, death, are all described. The following in-

294 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
cident is related as an example. Certain Norwegian merchants
had once visited the Lapps and were sitting at table when the
hostess was suddenly stricken by illness and died. While the
guests were expressing their fear that some envious shaman
had caused her death, and even the Lapps in their confusion
did not know what to do, a shaman rose, spread out a cloth
Under which he placed himself, and began to shamanise.
Soon he lifted up an object like a sieve on which was portrayed
a whale, a reindeer with a sleigh, and a boat with oars, these
being the means used by the shaman's soul in hurrying over
the high snow-clad mountains and the deep seas. Having
sung and danced a long time on the floor, he finally fell -down,
becoming black in the face. Foam appeared on his lips, his
stomach burst open, and, with a fearful cry, life left him.
The visitors then turned to another shaman for knowledge
of the fate of the two lying dead. This shaman accomplished
his task with such success that the hostess arose quite whole
and related the fate of the first shaman. When the first
shaman, in the shape of a whale, had hurried over a lake,
an antagonistic shaman had seized the opportunity to lie in
wait for his enemy in the form of a sharp post, with the result
that the belly of the whale was split. This accident had
shown itself on the body of the shaman.27
The objects mentioned in the above as being portrayed on
the drum are probably the very earliest pictures on the Lapp
drum, their object being originally, like the pictures on the
Siberian drum, to give wings to the shaman's fantasy by re-
minding him of the means of locomotion which his soul was
believed to need, and the forms of the animals in whose
shape he was supposed to make the journey to the underworld.
On some of the Lapp drums, these pictures may be seen to
occupy a central position, round which, during the develop-
ment of the drum as an instrument of divination, later draw-
ings have gradually been grouped.
Shamans, who with the help of magic drums have fallen

THE SHAMAN 295
into trances, have been met with also among the Ugrian
peoples. Here also the shaman possesses a special protecting
spirit, " head spirit," said to protect him on his journeys to
the other world. In tales, the " bear-like spirit" of the
f shaman is often mentioned, this being doubtless a metamor-
phosis of his soul. Images of such " soul-animals " are very
likely the animal-like objects of wood or metal found in the
graves of shamans. The Ostiak shaman, like those of the
Samoyeds and of the majority of the Siberian peoples, seems,
at least in the more northern districts, to have attired himself
for his functions in special apparel, a fact unknown in the very
oldest accounts of the Lapp shaman. From the scanty existing
' accounts of the earlier Ostiak shamans it would seem that
they, in general, and even in the matter of their drums, were
nearly related to those of the Samoyeds and the other Siberian
peoples.28
The other Finno-Ugric peoples who possibly possessed
shamans at an earlier date have for a long period used more
modern methods of prophesying their fate. Not even the
earlier accounts contain any mention of the use of magic drums
; among them. And yet, the author of the " Life of St.
Stephen " (d. 1396) mentions that the Siryan magicians could
" on that same day, and at the very moment " know " what was
happening in a distant neighbourhood, in another town, in the
ninth land."39 Most probably this happened in an ecstatic
state. A similar condition is perhaps intended by the phrase
in a Russian Chronicle, in which it is related how a Nov-
gorodian visited a Chudic magician in 1071, the latter " lying
* dumb" while he invoked the spirits to his aid.30 For the
r shaman's falling into a trance, the Finns have to this day a
special expression (langeta loveen, " fall into trance ") which
may, however, have been used originally with regard to the
Lapp shaman. Further it may be pointed out that the Lapp
1 name noidde (" shaman ") occurs also in the Finnish noita.



SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
BY
UNO HOLMBERG
PH.D.
DOCENT OF THE UNIVERSITY OF FINLAND, HELSINGFOKS

1

INTRODUCTION
M
OST dominant among the Siberian peoples is the great
Altaic race, the original dwelling-place of which ap-
pears to have been in the vicinity of the Altai Mountains, but
which at the present time is distributed over an enormous
stretch of territory in Central and North Asia, the Near East
and Eastern Europe. The languages spoken by these scattered
peoples are divided into three large groups: Turco-Tatar,
Mongolian, and Mandshu-Tungus.
Besides the Turks proper, or Osmans, the closely related
Turkomans to the east of the Caspian Sea and in the Stavropol
Government, and the Eastern Turkish tribes in East Turkes-
tan, the Turco-Tatar group comprises further, the Tatars
around the Volga, whence pioneers have migrated as far as
to Western Siberia, the Tatars in the Crimea and other dis-
tricts in Russia, the Bashkirs in the central Ural districts, the
Nogaiyes in the Crimea and Northern Caucasia and other Tatar
tribes up to south of the Caspian Sea, the Kirghis in Russia
and Turkestan, the Altai Tatars in the neighbourhood of the
Altai, where they form a number of smaller groups with dif-
ferent dialects, — Soyots, Karagass, the Abakan, Cholym, and
Baraba Tatars, — the Teleuts, the Lebed Tatars and the Ku-
mandines, and also the Yakuts by the River Lena in North
Siberia, and the Chuvash from the bend of the Volga in
Russia.
The Mongolians, whose original home was by Lake Baikal,
and from whom Mongolia derives its name, have assimilated
different Turkish tribes, which have appropriated the Mongo-
lian language. In the course of raids of conquest the Mon-
golians have also overflowed to other districts, amongst others,

300 INTRODUCTION
to Afghanistan, where they are now termed Moghols. Closely
related to the Mongolians are the Kalmucks to the south of
the Altai, in the southern stretches of the Tientshan Mountains
and by the Volga in Russia, whither inner disturbances caused
them to wander in the seventeenth century. Further, the
Buriats around the Caspian Sea belong to the Mongolian group.
The Mandshu-Tungus stocks, which are composed of many
closely related lesser groups with different languages, appear
to have migrated from the districts around the Amur River.
At the present time tribes belonging to these stocks dwell over
wide stretches in North-East Siberia, reaching from the Yenisei
Valley to the Pacific Ocean, and from Northern China and
Lake Baikal to the Arctic Ocean. The Tungus stocks dwelling
in the Amur Valley include the Goldes, the Orotchones, the
Manegres, etc., and also the more distantly related Solones,
Mandshus and Dahurs, of which the last-named have for the
most part appropriated the Mongolian language. The Tungus
dwelling on the shores of the Northern Arctic Ocean and the
Pacific are called Lamutes. The Dolgans dwelling around the
Khatanga River, and at present wholly under the influence of
the Yakut language and culture, appear also to have been
originally Tungus.
The primary cause of the present widely scattered state of
the Altaic race would seem to be found in their restless, migra-
tory mode of life, and their lust for war. Tribes belonging to
this race first appeared in Europe with the great migration of
the Huns, whose barbaric advance-guards are described al-
ready by Ptolemaios in the second century. When these re-
turned to Asia after their martial exploits, certain Turkish
tribes remained behind, the remains of which are the Bolgars,
or, to call them by their present name, the Chuvashes by the
Volga. Early in history, Turkish peoples in Asia have built
up powerful empires, attaining a certain, though short-lived,
prosperity. Their chiefs have ruled everywhere in Asia.
An important centre of development seems to have existed

INTRODUCTION 301
at some period south of Lake Baikal on the Selenga River and
its tributary, the Orkhon, where a number of ancient Turkish
inscriptions on the gravestones of departed chiefs have been
discovered. These inscriptions, translated in 1893 by Prof.
Vilhelm Thomsen, originate from the Turk dynasty (Chinese,
Tu-kiu, 680-745" A.D.) and the subsequent period of pros-
perity among the Uigurs (745-840). The Uigurs came at
that time into contact with missionaries from Syria, who
preached the Nestorian and Manichean doctrines, and also
with Buddhist missionaries from China. When, later, a part
of the Uigurs moved to the districts around the Tientshan,
where they took up agriculture and commerce, an important
centre of culture arose in East Turkestan (900-1200 A.D.).
Through the Uigurs other Mongolian tribes came into con-
tact with the Christian Faith. The influence of Syrian culture
is evident in the Syrian characters of Uigurean literature, re-
mains of which were dug up in excavations commenced in 1905
at the town of Turfan in East Turkestan. During the period
of Mamcheanism, and probably during a still earlier period,
ancient Persian culture affected the religious views of the Mon-
golians and the Turco-Tatars dwelling at Sajan and the Altai,
as will be seen from certain mythological names (i.e., Mon-
golian Hormusda, Kalmuck Hormustan = Persian Ahura-
Mazdaj Buriat Arima = Persian Ahriman; Altai-Tatar and
Kirghis Kudai ("God") = Persian Hudaij Altai-Tatar Aina
("an evil spirit dwelling under the earth") = Persian
Aenanh).
Great upheavals and new groupings of tribes took place
when the great Mongolian ruler Temudjin, or as he is more
often called, Jenghiz Khan or Chingiskan (1162-1227), ac-
complished his ambitious schemes of conquest. These migra-
tions of tribes pressed also the Turks farther west, gradually
even to Europe. After the Mongolian conquest, different
Tatar tribes remained behind in Russia, represented by the
Tatars at present dwelling there. Jenghiz Khan himself was

3oa INTRODUCTION
extremely liberal in religious matters, tolerating all the dif-
ferent religious sects. His successors, notably Kubilai (1260-
1294.), whose capital became Pekin, were, however, more in-
clined towards Buddhism, which seems also to have exercised
a great influence over the Mongolians. But with the fall of
the Mongol dynasty in China in 1368, Buddhism appears to
have gone out of fashion, and paganism blossomed anew, until
Buddhism again, in the shape of Lamaism, won over in the
seventeenth century fervent disciples among both Mongolians
and Kalmucks, the last-named setting up during their war in
Thibet the Dalai Lama as their spiritual leader. Eager mis-
sionaries arose also in the ranks of the people, and gradually,
by fines and other punishments, the pagan sacrifices were over-
come. For political reasons, however, many old folk-customs
were tolerated by giving them a new meaning. At the present
day, the orthodox people abhor their old shamanistic religion,
the " Black Religion," which has almost entirely been sup-
planterf by Lamaism, the " Yellow Religion," with Thibetan
books of devotion. Since the beginning of the nineteenth
century, the Buriats south and east of the Baikal, and a part of
the Tungus dwelling there, have also been led to accept the
" Yellow Religion." The older Buddhistic culture, which
.penetrated from China, has left among the Central Asian
tribes a number of myths, in which the Buddhist names of the
gods appear borrowed from the Sanscrit and not from the
Thibetan.
Of the tribes belonging to the Turco-Tatar group, the ma-
jority, have gradually declared for Islam, which had already
in the eighth century penetrated to a Turkish tribe, forcing its
way via Turan into the Near East. Only the Soyotes in Mon-
golia and the Uigurs, the latter lapsing little by little into
Chinamen, are Buddhists; the Yakuts, part of the Tungus in
Trans-Baikal and the Chuvashes, being, like many of the
Tatars in the Minusinsk District and on the Volga, members of
the Russian Orthodox Church.

INTRODUCTION 303
Traces of the religion conformed to at one time by the whole
of the Altaic race, shamanism, have adhered to many of the
converted tribes, such as the Yakuts, Buriats, part of the
Kirghis, etc. In its primitive state, this religion still flourishes
among the Tungus and the tribes related to them among the
more Northern Yakuts, among the Buriats west of the Baikal,
and among a few small Tatar tribes at the Altai.
An important field of investigation is moreover found
among all the peoples who, in different ways, have been in close
contact with the Altaic race. The peoples, related to the Finns,
on the River Ob, the Ostiaks and Voguls, have been at least
in their southern districts influenced by the Tatars. The
Tungus, again, have transmitted many of their beliefs and
customs to the eastern Samoyeds and to some Old Asian tribes,
such as, for example, the nearly extinct Yenisei Ostiaks and
the Yukagires. Asiatic shamanism exists still among the
Chukchee, Koriaks and the Kamchadales. The Kamchadales
have, however, to a great part become Russianised in recent
times. Among the Tungus tribes by the Amur River, and
equally among the East Mongolians, Chinese culture also has
in some degree left traces.
Concerning the means of existence of the Altaic races, with
which the religious beliefs stand in connection, the tribe most
completely adhering to its primitive mode of life is the Tungus.
They exist in the great primeval forests by hunting, or wander
about with reindeer, riding on the backs of these; on the banks
of rivers and on the sea-coasts, fishing is also an important
means of existence On the same plane of civilization are also
the other North Siberian peoples. The tribes dwelling on the
great steppes of Central Asia have from prehistoric times been
nomads j part of the Soyots near the Altai are reindeer-nomads.
For the majority the horse and the sheep are the domestic
animals of most importance. In some districts, chiefly in the
south, agriculture has recently been taken up.
The oldest information concerning the Mongolian and

304- INTRODUCTION
Tatar religions, is found in accounts of travels by certain Euro-
peans, sent out in the thirteenth century to Central Asia. One
of these was the Franciscan monk, Johannes de Piano Carpini,
sent by Pope Innocent IV to the land of the Mongolians. He
journeyed over the Volga as far as to Karakorum on the
Orfchbn, the capital founded by Cgedei, the son of Jenghiz
Khan, in which town he remained over one winter. His
experiences he describes in his Historta Mongolorutn. An-
other important book of travel of the same period was written
by the Franciscan Vilhelm Rubruquis (Ruysbroeck), who
travelled in I253~i25'5 as the ambassador of the French King,
Louis IX, in nearly, the same districts as did Carpini. Of
the accounts mentioned above, a critical edition appeared in
Recueil de voyages et de memoires publie 'par la societe de
Geogra-phie, tome IV, Paris, 1839. The well-known travel-
ler, Marco Polo, sojourned also for a longer period among
the Mongolians, going out in 1271 as the Pope's ambassador to
visit Kubilai-Khanj serving the latter at one time in the capacity
of governor, until in 1292 he was accorded permission to return
to his native country. His De regionibus orientalibus, touch-
ing in some degree also on the religion of the Mongolians,
has been translated into many languages. A few older frag-
ments of knowledge concerning Mongolian religious beliefs are
to be found in certain Chinese, Mohammedan, and Mongolian
sources, amongst others, in the Mongolian Chronicle of
Ssanang Ssetsen, translated into German by the Academician
I. J. Schmidt (Geschlchte der Ost-Mongolen und ihres Filr-
stenha/ttses, 1829).
The oldest reports are, however, so few and insignificant,
that it is not possible to build up any clear representation of the
ancient religion of the Altaic race by their aid alone. But as
the majority of the scattered peoples have retained the old
traditions handed down by their ancestors nearly to the present
day, even in many cases right on to our time, it has still been
possible to gather together an imposing mass of material for

INTRODUCTION 305
investigation. The foundation of these, at present compara-
tively large, collections, was already laid in the seventeenth
century, and later, after the Russian migration to Siberia.
Among some of the tribes, notably the Buriats and Yakuts,
native investigators have played an important part in this work.
Some of the northern tribes, in particular the Tungus living in
their inaccessible primeval forests, are, however, up to the
present day, still very little known.



SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY