CHAPTER VII
THE CREATION OF MAN
TRANS-BAIKAL Tungus relate how Buga (the
J. Heaven god) made the first two people out of various
materials which he gathered from the four quarters of the
earth. From the east he brought iron, from the south fire,
from the west water, and from the north earth. Out of the
earth he created the flesh and the bones, out of the iron the
heart, out of the water blood, and out of the fire warmth.1
According to a Yeside creation story God made the body
of Adam by mixing the four elements, fire, water, air and earth.
Old Jewish, Arabian and Syrian tales describe also how God,
when creating the first man, gathered material from the four
corners of the earth.3 According to the Jewish story, these
materials of which God made the body of Adam in the centre
of the earth, were of different colours, red, black, white and
brown, from which we may assume that, as in the Tungus' tale,
each contained some element connected with some quarter of
the earth. Thus the first man was a kind of microcosmos,
closely related to the macrocosmos.
This ancient fancy is to be found also in Russian tales of
creation. In one manuscript from the twelfth century the four
quarters of the earth have been doubled, the story relating
that God gathered material from eight directions. In later
tales, of which one is from the sixteenth century, it is said
that Adam's body, i.e., the flesh, was made of earth, his bones
of stone, his ligaments of roots, his blood of water, his eyes
of the sun, his thoughts of clouds, his spirit of wind and his
warmth of fire. According to another tale God made the body
of earth, the bones of stone, the ligaments of roots, the blood

372 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
of water, the hair of grass, the thoughts of wind (clouds)
and the spirit of clouds (wind).3
How close the connection is between man and nature accord-
ing to this Asiatic conception appears also in Persian literature
(Bundahishy 30) in which the resurrection is described in the
following words: "At that time the bones will be demanded
back from the earth, the blood from water, the hair from
plants, and life from fire, all these having been at the time of
creation ordered to return to their respective sources after
death."
But this relation of man with nature appears also from a
contrary conception, according to which the macrocosmos itself
is born of man, the microcosmos. According to a tale of the
Kalmucks the world was formed from the body of Manza-
shiri (=the Buddhist Bodhisattva Manjucri), the trees from
his blood-vessels, fire from the warmth of his interior organs,
earth from his body, iron from his bones, water from his blood,
grass from his hair, the sun and the moon from his eyes,
the seven planets'from his teeth, and the other stars from his
back.* In the same way is the cosmos formed when the Chinese
demiurge Pan-ku expires: from his spirit is born the wind,
from his voice the thunder, from his left eye the sun and his
right eye the moon, from his blood the rivers, from his hairs
the plants, from his saliva the rain, and from his vermin man-
kind.6 Already the Vedic literature of India (Rgveda9 X. 90)
tells how the world was formed from the body of a human-
shaped primordial being, Purusa. The Manicheans have a
similar tale,6 and even far in Europe, in Scandinavia, we find
a variant of it. In the Edda of Snorri it is told how the sons
of Bor slew the giant Ymir, and of his flesh created the earth,
of his blood the water, of his bones the stones and rocks, of
his skull the sky, of his brains the clouds, and of his eyebrows
the circle surrounding Midgard. Doubtless all the above
stories have some connection with each other and have not
arisen separately.

THE CREATION OF MAN 373
In the tales of the Central and North Asian peoples the
materials of which the first man's body was made, vary. The
most common conception among the Buriats is that the flesh was
made of red clay, the bones of stone, and the blood of water/
The Altaic peoples believe that bones were created from reeds
and the rest of the body from clay.8 The North-West Siberian
peoples, like the Voguls, relate how God " took willow-twigs,
bound them into skeletons, covered them with a layer of clay,
set them before him and blew into them." In other tales
they tell how God created man and animals from earth and
snow.8 The Yenisei Ostiaks relate how God rubbed a piece of
earth in each hand for a long time and at last threw them
away. The piece thrown by the right hand became a man, that
from the left hand, a woman.10
Although some Siberian peoples seem to have partly shaped
their own creation beliefs, we can in nowise decide from
this that the idea of creation itself was their own. The tales
themselves, to which these original fancies are connected
as separate details, are the best proof of their being of foreign
origin.
As in the stories about the origin of the earth, so also in tales
telling of the creation of man we find two antagonistic beings,
God and the devil, the latter in some way marring the work of
the former. In most instances the devil succeeds in approach-
ing man before God has had time to give him life. The dog,
whom God sets to watch over man, has a very, important part
in these tales.
Among the Black Tatars there is the following story: When
the great Pajana formed the first people from a piece of earth,
he could not give them life. He was therefore compelled to
go to Heaven to Kudai to seek a life-giving spirit for them.
When going he left a dog to guard the people. While he was
away the devil Erlik arrived and said to the yet naked dog:
"Thou hast no fur-covering, I will give thee golden hairs,
give thou to me those soulless people." The dog was delighted

374 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
with Erlik's proposal and gave the people whom he was to
guard into the keeping of the devil. Having thus come near
the people the devil defiled them by spitting on them, but
fled when he saw Kudai approaching to give them life. When
God saw that the devil had befouled the bodies of the people
and that it was impossible to make them clean again he turned
them inside out. From that time the interior of man is full
of filth and spittle.11
A similar explanation of the origin of the filth inside man is
given by a Yakut tale. When God had created the world he
built a great stone house in which he placed seven stone images
and " Man " to guard them. Day by day the devil begged
for entrance into the house, endeavouring to bribe the guardian
without success, until he promised " Man " an indestructible
garment, which he need never take off. He was then allowed
to approach the images and to soil them with his evacuations.
When God came to look at his images and saw what the devil
had done in his absence he grew angry, reproached the
guardian, and fulfilled his wish by changing him into a dog.
The images he turned inside out and blew a spirit into them.
For that reason the interior of man is full of filth.12
Corresponding tales are met with among the Volga Finns,
the Cheremiss, Votiaks and Mordvins. The purport of these
tales also is to explain why the interior of God-created man is
unclean. The Mordvin tale tells in addition that internal
diseases are caused by the spittle of the devil.13 Certain
diseases, a cough in particular, are given a similar origin in
Russian tales. In the Samoyed tale which does not contain
the turning inside out of man, serious eruptions, pox, and
gatherings are the result of the devil's saliva. In this tale
also appears a dog, naked as man himself, on whose body
the devil causes hair to grow by. stroking it.14
In another cycle of tales, in which the devil soils the people
whom God had created by spitting on them, these people had
originally some covering, hair or nail-matter.

THE CREATION OF MAN 375
The Buriats of the Balagan District tell how three creators,
Shibegeni-Burkhan, Madari-Burkhan, and Esege-Burkhan
made the first pair of human beings, using red clay for the
flesh, stone for bones and water for blood. Doubtful as to
which of them should procure a spirit for these as yet soulless
beings, they determined to find out by placing a torch and a
vessel of water before each and going to sleep beside them.
The one whose torch took fire during the night and in whose
water-vessel a plant appeared should have the honour of giving
life to man and of being his tutelary genius. Shibegeni-
Burkhan awoke in the night before the others and seeing that
the burning torch and the plant were in front of Madari-
Burkhan he stealthily lighted his own candle, putting out that
of the other, and removed the plant into his own vessel. In
the morning, when the Burkhans awoke and saw that the fire
and the plant had appeared before Shibegeni-Burkhan they
decided that fate had determined him to be the life-giver
and the guardian of man. But Madari-Burkhan suspected
Shibegeni-Burkhan of having acted deceitfully, and said:
" Thou hast stolen the fire and the plant from me, therefore
the people thou givest life to will ever steal from one another
and quarrel together."1D
This story, a product of Buddhism, which evidently en-
deavours to explain the origin of quarrelling and robbery in
the world, is in itself a complete tale, although in this Buriat
tale it appears only as a preface to another story. The tale
tells further how Madari-Burkhan and Esege-Burkhan de-
parted to heaven, leaving these earth-created beings, which at
that time were covered with hairs, in the keeping of Shibegeni-
Burkhan. When the latter also had to visit heaven to bring
a spirit for man, he set a dog, which had then no hair, to guard
the sleeping people. While he was away the devil Shiktur
bribed the dog with a promise of hair resembling that of
mortals, and was allowed to defile them by spitting on them.
When Shibegeni-Burkhan came down from heaven and saw

376 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
that the devil had succeeded in soiling the bodies of the people,
he became angry and cursed the dog on whose body he saw the
devil's hair-covering, saying: " Thou shalt ever suffer hunger,
gnaw cold bones and nourish thyself with remains from man's
repasts, and man shall beat thee." Then Shibegeni-Burkhan
cleaned the peoples* bodies of the hairs which the devil had
soiled, and they became naked except in those parts which the
devil's saliva had not touched, such as the head, which they
in sleeping had happened to cover with their hands.18
A corresponding tale of the Buriats of Alarsk, in which we
do not meet with the preface mentioned above, also tells how
Burkhan created a hair-covered man out of various materials,
set the dog to guard him and went to heaven to fetch a spirit for
him, and how the wicked Sholmo, having deceived the dog, de-
prived man of his hair, leaving only a remnant in some parts
of the body. The tale tells at its close that had the devil never
succeeded in touching man, man would never have known
sickness or death." In a tale recorded among the Voguls of
the Losva, the covering of the first man was nail-matter or
horn-matter. But while God was absent, seeking a spirit for
man, the devil (Kul-oter) managed to spoil his body so that
the nail-matter remained only on the ends of his fingers and
toes. The surface of the body having thus become tender man
was an easy prey for sickness and death.18
In this form the tale is known also to the Mordvins. By
giving the dog a hair-covering the devil secures the opportunity
of spoiling the first horn-covered man so that only the ends
of the fingers and toes keep their coverings.18
This original hair-covering or horn-covering of the human
body is met with even in other tales which remind one of the
Biblical story of the fall of man. Seeing that the last men-
tioned covering is comparatively rare in creation tales, but in
paradise-stories quite common, we may conclude that it has been
taken from the latter into the former.
In some Central Asian creation tales in which the dog also

THE CREATION OF MAN 377
appears, the devil, during God's absence, blows a spirit into
the man whom God has created.