CHAPTER III
MEMORIAL FEASTS FOR A PARTICULAR
DEAD PERSON
duties of the living with regard to the dead do not.
_L cease when the latter have been carried to the grave
with all honours. The dead continue to need the help and care
of the living. If a dead man is not given his rights, he may
resent it and, coming back, disturb the peace of his survivors.
Such of the dead as haunt their old homes are called by the
Esthonians "home-visitors" (Kodukaiat). Generally, they
are masters and mistresses who in their life-time were par-
ticularly order-loving, economical and strict. They are, of
course, seldom seen, but every now and then they are heard
making noises to remind their family of their duties, or they
may even attack their children if these have not arranged the
memorial-feast due to them.1
Memorial feasts may be either general ones, celebrated in
memory of all deceased relations, or special, in which case a
certain deceased relative is the object of remembrance. Of
these, the latter seem to be of older origin.
The first memorial feast celebrated in remembrance of a
member of the family, takes place on the actual burial-day,
so that this first feast is at the same time a burial feast.
Lundius, the missionary, relates of the Swedish Lapps, that
when their dead were buried, they drank " funeral beer."
When the liquor was handed round, the Lapps first dipped
their fingers into it and smeared their faces. Having become
intoxicated, they began to praise the dead man, saying that he
was shrewd and strong, that he was an able forester, that he

38 FINNOUGRIC MYTHOLOGY
understood well his wife and children, that he was a mighty
shaman, etc.8 This wetting of the fingers and smearing of
the face can be traced to a corresponding custom among the
Norwegian Lapps of whom Randulf, the missionary, relates,
that before going to the Lord's Supper, they used to take a
glass of beer or gin, if they had any, and dipping three fingers
into the drink, make the sign of the cross on their foreheads.
At other times they made, with fingers dipped into the drink,
three dots on the breast, one with each finger. This was done
by the Lapps in order to get their dead relations to protect
them.* The memorial drink, as well as the three finger-
marks, is with the Lapps a later Scandinavian custom,
The custom, however, of killing the reindeer that dragged
the dead man to his grave, seems to be an original Lapponian
usage. This sacrifice performance is described by Rheen, the
missionary, in the following way: — " Three days after the
funeral of the dead man, the Lapps take the reindeer which
conveyed him to the cemetery, kill it in his honour, and con-
sume it in company with their relations and dependants.
They collect all the bones, and having made a chest, put them
into it, burying the chest in the earth. They then make an
image of wood which is placed on the chest, the image being
large or small, according to the size of the dead man." * Ac-
cording to Graan, three rods besmeared with blood, on which
were placed pieces of the heart and lungs of the reindeer, were
also buried with the bones.8
Even after the funeral feast, the deceased was remembered
by taking some tobacco, or anything else he may have been
fond of, to his grave. Rheen mentions that if the deceased
was a rich man, reindeer were killed in his honour one, two or
even three years after his death. Here also the slaughtered
animal's bones had to be hidden in the earth. A black piece
of thread had to be sewn into the ear of the reindeer chosen
for the sacrifice.*
If sacrifices were not made to the dead man, the Lapps

MEMORIAL FEASTS 39
believed that they would be punished with poverty. Accord-
ing to Lundius, the Lapps believe that their reindeer, be they
many or few in number, " will die after their master, as they
stand or walk, like grass." T
If, after the death of the deceased, he was given some
charge, e.g., as reindeer-herd, they were obliged to sacrifice
to him yearly during that time. J. Kildal relates how the
Lapp was able, by means of sacrifice, to make his father or
some other near relation from the lower regions guard his
reindeer for one, two or three years. After that time he
would go back to the dead.8
The deceased are also remembered at ordinary feasts.
Randulf says that when a Lapp drinks the health of anyone
he always pours one part of the liquor, before drinking, on
the ground, in honour of the spirits, but in particular of the
deceased.* Lundius relates that at their feasts, they sacrifice
cheese, meat, fish, fat, marrow and other food, which they
put into a little trough and bury in the earth together with
• 10
an image.
Like the Lapps, the Samoyeds have no fixed memorial days
or annual feasts in honour of the dead. The reindeer which
dragged the deceased to his grave, is here also sacrificed.
Most frequently it is impaled on the grave, a meal being
sometimes prepared from the meat.11 Milller says that the
Samoyeds tie up a reindeer or two, if the deceased has had
any, on the grave, where the poor beasts are left to starve to
death. In some districts they believe that the dead need the
care of their relatives until the shaman has taken their
" shadows " to the world of the dead. When, for some acci-
dental reason, e.g., during illness, they sacrifice a reindeer or
a dog to the deceased, the sacrifice is performed after sunset,
behind the tent. The head of the sacrificial beast must then
be directed to the west.12
According to Pallas, the Ugrians of the North take to the
graveyard three of the best reindeer of the deceased on the

40 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
sleighs which follow that on which the corpse lies. Having
placed the body in the grave, they tie a strap to each of a
reindeer's hindlegs, two men seize the straps and four others
pierce the animal with sharpened poles from different direc-
tions. In this way one reindeer at a time is killed. When a
rich man is buried, several reindeer are killed j a noose is
placed round their necks and legs, and thus tied, they are
beaten along their backs with poles until they cease to breathe.
An animal killed in honour of the deceased is left on the
gravej the straps are placed on a stand fixed above the grave
and the sleighs are overturned against it. Near the grave the
funeral meal is cooked, and when they have eaten enough,
the burial guests take the rest home." According to later
custom, the best-beloved reindeer of the deceased is killed, the
meat being eaten, and the bones and horns, together with the
sleigh and harness, are placed on the grave.1*
The funeral feast of the North Voguls is described by Gon-
datti. Immediately after burying the dead, they cook some
kind of cereal or meat-dish, which they then pour out against
the coffin. The bottom of the pan is knocked out, after which
it is left by the grave. If the deceased has been conveyed by
reindeer, the latter are strangled by the grave, the meat being
boiled and eaten on the spot, the hide buried, and the bones
placed by the dead man.1"
Like the Lapps, the Ugrians frequently remember their
dead, especially during the first period of their life in Hades.
In most districts, however, they have no fixed memorial days,
but settle these according to agreement with relations. Kar-
jalainen says that the Northern Ugrians celebrate memorial
feasts in honour of a dead man for fifty days, and of a dead
woman, for forty. The ceremonies are very simple:'—they
cook some food, and, having kept it at the grave for a while,
they eat it at home. At Tremyugan the dead are remembered
after one or two months, a half-year, or a whole one, by
" setting forth a dish or a trough made of birch-bark." Fish

MEMORIAL FEASTS 41
and meat are cooked and, together with other eatables, placed
in vessels either on the ground by the house against the door
on the side of the hinges, or taken to the cemetery, where
they are put on the ground above the head of the deceased or
below the window of the grave-house, if there is one. On
the ground tea, gravy, gin, and, finally, some cold water are
poured, whence the term " water-pouring" is derived,16
According to Munkacsi, the Northern Voguls celebrate
memorial feasts on the third day after death, then, at the end
of " the holy week," and, after that time, thrice a year. They
make a fire by the grave and cook a dish, a small part of which
is placed in a vessel by the grave with the saying: a Do not
remember us, thinking evil thoughts."17 Where outside in-
fluence can be traced, the memorial feasts are celebrated on
carefully fixed days. With the Southern Ugrians, such days
are the ninth, the sixteenth, and thirty-sixth, and a half-year
or a whole year after death.18
A strange custom among the Northern Ugrians is the
making of a memorial doll of the deceased, of which Novit-
skiy says: " A curious irrational and shameless custom is that
which is observed by their women after the death of their
husbands. The widow carves a wooden doll, resembling a
human being, to represent her dead husband, takes some of
her husband's clothes, dresses the doll in them and provides
it with ornaments worn by the deceased, and putting it in the
place where her husband used to sit, cooks for this lifeless
block of wood all the dishes that used to please the deceased.
When they sit down in the place of honour to eat, she places
the image beside her, embracing and kissing the doll as if it
were a living being, fully believing that the deceased sees all
this and that his soul enters this image at times. She keeps
the doll for some time, going on with this nonsense for a
year or even longer, and then buries it with its clothes on in
the earth, exhibiting her sorrow by weeping and wailing."1B
Castren and Pallas relate that memorial dolls of this descrip-

42 FINNCMJGRIC MYTHOLOGY
tion were made to represent persons who had been in some
way important. The image was kept in the tent of the de-
ceased and was shown the same honours as its precursor. It
was fed at every meal, dressed in the morning and undressed
in the evening, and a widow, who had loved her husband,
even went so far as to place it beside her in bed. According
to Castren the image was worshipped in this way for three
years, after which it was buried. They supposed that the
body of the deceased had disintegrated during these three
years.20 In some places the image was kept for five years, if
the deceased was a'man, and for four, if a woman. In our
days the image is burned after the course of the said time.
Yet the old idea also remains that the doll should be buried in
the grave of the deceased. Where they are in the habit of
building the so-called grave-houses, the doll is placed in these.
During the time when Finsch was travelling among the
Ugrians, he saw, among the most Northern, small buildings
on their graves of the size of kennels, provided with a door,
and within them a doll, dressed in Ugrian garments. These
dolls noticed by Finsch were plainly such as had been taken
to the graveyard at the end of the memorial-time and placed
in the grave-house.21
The memorial doll is also to be found among some Sa-
moyed tribes, though the custom of making images of shamans
seems here to be more widely spread. According to Lehtisalo,
the Yuraks make a wooden image of the "shadow" of the
shaman, which resembles a reindeer-bull. This image is kept
by the wife or son of the deceased in a case, consisting of the
whole-flayed skin of a young calf.22 The fact that the
" shadow" of the shaman is thus represented, springs from
the idea of the Samoyeds that the soul of the shaman, when
leaving his body, takes on the shape of a reindeer-bull.28
Karjalainen suggests that the custom of the Northern
Ugrians of making an image of the deceased has developed
from a usage retained among the Southern Ostiaks and Voguls.

MEMORIAL FEASTS 43
Among the latter, the linen and bed-clothes of the deceased
are kept unwashed in his bed, among the former generally
under his pillow. These clothes are brought out at the me-
morial feast and placed in the middle of the bed. A spoon is
then placed in the dishes with its handle directed towards the
clothes. In some places a widow even keeps her late hus-
band's clothes beside her when going to bed. Karjalainen
thinks that this method of representing the deceased has de-
veloped into the Northern Ugrians' custom of making a par-
ticular image of the dead.24 Yet it must be remembered that
the Lapps, who were not in the habit of worshipping the
clothes of the deceased, also used an image every time they
sacrificed to them. This image, which does not seem to have
been an object for worship at home, but was made only for
the occasion of the sacrifice, was not clothed." Among most
of the Finno-Ugrian races the clothes of the dead man are
nowadays considered as visible representations of himself.
This is true of all the Volga peoples. Images are not seen
among them nowadays, but according to the most ancient
sources, the Mordvins seem to have had memorial dolls, which
were worshipped at the memorial feasts. A very common
usage is, further, to choose as the representative of the de-
ceased a living man who resembles him in appearance and
who dresses himself for the feast in the deceased's clothes.
The fact that even the name of the deceased was later made
into a visible object of remembrance to the survivors, has been
mentioned already when speaking of the karsikko of the
Finns. The name karsikko was also given in North Savolax
to a piece of white paper on which were written the name of
the deceased and the year of his birth and death, this paper
being placed for the funeral day on a cloth spread on the back
wall of the hut.2fl
Like the Chuvashes, the Volga Finns celebrate memorial
feasts in honour of some particular person on the funeral
day, and also on the third, the seventh and the fortieth day

44 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
after death. In some districts, the anniversary is also cele-
brated. These memorial feasts are often celebrated late at
night, and the time for them is calculated by the Volga Finns
not according to days but according to the number of nights.
For this reason they call the memorial feast of the third day,
" the third night," that of the seventh, " the seventh night,"
and that of the fortieth, " the fortieth night." According to an
old custom, some animal, a hen at the very least, must be
killed during each memorial feast, for without bloodshed, as
the Votiaks say, a memorial feast cannot be celebrated."
The Votiaks begin their preparations for the first memorial
feast before the deceased is taken to the burial-ground. As
soon as the dead man is washed and dressed, he is placed on a
benchj the eldest female member of the family puts down
two bowls by the body and makes meat pies. The eldest male
member of the family then takes a pie and breaks three pieces
from it, placing these into one of the bowls; into the other he
pours some gin, saying: "In this life you lived well, live
well also there. Do not torment and worry us. Protect our
cattle well. Protect our children well. Gather the dead
round you. Protect our good cattle from floods and preci-
pices. More I cannot say to you; do not be angry. Live well
in the life over there; do not take hold of us in front or from
behind; do not persecute us." The eldest member of the
family having finished, the others do and say the same.28
These ceremonies differ somewhat in different places. In
the district of Sarapul, where they believe that the relatives of
the deceased who died earlier have arrived to meet the new-
comer, they are believed to take part in the feast together
with the deceased. In honour of the latest deceased and of
the others, the men make wax-tapers and the women cook a
hen, if the deceased is a woman, and a cock, if it be a man.
At the door near the fireplace, a trough is placed on which,
as on the head of the bed, little wax-tapers are fixed. Into
the trough pieces of meat are thrown and some gravy poured

MEMORIAL FEASTS 45
when the names of the dead are mentioned, with an appeal to
them to eat and drink and to receive the lately deceased with
a contented mind into their company.29 Such customs are
common to all the Volga Finns.
When the Esthonians are ready to take their dead to the
grave, they cook beans or peas (which fare among the Baltic
Finns seems to be a general memorial dish), and pour ladle-
fuls of these on to the coffin, on which they also place some
other food, white bread, etc. In some places they are in the
habit of pouring out beer or gin on the ground by the gate
while the deceased is being taken away, lest he should suffer
from thirst in the life to come.30
Most frequently the Volga Finns, however, prepare the
funeral meal only when they have returned from the grave-
yard. Generally no one is invited to such a feast, but it is
everyone's duty to know for himself that he must come and
honour the deceased. For the feast, everyone brings food
with him, no one coming empty-handed, and the attention of
the dead is generally called to what each has brought. For
the newly-buried a dish is placed on the table at the spot where
he is supposed to sit among his own people, but for those who
died earlier, a trough is placed by the door. For all the dead,
for the nearest relations and also for more distant ones, whose
memory still lives in the minds of the survivors, a wax taper
is lighted. Even the ruler of the kingdom of the dead and
that of the graveyard are remembered. The first cup and the
first morsels of food belong to the dead. If anything happens
to fall on the floor under the table, no one is allowed to take
it up. The food sacrificed to the deceased is afterwards taken
into the yard for the dogs. If the latter scorn the food, it is
believed that the dead are not satisfied with the feastj should
the dogs fight while eating it is considered to be a sign that
the dead do not agree among themselves.
For the earlier deceased relations, who have arrived to meet
the newly deceased, there has thus been placed a dish of food

46 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
near the door. This custom is very common, as it is believed
that the place by the door is the place of residence of the
dead who arrive at the memorial feast.
Even to the graveyard all kinds of food are taken, and
there crumbled over the grave of the deceased. In some
places, they dig a pit above the head of the dead man, into
which they pour gin, a honey-drink or water. When doing
this, the Siryans say: " Drink, drink."31
Nowadays, the Volga Finns seldom kill larger domestic
animals than poultry for the memorial feasts. Formerly, cir-
cumstances seem to have been different. Olearius relates that
during the first half of the sixteenth century, the Cheremiss,
when burying a rich man, killed his best horse, the surviving
friends eating the meat of the animal.32 A hundred years
later Mtiller reports likewise: " When some important person
dies, the Chuvash and Cheremiss put up two sticks in the yard,
between which they stretch a thick thread. On this thread
they place a ring. The young people then shoot at it with
bows and arrows at a distance of ten paces, and he who first
makes the ring fall, mounts the horse that the deceased used
to drive, but in case of the deceased being a woman, any
horse he may choose, galloping three times to the grave of the
deceased and back. The horse is then killed — the Cheremiss
carrying out this in the yard and the Chuvash in the graveyard
— the meat being boiled and eaten in memory of the
deceased."83
Numerous examples show that the Baltic Finns were also
in former times in the habit of killing a large domestic animal
in honour of the dead. Even in our days they believe, in
some places, that if a cow is not killed for the funeral of the
host or hostess, it will die in any case. A remainder of the
said funeral sacrifice is found in a custom among the Finns,
as well as among the Esthonians, of making the clergyman a
present of a cow after the death of the host or hostess, as a
fee for the burial ceremony. The Esthonians were in the

MEMORIAL FEASTS 47
habit of taking an ox to the clergyman after the death of the
host, and a cow after that of the hostess. Sometimes the
clergyman was expected to prepare a meal of these for the fu-
neral guests. In North Karelia the people were in the habit
of tying the cow due to the clergyman to a tree in the grave-
yard for some time, the clergyman having to take it from
there.31
The different memorial days are celebrated by the Volga
Finns in varying ways, some of them being more solemn than
others. Thus, Georgi relates of the Votiaks, that at the first
memorial feast, which is celebrated on the third day, the
friends of the house of mourning are assembled only to eat
pancakes and drink beer, some of which is also poured out in
the yard for the dead, but on the seventh day a sheep is killed,
and on the fortieth, a cow or a horse.80
The memorial feast of the third day among the Siryans
(District of Orlov) is described by Dobrotvorskiy. When the
guests have arrived, wax-tapers are lighted in the window
and on either side of the threshold. The door is opened for
a while, when the guests are sitting down at table, to invite
the soul (lol) of the deceased to the feast. In the farther-
most corner, a hat or a kerchief is placed, depending on the sex
of the deceased. On the place where the hat has been set
down, no one seats himself. On the table beside it, they
place a bowl filled with pancakes, porridge, milk and gin.
Every guest considers it his duty to put into the bowl of the
deceased some of the food displayed on the table.36
The memorial feast of the seventh day is, in most places,
like that of the third day. Some one of the relatives of the
deceased goes to the grave to remember him. At home, they
light a candle on the brim of the vessel of food offered to the
deceased. When the first pieces of food are dropped into this
vessel, everyone utters a few words of remembrance, pointing
out that it is now the seventh day of the memorial feast. In
other places the seventh day is kept almost as solemnly as

48 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
the fortieth. The participants in the ceremony go to the grave
with two horses to invite the deceased; they kill a hen for
him, sometimes even a sheep; in the evening they go to the
bath-house with him; all night he is regaled; and not until
dawn is he taken back to his new home.87
According to a general idea of the Volga Finns and of many
other East European peoples, the deceased remains during the
course of forty days in a very near relationship to his old home.
The Vbtiaks say that the " soul " of the dead lives at home
for forty days after death. It is therefore the duty of his
people to show kindness and hospitality to the deceased, par-
ticularly during that time. In some places, it is customary,
during these forty days, to put down a bowl for the deceased
every time the family and servants sit down to take a meal.38
The Siryans believe that after the funeral, the deceased
returns with the funeral guests to his old home and remains
there for the above-named time. For that time, therefore,
it has been customary to hang up a towel in some fixed place
in the hut, so that the deceased may wipe his face every time
he washes himself. No living soul may touch it, as death
might be the immediate consequence.88
The Mordvins say that the deceased passes over to the
realm of the dead forty days or six weeks after his death.*0
The same idea is found also among the Baltic Finns who have
been under Russian influence. According to Groundstroem
the Votes dared not speak ill of the dead for six weeks, for
they believed that the soul of the deceased stayed for that time
in his home, mostly under the table. They were careful also
not to stretch their legs under the table, as they might easily
trample on the deceased." Like the Siryans, the Karelians in
the Government of Tver were in the habit of hanging a towel
for six weeks on the back wall of the hut, so that the deceased
when coming home, might wipe himself.42 A similar custom
is found among the Russians, from whom the Finnish tribes
seem to have borrowed it.

MEMORIAL FEASTS 49
As the forty-days' memorial feast is at the same time a fare-
well feast, it has attained a particular significance and is cele-
brated more solemnly than the others. Among all the Volga
Finns, the ceremonies observed on this occasion were very
much alike. The following description was taken down by
the author among the Cheremiss in the District of Urzhum,
'where, on the fortieth day, they kill a sheep, or at times even a
bigger animal, all the relations, neighbours and friends of the
deceased gathering together. The deceased himself is fetched,
with particular ceremonies, from the graveyard, members of
his own family being chosen to do this. When the sun is
highest in the heavens, the latter put the best horses before a
waggon, take meat and drink with them and drive with great
speed and tinkling of bells to the burial-ground. The cere-
monies had to be as solemn as at a wedding, and all the dead
were to know that they were now coming with two horses to
fetch " so-and-so " to the " great feast," The horses stop
by the grave, where honey, meat, gin and beer, and also bread,
cheese and pancakes are placed on a white cloth. Uncovering
their heads, those who have come to fetch the deceased now
remind him, kneeling, of the great day that has arrived: " Get
up (the name of the deceased is mentioned), see what we
have brought thee — honey, mead, gin, beer, bread, butter and
pancakes, get up and eat! The { fortieth night' is nearing,
come with us to the village. At home they have killed a
sheep for thee, thy widow and children await thee, thy rela-
tions want to meet thee. We have not come to thee for
nothing, we have come to take thee to the great feast." They
then pour out drink on the grave, placing also some food on
it and repeating the words usual at memorial-feasts: "May
this be thy portion! " The deceased is called on to bring with
him the relations who died earlier, all the dead fathers and
mothers of the family; even the ruler of the lower world is
invited to the feast. When about to start, they place a soft
cushion in the waggon for the deceased to sit on. Having

50 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
regaled the dead man in every way and tasted of the food
themselves, they ask him to get into the waggon. The de-
ceased may seem shy, or puzzled, so they assure him: " Thou
knowest us, and thy waggon thou knowest, thine own are the
horses too." Having shaken up the cushions, the one who
gets into the waggon says: " Sit down beside me, we will drive
together, we are going home." Though the seat is empty,
the Cheremiss believes that the shade of the deceased is there.
He often turns to it during the drive and speaks to it. If
several persons have arrived to invite the deceased, the horse
by which he is taken is at the head of the procession. In some
places they drive three times round the grave before returning
to the village.
At the homestead, the widow comes to meet the deceased,
and kneels with her children by the steps. Before them stands
, a solemn functionary with bared head, holding bread, cheese
and drink in his hands. He speaks kindly to the dead man,
calls him by name and asks him politely to step into the hut.
The widow and children look at the arriving guests with tears
in their eyes. When the deceased is supposed to have stepped
out of the waggon, the cushion is taken into the hut to a fixed
place where the deceased is asked to sit down. None of
the living people seat themselves on that place, and near it
all his clothes, even his bast-shoes, are hung on the beams.
Pointing to them, the widow says: " Look, here are thy clothes,
no one has used them, nothing of them have we lost." They
place meat and drink before the deceased, and when they
suppose him to have eaten enough, the men take him to see
the cattle, the corn-stacks and the farm implements, and it
is even customary to take him to the bath-house to have a
bath. Some of the relations living a long way off have already
arrived, but the feast proper does not begin until the sun goes
down.
Then all the relations and friends of the dead man arrive
at the yard. A common usage is for every family to bring

MEMORIAL FEASTS 51
with them meat and drink of every kind. The member of
the family who receives the guests, says to the deceased: " See,
thy-friend (the name is mentioned) has brought thee this."
Besides bringing meat and drink every guest takes also a
small wax-taper with him. The festival mood is heightened
above all by the numerous wax-tapers which are placed near
the back wall on a stand made for the purpose. In the middle
burns a thick wax-taper, one metre in length, twisted out of
three ordinary tapers. To the right of it stands a row of
smaller ones, one for each of the dead man's relations who
have departed earlier, and to the left each guest places his
taper in honour of the deceased. When they are burnt out
fresh ones are lighted. The " great taper " that burns until
dawn has also been lighted for the actual guest of the day.
It is this last who is the object of everyone's attention.
All eyes are directed towards the cushion on the bench in
the interior of the room below the tapers, where they believe
that the dead man is sitting. The women vie in carrying meat
and drink there; everything cooked is intended for the de-
ceased. Yet the living also get their share. The memorial
feast in honour of the dead man is no real festivity unless
everyone eats and drinks on this occasion. The Cheremiss be-
lieves, just as the Votiak does, that the more sated the guests
are, the more so is the deceased. For this last separate vessels
are set forth; a separate trough for meat, bread, pancakes,
pies and eggs, and a large round stoop made of birch-bark for
gin and mead. Every one going up to taste of the meat and
drink kneels by the seat of the deceased and throws or pours
a little into his vessel, inviting him to eat. A small piece of
each part of the slaughtered sheep is also placed in his trough.
Old men remain long kneeling before the deceased imploring
him to protect the family, and also the cattle from falling
down precipices or being torn to pieces by wild animals; asking
him, further, to make the corn grow, to ward off insects from
the fields, mice from the store-house, etc.

52 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
At midnight the living, at least, begin to feel that they have
had enough. They are all in good humour, the gin-goblets
have been emptied every now and then, and also the " stoop "
of the deceased has gradually filled. The bag pipe which
until now has lain mute, tucked into the shirt-front of its
owner, is now brought out, and one and another invite the
" shade " of the deceased to come and dance. No one keeps
in his seat, all swing and whirl around. The tired hands can
hardly longer make fresh tapers and put them up. Even
the widow and children have for a while forgotten their grief.
Many old men move now only mechanically,' and ^s^me of
them have already gone to sleep in the corners.
But there are people among them who have strength enough
to watch. The dancing and the murmur of the people cease
for a moment. Curiosity increases, when some one near the
door exclaims: "The dead man is coming," upon which a
person, looking very dignified, steps into the hut and takes the
seat of the deceased. The widow hastens to embrace him,
calling him her husband, the old men press his hand, calling
him by the name of the deceased. The Cheremiss choose
some one resembling the dead man in size and appearance,
and for the night this substitute is dressed in the dead man's
clothes. He is called " the representative of the deceased,"
and every politeness and kindness is consequently shown him.
Every one wishes to regale him in the best possible way with
meat and drink, especially drink. The " dead man " relates
his observations on life beyond the grave and advises his re-
lations to remember him, to live in harmony and avoid quarrel-
ling, to work and to be economical. The survivors, for their
part, ask for the protection of the dead man.
The tapers gradually begin one after the other to go out,
only the biggest of them is still burning, when one of the
old men, coming in, wakes up the sleeping people, saying:
" The day is dawning, the dead man wants his rest." The
languid people then bestir themselves, as before sunrise the

MEMORIAL FEASTS 53
dead man must be conveyed with all honours to the peace of
the grave. But first a prayer is said, all kneeling and turning
their faces in the direction of the seat of the deceased. He
is told that it is now time for him to depart for his home
among the other dead. They wish him a pleasant time, advise
him to make friends with the " old Cheremiss," by which
name they mean those who have departed before. The latter,
who are considered to be present, are also addressed with good
wishes: "May you have bread and salt over there in abun-
dance, do not go away from us hungry and thirsty, be rich
and happy, walk in light, help us too, to live, do not frighten
us, do not forget our cattle and do not disperse our family."
Then one of them takes the taper-stand, another the food-
trough, a third the drinking-vessel, and the others, with the
widow at their head, carry the dead man's clothes, and thus
they go out into the yard, the " representative " being the
foremost. From the yard they step out into the village
street, wending their way to the burial-place. The women
weep aloud. They do not, however, walk all the way there,
but the procession stops at a hill situated outside the village,
where the rest of the burning tapers and the food and drinks
are thrown down. Even here, they remember the deceased,
wishing him a happy existence and exhorting him to live in
comfort in the society of those already there, and asking him
not to come home, at least not as an uninvited guest. Besides
giving him meat and drink, he is presented, on his departure,
with a wooden spoon and cup, which are shattered on the spot,
for otherwise — so say the Cheremiss — the dead man does
not get them.
It is usual among the Hill Cheremiss to kill a horse for the
memorial feast of the fortieth day, if the deceased is a man,
and a cow, if a woman. During the feast all the meat must
be consumed, as it is not right to reserve festival food for the
next day. The vessels and tapers of the deceased are here
placed by the threshold. When sacrificing to the deceased,

54 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
his own people say: " In thy memory have we prepared meat
and drink j we, thy relations and neighbours, have all as-
sembled. Do not take it amiss if we have not entertained thee
enough, forgive us if we have hurt thee in thy lifetime, do
not be angry with us, and do not punish us by sending us
diseases and other misfortunes. Together with our friends
and comrades, we wish you, all ye dead ones, to be satisfied
with our feastj now go back to your dwelling, sated, singing
and dancing." The deceased is then conveyed with music
and singing to a fixed place, where they put up in his honour
a little table with one foot. On this table, which is called
" the table of the deceased," they place a vessel for food and
three spoons. In some parts it is customary to lay a long pole
across chasms or rivulets, should any such be in the neighbour-
hood, so that the dead man may be able to cross them. The
pole is called the " bridge of the deceased." This seems to be
a symbol of the "bridge of the realm of the dead," across
which, according to an idea descending from Iran, the de-
ceased had to wander to the other life.*3
Among the Eastern Cheremiss in the District of Birsk it is
also customary, in some places, to go to bed on the fortieth
night. After the music, the dancing, and the entertainment
are over, the widow takes to her the cushion on which the
deceased is supposed to have been sitting during the feast and
says: " Still for the last night will we sleep together." Early
next morning the dead man is ceremoniously conveyed with
two horses back to the burial-ground.4*
In the province of Perm the Cheremiss are in the habit
of making one of the dead man's relatives ride on horseback
to the burial-ground to invite the deceased. Having fulfilled
his task, the rider returns to the village at full gallop, crying:
" He is coming, he is coming." At the same moment, the
waiting crowd rush at the panting horse with knives in their
hands, slaughtering it at once. The meat of the horse is then

MEMORIAL FEASTS 55
boiled and eaten, but the hide is hung over the grave of the
dead man.*9
Similar ideas and customs are observed also among the
Mordvins. The dead man is fetched from the graveyard by
the horse promised him for sacrifice. The one who has dressed
himself in the clothes of the deceased relates his experiences
and describes the work of the dead, saying, among other things,
that such and such a person has fine horses, another walks in
the forest, this one has lost his property, that one has married,
such a one keeps bees, etc. Among other curious customs
occurring at funeral festivities, it may be mentioned here
that the Mordvins even make the " dead man " fell trees, if
he wishes it. They place the man who has dressed himself
in the clothes of the deceased on a chair provided with a
cushion, put a big knife into his hand and then carry him
sitting on the chair out of the hut to the drying-kiln, where,
beforehand, they have stuck a twig into the ground. The
dead man begins to chop it down with all his might. The
" tree " having been felled, the deceased is carried back to
the hut, taking the " tree " with him. At dawn the repre-
sentative of the dead man is taken to the graveyard, where
he is carried from the waggon on the cushion on which he has
been sitting, and seated on the grave of the deceased with his
back to the east. At his feet the others lay pancakes, mutton,
etc., asking the dead man to eat together with them for the
last time. Then, having eaten, they say good-bye to the de-
ceased, asking him to come again at harvest-time, when also
his portion is to be reaped. The deputy bows and hastily
steps from the grave.**
Of the Siryans it is related that at the memorial feast of a
deceased female a woman appears as the principal guest of
the feast, and, at that of a male, a man, who, at the close
of the feast is the first to go out of the'hut, attended by the
others with candles in their hands, for, according to their

56 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
ideas, the deceased withdraws from the hut in the person of
his deputy. In some places the latter is accompanied as far
as the first cross-road.*7
In Ingria the people used to go with food to the grave at
the " six weeks " festival, in order to invite the deceased to
the feast. Having returned home, they put the food on the
table with a spoon in it, which no one was allowed to touch.
Moreover, the eldest member of the family scattered some
salt, peas and slices of egg on the table for the benefit of the
dead. During the repast, a woman in the entrance sang a
" weeping-song," in which the deceased were implored to join
the circle of relations. After the repast these went, in the
order in which they left the table, out of the door into the
village street, turning their faces in the direction of the grave-
yard. At the same time each one stuck a fire-stick or a twig
into the ground, as a walking-stick for the dead man.48
In Russian Karelia it was customary, when the relations
were going to the graveyard to invite the deceased to the feast,
to take with them, besides the other horses, one that was with-
out a driver and harnessed to an empty sleigh over which
was spread a white cloth, for the purpose of conveying the
deceased to his former home.*9
In some districts, among the Siryans and the Volga races,
there seems to have been the custom to celebrate also the
anniversary with a farewell feast.
According to the Eastern Votiaks the deceased then first
leaves his own people, among whom his " soul " (itrt) has
up to that time lived and thriven. To accompany the deceased
all the relations arrive j a sheep or a cow is killed for the feast,
and some of the food is taken to the grave. The white piece
of cloth which on the funeral day had been fixed to a rafter,
is also taken there and solemnly buried in the grave. After
that day the clothes of the dead man, which up to then had
been carefully kept and only produced on the occasion of
great memorial feasts, 'could be given away to the poor.80

MEMORIAL FEASTS 57
According to one report the Votiaks believe that if they do
not celebrate a memorial feast then, the dead will not give the
new-comer a place m their community, but will make him
continue to wander about the village, as the deceased had done
in the course of the year.51
The anniversary is celebrated by the Eastern Cheremiss,
in the District of Birsk, in such a manner that all the clothes
of the deceased are hung upon his favourite horse, which is
then taken to the grave and led three times round it. They
light a three-branched candle on the grave, saying at the same
time to the dead man that the anniversary has arrived and
promising to kill the horse in his honour. Having arrived at
the homestead, the horse is killed at once and a memorial
meal prepared of its flesh. While sacrificing, the relations
say to the deceased: " Eat what we have prepared for thee;
we have not harnessed thy horse, we have not used it, now
take it with thee." At the end of the feast, the bones of the
horse are taken to the graveyard, where they are hung in a
tree, but the hide is sold for the benefit of the poor and the
fatherless.62
In honour of particular persons the Votiaks further cele-
brate a remarkable memorial feast, which, however, does not
take place at a specially fixed time, but sometimes a year or
several years after death.
This festivity, which is generally celebrated late in autumn,
is called by the Votiaks a " horse-wedding " or " the wedding
of the dead," these names being derived from the fact that
it is, above all, a cheerful feast with wedding-songs and wed-
ding-presents. The sacrificial animal, which is generally
killed in the yard, must be a horse, if the deceased in question
is a man, but a cow, if a woman. In some places where the
memorial feast is celebrated the first year after death, the
animal which the deceased liked best and which he used in his
lifetime, is generally sacrificed to him. All his relations are
invited, these alone partaking of the sacrificial meal, as it is

58 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
against custom to invite strangers. The most important per-
formance consists of the taking of the animal's bones in the
evening, by candle-light, with music and singing, to the grave-
yard, where they are hung upon a tree.63
A curious custom among the Mordvins is the " harvest of
the dead." Already when sowing in spring they pray to the
Lord to let the corn grow for the welfare of the living and
the dead. During the harvest-festival the relatives of the
deceased also reap the portion of the dead man, each of them
cutting only a few straws. The chief part is played by the
widow, who all day wears a belt of straw made by herself.
Cattle are slaughtered for this feast.s* Among the Siryans,
traces of a memorial feast in the harvest-field have also been
found."
Besides feasts decided on beforehand, particular memorial
feasts are occasionally celebrated for some special reason. Ac-
cording to a general idea, the dead may remind the living in
in a dream, or by all kinds of signs, of their wishes. Memorial
feasts are chiefly celebrated in such cases of illness as have
been declared by a wise man to originate from some one among
the dead. Among the Mordvins, the patient must then creep
on all fours to the grave of the deceased to ask his forgive-
ness.56 Should an animal — a horse or a cow — disappear
from the pasture-land, or go astray in the forest, one of the
dead relations, according to the Votiaks, has hidden away
the animal. Wax-tapers are then lighted, and just as at the
memorial feasts, food is sacrificed to the dead, in the hope that
they will not keep the animal, but drive it home. Even little
adversities, such as a failure in distilling brandy, or the loosen-
ing of a wheel on a journey, the restlessness of a baby, etc.,
may become reasons for preparing a memorial feast.57 A
widow, at least, must always be on the lookout. If the
Cheremiss woman's back aches, she believes that her deceased
husband has had sexual connexion with her during the night.
Then she must light a wax-taper and sacrifice to the dead

MEMORIAL FEASTS 59
man, saying: " Make me well again. Here are pancakes and
a candle, eat and do not touch me any more." °8 The customs
of Finnish widows are described by Agricola in the following
words: "The deceased (Manninkaiset) also received their
offerings when widows re-married."