CHAPTER VIII
THE FALL OF MAN
I
N CONNECTION with the creation myths we have
touched on many tales, in which already at his creation,
man was corrupted by the devil and, therefore, never attained
the perfection which God had intended for him. In the fol-
lowing we shall see how man, after his creation by God, has
of his own accord drawn disaster on himself.
In most of the tales of this series, man was originally en-
dowed with a special covering, which protected him from cold,
moisture, wind and other matters liable to affect his health.
Some of thfr tales provide him with a coat of fur, others with
a nail-substance or horn covering. With the eating of the
forbidden fruit man loses his natural, protective covering.
Very interesting is the following Altaic tale:
A lonely tree grew without branches. God saw it and said:
" A single, branchless tree is not pleasant to look upon, let
nine branches grow on it." The nine branches grew on the
tree. God continued: " Let nine human beings appear under
the nine branches; from the nine human beings nine races."
Further on in this tale only two people are spoken of, man and
wife, who were at first covered with fur. The name of the
man was Torongoi and of the wife Edji (" Mother "). God
said to these people: "Do not eat of the fruit of the four
branches growing towards the sunset, but eat of the five towards
the sunrise." And God placed a dog under the tree as its
guardian, saying: " If the devil comes, seize him." In addi-
tion he stationed the snake there, saying to it: " If the devil
comes, bite him." Further, he said to both dog and snake:
" If man comes to eat of the fruit towards the sunrise, let him

382 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
approach the tree, but if he wishes to eat of the fruit of the
forbidden branches, do not let him come near." Having said
which God returned to Heaven.
The devil then arrived at the tree, where he saw the snake,
which had just happened to fall asleep. He crept cunningly
into the snake and with its help climbed the tree, from where
he tempted first the woman and then, through her agency, the
man, to eat of the fruit of the forbidden branches. Having
eaten, the couple see to their astonishment how the hair begins
to fall from their bodies. Ashamed, they hide frightened
behind the tree.
When God came on to the earth and saw what had happened
in his absence, he said to the man: " How is it with thee? "
The man replied: " The woman has pushed into my mouth
the forbidden fruit." God turned admonishingly to the
woman: " Why, hast thou done this? " The woman answered:
"The snake tempted me to eat." God said to the snake:
"Snake, what hast thou done? " It replied: "Not I, but
the devil who had crept into me tempted her." God said:
"How did the devil creep into thee? " The snake replied:
" As I slept, the devil arrived." God turned then to the dog,
saying: "How was it with thee, why didst thou not drive
away the devil? " The dog answered: " Mine eyes saw him
not." 1