CHAPTER XIV
THUNDER
L
IKE most of the North American Indian tribes, the
peoples in the farthest north of Siberia imagine thunder
to be something resembling a large and mighty bird. The
Forest Tungus speak of it as such and explain that the rustle of
this mighty bird's wings is heard on the
earth, when it flies, as the terrific rumbling
of thunder. The Tungus never offer up
sacrifices to this being, nor do they wor-
ship it in any other way, but when weav-
ing a magic- spell they make a wooden
image of a bird to represent it, fixing this
outside their tent at the head of a long
pole. The Thunder bird is believed to
protect the soul of the shaman, who in
his flight through the air may encounter
many dangers. The shaman can even Fie. 17- THE TUN-
j .,1 T>I j !_• j • , i • • cus THUNDER-BIRD
send the Inunder bird against his enemies
should he deem it necessary. The Tungus see a proof of the
gigantic powers of this bird of the upper air in trees struck by
lighting, which it has torn to shreds with its " claws of stone." *
A similar conception of the nature of thunder is found
among the Chukchee and all the primitive peoples of the Dis-
trict of Turukhansk. The Eastern Samoyeds liken the
Thunder bird to a duck, whose sneezing is the cause of rain.
It is also imagined as the Iron bird, probably on account of the
din it can create.2 The Yurak Samoyeds of Northern Russia,
who make themselves an image of thunder in the form of a
goose, fancy, like the Tungus, that the Thunder bird attends

440 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
and protects the soul of the shaman. A certain shaman is even
said to have wandered two or three years in the air accompanied
by this giant bird.8 The hero in a Yakut tale says: "Why
should I not change myself into a bird and pretend to be the
ruler of rain and thunder." *
In the beliefs of the Tremyugan Ostiaks, thunder appears
as a black bird resembling a grouse and screaming very loudly.5
The Mongol tribes, many Altai peoples, and some Eastern
Tungus tribes, such as the Goldes, believe that the phenomenon
of thunder is caused by a large flying dragon. The Mongols
say that this dragon has wings and a body covered with fish
scales. At times it lives in the water, at times flies in the air.
When it moves in the sky the rumbling of thunder follows.
In some places the rumbling is explained to be the dragon's
voice and every movement of its tail to be a flash of lightning.
It never comes sufficiently near to the earth for people to see
it, and in the winter it hides in lofty mountains where the
hoar-frost on the crags is caused by its breath. Others say that
it winters in dense forests, over which a perpetual mist then
hovers, and a third opinion is that it spends the winter in the
sea.8
The peoples of the Altai say that lightning and thunder
follow when the dragon strikes two stones against each other,
of which one is in its mouth, the other in its hand. It is also
told that a certain Tengeri rides on the back of this monster,
chasing a striped or flying squirrel.7 The Tengeri desires to
wreak vengeance on the squirrel, which, while in Heaven, tore
out the eye of God's youngest son. It is dangerous during a
thunder-storm to stand under a tree in which a squirrel is
hiding, as the lightning always strikes such trees. This belief
is also common among the Buriats.8 The Goldes say that the
dragon pursues evil spirits who will hide anywhere when a
thunder-storm arises.8
This conception, in which the Creator of thunder is intro-
duced in an exceedingly mythological shape, is not an original

THUNDER 441
Altaic one, but, as its geographical area already denotes, comes
from China. As we know, the Chinese and, following their
example, the Japanese, imagined the Thunder god to have the
shape of a peculiar dragon, which is represented in their art
in many different ways.
Both the above mentioned conceptions, the bird and the
winged dragon, are evidently born of the swift movement of a
thunder-storm and especially of the sudden flash of the light-
ning. Even where human features are attributed to the
Thunder god, he is often regarded as a being with wings. The
Ostiaks of Demyanka call him " the Winged old man."10
Among the Burials a number of tales have been found
relating how some human hero becomes transformed into a
Thunder god by dressing himself in winged garments. One
of these tales tells of a clever archer who came to heaven alive.
On the earth he had had a wife and three sons with whom he
lived happily until he became old. One day he told his sons
that his days were numbered and asked them to prepare him
a garment and saddle a horse. After wishing good-bye to
his family he mounted the horse and departed. Coming to
the meeting of three roads he chose the middle one, which led
to the sky. There he arrived at an empty house where he was
soon joined by four young men. These feasted the old man
and asked him to remain there as guardian of that heavenly
abode j at the same time they forbade him to open a chest which
stood in the room or to put on a winged garment hanging on
the wall. When he was alone, however, the man became so
curious that he once opened the mystic chest and saw there
strange, different-coloured stones shaped like arrow-points.
Happening at the same time to turn his eyes to the earth,
where at that moment a person was stealing vegetables from his
neighbour's garden, he became so angry that he threw a red
stone at the thief. A little later the four masters of the house
returned home and scolded the old man for having set a whole
village on fire because of one wicked man. Still later on,

442 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
the old man conceived a desire to try on the winged clothes.
When he had dressed himself in them he acquired a magic
power of flying and thus he became the god of Thunder.11
There is another version of the same tale in a slightly dif-
ferent form. A man who had lost his way while wandering in
great forests came to a place where a flight of stairs led up from
the earth to the sky. Ascending the stairs he arrived at a fine
house glittering and shimmering with gold and silver, where
the old god of Heaven, Esege-Malan-Tengeri, was sitting.
Hearing how the man had come to Heaven, God was delighted
and begged him to be his servant, the man consenting to his
request. One day God urged him to look down and see how
people were living on the earth. On doing so, he saw a man
leading a sheep stolen from another's flock, and he became so
angry that he seized one of the stones which God kept in a
chest and threw it on the earth. Instantly, God sent him down
after his stone, so that he could see it fall on the earth as a
great flash of lightning that slew the thief. From that day he
remained with the god of Heaven and served him as the
Thunderer.12
Notwithstanding all these tales, which evidently belong to
a world-wide group of myths, the Buriats have no clearly-
defined, anthropomorphic god of Thunder. They often call
the rumble of thunder " the song of heaven."1S As they have
now, as mentioned earlier, a great number of different Ten-
geris, they cannot tell which of them is at the precise time the
Thunderer. Therefore, when necessary, they consult a magi-
cian, sometimes even nine shamans, who endeavour to find out
which god, one belonging to the eastern or one belonging to the
western group, is the raiser of the particular storm. One of
the mightiest Thunder gods is Asan-Sagan-Tengeri, who fights
evil spirits with his fiery arrow.14
The Yakuts, on the contrary, have quite a distinct Thunder
god whom they call Ulu-Tojon (" Great Lord ") or Syga-
Tojon (" Lord with the axe"). Frequently he is only named

THUNDER 443
" the Thunderer." According to one source " the Lord with
the axe" lives in the eighth heaven. Other sources speak
separately of the gods of Thunder and of Lightning. In such
cases the Yakuts call the Thunderer " Bold Screamer " and the
Lightning-maker " the Lord with the axe." Both are sup-
posed to pursue demons and evil spirits. In order to rid
their homes of the evil spirits which endeavour to hide
themselves there when a thunder-storm threatens, the
Yakuts smoke them out by burning pieces of a tree struck
by lightning, crying at the same time: " The Bold Screamer
shrieked, the Lord with the axe moved! Away, away! " They
then throw the bits of wood far out on the meadow. Thunder-
bolts, which the people believe they find in the earth, are
treasured in the houses as important talismans against light-
ning." The Goldes call old stone weapons found in the
ground " thunder-axes." 1S
The Yakut "Lord with the axe," who pursues demons, is
most probably, like the corresponding figures in European
myths, derived from the ancient civilized peoples of Asia.
Of another origin also is the other conception of the god
of Thunder, met with already among the Finns, according to
which the Thunder god is a skilful archer. The Altai Tatars
tell of a mighty hero whose bow is the rainbow and whose
arrow the lightning.17 In some Ostiak districts the rainbow is
explained to be the Thunder god's bow and ancient stone
weapons found in the ground his arrows, which he shoots in
order to kill the Forest spirit hiding in the trees.18
Generally the peoples of the Altaic race do not speak of
the rainbow as the Thunder god's weapon, nor do they call
it the thunder-bow. Very common is the fancy that the
rainbow is a kind of being that drinks water. The Tatars
have probably transmitted this idea to the Yenisei Ostiaks,
who call the rainbow: " The thunder drinks water."I9
What this animated water-drinker, as the Votiaks also call it,
really is, does not appear from the beliefs of the Turco-Tatar

444- SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
peoples. On the other hand the East European peoples, ac-
cording to whom the rainbow sucks water from seas, lakes and
rivers, sprinkling it anew on the earth as rain, imagine it to
be a kind of giant snake. The Esthonians say that it has the
head of an ox, which it lowers down to a river, emptying it
of water.20 Could this be the Vrtra or Ahi (" snake ") of the
Vedat from whose power the Thunder god Indra releases the
waters?
The Yakuts believe that the rainbow can also raise people
from the ground. A tale relates how it once lifted up a girl
in the District of Verchoyansk and set her down again near
Irkutsk.21
Both the Yakuts and Buriats call the rainbow also " the
urine of the she-fox."22 The southern Tatar tribes have
several names for it, such as " rainbelt," " the half-bow of the
pot," "God's sword" (Caucasus). The Kirghis name, "the
old woman's sheep-halter," is explained by the following tale:
A certain man had two wives who were always quarrelling.
The mother-in-law cursed the older, who had three sons, so
that she fled to the heavens with her sons and her cattle, and
now tethers her sheep to the rainbow.23
The conception of the rainbow as the weapon of the Thunder
god seems thus to be quite local to Middle and Northern Asia,
where it occurs sporadically. Another tale written down some-
where in the district of the Altai belongs to a still more limited
area. It tells of a camel moving in the sky with three persons
on its back. The first beats a drum, whence the rumbling of
thunder, the second waves a scarf, whence the lightning, the
third pulls at the reins, causing water to run from the camel's
mouth, whence the rain.2* In other places it is said that a great
shaman beats a drum in the sky when it thunders. The latter
opinion, though only occasionally met with, belongs naturally
to Siberia, the land of shamanism.
The Tatars, like many other of the peoples of the world,
imagine the lightning, which for a moment draws a livid,

THUNDER 445
winding streak of light across the sky, to be a fiery snake fall-
ing down from Heaven.20 The same idea has been earlier met
with in a Finnish poem on the origin of fire.
The most northerly peoples of Siberia, with the exception of
The Yakuts, do not sacrifice to the Thunder god. Some, e.g.,
the Yenisei Ostiaks, bid him during a storm pass by quietly
without raising a tempest. Records of Thunder worship are
found more among other Siberian peoples. Old Chinese
chronicles relate that the Northern Uigurs fear the thunder,
and cry out and shoot towards the sky at every crash. They
then leave the place and separate. The following spring they
assemble again at the spot where the lightning struck and
slaughter a ram there. A certain Persian historian mentions
that the Mongolians were greatly afraid of thunder and poured
milk and kumiss on the ground, begging it not to hurt their
dwellings or their cattle. It has been a custom with the Tatars
of the Altai to assemble village by village on high mountains,
when the first roll of thunder is heard in spring, and to sprinkle
milk towards the four points of the sky.26
Special attention is awakened by the thunder when it hap-
pens to kill a human being or a domestic animal. Such victims
of the lightning are regarded as sacred and so too is the spot
where the lightning has struck. According to the Buriats,
people and animals slain by lightning must always be buried
in the air upon a platform built on four posts. If the light-
ning strikes a house, the house must at once be removed to
another place, or certain rites, called " the raising," have to be
observed, the intention of which is the sending of the thunder-
bolt back into the sky. Unless this be done danger is be-
lieved to threaten. These rites, which must take place on the
third day after the thunder-storm, are conducted by a magician
and his eight assistants, who ride on horseback three times
round the dwelling in question, stopping before the door at
every round. The magician has a branch of a silver-fir in
his hand, the others a drinking-cup. While the magician re-

446 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
peats a prayer his assistants sprinkle liquid from their cups.
The most important of these rites seems to be the raising of a
felt carpet spread before the tent, on which some article re-
sembling or intended to represent a thunderbolt has been laid.
" The raising," from which the ritual gets its name, is per-
formed by the eight assistants. Finally, molten tin is dropped
into a liquid to test by the shapes thus obtained whether the
raising has been successful. If the tin, on falling into a basin
containing wine or milk, forms into a single lump, the sign
is favourable."
Exceedingly strange is the fancy of the Buriats that the
Tengeris who are mentioned as the senders of thunderbolts
sometimes pour down from the sky wrak (the " first-milk,"
differing in colour from other milk given by a cow after
calving). Although many such Tengeris are mentioned, e.g.,
Khan-Budal-Tengeri, Urak-Sagan-Tengeri, Kharan-Budal-
Tengeri (budal, " to let down "), of which the last mentioned
is fancied to belong to the black, i.e., the eastern Tengeris, it
is probable that all these names originally meant one and the
same being. According to tales, the urak dropped down from
the sky is a thick yellowish-white liquid. The person who re-
ceives some of this " first milk " during a thunder-storm is
deemed very fortunate and is believed to remain rich for ever.
It is, however, an extremely rare event for a person to receive
urak. When a Buriat perceives that he has been the recipient
of special heavenly favour, urak appearing sometimes in his
milk-foods, he turns to the magician, who witnesses the fact
and examines from which Tengeri the urak has come. The
liquid is then poured into a vessel made of birch-bark and
placed on a high place, to prevent it from becoming defiled on
the earth. The Buriats believe that the urak can rise into the
sky again. According to the common custom, it must always,
like a thunderbolt, be returned to heaven.28
This uraky which falls from the sky during a thunder-storm
and must immediately be sacrificed to its sender again, reminds

THUNDER 447
one of the Indo-Iranian tales about Haoma or Soma which an
eagle brings down from the sky. The Soma, sometimes called
" first milk " in the Rgveda, was originally the favourite drink
of Indra, the god of Thunder. It provides the " Bearer of
thunderbolts " with giant powers for his great deeds. Doubt-
less, the eagle itself, which, according to tales, procured this
drink for its master, was the bird of Indra. Compared with
Indo-Iranian legends, the beliefs of the Buriats seem to repre-
sent a more primitive standpoint. On the ground of these
tales we may conjecture that the Indo-Iranians, like the peoples
of Northern Siberia, orginally regarded thunder as a giant
bird resembling an eagle. The fact that the liquid brought
down from the sky by the Thunder bird is sacrificed to the
Thunder god, may easily have given rise to an idea that there
are two separate beings, of which the one brings and the other
receives the Soma.
In a Yakut tale about how the son of Ulu-Tojon fought
with a giant, even the thunder-bolt seems to appear personi-
fied. The tale begins with the description of a terrible storm
and then goes on to relate how <l suddenly pitch-black darkness
covered the earth, a frightful roar, louder than the strongest
peal of thunder, was heard, and at the same time a man three
fathoms long, made half of fire, half of iron, came flying and
twirling down in a mighty whirlwind. He sank over a yard
deep into the earth, but bounced up again and stepped before
the giant." 2fl
That the Thunder god has not so prominent a place among
the nomads, hunters, and fishers of Northern Siberia as in the
mythology of the agricultural peoples of Nearer Asia, India
and Europe is explained by the fact that the life of the farmers
is in a much greater degree dependent on weather and rain.
There are, it is true, even in the districts of the Altai, certain
persons and even families, whose duty it is to bring about rain
or drought as necessary, but these rainmakers (Jadatshy) do
not seem to appeal to any special Thunder god, but to the god

448 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
of Heaven in general (Kaira-Khan), or to sundry gods living
at the springs of certain rivers, who are believed to cause rain.
Extremely famous in this respect are Mordo-Khan and Abakan-
Khan/who are said to live at the spring of the Abakan river.30
The Buriats also speak of a separate Rain-god, Khuran-
Nojon ("the Lord of Rain "), who is believed to have nine
water-barrels in heaven. When he opens only one of them,
a three days' rain ensues.81 There is no information, how-
ever, as to whether this god has ever been worshipped with
sacrifices.