CHAPTER XIX
DREAMS, SICKNESS AND DEATH
N
ATURAL causes of dreams, sickness and death, as with
most of the peoples of the earth, were unknown to the
Altaic race. The most usual idea is that man, in these states,
has lost his "shadow." Of the varied souls that are com-
monly believed to be contained in man, it is just this " shadow "
(Altai Tatar kuty sur and sun'd, Mongol Buriat sun'dsun, Yakut
kutt etc.)) which is the most important in myths.
A " shadow-soul" of this description, as already mentioned,
is owned also by animals, plants and lifeless objects.
The close connection between this soul and the shadow ap-
pears, e.g., from the idea that when a human being loses his
soul, he loses also his shadow. According to the Yakuts men
have three shadows; when all of these have disappeared, the
one who loses them dies. Spirits are said to be beings without
shadows.1
That the shadow-soul is received by a child at its birth from
outside would seem to be a general belief. The idea of the
Yenisei Ostiaks that all human beings born into the world re-
ceive, instead of new souls (ulvei, " shadow," " reflection in
water "), such souls as have existed before, is enlightening
in this respect. The shadow-soul is said to enter the sexual
organs of a woman with child a little before confinement; the
other life-spirits, on the other hand, which are believed to
dwell in the heart, head, etc., are received by the child in the
womb through its mother's food. From the moment of entry
of the shadow-soul, birth pangs begin, as the soul (ulvei) is
uncomfortable in the womb, where it is hot and suffocating.
During life this shadow-soul is the faithful companion of man.

DREAMS, SICKNESS AND DEATH 473
The Yenisei Ostiaks, like the Yakuts and Buriats, imagine
it to be a little being which can be seen more especially by
shamans.2
Among the Buriats, this belief in a previous existence of
souls appears in a more developed form, of Indian origin.
They explain that when the Tengeris lay themselves down to
sleep (a slumber that may sometimes last a hundred years),
their souls appear on the earth and are born here as human
beings. If the soul of a Tengeri comes down a long time
after the god has slept, the person within whom the soul has
taken up its abode soon dies, as the soul has to return to its
owner in heaven before the latter awakens from his sleep.
Where the soul of the Tengeri comes down soon after its
owner has fallen asleep, the person in question lives to old
age.3
As has been said, the shadow-soul of a human being can
leave its dwelling-place during life. In dreams it wanders
unfettered by material means, visits distant places, strange
races, passes through locked doors, and even keeps company
with deceased companions. The Buriats say that what the
soul has seen or heard during its journeys, remains in its
memory, so that a person, when the soul has returned and
awakened its owner, can relate to others the experiences of his
soul. Dreams are thus believed to be actual truths, and for
this reason are regarded as important/ But the wandering,
released soul is also an actual and in some degree material
being, which, e.g., may be both visible and audible to others.
Besides its human form the soul of a sleeper can also take on
the form of some animal. The Yakuts say that it wanders
in space as a little bird or butterfly. In a Buriat tale the soul
issued from the mouth of a sleeper in the form of a bee or a
wasp. Such soul-animals must be left strictly in peace."
Like dreams, sickness is caused also by the temporary absence
of the soul from the body. But during sickness, the soul is
believed to have been driven out of the body against its will.

474 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
Often a malicious spirit, for some reason or other, generally
to obtain a sacrifice, carries off the soul. This may happen in
different circumstances, and the soul is exposed to this danger,
especially during its nocturnal journeys. In the stillness and
darkness of the night all evil spirits are in motion and on the
hunt for souls. To obtain help, the soul has to seek its
deceased friends or other protecting spirits. Thoughtful souls
can also help themselves by skilfully hiding, e.g., in the fur of
animals, in leafy trees, or in other objects. Should a poor
soul be pursued too long it loses itself in deep forests or other
places strange to it, so that it can no longer find its way home.
When a soul is seized by an evil spirit, one can sometimes hear
its weeping and cries.6
Another very common belief is that the soul, against its
will, may be driven by a shock from the body. The Buriats
believe that the homeless soul then remains for some time at
the place where this misfortune happens. Unless attention is
given at once to this accident, the soul begins to wander about
and flies further and further away, with the result that the
victim becomes more and more seriously ill and in the end dies.
The souls of little children can easily be driven away in this
manner if they are frightened. The consequences of the
absence of the soul soon show themselves as fatigue, paleness,
tears, and restlessness during sleep, etc. One has then to seek
out the place where the soul left its dwelling-place, where it
may still possibly be found. Should one succeed in winning
the soul back again by special ceremonies, the sick one becomes
well again. Often, however, the soul may. disappear without
its owner being aware of the fact, and when he or she grad-
ually begins to feel apathetic, weak, and in a decline, it is
too late to find the soul again. The help of a shaman, who
has the power of finding all lost and wandering souls, is then
necessary.7
At times a sick person may recover his soul himself. He
must recall to memory the place where his soul left him, dress

DREAMS, SICKNESS AND DEATH 475
in the clothes he wore on that occasion, and visit the scene of
the disaster at a time corresponding to the time of his loss,
viz., in the evening if his soul left him in the evening, and so
on. The person seeking his soul has further to take with him
such delicacies as his soul delights in, and call his soul to par-
take of them. If the soul happens to be still in the vicinity,
it will return to its owner, who is said to feel the reunion by
a violent shivering in the back. It is important to remember
the exact time, as then the soul is most certainly, to be met with,
at first every day, later at ever-increasing intervals, until it
comes at last only once a year to the place of its liberation.
During a long absence from the body, a soul, however, seldom
wins through all the dangers threatening it from the many
malicious and cunning spirits.8
A further means of driving a soul from its home, said to be
used by, the spirits, is a tickling of the nose, which induces
sneezing. This appears from the following Buriat tale, which
in many other respects also throws light on the beliefs of the
Mongols regarding souls.
Once, a man who had the power of seeing spirits and talking
with them went -on a journey. Meeting three spirits on the
way he went on in their company. As they journeyed he
ascertained that these spirits had formed wicked plans, intend-
ing to steal away the soul of a rich man's son. The man tried
to worm himself into the spirits' favour by promising to help
in the capture of the soul, and thus obtained an opportunity
of accompanying them. This man, who wished to play the
part of a spirit, could not, however, but awaken the attention
of the spirits. When they had travelled awhile together, the
spirits asked in astonishment: "Why dost thou walk so that the
grass falls down and the dry leaves rustle under thy steps? "
The man replied cunningly that he had died so recently that
he had not yet learned to walk silently and without leaving a
track as a spirit should. The spirits believed this. When
they arrived at the rich man's house, one of the spirits placed

476 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
itself at the door, the other at the chimney, the third went to
the unlucky son, and by producing an irritation in his nose,
caused him to sneeze violently. During the sneeze the son's
soul jumped out of his body and tried to escape by the door,
but the spirit watching there seized it at once and held it tight,
although the soul wept bitterly. The spirits then took the
captured soul away with them. On the way back, the man
who had joined the spirits asked them if they, had anything in
the world to fear. The spirits answered that they were very
much afraid of thistles and thorns. " But what art thou
afraid of? " asked the spirits. " I," said the man, " am most
afraid of fat meat." The spirits, unaware that the man in-
tended to deceive them, travelled further and further. On
the way the man begged to be allowed to help by carrying the
soul, which was also granted. But just then they happened
to come to a place where thorny bushes and thistles grew.
The man jumped with the soul in his arms among the prickly
bushes, where the spirits were afraid to come. Remembering
that the man had expressed his dread for fat meat, they began
to throw pieces of meat among the bushes to drive him out.
But the man, who was very fond of meat, ate them without
danger to himself, on seeing which, the spirits realized that
they had been tricked and went their way. The man then
hurried back to the rich man's house, taking the soul with him
so that the son recovered.9
Sickness may also be caused by the soul injuring itself in
some way on its travels. According to the Yenisei Ostiaks
bodily pain is often closely connected with damage to the soul
(shadow). Should the soul, e.g., hurt its foot, its owner will
limp; should the soul catch cold, its owner begins to shiver,
etc., etc. Similar ideas are met with among the Tungus, and
are reflected in the general belief that everything done to the
image of a person affects the person himself. The word
" soul" originally meant both shadow and image.10
Should the shadow-soul have left its dwelling-place for

DREAMS, SICKNESS AND DEATH 477
good, death follows, when also the spirit-soul (Altai Tatar /««,
Mongol and Buriat amin, " breath ") disappears. Among cer-
tain peoples, the Buriats and Altai Tatars, the belief prevails
that when the soul of a sick person comes into the hands of the
Prince of Death, fate has decreed that the person in question
shall die, and then even the shaman can no longer be of any
assistance. The Buriats relate how Erlen-Khan (" Death-
kingdom's Prince ") sends out his servants to capture wander-
ing souls. Without caring for the cries for help and the
prayers of the souls, these servants put them into sacks and
bear them to their hard master, who places the souls in cap-
tivity.11 In a tale about the first shaman, Mergen-khara, it is
said that he possessed the power of freeing souls even from the
prisons of the Prince of Death, where these sit with strong
chains round their necks, hands and feet. The Prince of
Death complained to the Heaven god Esege-Malan-Tengeri,
who decided to test the power of the shaman by taking a soul
up to the heavens and hiding it there in a bottle, the mouth of
which he stopped up with his thumb. The person whose soul
had been taken became now dangerously ill and the shaman,
according to his wont, hurried to seek the soul. He went
down to the kingdom of the Prince of Death, but failed to
find the soul there. He then journeyed everywhere under
the earth and the sea, in chasms in the mountains and deep
forests, but without result. Then he "sat himself on his
drum," flew up to heaven and after much difficult searching
found the soul of the sick one in the bottle. But how to free
it, as God kept his finger on the mouth of the bottle? The
shaman was equal to the task. He changed himself into a
wasp and stung God violently on the forehead, and as God
tried to protect himself with his right hand the soul escaped
from the bottle. After a while God noticed that the bottle
was empty and that the shaman, sitting on the drum with his
prize, was already sinking towards the earth. God then be-
came very angry and decreased the power of the shamans, and

478 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
now no shaman can save a soul which has come into the hands
of the Prince of Death.12
After death, the soul is said to remain for a few days in the
home. According to the Altai Tatars, Buriats, Yakuts, and
others, the soul of a person recently dead cannot understand
at once that it has left the body, but wanders for three days
yet in its old home. Not until the soul notices that it leaves
no trace in the ashes of the hearth, does it realize that it now
belongs to the world of spirits.13 Despite the last fact, how-
ever, the soul appears in stories with a material body. The
Yakuts believe it can burn or wound itself and that blood runs
from its wounds. By means of sharpened objects the soul of
a dead person can easily be prevented from returning to its
home. If the soul does not receive sufficient food, it feels
hungry; without the necessary clothing it feels cold.14 The
soul can even die, according to a popular belief. Of later
origin is probably the belief held by, the .Yakuts, that the soul
is taken round by spirits on the night of burial, to the places
where its former owner sojourned during life, and punished
for misdeeds on the spot where these occurred, so that one can
hear its cries and plaints.15
According to a mere northern idea, the soul remains among
the relatives for some time after death. During this period
the property of the deceased may not be touched, but the soul,
like a living person, must be provided with food and drink.
Many peoples, such as the Yakuts, Dolgans, Goldes, and, at
an earlier time, the Mongols, Kirghis, etc., who prepare images
of their deceased, or for longer or shorter periods look
well after and provide for the soul in connection with some
object owned by the deceased, believe that only at the end
of these periods does the soul remove to the kingdom of the
dead.18
Besides the souls living in peace and rest in the land of the
dead, there are also others, which wander restlessly around,
disturbing the living with all kinds of misfortunes, especially

DREAMS, SICKNESS AND DEATH 479
sickness. A very common view is that the souls of childless
or unmarried women, together with those whose owners either
met with a violent death or died before their time, haunt their
old homes, causing much trouble to their relations. Only a
very clever shaman can drive out these spirits, which are
especially dangerous for infants. The Yakuts call them tJor,
the Buriats Anakhai.17 According to the Yenisei Ostiaks the
spirits of little children and unmarried women wander irri-
tated around their graves for a whole year after death.18 The
longer a soul has been among the other dead, the more it
begins to acquire the characteristics of an evil spirit. Such
spirits of the long-ago deceased are the Abasy among the
Yakuts, Buriat Bokholdoi, Altai Tatar Aina, Uziit, etc.19 Be-
sides graves, certain deserted places, e.g., the deserts of Turan
and Gobi, are the dwelling-places of these evil spirits, who
from these centres set out on their destructive excursions. In
mountainous districts places difficult of reach, the summits,
etc., are the homes of all manner of spirits. The Mongols
believe further that the souls of wicked people stop halfway
between this and the next world, floating in the air and causing
many kinds of misfortune.20 The Buriats relate that the
wandering spirits make fires at night in deserted huts. These
fires are pale and bluish in colour. This fire can be stolen,
the person succeeding in doing this becoming- very rich. When
the spirits gather round their fires to sit or dance, they never
form a complete ring as human beings would. Men can
sometimes see such spirits, and if they succeed in glancing at
them before being noticed, the spirits become frightened and
take to flight. The living are also said to be able to hear
the song of these spirits.21
Like Odin of the Scandinavians, the ruler over the dead is
said by the Buriats to have one eye in the middle of his fore-
head. In one of the tales of the latter, a man who had the
power of seeing spirits kept watch while the spirits gathered
at a deserted hut. There he happened to see also the ruler

480
SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
of the spirits. This was a roughly-built big man, with one
eye in his forehead. The ruler seated himself in the place of
honour and now and then announced which souls should be
brought before him. Each time, certain of the spirits went to
fulfil his command. The man approached the ruler of the
dead and shot him in the centre of his forehead so that he fell
down and was changed into a hip-bone.22
The idea that the soul of man is intimately connected with
the bone-construction of the body, would seem to be a primi-
tive belief among the Siberian peoples. Just as the preserv-
ing of the bones of animals — bears, reindeer, etc. — is said to
FIG. 18. NORTH-SIBERIAN TOMB
be founded on the hope that these animals can preserve their
lives as long as the skeleton is uninjured, so a similar belief
was applied to the remains of human beings. In earlier times
the dead were buried over the earth. According to Strahlen-
berg the Yakuts often left the body in the hut, removing
themselves elsewhere.23 Among nearly all the more northern

DREAMS, SICKNESS AND DEATH 481
peoples, the custom of placing the bodies of children, some-
times also of adults, in hollow trees or on the branches of a
growing tree, has been preserved down to our day. At the
present time burial-erections are mostly made of wood. The
body, of a shaman in particular, may not, among the Tungus,
Yakuts and others, be buried in the earth. For this reason it
is generally laid in a wooden box, borne on two or four posts."
" Shamans," says Georgi, " will mostly dissolve in the free
air, as the devil lives in the earth." 25 A Tungus assured the
author that if a shaman is buried in the earth, his soul-bird
will never return again to a new shaman of the same family.