CHAPTER VI
ANIMAL WORSHIP
L
IKE many other primitive peoples the Finno-Ugric
stocks regard the fruits of the chase and of fishing as
holy. While engaged in either of these two occupations their
actions, having a significance beyond those needed in ordinary
tasks, follow closely certain rules. Their words for game are
used with meanings differing from those in everyday use.
The bear, especially, has many secret names. The Lapps call
him " master of the forest," " the old man of the mountains,"
" the wise man," " the holy animal," " the dog of God."
The Ostiaks have names such as " the fur man," " the dweller
in the wilds," for himj the Finns speak of him as "honey-
paw," " great forest," etc. They believe that were the actual
name of the prey to be used, it might hear it and become
angry. On hunting trips and at bear feasts even the different
parts of the bear and the hunting gear are given special names.
Similarly, on fishing expeditions, a special language is used.
The Livonians, for example, when out at sea, retain even to
this day the habit of speaking of their fishing gear in strange,
mysterious terms.
Cleanliness was essential in both hunting and fishing. O£
this, traces can be observed even to-day amongst all the Finno-
Ugric peoples. The most general methods of purification,
used both for people and for the implements of the hunter
or fisher, were smoking over a fire, jumping over fire, washing
in water, or being besprinkled with water. The opinion of
the Siryans that hunting is a " pure " occupation, animals lov-
ing only " pure " people,1 is common to all the Finno-Ugric

84 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
stocks. The Ostiaks regard it as improper even for those who
stay at home to engage in any dirty work, such as scrubbing
floors, or washing clothes, on the day when they know that
the hunters have reached the lair of the bear.2 The Samoyeds
do not hunt or fish or even cross the stream when there is a
corpse in the village j they also avoid intercourse with women
at hunting or fishing times.3
In earlier times, when the hunters or fishers among the
Lapps set out on an expedition, they did not use the ordinary
outlet when leaving their tents, but instead, a special opening
in the back of the tent that was regarded as holy and was
never used by womenfolk. This opening was called varr-lyps
(" the bloody backdoor ") by the Russian Lapps, the name
originating from the fact that the bleeding corpses of the
prey were always brought in by it.* Missionaries relate that
the Lapps threw in by this opening " both the gifts of the
forest, viz, birds and animals, and of the sea, viz, fish." °
Traces of this custom can be observed among the Ostiaks, who,
on returning from the forest, carry in the head of the bear
through the window and, after the feast-night, carry it out
the same way to the storehouse.8 Of similar origin is likewise
a custom among the Finns, whose hunters, when going out in
pursuit of a bear, lift the door from its bottom hinges and
pass through the opening between the door and the door-
post on the side where the hinges are.7 One had also to set
forth with due secrecy on hunting or fishing trips and without
meeting anyone, women in particular. A very old custom
decrees that no woman may take part in hunting trips, but
instead must prepare to meet the returning hunters with spe-
cial ceremonies, obviously in order thus to avoid dangerous
contact. This was especially necessary when the prey was
some large animal. When the Lapp brought in the meat of
some fallen wild reindeer through the " holy " backdoor, his
wife had to have in readiness a liquid prepared from alder-
bark, with which the Lapp washed his face while being be-

ANIMAL WORSHIP 85
sprinkled by his wife, believing that by this ceremony he
could assure himself of better luck among the wild reindeer.*
Besides the special animals caught in or near the " holy "
places, a woman, according to the Lapps, was not allowed to
eat of every part of even birds, squirrels, hares, wild reindeer,
bears, in short, of any forest animal.9 It is also to be noted
that slaughtering and the cooking of the meat were always
left to the men. The more northern stocks, the Lapps and
Samoyeds, do their slaughtering for the home-sacrifices also,
behind the back of the tent, where women are not allowed to
tread.10
The bear has always been regarded among the Finno-Ugric
peoples as being the most holy of all wild animals. At least
the Lapps, Finns, Ostiaks and Voguls held feasts in its honour.
Among the Volga peoples, relics of these feasts are no longer
found, though many of the beliefs appertaining to the
bear are still general among them all. The bear is more in-
telligent and stronger than a man, say the Votiaks. It under-
stands the speech of men though it cannot talkj when they
meet " the old man " in the forest they bare their heads, as
is fit and proper, before the master of the forest. Sometimes
they bow to it, go down on their knees, etc., as they believe
that if one shows due respect to a bear, it will not do them any
harm. Enemies are recognized by the bear even after its
death, and persecuted by him. For this reason it is unwise
to laugh near the body of a bear.
In the life of the community, among the more northern
peoples, the bear would seem also to have had some part.
The Samoyeds, Ostiaks and Voguls swore their oaths by the
bear. A delinquent would bite the hair of the animal, or its
nose, claws or teeth, saying: " If I am wrong, so bite me as
I now bite thee."ll
The festival ceremonies of the " holy animal" have been
preserved in their most original form among the Lapps j Pehr
Fjellstrom and another unknown author having left us com-

86 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
plete accounts.12 Both descriptions date from the eighteenth
century, and were made in the Swedish Lapp territory.
In the autumn the Lapps track the bears and seek their
hiding-places for the winter. When they have discovered one
of these spots they leave the bear there in peace until it has
snowed so much that it is difficult for the animal to move
freely. Often the bear is not awakened until March or April,
when the Lapp invites his nearest relations and friends to a
bear-killing. This is not, however, proceeded with at once,
the magic drum having first to be consulted as to whether
the hunt will succeed or not. When this matter is clear the
hunters arrange themselves in a fighting-line, and march one
after the other in a certain order to the winter-quarters of
the bear. As first man, marches the one who tracked the bear.
To the end of a pole which he bears in his hands a brass ring
must without fail be attached. After him comes the inter-
preter of the message of the magic drum, who in turn is
followed by the bravest of the company, their duty being to
fell the bear, and lastly the crowd according to rank. Each
of them has his own fixed duties in the bear feast ceremonies,
one having to cook the flesh, another to carry water, a third
to make the fire, and so on. When this procession finally
arrives at the lair, the bear is attacked with spear and gun, and
having been killed, is dragged out of its hiding-place. To
the accompaniment of much merry singing, it is then begged
for forgiveness that its sleep was disturbed, and thanked for
the little trouble it gave the hunters and that none of the
staves or spears was broken.
In all this, the Lapps follow many curious customs handed
down from their ancestors. They whip the bear with slender
twigs as soon as it has been dragged from its lair, or they lay
their skis against it as a token of their victory. It is also cus-
tomary to weave a ring of fir-twigs round the lower jaw of
the animal, to which ring the highest in rank among the crowd
fastens his belt and, accompanied by the merry singing of

ANIMAL WORSHIP 87
the others, drags the fallen bear a little way from its place.
The Lapps also indicate their bravery by swinging their spears
threateningly against the dead enemy as though it were still
alive. After this play the carcass is covered with branches of
fir and left lying there until the next day.
When the hunters approach their home after a successful
hunt, they indicate their success by a merry traditional singing
at the first sound of which the women in the tent begin to array
themselves in festive garments, answering meanwhile the sing-
ing of the heroes by a similar singing. According to Fjell-
strom the leader of the crowd usually plaits a twig of fir
(soive-rise), at the end of which he forms a little ring.
With this twig he strikes thre^e times at the backdoor of the
tent, saying: " Soive-olmai," if the prey be a male animal,
and " Soive-neida " if it be a female. The same name was
afterwards given to the hunter and his wife. From another
source we learn that the wife of the hunter or some other
person gives him a twig of birch, plaited solely for this occa-
sion, to which the womenfolk have to fasten copper rings.18
According to Randulf, the slayer of the bear informs those at
home of his arrival by pushing an alder-branch under the Wall
of the tent. When the wife notices this, she tries to take
hold of the branch, but the man draws it out again, repeating
this manoeuvre three times, from which the wife understands
that " the holy hound of God n has been felled. Before the
hunters enter the tent they sing for a while outside, until the
women are ready to receive them.1*
The women, who on no account may go near the bear, or
take part in its slaughtering, have now, as the men enter
through the sacred backdoor, to cover their faces with a cloth.
Should they wish it, they are allowed to cast a glance through
a copper ring at those entering; but at the same time, according
to an old custom, they must spit the juice of chewed alder-
bark in the faces of the hunters, from which the men's faces
become quite red. The same thing is done to the dogs which

88 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
have taken part in the hunt. Sometimes both men and women
paint their bodies with alder-bark juice — a ring round the
arms, lines on the breast and a cross on the forehead. The
women also sometimes paint their faces red.16 It is further
the custom for women to decorate their husbands with brass
rings and chains, which are hung on the neck and, under the
garments, round one hand and foot. The twig described above
is now given into the care of the bear-killer's wife} she wraps
it in a piece of linen and keeps it until the tail of the bear has
been cooked and eaten. The news of the killing of the bear
having thus been spread, the Lapps feast in honour of the
day on all the delicacies they can command, men and women,
however, eating in separate groups. Nothing else is even at-
tempted to be done on this day. Everyone goes to sleep in
the evening in the finery which has during the day fallen to
their lot, the husbands forsaking their usual couches with their
wives and sleeping, like the women, with their own sex only.
The next day measures are taken for the transport of the
bear. All the men do not go out for this purpose, some of
the hunters remaining behind to prepare a temporary dwelling-
place for the bear. This is formed of hewn boards and is
covered with branches of fir. Rooms of this description for
the cutting-up and cooking of the bear are built where the
bear, as, for example, at Jockmock, is not carried to the holy
back-compartment of the tent.16 Most of the men, however,
go out to bring in the bear, all of them being, like the reindeer
detailed for the work, decorated with rings and chains of brass,
those of the reindeer being hung round its neck. It is also
usual to draw a ring with alder-bark juice on the neck of the
reindeer and a cross on its forehead, sometimes also other
figures. On the way the men sing merrily, and pray to the
bear not to send bad weather to inconvenience them. During
the whole time care must be taken not to cross over the track
of any woman. Neither is it advisable for a woman, for the
period, at least, of the ceremonies, to pass over the track left

ANIMAL WORSHIP 89
behind by the bear, and even the use of the reindeer which
has dragged in the bear is forbidden to women for a whole
year.
As the brave men near their home with their burden they
sing arrogantly: "Here come men from Sweden, Germany,
England and from all lands"} to which the women reply:
" Welcome, ye noble men from Sweden, Germany, England
and all lands, ye who have felled the bear."1T
The bear, brought thus ceremoniously from the forest, is
now placed in the cutting-up tent, generally built a stone's
throw from the holy backdoor of the dwelling-tent, and often
decorated with garlands of hay in honour of the event. Here
the carcass is laid down outstretched, alder-bark juice is
sprinkled on it, and a small receptacle made of bark and filled
with this liquid is set before the bear's nose. The knives are
decorated with rings of brass, which, like alder-bark, are used
on these occasions for magic protective purposes. Similarly,
all vessels used in the ceremonies are decorated. Round the
neck of the " holy " animal itself brass rings and chains are
bound. The children, who are allowed to be present on these
occasions, run frequently into the house to tell the women what
they have seen and heard.
During the whole time of the cutting-up the men sing their
varying moods, trying to guess the home district of the bear,
thanking it for its fur, or pointing out how great an honour
has fallen to its part. Further, they beg the bear to tell the
other bears of the honour shown it, so that these may more
willingly surrender themselves to their hunters. In songs
the men also try to guess what the women are doing in the
tent, and should they guess correctly, which can easily be
ascertained from the children running between the two tents,
this is regarded as a good omen.
When the animal has been skinned, the flesh is cut up very
carefully lest even the smallest bone should be damaged, or
some artery or muscle be broken. The whole of the flesh is

90 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
cooked at once, the women's part separately. The blood is
cooked first and mixed with fat$ this is devoured at once as
the greatest delicacy. With the blood of the bear, which is
believed by the Lapps to possess magical qualities, the hunters
also sometimes besmear their bodies, and in some districts they
even smear their wives and children and the door and the logs
bearing up the tent. The head of the animal with the wind-
pipe and all the entrails hanging from it is left untouched
until all the flesh has been cooked. It is skinned last, at which
operation the thin, hairless region of the mouth is cut outj
the person skinning the head is permitted the honour of bear-
ing this skin before his face for a time. The head is cooked,
with all its hanging burden of entrails, which are perfunctorily
cleaned but not detached from the skull.
While the flesh is being cooked the hunters sit on each side
of the fire according to their rank and position. First sits the
one who tracked the bear, then the interpreter of the magic
drum, the bear-killers, etc., all according to the importance of
the duty which they have had to do during the kill. The
vessel in which the flesh is cooked must be of brass, or at the
very least, ornamented with brass rings. It must be carefully
watched during the cooking, as the running-over of the tiniest
trifle of gravy into the fire is regarded as a very bad omen.
Should the gravy commence to boil too violently it is not
regulated by adding water or thinning out the fire, but one
of the men must go to the tent to see whether any of the
women has caused the trouble by unsuitable behaviour.
Should nothing blameworthy be found there, the chief person
of the gathering tries to stop the gravy from boiling over by
the customary singing.
When the preparation, which may not be seasoned with salt,
is finally ready, the chief person deals out to each his share of
the meat, which the men sitting in their places begin to de-
vour; the women's share is taken over to the dwelling-tent.
In the division of the meat certain rules are followed. Thus,

ANIMAL WORSHIP 91
women may not partake of the fore part of the bear, this
belonging to the men, and the oldest man of the party must
eat from the hind part of the bear the three or four last joints
of the backbone.18 It is also forbidden for women to eat the
more noble organs, in especial, the heart, " the holy flesh,"
which the men devour greedily as the greatest delicacy. The
kidneys also are of great merit, not only as delicacies, but as
awakeners of love. Some suck in the gall of the bear to harden
their natures. It is not, however, advisable to besmear one's
boots with fat from the bear, as the latter might thus find
out who it was who killed him.19 When eating bearVmeat,
knives or other metal aids may not be used, only the fingers
or pieces of wood being allowable. Neither may one save
anything for another occasion, but the whole of the meat must
be eaten at one sitting.20
The men who carry over the women's share to the dwelling-
tent are received by the women with showers of alder-bark
juice in the face and with glances through a brass ring. This
is also done by the women to the children coming from the
cutting-up place, their festival-portion undergoing the same
treatment. The first bite is taken through a ring of brass,
or the ring is at least held before the mouth while eating it.
Sticks of wood must all the time be used by the women during
the meal, as women may not touch bearVmeat with their hands
at all.21 Lastly the bear's tail, which has been cooked unskinned
in a little lard, is brought into the tent. The twig mentioned
earlier is brought from its hiding-place, and all the women and
children present bind brass rings to it as ornaments.22 When
everything eatable has been chewed off the tail and the last
speck of lard sucked from among the hair, the tail is tied to the
branch and returned to the men. The women then cover their
faces and are kissed and thanked by the men for not having in
any way disturbed the bear feast.
In the notes of the unknown author of the eighteenth century
we find many of the songs sung at the bear feasts. From them

92 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
it would appear that the Lapps, like the Voguls and Ostiaks, had
some kind of dramatic ceremonies at these feasts, in which the
bear also is regarded as appearing. In the name of the bear
the Lapps sing: " Now come I from great wide forests, where
I lived, to thickly-peopled districts," or: "I thought of re-
turning to my old place, but these young men hindered my
journey." 23
As mentioned earlier, the Lapps do not break the smallest
bone of the bear, but prepare a resting-place in a hole dug in
the ground of about the size of the animal, on the bottom of
which twigs form a soft bed. The bones are all placed in this
grave in the order which they occupy in the bear. Should a
dog have happened to devour or take away any of the bones,
the missing bone or bones are taken from the dog.24 The skin
of the nose, borne hitherto by the flayer of the head, is now put
back in its place, likewise the sexual organs and the tail. The
rings hung on this last by the women are taken off, being used
afterwards, e.g., for decorating the magic drumj or the one who
tracked the bear may sometimes receive them as reward for the
bearVmeat to which he has invited the others. The final fate
of the plaited birch-twig mentioned earlier, kept wrapped in a
cloth on account of its supreme holiness, and to the ring in the
end of which the tail was bound, is not given. It would appear,
however, from the notes left by the Lapp Spirri Nils that
" when they have cooked the flesh of the bear they gather
together all the joints of the backbone, threading them on a
twig in their natural order, later fastening also the head to
it." " In this way the tail attached to the twig would fall
naturally into its place. A vessel made of birch-bark and filled
with alder-bark juice is also placed before the nose of the bear.
The significance of this vessel is unknown. The custom of
the Ostiaks and Voguls of placing food in a vessel before the
nose of a fallen bear might be compared with the above.
Sometimes, other objects also were laid in the grave of a bear
— skis, a plane, a knife, etc."

ANIMAL WORSHIP
93
After having, as above, ceremoniously buried the bear, the
Lapps speak in a friendly manner to it, begging it to run about
and relate to the other bears the great honour that befell it,
so that these may not be afraid and show resistance when being
captured. The grave is then covered carefully with logs and
branches of fir to prevent dogs or beasts of prey from seizing or
disturbing the dead one. In some districts it is the custom to
set up a little wooden spear on the bear's grave as a monument.
All the Lapps do not make the graves alike j some make
them smaller but deeper, and place the bones upright in them.
At the bottom they place the hind-legs, on these in their right
order the other bones, and finally the head, by which they place
the bark-vessel with its contents of alder-bark juice. Accord-
ing to other reports, the Lapps also tied together the bones of
the bear and hung them up in trees at the spot where the bear
was killed.27
During the whole of the meal-time the bear's skin, which,
especially at the head, had been decorated with all kinds of
brass ornaments and rings and sprinkled over with alder-bark
juice, has been hidden away under branches of fir. It is now
taken from its hiding-place and spread out on a snowdrift or
against a tree near the tent. And now comes the last of the
bear feast games. The women are led veiled from the tent
and a bow or a twig of alder is placed in their hands with which
they must, following the directions of the men, take aim at the
bearskin. Lucky the one who hits the skin, as this is regarded
as a sign that her husband will be the next to kill a bear.
Should she be unmarried, she can live cheerfully in the certain
hope of being one day the wife of a celebrated bear-hunter.28
The honour of sewing crosses with metal wire on pieces of
cloth, which are then hung round the neck of every man who
has taken part in the bear hunt, falls also to her lot. Even the
reindeer used for dragging the bear is given one of these orna-
ments. The veils are then taken off the women and they are
allowed to look at the magnificent skin of the bear, but even

94
FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
now, only through a ring of brass. The brass ornaments on
the skin are not taken away at this conclusion to the festival,
but are left on until the skin has dried and is ready for use.
When the bear feast is ended, the men do not at once go into
the dwell ing-tent, but delay some time still in the cutting-up
tent. It is not seemly, according to the Lapps, for a hunter to
approach his wife for three days after the killing of a bear.
The leader of the expedition must abstain from his wife for
five days. They must also purify themselves by peculiar cere-
monies, carried out after sunset on the third day after the kill.
All who have taken part in the hunt wash themselves with a
solution of birch-ash in water and afterwards run three times
round the cutting-up tent, jump into the dwelling-tent through
the door and immediately out again, in again and out through
the holy backdoor of the tent. While running they imitate
the growling of the bear. Finally the wife of the bear-killer
catches hold of them and asks when the next bear feast is to be.
On these occasions she is said always to have mittens on her
hands. According to Rheen the purification takes place in such
a manner that the men run singing round the fire a few times
and then jump one after the other through the door, an old
woman throwing hot ashes after each as they do so. After this
the men take off their brass ornaments and may without danger
return to their wives.29 To the memory of each bear killed,
the Lapps hammered a copper nail in their spears, their gun or
the magic drum, the felling of a bear having always been re-
garded as a great honour.80
Like the bear of the forests, the polar bear is also an object
of worship among the Lapps. When the drift-ice sometimes
brings with it in the spring a polar bear to the shores of the
Kola Peninsula, the Lapps quickly capture it. Having suc-
ceeded in killing it, they are merry and play like children, e.g.,
they creep over the bear roaring as it used to do, extolling at
the same time their own bravery. They then make a log-fire
round which they sit long and sing. Now and then they rise

ANIMAL WORSHIP 95
and bow to the bear. Finally they place a piece of salt fish in
the mouth of the animal and say: " Thou shalt not tell at home
that thou paidst a visit to us and received nothing, the others
may come also, them also shall we feed." Their last words
express a pious hope that the bear will tell all its relations
what brave men the Lapps are.31
The bear feast ceremonies of the other peoples mentioned
correspond in their main points with those related here. A
very common custom is to place the bear or its head or its
skin for the period of the feasting in the sacred back part of
the dwelling-place, where women are not allowed to go.
Somewhat resembling the magic protective use of alder-bark
by the Lapps is the Finnish custom of chewing a piece of alder-
wood before the skin of the bear is brought into the house
" so that the forest shall not infect anything."32 Thus,
among the Ostiaks it is the fashion when the huntsmen re-
turn to the village with the bear-skin for the men and women
of the village to go out to meet them, some bearing a dish of
water and a " smoke " in their hands. The bear-skin is smoked,
and sprinkled three times with water. Very general is the
use of metal objects as means of protection. More difficult
to derive is the Ostiak custom of cutting a picture of the bear
on a flat surface chopped out of a tree-trunk and cutting over
this as many lines as there were hunters in the kill. While
the picture is being made, one of the men strokes the bear's
head with dry branches, " waking " it to let it know that they
have arrived at the village. A means of protection used often
at burial feasts — the covering of the nose and mouth of the
dead — is met with among the Ostiaks and Voguls. Round
pieces of birch-bark are sewn on to the eyes of the bear, or
these are covered with silver or copper coins, and the nose
is covered with a piece of tin-plate which is fastened from its
sides by threads behind the ears. Thus arrayed, the bearskin
is placed in the sacred back part on a low table with the head
resting on the forepaws. A many-coloured cloth is spread

96 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
over the back. In some districts a hat was placed on the head
of a male animal and a muffler round its neck, while a female
animal was decorated with a small shawl round its head and
a pearl necklace round its neck. Women and children slip
brass rings on to its claws " so that it should not scare them
during berrying time in the summer." On the table all kinds
of victuals and drink are placed before the bear, even the
neighbours bringing these. The skin is allowed to remain for
three or four days in the house, during which time festivals
are held each evening, banquets are eaten and much merriment
made in honour of the bear. The participants must arrive
" purified," and are sprinkled with water as they enter. The
festivals generally begin in the afternoons. Included in the
programme are bear songs in which the birth of the bear, its
adventures with the hunters, and its life after death are de-
scribed j dances are performed, the dancers wearing bearskins
turned inside outj the bear and its actions are imitated by pe-
culiar movements.38 Among the Voguls these bear-feast games
have developed into a kind of drama in which masked men ap-
pear. The masks are made of birch-bark, generally with huge
noses, and are painted over with charcoal and red earth. Some-
times a beard is affixed to them made of a piece of hairy rein-
deer-hide or oakum. The purpose of the masks is said to be
to hide the actors from the bear so that should the latter be
offended by the play he will not recognize them. For the
same reason the performers alter their voices, talking chiefly
in a shrill falsetto. Everyone tries to make the bear believe
they are not from the village in question, but travellers from
a long way off. Without doubt the origin of the masks is to
be found in the fear that the bear might recognize its killers
after death and avenge itself. To the most original cere-
monies, i.e., those picturing the life and hunting of the bear,
others have been added later, some of these borrowing their
form from such modern sources as the Russian baptism cere-
monies.3*

ANIMAL WORSHIP 97
At sunrise after the last feast night the skin is borne out
through the window to the warehouse-shed where the dish
first placed on the table before it in the house is placed in
front of it. After two or three days the hunters gather together
again in the house and then go into the shed, where each takes
a morsel of food from the dish and eats it " for luck." 36
From the prayers and wishes made by the Ostiaks to the
dead bear, it appears plainly that in doing honour to it they
wish to honour the whole race of bears. As an example of
this the words of the Ostiak woman as she places a ring in
the bear's claw may be cited: " When I go to gather berries,
go thou round one tree, round two trees." When they set
food before the bear-skin they say: "Do not touch my horse
or my cow, I placed the dish before thee." 3a
The Finns called the bear feast " the wedding." The
house had to be cleaned and everyone clad in his or her best.
A young man was arrayed as a bridegroom and a young girl
as a bride, or one only of these was chosen: a bridegroom if
the bear was a female, and a bride if a male. The head of
the bear was placed highest on the table and the rest of the
meat in its natural order. In the place of honour sat the
bridegroom and bride. The singing of runes in honour of
the bear was customary among the Finns, certain of these be-
ing sung while the bear was carried to the house. In these the
hunters endeavoured to show themselves innocent of the kill-
ing of the bear, declaring that the bear had wounded itself
or that they had taken its life by accident. Arrived at the
house-door the hunters asked singing whether the floor had
been scrubbed and the room cleaned, or also singing urged
the womenfolk to get out of the way and to beware of the
holy bear.37
That the object of the ceremonies with the Finns was to
ensure good bear-luck in hunting, appears from the oldest
account of their bear feast ceremonies. Bishop Rothovius, in
his speech at the inauguration of the University of Abo in

98 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
1640, relates the following concerning the customs of the
Finns: " When they capture a bear, they must hold a feast in
the dark, drinking the health of the bear from its skull, act-
ing and growling like the bear, procuring in this way further
success."
The skull of the bear had to be left overnight on the table
and taken the following morning, ceremoniously as at a wed-
ding, to a certain tree. First went the " bridegroom " and
" bride " side by side, after these a man carrying beer in a
vessel, after him a singer, then the one who carried the skull,
and lastly the rest of the people.
The Samoyeds, who like the Finns specially preserve the
skull, hang it up in a tree or place it on the end of a long pole,
generally near a road.38
Like the bear, other wild animals had also to be treated
with honour. More particularly the wild reindeer and other
scarce and valuable animals had to be received with special
ceremonies. The Ostiaks, when they kill a stag or an otter,
often cut pictures of these in a pine near the village as they
do with the bear.39
An important question is the original purpose behind the
Lapps' method of carefully preserving all the bones of beasts
of prey. That this care was not only expended on the bones
of the bear is shown by an account from the year 1724: " The
bones of the bear, the hare, and the wild-cat must be buried in
dry sand-hillocks or clefts between rocks where neither dog
nor other prowling animal can reach them. This is because
these animals lived on dry landj the bones of those living in
in the water are hidden in springs." *° Even today the Lapps
in some districts have a custom of throwing the bones of the
fish caught by them, as far as possible complete, into the water
again/1 Sometimes the skeletons of wolves were hung up in
trees.42 Similar accounts are preserved of the Samoyeds.
These also do not give the bones of forest animals to the dogs,
but, as far as possible, preserve them. The Yuraks, for

ANIMAL WORSHIP 99
example, hang up the bones of the fox and the skulls of many
other animals in trees.48 In the slaughtering of domestic
animals similar ceremonies were also observed. The Lapps
exercised the same care for the bones of the reindeer, which
also they buried carefully in the ground/*
Similar usages throwing light on these customs are found
among many other primitive peoples. Thus, for example,
we know that the American Indians arranged the bones of
the bison which they had killed in their natural order on the
prairies, with the intention that the animal might come to
life again for the next hunting season. The Eskimos throw
the bones of seals into the water in order to be able to catch
them afresh. In some mysterious way, life is held to exist
while the skeleton is in existence. That this belief was not
alien to the Finno-Ugric stocks is shown by the words of an
old Lapp who, when asked why he placed the head, the legs
and the wings of a capercailzie on a rock, explained that " from
them new birds would grow which he could shoot again." "
The same belief has caused the preservation of the bones of
the bear. The unknown author, whose account has already
been cited, remarks in his description of a Lapp bear feast:
" They believe that the bear will arise again and allow itself
to be shot." "
In these circumstances the preservation of those parts of
the bodies of useful animals which were supposed to contain
the soul or the soul-force cannot originally have been a sacri-
ficial act, but had behind it purely practical motives. Not until
the original conception had paled could these actions have be-
come incorporated in a cult. Then in the throwing of fish
bones by the fisherman into the water, it was easy to see an
act of sacrifice to the Water god, and in the burial of animal
bones in the forest, a sacrifice to the Forest god.