CHAPTER XV
FIRE
XT THERE did fire first appear to me, what is its purpose
V V and its power, who has given it birth? " So cries in a
Yakut tale a hero, supposed to be the ancestor of this tribe,
arriving at last at the conclusion that fire is the son of Yryn-
Ai-Tojon who sits on a milk-white throne to which three flights
of silver stairs lead up.1 The belief that the first fire came
down from heaven is very common among the peoples of the
Altaic race.
Tales gathered from different peoples show the origin of
this belief. The Tungus told me that the Thunder bird
brought down fire from the sky to earth. A fire caused by
lightning is considered sacred by them and they dare not put
out a forest-fire which has been lighted from Heaven. Among
the Yakuts also the fancy is most common that the Thunder
god Ulu-Tojon gave people the first fire.2 The Buriats call
the god of Fire, who was also the first sender of fire, Galta-
Ulan-Tengerij he is further the god of heat and drought, who
"dries up the growing grass to the roots and the running
rivers with their springs," and the sender of the lightning,
who sets on fire all that he strikes.3 The Altai Tatars declare
that mankind originally lived on vegetables and fruits and
therefore neither needed fire nor missed it, but with the
change in their manner of nourishing themselves fire became
necessary for the preparing of food. It was then that Olgen
took two stones, a white one and a black one, and struck them
together so that the spark which flew from the sky to the earth
set fire to the dry grass. From this man learned to strike
fire.4 Through the mouth of the Buriat shaman, fire declares

450 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
itself to be " the middle son of the day-sky, the youngest son
of the night-sky."8
Certain other North Siberian peoples explain the origin of
fire in the same way. The Ostiaks on the Yenisei give a more
detailed account of how their ancestors received fire from
lightning. The lightning kindled a tree, and some great
shaman taught the people to make use of the fire. At first a
great fire was kept burning, from which everyone could borrow
a flame. Later on, fire-steel and tinder were placed beside it,
and fire was thus transferred to these objects.8
In some tales about the origin of fire there figures also an
inventor of fire, often an animal. In Buriat tales this wise
animal is the porcupine, which has also in other ways already
figured as an inventor. In the beginning, it is told, neither
gods nor men could make fire, with one exception — the Porcu-
pine, which was then a human being. One day a crowd had
gathered round the Porcupine to hear the secret of fire-making.
But the young maidens, seeing the strange shape of Porcupine,
began to laugh, and this angered him so much that he decided
to tell his secret only to his own wife, and even to her only
against a promise of silence. But the hawk, whom the gods
had sent out to steal his secret, happened to hear Porcupine
explaining to his wife where flintstone was to be found and
how steel could be made, with which two articles it was easy
to strike fire, and the hawk told the secret to the gods. From
these men learned the art of making fire. Later, the descen-
dants of Porcupine became porcupines.7
In the tales of the Altai Tatars the frog advises Olgen, who
is in perplexity as to where men could get the necessities for
striking fire, that " the mountains contain stones and the birch
tinder." 8 The Mongols say: " Iron is the father of fire and
stone its mother." 9 The above tales give thus two different
explanations: fire has come down from heaven with the light-
ning, or its spark has sprung from a stone. Both fancies are
also met with in Finnish poems on the origin of fire.

FIRE 451
In Mongolian prayers, in which the birth of fire is related in
many different ways, it is said that fire came from a tree or
that it was born when in ancient times Heaven and Earth
separated.10
Whether fires of different origin have been considered to be
of unequal value does not appear from the sources at hand.
Besides fire caused by lightning, which is esteemed holier than
other fires, wood-fire or friction-fire has played an important