The following Buriat tale gives a description of the con-
fining and liberating of the heavenly lights, a theme greatly
favoured in the stories of many peoples. When Heaven and
earth through the intermarriage of their children became re-
lated to one another, the " Lord of the Earth " once made a
visit to the god of Heaven. On leaving he begged for the
sun and the moon as presents. The god of Heaven, who
wished to observe the sacred customs of hospitality, dared not
refuse, and the " Lord of the Earth " took the lights of the
sky with him and shut them into a box. Then all nature be-
came dark. The god of Heaven had no other resource than
to turn to the porcupine, asking him to help by; bringing back
the sun and the moon. The porcupine agreed to try and made
a visit to the " Lord of the Earth." When the guest was
about to depart, the host asked him what gift he wished as
a token of hospitality. " Give me the mirage-horse and the
echo-spear," answered the porcupine, and as the " Lord of
Earth" could not fulfil so difficult a wish he gave his
guest the sun and the moon. The porcupine put the lights
back in their former orbits and the world became bright
again.1*
In the tales of Turco-Tatar peoples the porcupine appears as
a wise and wily creature, sometimes as the inventor of fire, or
the originator and teacher of agriculture.15 Seeing that this
animal also occupies an important position in the beliefs of the
ancient Iranians, one might assume that the above mentioned
tales have come to Central Asia from them.
The Altaic Tatars describe the nature of the sun and the
moon by relating how Otshirvani took fire, placed it on his
sword and slung it in the sky, and thus created the sun, and
how he made the moon by striking the water with his sword.
The reason why daylight is burning hot, say the people, is that
the sun is made of fire, whereas moonlight is cold because this
star came out of the water.18 The Dolgans say that the sun
was created in the day, the moon in the night.11

422 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
Most of the peoples of Turkish origin living in Siberia
imagine, when addressing these heavenly lights, the sun to be
feminine (Mother sun) and the moon masculine (Father moon,
Old man moon). Often, especially in tales, we also hear
of the Sun Khan and the Moon Khan. According to Chinese
sources the Mongolian and the Old Turkish rulers used to
worship the sun in the morning and the moon in the evening.18
The Chuvash until quite lately brought the Sun god white
sacrifices. Concerning moon-worship we have not much other
information than that it has been a custom to greet the new
moon and to utter a wish that he would bring good luck and
prosperity. The most northern peoples of Turkish origin, who
have eagerly retained their old customs, do not sacrifice to
the sun or the moon, although these orbs seem to have played
an important part in the rites of the shamans. Yet both are
considered by them to be living beings. They believe that the
sun sees all that people do, and therefore often appeal to it:
" May the sun see! " or " May the sun know! " In swearing,
the Yakut turns towards the sun and says: " If I have made a
wrong oath may. the sun refuse me light and warmth." It is
said that the Tungus believe the sun to watch their conduct
and to punish their wicked actions.18
As is natural, the tribes of Turkish origin, like all other
nations, keep account of time by the cycles of the sun and the
changes of the moon. Piano Carpini says that the Mongolians
never undertook a war expedition or any other important
work except at the time of the new or the full moon. Weather
prophesying by the sun is the same in Central and Northern
Asia as in Europe. The Tungus and the Yenesei Ostiaks
consider a ring round the moon in winter to be an omen of cold,
in summer of rain, saying that the moon protects himself from
the weather by making himself a tent. The Ostiaks on the Ob
also know this saying.30
The spots on the sun and the moon, especially those on the
latter, have always been interesting themes for tales among all

THE STARS 423
peoples. The Yakuts tell of a poor orphan girl for whom life
was so hard that the moon pitied her and determined to take
her to him. One frosty night when the girl had gone out to
get water the moon descended, raised the child to his breast,
and ascended again to the heavens. Wherefore, we now see
in the moon a girl bearing a yoke with two buckets on her
shoulder. In other places there is a story of two children, a
brother and a sister, who, having gone out to fetch water,
stayed to watch the moon until he became angry and snatched
them to him. The Yakuts never allow their children to watch
the full moon."
The Buriats see more than a girl with her yoke and buckets
in the moon. They see also a willow-bush. The girl had had
a strict and hard-hearted step-mother, who once when the child
was a long time fetching water cried to her in anger: "Oh,
that the sun and the moon took thee! " When she was bearing
water the girl saw the sun and the moon descending towards
her. In her fright she grasped a willow-bush. When the sun
was about to take her the moon said: " Thou walkest in the
day and I in the night. Give the girl to me." The sun agreed
to the moon's request, who immediately lifted up the child
with buckets, bush and all. The Yakuts also know this tale
in the same form.22
This tale about the water-f etcher, of which we find a variant
in the Edda of Snorri, is very widely known in Asia and in
Europe.
The Altai Tatars tell of the old man of the moon, who in
former times lived on the earth and caused great havoc as a
man-eater. The dwellers of Heaven wished to save the people
and gathered together to take counsel. The sun said: " I
would willingly descend to free the poor people from that
monster were not my heat harmful to them." On hearing this
the moon remarked that they could well stand his coldness,
and he descended to the earth, where he found the man-eater
picking berries from a hawthorn. The moon at once seized

424- SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
the wretch and his tree and returned to the sky, where the
man-eater and the hawthorn can still be seen in the moon.23
The primitive peoples of the District of Turukhansk see a
shaman with his drum in the moon. This formerly mighty
man undertook to fight against the moon, but scarcely, had he
drawn near it before the moon made him its prisoner.24
The Mongolians and the peoples of the Altai imagined also
that a hare dwelt in the moon.25
The waning of the moon is said by the Yakuts to be caused
by wolves and bears eating its disc. Every time the moon has
grown to its ordinary size the beasts again attack it.26
According to Buriat tales an eclipse of the sun or the moon
takes place when a certain beast, which is ever persecuting the
lights of the sky, swallows the sun and the moon. Once when
this monster, Alkha, again darkened the world, the gods be-
came so angry that they cut his body in two. The hind part
fell down, but the living forepart still haunts the sky. Every
time Alkha now swallows stars they soon appear again, as the
beast is unable to retain them in his body. The Buriats say
that when Alkha is troubling the sun and the moon they pray
for help, and the people have a custom of screaming and
making a noise, throwing stones and even shooting up into the
sky in order to drive away the monster."
A tale recorded in another Buriat district relates that Arakho,
as the beast is here called, formerly lived upon the earth and
consumed the hairs off the people's bodies, which at that time
were quite hairy. Seeing this, God became angry and inquired
of the moon Arakho's hiding-place. On finding the beast he
struck it in two, and the living forepart is forever eating the
* 2fl
moon m consequence.
It is also told that Otshirvani, wishing to sweeten life for
people and animals, let the sun and the moon prepare water
of life, but Arakho drank it up and soiled the cup. Having
inquired the beast's dwelling-place from the moon, God
hurried there and cut him in two. The forepart, having thus

THE STARS 425
become immortal, pursues the moon. Some see the " body " of
the monster in the moon-spots.29
The Arakho who causes eclipses of the sun and moon, and
who has only, a head but no body, is known to the Mongols
also. The tale originates in India where the monster's name is
Rahu. Arakho and Alkha are corrupt variants of this name.
The conception prevalent among the peoples of North-East
Asia that the persecutor of the lights of heaven is a dragon has
Come from China. The Altai Tatars say that the eclipse of
the moon is the work of a man-eater living in a star. The
Russian Tatars and the Chuvash speak of a vampire which
sometimes swallows the sun and the moon but soon leaves them
in peace again, as the stars begin to burn his mouth.
THE POLE STAR AND THE LITTLE BEAR
The significance of the Pole Star in the universe has al-
ready been mentioned. The fact that other surrounding stars
seem to circle round that " golden " or " iron pole " has given
rise to a fancy that bonds exist between them. The Kirghis
call the three stars of the Little Bear nearest the Pole Star,
which form an arch, a " rope " to which the two larger stars
of the same constellation, the two horses, are fastened. One
of the horses is white, the other bluish-grey. The seven stars
of the Great Bear they call the seven watchmen, whose duty
it is to guard the horses from the lurking wolf. When once
the wolf succeeds in killing the horses the end of the world
will come.30 In other tales the stars of the Great Bear are
" seven wolves " who pursue those horses. Just before the
end of the world they will succeed in catching them.81 Some
even fancy that the Great Bear is also tied to the Pole Star.
When once all the bonds are broken there will be great dis-
turbances in the sky. The Tatars by Minusinsk say that when
the " seven dogs " are let loose the end of the world will

426 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY