The numerous tales about the one or more bound beasts,
which are to be set free before the end of the world, were
possibly originally similar star-myths. The Slavs have a story
about a bound dog whose iron chains form the Little Bear.
When the dog, who is ever endeavouring to bite his chains in
two, once gets loose, the end of the world will be at hand.88
THE GREAT BEAR
Many North Siberian primitive peoples and even the
Russians living in those parts call the Great Bear a "stag."
The Samoyeds of the District of Turukhansk fancy that the
Pole Star is a hunter chasing the stag and trying to kill it."
The Yenisei Ostiaks see a stag and three hunters in this con-
stellation. The stars forming the square are the stag, those
in the arch the hunters, the first of these being a Tungus, the
second a Yenesei Ostiak and the little star, Alcor, glimmering
by, his side, his kettle, the third a Russian. In addition, the
three stars forming the forepart of the stag are also specially
explained: one is the beast's nose, the other two its ears.85 This
same tale is known among the Tungus of that district and it is
possible that even the following Yakut variant, which is said
in different places to refer to different stars, e.g., to Orion,
also belongs to the same series. The Yakut variant is as fol-
lows: Once upon a time three Tungus chased a stag up into
the sky, where they wandered long in hunger. In the end one
of the hunters died, but the other two, together with the stag
and the dog, were changed into stars (the stag-star).86
For the sake of comparison it may be mentioned that even
the Indians of North America see an animal in the Great Bear,
usually a bear, with three hunters at his heels.87
The Buriats call the seven stars of the Great Bear " seven
old men." According to one tale they are the skulls of seven
smiths. A hero once killed " seven blacksmiths M and pre-
pared from their skulls seven cups, out of which he gave his

T
THE STARS 427
wife to drink until she was intoxicated. When she had drunk
she threw the cups into the sky where they formed the seven
stars of the Great Bear. All blacksmiths are said to be under
the protection of these stars.88
The Mongols, who also call this constellation "the seven
old men " or " the seven Burkhans," sacrificed milk and kumiss
and even devoted some domestic animals to it.39
Very widespread is a tale in which the " seven old men "
or the " seven Khans " as they are also called, are accused of
theft. The Mongols tell that " the seven Burkhans " stole a
star from the Pleiades, which numbered seven before but are
now only six. This little stolen star (Alcor) is to be seen close
to the central star of the arch of the Great Bear. With the
Mongols it has developed into the god of thieves, to whom
these always call on their predatory excursions to give luck
in their wickedness.*0 It is in order to be revenged on the
Great Bear, so say the Altai Tatars, that the Pleiades pursue
the " seven Khans" although they never overtake them.41
The Kirghis also call the Great Bear " the seven thieves," and
accuse them of having stolen one of the two daughters of the
Pleiades.42 In Northern Caucasia there is a tale of how a
certain Khan left his child in the keeping of " seven brothers"
and how they were already on their homeward journey when
the Pleiades attacked them, wishing to kill the child, but the
" seven brothers " succeeded in saving it.43
The tales about the " seven brothers" and their " little
sister " who was taken up into the sky, belong to the same
series. That the " seven old men " of the Buriats also are
originally robbers of a star-maiden appears from the following
story, which has been recorded among them. There was once
upon a time a poor man who received the gift of understand-
ing the speech of birds. One day when he was resting under
a tree he heard two ravens discussing how to heal the son of a
Khan who had long lain ill. On hearing the method agreed
upon by the ravens, he at once hurried to the Khan and healed

428 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
his son. Greatly thankful, the Khan presented him with seven
steeds. On his homeward journey he met six men, each of
whom attracted his attention in a peculiar way. The first was
so strong that he could lift a mountain from the ground. The
second had so keen a sense of hearing that he could tell what
was happening under the earth. The third was an archer of
such power that with his bow he could bring down a piece of
the " heavenly mountain." The fourth was so clever with his
hands that he easily transplanted the feathers from one kind
of bird to another. The fifth was able to suck a whole river
into his mouth and squirt it out again. The sixth was so
nimble of foot that he outran a wild-goat on the prairie. These
heroes now joined the poor man who understood the language
of birds. Then the one who had the keen sense of hearing
happened to hear how a certain Khan, wishing to choose a
husband for his daughter, set all the suitors-elect three diffi-
cult conditions to fulfill. The heroes, determining to try their
luck, went to the Khan and asked him for his daughter's hand.
Having easily fulfilled the most difficult tasks they took the
maiden with them. The servants of the Khan pursued them,
but the seven heroes escaped with their booty. In the end God
took them up into the sky where they were changed into the
Great Bear. The little star Alcor by the arch is the maiden
whom they won.44 The same story-motif would seem to have
been known to the ancient Greeks also. They told how Elek-
tra, one of the seven Pleiades, who is said to have been the an-
cestress of the Trojans, took the fall of Troy so much to heart
that she left her original place in the Pleiades. Hence, ac-
cording to them, this constellation now has only six stars.
Elektra is said to have moved to the Great Bear where she
now glimmers as a little star beside the central star of the arch.
It is possible that the ancient Greeks had mixed up two tales,
viz., that of the robbing of the maid who caused the Trojan
war, and that of the robbing of the star, belonging to an earlier
period.

THE STARS 429
ORION
As with the Great Bear, a hunting-myth is also connected
with Orion. Once upon a time, according to the Buriats, there
lived a famous archer who hunted " three stags " and was just
about to overtake them when the animals suddenly, rose into
the sky. The hunter had time, however, to send an arrow
after them. The stags then suddenly changed into the three
stars of Orion (" the three stags "), and a little lower down
one can see the hunter's arrow as a star in the sky.46
In the district of the Altai this tale has been taken down in
various other forms also. The Teleuts tell of a hero named
Kuguldei-Matyr who chased three stags on horseback. Hav-
ing speeded to and fro over the earth in all directions without
finding a resting-place, the animals at last sprang into the sky.
But the hero followed at their heels, shooting at them with
two arrows. His steed appears as a great star in the east, near
the " three stags " (the belt of Orion), and there also are his
two arrows, the one white, the other red. The latter, having
passed through the bodies of the stags, is bloody. The hero
himself has also become a large star.48
Another tale tells how God cursed this hunter, who had in-
tended to kill all the stags on the earth, and therefore changed
the " three stags " into the belt of Orion, around which hunter,
steed, hound and arrows now twinkle as stars. Some see in
Orion, besides the stags, a hunter, a hound, a hunting-hawk and
arrows. Some speak of two hounds. Hunters are said to
worship this archer-hero and to pray to him for good luck in
hunting.47
The Mongols also call the belt of Orion " the three stags."
They see in addition, an archer, a horse, a hound and an arrow
in this constellation/8 According to a Buriat tale this hero was
born of a cow, and had a human head and a horse's body.49
The Kirghis see in the belt of Orion three deer, the sur-
rounding stars being the " three hunters " and their " arrow,"

430 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
These hunters are said to have lived on the earth in former
times, but as no animal could escape their well-aimed arrows
God took the deer into the sky.60
The centaur of the Buriats brings into mind the ancient
Greek tales in which Orion appears as a hero who was regarded
as an exceedingly mighty hunter. The ancient Greeks be-
lieved, like the Siberian Tatars, that this hero intended to de-
stroy all the animals on the earth. " The hunt of Orion "
was reflected in the sky, where the hunter had even a hound
(Sirius) with him.
The Yenisei Ostiaks call Orion "stag's head." Their ideas
do not, however, appear to be connected with the series of
myths just referred to. Thus they tell how this stag carried
off a bride for the hero Alba.51 For the Yenisei Ostiaks, Orion,
and not the Great Bear, is the maiden-robber. Ideas corre-
sponding to this are found among other peoples.
Orion has also many names taken from objects. The most
common of these are: "the scales" or "the hand-scales"
(Turkish, Kirghis, Tatar, Votiak, etc.) and " the yoke " (for
buckets) (Volga Tatar, Cheremiss, Vogul, etc.).
THE PLEIADES
We have mentioned before that some peoples imagine the
Pleiades to be air holes, a ventilator, or a sieve through which
streams a cold draught from the upper air. With others this
constellation has suggested a group of animals. The most
northern peoples of Siberia call it a bird's nest, or a duck's nest
(Yakuts, Voguls, Koriaks, etc.). Some Central Asian peoples
call the Pleiades " monkeys " (metshit) or " monkey " (met-
shin). With this unexpected fancy, in a district where monkeys
are unknown, stories are also connected.
The Altai Tatars relate that in olden times Metshin lived
upon the earth. It was then terribly cold on the earth, and for
this reason the camel and the cow determined to kill him.

THE STARS 431
Once, when he was hiding in the ashes of a log-fire and the
camel had lifted his foot to crush him, the cow remarked:
" Thy foot is too soft, let me try with my hard hoof." The
camel stepped aside and let the cow stamp with its hoof into
the ashes. Metshin was trodden in pieces, but through the
cleft of the cow's hoof the pieces escaped and flew into the
sky, where they now twinkle as six little stars.62
A variant of the tale is that as long as Metshin was on the
earth it was exceedingly, hot, but since the Pleiades rose into
the sky the weather on the earth has grown colder.63
In connection with this tale, the Pleiades are mostly imagined
to be a great insect. The Kirghis say that Urker was a great
green insect that lived in the grass and ate cattle, especially
sheep, for which it had a great liking. The camel and the
cow grew angry and determined to kill it, but it escaped
through the cleft of the cow's hoof into the sky. In the
summer, when Urker cannot be seen in the sky, it is said to
have come on the earth. If it alights in a watery district, the
winter will be bad, but if in a dry spot, the Kirghis expect a
good winter.5*
In the district-of the Altai the carrying-off of a star is con-
nected with this tale. The Great Bear, which here appears as
a mighty Khan, could not endure that Metshin should live on
the earth as a great and wicked insect which ate up human
beings and animals. Not knowing how he could destroy the
monster, he asked his horse for advice. The horse replied:
" I will crush him to powder with my hoof." The cow, hap-
pening to hear this, hurried to the ice where the insect was
resting and stamped it into pieces with her foot. When the
pieces escaped through the hoof to the sky the Khan managed
to catch only one which he took with him. Metshin, which is
now bereft of one of its stars, ever angrily pursues the Great
Bear."
A belief that the Pleiades originally formed one star, which
afterwards was parted into many pieces, is suggested by many

432 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
of the tales connected with this constellation from different
parts of the globe, in which some creature is crushed into
pieces. The idea, also, that the Pleiades formerly consisted
of seven stars but now number only six is comparatively
common.
VENUS
Of the planets Solbon (Turco-Tatar, Tsholbon = Venus),
which " can be seen in the morning and in the evening," plays
in the tales of the Buriats a considerable part. This star is
said to be a famous horse-lover, who rides over the sky lasso
in hand. He has in his possession a great troop of horses,
watched over by a horse-herd named Dogedoi or Toklok. The
Buriats consider Solbon to be the patron-god of their own
horses, and for this reason they pray to and worship him. In
the spring, when they cut the manes and tails of their horses
and set the mark of the owner on the colts, they prepare a
sacrifice for SoJbon, cooking meat and cream-porridge (sala-
mat) and making home-distilled spirits (tarasun) in his
honour. The wine they throw into the air for Solbon and his
groom Toklok, but the meat and the porridge they put into
the fire. They then begin their own meal. In addition they
have a custom of dedicating live horses to Solbon, as to many
other gods, which horses are then no longer used in human
service.66 Georgi says the Buriats believe "that the gods
and especially the shepherd-god Sulbundu (sic!) ride on
these in the night when watching over the other horses, and
for this reason they are believed to be covered with perspira-
tion in the mornings."BT Tales also tell how Solbon's groom
teaches people to tend their horses well. Sometimes he in-
forms them beforehand which persons will prosper with their
horses during their lifetime. The Buriats regard as a good
omen the birth of a colt in the autumn after Solbon has ap-
peared in the sky, believing such a colt to become a very good
horse afterwards.68

THE STARS 433
A certain tale relates how once when Solbon travelled to the
western sky, his groom Dogedoi left the horses untended for
three days, going out for a walk with his dog Burto. On re-
turning, the groom saw to his surprise that the wolves had
scattered his horses and even devoured some of them. Just as
he was about to gather them together Solbon returned from
the western sky and seeing the disorder punished his groom
severely.™
It is easy to understand how Venus, as the morning and eve-
ning star, should have suggested the idea of a shepherd tending
the flocks of stars. As a ruler over the stars, this planet ap-
pears also in the tales of the North American Indians. The
Yenisei Ostiaks imagine Venus to be the oldest among the
stars, and to guard them from dangers and watch that they
do not disappear before their time. For this reason it is " first
and last" in the sky.80 Even the ancient Babylonians speak of
the heavenly " sheep " that I star tended.
But whence have the Mongols obtained their horseman and
his groom? One might assume that this horse-loving nomad
tribe had of itself begun to imagine the stars to be a great
flock of horses. And yet the Indo-Iranian peoples also seem
to have had the same idea. Probably, as Oldenberg says, the
twin gods Asvin (" the horsemen ") of the Veda were origi-
nally the morning and the evening stars. The gods Asvin were
worshipped together with the god of dawn in the early, morn-
ing and they are mentioned also as " the givers of horses."
With this same star the Buriats connect a tale of the robbing
of a bride. Solbon is said to have three wives, the third being
a former Buriat girl, whom the hero carried off just as she
was about to celebrate her wedding. Solbon descended to the
earth, seized the girl, who was far-famed for her beauty,
from the midst of the wedding-guests and took her with him
to the sky. By his two first wives Solbon had no children, but
the maid whom he carried off from the earth bore him a son."
With the Yakuts Venus is feminine. They relate that she

434 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
is a beautiful maiden whom Crgel (the Pleiades) loves.
When these two meet in the sky it is a bad omen, foretelling
storm and violent weather.62
The Kirghis say that " the Pleiades are the moon's son, and
the evening star the moon's daughter."63
THE MILKY WAY
The imagination of the child of nature was early exercised
also by the distant spectacle of the Milky Way. The most com-
mon name for it in the Turco-Tatar languages is " the birds'
way" (Turkoman, Kirghis, etc.) or "the wild ducks* way"
(Volga-Tatar, Chuvash, Votiak and Cheremiss), to which the
corresponding term in Finnish and Esthonian is " the birds'
road " and in Lapp " the birds* stair " (lodderaiddaras}. What
the origin of this comparatively old name is, appears from the
beliefs of the Ostiaks and the Voguls: these say that the Milky
Way, which they also name " the ducks* road " or " the south-
ern birds' road," is the guide of birds of passage in the night-
time. The Esthonians explain the origin of this name in the
same manner.6*
Many other fancies have also been awakened by the Milky
Way. We have already remarked that the Buriats and the
Yakuts call it " the seam of the sky." The Samoyeds of the
District of Turukhansk call it the " back of the sky." " These
names evidently result from a conception of the sky as a kind
of tent-roof.
In some Buriat districts, as mentioned, a tale has been
recorded in which the Milky Way is said to have come into
being when Manzan-Gormo milked herself and then threw
away the milk.
In North-East Siberia the Milky Way is imagined to be a
large river flowing across the sky.6* This idea has perhaps its
origin in China, where the idea of a " heavenly river " is also
met with. Like the Japanese, the Koreans tell of two stars who

THE STARS 435
loved one another and whom God, because they neglected their
duties for the sake of their love, separated by placing the one
in the Uttermost east, the other in the uttermost west. In
addition the broad heavenly, river flows between them. Once
a year, in the seventh month, these lovers are said to meet,
the birds building a bridge for them over the river.67
With the Caucasian Tatars, the Turks, and many of the
Balkan peoples, a tale of Persian origin is connected with the
Milky Way, the tale telling of a man who stole straw or hay,
intending to hide his booty in the sky, but, as he journeyed,
sprinkled so much on the way that his path can yet be traced
in the sky. For this reason these stars are also called " the
straw-thief's track."as
Names of later origin are the " pilgrims' way to Mecca " of
the Mohammedan Tatars, and the " Burkhans' road " of the
Mongols. The Yakuts call the Milky Way, " God's foot-
prints." He is said to have walked across the sky in creating
the earth.88 More common is " the ski-track of the son of
God," T0 behind which name there is perhaps hidden some
hunting-story like the one written down among the Ostiaks
and the Voguls. When God (Numi-Torem), as the Voguls
relate, had created the earth, he sent a six-footed stag upon it.
An ordinary human being could not hunt this quick-footed
animal, and so he begged the Forest spirit to pursue it. But
even for this being, who glided at a terrific rate on his skis,
it was not easy to overtake his six-legged prey. When at last
he succeeded in killing the animal, which was so big that its
body " reached over thirty rivers," the Forest spirit broke off
the two additional feet, saying to his father Numi-Torem:
" Change this animal with the power of thy word into a four-
footed beast, as, seeing that the work of chasing and killing it
has been difficult even for me, how should an ordinary human
being have the strength necessary for it." This hunt was re-
flected in the sky. The stag became the Great Bear, in which
are to be seen the beast's head, its two eyes, its forefeet and

436 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
hindfeet, and in addition the chopped-off stumps of the other
two feet. The Milky, .Way is " the ski-track of the Forest
spirit." Even the Forest spirit's house can be seen in the sky in
a shape which the Voguls call "the complete house of the
Forest spirit," (i.e., the Pleiades). In this story also, the hero
who attacks the Great Bear is from the Pleiades.71
The Ostiaks on the Irtysh River tell of a man named
Tungk-Pok. who once when he was in the sky undertook to
hunt this six-footed stag. Having chased it across the sky on
his magic skis the hero overtook it at the mouth of the Irtysh,
where the stag threw itself on to the earth. The hunter did
not succeed in killing it, but could only cut off its two hind-
most feet. He therefore declared: " Men will become more
and more small and weak, how can they then overthrow a six-
footed beast, which even for me is very difficult? May stags
and other animals from this day onwards have only four
feet! " The stag continued its flight towards the north until
the hero again reached it near Obdorsk. The animal being
then dead-tired, it begged God to save it from the hands of the
hunter. God took pity on the stag and changed it into a great
stone, but, as a memento of this heavenly chase, the Ostiafcs
see in the Milky Way two parallel ski-tracks (" the ski-track
of Tungk-Pok " or " the way of Tungk-Pok ") and in the
Great Bear a " stag."
The Ostiaks of Vasyugan call this hunter " the son of the
god of Heaven."72
THE SIGNS OF A TWELVE-DIVISIONED PERIOD
In connection with fancies relating to the stars it may be
mentioned that the peoples of Central Asia divide time into
periods of twelve, usually calling each of these units of time
by the following animal names: mouse, cow, tiger, hare,
dragon, snake, horse, sheep, monkey, cock, dog and sow."
Images of these animals in relief can often be seen decorating

THE STARS
437
SIGNS OF A TWELVE-DIVI-
SIONED PERIOD
the edges of the circular metal mirrors (toli) hanging with
other magic objects on the costume of the shamans and used
as instruments of sorcery. Other objects, also decorated with
the same images, for reckoning time can be seen here, most
of which have been brought
from China where, as in other
parts of East Asia, this method
of keeping account of time still
prevails. From the Chinese
pictures it will be seen that the
animal-images there are the
same as those of the Mongols.
Only the sign of the mouse is
called a rat by the Chinese, and
that of the hare a rabbit. Al-
though these animal signs are Fic
mainly the same with the dif-
ferent peoples of Central Asia, their order varies somewhat.
Thus the Eastern Soyots are said to reckon the years in the
following order — dragon, tiger, cow, sow, monkey, mouse,
dog, frog, snake, cock, horse and hare.7*
The Buriats, who begin their twelve-year and twelve-month
periods with the mouse, say that they really ought to begin with
the camel, but that the camel has lost this honour. Light is
thrown on the subject by the following tale. The camel and
the mouse quarrelled over which of them should rule over the
first year of a period or the first month of a year. In the end
they decided to solve the dispute in such a way that the one
who first saw the rays of the rising sun should call the year or
month in question by his name. The camel took his stand
looking towards the east, but the mouse climbed on his hump
and from there watched the west. At dawn the camel's eye
had not yet caught the sun when the mouse had already seen
the reflection of its rays on the western mountains. For this
reason the first year and also the first month of the year are

438 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
called after the mouse. From this tale the Buriats have a
proverb: " In believing himself great the camel lost a year." "
Signs of animals representing a period of time divisible by
twelve are already to be found side by side with the signs of
the Zodiac on the marble tablets of the ancient Egyptians,
found in the beginning of the last century. A period of twelve
hours, which were represented by animal figures of the same
description, was called Dodekaoros by the ancient Greeks.
These pictures, which to some extent resemble the time-marks
of the Mongols, are mentioned in the following order: cat,
dog, snake, crab, ass, lion, goat, ox, hawk, monkey, ibis and
crocodile. There can be no doubt that these time-marks, which,
like the twelve-divisioned period itself, seem to have spread
into East Asia from the west, are closely connected with the
corresponding ideas of these civilized peoples. Later Greek
texts call this method of reckoning time "Chaldean," which
points to Babylonian astrology. The signs of the twelve-
divisioned period are thus most probably explained by the
twelve signs of the Zodiac.