CHAPTER VIII
FAMILY GODS
T
HE TERM family gods is here meant to express such
tutelary genii as are worshipped by each separate family
and whose images are kept at home, or in the vicinity of the
home, and which the family carry along with them when re-
moving from one place to another. As already stated in an
earlier chapter, Tornaeus relates about the Seides of the Lapps
by the Torne Lake that among " many gods " there was always
one which was the highest and foremost, the principal god,
which alone was worshipped by the whole village. It was
set up in an elevated place, in order to be seen and honoured
by everybody, but those which were merely " family gods,"
stood in lower places. Whether the Lapps carried their family
gods with them during their rovings, is uncertain, and also
whether they used to keep them in their tents.
The family gods of the Samoyeds are made of wood or
consist of stones only, the latter often of a peculiar form,
The father of the family may have as many as fifteen dif-
ferent " dolls," generally dressed in reindeer-skins or in
gowns of cloth. These clothes may not be sewn, but are
wrapped or tied around the god. When travelling, the gods
are conveyed in sleighs made specially for them, and during
the journey the " sleigh of the gods " must be the last in the
caravan. These images are well keptj they get new clothes
every year, and sacrifices are made to them from time to
time, though these are, indeed, very often of little value.
On the occasion of sacrificing, they are taken out of their
sleigh, which is outside the holy back of the tent, and set up

H4 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
on a dais made solely for the occasion, or are carried into the
tent and placed in its sacred background. When sacrificing
reindeer to them, the Samoyeds besmear the mouths of the
images with blood and lard. When they make images of
their family gods, the shaman must conjure up a spirit to
live in them. Sometimes the gods have, in their vicinity,
small arms and tools made of lead, and, for company and
help, images of the spirits of animals.1
Like the Samoyeds the Northern Ostiaks also preserve and
carry their family gods with them in a special sleigh. A more
common custom among the Ostiaks and also the Voguls,
seems to be the harbouring of them in the dwelling-house
itself near the back part of the tent, in a chest or case. Later
they have begun to keep them also in a barn, or in the attic.
The family gods may be made of wood, metal, hides, etc.
Besides all sorts of victuals, such as meat, fish, gin, they re-
ceive for clothing, offerings of hides, kerchiefs, pieces of cloth,
etc. The feeding of the family gods takes place, among the
above-named races, at hours that are not fixed beforehand.2
Traces of the social signification of the family gods among
the Finno-Ugric peoples, have, however, been best preserved
among the Votiaks, who live a settled existence. By acquaint-
ing oneself with their beliefs and customs, one can clearly
discern that these family gods are really the late forefathers
of the family, who are worshipped from generation to genera-
tion as the tutelary genii of the family. In their capacity of
protectors of the family prosperity, a small building is devoted
to them on the Votiak farm. Its name kuala or kua is of
Finno-Ugric origin and corresponds to the Finnish kota,
The kuala is a barn-like, square building of timber, without
a basement. It has neither windows nor ceiling, and the floor
consists of hard-stamped earth. In the middle of the floor
there is a fireplace bordered with stones, and on this a large
iron cauldron is kept, resting either on the stones or attached to

FAMILY GODS 115
an iron chain hanging down from the rafters. From the fire-
place the smoke goes out through an opening in the wooden
roof. The low door was formerly situated on the south side.
Sometimes we find the kuala divided into two parts, or an
extra building erected behind it. The inner part is generally
held sacred, and women are not allowed to enter it. At the
present time, the Votiaks use the kuala only as a depository
for household utensils, but in olden times, before their archi-
tecture had developed into its present form, the kuala was the
only dwelling-house of the Votiak family.
A reminiscence of these distant times, of which the Votiaks
still speak in their tales, is the custom in some districts of still
using the kuala} not only as a storehouse, but also as a room
for cooking and eating by the family, especially during the
warm season. In this case, it is generally fitted up like a
dwelling-house j along the walls run solid benches of red-
wood, and in the corner nearest the door there is a table round
which, in summer, the family assemble to take their meals.
At times there will be found, near the door, a cupboard for
holding household utensils. The most notable and remarkable
object is, however, a shelf of wood in the cupboard, dark with
age and situated at the height of a man, on which may be seen
in some districts even in our days, a little case with a lid. This
little case is the most sacred object of the Votiaks, for in its
vicinity the living believe they can approach departed genera-
tions. As a sanctuary, the kuala has been retained in its former
condition, though the Votiaks, now that agriculture has become
their principal means of existence, have begun to build more
modern dwelling-houses for themselves.
The resemblance of the kuala cult to the worship of the
spirits of the dead is seen in the fact that the kuala sacrifices
must always be performed within the particular family. A
person belonging to one family will never enter the sanctuary
of another family in order to perform a sacrifice. How par-

n6 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
ticular the Votiaks are in this respect is shown by the fact that
if the family has a foster-son of another family, he must,
during the kudo, sacrifice, go to the pray'mg-kuala of his
own family, even though the latter be situated in another
village. Further, the alien position of a married woman in
her husband's family is shown by the "usage of the Votiaks
of calling her by the name of her kuala-fzmi\y as a distinction
from the family which she entered by her marriage. In the
beginning of her married life, she is even for a time obliged to
frequent her own family kuala, in order to sacrifice there,
when sickness or other troubles occur. From the above the
signification of the kuala cult in the social life of the Votiaks
will be clearly seen. As an uninterrupted tie of union between
those belonging to the same family or tribe, and not only be-
tween the living but also between the living and the departed,
this cult unites the present with the dark primeval time. Every
Votiak considers it his holiest duty to know his origin, even
after removing to a strange neighbourhood. This is, indeed,
not very difficult, as every Votiak family has a particular de-
nomination of its own. These family names are words, the
meaning of which has been generally forgotten, such as mozga,
utsa, etc. By the family name kinsfolk may know each other
even in a strange place. This fact is of all the more importance
as the Votiaks consider it a crime to marry within the same
kuala family, obstacles to marriage being confined not only
to the nearest of kin but extended over a comparatively large
circle.
Originally, the Votiak villages were family villages; hence
a village and a family living in it often bear the same namej
at times, a newly built village is called by the name of the
home village. If, in such a village, there are several families,
the village generally takes the name of the oldest family
living in it. Certain instances from the District Sarapul will
show that the Votiaks really have a natural tendency to keep
together almost as one family. Some time ago, in a village

FAMILY GODS 117
called Norja, sixteen fathers of families still lived in such
economic nearness, that in spite of their inhabiting different
houses, they took their meals in common. In another village,
twenty men, Jiving separately, were subordinate to one com-
mon head.8
Besides by means of the family name, the Votiaks are united
by the stamp with which they mark their property. This
mark is generally the picture of some object, such as a goose-
foot, an axe, etc. (The Ostiaks at an earlier time used also
pictures of animals.)
The mark of the father is left to the eldest son, who lives on
in his father's cottage. The other male members of the same
family, must therefore, when removing from the paternal
home, procure a new mark for themselves, which is generally
done by making a trifling addition to or slightly changing the
mark of their former home. Having received their own,
they do not, however, forget the mark of their fathers, which,
at the same time, belongs to the kuala sanctuary still in exist-
ence in their former home. Left thus as an inheritance by the
father to the eldest son, a mark may sometimes be very old.
As in the case of the family name, blood relations may also,
by means of the mark, know each other in strange parts.
As a family inheritance, the eldest son, after the death of
the father, besides the homestead, the mark and the kualat
also receives the office of " kuala guardian," whose duty it is
to perform family sacrifices. Should there be no male heir,
the office of " kuala- guardian " is inherited by the brother of
the deceased or by some other of the nearest male relations.
Besides worshipping in the kuala sanctuary of the family,
which by its master is used at the same time as a storehouse
and a kitchen, and in which only the family in question wor-
ships, the Votiaks take part in the sacrifices also in the kuala
whose guardian is, if possible, a lineal descendant of the
founder of the village family. Compared with the latter
the family sanctuary is called " the little kuala." Of little

n8 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
kualas there are many to be found in a village, not so many,
however, as there are families, for every kuala is not a sanc-
tuary. This springs from the fact that every Votiak who has
founded a family and home of his own does not mark a sanc-
tuary for himself at once, but continues to worship in his
father's kualay and should he have none, in the kuala of his
grandfather, the guardian of which is a lineal descendant of
the latter, and, where possible, an eldest son. Thus we find
here another suggestion that the Votiak family was formerly
larger than at the present time, comprising several sub-fam-
ilies, who most likely lived in the same complex of houses,
obeying the same head.
Of " great kualas " there is, on the other hand, only one,
if the village is a family village, as are most of the old Votiak
villages. If, as often happens when founding a new village,
people descended from different families are included in the
population, there will be as many kualas in the village as there
are families. Every " great kuala " is called after its respec-
tive family: tnozga kualat utsa kuala t etc. The worshippers of
the kuala are likewise called after their family; mozga- pi/os
("mozga sons")? ^a P*iost etc* From the number of the
great kualas one can thus easily find out how many families
there are in a village. Especially among the Eastern Votiaks,
there are villages formed of several different families which
have moved to strange parts as settlers. Where there are
several great kualas in a village, these are generally to be
found in the houses of their guardians} they differ in no way
from a private kuala and are also used like the last named as
store-rooms for household utensils. Should, however, the
village be inhabited by one family only, there being conse-
quently only one " great kuala," the latter attains an entirely
different position from the other kualas. In its capacity of
the common property of the village, the " great kuala " or
" village kuala" is generally situated in the garden of its
guardian, or in a particular enclosure either in the village or

FAMILY GODS 119
near it. As a village sanctuary, the kuala has attained an ex-
clusively religious significance, being sometimes considered so
sacred that, for instance, no women are allowed to enter it.
»
Thus, among the Votiaks, it has generally developed into a
kind of temple, which development, in the southern parts, at
least, has evidently been influenced by the Mohammedan
prayer-houses of the Tatar villages.
In the family kuala, as in the village kualat the sacrifice
shelf is generally situated on the back wall, most often in the
left-hand corner there. On holy days, offerings are placed
on the shelf, but, generally, it is for the most part empty,
when not occupied by articles necessary for the sacrifices.
In some instances, there is, under the sacrifice shelf, a cup-
board about a yard high, in which are kept, besides the sacrifice
utensils, smaller offerings. The Votiaks believe that the
" Luck-protector," Vorsud, lives near the sacrifice shelf.
Formerly, there was, on the sacrifice shelf, a little case with a
lid to it made of linden bark, which is still to be found in some
parts, e.g., in the Government of Kazan. The size and form
of the sacrifice case vary somewhat in different places. For
the most part, they are round, but very often we also find
oblong and square ones. A sacrifice case may sometimes be
found to be very old and darkened by the smoke in the kuala,
having been handed down as a sacred heirloom from father
to son for generations.
In our time, the Vorsud case, in both family and village
kualasj is generally empty. But can it be possible that a re-
ceptacle regarded with such superstitious awe, forbidden to
women and strangers to approach, was always thus empty?
Several authorities, for the most part among the very oldest,
relate that they have seen many different objects in these
cases: ancient coins, the bones of birds, gaily coloured feathers,
squirrel skins, sheep's wool, etc. But again, could these trifles,
possessing obviously more the nature of sacrifices than of ob-
jects of worship, have been venerated by the Votiaks? When

120 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
one compares the sacred background of the kuala with the
corner of the bothies regarded as holy by both the Ostiaks and
the Voguls, and the sacrifice case with the god-chest of the
latter, which is not empty, but among these more primitive
peoples contains images of their tutelary genii, is it not more
likely that the Votiaks' sacrifice case was also in former days
a similar home for their family gods? In our days, there are
certainly no images to be found among them. Even in the
oldest sources we find it written that the Votiaks possess
neither pictured nor carven images. But the memory of gods
who formerly dwelt in these cases has not altogether died out,
and the Christian Votiaks place even today a picture of a
saint on the same shelf that, earlier, held their spirit offerings.
The scanty traditions, however, give no clear idea of the
images of the Votiak family spirits. Assuming that the sacri-
fice cases, the circumference of which is, on an average, about
one hundred and twenty centimeters, and the height about
thirty centimeters, have not become very much altered in the
course of time, we may conclude that the images were not
very large. Most likely they were just such clumsy, dressed
wooden dolls as the Votiaks still make for themselves during
severe illnesses, in order to remove the illness from the patient
to the doll. Such would also seem to have been the images
of the Siryans, judging from the fact that in the life of St.
Stephen, their apostle, it is stated that their images resembled
human beings, had noses, mouths and even feet, and that they
were either carved, or hollowed out. As they were made of
wood, St. Stephen was able to chop them into pieces with an
axe and burn them. There was a great number of them " both
in the villages and dwelling houses." *
When beginning their sacrifice, the Votiaks place fresh
green twigs on the corner shelf of the kitalay under the sacri-
fice case. In autumn or in spring, or, generally during the
time when the trees are leafless, they use, when sacrificing,
twigs of the silver pine (finus pichta or sibirica)) but in the.

FAMILY GODS 121
summer birch twigs. The use of green twigs certainly origi-
nates from very ancient times, for this custom has also been
observed among the Lapps, of whom missionaries relate that
they placed birch twigs under their images in the summer,
and fir twigs in the winter.
This custom of laying green twigs on the sacrifice shelf,
which, together with the sacrificing, belongs to the most im-
portant duties of the kuala guardians, has, curiously enough,
been kept up even in parts where the sacrifice cases, not to
speak of images, are no longer to be found. This is particu-
larly the case among the Eastern Votiaks. Among these we
seldom find sacrifice cases, but on the other hand we may see,
even in our days, on every sacrifice shelf, whether there be
sacrifice vessels there or not, twigs more or less faded, accord-
ing to the time that has passed since the sacrifice. In several
places, these twigs, which originally were of quite a secondary
importance compared with the images, are regarded with the
same superstitious awe as the latter. Only the officiating
priest, who on holy days burns the old twigs and places fresh
ones in their stead, is allowed to touch them. Certain investi-
gators have supposed that these same twigs have been objects
of worship.6 This is, however, a mistake, though the twigs
have at times had the high honour of being removed from
their place under the " case " to the " case" itself, and in
this way the original idea became confused. That the kuala
cult is concentrated around the sacrifice shelf and the " case,"
is proved, above all, by the custom of the sacrificing priest's
standing, while praying, with his face turned towards the
sacrifice shelf.
We have stated earlier that not every Votiak kuala is used
as a sanctuary. This it may become only by means of particu-
lar inaugural ceremonies, generally performed in the summer.
On a day fixed beforehand, the person who intends to obtain
for himself a Vorsud of his own, invites a few guests, gen-
erally two men and two women. The guests having arrived,

122 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
the young master and mistress, with their guests, proceed to
the head of the family who is at the same time the guardian
of the Vorsud kuala, taking bread and gin with them.
On arriving, they begin to feast in the house of the chief.
The latter invites one of his neighbours and his wife, and these
officiate as host and hostess, the host of the feast entertaining
the men, and the hostess the women. When the guests have
been sufficiently entertained, the host and his wife begin
singing wedding songs, in which those present also join.
Lastly, the guests go to their neighbours for more hospitality
and return to the kuala guardian in the evening. On their
return, porridge is cooked by the guardian of the family kttala.
The one who intends to secure a Vorsud for himself, now
goes to the kuala, takes some ashes from the fireplace, and
wraps them in a clean white cloth, saying: " I take the smaller
and leave the greater." He then places the bundle of ashes
on the shelf of the kuala and sits down to the sacrificial por-
ridge together with the other guests. After the meal he goes
back to the kualat takes the ashes from the shelf, and sets
out for home with his guests. During the journey home, the
escort of the Vorsud play and sing, the mistress of the new
kuala meanwhile keeping a copper coin in her mouth until they
arrive at the homestead. When starting out into the street,
on the way home, and on arrival, she dances to the music of a
stringed instrument. The ashes conveyed in this manner are
now placed on the shelf of the new kualat the master saying:
" I, thy master, have brought thee here with reverential
ceremonies, be not angry therefore, and when we pray to thee,
hear our prayers."
In some places, the feast is held, according to an older cus-
tom, in the kuala itself, where a functionary, with a loaf
received from the guardian of the old kiwla, turns to the
Vorsud with the following words: "Vorsud, come with us to
another place; do not take offence, old ones, deceased ones."
Later, he does the same thing with a loaf from the son,

FAMILY GODS 123
afterwards handing the father's loaf to the son, and the son's
to the father. When the son who has separated from the
home of his father, has received the bread, he reverently
carves a chip from the pot hanger of wood suspended from the
ceiling. He takes, further, ashes from the hearth, and conveys
these with the chip to the newly founded kuala of his new
home.*
A curious statement is that he who carries the Vorsud must
not put his foot on the bare ground, but must walk all the time
on planks laid on the ground.
Many circumstances in the above descriptions recall the
customs followed at a Votiak wedding. The very tunes
played on this occasion are wedding tunes. In some places,
it is further customary to distribute presents at the kuala
feast, as at a wedding. In the District of Mamadysh a custom
recalling a wedding is connected with the above mentioned
ceremonies, namely, that the Vorsud is taken to the new home
like a bride in a sleigh with two horses and tinkling bells, the
women being dressed in wedding costume. That the Votiaks
themselves consider the Vorsud feast to be a wedding festivity
is seen from the name of this feast, mudor suan (" mudor
wedding ")• Among the Votiaks, certain ceremonies recalling
those of the mudor wedding are now observed at the inaugura-
tion of the modern huts used in these days. They also call
this festivity " hut wedding" (korka suan), on which occasion
as at a wedding a " host " (toro) officiates. As the Indo-Euro-
pean races observe similar customs, we may assume that the
Volga Finns acquired theirs through a foreign culture. The
fact, however, that the above named ceremonies refer to a
time when the Votiaks were still living in the old kuala, in-
dicates that they date from a comparatively distant time.
The very word mudor, which phonetically corresponds to
the Finnish mantere (" earth foundation "), recalls a different
kind of removing ceremony, described by Aminoff. " When
leaving his father's home to found a household of his own,

124 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
the son descends under the floor of the hut, takes a little earth
from there, and also fire from the hearth of the hut and then
prays to the son of the family spirit to accompany him to the
new home." 7 A similar custom, when removing, seems to
have been known also among the Siryans in former times.
This appears from the following statement by Nalimov:" Even
in our days, everyone, on leaving home for a long journey,
takes with him a handful of earth from under the earth foun-
dation of his home. This earth protects him from accidents
and nostalgia." 8 Similar beliefs are to be found among the
Baltic Finns. Among the Ingrians a custom has been found of
giving to a bride who is going to a strange neighbourhood, a
bundle containing earth from the earth foundation under the
floor of her native hut, to protect her from nostalgia. Like-
wise, they believe that a domestic animal removed to another
farm, will not miss its former home, if, when removing it,
some earth is also brought from the outhouse where the animal
was kept before.9
In the earliest times, the founder of a new family, when
parting from the home of his fathers, seems to have received
one or several images of his family spirits, to take with him,
the Lapps believing these to descend as an inheritance from
father to son, like any other property. On account of the fact
that the Votiaks have not, for a long time, used images, no
exact statements concerning this custom are to be found. Only
a few traditions and customs point back to this distant time.
Wichmann relates about the District Urzhum, that on leaving
his father's home, a son was given also a part of the contents
of the sacrifice case.10 Another writer mentions that the
sacrifice case of the new kuala must be made in the old kuala,
and before being removed, it must have lain for some time on
the sacrifice shelf of the old kuala.11 This may be the origin
of the words in the above mentioned custom among the Votiaks
when removing the Vorsudj "I take the smaller and leave
the greater." To receive a Vorsud from his native home is

FAMILY GODS 125
of such great importance to the son that if for one reason or
another the father quarrels with his son and refuses to give
him a Vorsud, the son must procure it by robbery. If the son
who is angry with his father says, when taking the Vorsud:
" I leave the smaller, I take the greater," the consequence,
according to the interpretation of the magicians, is that the
son gets the older Vorsud, and, in a religious sense, stands
higher than his father. If, after this, any of his younger
brothers is in want of a Vorsud, he must apply to his brother
with his request and not to his father.12
After the mudor wedding, the kuala. is a sanctuary} the
Vorsud lives in it, and from that day, worship is carried out
there. To keep up this is the sacred duty not only of that
generation, but also of the following, for according to the
beliefs of the Votiaks, the sacrifices in a building consecrated
as a sanctuary must never be interrupted. He who does not
observe this rule, will meet with some great accident. The
people tell with terror how such persons have lost their prop-
erty, have gone mad, etc. If, for instance at the change of
guardians, the kuala should be removed from one place to
another, the building is pulled down, and the timber of the
walls is placed in the same order when built anew. The
ashes of the hearth, the stones, and the Vorsud case are taken
with ceremony to the new place, together with the timber.
Besides being removed when changing a guardian, the kuala
may also be taken away for some other reason. Thus, for in-
stance, it once happened that a sacrificial bull, when about to
be killed, broke loose and ran away from a " great kuala"
the sacrificers, in the midst of their devotions, having to leave
off and pursue it. The place where the animal was at last
caught, was considered to be so pleasing to the kuala spirit
that the whole building was removed there.13 If, from any
cause, people are obliged to destroy a kuala, the sacrifice case
and the stones of the hearth may not on any account be lost.
As an instance of the superstition of the Votiaks the following

126 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
legend is mentioned: A man destroyed his kuala and built in
its stead a barn, leaving the sacrifice case and the stones under
the hearth. Once, some young men who had gone there to
sleep were awakened suddenly by groans from under the barn,
like the wailing of a sick man. The next night the same wail-
ing was heard. At last, the master himself went to sleep there,
and found that it was none other than the Vorsud who was
moaning. He then promised to remove the stones and the
case into a new kuala., which he did, and thenceforward there
was silence in the barn.1*
Considering that the name of Vorsud, at the sacrifice meet-
ings of the Votiaks, is generally used in the singular, most
frequently in connection with the kuala family's name, as
" mozga Vorsud," " utsa Vorsud," etc., it would seem as if
every Votiak kuala had possessed only one family spirit. This
was, however, not so in olden times, as is proved by the cir-
cumstance that the Votiaks consider themselves able to dis-
tribute them among their descendants. In one prayer the
name of Vorsud is also used in the plural.16 The idea of
several spirits in one kuala appears, moreover, in the follow-
ing legend: A certain Votiak became a Christian and re-
nounced the ancient customs of sacrifice, but did not destroy
his kuala. After some time the spirits began annoying himj
when lying in bed, he seemed to feel a heavy stone pressing
on his breast; when he went to the barn to sleep, the spirits
came there, too, to annoy him. At last, the man made up his
mind to shoot them, and one night he walked about, gun in
hand, waiting for them. At midnight three persons in white
came out of the kuala, the first a beardless youth, the second
also young but with the beginnings of a beard, the third, a
woman. The man fired, and the vision vanished at once.
After that they did not show themselves any more, but re-
moved to another place, sending the man a severe illness as a
punishment."