CHAPTER XVIII
THE "MASTERS" OF NATURE
/CONNECTED with the animating of natural objects and
\^ phenomena among the Altaic race, there is a conception
that a " soul," corresponding to the soul of man, lies hidden
within them, the name given to this being the same as that for
the human soul. Thus, the Altai Tatars use the word kuft
which appears in many Turco-Tatar languages, as signifying
the soul of both human beings and natural objects. Just as
the kut of the former leaves its dwelling for one reason or an-
other, causing decline and sickness, so the earth, a tree, etc.,
wither when their kut leaves them. When expressing the fact
that a field has lost its fertility, the people say: " The ground
has lost its kut" (jer kudun pardy.) Similarly, the kut of a
dwelling-place may depart, taking with it the feeling of home-
liness. In cases like this last, kut is often translated as mean-
ing " happiness," " health," " homeliness," etc.1 A word with
a similar signification in the Turco-Tatar language is sur
("appearance," "beauty," "comfort," "power," "soul"),
used when speaking of the human soul, the haunting spirit of
the dead, the health of cattle, the power of an army, the
nourishing properties of bread, etc. Thus, for example, it is
said that " when an army loses its sury it cannot defeat its
enemy." When food has lost its nourishing power, it is said
that " its sur has departed." A soul of this description is be-
lieved to animate and to govern all the phenomena of nature
and its parts, and thus a conception arises that these invisible
souls, to use the words of M. A. Castren, are " in respect of
all visible nature, in a position of power resembling that of a
master towards his property."3

464 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
That the metaphor " Master " used by Castren is correct, is
best proved by. the names of like signification given by the
peoples of the Altaic race to the invisible Nature gods.
" Master," " Lord," or " Ruler " is expressed in the different
Tatar dialects by the words Ea or Oja, in Chuvash Hoza,
Yakut Itshi and Buriat Edzhi. An invisible Ruler of this
description is to be found in the sky and its phenomena, the
stars, fire, land and forest, trees and grass, rivers and lakes,
mountains and rocks, the different animals, and even in objects
made by man, buildings, weapons, tools, vessels, etc. Espe-
cially in sharp or " living'* weapons, with which it is easy to
harm oneself, such as knives or axes, do the Yakuts see a Ruler
(Itshi), and similarly in objects capable of motion, such as a
spinning-wheel, or of noise, such as a magic drum or a musical
instrument. The Yakuts even speak of a Ruler in the bundle
of birch-branches with which they beat themselves in their
baths.8 The trade of blacksmith is held in great respect by
both Yakuts and Buriats, and a Ruler is believed to dwell in
all the tools needed for this work. Troscanskiy points out
that each blacksmith's tool not bought from the Russians has
its Itshi: the anvil and striking-hammer have theirs in common,
the tongs and the forge have each their own, but the " Head-
Itshi " is in the bellows.4 Pripuzov speaks of a special tutelary
genius of blacksmiths, called Kudai-Bakshy by the Yakuts, and
whose dwelling-place is in the underworld. The smiths
slaughter a brown cow in its honour and anoint themselves and
their tools with the animal's blood, but the heart and the liver
they roast in the forge and place them on the anvil, where
they are beaten until nothing remains of them.6
The Buriats of the Balagan District worship a deity of
blacksmiths called Boshintoi, with nine .sons and one daugh-
ter, who are said to have taught the blacksmith's craft to men.
In sacrificing to these, the smiths pour kumiss and other sacri-
ficial liquids on to the glowing forge. A lamb is also some-
times slaughtered to them. Iron images are made of the

THE "MASTERS" OF NATURE 465
aforesaid sons and the daughter, each with some blacksmith's
tool in its hand, a hammer, tongs, an anvil, bellows, charcoal,
etc.j these are called the corresponding "Masters" of these
objects.*
The Master of a musical instrument (Khuri Edzhin) is said
by the Buriats to teach people to become skilful musicians.
The neophyte has to go out on a moonless night to the junction
of three roads and there sit down on the skull of a horse fitted
with silken reins. At midnight the skull is said to try to
unseat its rider. Should the latter fall he loses his life, but
if, being on his guard, he remains seated and continues to play,
he becomes a very skilful player.7
Most often, the said " Masters)J are believed to dwell in
the phenomena or objects they, represent, the Master of fire
in. the fire, the Master of water in the water, the Master of a
tree in the tree, etc., although at times they can separate from
these. How close the connection between these Masters and
their visible incarnations has actually been, appears from the
habit of making images of the Masters of the sun and moon
in the shape of these heavenly bodies. The Masters of ani-
mals appear to men in the shape of the respective animals.
The Tungus make an image of the reindeer to represent the
Reindeer's Master, and similarly certain North-East Siberian
tribes make an image of a fish to represent the Fish Master.
The Buriats speak of a Master-tree, which is recognized by
the fact that its pith is blood-red; the tree is thus the body of
the Master dwelling in it, from which, as from a human body,
the blood can run.8 This conception of Masters animating
nature is not confined only to the Altaic race, but the same
belief is met with among other Siberian peoples, the Yukagirs,
the Chukchee, etc.9
The anthropomorphism of certain Masters, such as those
of dwelling-places, forests and water would seem to have been
helped by the spirits of the dead, who are said to dwell in
these places. Often the dead can be seen to have become

466 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
directly assimilated into these Masters. Thus the Master of
the Yakut dwelling-place (Balagan Itshita) sometimes appears
in the shape of former dwellers in the place. Middendorff
says that the oldest inhabitant becomes after his death the
Master of a home.10 The ancient Finns had the same belief.
The Masters of forests and water are also said by the people
to have originated in the spirits of those lost or drowned
there. Buriat tales relate how a hunter was once lost in the
forest, dying finally there of hunger, and how this unfor-
tunate man became the Forest Master.11 Similar tales are
told of the origin of the Water Master. These tales make
clear why the Masters of forests and water seek the company
of men, and in tales aspire to marriage and other ties with
them. We must not, however, from tales like those described,
draw the conclusion that the Masters of natural phenomena
and objects are generally the spirits of the dead.
The trees of the forest itself are imaged in the conception
which causes the Master of the forest to be seen as a being
of the height of a tree. As in Europe, this conception is
general among the Asiatic peoples. The Mongols' Khan of
the forest and of forest animals (Mani-Khan) is a being like
a man of more than ordinary size.12 A long, dark, human-like
being is also the Forest Master of the Buriats, who halloes
and weeps in the forest, leads wanderers astray, but gives also
game to the hunter." The large-sized Forest Master of the
Tungus can at times take on the shape of a strange rock,
resembling a man or an animal, the forest dwellers fearing to
approach such rocks. A similar spirit is the Yakut Bajanai,
who, as the owner of the valuable game of the forests, is
called " rich," Bai-Bajanai. As the Master of forest animals
it is also conceived as shaped like an animal. In the latter
shape it has been seen by hunters and gatherers of berries.
Sometimes, it is of the size of a year-old calf, with the muzzle
of a dog, little moist eyes, long whiskers, a grey coat and
forked hoofs. In some districts the Forest Master is said to

THE "MASTERS" OF NATURE 467
have two sons, one living in the depths of the primeval forests
and giving valuable game to the hunter, such as sable foxes,
blue foxes, etc., the other dwelling on heaths and giving brown
foxes, squirrels, and other animals of smaller value."
Many North Siberian tribes, for whom hunting is an im-
portant means of subsistence, have a habit, at the beginning
of the autumn hunting season, of sacrificing a part of the first
" bag " to the Forest Master. The Yakuts are even said to
have sacrificed black bulls to Bajanai. In sacrificing, the
Tungus, the Yakuts, and other northern peoples make an
image of the Forest Master, either by carving human features
on the trunk of a living tree or by shaping a billet of wood
roughly into a human-like shape. The mouth of the image
is smeared with the blood of the sacrifice. At each sacrifice,
a new image is made.15
Comparing the Yakut Forest Master with the corresponding
Russian spirit, Serosevskiy points out that beliefs brought by
the Russians have become connected with the former. Ac-
cording to his view, the Yakuts did not originally possess a
single spirit, comprising all forests, but each forest and thicket,
each separate tree even, had its own Master.18 It is also
related of the Buriats, that they do not beg for game from
one general Forest spirit, but separately, from each local
Forest Master.
Among the European Tatars and Chuvashes the Forest
spirit has already received a strictly defined appearance, which
proves a more developed, more stable plane of thought. Here
the Forest Master, corresponding to Russian spirits, is chiefly
an evil being, which is seldom worshipped. In this respect
it differs from the Forest spirits of the most northern primeval
forests of Siberia.
The evil Shurale of the Volga Tatars, which can increase or
diminish its height, has exceedingly large nipples on its
breasts, and kills its victims by tickling them, we have already
met with among the Volga Finns."

468 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
A corresponding evil Forest spirit is the Chuvash Obyda,
which wanders in the forest as a human being, but naked, long-
haired, with large nipples, and with feet turned in the wrong
direction. Having caused a man to lose his way, it tickles or
dances its victim to death. The poor animal on whose back
Obyda seats himself begins to run backward. According to
folk-tales this spirit itself wanders backwards. The evil Forest
spirit is also called the " Half-human" (Ar-sori) by the
Chuvash.18 Possibly this name signifies a being known also
to the Votiaks, which has only half of a human body, viz., one
eye, one arm, and one leg. The Yakuts speak also of an evil
being with the same name, declaring it to live in an icy, mound
with a door-opening at the top.19
Worse than Shurale is the Tatar Albasta, which they believe
to dwell in desert spaces, bogs and chasms. This also is human
in shape but takes on the form of many objects belonging to
the forests or fields. It is said to kill people by suffocating
them.80 The Kirghis imagine Albasta as a great woman, with
a large head, and breasts reaching to the knee. She has long
and sharp nails on her fingers. The Kirghis believe her to
attack chiefly women who are enceinte, killing her victims by
suffocation. They relate tales of how a certain Kirghis once
saw her rinsing in a brook the lungs of a woman, whom she
had deprived of these.21
Like the Forest Master, the Steppe Master also tries to
lead travellers astray. The Mongols say that the Steppe
Master Albin lights will-o'-the-wisps by the wayside. When
the traveller, believing these to be the lights of dwellings,
steps aside from the road, he finds that he has been deceived
by Albin, who wishes him to lose his way.22
To the Forest spirits, the spirits of the forest animals are
closely related. The latter, and even each species of animal,
have, as has been said, their Masters or Khans, whom it is not
always easy to separate from the respective animals. Sacri-
fices are even made to these Masters. The Tungus sacrifice

THE "MASTERS" OF NATURE 469
to the Mammoth Master in order to find mammoth's teeth.
The Reindeer Master is said to have received blood-sacrifices.
Especially do the people fear to offend the Bear Master, for
which reason this animal must not be called by its proper name.
Women are afraid to touch bear-flesh with their naked hands
and even the men have to treat the carcase of the bear with
due respect, its skeleton being preserved on an erection of wood
or branches, or, at least, its skull having to be hung up in a
tree.23
The peoples living on the banks of rivers or lakes speak
also of the Water Master. Each river, each Jake, and each
water has its Master, say the Yakuts. Most often this is
imagined to be an anthropomorphic being, although it can also
take on other shapes. The fishers of North Siberia sacrifice
to it at the beginning of the fishing season in the spring. The
Yakuts are said to have then offered up, through the agency
of their shamans, a black bull, in order that the water-spirit
(Ukulan Tojon) might give fish in plenty. More often, fish
is sacrificed to the Water Master, sometimes also bread, salt or
gin.24 The Yenisei Ostiaks, who as a river and fisher people
are dependent in a great degree on the bounty of the water,
make images of the Water spirit."
Although the spirits of the northern waters of Siberia are
anthropomorphic beings, whom the shaman can visit and who
choose wives and servants for themselves, from those drowned
in the water, they have yet no strictly defined, unchangeable
features. In many districts, however, the Russian Water
spirit and Rusalka, as among the Volga Turks, have had time
to settle in the rivers and lakes of Siberia. Especially among
the Yakuts does one meet with purely Russian ideas. They
believe the Water spirits to rise on to the land in the time
between New Year's Eve and Twelfth Night, when they
wander along the roads, bearing on the backs of oxen their
small children, of whom the Water spirits have many. While
wandering from place to place the Water spirits make different

470 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
noises, the people gathering to listen to these at cross-roads,
openings in the ice, and near deserted huts. From what they
hear, they decide on the events of the ensuing year.26
As we have seen earlier, the Russians also believe the Water
spirits to wander on land at Christmas-time, until Twelfth
Night, when according to the Orthodox Church ceremonies
the Cross is lowered into the water, and they then return to
their homes. Probably, therefore, the belief in the wandering
abroad of the spirits of the drowned at Christmas-time has
reached the Yakuts together with these holy-days themselves.
Over a large area in Central and Northern Asia a belief
has been recorded, that in the lakes a bull dwells, which begins
to roar before a storm or any other great event. When on
frosty nights the ice begins to crack and rise, the water-bull is
said to be breaking it.21 Like the East European peoples, the
Yakuts and Yukagirs celebrate the departing of the ice with a
special ceremony. At such times they sacrifice food to the
water, sometimes firing their guns. With their offerings they
try to appease the Mother or Old Woman, as they call the
stream, that it may refrain from doing damage to their lands
during the spring floods.28
Once the belief in Nature spirits has originated, the number
of these may easily become legion. Wherever a human being
moves, some spirit accompanies him. Should an accident occur
on a journey, e.g., a horse take fright or a cart break down,
the Yakuts believe the Master of the spot to have occasioned
the misfortune.*9 Especially in places traversed with difficulty,
where the road runs along a steep mountain-ridge or precipi-
tous pass, something, a piece of cloth or wool or a hair of the
horse, is sacrificed to the Master of the place. The Mongols,
Altai Tatars, etc., when crossing over a mountain, are in the
habit of placing a .stone at a certain spot, so that great heaps of
stones (obot " heap") have accumulated at such places.80
Similarly, on journeys by water, the Siberian peoples, after
safely passing a difficult stretch of water, offer up some small

THE "MASTERS" OF NATURE 471
sacrifice. On the Yenisei River, the author has even heard
Russians speak of " the boiling of porridge " when a danger-
ous, swift rapid was being passed with great difficulty, the
place being called the " bull" by the rowers. To deceive
the Master of the place, the Yakuts, when making long jour-
neys, speak in a secret language, in which the words have
meanings differing from those of their everyday use, like the
hunters and fishers, who also on their expeditions twist the
significations of their words.81