CHAPTER XVI
DEITIES OF BIRTH
DEITIES of birth among the Lapps were Madder-
J. akka and her three daughters Sarakka, Juksakka and
Uksakka.
Madderakka (akka, " old woman") although called the
mother of other deities, seems at least in later times to have
been regarded as of less importance than these others. Si-
denius says that the Lapps sacrificed to her only " so that she
would allow her daughters to serve women." He points out,
however, that among some she was believed to help her
daughters herself in their duties.1 Jessen relates that she
creates the body of the child,2 and Randulf tells that she
renders both women and cattle fruitful.8
On certain magic drums appears also a male counterpart to
Madderakka, the so-called Madderatshe (" Madder fa-
ther"), who is, however, little known and has most probably
only later appeared at the side of the female Madderakka.*
This latter — the first part of whose name, according to
SetaTa, corresponds to the Finnish word mantere (" the
earth") — lived, according to the Lapps, together with her
three daughters, in the earth beneath the Lapp tent. For this
reason, sacrifices to them were placed in the ground.5
At the birth Sarakka of Saredne (" Sar mother ") seems
to have played the most important part. Her name may
possibly be derived from the Lapp word saret (" to cleave "),
Skanke gives Sarakka another significant name, Sadsta-akka,
in which the word sadsta is said to be identical in meaning with
the Lapp word suorek-muora (a piece of wood split at one
end into two parts).6 Both names of this deity remind one of

DEITIES OF BIRTH 253
a magic method of assisting childbirth and rendering it easier,
a method palpably touched on by Forbus when he puts the
following question to the Lapps: "Have you not chopped
wood in honour of Sarakka in time of birth? " T
From the questions by Forbus it is further apparent that
these pieces of wood, cleft in honour of Sarakka, were re-
garded as holyj they were not used as fuel, and were not
even allowed to be touched.
Sarakka was worshipped chiefly, in childbed. Besides
women, she helped also reindeer at the birth of their calves,
assuaging their pains. For this reason the Lapps endeavoured
to stand well in the favour of the deity. How intimately
Sarakka followed the course "of the birth-pangs of her wards
is seen from the belief of the Lapps that she felt the same
agony as the one in childbed. Like Madderakka, Sarakka was
also believed to create the body of the infant.8
The protection of Sarakka was sought by the Lapp women
also during menstruation. According to Forbus the women
took off their collars and belts at such times " in honour of
Sarakka." This custom is unquestionably derived from the
magic belief that during these periods, as also during child-
birth, nothing knotted may be worn on the body. During
menstruation women were regarded as unclean and were not
allowed to move about freely. When the said period was
over, a woman would wash her head in water, in a pan which
she then scoured with meal and used for the baking of a cake
which women only were allowed to eat.8
A purification-meal in honour of Sarakka was eaten also
after the successful birth of a child. Jessen relates that women
in childbed drank " Sarakka's brandy " before deliverance and,
together with other women, ate " Sarakka's porridge " after
giving birth. In the porridge three sticks were placedj the
first one was cleft and had three rings hanging from it, the
second was black, and the third white. These were all laid
for three days at the door of the tent. If it were found that

254 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
the black stick had disappeared, it was believed to indicate that
either the mother or the child would die. If, on the other
hand, the white one was lost, both would live.10 S. Kildal
relates that in some districts a miniature bow and arrow were
placed in the porridge so that the child, if a boy, would be-
come a good hunter when grown up.11 Forbus explains that
the weapons were placed in the porridge in three different
parts, the shaft, the bow, and the arrow. The accident of
lifting out any of these parts with the spoon while eating was
fraught with significance. The bow was hung later on the
child's cradle; but if the pieces placed in the porridge had
unluckily not been fished out in the spoons, they were thrown
away. Among the questions written by. Forbus is the follow-
ing: " Have you still the little bow that you had to bear on
thy body? "12
Just as the cleft stick seems to be connected with the name of
Sarakka, the bow placed in the porridge is connected with an-
other name, Juksakka ("Bow old woman"). Of this last-
named deity Solander says that she helps women at the pro-
duction and birth of children. The most important duty of
Juksakka was to change the girl-child in the womb to a boy-
child.18 To gain her help in this, sacrifices had to be offered
up to her. According to Leem the Lapps sacrificed contin-
ually to her because they desired boys rather than girls, as
these last were of no use in the chase. Juksakka, who is some-
times pictured on the magic drums with a bow in her hand,
seems to have taken care that the Lapp boy became a good
hunter.14
The third of Madderakka's daughters was Uksakka (" Door
woman "), who was believed to live in the ground under the
door of the tent. As a watchman at the door she protected
people at their goings in or out. At childbirth she received
the newcomer on his arrival in the world. Later she watched
over the first steps of the child to prevent its falling and
hurting itself. The Lapps sacrificed drink to her in the

DEITIES OF BIRTH 255
ground at the door of the tent, where she was supposed to
dwell.18
Jessen adds that a special, consecrated building was erected
for Madderakka and Sarakka. On some magic drums Sar-
akka's tent can be seen.16 As the Lapps do not customarily
erect special dwelling-houses for their deities, there is reason
to believe that the so-called " tent of Sarakka " is a relic of
the times when a woman in childbirth was not allowed to stay
in the common tent, but had a special tent erected for her.
Such, for example, is the custom among the Samoyeds and
Ostiaks even today.
When the Lapps sacrificed to the deities of birth, they did
this in a manner differing from the ordinary sacrifices. Olsen
tells us that the Lapp mother, when convinced that she was
with child, secured beforehand a little dog, which she kept
by her until the time of giving birth had come. A little while
before lying down for the approaching birth this dog had to
be sacrificed " in order that God might help her and every-
thing go well, and that both she and the child would preserve
their lives and health, and live merrily and well afterwards."1T
After the birth a reindeer or some other domestic animal
bought from the neighbouring peasants was sacrificed. Among
such animals, goats, calves, sheep, lambs, pigs, cats and
cockerels are mentioned.18 On the head of the sacrificial
animal " a linen kerchief or a woman's linen hat" had to be
bound.19 Jessen points out that the sacrificial priest also wore
on these occasions a white linen hat, besides the linen apparel
usually worn at votive ceremonies in Norwegian Lapland.80
The dog, together with the other animals, had to be buried
alive in the ground, only the cock being shut in in a grotto of
stone, where it could live and crow for a time, before dying
of hunger.21 With the exception of the cock, male animals
were never sacrificed to the deities of birth.22 From Randulf's
notes it appears that the Lapps also sacrificed spinning-wheels
and spindles to them.23

256 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
Certain customs had also to be observed after the calving
of a cow. According to Leem, the " first milk " had to be
milked on to the ground. In the purification ceremonies flour
was used, being scattered over both the cow and the calf,
and flour had to be added also to the milk, before a male
person might partake of it." Doubtless, the flour was here
of the same significance as at the ceremony for women. The
custom here pictured by Leem can only have prevailed among
the more Southern Lapps, who had, in places, begun to keep
cows.
Many features in the above beliefs and customs show plainly
that they cannot have been of Lapp origin, for instance, the
special dress of the sacrificial priest, but, above all, the use
of flour in so important a degree, points to derivation from an
agricultural people. There would seem to be, therefore, good
grounds for comparing Sarakka's porridge with the Old-
Scandinavic " Norna porridge" (Norna greytur), the first
meal eaten after childbirth by the women of the Faro-Islands.
Troels Lund shows that among the Scandinavians also it was
the custom to place in the porridge for women in childbed,
" three sticks," with which the luck of the child was supposed
to be intimately connected.25 The sacrifice of spinning-wheels
and animals bought from the neighbouring peasants, and clad
with linen kerchiefs, points, too, with certainty to the fact
that these customs have been borrowed by the Lapps. On
several of the Lapp magic drums the deities of birth are seen
pictured as three females, their number corresponding with
that of the Scandinavian Norns. It should be observed also
that Madderakka's three daughters are known only among
the Scandinavian Lapps. One of the daughters, Uksakka, has
a counterpart in the Swedish Dorr-Karing ("Door old
woman"), who even to our times lives in the beliefs of the
people in Vasterbotten, as " a light-fearing spirit, dwelling
near the door." One had to be careful of her in going out
with a lighted candle, as she would blow it out."

DEITIES OF BIRTH 257
More widely known also among the Finnish Lapps, is the
mother, Madderakka.27 She might also find her counterpart
in the Swedish Jordegumma ("Old woman of the earth"))
which word now means " midwife," but in earlier times may
well have been the name of a deity who, dwelling in the
earth, assisted at childbirth. Similar changes in the meaning
of a term may be observed in the Lapp tongue. At Gellivara
the word sa/rak has been noted as meaning also " midwife." 2g
It is not, however, necessary in all the Lapp customs connected
with birth to see only borrowed beliefs. The Yurak Samoyeds
also worship a deity living in the earth and assisting at births,
and, like the Lapps, they bury a dog alive to secure her help
at the said event.2*
Among the ancient Finns the deities of birth were called
Luonnotar (luonto, " nature ") or Synnytar (synty, " birth "),
and were three in number, corresponding thus with the Scandi-
navic Norns and the Roman Parcae. In a magic song a man
says:" I am created by three Luonnotars." These three deities
appear also in the songs on the origin of iron, in which it is
described how their milk was allowed by them to run into
the earth, one dripping forth black milk, the second white,
the third blood-red j the first giving birth to smithy-iron, the
second to steel, and the third to refuse iron.80 Often, the
Virgin Mary, who in the Catholic period has played an im-
portant part in the beliefs of the people, is also in the magic
songs given the name Luonnotar and Luojatar (Luoja,
" Creator"), and is appealed to in childbirth; the " sweet
milk of Mary " is supposed to cure all kinds of sickness. At
times she is imagined to have many breasts, like her prototype,
the Ephesian Artemis, and is said to have " a hundred horns
on her forehead, a thousand nipples to her breast." 81 In magic
songs she " spins a blue thread with a blue spindle." It is
difficult to distinguish how much in the above beliefs is from
an older time, and how much from the Catholic period (" the
three Maries"). Both the origin and the name of the

258 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
Esthonian Rougutaja, of which all that is known is that she
was believed to help at births, are uncertain.32
The Cheremiss and the Votiaks have a custom of sacrificing
a white sheep at the birth of a child to the deity of birth,
called Kugu shotshen-ava (the " Great birthgiving mother ")
by the former, by the latter Kildisin (kildinit " procreate,"
" give birth to "j int " heaven, god"), or Kildisin-mumy,
("Kildisin mother"). According to an account from the
eighteenth century, the Votiak women prayed to the goddess,
Kaldyni-mumas, for children, and virgins for a happy mar-
riage.88 Another account from the same period states that
this deity was the fructifier of women and animals.84 Gen-
erally, however, the Votiaks speak of special deities of fruit-
fulness, the Kildisin of the earth, of the corn, and of children,
who receive their own special sacrifices. Similarly, the Chere-
miss worship the Shotshen of children, animals, corn, bees,
etc., as separate deities. In the place of Shotshen (= Hill
Cheremiss Shatshektshe), the Turco-Tatar loan-words Puir-
sho ("procreator ") and Perke (Kazan Tatar, b'dr'dg'dt, "suc-
cess ") are used with the same meaning.85
From the sacrifice of the white sheep, one may, conclude
that both the Cheremiss and the Votiak deities of birth, who
" carried the soul to the child," were deities of Heaven. The
word Kildisin means also literally the " procreating Heaven."
According to Ryckov the female Kildisin was the mother or
wife of the Heaven god, Inmar. In their folklore mention
may also be found of " Inmar mother."S8 The Jumon-ava
of the Cheremiss (j'umo, " Heaven," " Heaven god "; ava,
" mother," " wife"), to whom female animals were sacrificed
in the sacred groves, was worshipped also as the deity of
childbirth and marriage.37 Another heavenly deity was the
Nishke-ava (properly, Ine-shki-ava, "the Great birth-giving
mother"), probably identical with the little-known Azer-ava
(" Mistress ") of the Moksha Mordvins, who was, according

DEITIES OF BIRTH 259
to an old account, a " corn-begetter " and " a dweller in the
high place, in the upper parts of the atmosphere." 88
The other deities of fruitfulness were sacrificed to in the
same manner as to the " souls " of the things they were sup-
posed to fructify, thus, for example, a black sheep to the
" Earth-fructifier," the bones being buried in the earth. The
" Cattle-fructifier" was worshipped by the Cheremiss espe-
cially when the cows had borne calves; friends and neighbours
being invited to a " cow's-milk feast." The host poured water
on the oven and prayed that the calf might grow to be the size
of the oven. The bystanders were also sprinkled with water
with an accompanying prayer that god would let the cow give
much milk. At the sacrifice-porridge, which was mixed with
butter, the host prayed that the " Cattle-fructifier" would
give " as much cattle as there are hairs on the cow, so that one
end of the herd might be still on the village-road when the
other end had entered the cowsheds."39
Other magic ceremonies are also connected with the cult
of procreation. As an example of these, the following custom
of the Eastern Cheremiss may be described. When the sheep
have not increased satisfactorily, a festival is proclaimed, to
which boys and girls are invited. As a sacrifice a wild bird
is shot, but for lack of this a hen may be used. The host
takes the bird and the hostess the implements necessary at the
sacrifice, and a journey to the sheepfolds is made, the boys and
girls following them, creeping on all fours. The hostess
induces the children to keep after her, enticing them like
sheep, the movements and voices of which the children seek
to imitate. The boys butt at the girls, imitating rams. Ar-
rived at the sheepfold the host makes a fire, round which
the so-called sheep crawl baa-ing three times, following the
hostess. They, then rise, and the bird is cooked and eaten in
the sheepfold, the bones being thrown on to the roof of the
fold and prayers offered up to the " Sheep-fructifier." The

260 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
Cheremiss, from whom the author took down the above ac-
count, remarked that is not customary to invite many boys to
this ceremony, but chiefly girls, lest too many rams be born in
the flock.
A being dwelling in Heaven is also the deity to whom the
Ostiaks and the Voguls pray for children, and who gives aid
to their wives in childbed. At Vasyugan she is called Puges,
" daughter of the Heaven god," and is said to live in the heights
in a golden house, in the roof of which hang seven cradles.
When she rocks one of these seven times a " soul " is created,
but if the cradle should overturn during its movements, a
" soul " is born that will not live long. The road to this
dwelling goes over seven seas to a mountain consisting of
seven stories. In the districts around Surgut, this deity with
the seven cradles is called Vagneg-imi (imij " old woman "),
said in the old stories to be " the mother of the seven sons
of the Heaven god." In her hand she holds a wooden staff,
from which hang threads for each person born. When a
child is born the goddess makes a knot in one of the threads,
the distance between this and the staff indicating the length
of the child's life, a matter not to be altered whatever sacrifices
are offered up to the deity. The " Kaltas mother " of the
Northern Ostiaks and the " Kaltes mother " of the Voguls,
who protects both the one giving birth and the child, and
who is said at a birth to " write down in a golden book," or
on a "gold-embroidered seven-forked tree," the fate of
the child just born and the length of his life, reminds one,
as far as the name is concerned, of the Kildisin of the Votiaks.
In folklore, the " Kaltes mother," often furnished with the
epithet " the golden," appears as the daughter or wife of the
Heaven god Torem, and as the mother of his children. Un-
der the name of " Turem mother," the Northern Ostiaks also
worship their great soul-giving deity.40
In certain districts images are made of this deity of child-
birth. Possibly an idol of this description, worshipped for

DEITIES OF BIRTH 261
long distances around, has given rise to many exaggerated
tales of the " Golden old woman," mentioned for the first
time in an old Russian Chronicle, and afterwards, often under
the name of Zlota baba, in the older geographical accounts.
In the seventeenth century she is seen pictured, sometimes
with a child in her arms, on many maps, on which she repre-
sented the districts round the Northern Ural, little known at
that time.41
Of the ceremonies observed by the Ostiaks at the birth of a
child, only the fact that special consideration is attached to
the placenta need be mentioned. We find Pallas already re-
lating that it was laid in a basket of birch-bark, together with
fish and meat, as a sacrifice, and carried to the forests where
it was hung up in a tree. This custom survives today. Kar-
jalainen says that the Ostiaks around Tremyugan call the pla-
centa, in which they believe they can make out human features,
" the nourishing-mother of the child," and, before the birth,
sew a little shirt for it, to which is further attached a kind of
belt and a headdress, the whole being placed together with
the placenta in the above mentioned basket. Before the bas-
ket is carried into the forest, fish, meat, and other victuals are
set before it, and the women bow, saying: "Nourishing-
mother of the child, eat! " The food used at this ceremony
may only be eaten by women. At Vasyugan, if the newly-born
is a boy, a little bow with two tiny arrows is tied to the
basket.42
Similar beliefs about the placenta were prevalent also among
the Slavs, and are met with even today among many primitive
peoples.