part in their feasts. He also arranges feasts and weddings
in the forests, where he has a magnificent home and a large
family, servants and cattle. To see the Forest-people is not
a good sign, as very often some accident, sickness, or death
follows."
Ovda is another evil Forest spirit who has descended from
the Chuvash to the Volga Finns. Besides living in the forest
it is said to dwell in chasms in the rocks and in the ruins of
old castles. These last named, one often hears called " Ovda's
village." Ovda wanders in the forest in the shape of a hu-
man being, but its feet are turned backwards. It is naked,
with long hair and large breasts which it sometimes throws
over its shoulders, and it is also covered with hair. Sometimes
it appears as a man, sometimes as a woman. It has a home and
property in the forest. In the same way as Targeldes cele-
brates a marriage, Ovda also moves then as a whirlwind, so
that the trees bend to the ground. Often one may hear it
laugh and clap its hands in the forest. Ovda is feared be-
cause it approaches people, enticing them to dance or wrestle
with it, when it tickles or dances them to death. A human
being can overpower the Forest spirit if he knows how to
touch it on the left armpit, where there is a hole, the Forest
spirit becoming powerless immediately when touched there.
Ovda tortures animals out at pasture, as well as people, some-
times mounting a horse and racing it nearly to death. In some
places the people say that Ovda will mount a horse and make
the poor animal run backwards. The Cheremiss call this

i?4 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
spirit also by the Tatar name Surali. A foreign name for an
evil Forest spirit is AJvasta.26
When a Cheremiss makes offerings to the Forest spirits he
addresses them mostly by the names Kosla-Kuguza and Kosla-
Kuva (" Old man " and " Old woman of the forest ")- He
asks them for protection in the spring when he sends his cattle
out into the forest. When a hunter goes out hunting he cuts
a little opening in a tree and puts in a piece of bread for the
Forest man, in the hope that the latter will help him by
driving game into his path. The " Old man and Old woman
of the forest" are further appealed to when a person is lost
in the forest or wishes to spend the night there, and in the
sacred groves, the people never omit to pour a drink-offering
on the ground for the " Forest man and Forest woman." "
To the Mordvin Vir-ava (" Forest mother ") alien features
have also become attached later, which are obviously loans from
the Forest spirits of the Russians. More especially in tales,
the " Forest mother " is a humanlike being as high as a tree.
She has a particular habit of sometimes slinging her large
hanging breasts over her shoulders. She has long, freely
flowing hair and her legs are as thick as logs. Besides appear-
ing in human guise the " Forest mother " shows herself also
in other forms, e.g., as a flame burning on the ground, as a
whirlwind, or as any of the forest animals. She visits the
villages in the form of a dog, a cat, or a wolf. A general
belief is further that the Forest spirit appears at times as a
horse flying at full speed through the forest. In stories it
is said that the Forest spirit comes to the log fires to warm her
long hands/8
Among the Baltic Finns also, a Forest spirit resembling a
human being is met with. Usually the Finns call the Forest
spirit Metsanhaltia (" Forest ruler"), every forest possess-
ing one of these beings. In some places he is believed to be
an old grey-bearded man with a coat of lichen. Here also
the Forest spirit can lengthen his body so that his head is on

FOREST SPIRITS 185
a level with the highest tree. When seen, he is of the height
of an average human being but on being approached he be-
came longer, so that at a distance of nine paces, he was six
yards in height, and at six paces nine yards in height. Accord-
ing to other reports the Forest spirit grew smaller on approach.
Sometimes the Forest spirit appears as a woman. In West
Finland the Metsanneitsyt (" Forest virgin ") is said to look
like a very beautiful, well-dressed woman, but from behind
she is like a stump, a bundle of twigs, a pole or a trough.
.Sometimes she is fitted with a tail like an animal. The Forest
virgin is in love with men, and entices them to cohabit with
her.29
The Finnish Metsanhaltia has its counterpart in the Skogs-
radare of the Swedish Finns, and likewise their Metsanneitsyt
in the Skogsjungfru of the latter. The Mets-haldijas
(" Forest ruler ") is known also among the North Esthonians,
his cry in the forest meaning that something special is about
to happen, — a death, —for example.30
Bishop Agricola mentions two Karelian Forest or Game
spirits — Nyrckes (in folk-poetry, Nyyrikki, " Tapio's son "),
who " gave squirrels from the forest," and Hittavainen, who
" brought hares from the bushes." The latter is even today
known in East Finland} the people say, for example, of a good
hunter that: " Hittavainen will bring him game even if he set
his traps in the stable-loft." Etymologically these names are
not clear.
A peculiar idea of the Finns is that one must make offerings
to the Forest spirit at some ant-hill. Here, however, one can
note traces of the former belief in certain small anthropo-
morphic beings, who were supposed to live under the earth
(Maahiset, Esthonian Maa-alused, Swedish Alva). It is be-
lieved that " those who live under the earth," and who can
cause skin-diseases in one who sits down near their abode, are
small ant-like beings. Similar beliefs are also met with in
Sweden, where such ant spirits are called Alv-myror.Bl Un-

186 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
derground people and Forest spirits often play similar parts
in folk-belief.
If the forest people were angered, they could keep one in
the forest, so that it became impossible to find one's way any-
where. Especially if, when wandering in the forest, one hap-
pened to hit on the Forest spirit's track, one was sure to be-
come lost. Those who had thus been bewildered by the
Forest spirit were called " forest-bewitched." To find one's
way out of the forest the reversing of one's garments was
employed. Cattle which had become lost in the forest, were
said to be "hidden by the forest" (metsan peitossa). The
Swedes in Finland called this skogen holler (" the forest
keeps").
According to the Cheremiss the anthropomorphic Forest
spirits were originally human beings. It is believed that those
who die in the forest become Forest spirits or their assistants.
When anyone dies in the forest, he becomes a Forest spirit,
who on the site of his death frightens people and causes
them to lose their way so that they too may die.82 Even a
horse that dies in the forest is believed to move in the night
and to attack wanderers. The Cheremiss call it " horse-
Targeldes." "«
The ceremonies attached to the making of offerings to the
Forest spirit by the Votiaks also bring into mind the cult of
the dead. In certain districts it is an old custom at the worship
of the Forest spirit to remember the dead. Aminoff relates
that in the District Vjatka, where hunting still plays an im-
portant part in the nourishing of the tribe, offerings are made
at the beginning of the autumn hunt to the dead, coincidentally
with those to the Forest spirits." It is hardly to be wondered
at that the dead should gradually have changed into Forest
spirits, when one remembers that burials took place in the
forest at an earlier time. A relic of this old custom can still
be traced among the Votiaks, who believe the dead to in-
habit willingly the depths of the forest. And further, it is

FOREST SPIRITS 187
only natural that those who have found an unknown grave
in the forest should remain there as feared, ghostly beings.
One must, however, also recollect that the ceremonies in
honour of the fallen bear and other more remarkable forest
animals are of a similar character. That among the Forest
spirits there should actually be found the race-souls of tutelary
genii of animals appears, e.g., from the beliefs of the Lapps.
Originally these animal spirits moved in the material shape
of the animal they represented; little by little they became,
in the imagination of these people, more humanlike. But
even thus changed, they cannot hide their origin — they are
hairy, like animals, they have the feet or tails of beasts, etc.
The ingrian wolf-spirit is described in the following tale:
" To a village tavern in Sombra there once came a being, who
was in all else like a man except that he had a wolf's head,
and asked for spirits to drink. He was offered a small bottle
which, in the host's opinion, was quite enough for a man.
The guest was, however, unsatisfied, and drank first a whole
can, and then several small bottles in addition. When he was
about to leave, the host, wondering greatly, asked him who
he was. The guest answered that he was one who would lead
all the wolves out of their country." "
But the forest itself and the separate trees contained therein
were also regarded as animated among the Finno-Ugric
peoples. Charuzin relates that when the Lapp goes to the
forest to fell trees, he strikes the trunks first with the back
of the axe before beginning to chop them down, or, as the
Lapps themselves say, "kills the tree first." Should they
omit to do this, they believe that the wood from these trees
will crackle and throw out sparks when burning.88 Mrs. De-
mant-Hatt, during her travels among the Lapps, observed
that the Lapp girls, when returning from the heights to the
forest districts, hurried to embrace and greet the trees. Ac-
cording to the missionary Lundius, the Lapps also worshipped
trees, as when they had shot down game from a tree, they

i88 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
laid the feet of the animal in the tree, smearing it also with
the blood."
In the same way the Cheremiss also regard the forest in
animistic fashion. When they go into it, they greet the trees,
ask them the way, and pray to them for a peaceful resting-
place for the night. In the morning they give thanks and
offer their hands to the tree under which they have spent
the night. " The tree understands what men say, and the
forest listens to the song of the hunter." The trees are afraid
of the lumbermen and tremble when one of these goes by with
his axe on his shoulder. When felled, the tree attempts to
kill its murderer by falling on him. It is even believed that
trees can change their sites. As elsewhere in nature, one may
not use ugly or rough words in the forest. The Cheremiss
speak also of the tree's " soul" (or/). While the soul is in
the tree, it is glad and prospers, but when the " soul" moves
away, the tree withers. At festivals for the furthering of
bee cultivation, an offering of a duck is even made to the
" tree-soul." When hanging up a bee-hive in a tree, they
say: " Tree-soul (Pu-6rt), give luck to the bees," or: " Gather
the bees around thee." 88
Whether the Finno-Ugric peoples worshipped special kinds
of trees as such is uncertain. The Baltic Finns, however, seem
to have known tutelary genii for the different trees. The
Esthonians believe that the spirit of the birchwood never goes
into a forest of alder or oak.39 Milkovic relates of the Erza
Mordvins that when they prayed for rain, they turned towards
an oak, saying: " Oak god (Tumo-pas), give rain." While
doing so, a man would conceal himself in the foliage, whence
he would sprinkle those praying with a drink made from
honey. The food-offering was hung in a vessel of bark on a
branch of the sacred oak.*0 It is possible, however, that not
the oak itself, but the Thunder god in the shape of the oak
was the object of worship at these ceremonies. The rowan also
played a prominent part in the beliefs of the people. Both

FOREST SPIRITS 189
the Baltic and the Volga Finns believed in its protective
powers, though offerings were not made to this tree. Accord-
ing to the Hill Cheremiss evil spirits could not approach the
rowan, and for this reason, when anyone was obliged to spend
the night in the forest, branches of rowan were placed under
the head, and if one were even then afraid of "ghosts, one
could run to the shelter of a rowan.*1 The same idea is met
with also among the Russians, etc.
The common representative of all the trees is the forest
itself; when worshipping it the Mordvins call it Vir-ava
(" Forest mother " or " Mother forest "). The Tapio of the
Finns, of whom Agricola says: " he gave game from the
forest," and who in folk-poetry appears in anthropomorphic
guise, meant originally merely " forest," as may be seen even
today from countless expressions in folk-songs, e.g., " the
twig-filled Tapio," or " oak Tapio." This would seem to have
been taken over by the Russian Lapps, whose Tava or Tava-ajk
(" Tava mother ") is a Forest spirit.42 Originally, the Hiisi
of the Finns, who, according to Agricola, " gave victory over
the forest dwellers," meant also " forest" ; but, in a more
restricted sense, hnsi also signified a sacred grove. Often in
magic prayers and songs, the forest itself is appealed to:
" Good forest, pure forest,
Watch over my herds of cattle."
Like the animal spirits dwelling in the forests, the animated
forest itself aspires to anthropomorphic features. In attempt-
ing to simulate a human being, however, it cannot hide its
original self. Standing among tall pines, the Forest spirit
is as long as these, and moving in the underbrush it again
shrinks to the height of this. The Mordvin Forest mother,
when in the shape of a human being, has still feet as clumsy
and thick as logs, and the Forest virgin of the Finns, beautiful
from a front view, appears from behind as a rotted stump or
a bushy tree. In the folk-poetry of the Finns, " the King

190 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
or Lord or Mistress of the forest" has " a hat of pine-
needles," a " blue mantle," and a " beard of leaves."
An extremely wide-spread belief is that the Forest spirit,
having bewildered human beings and enticed them into its
power, tickles, dances, or smothers them to death. The ex-
planation of this curious idea is to be found in the psychic
state that overwhelms the individual, when lost in the forest,
and, in desperation, he sees no chance of ever finding his way
out.