CHAPTER IV
THE WORLD-MOUNTAIN
T
HE MAJORITY of the peoples of Central Asia have
tales of a mighty world-mountain, which the Mongols
and Kalmucks call Sumur or Sumer, and the Buriats Sumbur.
In whatever form this mountain is imagined, it is connected
always with the cosmography of these peoples, forming its
centre. Assuming that the world was formerly small and has
gradually grown to its present sizej the folk-tales tell of a
distant time, when Sumur was only a very little hill.1 Now
its summit aspires to heights unattainable by man, offering
thus to the gods a dwelling-place worthy of them.
Although the Altai peoples have worshipped their moun-
tains, especially the Altai, adored in many tales, which they
called the " prince,"2 the conception of a central mountain of
the earth-disc was not bound to any of the Central Asian
mountains, but came from abroad, ready-shaped to a particular
cosmography. It is worthy of note that this mythical mountain
is often placed in Heaven itself. Thus, the Over-god Bai-
Ylgon (" rich-great") lives in Heaven " on a golden moun-
tain." 3 Similarly, the tales of the Yakuts tell of the " milky-
white stone mountain" of Heaven.4 Often this mountain is
described as rising in storeys, the number of which varies, but
is generally the same as the number of storeys into which
Heaven is divided among that particular people. A certain
Central Asian tale describes the central mountain of the earth-
disc as " three-stepped," * The Ostiaks speak of the " seven-
storied mountain " of Heaven.8 Even Heaven itself is some-
times imagined as a mountain of this description j its underside,
which we mortals see, is like a rounded arch. An Altaic crea-

342 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
tion tale relates how Clgen when creating the earth, sat on a
" golden mountain " where the sun and the moon always shine,
and how this mountain later descended, hiding the earth j the
edges of the sky did not, however, reach to the earth itself.7
The idea of a heavenly mountain appears also in the follow-
ing tale of the Goldes living in North-East Siberia: "When
the gods built Heaven, they made it of stone, but when it was
ready, the people below began to be afraid that it would fall
down on them, wherefore the gods blew under the arch so
that the air thus formed hid the arch from the sight of men." *
Without doubt, this picture of Heaven is closely connected with
" the mountain " and has developed from it. This idea of
the stone arch cannot have arisen among the Goldes, as this
structure is quite unknown to them, as it is to all other North
Siberian tribes.
In the tales of the Mongols, Buriats, and Kalmucks the
world-mountain — Sumbur, Sumur, or Sumer -— has a name in
which the central mountain of the inhabitants of India, Sumeru,
is easily recognized, and the beliefs connected with the same
have spread ready-formed along with a stream of civilization
from India to the peoples of Central Asia. Whether this
mountain Sumeru or Meru originated in India, in connection
with some actual mountain there, is difficult to say. As far
back as can be traced it has been a cosmologic belief.
Where then, is the summit of this earth-mountain? We
might suppose it to be at the summit of Heaven, directly above
us, and, as such, the apex of a hollow sky. It was not, how-
ever, envisaged thus, but instead, its peak rises to the sky at
the North Star where the axis of the sky is situated, and where,
on the peak, the dwelling of the Over-god and his " golden
throne n are situated. To this idea points also the assumption,
met with everywhere in Asia, that the world-mountain is in
the north. This appears quite clearly in a Buriat tale reflecting
Indian views of life: " In the beginning was only water and a
frog (turtle), which gazed into the water. God turned this

THE WORLD-MOUNTAIN 343
animal over and created the world on its belly. On each foot
he built a continent, but on the navel of the frog he founded
the Sumbur-mountain. On the summit of this mountain is the
North Star." In another tale in which a temple is placed on
the summit of Sumbur, the North Star is the golden spire of
the tower of this temple."
The cosmic mountain rising in this part of the sky was known
long ago to the great civilized peoples of Nearer Asia. This
idea appears also in the Bible. In the I4th chapter of Isaiah
a proud being, who wished to "be like the most high," is
described in the following words: " For thou hast said in thy
heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above
the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congre-
gation, in the sides of the north," As the throne of God is
believed to be on the summit of the world-mountain in the
north, this point of the compass was the direction of the prayers
of the Mandeans.
Although the idea of this wonderful, cosmic mountain, as
its name denotes, arose in India and travelled with a stream of
civilization to the Mongol tribes, the same belief reached the
Turco-Tatar peoples by other roads. The Siiro (" Majesty ")
mountain, appearing in the tales of the Altai Tatars, has doubt-
less originated in Persia, as also the seven gods, who are be-
lieved to dwell on this heavenly mountain and whose name
Kudai is a loan-word from the Persian.10 That the idea of
the heavenly mountain was known also far away in Europe,
is shown by the Himinbjorg (heaven-mountain) of Scandi-
navian tales and by a Finnish poem on the origin of fire, in'
which it is asked where fire was born, the answer being:
" There on the navel of the sky, on the peak of the famous
mountain." u
In comparing the above traditions we notice in them two
leading ideas, one in which this world-mountain is merely
a giant mountain in the centre of the earth-disc with a summit
touching the sky, another in which the mountain itself is situ-

344 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
ated in the sky, or the whole of the sky is imagined to be a
mountain. Unless these ideas have a separate origin, the
latter has in all probability developed from the former. The
world-mountains of the ancient peoples — at least the Sumeru
of India and the Hara Berezaiti of the Iranians — were cosmic,
central mountains of the earth-disc. The Btindahish explains
how all the stars, both fixed stars and planets, move round the
mountain, to which they are bound as to the world-post. In
a very interesting manner, both ideas are joined in the Sumeru
of Chinese pictures, the mountain here resembling an hour-
glass, comparatively narrow at its centre and widening both
upwards and down wards j the upper part widens to a sky cover-
ing the earth.12 Still stranger forms can be seen in Japanese
art, where this rather narrow central mountain widens at meas-
ured intervals to represent the different storeys of Heaven.13
In this shape Sumeru resembles a tree rather than a mountain,
and is well designed to throw light on the manner in which
the branched world-tree may have developed from the world-
pillar.
A Central Asian tale places on this high, three-stepped cen-
tral mountain a still greater world-tree. That this mountain,
imagined as being three great steps, was rectangular, is shown
by the fact that the summit, on which the world-tree stood,
was " a square-shaped area." In addition, on each side of the
mountain, there are said to be four mounds, which are called
the four continents, believed by the inhabitants of India to be
situated round Sumeru, one at each point of the compass. How
impressive the view from the crown of the world-tree on the
summit of the mountain is, appears from the fact, that looking
from there, according to the tale, the earth floating in the
ocean is no larger than the hoof of a horse. The height of the
tree is pictured further by the idea that if a stone of the size
of a bull is thrown down from there, it will reach the earth
after the lapse of fifty years and then be no larger than a
lamb.14

THE WORLD-MOUNTAIN 345
To this heaven-mountain idea, there is thus also connected
the idea of a world-ocean. In an Altaic creation tale the moun-
tain and the ocean are said to have existed before the earth
peopled by men was created.15
The same mountain and ocean appear in the tales of the
Mongols, in which an evil giant snake called Losy is spoken of,
the home of which is in the ocean under the earth. By squirt-
ing poison on the earth, this being attempts to crush out life
by killing men and animals. At the request of God the hero
Otshirvani engaged this sea-monster in battle, but his powers
were not sufficient to overcome it, and he nearly fell victim
himself to the monster. Seeing this he fled from the earth and
ascended the Sumer mountain where he changed himself to the
mighty Garide bird. In this form he attacked the monster
again, seized its head with his claws, dragging it three times
round the world-mountain, and finally smashed in its head
with a great rock. This giant snake is said to be so large that
though its head is on the summit of the world-mountain, round
which its body is wound three times, its tail is still in the
ocean.16
This sea-monster, appearing in Central Asian tales also
under the name of Abyrga, was known already among the
ancient peoples of Asia. Along with Eastern myths and beliefs
it wandered to Europe. In Scandinavia there are tales of the
dreaded " Midgard snake," which " squirts poison " " scatter-
ing this over air and land." At the end of the world, " when
the sea will rise over the land " and " the giant snake squirms
in its wrath and crawls on to the earth," Thor will at last
succeed in killing it, falling dead himself from the poison
which the snake will have ejected against him.
As alien as the snake itself, is its vanquisher, the Garide
bird, which is said to live on Sumeru mountain and thus repre-
sents the heavenly powers in the tales of the Mongols. Its
name is identifiable with that of the Indian bird Garuda. The
hero Otshirvani, who changes himself into a bird, is the Bud-

346 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
dhist Bodhisattva Vairapani, and is only an addition, taken
from legends, to this ancient tale.
Furthest developed is the cosmography with the Sumeru
mountain in its centre, found at the present time in the teach-
ings brought by Lamaism into Central and Eastern Asia.. Ac-
cording to notes made among the Kalmucks the whole of the
proportions of the universe is strictly fixed. The height of
the central mountain is 80,000 leagues above the surface of the
ocean, and at the same distance is its foundation in the world-
ocean, where it rests on a stratum of gold, borne in its turn
by a turtle. Round Sumeru there are seven circular " golden "
mountain chains, divided from this and from each other by
seven seas. Naturally these seas also are ring-shaped. The
nearer a mountain chain is to the central mountain, the higher
it is. The first is 40,000 leagues, the second 20,000, the third
10,000, the fourth 5,000, the fifth 2,500, the sixth 1,250,
and the seventh, or last, 625 leagues above the ocean. As
with the height, the distance between these mountain chains
is also exactly defined. The higher the mountains become,
the further they are from each other. The distance of
each from the central mountain is the same as their height.
The water of each of these inland seas is fresh, but the
last mountain chain is surrounded by a salt ocean, which in
its turn is ringed m with an " iron " mountain chain 312£
leagues high. This iron chain, the circumference of which
is 3,602,625 leagues and which is situated 322,000 leagues
distant from the nearest mountain chain, forms the outer edge
of the world. The circumference of the salt ocean is 3,600,750
leagues.
Sumeru itself is shaped like a pyramid slightly broken-off
at the top. Its circumference at the surface of the sea is 2000
leagues and at its summit 3^ leagues. The sides of the
pyramid facing the different points of the compass glow with
different colours. The southern side is blue, the western red,
the northern yellow, and the eastern white. These different

THE WORLD-MOUNTAIN
347
colours are said to come from the jewel or metal coverings
of the different sides. On the south side there is a blue-gleam-
ing and on the west a-red-glowing jewel covering, the north
side is golden and the east silver. These four colours are
reflected in the parts of the world facing them, and for this
reason the south is called the blue, the west the red, the north
the yellow, and the east the white point of the compass.
In each direction there is a continent in the salt ocean, or as
many as in certain tales already related. These continents are
pictured as great islands, beside which there is on each side a
smaller island, so that the total number of the islands sur-
rounding the centre of the world is twelve. Without doubt,
this conception, free from all geographical facts, reflects the
beliefs connected with the twelve pictures of the cosmologic
Zodiac. The Zodiac was already imagined by the ancient
Babylonians as the " land of Heaven." As above, so are there
twelve lands below.
The people dwelling in these four continents differ from
one another, above all, in the shape of their faces. The
dwellers in the southern, or
the continent in which India,
China, Mongolia and many
other lands are situated, have
oval facesj those of the west
round j those of the north
squarej and those of the east
crescent-moon shaped faces.
The continents themselves, as
may be seen from the accom-
panying illustration, are of
the same shapes." ^ FIG i$ A KALMUCK WoRL^P1CTUIlE
This cosmography, which
prevails in Tibet and in other Buddhistic districts, has its roots
in the mists of antiquity. It is strange to find this colour idea
connected with the four cardinal points also among certain

343
SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
North American Indian tribes. Naturally, the colours of the
different points vary among different peoples. The Chinese
regard the east as blue, the south as red, the west as white, and
the north as black. The colours of the cardinal points in
America are black, white, yellow and blue, or, black, white,
red and blue (green).18 That these colour ideas have also had
their counterparts in the sources of civilization in Nearer Asia
is shown, e.g., by the belief, that when God created man he
gathered differently coloured materials from the four quarters
of the earth: i.e., red, black, white and brown.