CHAPTER XIV
FIRE
F
IRE is the friend of man," say the Cheremiss, " it warms
the house and cooks the food, but if it has reason to be
angered, it jumps from the fireplace and burns up the house
and the village." One cause for the fire's anger, is the spitting
into it by any person, another the " wounding " of it by any
sharp instrument, another the stirring of it with an " unclean "
stick. Further, if one throws the wood on to the hearth, or
addresses the fire with evil words, it may become vexed.
Probably, from the very earliest times, fire was regarded as
something pure that cannot endure defilement. The most
common punishment to befall the culprit is a kind of skin-
disease. The fire must then be appeased by small sacrifices.
The Cheremiss use the following words: " Forgive me, ( Fire
mother,' perhaps I have spat in thee or wounded or defiled
thee. Make me well again." The worst punishment the fire
is capable of is the breaking loose of fire. At such times,
the Cheremiss go round the fire, sacrificing to the " Fire
mother " a black hen, or milk from a black cow. During this,
the " Fire mother " is prayed to not to destroy the village, and
also in the future to protect the people from loss through its
agency.1
The Ostiaks call the fire " Fire girl " or " Fire woman "
in their prayers, this deity being as easily wounded as the
Fire god of the Cheremiss and the other Volga peoples. To
appease it, the Ostiaks sacrifice to the fire victuals, cloths of
red or a fire-like colour, and pieces of stuff. Despite these
sacrifices, intended as clothing for the " Fire girl" or the
" Fire mother," it is merely the animated fire itself that is

236 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
the object of worship.2 The Mordvins say: " the Fire mother
* flames,1" the Ostiaks speak of " the many-tongued Fire
mother," and in a Cheremiss prayer the passage occurs: "Fire
mother, thou whose smoke is long and whose tongue is sharp." 8
The Cheremiss speak also, at times, of the soul (ore) of
the fire, which disappears if water is poured over the fire, a
method of putting it out which is regarded as unseemly,
among them the wood being merely drawn to one side so
that the fire goes out of its own accord.* This " soul " of the
fire can appear to men in some shape or other. According to
the Finns, the " Ruler " of the fire appeared in the night as
glittering sparks before some accident. The Esthonians be-
lieve that the " Fire mother" appears in the shape of an
animal as a warning of a coming fire; a " Fire cock " or cf Fire
cat" has been seen to move over the roof of a house shortly
before a destructive fire."
In the tales of the Ostiaks, the " Fire spirit " can even take
on human form. A man who had used the fire badly, saw
the " Fire girl" sitting naked and covered with wounds on a
stone. According to another tale, every hearth has its own
" Fire maiden "; these can visit one another, tell each other
their experiences and ask advice of one another.8 Similar
tales are met with among the Turco-Tatars.
The holiness of the domestic hearth is seen from the custom
of bearing fire, burning brands, or ashes from the old home to
the new. According to an earlier view, the fire should never
be allowed to go out, and even today the Cheremiss light
their sacrificial fires with brands from the hearth. Were the
fire to go out of its own accord, it was deemed an omen of
misfortune. The people seem, however, to have believed
that the power of the fire diminishes, if it is allowed to burn
too long. The Volga Finns had therefore a habit of renewing
their fires once a year by lighting a " new fire," or a " wood
fire," by rubbing two dry sticks against one another. The
" new fire " is supposed to contain a specially purifying magic

FIRE 237
power. For this reason, the Cheremiss extinguish all their
village hearth fires on an agreed date in the hottest part of the
summer, at the close of the " evil time," draw forth a " new
fire," and make a fire of logs somewhere on the edge of the
village, over which the people have to jump; the cattle, even,
are driven through it. To render this last more easy, the site
for the fire is chosen at the gateway to some meadow, the
gate itself, having for reasons of magic, branches of rowan
bound to it. From this log-fire, which generally burns for
two or three days, every householder carries home " new
fire " to his hearth, smoking out his stockyard at the same
time.7
For occasional reasons also a similar fire may be made.
The Mordvins sometimes lit such fires even at the forty days'
feast for the dead, at which those present cleansed themselves
by jumping over the fire.8 A more widespread custom is to
use this method of purification during the course of some
epidemic in the neighbourhood. At such times a furrow is
also ploughed round the village, or a plough carried round
it. That also the Spring and Midsummer-Eve bonfires of
the Finns originally possessed a prophylactic significance ap-
pears from an account from Ingria, according to which the bon-
fires were intended to be made on the pasture land visited by
the cows.9
The stocks Jiving along the Volga have further a custom
of worshipping fire as an intermediary between the gods
and men. Sacrifices thrown into the fire are not always in-
tended for the " Fire mother," but it is intended that she
should hand on these offerings to their true recipients. In the
sacred groves of the Cheremiss one can hear the priests say to
the fire: " Bear with thy smoke our sacrifices to God, and re-
cite to him our prayers! " As a reward, a sacrifice is then
given to the fire also.10 These beliefs and customs are un-
doubtedly, however, like so much else in the fire cult of the
Finno-Ugric peoples, of foreign origin, probably, Iranian. A

238 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
more original custom is that of the Lapps, as described by
Randulf: " To none of their idols do the Lapps offer up
burnt sacrifices, i.e., they do not destroy their sacrifices by fire,
excepting those to the sun, which are burnt up to show the
heat and fire of the sun, and are made on a particular stone,
consecrated for the purpose." "
In their magic songs the Finns describe how mankind came
to obtain fire. In some, the origin of fire is said to be from
heaven, as appears from the following words: "Where has
fire been cradled, where rocked the flame? —Over there on
the navel of the sky, on the peak of the famous mountain."
Its birth there is also pictured in the following: " Fire struck
Ismaroinen (Ilmarinen), fire flashed Vainamoinen, he struck
fire without a flint, tinderlesss he secured it, struck it with a
-black snake, with a mottled serpent, on the open plain of
water, on the wide-spread waves." In a variation the Thun-
derer appears as the giver of fire: "Pitkamoinen struck fire,
among the rocks of the sea, from a many coloured serpent." 12
That the serpent here is the lightning is obvious.
In another song it is described how a net is woven to catch
a " red salmon " in the bowels of which fire is bound. That
this tale is very old is shown by the method of preparing
the net as described in the Finnish song: " A net was made of
lime-bark, it was woven of heather," or " the net was woven of
bast, of juniper threads was it spun."13 An interesting
counterpart to this tale is to be found among certain North
American tribes on the North-West coast in which fire is also
found in the bowels of a salmon.14 The colour of the salmon
has perhaps, in the fantasy of these people, awakened
the idea of connecting it with fire.