CHAPTER XIII
GODS OF SKY AND AIR
SUPREME deity among the Finno-Ugric stocks
A is the Heaven god, who is called by different names,
the original signification of which is the same among all the
peoples.
In the Finnish language there are two words, Jumala and
Ilmarinen, both of which were originally names for the god of
the sky. The former, which is found in Icelandic literature
as early as 1026 (Jomali), has in our time come to denote
"god" in general (deus), like the loan-word Jubmel or Ibmel
in the Lapp tongue, except among the Cheremiss, where in
its present form of Jumo it has preserved its original meaning.
In this last language the word has also a third meaning which
may be taken to be the very oldest, i.e., the " sky " or the
" air." A similar example of a word meaning " heaven " or
" the Heaven god" gradually coming to denote generally
" god," is provided by the Turco-Tatar Tangere. The second
Finnish word also, Ilmarinen (diminutive of ilmari), which
later became the name of a hero in the Kalevalat comes from
a word originally meaning "sky" or "air" (ilma). The
word Ilmari formed by adding a suffix, is met with also among
the Votiaks, Inmar (the god of the sky), and originates there-
fore from the Finno-Permian period, over a thousand years
before the birth of Christ. Contemporaneously, and with the
same meaning as the word Inmar, there is another word in the
Votiak, In(m) (= Finnish Ilma)j the same word being also
found among the Siryans, Jen (now meaning the Christian
God), and among the Ostiaks, Hem or Item. These last-named

2i8 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
have also other names for this god, such as Num-Turem
(Turem ="sky," "air," "world," etc.), which has its
counterpart in the Vogul Numi-Torem. The word Turem
has been compared by Castren with the Lapp Tiermes (the
god of thunder). Both the sky and the Heaven god are called
Num by the Samoyeds.
Knowing that the highest god, as appears already from his
names, was at one time merely the animated sky, it is not sur-
prising that, especially in earlier times, the people's ideas of
him were dim and uncertain. The most usual qualities at-
tributed to him are " great," " high," " good " j in the south-
ern districts the Ostiaks call him Sangke ("light"), prob-
ably a shortening of Sangke-Turem. As there was no actual
conception of his being, there were no attempts to materialise
him. Characteristic for all the above-mentioned peoples is
the following description of the Samoyeds: "They never
make images of Num, therefore they do not know how to
sculpture him."*
Only in folk-poetry do we find the Sky god anthropo-
morphised. Here, we find the Cheremiss relating that he is
a man-like being, living in the sky. Like the people down
below, he practises agriculture, he has green pastures and much
excellent cattle. As befits a good Cheremiss farmer, he even
keeps bees. In the sacrificial prayers he appears as a worldly
ruler with a large train of' lesser deities, to whom at times
sacrifices are also made. Like a rich and powerful ruler, the
god of the Ostiaks and Voguls dwells in the highest story of
heaven in a house glittering with gold and silver; he is said
to have seven sons and many assistant spirits, some of which
have wings. The idea of a heavenly suite is, however, of
later origin, a fact that appears also from the names borrowed
from the Turco-Tatar.2
It is quite natural that the sky with its light and rains, and
other wondrous forces and phenomena affecting so closely
the whole of our earthly existence, should have early become

GODS OF SKY AND AIR 219
the object of the curiosity of primitive peoples. It would
seem, nevertheless, that however animated the sky was re-
garded as being, no sacrifices were originally offered up to it.
This is witnessed to by the fact that even today, sacrifices to the
Heaven god are extremely rare among the more northern
peoples, e.g., the Eastern Samoyeds and the Northern Ostiaks,
for whom the god himself is too far away to be at all interested
in human life.3
The worship of the Heaven god is more closely connected
with agriculture, which, more often than any other occupation,
raises its glance to the sky. That he is a god of agriculture,
is shown plainly by the fact that sacrifices are made to him
chiefly that the fields may become fruitful. According to cer-
tain peoples, his period of worship is the summer months
onlyj as the Votiaks, for example, believe that Inmar may be
sacrificed to, like the " Earth mother," only up to the begin-
ning of winter, after which it is regarded as unsuitable to do
so.* Quite apparent is the opinion that the sky is a pro-
creative power. In their prayers, the Votiaks call Inmar,
" the procreator and nourisher," the Mordvins address their
"god dwelling on high" (Erza: Vere-pas) generally by the
name "procreator," Moksha: Shkaj or Shka(j)-bavas, Erza:
Shki-pas (from ska-msy "to procreate," "to give birth to,"
words to be found now only in folklore j haws or pas, " god,"
an Indo-Iranian loan-word). The word skaj may at times
denote only and solely " the sky," as in the phrase, skajs
mazems ("the sky reddens")/ The Voguls believed that
the Heaven god "sends down" even animalsj in a prayer
to Numi-Torem occur the words: " Send down, our father,
the fishes of the sea, let down the game of the forest! " 6
In later times the Heaven god among the Volga Finns has,
under the influence of Christianity and Islam, become a much
more powerful god, to be worshipped in all the necessities
imposed by life. Even now, however, he is turned to solely
in the case of material needs. Extremely characteristic is the

220 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
belief of the Votiaks as described by an unknown author:
" Inmar is, according to them, only a good spirit, who pro-
tects their lives and gives them food and clothing, having
nothing whatever to do with the mutual relations between
mankind." 7 Thus, the Heaven god did not originally, in the
view of the Finno-Ugric stocks, watch over the morality
of the people, as the spirits of the dead were supposed
to do.
By the side of the male Heaven god, generally termed the
a Father," the peoples by the Volga and the Ob speak in their
sacrificial prayers of a female deity, the " Mother of heaven,"
regarded as the guardian-spirit of child-birth and as such
later merged into the Virgin Mary. This " Mother of heaven,"
pictured in folk-tales at times as the wife of the Heaven god,
and met with also among the Turco-Tatars, originates from
pagan times.8
In sacrificing to the Heaven god, the peoples by the Volga
and the Ob follow similar customs, previously common also to
the surrounding peoples, of keeping the faces, both of the
sacrificing priests and the sacrificial animal, turned in the direc-
tion of the rising sun, contrary to the custom in the worship of
the dead of turning in the opposite direction j the Cheremiss
and the Votiaks having also different expressions for the two
ceremonies, i.e., " sacrificing upward " and " sacrificing down-
ward." The sacrifice to the Heaven god must, as far as possi-
ble, consist of a white animal. Where this is not possible, the
Ostiaks place a white cloth over the animal's back. A feature
of note is also that the sacrificial-tree of the Heaven god,
must, as with other Nature gods, be a leaf or " white " tree,
those of the dead being invariably coniferous, or " dark "
trees.9 Most often burnt offerings are offered up to the
Heaven god, but there are traces of other methods having been
used. As the smoke from the sacrifice could not reach the
sky from the plains, the sacrifice was performed on a hill or
other high place. In the oldest accounts of the Samoyed re-

GODS OF SKY AND AIR 221
ligion it is stated that the Yuraks offered up white reindeer
to Num on the highest mountains. When the animal was
slaughtered, it was held, as during the rest of the ceremony,
with its head turned to the east. The flesh was eaten uncooked.
The skull, together with all other bones, was left on the place
of sacrifice j the first-named being generally stuck on a pole
with its nose towards the east.10
In looking at the night sky, the attention of people was
drawn to a certain fixed point, round which the heavens, as
seen from the earth, seemed to revolve. This regular motion
of the sky, which we know to be due to the movement of the
earth round its axis in the opposite direction, awakened among
primitive peoples the idea that the sky at this point, i.e., at the
North Star, is affixed to some object bearing or supporting the
heavens. For this reason, the Samoyeds (Turuhansk District)
call the North Star the " nail of the sky," " round which the
heavens revolve." ll The ancient Finns had also a correspond-
ing but now forgotten term, as proved by the name of the
North Star, borrowed by the Lapps from the Finns, Bohi-
navlle (" the nail of the north ") j its counterpart among the
Esthonians being the Pohjanael. The connection of these
beliefs with the sky is described by Holzmayer in the follow-
ing words: " In the middle of the sky, or in the north, the
heavens are affixed to a nail in such a manner that they are
able to revolve round the nail, the revolving causing the
movement of the stars. As the North Star is situated in the
very centre, it is called the * nail of the north.'"12 This nail
is, at the same time, regarded as supporting the sky. Turi
relates that the Lapps believe the Boahje-naste (" north
nail," " north star ") to support the sky, and that when Arc-
turus, supposed to be an archer, shoots down the Boahje-naste
with his arrow on the last day, the heavens will fall, crushing
the earth and setting fire to everything.18
The Lapps believed also, however, in a more reliable sup-
port for the sky than a nail. Missionaries relate that the

222 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
Lapps sacrificed to their highest god Veralden rade (" Ruler
of the world ") so that " he should not let fall the sky,"
erecting at the altars a tree either split in two or forked nat-
urally, or also, at times, a high pillar, called the " pillar of
the world" (Veralden tshuold) for the god to "support the
world with, and keep it in its present form and condition,
that it might not grow old and fall from its former nature."
The tree was besmeared with blood from the sacrifice." A
"pillar of the world" of this description was seen by Leem
in the vicinity oi the Porsanger Fjord at an old site of sacri-
fice, where there were two great stones and, on their eastern
side, a very high square log with its lower end stuck in the
ground. In the top of the log there was an iron nail." That
these pillars of the Lapps had a heavenly counterpart is
shown by the fact that in some places, the name of the North
Star is "pillar of the world" (Veralden tshuold).16 It is
probable that the Lapps obtained both their ideas and their
sacrificial customs from the Scandinavians (Cf. Teutonic Ir-
minsulj " world-pillar ") j the " nail " may be compared with
the Scandinavian Veraldar nagli, the " world-nail."" The
corresponding belief of the ancient Finns is found nowadays
only in the phrase, known also to the Esthonians, and used
of people living to a very old age, that these live " to be a
pillar of the world " (Finnish Maailmanpatsas or Maasampa,
Esthonian Ilmasamba). The Ostiaks, amongst whom this
" pillar " was also known, and who even worshipped it as a
deity, have, as we shall see, in this respect been under Turco-
Tatar influence.18
Like the sky itself, the heavenly bodies and certain
phenomena in the air were regarded as animated beings, al-
though not all of them were the objects of worship. In Ostiak
poetry " the Sun mother " and the " Moon old man" are
often mentioned, but sacrifices to them are rare; only at
Vasyugan was a piece of cloth with a ring attached offered up
to the sun, when the latter had caused a sudden fainting fit.1*

GODS OF SKY AND AIR 223
Among the Samoyeds, only the Yuraks, according to Lehtisalo,
worship the sun, " the kindly eye of the heavens," and the
moon, " the evil eye of the heavens," to which they even
sacrifice at the New Year's Festival in July, " when the
wild geese arrive again." A " shadow " (image) is made of
them, similar in form to these bodies. Besmeared with
the blood of the sacrifice, these images are set up on long
poles.20
Much more general is the worship of the sun and the
moon amongst the agricultural peoples. The Cheremiss and
the Votiaks sacrifice white animals to the sun (" the Sun
mother "), both at annually recurring ceremonies, and also for
occasional reasons, e.g., when a long drought dries up the
grass and ruins the harvest, or for certain sicknesses. During
the prayers, the priest keeps his face towards the sun.31 Why
the Eastern Cheremiss should sacrifice animals to the moon
(" the Moon mother ") is uncertain." A very important part
is also played by " the rising and setting Sun god " and " the
wandering Moon god " in the religion of the Mordvins. In
honour of the former, public sacrificial festivals were held,
but the Mordvins worshipped it at other times also, bowing
whenever a ray of sunlight fell on the window. Sacrifices to
the sun were set up in high places, so that the sun on rising
could take possession of them. The Mordvins also took oath
before the sun.23 Of sun-worship by the Finns, there are no
reliable accounts. The custom of the East Karelians of going
at dawn to the eastward slopes of their fields, to a " purified
place," where they bowed three times, saying: " My dear sun,
my provider, give peace, health, look over everything, watch
over everything," may, however, be mentioned.2* The new
moon was also accorded a welcome by many Finno-Ugric
peoples. The Mordvins say, like the Russians: "Be greeted,
new moonj to me health, to thee a whole loaf," The silver
and golden horns of the Moon god are also spoken of.28 Ac-
cording to Agricola, the Finns believed that at eclipses, the

224 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
" animals " (kafeet) " ate up the moon," and lunar markings
were explained by saying that Rahkoi " makes the moon black
in parts." In Northern Finland " the man in the moon " is
called Rahkonen.
More apparent is the worship of sun and moon among the
Scandinavian Lapps, on whose magic drums they are often
pictured. When the Lapps sacrificed to the sun they made a
wooden image, one end of which they formed like a globe
and furnished with thorns, or they used only a large, wooden
ring decorated with figuresj these objects were besmeared
with the blood of the sacrifice. The animals offered up to the
" Sun virgin," were always female, and where possible, white.
At the very least, a white thread had to be sewn through the
right ear of the sacrificial reindeer. When the sacrifice had
been killed, the Lapps cut a piece from all its quarters, thread-
ing them on to a switch bent into a ring. This object they then
hung up on a high sacrificial-board behind the tent. The
Lapps also sacrificed to the sun by taking three switches of
birch, plaiting them together up to about half-way, where
they bound a tape. These switches they besmeared with blood
from the sacrifice. Afterwards a ring was made of a birch-
bough and laid in the middle of the board as an image of the
sun, and inside this a small piece of the lungs, heart, tongue
and lips of the sacrifice. On the ring they set up the blood-
smeared switches. The bones of the sacrifice were also often
placed within a ring on the offering-board.26
Like the Norwegian peasants, the Lapps living in Norway
had a custom of besmearing their doors with butter when the
sun, after the darkness of winter, first threw its rays on them
from the horizon.27 Another annual sacrifice was performed
at the lightest period of the summer. On Midsummer's Eve
the Norwegian Lapps hung up a ring of leaves or grass,
called the " sun-ring," in honour of the " Sun virgin." A
porridge of meal, mixed with butter, " sun-porridge," was
also cooked and eaten. On beginning this sacrificial meal,

GODS OF SKY AND AIR 225
eaten by the men together with their wives, the Lapps bowed
their knees and prayed the sun to " pour its merciful rays
over the reindeer, and everything else they needed to live on."
After the meal, they did the same, praying for " a merry
milking-summer and good luck for the reindeer herds."28
Besides reindeer, sheep and goats could be used for sun-
sacrifices. At times even a spinning-wheel and flax were set
up on the altar to the Sun goddess.29
Magic acts were also at times connected with the prayers.
Missionaries relate that Lapps who had gone astray during the
day among the mountains, would go on their
knees and call to the sun not to set, using at the
same time a wooden object with a handle, in
which a round hole had been cut. This object
they held up in their hands against the sun, so
that it might shine through it.80
Without doubt, much in the sun-worship of
the Lapps may be referred to the corresponding „
* r *k • c j- • • uu TU SuN RlNC
customs of their Scandinavian neighbours. Inus,
for example, the " sun-porridge" and the spinning-wheel
and the flax are certain proofs of foreign influence.
The Lapps turned to the moon as well as to the sun with
worship. The Christmas new moon, in especial, called " the
holy moon," was worshipped with separate ceremonies. Im-
mediately the new moon had risen, complete silence was ob-
served in the Lapp home, the women being forbidden to spin,
the men to perform any noisy labour. As an offering to the
moon a ring of copper was placed in the roof-hole of the tent
so that the moon could shine through this into the tent. If
for any reason this old custom was broken, it was believed that
the moon became angry, and had then to be placated by sacri-
fices.81 In some districts it was the custom to sacrifice a half-
year-old reindeer calf, the hide of which was hung up in the
tent in honour of the moon. Of the reasons for this worship,
an unknown author writes the following: " The Lapps hang

226 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
up a ring of copper tied to a copper chain in the roofs of their
tents before the door, in such a manner that the rays of the
moon can fall on the ring of copper; believing, i.e., that the
moon can help the reindeer-cows to give birth easily to calves
and also protect them from all injuries during the time they
are with calf." 32
Besides the Christmas new moon, the Scandinavian Lapps
formerly worshipped with special ceremonies the February-
moon also, which they called Kuova-manno. Hogstrom re-
lates how he heard from an old Lapp woman in Swedish
Lapmark that in earlier days it had been the custom at a
certain time in February (probably the time of the new moon)
to bind hay, used by the Lapps in their foot-wear and mittens,
to the horns of the reindeer. The Kuova-manno was then
adjured with alarm and din to eat.33 Certain marks of honour
have also in other districts in the northern lands fallen to the
first two months in the year, e.g., in Iceland the first (thorn)
and the second (goa, Lapp kuova) new moons were wor-
shipped.34
These, the coldest months of the year, are also mentioned
in a Finnish tale, in which January is called Iso tammi ("the
great oak ") and February Pikku tammi (" the little oak "),
the latter saying to the former: " If I were in thy place I
would freeze the foal in its mother's womb, the hands of
the housewife to the dough, and the feet of the swine to the
ground, but though I freeze in the night, water runs from my
eye during the day." A similar myth seems to have existed
among the Teutons. In one of their proverbs " the little
Horn" (das kleine Horn = February) says to the "great"
(das grosse Horn — January): " hatt ich die Macht wie du,
liess ich erfrieren das Kalb in der Kuh."36
When the Scandinavian Lapps sacrificed to the moon, they
acted in the same manner as when sacrificing to ths sunj the
sacrificial animals were also similar, never black and never
males. The magic act mentioned earlier, appeared also in

GODS OF SKY AND AIR 227
their moon-cult, the wooden object, however, being furnished
with a smaller hole for the moon to shine through, for the
purpose of preventing the moon from withdrawing
its light during the long, dark winter-time.86
Among the Baltic Finns and the Lapps, the
Thunder god had waxed more and more power-
ful, until at the close of the pagan period in Fin-
land he had pushed aside even the Heaven godj
this development has, however, in the light of
comparative research, taken place under foreign IGp '*
• n MOON RING
influences.
Like the North Siberian peoples in general, the Samoyeds
regard the Thunderer as a great bird, in the company of which
the soul of the shaman can travel over sea and water. Sacri-
fices to this Thunder bird have not been noted, excepting
among the Yuraks, who sacrifice to it during the before-men-
tioned New Year's Festival at about the time of the first
thunderstorms, making then out of birch-wood, a goose-like im-
age of the Thunder god." In some districts the Ostiaks also
believe the Thunderer to be a " black, loudly-screaming bird,"
but call it also " the winged old man," to the honour of whom,
in the more southern districts, they devour " thunder-por-
ridge," when the first thunder is heard, bowing in the direction
in which the thunder travelled.38 We know also the Siryans
to have greeted the first thunder of the Spring.89 The Vo-
tiaks call thunder " the Thunder mother," but have no definite
idea of its form. In their sacred groves, they sacrifice horses,
as the Chererniss do, in order that the Thunderer may spare
their fields from hail and give fruitful rains. The last-named
speak of two separate beings: the "Lightning god" and the
" Thunder god "j a common sacrifice is, however, made to
them. The so-called " summer lightning" they believe to
ripen the crops. A magic means of stilling a thunderstorm is
used by the Eastern Cheremiss, who, during the storm, throw
an axe into the yard, sacrificing at the same time the wool of

228 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
a white sheep in the fire, and praying that the thunder should
pass by,40
The Mordvins have a Thunder god with anthropomorphic
characteristics. The. Moksha call him, like the phenomenon
itself, At'am (a derivative of at'a, " grandfather," " old
man"), the rainbow At'amjonks (jonks, "bow," "cross-
bow "). The Erza, who worshipped thunder in the communal
sacrificial feasts, and at oaks or other trees struck by lightning,
call the Thunderer Pur'gine, a word derived from the Lithu-
anian Perkunas.41 Probably through the Letts this word has
travelled also to the Esthonians, who called the thunderbolt,
according to an old lexicon of the year 1660, perckun nohl.
Together with the old name of the Scandinavian Thunder god
Fjorgynn, the Finnish Perkele (" devil") comes from the
same root. The Esthonians' kott, kouk (" thunder ") must be
regarded as cognate with the Lithuanian kaukas (" ghost")
and kauk-S'pennis ("thunderbolt"). The Norse Thor has
been recognized in the battle-cry of the Esthonians about
1200 A.D.: "Tar abitha! " ("Tar help! ") and in the name
Tuuri, which appears in a Karelian magic song. It is uncertain
whether Turisas (? "father Tur"), who, according to
Agricola, " conferred victory in war," is also the same god.
Like all the other peoples dwelling around, the Esthonians
(Ai, "old man"; Aia-hoog, " thunder-shower"j Aikene,
" the little old man," " thunder ") and the Finns (Isanen,
" the little father "; Ukko, Ukkonen, " grandfather," " thun-
der ") have regarded the Thunderer as an old man. Descrip-
tive names are the Finnish Pitkainen, Pitkamoinen (from
fitka, " long "), the Esthonian Pitkne, Piker, etc.*2
The cult of the Thunder god played so important a part
in the life of the Finns, that we find Agricola describing it as
follows: " Ukko's goblet was drunk at the sowing of the spring
seed; Ukko's chest was also brought, and then maid and wife
drank to excess, and, moreover, many shameful things were
done there, as was both heard and seen," This god was wor-

GODS OF SKY AND AIR 229
shipped because it " brought thunder showers and the year's
harvest." Dating from Agricola's time (c. 1550) is a petition
still preserved, written in Swedish by peasants from the east
of Finland, in which the fine for drinking " Thordns gilde "
is described. " Ukko's chests " (Ukon vakat) are also men-
tioned in the report of an ecclesiastical inspection held in
1670. Vestiges of the sacrificial feast connected with the
same, described by Agricola, have been noted in quite recent
times. The " chests " were made of birch-bark, and sacrifices
of food intended for Ukko were placed in them and carried
to " Ukko's mountain." For the sacrifice itself the best sheep
in the flock was taken and slaughtered on a given day. Its
flesh was boiled and portions of the meat, together with other
victuals, were put into the chests, and along with a large quan-
tity of beer and spirits, taken to the holy mountain, where they
were left untouched until the next day. Ukko was supposed
to eat his share during the night, and in the morning what
remained of the victuals was eaten by the worshippers, part
of the liquors, however, being poured on to the ground to
ensure a summer free from drought.43 These festivals have
been held in Finland very nearly to our time. The most
detailed accounts come from Ingria, where the Ukko festival
was held on the days of St. Peter and St. Elias (twenty-ninth
June, twentieth July, old style). Sacrificial beer was poured
on to the ground to Ukko to invoke fruit-giving rains, or the
ground was sprinkled with water with magic ceremonies.44
Sacrifices of bulls are reported from Esthonia in an account
of the year 1644, which contains the following prayer: " Piker,
we, praying, give a bull, two-horned, four-footed, for the
sake of the ploughing and the sowing: stalks of brass, ears
of gold. Push elsewhere the black clouds, over the great
swamp, the high forest, the wide plain; air of mead, rains of
honey to our ploughmen, sowers! Holy Piker, look after
our fields: fine straw beneath, fine ears above, fine grain
within! »*

230
FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
Agricola mentions also the wife of the Thunder god,
Rauni, whose name occurs in a song as Roonikka, and was also
known to the Finnish Lapps as Ravdna. In the same manner
as to the Thunder god himself, the Lapps sacrificed reindeer
to Ravdna, most often in grottoes in the mountain consecrated
to her. Just as, among many peoples, the oak was the favour-
ite tree of the Thunder god, the rowan was Ravdna's
favourite, growing in her grottoes.46 In Finnish folk-poetry
also the rowan and its berries are described as being " holy."
The name of the Thunder goddess seems originally to have
applied to the tree, being, as such, a loan-word, from the
Scandinavian (Icelandic reymrt Swedish ronn}"
FIG. 8. LAPP SACRIFICIAL BOARD OF THE THUNDER-GOD
According to Rheen
In the Finnish magic songs the Thunder god, like the
Scandinavian Thor, is given a hammer as a weapon. Armed
in the same manner was the Tora-galles or Hora-galles
(" Thor-man") of the Scandinavian Lapps, who was pic-
tured on the magic drums with one or two hammers in his
hand. In their own language, the Lapps called the Thunder
god Tiermes, who had a " bow " (tiermaz-juks, " rainbow ")

GODS OF SKY AND AIR 231
and an " arrow " as arms. With either his hammer, or with
his bow and arrow, the Thunder god was regarded as driving
away evil spirits who everywhere hide themselves at his ap-
proach. When the Lapps, to frighten away these beings, in-
voked thunder, they beat on their drums and shouted. At
times, Hora-galles had as assistant a man-servant.48
The missionary Rheen describes how the Swedish Lapps
sacrificed to the Thunder god: "When the magic drum has
indicated that a sacrifice to Thor must be made, the reindeer-
bull chosen as a sacrifice is bound fast behind the tent, where
the women are not allowed to go. The animal is killed by
being stabbed with a knife in its heart. The blood is pre-
served to be smeared on the image of Thor. As many rein-
deer as the Lapp sacrifices, so many images of Thor does he set
up. The images are prepared out of the stumps of birch trees,
the root being made into the head, the trunk into the rest of the
bodyj a hammer is placed in its hand. After the slaughtering
of the votive reindeer, the Lapps build up behind their tents
an offering-board, about three yards high, setting pretty birch
branches around it. These are also strewn on the ground from
the tent to the board. On this board the blood-besmeared
images of Thor are set up, certain marks resembling crosses
being also made on the latter. Behind the images, the horns
and skull and the feet are set up. At the same time a small
piece of flesh is cut from each quarter and placed in a little
wooden case, into which also a little fat is poured, on the dais
before the image. In the right ear of the reindeer chosen for
sacrifice to Thor, a grey woollen thread must be sewn as a
mark."49
At times the Lapps offered up, besides reindeer, large
wooden hammers to the Thunder god. Forbus says that a
hammer, two fathoms long and beautifully carved, was made
in his honour and smeared with blood from the sacrifice; 60
S. Kildal relates that such hammers were laid in mountain
grottoes.51 The Finnish Lapps regarded clefts in the moun-

232 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
tains as suitable places in which to sacrifice to the Thun-
derer.53
The Wind god is called by the Votiaks in their prayers,
simply " the Wind." A goose is sacrificed to it in the sown
fields at the time of the general field-sacrifices, and it is ap-
pealed to not to blow overmuch, spoiling in that way the
seed, but to blow mildly over the sown fields. The colour of
the votive goose is not particularized, but it is not seemly to
sacrifice to the wind anything black or white. In some places
it is the practice to sprinkle blood in the air. Occasional sacri-
fices are also made to the wind, particularly during storms.
Besides this cult in the fields for the sake of the seed, it is
worshipped at times in the stock-yards, to the intent that the
violent autumn storms of the steppes should not destroy
the straw-roofed cattle-sheds or do injury to the cattle."
For similar purposes, the Cheremiss and the Mordvins sacri-
fice to the " Mother wind " or " Wind mother." The last-
mentioned say: " When the children of Wind mother are
noisy, the storm begins." "
The Esthonians say that the Wind god dwells in the forest
on a shaded branch, whence it sets the wind blowing; accord-
ing to its dwelling-place, it is called Metsmees (" Forest
man "). A more general name is, however, " Wind mother,"
who " weeps" when the rain falls during a storm, and
" dances" in whirlwinds.65 At the sowing of flax, doves or
a cock are sacrificed to the "Wind mother."56 In Finnish
magic prayers the appeal is to the wind itself, though, some-
times, also to the "Wind woman," etc. According to Agri-
cola, Ilmarinen was, later, worshipped as the Wind god,
"giving calm and bad weather, and furthering travellers."
A figure of Ilmaris, " the ruler of the storm, and of bad
weather," has been found also on the magic drum of a Finnish
Lapp.67 Usually, the Lapps called the Wind god the " Wind
man," in the cult of whom one can discern Scandinavian in-
fluence. The missionary Randulf describes the Wind god

GODS OF SKY AND AIR 233
of the Lapps as follows: "Their third great god the Lapps
call the 'Wind man,' who is identical with Aeolus. They
picture him (on their magic drums) with a spade in his right
hand, with which spade he shovels back the wind to blow.
This god they call on both when out with their reindeer on
the mountains for the stilling of a wind harmful to their herds,
and when, while fishing out at sea, a storm arises that places
them in danger of their lives. They promise then to lay
sacrifices on his altar." "
At the sacrifices to the Wind god, a peculiar bundle of
twigs, sometimes formed of birch (Finnish tuulenpes'd, " the
nest of wind"), had to be set up at the sacrificial altar, and
smeared with blood from the sacrifice. Boats and spades were
also offered up to him."
Randulf speaks of a kind of wind-magic, formerly invoked
very often by the Lapps: " When they are angered with any-
one, they call to the Wind god to blow, binding this appeal
by incantations into three bundles. On opening the first of
these, a moderate storm arises; with the second, a storm strong
enough to make sailing dangerous even for a vessel with a
main-sail reefed half-way; but when they open the third, a
shipwreck is the inevitable result." This magic means of in-
voking wind, reports of which are found as early, as the thir-
teenth century, and which was used both by the Finns and the
Esthonians, is obviously adopted from the Scandinavians.*0
The wind is personified also among the Ugrians, the Ostiaks
calling it the " Wind old man," to whom huntsmen sacrifice
at Vasyugan a small piece of white cloth at a birch-tree, to
secure good luck for themselves in hunting.81
The agricultural peoples sacrifice also to the Frost god.
The Votiaks sacrifice a grey lamb or a duck to the "rime-
frost," when during the cold spring nights the rime appears
on the fields. In some districts, an annual sacrifice is even
made at Easter-time.62 In their prayers, the Cheremiss speak
of the " Frost man " and the " Frost woman." But despite

234 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
these names, they are not regarded as anthropomorphic beings.
Some districts call the morning-frost the " Frost man," and
the evening-frost the " Frost woman." They sacrifice a grey
ram to the " man," and a grey sheep to the " woman." Sacri-
fices are made to them both annually and also at other times
for accidental reasons. The appeal in the prayers is for the
frost to refrain from spoiling the seed.83
The Mordvins had a custom of placing porridge for the
" Frost man " in the smoke-outlet on the Thursday before
Easter. The prayer recited on this occasion runs: " For thee
have we prepared porridge, protect our spring-sowings! "
The Russians had an absolutely identical custom.6*
There are no reliable accounts of sacrifices to the Frost god
among the Baltic Finns, although the frost is personified in
the Finnish magic songs. But the most Southern Lapps in
Scandinavia worshipped the " Frost man," who is said to be
" the god of weather, snow and ice," and to whom they sacri-
ficed, so that " the ice should not harm the reindeer and that
the blizzard should cease."6S The word, recurring in the
name, which means " rime-frost in the grass " and is found
only in the more southern dialects, points to a connection with
the customs of the agricultural peoples.
With the gods of the air, the " Cloud mother " of the
Cheremiss should also be reckoned, being remembered at the
great sacrificial feasts with a drink-offering, which is poured
into the fire. The clouds are living beings, according to the
Cheremiss. " If they were not alive, how could they move
about and wander whither they will? " they say. " One can
call them towards oneself, or beg them to travel away to
other neighbourhoods." 66 The " twilight " they worshipped
only by not performing any work, or at least any work that
causes a din, after sunset, lest the " twilight" should punish
them. A similar belief exists among the Volga Tatars.61