CHAPTER XVII
SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS AMONG
THE VOLGA FINNS
A LTHOUGH sacrifices to Nature gods are not bound
JL\ to be made at particular holy places, but may be per-
formed anywhere, in the farm-yard, or at a " pure " spot in
the fields, generally certain sacred groves are kept also for
them. These groves resemble very much the already, described
keremet-groves, though they are not always fenced in like
these last. .Among the Cheremiss, who call them kus-oto
("sacrifice-grove"), they are often very large in area. As
far as possible, groves to the Nature gods consist of leafy
treesj the Cheremiss say that the most suitable tree is the lime,
though oak and birch will do at a pinch. Sacrifices are made
with the face turned to the east, or " upward."
Often, each village has its separate grove, called " the vil-
lage-grove." In addition, the Volga Finns have had more im-
portant groves, in which the villages of a whole district offered
up mutual sacrifices. Both the Votiaks and the Cheremiss call
a district, bound in this way to sacrifice together, by, a loan-
word mer (Russian mir} " village-community"), but the
latter (Urzhum District) also by their own word tiste-kerge
(tihe, "ownership-mark," kerge, "district"), probably from
the fact that the villages connected therewith have had a
common ownership-mark. From this, one may conclude that
the greater sacrifice-district originally consisted of villages and
families belonging to the same clan. Even today, one may
observe in certain neighbourhoods, that although the villages
belonging to one of these sacrifice-areas may be relatively
distant from one another, similar usages and customs are ob-

SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS 263
served, while in a much nearer village belonging to another
sacrifice-area, widely differing customs are followed. Each
mer has its special name, often after the village near which
the grove is situated. It is possible that these villages were
the mother-villages of the clan. Besides its connection with
sacrifices, the term tiste-kerge has also a communal significa-
tion among the Cheremiss. During periods of great trouble,
war, or famine, several mer may, according to the directions
of a " seer," assemble to still greater mutual sacrificial feasts,
lasting sometimes for a week or two, in some very old grove,
where the number of animals sacrificed may rise to a hundred
and the sacrificing congregation to a thousand or so. It is
obvious, that such great gatherings have great significance
politically j even today the often very widely-scattered vil-
lages are bound together and prevented from being assimi-
lated into the foreign tribes living around them by these
gatherings.
In the groves sacred to Nature gods there are no buildings
for the preservation of sacrificial offerings or idols. It is
probable that these peoples never made images of their Nature
gods.
The great festivals in honour of the Nature gods are gen-
erally held during the most beautiful time in the summer,
before the hay-making, or also after the harvest. Often the
#«?r-festivals are not annual like the village-festivals, but are
celebrated after the lapse of a longer period, e.g., after three
or five years.
When intending to hold a mutual sacrificial festival, the
different villages belonging to the area send representatives,
i.e., priests, to a meeting, at which the precise day for its
celebration is fixed upon, as well as the animals to be sacrificed
and the procuring of these. The animals must be of one
colour, healthy, and not too old, at the most in their second
year. Moreover, they must be " untainted" animals, i.e.,
animals that have not been used for labour or for procreation.

264 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
According to the Cheremiss, not even a goose or duck may be
used that has sat on eggs. Should an animal shiver when it
is looked at, this is regarded as a good omen. When the
sacrificial animal has been decided on, a long, narrow towel
is bound round its neck, as a sign that it has been set aside for
a sacred purpose. The towel is not taken away until the
sacrifice begins, when it is hung up in the sacrifice tree for
the period of the ceremony.
Funds for the procuring of the victim are collected from
all the farmers belonging to the area, regardless of whether
these intend to be present at- the festival or no. Although
there is no question here of an obligatory tax, but of voluntary
gifts, each head of a family deems it his duty to subscribe to
the mutual sacrifice, according to his means and present con-
dition. The handling of and accounting for the funds is en-
trusted to a special functionary, the so-called " cashier." The
number of sacrifices depends on the prosperity of the people;
the sacrificing priests discuss together and decide which of the
gods is to be sacrificed to in each separate case.
In every village there are one or more priests, called among
the Cheremiss kart ("old man"). In the choice of these
ka-rty who keep their positions until their death, or until the
weakness of old age, the trustworthiness of the candidate, his
knowledge of the sacrificial ceremonies, and his ability to
recite prayers are taken into consideration. Often, a former
assistant to some kartt who has already filled a lower position
in the priesthood, is chosen to be the follower of one of these.
Where there are several priests, the Cheremiss call the oldest
or most capable of these the "great kart" the others being
" small kart." At the sacrifices of several villages, the many
priests of the area are, without further choosing, participators
in the ceremony, discussing among themselves the order of
the same and which god each separate priest shall pray to.
When one of these priests, who in the sacred grove stand in
line, each under his own sacrifice tree, resigns, the new-comer

SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS 265
does not take his place, but instead the neighbour to the one
leaving moves up one place in his holy office, followed by
those coming after him, so {hat the newcomer may step into
the place at the end of the line. Each priest has the right
to choose his own assistant.
To obtain a clear and complete view of the ceremonies at
a great festival in honour of the Nature gods among the agri-
cultural Volga Finns, we should follow closely, the programme
of one of these festivals at any one place. As the old heathen
customs have best been preserved among the unbaptized Chere-
| miss, we shall consider a great w^r-festival among these
t (Birsk District, Tsherlak village) at which the author was
* present in 1913.1
On the morning of the festival the functionaries concerned
in the same go earlier than the rest of the congregation to
the grove. They do not, as yet, step right into the sanctuary,
but remain at first in a kind of forepart to the grove itself,
where a provisional little tent-like hut has been erected.
Here the treasurer accounts for the means collected during the
festival. This forepart is chiefly intended for the congrega-
tion, who remain here during the holy ceremonies, discussing
the news of the day, telling fairy-tales, enjoying refreshments,
etc., or drying their garments, washed in the brook in the
vicinity of the grove. Into the sanctuary itself no one may
* go who has not previously bathed in this brook and clothed
I himself in clean, preferably white, holiday garments. This
j is a daily duty to each participator in the festival for the
I whole period of the same. In the forepart may also be seen
* the sacrificial animals and the sacrificial objects awaiting their
i turn to be put into use.
f In a Cheremiss grove, in which several gods are offered up
1 to, each god has his own " sacrifice tree "j these trees stand
in a row a few paces distant from each other. On the extreme
east is the tree of " the great Jumo," at which the ceremonies
are begun. As the ceremonies at each tree resemble one an-

266 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
other closely, we shall follow only the one at the tree of the
Heaven god.
Having bathed in the brook, the sacrificing priests bear all
the objects needed at the ceremony to the foot of the tree of
the Jumo. Every one has his own particular duty, one bring-
ing water from the brook, another chopping down old stumps
and gathering fallen branches for fuel. Others prepare from
lime-bark sacred objects necessary at the sacrifice, a girdle, a
bridle, a peculiar " tassel," etc. At the beginning a fire must
be made on the site of former fires. Fire must be brought
from the village in a pot, as the Cheremiss believe that one
may not light a sacrificial fire with a match. Over the fire-
place an erection of young limes is set up, on which in earlier
times, as one may judge from the name " cauldron-holder,"
cauldrons for sacrifice were hung, but in the present time it
is generally so weak that it can hardly bear a small pan for
porridge} the meat-cauldrons are placed on a foundation of
birch-logs. The trunks of both the above-mentioned trees
must be laid so that the thick end is towards the sacrifice tree.
The chief priest now digs up the copper coins, buried during
the foregoing festival in the ground at the foot of the tree.
To the left, before the tree, a candlestick of wood ("silver
candlestick ") is stuck into the ground, in which a little yellow
candle, formed in the grove, is placed. Although this candle
is thin and unpretentious, it is called in the prayers " the
great silver candle." To the right of the sacrifice tree, a little
round pillar is also stuck into the ground, and a little wooden
bowl placed on it. Into this, a drink made of honey is poured,
but, judging from the name " resin-bowl," it must formerly
have contained resin. Further, against the living " great"
sacrifice tree, a " little " one is set up, which is bound to the
former with bast; the "Iktie " tree is a young lime chopped
off at the root. If the "great" sacrifice tree is an oak or a
birch, the " little " tree should also be an oak or a birch.
Before the great sacrificial cauldrons are laid on the fire,

SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS 267
porridge is cooked in a smaller vessel, which is then lifted
on to the roots of the sacrifice tree, being placed next to the
" resin-bowl." In the vessel a small spoon like a shaving of
lime-bark is placed, called, despite its unpretentiousness, " the
silver spoon." Before all this, white cloths are spread on the
ground bestrewed with lime-branches, and on these, in rows,
the sacrificial "butter and milk" loaves are placed touching
one another. Of the sacrificial bread, baked by the priest
himself early in the morning at the
village, there must be nine loaves,
one " large" and eight " small."
In the middle and at the edge these
loaves have a mark made by the
three finger-tipsj the mark on the
edge is called the " nose" (ner)
and the one in the middle " the
body" (ka$). On the "large"
loaf there are also lines, ^those Fia Ia SACRIFICIAL BREAD
on the sides being called " wings,"
and those on the opposite end to the " nose " the " (bird's)
tail." On this loaf, therefore, a bird is formed. The
loaves are placed on the cloth with the " noses" towards
the tree, the " large " loaf on the extreme right. Behind the
loaves, nine wooden bowls are laid parallel with these. Later,
a drink made of honey is poured into them, the drink being
prepared for the festival by young maidens. Sometimes the
loaves and the bowls are arranged in two rows. Both are dedi-
rated to certain deities: the " large " loaf and the bowl behind
it to the " great Jumo," the others to other gods who do not
seem to be exactly defined, but vary, even at different festivals
in the same grove.
The candle is now lit with a brand from the fire and a
young foal is led into the sanctuary. To the right of the
fire, about ten paces away from this, a post of birch-wood is
driven into the ground and to this the sacrificial horse is

268 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
bound fast with a bridle made solely of lime-bark (" the
silver bridle"). To this ceremony belong also a footsnare
of plaited lime-bark with which the forefeet of the sacrifice
are bound during the sacrifice.
The first sacred act is the casting of pewter. The k&rt
places himself to the left of the fire, holds the blade of an
axe vertically over a vessel of water and says: " O bless and
protect us, great god, give us health, prosperity and riches!
We on our side brought and set up for thee a sacrifice; if thou
on thy side wilt accept a horse with shining hair and gleaming
mane, with silver tail and silver hoofs, may its head and
feet be formed in the cast pewter! " Here the assistant
pours the molten metal on the blade of the axe, having heated
the former, praying as he did so, in a little iron ladle. With
great curiosity, the priest examines the shape formed by the
metal as it fell into the water. Should there be nothing in
its shape that resembles the sacrifice it is thrown into the fire
and a new lot melted; but if there is, this shows, as the Chere-
miss believe, that the god is willing to accept the animal.
The pewter figure which is called the " picture " or " shadow "
of the sacrifice is set for the while on the " large " sacrificial
loaf.
The axe is now laid on the ground before the sacrifice tree.
The kart takes a knife in his right hand and a burning brand
in his left, and places himself by the axe with his face towards
the tree. Swinging the brand in the air, he speaks now also
of the shining sacrificial horse, adding: " With the scent of
smoke and the clang of iron, we call thee to our feast, thou
merciful! " When he has finished this prayer, he rings three
times on the axe with the knife. Thereafter he goes to the
horse and touches its forehead and neck three times with
the brand, saying: " Accept a good foal, with shining hair and
silver tail! "
He then takes the knife and a green lime-branch and stands
to the left of the fire, where he whittles a little of the thick

SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS 269
end of the branch, after which he moves over to the sacrifice
tree where, with the knife in his right hand and the branch
in his left, he recites the following prayer: "O bless and
protect us, great god! With a large sacrifice loaf and with
a great vessel filled with honey-drink, with a great silver
candle, with a great resin-bowl, with a great sacrifice tree,
with a great sacrifice girdle, with a great l tassel' and with
a great sacrifice pewter we approach thee. If thou art satisfied
with thy people and the priests, let the shaving of lime-wood
fall right." As he says this, he shaves off a piece from the
branch, the position of which on the ground is then closely
examined by the priests together. Should the thicker end be
towards the sacrifice tree or to the east, it signifies that the
god is kindly disposed and satisfied with the people and
the priests j in the opposite case, the sacrificing priest, follow-
ing the direction of the sun, goes round the fire, placing
himself again to the left of it, where he whittles the branch
again and, standing before the sacrifice tree, does as before.
Where the first shaving has signified good luck, it is placed
in the porridge-pan, to the right of the " silver spoon." As
the kart whittles the second he pronounces a prayer, the be-
ginning of which is the same as in the foregoing, but finishes
with a new wish: " If thou art pleased with the work of our
hands (i.e., with the objects needed at the ceremony) let the
shaving fall right] " Its position is examined again, and if
a lucky omen is now also discovered in it, it is laid beside
the other in the porridge-pan. A third shaving must still
be whittled. With the help of this the sacrificial foal, which
has to shiver when sprinkled with water, is examined to see
whether it is acceptable to the god. The prayer accompanying
this begins also like the former, but ends with the words:
" If thou art satisfied with the shivering horse with shining
hair and gleaming mane, with the silver tail and silver hoofs,
let the shaving fall right." The third shaving also is laid in
the porridge-pan.

270 F1NNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
The assistant of the sacrificing priest now pours fresh water
into a wooden bowl, takes this in his right hand and green
lime-branches in his left and goes to the foal, after having en-
circled the fire in the direction of the sun. The head of this,
on which the " silver bridle " has been set, should be turned
towards the sacrifice tree. The kart himself stands before the
tree and prays again: " O bless and protect us, great god! We
on our side have brought and set up a sacrificial horse, with
shining hair and gleaming mane and silver tail, accept it on thy
side with good feeling, and shake from it the touch of human
hands! " During the prayer the assistant pours water on the
animal's back through the lime-branches, beginning from the
head. That the purpose of this is to purify the animal appears
from the accompanying prayer. During this ceremony, as
during all others, the other participants kneel with bared heads
and wait reverently for the shudder which the touch of the
water is bound to cause in the animal, and which is regarded as
a sign of acceptance of the sacrifice by the god. Should the
desired result not be accomplished at the first attempt, it is
repeated a second, third, or even more times. Each time the
kart recites the same prayer before the tree. While waiting
for the sign, the reasons why the god will not accept the
offering are examined. The assisting priests look to see that
the fire is made on exactly the site of former fires, that the
erection over the fire is rightly placed, so that the saplings
have their thin ends upward, and the horizontal ones their
roots towards the sacrifice tree. The positions of the objects
on the altar are also looked to. Finally, the bridle is set
right on the foal's head. If the candle has gone out, it is
lighted anew. The assistants of the officiating priests try
their luck at sprinkling, one after another, even attempting to
obtain the desired result by sprinkling in the animal's ear.
While the kart prays, the person from whom the animal was
brought, kneels also before the tree. While waiting the result,
all present, kneeling, pray half-aloud: " O good, great god,

SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS 271
let the sacrifice shake and shiver! " The sprinkling may not,
however, be repeated an unlimited number of times, but the
animal, after a ninth attempt, is taken out of the grove and
a new one procured in its place. When the victim, some-
times at the first attempt, does shiver, all rise from their knees,
thanking the god, and the slaughterers begin their work imme-
diately. The animal's feet are bound together with a rope
of lime-bark, and it is then thrown over on to its left side; the
head must also now be in the direction of the tree. A smaller
hole is dug in the ground at the head, and, in order that the
blood shall not flow on the ground, is covered with lime-
branches. The hart now places himself before the tree and
says: " We on our side have brought and set up a sacrifice for
thee, accept thou it on thy side and let the rising * soul *
(tson) be a foal with shining hair, etc." Meanwhile the
slaughterer cuts the veins of the neck open, with an old-
fashioned knife used only at sacrifices, so that the blood
streams through the lime-branches into the hole. The first
warm drops are taken by the kart in a little wooden spoon,
after which he goes as before round the fire to the tree and
prays: "O good, great god, with fresh blood we turn to thee.
Send peace and justice to all peoples living under the sky! "
Having said which, he throws the blood up into the tree,
goes again to the foal and fills the spoon with blood as this
continues to flow out of the wound. This time he steps to
the left of the fire and with his face to it says: " Thou, (Fire-
mother,' with fire and steam, with thy sharp tongue carry
up the sacrifice to the great god! " At the same time he
throws the blood into the fire. Afterwards, the offering-girdle,
intended later to be placed round the tree, is drenched with
blood j both sides of the girdle are drawn over the wound.
The " bridle " and the " footsnare n are taken off and for the
time hung up on the post to which the foal had been tied,
and the flaying of the foal, in which four men take part,
begins. Now also, the head of the victim must be kept towards

272 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
the tree. The candle at the foot of the tree burns all this
time, a new one being used to replace the old one as soon as
needed.
Immediately the flaying is begun, the nose or the part con-
taining the lips is cut off as a special sacrifice, and purified by
being scorched in the fire. The head, from which the lower
jaw has been removed, is similarly scorched. The flesh is
cut from the limbs without damaging the bones. Regarding
the different parts of the meat, the Cheremiss follow a certain
order. The so-called suvo-pieces are placed separately in the
cauldron at the cauldron-stand which is nearest to the sacrifice
tree. These are the nose, or the parts around the mouth, the
tongue, the brain, the throat, the back of the neck, the breast-
bone, the heart, five ribs from the right and three from the left
side, a piece from each hip, the knees of the hind legs, the
stomach, liver, kidneys, and the intestines. The remainder
is boiled in two cauldrons behind this first. When the flesh
has been divided among the cauldrons, the hide is spread on
the ground to the right of the sacrificial altar, with the head
towards the tree. Spread on the ground, the hide resembles
a horse, thrown over on its left side. The parts unfit to eat
are placed in the hole with the blood. Later, the contents
of this hole are burned up in a fire which is built over it.
While the flesh is being cooked, this taking about two or three
hours to do, the people remain in the forepart of the grove,
to which new people continue to come from the surrounding
villages. Only, the kart with his assistants remains at the
sacrificial fire. This is the time to gird round the " little "
tree with the sacrificial u girdle," which must be twisted three,
five, seven, or nine times (an odd number) round the tree.
Between the tree and the girdle a bunch of green twigs is
placed and the above-mentioned " tassel" is attached to the
same, the pewter figure being made fast to this.
A separate sacrifice must now be made to the " messenger
of Jumo." A white sheep is led into the grove and bound

SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS 273
fast to another post. The sacrifice of this is made before the
same tree and is performed by the same kart. The ceremonies
are.also the same as with the foal, except for the casting of
the pewter, the clinking of the knife against the axe, and the
whittling. At the slaughtering the blood is thrown into the
tree and fire. For the flesh of the sheep a fourth cauldron
is laid further behind on the stand. The skin is stretched
out against that of the foal, with the head towards the tree
and the legs stretched out to the right. At this time the kart
pours the honey-drink in the wooden bowls on the altar and
cuts out from the loaves the marks made on them by three
fingers, leaving them still, however, in their places.
When the sacrifice flesh is at last ready, the j«vo-pieces are
laid in a row in a special trough. From each piece of flesh a
piece is cut out and placed in a round wooden dish, which is
then placed at the foot of the tree. The pieces laid in the dish
are called orolek. In addition, quite small pieces are cut from
these parts of the flesh, and laid in two small wooden bowls
(suvo-korka) of which one is dedicated to the accepter of the
sacrifice, Jumo, and the other to the intermediary, the Fire
god. Pieces are cut from the tongue at its root and from its
apex, from the head at several different places, such as the
upper and lower jaws, the parts round the eyes, and from the
gullet. In each of the bowls the loosened pieces of bread
are also placed, the fop-parts in the first, and the «-?/-parts in
the second. A little porridge is also placed in each. Small
slices are also cut from the following parts in this order and
threaded on to a thin pointed stick of lime-wood: the after-
intestine, the right and left hips, the kidneys, the middle of
the breast, the heart, the aorta, the back of the neck, the
throat, the tongue, the lips, and from the liver. On examining
more closely the order of these twelve parts one notices that
they stand towards each other pretty much in the same rela-
tion as in the body of the animal. This stick with meat-
slices, called sopsar, the kart places in the sacrificial girdle with

274
FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
these words: " O, bless and protect us, great god! The shining
sacrificial horse, etc., etc. — accept it with good feeling; with
the great sopsar-meat we approach thee, give us health, pros-
perity, riches, and peace! " The flesh remaining in the trough
from the first cauldron, together with the left part of the
" large " loaf and five small ones, is cut up at once to be eaten.
FIG. ii. SACRIFICIAL ACCESSORIES
a, Silver Candlestick, b, Silver Spoon, c, Sacrificial Tassels, d, Sopsar.
e, Suldes.
The right-hand part of the " large " loaf and three small ones
are placed in the orolek-piece dish. When the sheep's flesh is
ready, pieces are cut from it as in the foregoing and placed
in two /ttuo-ladles. No flesh-stick is made from them, nor is
on>/i?£-flesh divided from the rest.
The sacrificing priest begins again to recite a prayer, holding
a knife in his right and a burning brand in his left hand, at
the close of the prayer ringing three times with the knife
against the axe, which lies on the ground before him, and
saying: " O bless and protect us, great god! With the large
sacrificial loaf, with the great mead-dish, with the great silver
candle, with the great candlestick, with the great resin-bowl,
with the great sacrificial tree, with the great sacrificial girdle,
with the great (tassel,' and with the (great pewter,' we ap-

SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS 275
proach theej grant to us health, happiness, riches and peace.
Give family-happiness in the house, cattle-luck in the stock-
yards, grain-luck in the threshing-barn, bee-luck in the hives,
money-luck in the money-chest, give all kinds of luck and
progress! " After which he throws the brand into the fire
and seizing the lime-branch which he had earlier whittled,
goes as usual round the fire, whittles a little from the end,
and placing himself before the tree, says: " If thou wilt grant
family-luck in the house, let the shaving fall right." As he
says this, he lets fall a shaving, the position of which is then
examined as before. The fifth shaving is whittled to a ques-
tion regarding cattle-luck. The sixth for the threshing-barn,
the seventh for the bee-hives, the eighth for the money-chest j
whereafter the kart whittles a ninth, saying: " If thou, like
the rising morning mist, wilt give all kinds of blessings to us,
likewise long life, let the shaving fall right! " These six
shavings are also laid by the others in the porridge-pan with
the bark upward.
The bough from which the shavings have been pared is
taken by the kart a third time round the fire, after which he
stands to the left of the fire, saying as he stares into the fire:
"O great, good god! As the lime-bush in the meadows is
glad, grant to us health, happiness, wealth and peace! But
to those who regard not god as a god, the Czar as a Czar, a
man as a man, and to the one who says he can work evil to
others, give not, O god, to him that which he prays for. They
who pluck ears of rye (for magical reasons), they who pluck
out hairs from the cattle, they who l cut the heart and liver,'
hound them from one end of the world to the other. Health,
happiness, give} peace and riches present to all the peoples
living under the air! "
Having said this he strikes off with the knife the top of
the bough, so that it falls into the fire. Thereafter he splits
both branches of the bough, threading on them (see Fig. 11, e)
the afore-mentioned shavings in the order in which they were

276 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
whittled. The object thus obtained, suldest is besmeared with
the porridge and placed in the girdle next to the meat stick.
As he fastens it to the tree, he says: " With the sacrificial por-
ridge, with the great suldes, we approach thee."
When both the meat and the shavings have been placed in
the girdle, the congregation is called into the grove itself. In
front of the altar, a great white cloth is spread on the ground,
before which four assisting priests place themselves to pray
for every person, who, with his sleeve over his hand, brings a
sacrifice coin. While praying the priest also keeps the coin on
the sleeve drawn over his hand, as the Cheremiss believe the
naked hand defiles the coin. In these prayers, in which the
donor is always named and kneels behind the priest, the words
are as follows: " Good, great god! (then the person's name)
comes with a sacrifice coin to the great sacrifice tree to worship,
give him health, happiness and wealth, let him live happily
in his house with his playful family! Give him family-luck
— and all the different lucks up to money-luck — protect the
cattle in the pastures from wolves, bears, evil sicknesses, and
from the thieves who move in the night. Protect the seed
from destructive frosts, from heat that might wither it, from
heavy storms, from violent thunder-storms, and from all
insects, that he might have bread to give also to the needy.
Give all kinds of blessings to him! " As he finishes the prayer,
the priest allows the coin to fall from his sleeve to the cloth.
Those who have been hindered from coming to the festival
send money by others, and prayers are read for them also.
When each donor has been prayed for, which, although there
are four priests, takes some time, the congregation fall on
their knees in parallel rows behind the sacrificing priest. The
essential festival-prayer of the day, often lasting half an hour,
is now begun, the kart praying for all that is good in the eyes
of the Cheremiss, chiefly for children in the house, cattle in
the yard, but mostly for great stacks in the threshing-barn.
Having prayed for all blessings, he prays to the god for

SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS 277
many kinds of protection. Further, he thanks the god for
having attended the sacrifices with fortune and accepted the
offerings in good feeling. Finally he prays for pardon,
should he have said last that which should come first, or vica
versa. After each prayer the congregation bow their fore-
heads to the ground. The kart then makes a speech to the
people, urging them to live in harmony, to avoid quarrels,
not to take another's property, also not to lie, not to bear false
witness, not to drink too much spirits, etc. The congregation
then rises and the elder people go to shake the Mart's hand in
thanks.
Soon the congregation go on their knees again. The kart
takes Jumo's drinking-bowl and two assistants the /wvo-bowls,
after which they follow one another, keeping to the right,
round the fire, stopping on the left side of the same, where the
contents of the bowls are thrown into the fire. The kart pours
twice from his bowl, the first time to Jumo, the second to the
Fire god, to whom also the jfivo-bowls are sacrificed. As he
sacrifices to Jumo he says: "O great, good god! the great
sacrificial drinking-bowl, the great /wfo-bowls have we
brought. Accept them with good feeling! " To the Fire god
he says: " Fire god, thy smoke is high, and thy tongue sharp,
take the sacrifice up with the smoke and steam and bear it
to the great god! " Immediately afterwards a drink-offering
and a .?#w-sacrifice is made in the same way, to " Jumo's mes-
senger," and the Fire god. From the great meat-trough, an
assisting priest takes a piece also to the fire built on the place
where the foal was slaughtered, and sheep's flesh to the fire
on the place of the sheep's slaughtering. In both cases he
turns to the Fire god and prays that the last drop of blood
might be burned up, those also that possibly have spattered
further.
The kayt now gives to eight assisting persons ("goblet-
bearers ") each his bowl, saying in which god's honour each
shall cast the contents into the fire. The " goblet-bearers "

278 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
pass round the fire in the direction of the sun, stopping to the
left of the same. This round is made several times, the sacri-
ficing priest refilling the bowls each time and naming new gods
to be remembered. Thus, all the Cheremiss gods and spirits,
from the highest to the lowest, obtain their share of this sacri-
fice. After this drink-sacrifice the bowls are replaced in their
former order.
The kart now prays alone, with a bowl in his hand, casting
three times from it also on to the sacred tree, saying: " Accept
our prayer, give justice and peace to all the peoples under the
heavens! " Repeating this prayer he throws soup from the
trough on to the tree with a ladle. The assisting priest does
the same also once.
The congregation then seat themselves on the grass. Two.
assisting priests go three times in the direction of the sun
round the fire, shaking heartily all the sacrificial objects on the
trough, the bowls, the dishes, the cloths, the "little " sacrifice
tree, the animal's skin, etc., saying: "This is for thee."
It is nearly evening when the sacrificial meal is begun.
First, the porridge and the honey-drink are tasted, everyone
wishing each other happiness and prosperity. After this the
bread and meat in the jww-dishes are shared out, and lastly
the rest of the food, excepting the orolek, the people sitting
on the ground and eating greedily after nearly a day's fast.
All the remains and the bones are gathered together. "When
the meat from the head has been eaten, the kart places the
bones in their natural order in the fire. The " little " sac-
rifice tree with the objects attached to it is also burnt up.
More wood is then laid on the fire, and over the crackling
flames assistants hold the skin by sticks fastened to the head,
the tail and the feet. The kart goes round the burning skin
with a fire-brand in his left, and a " resin-bowl" in his right,
and stands to the left of the fire, saying, as he pours the con-
tents of the bowl into the fire: " Say not, that we burned an
empty hide; a great resin-bowl we set up on it." The already

SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS 279
mentioned " silver bridle " is also thrown upon the burning
skin. Finally, the " stand " for the resin-bowls is also burnt
up. The sheep-skin is not burnt by the Cheremiss, but given
to the kartt who receives no other honorarium for his services j
or it may be sold for the benefit of the sacrifice fund, or some-
times, the former owner of the animal may have reserved the
right to it.
Together with the orotek-pieces, the candlestick, the other
half of the " large" loaf, and three small ones without
" noses " are left at the foot of the tree, as sacrifices have still
to be made on the following morning. Neither is the fire ex-
tinguished with the fall of evening, but allowed to illuminate
the grove through the night. Early in the morning, at sun-
rise, the so-called ofo/^-sacrifice is carried out, in which those
who have passed the night in the grove, take part. From the
pieces of meat left over to this day, a small piece is cut again
into two bowls as on the preceding day. The rest is sliced
into a larger dish. From the large half-loaf a piece is also
added to each smaller bowl. Besides these a bowl of drink is
placed on the cloth before the tree, together with three small
loaves, and the coins which were dug up on the day before.
The candle is lit. The kart takes a brand in his left and a
knife in his right hand, ringing as before three times on the
axe, and reminding the god again of the shining sacrifice foal.
Having encircled the fire and thrown in the brand, he stands
before the tree and reads a prayer nearly as long as that said
on the preceding day. After the prayer everyone shakes his
hand in thanks. The priest himself now sacrifices the drinking-
bowl, and two assistants the meat-bowls as on the day before,
the prayers also being the same. The presenting of the sacri-
ficial objects and the eating of the ew/^&-flesh follows, with
the former expressions of good wishes. All remains, even the
candlestick, are thrown into the fire. The coins dug up
(onaptt-o&sa, " the sacrifice tree coins ") to which a few copper
coins have been added, are hidden again in the earth. While

280 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
doing this, the kart says: " Sacrifice tree, do not say we left
thee empty! "
The ceremonies at the other trees are similar, the gods of
the sun, thunder, wind, or some other god being the object
of worship to be sacrificed to either on the same day or later
in the festival. The tokens of honour to the different gods
do not end, however, with the sacrifices, but during the whole
of the festival, the fires burn before the different trees, as
well as those lit quite early, a long prayer being read at them
each day. Sometimes the " messenger of Jumo " is not sacri-
ficed to until the close of the festival. Then, from all the
priests standing under the sacrifice tree, a peculiar murmur
of prayer js heard, the echo of which in the centuries-old grove
cannot but awaken reverence.
When the sacrificial fire, after the finish of the festival, is
allowed to go out, the priest who has sacrificed at the same,
sweeps together the ashes, saying: " Should a man blunder
on to thee, may he become happyj if a dog, may he obtain
a good weather-sense; if cattle, may they increase greatly."
Those who wish, may still go to a specially reserved room in
the village, where pancakes are eaten and mead and beer
drunk, and the deities, to whom sacrifices have been made,
are remembered.
It is only natural that divergences may occur in the dif-
ferent mer. This need not, however, depend on the distance
between themj among the Western Cheremiss the same cus-
toms as were described in the foregoing are followed. As an
example of different usages, it may be mentioned that in some
places, the " girdle " is bound fast, together with the objects
attached to it, to the living sacrifice tree, on which it remains as
a pledge until the following festival. The number of shav-
ings inserted in the /»/^<?/-branches also varies (cf. the Scan-
dinavian blo(s-pdn), While the shavings are being whittled, it
is noted in some places which side of them falls upward.
Likewise the number of slices of meat and their order on the

SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS 281
stick vary. Why the piece of liver should be placed on the
point of the stick, while the others are placed in some kind of
natural order, the Cheremiss could not explain. Could it be
connected with the custom in some places of commencing the
eating of sacrificial flesh with the liver? The most important
incident in all sacrifices among the Volga peoples, as among
the ancient Greeks, was the trial by water of the sacrificial
animal.