CHAPTER XVII
THE EARTH
ALTAIC peoples early regarded the earth as being
X an animated, conscious and comprehending being. Even
now the Central Asian peoples are afraid of being punished
if they offend the earth. According to the Soyots the digging
or the wounding of the earth with sharp instruments is a great
sin.1 The Altai Tatars declare the pulling up of plants out
of the earth to be as improper as the pulling out of the hair or
beard of a human being would be.2 With ideas such as these,
it is not to be wondered at that the nomads did not look with
a favourable., eye on the pioneers of agriculture. The agri-
culturist Cain, according to the Semites, was also less pleasing
to God than the nomad Abel. Similar ideas were held, fur-
ther, by the American Indians when the first whites penetrated
into their territory.
As the producer of vegetation, etc., the earth was regarded
as a female being. As the sky, which renders the earth fruit-
ful, was called " the Father," the earth, which gives birth, was
called " Mother." Already in the Orkhon stone inscriptions
it is written: " The sky above is our father, the earth beneath
is our mother, man is the child of both." In the ancient tales
of the Mongols, the " Blue sky " and the " Brown earth " are
two of the chief deities.8 The Yakuts believe that the " Earth
mother," also called " Mistress" (An-Darkhan-Khotun or
An-Alai-Khotun) acts both as the producer of vegetation and
as the birth-giver of children.4 The Tungus lay to the merit
of the earth, as Georgi points out, " all that it brings forth." °
The Mongols say that the sky gives life to beings, but that the
earth gives them their form.8 Thus the Earth mother becomes

4.6o SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
also the deity of child-birth. As is well known, the ancient
peoples of Asia had this same idea.
Concerning sacrifices to the earth there exist very old re-
ports. The Chronicles of the Chinese relate that the Hunnu
and Tukiu peoples sacrificed to the earth.7 Marco Polo tells
us that the chief object of Mongolian worship was the Earth
god Natigai, to whom milk, kumiss and tea were sacrificed.
When sacrificing, the people prayed to this deity for fruitful-
ness. The name Natigai mentioned by Marco Polo is prob-
ably a corrupted form of the name Otiikan, which appears in
the Orkhon inscriptions as meaning the country of the old
Turks, worshipped by them as a special deity.8
Even to-day the agricultural peoples, such as the Buriats,
Tatars and Chuvashes, sacrifice to the Earth goddess. Gen-
erally, earth worship would seem to have gained in importance
in places where agriculture had obtained foothold. The
Buriats offer up a blood-sacrifice to the Earth spirit in the
autumn when field-work is over.9 The Chuvashes, like the
Volga Finns, sacrificed black, " earth-coloured " animals to the
Earth mother at their agricultural festivals. The most North-
ern Siberian peoples, however, such as the Tungus, do not
see the necessity of sacrificing to the earth, as in the life of this
hunting and fishing people the earth has not the same nourish-
ing value as among these others.
Doubtless the earth as such was worshipped, as the Mongol
prayer-name " Brown earth " shows. Illuminative are also
the following words in the Yakut sacrifice ceremonies: "Ruler
of vegetation (literally * grass-tree ')> earth moisture, eat, en-
joy (Ot~tnas itsit'd, sir-daidy siga, asan, sian)."™ Later, the
imagination of the people, especially in tales, created certain
anthropomorphic features for the Earth mother. Chuvash
fancy created an Earth old man to accompany the Earth
mother." The Buriats imagine the spirit of the earth as a
whole (Daida-Delkhe-Edzhin) to be an old grey-bearded man,
and his wife a white-haired old woman.11 Generally, it seems

THE EARTH 461
to have been exceedingly difficult to give anthropomorphic
features to the Earth mother.
The agricultural Chuvashes, when a field has lost its pro-
ductive powers, carry out special ceremonies, called " The
stealing of earth." The intention of these ceremonies is to
procure productive earth from a field owned by someone else,
in which the grain flourishes. A living " suitor " is chosen for
the Earth mother, and arrayed precisely as for a real courtship j
this suitor goes out to seek a bride. The suitor has to be young
and strongly-built, as a marriage with the Earth mother,
according to the Chuvashes, is so exhausting that in spite of his
staying powers, the bridegroom hardly ever lives to a ripe old
age. Although the wedding procession sets off with much
jingling of bells and singing of wedding-songs and music, the
participants all quiet down as the place whence the bride has
to be fetched is reached. In the silence of the night the pro-
cession drives into the field, where the bridegroom, sitting in
the first wagon, is lifted to the ground. The oldest man in the
procession now acts as the agent for the bridegroom, saying,
with glance fixed on the earth: " We have come to thee, rich
and dear bride, with a young and beautiful bridegroom. We
know that thy, riches are endless, but undescribable is also the
burning love of our bridegroom for thee." At this, the bride-
groom bows down to the ground. The agent goes on: "Do
thou also, dear bride, love our bridegroom, and refuse not to
comply with our request." The bridegroom bows again.
" Take with thee, dear bride, all thy property from the fields
and meadows, the forests and rivers." After further deep
bows, shovelsful of earth are lifted into all the wagons. The
bridegroom is lifted into the first vehicle. When at last, with
singing and music, clapping of hands and cries of delight, the
home-village is reached, the "bridegroom," with a spade in
his hand, goes first to his own and then to the other vehicles
to welcome his " bride," saying: " Be welcome, my dear bride,
I love thee more than gold, more, even, than my life. For

462 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
the sake of my, love, spread out thy property on our fields and
pastures, our forests and rivers." Having said this, he takes
earth from all the waggons with his spade, which also the
other participants in the ceremony carry to their patches of
field.13
Relics of similar weddings for the amusement and the en-
ticing of the Earth mother, ceremonies alien to the nomad-
culture of the Altaic peoples, are met with among certain
other agricultural peoples. The " bridegroom " of the Earth
mother is mentioned also in old Finnish poems.
Another Earth deity of whose origin there can be no doubt,
is the Jar-Sub (" Land-water") mentioned already in the
Orkhon inscriptions.1* " From the oldest times," say the
Teleuts," we have worshipped our Land-water and our Sky."15
The " Land-water spirit" (Sir-syv-Kudegen or -Kten) ap-
pears also in the list of deities of the Chuvashes side by side
with the "Earth mother" and «Earth father."16 The
" Man of Land-water" is also known among the Voguls."
" Land and water " as a name for one's fatherland may, how-
ever, be originally an Iranian phrase. As Vambery points out,
the Persians are still in the habit of saying, for example,
ab-i-chak-i Isfahan (" Isfahan's district," literally <f Land and
water of Isfahan.").18 It is therefore easy to understand
what Xerxes meant in demanding from the Greeks, as a sign
of submission, " land and water."