The Central Asian tale mentions only one tree, the fruit of
the five eastward branches of which were intended as nourish-
ment for man, but the fruit of the four westward-growing
branches of which was fraught with misfortune. This tree
was at the same time the tree of life and death j in the Bible
story life and death were represented by separate trees. The
latter differs also from the former in the fact that it attempts
to explain the origin of death spiritually, as a consequence
of disobedience or the fall. The Central Asian tale would
seem to represent a more primitive state by connecting the
misfortune with the fruit itself. Starting from this, we may
perhaps assume that the original form of the so-called story
of the fall has come into being merely to explain how man,
believed to have originally been created for eternity, could
die. Death was thus not originally regarded in the light of
a punishment, but as the natural consequence of eating of the
fateful fruit, as, having lost its original covering, the power
of resistance of the human body declined and diseases fol-
lowed. Generally, primitive peoples tell how sickness and
death, non-existent in the beginning, have since become the
scourge of mankind.
The idea of an original covering of hair on the human
body is widely-spread in Central and Northern Asia. The
Voguls relate that in the beginning God created human beings

384 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
covered altogether with hair, and that they were allowed to
move everywhere and eat of everything but the " forest-
spirit-berry" (Vacctnium uliginositmt growing in swamps).
God then went off to Heaven, but returning to look at his
creatures, he had great difficulty in finding these at all. In
the end God found them hidden beneath some bushes. When
they crept out at God's command, he saw that the human
beings whom he had created had lost their covering of hair
and shivered naked before him. This had come about by their
eating of the fateful berries, against the express command of
God, and thus becoming a prey to cold and moisture.8
In this tale of the Voguls, the mighty and beautiful tree
of paradise of the ancient Semitic race has been transformed
to a modest plant growing in the barren unfruitful north.
Besides the covering of hair, we have in the creation-tales
met with another protective covering of the human body, i.e.,
the horn-covering, lost so completely by mortals that the only
reminder of this primitive state is the substance of which
our finger-nails and toe-nails are made.
This form of the tale, common also in Eastern Europe,
appears already in old Jewish and Arabian tales, in which it
is related how the bodies of Adam and Eve in paradise were
covered with a horny substance so that they did not need
clothes. Not until the fall did they, with the exception of
the finger-nails and toe-nails, lose their covering.4
The idea of the hair-covering of the first human beings is
also probably from Nearer Asia. It is related in an Arabian
tale, how, on the diamond mountain of paradise, Adam and
Eve had long hair reaching to the ground, protecting the
whole body, and how this fell off when they had eaten of the
forbidden fruit, so that their unprotected bodies darkened in
the sun. The Bible story also obviously presupposes the exist-
ence of some covering, as it is expressly stated that when the
first people had eaten of the forbidden fruit they saw them-
selves to be naked and in need of some garment.

THE FALL OF MAN 385
The Astrachan Kalmucks relate further that during the
time of paradise the first people were some kind of illuminated
beings. At this time there was neither sun nor moon, these
being unnecessary, as human beings then lighted up their
surroundings themselves. The eating of the fruit extin-
guished their light altogether, all nature became dark, and
God was obliged to give mankind the sun and the moon.8
This belief is also founded on Nearer Asian tales.
Another consequence of the fall, according to the Kal-
mucks, was the shortening of the age of man and a reduction
in his size. In the beginning men had been immortal or
could at least live through a world-epoch, eighty thousand
years, but gradually their age decreased, one year each cen-
tury, so that their present average age is only sixty. This
shortening will continue with the growth of sin until people
will live to be only ten years of age. At the same time, after
having originally been giants, they will decline to the length
of a thumb. Then the messenger of the Bodhisattva Maidere
and his apparition Berde-Gabat will arrive on the earth, and
begin to better the state of men, increasing their age and size,
until they have again attained their former age.8
With these Lamaistic beliefs may be compared the ideas of
the modern Jews, reflected in the following words taken from
a collection of their tales: "When Adam was created, his
enormous volume filled all the earth, but when he fell into
sin, he became very small." Concerning the shortening of
the age of man we find comments in the Bible itself.