CHAPTER X
THE HEAVEN GOD
A
S FAR back as the thirteenth century, Piano Carpini
relates in his Historic Mongolorum that " The Mongols
believe in one God, whom they regard as the creator of all
things visible and invisible." Rubruquis also remarks that
the Mongols acknowledge the existence of one God, but
that despite this they prepare idols for themselves. Similarly,
the Arabian historians mention the " one " God of the Mon-
gols, whom, according to a decree of Jenghiz Khan, all the
subjects of the Great Khan had to honour and worship.
We might perhaps assume the above reports of " one "
God to have been coloured in some way or other, but on
closer acquaintance with the beliefs of the Central Asian
peoples, we find that the Heaven god has actually had an
exceptional position among them. These reports are, further,
of such late date, that alien, and, more particularly, Persian
currents of civilization have long before their time exercised
a considerable influence on them. As a relic of Mazdaism
we find in the folk-lore of both the Mongols and the Tatars
the name of Ahura-Mazda (Mongol Hormusda; Altaic
Tatar Khurbystan). It is also a well-known fact that Mani-
cheism and Nestorianism had by then spread their doctrines
into this territory j the wife of Jenghiz Khan himself would
seem to have been a Nestorian Christian. Matters being thus,
we have no reason to doubt these old reports j they are trust-
worthy at least regarding the time of which they speak. An-
other question is whether they may be regarded as expressing
the oldest beliefs of the Central Asian peoples concerning
the god of Heaven.

THE HEAVEN GOD 391
A word of their own language, used by the Mongols as
a name for their " one " god, is Tengri, a name used for the
Heaven god in many other Altaic languages (Kalmuck Tengri,
Buriat Tengeri, Tatar Tangere, Yakut and Dolgan Tangara,
Chuvash Tura). This word meant originally, "Heaven."
Among the Chuvash the meaning " Heaven " for Tura seems
to have become extinct, and among the Yakuts also, Tangara
appears only, in folk-lore as meaning " the sky." Having
acquired the meaning of a god living in Heaven, this word
began to be used in many languages for " god " in general
(= Latin deus). The Yakuts use it when speaking of their
idols, i.e., wood, stone or birch-bark Tangara. The disap-
pearing significance of the word, a " sky " appreciable by the
senses, shows plainly, that in the beginning the " Heaven god "
of the peoples related to the Turks was the animated sky
itself with its wonderful, mystical powers. At this stage,
when as yet no humanlike or otherwise specially shaped being
is thought of, with the sky merely as his dwelling-place, the
heavens and the Heaven god do not require separate names
as they did later. An irrefutable proof of this original point
of view is the old title given by the Mongols to the Heaven
god when worshipping him: "Blue Tengri."
Examples of the deification of the heavens themselves are
met with among the other surrounding peoples. Herodotus
already tells how the ancient Persians worshipped as their
god (Zeus) " the whole area of the sky." The name Tien
of the Chinese Heaven god meant originally " the sky." The
Finnish races also used the word " sky " when speaking of
their Heaven gods without any resulting confusion of thought.
Similar examples are offered by the most northern peoples
of Asia, the Samoyeds and the Yenisei Ostiaks.
In Mongolian folk-lore two expressions are met with:
" Blue Tengri " and " Eternal Tengri," which, according to
Banzarov, denote two different stages of development. The
most common name, " Blue Tengri," for the power behind

392 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
all the different phenomena of the sky, which gives to the
earth fruitfulness and productivity, cannot, according to this
investigator, apply to a spiritual being; but the " Eternal
Tengri" who rules the world and decrees the fates of peoples
and individuals, does seem to be a spiritual entity.1 We can-
not on our part, however, discern any such sharp division in
the use of these qualifying terms, both being often used
simultaneously.
In the beliefs of the Mongols the determining activities
of the sky are extremely, conspicuous. They speak frequently
of the " Fate " (Dzajaga) of the heavens. In the Chronicle
of Ssanang Ssetsen it is said that Jenghiz Khan, " that lion
among men," appeared on the earth through " the Providence
(Fate) of the blue, eternal sky." But not only rulers and
princes, " sons of Heaven" in a special meaning, but also
ordinary mortals were born into the world through the agency
of the same " Providence." Everything that happens was
believed to have been decreed by the sky. When the Mongol
princes published their laws, they added to their authorization
the words: "By the Providence of the eternal sky," in the
same way as Christian monarchs exercise their power " by the
grace of God."
As this Providence belief is not met with among the more
northern peoples of the Altaic race, at least not in any such
developed form, our attention is drawn to the Indo-Iranians,
the proximity of whom to the Mongols cannot but have left
some trace. The Dzajaga idea of the Mongols corresponds
in fact with the Rita of the ancient Vedic poems and the Asha
of the Avesta, by which a power watching over the world was
meant. This Providence does not seem to have been per-
sonified, neither were sacrifices offered up to it in the begin-
ning. The relations of men towards it may be compared with
those of the Greeks of Homer's time towards Moira, under
whose laws even the gods existed. But it is to be noted that
this Providence or Fate, the decrees of which were unrecall-

THE HEAVEN GOD 393
able, was always connected with the sky, according to the
ideas of the Central Asian peoples. In a similar way Fate
was regarded by the Chinese, who call Fate Tien-ming (" the
sky-order ") being in this respect entirely of the same opinion
as the Mongols. Both these peoples see in the complete sub-
ordination of Heaven to its own laws an example for all earthly
order.
In the list of gods of the Chuvash living in Russia, a spirit
named K'aba (" Fate," " Providence") corresponds to the
Dzajaga of the Mongolsj from the former the Cheremiss
have taken it as Kava-Jumo and the Votiaks as Kaba-Immar,
and unaware of its origin, sacrifice nowadays to it as to a
Heaven god. Among the Eastern Cheremiss even sacred
groves (Kawalan pumas) were consecrated to Fate,2
Obviously, Dzajaga, Kaba, Rita, Asha, Tien-ming and
Moira, called Fatum by the Romans, are closely related to
one another in their meaning. The question arises, therefore,
as to whether this fatalistic belief is a general product of the
human intellect, born among each of the separate peoples,
or whether we have here a result of the so-called " migration
theory." The dependence of fate on the heavenly rules pre-
supposes so naturally a certain stage of development that we
cannot avoid turning our glance to the cosmology of the
ancient Babylonians. Nowhere else, in this early period, do
we meet with such admiration of the constant order of the
sky and such blind belief in its mechanically working powers,
the latter affecting all life down to the smallest details. Here
the sky has truly been " a Book of Fate " in which the wise
can read future events. For this reason it is more than
probable that just this star fatalism of the Babylonians has
been the model and the source of the Providence beliefs of
all the above mentioned peoples.
As the fate of everything is thus dependent on the sky,
it is natural that one should say, like the Mongols: " The sky
decrees M or " the sky commands." In the same way as the

394 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
Vedic poems speak of the " director of Rita," so the ruler of
Providence, Dzajagatsi (dzaja="to decree," "allow,"
" order," or " command"), appears simultaneously with
Dzajaga in the beliefs of the Mongols, meaning the god of
Heaven. The qualifying attribute of the sky is often
" Dzajagatsi Tengri." In the inscriptions of Orkhon, where
the " heavens " are mentioned also as the god of armies, we
meet with the word dzaja with the meaning of " to com-
mand": "The sky commanded our armies in the war and
we were victorious."
The Dzajagatsi of the Mongols has a counterpart in the
Jajutsi of the Altaic race, the Dzajan of the Minusinsk Tatars,
and the Buriat Zajan (Mongol dzaja = Altaic Tatar jaja
— Buriat zaja). The Buriats by Khudinsk call the Over-
god of the heavens Zajan-Sagan-Tengeri (sagan, "white").
Another qualification of the Heaven god with the same mean-
ing is the Tatar Bujuruktsi (bujurt " to decree," or " order "),
loaned also by the Ugrians (Ostyafc Pairekse). The Voguls
append to the name of their god in their own language,
" Num-Torem-paireks." The same word is further met with
in the god-name of the Chuvash, Purdan-Tura, and in that of
the Cheremiss, Puirso-Jumo (Cheremiss pujurem = Chuvash
^«r-== Kazan Tatar bojor-).
We see thus how this idea o'f a Fate bound up with the
heavens is common to all the Turk-related peoples. In addi-
tion to all the more fateful occasions of life, birth in especial
is dependent on the providence of Heaven. Dzajagatsi,
Jajutsi, Bujuruktsi, etc., are often spoken of as the decreers
of birth, and at the same time as a kind of gods of birth.
Sometimes some other than the actual Heaven god is given
this title. The Altai Tatars, who speak of several storeys in
the heavens, believe Jajutsi to live in the fifth of these.8
Here he is thus a being apart from the Over-god. Each
mortal having his own fate, each has been given a special
ruler of fate, which follows him faithfully from the moment

THE HEAVEN GOD 395
of birth. The Mongols call this spirit, which does not desert
man as long as he is in favour with the heavens, Dzol- (" hap-
piness ") DzajagatSi.* It is said to watch over the health of
its ward, his property and his prosperity in general, protecting
him at the same time from all dangers. Similarly, each
mortal has, according to the Altai Tatars, his own Jajutsi,
which, having received orders from above, brings down life-
force from the wonderful " lake of milk " in the third storey
of Heaven, then brings the embryo alive into the world, and
follows the man thus born from his infancy onward as a kind
of good spirit. Besides this, each mortal is supposed to have a
lifelong evil companion, Kormos, which from his birth tries
to harm him. The former, which writes down the good deeds
done in life, is said to be on man's right shoulder, the latter,
which notes down his evil deeds, at his left. These Jajutsi,
like the blessed dead, live in the lands of paradise in the third
storey of Heaven.5 It is hardly necessary to point out that
these beliefs in good and bad angels reached the Tatars from
the Iranians.
The belief that each mortal has a special arbiter of his fate
in Heaven, seems to be closely related to the idea that each
mortal has his own star in the sky. The appearance of a new
star signifies birth, the " falling " of a star, death. When the
Chuvash see a shooting-star they shout at once: " My star is
still up above! "" Several North Siberian peoples also, e.g.,
the Tungus, speak of the stars of each mortal.7
Piano Carpini says that the Heaven god, according to the
Mongols, is also the "avenger." This punishing activity of
Heaven is closely related to its " providence " or " decreeing."
When once Heaven has decreed anything, it is not good for
men to show resistance. The Mongols believe that Heaven
" sees " everything, and that therefore no one can conceal his
actions from it. In taking an oath, the Mongols say: " May
Heaven know! " or " May Heaven judge! " The revenge of
the heavens has not, however, been regarded as something

396 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
occurring beyond the grave, but is believed to f; U on the
guilty already in this life. In its judgments Heave, is com-
pletely neutral, punishing princes as effectually as pedants.
Punishment is believed to follow crime as a kind of inner
necessity.8
Without being in any way, inconstant the sky can sometimes
make troublesome demonstrations, reflecting in its own way
disturbances on the earth. Neither were the ancient Baby-
lonians unfailingly logical in their conception of the unwaver-
ing laws of Heaven, but saw at times " signs " in the sky,
which were interpreted as showing the dissatisfaction of the
gods. Heavenly demonstrations of this description were, ac-
cording to the Mongols, comets, meteors, years of famine,
floods, etc., at the threatening of which rulers and subjects had
to review their plans and intentions and humbly submit to the
will of the " eternal sky."
The Chronicles containing the history of the Mongols men-
tion many illuminative examples. It is related in them how
Mogan-Khan (during the Tukiu dynasty) having held am-
bassadors from China for a long time in captivity, freed them
and made peace with their ruler after Heaven had by long
storms shown its dissatisfaction at the tyrannous acts of the
Khan. In the fifteenth century the Mongols seized the ruler
of China and sentenced him to a long term of hard labour,
but noticing once how the cup from which the emperor had
drunk, glowed with a purple light, they sent him with all
honours back to China, as they believed this to be the will of
Heaven. Especially have the leaders of the people to follow
closely all the " signs" of the sky. The Mongols regard
Jenghiz Khan as having taught them the following wisdom:
" The highest happiness, with which nothing can be compared,
is for the ruler of a land to be in the favour of the eternal
heavens." *
In crossing over to the most northern peoples of Siberia,
we no longer find this deep belief in the Providence of Heaven.

THE HEAVEN GOD 397
The Heaven god of the Tungus, Samoyeds and Yenisei
Ostiaks is generally regarded as a being so apart, that he in
no way directs towards men any action of a commanding or
avenging character. It is therefore unnecessary to fear the
heavens. It is also expressly said, concerning the Heaven god
of the Yakuts, that he does not concern himself with doings
on earth or the fates of men. A certain tale shows God as
saying of mortals: " In letting them down upon the earth I
did not say to them: * Come back! ' If they increase, let
them increase, if they die, let them die."10 In other places,
however, conceptions differing from the foregoing appear.
Extremely widespread among the peoples of Central Asia
is, further, the belief that Heaven is some kind of a giver of
life. As a life-creating god of this description the sky is
imagined as male, though not anthropomorphic, with the earth,
as its opposite, female. Both are then gods of birth, the
former acting the part of father, the latter that of mother:
the sky procreates, the earth gives birth. Doubtless, this con-
ception is founded on observations made in nature. The effects
of light, warmth, rain and wind on vegetation in particular,
awakened in the mind of primitive man the idea of similar
effects on all that has life. Thus the thought arose that the
sky gives the spirit, the Earth Mother the material body.
In this same connection there is perhaps reason to point out
that certain Central Asian peoples, as, for instance, the Buriats,
have for the sake of fruitfulness worshipped a certain kind of
stone, said to have dropped down from the sky. A very
famous " fallen stone " is near the town of Balagansk. Dur-
ing a long drought the Buriats sacrifice to it in order to obtain
refreshing rains. The stone, which is white in colour, is said
by the people to have originally fallen on a mountain, whence
it has later removed to several different places. Among the
Buriats by Khudinsk, each village is said to possess a smaller
" fallen stone," kept in the middle of the village in a trunk
attached to a post. In the Balagansk District, where these

398 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
stones are larger, they are generally placed on a platform sup-
ported by four posts. In the hope of a rainy and fruitful
summer they are wetted in the spring and offerings are made
to them. Probably, these stones dropped from Heaven, which
in shape often resemble the longish weapons of the Stone Age,
are, as Agapitov assumes, relics of a Mongol phallus cult.11
The belief in the procreative powers of the sky is reflected
in numberless tales, in which it is explained how the children
of men and the young of animals have come from Heaven to
the earth. Generally, however, it is believed that only the
souls of these come from Heaven. The Yakuts believe that
the soul of a child comes down to its mother in the shape of a
bird.12 According to a Mongol tale the soul of the founder
of the power of the Sjanbi tribe, Tanshikai, came down from
above as hail, which fell on the lips of his mother. A certain
ancestor of the Mongols was born in such a manner that a
descending ray of light fructified his mother. Jenghiz Khan
is said by the tales to have been born of a virgin, wherefore he
could call the sky " father." " All these ideas spring from the
same original idea, viz., that the sky is the giver of the spirit
and life.
Whether the name of the Yakut Heaven god, Ajy-tangara
(" Creator god," really " Creative Heaven "), springs from
the preceding belief, which is doubtless extremely old, we do
not know for certain. The Chuvash, however, seem to
possess a counterpart, Suratan-Tura (really "Birth-giving
Heaven "), a name connected also with the Aurora Borealis.
They believe that the sky, during this phenomenon, " gives
birth to a son." Suratan-Tura is said to ameliorate the agonies
of a woman in child-birth." Otherwise, the idea of this deity
is somewhat confused. Among the Yakut gods we find also
other names for the Creator god, Ajy ("Creator"), ^ryn-
Ajy (" White Creator ") or Yryn-Ajy-Tojon (tojon " lord ")
and Aihyt-Aga ("Creator Father")- Although the same
names may be used for the Creator of the Christian teachings,

THE HEAVEN GOD 399
the ideas in question cannot be said to have arisen from these
teachings. By the side of Ajy-Tojon, appears a special deity
of birth, Ajysit, the name, like Ajy, being derived from the
verb at (" to give birth to," " to create "). Ajysit, of whom
we shall speak later, is generally regarded as a feminine being
(Ajysit-Khotun, '* Ajysit-mistress "), and brings the soul from
heaven to the child while being born, helping also the woman
in the pains of child-birth. In prayers this deity, is often re-
ferred to as Ajysit-Ijaksit ("Procreating-Nourishing"), a
term corresponding to the qualifying term of the Votiak
Heaven god, Kildis-Vordis. Possibly from the Turco-Tatar
peoples the Volga Finns obtained their Creator-god (Votiak
Kildisin, Cheremiss Satsektse or Sotsen, Mordvin Skaj),
names derived from verbs denoting procreation and birth-
giving.
It is certain that the conception of the creative power of the
heavens of the Central Asian peoples is extremely old. Among
the more northern tribes the conception does not appear quite as
clearly, although they also, like the Yenisei Ostiaks, believe
that not only men, but animals also, have the sky to thank
for their existence: Heaven (Es) "gives," Heaven "sends,"
even "lets fall," what the earth needs.16 A similar giver of
everything good is the Buga or Savoki of the Tungus, also
called «the Lord " (Amaka).
The close connection between the Heaven god and light
and the sun, appears from the sacrificial rites. Sacrifices to
the Heaven god are offered always towards the direction of the
" day " or the dawn, and at the same time the votive animal,
when such is used, has to be white in colour. Sacrifices to the
Heaven god among the most northern peoples are, however,
comparatively rare. In some places it has been the custom to
consecrate some live domestic animal, a horse or a reindeer,
which is then never worked and is looked after well. In
older times a consecrated animal of this description was driven
far to the eastward.

400 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
A curious custom, which occurs among the Yakuts, is that
several trees are erected before the victim, of which seven
bear leaves and a few have figures of birds upon them. All
these trees, which are ranged in a row, represent the different
storeys of heaven, through which the victim is to wander to
the Supreme God in the highest Heaven. A corresponding
custom exists among the Dolgans, who, at the shaman cere-
mony set up, one behind the other, nine stumps, on which are
figures of birds. There also these stumps represent the nine
storeys of Heaven through which the shaman, with the help
of these birds, will fly to God.16
The idea of the purity of Heaven would also seem to be of
great antiquity. More even than the rest of nature, the sky
loves cleanliness. Very widespread is a tale of how the clouds
were at an earlier time lower down, but, after being soiled by
the people, rose higher. An example of the purity of the sky,
from which later sprang the belief in the holiness of God, is
given by the Tungus of the North Siberian primeval forests.
According to them, a woman, during her period of unclean-
ness, should not look up at the sky. Common also is the belief
that the lightning strikes places where something evil or filthy
is hidden.
Where the Heaven god has begun to be regarded as a kind
of anthropomorphic being, the heavens have become merely
the dwelling-place of this being. Countless tales relate how
God has a magnificent home in the sky, sometimes also a wife
and children, servants, cattle, and other property. In the
brilliant palace of God a Tatar hero was once on a visit, and
was received well and entertained with food, etc." The special
characteristics of these tales have, however, hardly been in-
corporated with the beliefs concerning heaven.
The old Babylonian idea of the seven or more storeys of
Heaven gave rise to the thought that the Over-god dwells in
the topmost storey of Heaven. The Yryn-Ajy-Tojon of the
Yakuts dwells sometimes in the seventh, sometimes in the

THE HEAVEN GOD 401
ninth storey of Heaven, depending on the number of storeys
believed to be in the sky. The Es of the Yenisei Ostiaks lives
in a transparent palace over the seventh Heaven, and accord-
ing to the Ugrians the dwelling-place of God is in the seventh
Heaven.18 We see thus, that this belief has spread also among
the most northern of the Siberian peoples.
In the same way as the ancient Babylonians regarded the
navel of the sky. as the throne of Anu, whence he ruled over
the earth, the Central Asian peoples place the abode of the
Over-god somewhere around the North Star.18 Wherever
the belief in a Heaven-mountain has spread, God is regarded
as dwelling on the summit of this mountain, which touches the
North Star. In connection with the world-pillar it has already
been mentioned how some of the North Siberian peoples wor-
ship the Heaven god in connection with this pillar, as shown,
e.g., by the " seven-divisioned Sanke " of the Ostiaks. A more
suitable throne in the sky than the stationary, changeless region
of the sky-navel near the North Star, whence he can best
direct the countless, varying activities of the earth, can hardly
be imagined for the Over-god.
Many flattering attributes are given to their Over-god by
the Central Asian peoples. The Altai Tatars call him
"Great" (Clgon, tUgen), or "Rich and Great" (Bai-
Clgon). "Merciful Khan " (Kaira-Khan) and other general
names are also given to him. The term Burkhan-Baksi (really
" Buddha-master "), which the Mongols, Burials and Soyots
have begun to use for their highest god, was brought by Bud-
dhists from China.