The following Altaic tale relates that Olgen created the
first man, using earth for flesh and stone for bones, and made
a woman of the man's rib. But he had no spirit to give them
and was forced to go in search of one. On starting he created
a hairless dog to guard the pair. This time the dog received
its hair-covering by eating the excrement of the devil. The
latter then blew a spirit into the people with a reed, which he
inserted in the rectum of the sleeping bodies. When Olgen
returned and saw his people alive he was doubtful as to what
he should do, whether to create new human beings or not.
While he was considering, the frog came up to him and said:
"Why shouldest thou destroy these beings. Let them exist
for themselves. Who dies, let him die; who lives, let him
live." And so Olgen let the people live.20
In another tale two creators, Otshirvani and Chagan-
Shukuty, built together a human body. The latter said to the
former: "We have created a man, we must yet find him a
spirit to make him alive." Otshirvani remarked that the devil
might steal the body in their absence, and therefore they de-
cided to set a naked dog to guard it. While they were away the
devil arrived, bribed the dog by promising him hair, and light-
ing some flax blew the smoke into man's nostrils. Then man
arose and began to walk. To their surprise the gods on re-
turning saw that man had already begun to live.21
We find thus that in Central and Northern Asia two cycles
of tales are known, in one of which the devil soils the human
body which God has created, while in the other the devil gives
life to a God-created man. The purpose of both these cycles
of tales is to explain the unexpected deficiencies in a being
of God's creation. The former tales represent perhaps a more
materialistic conception, dwelling as they do on the weaknesses
of the human body, and chiefly on the filth inside it and the
diseases caused by this, although in certain East European

378 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
variants wicked, sinful tendencies also are the result of the
devil's touch. The latter cycle of tales endeavours to explain
man's mental deficiencies. This appears even from the fol-
lowing Altaic story, in which, however, only the capricious
character of woman is under consideration.
When Olgen had created the earth he made seven masculine
beings upon it and seven trees, one tree for each man. After
that he created yet an eighth man named Maidere and a tree
" upon the golden mountain." Having created these beings
God left them to their own resources and departed. After
seven years he returned and saw that each tree had grown seven
branches, one branch each year, but the number of men had
not increased. God said: "What is the meaning of this?
The trees bring forth new branches but the number of men
does not increase?" Then Maidere replied:"How could
they increase when there is none able to procreate? " God
now gave Maidere the power to rule freely over men and to
take care that they increased, and so Maidere stepped down
from the golden mountain, went to the men and began to create
a woman, just as Olgen had created him. On the third day,
when he had finished, the woman was ready, but without a
spirit, so Maidere went out to meet Olgen and left the dog
to guard the being he had made. The wicked Erlik, by brib-
ing the dog, succeeded in approaching the woman. He blew at
once into her nostrils with a seven-toned flute and played into
her ear with a nine-stringed instrument, woman thus receiving
a spirit and an intellect. But for this reason woman has seven
tempers and nine moods. When Maidere hurried back, he
saw the living woman and said to the dog: " Why didst thou
let Erlik come so near, how did he deceive thee ? " The dog
replied: "Erlik promised me a fur-coat which should last
unto my death and be neither hot in summer nor cold in
winter." Then Maidere said to him: " The garment promised
thee shall be a hairy covering which shall grow fast on to thy
body." At the same time he cursed the dog, prophesying that

THE CREATION OF MAN 379
people should always treat him ill, that he should be compelled
to live under the sky, etc.22
Thus, even in this tale, the originally naked dog has an
important part. The existence of this common feature in all