CHAPTER IX
HEROES
'TpHERE is every reason to believe that those Lapp Seides,
-L which were worshipped by a larger following, were dedi-
cated to the spirit of some more famous man, the founder of a
family, a shaman, etc. Such people were worshipped also
among other Finno-Ugric peoples and the Samoyeds. Ven-
iamin relates of the Yuraks that certain of their stone or
wooden gods, the latter having a head coming to a point, were
worshipped by a great tribe, spread over a wide area, others
again by only-a very scant congregation. The former are
generally situated in the neighbourhood of such places as the
Yuraks are accustomed to gather at, to hunt or fish or to seek
food for their reindeer. He mentions two such ancient sacred
places, visited by great numbers, of which one was situated
on the holy island Vajgats. At these meetings the Samoyeds
sacrifice reindeer and dogs to their tutelary spirits, besmearing
the mouths of the idols with the blood and fat of the sacrifice,
and having eaten the flesh, hanging up the head, and even
at times, the hide, on a holy tree.1 Of later origin is possibly
a custom of the Eastern Samoyeds of throwing pieces of the
flesh of the sacrifice into the fire. Bloodless sacrifices are per-
formed among the Ostiak Samoyeds. These sometimes do
not slaughter the sacrificial deer, but content themselves with
cutting out the face of the god or other strange figures on its
back. After a ceremony of this description the animal is re-
garded as holy, and may not be used for any purpose or
eaten.2
The " sacred places" of the Yuraks are not fenced in,
neither are buildings to be found on them, the idols standing al-

I4o FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
ways under the open sky.a On the other hand, special buildings
for their idols are met with among the Ostiak Samoyeds. A
building of this kind, hidden away in the forest, is described
by Donner in the following words: "As the dwelling-place
of the gods they use here a building standing on four high
supports, resembling greatly the average barns by the River
Ob. In the fore-wall there was a little opening and against
the back wall stood the god, made of wood and resembling
a human being, together with his marital partner. The face
was very clumsily carved, the eyes formed of two large blue
glass-pearls, imparting a very quaint expression to the old
man. The images were dressed in fine furs and had around
them a number of weapons made of pewter with which to
protect themselves; and, fashioned of the same material,
swans, geese, snakes, reindeer and other animals, by the help
of which they were supposed to be able to flee on the approach
of an unconquerable enemy. Near the door was posted a
little man dressed as a Russian policeman, holding a wooden
sabre in one hand, while in the other he swung a great sword.
The dwelling-place of the gods was furnished with gaudy
cloths and expensive furs, and before the image of the ancestor
the most varying objects lay on the floor, among other things
a great deal of money, of which many coins were a couple of
hundred years old. In the branches of the holy trees sur-
rounding the building garments, horns of animals, hides, etc.,
were hung." 4
Similar spirits, bound to certain fixed places, are also pos-
sessed by the Ostiaks and Voguls in great numbers. The
mightiest of these are honoured by a great circle extended
over a wide area, others again only by a small one, or merely
by the population of a single village. " All places dedicated
to idols," says Pallas, " the boundaries of which are exactly
defined by rivers, brooks, or other marks, are spared by the
Ostiaks, who neither cut down trees nor mow grass, neither
hunt nor fish, abstaining even from drinking the water within

HEROES 141
their boundaries, for fear of offending the gods. Should they
be obliged to traverse these waters by boat, they are careful
not to approach too closely to the shores or to touch them
with their oars, and if the way through them is very long,
they supply themselves with water before reaching the 'holy
place, as they would sooner suffer the worst tortures from
thirst than drink of the holy water." * These holy places,
however, have not definite boundaries, still less are they fenced
in, but especially in the southern districts there is a little build-
ing resembling a storehouse, intended for the preservation of
offerings and the images. Like their house gods, the spirits
living at fixed holy places of the Ostiaks and Voguls have all
been materialised into images. Most often they have been
shaped as wooden figures resembling human beings, at times
as rag-dolls made out of stuffed sacks or natural stones j fur-
ther, they have also been formed of bronze, copper, lead, or
even of bones. As assistants these have often images resem-
bling various animals. The storehouses for offerings are gen-
erally under the care of a special person, who then also
carries out the sacrificial ceremonies and receives the offerings,
money, skins, etc. Very often this occupation is hereditary in
the same family.6
That these powerful and dreaded spirits, regarded as being
able to visit people with sickness, were originally human,
has not been forgotten by the people. A part of them are said
to have been former rulers or heroes, whose mighty deeds
are extolled in songs, others are expressly said to be the
founders of the clans. Those again that are furnished with
images of animals were probably famous shamans. An example
of how a powerful spirit is believed to develop out of a man
of mark after death is given by an Ostiak folk-poem, in
which a Vasyugan hero displays an uncommon nobility of
character by burying the body of a dead enemy-hero, erecting
his sword on the grave, and consoling him by saying: " In
the times of coming daughters, in the times of coming sons,

142 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
thou shalt be called to life, and thou shalt become an offering-
spirit accepting offerings,"T
At times one may see many images in the same offering-
house. Two hundred years ago, Novitskiy visited a " great"
god-house, containing five wooden images resembling human
beings wrapped round with " clothes." Around this chief
building were smaller square store-rooms on posts about the
height of a manj in these were preserved the objects used at
the slaughter of a sacrifice; axes, knives, etc. Separated from
these was another little store-room filled with bones.8
The sacrifices of the Ostiaks and Voguls, which may be
either annual or occasional, do not materially differ from the
corresponding uses of the Samoyeds. According to the oldest
sources, the mouths of the images were besmeared with blood
and fat, and the hides of the animals, with horns and hoofs
attached, hung up in trees. The use of fire as a means of
transmitting the offerings, met with also among the Ostiak
Samoyeds, is most probably of later origin. Like these last
mentioned, the more Eastern Ostiaks have the custom of occa-
sionally offering up so-called bloodless sacrifices, that is to
say, sacrifices in which the animal is not killed, its " soul"
only being made over to the god. Even children may thus
be consecrated to some spiritj the child" thus consecrated has
to fulfil certain duties during his lifetime, as, for example,
to marry a wife, or a husband, from the direction of the com-
pass in which the spirit dwells."
The worshipping of heroes among the Siryans, at the pres-
ent time totally forgotten by them, is described in the Life of
St. Stephen (d. 1396) in the following words: "In Perm
many kinds of idols were to be found: some large, some small,
others again, of medium size; some were famous and very
fine, others were legionj a part were worshipped only by
few and were shown little honour, but others again were wor-
shipped by people dwelling far and wide. They have certain
idols to whom they travel long distances, bringing them gifts

HEROES 143
from afar, even from districts three or four days' or a week's
• It 10
journey away."
The brother-tribe of the Siryans, the Votiaks, have even
today forest copses, consecrated to their ancient heroes, and
called lud by them. In. earlier times these holy places were
hidden in the forests. The oldest authors to mention the
Votiaks say that these lud were generally in forests of fir.11
Nowadays, as the forests in East Russia have diminished to a
very great degree, having even become quite scarce in some
districts, these consecrated groves have become visible, standing
out on the open plains as memorials of the former forests.
Thus, in the vicinity of the pagan Votiak villages flourish
luxurious sacrificial groves, the tall trees of which have been
hesld sacred from generation to generation.
Wherever these lud may happen to be, in the forests or
open plains, they are always fenced in. In this respect they
differ from the holy places of the Samoyeds and the other
northern peoples. But common to them all is the super-
stitious fear felt by the people for them. The Votiaks have
nothing else that they hold so sacred as these lud. No one
enters them without due reason, not even on holy days, with-
out taking an offering there. Cattle may not enter them,
branches may not be broken off, not even a stick may be
taken awayj all disturbance is forbidden, and game seeking
shelter there may not be shot at by the hunters. Women and
children avoid them altogether} in passing them they turn
their heads aside, still less would they ever set foot in them.
Neither may a stranger enter the sacred area. The spirit,
when angered, vents its wrath relentlessly by causing a severe
sickness. Most fear-inspiring, however, is the lud in the
twilight,
The fence surrounding the sacred grove is either of sticks
or boards, or sometimes of plaited branches. As in appear-
ancej so also in height, do they vary in the different districts.
A little gate of boards, swinging on wooden hinges, generally

144 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
leads to the sanctuary, being open only during the performance
of sacrifices. The direction of these gates varies so much that
it is impossible to conclude that they have been placed to point
to any special point of the compass, Wichmann saw in the
Elabuga District (Bussurman Mozhga) a lud that was divided
into two by a fence j into the inner part only the guardian of
the lud and his assistants were allowed to enter. In this part
was the fireplace and a table for the flesh of the sacrifice.
In the front part, to which the congregation also were ad-
mitted, there was a table for the mutual meal.12
In most of the lud which the author was able to see during
his travels, there was, with the exception of the fence, nothing
that might specially draw attention to it Only in a few
sanctuaries was there a rotted bench, a moss-grown stool, or
a narrow table, used by the Votiaks as an altar on which to
offer up their sacrifices. The offering-table is often placed at
the foot of some thick, centuries-old tree, under which the
sacrificing priest reads out his prayers. It would appear that
the sacrificial ceremonies of the Votiaks were particularly
centred round some old tree. Of this, Buch relates also, from
the Sarapul District, that in the centre of the lud there was
an old tree, the lower branches of which were lopped away to
allow of a freer approach.18
In the larger and much visited groves there was also a
store-like building, without a fireplace, called the lud-kuala
by the Votiaks." One of these the author saw in the Mama-
dysh District. It was a small hut, unfitted for a dwelling-
place, with a roof sloping backwards, and a small door, which,
like the gate of the grove, opened towards the west, that is
to say, towards the village. Nothing was to be seen in the hut,
except a shelf of board in the right-hand back corner. The
fireplace was outside the building, between it and the gate.
The old inhabitants relate that the kuala was not as empty in
earlier times as it was then, but was used as a store-place for
offerings, sacrificial vessels, towels, coins, etc.

HEROES 145
The Votiaks worship in families at the lud; the members of
one family never come to worship in the lud of another
family. Should several //^-families live in the same village,
just as many groves will be found in its vicinity. A grove in
which a great clan, i.e., many villages, gathers for a mutual
sacrifice, is called a " great lud." Every lud has its separate
" guardian," the post passing down from father to son. Only
when a " guardian " is childless, is another member of the
family or clan chosen at a meeting of its members to be a
sacrificing priest. Sometimes, the magician (tuno) chooses a
guardian for the sacred grove.
The guardian has no special ceremonial dress at the sacrifices,
but it is demanded of him that his apparel shall be neat and
clean. Where possible, he must wear a white coat, on his
head a white hat, and white wrappings round his feet, and new
bark-shoes. Cleanliness is also demanded of the congrega-
tion visiting the grove. No one is allowed to enter who has
not bathed beforehand.
The Votiaks make a lud for themselves for many different
reasons. They begin to worship the lud spirit, for example,
in the hope of being delivered from some serious illness, or,
again, they build a fence round a grove, the spirit of which
has revealed itself in a dream, giving the exact situation of
the same. It is the duty of the dreamer to set out at once to
fence in the place shown him in his dream. When the Votiaks
move as settlers to a new neighbourhood, too far away for the
old lud to be conveniently visited, they prepare a new one
for themselves. This may not be done in any place without
calling upon the services of the magician, who bestrides a
young foal that has never been ridden before, and rides with-
out a bit or reins into the forest. The place where the foal
stops is the site of the grove. The Votiaks, however, take care
that the grove is not situated too far from the village.15
Sacrifices are not offered up in a new sacred grove until the
" spirit " has been brought from the old place. The " bring-

r
146 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
ing of the spirit" is carried out in the same manner as the
•mudor-wedding. The Eastern Votiaks relate that their fore-
fathers, for the inauguration of sacred groves in strange neigh-
bourhoods, brought with them ashes from the grove of their
native village. In the same manner Bogayevskiy says of the
Sarapul District, that when the tuno has decided on a site for
a new grove, the sanctuary is removed there with solemn
ceremonies, in which the most important act is the bringing
over of ashes from the old place to be placed on the site of
the fireplace of the new."
As soon as the lud has been inaugurated for its mission, it
becomes a sanctuary in which yearly sacrifices must be offered
up. This is not only the sacred duty of the founder, but of all
his descendants. Miropolskiy says that though the Russians
may have laid waste a lud, the Votiaks continue to worship
the spirit at the site of the former grove.17 Anyone omitting
the proscribed sacrifices is sure to be punished severely by the
/tt^-spirit, who is regarded by the Votiaks as stern and exacting.
Doubtless, the Votiaks formerly had images within their
sacred groves, although we can no longer determine the ap-
pearance of these. The difficulty, for a child of nature, of
grasping the idea of a spiritual being when he has nothing
material to lay hold of, is^shown by a fable of the Votiaks
in which it is told how they were at one time so crushed be-
neath material adversities that the duty of sacrificing lay too
heavily upon them and they decided to abolish this rite. A
Tatar offered to take away the /w^-spirit by collecting all the
objects gathered together as offerings in the grove. The
hopes of the Votiaks were, however, dashed again by their
being continuously punished by the spirit. The people be-
lieved this to be due to the fact that the Tatar had not taken
the offerings far enough away, but had cast them on to the
village fields.18
Besides occasional offerings, annual sacrifices are offered up
by the Votiaks in the lud. The annual sacrifices appear to

HEROES 14.7
have been made chiefly in the summer before hay-making
time, and in the autumn after the conclusion of work in the
fields. The ceremony itself was performed, according to the
most ancient custom, in the evening. Occasional offerings are
made by the Votiaks after every misfortune, especially during
a severe illness, said by the magician (tuno) to be a sign that
the lud-spint demands a sacrifice. It is the magician's duty to
find out what the spirit wishes as a sacrifice on the varying
occasions. To begin with, however, a promise of sacrifice is
regarded as sufficient. Thus, a few copper coins are bound
up in a rag, with the words: "With this money, /w^-spirit, I
buy thee a horse, let the sick not lose his life." Silver coins
are then placed in the rag, with the words: "With silver I
deck the mane of thy horse." Further, a little meal is strewn
there, with the words added: " Besides which I will bake thee a
loaf, if thou wilt give health to the sick." The rag bundle is
then hung up in some secret place. Should the sickness not
improve after this, it is regarded as a sign that the spirit wishes
the actual sacrifice immediately.10
This promise to the /«^-spirit is often made by the guardian,
who, as soon as he is informed of the matter, goes out into his
yard or even into the sanctuary with a loaf of bread or a dish
of porridge in his hand, praying in the name of the sick per-
son, that the lud-spirit may be appeased and wait until the
sick person is himself in a condition to offer up his sacrifice.
Sometimes, the promise is again " renewed " before the actual
sacrifice. When the /«^-guardian prays in his own yard, he
keeps his face always turned in the direction in which the
sanctuary is situated.
The day on which an annual sacrifice is to be performed,
is determined by the lud-iamily or W-clan. Before the cere-
mony, the participants must all cleanse themselves and put on
clean apparel. To the preparations belong also the collecting
of sacrifice-money by cutting the family-mark of each family
on a stick, the marked lines indicating the amount given.20

148.
FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
The lud-spirit always demanding blood-offer ings, a foal is
generally used as the victim, but also, at times, a black sheep.
After the conclusion of all these preparations, the actual
ceremony is begun. Only the older males go into the sanc-
tuary, carrying with them the vessels, cauldrons, dishes, pro-
visions, and the sacrificial animal. When the crowd arrives
at the gate of the sanctuary, they greet the spirit by taking off
their head-dress, the guardian himself opening the door and,
as the leading person, going first into the grove, the others
following silently after. As a beginning fire must be made on
the site of the old fires, fallen trees, stumps, or fallen branches
being used for fuel. Towels for the wiping of hands are
brought with them also and hung up in the branches of the
tree. On the altar-table, decked "with green boughs and
white cloths, the accompanying loaves and pancakes are piled
up. When the number of worshippers is very great, the food-
offerings are placed on the ground, a white cloth being laid
under the wooden bowl of each family.
Before commencing the sacrifice it must be ascertained
whether the lud-spirit will accept the offering. This is done
by pouring fresh spring-water by means of a bundle of twigs,
over the sacrificial animal, which must be flawless and of one
colour. This ceremony is repeated several times, the lud-
guardian reading softly a prayer the while, until the animal
shivers, which, according to the Votiaks, Chuvashes and Chere-
miss, is a sign that the sacrifice is pleasing to the god.
After the " sign " the sacrificing priests begin the slaughter-
ing. Its feet having been bound together, the animal is
turned over on to its left side and the blood allowed to run
dry from the veins in its throat without any previous stunning
of the victim. A few drops of the warm blood are thrown
by means of the sacrifice ladle into the fire. During the
slaughtering, the /W-guardian reads out a prayerj holding the
sacrificial bread in his hand. As soon as the animal has been
killed, the hide is flayed from it and the carcase divided in a

HEROES 149
particular way. The chief organs of the body, the heart,
lungs, liver, etc., are cooked separately and when prepared
are set in a special dish. Later, two small fragments are cut
from each quarter of the carcase, from the tongue, lungs,
heart, liver, etc., one of which is placed in a dish on the table,
the other thrown into the fire. During an earlier period, the
pieces now set on the altar-table were hung up in the tree
itself, and in some places it is still said to be usual to thread
them on to a little twig, to the end of which a strip of lime-
bark is bound, probably for hanging up in the tree.21 As
other peoples also, including the Lapps, have been in the
habit of cutting small slices from the most important organs of
the sacrificed animal, which were then threaded on to a pole
and fastened to the holy tree, it is apparent that this must
have been an ancient Finno-Ugric custom.
In sanctuaries possessing a building, the offerings are placed
on the corner shelf. This is quite to be expected, for if the
/^-spirits, as may be supposed, were at one time materialised
in the form of images, they were certainly situated in the
lud-kuala, together with the offering vessels and the money.
This is further pointed to by the fact that the Votiaks regard
the lud-kttala, as being so sacred, that only the //^-guardian
may enter it.
From the Life of St. Stephen we may obtain a graphic view
of the ancient Ittd-kuala sacrifices. Incidentally, the image-
house of the Siryans is mentioned, which was also watched over
by a special " guardian." The actual appearance of the build-
ing is not described; it is only stated that within were images,
sacrificing tables and a great amount of valuables. The saint
is praised for the fact, that out of all that was hung up round
the gods, either as clothing for them, or for their bedecking
themselves, or merely as gifts of sacrifice — skins of sable,
ermine, skunk, beaver, fox, bear, lynx, and squirrel — all these
he gathered together into a pile, and burnt them, smote the
images with an axe on their foreheads and hewed them into

i5o FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
small pieces, throwing these on the fire, and burning up every-
thing together, the pile with the skins and the images at the
same time. This caused great surprise among the Siryans, who
said: " Why did he not take all this as booty for himself? "
In another place we read: "In the same manner he forbade
his disciples to take away anything from the houses of the idols,
neither gold, silver, copper, iron, pewter, nor any of the objects
mentioned earlier."2a
When the /W-spirit has received his share of the sacrifice,
the food is divided according to the number of families taking