The flood tale of Pseudo-Methodius is without doubt a late
Eastern apocryphal legend founded on the Bible story. That
the wife of Noah, who is not especially mentioned in the Bible,
was also the subject of tales among the Arabians, is suggested
by the passage in the Koran, in which Noah's wife is mentioned,
together with the wife of Lot, as being among the damned.
Further, the manner in which the devil succeeds in entering
the ark in the company of Noah's wife, greatly resembles the
following Islamic tale, as already pointed out by Dahnhardt:
When the ark was completed and all the animals hurried there
in pairs, Noah saw that the ass lingered behind j annoyed, he
shouted to it: "Come in, thou accursed! " This moment
was taken advantage of by the evil Iblis, who answered, when
the astonished Noah asked him how he had come into the
ark: "I came at thine invitation, there being among the

364 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
creations of God none accursed but I."8 There are, how-
ever, no indications that the already cited tales could have
spread into Siberia from Islam.
Nearer the Bible story than any other ancient flood tale
known to us, is the following Altaic tale: "Up to the time
when the flood (jaik) hid all the earth, Tengys (Sea) was
lord over the earth. During his rule there lived a man called
Nama, a good man, whom Olgen commanded to build an ark
(kerep), Nama, who had three sons, Sozun-uul, Sar-uul, and
Balyks, was already failing of sight and therefore left the
building of the ark to his sons. When the ark, which was built
on a mountain, was completed, Nama told his sons to hang
from its corners and walls eight cables of eighty fathoms each,
by the help of which he could later determine l how many days
it takes for the water to rise eighty fathoms.' After this had
been done, Nama entered the ark, taking with him his family
and the various animals and birds which, threatened by the ris-
ing waters, gathered around him. Seven days later the cables
attached to the earth gave way and the ark drifted free. This
showed that the water had already risen eighty fathoms.
When seven days had elapsed again, Nama told his eldest son
to open the window of the ark and to look around. Sozun-uul
looked in all directions and then said: * Everything has sunk
under the waters, only the summits of the mountains are in
sight.1 Later, when ordered by his father to look out again,
he was able to answer: f Nothing is to be seen, only the sky
and the waters.1 At last the ark stopped on eight closely
situated mountains. Then Nama himself opened the window
and set free the raven, which, however, did not return. On the
second day he released the crow, and on the third the rook,
but neither of these returned. On the fourth day he sent out
the dove, which returned with a twig of birch in its beak.
From this bird Nama also heard why the other birds had not
returned. The raven had found the carcase of a deer, the
crow that of a dog, and the rook that of a horse, which they had

DESTRUCTION OF THE WORLD 365
stayed behind to devour. Hearing this, Nama became enraged
and laid a curse on these birds, saying: ' What they are doing
now, let them continue with to the end of the world! *" The
tale goes on to relate that when Nama had become very old,
his wife exhorted him to kill all the men and animals he had
saved from the flood, so that, being transferred to the other
world, they would be under his power there also. Under the
ceaseless exhortations of his wife, Nama became restless and
did not know what to do. Then his son Sozun-uul, who knew
the intentions of his mother but did not dare to oppose her
openly, related to his father the following incident: " I saw
a blue-black cow devouring a human being so that only the
legs were any longer to be seen." Having understood this
fable, Nama seized his sword and cleft his wife in two, begin-
ning at the head. Finally Nama removed to heaven, taking
his son Sozun-uul with him, and changing the latter into a
constellation of five stars.'
Thus, in this tale also, the wife of the hero of the flood
is pictured as a wicked person. Otherwise, the tale differs
greatly from the preceding dualistic tales and has obviously
reached Central Asia apart from these. Among some of the
Altaic peoples the hero of the flood has also become the object
of certain beliefs. As such he is often called Jaik-Khan (" the
Flood Prince ") and is prayed to as the intervener between
the Over-god and man, and as the protector of man. In some
places a white lamb is sacrificed to him annually in the spring.
The sacrifice is carried out on a high mountain. He is also
supposed to be the ruler of the dead, and as such is invited
to the house-purification ceremonies forty days after a death,
and begged to return the domestic animals, which the dead,
according to the people, sometimes take with them. In the
shaman rites also he is often spoken with and desired to con-
vey the prayers of the people to the Over-god.8 His dwelling-
place is situated in the third heaven, where the paradise of the
blessed is, and from there, at suitable times, he sends his mes-

$66 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
senger with a soul for a child born on the earth. In this
capacity he is called Jajutshi (" the Orderer ").B
These ideas of the Altai Tatars correspond to those which
the Irtysh Ostiaks have borrowed for their Pairekse from the
Tatars. As we have already seen, the latter also is regarded
as the hero of the flood, appearing besides in some tales as
the " Writer man," who writes in heaven, in the Book of Fate,
according to the dictation of God, how long and in what cir-
cumstances a human being is to live on the earth.
Not only as the ancestor of the present human race, but
also as a kind of Creator does the hero of the flood appear in