The following Mongolian story is probably a product of
Lamaism: In the beginning, when there was yet no earth, but
water covered everything, a Lama came down from Heaven,
and began to stir the water with an iron rod. By the influence
of the wind and fire thus brought about, the water on the
surface in the middle of the ocean thickened and coagulated
into land.39 Certain syncretists of Nearer Asia also describe
how the earth was formed when God caused the cosmic foam
on the surface of the ocean to coagulate.40 Closely correspond-
ing to the Mongolian story is a Japanese tale: In the beginning
one of the seven gods of Heaven stirred the chaotic waters

j THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH 329
5 ' with his staff. When he raised his staff, muddy foam dripped
J from it and, expanding and thickening, formed the islands of
\41
! More than a hundred years ago a tale was written down
among the Tungus beyond the Baikal, describing how God
I sent fire into the primordial ocean. In the course of time the
5 fire vanquished the power of the water and burnt up a part of
j the ocean, so that it became quite hard. Thus the present land
t and sea were formed. With this tale is connected a dualistic
j conception of two antagonistic primitive beings. When God
stepped down upon the earth he met the devil, Buninka, who
* also desired to create a world. Thus a dispute arose between
'• God and the devil. The devil wished to destroy God's earth
j and broke the latter's twelve-stringed musical instrument,
t Then God was angry and said: " If thou canst command a
I pine-tree to grow out of the lake I will recognize thy power,
• but if I can do it, thou must admit that I am omnipotent,"
| The devil agreed to God's proposal. At once, when God com-
' manded, a tree arose from the water and began to grow, but
: the devil's pine would not stand erect but tottered from one
i side to the other. Thus the devil saw that God was mightier
| than he."
; In this story, which concludes with the creation of man,
* God and the devil as rivals, the stringed instrument, etc., are
i features which can by ho means be reconciled with the original
; circumstances and beliefs of the Tungus. A feature corre-
| spending to the tree-growing competition may, be found in the
? Central Asian creation tale in which Otshirvani and his conv
\, Chagan-Shukuty, pour water into a vessel and wait
[ to see on whose side a plant shall appear. Similarly in the
I Buriat tale, three Burkhans try which of them is to procure a
f spirit for the people whom they had created.
• The Tungus believe that fire played a great part in the
[ creation of the world. This conception appears already among
E the syncretistic Mandaean sect, the influence of which was felt

330 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
in Mesopotamia in the first centuries of our era. Their tale
had possibly been accepted by the Manicheans. It tells how
fire is slung into the water and how, with the ensuing steam,
dust rises into the air and in sinking again to the surface of the
water forms into solid land.48
The presence of oriental learning is to be discerned also
in a conception met with in Central Asia of a primi-
tive chaos consisting of fire, water and wind. Burkhan-
bakshi (= Buddha-master; baksht = Mandshu fakshi,
"master," Chinese fashi, "teacher") separated them and
scattered the dust thus formed on the surface of the water,
where it gradually grew into an earth covered with grass and
trees."
In some Mongolian districts we meet also with an idea,
common in China and Japan, that heaven and earth were
joined together in the beginning, but later separated. At the
parting of earth and sky fire appeared, or, according to some
variants, the constellations in the sky.46 This belief evidently
originates in the Indian tale, which has spread especially to the
eastward of India, of a world-egg, from whose halves earth
and heaven have been formed.
Some of the most northern peoples of Siberia believe
further that the earth came down from Heaven. Stories re-
ferring to this have been recorded both in the west, in the
Vogul districts, and in the far east, among the Kamchadales.
The Voguls tell that Numi-Torem let down an earth-disc
from heaven as a dwelling-place for the people he had made.48
The Kamchadales say that the god of Heaven, Kutku, brought
the earth down from the sky and placed it on the surface of the
ocean. The latter also relate how the wife of the god of
Heaven bore a son while moving on the ocean, and that Kutku
created an earth out of his body.47
The idea that the earth has come down from Heaven is
closely connected with those tales in which sometimes fire,
sometimes some animal, object, etc., is dropped or let down

THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH 331
from the Upper spheres. We may therefore assume that the
letting down of the earth from Heaven is of the same origin.
It is, however, to be noted that these tales take for granted
the existence of a primordial ocean.
Just as the idea of a vast ocean surrounding the earth is
natural to coast-dwellers, and the conception of the growing
of the earth, i.e., the shore, is founded on the actual experi-
ence of years, so these same ideas seem unnatural and unex-
pected in the central parts of a great continent. How entirely
different the conceptions of the nomads of the Altaic race have
been, is to be seen from a story of the Kirghis, in which it is
declared that in the beginning there was no water at all. Two
people tended a great ox, but having long been without drink
they were dying of thirst. The ox then determined to get
them water by digging into the earth with his great horns.
Thus were formed the lakes and the rivers on the surface of
the earth."
We cannot, then, consider any of the above mentioned crea-
tion tales to be the invention of the Altaic race. Without
doubt the idea of the Yakuts: " The world has always been,"
probably represents the original belief of the whole Altaic
race. By this we do not mean to say that the peoples of this
race have not also had their own local myths, which try to
explain the causes of certain changes on the surface of the
earth. An example of this is the Kirghis tale already men-
tioned. The most northern peoples of Siberia, such as the
Tungus, Samoyeds, Ostiaks, etc., who often find, in the neigh-
bourhood of their homes, bones and teeth of the mammoth
in the ground, say that this beast made the originally smooth
earth uneven with his horns. The mountains and chasms at
least are said to have been thus formed. The valleys and de-
pressions were caused by the quaking of the earth under the
weight of this former giant animal when it walked. The
water, gathering into .these depressions, afterwards formed the
lakes and rivers. God is said to have at last become angry

332 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
and to have drowned the mammoth in a lake where it still lives
under the ground.49
Local also is another North-East Siberian tale of the origin
of mountains and valleys. God lived in Heaven originally,
but settled later upon the earth. When he then travelled,
moving on skis, the thin earth bent under him like new, pliant
ice. That is the reason why the surface of the earth is
uneven.*0