CHAPTER IV
GENERAL MEMORIAL FEASTS
B
ESIDES memorial feasts in honour of some particular
person, general ones are also celebrated, on which occa-
sion all the deceased belonging to the family are remembered.
Such feasts are called by the Cheremiss " taper-feasts," be-
cause then, as at memorial feasts in general, a number of wax-
tapers are lighted. The Volga Finns seem to have two sepa-
rate memorial feasts each year, namely, one in spring at
Easter-time, and another in autumn, at the end of field-labour.
General memorial feasts are here celebrated either in such
manner that every family circle remembers its own dead by
itself, or that related families assemble at the house of the
head of a greater family, to celebrate in common the memory
of their mutual dead relations. At times even the whole village,
which in that case is a so-called family-village, will celebrate
in common the memory of its dead. Nowadays the first-
named way would seem to be most in use, but in many places,
even up to our days, remainders of the last-named also have
survived.
The ceremonies observed at the general memorial feasts
recall very much those of the special ones. To every relation
kept in memory a wax-taper is lit, meat and drink being also
sacrificed. To those no longer remembered a mutual taper
is also lighted. When crumbling bread and pouring gin into
the trough of the dead the Votiaks say: " Ye long ago de-
ceased, may this food we are sacrificing to you reach you."
In some places a farewell feast is still celebrated on the morn-
ing of the next day.

GENERAL MEMORIAL FEASTS 61
When the memorial feast lasts a day and night, the family
must see that the dead are not bored in any way and that
they do not go away hungry from the feast. In order to
amuse their dead relations, the Votiaks, among other things,
take them for a walk. They believe that near to every par-
ticipant in the feast there is a dead person of the same age,
who in his life-time was more intimate with him than with
anybody else, and it is therefore the duty of every participant
to amuse and regale the soul in his vicinity. According to the
belief of the Votiaks the deceased does everything that his
living relation of equal age doesj the more cheerful the par-
ticipant is, the more cheerful is his dead friend j the more
sated he is, the fuller is the deceased. From this it follows
that, at the memorial feast, people eat and drink as much as
possible, so that the dead need not go away hungry. For the
same reason, it is not proper to work on this occasion, so as
not to vex the deceased by not only not amusing him, but by
actually compelling him to work. Therefore, also, people
do not go to bed during a memorial feast, as the deceased
who has been in company with the sleeping, might easily
sleep too long and thus remain among the living when the
other dead are taken to the burial ground.1
The most remarkable of all the Volga peoples' memorial
feasts is the one celebrated during Easter-week. The night
before Maundy Thursday is called " the wandering-night of
the dead " by the Votiaks. They believe that all the dead
then move about. On the night before, after sunset, these
rise from their graves and make for the villages. At night
one can even see them, if one turns one's clothes inside out,
and, putting a horse-collar round one's neck, goes up on the
roof of the house. But during this time the Votiaks take many
precautions. Thus, they do not work, nor do they heat the
oven, nor may they bring anything to the house, or take any-
thing away from it. In many places, they do not even feed
the cattle, at least not with their hands, the food being pushed

62 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
before the animals with their feet. In some parts the young
people are warned not to take even a stick or a distaff into
their hands, as the one who does this will be bitten by a snake
the following summer. In the night-time everything must be
still. Food must be set forth on every table, and it is even
carried to the bath-house, where the dead go to have baths.
During the feast, they place on a bench by the door pancakes,
pies, bread, cheese, eggs, etc., for the dead, and, in addition two
empty vessels, on whose brim they fix a little home-made wax-
taper for each of the dead relations retained in memory. On
the bench spoons are also placed for the invisible hands of
the spirits. When throwing food and pouring drink into the
vessels set forth for the dead, the Cheremiss say: " Dead
people, eat, drink, give us health, peace, success and wealth j
multiply our cattle, make our corn grow, give us a good wind
for cleaning the corn, and protect us from destruction by fire,
water and evil spirits! " In other places the door is opened,
and food is thrown over the threshold, with the saying: "Ye
deceased, eat and drink, do not be angry, do not go away
hungry, may ye live in light in the other world, may the
earth on your graves feel light, do not torment us, the sur-
vivors, with illnesses, do not attack our cattle and do not worry
us with other calamities!" The names of all the relations
retained in memory are mentioned at the feast. At the same
time the ruler of the graveyard is remembered. Even to the
dead that have no surviving relations they light a mutual
taper and throw some morsels of food. When the ceremonies
are over, the food of the dead is carried out into the yard,
where it is eaten by the dogs.2
With this feast are frequently connected all kinds of pro-
tective ceremonies. Pervuchin relates of the Votiaks that on this
occasion they collect all sorts of weapons and go to the nearest
forest, shooting and shouting, in order to chase away wolves
and other beasts of prey. Having returned, they take a scythe,
a shovel or a spade, and some ashes from the hearth and draw

GENERAL MEMORIAL FEASTS 63
a ring round their houses to protect them from evil spirits,
who at this time are abroad everywhere. When going to bed,
they burn juniper in the hut, and shut the windows, the smoke-
hole and the openings under the floor, lest the spirits should
get in. In some places the young men sit armed all night on
the roof of the hut or the store-house to watch for these.
The spirits generally appear in the shape of a cat or a dog,
sometimes even in that of a wolf. Next morning, in the
yard, a fire of straw is made, over which the members of the
family jump one after another, to purify themselves.8
The idea that the spirits of the dead walk about early in
spring is a common one among the Slavic and other East
European peoples. During the Christian era the above festival
coincided with the Easter festivities, but, in some parts, the
Cheremiss have retained for it a more original time, namely,
the first new moon in the month of March.*
From the Russians, the above ideas reached the Orthodox
Esthonians, who were in the habit of celebrating a similar
memorial feast on Easter morning. The hostess spread a
clean table-cloth in the yard near the gate, and placing on it
every kind of food, milk, cheese, butter, meat, pies, etc., she
began calling the dead relations, saying: "Come, (the names
are mentioned), come yourselves and bring your children with
you, come and partake of our food and our drink! I invite
you in hospitable mood, with a tender heart} I serve you first,
and help myself afterwards." Having kept silence for a
while, in order to give the dead people time to eat and drink,
she then began counselling them to return: " Go away, let
it be enough of eating and drinking, go where ye were taken,
each to his placej lead the children by the hand, go away!"
The food of which the deceased had had their portion, was
taken back to the hut and placed on the table, round which
the family sat down to eat.6
According to a general belief among the Baltic Finns, the
dead move about in autumn. The month of October is called

64 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
by the Esthonians " the time of the spirits " (Hingede aeg)
or "the month of the spirits" (Hingekuu). Occasionally,
this time lasts until November, which not infrequently is
called " the month of the dead " (Kooljakuu). The Catholic
festivities of All Saints1 Day and All Souls' Day were more
especially devoted to the dead. During these days it was
not permitted to shout or make a noise, huts were cleaned,
and food was set forth at night for the dead. The festivity
coinciding with the Catholic All Saints' Day was called by the
Finns, Kekri, of which Agricola says: " Kekri multiplied the
cattle."
The oldest description of the Kekri-feast is to be found in
E. Castren's narration about the neighbourhood of Kajana in
1754. He says that the Kekri-feast or All Saints* Day was
celebrated in two different ways: partly in the pagan manner
in honour of the ancient Finnish god Kekri, partly in the
Catholic way, in honour of all the saints. According to the
heathen custom, a half-year-old sheep was killed either in
the evening before the feast-day or very early the next morn-
ing. The sheep was boiled, the bones being kept intact, and
it was not allowed to be tasted, not even to try its saltness,
before the carcase had been served whole on the tabfe. Then
it had to be eaten until the last morsel had gone and no re-
mains were left. By Kekri other spirits also were meant, for
whom all sorts of eatables and drinkables were prepared on
the evening before the feast day, some in the cow-house for
the welfare of the cattle, others in the stable for luck with
horses, others under big trees and by huge stones in the fields
or in the forest, and yet others in all these places at once.
According to the Catholic way, the host received the saints
outside in the yard, in the darkness of the evening before the
feast, taking them to the bath-house, which had been particu-
larly cleaned and heated for their use and provided with cold
and hot water and " bath-brooms." A table with meat and
drink had also been placed there. The host waited on these

GENERAL MEMORIAL FEASTS 65
guests at certain fixed times, and finally, on the evening of
the following day, All Souls' Day, late and in the dark, with
bared head, and pouring on the ground some beer and brandy,
he took his guests out of the yard. If, after the baths of the
" saints," there were straws in the water, it was the sign of a
good harvest, but if there were instead chips of wood or bits
of coal, it was a presage of famine.6
To the celebration of the Kekri-feast belonged, further,
the custom of disguising oneself in curious costumes. Masks
for the face were made of birch-bark, paper, etc. People,
masked in this way, were called Kekritar. The latter wandered
unknown from house to house, from village to village, threat-
ening to pull down the ovens of the house, should these un-
common guests not be abundantly regaled and entertained.
During All Saints1 time it was also customary to regale beggars
with food.
As at the New Year's festivities, the people tried to make
the spirits reveal coming events. The custom of casting tin,
and foreseeing events from the figure formed when the molten
tin was poured into water was of this character. Or, on the
night before Kekri, they walked under the windows to listen
to what was being talked about in the hut, and, from the con-
versation going on there, to infer what would happen during
the following year. Further, in the evening, they would
count the sticks in the oven, and if they were all there in the
morning, no one needed to trouble himself about possible
deaths in the following year, but otherwise there would be as
many deaths at the house as the number of the absent sticks
indicated. When making bread they took from the straw
as many ears of corn (rye) as there were members in the
family and pressed them into the bread. The one whose ear
was burnt up during the baking, would die before the next
Kekri-feast. When the loaves were taken out of the oven,
the master of the house cut a piece from one and let it
falJ on the table. If the piece happened to fall with the

66 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
crust downwards, life would go well during the yearj other-
wise some disaster was to be expected. In some neighbour-
hoods it was, moreover, customary, on the evening before All
Saints' Day, to place on the window-sill one grain of salt for
each member of the family. He whose grain of salt melted
during the night, was to die. It was also customary to burn
Kekri-fires, most probably for the purpose of driving away
spirits. The fire was burnt on some hill and was made of
oakum mixed with straw.7
A corresponding feast is known also among the Esthonians
and seems to be common among the Baltic Finns, though the
wandering-time of the dead has later been influenced by the
Catholics, who, since 835, have celebrated the first of Novem-
ber as All Saints' Day and, since 998, the second of November
as All Souls1 Day, The name kekri or keyri seems further
to be known among the Russian Lapps (kevre, kotore) " a
sacrifice")-8
In Western Finland the belief prevails that the spirits
walk at Christmas. Even in our days young people are
in the habit of dressing up and masking themselves at Christ-
mas and going about the farms, where they are called
" Christmas Mothers." This custom together with the idea
behind it is borrowed from Scandinavia. Like the Scandi-
navians, the Lapps also believed that at Christmas the dead
left their underground dwelling and set out to wander through
the woods and fells. For this reason, the children had to keep
still during that timej if they made a noise, ghosts would
appear. When, on Christmas night, the shamans sat at the
entrance of their dwelling, they felt the spirits climbing over
their legs into the tent. Food, and particularly some water,
had to be set out when the spirits came. In order to protect
their wells from being destroyed by the spirits, the Lapps used
to throw pieces of metal into the water on " the most danger-
ous evening." If they did not treat the underground people
well, these might take a cruel revenge, e.g., suck out the brain

GENERAL MEMORIAL FEASTS 67
from a man's head. These spirits, walking about at Christmas,
were called by the Lapps, " the Christmas people."8
The keeping of Christmas by the Swedish Lapps in heathen
times is described by the missionary Graan, who says that the
? Lapps then collected morsels from all the dishes prepared
for the feast and put them into a small trough of .birch-bark,
shaped like a little sailing-boat with masts, sails and oars.
They then searched out the tallest pine-tree near the tent,
and into the tree nearest the pine they put the boat as high
up as their hands would reach, but in the trunk of the pine
they cut round figures on four sides. Into each
of these, every man in the village who had put
* food into the trough, had to throw three spoon-
fuls of fat with his left hand. According to
_ Graan they also used to set up a tree, four yards
j high, with twigs set half-way up it. This tree LAPP CHRISTMAS
'{ was smeared with blood from a slaughtered
I reindeer on Christmas Eve, and on its branches were put mor-
I sels of the animal's lungs, heart, tongue and lips.10
Mallmer relates that at Christmas they made boats of fir,
three-quarters of a yard long, with masts, which were then
dedicated to " the Christmas Master." The boat with its
masts was smeared with reindeer-blood and here and there the
sign of the cross was drawn on it.11 Hogstrom adds that the
sailing-boats were placed in tall trees, not in a hanging posi-
tion, but resting on branches. Even the pine was marked with
the sign of the cross and was smeared a good way upwards
from its root with reindeer blood. Moreover, it had been
customary, he says, to hang up a trough of birch-bark in tall
trees which were carved on two sides and marked with the
sign of the cross. Into the trough Christmas food, fish, cheese
and milk were laid. On its rim were stuck two spade-like
sticks, one foot long (most probably, as oars). This sacrifice
was made to a spirit called Ruotta, " to prevent it from pierc-
ing the womb of the women." l2

68
FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
This sailing-boat sacrifice among the customs of the Lapps,
cannot fail to attract attention, as the Lapps themselves did
not use sailing-boats. With reason does Fritzner therefore
compare the " Christmas people " of the Lapps, who are fur-
thermore worshipped in connection with a foreign feast, with
the Icelanders' Jolasveinar, who were also believed to move
about at Christmas.13 Remains of this belief are met with still
in our days everywhere in Scandinavia. In Lapland the above-
named custom of sacrificing is limited to the Lapps of Scan-
dinavia.
A common feast in honour of the deceased, celebrated at a
time agreed upon by the relations, has been retained in East
Karelia. This feast was arranged by the owner of a farm
agreed on beforehand. Many animals were killed, and the
invited relations and friends brought with them food in abun-
dance. For the deceased a cloth was spread in a separate
room on a separate table, on which something, a spoon or a
dish, had to be laid every day for nine weeks. Into the walls
of the room many nails were driven, for the deceased to hang
their clothes on. The day before the feast the food was put
on the table, round which empty chairs were placed. The
windows were opened, after which all the family went to the
burial-ground to invite the deceased to the feast. Everyone
invited his kinsfolk, the women weeping aloud: " Come and
bring with you your relations unto the ninth generation! Kins-
folk, bring all your acquaintances with you!" 14
According to the oldest sources, the Mordvins were earlier
in the habit of celebrating from time to time, after a longer
period, e.g., fifty years or so, a great common feast for a
large family, in honour of the deceased.16
It is customary among the Cheremiss to celebrate a memorial
feast also in honour of the unknown deceased who have no
relations in life. Such deceased are called Utumo. Nowadays
these feasts are customary only among the Eastern Cheremiss.
The feast is celebrated in the village community in summer

GENERAL MEMORIAL FEASTS 69
when many insects and larvae have appeared in the fields,
hindering the growth of the crops. The guests put on their
holiday attire, and the ceremonies, which resemble those at a
wedding, are led by a host, who is called the " head of the
wedding." The " wedding-women" also appear, wearing
round their shoulders beautiful shawls embroidered with silk,
and also the " wedding-dancers," who are commanded by a
leader with a whip to which a bell is fixed. Further par-
ticipants in the festivity are a drummer and a bagpiper. As
in a wedding-procession — only without a bride and bride-
groom — the villagers, carrying with them pancakes, bread,
beer and brandy, with the functionaries and pipers at their
head, go to the corn-field, round which they drive or walk
three times, following the sun. Every now and then the
procession stops, a wax-taper is lighted and the festival food
is tasted, part of which is also sacrificed to the dead. All the
time music is played and wedding-songs sung. In the mean-
time the old people have started for the burial-ground, where
a black ox is to be sacrificed to the Utumo. The killing, the
cooking of the sacrifice-meat, and the eating of it take place
by the burial-ground, outside its enclosure. Having marched
or driven round all the corn-fields of the village, the wedding-
procession also arrives at the graveyard. Thinking of the
Utumo, everyone places a wax-taper on the fence. A prayer
noted down by the author in the District of Birsk runs thus:
"Utum man, Utum woman, protect our fields from larvae,
from butterflies! A large ox has been killed, come with your
family and eat. Do not touch the corn!" After the meal
the ox-hide is cut into one narrow strip, long enough to sur-
round the whole of the burial-ground. The bones of the ox
and certain parts of the meat are buried in the earth. The
sacrifice is, however, not often performed immediately j fre-
quently it is enough to make only a promise, which is done
in this way:—-a bast-rope is wound by the old people of the
village round the tree dedicated to the Utumo in the grave-

70 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
yard. If the rope is wound one, three, five or seven times
round the tree, this means that the sacrifice will be per-
formed after so many years. The number must always be an
odd one. The old promise-rope is not burnt till the sacrifice
is performed. On account of its similarity with the wedding-
ceremonies, this memorial feast is called " Utum-wedding."
At times a single family must also perform an Utum-sacri-
fice. If there are many mice in the store-house, it is, accord-
ing to the Cheremiss, a sign that the Utumo claim a memorial
feast. It is generally not celebrated at once, but the father
of the family goes to the forest and hunts up as large a piece
of lime-bark as possible, which he then twists into a rope and
winds nine times round the aforesaid tree. Thus they need
not perform the sacrifice till nine years later. In the wedding
ceremonies only the members of the family participate. This
time they do not go to the corn-field, but instead wander three
times round the farm-yard, going into the store-house, the
larder and the cow-house. The sacrifice, which also now
consists of a black ox, is performed, cooked and eaten at the
burial-place.16
Only a few of the innumerable dead can, in the long run,
avoid the fate of the Utumo, the identity of which becomes in
time quite effaced from the memory of the living. Castren
says of the Samoyeds that only their shamans remain " im-
mortal." However, some other remarkable persons, such as
famous ancestors, princes, heroes, etc., may be retained for a
longer time in the memory of their survivors and be wor-
shipped as household-gods and heroes.
The importance of ancestor worship in the social life of
the Finno-Ugric races will be further seen from their belief
that their deceased ancestors did not only create their customs
and found their religion, but even now protect and watch
over them. The Votiaks say that if the present people begin
to neglect the customs and usages of their ancestors, they will
be punished with diseases and years of famine.

GENERAL MEMORIAL FEASTS 71
The near connexion between the worship of ancestors and
an instinctive nationalistic feeling, is very vividly described
by the Norwegian missionary Isaac Olsen (f 1730) in his
account of the Lapp's belief in his underground spirits, whose
dwellings, clothes and language are perfectly similar to those
of the Lapps living above ground. The underground people
exhort the Lapps to " have just such dwellings, ceremonies
and customs, clothes and language and other things as the
living have seen among the dead, impressing this especially
upon the shamans, whose duty it is to instruct the others and
educate them by a wise discipline. They speak the Lapp
tongue with them, as this language is the best of all, and warn
them not to speak any other language than that spoken by
their gods, which was created by their first shamans, the spirit-
folk, and other ancient beings. This they must do, if they
wish to live long and happily, to have success in their trades,
and to keep themselves and their cattle in good health." "