the flood tales of the Soyots: When the giant frog (turtle)
supporting the earth happened to move once, the cosmic ocean
began to flood the earth. A certain old man who had guessed
that something of the kind would happen, built a raft
strengthened with iron, placed himself upon it with his family,
and was saved. With the decline of the waters the raft
grounded on a high wooded mountain, where it is said to be
still. After the flood, this Kezer-Tshingis-Kaira-Khan re-
created everything we now see around us. He is especially
mentioned as having taught people how to prepare strong
drinks, an invention accredited also to the hero of the Bible
story.10
How deeply the story of the flood has taken root in the
beliefs of the peoples around the Altai, is shown by their
obstinate belief that the raft or the ark is still today on the
summit of one of the local mountains, where, however, it is
not good for man to search for it, as none have returned from
the spot alive. In other places, tradition tells that on the site
of the grounding of the ark, great nails have been found,
believed to be remains of the vessel of the flood."
But in what manner can the hero of the flood have risen to
godlike eminencej to be the object of worship, and have had
ascribed to him so wide a field of action as he actually has
among the Altaic peoples? Without doubt, the beliefs of the

DESTRUCTION OF THE WORLD 367
Iranians may be regarded as having brought this about. Their
" First Man," Yima, who was worshipped as the ruler over
souls, was at the same time the hero of the flood. This ruler
is met with in Altai Tatar tales as Schal-Jime, the first part of
the name being a deformation of a Thibetan word meaning
"Prince of Death." In one Altaic creation-tale God says:
" Thou art my man, Schal-Jime j look well after the man who
has tasted strong drink, and little children, foals, calves and
lambs j those dying happily take to thee! "12 According to the
preceding, Schal-Jime, like Jaik-Khan, is the ruler over in-
fants and those dying happily.
Some of the more northern peoples of Siberia tell how the
flood brought about the origin of many races and many lan-
guages, a question dealt with in the Bible in connection with
the tower of Babel. The Ugrians tell how the people saved
on their rafts drifted in different directions, settling after the
flood in different parts of the earth.13 In the same way, with-
out mentioning any special hero, the Yenisei Ostiaks relate;
When the water rose continuously during seven days, part of
the people and animals were saved by climbing on to the logs
and rafters floating on the water. But a strong north wind,
which blew without ceasing for seven days, scattered the people
far from one another. And for this reason they began, after
the flood, to speak different languages and to form different
peoples."
Original and unaffected as these tales appear to be, especially
in the frequently flooded Yenisei district, where the hated
north wind often causes trouble, we cannot even here, in this
primitive state, assume the story to have originated in North
Siberia. Above all, the influence of foreign flood tales seems
to be apparent in the seven-day periods of time. Compared
with the former tales, however, these latter would seem to
represent a new type.
Far away in the north, on the tundras of the Samoyeds,
a flood tale has also been recorded, in which, as in the ancient

368 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
Indian tales, seven persons are said to have been saved in a
boat. The Samoyeds go on to relate how, after the flood, a
terrible drought followed, so that these survivors were nearly
dying of thirst. From this disaster, however, they were saved
by digging a deep hole in the ground, in which water formed.
More difficult was the finding of nourishment. This caused all
but one young man and one maid to die of hunger, these two
having started to eat the mice which came out of the ground.
From this couple the present human race is descended.15
For the sake of comparison a flood tale from North-East
Siberia may be given, according to which people were saved
by binding together trunks of trees into great rafts. Establish-
ing themselves on these, they took with them sufficient provi-
sions for the duration of the flood. To prevent the rafts from
drifting out to sea, the people fastened rocks to long ropes
which were then dropped to the bottom as anchors. Finally,
these log-rafts grounded on a high mountain.16 In the above
form this story is told, e.g., by the Kamchadales.
Besides a destructive flood, some of the North Siberian
peoples speak also of a great conflagration, which once de-
stroyed all life on the earth. The Tungus from behind the
Baikal describe it as follows: In the beginning was the earth,
but then a great fire raged for seven years and the earth was
burned up. Everything became sea. All the Tungus were
consumed except a boy and a girl who rose up with an eagle
into the sky. Having wandered for a time in the air, they
descended to a place where the water had dried up. With
them the eagle also descended to the earth."
Of an all-devouring conflagration the Voguls also speak,
telling how God sent a sea of fire upon the earth in order to
destroy the devil. The cause of the fire they call " the fire-
water." In the destruction of all creation, only the gods and
a few mortals succeeded in saving themselves. The former
placed themselves on an " iron ship," the latter on a " seven-
bottomed beech-raft," which was provided in addition with

DESTRUCTION OF THE WORLD 369
a fireproof, sevenfold cover of sturgeon-skin. The tale
gives thus the same means of escape as the ordinary flood
tales, which the conflagration tales of the Voguls otherwise
resemble.
The tales of the Voguls also tell of a recurring conflagration,
the fearful thunder of which the " Earth-watching man " hears
from afar. This hero decides to ride through the fire, " one
side of which glows in the heights of the sky, the other burning
at both corners of the sky." With the help of his magic horse
he succeeds also in his attempt. Munkacsi believes the Aurora
Borealis to have been the original source of these ideas.18 This
he assumes is meant by the " sea of fire " through which the
hero rides for seven days. Obviously, this great phenomenon
of North Siberia has played a great part in awakening the
imagination of the people, the white streaks appearing among
the Northern Lights being sometimes called "The track of
the white horse of the Earth-watching man," but even then
this tale can hardly have been born among the Ugrians. A
hero riding across a sea of fire on a magic steed is a story-
theme met with over a wide area. Neither can the steed be
identified with the eagle of the Tungus tale, although the con-
flagration tales of the two peoples seem to have much in
common. As mentioned before, the fire in the Tungus tale
lasts for seven years, corresponding to the description in the
Vogul tale: "Already for seven winters and summers the
fire has raged, already for seven winters and summers it has
burnt up the earth."19
Conflagration tales have also been noted down elsewhere in
Asia. Thus, for instance, in East India it is told how God, as
mankind sank deeper into sin, sent a flood of fire on to the
earth, here also called " water of fire." Two people only,
brother and sister, were saved by, hiding themselves.20 The
ancient civilized peoples of Nearer Asia would also seem to
have known these conflagration tales.
Quite obvious is the alien influence in such Central Asian

SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
tales which tell how a great fire will occur at the end of the
world and burn up the whole earth.
The Altai Tatars say that when Olgen sends Maidere (a
Buddhist Bodhisattva) from the sky, who will teach people
the fear of God and convert the greater part of mankind, the
evil Erlik will become angry and say to Maidere: " I am
strong enough to kill thee with my sword." At the same
time the devil will attack Maidere and fulfil his threat. The
blood of Maidere, said to turn the whole world red, will take
fire, the flames surrounding the earth and rising to the heavens.
Then Olgen will arrive and clapping his hands together shout:
"Ye dead, arise! " And at once these will arise from their
hiding-places, some out of the earth and some from the sea,
others from the fire or the places in which they had hidden
when overtaken by. death. In the world-conflagration Erlik
and all wicked people will be destroyed.21
This mighty drama of the end of the world, in which the
powers of good and evil engage in a final contest and in which
evil is completely destroyed, is probably Iranian eschatology,
preached perhaps in Central Asia by the apostles of Manicheism
in their time.
Comparable with the eschatology of the Bible is also the
belief of the Buriats, that at the end of the world a great
river of fire will flow from the east to the west, throwing its
sparks everywhere so that the whole of creation will be set
alight. In the place of this old earth it is believed, however,
that a new one will appear with new inhabitants.32