CHAPTER XI
THE SONS OF GOD
connected with the Heaven god, according to
the Siberian peoples, are certain other gods living in
the sky, the number of which is precisely fixed. Extremely
common is a group of seven gods, said to act as the assistants
of the Over-god.
More especially in the beliefs of the Kirghis and the Siberian
Tatars, do these gods play an important part. In the Altaic
tales mention is made of seven beings named Kudai (" god **),
situated in the third storey of Heaven on the Suro (" Maj-
esty ") mountain.1 The Yakuts call this group of seven gods,
which they declare forms " the suite of the Over-god Ai-
Tojon," Satta-Kuro-Dziisagai-Ai (satta, "seven"); they are
supposed to be the tutelary genii of horses, and a sacrifice of
kumiss is poured into the fire for them at the spring festivals.2
Often these grouped spirits are called the sons of the Over-god.
Certain of the Altaic tribes can recount the names of these
"seven sons": Jashigan, Karshit, Bakhtagan, Kara, Kushkiin,
Kanym and Jaik.3 Much cannot, however, be grounded on
these names, as they vary greatly in the different districts.
As little known as the names of this group are the spheres of
activity ascribed to each. In the corresponding list of the
Lebed Tatars, Kanym appears as the wife of Olgen. Kara
("Black "), also Kara-Khan, according to these last, has left
his father and, instead of the light-filled abodes of Heaven, has
chosen the dark holes of the underworld as his lot. Jaik or
Jaik-Khan is the prince of the flood and at the same time a
kind of escort to the souls bound for Hades.4
Names for the seven " sons " of the Heaven god have also
been invented by the Voguls and the Ostiaks, although these

THE SONS OF GOD 403
are for the most part the names of their own district gods.
The list of the Voguls comprises, according to Gondatti, the
following spirits: the god of Pelym, the god of the upper field
of the Ob, the god of the Holy Ural, the Prince of the river
Aut, the god of the Little Ob, the god of the Sosva centre,
and the " Earth-watching Man." In the information ob-
tained by Munkacsi from Sygva the following are named:
the god of Pelym, the Old Man of the village Tek, the Holy
Prince of the Lozva-water, the god of the Sosva centre, the
god of the Little Ob, the Old Man of the village Lopmus,
and the " Earth-watching man." Part of the corresponding
catalogue of the Ostiaks by Tremyugan deserves mention:
" The Forest-game-sharing man " and the " youngest son " of
the Heaven god, Khan-Iki (" Prince old man "). The former
is a deity living in the sky, from whom game is prayed for,
and to whom, as to a Heaven god, a white animal has to be
sacrificed.8 The greatest interest is, however, awakened by
the " youngest son " among this group, the Vogul " Earth-
watching man," the Khan-Iki of the Ostiaks, to whom many
tales are attached and who is certainly not an original Ugrian
god.
The fact that these seven gods are but little known to the
Siberian peoples, as is often true of their names also, draws
our attention to their number. We know the Iranians to have
had a group of gods of the same number, Amesha Spentas,
and similarly, the Adityas of the Rgveda were originally seven
gods, the duties of whom, like that of the Siberian sons of
God, was the watching over and the control of the heavenly
laws of nature. We arrive thus at the assumption that these
Asiatic gods, wherever they may be met with, have the same
origin. But where and how did this heavenly group first take
shape?
Light is thrown on the problem by the picture of Heaven
of the Vasyugan Ostiaks, seen by the " eyes of the soul w of
the shamans, and described by them in songs. From these we

404 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
learn that the heavens are seven-storeyed, in the topmost of
which the Over-god Num-Torem himself lives, and in the
lower ones his sons. The dwellers in these storeys of the sky
are called also by names borrowed from the Tatars, Torem-
Talmas ("Heaven interpreter"; talmas^= Tatar tolmats) or
Torem-Karevel ("Heaven watcher"; karevel = Tatar £ar0-
vel). The names of the separate " Interpreters " are unknown
to the Vasyugans, neither can their activities be explained, but
they are believed to live one in each storey of the heavens.
Usually, they are called after the sacrifices offered up to each.
i. "The arrow-sacrifice Torem" receives arrows shot any-
where into the sky; 2. " The cloth-sacrifice Torem," who re-
ceives a cloak of white cloth, which is hung up on forest
expeditions in some birch in a primitive forest; 3. " The sable-
sacrifice Torem," who is given a sable-skin, kept in a box taken
on forest expeditions; 4. " The cup-sacrifice Torem," for whom
a special tin cup is kept in the storeroom; 5'. "The horned-
deer-sacrifice Torem," for whom the hide of a deer killed in
the forest is left, with horns and hoofs attached, hanging on a
birch. This spirit is believed to let down game and fish upon
the earth for men, and is the same being as the previously
mentioned " Forest-game-sharing man." As the sixth a
Russian saint, Nikolai the miracle-maker, is mentioned, the
latter being the protective spirit of travellers by water, to whom
the Ostiaks hang up the skin of a marten in their store-rooms
as a sacrifice.8
As Karjalainen points out, this Karevel arrangement is not
an invention of the Ostiaks, but has reached them in the first
instance from the Tatars. It is unfortunate that we should
know so little of the beliefs of the pagan period of the Tatar
tribe geographically nearest to the Ugrians, a tribe from which
these have acquired much interesting culture, but among the
tribes further south, which have better preserved the beliefs of
their forefathers we find a corresponding idea to the Ostiak
Karevel arrangement, appearing in such a manner that each

THE SONS OF GOD 405
son of the Over-god is given a different storey of the heavens
as dwelling-place. Radloff relates that he obtained from the
Lebed Tatars on his travels the following description of their
heaven: "The original Father, the Creator of everything, is
Kudai Bai-tllgonj he has four sons: Pyrshak-Khan, Tos-Khan,
Kara-Khan and Suilap. The son of Suiiap is Sary-Khan, and
the son of Pyrshak-Khan is Kyrgys-Khan, the protective spirit
of the local Tatars. All of these gods except Kara-Khan bring
happiness to men. They give food and protection against
dangers. To the highest god, Olgon, white horses are sacri-
ficed, to Pyrshak and his descendant brown onesj to all the
gods, grain is further sacrificed. The gods live in Heaven,
which according to these Tatars, is seven-storeyed. In the top-
most lives Clgon and his wife Kanym, in the next Pyrshak-
Khan, in the third Tos-Khan, in the fourth Kyrgys-Khan, in
the fifth Suilap, in the sixth Sary-Khan, and in the seventh the
messengers sent by the gods down to men. Kara-Khan
(" Black Prince ") is said to have deserted his father and re-
moved from the light-filled dwellings of Heaven to the under-
world." 7
It is to be understood that this heavenly order is not an
invention of the Turco-Tatar peoples, but has come to them
from elsewhere. For this reason the signification of the dif-
ferent gods is so vague to the people; from the investigator,
however, these gods dwelling in the seven storeys of the
heavens cannot hide their origin, pointing plainly as they do to
the Babylonian Planet gods, which, in their distant fatherland,
ruled over seven discs of the sky situated one above the other.
In another description recorded by Radloff, in which seven-
teen storeys of heaven are spoken of, a detail that is only an
accidental transformation found amongst a certain Altaic tribe,
the sun is mentioned as dwelling in the seventh, and the moon
in the sixth storey of Heaven.8 Thus the sun and the moon
govern two sky-discs situated one above the other. In the
seventh storey, together with the sun, lives an omniscient

4o6 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
Mergen-Tengere (" Sharpshooter-god"), who reminds one of
the Ostiak " Arrow-sacrifice Torem," Dare one assume this
deity to reflect an ancient god of lightning?
As the spirit of the ninth Heaven, Radloff mentions Kysa-
gan-Tengere. The corresponding Kisagan-Tengri of the
Mongols was the god of war, believed to protect the army, to
direct it in dangerous and difficult places, and to procure victory
for it by vanquishing the enemy. In the fifth storey lived
Kudai Jajutshi. If these, as seems probable, were originally
Star gods, the counterpart of the former would be the Babylo-
nian Nergal (Mars). Of the spirits of the upper storeys of
heaven only Kaira-Khan (" merciful khan ") and Bai-Clgon
(" Rich and Great ") are mentioned, the former being placed
in the seventeenth and the latter in the sixteenth storey of
Heaven j according to the most general belief, however, these
names apply to the same Over-god. The " black " Kara or
Kara-Khan of the earlier lists, who descended from Heaven to
Hades, being doubtless a Star god, deserves special attention}
on account of his colour and other attributes he may possibly
correspond to Saturn, called " the black star " by the ancient
Babylonians.
Instead of the more original group of seven, a group of
nine " sons " or " servants " of God appears in some districts.
Thus, in the tales of the Mongols we often meet with " nine
Tengeri, protectors and brothers," these words denoting attri-
butes often ascribed to them.9 The Buriats can give the names
of the " nine sons " of the Over-god. These are, however,
exceedingly artificial and vary in the different districts. Doubt-
less, these " nine sons " or " brothers " originally signified the
Planet gods, from whom the names of the days of the week
have been taken, although others have come later to join them
as the storeys in Heaven were increased to nine. Banzarov
says expressly that the Mongols worshipped " nine great stars,
which corresponded to nine Tengeri." 10 The group of nine
has not been as common in Asia as the group of seven, which is

THE SONS OF GOD 407
known also in Eastern Asia. In ancient times the Chinese
worshipped the " seven rulers " or " directors " of the sky, by
which they are said to have meant the sun, the moon and five
planets. Where the numbers seven and nine have started to
compete among themselves, one notices that the former has
often given way to the latter.
These sacred numbers of the gods have in places left their
mark on the sacrificial cults. The descriptions of the sacrifices
among the Chuvash living on the Volga often mention nine
sacrificial priests, nine sacrificial animals, nine cauldrons, etc."
Naturally the recipients of these sacrifices were formerly as
numerousj therefore the people even now try to arrange their
gods in a series of nine. Built on a similar foundation is the
custom of the Finnish tribes in East Russia, especially of the
pagan Cheremiss, of placing in some districts, when sacrificing
to the Heaven god, nine sacrificial loaves and as many bowls
of honey-drink on their altars.12 On the sacrifice platform of
the Yakuts one may also see nine small bowls.13
But let us return again to the older group of seven gods,
the members of which the Ostiaks call " the Interpreters " or
" the Watchmen of Heaven." The conception of the Planet
gods as a kind of interpreters seems to be of great antiquity.
Diodorus already speaks of it in describing the Chaldean fore-
casting from the stars in the following words: " Most impor-
tant to them is the examination of the movements of those
five stars, which are called planets. They call them the (In-
terpreters * (ypjuTjwts) j to the one we call Saturn they give a
special name, * Sun-star,' as they have it to thank for their
newest and most important forecasts. They call the planets
(Interpreters' because, while the other stars never deviate
from their routes, these go their own ways and thus interpret
the future and reveal to men the mercy of the gods."
The duties of these heavenly " Interpreters " is thus made
clear by Diodorus- According to the Chaldeans the starry
heavens are a book of fate, reflecting the path of life on earth,

4o8 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
and also affording to the wise an opportunity of reading the
future. That the ancient Babylonians already knew the
" Tables of Fate " and the " Book of Life " is known to us
from the Bible. Founded on these ancient models is the belief
of the Ostiaks, that the helpers of God write in the "Book
of Fate," according to his dictation, each time a child is born,
the length and all the varying fortunes of its life.1* That these
helpers or assistants are the previously described seven gods
appears from the old tales of the western Tatar tribes of
Siberia, in which seven Kudai live in a tent in the sky, before
which is the "golden tethering-post." Here the gods sit in
their abode behind a curtain, with the great " Book of Life "
before them, marking down births and deaths and deciding
the fate of men."
Though these fatalistic beliefs may have spread with Islam
wherever this religion obtained foothold, and thus among the
Turco-Tatar peoples also, it is still evident that, even much
earlier, they had taken deep root in the conception of life
currenf among the Central Asian peoples. It is to be noted
that the " Interpreters" and the " Sons of God " already
appear in the pagan beliefs. The Kudai of the Tatar tribes
already referred to have clearly come from Persia, as their
name, a Persian loan-word, shows.
The most interesting of all the assistants of the Heaven
god is a certain being, who, through the Turco-Tatar peoples,
has reached the distant Ostiak territory. This being has a
special duty to perform, as the name " Writer man " shows.
On the Demyanka he is regarded as the " first assistant of the
Heaven god " and is believed to live in heaven, a little lower
than the Over-god himself. His duty is said to be " to write
in the Book of Fate, according to the dictation of the Over-
god, how long and in what circumstances a mortal may live
on the earth." When a person dies, the Ostiaks say: "His
days written by the £ Writer man * have finished." In other
Ostiak districts a deity of this name is unknown, and for this

THE SONS OF GOD 409
reason Karjalainen assumes him to be of late origin and to
have sprung from the Heaven god himself, in other words,
he is a being developed from one of the Heaven god's attri-
butes, as, according to an explanation recorded by the author
in question at Tsingala, the name " Life-time writing man n
is one of the names of the Heaven god." This assumption is
hardly correct, since besides being the writer of the Book of
Fate, this deity appears also as the bearer of God's commands.
The Irtysh Ostiaks call him by a name borrowed from the
Tatars, Pairekse, and believe that his duties are to come down
to the earth on reconnaissances as the messenger of the heavens,
and to write in the Book of Fate the length and circumstances
of the life of each person being born. As the messenger and
spy of the Over-god he has been given the attribute " the Man
of many, lands," " the Travelling man." According to the
Ostiaks these journeys are often made in the shape of some
animal, occasionally as a goose. As such he resembles more the
"younger son " of God, " the world-watching man " or Ort-
iki, who in the shape of a goose or " sitting on the wings of a
goose goes to the place he desires," and who, in tales, is called
the "goose spirit." Further, the winged steed of the deity
under discussion, on which as the mediator between God and
man he flies through the air, and from " one nostril of which
fire darts out, from the other smoke," is spoken of.17 However
great the number of tales mixed up with these names may be,
it is probable that this messenger of God, the " Man of many
lands," the " Travelling man," did not originate among the
Ostiaks. Still less can a " writing " god have had his birth
among people who have never been able to write.
The same being was known to the Chuvash living on the
Volga, in their belief that the god of Fate, Kab'a, sends to the
earth at the birth of each child a being called Piileh, who
decrees the fate of the child and notes down its name. Having
accomplished his task, he returns to heaven and relates the
matter to the god of Fate.18 Possibly, the same being is to be

4ro SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
found in the Cheremiss " Propounder of God," to whom, when
sacrificing to the Heaven god, a special offering is prepared,
in order that he may lay before his master the troubles of the
Cheremiss people.1* The Votiaks also, at their horse-sacri-
fices, have a custom of sacrificing a goose, without knowing
any longer to which deity it is intended, remarking only that
the goose escorts the sacrificial horse to heaven.
In searching for the origin of the Writing god, we must
turn again to the land of the twin rivers, where the art of
writing was known earlier than elsewhere in Asia, and where,
from ancient times, the Tables of Fate and the Book of Life
were known. A god corresponding to the " Writing man "
of the Ostiaks is also to be found among the ancient Babylo-
nians, who call this scribe of the gods Nabu. As the writer of
the Book of Fate he is pictured with an object resembling a
pen in his hand and the art of writing is itself called "the
wisdom of Nabu." Among the planets he appears as Mercury.
The same being is met with in another land where the art
of writing was known, Egypt, where Thout is the counterpart
of the Babylonian scribe. This ibis-headed deity is often
pictured, like Nabu, with a tablet and writing materials in his
hand.20
In addition to the groups of gods just mentioned, we meet
in the mythology of Central Asia with more numerous groups,
these forming also a closed ring, the origin of which the people
can no longer explain. As in the Altaic tale of the Sumeru
mountain, the thirty-three gods (Tengeri) believed to live
on this world-mountain have come from India. Most prob-
ably connected with these gods is the information given by
Verbitskiy regarding the cosmos of the Altaic peoples, that
"in Heaven there are thirty-three discs, one higher than the
other."21
Three times greater is the crowd of Tengeri in the Buriat
Heaven. These were divided either according to their disposi-
tions into good and evil, or according to where their habitations

THE SONS OF GOD 4"
were supposed to be, into " western " and " eastern." The
" western," friendly to man, were called " white "; the eastern,
bringing all kinds of evil, fogs, diseases, and other misfortunes,
were called " black" Tengeri. Of the former there are
fifty-five, of the latter forty-four. The Mongols have also
known these ninety-nine Tengeri of Heaven. The Buriats
relate how these gods, who formerly, lived in peace together,
quarrelled among themselves. In the beginning there were
then fifty-four western, good Tengeri and forty-four eastern,
evil ones, one being on the border of each group but belonging
to neither. Being in the minority, the " easterns" begged
this solitary god, the name of whom is said to have been Segen-
Sebdek-Tengeri, to join their side, but the " westerns " put
up a resistance and tempted this god to their own side. In some
districts the source of the disagreement, and even of the war
among the gods, is mentioned as being the beautiful daughter
of Segen-Sebdek-Tengeri, whom both groups passionately
wished to own.22
That these ninety-nine gods are not the invention of either
Buriats or Mongols, appears already from the fact that these
peoples do not know the grounds for the above division, nor
do the names given by the Buriats to these gods throw light
on the question. To judge from all the data, this idea has
arrived complete from elsewhere.
More difficult is the explanation as to how this fancy has
originated. An idea has spread among the Altai Tatars, that
besides this earth of ours, the smallest and lowest, there are
ninety-nine other worlds.23 It is further related that when
Olgen thrust out the devil Erlik and his company from
Heaven, Erlik pronounced the following words: " Thou hast
cast out my servants and myself from Heaven to the earth,
these falling in forty-three different places- Therefore shall
I send out these forty-three kinds of servants (etker} and these
shall work evil each in the place where he has fallen from
Heaven, and trouble men up to their death." Counting Erlik

412
SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY
himself there are thus forty-four of these Altai Tatar evil
spirits, or as many as the evilly-disposed Tengeri of the Buri-
ats.a* The placing of the evil spirits in the east and the good
in the west by the latter is peculiar, all other peoples having
a contrary opinion. Most probably some star-myth is at the
back of these beliefs also. For the sake of comparison it may
be mentioned that the Chinese know of seventy-two good and
thirty-six evil Star gods.