CHAPTER XII
WATER SPIRITS
/COMPARATIVE research shows that the ideas of the
\ Finno-Ugric peoples regarding Water spirits have to a
large extent been influenced by impressions from other sources.
In remote times, the Lapps, for success in fishing, seem to
have offered chiefly to their gods of stone or Seides, which
the Fisher Lapps always put up on the coasts of rivers and
seas. Such a Seide stone was called also a " Fish-god." The
spirits living in the water itself have never had sacrifices
offered up to them to the same degree.
A god, known only at the coasts, is Akkruva, the upper part
of whose body the Lapps imagine to be human, the head
covered with long hair, the lower part of the body that of a
fish. She rises at times from the sea and, sitting upon the
water, rinses and combs her hair. Sometimes Akkruva walks
up to the mouths of the rivers taking fishes with her, and at
such times the catch is excellent. What this sea-spirit, called
by Friis Avfruwa, really is, is shown above all by her name
— a distortion of the " Havfru " of the Scandinavians, which,
like the above mentioned being, had a human upper body
whilst the lower body was fishlike.1
Limited also to Scandinavian Lapland is the Ravgga,
which lives in the water mostly in human shape, its appearance
or voice predicting misfortune, tempest or shipwreck. Meri-
1'iinen, who calls it in Finnish, Meriraukka, tells that it ap-
pears on the shore examining the accessories of a boat, from
which, later, somebody will be drowned. When it is seen
walking on the shore, the duty of the beholder is to walk
round it with a firesteel, when it will stop, or, if it disappears

192 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
on approach, to wait for its reappearance. It should then
be asked why it has appeared, who will be drowned and when.
That the Meriraukka is the spirit of a drowned person, is
shown by the fact that it keeps in the neighbourhood of the
body, the boat, the clothes, etc., of the drowned.2
As already pointed out by Fritzner the Ravgga of the Lapps
is the same being as the Old Norse draugr.*
As will be seen from the name, the Lapps have also re-
ceived from the Scandinavians the evil Nekke or Nik (Swedish
Nacken), which is known also in Finnish Lapland, and is fur-
ther met with among the Finns and the Esthonians.4
A Water spirit with a Lapp name, to whom offerings are
sometimes made, is the Cacce-olmai ("the Water man").
He is the god of fishing, who brings fish to the hooks or in
the nets and lines. In the notes made by S. Kildal we read
that at sacrifices men made an image of the Water man and
put it into a crevice so that he might give them more luck.
On the other hand they sacrificed to the " Water man " so
that he should not do them any harm on the water.5
The Cacce-olmai of the Scandinavian Lapps corresponds
to the Cacce-jielle (" Water dweller ") of the Russian Lapps.
This is a dangerous spirit who calls upon and then tries to
drag people into the water. The sight of it predicts disaster.
A woman who saw this spirit while fetching water from the
sea asked him whether his appearance predicted good or bad.
She was told that her son would die, which happened also
within three days.
Cacce-jielle presents itself to people in different shapes}
as an -old man, a pretty woman, a naked child, or often also
as a fish, which somehow differs from other fishes. It is
considered dangerous to kill such a fish. When seeing it
one has to sacrifice something, a piece of bread, a coin or
brandy. Strange fish are said to be the children of the water
spirit.6
The " Water dweller " of the Russian Lapps corresponds

WATER SPIRITS 193
completely to the Vodyanoy of the Russians, whose Water-
Nymph, the Rusalka, is called by the Kola-Lapps Cacce-
jienne ("Water mother"). In the shape of a naked woman
she emerges from the water at dawn to comb her long black
hair. When frightened, she throws herself into the water
so quickly, that she leaves her comb on the shore in the
place where she was sitting. She loves men and entices them
to her. The Saiva-neida (" Sea maid ") of the Western Lapps
is a loan from Scandinavia.7
A Water spirit is also found amongst the Samoyeds, who
call it the " Master of the water." Generally he is looked
upon as a dangerous spirit, sometimes bringing disease. Ac-
cording to Donner they sacrifice money, etc., to him, espe-
cially at the mouths of rivers. In cases of illness they hang
clothes on bushes near the water for him. During certain
seasons the " Master of the water " is offered sacrifices that
he may give fish.8 As a rule, images are not made of him,
only the Turaks worshipping him in the form of a fishlike
image of wood, or choosing a specially shaped dried fish to
represent him."
The Ostiaks call the Water spirit Jengk-tongk (" Water
spirit"). Patkanov tells that sacrificial feasts are held on the
shore, before the beginning of the fishing, to honour the
Water spirit and to influence him in the fishermen's favour.
Although their Water spirit has no image, almost all the
usual sacrificial ceremonies are gone through. For the spirit
itself the blood of bigger animals and of cocks is poured into
the water. Polyakov says that the spirit was offered brandy
and a cock, a lamb or a calf, and that only some drops of the
blood of the victim were poured into the water. Also in the
autumn, as soon as the rivers are frozen, the Ostiaks sacrifice
to the Jengk-tongk on the ice,10
Like the Lapps, the Ostiaks sacrificed in older times for
luck in fishing chiefly to the spirits of the dead, which are
believed to live in certain holy places. Karjalainen points

194 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
out that the Forest spirit as well as the Water spirit is sacri-
ficed to chiefly in such districts where foreign influences may
be noticed. Except in tales, where the Water spirit has been
given special features, the idea entertained regarding it, espe-
cially in more remote territories, is very vague." At Vasyugan
they sacrifice to a certain Fish spirit, Kul jungk (" Fish
spirit"), that lives in the water and is said to give fish to its
favourites. When the ice has broken up, a fish-like image
is made of wood or birch-bark and taken along to the fishing
place. Especially of the first catch is the Fish spirit given
its share.12
The Water spirit of the Voguls, Vit-khan (" Water Khan ")>
appears to be still less than that of the Ostiaks an object of
sacrificial worship, although it is mentioned in folk-lore, e.g.,
that the spirit or his daughter may marry human beings.18
A loan from the Siryans is the Water spirit Kul, an evil
being living in deep waters and known both in the western
districts of the Ostiaks and in the northern part of the Vogul
territory. It has a human shape.14
In leaving the Lapps and Ugrians and turning to the other
tribes, we pass at the same time from hunting and fishing
peoples to agricultural ones. Fishing is no longer of the same
importance, although it is in places pursued next to the chief
occupation as a good second industry. The importance of the
water is nevertheless not diminished by the development of
agriculture. The villages are still, as far as possible, situated
near to the waters, which besides ways of communication are
used also to afford power for mills. Agriculture, moreover,
has drawn the attention of man to an important feature of
water, namely its secret power of fertilization, without which
no vegetation can exist. Man being thus in many respects
dependent upon this important element of nature, the result
is that the water itself becomes an object of sacrificial cult.
Before considering the animated water itself, we will first
glance at those Water spirits, found amongst other Finno-

WATER SPIRITS 195
Ugrian tribes, to which the imagination of the people has
given distinct features.
The Votiaks call their Water spirit Vu-murt (" Water
man "). In some places he is also called Vu-kuzo ("Water
master ")• He is a human-like, often naked being, with very
big eyes and long black hair. They speak also of the fingers
of the " Water man " j these are stones resembling thunder-
bolts which they believe to be found on the shores of rivers.
Usually, the " Water man " lives in deep waters, such as the
big rivers and seas, but he also likes to dwell in little brooks
and especially in miHr ponds. The " Water man " has a house
and a family in the water. According to folk-tales he may
also seek the company of people, especially at the time of the
great fairs. The " Water man " then appears dressed as a
peasant, but is easily recognized by the left side of his coat
being always damp. Often the " Water man " is an invisible
being, and woe to the unfortunate person to whom he then
appears, as this is a foreboding of death or other misfortune.
Like the male Water spirit, the female has also features
which betray her foreign origin. She is beautiful and her
naked body is glistening white. Sometimes in the twilight
the wife or daughter of the " Water man " will emerge on
the shore to comb her long black hair. In some places she is
said to have breasts as big as buckets. The male spirit, like
the female one, is a shy being, who immediately throws him-
self into the water on being observed by a human eye.
Besides appearing generally in human form, the " Water
man " may sometimes become visible in the shape of a fish,
Fishermen have seen him as a pike, differing from other
pikes by his enormous size and by his sleeping with his head
in the opposite direction to that of other pikes.
Twice a year, in the spring and in the autumn, the Water
spirits have weddings, during which they move in the water
merrily and noisily, causing inundations, so that the mill
sluices break. The Northern Votiaks have, further, the idea

196 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
that they come during the winter before Christmas to the vil-
lages and occupy the bath-houses; one may sometimes meet
them in the twilight on the village street. For this reason
the Votiaks are afraid to go out alone without a light. It is
also dangerous at these times to make a noise near the water,
to rinse dirty clothes, or to ferry singing people over any
river. While they are thus on the move they are called the
" evil spirits." When Twelfth Day is over, the Votiaks
accompany the Water spirits back to the water where they
live. On account of this the feast of Epiphany is also called
" the following of the Water spirit." During Twelfth Night
the young people wander with torches from bath-house to bath-
house, to hear their fate and to call to the " Water man " —
"Leave us! " The following morning men supplied with
axes, sticks, or branches go down to the river, where they knock
on the ice saying: " Go away from us." On this occasion they
turn to the river itself with offerings: " Preserve us from all
disease and accidents." A piece of bread, a spoonful of por-
ridge and a piece of meat are thrown into the water. In some
districts it was the custom to sacrifice a duck to the " Water
man " through an ice-hole.
The Votiaks1 impression of the " Water man " is more that
of an evil than a good spirit. He brings ruin to both people
and animals, and is dangerous in the winter, because he breaks
the ice under the feet of the wanderers so that these sink
helplessly into the depths. The " Water man " can also send
sickness. If appeased he can, however, be of very great use.
For example, he helps the miller in his work, and fishermen
by driving fish into their nets. He is also believed to protect
and increase the water birds.
Sacrifices are made to the " Water man " for accidental
reasons, but also at fixed times. In the autumn the Votiaks
sacrifice a duck or a goose in the river, so that no one will
drown or be taken ill with ague. At the same time the " Water
man " is prayed to, to protect the geese and ducks, and to

WATER SPIRITS 197
increase their number. The blood of the bird, its bones and
a piece of the meat are thrown into the water, along with
bread. Sacrifices are made in addition when sickness occurs,
a bird often sufficing for this offering. If'the mill sluice is
out of order, or if there is fear of a flood, offerings are made
to the " Water man." 1D
Among the Siryans the usual name of the Water spirit is
Kul, but it is also called Vasa ("Water dweller"). As
among the Votiaks the Water spirit possesses here distinct
features that hint at a longer period of development. This
is true of both the male and the female spirit. The male one
is a black, hairy and wet being, who at times sits on the shore
shaking himself and sometimes seizing the mill-wheel. Some-
times the people imagine him to be a being with a big head
and big round eyes, who at times emerges from the water and
comes ashore to comb his dark green hair. He is dressed in a
green robe or his body is naked. When he throws himself
from the shore into the water a tempest arises and the waves
rise high. He swims thus, especially in bad weather, in the
water, but at other moments he has been seen rocking on the
water or on fishing nets or standing on some pier. Sometimes
the water spirit haunts the night, slapping the washing hung
out to dry, or crying loudly on the river-bank. He has also
been seen at the fish-spearing and recognised by the sudden
disappearance of his boat and torch.
As with the male Water spirit, the characteristics of the
female one differ in different districts. She is also a long-
haired being, who combs her hair with her big paws. There
is a tale about a peasant, who found a Water maid sitting
naked on a hill, combing her hair, and frightened her so that
she threw herself into the water, leaving her comb on the hill.
The peasant took the comb to his house, but in the night the
Water maid came to claim it back.
The Water spirit may also appear in the shape of a small
child, according to the Siryans. The children of the Water

i98 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
spirit are, while young, hairy and of a peculiar appearance,
often like fishes, but become later more human in shape.
Now and then a child of the Water spirit may stray into the
net of a fisherman.
Like the Votiaks the Siryans also know the stony fingers of
the Water spirit. These are belemnites, found near the beaches
in the land of the Siryans.
At times the Water spirit takes another shape than that of
a human being. Thus it may appear, as among the Votiaks,
in the shape of a big pike. In the collected works of Nalimov
the Water spirit is mentioned as a pike that could speak and
had long white hair on its head. By mistake it had gone into
the net of a fisherman.
The Siryans also believe the Water spirits to have weddings,
when they make much noise and break down the sluices of mills,
and that they go and dwell amongst human beings at Epiphany.
The Water spirit of the Siryans is a being much feared.
The mere sight of him means tempest, death or other dis-
aster. He entices both mankind and animals to his home.
From the notes of Wichmann it appears that the Siryans
offered the " Sea spirit" butter and bread in order that he
might give them fish. When fishing one had to be careful
not to use bad words, as this incensed the Water spirit, who
m his anger would seize the net so firmly, that the fisherman
could not move it. Like the fisherman, the miller also has
to keep on good terms with the Water spirit. For other pur-
poses also, the Water spirit is sometimes given small offerings.
No Siryan will go over water without giving the Water
spirit a gift: if nothing else he throws at least a thread from
his belt into the water.16
According to the Siryans the Water spirits have their origin
in the spirits of the drowned, which continue living in the
water, where they have entered the service of the Water spirit.
Even the name Kul is, as is proved by Set'ala*, the old name of
a Finno-Ugric god who lived under the earth, the cult of

WATER SPIRITS 199
which was obviously connected with the cult of the dead.17
When" comparing the present highly developed characteris-
the spirit Kul, which the similarly-named spirit of the
peoples, borrowed from the Siryans, does not possess, with
the corresponding features of the Water spirit of the Great
Russians, it is evident that the first mentioned, even to its de-
tails, is a copy of the latter. The name Vasa seems to be only
a translation of the Russian Vodyanoy.
A fully corresponding Water spirit of the Cheremiss is their
"Water master" (Vttt-oza). He is said to dwell in such
waters as do not dry up during the hot season. Usually the
Water spirit is here also an evil and feared being. Especially
is it dangerous to swim at midday. Where he does not
succeed in kidnapping a man, he will take cattle. The male
Water spirit appears usually as an old man who is often seen
before dawn on the surface of the water near the shore. He
is dressed sometimes in rags, and sometimes in splendid
clothes; his chest being, for example, sometimes covered with
silver coins, but at times he is also naked. The Cheremiss
say that the greater a river is in which a Water spirit lives,
the richer it is. Should a human being cast his eye on him,
he throws himself immediately into the water. Besides his
human form, the Water spirit can also show himself in the
form of a horse or a bullock. The Water spirits living in the
sea show themselves mainly as bulls, and the bellowing of
the " water bull" has often been heard from the sea. But
the Water spirit can also take the form of a fish, or of other
miscellaneous objects. But in whatever form he shows him-
self, the sight denotes disaster — often death — to the one
who has seen him, or to some one belonging to him.
The female Water spirit, " Water master's daughter," has
been seen on the shore combing her long hair with a gold
or silver comb. Sometimes she becomes entangled in a fisher-
man's fishing-tackle. Once some fishers found a great being
in their net, which dragged it here and there. With great

200 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
labour they managed to keep hold of their net, and when they
finally succeeded in dragging it nearer to the boat, they saw
a pretty dark maid, who, however, disappeared immediately
from sight. The net became at once lighter and was found
to contain no fish at all. Sometimes people are fortunate
enough to get a " Water master's daughter " into their power.
This happens only when they throw a piece of iron at her or
touch her with their hands, as then the water-maid cannot
move an inch.
In prayers, the Water spirit is often referred to as " Water
old man" (Viit-kuguza) and " Water old woman" (Vut-
kuva). The Cheremiss worship the " Old man " and the
" Old woman " of the water when they go swimming or fish-
ing. The fishermen offer up to these spirits bread or brandy,
sometimes even a duck, a goose, or a hen, as they are supposed
to drive fish into the fishermen's tackle. In the spring, when
the first fish has been caught, the Eastern Cheremiss generally
boil it immediately, and eat it without breaking the bones,
the latter being thrown back into the water with the following
words; "'Water man,' come and eat fish; I have tasted it
already, give us still more fresh fish." "
Similar beliefs in human-like Water spirits are met with
among the Mordvins. The spirits living in the water are
here called Ved-eraj (" Water dweller ") or Vetsa-er'aj (" He
who inhabits the water "). There are many such spirits, and
they are malignant beings, who, like Vampire spirits, lie in
wait for newly born children, and devour grain that has been
cursed by an enemy.19
The Baltic Finns have been under Germanic influence.
The Nacken of the Swedes is called Nakk by the Esthonians,
and they believe it to live in all deeper waters, such as the
sea, rivers, lakes and wells. The deepest spot in the water
is particularly its dwelling-place, and also any whirlpool.
The Nakk presents itself in different shapes, as a human
being, an animal, or even some inanimate object. Neverthe-

WATER SPIRITS 201
less, it lives in the imagination of the people mostly as a
human being. In this shape, according to the idea of the
Esthonians, it is both male and female, and may appear full
grown or as a child. The people believe the male spirit to be
a grey old man, who at times swims in the water with his
enormous, widely opened maw, swallowing everybody who
comes in his path, sometimes lifting his head above the water,
sometimes seating himself on the shore of a river, lake or
sea, or on the cover of a well to watch for people. When ap-
pearing in human shape he executes human work. Now and
then he is found by night at the fish-spearing places and is
recognized by having his torch not in a boat but on a stone
slab. One of the most remarkable features of the Nakk is
his song, by which he bewitches his hearers, who in this way
become his prisoners. In the neighbourhood of Hapsal the
belief prevails that when the Nakk sings or plays, men and
animals begin to dance in gradually increasing tempo until
they at last fall into the sea. Although the Nakk appears in
human shape, he has, in the tales of the people, fish teeth.
Like the male spirit, the female human-like Water spirit
has also the pronounced character that proves development.
To distinguish her from the male, the Esthonians call her
Nakineiu or Nakmeitsi ("Nakk's maid"), Veeneiu ("Water
maid") or Mereneiu ("Sea maid"). Usually, Na'kineitsi
is a pretty young girl, who sits on the surface of the water,
or on a stone on the shore, or in the shadow of a tree growing
near to the water, combing her long hair with a golden comb.
Her hair is wonderfully pretty, now golden yellow, now
grass-green. Occasionally she appears naked, at other times
dressed. In some districts the Nakineitsi has a human body
and a fish tail.
As with the Nakk, one of the most important features of
the Nakineitsi is her song and her music. On the coasts they
speak also of the cattle of the water-maid, which are beautiful
and fat. The colour of the animals is usually grey, like the

202 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
sea. Suddenly emerging from the sea, the cattle come ashore,
where they are tended by the Nakineitsi until she again dis-
appears with them after awhile. The Livonians tell of blue
sea-cows j some of these sometimes go astray from the other
cattle and remain on the shore, falling thus into the hands of
men.
Besides his human form, the Nakk of the Esthonians also
appears in the shape of a young, usually grey horse, sometimes
also as a white foal. This emerges from the water, runs all
round the shore, approaches children and entices them to sit
on its back, whereupon it immediately rushes back into the sea at
a gallop. At times it can also appear as an ox, now black, now
brown or grey, or as a white calf. The Nakk that has changed
himself into an animal, is recognized by his coming from the
sea and disappearing into the water. Sometimes he even
changes himself into a startled hare, which by running to
and fro on a pier tries to entice its pursuer so far, that the
latter is in danger of falling into the water. He may also
appear as a waterbird, a swan, a goose or a duck. Further,
the Nakk is seen in the shape of a fish, which at times comes
ashore, winds its tail round a fisherman, and drags him into
the water. Often the Water spirit appears also as a big
strange-looking or one-eyed fish. Two fisherman had once
fished a long time without catching anything when one of
them saw two strangely shaped gold-glittering fishes in the
water. Neglecting the warning of his comrade he set about
catching these fish and got one in his net, but as he was about
to lift it from the water there suddenly arose a strong tempest
and snowstorm, and at the same moment the fish disappeared
from the net. The Nakk can also take the shape of a lifeless
object.
In whatever shape the Nakk appears, he is always a danger-
ous and feared being, whose mere appearance predicts drown-
ing or other disaster. Even if the one who sees him is not
himself doomed, one of his relatives will perish in the water.

WATER SPIRITS 203
Some people believe that in all waters where a Nakk dwells,
a man will be drowned every summer. When the time for
this approaches, a voice is heard from the water: "The hour
has struck, a man is wanted." Against his will somebody
will then go and bathe and lose his life in the water. Be-
fore he drowns, the water becomes agitated, boils and seethes,
but calms down as soon as it has got its victim. The Nakk
can drown people not only in deep but in shallow places, where
the water is only a foot deep.
The Nakk takes his victim either by enticement, by be-
witching songs, or by appearing in the shape of the animals
or object that a man desires. At times he bewitches the eyes
of people so that they no longer recognize their surroundings,
but lose themselves and at last are at his mercy. The cattle
hi entices by changing himself into an animal, mingling with
them on their pasture ground, and, on his return into the
water, enticing the other animals to follow him.
One who notices the danger in time, may protect himself
against the menace of the Nakk. An effective remedy is to
mention his name, as on hearing this he flees at once and throws
himself into the water. To protect themselves, the inhabitants
of the island Mohn, before going into the sea, take a stone
from the beach, spit on it and throw it into the sea, saying:
" A cake to the Nakk." Women also do this when they go
to the sea-shore to watch the sheep, as they believe that the
Nakk will not touch them or their cattle if they throw him a
cake into the water.20
The Nakki of the Finns closely resembles the Nakk of the
Esthonians, only a few new features being met with in the
former. In West Finland the Water spirit is represented as
a man of unusual size. He has been seen in the shape of an
immense, long and stout old man standing over the water,
so that one foot was on the one shore and the other foot on
the other shore of the sea. A miller saw him thus standing
over a waterfall, like an unusually big, grey man. Probably

204 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
this latter type of the Water spirit has been influenced by the
traits of the Forest spirit, which appears in mythology more
regularly than the Water spirit as a lone being. At times the
Water spirit also appears as a dwarf. So he was once seen
by fishermen: " in the bag of the net was a small human-like
old man, not longer than two spans, with long hair reaching
to his throat."
Sometimes he is half-man, half-animal: the upper part
human, with horse-feet. He does not seem to appear in com-
plete horse form in the imagination of the Finns. On the
other hand he has been seen as a dog with a long beard; some-
times as an enormous buck, which wears net-pouches on its
horns. Often Nakki appears also in the shape of an object,
at times as a big balk or log, which differs from an ordinary
one by having an eye as big as a plate and a mane on its back, or
as a tree, fallen into the water, which sinks when one tries to
sit on it.
The female Nakki has also many other names such as
Nakinneito, Nakinpiika (" Nakki maid "), Vedenneito (" Water
maid"), Merenneito ("Sea maid"), Vedenemanta ("Water
mistress "). According to the ideas of the people this Water
spirit is a pretty being. In Osterbotten they believe that the
female Nakki is a beautiful woman with glittering white body
and very long curly hair. On the coast of Osterbotten and in
Nyland the Water maid is further known by her breasts as big
as buckets, which are thrown over the shoulder when bathing.
When the Water maid appears, she is always busy in some
way. Now she washes her face or her breasts, now she combs
her hair, splashes gaily in the water, washes her clothes on
a stone on the shore or on a rock in the sea, or goes sometimes
on land to watch the water cattle in the grass on the beach.
The idea that the Water spirit possesses magnificent cattle
in the water is very general in Finland. Often it has been
noticed how stately cows emerge from the sea, which on the
approach of a man go back into the water and dive down.

WATER SPIRITS 205
When the Water spirit disappears with his cattle at sun-
rise, it may happen that an animal is left on the shore. Ac-
cording to the general belief of the people, this can be seized
by walking round it once or thrice with a piece of iron in the
hand, as then it can return no more to the water, but belongs
to man. In vain the spirit cries from the water for his lost
animal. It is very advantageous to possess a cow of the Water
spirit, not only because it is pretty, but also because it gives
much milk; it is however to be noted, that it always gives
only the same quantity that was milked the first time.
At times the cow of the Water maid is like a fish. Once in
Karelia a fish with horns and feet was caught in the net of a
fisherman, who, after some wondering at its appearance, threw
it ashore, with the result that in the night the plaintive cries
of the Water woman were heard.
According to the Scandinavian Finns, besides the Water
spirits, the Maahiset (" those living under the earth ") also
possess big cattle that man may seize, if he throws something
made of steel upon them. As the Water spirits rise from the
water, so the " Undergrounders " emerge from the earth and
disappear therein. In North Finland and in Russian Karelia
the same power is given to the cows of the Manalaiset ("the
deceased").
Now and then the Water spirit also appears in the shape of
a big fish of unusual species or strange shape. Once some
boys caught a big salmon-trout, which had lost itself on a low
river-bank. At home they were told, however, that the fish
was a Marras, and they were instructed to take it back to the
water, because they would otherwise drown on the same spot
where they had caught the trout. Lencqvist already mentions
the Marta as an omen of death.
The Finnish Nakki is, like the Esthonian Nakk and the
Swedish Nacken, always an evil and feared being. That
children may take care when near the water, they are fright-
ened by words such as " Nakki comes." A usual means of

206 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
protection against Nakki when bathing is a form of witch-
craft in connection with certain words. On stepping into the
water the bather once, thrice, or even nine times, scoops water
on to the beach with his hand or throws a stone, taken from
the water, or earth from the sea4>ottom, on the shore, saying:
" Nakki ashore, I into the water." After bathing the pro-
ceeding is reversed, the water or the object used previously
is now thrown back in the river or the sea, with the saying:
" Nakki into the water, I on land." Another means of pro-
tection against Nakki is to put into the water a piece of metal
or a metal object while one is bathing. Similarly, animals
also have to be protected against the evil caused by Nakki.
When bathing a horse they used to put into the water some
one of the above-mentioned metal objects or bind a fire-steel
to the tail, or hang a bell on the neck of the horse. More
particularly had this to be done with an unshod horse, be-
cause Nakki is believed not to seize a shod horse.
Similar ideas and means of protection are general also
amongst the Swedes.
Of foreign origin is also an idea of the Finns, that the
Water spirit is a musician, whose wonderful music anybody
can learn. The proper moment to approach it for this purpose
is Midsummer Night, or before the Eves of Lent and Easter.
The spirit may be seen on a rock in a waterfall, on one that
has never been under water, or on one that is always sur-
rounded by water. The person wishing to learn has to take
a violin with him. When the Water spirit has emerged from
the waterfall, he will seat himself on the same stone as the
man, turning his back to him, and start to teach him. As a
reward the man has to promise himself to the Water spirit
and during the lesson bind himself fast to the master, but with
caution, so that the ties break or become undone when the
spirit suddenly precipitates himself into the water. Should
the fetters not loosen, the pupil falls into the power of the
Water spirit. The one who succeeds in passing through the

WATER SPIRITS 207
trial becomes a great player, who can make people dance even
against their will. Sometimes his violin develops the wonder-
ful quality of playing by itself and even its pieces will play
when the violin is at last broken.
The wonderful music to be learnt from the Water spirit is
known round all the Scandinavian countries.
Corresponding to Nakki is the Vetehinen (" Water
dweller ")> known originally only in Russian Karelia, Ingria,
and East Finland, who in the imagination of the people ap-
pears as a human-like being with marked characteristics.
Vetehinen is also regarded as a malignant being. He causes
a disease (eruption) and, like Nakki, seizes people and
animals as sacrifices. Protection against him, as against Nakki,
is found in metal objects. The idea of Vetehinen does not
however completely cover that of Nakki, which latter is ex-
clusively the cause of drowning, because the Karelians worship
the former also as the giver of luck in fishing.21 Foreign in-
fluence is to be noted already in the name of Vetehinen, of
which Castren says that both in idea and etymologically there
is a correspondence to the Water spirit, which the Russians call
Vodyanoy."
The Mordvinian Ved- or Vetsa-eraj corresponds in name to
the Water spirit of the Votes, the Jarv-elaj (" Sea dweller ").*8
Only through their literature do the Finns know anything now
of the old Water spirit of the Tavastlanders, Ahti, about
whom Agricola says, that he " brought fishes from the water."
In the old popular poetry he appears as a water dweller, and
in a song about the origin of frost, the following description
occurs: " then thou caused a strong frost, when thou made Ahti
freeze in the sea." z* The etymology of the name is not
clear. According to Daniel Juslenius (1745) Wainamoinen
was also a Water spirit j Agricola does not, however, mention
him thus, but says only that he " composed songs." Both Ahti
and Wainamoinen appear in folk-poetry as mighty heroes.
Over all Finland and also amongst the Finnish Lapps and

2o8 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
Northern Esthonians the dark Vedenhaltija ("Water ruler")
is known. He is supposed to appear before a disaster in hu-
man shape, and he corresponds completely to the Swedish
Sjora, Sjoradare, etc.
The belief that the drowned are transformed into Water
spirits is general among most of the Finno-Ugric peoples.
The Esthonians, for instance, believe that the size and shape
of a Nakk depend upon the person drowned. If an adult
had fallen victim to the water, his Nakk would appear as a
full-grown person 5 if a child, the spirit would appear as a
child. When swimming in places where people had been
drowned, one might easily get cramp, because the spirits of
the dead seized the living by their feet and dragged them
down. Like the Siryans, the Esthonians sometimes call the
water spirit by a name that originally meant the spirit of the
dead: Kull or Koll (cf. the Lapp Ravgga). The spirit living
in a river is called Joe Kull (" River Kull»)-"
A similar being, although not originally of Cheremiss origin,
is their Pele kolese. (" Half-dead "), which floats on the sur-
face of the water with its face turned upwards like someone
drowned. A person who tries to save it falls a victim himself
to the water. The Cheremiss have a general idea that where
a corpse lies, there its " soul" (or*) remains. The fishermen
at Belaya told me how a young Cheremiss mother, who, on
her way back from a feast, had been drowned by falling
through thin ice, rises early in the morning on the beach to
express her sorrow for the babe she had left. The fishermen
had heard her plaints: "My breasts are filled with milk, my
little child cries at home! "2a
Further evidence of the transformation of drowned people
into Water spirits, to whom one sacrifices for luck in fishing,
are the Soiem tongk (" River spirits ") of the Konda Ostiaks,
" which are drowned people." According to Paasonen, every
family has a common idol-house for its members lost thus,
where they are given offerings twice a year, in spring and in

WATER SPIRITS 209
autumn, before the beginning of the fishing season; the latest
of the deceased receiving a cock, while to those transformed
earlier, clothes are given. The drowned appear during the
course of the year following their death to the priest and
are then escorted to the god-house, receiving at the same time
a shirt or a kerchief as an offering.27 But from the examples
given it becomes evident that the " souls " of the different
species of fish, or their tutelary genii are also contained in the
Finno-Ugric Water spirits. The Yurak Samoyeds make an
image of a fish-like " Water master " or they choose as such a
dried fish of peculiar appearance. The Ostiaks make an image
of a fish when they worship their " Fish spirit," and with other
peoples also the Water spirit often appears in the form of a
rare fish. The Pite Lapps speak of a Water spirit with horns.28
Sometimes these " spirit-fish " can be detected only by their
position. The Water spirit of the Permian tribes appears as
a large pike which is recognised by the fact that it is larger
than others, and that when sleeping it holds its head against
the current of the water, or towards the shore, or contrary
to the other fish. The " Water dweller" of the Russian
Lapps often appears as a turbot or a flounder, which contrary
to the habit of these fish conies inshore. Sometimes the Fish
spirit strives after more human-like features.
The Siryans say that the " Water dweller " when young
resembles a fish, but as it grows begins to resemble a human
being. A " spirit-pike " could speak and had long light hair
on its head.29 In Pite Lapland a white fish was caught that
had scales all over its body, except on its breast, which re-
minded one of a woman's breast.30 In a tale from the Finnish
coast, a Water spirit was found by the people, which from the
front was like a most beautiful young maiden, but on its back
was covered with scales and had also fins. It is believed in ad-
dition that in the Baltic there are water-dwellers with a human
body and a fish-tail. Even when a spirit appears altogether
as a human being, it has generally some fish-like feature,

2io FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
such as the large maw of a fish, fish-teeth and round eyes.
Another significant fact is that it moves with the other fish,
taking them with it from the sea to the rivers, and also that it
wanders into the fishers' traps. There is a story of such a half-
fish, half-female being in the Karelian folk-songs which Lonn-
rot uses in the Aino episode in Kalevala (vlii. 45—133)-
The Finno-Ugric peoples also envisage the water itself
animistically. The Cheremiss say that the " water lives," it
moves from one place to another, serves people and carries
their boats. Donner relates, that the Samoyeds, when they
are out in their boats and come to a new river, wash their
heads with its water. A large river they call " Mother." 31
This custom is met with also among the Siryans, who, when
they go out fishing, sacrifice bread to the Vorikva River say-
ing: " Vorikva-mother, carry us without danger, protect us,
and give us a whole boatful of fish."32 The Votiaks and
Mordvins, when praying, use also the name " Mother " to
their rivers and brooks as the Russians speak of the " Volga-
mother," etc.
The Volga and Baltic Finns have the same belief, i.e.,
fhat lakes can move from one place to another. This may
happen as a consequence of someone offending the water by
polluting it. They say that when the sea wanders, a black
bull goes bellowing before it, so that people may know to
get out of its way.53
In a little village in the District of Birsk there is a lake
that has the same name as the village, Cherlak. The people
say it has two sisters, Azelekel and Kandralekel, which are
also two lakes in the District of Belebey. Cherlak Lake is
the youngest sister and is called the " Cherlak girl." Some-
times it is asked to visit the older sisters, and to take with it
water, fish and sea birds. Some time ago it paid a visit to
them, the lake being in the meanwhile so dry that cattle were
able to pasture on its bed, the only water being in a hole.
The village was quite unhappy over the shortage of water and

WATER SPIRITS an
decided to offer up a sacrifice to the " Cherlak girl." They
thought first of offering her a black bull, but this did not
please the lake as the animal did not shudder when water
was poured over it. In the end they offered a black heifer,
which she accepted with pleasure. Clad in clean clothes,
the people around sprinkled water on one another from the
water that was left in the hole, praying to the " Cherlak girl "
to return to its old place. The heifer's bones and pieces of
its flesh were wrapped in its hide and hidden in the water
hole. On this occasion the following prayer was read: " Water-
mother, protect the water, give the Cherlak girl good
health, bring her and all kinds of fish back to her place,
bring her with all kinds of sea-birds, give the water good
health. Make Azelekel and Kandralekel return her former
riches to the Cherlak girl! " When it had received the sacri-
fice, the water began to return, but in the beginning it was
muddy and foul. The village sacrificed a black lamb for the
health of the water, and then " the water became clean and
even fish and sea-birds began to appear." Sometimes, the
elder sisters also come from Belebey to visit the " Cherlak
girl," when it becomes flooded. An old Cheremiss related that
during his lifetime it has happened twice that a strange lake
has visited another.
The Cheremiss and Mordvins generally call the animated
water " Water mother." Probably the Ksthonians* Vete-ema
(" Water mother ") and Mere-ema (" Sea mother ") have the
same origin, although the ideas connected with them are now
in close relation to the Wasser-mutter of the Teutons. The
Livonians' Mier-iema (" Sea mother ") is a similar goddess."
Agricola says that the Karelians worshipped Veden em'a, who
"drove fish into their nets."
In the magic prayers of the Mordvins the " Water mother "
has already certain anthropomorphic features: silky hair, and
a plait decorated with silver wire, at times also her children
and family are mentioned. One finds, however, in some

212 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
prayers words like these: " Water mother, Boyar mistress, thou
comest from the sea and spreadest thyself over the whole
country, thou wanderest over thine own land, thou floatest
over thine own ways, thou doest much good, thou receivest
many genuflexions, thou flowest glowing like gold, shining
like silver." 3B
It is quite evident that the " Water mother " in the votive
prayers is the animated water itself. As an example one might
give the following prayer written down by Melnikov among
the Christian Mordvins. " Water mother, give all Christian
people good health. Give health to those who eat thee and
those who drink thee, to those who bathe in thee a light and
merry heart j give the cattle also who drink thee good
health."88
Smaller offerings are also made to the water when going
out to fish, or in sickness, i.e., ordinary skin diseases which are
believed to come from the offended water. The real water-
cult is, however, connected with agriculture. Mutual sacri-
fices have been made to the Water mother, chiefly to obtain
fruitful rains. Like the earth, the water is given a black
sacrificial animal, generally a bull or a sheep. The Cheremiss
have a custom of sprinkling water on one another at such
ceremonies. Black sheep, or hens that happen to be near the
water, are also sprinkled with it. A part of all the sacrificial
food is thrown into the water, in addition to the bones and a
portion of each part of the carcase, which, wrapped in the
hide, are also thrown in. At the close everything used at the
sacrifice is rinsed in the water. If a sacrifice should bring too
much rain, the offerings that have been thrown into the water
must be taken up again, and buried in the earth to make the
rain cease."
A water cult of this description was known among the Vo-
tiaks, Mordvins and Baltic Finns. J. Gutslaff (1644) relates
about the Esthonians that they worshipped a brook (W5h-
handa), which they believed could produce a fertilising rain,

WATER SPIRITS 213
or when the brook so desired, torrential rains, hail, or frost.
An old man said that the weather could be arranged with the
brook's help. If one wished for rain and stormy weather,
one threw something into the water, but if one wished for fine
weather, one cleaned out the brook. An example was given of
a pair of oxen which, while out at pasture, fell into the water
and were drowned, with the result that a terrible rainstorm
arose and only ceased when the carcases were dragged out of
the water.38 Often, " rain is made " without sacrifice, by
wetting people, the walls of houses, cattle, and the fields.
Among the Votiaks, the " Thunder mother" has in many
districts usurped the place of " the Water " at the large com-
mon sacrifices. Among the Mordvins it has been noted that
in some places they had a custom, when sacrificing for rain,
of going round a little lake three times, carrying a duck, which
was afterwards cooked and eaten in honour of the water.
Sometimes the finding of rain-giving springs is difiicult. But
if rain comes soon after a sacrifice to a spring or brook, one
can be certain of having found a good sacrificing-place.
Droughts are often caused by rain-giving springs becoming
choked. These have then to be cleaned out in order to obtain
rain.89
When the fructifying powers of rain were noticed, the
belief arose that rain could also fructify human beings and
animals. To the general custom of taking a newly married
woman to the brook near her husband's home, in order to
conciliate the strange water, the rite of sprinkling her with
water has been added. This custom can be explained partly
by the belief that one must come into contact with the new
water oneself in order to become acquainted with it. The
Siryans have a custom according to which a newly married
pair should go to the nearest stream three days after their
wedding, when the wife sacrifices money and pieces of cloth
and thread, or bread and cheese to the " mother " river, after
which she washes her hands and face in the water. With

214- FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
most of the agricultural Finnish races it is regarded as neces-
sary to drench the bride completely with water. If weddings
are celebrated in the winter, when it is of course too cold to
do this, the Votiaks and Ingrians consider it their duty to
drench all the winter's brides together in the spring. It is
not quite clear why this wetting is done, but some light may
perhaps be thrown on the matter by a Mordvinian custom.
According to this the bride goes the day after the wedding to
the stream or well, not only to pour water over herself, but
to beg the " Water mother " to give her children. Bishop
Makariy says that when the bride sacrifices money, linseed,
bread and salt to the water, she begs it to wash her clothes
and give her children. The same author says that barren
Mordvin women also pray to the " Water mother " for her
assistance. Usually such sacrifices were made at midnight,
when both husband and wife went together in secret to the
shore. According to Butuzov the Erza woman also prayed
in the following words: " Water mother, pardon me, if I have
offended thee and therefore cannot give birth to children."
The German belief that children come from the water
(" Kinder-brunnen ") is also explained by the above.40
Rivers and seas were also prayed to for an increase of water-
birds. Aminoff says that the Votiaks sacrificed a duck to the
water, so that it might richly increase their geese and ducks.41
Wichmann has discovered the following prayer: "To Mother
Ybyt (a river) I give a goose. Produce many geese when
their time comes." *2 The Mordvins also pray to the " Water
mother " to increase their cattle.
The Votiaks and Mordvins, like the Russians earlier, each
spring when the ice begins to break up, celebrate great festi-
vals with sacrifices of horses in honour of the water. Among
the Votiaks this feast is called " to follow the ice." In 1911
the author had the opportunity of being present at one of these
feasts at the river Buy, one o£ the tributaries o£ the Kama.
After a young foal had been killed and cooked on the shore

WATER SPIRITS 215
of the stream, the people knelt down with their faces towards
the water, while the officiating priest read out a long prayer,
begging prosperity from the river. During the prayer the
bones, hide, and small pieces of the different parts of the
carcase were thrown into the water, together with the animal's
new halter, the blood having been already drained there by
means of a channel dug into the bank. The animal sacrificed
is changed each year, being one year a brown foal, the next
year a black bull. The people believe firmly that if they do
not sacrifice to the river, it will flood their corn-fields, or make
great gaps in the banks, or cause fogs, storms and disastrous
hail-storms. In one village this same spring, the sacrifice
had been neglected, and in punishment hail had ruined the
corn-fields.
The Cheremiss believe that the water has also a " soul "
(ort) that can depart to other places. They say that when
the water's " soul " disappears, the water becomes muddy and
foul. Illness follows from drinking such water. The close
relation between the Water spirit and the water itself with its
" soul," is shown by the belief that if the " Water master "
leaves, the water dries up, and that a spirit can rule over two
different waters, causing each to fill or dry up as it removes
from one to the other. The undefined Pamas-oza (" the
Spring's master") of the District Ursum is also apparently
a nature-soul. It becomes angry if anyone comes to take
water from the spring with unclean vessels, or if any one
shouts, quarrels, speaks indecently or spills water over his
clothes. It punishes such people by giving them boils or
some other skin disease j and they must then cook porridge
at the edge of the spring and ask for pardon.48
Doubtless the undefined Veden Haltia (" Water ruler ") of
the Finns is of the same origin. An indication of this is the
strange magic custom, that when the water in a well is spoilt
or run dry, fresh water is brought from another well, in the
belief that by thus renewing the water in the well, a new

2l6
FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
Haltia is secured. To lakes also in which the fishing water
is spoilt or where the Haltia is not good, " new water " and a
w new Haltia " are brought. Considering that in the above-
mentioned proceeding, which is also known among other tribes,
e.g., among the Chuvashes, the water, by the addition of new
and better water, is provided with new soul-power, we may
assume that the Haltia here is to be understood in the sense
of the nature-soul. It is further to be observed that origi-
nally each sea, lake or river had only one Haltia.
These examples should show, that besides the spirits of
those drowned and the tutelary genii of the fish, the water
itself, furnished with a soul, is included among the Water
gods of the Finno-Ugric stocks.