CHAPTER XV
DEITIES OF THE EARTH AND
VEGETATION
A
MONG the non-agricultural Finno-Ugric peoples, of-
ferings to the earth are rare. The Ugrians often men-
tion in their folk-poetry " the black or hairy Earth mother,"
but sacrifice to her only when suffering from certain sicknesses,
believed to come from the earth.1 Much more important
is the " Earth mother " among the stocks living along the
Volga j these sacrifice to her black animals, most often cows arid
sheep, the bones of which are carefully buried in the earth
" so that the earth shall be able to produce corn and grass."
The blood is also allowed to run into the earth. Besides
annual sacrifices, additional ones are performed when, for
example, the fields do not grow in spite of rain. When sacri-
ficing to the earth, the Cheremiss say: " Eat, Earth mother,
and give us corn."2 The following prayer has been taken
down among the Votiaks: "O Earth mother, we thank thee
for that thou hast nourished us during the past year, be not
grudging now either with thy gifts, produce corn for us also
during this summer." These last also pray that the earth
might not be offended, when men are obliged to wound her
with their ploughs. Very late in the autumn, sacrifices may
not be made to the earth, as then, the Votiaks say: " the earth
sleeps." * Equally primitive is the " Earth mother " of the
Mordvins, who is turned to in the following words: "That
which we sow in thee, allow to come up." 4 The Mountain
Cheremiss worship also the " Yard mother " and the Mordvins
the " Field mother " and the " Meadow mother." '

240 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
" Earth-luck or field-luck" can be stolen from another by
bearing to one's own field a sod or a little earth from the field
of some one more fortunate. When the Siryans do this, they
say: " Good luck, follow me, give me a good subsistence."*
As soon as the Cheremiss sees that his " field-luck " has been
stolen, he finds out who has robbed him of this. Should he
discover that a field which formerly produced a scanty harvest
has improved, he believes he has found the culprit and goes in
the dusk to carry the lost " field-luck" back with him in a
bark-shoe, saying to it: "Let the corn grow, do not go away
if someone tries to steal thee, but remain always in my fields." T
The Chuvashes " steal earth " with wedding-like ceremonies,
choosing even a living " bridegroom " for the Earth mother.8
This custom would seem to have been known also among the
Votiaks.8 According to Mordvinian folk-lore, these were afraid
that even in the hoof of a horse, the " Field mother " might
be taken to a strange field.10
Coincidently with these material views, the Cheremiss talk
also of the "' soul' (or/) of the earth," which may disappear
from the tilled earth, taking the fruitfulness of this away
with it." Like the Votiaks, they believe this also of the
" field-soul." When this happens, it is essential to discover
whither the " field-soul" has gone, and if possible, procure
its return. The Votiaks also call the productive power of the
field, which can free itself from the latter, the " corn-soul,"
and they believe that this can, like the soul of a human being,
become visible in the shape of a little, grey butterfly.12
In the course of the author's sojourn among the Eastern
Votiaks, he had the opportunity of hearing how the vanished
" soul" of a cornfield is sought after. Besides the actual
"seer," six other persons are chosen for this purpose, three
youths and three maidens, who, clad in white, ride round the
village fields on white horses, to seek the above-mentioned
butterfly. Having found this, the whole suite returns well-
pleased, singing and playing a song special to this occasion, to

DEITIES OF THE EARTH 241
the sacrificial site on the edge of the field, where the oldest
men in the village have, meanwhile, slaughtered a white
sheep as a sacrifice. After the completion of the sacrificial
meal, during which the soul-butterfly is kept enclosed in a
white cloth, the one whom the butterfly had most obviously
neared during the search, receives the " corn-soul" into his
care, taking it to his granary for a time, after which the butter-
fly is again ceremoniously escorted to the cornfield and there
set free. After the recovery of the " corn-soul," it is believed
that the badly-grown corn will improve.13
The " soul" of the corn can easily develop into a separate
deity of corn. In the " Corn mother " of the Mordvins, to
whom a duck of a yellow, or corn-resembling, colour is sacri-
ficed, there are already noticeable signs of a change into an
anthropomorphic goddess. But in no case need one be un-
certain as to the origin of this goddess, for though the " Corn
mother" appears in a popular lyric as singing-songs in the
festive attire of a Mordvin woman, she goes on to speak of
herself thus: " I was sown in the morning twilight, reaped in
the evening twilight, thrown into the granary in order to be
brewed into small beer at Easter, and baked into pastries at
Christmas." "
That the corn-seed as such was worshipped appears from a
Votiak custom connected with the feast of the spring seed.
After having sowed the first measure of oats in his field, the
Votiak farmer fills his measure again, sets it on the ground
before him, and, addressing the measure of seed, prays, with
a loaf in his hand, for a good harvest. To assist the growth
of the crops, magic is also used in this ceremony. Into the
first measure, besides the seed, hard-boiled eggs are placed.
Whilst sowing, the farmer flings these also into the air, where
they are caught amid much competition by young girls.
Lucky the one who gathers most in her lap, as this is regarded
as a good omen. Should the gatherers of the eggs often trip
or fall, it is regarded as a sign that the grain will also bend

242 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
over during the summer on account of the heaviness of the ears.
The sowing of eggs in this manner is an old custom common to
all the East European and many other peoples, and one can
discern in it a wish expressed in terms of magic, that the seed
sown should give grain of the size and the agreeable taste of
hen's eggs, a wish often expressed also in prayers.15
Other means of magic, for the growth of the corn and the
bringing forth of fruitful rains, are connected also with the
spring seed festival of the Cheremiss. After the offering up
of sacrifices at a " pure spot" in the fields, the people gather
closely together, holding their shirts or their blouses stretched
out before them, while the sacrificing priest sows oats over
them. The one who receives the biggest share of the seed
as his part will reap the biggest harvest in the autumn. It
is, further, customary to sprinkle water over the crowd " in
order to ensure warm and refreshing rains during the
summer."18
The Votiaks sacrifice early in the spring " to the honour
of the grass." At a spot where the bare earth first showed
through the melting snow of the past winter, porridge in a
dish is laid on three such places. In these porridge-dishes hay
and a spoon are placed. During the ceremony prayer is made
to Inmar for a good harvest of hay. The Votiaks living in
the Glazov District sacrifice at the same time a white bull, the
tail of which is cleaned of hair and soaked in water until it
becomes tough. It is then taken by one of the young men
who, pressing his chin on his breast, waves it behind him, bel-
lowing meanwhile like a bull. This youth, who is called the
c* bull-calf," is offered home-distilled spirits to drink by some
of the surrounding crowd, while others again try to prevent
him from drinking it. The " bull-calf " becomes incensed at
this and charges at the crowd, waving the tail behind him,
pursuing the flying people.17
A perfect counterpart to the Russian Polevik (field-spirit)
is the anthropomorphic " Meadow man " of the Votiaks, who

DEITIES OF THE EARTH
is supposed to be of the size of a child, but has the power, like
the forest spirit, of becoming longer or shorter according to
the length of the grass. For this reason it is difficult to see
the spirit. It is said to be clad in a white garment, and to
live chiefly in the pastures, where it looks after and protects
the animals. The only sacrifice to this spirit is one when the
cattle are first let out to pasture, offered up with the words:
" Protect the cattle well, follow them nicely to the meadow,
do not give them into the power of the beasts of prey."18
The Baltic Finns doubtless also, as an agricultural people,
worshipped the " Earth mother," who appears in the folklore
of both the Finns and the Esthonians. In the Finnish magic
songs, the " Field old woman," the " Meadow old woman,"
and others, are spoken of. That the " Earth mother " re-
ceived here a black sheep as sacrifice, is indicated by the belief,
that, if a field produces too little, the milk of a black sheep
must be sacrificed to it.18 The " Earth bridegroom " men-
tioned in many poems may be a relic of some ancient ceremony
in which the " Earth mother " was honoured with a wedding.
At the Ingrian festival of the Thunder god, a song was sung of
some deity of vegetation, called Sampsa or Pellervo (from
•pelto, " field "), in the absence of whom nothing could grow.
The " Winter son " was first sent after him, who driving with
his wind-horse, caused only disaster, and was, therefore,
killed} the " Summer son" finally succeeding in bringing
Sampsa. In Finland this god was represented as being con-
veyed from an island, sleeping upon a corn-ship, with his
mother as his wife. These ideas seem to emanate from the
Scandinavian cult of Frey. The name Sampsa (a Teutonic
loan-word, German Simse or Semse, "bulrush") signifies a
species of fodder-grass (Scirpus sylvaticus, the wood club-
rush), one of the earliest products of the spring, which is
gathered for the cattle when the snow melts, and the roots of
which are readily eaten by children.20
According to Agricola, the Karelians worshipped deities of

244 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
the different kinds of grain: Rongoteus who "gave rye";
Pellon Pekko (the "Pekko of the fields") who "furthered
the growth of barley "j Virankannos who " tended the oats "j
Egres who " created peas, beans, and turnips, and brought
forth cabbages, flax and hemp "; Kondos who " reclaimed land
and tilled fields." Of these names, the first is to be found in
several old songs, as Runkateivas or Rukotivo, the name being
regarded as a Teutonic loan-word (cf. Icelandic rugry " rye ";
twar, "gods"). Later the Rye god is associated with St.
Stephen (Ruki-tehvana or -tahvana, " rye-Stephen"); in
a magic prayer Rukotivo appears beside St. Stephen as the
" ruler of horses " (cf. Halmstaffan, " straw-Stephen " in the
Christmas customs among the Swedes).21 Agras or Agroi is
known even today to the people, who call by that name two
turnips growing together. When a double turnip was found,
it had to be carried by itself, on the shoulders, or in a basket
of bark, to the turnip-cellar. On the way, one had to fall
three, or in places, even nine times on one's knees or flat on
to the ground, as though one were tottering under the weight
of some too heavy burden, and each time one had to shout:
"I cannot bear it, holy Agroi, oh, how heavy it is! " In the
prayers recited at the turnip-cellar, a good turnip year was
asked for.22
Originally, Agroi was not only the deity of turnips, but the
god of twins in general. Ceremonies resembling the above
are also performed by the Votiaks when they find a double
ear of grain in the fields. Gavrilov relates that the custom was
to hang the ear over a stick, round which clean, white linen
was wound, and then bear it by two men to an empty chest
in the granary, the men acting during the journey as though
they bore something heavy. Spectators and passers-by had to
be avoided on the way. If this was done, one became rich
little by little, said the Votiaks.23
Pekko, the god of barley, was worshipped by the orthodox
Esthonians under the name of Peko, his image being prepared

DEITIES OF THE EARTH
245
in wax and preserved as the common property of the village,
in each farm in turn for the duration of a year. The feast
of Peko was held in the spring, when vegetation awakes to
life. Before Whitsuntide, each worshipper of Peko had to
bring corn, from which Peko's host prepared festival-beer.
On the eve of Whitsuntide, after sunset, the worshippers
gathered, bringing food with them, in a room, in the corner of
which Peko stood on a beer-barrel surrounded by burning wax
candles. On separate sides of the corner beer-vessels and
loaves of bread were spread in rows along the walls. In the
front row of the kneeling congregation the host of the feast
and his assistants grouped themselves. After all had prayed,
each for himself, the host took a little beer in a cup from each
vessel, pouring it back again with a prayer of blessing for its
owner and his family. Afterwards the congregation ate and
drank to the honour of the god. A mutual prayer against
hail was finally sung at dawn. The remains of the feast were
divided amongst the poor. The wax remaining in the candles
was added to Peko's head; the greater the amount of wax
gathered there, the more prosperous the summer became.
According to another report the worshippers of Peko
gathered together after sunset with their food-knapsacks on
their backs at the house of Peko's guardian, who had previously
carefully closed all the windows and lit the roof-lamp. The
guardian, followed by two men, went to bring in Peko with a
sheet in his hand, Peko being kept in the granary. The god
was wrapped up in the sheet, brought into the house, and
placed under the hanging-lamp. Everyone sat down with
his back to Peko and began to eat out of his food-sack. Hav-
ing finished, all rose up without even then turning towards
Peko, and made fast their food-sacks again. They then
marched nine times round Peko, singing: "Peko, our god,
shepherd our herds, look after our horses, protect also our
corn from snow, from hail! " Leaving Peko in the room,
they then went on to wrestle. The one receiving the first

246 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
bruise cried out with a loud voice that blood was shed, on
which ail hurried to acclaim him as the guardian of Peko for
the next year. The image of Peko was taken the same night
in the dark to the new guardian's granary.2*
The name Pekko or Peko is to be traced to the same Scan-
dinavian word from which Beyggvir or Byggvir, the name
of Frey's servant, and the Swedish bfagg (" barley") are
derived.
In North Tavastland in Finland, it was believed that the
hop-field also had its own " ruler "j the Esthonians calling it
the "Hop king" or the "Hop-field master." This last
people still speak of the " Flax mother," preserved in the
linen-chest " in order that the linen should flourish well." M
Counterparts to these deities of particular kinds of plants of
the Baltic Finns are met with among the Teutons.
A very general belief amongst the majority of European
peoples is that the cornfield is protected by its tutelary spirit,
especially during the period of ripening. During the ripen-
ing-time of the rye, the Volga Finns say that one may not
dig in the earth or go into the rye-fields, and that one must
avoid all noisy work and work causing evil smells, such as,
for example, the carting of manure or the making of tar.
Neither may one dress in startling colours. The most
exacting time is noon, when one may even not talk aloud.
As a punishment for unseemly behaviour, hailstorms and
thunder, which ruin the crops, are dreaded. The hot
" evil time," said to last a couple of weeks, is concluded
among the Cheremiss (Kazan Government) by so-called
jwVtfw-ceremonies, in which occurs an odd custom of blow-
ing long horns of wood made specially for the occasion.
These are taken later to a tree, round which one goes in a
procession with the horns held in the hand, and where the
sacrificing priest with cakes in his right hand and a vessel of
beer in his left, recites a prayer. Should one of the horns
break during the ceremony, it is regarded as a sign of hail.

DEITIES OF THE EARTH 247
The more Northern Cheremiss blow these horns later in
the autumn after the conclusion of field-labour, keeping them
for the next year in a secret place. During the " dangerous
time " one may not blow them. It is further related that the
members of a wedding-procession, when escorting the bride
to the village of the bridegroom, attempt to steal these horns
from her home, believing that they carry with them " corn-
luck."26
The Mordvins believe that if absolute silence is observed
during the flowering of the rye, one can hear from the " corn-
mother " what kind of a harvest to expect. One has only to
go out in the stillness of the night and listen j should one hear
whistling from the field, then a good year may be expected,
but if one hears weeping and wailing, it is a sign of a year of
famine.27
According to the Siryans a female spirit dwells in the rye-
fields, called Poib'znitsa (from Russian Poludnitsa, " Mid-
day-goddess ") and punishes all who in any way, harm the
rye during the time of flowering. A blue flower (Centaurea
cyamts) which grows among the corn, is called " Poloznitsa's
eye."28 The Esthonians speak of the spiteful " Corn virgins "
who wander in the fields, and of a " Corn wolf " (also " Pea
wolf" and " Bean wolf "), with which they frighten the
children.29 The Finns also represented the corn-spirit in the
form of an animal j in Osterbotten, they say that the person
to cut the last stalk of the crop on the rye-field or oat-field
" catches a hare."30 Among the Esthonians the animated
last sheaf goes by the name of " rye-pig." 31
Like the Teutons and Slavs, the Baltic Finns have retained
a habit of preserving the last sheaf of the corn-field, regarding
this as a kind of corn-deity. The Finns are said to have
placed a sheaf left from the previous autumn on the rafters
of the threshing-shed whence it was brought at Christmas-
time into the dwelling-house. There the grain was separated
from the ears and the straw thrown up to the ceiling, where

248 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
part of it remained clinging to the rafters. The spring sow-
ings were begun with the grain obtained in this way; the
straw which adhered to the ceiling being also hidden in the
corn-field.32 A more widespread custom found also among the
Volga Finns, was to preserve the last sheaf undisturbed till
the next year, in order that the corn should thrive. Among
the Esthonians such a sheaf was called " threshing-shed
father."as The Swedes in Finland constructed a human-like
" Christmas old man " (Jul-gubbe) of straw at Christmas-
time, which was then put in the place of honour at the head
of the table and was treated with drink.3* A corresponding
straw doll was prepared by the Finns on Kekri or Keyri (All
Saints1 Day) and was called the " Keyri old man" (Keyri
ukko).M At both festivals there was further a custom of
placing straw on the floor of the dwelling-room and of baking
of new flour an especially large cake, sometimes faintly re-
sembling an animal (Esthonian " Christmas pig " or " Christ-
mas bull"); the cake being kept on the table during the
holiday, but afterwards taken to the granary, where it was
preserved among the grain until sowing-time. According to
an older custom this loaf was baked from grain dried in the
open air.86 Compared with Christmas, the Kekri of the Finns
represents an older festival of new bread and a new year; as
the agricultural peoples, also of Finnish stock, earlier cele-
brated this festival as the time for the baking of the fruits
of the new harvest (Finnish vuodenalko-jaisetj " the beginning
of the year"; Votiak, vil'ar, "New Year"). A straw doll
is known also among the Esthonians. According to a state-
ment made in 1694 the peasants on Shrove Tuesday evening
made of straw a human-like figure, metsik, dressed as a man
or a woman, which was put upon a stick and carried to the
wood, where it was bound on the tip of a bush in order " that
the corn and flax should grow well." The custom was in
some districts connected also with New ,Year and other times,"
The Cheremiss conclude their harvest with a ceremony,

DEITIES OF THE EARTH 249
called " the feeding of the sickle." The people of the farm
take bread, cheese, etc., out with them to the field, and kneel
down before a few remaining stalks of oats, the master of
the house reading a prayer in which a good harvest is prayed
for from the gods. After this, the food brought out is tasted,
and then all kneel down again. The master of the house
now collects all the sickles used in the harvest, piles them up
on the unreaped stalks, which he thus presses to the ground
and then, beginning at the point, winds them round the sickles
down to the root. Finally, by lifting the sickles he pulls out
the oat-stalks by the roots, saying meanwhile: " Sickles, the
whole summer have you laboured, may the food you now
have eaten bring strength to you," or " Sickle, take strength,
the whole summer hast thou laboured, take strength. Thy
share have we spread out, our share mayest thou not touch! "
The master of the house, followed by the family, then takes
the sickles, wrapped in oat-straw, to some attic in the house or
a barn, whence they are taken out first at the next summer.
The last stalks are called " the sickle's share." 3S
It is quite natural that among the more northern peoples,
who exist chiefly, by hunting and fishing, deities of vegetation
are not found. The " grass mother " of the Russian Lapps,
seeing that grass is of very little consequence even to the
reindeer, who live on moss, is probably of late origin. This
may also be true regarding the Rana-neidda (" Rana virgin ")
of the Lapps, who lived in heaven and ruled over the moun-
tains which first became green m the spring. When sacrificing
to her " in order that the reindeer should get grass in time," a
spinning-wheel or a spindle was placed against her altar, both
of which were besmeared with sacrificial blood. The spin-
ning-wheel sacrifice, which cannot originally have been a Lapp
custom, shows that "the greatest of all goddesses," who be-
sides the grass, called forth also the leaves in the spring, is a
Scandinavian goddess (Frigg).89
The Norse Frey can be recognised in the Scandinavian

250
FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
Lapps' Veralden^olmai ("World's man"). The missionary
Randulf compares him with Saturn and says that the Lapps
" paint him on their magic drums in such a manner that a
curved line with many little outspringing thorns is drawn
over his head; this symbolizes the fruitfulness of sea, land
and cattle. They pray to him to make the earth fruitful with
corn, that they might on reasonable terms brew beer and
FIG. 9. DRAWINGS OF HEAVEN ON SHAMAN DRUMS
Left: c and e, Thunder-gods; d, God of Fertility; f, Wind-god.
Right: d and f, Thunder-gods; b, God of Fertility; e, Wind-god.
From Rudbeck's Atlantica,
spirits and everything prepared from corn. This is indicated
by the hoe which they fit into his hand. At the same time they
pray that he would render the sea bounteous in order that they
might procure much fish (this is done especially by the Sea
Lapps), and that he would make their reindeer fruitful, so
that they might bear many calves, and that he would make
the moss of the uplands, which is eaten by, their reindeer,
grow richly, that they might obtain much reindeer butter,
cheese, etc. Altogether they pray to Veralden-olmai or Saturn,
for everything that grows or is born." 40
In the cult of this god of fruitfulness the sexual organs
played an important part. Noraeus relates that the Swedish
Lapps sacrificed to it on St. Matthew's Day in the following
manner: " They gathered together the horns of the reindeer
they, had slaughtered, but the bones of one reindeer, from
the smallest to the biggest, were extracted and the blood of
the same reindeer sprinkled over these bones, which were then
buried in the earth; erecting thereafter amongst them an

DEITIES OF THE EARTH 251
image made of birch-wood, also sprinkled with blood, on the
breast of which, under the face, the membritm gemtale was
attached." When the Lapps were asked why they did this,
they answered that they were following the ancient habits of
their forefathers and sacrificing to the earth, firstly, because
the earth kept alive their reindeer} secondly, that it might
not send diseases that hurt the feet of the reindeer in summer}
and thirdly, that the earth, besides nutrition, would give their
reindeer a powerful pairing-lust, sacrificing for this purpose
the above-mentioned organ, in order that the number of rein-
deer might increase greatly, as the time of the feast of St.
Matthew was the best pairing-time of the reindeer.41
Besides reindeer, in the ear of which a red thread was tied,
the Scandinavian Lapps sacrificed also the implements needed
in agriculture — hoes and spades, to the "World's man."42
Even without these customs, one can see from the name of the
god that he is none other than the Scandinavian Frey, who is
also called " Veraldar god " by Snorri Sturlason.