The unchanging excellence completes its tale;
   The simple infant man in him we hail.

2. The unwrought material, when divided and distributed, forms
vessels.  The sage, when employed, becomes the Head of all the
Officers (of government); and in his greatest regulations he employs
no violent measures.


29. 1. If any one should wish to get the kingdom for himself, and to
effect this by what he does, I see that he will not succeed.  The
kingdom is a spirit-like thing, and cannot be got by active doing.  He
who would so win it destroys it; he who would hold it in his grasp
loses it.

2.

   The course and nature of things is such that
   What was in front is now behind;
   What warmed anon we freezing find.
   Strength is of weakness oft the spoil;
   The store in ruins mocks our toil.

Hence the sage puts away excessive effort, extravagance, and easy
indulgence.


30. 1. He who would assist a lord of men in harmony with the Tao will
not assert his mastery in the kingdom by force of arms.  Such a course
is sure to meet with its proper return.

2. Wherever a host is stationed, briars and thorns spring up.  In the
sequence of great armies there are sure to be bad years.

3. A skilful (commander) strikes a decisive blow, and stops.  He does
not dare (by continuing his operations) to assert and complete his
mastery.  He will strike the blow, but will be on his guard against
being vain or boastful or arrogant in consequence of it.  He strikes
it as a matter of necessity; he strikes it, but not from a wish for
mastery.

4. When things have attained their strong maturity they become old.
This may be said to be not in accordance with the Tao: and what is not
in accordance with it soon comes to an end.


31. 1. Now arms, however beautiful, are instruments of evil omen,
hateful, it may be said, to all creatures.  Therefore they who have
the Tao do not like to employ them.

2. The superior man ordinarily considers the left hand the most
honourable place, but in time of war the right hand.  Those sharp
weapons are instruments of evil omen, and not the instruments of the
superior man;--he uses them only on the compulsion of necessity.  Calm
and repose are what he prizes; victory (by force of arms) is to him
undesirable.  To consider this desirable would be to delight in the
slaughter of men; and he who delights in the slaughter of men cannot
get his will in the kingdom.

3. On occasions of festivity to be on the left hand is the prized
position; on occasions of mourning, the right hand.  The second in
command of the army has his place on the left; the general commanding
in chief has his on the right;--his place, that is, is assigned to him
as in the rites of mourning.  He who has killed multitudes of men
should weep for them with the bitterest grief; and the victor in
battle has his place (rightly) according to those rites.


32. 1. The Tao, considered as unchanging, has no name.

2. Though in its primordial simplicity it may be small, the whole
world dares not deal with (one embodying) it as a minister.  If a
feudal prince or the king could guard and hold it, all would
spontaneously submit themselves to him.

3. Heaven and Earth (under its guidance) unite together and send down
the sweet dew, which, without the directions of men, reaches equally
everywhere as of its own accord.

4. As soon as it proceeds to action, it has a name.  When it once has
that name, (men) can know to rest in it.  When they know to rest in
it, they can be free from all risk of failure and error.

5. The relation of the Tao to all the world is like that of the great
rivers and seas to the streams from the valleys.


33. 1. He who knows other men is discerning; he who knows himself is
intelligent.  He who overcomes others is strong; he who overcomes
himself is mighty.  He who is satisfied with his lot is rich; he who
goes on acting with energy has a (firm) will.

2. He who does not fail in the requirements of his position, continues
long; he who dies and yet does not perish, has longevity.


34. 1. All-pervading is the Great Tao!  It may be found on the left
hand and on the right.

2. All things depend on it for their production, which it gives to
them, not one refusing obedience to it.  When its work is
accomplished, it does not claim the name of having done it.  It
clothes all things as with a garment, and makes no assumption of being
their lord;--it may be named in the smallest things.  All things
return (to their root and disappear), and do not know that it is it
which presides over their doing so;--it may be named in the greatest
things.

3. Hence the sage is able (in the same way) to accomplish his great
achievements.  It is through his not making himself great that he can
accomplish them.


35. 1. To him who holds in his hands the Great Image (of the invisible
Tao), the whole world repairs.  Men resort to him, and receive no
hurt, but (find) rest, peace, and the feeling of ease.

2. Music and dainties will make the passing guest stop (for a time).
But though the Tao as it comes from the mouth, seems insipid and has
no flavour, though it seems not worth being looked at or listened to,
the use of it is inexhaustible.


36. 1. When one is about to take an inspiration, he is sure to make a
(previous) expiration; when he is going to weaken another, he will
first strengthen him; when he is going to overthrow another, he will
first have raised him up; when he is going to despoil another, he will
first have made gifts to him:--this is called 'Hiding the light (of
his procedure).'

2. The soft overcomes the hard; and the weak the strong.

3. Fishes should not be taken from the deep; instruments for the
profit of a state should not be shown to the people.


37. 1. The Tao in its regular course does nothing (for the sake of
doing it), and so there is nothing which it does not do.

2. If princes and kings were able to maintain it, all things would of
themselves be transformed by them.

3. If this transformation became to me an object of desire, I would
express the desire by the nameless simplicity.

   Simplicity without a name
   Is free from all external aim.
   With no desire, at rest and still,
   All things go right as of their will.