The story of Tom Tit Tot, which opens our collection, is unequalled
among all other folk-tales I am acquainted with, for its combined sense
of humour and dramatic power.

The first adjective of our title also needs a similar extension of its
meaning. I have acted on Molière's principle, and have taken what was
good wherever I could find it. Thus, a couple of these stories have been
found among descendants of English immigrants in America; a couple of
others I tell as I heard them myself in my youth in Australia. One of
the best was taken down from the mouth of an English Gipsy. I have also
included some stories that have only been found in Lowland Scotch.
I have felt justified in doing this, as of the twenty-one folk-tales
contained in Chambers' “Popular Rhymes of Scotland,” no less than
sixteen are also to be found in an English form. With the Folk-tale as
with the Ballad, Lowland Scotch may be regarded as simply a dialect
of English, and it is a mere chance whether a tale is extant in one or
other, or both.

I have also rescued and re-told a few Fairy Tales that only exist
now-a-days in the form of ballads. There are certain indications that
the “common form” of the English Fairy Tale was the _cante-fable_, a
mixture of narrative and verse of which the most illustrious example in
literature is “Aucassin et Nicolette.” In one case I have endeavoured to
retain this form, as the tale in which it occurs, “Childe Rowland,”
 is mentioned by Shakespeare in _King Lear_, and is probably, as I have
shown, the source of Milton's _Comus_. Late as they have been collected,
some dozen of the tales can be traced back to the sixteenth century, two
of them being quoted by Shakespeare himself.

In the majority of instances I have had largely to rewrite these Fairy
Tales, especially those in dialect, including the Lowland Scotch.
[Footnote: It is perhaps worth remarking that the Brothers Grimm did the
same with their stories. “Dass der Ausdruck,” say they in their Preface,
“und die Ausführung des Einzelnen grossentheils von uns herrührt,
versteht sich von selbst.” I may add that many of their stories
were taken from printed sources. In the first volume of Mrs. Hunt's
translation, Nos. 12, 18, 19, 23, 32, 35, 42, 43, 44, 69, 77, 78, 83,
89, are thus derived.] Children, and sometimes those of larger
growth, will not read dialect. I have also had to reduce the flatulent
phraseology of the eighteenth-century chap-books, and to re-write in
simpler style the stories only extant in “Literary” English. I have,
however, left a few vulgarisms in the mouths of vulgar people. Children
appreciate the dramatic propriety of this as much as their elders.
Generally speaking, it has been my ambition to write as a good old nurse
will speak when she tells Fairy Tales. I am doubtful as to my success in
catching the colloquial-romantic tone appropriate for such narratives,
but the thing had to be done or else my main object, to give a book of
English Fairy Tales which English children will listen to, would have
been unachieved. This book is meant to be read aloud, and not merely
taken in by the eye.

In a few instances I have introduced or changed an incident. I have
never done so, however, without mentioning the fact in the Notes. These
have been relegated to the obscurity of small print and a back place,
while the little ones have been, perhaps unnecessarily, warned off them.
They indicate my sources and give a few references to parallels and
variants which may be of interest to fellow-students of Folk-lore. It
is, perhaps, not necessary to inform readers who are not fellow-students
that the study of Folk-tales has pretensions to be a science. It has its
special terminology, and its own methods of investigation, by which it
is hoped, one of these days, to gain fuller knowledge of the workings
of the popular mind as well as traces of archaic modes of thought and
custom. I hope on some future occasion to treat the subject of
the English Folk-tale on a larger scale and with all the necessary
paraphernalia of prolegomena and excursus. I shall then, of course,
reproduce my originals with literal accuracy, and have therefore felt
the more at liberty on the present occasion to make the necessary
deviations from this in order to make the tales readable for children.

Finally, I have to thank those by whose kindness in waiving their rights
to some of these stories, I have been enabled to compile this book. My
friends Mr. E. Clodd, Mr. F. Hindes Groome, and Mr. Andrew Lang,
have thus yielded up to me some of the most attractive stories in
the following pages. The Councils of the English and of the American
Folk-lore Societies, and Messrs. Longmans, have also been equally
generous. Nor can I close these remarks without a word of thanks and
praise to the artistic skill with which my friend, Mr. J. D. Batten, has
made the romance and humour of these stories live again in the brilliant
designs with which he has adorned these pages. It should be added that
the dainty headpieces to “Henny Penny” and “Mr. Fox” are due to my old
friend, Mr. Henry Ryland.

JOSEPH JACOBS.


CONTENTS

I. TOM TIT TOT II. THE THREE SILLIES III. THE ROSE-TREE IV. THE OLD
WOMAN AND HER PIG V. HOW JACK WENT TO SEEK HIS FORTUNE VI. MR. VINEGAR
VII. NIX NOUGHT NOTHING VIII. JACK HANNAFORD IX. BINNORIE X. MOUSE AND
MOUSER XI. CAP O' RUSHES XII. TEENY-TINY XIII. JACK AND THE BEANSTALK
XIV. THE STORY OF THE THREE LITTLE PIGS XV. THE MASTER AND HIS PUPIL
XVI. TITTY MOUSE AND TATTY MOUSE XVII. JACK AND HIS GOLDEN SNUFF-BOX
XVIII. THE STORY OF THE THREE BEARS XIX. JACK THE GIANT-KILLER XX.
HENNY-PENNY XXI. CHILDE ROWLAND XXII. MOLLY WHUPPIE XXIII. THE RED ETTIN
XXIV. THE GOLDEN ARM XXV. THE HISTORY OF TOM THUMB XXVI. MR. FOX XXVII.
LAZY JACK XXVIII. JOHNNY-CAKE XXIX. EARL MAR'S DAUGHTER XXX. MR. MIACCA
XXXI. WHITTINGTON AND HIS CAT XXXII. THE STRANGE VISITOR XXXIII. THE
LAIDLY WORM OF SPINDLESTON HEUGH XXXIV. THE CAT AND THE MOUSE. XXXV.
THE FISH AND THE RING. XXXVI. THE MAGPIE'S NEST XXXVII. KATE CRACKERNUTS
XXXVIII. THE CAULD LAD OF HILTON XXXIX. THE ASS, THE TABLE, AND THE
STICK XL. FAIRY OINTMENT XLI. THE WELL OF THE WORLD'S END. XLII. MASTER
OF ALL MASTERS. XLIII. THE THREE HEADS OF THE WELL

NOTES AND REFERENCES


TOM TIT TOT

Once upon a time there was a woman, and she baked five pies. And when
they came out of the oven, they were that overbaked the crusts were too
hard to eat. So she says to her daughter:

“Darter,” says she, “put you them there pies on the shelf, and leave 'em
there a little, and they'll come again.”--She meant, you know, the crust
would get soft.

But the girl, she says to herself: “Well, if they'll come again, I'll
eat 'em now.” And she set to work and ate 'em all, first and last.

Well, come supper-time the woman said: “Go you, and get one o' them
there pies. I dare say they've come again now.”

The girl went and she looked, and there was nothing but the dishes. So
back she came and says she: “Noo, they ain't come again.”

“Not one of 'em?” says the mother.

“Not one of 'em,” says she.

“Well, come again, or not come again,” said the woman “I'll have one for
supper.”

“But you can't, if they ain't come,” said the girl.

“But I can,” says she. “Go you, and bring the best of 'em.”

“Best or worst,” says the girl, “I've ate 'em all, and you can't have
one till that's come again.”

Well, the woman she was done, and she took her spinning to the door to
spin, and as she span she sang:

  “My darter ha' ate five, five pies to-day.
  My darter ha' ate five, five pies to-day.”

The king was coming down the street, and he heard her sing, but what she
sang he couldn't hear, so he stopped and said:

“What was that you were singing, my good woman?”

The woman was ashamed to let him hear what her daughter had been doing,
so she sang, instead of that:

  “My darter ha' spun five, five skeins to-day.
  My darter ha' spun five, five skeins to-day.”

“Stars o' mine!” said the king, “I never heard tell of any one that
could do that.”

Then he said: “Look you here, I want a wife, and I'll marry your
daughter. But look you here,” says he, “eleven months out of the year
she shall have all she likes to eat, and all the gowns she likes to get,
and all the company she likes to keep; but the last month of the year
she'll have to spin five skeins every day, and if she don't I shall kill
her.”

“All right,” says the woman; for she thought what a grand marriage that
was. And as for the five skeins, when the time came, there'd be plenty
of ways of getting out of it, and likeliest, he'd have forgotten all
about it.

Well, so they were married. And for eleven months the girl had all she
liked to eat, and all the gowns she liked to get, and all the company
she liked to keep.

But when the time was getting over, she began to think about the skeins
and to wonder if he had 'em in mind. But not one word did he say about
'em, and she thought he'd wholly forgotten 'em.

However, the last day of the last month he takes her to a room she'd
never set eyes on before. There was nothing in it but a spinning-wheel
and a stool. And says he: “Now, my dear, here you'll be shut in
to-morrow with some victuals and some flax, and if you haven't spun five
skeins by the night, your head'll go off.”

And away he went about his business.

Well, she was that frightened, she'd always been such a gatless girl,
that she didn't so much as know how to spin, and what was she to do
to-morrow with no one to come nigh her to help her? She sat down on a
stool in the kitchen, and law! how she did cry!

However, all of a sudden she heard a sort of a knocking low down on the
door. She upped and oped it, and what should she see but a small little
black thing with a long tail. That looked up at her right curious, and
that said:

“What are you a-crying for?”

“What's that to you?” says she.

“Never you mind,” that said, “but tell me what you're a-crying for.”

“That won't do me no good if I do,” says she.

“You don't know that,” that said, and twirled that's tail round.

“Well,” says she, “that won't do no harm, if that don't do no good,” and
she upped and told about the pies, and the skeins, and everything.

“This is what I'll do,” says the little black thing, “I'll come to your
window every morning and take the flax and bring it spun at night.”

“What's your pay?” says she.

That looked out of the corner of that's eyes, and that said: “I'll
give you three guesses every night to guess my name, and if you haven't
guessed it before the month's up you shall be mine.”

Well, she thought she'd be sure to guess that's name before the month
was up. “All right,” says she, “I agree.”

“All right,” that says, and law! how that twirled that's tail.

Well, the next day, her husband took her into the room, and there was
the flax and the day's food.

“Now there's the flax,” says he, “and if that ain't spun up this night,
off goes your head.” And then he went out and locked the door.

He'd hardly gone, when there was a knocking against the window.

She upped and she oped it, and there sure enough was the little old
thing sitting on the ledge.

“Where's the flax?” says he.

“Here it be,” says she. And she gave it to him.

Well, come the evening a knocking came again to the window. She upped
and she oped it, and there was the little old thing with five skeins of
flax on his arm.

“Here it be,” says he, and he gave it to her.

“Now, what's my name?” says he.

“What, is that Bill?” says she.

“Noo, that ain't,” says he, and he twirled his tail.

“Is that Ned?” says she.

“Noo, that ain't,” says he, and he twirled his tail.

“Well, is that Mark?” says she.

“Noo, that ain't,” says he, and he twirled his tail harder, and away he
flew.

Well, when her husband came in, there were the five skeins ready for
him. “I see I shan't have to kill you to-night, my dear,” says he;
“you'll have your food and your flax in the morning,” says he, and away
he goes.

Well, every day the flax and the food were brought, and every day that
there little black impet used to come mornings and evenings. And all the
day the girl sat trying to think of names to say to it when it came at
night. But she never hit on the right one. And as it got towards the
end of the month, the impet began to look so maliceful, and that twirled
that's tail faster and faster each time she gave a guess.

At last it came to the last day but one. The impet came at night along
with the five skeins, and that said,

“What, ain't you got my name yet?”

“Is that Nicodemus?” says she.

“Noo, t'ain't,” that says.

“Is that Sammle?” says she.

“Noo, t'ain't,” that says.

“A-well, is that Methusalem?” says she.

“Noo, t'ain't that neither,” that says.

Then that looks at her with that's eyes like a coal o' fire, and that
says: “Woman, there's only to-morrow night, and then you'll be mine!”
 And away it flew.

Well, she felt that horrid. However, she heard the king coming along the
passage. In he came, and when he sees the five skeins, he says, says he,

“Well, my dear,” says he, “I don't see but what you'll have your skeins
ready to-morrow night as well, and as I reckon I shan't have to kill
you, I'll have supper in here to-night.” So they brought supper, and
another stool for him, and down the two sat.

Well, he hadn't eaten but a mouthful or so, when he stops and begins to
laugh.

“What is it?” says she.

“A-why,” says he, “I was out a-hunting to-day, and I got away to a place
in the wood I'd never seen before And there was an old chalk-pit. And I
heard a kind of a sort of a humming. So I got off my hobby, and I went
right quiet to the pit, and I looked down. Well, what should there be
but the funniest little black thing you ever set eyes on. And what was
that doing, but that had a little spinning-wheel, and that was spinning
wonderful fast, and twirling that's tail. And as that span that sang:

  “Nimmy nimmy not
  My name's Tom Tit Tot.”

Well, when the girl heard this, she felt as if she could have jumped out
of her skin for joy, but she didn't say a word.

Next day that there little thing looked so maliceful when he came for
the flax. And when night came, she heard that knocking against the
window panes. She oped the window, and that come right in on the ledge.
That was grinning from ear to ear, and Oo! that's tail was twirling
round so fast.

“What's my name?” that says, as that gave her the skeins.

“Is that Solomon?” she says, pretending to be afeard.

“Noo, t'ain't,” that says, and that came further into the room.

“Well, is that Zebedee?” says she again.

“Noo, t'ain't,” says the impet. And then that laughed and twirled that's
tail till you couldn't hardly see it.

“Take time, woman,” that says; “next guess, and you're mine.” And that
stretched out that's black hands at her.

Well, she backed a step or two, and she looked at it, and then she
laughed out, and says she, pointing her finger at it:

“NIMMY NIMMY NOT, YOUR NAME'S TOM TIT TOT!”

Well, when that heard her, that gave an awful shriek and away that flew
into the dark, and she never saw it any more.


THE THREE SILLIES

Once upon a time there was a farmer and his wife who had one daughter,
and she was courted by a gentleman. Every evening he used to come and
see her, and stop to supper at the farmhouse, and the daughter used to
be sent down into the cellar to draw the beer for supper. So one evening
she had gone down to draw the beer, and she happened to look up at the
ceiling while she was drawing, and she saw a mallet stuck in one of the
beams. It must have been there a long, long time, but somehow or other
she had never noticed it before, and she began a-thinking. And she
thought it was very dangerous to have that mallet there, for she said
to herself: “Suppose him and me was to be married, and we was to have a
son, and he was to grow up to be a man, and come down into the cellar to
draw the beer, like as I'm doing now, and the mallet was to fall on his
head and kill him, what a dreadful thing it would be!” And she put down
the candle and the jug, and sat herself down and began a-crying.

Well, they began to wonder upstairs how it was that she was so long
drawing the beer, and her mother went down to see after her, and she
found her sitting on the settle crying, and the beer running over the
floor. “Why, whatever is the matter?” said her mother. “Oh, mother!”
 says she, “look at that horrid mallet! Suppose we was to be married, and
was to have a son, and he was to grow up, and was to come down to the
cellar to draw the beer, and the mallet was to fall on his head and kill
him, what a dreadful thing it would be!” “Dear, dear! what a dreadful
thing it would be!” said the mother, and she sat her down aside of the
daughter and started a-crying too. Then after a bit the father began to
wonder that they didn't come back, and he went down into the cellar to
look after them himself, and there they two sat a-crying, and the beer
running all over the floor. “Whatever is the matter?” says he. “Why,”
 says the mother, “look at that horrid mallet. Just suppose, if our
daughter and her sweetheart was to be married, and was to have a son,
and he was to grow up, and was to come down into the cellar to draw
the beer, and the mallet was to fall on his head and kill him, what a
dreadful thing it would be!” “Dear, dear, dear! so it would!” said the
father, and he sat himself down aside of the other two, and started
a-crying.

Now the gentleman got tired of stopping up in the kitchen by himself,
and at last he went down into the cellar too, to see what they were
after; and there they three sat a-crying side by side, and the beer
running all over the floor. And he ran straight and turned the tap.
Then he said: “Whatever are you three doing, sitting there crying, and
letting the beer run all over the floor?”

“Oh!” says the father, “look at that horrid mallet! Suppose you and our
daughter was to be married, and was to have a son, and he was to grow
up, and was to come down into the cellar to draw the beer, and the
mallet was to fall on his head and kill him!” And then they all started
a-crying worse than before. But the gentleman burst out a-laughing, and
reached up and pulled out the mallet, and then he said: “I've travelled
many miles, and I never met three such big sillies as you three before;
and now I shall start out on my travels again, and when I can find
three bigger sillies than you three, then I'll come back and marry your
daughter.” So he wished them good-bye, and started off on his travels,
and left them all crying because the girl had lost her sweetheart.

Well, he set out, and he travelled a long way, and at last he came to a
woman's cottage that had some grass growing on the roof. And the woman
was trying to get her cow to go up a ladder to the grass, and the poor
thing durst not go. So the gentleman asked the woman what she was doing.
“Why, lookye,” she said, “look at all that beautiful grass. I'm going to
get the cow on to the roof to eat it. She'll be quite safe, for I shall
tie a string round her neck, and pass it down the chimney, and tie it
to my wrist as I go about the house, so she can't fall off without my
knowing it.” “Oh, you poor silly!” said the gentleman, “you should cut
the grass and throw it down to the cow!” But the woman thought it was
easier to get the cow up the ladder than to get the grass down, so she
pushed her and coaxed her and got her up, and tied a string round her
neck, and passed it down the chimney, and fastened it to her own wrist.
And the gentleman went on his way, but he hadn't gone far when the cow
tumbled off the roof, and hung by the string tied round her neck, and
it strangled her. And the weight of the cow tied to her wrist pulled the
woman up the chimney, and she stuck fast half-way and was smothered in
the soot.

Well, that was one big silly.

And the gentleman went on and on, and he went to an inn to stop the
night, and they were so full at the inn that they had to put him in a
double-bedded room, and another traveller was to sleep in the other bed.
The other man was a very pleasant fellow, and they got very friendly
together; but in the morning, when they were both getting up, the
gentleman was surprised to see the other hang his trousers on the knobs
of the chest of drawers and run across the room and try to jump into
them, and he tried over and over again, and couldn't manage it; and the
gentleman wondered whatever he was doing it for. At last he stopped and
wiped his face with his handkerchief. “Oh dear,” he says, “I do think
trousers are the most awkwardest kind of clothes that ever were. I can't
think who could have invented such things. It takes me the best part
of an hour to get into mine every morning, and I get so hot! How do you
manage yours?” So the gentleman burst out a-laughing, and showed him how
to put them on; and he was very much obliged to him, and said he never
should have thought of doing it that way.

So that was another big silly.

Then the gentleman went on his travels again; and he came to a village,
and outside the village there was a pond, and round the pond was a crowd
of people. And they had got rakes, and brooms, and pitchforks, reaching
into the pond; and the gentleman asked what was the matter. “Why,” they
say, “matter enough! Moon's tumbled into the pond, and we can't rake
her out anyhow!” So the gentleman burst out a-laughing, and told them to
look up into the sky, and that it was only the shadow in the water. But
they wouldn't listen to him, and abused him shamefully, and he got away
as quick as he could.

So there was a whole lot of sillies bigger than them three sillies at
home. So the gentleman turned back home again and married the farmer's
daughter, and if they didn't live happy for ever after, that's nothing
to do with you or me.


THE ROSE-TREE

There was once upon a time a good man who had two children: a girl by a
first wife, and a boy by the second. The girl was as white as milk, and
her lips were like cherries. Her hair was like golden silk, and it hung
to the ground. Her brother loved her dearly, but her wicked stepmother
hated her. “Child,” said the stepmother one day, “go to the grocer's
shop and buy me a pound of candles.” She gave her the money; and the
little girl went, bought the candles, and started on her return. There
was a stile to cross. She put down the candles whilst she got over the
stile. Up came a dog and ran off with the candles.

She went back to the grocer's, and she got a second bunch. She came to
the stile, set down the candles, and proceeded to climb over. Up came
the dog and ran off with the candles.

She went again to the grocer's, and she got a third bunch; and just the
same happened. Then she came to her stepmother crying, for she had spent
all the money and had lost three bunches of candles.

The stepmother was angry, but she pretended not to mind the loss. She
said to the child: “Come, lay your head on my lap that I may comb your
hair.” So the little one laid her head in the woman's lap, who proceeded
to comb the yellow silken hair. And when she combed the hair fell over
her knees, and rolled right down to the ground.

Then the stepmother hated her more for the beauty of her hair; so she
said to her, “I cannot part your hair on my knee, fetch a billet of
wood.” So she fetched it. Then said the stepmother, “I cannot part your
hair with a comb, fetch me an axe.” So she fetched it.

“Now,” said the wicked woman, “lay your head down on the billet whilst I
part your hair.”

Well! she laid down her little golden head without fear; and whist! down
came the axe, and it was off. So the mother wiped the axe and laughed.

Then she took the heart and liver of the little girl, and she stewed
them and brought them into the house for supper. The husband tasted them
and shook his head. He said they tasted very strangely. She gave some
to the little boy, but he would not eat. She tried to force him, but he
refused, and ran out into the garden, and took up his little sister, and
put her in a box, and buried the box under a rose-tree; and every day he
went to the tree and wept, till his tears ran down on the box.

One day the rose-tree flowered. It was spring, and there among the
flowers was a white bird; and it sang, and sang, and sang like an
angel out of heaven. Away it flew, and it went to a cobbler's shop, and
perched itself on a tree hard by; and thus it sang,

  “My wicked mother slew me,
  My dear father ate me,
  My little brother whom I love
  Sits below, and I sing above
    Stick, stock, stone dead.”

“Sing again that beautiful song,” asked the shoemaker. “If you will
first give me those little red shoes you are making.” The cobbler gave
the shoes, and the bird sang the song; then flew to a tree in front of a
watchmaker's, and sang:

  “My wicked mother slew me,
  My dear father ate me,
  My little brother whom I love
  Sits below, and I sing above
    Stick, stock, stone dead.”

“Oh, the beautiful song! sing it again, sweet bird,” asked the
watchmaker. “If you will give me first that gold watch and chain in your
hand.” The jeweller gave the watch and chain. The bird took it in one
foot, the shoes in the other, and, after having repeated the song, flew
away to where three millers were picking a millstone. The bird perched
on a tree and sang:

  “My wicked mother slew me,
  My dear father ate me,
  My little brother whom I love
  Sits below, and I sing above
    Stick!”

Then one of the men put down his tool and looked up from his work,

  “Stock!”

Then the second miller's man laid aside his tool and looked up,

  “Stone!”

Then the third miller's man laid down his tool and looked up,

  “Dead!”

Then all three cried out with one voice: “Oh, what a beautiful song!
Sing it, sweet bird, again.” “If you will put the millstone round my
neck,” said the bird. The men did what the bird wanted and away to the
tree it flew with the millstone round its neck, the red shoes in one
foot, and the gold watch and chain in the other. It sang the song and
then flew home. It rattled the millstone against the eaves of the house,
and the stepmother said: “It thunders.” Then the little boy ran out to
see the thunder, and down dropped the red shoes at his feet. It
rattled the millstone against the eaves of the house once more, and the
stepmother said again: “It thunders.” Then the father ran out and down
fell the chain about his neck.

In ran father and son, laughing and saying, “See, what fine things the
thunder has brought us!” Then the bird rattled the millstone against the
eaves of the house a third time; and the stepmother said: “It thunders
again, perhaps the thunder has brought something for me,” and she
ran out; but the moment she stepped outside the door, down fell the
millstone on her head; and so she died.


THE OLD WOMAN AND HER PIG

An old woman was sweeping her house, and she found a little crooked
sixpence. “What,” said she, “shall I do with this little sixpence? I
will go to market, and buy a little pig.”

As she was coming home, she came to a stile: but the piggy wouldn't go
over the stile.

She went a little further, and she met a dog. So she said to the dog:
“Dog! bite pig; piggy won't go over the stile; and I shan't get home
to-night.” But the dog wouldn't.

She went a little further, and she met a stick. So she said: “Stick!
stick! beat dog! dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and
I shan't get home to-night.” But the stick wouldn't.

She went a little further, and she met a fire. So she said: “Fire! fire!
burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get
over the stile; and I shan't get home to-night.” But the fire wouldn't.

She went a little further, and she met some water. So she said: “Water,
water! quench fire; fire won't burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog
won't bite pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and I shan't get home
to-night.” But the water wouldn't.

She went a little further, and she met an ox. So she said: “Ox! ox!
drink water; water won't quench fire; fire won't burn stick; stick won't
beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and I
shan't get home to-night.” But the ox wouldn't.

She went a little further, and she met a butcher. So she said: “Butcher!
butcher! kill ox; ox won't drink water; water won't quench fire; fire
won't burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't
get over the stile; and I shan't get home to-night.” But the butcher
wouldn't.

She went a little further, and she met a rope. So she said: “Rope! rope!
hang butcher; butcher won't kill ox; ox won't drink water; water won't
quench fire; fire won't burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite
pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and I shan't get home to-night.”
 But the rope wouldn't.

She went a little further, and she met a rat. So she said: “Rat! rat!
gnaw rope; rope won't hang butcher; butcher won't kill ox; ox won't
drink water; water won't quench fire; fire won't burn stick; stick won't
beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and I
shan't get home to-night.” But the rat wouldn't.

She went a little further, and she met a cat. So she said: “Cat! cat!
kill rat; rat won't gnaw rope; rope won't hang butcher; butcher won't
kill ox; ox won't drink water; water won't quench fire; fire won't burn
stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get over
the stile; and I shan't get home to-night.” But the cat said to her, “If
you will go to yonder cow, and fetch me a saucer of milk, I will kill
the rat.” So away went the old woman to the cow.

But the cow said to her: “If you will go to yonder hay-stack, and fetch
me a handful of hay, I'll give you the milk.” So away went the old woman
to the haystack and she brought the hay to the cow.

As soon as the cow had eaten the hay, she gave the old woman the milk;
and away she went with it in a saucer to the cat.

As soon as the cat had lapped up the milk, the cat began to kill the
rat; the rat began to gnaw the rope; the rope began to hang the butcher;
the butcher began to kill the ox; the ox began to drink the water; the
water began to quench the fire; the fire began to burn the stick; the
stick began to beat the dog; the dog began to bite the pig; the little
pig in a fright jumped over the stile, and so the old woman got home
that night.


HOW JACK WENT TO SEEK HIS FORTUNE

Once on a time there was a boy named Jack, and one morning he started to
go and seek his fortune.

He hadn't gone very far before he met a cat.

“Where are you going, Jack?” said the cat.

“I am going to seek my fortune.”

“May I go with you?”

“Yes,” said Jack, “the more the merrier.”

So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt.

They went a little further and they met a dog.

“Where are you going, Jack?” said the dog.

“I am going to seek my fortune.”

“May I go with you?”

“Yes,” said Jack, “the more the merrier.”

So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt. They went a little
further and they met a goat.

“Where are you going, Jack?” said the goat.

“I am going to seek my fortune.”

“May I go with you?”

“Yes,” said Jack, “the more the merrier.”

So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt.

They went a little further and they met a bull.

“Where are you going, Jack?” said the bull.

“I am going to seek my fortune.”

“May I go with you?”

“Yes,” said Jack, “the more the merrier.”

So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt.

They went a little further and they met a rooster.

“Where are you going, Jack?” said the rooster.

“I am going to seek my fortune.”

“May I go with you?”

“Yes,” said Jack, “the more the merrier.”

So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt.

Well, they went on till it was about dark, and they began to think of
some place where they could spend the night. About this time they came
in sight of a house, and Jack told them to keep still while he went up
and looked in through the window. And there were some robbers counting
over their money. Then Jack went back and told them to wait till he gave
the word, and then to make all the noise they could. So when they were
all ready Jack gave the word, and the cat mewed, and the dog barked, and
the goat bleated, and the bull bellowed, and the rooster crowed, and all
together they made such a dreadful noise that it frightened the robbers
all away.

And then they went in and took possession of the house. Jack was afraid
the robbers would come back in the night, and so when it came time to go
to bed he put the cat in the rocking-chair, and he put the dog under the
table, and he put the goat upstairs, and he put the bull down cellar,
and the rooster flew up on to the roof, and Jack went to bed.

By-and-by the robbers saw it was all dark and they sent one man back to
the house to look after their money. Before long he came back in a great
fright and told them his story.

“I went back to the house,” said he, “and went in and tried to sit down
in the rocking-chair, and there was an old woman knitting, and she stuck
her knitting-needles into me.” That was the cat, you know.

“I went to the table to look after the money and there was a shoemaker
under the table, and he stuck his awl into me.” That was the dog, you
know.

“I started to go upstairs, and there was a man up there threshing, and
he knocked me down with his flail.” That was the goat, you know.

“I started to go down cellar, and there was a man down there chopping
wood, and he knocked me up with his axe.” That was the bull, you know.

“But I shouldn't have minded all that if it hadn't been for that little
fellow on top of the house, who kept a-hollering, 'Chuck him up to me-e!
Chuck him up to me-e!'” Of course that was the cock-a-doodle-do.


MR. VINEGAR

Mr. and Mrs. Vinegar lived in a vinegar bottle. Now, one day, when Mr.
Vinegar was from home, Mrs. Vinegar, who was a very good housewife, was
busily sweeping her house, when an unlucky thump of the broom brought
the whole house clitter-clatter, clitter-clatter, about her ears. In an
agony of grief she rushed forth to meet her husband.

On seeing him she exclaimed, “Oh, Mr. Vinegar, Mr. Vinegar, we are
ruined, I have knocked the house down, and it is all to pieces!” Mr.
Vinegar then said: “My dear, let us see what can be done. Here is
the door; I will take it on my back, and we will go forth to seek our
fortune.”

They walked all that day, and at nightfall entered a thick forest. They
were both very, very tired, and Mr. Vinegar said: “My love, I will climb
up into a tree, drag up the door, and you shall follow.” He accordingly
did so, and they both stretched their weary limbs on the door, and fell
fast asleep.

In the middle of the night Mr. Vinegar was disturbed by the sound of
voices underneath, and to his horror and dismay found that it was a band
of thieves met to divide their booty.

“Here, Jack,” said one, “here's five pounds for you; here, Bill, here's
ten pounds for you; here, Bob, here's three pounds for you.”

Mr. Vinegar could listen no longer; his terror was so great that he
trembled and trembled, and shook down the door on their heads. Away
scampered the thieves, but Mr. Vinegar dared not quit his retreat till
broad daylight.

He then scrambled out of the tree, and went to lift up the door. What
did he see but a number of golden guineas. “Come down, Mrs. Vinegar,” he
cried; “come down, I say; our fortune's made, our fortune's made! Come
down, I say.”

Mrs. Vinegar got down as fast as she could, and when she saw the money
she jumped for joy. “Now, my dear,” said she, “I'll tell you what you
shall do. There is a fair at the neighbouring town; you shall take these
forty guineas and buy a cow. I can make butter and cheese, which
you shall sell at market, and we shall then be able to live very
comfortably.”

Mr. Vinegar joyfully agrees, takes the money, and off he goes to the
fair. When he arrived, he walked up and down, and at length saw a
beautiful red cow. It was an excellent milker, and perfect in every
way. “Oh,” thought Mr. Vinegar, “if I had but that cow, I should be the
happiest, man alive.”

So he offers the forty guineas for the cow, and the owner said that, as
he was a friend, he'd oblige him. So the bargain was made, and he got
the cow and he drove it backwards and forwards to show it.

By-and-by he saw a man playing the bagpipes--Tweedle-dum tweedle-dee.
The children followed him about, and he appeared to be pocketing money
on all sides. “Well,” thought Mr. Vinegar, “if I had but that beautiful
instrument I should be the happiest man alive--my fortune would be
made.”

So he went up to the man. “Friend,” says he, “what a beautiful
instrument that is, and what a deal of money you must make.” “Why, yes,”
 said the man, “I make a great deal of money, to be sure, and it is a
wonderful instrument.” “Oh!” cried Mr. Vinegar, “how I should like to
possess it!” “Well,” said the man, “as you are a friend, I don't much
mind parting with it; you shall have it for that red cow.” “Done!” said
the delighted Mr. Vinegar. So the beautiful red cow was given for the
bagpipes.

He walked up and down with his purchase; but it was in vain he tried
to play a tune, and instead of pocketing pence, the boys followed him
hooting, laughing, and pelting.

Poor Mr. Vinegar, his fingers grew very cold, and, just as he was
leaving the town, he met a man with a fine thick pair of gloves. “Oh,
my fingers are so very cold,” said Mr. Vinegar to himself. “Now if I had
but those beautiful gloves I should be the happiest man alive.” He went
up to the man, and said to him, “Friend, you seem to have a capital pair
of gloves there.” “Yes, truly,” cried the man; “and my hands are as warm
as possible this cold November day.” “Well,” said Mr. Vinegar, “I should
like to have them.”. “What will you give?” said the man; “as you are
a friend, I don't much mind letting you have them for those bagpipes.”
 “Done!” cried Mr. Vinegar. He put on the gloves, and felt perfectly
happy as he trudged homewards.

At last he grew very tired, when he saw a man coming towards him with a
good stout stick in his hand.

“Oh,” said Mr. Vinegar, “that I had but that stick! I should then be the
happiest man alive.” He said to the man: “Friend! what a rare good stick
you have got.” “Yes,” said the man; “I have used it for many a long
mile, and a good friend it has been; but if you have a fancy for it,
as you are a friend, I don't mind giving it to you for that pair of
gloves.” Mr. Vinegar's hands were so warm, and his legs so tired, that
he gladly made the exchange.

As he drew near to the wood where he had left his wife, he heard a
parrot on a tree calling out his name: “Mr. Vinegar, you foolish man,
you blockhead, you simpleton; you went to the fair, and laid out all
your money in buying a cow. Not content with that, you changed it
for bagpipes, on which you could not play, and which were not worth
one-tenth of the money. You fool, you--you had no sooner got the
bagpipes than you changed them for the gloves, which were not worth
one-quarter of the money; and when you had got the gloves, you changed
them for a poor miserable stick; and now for your forty guineas, cow,
bagpipes, and gloves, you have nothing to show but that poor miserable
stick, which you might have cut in any hedge.” On this the bird laughed
and laughed, and Mr. Vinegar, falling into a violent rage, threw the
stick at its head. The stick lodged in the tree, and he returned to his
wife without money, cow, bagpipes, gloves, or stick, and she instantly
gave him such a sound cudgelling that she almost broke every bone in his
skin.


NIX NOUGHT NOTHING

There once lived a king and a queen as many a one has been. They were
long married and had no children; but at last a baby-boy came to the
queen when the king was away in the far countries. The queen would not
christen the boy till the king came back, and she said, “We will just
call him _Nix Nought Nothing_ until his father comes home.” But it was
long before he came home, and the boy had grown a nice little laddie.
At length the king was on his way back; but he had a big river to cross,
and there was a whirlpool, and he could not get over the water. But a
giant came up to him, and said “I'll carry you over.” But the king said:
“What's your pay?” “O give me Nix, Nought, Nothing, and I will carry you
over the water on my back.” The king had never heard that his son was
called Nix Nought Nothing, and so he said: “O, I'll give you that and
my thanks into the bargain.” When the king got home again, he was very
happy to see his wife again, and his young son. She told him that she
had not given the child any name, but just Nix Nought Nothing, until he
should come home again himself. The poor king was in a terrible case.
He said: “What have I done? I promised to give the giant who carried me
over the river on his back, Nix Nought Nothing.” The king and the queen
were sad and sorry, but they said: “When the giant comes we will give
him the hen-wife's boy; he will never know the difference.” The next
day the giant came to claim the king's promise, and he sent for the
hen-wife's boy; and the giant went away with the boy on his back. He
travelled till he came to a big stone, and there he sat down to rest. He
said,

“Hidge, Hodge, on my back, what time of day is that?”

The poor little boy said: “It is the time that my mother, the hen-wife,
takes up the eggs for the queen's breakfast.”

The Giant was very angry, and dashed the boy's head on the stone and
killed him.

So he went back in a tower of a temper and this time they gave him the
gardener's boy. He went off with him on his back till they got to the
stone again when the giant sat down to rest. And he said:

“Hidge, Hodge, on my back, what time of day do you make that?”

The gardener's boy said: “Sure it's the time that my mother takes up the
vegetables for the queen's dinner.” Then the giant was right wild and
dashed his brains out on the stone.

Then the giant went back to the king's house in a terrible temper and
said he would destroy them all if they did not give him Nix Nought
Nothing this time. They had to do it; and when he came to the big stone,
the giant said: “What time of day is that?” Nix Nought Nothing said: “It
is the time that my father the king will be sitting down to supper.” The
giant said: “I've got the right one now;” and took Nix Nought Nothing to
his own house and brought him up till he was a man.

The giant had a bonny daughter, and she and the lad grew very fond of
each other. The giant said one day to Nix Nought Nothing: “I've work for
you to-morrow. There is a stable seven miles long and seven miles broad,
and it has not been cleaned for seven years, and you must clean it
to-morrow, or I will have you for my supper.”

The giant's daughter went out next morning with the lad's breakfast, and
found him in a terrible state, for always as he cleaned out a bit, it
just fell in again. The giant's daughter said she would help him, and
she cried all the beasts in the field, and all the fowls of the air, and
in a minute they all came, and carried away everything that was in the
stable and made it all clean before the giant came home. He said: “Shame
on the wit that helped you; but I have a worse job for you to-morrow.”
 Then he said to Nix Nought Nothing: “There's a lake seven miles long,
and seven miles deep, and seven miles broad, and you must drain it
to-morrow by nightfall, or else I'll have you for my supper.” Nix Nought
Nothing began early next morning and tried to lave the water with his
pail, but the lake was never getting any less, and he didn't know what
to do; but the giant's daughter called on all the fish in the sea to
come and drink the water, and very soon they drank it dry. When the
giant saw the work done he was in a rage, and said: “I've a worse job
for you to-morrow; there is a tree, seven miles high, and no branch on
it, till you get to the top, and there is a nest with seven eggs in it,
and you must bring down all the eggs without breaking one, or else I'll
have you for my supper.” At first the giant's daughter did not know how
to help Nix Nought Nothing; but she cut off first her fingers and then
her toes, and made steps of them, and he clomb the tree and got all the
eggs safe till he came just to the bottom, and then one was broken. So
they determined to run away together and after the giant's daughter had
tidied up her hair a bit and got her magic flask they set out together
as fast as they could run. And they hadn't got but three fields away
when they looked back and saw the giant walking along at top speed after
them. “Quick, quick,” called out the giant's daughter, “take my comb
from my hair and throw it down.” Nix Nought Nothing took her comb from
her hair and threw it down, and out of every one of its prongs there
sprung up a fine thick briar in the way of the giant. You may be sure it
took him a long time to work his way through the briar bush and by the
time he was well through Nix Nought Nothing and his sweetheart had run
on a tidy step away from him. But he soon came along after them and was
just like to catch 'em up when the giant's daughter called out to Nix
Nought Nothing, “Take my hair dagger and throw it down, quick, quick.”
 So Nix Nought Nothing threw down the hair dagger and out of it grew as
quick as lightning a thick hedge of sharp razors placed criss-cross. The
giant had to tread very cautiously to get through all this and meanwhile
the young lovers ran on, and on, and on, till they were nearly out of
sight. But at last the giant was through, and it wasn't long before he
was like to catch them up. But just as he was stretching out his hand
to catch Nix Nought Nothing his daughter took out her magic flask and
dashed it on the ground. And as it broke out of it welled a big, big
wave that grew, and that grew, till it reached the giant's waist and
then his neck, and when it got to his head, he was drowned dead, and
dead, and dead indeed. So he goes out of the story.

But Nix Nought Nothing fled on till where do you think they came to?
Why, to near the castle of Nix Nought Nothing's father and mother. But
the giant's daughter was so weary that she couldn't move a step further.
So Nix Nought Nothing told her to wait there while he went and found
out a lodging for the night. And he went on towards the lights of the
castle, and on the way he came to the cottage of the hen-wife whose
boy had had his brains dashed out by the giant. Now she knew Nix Nought
Nothing in a moment, and hated him because he was the cause of her son's
death. So when he asked his way to the castle she put a spell upon him,
and when he got to the castle, no sooner was he let in than he fell down
dead asleep upon a bench in the hall. The king and queen tried all they
could do to wake him up, but all in vain. So the king promised that if
any lady could wake him up she should marry him. Meanwhile the giant's
daughter was waiting and waiting for him to come back. And she went up
into a tree to watch for him. The gardener's daughter, going to draw
water in the well, saw the shadow of the lady in the water and thought
it was herself, and said; “If I'm so bonny, if I'm so brave, why do you
send me to draw water?” So she threw down her pail and went to see if
she could wed the sleeping stranger. And she went to the hen-wife, who
taught her an unspelling catch which would keep Nix Nought Nothing awake
as long as the gardener's daughter liked. So she went up to the castle
and sang her catch and Nix Nought Nothing was wakened for a bit and they
promised to wed him to the gardener's daughter. Meanwhile the gardener
went down to draw water from the well and saw the shadow of the lady in
the water. So he looks up and finds her, and he brought the lady from
the tree, and led her into his house. And he told her that a stranger
was to marry his daughter, and took her up to the castle and showed her
the man: and it was Nix Nought Nothing asleep in a chair. And she saw
him, and cried to him: “Waken, waken, and speak to me!” But he would not
waken, and soon she cried:

  “I cleaned the stable, I laved the lake, and I clomb the tree,
  And all for the love of thee,
  And thou wilt not waken and speak to me.”

The king and the queen heard this, and came to the bonny young lady, and
she said:

“I cannot get Nix Nought Nothing to speak to me for all that I can do.”

Then were they greatly astonished when she spoke of Nix Nought Nothing,
and asked where he was, and she said: “He that sits there in the chair.”
 Then they ran to him and kissed him and called him their own dear son;
so they called for the gardener's daughter and made her sing her charm,
and he wakened, and told them all that the giant's daughter had done
for him, and of all her kindness. Then they took her in their arms and
kissed her, and said she should now be their daughter, for their son
should marry her. But they sent for the hen-wife and put her to death.
And they lived happy all their days.


JACK HANNAFORD

There was an old soldier who had been long in the wars--so long, that
he was quite out-at-elbows, and he did not know where to go to find a
living. So he walked up moors, down glens, till at last he came to a
farm, from which the good man had gone away to market. The wife of the
farmer was a very foolish woman, who had been a widow when he married
her; the farmer was foolish enough, too, and it is hard to say which of
the two was the more foolish. When you've heard my tale you may decide.

Now before the farmer goes to market says he to his wife: “Here is ten
pounds all in gold, take care of it till I come home.” If the man had
not been a fool he would never have given the money to his wife to keep.
Well, off he went in his cart to market, and the wife said to herself:
“I will keep the ten pounds quite safe from thieves;” so she tied it up
in a rag, and she put the rag up the parlour chimney.

“There,” said she, “no thieves will ever find it now, that is quite
sure.”

Jack Hannaford, the old soldier, came and rapped at the door.

“Who is there?” asked the wife.

“Jack Hannaford.”

“Where do you come from?”

“Paradise.”

“Lord a' mercy! and maybe you've seen my old man there,” alluding to her
former husband.

“Yes, I have.”

“And how was he a-doing?” asked the goody.

“But middling; he cobbles old shoes, and he has nothing but cabbage for
victuals.”

“Deary me!” exclaimed the woman. “Didn't he send a message to me?”

“Yes, he did,” replied Jack Hannaford. “He said that he was out of
leather, and his pockets were empty, so you were to send him a few
shillings to buy a fresh stock of leather.”

“He shall have them, bless his poor soul!” And away went the wife to the
parlour chimney, and she pulled the rag with the ten pounds in it from
the chimney, and she gave the whole sum to the soldier, telling him that
her old man was to use as much as he wanted, and to send back the rest.

It was not long that Jack waited after receiving the money; he went off
as fast as he could walk.

Presently the farmer came home and asked for his money. The wife told
him that she had sent it by a soldier to her former husband in Paradise,
to buy him leather for cobbling the shoes of the saints and angels of
Heaven. The farmer was very angry, and he swore that he had never met
with such a fool as his wife. But the wife said that her husband was a
greater fool for letting her have the money.

There was no time to waste words; so the farmer mounted his horse and
rode off after Jack Hannaford. The old soldier heard the horse's hoofs
clattering on the road behind him, so he knew it must be the farmer
pursuing him. He lay down on the ground, and shading his eyes with one
hand, looked up into the sky, and pointed heavenwards with the other
hand.

“What are you about there?” asked the farmer, pulling up.

“Lord save you!” exclaimed Jack: “I've seen a rare sight.”

“What was that?”

“A man going straight up into the sky, as if he were walking on a road.”

“Can you see him still?”

“Yes, I can.”

“Where?”

“Get off your horse and lie down.”

“If you will hold the horse.”

Jack did so readily.

“I cannot see him,” said the farmer.

“Shade your eyes with your hand, and you'll soon see a man flying away
from you.”

Sure enough he did so, for Jack leaped on the horse, and rode away with
it. The farmer walked home without his horse.

“You are a bigger fool than I am,” said the wife; “for I did only one
foolish thing, and you have done two.”


BINNORIE

Once upon a time there were two king's daughters lived in a bower near
the bonny mill-dams of Binnorie. And Sir William came wooing the eldest
and won her love and plighted troth with glove and with ring. But after
a time he looked upon the youngest, with her cherry cheeks and golden
hair, and his love grew towards her till he cared no longer for the
eldest one. So she hated her sister for taking away Sir William's love,
and day by day her hate grew upon her, and she plotted and she planned
how to get rid of her.

So one fine morning, fair and clear, she said to her sister, “Let us
go and see our father's boats come in at the bonny mill-stream of
Binnorie.” So they went there hand in hand. And when they got to the
river's bank the youngest got upon a stone to watch for the coming of
the boats. And her sister, coming behind her, caught her round the waist
and dashed her into the rushing mill-stream of Binnorie.

“O sister, sister, reach me your hand!” she cried, as she floated away,
“and you shall have half of all I've got or shall get.”

“No, sister, I'll reach you no hand of mine, for I am the heir to all
your land. Shame on me if I touch the hand that has come 'twixt me and
my own heart's love.”

“O sister, O sister, then reach me your glove!” she cried, as she
floated further away, “and you shall have your William again.”

“Sink on,” cried the cruel princess, “no hand or glove of mine you'll
touch. Sweet William will be all mine when you are sunk beneath the
bonny mill-stream of Binnorie.” And she turned and went home to the
king's castle.

And the princess floated down the mill-stream, sometimes swimming
and sometimes sinking, till she came near the mill. Now the miller's
daughter was cooking that day, and needed water for her cooking. And as
she went to draw it from the stream, she saw something floating towards
the mill-dam, and she called out, “Father! father! draw your dam.
There's something white--a merry maid or a milk-white swan--coming down
the stream.” So the miller hastened to the dam and stopped the heavy
cruel mill-wheels. And then they took out the princess and laid her on
the bank.

Fair and beautiful she looked as she lay there. In her golden hair were
pearls and precious stones; you could not see her waist for her golden
girdle; and the golden fringe of her white dress came down over her lily
feet. But she was drowned, drowned!

And as she lay there in her beauty a famous harper passed by the
mill-dam of Binnorie, and saw her sweet pale face. And though he
travelled on far away he never forgot that face, and after many days he
came back to the bonny mill-stream of Binnorie. But then all he could
find of her where they had put her to rest were her bones and her
golden hair. So he made a harp out of her breast-bone and her hair, and
travelled on up the hill from the mill-dam of Binnorie, till he came to
the castle of the king her father.

That night they were all gathered in the castle hall to hear the great
harper--king and queen, their daughter and son, Sir William and all
their Court. And first the harper sang to his old harp, making them joy
and be glad or sorrow and weep just as he liked. But while he sang he
put the harp he had made that day on a stone in the hall. And presently
it began to sing by itself, low and clear, and the harper stopped and
all were hushed.

And this was what the harp sung:

  “O yonder sits my father, the king,
    Binnorie, O Binnorie;
  And yonder sits my mother, the queen;
    By the bonny mill-dams o' Binnorie,

  “And yonder stands my brother Hugh,
    Binnorie, O Binnorie;
  And by him, my William, false and true;
    By the bonny mill-dams o' Binnorie.”

Then they all wondered, and the harper told them how he had seen the
princess lying drowned on the bank near the bonny mill-dams o'
Binnorie, and how he had afterwards made this harp out of her hair and
breast-bone. Just then the harp began singing again, and this was what
it sang out loud and clear:

  “And there sits my sister who drownèd me
  By the bonny mill-dams o' Binnorie.”

And the harp snapped and broke, and never sang more.


MOUSE AND MOUSER

The Mouse went to visit the Cat, and found her sitting behind the hall
door, spinning.

MOUSE. What are you doing, my lady, my lady, What are you doing, my
lady?

CAT (_sharply_). I'm spinning old breeches, good body, good body I'm
spinning old breeches, good body.

MOUSE. Long may you wear them, my lady, my lady, Long may you wear them,
my lady.

CAT (_gruffly_). I'll wear' em and tear 'em, good body, good body. I'll
wear 'em and tear 'em, good body.

MOUSE. I was sweeping my room, my lady, my lady, I was sweeping my room,
my lady.

CAT. The cleaner you'd be, good body, good body, The cleaner you'd be,
good body.

MOUSE. I found a silver sixpence, my lady, my lady, I found a silver
sixpence, my lady.

CAT. The richer you were, good body, good body, The richer you were,
good body.

MOUSE. I went to the market, my lady, my lady, I went to the market, my
lady.

CAT. The further you went, good body, good body The further you went,
good body.

MOUSE. I bought me a pudding, my lady, my lady, I bought me a pudding,
my lady.

CAT (_snarling_). The more meat you had, good body, good body, The more
meat you had, good body.

MOUSE. I put it in the window to cool, my lady, I put it in the window
to cool.

CAT. (_sharply_). The faster you'd eat it, good body, good body, The
faster you'd eat it, good body.

MOUSE (_timidly_). The cat came and ate it, my lady, my lady, The cat
came and ate it, my lady.

CAT (_pouncingly_). And I'll eat you, good body, good body, And I'll eat
you, good body.

(_Springs upon the mouse and kills it._)


CAP O' RUSHES

Well, there was once a very rich gentleman, and he'd three daughters,
and he thought he'd see how fond they were of him. So he says to the
first, “How much do you love me, my dear?”

“Why,” says she, “as I love my life.”

“That's good,” says he.

So he says to the second, “How much do _you_ love me, my dear?”

“Why,” says she, “better nor all the world.”

“That's good,” says he.

So he says to the third, “How much do _you_ love me, my dear?”

“Why, I love you as fresh meat loves salt,” says she.

Well, he was that angry. “You don't love me at all,” says he, “and in
my house you stay no more.” So he drove her out there and then, and shut
the door in her face.

Well, she went away on and on till she came to a fen, and there she
gathered a lot of rushes and made them into a kind of a sort of a
cloak with a hood, to cover her from head to foot, and to hide her fine
clothes. And then she went on and on till she came to a great house.

“Do you want a maid?” says she.

“No, we don't,” said they.

“I haven't nowhere to go,” says she; “and I ask no wages, and do any
sort of work,” says she.

“Well,” says they, “if you like to wash the pots and scrape the
saucepans you may stay,” said they.

So she stayed there and washed the pots and scraped the saucepans and
did all the dirty work. And because she gave no name they called her
“Cap o' Rushes.”

Well, one day there was to be a great dance a little way off, and the
servants were allowed to go and look on at the grand people. Cap o'
Rushes said she was too tired to go, so she stayed at home.

But when they were gone she offed with her cap o' rushes, and cleaned
herself, and went to the dance. And no one there was so finely dressed
as her.

Well, who should be there but her master's son, and what should he do
but fall in love with her the minute he set eyes on her. He wouldn't
dance with any one else.

But before the dance was done Cap o' Rushes slipt off, and away she went
home. And when the other maids came back she was pretending to be asleep
with her cap o' rushes on.

Well, next morning they said to her, “You did miss a sight, Cap o'
Rushes!”

“What was that?” says she.

“Why, the beautifullest lady you ever see, dressed right gay and ga'.
The young master, he never took his eyes off her.”

“Well, I should have liked to have seen her,” says Cap o' Rushes.

“Well, there's to be another dance this evening, and perhaps she'll be
there.”

But, come the evening, Cap o' Rushes said she was too tired to go with
them. Howsoever, when they were gone, she offed with her cap o' rushes
and cleaned herself, and away she went to the dance.

The master's son had been reckoning on seeing her, and he danced with
no one else, and never took his eyes off her. But, before the dance was
over, she slipt off, and home she went, and when the maids came back
she, pretended to be asleep with her cap o' rushes on.

Next day they said to her again, “Well, Cap o' Rushes, you should ha'
been there to see the lady. There she was again, gay and ga', and the
young master he never took his eyes off her.”

“Well, there,” says she, “I should ha' liked to ha' seen her.”

“Well,” says they, “there's a dance again this evening, and you must go
with us, for she's sure to be there.”

Well, come this evening, Cap o' Rushes said she was too tired to go, and
do what they would she stayed at home. But when they were gone she offed
with her cap o' rushes and cleaned herself, and away she went to the
dance.

The master's son was rarely glad when he saw her. He danced with none
but her and never took his eyes off her. When she wouldn't tell him her
name, nor where she came from, he gave her a ring and told her if he
didn't see her again he should die.

Well, before the dance was over, off she slipped, and home she went, and
when the maids came home she was pretending to be asleep with her cap o'
rushes on.

Well, next day they says to her, “There, Cap o' Rushes, you didn't come
last night, and now you won't see the lady, for there's no more dances.”

“Well I should have rarely liked to have seen her,” says she.

The master's son he tried every way to find out where the lady was gone,
but go where he might, and ask whom he might, he never heard anything
about her. And he got worse and worse for the love of her till he had to
keep his bed.

“Make some gruel for the young master,” they said to the cook. “He's
dying for the love of the lady.” The cook she set about making it when
Cap o' Rushes came in.

“What are you a-doing of?”, says she.

“I'm going to make some gruel for the young master,” says the cook, “for
he's dying for love of the lady.”

“Let me make it,” says Cap o' Rushes.

Well, the cook wouldn't at first, but at last she said yes, and Cap o'
Rushes made the gruel. And when she had made it she slipped the ring
into it on the sly before the cook took it upstairs.

The young man he drank it and then he saw the ring at the bottom.

“Send for the cook,” says he.

So up she comes.

“Who made this gruel here?” says he.

“I did,” says the cook, for she was frightened.

And he looked at her,

“No, you didn't,” says he. “Say who did it, and you shan't be harmed.”

“Well, then, 'twas Cap o' Rushes,” says she.

“Send Cap o' Rushes here,” says he.

So Cap o' Rushes came.

“Did you make my gruel?” says he.

“Yes, I did,” says she.

“Where did you get this ring?” says he.

“From him that gave it me,” says she.

“Who are you, then?” says the young man.

“I'll show you,” says she. And she offed with her cap o' rushes, and
there she was in her beautiful clothes.

Well, the master's son he got well very soon, and they were to be
married in a little time. It was to be a very grand wedding, and every
one was asked far and near. And Cap o' Rushes' father was asked. But she
never told anybody who she was.

But before the wedding she went to the cook, and says she:

“I want you to dress every dish without a mite o' salt.”

“That'll be rare nasty,” says the cook.

“That doesn't signify,” says she.

“Very well,” says the cook.

Well, the wedding-day came, and they were married. And after they were
married all the company sat down to the dinner. When they began to eat
the meat, that was so tasteless they couldn't eat it. But Cap o' Rushes'
father he tried first one dish and then another, and then he burst out
crying.

“What is the matter?” said the master's son to him.

“Oh!” says he, “I had a daughter. And I asked her how much she loved me.
And she said 'As much as fresh meat loves salt.' And I turned her from
my door, for I thought she didn't love me. And now I see she loved me
best of all. And she may be dead for aught I know.”

“No, father, here she is!” says Cap o' Rushes. And she goes up to him
and puts her arms round him.

And so they were happy ever after.


TEENY-TINY

Once upon a time there was a teeny-tiny woman lived in a teeny-tiny
house in a teeny-tiny village. Now, one day this teeny-tiny woman put
on her teeny-tiny bonnet, and went out of her teeny-tiny house to take
a teeny-tiny walk. And when this teeny-tiny woman had gone a teeny-tiny
way she came to a teeny-tiny gate; so the teeny-tiny woman opened the
teeny-tiny gate, and went into a teeny-tiny churchyard. And when this
teeny-tiny woman had got into the teeny-tiny churchyard, she saw a
teeny-tiny bone on a teeny-tiny grave, and the teeny-tiny woman said to
her teeny-tiny self, “This teeny-tiny bone will make me some teeny-tiny
soup for my teeny-tiny supper.” So the teeny-tiny woman put the
teeny-tiny bone into her teeny-tiny pocket, and went home to her
teeny-tiny house.

Now when the teeny-tiny woman got home to her teeny-tiny house she was
a teeny-tiny bit tired; so she went up her teeny-tiny stairs to her
teeny-tiny bed, and put the teeny-tiny bone into a teeny-tiny cupboard.
And when this teeny-tiny woman had been to sleep a teeny-tiny time, she
was awakened by a teeny-tiny voice from the teeny-tiny cupboard, which
said:

“Give me my bone!”

And this teeny-tiny woman was a teeny-tiny frightened, so she hid her
teeny-tiny head under the teeny-tiny clothes and went to sleep again.
And when she had been to sleep again a teeny-tiny time, the teeny-tiny
voice again cried out from the teeny-tiny cupboard a teeny-tiny louder,
“Give me my bone!”

This made the teeny-tiny woman a teeny-tiny more frightened, so she hid
her teeny-tiny head a teeny-tiny further under the teeny-tiny clothes.
And when the teeny-tiny woman had been to sleep again a teeny-tiny
time, the teeny-tiny voice from the teeny-tiny cupboard said again a
teeny-tiny louder,

“Give me my bone!”

And this teeny-tiny woman was a teeny-tiny bit more frightened, but she
put her teeny-tiny head out of the teeny-tiny clothes, and said in her
loudest teeny-tiny voice, “TAKE IT!”


JACK AND THE BEANSTALK

There was once upon a time a poor widow who had an only son named Jack,
and a cow named Milky-white. And all they had to live on was the milk
the cow gave every morning which they carried to the market and sold.
But one morning Milky-white gave no milk and they didn't know what to
do.

“What shall we do, what shall we do?” said the widow, wringing her
hands.

“Cheer up, mother, I'll go and get work somewhere,” said Jack.

“We've tried that before, and nobody would take you,” said his mother;
“we must sell Milky-white and with the money do something, start shop,
or something.”

“All right, mother,” says Jack; “it's market-day today, and I'll soon
sell Milky-white, and then we'll see what we can do.”

So he took the cow's halter in his hand, and off he starts. He hadn't
gone far when he met a funny-looking old man who said to him: “Good
morning, Jack.”

“Good morning to you,” said Jack, and wondered how he knew his name.

“Well, Jack, and where are you off to?” said the man.

“I'm going to market to sell our cow here.”

“Oh, you look the proper sort of chap to sell cows,” said the man; “I
wonder if you know how many beans make five.”

“Two in each hand and one in your mouth,” says Jack, as sharp as a
needle.

“Right you are,” said the man, “and here they are the very beans
themselves,” he went on pulling out of his pocket a number of
strange-looking beans. “As you are so sharp,” says he, “I don't mind
doing a swop with you--your cow for these beans.”

“Walker!” says Jack; “wouldn't you like it?”

“Ah! you don't know what these beans are,” said the man; “if you plant
them over-night, by morning they grow right up to the sky.”

“Really?” says Jack; “you don't say so.”

“Yes, that is so, and if it doesn't turn out to be true you can have
your cow back.”

“Right,” says Jack, and hands him over Milky-white's halter and pockets
the beans.

Back goes Jack home, and as he hadn't gone very far it wasn't dusk by
the time he got to his door.

“What back, Jack?” said his mother; “I see you haven't got Milky-white,
so you've sold her. How much did you get for her?”

“You'll never guess, mother,” says Jack.

“No, you don't say so. Good boy! Five pounds, ten, fifteen, no, it can't
be twenty.”

“I told you you couldn't guess, what do you say to these beans; they're
magical, plant them over-night and----”

“What!” says Jack's mother, “have you been such a fool, such a dolt,
such an idiot, as to give away my Milky-white, the best milker in the
parish, and prime beef to boot, for a set of paltry beans. Take that!
Take that! Take that! And as for your precious beans here they go out of
the window. And now off with you to bed. Not a sup shall you drink, and
not a bit shall you swallow this very night.”

So Jack went upstairs to his little room in the attic, and sad and sorry
he was, to be sure, as much for his mother's sake, as for the loss of
his supper.

At last he dropped off to sleep.

When he woke up, the room looked so funny. The sun was shining into part
of it, and yet all the rest was quite dark and shady. So Jack jumped
up and dressed himself and went to the window. And what do you think
he saw? why, the beans his mother had thrown out of the window into the
garden, had sprung up into a big beanstalk which went up and up and up
till it reached the sky. So the man spoke truth after all.

The beanstalk grew up quite close past Jack's window, so all he had to
do was to open it and give a jump on to the beanstalk which was made
like a big plaited ladder. So Jack climbed and he climbed and he climbed
and he climbed and he climbed and he climbed and he climbed till at last
he reached the sky. And when he got there he found a long broad road
going as straight as a dart. So he walked along and he walked along
and he walked along till he came to a great big tall house, and on the
doorstep there was a great big tall woman.

“Good morning, mum,” says Jack, quite polite-like. “Could you be so kind
as to give me some breakfast.” For he hadn't had anything to eat, you
know, the night before and was as hungry as a hunter.

“It's breakfast you want, is it?” says the great big tall woman, “it's
breakfast you'll be if you don't move off from here. My man is an ogre
and there's nothing he likes better than boys broiled on toast. You'd
better be moving on or he'll soon be coming.”

“Oh! please mum, do give me something to eat, mum. I've had nothing to
eat since yesterday morning, really and truly, mum,” says Jack. “I may
as well be broiled, as die of hunger.”

Well, the ogre's wife wasn't such a bad sort, after all. So she took
Jack into the kitchen, and gave him a junk of bread and cheese and a jug
of milk. But Jack hadn't half finished these when thump! thump! thump!
the whole house began to tremble with the noise of someone coming.

“Goodness gracious me! It's my old man,” said the ogre's wife, “what on
earth shall I do? Here, come quick and jump in here.” And she bundled
Jack into the oven just as the ogre came in.

He was a big one, to be sure. At his belt he had three calves strung up
by the heels, and he unhooked them and threw them down on the table and
said: “Here, wife, broil me a couple of these for breakfast. Ah what's
this I smell?

  Fee-fi-fo-fum,
  I smell the blood of an Englishman,
  Be he alive, or be he dead
  I'll have his bones to grind my bread.”

“Nonsense, dear,” said his wife, “you're dreaming. Or perhaps you smell
the scraps of that little boy you liked so much for yesterday's dinner.
Here, go you and have a wash and tidy up, and by the time you come back
your breakfast'll be ready for you.”

So the ogre went off, and Jack was just going to jump out of the oven
and run off when the woman told him not. “Wait till he's asleep,” says
she; “he always has a snooze after breakfast.”

Well, the ogre had his breakfast, and after that he goes to a big chest
and takes out of it a couple of bags of gold and sits down counting them
till at last his head began to nod and he began to snore till the whole
house shook again.

Then Jack crept out on tiptoe from his oven, and as he was passing the
ogre he took one of the bags of gold under his arm, and off he pelters
till he came to the beanstalk, and then he threw down the bag of gold
which of course fell in to his mother's garden, and then he climbed down
and climbed down till at last he got home and told his mother and showed
her the gold and said: “Well, mother, wasn't I right about the beans.
They are really magical, you see.”

So they lived on the bag of gold for some time, but at last they came to
the end of that so Jack made up his mind to try his luck once more up at
the top of the beanstalk. So one fine morning he got up early, and got
on to the beanstalk, and he climbed and he climbed and he climbed and
he climbed and he climbed and he climbed till at last he got on the road
again and came to the great big tall house he had been to before. There,
sure enough, was the great big tall woman a-standing on the door-step.

“Good morning, mum,” says Jack, as bold as brass, “could you be so good
as to give me something to eat?”

“Go away, my boy,” said the big, tall woman, “or else my man will eat
you up for breakfast. But aren't you the youngster who came here once
before? Do you know, that very day, my man missed one of his bags of
gold.”

“That's strange, mum,” says Jack, “I dare say I could tell you something
about that but I'm so hungry I can't speak till I've had something to
eat.”

Well the big tall woman was that curious that she took him in and gave
him something to eat. But he had scarcely begun munching it as slowly as
he could when thump! thump! thump! they heard the giant's footstep, and
his wife hid Jack away in the oven.

All happened as it did before. In came the ogre as he did before, said:
“Fee-fi-fo-fum,” and had his breakfast off three broiled oxen. Then he
said: “Wife, bring me the hen that lays the golden eggs.” So she brought
it, and the ogre said: “Lay,” and it laid an egg all of gold. And then
the ogre began to nod his head, and to snore till the house shook.

Then Jack crept out of the oven on tiptoe and caught hold of the golden
hen, and was off before you could say “Jack Robinson.” But this time the
hen gave a cackle which woke the ogre, and just as Jack got out of the
house he heard him calling: “Wife, wife, what have you done with my
golden hen?”

And the wife said: “Why, my dear?”

But that was all Jack heard, for he rushed off to the beanstalk and
climbed down like a house on fire. And when he got home he showed his
mother the wonderful hen and said “Lay,” to it; and it laid a golden egg
every time he said “Lay.”

Well, Jack was not content, and it wasn't very long before he determined
to have another try at his luck up there at the top of the beanstalk. So
one fine morning, he got up early, and went on to the beanstalk, and he
climbed and he climbed and he climbed and he climbed till he got to
the top. But this time he knew better than to go straight to the ogre's
house. And when he got near it he waited behind a bush till he saw the
ogre's wife come out with a pail to get some water, and then he crept
into the house and got into the copper. He hadn't been there long when
he heard thump! thump! thump! as before, and in come the ogre and his
wife.

“Fee-fi-fo-fum, I smell the blood of an Englishman,” cried out the ogre;
“I smell him, wife, I smell him.”

“Do you, my dearie?” says the ogre's wife. “Then if it's that little
rogue that stole your gold and the hen that laid the golden eggs he's
sure to have got into the oven.” And they both rushed to the oven. But
Jack wasn't there, luckily, and the ogre's wife said: “There you are
again with your fee-fi-fo-fum. Why of course it's the laddie you caught
last night that I've broiled for your breakfast. How forgetful I am, and
how careless you are not to tell the difference between a live un and a
dead un.”

So the ogre sat down to the breakfast and ate it, but every now and
then he would mutter: “Well, I could have sworn----” and he'd get up
and search the larder and the cupboards, and everything, only luckily he
didn't think of the copper.

After breakfast was over, the ogre called out: “Wife, wife, bring me my
golden harp.” So she brought it and put it on the table before him. Then
he said: “Sing!” and the golden harp sang most beautifully. And it
went on singing till the ogre fell asleep, and commenced to snore like
thunder.

Then Jack lifted up the copper-lid very quietly and got down like a
mouse and crept on hands and knees till he got to the table when he got
up and caught hold of the golden harp and dashed with it towards the
door. But the harp called out quite loud: “Master! Master!” and the ogre
woke up just in time to see Jack running off with his harp.

Jack ran as fast as he could, and the ogre came rushing after, and would
soon have caught him only Jack had a start and dodged him a bit and knew
where he was going. When he got to the beanstalk the ogre was not more
than twenty yards away when suddenly he saw Jack disappear like, and
when he got up to the end of the road he saw Jack underneath climbing
down for dear life. Well, the ogre didn't like trusting himself to such
a ladder, and he stood and waited, so Jack got another start. But just
then the harp cried out: “Master! master!” and the ogre swung himself
down on to the beanstalk which shook with his weight. Down climbs Jack,
and after him climbed the ogre. By this time Jack had climbed down and
climbed down and climbed down till he was very nearly home. So he called
out: “Mother! mother! bring me an axe, bring me an axe.” And his mother
came rushing out with the axe in her hand, but when she came to the
beanstalk she stood stock still with fright for there she saw the ogre
just coming down below the clouds.

But Jack jumped down and got hold of the axe and gave a chop at the
beanstalk which cut it half in two. The ogre felt the beanstalk shake
and quiver so he stopped to see what was the matter. Then Jack gave
another chop with the axe, and the beanstalk was cut in two and began
to topple over. Then the ogre fell down and broke his crown, and the
beanstalk came toppling after.

Then Jack showed his mother his golden harp, and what with showing that
and selling the golden eggs, Jack and his mother became very rich, and
he married a great princess, and they lived happy ever after.