THE STORY OF THE THREE BEARS

Once upon a time there were Three Bears, who lived together in a house
of their own, in a wood. One of them was a Little, Small Wee Bear; and
one was a Middle-sized Bear, and the other was a Great, Huge Bear. They
had each a pot for their porridge, a little pot for the Little, Small,
Wee Bear; and a middle-sized pot for the Middle Bear, and a great pot
for the Great, Huge Bear. And they had each a chair to sit in; a little
chair for the Little, Small, Wee Bear; and a middle-sized chair for the
Middle Bear; and a great chair for the Great, Huge Bear. And they had
each a bed to sleep in; a little bed for the Little, Small, Wee Bear;
and a middle-sized bed for the Middle Bear; and a great bed for the
Great, Huge Bear.

One day, after they had made the porridge for their breakfast, and
poured it into their porridge-pots, they walked out into the wood while
the porridge was cooling, that they might not burn their mouths, by
beginning too soon to eat it. And while they were walking, a little
old Woman came to the house. She could not have been a good, honest old
Woman; for first she looked in at the window, and then she peeped in at
the keyhole; and seeing nobody in the house, she lifted the latch. The
door was not fastened, because the Bears were good Bears, who did nobody
any harm, and never suspected that anybody would harm them. So the
little old Woman opened the door, and went in; and well pleased she was
when she saw the porridge on the table. If she had been a good little
old Woman, she would have waited till the Bears came home, and then,
perhaps, they would have asked her to breakfast; for they were good
Bears--a little rough or so, as the manner of Bears is, but for all
that very good-natured and hospitable. But she was an impudent, bad old
Woman, and set about helping herself.

So first she tasted the porridge of the Great, Huge Bear, and that was
too hot for her; and she said a bad word about that. And then she tasted
the porridge of the Middle Bear, and that was too cold for her; and she
said a bad word about that too. And then she went to the porridge of the
Little, Small, Wee Bear, and tasted that; and that was neither too hot,
nor too cold, but just right; and she liked it so well, that she ate
it all up: but the naughty old Woman said a bad word about the little
porridge-pot, because it did not hold enough for her.

Then the little old Woman sate down in the chair of the Great, Huge
Bear, and that was too hard for her. And then she sate down in the chair
of the Middle Bear, and that was too soft for her. And then she sate
down in the chair of the Little, Small, Wee Bear, and that was neither
too hard, nor too soft, but just right. So she seated herself in it, and
there she sate till the bottom of the chair came out, and down she came,
plump upon the ground. And the naughty old Woman said a wicked word
about that too.

Then the little old Woman went upstairs into the bed-chamber in which
the three Bears slept. And first she lay down upon the bed of the Great,
Huge Bear; but that was too high at the head for her. And next she lay
down upon the bed of the Middle Bear; and that was too high at the foot
for her. And then she lay down upon the bed of the Little, Small, Wee
Bear; and that was neither too high at the head, nor at the foot, but
just right. So she covered herself up comfortably, and lay there till
she fell fast asleep.

By this time the Three Bears thought their porridge would be cool
enough; so they came home to breakfast. Now the little old Woman had
left the spoon of the Great, Huge Bear, standing in his porridge.

“Somebody has been at my porridge!”

said the Great, Huge Bear, in his great, rough, gruff voice. And when
the Middle Bear looked at his, he saw that the spoon was standing in it
too. They were wooden spoons; if they had been silver ones, the naughty
old Woman would have put them in her pocket.

“Somebody has been at my porridge!”

said the Middle Bear in his middle voice.

Then the Little, Small, Wee Bear looked at his, and there was the spoon
in the porridge-pot, but the porridge was all gone.

“Somebody has been at my porridge, and has eaten it all up!”

said the Little, Small, Wee Bear, in his little, small, wee voice.

Upon this the Three Bears, seeing that some one had entered their house,
and eaten up the Little, Small, Wee Bear's breakfast, began to look
about them. Now the little old Woman had not put the hard cushion
straight when she rose from the chair of the Great, Huge Bear.

“Somebody has been sitting in my chair!”

said the Great, Huge Bear, in his great, rough, gruff voice.

And the little old Woman had squatted down the soft cushion of the
Middle Bear.

“Somebody has been sitting in my chair!”

said the Middle Bear, in his middle voice.

And you know what the little old Woman had done to the third chair.

“Somebody has been sitting in my chair and has sate the bottom out of
it!”

said the Little, Small, Wee Bear, in his little, small, wee voice.

Then the Three Bears thought it necessary that they should make farther
search; so they went upstairs into their bedchamber. Now the little old
Woman had pulled the pillow of the Great, Huge Bear, out of its place.

“Somebody has been lying in my bed!”

said the Great, Huge Bear, in his great, rough, gruff voice.

And the little old Woman had pulled the bolster of the Middle Bear out
of its place.

“Somebody has been lying in my bed!”

said the Middle Bear, in his middle voice.

And when the Little, Small, Wee Bear came to look at his bed, there was
the bolster in its place; and the pillow in its place upon the bolster;
and upon the pillow was the little old Woman's ugly, dirty head,--which
was not in its place, for she had no business there.

“Somebody has been lying in my bed,--and here she is!”

said the Little, Small, Wee Bear, in his little, small, wee voice.

The little old Woman had heard in her sleep the great, rough, gruff
voice of the Great, Huge Bear; but she was so fast asleep that it was
no more to her than the roaring of wind, or the rumbling of thunder. And
she had heard the middle voice, of the Middle Bear, but it was only as
if she had heard some one speaking in a dream. But when she heard the
little, small, wee voice of the Little, Small, Wee Bear, it was so
sharp, and so shrill, that it awakened her at once. Up she started; and
when she saw the Three Bears on one side of the bed, she tumbled herself
out at the other, and ran to the window. Now the window was open,
because the Bears, like good, tidy Bears, as they were, always opened
their bedchamber window when they got up in the morning. Out the little
old Woman jumped; and whether she broke her neck in the fall; or ran
into the wood and was lost there; or found her way out of the wood, and
was taken up by the constable and sent to the House of Correction for
a vagrant as she was, I cannot tell. But the Three Bears never saw
anything more of her.


JACK THE GIANT-KILLER

When good King Arthur reigned, there lived near the Land's End of
England, in the county of Cornwall, a farmer who had one only son called
Jack. He was brisk and of a ready lively wit, so that nobody or nothing
could worst him.

In those days the Mount of Cornwall was kept by a huge giant named
Cormoran. He was eighteen feet in height, and about three yards round
the waist, of a fierce and grim countenance, the terror of all the
neighbouring towns and villages. He lived in a cave in the midst of the
Mount, and whenever he wanted food he would wade over to the main-land,
where he would furnish himself with whatever came in his way. Everybody
at his approach ran out of their houses, while he seized on their
cattle, making nothing of carrying half-a-dozen oxen on his back at a
time; and as for their sheep and hogs, he would tie them round his waist
like a bunch of tallow-dips. He had done this for many years, so that
all Cornwall was in despair.

One day Jack happened to be at the town-hall when the magistrates were
sitting in council about the Giant. He asked: “What reward will be given
to the man who kills Cormoran?” “The giant's treasure,” they said, “will
be the reward.” Quoth Jack: “Then let me undertake it.”

So he got a horn, shovel, and pickaxe, and went over to the Mount in the
beginning of a dark winter's evening, when he fell to work, and before
morning had dug a pit twenty-two feet deep, and nearly as broad,
covering it over with long sticks and straw. Then he strewed a little
mould over it, so that it appeared like plain ground. Jack then placed
himself on the opposite side of the pit, farthest from the giant's
lodging, and, just at the break of day, he put the horn to his mouth,
and blew, Tantivy, Tantivy. This noise roused the giant, who rushed
from his cave, crying: “You incorrigible villain, are you come here
to disturb my rest? You shall pay dearly for this. Satisfaction I will
have, and this it shall be, I will take you whole and broil you for
breakfast.” He had no sooner uttered this, than he tumbled into the pit,
and made the very foundations of the Mount to shake. “Oh, Giant,” quoth
Jack, “where are you now? Oh, faith, you are gotten now into Lob's
Pound, where I will surely plague you for your threatening words: what
do you think now of broiling me for your breakfast? Will no other diet
serve you but poor Jack?” Then having tantalised the giant for a while,
he gave him a most weighty knock with his pickaxe on the very crown of
his head, and killed him on the spot.

Jack then filled up the pit with earth, and went to search the cave,
which he found contained much treasure. When the magistrates heard of
this they made a declaration he should henceforth be termed

JACK THE GIANT-KILLER

and presented him with a sword and a belt, on which were written these
words embroidered in letters of gold:

  “Here's the right valiant Cornish man,
  Who slew the giant Cormoran.”

The news of Jack's victory soon spread over all the West of England,
so that another giant, named Blunderbore, hearing of it, vowed to be
revenged on Jack, if ever he should light on him. This giant was the
lord of an enchanted castle situated in the midst of a lonesome wood.
Now Jack, about four months afterwards, walking near this wood in his
journey to Wales, being weary, seated himself near a pleasant fountain
and fell fast asleep. While he was sleeping, the giant, coming there
for water, discovered him, and knew him to be the far-famed Jack the
Giant-killer by the lines written on the belt. Without ado, he took Jack
on his shoulders and carried him towards his castle. Now, as they passed
through a thicket, the rustling of the boughs awakened Jack, who was
strangely surprised to find himself in the clutches of the giant. His
terror was only begun, for, on entering the castle, he saw the ground
strewed with human bones, and the giant told him his own would ere
long be among them. After this the giant locked poor Jack in an immense
chamber, leaving him there while he went to fetch another giant, his
brother, living in the same wood, who might share in the meal on Jack.

After waiting some time Jack, on going to the window beheld afar off the
two giants coming towards the castle. “Now,” quoth Jack to himself, “my
death or my deliverance is at hand.” Now, there were strong cords in a
corner of the room in which Jack was, and two of these he took, and made
a strong noose at the end; and while the giants were unlocking the iron
gate of the castle he threw the ropes over each of their heads. Then
he drew the other ends across a beam, and pulled with all his might, so
that he throttled them. Then, when he saw they were black in the face,
he slid down the rope, and drawing his sword, slew them both. Then,
taking the giant's keys, and unlocking the rooms, he found three fair
ladies tied by the hair of their heads, almost starved to death. “Sweet
ladies,” quoth Jack, “I have destroyed this monster and his brutish
brother, and obtained your liberties.” This said he presented them with
the keys, and so proceeded on his journey to Wales.

Jack made the best of his way by travelling as fast as he could, but
lost his road, and was benighted, and could find any habitation until,
coming into a narrow valley, he found a large house, and in order to
get shelter took courage to knock at the gate. But what was his surprise
when there came forth a monstrous giant with two heads; yet he did not
appear so fiery as the others were, for he was a Welsh giant, and
what he did was by private and secret malice under the false show of
friendship. Jack, having told his condition to the giant, was shown into
a bedroom, where, in the dead of night, he heard his host in another
apartment muttering these words:

  “Though here you lodge with me this night,
  You shall not see the morning light
  My club shall dash your brains outright!”

“Say'st thou so,” quoth Jack; “that is like one of your Welsh tricks,
yet I hope to be cunning enough for you.” Then, getting out of bed, he
laid a billet in the bed in his stead, and hid himself in a corner of
the room. At the dead time of the night in came the Welsh giant, who
struck several heavy blows on the bed with his club, thinking he had
broken every bone in Jack's skin. The next morning Jack, laughing in his
sleeve, gave him hearty thanks for his night's lodging. “How have you
rested?” quoth the giant; “did you not feel anything in the night?”
 “No,” quoth Jack, “nothing but a rat, which gave me two or three slaps
with her tail.” With that, greatly wondering, the giant led Jack to
breakfast, bringing him a bowl containing four gallons of hasty pudding.
Being loth to let the giant think it too much for him, Jack put a large
leather bag under his loose coat, in such a way that he could convey the
pudding into it without its being perceived. Then, telling the giant he
would show him a trick, taking a knife, Jack ripped open the bag, and
out came all the hasty pudding. Whereupon, saying, “Odds splutters hur
nails, hur can do that trick hurself,” the monster took the knife, and
ripping open his belly, fell down dead.

Now, it happened in these days that King Arthur's only son asked his
father to give him a large sum of money, in order that he might go and
seek his fortune in the principality of Wales, where lived a beautiful
lady possessed with seven evil spirits. The king did his best to
persuade his son from it, but in vain; so at last gave way and the
prince set out with two horses, one loaded with money, the other for
himself to ride upon. Now, after several days' travel, he came to a
market-town in Wales, where he beheld a vast crowd of people gathered
together. The prince asked the reason of it, and was told that they had
arrested a corpse for several large sums of money which the deceased
owed when he died. The prince replied that it was a pity creditors
should be so cruel, and said: “Go bury the dead, and let his creditors
come to my lodging, and there their debts shall be paid.” They came,
in such great numbers that before night he had only twopence left for
himself.

Now Jack the Giant-Killer, coming that way, was so taken with the
generosity of the prince, that he desired to be his servant. This
being agreed upon, the next morning they set forward on their journey
together, when, as they were riding out of the town, an old woman called
after the prince, saying, “He has owed me twopence these seven years;
pray pay me as well as the rest.” Putting his hand to his pocket, the
prince gave the woman all he had left, so that after their day's food,
which cost what small spell Jack had by him, they were without a penny
between them.

When the sun got low, the king's son said: “Jack, since we have no
money, where can we lodge this night?”

But Jack replied: “Master, we'll do well enough, for I have an uncle
lives within two miles of this place; he is a huge and monstrous giant
with three heads; he'll fight five hundred men in armour, and make them
to fly before him.” “Alas!” quoth the prince, “what shall we do there?
He'll certainly chop us up at a mouthful. Nay, we are scarce enough to
fill one of his hollow teeth!”

“It is no matter for that,” quoth Jack; “I myself will go before and
prepare the way for you; therefore stop here and wait till I return.”
 Jack then rode away at full speed, and coming to the gate of the castle,
he knocked so loud that he made the neighbouring hills resound. The
giant roared out at this like thunder: “Who's there?”

Jack answered: “None but your poor cousin Jack.”

Quoth he: “What news with my poor cousin Jack?”

He replied: “Dear uncle, heavy news, God wot!”

“Prithee,” quoth the giant, “what heavy news can come to me? I am
a giant with three heads, and besides thou knowest I can fight five
hundred men in armour, and make them fly like chaff before the wind.”

“Oh, but,” quoth Jack, “here's the king's son a-coming with a thousand
men in armour to kill you and destroy all that you have!”

“Oh, cousin Jack,” said the giant, “this is heavy news indeed! I will
immediately run and hide myself, and thou shalt lock, bolt, and bar
me in, and keep the keys until the prince is gone.” Having secured the
giant, Jack fetched his master, when they made themselves heartily merry
whilst the poor giant lay trembling in a vault under the ground.

Early in the morning Jack furnished his master with a fresh supply of
gold and silver, and then sent him three miles forward on his journey,
at which time the prince was pretty well out of the smell of the giant.
Jack then returned, and let the giant out of the vault, who asked what
he should give him for keeping the castle from destruction. “Why,” quoth
Jack, “I want nothing but the old coat and cap, together with the old
rusty sword and slippers which are at your bed's head.” Quoth the giant:
“You know not what you ask; they are the most precious things I have.
The coat will keep you invisible, the cap will tell you all you want to
know, the sword cuts asunder whatever you strike, and the shoes are
of extraordinary swiftness. But you have been very serviceable to me,
therefore take them with all my heart.” Jack thanked his uncle, and then
went off with them. He soon overtook his master and they quickly arrived
at the house of the lady the prince sought, who, finding the prince to
be a suitor, prepared a splendid banquet for him. After the repast was
concluded, she told him she had a task for him. She wiped his mouth with
a handkerchief, saying: “You must show me that handkerchief to-morrow
morning, or else you will lose your head.” With that she put it in
her bosom. The prince went to bed in great sorrow, but Jack's cap of
knowledge informed him how it was to be obtained. In the middle of the
night she called upon her familiar spirit to carry her to Lucifer. But
Jack put on his coat of darkness and his shoes of swiftness, and was
there as soon as she was. When she entered the place of the Old One, she
gave the handkerchief to old Lucifer, who laid it upon a shelf, whence
Jack took it and brought it to his master, who showed it to the lady
next day, and so saved his life. On that day, she gave the prince a kiss
and told him he must show her the lips to-morrow morning that she kissed
last night, or lose his head.

“Ah!” he replied, “if you kiss none but mine, I will.”

“That is neither here nor there,” said she; “if you do not, death's your
portion!”

At midnight she went as before, and was angry with old Lucifer for
letting the handkerchief go. “But now,” quoth she, “I will be too hard
for the king's son, for I will kiss thee, and he is to show me thy
lips.” Which she did, and Jack, when she was not standing by, cut off
Lucifer's head and brought it under his invisible coat to his master,
who the next morning pulled it out by the horns before the lady. This
broke the enchantment and the evil spirit left her, and she appeared in
all her beauty. They were married the next morning, and soon after went
to the court of King Arthur, where Jack for his many great exploits, was
made one of the Knights of the Round Table.

Jack soon went searching for giants again, but he had not ridden far,
when he saw a cave, near the entrance of which he beheld a giant sitting
upon a block of timber, with a knotted iron club by his side. His goggle
eyes were like flames of fire, his countenance grim and ugly, and his
cheeks like a couple of large flitches of bacon, while the bristles of
his beard resembled rods of iron wire, and the locks that hung down upon
his brawny shoulders were like curled snakes or hissing adders. Jack
alighted from his horse, and, putting on the coat of darkness, went up
close to the giant, and said softly: “Oh! are you there? It will not
be long before I take you fast by the beard.” The giant all this while
could not see him, on account of his invisible coat, so that Jack,
coming up close to the monster, struck a blow with his sword at his
head, but, missing his aim, he cut off the nose instead. At this, the
giant roared like claps of thunder, and began to lay about him with his
iron club like one stark mad. But Jack, running behind, drove his sword
up to the hilt in the giant's back, so that he fell down dead. This
done, Jack cut off the giant's head, and sent it, with his brother's
also, to King Arthur, by a waggoner he hired for that purpose.

Jack now resolved to enter the giant's cave in search of his treasure,
and, passing along through a great many windings and turnings, he came
at length to a large room paved with freestone, at the upper end of
which was a boiling caldron, and on the right hand a large table, at
which the giant used to dine. Then he came to a window, barred with
iron, through which he looked and beheld a vast number of miserable
captives, who, seeing him, cried out: “Alas! young man, art thou come to
be one amongst us in this miserable den?”

“Ay,” quoth Jack, “but pray tell me what is the meaning of your
captivity?”

“We are kept here,” said one, “till such time as the giants have a wish
to feast, and then the fattest among us is slaughtered! And many are the
times they have dined upon murdered men!”

“Say you so,” quoth Jack, and straightway unlocked the gate and let them
free, who all rejoiced like condemned men at sight of a pardon. Then
searching the giant's coffers, he shared the gold and silver equally
amongst them and took them to a neighbouring castle, where they all
feasted and made merry over their deliverance.

But in the midst of all this mirth a messenger brought news that one
Thunderdell, a giant with two heads, having heard of the death of his
kinsmen, had come from the northern dales to be revenged on Jack, and
was within a mile of the castle, the country people flying before him
like chaff. But Jack was not a bit daunted, and said: “Let him come! I
have a tool to pick his teeth; and you, ladies and gentlemen, walk out
into the garden, and you shall witness this giant Thunderdell's death
and destruction.”

The castle was situated in the midst of a small island surrounded by a
moat thirty feet deep and twenty feet wide, over which lay a drawbridge.
So Jack employed men to cut through this bridge on both sides, nearly to
the middle; and then, dressing himself in his invisible coat, he marched
against the giant with his sword of sharpness. Although the giant could
not see Jack, he smelt his approach, and cried out in these words:

  “Fee, fi, fo, fum!
  I smell the blood of an Englishman!
  Be he alive or be he dead,
  I'll grind his bones to make me bread!”

“Say'st thou so,” said Jack; “then thou art a monstrous miller indeed.”

The giant cried out again: “Art thou that villain who killed my kinsmen?
Then I will tear thee with my teeth, suck thy blood, and grind thy bones
to powder.”

“You'll have to catch me first,” quoth Jack, and throwing off his
invisible coat, so that the giant might see him, and putting on his
shoes of swiftness, he ran from the giant, who followed like a walking
castle, so that the very foundations of the earth seemed to shake at
every step. Jack led him a long dance, in order that the gentlemen and
ladies might see; and at last to end the matter, ran lightly over the
drawbridge, the giant, in full speed, pursuing him with his club. Then,
coming to the middle of the bridge, the giant's great weight broke
it down, and he tumbled headlong into the water, where he rolled and
wallowed like a whale. Jack, standing by the moat, laughed at him all
the while; but though the giant foamed to hear him scoff, and plunged
from place to place in the moat, yet he could not get out to be
revenged. Jack at length got a cart-rope and cast it over the two heads
of the giant, and drew him ashore by a team of horses, and then cut
off both his heads with his sword of sharpness, and sent them to King
Arthur.

After some time spent in mirth and pastime, Jack, taking leave of the
knights and ladies, set out for new adventures. Through many woods he
passed, and came at length to the foot of a high mountain. Here, late
at night, he found a lonesome house, and knocked at the door, which was
opened by an aged man with a head as white as snow. “Father,” said Jack,
“can you lodge a benighted traveller that has lost his way?” “Yes,” said
the old man; “you are right welcome to my poor cottage.” Whereupon Jack
entered, and down they sat together, and the old man began to speak as
follows: “Son, I see by your belt you are the great conqueror of giants,
and behold, my son, on the top of this mountain is an enchanted castle,
this is kept by a giant named Galligantua, and he by the help of an
old conjurer, betrays many knights and ladies into his castle, where by
magic art they are transformed into sundry shapes and forms. But above
all, I grieve for a duke's daughter, whom they fetched from her father's
garden, carrying her through the air in a burning chariot drawn by fiery
dragons, when they secured her within the castle, and transformed her
into a white hind. And though many knights have tried to break the
enchantment, and work her deliverance, yet no one could accomplish it,
on account of two dreadful griffins which are placed at the castle gate
and which destroy every one who comes near. But you, my son, may pass
by them undiscovered, where on the gates of the castle you will find
engraven in large letters how the spell may be broken.” Jack gave the
old man his hand, and promised that in the morning he would venture his
life to free the lady.

In the morning Jack arose and put on his invisible coat and magic cap
and shoes, and prepared himself for the fray. Now, when he had reached
the top of the mountain he soon discovered the two fiery griffins, but
passed them without fear, because of his invisible coat. When he had got
beyond them, he found upon the gates of the castle a golden trumpet hung
by a silver chain, under which these lines were engraved:

  “Whoever shall this trumpet blow,
  Shall soon the giant overthrow,
  And break the black enchantment straight;
  So all shall be in happy state.”

Jack had no sooner read this but he blew the trumpet, at which the
castle trembled to its vast foundations, and the giant and conjurer were
in horrid confusion, biting their thumbs and tearing their hair, knowing
their wicked reign was at an end. Then the giant stooping to take up
his club, Jack at one blow cut off his head; whereupon the conjurer,
mounting up into the air, was carried away in a whirlwind. Then the
enchantment was broken, and all the lords and ladies who had so long
been transformed into birds and beasts returned to their proper shapes,
and the castle vanished away in a cloud of smoke. This being done, the
head of Galligantua was likewise, in the usual manner, conveyed to the
Court of King Arthur, where, the very next day, Jack followed, with the
knights and ladies who had been delivered. Whereupon, as a reward
for his good services, the king prevailed upon the duke to bestow his
daughter in marriage on honest Jack. So married they were, and the
whole kingdom was filled with joy at the wedding. Furthermore, the king
bestowed on Jack a noble castle, with a very beautiful estate thereto
belonging, where he and his lady lived in great joy and happiness all
the rest of their days.


HENNY-PENNY

One day Henny-penny was picking up corn in the cornyard
when--whack!--something hit her upon the head. “Goodness gracious me!”
 said Henny-penny; “the sky's a-going to fall; I must go and tell the
king.”

So she went along and she went along and she went along till she met
Cocky-locky. “Where are you going, Henny-penny?” says Cocky-locky. “Oh!
I'm going to tell the king the sky's a-falling,” says Henny-penny. “May
I come with you?” says Cocky-locky. “Certainly,” says Henny-penny. So
Henny-penny and Cocky-locky went to tell-the king the sky was falling.

They went along, and they went along, and they went along, till they met
Ducky-daddles. “Where are you going to, Henny-penny and Cocky-locky?”
 says Ducky-daddles. “Oh! we're going to tell the king the sky's
a-falling,” said Henny-penny and Cocky-locky. “May I come with you?”
 says Ducky-daddles. “Certainly,” said Henny-penny and Cocky-locky. So
Henny-penny, Cocky-locky and Ducky-daddles went to tell the king the sky
was a-falling.

So they went along, and they went along, and they went along, till they
met Goosey-poosey, “Where are you going to, Henny-penny, Cocky-locky and
Ducky-daddles?” said Goosey-poosey. “Oh! we're going to tell the
king the sky's a-falling,” said Henny-penny and Cocky-locky and
Ducky-daddles. “May I come with you,” said Goosey-poosey. “Certainly,”
 said Henny-penny, Cocky-locky and Ducky-daddles. So Henny-penny,
Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles and Goosey-poosey went to tell the king the
sky was a-falling.

So they went along, and they went along, and they went along, till
they met Turkey-lurkey. “Where are you going, Henny-penny, Cocky-locky,
Ducky-daddles, and Goosey-poosey?” says Turkey-lurkey. “Oh! we're going
to tell the king the sky's a-falling,” said Henny-penny, Cocky-locky,
Ducky-daddles and Goosey-poosey. “May I come with you? Henny-penny,
Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles and Goosey-poosey?” said Turkey-lurkey. “Why,
certainly, Turkey-lurkey,” said Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles,
and Goosey-poosey. So Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles,
Goosey-poosey and Turkey-lurkey all went to tell the king the sky was
a-falling.

So they went along, and they went along, and they went along, till
they met Foxy-woxy, and Foxy-woxy said to Henny-penny, Cocky-locky,
Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey and Turkey-lurkey: “Where are you
going, Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey,
and Turkey-lurkey?” And Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles,
Goosey-poosey, and Turkey-lurkey said to Foxy-woxy: “We're going to tell
the king the sky's a-falling.” “Oh! but this is not the way to the
king, Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey and
Turkey-lurkey,” says Foxy-woxy; “I know the proper way; shall I show
it you?” “Why certainly, Foxy-woxy,” said Henny-penny, Cocky-locky,
Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, and Turkey-lurkey. So Henny-penny,
Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, Turkey-lurkey, and Foxy-woxy
all went to tell the king the sky was a-falling. So they went along,
and they went along, and they went along, till they came to a narrow and
dark hole. Now this was the door of Foxy-woxy's cave. But Foxy-woxy
said to Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, and
Turkey-lurkey: “This is the short way to the king's palace you'll
soon get there if you follow me. I will go first and you come
after, Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky daddles, Goosey-poosey, and
Turkey-lurkey.” “Why of course, certainly, without doubt, why not?”
 said Henny-Penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, and
Turkey-lurkey.

So Foxy-woxy went into his cave, and he didn't go very far but turned
round to wait for Henny-Penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey
and Turkey-lurkey. So at last at first Turkey-lurkey went through the
dark hole into the cave. He hadn't got far when “Hrumph,” Foxy-woxy
snapped off Turkey-lurkey's head and threw his body over his left
shoulder. Then Goosey-poosey went in, and “Hrumph,” off went her head
and Goosey-poosey was thrown beside Turkey-lurkey. Then Ducky-daddles
waddled down, and “Hrumph,” snapped Foxy-woxy, and Ducky-daddles'
head was off and Ducky-daddles was thrown alongside Turkey-lurkey and
Goosey-poosey. Then Cocky-locky strutted down into the cave and he
hadn't gone far when “Snap, Hrumph!” went Foxy-woxy and Cocky-locky was
thrown alongside of Turkey-lurkey, Goosey-poosey and Ducky-daddles.

But Foxy-woxy had made two bites at Cocky-locky, and when the first
snap only hurt Cocky-locky, but didn't kill him, he called out to
Henny-penny. So she turned tail and ran back home, so she never told the
king the sky was a-falling.


CHILDE ROWLAND

Childe Rowland and his brothers twain Were playing at the ball, And
there was their sister Burd Ellen In the midst, among them all.

  Childe Rowland kicked it with his foot
  And caught it with his knee;
  At last as he plunged among them all
  O'er the church he made it flee.

  Burd Ellen round about the aisle
  To seek the ball is gone,
  But long they waited, and longer still,
  And she came not back again.

  They sought her east, they sought her west,
  They sought her up and down,
  And woe were the hearts of those brethren,
  For she was not to be found.

So at last her eldest brother went to the Warlock Merlin and told him
all the case, and asked him if he knew where Burd Ellen was. “The fair
Burd Ellen,” said the Warlock Merlin, “must have been carried off by the
fairies, because she went round the church 'wider shins'--the opposite
way to the sun. She is now in the Dark Tower of the King of Elfland; it
would take the boldest knight in Christendom to bring her back.”

“If it is possible to bring her back,” said her brother, “I'll do it, or
perish in the attempt.”

“Possible it is,” said the Warlock Merlin, “but woe to the man or
mother's son that attempts it, if he is not well taught beforehand what
he is to do.”

The eldest brother of Burd Ellen was not to be put off, by any fear of
danger, from attempting to get her back, so he begged the Warlock Merlin
to tell him what he should do, and what he should not do, in going to
seek his sister. And after he had been taught, and had repeated his
lesson, he set out for Elfland.

  But long they waited, and longer still,
    With doubt and muckle pain,
  But woe were the hearts of his brethren,
    For he came not back again.

Then the second brother got tired and sick of waiting, and he went to
the Warlock Merlin and asked him the same as his brother. So he set out
to find Burd Ellen.

  But long they waited, and longer still,
    With muckle doubt and pain,
  And woe were his mother's and brother's heart,
    For he came not back again.

And when they had waited and waited a good long time, Childe Rowland,
the youngest of Burd Ellen's brothers, wished to go, and went to his
mother, the good queen, to ask her to let him go. But she would not at
first, for he was the last of her children she now had, and if he was
lost, all would be lost. But he begged, and he begged, till at last the
good queen let him go, and gave him his father's good brand that never
struck in vain. And as she girt it round his waist, she said the spell
that would give it victory.

So Childe Rowland said good-bye to the good queen, his mother, and went
to the cave of the Warlock Merlin. “Once more, and but once more,” he
said to the Warlock, “tell how man or mother's son may rescue Burd Ellen
and her brothers twain.”

“Well, my son,” said the Warlock Merlin, “there are but two things,
simple they may seem, but hard they are to do. One thing to do, and one
thing not to do. And the thing to do is this: after you have entered the
land of Fairy, whoever speaks to you, till you meet the Burd Ellen,
you must out with your father's brand and off with their head. And what
you've not to do is this: bite no bit, and drink no drop, however hungry
or thirsty you be; drink a drop, or bite a bit, while in Elfland you be
and never will you see Middle Earth again.”

So Childe Rowland said the two things over and over again, till he knew
them by heart, and he thanked the Warlock Merlin and went on his way.
And he went along, and along, and along, and still further along, till
he came to the horse-herd of the King of Elfland feeding his horses.
These he knew by their fiery eyes, and knew that he was at last in
the land of Fairy. “Canst thou tell me,” said Childe Rowland to the
horse-herd, “where the King of Elfland's Dark Tower is?” “I cannot tell
thee,” said the horse-herd, “but go on a little further and thou wilt
come to the cow-herd, and he, maybe, can tell thee.”

Then, without a word more, Childe Rowland drew the good brand that never
struck in vain, and off went the horse-herd's head, and Childe Rowland
went on further, till he came to the cow-herd, and asked him the same
question. “I can't tell thee,” said he, “but go on a little farther, and
thou wilt come to the hen-wife, and she is sure to know.” Then Childe
Rowland out with his good brand, that never struck in vain, and off went
the cow-herd's head. And he went on a little further, till he came to an
old woman in a grey cloak, and he asked her if she knew where the Dark
Tower of the King of Elfland was. “Go on a little further,” said
the hen-wife, “till you come to a round green hill, surrounded with
terrace-rings, from the bottom to the top; go round it three times,
widershins, and each time say:

  Open, door! open, door!
  And let me come in.

and the third time the door will open, and you may go in.” And Childe
Rowland was just going on, when he remembered what he had to do; so he
out with the good brand, that never struck in vain, and off went the
hen-wife's head.

Then he went on, and on, and on, till he came to the round green hill
with the terrace-rings from top to bottom, and he went round it three
times, widershins, saying each time:

  Open, door! open, door!
  And let me come in.

And the third time the door did open, and he went in, and it closed with
a click, and Childe Rowland was left in the dark.

It was not exactly dark, but a kind of twilight or gloaming. There
were neither windows nor candles, and he could not make out where the
twilight came from, if not through the walls and roof. These were rough
arches made of a transparent rock, incrusted with sheepsilver and rock
spar, and other bright stones. But though it was rock, the air was quite
warm, as it always is in Elfland. So he went through this passage till
at last he came to two wide and high folding-doors which stood ajar. And
when he opened them, there he saw a most wonderful and glorious sight.
A large and spacious hall, so large that it seemed to be as long, and as
broad, as the green hill itself. The roof was supported by fine pillars,
so large and lofty, that the pillars of a cathedral were as nothing to
them. They were all of gold and silver, with fretted work, and between
them and around them, wreaths of flowers, composed of what do you think?
Why, of diamonds and emeralds, and all manner of precious stones. And
the very key-stones of the arches had for ornaments clusters of diamonds
and rubies, and pearls, and other precious stones. And all these arches
met in the middle of the roof, and just there, hung by a gold chain,
an immense lamp made out of one big pearl hollowed out and quite
transparent. And in the middle of this was a big, huge carbuncle, which
kept spinning round and round, and this was what gave light by its rays
to the whole hall, which seemed as if the setting sun was shining on it.

The hall was furnished in a manner equally grand, and at one end of
it was a glorious couch of velvet, silk and gold, and there sate Burd
Ellen, combing her golden hair with a silver comb. And when she saw
Childe Rowland she stood up and said:

  “God pity ye, poor luckless fool,
  What have ye here to do?

  “Hear ye this, my youngest brother,
  Why didn't ye bide at home?
  Had you a hundred thousand lives
  Ye couldn't spare any a one.

  “But sit ye down; but woe, O, woe,
  That ever ye were born,
  For come the King of Elfland in,
  Your fortune is forlorn.”

Then they sate down together, and Childe Rowland told her all that he
had done, and she told him how their two brothers had reached the Dark
Tower, but had been enchanted by the King of Elfland, and lay there
entombed as if dead. And then after they had talked a little longer
Childe Rowland began to feel hungry from his long travels, and told his
sister Burd Ellen how hungry he was and asked for some food, forgetting
all about the Warlock Merlin's warning.

Burd Ellen looked at Childe Rowland sadly, and shook her head, but she
was under a spell, and could not warn him. So she rose up, and went
out, and soon brought back a golden basin full of bread and milk. Childe
Rowland was just going to raise it to his lips, when he looked at his
sister and remembered why he had come all that way. So he dashed the
bowl to the ground, and said: “Not a sup will I swallow, nor a bit will
I bite, till Burd Ellen is set free.”

Just at that moment they heard the noise of some one approaching, and a
loud voice was heard saying:

  “Fee, fi, fo, fum,
  I smell the blood of a Christian man,
  Be he dead, be he living, with my brand,
  I'll dash his brains from his brain-pan.”

And then the folding-doors of the hall were burst open, and the King of
Elfland rushed in.

“Strike then, Bogle, if thou darest,” shouted out Childe Rowland, and
rushed to meet him with his good brand that never yet did fail. They
fought, and they fought, and they fought, till Childe Rowland beat the
King of Elfland down on to his knees, and caused him to yield and beg
for mercy. “I grant thee mercy,” said Childe Rowland, “release my sister
from thy spells and raise my brothers to life, and let us all go free,
and thou shalt be spared.” “I agree,” said the Elfin King, and rising
up he went to a chest from which he took a phial filled with a blood-red
liquor. With this he anointed the ears, eyelids, nostrils, lips, and
finger-tips, of the two brothers, and they sprang at once into life, and
declared that their souls had been away, but had now returned. The Elfin
king then said some words to Burd Ellen, and she was disenchanted, and
they all four passed out of the hall, through the long passage, and
turned their back on the Dark Tower, never to return again. And they
reached home, and the good queen, their mother, and Burd Ellen never
went round a church widershins again.


MOLLY WHUPPIE

Once upon a time there was a man and a wife had too many children, and
they could not get meat for them, so they took the three youngest and
left them in a wood. They travelled and travelled and could see never
a house. It began to be dark, and they were hungry. At last they saw a
light and made for it; it turned out to be a house. They knocked at the
door, and a woman came to it, who said: “What do you want?” They said:
“Please let us in and give us something to eat.” The woman said: “I
can't do that, as my man is a giant, and he would kill you if he comes
home.” They begged hard. “Let us stop for a little while,” said they,
“and we will go away before he comes.” So she took them in, and set them
down before the fire, and gave them milk and bread; but just as they had
begun to eat a great knock came to the door, and a dreadful voice said:

  “Fee, fie, fo, fum,
  I smell the blood of some earthly one.

Who have you there wife?” “Eh,” said the wife, “it's three poor lassies
cold and hungry, and they will go away. Ye won't touch 'em, man.” He
said nothing, but ate up a big supper, and ordered them to stay all
night. Now he had three lassies of his own, and they were to sleep in
the same bed with the three strangers.

The youngest of the three strange lassies was called Molly Whuppie, and
she was very clever. She noticed that before they went to bed the giant
put straw ropes round her neck and her sisters', and round his own
lassies' necks he put gold chains. So Molly took care and did not fall
asleep, but waited till she was sure every one was sleeping sound. Then
she slipped out of the bed, and took the straw ropes off her own and her
sisters' necks, and took the gold chains off the giant's lassies. She
then put the straw ropes on the giant's lassies and the gold on herself
and her sisters, and lay down.

And in the middle of the night up rose the giant, armed with a great
club, and felt for the necks with the straw. It was dark. He took his
own lassies out of bed on to the floor, and battered them until they
were dead, and then lay down again, thinking he had managed fine. Molly
thought it time she and her sisters were out of that, so she wakened
them and told them to be quiet, and they slipped out of the house. They
all got out safe, and they ran and ran, and never stopped until morning,
when they saw a grand house before them. It turned out to be a king's
house: so Molly went in, and told her story to the king. He said: “Well,
Molly, you are a clever girl, and you have managed well; but, if you
would manage better, and go back, and steal the giant's sword that hangs
on the back of his bed, I would give your eldest sister my eldest son to
marry.” Molly said she would try.

So she went back, and managed to slip into the giant's house, and crept
in below the bed. The giant came home, and ate up a great supper, and
went to bed. Molly waited until he was snoring, and she crept out, and
reached over the giant and got down the sword; but just as she got it
out over the bed it gave a rattle, and up jumped the giant, and Molly
ran out at the door and the sword with her; and she ran, and he ran,
till they came to the “Bridge of one hair”; and she got over, but he
couldn't, and he says, “Woe worth ye, Molly Whuppie! never ye come
again.” And she says “Twice yet, carle,” quoth she, “I'll come to
Spain.” So Molly took the sword to the king, and her sister was married
to his son.

Well, the king he says: “Ye've managed well, Molly; but if ye would
manage better, and steal the purse that lies below the giant's pillow,
I would marry your second sister to my second son.” And Molly said she
would try. So she set out for the giant's house, and slipped in, and hid
again below the bed, and waited till the giant had eaten his supper, and
was snoring sound asleep. She slipped out, and slipped her hand below
the pillow, and got out the purse; but just as she was going out the
giant wakened, and ran after her; and she ran, and he ran, till they
came to the “Bridge of one hair,” and she got over, but he couldn't, and
he said, “Woe worth ye, Molly Whuppie! never you come again.” “Once yet,
carle,” quoth she, “I'll come to Spain.” So Molly took the purse to the
king, and her second sister was married to the king's second son.

After that the king says to Molly: “Molly, you are a clever girl, but if
you would do better yet, and steal the giant's ring that he wears on his
finger, I will give you my youngest son for yourself.” Molly said she
would try. So back she goes to the giant's house, and hides herself
below the bed. The giant wasn't long ere he came home, and, after he had
eaten a great big supper, he went to his bed, and shortly was snoring
loud. Molly crept out and reached over the bed, and got hold of the
giant's hand, and she pulled and she pulled until she got off the ring;
but just as she got it off the giant got up, and gripped her by the
hand, and he says: “Now I have catcht you, Molly Whuppie, and, if I had
done as much ill to you as ye have done to me, what would ye do to me?”

Molly says: “I would put you into a sack, and I'd put the cat inside
with you, and the dog aside you, and a needle and thread and a shears,
and I'd hang you up upon the wall, and I'd go to the wood, and choose
the thickest stick I could get, and I would come home, and take you
down, and bang you till you were dead.”

“Well, Molly,” says the giant, “I'll just do that to you.”

So he gets a sack, and puts Molly into it, and the cat and the dog
beside her, and a needle and thread and shears, and hangs her up upon
the wall, and goes to the wood to choose a stick.

Molly she sings out: “Oh, if ye saw what I see.”

“Oh,” says the giant's wife, “what do ye see, Molly?”

But Molly never said a word but, “Oh, if ye saw what I see!”

The giant's wife begged that Molly would take her up into the sack till
she would see what Molly saw. So Molly took the shears and cut a hole in
the sack, and took out the needle and thread with her, and jumped down
and helped, the giant's wife up into the sack, and sewed up the hole.

The giant's wife saw nothing, and began to ask to get down again; but
Molly never minded, but hid herself at the back of the door. Home came
the giant, and a great big tree in his hand, and he took down the sack,
and began to batter it. His wife cried, “It's me, man;” but the dog
barked and the cat mewed, and he did not know his wife's voice. But
Molly came out from the back of the door, and the giant saw her, and he
after her; and he ran and she ran, till they came to the “Bridge of one
hair,” and she got over but he couldn't; and he said, “Woe worth you,
Molly Whuppie! never you come again.” “Never more, carle,” quoth she,
“will I come again to Spain.”

So Molly took the ring to the king, and she was married to his youngest
son, and she never saw the giant again.


THE RED ETTIN

There was once a widow that lived on a small bit of ground, which she
rented from a farmer. And she had two sons; and by-and-by it was time
for the wife to send them away to seek their fortune. So she told her
eldest son one day to take a can and bring her water from the well, that
she might bake a cake for him; and however much or however little water
he might bring, the cake would be great or small accordingly, and that
cake was to be all that she could give him when he went on his travels.

The lad went away with the can to the well, and filled it with water,
and then came away home again; but the can being broken, the most part
of the water had run out before he got back. So his cake was very small;
yet small as it was, his mother asked him if he was willing to take the
half of it with her blessing, telling him that, if he chose rather to
take the whole, he would only get it with her curse. The young man,
thinking he might have to travel a far way, and not knowing when or
how he might get other provisions, said he would like to have the whole
cake, come of his mother's malison what like; so she gave him the whole
cake, and her malison along with it. Then he took his brother aside, and
gave him a knife to keep till he should come back, desiring him to look
at it every morning, and as long as it continued to be clear, then he
might be sure that the owner of it was well; but if it grew dim and
rusty, then for certain some ill had befallen him.

So the young man went to seek his fortune. And he went all that day, and
all the next day; and on the third day, in the afternoon, he came up to
where a shepherd was sitting with a flock of sheep. And he went up to
the shepherd and asked him who the sheep belonged to; and he answered:

  “The Red Ettin of Ireland
    Once lived in Ballygan,
  And stole King Malcolm's daughter
    The king of fair Scotland.

  He beats her, he binds her,
    He lays her on a band;
  And every day he strikes her
    With a bright silver wand.
  Like Julian the Roman,
  He's one that fears no man.

  It's said there's one predestinate
    To be his mortal foe;
  But that man is yet unborn,
    And long may it be so.”

This shepherd also told him to beware of the beasts he should next meet,
for they were of a very different kind from any he had yet seen.

So the young man went on, and by-and-by he saw a multitude of very
dreadful beasts, with two heads, and on every head four horns. And he
was sore frightened, and ran away from them as fast as he could; and
glad was he when he came to a castle that stood on a hillock, with the
door standing wide open to the wall. And he went into the castle for
shelter, and there he saw an old wife sitting beside the kitchen fire.
He asked the wife if he might stay for the night, as he was tired with
a long journey; and the wife said he might, but it was not a good
place for him to be in, as it belonged to the Red Ettin, who was a very
terrible beast, with three heads, that spared no living man it could get
hold of. The young man would have gone away, but he was afraid of the
beasts on the outside of the castle; so he beseeched the old woman to
hide him as best she could, and not tell the Ettin he was there. He
thought, if he could put over the night, he might get away in the
morning, without meeting with the beasts, and so escape. But he had not
been long in his hiding-hole, before the awful Ettin came in; and no
sooner was he in, than he was heard crying:

  “Snouk but and snouk ben,
  I find the smell of an earthly man,
  Be he living, or be he dead,
  His heart this night shall kitchen my bread.”

The monster soon found the poor young man, and pulled him from his hole.
And when he had got him out, he told him that if he could answer him
three questions his life should be spared. So the first head asked: “A
thing without an end, what's that?” But the young man knew not. Then the
second head said: “The smaller, the more dangerous, what's that?” But
the young man knew it not. And then the third head asked: “The dead
carrying the living; riddle me that?” But the young man had to give it
up. The lad not being able to answer one of these questions, the Red
Ettin took a mallet and knocked him on the head, and turned him into a
pillar of stone.

On the morning after this happened, the younger brother took out the
knife to look at it, and he was grieved to find it all brown with rust.
He told his mother that the time was now come for him to go away upon
his travels also; so she requested him to take the can to the well for
water, that she might make a cake for him. And he went, and as he was
bringing home the water, a raven over his head cried to him to look, and
he would see that the water was running out. And he was a young man of
sense, and seeing the water running out, he took some clay and patched
up the holes, so that he brought home enough water to bake a large cake.
When his mother put it to him to take the half cake with her blessing,
he took it in preference to having the whole with her malison; and yet
the half was bigger than what the other lad had got.

So he went away on his journey; and after he had travelled a far way, he
met with an old woman that asked him if he would give her a bit of his
johnny-cake. And he said: “I will gladly do that,” and so he gave her a
piece of the johnny-cake; and for that she gave him a magical wand, that
she might yet be of service to him, if he took care to use it rightly.
Then the old woman, who was a fairy, told him a great deal that would
happen to him, and what he ought to do in all circumstances; and after
that she vanished in an instant out of his sight. He went on a great way
farther, and then he came up to the old man herding the sheep; and when
he asked whose sheep these were, the answer was:

  “The Red Ettin of Ireland
    Once lived in Ballygan,
  And stole King Malcolm's daughter,
    The king of Fair Scotland.

  “He beats her, he binds her,
    He lays her on a band;
  And every day he strikes her
    With a bright silver wand.
  Like Julian the Roman,
  He's one that fears no man.

  “But now I fear his end is near,
    And destiny at hand;
  And you're to be, I plainly see,
    The heir of all his land.”

When he came to the place where the monstrous beasts were standing, he
did not stop nor run away, but went boldly through amongst them. One
came up roaring with open mouth to devour him, when he struck it with
his wand, and laid it in an instant dead at his feet. He soon came to
the Ettin's castle, where he knocked, and was admitted. The old woman
who sat by the fire warned him of the terrible Ettin, and what had been
the fate of his brother; but he was not to be daunted. The monster soon
came in, saying:

  “Snouk but and snouk ben,
  I find the smell of an earthly man;
  Be he living, or be he dead,
  His heart shall be kitchen to my bread.”

He quickly espied the young man, and bade him come forth on the floor.
And then he put the three questions to him; but the young man had been
told everything by the good fairy, so he was able to answer all the
questions. So when the first head asked, “What's the thing without an
end?” he said: “A bowl.” And when the second head said: “The smaller the
more dangerous; what's that?” he said at once, “A bridge.” And last, the
third head said: “When does the dead carry the living, riddle me that?”
 Then the young man answered up at once and said: “When a ship sails on
the sea with men inside her.” When the Ettin found this, he knew that
his power was gone. The young man then took up an axe and hewed off the
monster's three heads. He next asked the old woman to show him where the
king's daughter lay; and the old woman took him upstairs, and opened a
great many doors, and out of every door came a beautiful lady who had
been imprisoned there by the Ettin; and one of the ladies was the king's
daughter. She also took him down into a low room, and there stood a
stone pillar, that he had only to touch with his wand, when his brother
started into life. And the whole of the prisoners were overjoyed at
their deliverance, for which they thanked the young man. Next day they
all set out for the king's court, and a gallant company they made. And
the king married his daughter to the young man that had delivered
her, and gave a noble's daughter to his brother; and so they all lived
happily all the rest of their days.


THE GOLDEN ARM

Here was once a man who travelled the land all over in search of a wife.
He saw young and old, rich and poor, pretty and plain, and could not
meet with one to his mind. At last he found a woman, young, fair, and
rich, who possessed a right arm of solid gold. He married her at once,
and thought no man so fortunate as he was. They lived happily together,
but, though he wished people to think otherwise, he was fonder of the
golden arm than of all his wife's gifts besides.

At last she died. The husband put on the blackest black, and pulled the
longest face at the funeral; but for all that he got up in the middle of
the night, dug up the body, and cut off the golden arm. He hurried home
to hide his treasure, and thought no one would know.

The following night he put the golden arm under his pillow, and was just
falling asleep, when the ghost of his dead wife glided into the room.
Stalking up to the bedside it drew the curtain, and looked at him
reproachfully. Pretending not to be afraid, he spoke to the ghost, and
said: “What hast thou done with thy cheeks so red?”

“All withered and wasted away,” replied the ghost, in a hollow tone.

“What hast thou done with thy red rosy lips?”

“All withered and wasted away.”

“What hast thou done with thy golden hair?”

“All withered and wasted away.”

“What hast thou done with thy _Golden Arm_?”

“THOU HAST IT!”


THE HISTORY OF TOM THUMB

In the days of the great Prince Arthur, there lived a mighty magician,
called Merlin, the most learned and skilful enchanter the world has ever
seen.

This famous magician, who could take any form he pleased, was travelling
about as a poor beggar, and being very tired, he stopped at the cottage
of a ploughman to rest himself, and asked for some food.

The countryman bade him welcome, and his wife, who was a very
good-hearted woman, soon brought him some milk in a wooden bowl, and
some coarse brown bread on a platter.

Merlin was much pleased with the kindness of the ploughman and his
wife; but he could not help noticing that though everything was neat
and comfortable in the cottage, they seemed both to be very unhappy. He
therefore asked them why they were so melancholy, and learned that they
were miserable because they had no children.

The poor woman said, with tears in her eyes: “I should be the happiest
creature in the world if I had a son; although he was no bigger than my
husband's thumb, I would be satisfied.”

Merlin was so much amused with the idea of a boy no bigger than a man's
thumb, that he determined to grant the poor woman's wish. Accordingly,
in a short time after, the ploughman's wife had a son, who, wonderful to
relate! was not a bit bigger than his father's thumb.

The queen of the fairies, wishing to see the little fellow, came in at
the window while the mother was sitting up in the bed admiring him. The
queen kissed the child, and, giving it the name of Tom Thumb, sent for
some of the fairies, who dressed her little godson according to her
orders:

  “An oak-leaf hat he had for his crown;
  His shirt of web by spiders spun;
  With jacket wove of thistle's down;
  His trowsers were of feathers done.
  His stockings, of apple-rind, they tie
  With eyelash from his mother's eye
  His shoes were made of mouse's skin,
  Tann'd with the downy hair within.”

Tom never grew any larger than his father's thumb, which was only of
ordinary size; but as he got older he became very cunning and full of
tricks. When he was old enough to play with the boys, and had lost
all his own cherry-stones, he used to creep into the bags of his
playfellows, fill his pockets, and, getting out without their noticing
him, would again join in the game.

One day, however, as he was coming out of a bag of cherry-stones, where
he had been stealing as usual, the boy to whom it belonged chanced to
see him. “Ah, ah! my little Tommy,” said the boy, “so I have caught you
stealing my cherry-stones at last, and you shall be rewarded for your
thievish tricks.” On saying this, he drew the string tight round his
neck, and gave the bag such a hearty shake, that poor little Tom's legs,
thighs, and body were sadly bruised. He roared out with pain, and begged
to be let out, promising never to steal again.

A short time afterwards his mother was making a batter-pudding, and Tom,
being very anxious to see how it was made, climbed up to the edge of the
bowl; but his foot slipped, and he plumped over head and ears into
the batter, without his mother noticing him, who stirred him into the
pudding-bag, and put him in the pot to boil.

The batter filled Tom's mouth, and prevented him from crying; but, on
feeling the hot water, he kicked and struggled so much in the pot, that
his mother thought that the pudding was bewitched, and, pulling it
out of the pot, she threw it outside the door. A poor tinker, who was
passing by, lifted up the pudding, and, putting it into his budget, he
then walked off. As Tom had now got his mouth cleared of the batter, he
then began to cry aloud, which so frightened the tinker that he flung
down the pudding and ran away. The pudding being broke to pieces by the
fall, Tom crept out covered all over with the batter, and walked home.
His mother, who was very sorry to see her darling in such a woeful
state, put him into a teacup, and soon washed off the batter; after
which she kissed him, and laid him in bed.

Soon after the adventure of the pudding, Tom's mother went to milk her
cow in the meadow, and she took him along with her. As the wind was very
high, for fear of being blown away, she tied him to a thistle with a
piece of fine thread. The cow soon observed Tom's oak-leaf hat, and
liking the appearance of it, took poor Tom and the thistle at one
mouthful. While the cow was chewing the thistle Tom was afraid of her
great teeth, which threatened to crush him in pieces, and he roared out
as loud as he could: “Mother, mother!”

“Where are you, Tommy, my dear Tommy?” said his mother.

“Here, mother,” replied he, “in the red cow's mouth.”

His mother began to cry and wring her hands; but the cow, surprised
at the odd noise in her throat, opened her mouth and let Tom drop out.
Fortunately his mother caught him in her apron as he was falling to the
ground, or he would have been dreadfully hurt. She then put Tom in her
bosom and ran home with him.

Tom's father made him a whip of a barley straw to drive the cattle with,
and having one day gone into the fields, he slipped a foot and rolled
into the furrow. A raven, which was flying over, picked him up, and flew
with him over the sea, and there dropped him.

A large fish swallowed Tom the moment he fell into the sea, which was
soon after caught, and bought for the table of King Arthur. When they
opened the fish in order to cook it, every one was astonished at finding
such a little boy, and Tom was quite delighted at being free again.
They carried him to the king, who made Tom his dwarf, and he soon grew
a great favourite at court; for by his tricks and gambols he not only
amused the king and queen, but also all the Knights of the Round Table.

It is said that when the king rode out on horseback, he often took
Tom along with him, and if a shower came on, he used to creep into his
majesty's waistcoat-pocket, where he slept till the rain was over.

King Arthur one day asked Tom about his parents, wishing to know if they
were as small as he was, and whether they were well off. Tom told the
king that his father and mother were as tall as anybody about the court,
but in rather poor circumstances. On hearing this, the king carried Tom
to his treasury, the place where he kept all his money, and told him to
take as much money as he could carry home to his parents, which made
the poor little fellow caper with joy. Tom went immediately to procure
a purse, which was made of a water-bubble, and then returned to the
treasury, where he received a silver threepenny-piece to put into it.

Our little hero had some difficulty in lifting the burden upon his
back; but he at last succeeded in getting it placed to his mind, and set
forward on his journey. However, without meeting with any accident, and
after resting himself more than a hundred times by the way, in two days
and two nights he reached his father's house in safety.

Tom had travelled forty-eight hours with a huge silver-piece on his
back, and was almost tired to death, when his mother ran out to meet
him, and carried him into the house. But he soon returned to Court.

As Tom's clothes had suffered much in the batter-pudding, and the inside
of the fish, his majesty ordered him a new suit of clothes, and to be
mounted as a knight on a mouse.

  Of Butterfly's wings his shirt was made,
    His boots of chicken's hide;
  And by a nimble fairy blade,
  Well learned in the tailoring trade,
    His clothing was supplied.
  A needle dangled by his side;
  A dapper mouse he used to ride,
  Thus strutted Tom in stately pride!

It was certainly very diverting to see Tom in this dress and mounted on
the mouse, as he rode out a-hunting with the king and nobility, who were
all ready to expire with laughter at Tom and his fine prancing charger.

The king was so charmed with his address that he ordered a little chair
to be made, in order that Tom might sit upon his table, and also a
palace of gold, a span high, with a door an inch wide, to live in. He
also gave him a coach, drawn by six small mice.

The queen was so enraged at the honours conferred on Sir Thomas that she
resolved to ruin him, and told the king that the little knight had been
saucy to her.

The king sent for Tom in great haste, but being fully aware of the
danger of royal anger, he crept into an empty snail-shell, where he lay
for a long time until he was almost starved with hunger; but at last he
ventured to peep out, and seeing a fine large butterfly on the ground,
near the place of his concealment, he got close to it and jumping
astride on it, was carried up into the air. The butterfly flew with him
from tree to tree and from field to field, and at last returned to the
court, where the king and nobility all strove to catch him; but at last
poor Tom fell from his seat into a watering-pot, in which he was almost
drowned.

When the queen saw him she was in a rage, and said he should be
beheaded; and he was again put into a mouse trap until the time of his
execution.

However a cat, observing something alive in the trap, patted it about
till the wires broke, and set Thomas at liberty.

The king received Tom again into favour, which he did not live to enjoy,
for a large spider one day attacked him; and although he drew his sword
and fought well, yet the spider's poisonous breath at last overcame him.

  He fell dead on the ground where he stood,
  And the spider suck'd every drop of his blood.

King Arthur and his whole court were so sorry at the loss of their
little favourite that they went into mourning and raised a fine white
marble monument over his grave with the following epitaph:

  Here lies Tom Thumb, King Arthur's knight,
  Who died by a spider's cruel bite.
  He was well known in Arthur's court,
  Where he afforded gallant sport;
  He rode at tilt and tournament,
  And on a mouse a-hunting went.
  Alive he filled the court with mirth;
  His death to sorrow soon gave birth.
  Wipe, wipe your eyes, and shake your head
  And cry,--Alas! Tom Thumb is dead!


MR. FOX

Lady Mary was young, and Lady Mary was fair. She had two brothers, and
more lovers than she could count. But of them all, the bravest and most
gallant, was a Mr. Fox, whom she met when she was down at her father's
country-house. No one knew who Mr. Fox was; but he was certainly brave,
and surely rich, and of all her lovers, Lady Mary cared for him alone.
At last it was agreed upon between them that they should be married.
Lady Mary asked Mr. Fox where they should live, and he described to her
his castle, and where it was; but, strange to say, did not ask her, or
her brothers to come and see it.

So one day, near the wedding-day, when her brothers were out, and Mr.
Fox was away for a day or two on business, as he said, Lady Mary set out
for Mr. Fox's castle. And after many searchings, she came at last to
it, and a fine strong house it was, with high walls and a deep moat. And
when she came up to the gateway she saw written on it:

BE BOLD, BE BOLD.

But as the gate was open, she went through it, and found no one there.
So she went up to the doorway, and over it she found written:

BE BOLD, BE BOLD, BUT NOT TOO BOLD.

Still she went on, till she came into the hall, and went up the broad
stairs till she came to a door in the gallery, over which was written:

BE BOLD, BE BOLD, BUT NOT TOO BOLD, LEST THAT YOUR HEART'S BLOOD SHOULD
RUN COLD.

But Lady Mary was a brave one, she was, and she opened the door, and
what do you think she saw? Why, bodies and skeletons of beautiful young
ladies all stained with blood. So Lady Mary thought it was high time to
get out of that horrid place, and she closed the door, went through the
gallery, and was just going down the stairs, and out of the hall, when
who should she see through the window, but Mr. Fox dragging a beautiful
young lady along from the gateway to the door. Lady Mary rushed
downstairs, and hid herself behind a cask, just in time, as Mr. Fox came
in with the poor young lady who seemed to have fainted. Just as he got
near Lady Mary, Mr. Fox saw a diamond ring glittering on the finger of
the young lady he was dragging, and he tried to pull it off. But it was
tightly fixed, and would not come off, so Mr. Fox cursed and swore, and
drew his sword, raised it, and brought it down upon the hand of the poor
lady. The sword cut off the hand, which jumped up into the air, and fell
of all places in the world into Lady Mary's lap. Mr. Fox looked about a
bit, but did not think of looking behind the cask, so at last he went on
dragging the young lady up the stairs into the Bloody Chamber.

As soon as she heard him pass through the gallery, Lady Mary crept
out of the door, down through the gateway, and ran home as fast as she
could.

Now it happened that the very next day the marriage contract of Lady
Mary and Mr. Fox was to be signed, and there was a splendid breakfast
before that. And when Mr. Fox was seated at table opposite Lady Mary,
he looked at her. “How pale you are this morning, my dear.” “Yes,”
 said she, “I had a bad night's rest last night. I had horrible dreams.”
 “Dreams go by contraries,” said Mr. Fox; “but tell us your dream, and
your sweet voice will make the time pass till the happy hour comes.”

“I dreamed,” said Lady Mary, “that I went yestermorn to your castle, and
I found it in the woods, with high walls, and a deep moat, and over the
gateway was written:

BE BOLD, BE BOLD.

“But it is not so, nor it was not so,” said Mr. Fox.

“And when I came to the doorway over it was written:

BE BOLD, BE BOLD, BUT NOT TOO BOLD.

“It is not so, nor it was not so,” said Mr. Fox.

“And then I went upstairs, and came to a gallery, at the end of which
was a door, on which was written:

BE BOLD, BE BOLD, BUT NOT TOO BOLD, LEST THAT YOUR HEART'S BLOOD SHOULD
RUN COLD.

“It is not so, nor it was not so,” said Mr. Fox.

“And then--and then I opened the door, and the room was filled with
bodies and skeletons of poor dead women, all stained with their blood.”

“It is not so, nor it was not so. And God forbid it should be so,” said
Mr. Fox.

“I then dreamed that I rushed down the gallery, and just as I was
going down the stairs, I saw you, Mr. Fox, coming up to the hall door,
dragging after you a poor young lady, rich and beautiful.”

“It is not so, nor it was not so. And God forbid it should be so,” said
Mr. Fox.

“I rushed downstairs, just in time to hide myself behind a cask, when
you, Mr. Fox, came in dragging the young lady by the arm. And, as you
passed me, Mr. Fox, I thought I saw you try and get off her diamond
ring, and when you could not, Mr. Fox, it seemed to me in my dream, that
you out with your sword and hacked off the poor lady's hand to get the
ring.”

“It is not so, nor it was not so. And God forbid it should be so,” said
Mr. Fox, and was going to say something else as he rose from his seat,
when Lady Mary cried out:

“But it is so, and it was so. Here's hand and ring I have to show,” and
pulled out the lady's hand from her dress, and pointed it straight at
Mr. Fox.

At once her brothers and her friends drew their swords and cut Mr. Fox
into a thousand pieces.


LAZY JACK

Once upon a time there was a boy whose name was Jack, and he lived with
his mother on a common. They were very poor, and the old woman got her
living by spinning, but Jack was so lazy that he would do nothing but
bask in the sun in the hot weather, and sit by the corner of the hearth
in the winter-time. So they called him Lazy Jack. His mother could not
get him to do anything for her, and at last told him, one Monday, that
if he did not begin to work for his porridge she would turn him out to
get his living as he could.

This roused Jack, and he went out and hired himself for the next day
to a neighbouring farmer for a penny; but as he was coming home, never
having had any money before, he lost it in passing over a brook. “You
stupid boy,” said his mother, “you should have put it in your pocket.”
 “I'll do so another time,” replied Jack.

On Wednesday, Jack went out again and hired himself to a cow-keeper, who
gave him a jar of milk for his day's work. Jack took the jar and put it
into the large pocket of his jacket, spilling it all, long before he got
home. “Dear me!” said the old woman; “you should have carried it on your
head.” “I'll do so another time,” said Jack.

So on Thursday, Jack hired himself again to a farmer, who agreed to
give him a cream cheese for his services. In the evening Jack took the
cheese, and went home with it on his head. By the time he got home the
cheese was all spoilt, part of it being lost, and part matted with his
hair. “You stupid lout,” said his mother, “you should have carried it
very carefully in your hands.” “I'll do so another time,” replied Jack.

On Friday, Lazy Jack again went out, and hired himself to a baker, who
would give him nothing for his work but a large tom-cat. Jack took the
cat, and began carrying it very carefully in his hands, but in a short
time pussy scratched him so much that he was compelled to let it go.
When he got home, his mother said to him, “You silly fellow, you should
have tied it with a string, and dragged it along after you.” “I'll do so
another time,” said Jack.

So on Saturday, Jack hired himself to a butcher, who rewarded him by the
handsome present of a shoulder of mutton. Jack took the mutton, tied it
to a string, and trailed it along after him in the dirt, so that by the
time he had got home the meat was completely spoilt. His mother was this
time quite out of patience with him, for the next day was Sunday,
and she was obliged to make do with cabbage for her dinner. “You
ninney-hammer,” said she to her son; “you should have carried it on your
shoulder.” “I'll do so another time,” replied Jack.

On the next Monday, Lazy Jack went once more, and hired himself to a
cattle-keeper, who gave him a donkey for his trouble. Jack found it hard
to hoist the donkey on his shoulders, but at last he did it, and began
walking slowly home with his prize. Now it happened that in the
course of his journey there lived a rich man with his only daughter,
a beautiful girl, but deaf and dumb. Now she had never laughed in her
life, and the doctors said she would never speak till somebody made her
laugh. This young lady happened to be looking out of the window when
Jack was passing with the donkey on his shoulders, with the legs
sticking up in the air, and the sight was so comical and strange that
she burst out into a great fit of laughter, and immediately recovered
her speech and hearing. Her father was overjoyed, and fulfilled
his promise by marrying her to Lazy Jack, who was thus made a rich
gentleman. They lived in a large house, and Jack's mother lived with
them in great happiness until she died.


JOHNNY-CAKE

Once upon a time there was an old man, and an old woman, and a little
boy. One morning the old woman made a Johnny-cake, and put it in the
oven to bake. “You watch the Johnny-cake while your father and I go out
to work in the garden.” So the old man and the old woman went out and
began to hoe potatoes, and left the little boy to tend the oven. But he
didn't watch it all the time, and all of a sudden he heard a noise, and
he looked up and the oven door popped open, and out of the oven jumped
Johnny-cake, and went rolling along end over end, towards the open door
of the house. The little boy ran to shut the door, but Johnny-cake was
too quick for him and rolled through the door, down the steps, and out
into the road long before the little boy could catch him. The little boy
ran after him as fast as he could clip it, crying out to his father and
mother, who heard the uproar, and threw down their hoes and gave chase
too. But Johnny-cake outran all three a long way, and was soon out of
sight, while they had to sit down, all out of breath, on a bank to rest.

On went Johnny-cake, and by-and-by he came to two well-diggers who
looked up from their work and called out: “Where ye going, Johnny-cake?”

He said: “I've outrun an old man, and an old woman, and a little boy,
and I can outrun you too-o-o!”

“Ye can, can ye? we'll see about that?” said they; and they threw down
their picks and ran after him, but couldn't catch up with him, and soon
they had to sit down by the roadside to rest.

On ran Johnny-cake, and by-and-by he came to two ditch-diggers who were
digging a ditch. “Where ye going, Johnny-cake?” said they. He said:
“I've outrun an old man, and an old woman, and a little boy, and two
well-diggers, and I can outrun you too-o-o!”

“Ye can, can ye? we'll see about that!” said they; and they threw down
their spades, and ran after him too. But Johnny-cake soon outstripped
them also, and seeing they could never catch him, they gave up the chase
and sat down to rest.

On went Johnny-cake, and by-and-by he came to a bear. The bear said:
“Where are ye going, Johnny-cake?”

He said: “I've outrun an old man, and an old woman and a little boy, and
two well-diggers, and two ditch-diggers, and I can outrun you too-o-o!”

“Ye can, can ye?” growled the bear, “we'll see about that!” and trotted
as fast as his legs could carry him after Johnny-cake, who never stopped
to look behind him. Before long the bear was left so far behind that
he saw he might as well give up the hunt first as last, so he stretched
himself out by the roadside to rest.

On went Johnny-cake, and by-and-by he came to a wolf. The wolf
said:--“Where ye going, Johnny-cake?” He said: “I've outrun an old
man, and an old woman, and a little boy, and two well-diggers, and two
ditch-diggers and a bear, and I can outrun you too-o-o!”

“Ye can, can ye?” snarled the wolf, “we'll see about that!” And he set
into a gallop after Johnny-cake, who went on and on so fast that the
wolf too saw there was no hope of overtaking him, and he too lay down to
rest.

On went Johnny-cake, and by-and-by he came to a fox that lay quietly in
a corner of the fence. The fox called out in a sharp voice, but without
getting up: “Where ye going Johnny-cake?”

He said: “I've outrun an old man, and an old woman, and a little boy,
and two well-diggers, and two ditch-diggers, a bear, and a wolf, and I
can outrun you too-o-o!”

The fox said: “I can't quite hear you, Johnny-cake, won't you come a
little closer?” turning his head a little to one side.

Johnny-cake stopped his race for the first time, and went a little
closer, and called out in a very loud voice _“I've outrun an old man,
and an old woman, and a little boy, and two well-diggers, and two
ditch-diggers, and a bear, and a wolf, and I can outrun you too-o-o.”_

“Can't quite hear you; won't you come a _little_ closer?” said the fox
in a feeble voice, as he stretched out his neck towards Johnny-cake, and
put one paw behind his ear.

Johnny-cake came up close, and leaning towards the fox screamed out:
I'VE OUTRUN AN OLD MAN, AND AN OLD WOMAN, AND A LITTLE BOY, AND TWO
WELL-DIGGERS, AND TWO DITCH-DIGGERS, AND A BEAR, AND A WOLF, AND I CAN
OUTRUN YOU TOO-O-O!”

“You can, can you?” yelped the fox, and he snapped up the Johnny-cake in
his sharp teeth in the twinkling of an eye.


EARL MAR'S DAUGHTER

One fine summer's day Earl Mar's daughter went into the castle garden,
dancing and tripping along. And as she played and sported she would stop
from time to time to listen to the music of the birds. After a while as
she sat under the shade of a green oak tree she looked up and spied a
sprightly dove sitting high up on one of its branches. She looked up
and said: “Coo-my-dove, my dear, come down to me and I will give you a
golden cage. I'll take you home and pet you well, as well as any bird
of them all.” Scarcely had she said these words when the dove flew down
from the branch and settled on her shoulder, nestling up against her
neck while she smoothed its feathers. Then she took it home to her own
room.

The day was done and the night came on and Earl Mar's daughter was
thinking of going to sleep when, turning round, she found at her side a
handsome young man. She _was_ startled, for the door had been locked
for hours. But she was a brave girl and said: “What are you doing here,
young man, to come and startle me so? The door was barred these hours
ago; how ever did you come here?”

“Hush! hush!” the young man whispered. “I was that cooing dove that you
coaxed from off the tree.”

“But who are you then?” she said quite low; “and how came you to be
changed into that dear little bird?”

“My name is Florentine, and my mother is a queen, and something more
than a queen, for she knows magic and spells, and because I would not do
as she wished she turned me into a dove by day, but at night her spells
lose their power and I become a man again. To-day I crossed the sea and
saw you for the first time and I was glad to be a bird that I could come
near you. Unless you love me, I shall never be happy more.”

“But if I love you,” says she, “will you not fly away and leave me one
of these fine days?”

“Never, never,” said the prince; “be my wife and I'll be yours for ever.
By day a bird, by night a prince, I will always be by your side as a
husband, dear.”

So they were married in secret and lived happily in the castle and no
one knew that every night Coo-my-dove became Prince Florentine. And
every year a little son came to them as bonny as bonny could be. But as
each son was born Prince Florentine carried the little thing away on
his back over the sea to where the queen his mother lived and left the
little one with her.

Seven years passed thus and then a great trouble came to them. For the
Earl Mar wished to marry his daughter to a noble of high degree who came
wooing her. Her father pressed her sore but she said: “Father dear, I do
not wish to marry; I can be quite happy with Coo-my-dove here.”

Then her father got into a mighty rage and swore a great big oath, and
said: “To-morrow, so sure as I live and eat, I'll twist that birdie's
neck,” and out he stamped from her room.

“Oh, oh!” said Coo-my-dove; “it's time that I was away,” and so he
jumped upon the window-sill and in a moment was flying away. And he flew
and he flew till he was over the deep, deep sea, and yet on he flew till
he came to his mother's castle. Now the queen his mother was taking her
walk abroad when she saw the pretty dove flying overhead and alighting
on the castle walls.

“Here, dancers come and dance your jigs,” she called, “and pipers, pipe
you well, for here's my own Florentine, come back to me to stay for he's
brought no bonny boy with him this time.”

“No, mother,” said Florentine, “no dancers for me and no minstrels, for
my dear wife, the mother of my seven, boys, is to be wed to-morrow, and
sad's the day for me.”

“What can I do, my son?” said the queen, “tell me, and it shall be done
if my magic has power to do it.”

“Well then, mother dear, turn the twenty-four dancers and pipers into
twenty-four grey herons, and let my seven sons become seven white swans,
and let me be a goshawk and their leader.”

“Alas! alas! my son,” she said, “that may not be; my magic reaches
not so far. But perhaps my teacher, the spaewife of Ostree, may know
better.” And away she hurries to the cave of Ostree, and after a while
comes out as white as white can be and muttering over some burning herbs
she brought out of the cave. Suddenly Coo-my-dove changed into a goshawk
and around him flew twenty-four grey herons and above them flew seven
cygnets.

Without a word or a good-bye off they flew over the deep blue sea which
was tossing and moaning. They flew and they flew till they swooped down
on Earl Mar's castle just as the wedding party were setting out for the
church. First came the men-at-arms and then the bridegroom's friends,
and then Earl Mar's men, and then the bridegroom, and lastly, pale
and beautiful, Earl Mar's daughter herself. They moved down slowly to
stately music till they came past the trees on which the birds were
settling. A word from Prince Florentine, the goshawk, and they all rose
into the air, herons beneath, cygnets above, and goshawk circling above
all. The weddineers wondered at the sight when, swoop! the herons were
down among them scattering the men-at-arms. The swanlets took charge
of the bride while the goshawk dashed down and tied the bridegroom to a
tree. Then the herons gathered themselves together into one feather bed
and the cygnets placed their mother upon them, and suddenly they all
rose in the air bearing the bride away with them in safety towards
Prince Florentine's home. Surely a wedding party was never so disturbed
in this world. What could the weddineers do? They saw their pretty bride
carried away and away till she and the herons and the swans and the
goshawk disappeared, and that very day Prince Florentine brought Earl
Mar's daughter to the castle of the queen his mother, who took the spell
off him and they lived happy ever afterwards.


MR. MIACCA

Tommy Grimes was sometimes a good boy, and sometimes a bad boy; and when
he was a bad boy, he was a very bad boy. Now his mother used to say to
him: “Tommy, Tommy, be a good boy, and don't go out of the street, or
else Mr. Miacca will take you.” But still when he was a bad boy he would
go out of the street; and one day, sure enough, he had scarcely got
round the corner, when Mr. Miacca did catch him and popped him into a
bag upside down, and took him off to his house.

When Mr. Miacca got Tommy inside, he pulled him out of the bag and set
him down, and felt his arms and legs. “You're rather tough,” says he;
“but you're all I've got for supper, and you'll not taste bad boiled.
But body o' me, I've forgot the herbs, and it's bitter you'll taste
without herbs. Sally! Here, I say, Sally!” and he called Mrs. Miacca.

So Mrs. Miacca came out of another room and said: “What d'ye want, my
dear?”

“Oh, here's a little boy for supper,” said Mr. Miacca, “and I've forgot
the herbs. Mind him, will ye, while I go for them.”

“All right, my love,” says Mrs. Miacca, and off he goes.

Then Tommy Grimes said to Mrs. Miacca: “Does Mr. Miacca always have
little boys for supper?”

“Mostly, my dear,” said Mrs. Miacca, “if little boys are bad enough, and
get in his way.”

“And don't you have anything else but boy-meat? No pudding?” asked
Tommy.

“Ah, I loves pudding,” says Mrs. Miacca. “But it's not often the likes
of me gets pudding.”

“Why, my mother is making a pudding this very day,” said Tommy Grimes,
“and I am sure she'd give you some, if I ask her. Shall I run and get
some?”

“Now, that's a thoughtful boy,” said Mrs. Miacca, “only don't be long
and be sure to be back for supper.”

So off Tommy pelters, and right glad he was to get off so cheap; and for
many a long day he was as good as good could be, and never went round
the corner of the street. But he couldn't always be good; and one day he
went round the corner, and as luck would have it, he hadn't scarcely got
round it when Mr. Miacca grabbed him up, popped him in his bag, and took
him home.

When he got him there, Mr. Miacca dropped him out; and when he saw him,
he said: “Ah, you're the youngster what served me and my missus that
shabby trick, leaving us without any supper. Well, you shan't do it
again. I'll watch over you myself. Here, get under the sofa, and I'll
set on it and watch the pot boil for you.”

So poor Tommy Grimes had to creep under the sofa, and Mr. Miacca sat on
it and waited for the pot to boil. And they waited, and they waited, but
still the pot didn't boil, till at last Mr. Miacca got tired of waiting,
and he said: “Here, you under there, I'm not going to wait any longer;
put out your leg, and I'll stop your giving us the slip.”

So Tommy put out a leg, and Mr. Miacca got a chopper, and chopped it
off, and pops it in the pot.

Suddenly he calls out: “Sally, my dear, Sally!” and nobody answered. So
he went into the next room to look out for Mrs. Miacca, and while he was
there, Tommy crept out from under the sofa and ran out of the door. For
it was a leg of the sofa that he had put out.

So Tommy Grimes ran home, and he never went round the corner again till
he was old enough to go alone.


WHITTINGTON AND HIS CAT

In the reign of the famous King Edward III. there was a little boy
called Dick Whittington, whose father and mother died when he was very
young. As poor Dick was not old enough to work, he was very badly off;
he got but little for his dinner, and sometimes nothing at all for
his breakfast; for the people who lived in the village were very poor
indeed, and could not spare him much more than the parings of potatoes,
and now and then a hard crust of bread.

Now Dick had heard a great many very strange things about the great city
called London; for the country people at that time thought that folks
in London were all fine gentlemen and ladies; and that there was singing
and music there all day long; and that the streets were all paved with
gold.

One day a large waggon and eight horses, all with bells at their heads,
drove through the village while Dick was standing by the sign-post. He
thought that this waggon must be going to the fine town of London; so
he took courage, and asked the waggoner to let him walk with him by the
side of the waggon. As soon as the waggoner heard that poor Dick had
no father or mother, and saw by his ragged clothes that he could not be
worse off than he was, he told him he might go if he would, so off they
set together.

So Dick got safe to London, and was in such a hurry to see the fine
streets paved all over with gold, that he did not even stay to thank the
kind waggoner; but ran off as fast as his legs would carry him, through
many of the streets, thinking every moment to come to those that were
paved with gold; for Dick had seen a guinea three times in his own
little village, and remembered what a deal of money it brought in
change; so he thought he had nothing to do but to take up some little
bits of the pavement, and should then have as much money as he could
wish for.

Poor Dick ran till he was tired, and had quite forgot his friend the
waggoner; but at last, finding it grow dark, and that every way he
turned he saw nothing but dirt instead of gold, he, sat down in a dark
corner and cried himself to sleep.

Little Dick was all night in the streets; and next morning, being very
hungry, he got up and walked about, and asked everybody he met to give
him a halfpenny to keep him from starving; but nobody stayed to answer
him, and only two or three gave him a halfpenny; so that the poor boy
was soon quite weak and faint for the want of victuals.

In this distress he asked charity of several people, and one of them
said crossly: “Go to work, for an idle rogue.” “That I will,” says Dick,
“I will to go work for you, if you will let me.” But the man only cursed
at him and went on.

At last a good-natured looking gentleman saw how hungry he looked. “Why
don't you go to work my lad?” said he to Dick. “That I would, but I do
not know how to get any,” answered Dick. “If you are willing, come along
with me,” said the gentleman, and took him to a hay-field, where Dick
worked briskly, and lived merrily till the hay was made.

After this he found himself as badly off as before; and being almost
starved again, he laid himself down at the door of Mr. Fitzwarren,
a rich merchant. Here he was soon seen by the cook-maid, who was an
ill-tempered creature, and happened just then to be very busy dressing
dinner for her master and mistress; so she called out to poor Dick:
“What business have you there, you lazy rogue? there is nothing else but
beggars; if you do not take yourself away, we will see how you will like
a sousing of some dish-water; I have some here hot enough to make you
jump.”

Just at that time Mr. Fitzwarren himself came home to dinner; and when
he saw a dirty ragged boy lying at the door, he said to him: “Why do
you lie there, my boy? You seem old enough to work; I am afraid you are
inclined to be lazy.”

“No, indeed, sir,” said Dick to him, “that is not the case, for I would
work with all my heart, but I do not know anybody, and I believe I am
very sick for the want of food.”

“Poor fellow, get up; let me see what ails you.” Dick now tried to rise,
but was obliged to lie down again, being too weak to stand, for he had
not eaten any food for three days, and was no longer able to run about
and beg a halfpenny of people in the street. So the kind merchant
ordered him to be taken into the house, and have a good dinner given
him, and be kept to do what work he was able to do for the cook.

Little Dick would have lived very happy in this good family if it had
not been for the ill-natured cook. She used to say: “You are under me,
so look sharp; clean the spit and the dripping-pan, make the fires, wind
up the jack, and do all the scullery work nimbly, or--” and she would
shake the ladle at him. Besides, she was so fond of basting, that when
she had no meat to baste, she would baste poor Dick's head and shoulders
with a broom, or anything else that happened to fall in her way. At last
her ill-usage of him was told to Alice, Mr. Fitzwarren's daughter, who
told the cook she should be turned away if she did not treat him kinder.

The behaviour of the cook was now a little better; but besides this Dick
had another hardship to get over. His bed stood in a garret, where there
were so many holes in the floor and the walls that every night he was
tormented with rats and mice. A gentleman having given Dick a penny for
cleaning his shoes, he thought he would buy a cat with it. The next day
he saw a girl with a cat, and asked her, “Will you let me have that cat
for a penny?” The girl said: “Yes, that I will, master, though she is an
excellent mouser.”

Dick hid his cat in the garret, and always took care to carry a part of
his dinner to her; and in a short time he had no more trouble with the
rats and mice, but slept quite sound every night.

Soon after this, his master had a ship ready to sail; and as it was the
custom that all his servants should have some chance for good fortune as
well as himself, he called them all into the parlour and asked them what
they would send out.

They all had something that they were willing to venture except poor
Dick, who had neither money nor goods, and therefore could send nothing.
For this reason he did not come into the parlour with the rest; but Miss
Alice guessed what was the matter, and ordered him to be called in. She
then said: “I will lay down some money for him, from my own purse;” but
her father told her: “This will not do, for it must be something of his
own.”

When poor Dick heard this, he said: “I have nothing but a cat which I
bought for a penny some time since of a little girl.”

“Fetch your cat then, my lad,” said Mr. Fitzwarren, “and let her go.”

Dick went upstairs and brought down poor puss, with tears in his eyes,
and gave her to the captain; “For,” he said, “I shall now be kept awake
all night by the rats and mice.” All the company laughed at Dick's odd
venture; and Miss Alice, who felt pity for him, gave him some money to
buy another cat.

This, and many other marks of kindness shown him by Miss Alice, made the
ill-tempered cook jealous of poor Dick, and she began to use him more
cruelly than ever, and always made game of him for sending his cat to
sea.

She asked him: “Do you think your cat will sell for as much money as
would buy a stick to beat you?”

At last poor Dick could not bear this usage any longer, and he thought
he would run away from his place; so he packed up his few things, and
started very early in the morning, on All-hallows Day, the first of
November. He walked as far as Holloway; and there sat down on a stone,
which to this day is called “Whittington's Stone,” and began to think to
himself which road he should take.

While he was thinking what he should do, the Bells of Bow Church, which
at that time were only six, began to ring, and their sound seemed to say
to him:

“Turn again, Whittington, Thrice Lord Mayor of London.”

“Lord Mayor of London!” said he to himself. “Why, to be sure, I would
put up with almost anything now, to be Lord Mayor of London, and ride in
a fine coach, when I grow to be a man! Well, I will go back, and think
nothing of the cuffing and scolding of the old cook, if I am to be Lord
Mayor of London at last.”

Dick went back, and was lucky enough to get into the house, and set
about his work, before the old cook came downstairs.

We must now follow Miss Puss to the coast of Africa. The ship with the
cat on board, was a long time at sea; and was at last driven by the
winds on a part of the coast of Barbary, where the only people were the
Moors, unknown to the English. The people came in great numbers to see
the sailors, because they were of different colour to themselves, and
treated them civilly; and, when they became better acquainted, were very
eager to buy the fine things that the ship was loaded with.

When the captain saw this, he sent patterns of the best things he had to
the king of the country; who was so much pleased with them, that he
sent for the captain to the palace. Here they were placed, as it is the
custom of the country, on rich carpets flowered with gold and silver.
The king and queen were seated at the upper end of the room; and a
number of dishes were brought in for dinner. They had not sat long, when
a vast number of rats and mice rushed in, and devoured all the meat in
an instant. The captain wondered at this, and asked if these vermin were
not unpleasant.

“Oh yes,” said they, “very offensive, and the king would give half his
treasure to be freed of them, for they not only destroy his dinner, as
you see, but they assault him in his chamber, and even in bed, and
so that he is obliged to be watched while he is sleeping, for fear of
them.”

The captain jumped for joy; he remembered poor Whittington and his
cat, and told the king he had a creature on board the ship that would
despatch all these vermin immediately. The king jumped so high at the
joy which the news gave him, that his turban dropped off his head.
“Bring this creature to me,” says he; “vermin are dreadful in a court,
and if she will perform what you say, I will load your ship with gold
and jewels in exchange for her.”

The captain, who knew his business, took this opportunity to set forth
the merits of Miss Puss. He told his majesty; “It is not very convenient
to part with her, as, when she is gone, the rats and mice may destroy
the goods in the ship--but to oblige your majesty, I will fetch her.”

“Run, run!” said the queen; “I am impatient to see the dear creature.”

Away went the captain to the ship, while another dinner was got ready.
He put Puss under his arm, and arrived at the place just in time to
see the table full of rats. When the cat saw them, she did not wait for
bidding, but jumped out of the captain's arms, and in a few minutes laid
almost all the rats and mice dead at her feet. The rest of them in their
fright scampered away to their holes.

The king was quite charmed to get rid so easily of such plagues, and the
queen desired that the creature who had done them so great a kindness
might be brought to her, that she might look at her. Upon which the
captain called: “Pussy, pussy, pussy!” and she came to him. He then
presented her to the queen, who started back, and was afraid to touch
a creature who had made such a havoc among the rats and mice. However,
when the captain stroked the cat and called: “Pussy, pussy,” the queen
also touched her and cried: “Putty, putty,” for she had not learned
English. He then put her down on the queen's lap, where she purred and
played with her majesty's hand, and then purred herself to sleep.

The king, having seen the exploits of Mrs. Puss, and being informed that
her kittens would stock the whole country, and keep it free from rats,
bargained with the captain for the whole ship's cargo, and then gave him
ten times as much for the cat as all the rest amounted to.

The captain then took leave of the royal party, and set sail with a fair
wind for England, and after a happy voyage arrived safe in London.

One morning, early, Mr. Fitzwarren had just come to his counting-house
and seated himself at the desk, to count over the cash, and settle the
business for the day, when somebody came tap, tap, at the door. “Who's
there?” said Mr. Fitzwarren. “A friend,” answered the other; “I come to
bring you good news of your ship _Unicorn_.” The merchant, bustling up
in such a hurry that he forgot his gout, opened the door, and who should
he see waiting but the captain and factor, with a cabinet of jewels, and
a bill of lading; when he looked at this the merchant lifted up his eyes
and thanked Heaven for sending him such a prosperous voyage.

They then told the story of the cat, and showed the rich present
that the king and queen had sent for her to poor Dick. As soon as the
merchant heard this, he called out to his servants:

  “Go send him in, and tell him of his fame;
  Pray call him Mr. Whittington by name.”

Mr. Fitzwarren now showed himself to be a good man; for when some of
his servants said so great a treasure was too much for him, he answered:
“God forbid I should deprive him of the value of a single penny, it is
his own, and he shall have it to a farthing.” He then sent for Dick,
who at that time was scouring pots for the cook, and was quite dirty. He
would have excused himself from coming into the counting-house, saying,
“The room is swept, and my shoes are dirty and full of hob-nails.” But
the merchant ordered him to come in.

Mr. Fitzwarren ordered a chair to be set for him, and so he began to
think they were making game of him, at the same time said to them: “Do
not play tricks with a poor simple boy, but let me go down again, if you
please, to my work.”

“Indeed, Mr. Whittington,” said the merchant, “we are all quite in
earnest with you, and I most heartily rejoice in the news that these
gentlemen have brought you; for the captain has sold your cat to the
King of Barbary, and brought you in return for her more riches than I
possess in the whole world; and I wish you may long enjoy them!”

Mr. Fitzwarren then told the men to open the great treasure they had
brought with them; and said: “Mr. Whittington has nothing to do but to
put it in some place of safety.”

Poor Dick hardly knew how to behave himself for joy. He begged his
master to take what part of it he pleased, since he owed it all to his
kindness. “No, no,” answered Mr. Fitzwarren, “this is all your own; and
I have no doubt but you will use it well.”

Dick next asked his mistress, and then Miss Alice, to accept a part of
his good fortune; but they would not, and at the same time told him
they felt great joy at his good success. But this poor fellow was too
kind-hearted to keep it all to himself; so he made a present to the
captain, the mate, and the rest of Mr. Fitzwarren's servants; and even
to the ill-natured old cook.

After this Mr. Fitzwarren advised him to send for a proper tailor and
get himself dressed like a gentleman; and told him he was welcome to
live in his house till he could provide himself with a better.

When Whittington's face was washed, his hair curled, his hat cocked, and
he was dressed in a nice suit of clothes he was as handsome and genteel
as any young man who visited at Mr. Fitzwarren's; so that Miss Alice,
who had once been so kind to him, and thought of him with pity, now
looked upon him as fit to be her sweetheart; and the more so, no doubt,
because Whittington was now always thinking what he could do to oblige
her, and making her the prettiest presents that could be.

Mr. Fitzwarren soon saw their love for each other, and proposed to join
them in marriage; and to this they both readily agreed. A day for the
wedding was soon fixed; and they were attended to church by the Lord
Mayor, the court of aldermen, the sheriffs, and a great number of the
richest merchants in London, whom they afterwards treated with a very
rich feast.

History tells us that Mr. Whittington and his lady liven in great
splendour, and were very happy. They had several children. He was
Sheriff of London, thrice Lord Mayor, and received the honour of
knighthood by Henry V.

He entertained this king and his queen at dinner after his conquest of
France so grandly, that the king said “Never had prince such a subject;”
 when Sir Richard heard this, he said: “Never had subject such a prince.”

The figure of Sir Richard Whittington with his cat in his arms, carved
in stone, was to be seen till the year 1780 over the archway of the old
prison of Newgate, which he built for criminals.


THE STRANGE VISITOR

A woman was sitting at her reel one night; And still she sat, and still
she reeled, and still she wished for company.

In came a pair of broad broad soles, and sat down at the fireside;

And still she sat, and still she reeled, and still she wished for
company.

In came a pair of small small legs, and sat down on the broad broad
soles;

And still she sat, and still she reeled, and still she wished for
company.

In came a pair of thick thick knees, and sat down on the small small
legs;

And still she sat, and still she reeled, and still she wished for
company.

In came a pair of thin thin thighs, and sat down on the thick thick
knees;

And still she sat, and still she reeled, and still she wished for
company.

In came a pair of huge huge hips, and sat down on the thin thin thighs;

And still she sat, and still she reeled, and still she wished for
company.

In came a wee wee waist, and sat down on the huge huge hips;

And still she sat, and still she reeled, and still she wished for
company.

In came a pair of broad broad shoulders, and sat down on the wee wee
waist;

And still she sat, and still she reeled, and still she wished for
company.

In came a pair of small small arms, and sat down on the broad broad
shoulders;

And still she sat, and still she reeled, and still she wished for
company.

In came a pair of huge huge hands, and sat down on the small small arms;

And still she sat, and still she reeled, and still she wished for
company.

In came a small small neck, and sat down on the broad broad shoulders;

And still she sat, and still she reeled, and still she wished for
company.

In came a huge huge head, and sat down on the small small neck.

“How did you get such broad broad feet?” quoth the woman.

“Much tramping, much tramping” (_gruffly_).

“How did you get such small small legs?”

“Aih-h-h!-late--and wee-e-e--moul” (_whiningly_).

“How did you get such thick thick knees?”

“Much praying, much praying” (_piously_).

“How did you get such thin thin thighs?”

“Aih-h-h!--late--and wee-e-e--moul” (_whiningly_).

“How did you get such big big hips?”

“Much sitting, much sitting” (_gruffly_).

“How did you get such a wee wee waist?”

“Aih-h-h!--late--and wee-e-e-moul” (_whiningly_).

“How did you get such broad broad shoulders?”

“With carrying broom, with carrying broom” (_gruffly_).

“How did you get such small small arms?”

“Aih-h-h!--late--and wee-e-e--moul” (_whiningly_.)

“How did you get such huge huge hands?”

“Threshing with an iron flail, threshing with an iron flail”
 (_gruffly_).

“How did you get such a small small neck?”

“Aih-h-h!--late--wee-e-e--moul” (_pitifully_).

“How did you get such a huge huge head?”

“Much knowledge, much knowledge” (_keenly_).

“What do you come for?”

“FOR YOU!” (_At the top of the voice, with a wave of the arm and a stamp
of the feet._)


THE LAIDLY WORM OF SPINDLESTON HEUGH

In Bamborough Castle once lived a king who had a fair wife and two
children, a son named Childe Wynd and a daughter named Margaret. Childe
Wynd went forth to seek his fortune, and soon after he had gone the
queen his mother died. The king mourned her long and faithfully, but
one day while he was hunting he came across a lady of great beauty, and
became so much in love with her that he determined to marry her. So
he sent word home that he was going to bring a new queen to Bamborough
Castle.

Princess Margaret was not very glad to hear of her mother's place being
taken, but she did not repine but did her father's bidding. And at the
appointed day came down to the castle gate with the keys all ready to
hand over to her stepmother. Soon the procession drew near, and the new
queen came towards Princess Margaret who bowed low and handed her the
keys of the castle. She stood there with blushing cheeks and eye on
ground, and said: “O welcome, father dear, to your halls and bowers, and
welcome to you my new mother, for all that's here is yours,” and again
she offered the keys. One of the king's knights who had escorted the new
queen, cried out in admiration: “Surely this northern Princess is the
loveliest of her kind.” At that the new queen flushed up and cried out:
“At least your courtesy might have excepted me,” and then she muttered
below her breath: “I'll soon put an end to her beauty.”

That same night the queen, who was a noted witch, stole down to a lonely
dungeon wherein she did her magic and with spells three times three, and
with passes nine times nine she cast Princess Margaret under her spell.
And this was her spell:

  I weird ye to be a Laidly Worm,
    And borrowed shall ye never be,
  Until Childe Wynd, the King's own son
    Come to the Heugh and thrice kiss thee;
  Until the world comes to an end,
    Borrowed shall ye never be.

So Lady Margaret went to bed a beauteous maiden, and rose up a Laidly
Worm. And when her maidens came in to dress her in the morning they
found coiled up on the bed a dreadful dragon, which uncoiled itself
and came towards them. But they ran away shrieking, and the Laidly Worm
crawled and crept, and crept and crawled till it reached the Heugh or
rock of the Spindlestone, round which it coiled itself, and lay there
basking with its terrible snout in the air.

Soon the country round about had reason to know of the Laidly Worm of
Spindleston Heugh. For hunger drove the monster out from its cave and it
used to devour everything it could come across. So at last they went to
a mighty warlock and asked him what they should do. Then he consulted
his works and his familiar, and told them: “The Laidly Worm is really
the Princess Margaret and it is hunger that drives her forth to do such
deeds. Put aside for her seven kine, and each day as the sun goes down,
carry every drop of milk they yield to the stone trough at the foot of
the Heugh, and the Laidly Worm will trouble the country no longer. But
if ye would that she be borrowed to her natural shape, and that she who
bespelled her be rightly punished, send over the seas for her brother,
Childe Wynd.”

All was done as the warlock advised, the Laidly Worm lived on the milk
of the seven kine, and the country was troubled no longer. But when
Childe Wynd heard the news, he swore a mighty oath to rescue his sister
and revenge her on her cruel stepmother. And three-and-thirty of his men
took the oath with him. Then they set to work and built a long ship, and
its keel they made of the rowan tree. And when all was ready, they out
with their oars and pulled sheer for Bamborough Keep.

But as they got near the keep, the stepmother felt by her magic power
that something was being wrought against her, so she summoned her
familiar imps and said: “Childe Wynd is coming over the seas; he must
never land. Raise storms, or bore the hull, but nohow must he touch
shore.” Then the imps went forth to meet Childe Wynd's ship, but when
they got near, they found they had no power over the ship, for its keel
was made of the rowan tree. So back they came to the queen witch, who
knew not what to do. She ordered her men-at-arms to resist Childe Wynd
if he should land near them, and by her spells she caused the Laidly
Worm to wait by the entrance of the harbour.

As the ship came near, the Worm unfolded its coils, and dipping into
the sea, caught hold of the ship of Childe Wynd, and banged it off
the shore. Three times Childe Wynd urged his men on to row bravely and
strong, but each time the Laidly Worm kept it off the shore. Then Childe
Wynd ordered the ship to be put about, and the witch-queen thought he
had given up the attempt. But instead of that, he only rounded the next
point and landed safe and sound in Budle Creek, and then, with sword
drawn and bow bent, rushed up followed by his men, to fight the terrible
Worm that had kept him from landing.

But the moment Childe Wynd had landed, the witch-queen's power over the
Laidly Worm had gone, and she went back to her bower all alone, not an
imp, nor a man-at-arms to help her, for she knew her hour was come. So
when Childe Wynd came rushing up to the Laidly Worm it made no attempt
to stop him or hurt him, but just as he was going to raise his sword to
slay it, the voice of his own sister Margaret came from its jaws saying:

  “O, quit your sword, unbend your bow,
    And give me kisses three;
  For though I am a poisonous worm,
    No harm I'll do to thee.”

Childe Wynd stayed his hand, but he did not know what to think if some
witchery were not in it. Then said the Laidly Worm again:

  “O, quit your sword, unbend your bow,
    And give me kisses three,
  If I'm not won ere set of sun,
    Won never shall I be.”

Then Childe Wynd went up to the Laidly Worm and kissed it once; but no
change came over it. Then Childe Wynd kissed it once more; but yet no
change came over it. For a third time he kissed the loathsome thing,
and with a hiss and a roar the Laidly Worm reared back and before Childe
Wynd stood his sister Margaret. He wrapped his cloak about her, and then
went up to the castle with her. When he reached the keep, he went off to
the witch queen's bower, and when he saw her, he touched her with a twig
of a rowan tree. No sooner had he touched her than she shrivelled up and
shrivelled up, till she became a huge ugly toad, with bold staring eyes
and a horrible hiss. She croaked and she hissed, and then hopped away
down the castle steps, and Childe Wynd took his father's place as king,
and they all lived happy afterwards.

But to this day, the loathsome toad is seen at times, haunting the
neighbourhood of Bamborough Keep, and the wicked witch-queen is a Laidly
Toad.


THE CAT AND THE MOUSE

    The cat and the mouse
    Play'd in the malt-house:

The cat bit the mouse's tail off. “Pray, puss, give me my tail.” “No,”
 says the cat, “I'll not give you your tail, till you go to the cow, and
fetch me some milk.”

    First she leapt and then she ran,
    Till she came to the cow, and thus began:

“Pray, Cow, give me milk, that I may give cat milk, that cat may give me
my own tail again.” “No,” said the cow, “I will give you no milk, till
you go to the farmer, and get me some hay.”

    First she leapt, and then she ran,
    Till she came to the farmer and thus began:

“Pray, Farmer, give me hay, that I may give cow hay, that cow may give
me milk, that I may give cat milk, that cat may give me my own tail
again.” “No,” says the farmer, “I'll give you no hay, till you go to the
butcher and fetch me some meat.”

    First she leapt, and then she ran,
    Till she came to the butcher, and thus began:

“Pray, Butcher, give me meat, that I may give farmer meat, that farmer
may give me hay, that I may give cow hay, that cow may give me milk,
that I may give cat milk, that cat may give me my own tail again.” “No,”
 says the butcher, “I'll give you no meat, till you go to the baker and
fetch me some bread.”

    First she leapt and then she ran,
    Till she came to the baker, and thus began:

“Pray, Baker, give me bread, that I may give butcher bread, that butcher
may give me meat, that I may give farmer meat, that farmer may give me
hay, that I may give cow hay, that cow may give me milk, that I may give
cat milk, that cat may give me my own tail again.”

    “Yes,” says the baker, “I'll give you some bread,
    But if you eat my meal, I'll cut off your head.”

Then the baker gave mouse bread, and mouse gave butcher bread, and
butcher gave mouse meat, and mouse gave farmer meat, and farmer gave
mouse hay, and mouse gave cow hay, and cow gave mouse milk, and mouse
gave cat milk, and cat gave mouse her own tail again!


THE FISH AND THE RING

Once upon a time, there was a mighty baron in the North Countrie who was
a great magician that knew everything that would come to pass. So one
day, when his little boy was four years old, he looked into the Book of
Fate to see what would happen to him. And to his dismay, he found that
his son would wed a lowly maid that had just been born in a house under
the shadow of York Minster. Now the Baron knew the father of the little
girl was very, very poor, and he had five children already. So he called
for his horse, and rode into York; and passed by the father's house, and
saw him sitting by the door, sad and doleful. So he dismounted and went
up to him and said: “What is the matter, my good man?” And the man said:
“Well, your honour, the fact is, I've five children already, and now
a sixth's come, a little lass, and where to get the bread from to fill
their mouths, that's more than I can say.”

“Don't be downhearted, my man,” said the Baron. “If that's your trouble,
I can help you. I'll take away the last little one, and you wont have to
bother about her.”

“Thank you kindly, sir,” said the man; and he went in and brought out
the lass and gave her to the Baron, who mounted his horse and rode away
with her. And when he got by the bank of the river Ouse, he threw the
little, thing into the river, and rode off to his castle.

But the little lass didn't sink; her clothes kept her up for a time, and
she floated, and she floated, till she was cast ashore just in front of
a fisherman's hut. There the fisherman found her, and took pity on the
poor little thing and took her into his house, and she lived there till
she was fifteen years old, and a fine handsome girl.

One day it happened that the Baron went out hunting with some companions
along the banks of the River Ouse, and stopped at the fisherman's hut to
get a drink, and the girl came out to give it to them. They all noticed
her beauty, and one of them said to the Baron: “You can read fates,
Baron, whom will she marry, d'ye think?”

“Oh! that's easy to guess,” said the Baron; “some yokel or other. But
I'll cast her horoscope. Come here girl, and tell me on what day you
were born?”

“I don't know, sir,” said the girl, “I was picked up just here after
having been brought down by the river about fifteen years ago.”

Then the Baron knew who she was, and when they went away, he rode back
and said to the girl: “Hark ye, girl, I will make your fortune. Take
this letter to my brother in Scarborough, and you will be settled for
life.” And the girl took the letter and said she would go. Now this was
what he had written in the letter:

“Dear Brother,--Take the bearer and put her to death immediately.

“Yours affectionately,

“Albert.”

So soon after the girl set out for Scarborough, and slept for the night
at a little inn. Now that very night a band of robbers broke into the
inn, and searched the girl, who had no money, and only the letter. So
they opened this and read it, and thought it a shame. The captain of the
robbers took a pen and paper and wrote this letter:

“Dear Brother,--Take the bearer and marry her to my son immediately.

“Yours affectionately,

“Albert.”

And then he gave it to the girl, bidding her begone. So she went on
to the Baron's brother at Scarborough, a noble knight, with whom the
Baron's son was staying. When she gave the letter to his brother,
he gave orders for the wedding to be prepared at once, and they were
married that very day.

Soon after, the Baron himself came to his brother's castle, and what was
his surprise to find that the very thing he had plotted against had come
to pass. But he was not to be put off that way; and he took out the girl
for a walk, as he said, along the cliffs. And when he got her all alone,
he took her by the arms, and was going to throw her over. But she begged
hard for her life. “I have not done anything,” she said: “if you will
only spare me, I will do whatever you wish. I will never see you or your
son again till you desire it.” Then the Baron took off his gold ring and
threw it into the sea, saying: “Never let me see your face till you can
show me that ring;” and he let her go.

The poor girl wandered on and on, till at last she came to a great
noble's castle, and she asked to have some work given to her; and they
made her the scullion girl of the castle, for she had been used to such
work in the fisherman's hut.

Now one day, who should she see coming up to the noble's house but the
Baron and his brother and his son, her husband. She didn't know what
to do; but thought they would not see her in the castle kitchen. So she
went back to her work with a sigh, and set to cleaning a huge big fish
that was to be boiled for their dinner. And, as she was cleaning it,
she saw something shine inside it, and what do you think she found? Why,
there was the Baron's ring, the very one he had thrown over the cliff
at Scarborough. She was right glad to see it, you may be sure. Then she
cooked the fish as nicely as she could, and served it up.

Well, when the fish came on the table, the guests liked it so well that
they asked the noble who cooked it. He said he didn't know, but called
to his servants: “Ho, there, send up the cook that cooked that fine
fish.” So they went down to the kitchen and told the girl she was wanted
in the hall. Then she washed and tidied herself and put the Baron's gold
ring on her thumb and went up into the hall.

When the banqueters saw such a young and beautiful cook they were
surprised. But the Baron was in a tower of a temper, and started up as
if he would do her some violence. So the girl went up to him with her
hand before her with the ring on it; and she put it down before him on
the table. Then at last the Baron saw that no one could fight against
Fate, and he handed her to a seat and announced to all the company that
this was his son's true wife; and he took her and his son home to his
castle; and they all lived as happy as could be ever afterwards.


THE MAGPIE'S NEST

  Once upon a time when pigs spoke rhyme
  And monkeys chewed tobacco,
  And hens took snuff to make them tough,
  And ducks went quack, quack, quack, O!

All the birds of the air came to the magpie and asked her to teach
them how to build nests. For the magpie is the cleverest bird of all
at building nests. So she put all the birds round her and began to show
them how to do it. First of all she took some mud and made a sort of
round cake with it.

“Oh, that's how it's done,” said the thrush; and away it flew, and so
that's how thrushes build their nests.

Then the magpie took some twigs and arranged them round in the mud.

“Now I know all about it,” says the blackbird, and off he flew; and
that's how the blackbirds make their nests to this very day.

Then the magpie put another layer of mud over the twigs.

“Oh that's quite obvious,” said the wise owl, and away it flew; and owls
have never made better nests since.

After this the magpie took some twigs and twined them round the outside.

“The very thing!” said the sparrow, and off he went; so sparrows make
rather slovenly nests to this day.

Well, then Madge Magpie took some feathers and stuff and lined the nest
very comfortably with it.

“That suits me,” cried the starling, and off it flew; and very
comfortable nests have starlings.

So it went on, every bird taking away some knowledge of how to build
nests, but, none of them waiting to the end. Meanwhile Madge Magpie
went on working and working without, looking up till the only bird that
remained was the turtle-dove, and that hadn't paid any attention all
along, but only kept on saying its silly cry “Take two, Taffy, take
two-o-o-o.”

At last the magpie heard this just as she was putting a twig across. So
she said: “One's enough.”

But the turtle-dove kept on saying: “Take two, Taffy, take two-o-o-o.”

Then the magpie got angry and said: “One's enough I tell you.”

Still the turtle-dove cried: “Take two, Taffy, take two-o-o-o.”

At last, and at last, the magpie looked up and saw nobody near her but
the silly turtle-dove, and then she got rare angry and flew away and
refused to tell the birds how to build nests again. And that is why
different birds build their nests differently.


KATE CRACKERNUTS

Once upon a time there was a king and a queen, as in many lands have
been. The king had a daughter, Anne, and the queen had one named Kate,
but Anne was far bonnier than the queen's daughter, though they loved
one another like real sisters. The queen was jealous of the king's
daughter being bonnier than her own, and cast about to spoil her beauty.
So she took counsel of the henwife, who told her to send the lassie to
her next morning fasting.

So next morning early, the queen said to Anne, “Go, my dear, to the
henwife in the glen, and ask her for some eggs.” So Anne set out, but as
she passed through the kitchen she saw a crust, and she took and munched
it as she went along.

When she came to the henwife's she asked for eggs, as she had been told
to do; the henwife said to her, “Lift the lid off that pot there and
see.” The lassie did so, but nothing happened. “Go home to your minnie
and tell her to keep her larder door better locked,” said the henwife.
So she went home to the queen and told her what the henwife had said.
The queen knew from this that the lassie had had something to eat, so
watched the next morning and sent her away fasting; but the princess saw
some country-folk picking peas by the roadside, and being very kind she
spoke to them and took a handful of the peas, which she ate by the way.

When she came to the henwife's, she said, “Lift the lid off the pot
and you'll see.” So Anne lifted the lid but nothing happened. Then the
henwife was rare angry and said to Anne, “Tell your minnie the pot won't
boil if the fire's away.” So Anne went home and told the queen.

The third day the queen goes along with the girl herself to the henwife.
Now, this time, when Anne lifted the lid off the pot, off falls her own
pretty head, and on jumps a sheep's head.

So the queen was now quite satisfied, and went back home.

Her own daughter, Kate, however, took a fine linen cloth and wrapped it
round her sister's head and took her by the hand and they both went out
to seek their fortune. They went on, and they went on, and they went
on, till they came to a castle. Kate knocked at the door and asked for a
night's lodging for herself and a sick sister. They went in and found
it was a king's castle, who had two sons, and one of them was sickening
away to death and no one could find out what ailed him. And the curious
thing was that whoever watched him at night was never seen any more. So
the king had offered a peck of silver to anyone who would stop up with
him. Now Katie was a very brave girl, so she offered to sit up with him.

Till midnight all goes well. As twelve o clock rings, however, the sick
prince rises, dresses himself, and slips downstairs. Kate followed, but
he didn't seem to notice her. The prince went to the stable, saddled his
horse, called his hound, jumped into the saddle, and Kate leapt lightly
up behind him. Away rode the prince and Kate through the greenwood,
Kate, as they pass, plucking nuts from the trees and filling her apron
with them. They rode on and on till they came to a green hill. The
prince here drew bridle and spoke, “Open, open, green hill, and let the
young prince in with his horse and his hound,” and Kate added, “and his
lady him behind.”

Immediately the green hill opened and they passed in. The prince entered
a magnificent hall, brightly lighted up, and many beautiful fairies
surrounded the prince and led him off to the dance. Meanwhile, Kate,
without being noticed, hid herself behind the door. There she sees the
prince dancing, and dancing, and dancing, till he could dance no longer
and fell upon a couch. Then the fairies would fan him till he could rise
again and go on dancing.

At last the cock crew, and the prince made all haste to get on
horseback; Kate jumped up behind, and home they rode. When the morning
sun rose they came in and found Kate sitting down by the fire and
cracking her nuts. Kate said the prince had a good night; but she would
not sit up another night unless she was to get a peck of gold. The
second night passed as the first had done. The prince got up at midnight
and rode away to the green hill and the fairy ball, and Kate went with
him, gathering nuts as they rode through the forest. This time she did
not watch the prince, for she knew he would dance and dance, and dance.
But she sees a fairy baby playing with a wand, and overhears one of the
fairies say: “Three strokes of that wand would make Kate's sick sister
as bonnie as ever she was.” So Kate rolled nuts to the fairy baby, and
rolled nuts till the baby toddled after the nuts and let fall the wand,
and Kate took it up and put it in her apron. And at cockcrow they rode
home as before, and the moment Kate got home to her room she rushed and
touched Anne three times with the wand, and the nasty sheep's head
fell off and she was her own pretty self again. The third night Kate
consented to watch, only if she should marry the sick prince. All went
on as on the first two nights. This time the fairy baby was playing with
a birdie; Kate heard one of the fairies say: “Three bites of that birdie
would make the sick prince as well as ever he was.” Kate rolled all the
nuts she had to the fairy baby till the birdie was dropped, and Kate put
it in her apron.

At cockcrow they set off again, but instead of cracking her nuts as
she used to do, this time Kate plucked the feathers off and cooked
the birdie. Soon there arose a very savoury smell. “Oh!” said the sick
prince, “I wish I had a bite of that birdie,” so Kate gave him a bite of
the birdie, and he rose up on his elbow. By-and-by he cried out again:
“Oh, if I had another bite of that birdie!” so Kate gave him another
bite, and he sat up on his bed. Then he said again: “Oh! if I only had
a third bite of that birdie!” So Kate gave him a third bite, and he rose
quite well, dressed himself, and sat down by the fire, and when the folk
came in next morning they found Kate and the young prince cracking nuts
together. Meanwhile his brother had seen Annie and had fallen in love
with her, as everybody did who saw her sweet pretty face. So the sick
son married the well sister, and the well son married the sick sister,
and they all lived happy and died happy, and never drank out of a dry
cappy.


THE CAULD LAD OF HILTON

At Hilton Hall, long years ago, there lived a Brownie that was the
contrariest Brownie you ever knew. At night, after the servants had
gone to bed, it would turn everything topsy-turvy, put sugar in the
salt-cellars, pepper into the beer, and was up to all kinds of pranks.
It would throw the chairs down, put tables on their backs, rake out
fires, and do as much mischief as could be. But sometimes it would be in
a good temper, and then!--“What's a Brownie?” you say. Oh, it's a kind
of a sort of a Bogle, but it isn't so cruel as a Redcap! What! you don't
know what's a Bogle or a Redcap! Ah, me! what's the world a-coming to?
Of course a Brownie is a funny little thing, half man, half goblin, with
pointed ears and hairy hide. When you bury a treasure, you scatter over
it blood drops of a newly slain kid or lamb, or, better still, bury the
animal with the treasure, and a Brownie will watch over it for you, and
frighten everybody else away.

Where was I? Well, as I was a-saying, the Brownie at Hilton Hall would
play at mischief, but if the servants laid out for it a bowl of cream,
or a knuckle cake spread with honey, it would clear away things for
them, and make everything tidy in the kitchen. One night, however, when
the servants had stopped up late, they heard a noise in the kitchen,
and, peeping in, saw the Brownie swinging to and fro on the Jack chain,
and saying:

  “Woe's me! woe's me!
  The acorn's not yet
  Fallen from the tree,
  That's to grow the wood,
  That's to make the cradle,
  That's to rock the bairn,
  That's to grow to the man,
  That's to lay me.
  Woe's me! woe's me!”

So they took pity on the poor Brownie, and asked the nearest henwife
what they should do to send it away. “That's easy enough,” said the
henwife, and told them that a Brownie that's paid for its service, in
aught that's not perishable, goes away at once. So they made a cloak of
Lincoln green, with a hood to it, and put it by the hearth and watched.
They saw the Brownie come up, and seeing the hood and cloak, put them
on, and frisk about, dancing on one leg and saying:

  “I've taken your cloak, I've taken your hood;
  The Cauld Lad of Hilton will do no more good.”

And with that it vanished, and was never seen or heard of afterwards.


THE ASS, THE TABLE, AND THE STICK

A lad named Jack was once so unhappy at home through his father's
ill-treatment, that he made up his mind to run away and seek his fortune
in the wide world.

He ran, and he ran, till he could run no longer, and then he ran right
up against a little old woman who was gathering sticks. He was too much
out of breath to beg pardon, but the woman was good-natured, and she
said he seemed to be a likely lad, so she would take him to be her
servant, and would pay him well. He agreed, for he was very hungry,
and she brought him to her house in the wood, where he served her for a
twelvemonths and a day.

When the year had passed, she called him to her, and said she had good
wages for him. So she presented him with an ass out of the stable, and
he had but to pull Neddy's ears to make him begin at once to ee--aw! And
when he brayed there dropped from his mouth silver sixpences, and half
crowns, and golden guineas.

The lad was well pleased with the wage he had received, and away he rode
till he reached an inn. There he ordered the best of everything, and
when the innkeeper refused to serve him without being paid beforehand,
the boy went off to the stable, pulled the ass's ears and obtained his
pocket full of money. The host had watched all this through a crack
in the door, and when night came on he put an ass of his own for the
precious Neddy of the poor youth. So Jack without knowing that any
change had been made, rode away next morning to his father's house.

Now, I must tell you that near his home dwelt a poor widow with an only
daughter. The lad and the maiden were fast friends and true loves; but
when Jack asked his father's leave to marry the girl, “Never till you
have the money to keep her,” was the reply. “I have that, father,” said
the lad, and going to the ass he pulled its long ears; well, he pulled,
and he pulled, till one of them came off in his hands; but Neddy, though
he hee-hawed and he hee-hawed let fall no half crowns or guineas. The
father picked up a hay-fork and beat his son out of the house. I promise
you he ran. Ah! he ran and ran till he came bang against the door, and
burst it open, and there he was in a joiner's shop. “You're a likely
lad,” said the joiner; “serve me for a twelvemonths and a day and I will
pay you well.'” So he agreed, and served the carpenter for a year and
a day. “Now,” said the master, “I will give you your wage;” and he
presented him with a table, telling him he had but to say, “Table, be
covered,” and at once it would be spread with lots to eat and drink.

Jack hitched the table on his back, and away he went with it till he
came to the inn. “Well, host,” shouted he, “my dinner to-day, and that
of the best.”

“Very sorry, but there is nothing in the house but ham and eggs.”

“Ham and eggs for me!” exclaimed Jack. “I can do better than
that.--Come, my table, be covered!”

At once the table was spread with turkey and sausages, roast mutton,
potatoes, and greens. The publican opened his eyes, but he said nothing,
not he.

That night he fetched down from his attic a table very like that of
Jack, and exchanged the two. Jack, none the wiser, next morning hitched
the worthless table on to his back and carried it home. “Now, father,
may I marry my lass?” he asked.

“Not unless you can keep her,” replied the father. “Look here!”
 exclaimed Jack. “Father, I have a table which does all my bidding.”

“Let me see it,” said the old man.

The lad set it in the middle of the room, and bade it be covered; but
all in vain, the table remained bare. In a rage, the father caught the
warming-pan down from the wall and warmed his son's back with it so that
the boy fled howling from the house, and ran and ran till he came to a
river and tumbled in. A man picked him out and bade him assist him in
making a bridge over the river; and how do you think he was doing it?
Why, by casting a tree across; so Jack climbed up to the top of the tree
and threw his weight on it, so that when the man had rooted the tree up,
Jack and the tree-head dropped on the farther bank.

“Thank you,” said the man; “and now for what you have done I will pay
you;” so saying, he tore a branch from the tree, and fettled it up into
a club with his knife. “There,” exclaimed he; “take this stick, and when
you say to it, 'Up stick and bang him,' it will knock any one down who
angers you.”

The lad was overjoyed to get this stick--so away he went with it to the
inn, and as soon as the publican, appeared, “Up stick and bang him!” was
his cry. At the word the cudgel flew from his hand and battered the
old publican on the back, rapped his head, bruised his arms tickled his
ribs, till he fell groaning on the floor; still the stick belaboured
the prostrate man, nor would Jack call it off till he had got back the
stolen ass and table. Then he galloped home on the ass, with the table
on his shoulders, and the stick in his hand. When he arrived there he
found his father was dead, so he brought his ass into the stable, and
pulled its ears till he had filled the manger with money.

It was soon known through the town that Jack had returned rolling in
wealth, and accordingly all the girls in the place set their caps at
him. “Now,” said Jack, “I shall marry the richest lass in the place; so
tomorrow do you all come in front of my house with your money in your
aprons.”

Next morning the street was full of girls with aprons held out, and gold
and silver in them; but Jack's own sweetheart was among them, and she
had neither gold nor silver, nought but two copper pennies, that was all
she had.

“Stand aside, lass;” said Jack to her, speaking roughly. “Thou hast no
silver nor gold--stand off from the rest.” She obeyed, and the tears ran
down her cheeks, and filled her apron with diamonds.

“Up stick and bang them!” exclaimed Jack; whereupon the cudgel leaped
up, and running along the line of girls, knocked them all on the heads
and left them senseless on the pavement. Jack took all their money and
poured it into his truelove's lap. “Now, lass,” he exclaimed, “thou art
the richest, and I shall marry thee.”


FAIRY OINTMENT

Dame Goody was a nurse that looked after sick people, and minded babies.
One night she was woke up at midnight, and when she went downstairs,
she saw a strange squinny-eyed, little ugly old fellow, who asked her
to come to his wife who was too ill to mind her baby. Dame Goody didn't
like the look of the old fellow, but business is business; so she popped
on her things, and went down to him. And when she got down to him, he
whisked her up on to a large coal-black horse with fiery eyes, that
stood at the door; and soon they were going at a rare pace, Dame Goody
holding on to the old fellow like grim death.

They rode, and they rode, till at last they stopped before a cottage
door. So they got down and went in and found the good woman abed with
the children playing about; and the babe, a fine bouncing boy, beside
her.

Dame Goody took the babe, which was as fine a baby boy as you'd wish to
see. The mother, when she handed the baby to Dame Goody to mind, gave
her a box of ointment, and told her to stroke the baby's eyes with it
as soon as it opened them. After a while it began to open its eyes. Dame
Goody saw that it had squinny eyes just like its father. So she took the
box of ointment and stroked its two eyelids with it. But she couldn't
help wondering what it was for, as she had never seen such a thing done
before. So she looked to see if the others were looking, and, when they
were not noticing she stroked her own right eyelid with the ointment.

No sooner had she done so, than everything seemed changed about her.
The cottage became elegantly furnished. The mother in the bed was a
beautiful lady, dressed up in white silk. The little baby was still more
beautiful than before, and its clothes were made of a sort of silvery
gauze. Its little brothers and sisters around the bed were flat-nosed
imps with pointed ears, who made faces at one another, and scratched
their polls. Sometimes they would pull the sick lady's ears with their
long and hairy paws. In fact, they were up to all kinds of mischief; and
Dame Goody knew that she had got into a house of pixies. But she said
nothing to nobody, and as soon as the lady was well enough to mind the
baby, she asked the old fellow to take her back home. So he came round
to the door with the coal-black horse with eyes of fire, and off they
went as fast as before, or perhaps a little faster, till they came to
Dame Goody's cottage, where the squinny-eyed old fellow lifted her down
and left her, thanking her civilly enough, and paying her more than she
had ever been paid before for such service.

Now next day happened to be market-day, and as Dame Goody had been away
from home, she wanted many things in the house, and trudged off to get
them at the market. As she was buying the things she wanted, who
should she see but the squinny-eyed old fellow who had taken her on the
coal-black horse. And what do you think he was doing? Why he went about
from stall to stall taking up things from each, here some fruit, and
there some eggs, and so on; and no one seemed to take any notice.

Now Dame Goody did not think it her business to interfere, but she
thought she ought not to let so good a customer pass without speaking.
So she ups to him and bobs a curtsey and said: “Gooden, sir, I hopes as
how your good lady and the little one are as well as----”

But she couldn't finish what she was a-saying, for the funny old fellow
started back in surprise, and he says to her, says he: “What! do you see
me today?”

“See you,” says she, “why, of course I do, as plain as the sun in the
skies, and what's more,” says she, “I see you are busy too, into the
bargain.”

“Ah, you see too much,” said he; “now, pray, with which eye do you see
all this?”

“With the right eye to be sure,” said she, as proud as can be to find
him out.

“The ointment! The ointment!” cried the old pixy thief. “Take that for
meddling with what don't concern you: you shall see me no more.” And
with that he struck her on her right eye, and she couldn't see him any
more; and, what was worse, she was blind on the right side from that
hour till the day of her death.


THE WELL OF THE WORLD'S END

Once upon a time, and a very good time it was, though it wasn't in my
time, nor in your time, nor any one else's time, there was a girl whose
mother had died, and her father had married again. And her stepmother
hated her because she was more beautiful than herself, and she was very
cruel to her. She used to make her do all the servant's work, and never
let her have any peace. At last, one day, the stepmother thought to get
rid of her altogether; so she handed her a sieve and said to her: “Go,
fill it at the Well of the World's End and bring it home to me full,
or woe betide you.” For she thought she would never be able to find the
Well of the World's End, and, if she did, how could she bring home a
sieve full of water?

Well, the girl started off, and asked every one she met to tell her
where was the Well of the World's End. But nobody knew, and she didn't
know what to do, when a queer little old woman, all bent double, told
her where it was, and how she could get to it. So she did what the old
woman told her, and at last arrived at the Well of the World's End. But
when she dipped the sieve in the cold, cold water, it all ran out again.
She tried and she tried again, but every time it was the same; and at
last she sate down and cried as if her heart would break.

Suddenly she heard a croaking voice, and she looked up and saw a great
frog with goggle eyes looking at her and speaking to her.

“What's the matter, dearie?” it said.

“Oh, dear, oh dear,” she said, “my stepmother has sent me all this long
way to fill this sieve with water from the Well of the World's End, and
I can't fill it no how at all.”

“Well,” said the frog, “if you promise me to do whatever I bid you for a
whole night long, I'll tell you how to fill it.”

So the girl agreed, and then the frog said:

  “Stop it with moss and daub it with clay,
  And then it will carry the water away;”

and then it gave a hop, skip and jump, and went flop into the Well of
the World's End.

So the girl looked about for some moss, and lined the bottom of the
sieve with it, and over that she put some clay, and then she dipped it
once again into the Well of the World's End; and this time, the water
didn't run out, and she turned to go away.

Just then the frog popped up its head out of the Well of the World's
End, and said: “Remember your promise.”

“All right,” said the girl; for thought she, “what harm can a frog do
me?”

So she went back to her stepmother, and brought the sieve full of water
from the Well of the World's End. The stepmother was fine and angry, but
she said nothing at all.

That very evening they heard something tap tapping at the door low down,
and a voice cried out:

  “Open the door, my hinny, my heart,
  Open the door, my own darling;
  Mind you the words that you and I spoke,
  Down in the meadow, at the World's End Well.”

“Whatever can that be?” cried out the stepmother, and the girl had to
tell her all about it, and what she had promised the frog.

“Girls must keep their promises,” said the stepmother. “Go and open the
door this instant.” For she was glad the girl would have to obey a nasty
frog.

So the girl went and opened the door, and there was the frog from the
Well of the World's End. And it hopped, and it skipped, and it jumped,
till it reached the girl, and then it said:

  “Lift me to your knee, my hinny, my heart;
  Lift me to your knee, my own darling;
  Remember the words you and I spoke,
  Down in the meadow by the World's End Well.”

But the girl didn't like to, till her stepmother said “Lift it up this
instant, you hussy! Girls must keep their promises!”

So at last she lifted the frog up on to her lap, and it lay there for a
time, till at last it said:

  “Give me some supper, my hinny, my heart,
  Give me some supper, my darling;
  Remember the words you and I spake,
  In the meadow, by the Well of the World's End.”

Well, she didn't mind doing that, so she got it a bowl of milk and
bread, and fed it well. And when the frog, had finished, it said:

  “Go with me to bed, my hinny, my heart,
  Go with me to bed, my own darling;
  Mind you the words you spake to me,
  Down by the cold well, so weary.”

But that the girl wouldn't do, till her stepmother said: “Do what you
promised, girl; girls must keep their promises. Do what you're bid, or
out you go, you and your froggie.”

So the girl took the frog with her to bed, and kept it as far away from
her as she could. Well, just as the day was beginning to break what
should the frog say but:

  “Chop off my head, my hinny, my heart,
  Chop off my head, my own darling;
  Remember the promise you made to me,
  Down by the cold well so weary.”

At first the girl wouldn't, for she thought of what the frog had done
for her at the Well of the World's End. But when the frog said the words
over again, she went and took an axe and chopped off its head, and lo!
and behold, there stood before her a handsome young prince, who told her
that he had been enchanted by a wicked magician, and he could never be
unspelled till some girl would do his bidding for a whole night, and
chop off his head at the end of it.

The stepmother was that surprised when she found the young prince
instead of the nasty frog, and she wasn't best pleased, you may be sure,
when the prince told her that he was going to marry her stepdaughter
because she had unspelled him. So they were married and went away to
live in the castle of the king, his father, and all the stepmother had
to console her was, that it was all through her that her stepdaughter
was married to a prince.


MASTER OF ALL MASTERS

A girl once went to the fair to hire herself for servant. At last a
funny-looking old gentleman engaged her, and took her home to his house.
When she got there, he told her that he had something to teach her, for
that in his house he had his own names for things.

He said to her: “What will you call me?”

“Master or mister, or whatever you please sir,” says she.

He said: “You must call me 'master of all masters.' And what would you
call this?” pointing to his bed.

“Bed or couch, or whatever you please, sir.”

“No, that's my 'barnacle.' And what do you call these?” said he pointing
to his pantaloons.

“Breeches or trousers, or whatever you please, sir.”

“You must call them 'squibs and crackers.' And what would you call her?”
 pointing to the cat.

“Cat or kit, or whatever you please, sir.”

“You must call her 'white-faced simminy.' And this now,” showing the
fire, “what would you call this?”

“Fire or flame, or whatever you please, sir.”

“You must call it 'hot cockalorum,' and what this?” he went on, pointing
to the water.

“Water or wet, or whatever you please, sir.”

“No, 'pondalorum' is its name. And what do you call all this?” asked he,
as he pointed to the house.

“House or cottage, or whatever you please, sir.”

“You must call it 'high topper mountain.'”

That very night the servant woke her master up in a fright and said:
“Master of all masters, get out of your barnacle and put on your squibs
and crackers. For white-faced simminy has got a spark of hot cockalorum
on its tail, and unless you get some pondalorum high topper mountain
will be all on hot cockalorum.” .... That's all.


THE THREE HEADS OF THE WELL

Long before Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table, there reigned in
the eastern part of England a king who kept his Court at Colchester. In
the midst of all his glory, his queen died, leaving behind her an only
daughter, about fifteen years of age, who for her beauty and kindness
was the wonder of all that knew her. But the king hearing of a lady who
had likewise an only daughter, had a mind to marry her for the sake of
her riches, though she was old, ugly, hook-nosed, and hump-backed. Her
daughter was a yellow dowdy, full of envy and ill-nature; and, in short,
was much of the same mould as her mother. But in a few weeks the king,
attended by the nobility and gentry, brought his deformed bride to the
palace, where the marriage rites were performed. They had not been long
in the Court before they set the king against his own beautiful daughter
by false reports. The young princess having lost her father's love, grew
weary of the Court, and one day, meeting with her father in the garden,
she begged him, with tears in her eyes, to let her go and seek her
fortune; to which the king consented, and ordered her mother-in-law to
give her what she pleased. She went to the queen, who gave her a canvas
bag of brown bread and hard cheese, with a bottle of beer; though this
was but a pitiful dowry for a king's daughter. She took it, with
thanks, and proceeded on her journey, passing through groves, woods,
and valleys, till at length she saw an old man sitting on a stone at the
mouth of a cave, who said: “Good morrow, fair maiden, whither away so
fast?”

“Aged father,” says she, “I am going to seek my fortune.”

“What have you got in your bag and bottle?”

“In my bag I have got bread and cheese, and in my bottle good small
beer. Would you like to have some?”

“Yes,” said he, “with all my heart.”

With that the lady pulled out her provisions, and bade him eat and
welcome. He did so, and gave her many thanks, and said: “There is a
thick thorny hedge before you, which you cannot get through, but take
this wand in your hand, strike it three times, and say, 'Pray, hedge,
let me come through,' and it will open immediately; then, a little
further, you will find a well; sit down on the brink of it, and there
will come up three golden heads, which will speak; and whatever they
require, that do.” Promising she would, she took her leave of him.
Coming to the hedge and using the old man's wand, it divided, and let
her through; then, coming to the well, she had no sooner sat down than a
golden head came up singing:

  “Wash me, and comb me,
  And lay me down softly.
  And lay me on a bank to dry,
  That I may look pretty,
  When somebody passes by.”

“Yes,” said she, and taking it in her lap combed it with a silver comb,
and then placed it upon a primrose bank. Then up came a second and a
third head, saying the same as the former. So she did the same for them,
and then, pulling out her provisions, sat down to eat her dinner.

Then said the heads one to another: “What shall we weird for this damsel
who has used us so kindly?”

The first said: “I weird her to be so beautiful that she shall charm the
most powerful prince in the world.”

The second said: “I weird her such a sweet voice as shall far exceed the
nightingale.”

The third said: “My gift shall be none of the least, as she is a king's
daughter, I'll weird her so fortunate that she shall become queen to the
greatest prince that reigns.”

She then let them down into the well again, and so went on her journey.
She had not travelled long before she saw a king hunting in the park
with his nobles. She would have avoided him, but the king, having caught
a sight of her, approached, and what with her beauty and sweet voice,
fell desperately in love with her, and soon induced her to marry him.

This king finding that she was the King of Colchester's daughter,
ordered some chariots to be got ready, that he might pay the king, his
father-in-law, a visit. The chariot in which the king and queen rode
was adorned with rich gems of gold. The king, her father, was at first
astonished that his daughter had been so fortunate, till the young
king let him know of all that had happened. Great was the joy at
Court amongst all, with the exception of the queen and her club-footed
daughter, who were ready to burst with envy. The rejoicings, with
feasting and dancing, continued many days. Then at length they returned
home with the dowry her father gave her.

The hump-backed princess, perceiving that her sister had been so lucky
in seeking her fortune, wanted to do the same; so she told her mother,
and all preparations were made, and she was furnished with rich dresses,
and with sugar, almonds, and sweetmeats, in great quantities, and a
large bottle of Malaga sack. With these she went the same road as
her sister; and coming near the cave, the old man said: “Young woman,
whither so fast?”

“What's that to you?” said she.

“Then,” said he, “what have you in your bag and bottle?”

She answered: “Good things, which you shall not be troubled with.”

“Won't you give me some?” said he.

“No, not a bit, nor a drop, unless it would choke you.”

The old man frowned, saying: “Evil fortune attend ye!”

Going on, she came to the hedge, through which she espied a gap, and
thought to pass through it; but the hedge closed, and the, thorns
ran into her flesh, so that it was with great difficulty that she
got through. Being now all over blood, she searched for water to wash
herself, and, looking round, she saw the well. She sat down on the brink
of it, and one of the heads came up, saying: “Wash me, comb me, and lay
me down softly,” as before, but she banged it with her bottle, saying,
“Take that for your washing.” So the second and third heads came up,
and met with no better treatment than the first. Whereupon the heads
consulted among themselves what evils to plague her with for such usage.

The first said: “Let her be struck with leprosy in her face.”

The second: “Let her voice be as harsh as a corn-crake's.”

The third said: “Let her have for husband but a poor country cobbler.”

Well, she goes on till she came to a town, and it being market-day, the
people looked at her, and, seeing such a mangy face, and hearing such
a squeaky voice, all fled but a poor country cobbler. Now he not long
before had mended the shoes of an old hermit, who, having no money
gave him a box of ointment for the cure of the leprosy, and a bottle of
spirits for a harsh voice. So the cobbler having a mind to do an act of
charity, was induced to go up to her and ask her who she was.

“I am,” said she, “the King of Colchester's daughter-in-law.”

“Well,” said the cobbler, “if I restore you to your natural complexion,
and make a sound cure both in face and voice, will you in reward take me
for a husband?”

“Yes, friend,” replied she, “with all my heart!”

With this the cobbler applied the remedies, and they made her well in
a few weeks; after which they were married, and so set forward for the
Court at Colchester. When the queen found that her daughter had married
nothing but a poor cobbler, she hanged herself in wrath. The death of
the queen so pleased the king, who was glad to get rid of her so soon,
that he gave the cobbler a hundred pounds to quit the Court with his
lady, and take to a remote part of the kingdom, where he lived many
years mending shoes, his wife spinning the thread for him.


OYEZ-OYEZ-OYEZ