Produced by Charles Franks, Delphine Lettau and the people at DP


ENGLISH FAIRY TALES

By Anonymous


_COLLECTED BY_ JOSEPH JACOBS


_HOW TO GET INTO THIS BOOK._

    _Knock at the Knocker on the Door,
    Pull the Bell at the side,_

_Then, if you are very quiet, you will hear a teeny tiny voice say
through the grating “Take down the Key.” This you will find at the back:
you cannot mistake it, for it has J. J. in the wards. Put the Key in the
Keyhole, which it fits exactly, unlock the door and WALK IN._


_TO MY DEAR LITTLE MAY_


PREFACE

Who says that English folk have no fairy-tales of their own? The present
volume contains only a selection out of some 140, of which I have found
traces in this country. It is probable that many more exist.

A quarter of the tales in this volume, have been collected during the
last ten years or so, and some of them have not been hitherto published.
Up to 1870 it was equally said of France and of Italy, that they
possessed no folk-tales. Yet, within fifteen years from that date, over
1000 tales had been collected in each country. I am hoping that the
present volume may lead to equal activity in this country, and would
earnestly beg any reader of this book who knows of similar tales, to
communicate them, written down as they are told, to me, care of Mr.
Nutt. The only reason, I imagine, why such tales have not hitherto
been brought to light, is the lamentable gap between the governing and
recording classes and the dumb working classes of this country--dumb to
others but eloquent among themselves. It would be no unpatriotic task
to help to bridge over this gulf, by giving a common fund of nursery
literature to all classes of the English people, and, in any case, it
can do no harm to add to the innocent gaiety of the nation.

A word or two as to our title seems necessary. We have called our
stories Fairy Tales though few of them speak of fairies. [Footnote: For
some recent views on fairies and tales _about_ fairies, see Notes.] The
same remark applies to the collection of the Brothers Grimm and to all
the other European collections, which contain exactly the same classes
of tales as ours. Yet our stories are what the little ones mean when
they clamour for “Fairy Tales,” and this is the only name which they
give to them. One cannot imagine a child saying, “Tell us a folk-tale,
nurse,” or “Another nursery tale, please, grandma.” As our book is
intended for the little ones, we have indicated its contents by the name
they use. The words “Fairy Tales” must accordingly be taken to
include tales in which occurs something “fairy,” something
extraordinary--fairies, giants, dwarfs, speaking animals. It must
be taken also to cover tales in which what is extraordinary is the
stupidity of some of the actors. Many of the tales in this volume, as
in similar collections for other European countries, are what the
folklorists call Drolls. They serve to justify the title of Merrie
England, which used to be given to this country of ours, and indicate
unsuspected capacity for fun and humour among the unlettered classes.