This eBook was produced by John Williams, Juliet Sutherland,
Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


IN DIVERS TONES

BY

CHARLES G. D. ROBERTS

AUTHOR OF "ORION, AND OTHER POEMS"; PROFESSOR OF
ENGLISH LITERATURE IN THE UNIVERSITY OF
KING'S COLLEGE, WINDSOR, N. S.


To My Friend,
EDMUND COLLINS.


In divers tones I sing,
  And pray you, Friend, give ear!
My medley of song I bring
  You, who can rightly hear.

Themes gathered far and near,
  Thoughts from my heart that spring,
  In divers tones I sing,
And pray you. Friend, give ear!

Here's many a serious thing--
  You'll know if it's sincere.
Where the light laughters ring
  You may detect a tear.
In divers tones I sing,
  And pray you, Friend, give ear!


CONTENTS.


DEDICATION

COLLECT FOR DOMINION DAY

CANADA

ACTAEON

IN THE AFTERNOON

THE PIPES OF PAN

BEFORE THE BREATH OF STORM

OUT OF POMPEII

TO FREDERICTON IN MAY-TIME

IN SEPTEMBER

CONCERNING CUTHBERT THE MONK

IMPULSE

THE ISLES--AN ODE

A SERENADE

OFF PELORUS

A BALLADE OF CALYPSO

RAIN

MIST

THE TANTRAMAR REVISITED

THE SLAVE WOMAN

THE MARVELLOUS WORK

A SONG OF DEPENDENCE

ON THE CREEK

LOTOS

THE SOWER

THE POTATO HARVEST

AFLOAT

RECKONING

IN NOTRE DAME

NOCTURNE

TIDES

CONSOLATION

DARK

THE FOOTPATH

TOUT OU RIEN

SALT

KHARTOUM

LIBERTY. (From the French of Fréchette)

TO THE MEMORY OF SIDNEY LANIER

ON READING THE POEMS OF SIDNEY LANIER

IN LANG'S "HELEN OF TROY." (TO BLISS CARMAN.)

A BALLADE OF PHILOMELA

A HERALD

WINTER GERANIUMS

A BREATHING TIME

BIRCH AND PADDLE. (To BLISS CARMAN.)

AN ODE FOR THE CANADIAN CONFEDERACY

THE QUELLING OF THE MOOSE

A SONG OF REGRET

THE DEPARTING OF CLOTE SCARP

A BREAK

TO A LADY, AFTER HEARING HER READ KEATS' "NIGHTINGALE"

RONDEAU. (TO LOUIS HONORE FRÉCHETTE.)

A BIRTHDAY BALLADE

To S---- M----

LA BELLE TROMBONISTE

THE POET IS BIDDEN TO MANHATTAN ISLAND

THE BLUE VIOLET


IN DIVERS TONES.


COLLECT FOR DOMINION DAY.


Father of nations! Help of the feeble hand!
  Strength of the strong! to whom the nations kneel!
  Stay and destroyer, at whose just command
  Earth's kingdoms tremble and her empires reel!
Who dost the low uplift, the small make great,
  And dost abase the ignorantly proud,
  Of our scant people mould a mighty state,
  To the strong, stern,--to Thee in meekness bowed!
Father of unity, make this people one!
  Weld, interfuse them in the patriot's flame,--
  Whose forging on thine anvil was begun
In blood late shed to purge the common shame;
  That so our hearts, the fever of faction done,
  Banish old feud in our young nation's name.


CANADA.


O Child of Nations, giant-limbed,
  Who stand'st among the nations now
Unheeded, unadored, unhymned,
  With unanointed brow,--

How long the ignoble sloth, how long
  The trust in greatness not thine own?
Surely the lion's brood is strong
  To front the world alone!

How long the indolence, ere thou dare
  Achieve thy destiny, seize thy fame--
Ere our proud eyes behold thee bear
  A nation's franchise, nation's name?

The Saxon force, the Celtic fire,
  These are thy manhood's heritage!
Why rest with babes and slaves? Seek higher
  The place of race and age.

I see to every wind unfurled
  The flag that bears the Maple-Wreath;
Thy swift keels furrow round the world
  Its blood-red folds beneath;

Thy swift keels cleave the furthest seas;
  Thy white sails swell with alien gales;
To stream on each remotest breeze
  The black smoke of thy pipes exhales.

O Falterer, let thy past convince
  Thy future,--all the growth, the gain,
The fame since Cartier knew thee, since
  Thy shores beheld Champlain!

Montcalm and Wolfe! Wolfe and Montcalm!
  Quebec, thy storied citadel
Attest in burning song and psalm
  How here thy heroes fell!

O Thou that bor'st the battle's brunt
  At Queenston, and at Lundy's Lane,--
On whose scant ranks but iron front
  The battle broke in vain!--

Whose was the danger, whose the day,
  From whose triumphant throats the cheers,
At Chrysler's Farm, at Chateauguay,
  Storming like clarion-bursts our ears?

On soft Pacific slopes,--beside
  Strange floods that northward rave and fall,--
Where chafes Acadia's chainless tide--
  Thy sons await thy call.

They wait; but some in exile, some
  With strangers housed, in stranger lands;--
And some Canadian lips are dumb
  Beneath Egyptian sands.

O mystic Nile! Thy secret yields
  Before us; thy most ancient dreams
Are mixed with far Canadian fields
  And murmur of Canadian streams.

But thou, my Country, dream not thou!
  Wake, and behold how night is done,--
How on thy breast, and o'er thy brow,
  Bursts the uprising sun!


ACTAEON.

A WOMAN OF PLATAEA SPEAKS.


I have lived long, and watched out many days,
And seen the showers fall and the light shine down
Equally on the vile and righteous head.
I have lived long, and served the gods, and drawn
Small joy and liberal sorrow,--scorned the gods,
And drawn no less my little meed of good,
Suffered my ill in no more grievous measure.
I have been glad--alas, my foolish people,
I have been glad with you! And ye are glad,
Seeing the gods in all things, praising them
In yon their lucid heaven, this green world,
The moving inexorable sea, and wide
Delight of noonday,--till in ignorance
Ye err, your feet transgress, and the bolt falls!
Ay, have I sung, and dreamed that they would hear;
And worshipped, and made offerings;--it may be
They heard, and did perceive, and were well pleased,--
A little music in their ears; perchance,
A grain more savor to their nostrils, sweet
Tho' scarce accounted of. But when for me
The mists of Acheron have striven up,
And horror was shed round me; when my knees
Relaxed, my tongue clave speechless, they forgot.
And when my sharp cry cut the moveless night,
And days and nights my wailings clamored up
And beat about their golden homes, perchance
They shut their ears. No happy music this,
Eddying through their nectar cups and calm!
Then I cried out against them, and died not;
And rose, and set me to my daily tasks.
So all day long, with bare, uplift right arm,
Drew out the strong thread from the carded wool,
Or wrought strange figures, lotus-buds and serpents,
In Purple on the himation's saffron fold;
Nor uttered praise with the slim-wristed girls
To any god, nor uttered any prayer,
Nor poured out bowls of wine and smooth bright oil,
Nor brake and gave small cakes of beaten meal
And honey, as this time, or such a god
Required; nor offered apples summer-flushed,
Scarlet pomegranates, poppy-bells, or doves.
All this with scorn, and waiting all day long,
And night long with dim fear, afraid of sleep,--
Seeing I took no hurt of all these things,
And seeing mine eyes were drièd of their tears
So that once more the light grew sweet for me,
Once more grew fair the fields and valley streams,
I thought with how small profit men take heed
To worship with bowed heads, and suppliant hands,
And sacrifice, the everlasting gods,
Who take small thought of them to curse or bless,
Girt with their purples of perpetual peace!
Thus blindly deemed I of them;--yet--and yet--
Have late well learned their hate is swift as fire,
Be one so wretched to encounter it;
Ay, have I seen a multitude of good deeds
Fly up in the pan like husks, like husks blown dry.
Hereafter let none question the high gods!
I questioned; but these watching eyes have seen
Actaeon, thewed and sinewed like a god,
Godlike for sweet speech and great deeds, hurled down
To hideous death,--scarce suffered space to breathe
Ere the wild heart in his changed quivering side
Burst with mad terror, and the stag's wide eyes
Stared one sick moment 'mid the dogs' hot jaws.

       *       *       *       *       *

Cithaeron, mother mount, set steadfastly
Deep in Boeotia, past the utmost roar
Of seas, beyond Corinthian waves withdrawn,
Girt with green vales awake with brooks or still,
Towers up mid lesser-browed Boeotian hills--
These couched like herds secure beneath its ken--
And watches earth's green corners. At mid-noon
We of Plataea mark the sun make pause
Right over it, and top its crest with pride.
Men of Eleusis look toward north at dawn
To see the long white fleeces upward roll,
Smitten aslant with saffron, fade like smoke,
And leave the gray-green dripping glens all bare,
The drenched slopes open sunward; slopes wherein
What gods, what godlike men to match with gods,
Have roamed, and grown up mighty, and waxed wise
Under the law of him whom gods and men
Reverence, and call Cheiron! He, made wise
With knowledge of all wisdom, had made wise
Actaeon, till there moved none cunninger
To drive with might the javelin forth, or bend
The corded ebony, save Leto's son.

But him the Centaur shall behold no more
With long stride making down the beechy glade,
Clear-eyed, with firm lips laughing,--at his heels
The clamor of his fifty deep-tongued hounds;
Him the wise Centaur shall behold no more.

I have lived long, and watched out many days,
And am well sick of watching. Three days since,
I had gone out upon the slopes for herbs,
Snake-root, and subtle gums; and when the light
Fell slantwise through the upper glens, and missed
The sunk ravines, I came where all the hills
Circle the valley of Gargaphian streams.
Reach beyond reach all down the valley gleamed,--
Thick branches ringed them. Scarce a bowshot past
My platan, thro' the woven leaves low-hung,
Trembling in meshes of the woven sun,
A yellow-sanded pool, shallow and clear,
Lay sparkling, brown about the further bank
From scarlet-berried ash-trees hanging over.
But suddenly the shallows brake awake
With laughter and light voices, and I saw
Where Artemis, white goddess incorrupt,
Bane of swift beasts, and deadly for straight shaft
Unswerving, from a coppice not far off
Came to the pool from the hither bank to bathe.
Amid her maiden company she moved,
Their cross-thonged yellow buskins scattered off,
Unloosed their knotted hair; and thus the pool
Received them stepping, shrinking, down to it.

Here they flocked white, and splashed the water-drops
On rounded breast and shoulder snowier
Than the washed clouds athwart the morning's blue,--
Fresher than river grasses which the herds
Pluck from the river in the burning noons.
Their tresses on the summer wind they flung;
And some a shining yellow fleece let fall
For the sun's envy; others with white hands
Lifted a glooming wealth of locks more dark
Than deepest wells, but purple in the sun.
And She, their mistress, of the heart unstormed,
Stood taller than they all, supreme, and still,
Perfectly fair like day, and crowned with hair
The color of nipt beech-leaves: Ay, such hair
Was mine in years when I was such as these.
I let it fall to cover me, or coiled
Its soft thick coils about my throat and arms;
Its color like nipt beech-leaves, tawny brown,
But in the sun a fountain of live gold.

Even as thus they played, and some lithe maids
Upreached white arms to grasp the berried ash,
And, plucking the bright bunches, shed them wide
By red ripe handfuls, not far off I saw
With long stride making down the beechy glade,
Clear-eyed, with firm lips laughing, at his heels
The clamor of his fifty deep-tongued hounds,
Actaeon. I beheld him not far off,
But unto bath and bathers hid from view,
Being beyond that mighty rock whereon
His wont was to be stretched at dip of eve,
When frogs are loud amid the tall-plumed sedge
In marshy spots about Asopus' bank,--
Deeming his life was very sweet, his day
A pleasant one, the peopled breadths of earth
Most fair, and fair the shining tracts of sea;
Green solitudes, and broad low-lying plains
Made brown with frequent labors of men's hands,
And salt, blue, fruitless waters. But this mount,
Cithaeron, bosomed deep in soundless hills,
Its fountained vales, its nights of starry calm,
Its high chill dawns, its long-drawn golden days,--
Was dearest to him. Here he dreamed high dreams,
And felt within his sinews strength to strive
Where strife was sorest and to overcome,
And in his heart the thought to do great deeds,
With power in all ways to accomplish them.
For had not he done well to men, and done
Well to the gods? Therefore he stood secure.

But him,--for him--Ah that these eyes should see!--
Approached a sudden stumbling in his ways!
Not yet, not yet he knew a god's fierce wrath,
Nor wist of that swift vengeance lying in wait.

And now he came upon a slope of sward
Against the pool. With startled cry the maids
Shrank clamoring round their mistress, or made flight
To covert in the hazel thickets. She
Stirred not; but pitiless anger paled her eyes,
Intent with deadly purpose. He, amazed,
Stood with his head thrust forward, while his curls
Sun-lit lay glorious on his mighty neck,--
Let fall his bow and clanging spear, and gazed
Dilate with ecstasy; nor marked the dogs
Hush their deep tongues, draw close, and ring him round,
And fix upon him strange, red, hungry eyes,
And crouch to spring. This for a moment. Then
It seemed his strong knees faltered, and he sank.
Then I cried out,--for straight a shuddering stag
Sprang one wild leap over the dogs; but they
Fastened upon his flanks with a long yell,
And reached his throat; and that proud head went down
Beneath their wet, red fangs and reeking jaws.

I have lived long, and watched out many days,
Yet have not seen that ought is sweet save life,
Nor learned that life hath other end than death.
Thick horror like a cloud had veiled my sight,
That for a space I saw not, and my ears
Were shut from hearing; but when sense grew clear
Once more, I only saw the vacant pool
Unrippled,--only saw the dreadful sward.
Where dogs lay gorged, or moved in fretful search,
Questing uneasily; and some far up
The slope, and some at the low water's edge,
With snouts set high in air and straining throats
Uttered keen howls that smote the echoing hills.
They missed their master's form, nor understood
Where was the voice they loved, the hand that reared;--
And some lay watching by the spear and bow
Flung down.

              And now upon the homeless pack
And paling stream arose a noiseless wind
Out of the yellow west awhile, and stirred
The branches down the valley; then blew off
To eastward toward the long gray straits, and died
Into the dark, beyond the utmost verge.


IN THE AFTERNOON.


Wind of the summer afternoon,
Hush, for my heart is out of tune!

Hush, for thou movest restlessly
The too light sleeper, Memory!

Whate'er thou hast to tell me, yet
'Twere something sweeter to forget,--

Sweeter than all thy breath of balm
An hour of unremembering calm!

Blowing over the roofs, and down
The bright streets of this inland town,

These busy crowds, these rocking trees--
What strange note hast thou caught from these?

A note of waves and rushing tides,
Where past the dikes the red flood glides,

To brim the shining channels far
Up the green plains of Tantramar.

Once more I snuff the salt, I stand
On the long dikes of Westmoreland;

I watch the narrowing flats, the strip
Of red clay at the water's lip;

Far off the net-reels, brown and high,
And boat-masts slim against the sky;

Along the ridges of the dikes
Wind-beaten scant sea-grass, and spikes

Of last year's mullein; down the slopes
To landward, in the sun, thick ropes

Of blue vetch, and convolvulus,
And matted roses glorious.

The liberal blooms o'erbrim my hands;
I walk the level, wide marsh-lands;

Waist-deep in dusty-blossomed grass
I watch the swooping breezes pass

In sudden, long, pale lines, that flee
Up the deep breast of this green sea.

I listen to the bird that stirs
The purple tops, and grasshoppers

Whose summer din, before my feet
Subsiding, wakes on my retreat.

Again the droning bees hum by;
Still-winged, the gray hawk wheels on high;

I drink again the wild perfumes,
And roll, and crush the grassy blooms.

Blown back to olden days, I fain
Would quaff the olden joys again;

But all the olden sweetness not
The old unmindful peace hath brought.

Wind of this summer afternoon,
Thou hast recalled my childhood's June;

My heart--still is it satisfied
By all the golden summer-tide?

Hast thou one eager yearning filled,
Or any restless throbbing stilled,

Or hast thou any power to bear
Even a little of my care?--

Ever so little of this weight
Of weariness canst thou abate?

Ah, poor thy gift indeed, unless
Thou bring the old child-heartedness,--

And such a gift to bring is given,
Alas, to no wind under heaven!

Wind of the summer afternoon,
Be still; my heart is not in tune.

Sweet is thy voice; but yet, but yet--
Of all 'twere sweetest to forget!

FREDERICTON, N. B.


THE PIPES OF PAN.


Ringed with the flocking of hills, within shepherding watch of Olympus,
Tempe, vale of the gods, lies in green quiet withdrawn;
Tempe, vale of the gods, deep-couched amid woodland and woodland,
Threaded with amber of brooks, mirrored in azure of pools,
All day drowsed with the sun, charm-drunken with moonlight at midnight,
Walled from the world forever under a vapor of dreams,--
Hid by the shadows of dreams, not found by the curious footstep,
Sacred and secret forever, Tempe, vale of the gods.
How, through the cleft of its bosom, goes sweetly the water Penëus!
How by Penëus the sward breaks into saffron and blue!
How the long slope-floored beech-glades mount to the wind-wakened uplands,
Where, through flame-berried ash, troop the hoofed Centaurs at morn!
Nowhere greens a copse but the eye-beams of Artemis pierce it.
Breathes no laurel her balm but Phoebus' fingers caress.
Springs no bed of wild blossom but limbs of dryad have pressed it.
Sparkle the nymphs, and the brooks chime with shy laughter and calls.

Here is a nook. Two rivulets fall to mix with Penëus,
Loiter a space, and sleep, checked and choked by the reeds.
Long grass waves in the windless water, strown with the lote-leaf;
Twist thro' dripping soil great alder roots, and the air
Glooms with the dripping tangle of leaf-thick branches, and stillness
Keeps in the strange-coiled stems, ferns, and wet-loving weeds.
Hither comes Pan, to this pregnant earthy spot, when his piping
Flags; and his pipes outworn breaking and casting away,
Fits new reeds to his mouth with the weird earth-melody in them,
Piercing, alive with a life able to mix with the god's.
Then, as he blows, and the searching sequence delights him, the goat-feet
Furtive withdraw; and a bird stirs and flutes in the gloom
Answering. Float with the stream the outworn pipes, with a whisper,--
"What the god breathes on, the god never can wholly evade!"
God-breath lurks in each fragment forever. Dispersed by Penëus
Wandering, caught in the ripples, wind-blown hither and there,
Over the whole green earth and globe of sea they are scattered,
Coming to secret spots, where in a visible form
Comes not the god; though he come declared in his workings. And mortals
Straying in cool of morn, or bodeful hasting at eve,
Or in the depths of noonday plunged to shadiest coverts,
Spy them, and set to their lips; blow, and fling them away!

Ay, they fling them away,--but never wholly! Thereafter
Creeps strange fire in their veins, murmur strange tongues in their brain,
Sweetly evasive; a secret madness takes them,--a charm-struck
Passion for woods and wild life, the solitude of the hills.
Therefore they fly the heedless throngs and traffic of cities,
Haunt mossed caverns, and wells bubbling ice-cool; and their souls
Gather a magical gleam of the secret of life, and the god's voice
Calls to them, not from afar, teaching them wonderful things.


BEFORE THE BREATH OF STORM.


          Before the breath of storm.
While yet the long, bright afternoons are warm,
Under this stainless arch of azure sky
    The air is filled with gathering wings for flight;
    Yet with the shrill mirth and the loud delight
Comes the foreboding sorrow of this cry--
"Till the storm scatter and the gloom dispel,
          Farewell! Farewell!
              Farewell!"

          Why will ye go so soon,
In these soft hours, this sweeter month than June?
The liquid air floats over field and tree
    A veil of dreams;--where do ye find the sting?
A gold enchantment sleeps upon the sea
    And purple hills;--why have ye taken wing?
But faint, far-heard, the answers fall and swell--
          "Farewell! Farewell!
              Farewell!"


OUT OF POMPEII.


Save what the night-wind woke of sweet
  And solemn sound, I heard alone
The sleepless ocean's ceaseless beat,
  The surge's monotone.

Low down the south a dreary gleam
  Of white light smote the sullen swells,
Evasive as a blissful dream,
  Or wind-borne notes of bells.

The water's lapping whispers stole
  Into my brain, and there effaced
All human memories from my soul,--
  An atom in a shifting waste.

Weird fingers, groping, strove to raise
  Some numbing horror from my mind;
And ever, as it met my gaze,
  The sharp truth struck me blind.

The keen edged breath of the salt sea
  Stung, but a faint, swift, sulphurous smell
Blew past, and I reeled dizzily
  As from the blink of hell,

One moment; then the swan-necked prow
  Sustained me, and once more I scanned
The unfenced flood, against my brow
  Arching my lifted hand.

O'er all the unstable vague expanse
  I towered the lord supreme, and smiled;
And marked the hard, white sparkles glance,
  The dark vault wide and wild.

Again that faint wind swept my face--
  With hideous menace swept my eyes.
I cowered back in my straitened place
  And groped with dim surmise,

Not knowing yet. Not knowing why,
  I turned, as one asleep might turn,
And noted with half curious eye
  The figure crouched astern.

On heaped-up leopard skins she crouched,
  Asleep, and soft skins covered her,
And scarlet stuffs where she was couched,
  Sodden with sea-water,

Burned lurid with black stains, and smote
  My thought with waking pangs; I saw
The white arm drooping from the boat,
  Round-moulded, pure from flaw;

The yellow sandals even-thonged;
  The fair face, wan with haunting pain;--
Then sudden, crowding memories thronged
  Like unpent sudden rain.

Clear-stamped, as by white lightning when
  The swift flame rends the night, wide-eyed
I saw dim streets, and fleeing men,
  And walls from side to side

Reeling, and great rocks fallen; a pall
  Above us, an encumbering shroud
About our feet, and over all
  The awful Form that bowed

Our hearts, the fiery scourge that smote
  The city,--the red Mount. Clear, clear
I saw it,--and this lonely boat,
  And us two drifting here!

With one sharp cry I sprang and hid
  My face among the skins beside
Her feet, and held her safe, and chid
  The tumult till it died.

And crouched thus at her rescued feet
  Save her low breath, I heard alone
The sleepless ocean's ceaseless beat,
  The surge's monotone.


TO FREDERICTON IN MAY-TIME.


This morning, full of breezes and perfume,
  Brimful of promise of midsummer weather,
  When bees and birds and I are glad together,
Breathes of the full-leaved season, when soft gloom
Chequers thy streets, and thy close elms assume
  Round roof and spire the semblance of green billows;
  Yet now thy glory is the yellow willows,
The yellow willows, full of bees and bloom.

Under their dusty blossoms blackbirds meet,
  And robins pipe amid the cedars nigher.
Thro' the still elms I hear the ferry's beat.
  The swallows chirp about the towering spire;
The whole air pulses with its weight of sweet,
  Yet not quite satisfied is my desire!


IN SEPTEMBER.


This windy, bright September afternoon
  My heart is wide awake, yet full of dreams.
  The air, alive with hushed confusion, teems
With scent of grain-fields, and a mystic rune,
Foreboding of the fall of Summer soon,
  Keeps swelling and subsiding, till there seems
  O'er all the world of valleys, hills, and streams,
Only the wind's inexplicable tune.

My heart is full of dreams, yet wide awake.
  I lie and watch the topmost tossing boughs
    Of tall elms, pale against the vaulted blue;
But even now some yellowing branches shake,
  Some hue of death the living green endows:--
    If beauty flies, fain would I vanish too.


CONCERNING CUTHBERT THE MONK.


Cuthbert, open! Let me in!
  Cease your praying for a minute!
Here the darkness seems to grin,
  Holds a thousand horrors in it;
Down the stony corridor
Footsteps pace the stony floor.

Here they foot it, pacing slow,
  Monk-like, one behind another!--
Don't you hear me? Don't you know
  I'm a little nervous, Brother?
Won't you speak? Then, by your leave,
Here's a guest for Christmas Eve!

Shrive me, but I got a fright!
  Monks of centuries ago
Wander back to see to-night
  How the old place looks.--Hello!
This the kind of watch you keep!
Come to pray--and go to sleep!

Ah, this mortal flesh is weak!
  Who is saintly there's no saying.
Here are tears upon his cheek,
  And he sleeps that should be praying;--
Sleeps, and dreams, and murmurs. Nay,
I'll not wake you.--Sleep away!

Holy saints, the night is keen!
  How the nipping wind does drive
Through yon tree-tops, bare and lean,
  Till their shadow seems alive,--
Patters through the bars, and falls,
Shivering, on the floor and walls!

How yon patch of freezing sky
  Echoes back their bell-ringings!
Down in the gray city, nigh
  Severn, every steeple swings.
All the busy streets are bright.
Many folk are out to-night.

--What's that, Brother? Did you speak?--
  Christ save them that talk in sleep!
Smile they howsoever meek,
  Somewhat in their hearts they keep.
We, good souls, what shifts we make
To keep talking whilst awake!

Christ be praised, that fetched me in
  Early, yet a youngling, while
All unlearned in life and sin,
  Love and travail, grief and guile!
For your world of two-score years,
Cuthbert, all you have is tears.

Dreaming, still he hears the bells
  As he heard them years ago,
Ere he sought our quiet cells
  Iron-mouthed and wrenched with woe,
Out of what dread storms who knows--
Faithfulest of friends and foes!

Faithful was he, aye, I ween,
  Pitiful, and kind, and wise;
But in mindful moods I've seen
  Flame enough in those sunk eyes!
Praised be Christ, whose timely Hand
Plucked from out the fire this brand!

Now in dreams he's many miles
  Hence, he's back in Ireland.
Ah, how tenderly he smiles,
  Stretching a caressing hand!
Backward now his memory glides
To old happy Christmas-tides.

Now once more a loving wife
  Holds him; now he sees his boys,
Smiles at all their playful strife,
  All their childish mirth and noise;
Softly now she strokes his hair.--
Ah, their world is very fair!

--Waking, all your loss shall be
  Unforgotten evermore!
Sleep alone holds these for thee.
  Sleep then, Brother!--To restore
All your heaven that has died
Heaven and Hell may be too wide!

Sleep, and dream, and be awhile
  Happy, Cuthbert, once again!
Soon you'll wake, and cease to smile,
  And your heart will sink with pain.
You will hear the merry town,--
And a weight will press you down.

Hungry-hearted, you will see
  Only the thin shadows fall
From yon bleak-topped poplar-tree,--
  Icy fingers on the wall.
You will watch them come and go,
Telling o'er your count of woe.

--Nay, now, hear me, how I prate!
  I, a foolish monk, and old,
Maundering o'er a life and fate
  To me unknown, by you untold!
Yet I know you're like to weep
  Soon, so, Brother, this night sleep.


IMPULSE.


A hollow on the verge of May.
  Thick strewn with drift of leaves. Beneath
  The densest drift a thrusting sheath
Of sharp green striving toward the day!
  I mused--"So dull Obstruction sets
  A bar to even violets,
When these would go their nobler way!"

My feet again, some days gone by.
  The self-same spot sought idly. There,
  Obstruction foiled, the adoring air
Caressed a blossom woven of sky
  And dew, whose misty petals blue,
  With bliss of being thrilled athrough,
Dilated like a timorous eye.

Reck well this rede, my soul! The good
  The blossom craved was near, tho' hid.
  Fret not that thou must doubt, but rid
Thy sky-path of obstructions strewed
  By winds of folly. Then, do thou
  The Godward impulse room allow
To reach its perfect air and food!


THE ISLES--AN ODE.