The wonderous story heard. Some hard of faith
  Its truth, its probability deny.
  To true divinities such power some grant;
  And power to compass more;--to Bacchus none
  Such potence own. The sisters, silent now,
  Alcithoe beg to speak: she shooting swift
  Her shuttle through th' extended threads, exclaims;--
  "Of Daphnis' love, so known, on Ida's hill,
  "His flocks who tended, whom his angry nymph,
  "To stone transform'd (such fury fires the breast
  "Of those who desperate love!) I shall not tell:
  "Nor yet of Scython, of ambiguous form,
  "Now male, now female; nature's wonted laws
  "Inconstant proving: thee, O Celmis! too
  "I pass; once faithful nurse to infant Jove,
  "Now chang'd to adamant: Curetes! sprung
  "From showery floods: Crocus, and Smilax, both
  "To blooming flowers transform'd: unnotic'd these,
  "My tale from novelty itself shall please:
  "How Salmacis so infamous became,
  "Then list; whose potent waves, the luckless limbs
  "Enerve, of those they bathe. Conceal'd the cause;
  "Yet far and wide the fountain's power is known.

    "Deep in the sheltering caves of Ida's hill,
  "The Naiaed nymphs a beauteous infant nurs'd;
  "Whom Cyprus' goddess unto Hermes bore.
  "His father's beauty, and his mother's, shone
  "In every feature; in his name conjoin'd
  "He bore their appellations. When matur'd
  "By fifteen summers, from paternal hills
  "Straying, he wander'd from his nursing Ide:
  "In lands unknown he joy'd, and joy'd to see
  "Strange rivers,--pleasure lessening every toil.
  "Through Lycia's towns he stray'd; and further still,
  "To bordering Caria, where a pool he spy'd,
  "Whose lowest depth a gleam transparent shew'd:
  "No marshy canes,--no filthy barren weeds,
  "Nor pointed bulrush near the margin grew:
  "Full on the eye the water shone, yet round
  "Its brink a border smil'd of verdant turf,
  "And plants forever green. Here dwelt a nymph,
  "But one who never join'd the active chace;
  "The bow who never bent; who never strove
  "To conquer in the race: of all the nymphs,
  "Alone no comrade of Diana fleet.
  "Oft, as 'tis said, her sister-nymphs exclaim'd;--
  "Come, Salmacis, thy painted quiver take;
  "Or take thy javelin;--with soft pleasures mix
  "Laborious sporting: but nor javelin she,
  "Nor painted quiver took;--with sportive toil,
  "Soft pleasures mingling: sole intent to bathe,
  "Her beauteous limbs amidst her own clear waves;
  "And through her flowing tresses oft to draw
  "The boxen comb, while o'er the fountain bent,
  "She studies all her graces: now, her form
  "Clad in a robe transparent, stretcht she lies,
  "Or on the yielding leaves, or bending grass;
  "Now flowers she culls;--and so it chanc'd to fall,
  "Flowers she was gathering, when she first beheld
  "The charming youth; no sooner seen than lov'd.
  "Not forth she rush'd at first, though strongly urg'd,
  "Forward to spring, but all adjusted fair:
  "Closely survey'd her robe; her features form'd;
  "And every part in beauteous shape compos'd.
  "Then thus address'd him;--O, most godlike youth!
  "And if a god, the lovely Cupid sure!
  "But if of mortal mould, blest is thy sire!
  "Blest is thy brother! and thy sister blest!--
  "If sister hast thou;--and the fostering breast
  "Which fed thy infant growth: but far 'bove all
  "In rapturous bliss, is she who calls thee spouse;
  "Should nymph exist thou deem'st that bliss deserves!
  "If wedded, grant a stol'n embrace to me;
  "If not, let me thy nuptial couch ascend.
  "The Naiaed ceas'd: a bashful glow suffus'd
  "His face, for nought of love to him was known:
  "Yet blushing seem'd he lovely: thus warm glows
  "The apple, to the ripening sun expos'd;
  "Or teinted ivory; or the redden'd moon,
  "Whom brazen cymbals clash to help in vain.
  "To her, warm praying for at least a kiss,
  "A chaste, a sister's kiss,--her arms firm claspt
  "Around his ivory neck;--desist! he cries,
  "Desist! or sole to thee the place I'll leave.
  "His flight she dreaded, and reply'd,--I go,
  "Dear youth, and freely yield the spot to thee.
  "And seems indeed, her steps from him to turn;
  "But still in sight she kept him; lurking close
  "Shelter'd by shadowy shrubs, on bended knees.
  "Of spy unconscious, he in boyish play
  "Frisks sportive here and there; dips first his feet,
  "Then ancles deeper in the wantoning waves;
  "Pleas'd with the temper of the lucid pool:
  "Till hasty stript from off his tender limbs
  "His garments soft he flings. More deeply struck
  "Stood Salmacis; more fiercely flam'd her love,
  "His naked beauty seen. Her gloating eyes
  "Sparkled no less than seem bright Phoebus' rays,
  "When shining splendid, midst a cloudless sky,
  "A mirror's face reflecting gives them back.
  "Delay ill brooking, hardly she contains
  "Her swelling joy; frantic for his embrace,
  "She pants, and hard from rushing forth refrains.
  "His sides he claps, and agile in the steam
  "Quick plunges, moving with alternate arms.
  "Bright through the waves he shines; thus white appears
  "The sculptur'd ivory, or the lily fair,
  "Seen through a crystal veil. The Naiaed cries;--
  "Lo! here I come;--he's mine,--the youth's my own!
  "And instant far was every garment flung.
  "Midst of the waves she leaps;--the struggling youth
  "Clasps close; and on his cold reluctant lips,
  "Forces her kisses; down she girds his arms;
  "And close to hers hugs his unwilling breast:
  "Final, around the youth who arduous strives
  "In opposition, and escape essays,
  "Her limbs she twines: so twines a serpent huge,
  "Seiz'd by the bird of Jove, and borne on high,
  "Twisting his head, the feet close-bracing holds;
  "The wide-spread wings entangled with his tail:
  "So twines the ivy round the lengthen'd bough:
  "So numerous Polypus his foe confines,
  "Seiz'd in the deep, with claws on every side
  "Firm graspt. But Hermes' son persisting still,
  "The Naiaed's wish denies; she presses close,
  "And as she cleaves, their every limb close join'd
  "Exclaims;--ungallant boy! but strive thy most,
  "Thou shalt not fly me. Grant me, O ye gods!
  "No time may ever sunder him from me,
  "Or me from him.--Her prayer was granted straight;--
  "For now, commingling, both their bodies join'd;
  "And both their faces melted into one.
  "So, when in growth we boughs ingrafted see,
  "The bark inclosing both at once, they sprout.
  "Thus were their limbs, in strong embrace comprest,
  "Wrapp'd close; no longer two in form, yet two
  "In feature; nor a nymph-like face remain'd,
  "Nor yet a boy's: it both and neither seem'd.

    "When Hermes' son beheld the liquid stream,
  "Where masculine he plung'd, the power possess
  "To enervate his body, and his limbs
  "Effeminately soften; high he rais'd
  "His arms, and pray'd (but not with manly voice)
  "O, sire! O, mother dear! indulge your son,
  "Your double appellation bearing, this
  "Sole-urg'd petition. Whoso in these waves
  "In strong virility, like me, shall plunge,
  "Hence let him go, like me enervate made;
  "Spoilt by the stream his strength. Each parent god
  "Nodding, confirm'd their alter'd son's request;
  "And ting'd the fountain with the changing power."

    She ceas'd: the nymphs Minyeian still persist
  Their toil to urge, despising still the god;
  His festival prophaning. Sudden heard,
  The rattling sounds of unseen timbrels burst
  Full on their ears! the pipe; the crooked horn;
  And brazen cymbals loudly clash; perfumes
  Of myrrh and saffron blended smell:--but more,
  And what belief surpasses, straight their looms
  Virid to sprout begin; the pendent threads
  Branch into shoots like ivy: part becomes
  The vine: what now were threads, curl'd tendrils seem:
  Shot from the folded web, the branches climb;
  And the bright red in purpling grapes appears.

    Now was the sun declining, and approach'd
  The twilight season, when nor day it seems,
  Nor night confirm'd; but a gray mixture forms;
  Of each an indetermin'd compound. Deep
  The roof appear'd to shade; the oily lamps,
  Ardent to glow; the torches bright to burn,
  With reddening flames; while round them seem'd to howl,
  Figures of beast ferocious. Fill'd with smoke
  The room,--th' affrighted maidens seek to hide;
  And each in different corners tries to shun
  The fires and flaming light. But while they seek
  A lurking shelter, o'er their shorten'd limbs
  A webby membrane spreading, binds their arms
  In waving wings. The gloom conceal'd the mode,
  Of transformation from their former shape.
  Light plumage bears them not aloft,--yet rais'd
  On wings transparent, through the air they skim,
  To speak they strive, but utter forth a sound
  Feeble and weak; then, screeching shrill, they plain:
  Men's dwellings they frequent,--nor try the woods;
  And, cheerful day avoiding, skim by night;
  Their name from that untimely hour deriv'd.

    Now were the deeds of heaven-born Bacchus fam'd
  Through every part of Thebes; and all around,
  His aunt proud boasts the new-made god's great power:
  She, of the sisters all, from sorrow spar'd,
  Save what to view her sisters' sorrowing gave.
  Juno beheld her lofty thus, her breast
  Elate to view her sons; her nuptial fruits
  With Athamas; and her great foster child,
  The mighty Bacchus. More the furious queen
  Bore not, but thus exclaim'd;--"Has the whore's son
  "Power to transform the Tyrrhene crew, and plunge
  "Them headlong in the deep? Can he impel
  "The mother's hands to seize her bleeding son
  "And tear his entrails? Dares he then to clothe
  "The Minyeid sisters with un'custom'd wings?
  "And is Saturnia's utmost power confin'd
  "Wrongs unreveng'd to weep? Suffices such
  "For me? Is this a goddess' utmost might?
  "But he instructs me;--wisdom may be taught
  "Ev'n by a foe. The wretched Pentheus' fate,
  "Shews all-sufficient, what may madness do.
  "Why should not Ino, stung with frantic rage,
  "The well-known track her sisters trode pursue?"

    A path declivitous, with baleful yew
  Dark shaded, leads, a dreary silent road,
  Down to th' infernal regions: sluggish Styx
  Dank mists exhales: here travel new-made ghosts,
  With rites funereal blest: pale winter's gloom
  Wide rules the squalid place: the stranger shades
  Wander, unknowing which the path to tread,
  Straight to the infernal city, where is held
  Black Pluto's savage court. A thousand gates,
  Wide ope, surround the town on every side.
  As boundless ocean every stream receives,
  From earth pour'd numerous,--so each wandering soul
  Flocks to this city; whose capacious bounds
  Full space for all affords; nor ever feels
  Th' increasing crowd: of flesh depriv'd, and bones,
  The bloodless shadows wander. Some frequent
  The forum; some th' infernal monarch's court;
  Some various arts employ, resembling much
  Their former daily actions; numbers groan
  In punishments severe. Here Juno came,
  Braving the region's horrors, from her throne
  Celestial,--so did ire and hatred goad
  Her bosom with their stings! Sacred she press'd
  The groaning threshold,--instant as she stepp'd,
  Fierce Cerberus his triple head uprais'd,
  And howl'd with triple throat. The goddess calls
  The night-born sisters, fierce, implacable:
  Before the close-barr'd adamantine gates
  They sit; their tresses twisting round with snakes.
  The queen through clouds of midnight gloom they see,
  And instant rise. Here dwell the suffering damn'd.
  Here Tityus, stretcht o'er nine wide acres, yields
  His entrails to be torn. Thou, Tantalus,
  Art seen, the stream forbid to taste;--the fruit
  Thy lips o'erhanging, flies! Thou, Sisyphus,
  Thy stone pursuing downwards; or its weight
  Straining aloft, with oft exerted power!
  Ixion whirling, too; with swift pursuit,
  Thou follow'st, and art follow'd! Belides!
  Your husband-cousins who in death dar'd steep,
  And ceaseless draw the unavailing streams!
  All Juno view'd with unrelenting brow;
  But, view'd Ixion sterner far than all:
  And when on Sisyphus again she cast
  Her eyes, behind Ixion, angry cry'd;--
  "What justice this?--of all the brethren he
  "Sharp torture suffers! Shall proud Athamas
  "A regal dwelling boast,--whose scornful taunts,
  "And scornful spouse have still my power contemn'd?"
  Then straight her hatred's cause disclos'd. They see
  Her journey's object, and revenge's aim.
  This her desire, that Cadmus' regal house
  Perish'd should sink; and Athamas, fierce urg'd
  By madness should some dreadful vengeance claim.
  Commands, solicitations, prayers,--at once
  The goddesses besiege: and as she speaks,
  Angrily mov'd, Tisiphone replies,--
  (Shaking her hoary locks,--the twining snakes
  Back from her mouth repelling) hasty thus;--
  "A tedious tale we need not; what thou wilt
  "Believe accomplish'd. Fly this hateful gloom;--
  "Up to the wholesome breeze of heaven repair."
  Glad, Juno left the spot;--when near approach'd
  Heaven's entrance, there Thaumantian Iris met,
  And with her sprinklings purify'd the queen.

    Quick now Tisiphone, the savage fiend,
  Seizes her torch, with gory droppings wet;
  Flings round her limbs a garment, deeply dy'd
  With streaming blood; a twisting snake supplies
  A girdle:--thus array'd she sallies forth,
  Follow'd by loud lament, by terror, fear,
  And quivering-featur'd madness. When she press'd
  The threshold, fame declares the pillars shook;
  The maple doors, with terror mov'd, grew pale:
  Back shrunk the sun! Ino, with trembling dread
  Beheld these wonders;--Athamas beheld;
  And both prepar'd the haunted place to fly.
  Escape the fury hinders: fierce she stands,
  Blocking the entrance: wide her arms she spreads,
  With viperous twistings bound; and threatening shakes
  Her tresses: loud the serpents noise, disturb'd;
  Sprawl o'er her shoulders some; some, lower fall'n,
  Twine hissing round her breasts, with brandish'd tongue,
  Black poison vomiting. With furious gripe,
  Two from her locks she tore;--her deadly hand
  Hurl'd them straight on; the breasts of Athamas,
  And Ino, hungry, with their fangs they seiz'd;
  Fierce pains infixing, but external wounds
  Their limbs betray'd not: mental was the blow,
  So direly struck. Venoms most mortal, too,
  From Tartarus she bore:--the foam high-churn'd
  From jaws of Cerberus; the poisonous juice
  Of Hydra; urgent wish for roaming wide;
  Oblivion mental-blinded; wicked deeds;
  Weeping; and furious fierceness, slaughter fond.
  On these commingled, fresh-drawn gore she pour'd,
  And warm'd them bubbling in a brazen vase;
  Stirr'd by a sprouting hemlock. Trembling, they
  Shudder, while in their breasts the poison fierce
  She pours: both bosoms feel it deep instill'd;--
  Their inmost vitals feel it. Then her torch,
  Whirl'd flaming round and round, in triumph glares,
  Fires from the circling gathering. Powerful thus;
  Victorious in her aims, and deeds desir'd,
  To mighty Pluto's shadowy realm she speeds;
  And from her loins untwists the girding snakes.

    Mad bounded Athamas amid the hall,
  "Ho! friends," exclaiming;--"here spread wide your toils,
  "Here, in this thicket, where ev'n now I saw
  "With young twin cubs, a lioness!"--and mad,
  Pursu'd his consort for a savage beast;
  Snatching Learchus, who with playful smile,
  Outstretch'd his infant hands to meet him. Torne
  Rough from his mother's bosom, round in air
  And round, sling-like he whirl'd; then savage dash'd
  Upon a rugged rock the tender bones.

    Loud howls the frantic mother; frantic made
  By grief, or by the scatter'd poison's power:
  And, raving, with dishevell'd tresses spread
  Wide o'er her shoulders, flies. Her naked arms
  Young Melicertes bear; madly she shrieks;--
  "Evoe, Bacchus!"--Loud at Bacchus' name
  Revengeful Juno laugh'd, and said;--"Such boon
  "Thy foster-son upon his nurse confers!"
  A lofty rock the foaming waves o'erhangs,
  Whose dashing force deep in its base have scoop'd
  A cavern, safely sheltering from the showers:
  The adamantine summit high extends,
  And o'er the wide main stretches. Swift this height,
  Active and strong with madness, Ino gain'd
  And fearless, with the infant in her arms,
  Sprung from the cliff, and sunk beneath the waves.
  White foam'd the surge around her!

                                     Venus, griev'd,
  Such sufferings, undeserv'd, her race should bear,
  Thus with bland coaxings Ocean's god address'd:
  "Lord of the azure deep, whose high command
  "Sways next to heaven's,--a vast demand I ask;--
  "But pity my poor offspring, whom thou see'st
  "Plung'd in th' Ionian billows;--with their forms
  "Thy deities increase. Some influence sure,
  "In ocean I should hold, from thence produc'd;
  "Sprung from the froth that on the deep main swims:
  "Whence Grecian poets name me." Neptune nods,
  Assenting to her prayer; and from their limbs
  Abstracts the mortal portion; on their forms
  Breathes majesty; and with their alter'd mien,
  Their names he changes too; Palaemon he,
  Now stil'd, his mother as Leucothoe known.

    The princess' anxious comrades trac'd her steps
  With care; the last with arduous search they found,
  Just on the giddy brink, nor dubious deem'd
  Her fate a moment. Cadmus' house they wail;
  With beating hands their tresses tear, and robes;
  And highly Juno blame, as one unjust:
  Too ireful for the hapless sister's fault.
  Juno, fierce flaming, these reproaches stung;--
  "Ye too," she cry'd, "shall monuments become
  "Of the fierce ire ye blame!" Deeds words pursu'd.
  The nymph who most her hapless queen held dear,
  Exclaim'd;--"deep in the roaring main I'll plunge,
  "To join her fate,"--and sprung to take the leap;
  But motionless she stood,--fixt to the rock!
  Her wounding blows, upon her bosom one
  Strives to renew, as wont; her striving arms
  Stiffen'd to stone she sees. This tow'rd the waves
  Her hands extends; a rocky mass she stands,
  In the same waves far stretching. Lifted high,
  The locks to rend, the fingers might be seen
  Stiffen'd, and rigid with the hair become.
  In posture whatsoever caught, each nymph,
  In that same posture stands. Thus part are chang'd:
  The rest, to birds transform'd, by wings upborne,
  Skim o'er the surface of the neighbouring sea.

    Cadmus, the wond'rous change which rais'd his child,
  And his young grandson to the rank of gods,
  Yet knew not. By his load of grief o'erwhelm'd;
  A chain of woes; and supernatural scenes,
  So numerous which he sees; the founder quits
  His town, suspicious that the city's fate,
  And not his own, misfortune on him showers.
  Borne o'er the main, his lengthen'd wanderings end,
  When with his exil'd consort, safe he gains
  Illyria's shores. Opprest with grief and age,
  The primal fortunes of their house, with care
  They scan, and in their converse all their woes
  Again recounting, Cadmus thus exclaims;--
  "Was then that serpent, by my javelin pierc'd,
  "When driven from Tyre; whose numerous teeth I sow'd,
  "Sacred to some divinity?--If he
  "Thus, vengeful for the deed, his anger pours,
  "May I a serpent stretcht at length become."
  He said,--and serpent-like extended lies!
  Scales he perceives, upon his harden'd skin;
  And sees green spots on his black body form;
  Prone on his breast he falls; together twin'd,
  His legs commingling stretch, and gradual end
  Lessen'd in rounded point; his arms remain
  Still, and those arms remaining he extends;
  While down his face yet human tears flow fast.
  "O, hapless wife! approach," he cries, "approach,
  "And touch me now, while ought of me remains;
  "Receive my hand, while yet a hand I bear;
  "Ere to a serpent wholly turns my form."--
  More he prepar'd to utter, but his tongue,
  Cleft sudden, to his wishes words refus'd:
  And often when his sorrows sad he try'd
  To wail anew, he hiss'd!--that sound alone,
  Nature permitted. While her naked breast
  With blows resounded, loud his wife exclaim'd;--
  "Stay,--O, my Cadmus! hapless man, shake off
  "This monstrous figure! Cadmus what is this?
  "Where are thy feet,--and where thy arms and hands?
  "Where are thy features,--thy complexion? Where,
  "Whilst I bewail, art thou? Celestial powers!
  "Why not this transformation work on me?"
  She ended; he advancing, lick'd her face,
  And creep'd, as custom'd, to her bosom dear,
  And round her wonted neck embracing twin'd.
  Now draw their servants nigh, and as they come
  With terror start. The crested serpents play,
  Smooth on their necks,--now two; and cordial slide,
  In spires conjoin'd; then in the darksome shades
  Th' adjoining woods afford them, close they hide.
  Mankind they fly not, nor deep wounds inflict;
  Harmless, their pristine form is ne'er forgot.

    Still, though in alter'd shapes, the pair rejoic'd
  Their grandson's fame to hear; whom vanquish'd Ind'
  Low bending worshipp'd; Greece adoring prais'd,
  In lofty temples. Sole Acrisius stands,
  Like Bacchus sprung from Jove's celestial seed,
  Opposing; and from Argos' gates propels
  The god;--his birth deny'd, against him arms.
  Nor Perseus would he own from heaven deriv'd;
  Conceiv'd by Danae, from a golden shower:
  Yet soon,--so mighty is the force of truth,--
  Acrisius grieves he e'er so rashly brav'd
  The god; his grandson driving from his court,
  Disown'd. Now one in heaven is glorious plac'd;
  The other, laden with the well-known spoil
  Of the fierce snaky monster, cleaves the air,
  On sounding pinions. High the victor sails
  O'er Lybia's desarts, and the gory drops
  Fall from the gorgon's head; the Ground receives
  The blood, and warms it into writhing snakes.
  Hence does the country with the pest still swarm.

    Thence borne by adverse winds, he sweeps along,
  Through boundless ether driven; now here, now there,
  As watery clouds are swept. From lofty skies,
  The earth far distant viewing, round the globe
  He skimm'd: three times he saw the Arctic pole
  And thrice the warmer Crab. Oft to the west,
  Th' adventurous youth was borne; back to the east,
  As often. Now the day in darkness sank,
  When he, nocturnal flight mistrusting, lights
  In Atlas' kingdom 'neath th' Hesperian sky;
  A short repose requests, till Phosphor' bright,
  Should call Aurora forth;--she ushering in
  The chariot of the day. Japetus' son
  All men in huge corporeal bulk surpass'd.
  He to th' extremest confines of the land,
  And o'er the ocean sway'd, whose waves receive
  Apollo's panting steeds, and weary'd car.
  A thousand bleating flocks; a thousand herds,
  Stray'd through the royal pastures. Neighbouring lords
  Not near him plough'd their lands. Trees grew, whose leaves
  With splendor glittering, threw a golden shade
  O'er golden branches, and o'er fruit of gold.
  Thus Perseus;--"Friendly host, if glorious birth
  "Thee pleases, here one born of Jove behold.
  "If deeds of merit more attraction move,
  "Mine thy applause may claim. At present grant
  "An hospitable shelter here, and rest."
  But Atlas, fearing these oraculous words,--
  (Long since by Themis on Parnassus given)
  "The time, O king! will come, thy golden tree
  "Shall lose its fruit. The glory of the spoil
  "A son of Jove shall boast:" and dreading sore;
  Around his orchards massy walls he rears;
  A dragon huge and fierce the guard maintains.
  "Whatever strangers to his realm approach,
  Far thence he drives; and thus to Perseus too;--
  "Haste, quickly haste from hence, lest soon I prove
  "Thy glorious deeds but feign'd,--feign'd as thy birth."
  Then force to threats he added,--strove to thrust
  The hero forth; who struggling, efforts urg'd
  Resisting, while he begg'd with softening words.
  Proving in strength inferior (who in strength
  Could vie with Atlas?) "Since my fame," he cries,
  "Such small desert obtains, a gift accept."
  And, back his face averting, holds display'd,
  On his left side Medusa's ghastly head.
  A mountain now the mighty Atlas stands!
  His hair and beard as lofty forests wave;
  His arms and hands high hilly summits rear;
  O'er-topp'd above, by what was once his head:
  His bones are rocks; then, so the gods decree,
  Enlarg'd to size immense in every part,
  The weight of heaven, and all the stars he bears.

    His blustering vassals AEolus had pent,
  In ever-during prisons. Phosphor' bright,
  Most splendid 'midst the starry host of heaven;
  Admonitor of labor, now was risen;
  When Perseus bound again on either foot,
  His winnowing wings; girt on his crooked sword;
  And cleft the air, on waving pinions borne.
  O'er numerous nations, far beneath him spread,
  He sail'd, till Ethiopia's realms he saw;
  Where Cepheus rul'd. There Ammon, power unjust,
  Andromeda had sentenc'd,--guiltless maid,
  To what her mother's boastful tongue deserv'd.
  Her soon as Perseus spy'd, fast by the arms
  Chain'd to the rugged rock;--where but her locks
  Wav'd lightly to the breeze; and but her eyes
  Trickled a tepid stream; she might be deem'd
  A sculptur'd marble: him the unknown sight
  Astonish'd, dazzled, and enflam'd with love.
  His senses in the beauteous view sole wrapt,
  Scarce he remembers on his wings to wave:--
  Alights, exclaiming;--"O, whom chains like these
  "Should never bind, nor other chains than such,
  "As lovers intertwist! declare thy name;
  "Thy country tell; and why thou bear'st those bonds."
  Silent awhile the virgin stood; abash'd,
  Converse with man to hold: her blushing face,
  Her hands, if free, had long before conceal'd.
  Quick starting tears, 'twas all she could, her eyes
  Veil'd swimming: then her name and country told;
  And all the conscious pride her mother's charms
  Inspir'd, in full acknowledg'd; lest for crimes
  Her own, just suffering, Perseus might conceive.
  All yet untold, when loud the billows roar'd;
  Upheav'd the monster's bulk: far 'bove the waves
  He stood uprear'd, and then right onward plung'd;
  His ample bosom covering half the main.

    Loud shrieks the virgin! Sad her father comes;
  And sad her raving mother, wretched both,
  The mother most deserv'dly. Help in vain
  From them she seeks; with tears, and bosoms torn,
  Her fetter'd limbs they clasp, they can no more.
  Then Perseus thus;--"for tears and loud laments,
  "Long may the time be: but effective aid
  "To give, the time is short. Suppose the nymph
  "I ask;--I, Perseus! sprung from mighty Jove,
  "By her whose prison in a golden shower
  "Fecundative, he enter'd. Perseus, who
  "The Gorgon snaky-hair'd o'ercame; who bold
  "On waving pinions winnows through the air.
  "Him for a son in preference should ye chuse,
  "Arduous he'll strive to these high claims to add,
  "If heaven permits, some merits more his own.
  "Agree she's mine, if by my arm preserv'd."
  The parents promise;--(who in such a case
  Would waver) beg his help; and promise, more,
  That all their kingdom shall her dower become.
  Lo! as a vessel's sharpen'd prow quick cleaves
  The waves, by strenuous sweating arms impell'd,
  The monster comes! his mighty bosom wide
  The waters sideway breasting; distant now,
  Not more than what the Balearic sling
  Could with the bullet gain, when high in air,
  The sod repelling, upward springs the youth.
  Soon as the main reflected Perseus' form,
  The ocean-savage rag'd: as Jove's swift bird
  When in the open fields a snake he spies
  Basking, his livid back to Phoebus' rays
  Expos'd, behind attacks him; plunges deep,
  His hungry talons in his scaly neck,
  To curb the twisting of his sanguine teeth.
  With rapid flight, thus Perseus shooting cleaves
  The empty air; lights on the monster's back;
  Burying his weapon to the crooked hilt,
  Full in the shoulder of the raging beast.
  Mad with the deepen'd wound, now rears aloft
  The savage high in air; now plunges low,
  Beneath the waters; now he furious turns,
  As turns the boar ferocious, when the crowd
  Of barking dogs beset him fiercely round.
  With rapid waft the venturous hero shuns
  His greedy jaws: now on his back, thick-arm'd
  With shells, he strikes where opening space he sees;
  Now on his sides; now where his tapering tail
  In fish-like form is finish'd, bites the steel.
  High spouts the wounded monster from his mouth;
  The waves with gore deep purpling: drench'd, the wings
  Droop nagging; and no longer Perseus dares
  To trust their dripping aid. A rock he spies
  Whose summit o'er the peaceful waters rose,
  But deep was hid when tempests mov'd the main.
  Supported here, his left hand firmly grasps
  The craggy edge; while through his sides, and through,
  The dying savage feels the weapon drove.

    Loud shouts and plaudits fill the shore, the noise
  Resounding echoes to the heavenly thrones.
  Cassiope and Cepheus joyful greet
  Their son, and grateful own him chief support,
  And saviour. From her rugged fetters freed,
  The virgin walks; the cause, the great reward
  Of all his toil. His victor hands he laves
  In the pure stream: then with soft leaves defends
  A spot, to rest the serpent-bearing head,
  Lest the bare sand should harm it. Twigs marine
  He likewise strews, and rests Medusa there.
  The fresh green twigs as though with life endow'd,
  Felt the dire Gorgon's power; their spongy pith
  Hard to the touch became, the stiffness spread
  Through every twig and leaf. The Nereid nymphs
  More branches bring, and try the wonderous change
  On all, and joy to see the change succeed:
  Spreading the transformation from the seeds,
  With them throughout the waves. This nature still
  Retains the coral: hardness still assumes
  From contact with the air; beneath the waves
  A bending twig; an harden'd stone above.

    Three turfy altars to three heavenly gods
  He builds: to Hermes sacred stands the left;
  The right to warlike Pallas; in the midst
  The mighty Jove's is rear'd: (To Pallas bleeds
  An heifer: to the plume-heel'd god a calf:
  Almighty Jove accepts a lordly bull)
  Then claims Andromeda, the rich reward,
  without a dower, of all his valorous toil.

    Now Love and Hymen wave their torches high,
  Precursive of their joys: each hearth is heap'd
  With odorous incense: every roof is hung
  With flowery garlands: pipes, and harps, and lyres,
  And songs which indicate their festive souls,
  Resound aloud. Each portal open thrown,
  Display'd appears the golden palace wide.
  By every lord of Cepheus' court, array'd
  In splendid pomp, the nuptial feast is grac'd.
  The banquet ended, while the generous gift
  Of Bacchus circles; and each soul dilates,
  Perseus, the modes and customs of the land
  Curious enquires. Lyncides full relates
  The habits, laws, and manners of the clime.
  His information ended;--"now,"--he cry'd,--
  "Relate, O Perseus! boldest of mankind,--
  "By what fierce courage, and what skilful arts,"
  "The snaky locks in thy possession came."
  Then Perseus tells, how lies a lonely vale
  Beneath cold Atlas; every side strong fenc'd
  By lofty hills, whose only pass is held,
  By Phorcus' twin-born daughters. Mutual they
  One eye possess'd, in turns by either us'd.
  His hand deceiving seiz'd it, as it pass'd
  'Twixt them alternate; dexterous was the wile.
  Through devious paths, and deep-sunk ways he went;
  And craggy woods, dark-frowning, till he reach'd
  The Gorgon's dwelling: passing then the fields,
  And beaten roads, there forms of men he saw,
  And shapes of savage beasts; but all to stone
  By dire Medusa's petrifying face
  Transform'd. He then the horrid countenance mark'd,
  Bright from the brazen targe his left arm bore,
  Reflected. While deep slumber safe weigh'd down,
  The Gorgon and her serpents, he divorc'd
  Her shoulders from her head. He adds how sprung,
  Chrysaoer, and wing'd Pegasus the swift,
  From the prolific Gorgon's streaming gore.
  Relates the perils of his lengthen'd flight;
  What seas, what kingdoms from the lofty sky,
  Beneath him he had view'd; what sparkling stars
  His waving wings had brush'd;--thus ceas'd his tale:
  All more desiring. Then uprose a peer,--
  And why Medusa, of the sisters sole
  The serpent-twisted tresses wore, enquir'd.
  The youth:--"The story that you ask, full well
  "Attention claims;--I what you seek recite.
  "For matchless beauty fam'd, with envying hope
  "Her, crowds of suitors follow'd: nought surpass'd
  "'Mongst all her beauties, her bright lovely hair:
  "Those who had seen her thus, have this averr'd.
  "But in Minerva's temple Ocean's god
  "The maid defil'd. The virgin goddess shock'd,
  "Her eyes averted, and her forehead chaste
  "Veil'd with the AEgis. Then with vengeful power
  "Chang'd the Gorgonian locks to writhing snakes.
  "The snakes, thus form'd, fixt on her shield she bears;
  "The horrid sight her trembling foes appals."


*The Fifth Book.*


    Attack of Phineus and his friends on Perseus. Defeat of the
    former, and their change to statues. Atchievements of Perseus in
    Argos, and Seriphus. Minerva's visit to the Muses. Fate of
    Pyreneus. Song of the Pierides. Song of the Muses. Rape of
    Proserpine. Change of Cyane, to a fountain. Search of Ceres.
    Transformation of a boy to an eft. Of Ascalaphus to an owl.
    Change of the companions of Proserpine to Sirens. Story of
    Arethusa. Journey of Triptolemus. Transformation of Lyncus to a
    lynx. The Pierides transformed to magpies.


THE *Fifth Book* OF THE METAMORPHOSES OF OVID.


    These wonders, while the son of Danae tells,
  Circled around by Cepheus' noble troop;
  Sudden th' imperial hall with tumults loud
  Resounds. Not clamor such as oft we hear,
  The bridal feasts, in songs of joy attend:
  But what stern war announces. Much the change,
  (The peaceful feast to instant riot turn'd)
  Seem'd like the placid main, when the fierce rage
  Of sudden tempests lash its surges high.

    First Phineus stepp'd, the leader of the crowd;
  Soul of the riot; and his ashen spear,
  Arm'd with a brazen point, he brandish'd high;--
  "Lo, here!" he shouts, "lo, here I vengeful come
  "On him who claims my spouse! Not thy swift wings;
  "Nor cheating Jove, chang'd to a golden shower,
  "Shall save thee from my arm,"--and pois'd to fling,
  The dart was held, but Cepheus loud exclaim'd,--
  "Brother! what dost thou? what dire madness sways
  "To wicked acts thy soul? Is this the meed
  "His gallant deeds deserve? Is this the dower,
  "We for the valued life he sav'd bestow?
  "List but to truth,--not Perseus of thy wife
  "Bereft thee, but the angry Nereid nymphs,--
  "The horned Ammon,--and the monster huge!
  "Prepar'd to glut his hunger with my child.
  "Then was thy spouse snatch'd from thee, when remain'd
  "Of help no hope; to all she lost appear'd.
  "Thy savage heart perhaps had ev'n rejoic'd
  "To see her perish, that our greater grief
  "Might lighten part of thine. Couldst thou her see
  "Fast chain'd before thee? uncle! spouse betroth'd!
  "And yet no aid afford! And storm'st thou thus?
  "She to another now her safety owes;
  "And would'st thou snatch the prize? So high if seems
  "To thee her precious value, thy bold arm
  "Should on the rock where chain'd she lay, have sought
  "And have deserv'd her. Now permit that he
  "Who sought her there; through whom my failing age
  "Is not now childless, grant that he enjoy
  "Peaceful, what through his merits he no less,
  "Than our firm compact claims: not him to thee,
  "But him to certain loss I preference gave."

    Nought Phineus answer'd, but his furious eyes
  Now Perseus, now the king alternate view;
  Doubtful or this to pierce, or that: his pause
  Was short; his powerful arm, by fury nerv'd,
  At Perseus hurl'd the quivering spear,--in vain!
  Fixt in the couch it stood. Quick bounded up
  Th' indignant youth, and deep in Phineus' breast,
  Had plung'd the point returning, but he shrunk
  Behind an altar; which, O shame! preserv'd
  The impious villain. Yet not harmless sped
  The weapon;--full in Rhaetus' front it stuck;
  Who lifeless dropp'd; broke in the bone the steel;
  He spurn'd, and sprinkled all the feast with gore.
  Then rag'd with ire ungovern'd all the crowd,
  And hurl'd in showers their weapons; some fierce cry'd,
  Cepheus, no less than Perseus, death deserv'd.
  But Cepheus left the hall, adjuring loud,
  The hospitable gods; justice; and faith;
  That he was guiltless of the sanguine fray.

    Minerva comes; her sheltering AEgis shields
  Her brother's body; in his breast she breathes
  Redoubled valor. Atys, Indian bred,
  Whom fair Limnate, Ganges' daughter, bore,
  'Tis told, amid the waters' crystal caves,
  Scarce sixteen years had seen. His beauteous form,
  In gorgeous dress more beauteous still appear'd.
  A purple garment fring'd around with gold,
  Enwrapp'd him; round his neck were golden beads;
  And pins and combs of gold his lovely locks,
  With myrrh sweet-smelling, held. Well skill'd the youth
  To hurl the javelin to its distant mark;
  But more to bend the bow. Him Perseus smote,
  The flexile bow just bending, with a brand
  Snatch'd flaming from the altar; crush'd, his face
  A horrid mass of fractur'd bones appears.
  His beauteous features Lycabas beheld
  In blood convuls'd: his dearest comrade he,
  And one who proud his ardent love display'd.
  Griev'd to behold the last expiring breath,
  Of Atys parting from the furious wound,
  He seiz'd the bow the youth had bent, and cry'd;--
  "The battle try with me!--not long thy boast
  "Of conquest o'er a boy; a conquest more
  "By hate than fame attended." Railing thus,
  The piercing weapon darted from the string.

    Now Phineus, fearful hand to hand to meet
  The foe, his javelin hurl'd, the point ill-aim'd
  On Idas glanc'd, who vainly kept aloof
  With neutral weapon. Phineus, stern he view'd,
  "With threatening frown, exclaiming;--"though no share
  "In this mad broil I took, now, Phineus, feel
  "The power of him whom thou hast forc'd a foe;
  "And take reciprocally wound for wound."
  Then from his side the weapon tore to hurl;
  But fast the life-stream gush'd, he instant fell.
  Here, by the sword of Clymenus was slain,
  Odites, noblest lord in Cepheus' court;
  Protenor fell by Hypseus; Hypseus sunk
  Beneath Lyncides' arm. Amid the throng
  Was old Emathion too, friend to the just,
  And fearer of the gods; though ancient years
  Forbade his wielding arms, what aid his words
  Could give, he spar'd not: curs'd the impious war,
  In loud upbraidings. As with trembling arms,
  He grasp'd the altar, Chromis' gory sword
  His neck divided; on the altar dropp'd
  The head; and there the trembling, dying tongue,
  Faint imprecations utter'd; 'midst the flames
  He breath'd his spirit forth. By Phineus' hand,
  Broteas and Ammon fell: the brother-twins
  Unconquer'd in the fight, the caestus shower'd;
  Could but the caestus make the falchion yield:
  But Perseus felt it not,--its point hung fixt
  Amidst his garments' folds. On him he turn'd,
  The falchion, glutted with Medusa's gore,
  And plung'd it in his breast. Dying, he looks
  Around, with eyes rolling in endless night,
  For Atys, and upon him drops: then pleas'd,
  Thus join'd in death, he seeks the shades below.
  Methion's son, Syenian Phorbas, now
  And fierce Amphimedon, in Lybia born,
  Rush in the fight to mingle; both fall prone,
  The slippery earth wide spread with smoking blood.
  The sword attacks them rising; in his throat
  Phorbas receives it, and the other's side.
  But Erythis, of Actor born, whd rear'd
  An axe tremendous, not the waving sword
  Of Perseus meets: a cup of massive bulk,
  With both his hands high-heaving, fierce he hurls
  Full on his foe: he vomits gory floods;
  Falls back, and strikes with dying head the earth.
  Then Polydaemon falls, sprung from the blood
  Of queen Semiramis; Lycetes brave,
  The son of Spercheus; Abaris, who dwelt
  On frozen Caucasus; and Helicen
  With unshorn tresses; Phlegias; Clitus too;
  Those with the rest beneath his weapon fall;
  And on the rising heaps of dead he stands.
  And fell Ampycus; Ceres' sacred priest,
  His temples with a snow-white fillet bound.
  Thou, O, Japetides! whose string to sound
  Such discord knew not; but whose harp still tun'd,
  The works of peace, in concord with thy voice;
  Wast bidden here to celebrate the feast:
  And cheer the nuptial banquet with thy song!
  Him, when at distance Pettalus beheld,
  Handling his peaceful instrument, he cry'd
  In mocking laughter;--"go, and end thy song,
  "Amid the Stygian ghosts,"--and instant plung'd
  Through his left temple, his too deadly sword.
  Sinking, his dying fingers caught the strings,
  And, chance-directed, gave a mournful sound.
  Not long the fierce Lycormas saw his fall
  Without revenge: a massy bar of oak
  From the right gate he tore, and on the bones
  Behind the neck, the furious blow was aim'd:
  Prone on the earth, like a crush'd ox he fell.
  Pelates of Cinypheus, strove to rend
  A like strong fastening from th' opposing door;
  The dart of Corythus his tugging hand
  Transfix'd, and nail'd him to the wood confin'd:
  Here Abas, with his spear, deep pierc'd his side:
  Nor dying fell he;--by the hand retain'd,
  Firm to the post he hung. Melaneus fell.
  The arms of Perseus aiding; Dorilas,
  The wealthiest lord in Nasamonia's land,
  Fell too beside him: rich was he in fields;
  In wide extent no lands with his could vie;
  Nor equal his in hoarded heaps of grain.
  Obliquely in his groin, the missive spear
  Stuck deep,--a mortal spot: his Bactrian foe
  His rolling eyes beheld, and dying breath
  In sobs convulsive flitting, and exclaim'd;--
  "This spot thou pressest, now of all thy lands,
  "Possess,"--and turning left the lifeless corse.
  Avenging Perseus hurls at him the spear,
  Torn from the smoking wound; the point, receiv'd
  Full in the nostrils, pierces through the neck:
  Before, behind, expos'd the weapon stands.

    Now fortune aids his blows, the brother pair,
  Clanis, and Clytius fall, by different wounds.
  Hurl'd by his nervous arm, the ashen spear
  Transfix'd the thighs of Clytius: Clanis dy'd
  Biting the steel that pierc'd his mouth. Now fell
  Mendesian Celadon; and Astreus borne
  By Hebrew mother, to a doubtful sire.
  Now dy'd Ethion, once deep skill'd to see
  The future fates; now by his skill deceiv'd.
  Thoactes, who the monarch's armor bore;
  And base Agyrtes, murderer of his sire.
  Crowds though he conquers, thickening crowds remain;
  For all united wage on him the war.
  In every quarter fight the press, conspir'd
  To aid a cause to worth and faith oppos'd.
  The sire, with useless piety,--the queen,
  And new-made bride, the hero's party take;
  And fill the hall with screams. The clang of arms,
  And groans of dying men their screamings drown.
  The houshold deities, polluted once,
  The fierce Bellona bathes with gore again;
  With double fury lighting up the war.

    Now Phineus, followed by a furious throng
  Surrounds him single; thicker fly their darts
  Than wintry hail, on every side; his sight
  They cloud, and deafening, whiz his ears around.
  By crowds opprest, retreating, Perseus leans
  His shoulders 'gainst a massive pillar's height;
  And, safe behind, dares all the furious fight.
  Chaonian Molpeus rushes on his left;
  Ethemon, Nabathaean, on his right:
  Thus a fierce tiger, urg'd by famine, hears
  Combin'd the lowings of two different herds,
  Far distant in the vale; in doubt he stands,
  On this, or that to rush; and furious burns
  On both at once to thunder. Perseus so,
  To left and right inclin'd at once to bear,
  Plerc'd first the thigh of Molpeus,--straight he fled
  Unfollow'd; for Ethemon fiercely press'd.
  He, furious aiming at the hero's neck,
  With ill-directed strength, his weapon broke
  Against a column;--back the shiver'd point
  Sprung, and his throat transfix'd: slight was the wound;
  To doom to death unable. Perseus plung'd
  His mortal falchion, as the trembling wretch
  His helpless arms extended, in his breast.
  But now his valor Perseus found oppress'd
  By crowds unequal, and aloud exclaim'd;--
  "Since thus you force me, from my very foe
  "More aid I'll ask;--my friends avert your eyes!"
  Then shew'd the Gorgon's head. "Go, elsewhere seek,"
  Said Thescelus,--"for those such sights may move:"--
  The deadly javelin poising in his hand,
  In act to throw, a marble form he stands,
  In the same posture. Near him Ampyx rear'd,
  Against the brave Lyncides' breast his sword;
  His uprais'd hand was harden'd; here, or there,
  To wave unable. Nileus now display'd
  Seven argent streams upon a shield of gold;
  False boasting offspring from the seven-mouth'd Nile;
  And cry'd;--"Lo! Perseus, whence my race deriv'd;
  "Down to the silent shades this solace bear
  "By such a hand to die." The final words
  Were lost; his sounding voice abrupt was stay'd;
  His open'd mouth still seem'd the words to form,
  Incapable to utter. Eryx storm'd
  At these, exclaiming;---"not the Gorgon's hairs
  "Freeze ye, but your own trembling, dastard souls:
  "Rush forth with me, and on the earth lay low,
  "The youth who battles thus with magic arms."
  Fierce had he rush'd, but firmly fixt his feet
  Held him to earth, a rigid, fasten'd stone;
  A statue arm'd. These well their fate deserv'd,
  But one, Aconteus, while in aid he fought
  Of Perseus, sudden stood to stone congeal'd;
  As star'd the Gorgon luckless in his face.
  Him saw Astyages, but thought he liv'd;
  And fierce attack'd him with a mighty sword.
  Shrill tinkling sounds the blow: astonish'd stands
  Astyages;--astonish'd seems the stone;
  For while he stares, he too to marble turns.
  Long were the tale, of each plebeian death
  To tell; two hundred still unhurt remain;
  By Gorgon's head two hundred stiffen'd stand:
  When Phineus seems the strife unjust to mourn.
  But what to act remains? Around him crowd,
  The forms of numerous friends: his friends he knows,
  Their aid intreats, and calls on each by name:
  Still doubting, seizes those his grasp can reach
  And finds them stone! Averse he turns his eyes;
  Raises his conscious arms and hands oblique,
  And suppliant begs;--"go Perseus,--conqueror, go!
  "Remove that dreadful monster,--bear away
  "That stone-creating visage, Gorgon's head!
  "Whate'er it be, I pray thee bear it hence.
  "Nor hate, nor lust of empire, rais'd our arms
  "Against thee;--for my wife alone we warr'd.
  "Thy cause, by merit best; mine, but by time.
  "Bravest of men, me much it grieves I e'er,
  "Thy claim oppos'd: existence only give,
  "All else be thine." To him, as thus he begg'd,
  Fearing his eyes, to whom he suppliant spoke
  To turn;--"thou dastard, Phineus!" Perseus cry'd,--
  "What I can grant, I will; and what I grant
  "To souls like thine a mighty boon must seem.
  "Dispel thy terror; rest from steel secure.
  "Yet must a during monument remain,
  "Still in the dwelling of my spouse's sire,
  "Conspicuous. So my bride may daily see
  "Her imag'd husband." Speaking thus, he held
  The Gorgon's head, where pallid, Phineus turn'd;
  So turning stiffen'd stood the neck; so turn'd
  Appear'd th' inverted eyes; the humid balls
  To stone concreted. Still the timid look,
  And suppliant face, and tame-petitioning arms,
  And guilty awe-struck look, in stone remain'd.

    Now victor, Abantiades re-seeks
  His soil paternal, with his well-earn'd bride:
  And in his undeserving grandsire's aid,
  Avenging war on Proetus he declares.
  Proetus then all Acrisius' cities held;
  From each possession forc'd, his brother fled.
  But arms, and battled towns, like ill-possess'd,
  The head snake-curl'd, oblig'd at once to stoop.
  Yet not the youth's bold valor, amply prov'd,
  By all his brave atchievements; nor his toils
  Thee, Polydectes, mov'd; who rul'd the isle,
  The paltry isle, Seriphus; stubborn still,
  Inexorable hatred thou maintain'st:
  Endless against him burns thy rage unjust.
  Nay, from his true deserts, thou would'st detract;
  And swear'st Medusa's death a fiction form'd.
  Then Perseus;--"thus if true I speak, or no,
  "Experience. Close, my friends, your eyes!"--as forth,
  He held the Gorgon;--bloodless stood the face
  Of Polydectes, turn'd a marble form.

    Thus far, Minerva aided side by side,
  Her brother golden-born; then swiftly flew,
  Wrapt in a cloud opaque; and distant left
  Seriphus. On she flies, to right she leaves
  Cythnos, and Gyaros; and cross the main
  The shortest route she hastens; speeds to Thebes,
  And seeks the Heliconian nymphs, whose mount
  Alighting feels her first: the learned nine,
  Thus she bespeaks;--"fame tells, a new-made spring,
  "Burst from a blow the swift-wing'd horse's hoof
  "Inflicted; lo! the cause I hither come.
  "That steed I saw spring from his mother's blood:
  "Fain would I this new prodigy behold."
  Urania gave reply. "O, maid divine!
  "What cause soe'er has with thy presence grac'd.
  "Our dwelling, proves to us a grateful boon.
  "Fame speaks not false. Our fountain surely sprung
  "Sole from Pegasus." Speaking thus, she leads
  The virgin goddess to the sacred streams:
  Who long the spring admir'd;--the spring produc'd
  From the hoof's blow:--around surveying views
  The groves of ancient trees, the grots, the plants
  Of ever-vary'd tint; and happy calls
  The learned nymphs, who such a spot possess'd.
  Then thus a sister;--"O, divinest maid!
  "Our choir to join most worthy, did not aims
  "Of loftier import tempt thy warlike soul,
  "Right hast thou spoke; our habitation well,
  "And well our arts thy highest praises claim.
  "Blest were our lot, if still from danger free:
  "But nought a villain's daring power restrains,
  "And terror soon our virgin minds appals.
  "Ev'n now the dread Pyreneus to my eyes
  "Stands present: to its wonted calm not yet
  "Restor'd my mind. With furious Thracian bands
  "Daulis he conquer'd, and the Phocian fields;
  "And held the sway unjust. Parnassus' fane
  "We sought; th' usurper there beheld us pass,
  "And feigning reverence for our power divine
  "Worshipp'd, and then address'd us, whom he knew.
  "Here, O! ye Muses, rest, nor dubious stand
  "But straight beneath my sheltering roof avoid
  "The cloudy heaven, and rain (for fast it shower'd)
  "Oft mighty deities have enter'd roofs
  "Less pompous.--By his invitation urg'd,
  "And by the tempest, we accede and step
  "Within the hall. The pelting showers now ceas'd,
  "Auster by Boreas vanquish'd; fled the clouds
  "Black lowering, and the face of heaven left clear:
  "Anxious we wish to go: Pyreneus fast
  "His dwelling closes, and rough force prepares:
  "Wings we assume, and from his force escape.
  "He, standing on the loftiest turret's top,
  "Like us his flight about to wing, exclaims--
  "A path you lead, that path will I pursue.
  "Then madly from the tower's most lofty wall,
  "Dash'd on his face he fell, and dying strew'd
  "His shatter'd bones upon the blood-stain'd ground."

    As spoke the muse thus, loud and strong was heard,
  Of fluttering pinions in the air the sound;
  And hailing voices from high branches came.
  Jove's daughter then around enquiring look'd
  (The sounds she hears, so like the human voice,
  From human voice she deems them) birds the sound
  Emitted: magpies were they;--magpies nine:
  Their doom lamenting, on the boughs they sate,
  Aping in voice their neighbours all around.
  Then to the wondering goddess, thus the muse
  Explain'd: "These vanquish'd in the arduous strife
  "Of song, to us submitting, swell the crowd
  "Of feather'd fliers. In Pellenian lands
  "Most rich was Pierus their sire; to him
  "Evippe of Paeonia bore the nymphs;
  "Nine times invoking great Lucina's aid.
  "Vain of their number, proud the sister-crew,
  "In folly journey'd through Thessalia's towns,
  "And through the towns of Greece; when here arriv'd
  "Thus to the test of power their words provoke:--
  "At length desist to cheat the senseless crowd
  "With harmony pretended, Thespian maids!
  "With us contend, if faith your talents give
  "For such a trial. Ye in voice and skill
  "Surpass us not,--our numbers are the same.
  "If vanquish'd, yield the Medusaean fount,
  "And Hyantean Aganippe,--we
  "If conquer'd, all Emanthaea's regions cede,
  "Far as Paeonia's snows. The nymphs around
  "The contest shall decide. Deep shame we felt
  "Thus to contend, but deeper shame appear'd
  "To yield without contention to their boast.
  "The nymphs elected to adjudge the prize
  "Swear by the floods; and on the living rock
  "Seated, await to hear the rival songs.

    "Then one, impatient who should first commence,
  "Or we, or they, arises;--sings the war
  "Of gods and giants; to the rebels gives
  "False praises; and the high celestials' power
  "Much under-rating, tells how Typhon, rais'd.
  "From earth's most deep recesses, struck with fear
  "All heaven: each god betook him straight to flight
  "Far distant, till th' Egyptian land receiv'd
  "Each weary'd foot, where Nile's dissever'd stream
  "Pours in seven mouths. How earth-born Typhon here,
  "They tell, pursu'd them; and each god, conceal'd
  "In feign'd resemblance, cheated there his power.
  "Jove, (so she sung) a leading ram became;
  "(Whence still the Lybians form their Ammon horn'd)
  "The crow Apollo hid: a goat the son
  "Of Semele became: Diana skulk'd
  "In shape a cat: a snow-white cow conceal'd
  "The form of Juno: Venus seem'd a fish:
  "And 'neath an Ibis Hermes safely crouch'd.

    "Thus far she mov'd her vocal lips; thus far
  "Her lyre her voice attended: then they call
  "For our Aoenian song. But that to hear,
  "Perchance your leisure suits not; pressing deeds
  "Unlike our songs must more your time demand."
  Pallas replies;--"be hesitation far,
  "And all your song from first commence relate."
  So saying, in the forest's pleasing shade
  She rested; while the Muse proceeding, spoke.

    "To one the sole contending task we give,
  "Calliope;--she rises, neatly bound,
  "Her flowing tresses with an ivy wreath.
  "With dexterous thumb the trembling strings she tries,
  "Then to their quivering sounds this song subjoins.
  "Ceres at first with crooked plough upturn'd
  "The glebe; she first mild fruits and milder corn
  "Gave to the earth; and rules to tend them gave:
  "All gifts from her proceed. To her the song
  "I raise. Would that my best exerted power,
  "A song to suit thy least deserts could form,
  "O, goddess! worthy of our loftiest praise.

    "The vast Sicilian isle, with pressure huge
  "Thrown o'er them, deep the limbs gigantic weighs
  "Of huge Typhoeus, who the heavenly throne
  "Had dar'd to hope for: struggling oft he tries,
  "His efforts, daily bent to lift his load:
  "But hard Pelorus on his right hand lies,
  "Ausonia facing; while Pachyne rests
  "Heavy to left: wide o'er his giant thighs
  "Spreads Lilyboeum: Etna presses down
  "His head; beneath whose crater, laid supine,
  "From his hot mouth he ashes sends, and flames.
  "Thus with his body labouring to remove
  "The ponderous load of earth;--whole towns o'erwhelm;
  "And lofty hills o'erturn; trembles the ground;
  "And Hell's dread monarch fears a chasm should gape:
  "And through the opening wide his realm display:
  "The trembling ghosts with light un'custom'd scar'd.
  "The shock to meet expecting, starts the king
  "Quick from his cloudy throne; and in his car
  "Borne by his sable steeds, with care surveys
  "Sicilia's deep foundations; wide around
  "Exploring all; then with his toils content,
  "No ruin'd part detected, flings aside
  "Each apprehension. Strolling now at ease,
  "Him Venus from the Erycinian hill
  "Espy'd; and to her feather'd son, who lay
  "Clasp'd in her arms, exclaim'd;--O, Cupid! son!
  "My sole assistant! sole defence and aid!
  "Seize now that weapon which o'er all has sway,
  "That piercing dart,--and deep within the breast
  "Of the dark god whose lot was given to rule
  "The nether regions of the triple realm,
  "Bury it. All the gods thy might confess;
  "Ev'n Jove himself. The ocean powers allow
  "Thy rule, and he whom Ocean's powers obey.
  "Why then should Tartarus alone evade
  "Thy thrall? Why not my empire and thine own
  "With that complete? Of all the world's extent
  "A third is stak'd. Nay more, our utmost power,
  "Heaven our own seat contemns;--thy potent sway,
  "And mine alike impair'd. Behold'st thou not
  "Minerva, with the quiver-bearing maid
  "Deserting me? Thus will the blooming child
  "Of Ceres, if we grant it, still remain
  "Inviolate a virgin;--thither tend
  "Her anxious hopes. But thou, if dear thou hold'st
  "Our mutual realm, the virgin goddess link
  "In union with her uncle.--Venus spoke:
  "His quiver he unlooses; from the heap
  "Of darts, by her directed, one selects,
  "Than which none bore a keener point; than which,
  "None flew more certain,--trusty to the string.
  "Bends to his knee the yielding horn, then sends
  "Through Pluto's heart the bearded arrow sure.
  "Not far from Enna's walls, a lake expands
  "Profound in watery stores, Pergusa nam'd:
  "Not ev'n Caisters' murmuring stream e'er heard
  "The songster-swans more frequent. Woods o'ertop
  "The waters, rising round on every side;
  "And veil from Phoebus' rays the surface cool.
  "A shade the branches form; the moist earth round,
  "Produces purple flowers: perpetual spring
  "Here reigns. While straying sportive in this grove
  "Here Proserpine the violet cropp'd, and here
  "The lily fair; with childish ardor warm'd
  "Her bosom filling, and her basket high:
  "Proud to surpass her comrades all around
  "In skilful culling, she herself was seen;
  "Was chosen, and by Dis was snatch'd away.
  "Love urg'd him to the deed. Th' affrighted maid,
  "Loud on her mother, and her comrades call'd;
  "But chief her mother, with lamenting shrieks.
  "Then as her robe she rent, the well-cull'd flowers
  "Slipp'd through the loosen'd folds: e'en this (so great
  "Her girlish innocence) her tears increas'd.
  "Swiftly the robber speeds his car along
  "Urging his steeds' exertions each by name;
  "'Bove their high manes and necks the rusty reins
  "Rattling, as o'er the wide Palician lake,
  "Where the cleft earth with sulphur boils, he whirls:
  "And where the Bacchiads, from the double sea
  "Of Corinth wandering, rais'd their lofty walls;
  "'Twixt two unequal havens. Midst, the stream,
  "Pisaean Arethusa, and the lake
  "Of Cyane are seen, close round embrac'd
  "By narrowing horns. This Cyane was once,
  "Of all Sicilia's nymphs, the fairest deem'd;
  "Who gave the lake her name. She to the waist
  "Uprais'd, amidst the waters stood, and knew
  "The god, and,--here thy speed must stay,--exclaim'd;
  "Nor e'er of Ceres hope the son-in-law
  "'Gainst her consent to be: beseechings bland,
  "Not rugged rape, thy purpos'd hope might gain.
  "If lofty things with low I durst compare,
  "Anapis lov'd me; but the nuptial couch,
  "I press'd, entreated,--not as thus in dread.
  "She said;--her arms extended wide, and stopp'd
  "His course. The angry son of Saturn flames
  "Swelling with rage; exhorts his furious steeds;
  "Throws with a forceful arm, and buries deep
  "His regal sceptre in the lowest gulph:
  "Wide gapes the stricken earth; an opening gives
  "To hell, and headlong down, the car descends.

    Now equal Cyane the goddess mourns,
  "So forc'd; and her own sacred stream despis'd;
  "A cureless wound her silent breast contains;
  "And all in tears she wastes: lost in those waves,
  "Where lately sovereign goddess she had rul'd.
  "Soft grow her limbs, and flexile seem her bones;
  "Her nails their hardness lose. The tenderest parts.
  "Melt into water long before the rest:
  "Her tresses green; her fingers, legs, and feet.
  "Quickly this change the smaller limbs perceive,
  "To cooling rills transform'd. Next after these,
  "Her back, her shoulders, breasts, and sides dissolve,
  "And vanish all in streams. A limpid flood
  "Now fills the veins that once in purple flow'd;
  "Nought of the nymph to fill the grasp remains.

    "Meantime the trembling mother through the earth,
  "And o'er the main, the goddess vainly sought.
  "Aurora rising, with her locks of gold;
  "Nor Hesper sinking, saw her labors cease.
  "With either hand at Etna's flaming mouth,
  "A torch she lighted, restless these she bore
  "In dewy darkness. Then renew'd again
  "Her labor, till fair day made blunt the stars;
  "From Sol's first rising till his evening fall.
  "Weary'd at length, and parch'd with thirst,--no stream
  "Her lips to moisten nigh, by chance she spy'd
  "A straw-thatch'd cot, and knock'd the humble door.
  "An ancient dame thence stepp'd,--the goddess saw,
  "And brought her, (who for water simply crav'd)
  "A pleasing draught where roasted grain had boil'd.
  "Swallowing the gift presented, rudely came
  "A brazen-fronted boy, and facing stood:
  "Then laughing mock'd to see her greedy drink.
  "Angry grew Ceres, all the offer'd draught,
  "Yet unconsum'd, she drench'd him as he jeer'd,
  "With barley mixt with liquid: straight his face
  "The spots imbib'd; and what but now as arms
  "He bore, as legs he carries; to his limbs
  "Thus chang'd, a tail is added; shrunk in size,
  "Small is his power to harm; shorter he seems
  "Than the small lizard. Swift away he fled
  "(As, wondering, weeping, try'd the dame to clasp
  "His changing form) and gain'd a sheltering hole.
  "Well suits his star-like skin the name he bears.

    "Long were the tale to tell, what tracts of land
  "What tracts of sea, the wandering goddess pass'd.
  "Earth now no spot unsearch'd affording, back
  "To Sicily she turns; with close research
  "Each part exploring, till at length she comes
  "To Cyane; who all the tale had told
  "If still unchang'd: much as she wish'd to speak
  "Nor lips, nor tongue can aid her; nought remains
  "Speech to afford. Yet plain a sign she gives,
  "The zone of Proserpine upon her waves
  "Light floating; in the sacred stream it fell;--
  "Dropt as she pass'd the place. Well Ceres knew
  "The sight, and then--as then her loss first known,
  "Tore her dishevell'd tresses, beat her breast
  "With blows on blows redoubled. Still unknown
  "The spot that holds her, every part of earth
  "Blaming, ungrateful, worthless of her fruits.
  "But chief Trinacria, in whose isle was found
  "The vestige of her loss. For this she breaks
  "With furious hand the glebe up-turning plough:
  "And angry, to an equal death she dooms,
  "The tiller and his ox: forbids the fields
  "Back to return th' entrusted grain; the seeds
  "All rotting. Now that fertile land, renown'd
  "Through the wide earth, lies useless; all the grain
  "Dies in the earliest shoots: now scorching rays;
  "Now floods of rain destroy it: noxious stars
  "Now harm; now blighting winds: and hungry birds
  "The scatter'd seed devour: the darnel springs,
  "The thistle, and the knot-grass thick, which choke
  "The sprouting wheat, and make the harvest void.

    "Now Arethusa from th' Eleian waves
  "Exalts her head; her dropping tresses flung
  "Back from her forehead, parting shade her ears:
  "And thus;--O goddess! mother of the maid,
  "So sought through earth, mother of all earth's fruits!
  "Cease now thy toilsome labor; cease thine ire,
  "Against the land that prov'd to thee so true:
  "Thine ire unmerited; unwilling she,
  "Op'd for the spoil a passage. Hither I
  "No suppliant for my native isle approach;
  "An alien here sojourning. Pisa's land
  "My country; there near Elis first I sprung:
  "A stranger now in Sicily I dwell.
  "This soil, more grateful far than is my own;
  "This soil, where I my houshold gods have plac'd;
  "I, Arethusa, and have fix'd my seat,
  "Preserve, mild goddess! Why I chang'd my land,
  "Why to Ortygia, through the wide waves borne,
  "I came, a more appropriate hour will ask;
  "When you, from care reliev'd, can grant your ear
  "With brow unclouded. Through the opening earth
  "I flow; and borne through subterraneous depths,
  "Here lift again my head, again behold
  "The long-lost stars. Hence was my lot to see,
  "As pass'd my stream close by the Stygian gulph,
  "Your Proserpine;--sad still her face appear'd,
  "Nor fear had wholly left it. Yet she reigns
  "A queen; the mightiest in the realm of shade,
  "The powerful consort of th' infernal king.

    "Like marble at the words the mother stands,
  "Stupid with grief; and long astounded seems:
  "Sorrow by heavier sorrow now surpass'd.
  "Then in her chariot mounts th' ethereal sky,
  "And stands indignant at th' imperial throne;
  "Her locks wild flowing, and her face in clouds.
  "Lo! here a suppliant, Jove,--she cry'd,--I come,
  "To beg for her, my daughter and thine own;
  "For if no favor may the mother find,
  "The daughter's claim may move. Let not thy child
  "Deserve thy care the less, as born of me.
  "Lo! my lost maid, so long, so vainly sought
  "At length is found; if finding we may call
  "A surer loss; if finding we may call
  "The knowledge where she is. Her ravish'd charms
  "I'll pardon; let him but my child restore.
  "What though a robber might my daughter wed,
  "Thine sure is worthy of a different mate!
  "Then Jove;--our daughter, our dear mutual pledge,
  "As yours, so mine, demands our mutual care.
  "But rightly still affairs if we design,
  "What you lament will no injustice prove;
  "Love only. Sure, a son-in-law like him,
  "Can ne'er degrade, will you consent but yield.
  "Grant nought beyond,--'tis no such trivial boast,
  "Jove's brother to be call'd! How then, if more
  "I claim pre-eminence from chance alone!
  "Still, if so obstinate your wish remains
  "For separation, go,--let Proserpine
  "To heaven return, on this condition strict,
  "Her lips no food have touch'd. So will the fates.
  "He ceas'd.--Glad Ceres, certain to regain
  "Her daughter, knew not what the fates forbade.
  "Her fast was broken; thoughtless as she stray'd
  "Around the garden, from a bending tree
  "She pluck'd a fair pomegranate, and seven seeds
  "From the pale rind she pick'd, and ate. None saw
  "Save one, Ascalaphus, the luckless deed;
  "Whom Orphne, fam'd Avernus' nymphs among,
  "To Acheron, long since, 'tis said, produc'd
  "Beneath a dusky cave. He, cruel, told;
  "And his discovery stay'd the hop'd return.

    "Much wept the queen of Pluto, but she chang'd
  "The vile informer to an hideous shape:
  "Sprinkled with streams of Phlegethon, his head
  "Feather'd appears, with beak, and monstrous eyes;
  "Spoil'd of his shape, with yellow feathers cloth'd:
  "Large grows his head; bent are his lengthen'd nails;
  "Scarcely he moves the pinions which are shot
  "Light from his lazy arms. A filthy bird
  "Becoming;--constant presager of woe;
  "An owl inactive; omen dire to man.

    "Well he by his informing tongue deserv'd,
  "His doom, but Acheloides, from whence
  "Your wings, and bird-like feet, whilst still you bear
  "Your virgin features? Was it that you mix'd,
  "When Proserpine the vernal flowers would cull,
  "Amidst her numerous train? The nymph you sought
  "Through earth's extent in vain; that ocean too
  "Your anxious search might scape not, straight you pray'd
  "For waving wings to winnow o'er the deep;
  "And favouring gods you found. Of golden hue
  "Quick-shooting wings your arms you saw bespread;
  "But lest your inbred song, which every ear
  "Had charm'd; and lest your highly-gifted voice,
  "Your tongue should fail to use;--a virgin face,
  "And speech yet human are indulg'd you still.

    "Now Jove as umpire 'twixt the angry pair
  "His mourning sister, and his brother, bids
  "The year revolving either side oblige:
  "Now will the goddess, mutual in each realm,
  "Six months with Ceres dwell in heaven; and six
  "Reign with her spouse in hell. Straight were perceiv'd
  "The goddess' countenance, and demeanour chang'd.
  "For now her forehead, which had still retain'd,
  "(To Pluto even) a sad and sorrowing gloom,
  "Gladden'd: so Phoebus long in cloudy shade
  "Envelop'd, shines, their umbrous veil dispers'd.
  "Now Ceres calm, her daughter safe regain'd,
  "Enquires:--O Arethusa! say the cause,
  "Which hither brought thee; why a sacred fount?
  "Hush'd were the waves; and from the lowest depths
  "The goddess rais'd her head; and as she told,
  "The old amours the flood of Elis knew,
  "Press'd out the water from her tresses green.

    "Once with the nymphs, that on Achaia's hills
  "Rove, was I seen; none closer beat than I
  "The thickets; none than I more skilful spread
  "Th' ensnaring net. Yet though no fame I sought
  "For beauty; though robust, I bore the name
  "Of beauteous. Whilst the constant theme of praise,
  "My features fair, to me no pleasure gave;
  "What other nymphs inspire with joyful pride,
  "Corporeal charms, did but my blushes raise.
  "To please I thought a crime. Once tir'd with sport,
  "The Stymphalidian forest I had left:
  "Warm was the day; I with redoubled heat,
  "Glow'd from my toil. A gliding stream I found
  "By ripplings undisturb'd; silent and smooth
  "It flow'd; so clear, that every stone was seen
  "On the deep bottom; gently crept the waves;
  "To creep scarce seeming; o'er the shelving banks
  "The stream-fed poplar, and the willow hoar,
  "A grateful shadow cast. The brink I reach'd
  "Dipp'd first my feet, then waded to my knee;
  "Not yet content, I loos'd my zone, and hung
  "Upon a bending osier my soft robe:
  "Then naked plung'd amid the stream; the waves
  "Beating, and sporting in a thousand shapes;
  "My arms around in every posture flung;
  "A strange unusual murmur seem'd to sound,
  "Deep from the bottom; terror-struck I gain'd
  "The nearest brink;--when,--whither dost thou fly?
  "O, Arethusa? whither dost thou fly?
  "Alphaeus, from his waters, hoarse exclaim'd!
  "Vestless I fled, for on th' opposing bank
  "My garment hung. Fiercer the god pursu'd;
  "Fiercer he burn'd, all naked as I ran:
  "Prepar'd more ready for his force I seem'd.
  "Such was my flight, and such was his pursuit;
  "As when on trembling wings, before the hawk
  "Fly the mild doves: as when the hawk fierce drives
  "The trembling doves before him. Long the chase
  "I bore; Orchomenus, and Psophis soon
  "I pass'd, and pass'd Cyllene, and the caves
  "Of Maenalus, and Erymanthus' frosts,
  "To Elis, ere his speed could cope with mine.
  "In strength unequal, I sustain'd no more
  "The toilsome race; he stouter flagg'd less soon.
  "But still o'er plains I ran; o'er mountains thick
  "With forests clad; o'er stones, and rugged rocks;
  "And pathless spots. Behind me Phoebus shone.
  "I saw, if fear deceiv'd me not, far spread
  "His shade before me. What could less deceive,
  "I heard his footsteps; and his breath full strong
  "Blew on my banded tresses. Weary'd, faint
  "With the long flight, I cry'd;--Dictynna, chaste!
  "Lost am I,--help a quiver-bearing nymph,
  "One who thy bow has oft entrusted borne;
  "And oft thy quiver, loaded full with darts.
  "Mov'd was the goddess; from the darkest clouds
  "She one selected, and around me threw.
  "The river-god, about the misty veil
  "Pry'd anxious; and unwitting deeply grop'd
  "Within the hollow cloud! Unconscious, twice
  "The spot he compass'd, where Diana thought
  "My safety surest; twice he then aloud
  "Ho! Arethusa,--Arethusa! call'd:--
  "What terror seiz'd my soul! not less the dread
  "Of lambs, when round the sheltering fold they hear
  "The wolves loud howling: or the trembling hare
  "Close in a bramble hid, who sees approach
  "The wide-mouth'd, hostile hounds, and fears to move.
  "Further he pass'd not, for beyond the place
  "No footsteps he discern'd, but guarding watch'd
  "Around the mist. So closely thus besieg'd,
  "My limbs a cold sweat seiz'd; cerulean drops
  "Fell from my body; when my feet I mov'd,
  "A pool remain'd; fast dropp'd my hair in dew;
  "And speedier than the wonderous tale I tell,
  "Chang'd to a stream I flow'd. But soon the god,
  "Knew his lov'd waters; laid the man aside,
  "And straight assum'd his proper watery form;
  "With mine to mingle. Dian' cleft the ground;
  "Sinking, through caverns dark I held my way;
  "And reach'd Ortygia, from the goddess nam'd;
  "There first ascending view'd the upper skies.

    "Here Arethusa ceas'd. Then Ceres yokes
  "The coupled dragons to her car, their mouths
  "Curb'd by the reins; and through the air is borne,
  "Midway 'twixt heaven and earth. At Pallas' town
  "Arriv'd, Triptolemus the car ascends,
  "By her commission'd;--bade to spread the seed
  "Entrusted: part on ground untill'd before;
  "And part on land which long had fallow laid.
  "O'er Europe now, and Asia's lands, the youth
  "Sublimely sails, and reaches Scythia's clime,
  "Where Lyncus rul'd. Beneath the monarch's roof,
  "Here enter'd; and to him, who curious sought
  "How there he journey'd; what his journey's cause;
  "His name, and country; thus the youth reply'd.--
  "Athens the fam'd, my country; and my name
  "Triptolemus: but neither o'er the main,
  "Borne in a ship, nor travelling slow by land,
  "I hither came; my path was through the air.
  "I bring the gift of Ceres; scatter'd wide
  "Through all your spacious fields, quickly restor'd
  "In fruitful crops the wholesome food will spring.
  "The barbarous monarch, envious he should bear
  "So great a blessing, takes him for his guest,
  "And when with sleep weigh'd down attacks him. Rais'd
  "To pierce his bosom, was the sword;--just then
  "The wretch, by Ceres, to a lynx was turn'd.
  "Then mounts again the youth, and through the air
  "Bids him once more the sacred dragons steer.

    "Our chosen champion ended here her lays,
  "And all the nymphs unanimous, exclaim'd;--
  "The Heliconian goddesses have gain'd.
  "Vanquish'd, the others rail'd. When she resum'd:--
  "Is not your punishment enough deserv'd?
  "Foil'd in the contest, must you swell your crime,
  "With base revilings? Patient now no more,
  "To punish we begin; what anger bids,
  "We now perform.--Loud laugh'd the scornful maids,
  "Our threatening words despis'd, and strove to speak,
  "And clapp'd with outcries menacing, their hands.
  "When from their fingers shooting plumes they spy;
  "And feathers shade their arms; her sister's face,
  "Each sees to harden in an horny beak;
  "To beat their bosoms trying with rais'd arms,
  "In air suspended, on those arms they move;
  "The new-shap'd birds the sylvan tribes increase:
  "Magpies, the scandal of the grove. Thus chang'd,
  "Their former eloquence they still maintain,
  "In hoarse garrulity, and empty noise."


*The Sixth Book.*


    Trial of skill betwixt Pallas and Arachne. Transformation of
    Arachne to a spider. Pride of Niobe. Her children slain by Apollo
    and Diana. Her change to marble. The Lycian peasants changed to
    frogs. Fate of Marsyas. Pelops. Story of Tereus, Procne, and
    Philomela. Their change to birds. Boreas and Orithyia. Birth of
    Zethes and Calais.


THE *Sixth Book* OF THE METAMORPHOSES OF OVID.


    Minerva pleas'd attention to the muse,
  While thus she spoke afforded; prais'd the song,
  And prais'd the just resentment of the maids.
  Then to herself;--"the vengeance others take,
  "Merely to praise were mean. I too should claim
  "Like praise, for like revenge; nor longer bear
  "My power contemn'd, by who unpunish'd live."
  And on Arachne, fair Maeoenian maid,
  She turns her vengeful mind; whose skill she heard
  Rivall'd her own in labors of the loom.
  No fame her natal town, no fame her sire
  On her bestow'd; her skill conferr'd renown.
  Idmon of Colophon, her humble sire
  Soak'd in the Phocian dye the spongy wool.
  Her mother, late deceas'd, from lowest stock,
  Had sprung; and wedded with an equal mate.
  Yet had she gain'd through all the Lydian towns
  For skill a mighty fame. Though born so low,
  Though small Hypaepe was her sole abode,
  Oft would the nymphs the vine-clad Tmolus leave
  To view her wonderous work. Oft would the nymphs
  In admiration quit Pactolus' waves.
  Nor pleasure only gave the finish'd robe,
  When view'd; but while she work'd she gave delight;
  Such comely grace in every turn appear'd.
  Whether she rounded into balls the wool;
  Or with her fingers mollify'd the fleece;
  And comb'd it floating light in cloudy waves;
  Or her smooth spindle twirl'd with agile thumb;
  Or with her needle painted: plain was seen
  Her skill from Pallas learnt. This to concede
  Unwilling, she ev'n such a tutor scorn'd
  Exclaiming:--"come let her the contest try;
  "If vanquish'd, let her fix my well-earn'd fate."

    Pallas, an ancient matron's form conceals;
  Grey hairs thin strew her temples, and a staff
  Supports her tottering limbs; while thus she speaks:--
  "Old age though little priz'd, much good attends;
  "Experience always grows with lengthen'd years:
  "Spurn not my admonition. Great thy fame,
  "Midst mortals, for the wonders of the loom.
  "Great may it be, but to immortals yield:
  "Bold nymph retract, and pardon for thy words,
  "With suppliant voice require; Pallas will grant."
  Sternly the damsel views her; quits the threads
  Unfinish'd; scarce her hand from force restrains:
  And rage in all her features flushing fierce,
  Thus to the goddess, well-disguis'd, she speaks:--
  "Weak dotard, spent with too great gift of years,
  "Curst with too long existence, hence, begone!
  "Such admonition to thy daughters give,
  "If daughters hast thou; or thy sons have wives:
  "Enough for me my inbred wisdom serves.
  "Hope not, that ought thy vain advice has sway'd
  "My purpose; still my challenge holds the same.
  "Why comes your goddess not? why shuns she still
  "The trying contest?" Then the goddess,--"Lo!
  "She comes,"--and flung her aged form aside,
  Minerva's form displaying. Every nymph,
  And every dame Mygdonian, lowly bent
  In veneration. While Arachne sole
  Stood stedfast, unalarm'd; but yet she blush'd.
  A sudden flush her angry face deep ting'd,
  But sudden faded pale. A ruddy glow
  Thus teints the early sky, when first the morn
  Arises; quickly from the solar ray
  Paling to brightness. On her purpos'd boast
  Still stubborn bent, she obstinately courts
  Her sure destruction, for the empty hope
  Of conquest in the strife so madly urg'd.
  No more Jove's maid refuses, gives no more
  Her empty admonitions, nor delays
  The contest: each her station straight assumes,
  Tighten each web; each slender thread prepare.
  Firm to the beam the cloth is fix'd; the reed
  The warp divides, with pointed shuttle, swift
  Gliding between; which quick their fingers throw,
  Quick extricate, and with the toothy comb
  Firm press'd between the warp, the threads unite.
  Both hasten now; their garments round them girt,
  Their skilful hands they ply: their toil forgot
  In anxious wish for conquest. There appear'd,
  The wool of Tyrian dye, and softening teints
  Lost imperceptible. So seems the arch
  Coloring a spacious portion of the sky;
  Struck by the rays of Phoebus, when the showers
  Recede, a thousand varying tinges shine;
  The soft transition mocks the straining eye,
  So like the shades which join, though far distinct
  Their distant teints. In slender threads they twist
  The pliant gold, and in the web display,
  Each as she works, an ancient story fair.
  Minerva paints the rock of Mars so fam'd
  In Cecrops' city, and the well-known strife
  To name the town. Twice six celestials sate
  On their high thrones, great Jupiter around
  In gravity majestic; every god
  Bore his celestial features. Jove appear'd
  In royal dignity. The Ocean power
  Standing she pictur'd, with his trident huge
  Smiting the rugged rock; from the cleft stone
  Leap'd forth a steed; and thence the town to name
  The privilege he claim'd. Herself she paints
  Shielded, and arm'd with keenly-pointed spear.
  Helm'd was her head; her breast the AEgis bore.
  Struck by her spear, the earth a hoary tree
  She shews producing, loaded thick with fruit.
  The wondering gods the gift admire; the prize
  To her awarded, ends the glorious work.

    More, that the daring rival of her art,
  Should learn experimental, what reward
  Her mad attempt might hope, four parts she adds;
  And every part a test of power presents:
  Bright the small figures in her colors shine.
  This angle Thracian Rhodope contains,
  With Haemus; both their mortal bodies now,
  To frozen mountains chang'd; whose lofty pride
  Assum'd the titles of celestial powers.
  Another corner held the wretched fate
  Felt by Pygmaea's matron; Juno bade
  Her vanquish'd rival soar aloft a crane;
  And on her people wage continual war.
  Antigone, she paints;--audacious she
  With Jove's imperial consort durst contend;
  By Jove's imperial queen she flits a bird:
  Nor aids her Ilium ought; nor aids her sire,
  Laoemedon;--upborne on snowy wings,
  A stork she rises; loud with chattering bill
  She noises. In the sole remaining part,
  Was childless Cynaras, in close embrace,
  Grasping the temple's steps, his daughters once;
  And as he lies extended on the stone,
  In marble seems to weep. Around the piece
  She spreads the peaceful olive: all complete
  Her work is ended with her favorite tree.

    Arachne paints Europa, by a bull
  Deceiv'd; the god a real bull appears;
  And real seem the waves. She, backward turn'd,
  Views the receding shore, and seems to shriek
  Loud to her lost companions; seems to dread
  The dashing waves, and timid shrinks her feet.
  She draws Asteria, by the god o'er-power'd,
  Cloth'd in an eagle. Leda, fair she lays
  Beneath his wings, when he a swan appears.
  She adds how Jove beneath a Satyr's shape
  Conceal'd, the beauteous child of Nycteus fill'd,
  With a twin-offspring. In Amphytrion's form
  Alcmena, thou wert press'd. A golden shower
  Danae deceiv'd. A flame AEgina caught.
  A shepherd's shape Mnemosyne beguil'd.
  And fair Deoeis trusts a speckled snake.
  Thee, Neptune, too she painted, for the maid
  AEolian, to a threatening bull transform'd.
  Thou, as Enipeus, didst the Aloid twins
  Beget. Beneath the semblance of a ram,
  Theophane was cheated. Ceres mild,
  Of grain inventress, with her yellow locks,
  In shape a courser felt thy ardent love.
  Medusa, mother of the flying steed,
  Nymph of the snaky tresses, in a bird
  Conceal'd, you forc'd. Melantho in a fish.
  To these the damsel, all well-suiting forms
  Dispens'd, and all well-suiting scenes attend.
  And there Apollo in a herdsman's guise
  Wanders. And now he soars a plumy hawk:
  Now stalks a lordly lion. As a swain
  Macarean Isse, felt his amorous guile,
  Erigone to Bacchus' flame was dup'd
  Beneath a well-seem'd grape. Saturn produc'd
  The Centaur doubly-shap'd, in form a steed.
  Her web's extremes a slender border girt,
  Where flowery wreathes, and twining ivy blend.

    Not Pallas,--not even envy's rankling soul
  Could blame the work. The bright immortal griev'd
  To view her rival's merit, angry tore
  The picture glowing with celestial crimes.
  A boxen shuttle, grasping in her hand,
  Thrice on the forehead of th' Idmonian maid
  She struck. No more Arachne, hapless bore,
  But twisted round her neck with desperate pride
  A cord. The deed Minerva pitying saw
  And check'd her rash suspension.--"Impious wretch!
  "Still live," she cry'd, "but still suspended hang;
  "Curs'd to futurity, for all thy race,
  "Thy sons and grandsons, to the latest day
  "Alike shall feel the sentence." Speaking thus,
  The juice of Hecat's baleful plant she throws:
  Instant besprinkled by the noxious drops,
  Her tresses fall; her nose and ears are lost;
  Her body shrinks; her head is lessen'd more;
  Her slender fingers root within her sides,
  Serving as legs; her belly forms the rest;
  From whence her thread she still derives and spins:
  Her art pursuing in the spider's shape.

    All Lydia rung; the wonderous rumor spread
  Through every Phrygian town; the tale employ'd
  The tongues of all mankind. The nymph was known,
  Ere yet Amphion's nuptial bed she press'd,
  To Niobe. She, when a virgin dwelt
  In Lydian Sipylus. She still unmov'd,
  Arachne's neighboring fate not heeded, still
  Proudly refus'd before the gods to bend;
  And spoke in haughty boasting. Much her pride
  By favoring gifts was swol'n. Not the fine skill
  Amphion practis'd; not the lofty birth
  Each claim'd; not all their mighty kingdom's power,
  So rais'd her soul (of all though justly proud)
  As her bright offspring. Justly were she call'd
  Most blest of mothers; but her bliss too great
  Seem'd to herself, and caus'd a dread reverse.

    Now Manto, sprung from old Tiresias, skill'd
  In future fate, impell'd by power divine,
  In every street with wild prophetic tongue
  Exclaim'd;--"Ye Theban matrons, haste in crowds,
  "Your incense offer, and your pious prayers,
  "To great Latona, and the heavenly twins,
  "Latona's offspring; all your temples bound
  "With laurel garlands. This the goddess bids;
  "Through me commands it." All of Thebes obey,
  And gird their foreheads with the order'd leaves;
  The incense burn, and with the sacred flames
  Their pious prayers ascend. Lo! 'midst a crowd
  Of nymphs attendant, far conspicuous seen;
  Comes Niobe, in gorgeous Phrygian robe,
  Inwrought with gold, attir'd. Beauteous her form,
  Beauteous, as rage permitted. Angry shook
  Her graceful head; and angry shook the locks
  That o'er each shoulder wav'd. Proudly she tower'd.
  Her haughty eyes, round from her lofty stand
  Wide darting, cry'd;--"What madness this to place
  "Reported gods above the gods you see!
  "Why to Latona's altars bend ye low,
  "Nor incense burn before my power divine?
  "My sire, was Tantalus: of mortals sole,
  "Celestial feasts he shar'd. A Pleiaed nymph
  "Me bore. My grandsire is the mighty king,
  "Whose shoulders all the load of heaven sustain.
  "Jove is my father's parent: him I boast
  "As sire-in-law too. All the Phrygian towns
  "Bend to my sway. The hall of Cadmus owns
  "Me sovereign mistress. Thebes' high towering walls,
  "Rais'd by my consort's lute; and all the crowd
  "Who dwell inclos'd, his rule and mine obey.
  "Where'er within my palace turn mine eyes,
  "Treasures immense I view. Brightness divine
  "I boast: to all seven blooming daughters add,
  "And seven fair sons; through whom I soon expect,
  "If Hymen favors, seven more sons to see,
  "And seven more daughters. Need ye further seek
  "Whence I have cause for boasting. Dare ye still
  "Latona, from Titanian Caeus sprung,--
  "The unknown Caeus,--she to whom all earth
  "In bearing pangs the smallest space deny'd:--
  "This wretch to my divinity prefer?
  "Not heaven your goddess would receive; not earth;
  "Not ocean: exil'd from the world, she weep'd,
  "Till Delos sorrowing,--wanderer like herself,
  "Exclaim'd;--thou dreary wanderest o'er the earth,
  "I, o'er the main;--and sympathizing thus,
  "A resting spot afforded. There become
  "Of two the mother, only--can she vie
  "With one whose womb, has sevenfold hers surpass'd?
  "Blest am I. Who can slightly e'er arraign
  "To happiness my claim? Blest will I still
  "Continue. Who my bliss can ever doubt?
  "Abundance guards its surety. Far beyond
  "The power of fortune is my lot uprais'd:
  "Snatch them in numbers from me, crowds more great
  "Must still remain. My happy state contemns
  "Even now, the threats of danger. Grant the power
  "Of fate this nation of my womb to thin,--
  "Of part depriv'd, impossible I shrink
  "To poor Latona's two. How scant remov'd
  "From mothers childless! Quit your rites;--quick haste
  "And tear those garlands from your flowing hair."

    Aside the garlands thrown, and incomplete,
  The rites relinquish'd, what the Thebans could
  They gave: their whispering prayers the matron dame
  Address'd. With ire the angry goddess flam'd,
  And thus on Cynthus' lofty top bespoke
  Her double offspring:--"O, my children! see,
  "Your parent, proud your parent to be call'd,--
  "To no celestial yielding, save the queen
  "Of Jove supreme. Lo! doubted is my claim
  "To rites divine; and from the altars, burnt
  "To me from endless ages, driven, I go;
  "Save by my children succour'd. Nor this grief
  "Alone me irks, for Niobe me mocks!--
  "Her daring crime increasing, proud she sets
  "Her offspring far 'bove you. Me too she spurns,--
  "To her in number yielding; childless calls
  "My bed, and proves the impious stock which gave
  "Her tongue first utterance." More Latona felt
  Prepar'd to utter; more beseechings bland
  For her young offspring, when Apollo, cry'd:
  "Enough, desist to plain;--delay is long
  "Till vengeance." Dian' join'd him in his ire.
  Swift gliding down the sky, and veil'd in clouds,
  On Cadmus' roof they lighted. Wide was spread,
  A level plain, by constant hoofs well beat,
  The city's walls adjoining; crowding wheels,
  And coursers' feet the rolling dust upturn'd.
  Here of Amphion's offspring daily some
  Mount their fleet steeds; their trappings gaily press
  Of Tyrian dye: heavy with gold, the rens
  They guide. 'Mid these Ismenos, primal born
  Of Niobe, as round the circling course,
  His well-train'd steed he sped, and strenuous curb'd
  His foaming mouth,--loudly "Ah, me!" exclaim'd,
  As through his bosom deep the dart was driv'n:
  Dropp'd from his dying hands the slacken'd reins;
  Slowly, and sidelong from his courser's back
  He tumbled. Sipylus, gave uncheck'd scope
  To his, when through the empty air he heard,
  The rattling quiver sound: thus speeding clouds
  Beheld, the guider of the ruling helm,
  A threatening tempest fearing, looses wide
  His every sail to catch the lightest breeze.
  Loose flow'd his reins. Th' inevitable dart
  The flowing reins quick follow'd. Quivering shook,
  Fixt in his upper neck, the naked steel,
  Far through his throat protruding. Prone he fell
  O'er his high courser's head; his smoking gore,
  The ground defiling. Hapless Phoedimas,
  And Tantalus, his grandsire's name who bore,
  Their 'custom'd sport laborious ended, strove
  With youthful vigor in the wrestling toil.
  Now breast to breast they strain'd with nervous grasp,
  When the swift arrow from the bended horn,
  Both bodies pierc'd, as close both bodies join'd;
  At once they groan'd; at once their limbs they threw,
  With agonies convuls'd, prone on the earth;
  At once their rolling eyes the light forsook;
  At once their souls were yielded forth to air.
  Alphenor saw, and smote his grieving breast;
  Flew to their pallid limbs, and as he rais'd,
  Their bodies, in the pious office fell:
  For Phoebus drove his fate-wing'd arrow deep
  Through what his heart inclos'd. Sudden withdrawn,
  On the barb'd head the mangled lungs were stuck;
  And high in air his soul gush'd forth in blood.
  But beardless Damasichthon, by a wound
  Not single fell, as those; struck where the leg
  To form begins, and where the nervous ham
  A yielding joint supplies. The deadly dart
  To draw essaying, in his throat, full driven,
  Up to the feather'd head, another came:
  The sanguine flood expell'd it, gushing high,
  Cutting the distant air. With outstretcht arms
  Ilioneus, the last, besought in vain;
  Exclaiming,--"spare me, spare me, all ye gods!"
  Witless that all not join'd to cause his woe.
  The god was touch'd with pity, touch'd too late,--
  Already shot th' irrevocable dart:
  Yet light the blow was given, and mild the wound
  That pierc'd his heart, and sent his soul aloft.

    The rumor'd ill; the mourning people's groans;
  The servant's tears, soon made the mother know,
  The sudden ruin: wondering first she stands,
  To see so great heaven's power, then angry flames
  Indignant, that such power they dare to use.
  The sire Amphion, in his bosom plung'd
  His sword, and ended life at once, and woe.
  Heavens! how remov'd this Niobe, from her
  Who drove so lately from Latona's fane,
  The pious crowds; who march'd in lofty state,
  Through every street of Thebes, an envy'd sight!
  Now to be wept by even her bitterest foes.
  Prostrate upon their gelid limbs she lies;
  Now this, now that, her trembling kisses press;
  Her livid arms high-stretching unto heaven,
  Exclaims,--"Enjoy Latona, cruel dame,
  "My sorrows; feed on all my wretched woes;
  "Glut with my load of grief thy savage soul;
  "Feast thy fell heart with seven funereal scenes;
  "Triumph, victorious foe! conqueror, exult!
  "Victorious! said I?--How? To wretched me,
  "Still more are left, than joyful thou canst boast:
  "Superior I 'midst all this loss remain."

    She spoke;--the twanging bowstring sounded loud!
  Terrific noise,--save Niobe, to all:
  She stood audacious, callous in her crime.
  In mourning vesture clad, with tresses loose,
  Around the funeral couches of the slain,
  The weeping sisters stood. One strives to pluck
  The deep-stuck arrow from her bowels,--falls,
  And fainting dies; her brother's clay-cold corse,
  Prest with her lips. Another's soothing words
  Her hapless parent strive to cheer,--struck dumb,
  She bends beneath an unseen wound; her words
  Reach not her parent, till her life is fled.
  This, vainly flying, falls: that drops in death
  Upon her sister's body. One to hide
  Attempts: another pale and trembling dies.
  Six now lie breathless, each by vary'd wounds;
  One sole remaining, whom the mother shields,
  Wrapt in her vest; her body o'er her flung,
  Exclaiming,--"leave me this, my youngest,--last,
  "Least of my mighty numbers,--one alone!"
  But while she prays, the damsel pray'd for dies.

    Of all depriv'd, the solitary dame,
  Amid the lifeless bodies of her sons,
  Her daughters, and her spouse, by sorrows steel'd,
  Sits harden'd: no light gale her tresses moves;
  No blood her redden'd cheeks contain; her eyes
  Motionless glare upon her mournful face;
  Life quits the statue: even her tongue congeals,
  Within her stony palate; vital floods
  Cease in her veins to flow; her neck to bow
  Resists; her arms to move in graceful guise;
  Her feet to step; and even to stone are turn'd
  Her inmost bowels. Still to weep she seems.
  Wrapt in a furious whirlwind, distant far
  Her natal soil receives her. There fixt high
  On a hill's utmost summit, still she melts;
  Still does the rigid marble flow in tears.

    Now every Theban, male and female, all,
  Dread the fierce anger of the powers of heaven;
  And with redoubled fervor lowly bend,
  And own the twin-producing goddess' power.
  Then, as oft seen, they ancient tales recount,
  Reminded by events of recent date.
  Thus one relates.--"Long since some clowns, who till'd
  "The fertile fields of Lycia, felt the ire
  "Of this high goddess, whom they durst despise.
  "Obscure the fact itself, for low the race
  "Who suffer'd; yet most wonderous was the deed.
  "Myself have seen the marsh; the lake have seen
  "Fam'd for the prodigy. My aged sire,
  "To toil unable on the lengthen'd road,
  "Me thither sent; an herd of choicest beeves
  "Thence to conduct; to my unpractis'd steps
  "A guiding native of the land he gave.
  "While we the pastures travers'd, lo! we found
  "An ancient altar, 'midst a spacious lake
  "Erected; black with sacrificing dust;
  "With waving reeds surrounded. Here my guide
  "Halted, and softly whisper'd,--bless me, power!
  "And I, like softly whispering,--bless me!--cry'd.
  "Then ask'd, if nymph, or fawn, or native god
  "The altar own'd?--when thus my guide reply'd.
  "No mountain god, O, youth! this altar claims,
  "But her whom once imperial Juno's rage,
  "Stern interdicted from firm earth's extent:
  "Whom scarce the wandering Delos would receive,
  "Ardent beseeching, when the buoyant isle
  "Light floated. There at length, Latona, laid
  "Betwixt a palm, and bright Minerva's tree,
  "Spite of their fierce opposing step-dame's power,
  "Her twins produc'd. Even hence, in child-bed driven,
  "She fled from Juno; in her bosom bore,
  "'Tis said, the twin-celestials. Now the sun
  "With fervid rays, had scorch'd the arid meads,
  "When faint with lengthen'd toil, the goddess gain'd
  "The edge of Lycia's monster-breeding clime;
  "Parch'd and exhausted, from the solar heat,
  "And infants milking her exhausted breast.
  "By chance a lake, far distant she espy'd,
  "Deep in a vale's recess, of waters pure.
  "There clowns the bulrush gather'd; there they pluck'd
  "The shrubby osier, and the marsh-fond grass.
  "Approach'd the goddess; on her knees low bent,
  "The earth she press'd, and forward lean'd to drink
  "The cooling liquid. This the rustic mob
  "Forbade. When she to those who thus oppos'd,--
  "Water withhold? Water whose use is free?
  "Nature to all unsparing gives to take,
  "Of light, of air, and of the flowing stream.
  "I claim but public gifts: yet suppliant beg
  "Those public gifts to share. Not here I come,
  "My weary'd arms and limbs within the waves
  "To lave: my thirst alone I wish to slake.
  "Even now my speaking lips their moisture want;
  "Scarce my parch'd throat, a passage to my words
  "Can yield. As nectar were the limpid draught.
  "Life with the water give me; for to me,
  "Water is life; with water life I seek.
  "Let these too move you, who their tender hands
  "Stretch to your bosoms,--for by chance the babes
  "Their little hands held forth. The goddess' words,
  "Thus bland-beseeching, who could e'er withstand?
  "Yet these persisted;--obstinate refus'd
  "To grant her wish, and with opprobrious speech
  "And threats revil'd her, should she there remain.
  "Nor rested thus,--the lake with hands and feet
  "Muddy they trouble; with malicious leaps
  "They agitate the pool, and upward stir
  "From the deep bottom clouds of slimy ooze.
  "Anger her thirst diverted. Rage deny'd
  "More supplication from th' indignant dame.
  "Their threatening words, no more the goddess brook'd;
  "But raising high to heaven her hands, she cry'd,--
  "Be this your home for ever!--Gracious heard,
  "Her prayer was granted. Now they joy to plunge,
  "Beneath the waters; now they deep immerge
  "Their bodies in the hollow fen; now raise
  "Their heads, and skim the surface of the pool,
  "Often they rest upon the margin's brink,
  "And oft light-springing, in the cool lake plunge.
  "Now still their rude contentious tongues they use,
  "Still squabbling, lost to shame beneath the waves:
  "Beneath the waves they still abusings strive
  "To utter. Hoarsely still their voice is heard,
  "Through their wide-bloated throats. Their railing words,
  "Their jaws more wide dilate. Depriv'd of neck,
  "Their head and back in junction seem to meet;
  "Green shine their backs; their bellies, hugely swol'n
  "Are white; and frogs they plunge within the pool."

    Thus as the man, the fate destructive told
  Of Lycia's clowns, to mind another call'd
  The satyr's fate, who vanquish'd in the strife
  Of skill, on Pallas' pipe, Latona's son
  Severely punish'd.--"Wherefore thus,"--he cries,
  "Rent from myself? O, penitent I bow.
  "The pipe," he shrieks, "should not such rage provoke."
  Exclaiming thus, o'er his extremest limbs
  Stript was his skin; he one continuous wound!
  Blood flow'd from every part; the naked nerves
  Bare started; and the trembling veins full throbb'd,
  By skin uncover'd. Every beating part
  Inward, the breast's translucent fibres plain
  Display'd to sight. Him every forest fawn;
  Each brother satyr; and each sylvan god;
  And every nymph, with fam'd Olympus wept:
  And every swain, the woolly flock who fed;
  Or on the mountain watch'd the horned herd.
  Wash'd by their falling tears, the fertile earth
  Is soak'd,--absorbs them in her inmost veins;
  Then form'd to water, spouts them high in air.
  Rapid 'twixt banks declivitous, they seek
  The ocean. Marsya, is the river call'd;
  The clearest stream through Phrygia's land which flows.

    Thus far the crowd;--and then lamenting turn
  To present griefs:--Amphion's race extinct,
  Unanimous they wail; but hated still
  Remains the mother's pride. For her alone
  Weep'd Pelops;--rent his garments, bare expos'd
  His breast and shoulders lay, and fair display'd
  The ivory joint. This shoulder at his birth
  In fleshy substance, and carnation tinge,
  Equall'd the right. When by his sire his limbs
  Disjointed lay, the gods, 'tis said, quick join'd
  The sever'd members: every fragment found,
  Save what combin'd the neck and upper arm;
  The part destroy'd, with ivory they replace;
  And Pelops perfect from the gift became.

    The neighbouring lords assemble;--every town
  Their kings intreat condolence to bestow,
  And all to Thebes repair. First Argos sends;
  Sparta; Mycene; Calydon, not yet
  By stern Diana hated; Corinth, fam'd
  For beauteous brass; Orchomenus the fierce;
  Messene fertile; Patrae; Pylos, rul'd
  By Neleus; Troezen, yet unus'd to own
  The sway of Pittheus; Cleona the low;
  And all those towns the two-sea'd isthmus holds;
  And all those towns the isthmus views without.
  Athens, incredible! was absent sole.
  War all her energy demanded. Borne
  O'er ocean, fierce barbarian troops, the walls
  Mopsopian threaten'd. Thracian Tereus, these
  With arms auxiliar routed; bright his name
  Shone from the conquest. Him in riches great,
  Mighty in power, and from the god-like Mars,
  His lineage tracing, Procne's nuptial hand
  Close to Pandion bound. Their marriage bed
  Nor Grace, nor Hymen, nor the nuptial queen
  Attended. Furies held the torches, snatch'd
  From biers funereal. Furies spread the couch:
  And all night long an owl, ill-omen'd bird,
  Perch'd on the roof that crown'd the marriage dome.
  Join'd with such omens, with such omens bore
  Procne a son to Tereus. Wide through Thrace
  Congratulations sound: glad thanks to heaven
  The parents give, and hail the happy day
  Which gave Pandion's daughter to the king;
  And gave the pair a son. So ignorant still
  Mankind of real happiness remain!

    Now through five autumns had the cheerful sun
  The whirling year renew'd. When Procne, bland
  Her spouse besought.--"If grace within thy sight
  "Claim my deserts,--or suffer me to see
  "In her own clime my sister, or to ours
  "My sister bring: a quick return thou well
  "Our sire may'st promise. This high boon obtain'd,
  "My sister's presence,--to my sight thou'lt seem,
  "A deity in goodness."--On the main
  He bids them launch the vessel; in the port
  Cecropian enters, urg'd by oar and sail;
  And treads Piraeus' shore. Soon as he gain'd
  His audience; soon as hand with hand was clasp'd,
  His ill-presaging speech he open'd. First
  The journey's cause narrating; fond desire
  Of Procne; and the promis'd quick return
  Of Philomela, should the sire comply.
  Lo! Philomela enters, splendid robes
  Attire her; still more splendid shine her charms:
  Such they describe within the forests rove
  Dryad, and Naiaed nymphs; such would they seem
  Their shape like hers adorn'd, like hers attir'd.
  Instant was Tereus at the sight inflam'd;
  So instant would the hoary harvest burn,
  The torch apply'd: so burn the wither'd leaves;
  Or hoarded hay. Well might her charms inspire
  Such love in any;--him his inbred lust
  More goaded, more his country's warmth which burns
  Intense; he flames from nature, and from clime.
  First to corrupt th' attendants he designs,
  And faithful nurse; and Philomel' to tempt
  With gifts immense,--his kingdom's mighty price.
  Or forceful snatch her, and the rape defend,
  With all the powers of war. Nought but he dares.
  Impell'd by love's unbridled power; his breast
  The raging fire contains not. Irksome seems
  Delay:--and eager to the anxious wish
  Of Procne, turns his converse; her desires
  His wishes aiding. Eloquent he spoke;
  For love inspir'd him. Often as he press'd
  More close than prudent, all his earnest speech,
  Procne, he said, dictated. Heavens! how dark
  The gloom that blinds the view of human souls.
  Tereus for tenderest piety esteem'd,
  More as for vice he labors: praise he gains,
  for every crime. Now Philomela begs,
  His prayer assisting; flings her winning arms
  Around Pandion's neck, and suppliant sues
  A sight of Procne; for her woe she begs,
  But deems she begs delight. Her Tereus views;--
  Anticipates his joys; her every kiss,
  Her arms around her parent's neck entwin'd,
  But goad his passion: fuel fresh they add;
  Food for his flame. And when her sire she clasps,
  He longs that sire to be. Parent, not more
  His impious purpose would the wretch delay!
  The king by both their warm beseechings won,
  Consents;--she joyful to her father gives
  Glad thanks;--and hapless, deems completely blest,
  Herself and sister, both most deeply curst;

    Now Phoebus' toil nigh spent, his coursers' feet
  Sweep'd down the slope of heaven. The royal feast,
  And golden goblets, fill'd with Bacchus' gift,
  The board bespread. From hence in slumbers soft,
  Each sought repose. All but the Thracian king,
  Though far remov'd, still burning; all her face,
  Her hands and gesture he recals, and paints
  At pleasure all her beauties yet unseen:
  Feeding his flame, and sleep repelling far.

    'Twas morn;--Pandion, pressing warm the hand
  Of Tereus, as they parted, while the tears
  Gush'd sudden, thus bespeaks his friendly care.
  "Dear son, to thee I give her, pious claims
  "Compel me: suppliant let me thee adjure
  "By faith, by kindred, and by all the gods,
  "Thy care paternal, shall protect the maid;
  "And the soft solace of my anxious years,
  "Speedy restore, for each delay is long.
  "Quick, Philomela, quick my child, rejoin
  "Thy sire, if filial duty sways thee. Much
  "Thy sister's absence pains me."--Speaking thus
  He press'd with kisses soft, the maiden's lips,
  And dripping tears with each behest let fall.
  Their hands he asks as pledge of faith, and joins
  Their hands in his presented; tender begs
  His salutations to his daughter dear;
  And his young grandson. Scarce the last adieu,
  Chok'd with deep sighs, he breathes: his boding mind
  Foreseeing future woes.

                          Now Philomel'
  Safely on board the painted vessel plac'd,
  The land far left, as with their laboring oars
  The surges move;--exulting Tereus, cry'd,
  "Victorious,--lo! my utmost wishes borne
  Safe with me."--Scarce his burning soul defers
  His hop'd-for joys. His eyes are never turn'd
  From the lov'd face. Thus Jove's protected bird
  Rapacious bears, with his sharp talons pierc'd,
  An hare defenceless to his lofty nest:
  No flight remains, the spoiler calmly views
  His prey. Now ended is their voyage, now
  Weary'd they quit their ship, and joyful touch
  Their native beach; and now the Thracian king
  Pandion's daughter to a lofty stall
  Conducts; by ancient trees the spot well screen'd.
  There he inclos'd the pale, the trembling maid,
  Of all things fearful, as with tears she press'd
  Her sister's face to see: his purpose dire
  Disclosing,--force the helpless maid o'ercame,
  Loudly exclaiming to her sire; and loud
  Her sister's help invoking, equal vain:
  But chief she begs celestial powers to aid.
  Trembling she lies; so seems a shuddering lamb
  Wounded, and from the hoary wolf's fierce jaws
  Just 'scap'd, not sure his safety yet he deems:
  So seems a dove, her plumes in blood deep-drench'd,
  With fear still shivering; still the hungry claws
  Dreading, that lately pierc'd her. Soon restor'd
  Her mental powers, while scatter'd hung the locks
  Rent in her anguish, high her arms she rais'd,
  Livid with blows, as those that mourn the dead;
  Exclaiming,--"O, barbarian! wretch supreme!
  "In cruelty and vice; whom not the charge
  "Parental, seal'd with pious tears could move;
  "A sister's charge entrusted: not her state,
  "Virgin defenceless; not the sacred vows,
  "Conjugal plighted. In confusion all
  "Commixt, by thee, adulteress here I lie,
  "Against my sister. Thou a double spouse,
  "To both. This scourge is sure to me not due.
  "Why, villain, not my hated life destroy?
  "Perfect in deeds atrocious; would my breath
  "Before the horrid act supprest had been:
  "Then had I guiltless sought the shades. But still
  "If powers celestial view this act; if sway
  "On earth they hold; if all not sinks with me,
  "Thy fate hence-forward from me dread; myself
  "Shall unabash'd, thy acts proclaim. If power
  "Is granted, when in public walks I roam:
  "If here in woods imprison'd, all the woods
  "Shall with my plaints resound; the conscious rocks
  "I'll move. May heaven me hear! and if in heaven
  "A god abides, me hear!"--Rous'd by her words,
  The fierce king's anger burns; no less his fear
  Than anger moves him: strongly spurr'd by each,
  His weapon from the pendent sheath he drew:
  Dragg'd by the hair, her limbs he forc'd to yield
  To fetters; twisting rough her arms behind.
  Glad Philomel' to him her throat presents,
  Death from the glittering sword expecting. Grasp'd
  In pincers, fierce her tongue he tore away;
  Griev'd, and indignant, as her father's name
  She strove to utter: trembling still appear'd
  The bloody root; trembling the tongue itself
  Murmur'd as on the gore-stain'd earth it lay:
  As leaps the serpent's sever'd tail, the tongue,
  Quivering in death, still to her feet advanc'd.
  This deed of horror done, 'tis said that oft
  (Incredible the fact) repeated force
  Upon her mangled form the wretch employ'd.

    Now dares he, all those acts atrocious done,
  Return to Procne. Eager as he comes,
  For Philomel' she asks. False tears and groans
  He gives: the hapless nymph he feigns deceas'd:
  His tears convince. Now from her shoulders torn,
  Her robes with gold bright-glittering, sable vests
  Her limbs enfolded. High an empty tomb
  She rais'd, and pious obsequies perform'd
  To manes pretended: for her sister's fate
  She mourn'd, whose fate such mourning ill deserv'd.

    Through twice six signs had Phoebus journey'd on,
  The year completing. What, alas! remains
  For Philomela? Guards prevent her flight.
  Of stone erected, high the massive walls
  Circle her round. Her lips so mute, refuse
  The deed to blazon. Keen the sense of grief
  Sharpens the soul:--in misery the mind
  Ingenious sparkles. Skillful she extends
  The Thracian web, and on the snow-white threads,
  In purple letters, weaves the dreadful tale.
  Complete, a servant with expressive signs,
  The present to the queen she bids to bear.
  To Procne was it borne, witless the slave
  Of what he carry'd. Savage Tereus' spouse
  The web unfolded; read the mournful tale
  Her hapless sister told, and wonderous! sate
  In silence; grief her rising words repress'd:
  Indignant, chok'd, her throat refus'd to breathe,
  The angry accents to her plaining tongue.
  To weep she waits not, in turmoil confus'd,
  Justice and flagrance undistinguished lie;
  Her mind sole bent for vengeance on her spouse.

    Now was the time Sithonia's matrons wont,
  The rites triennial of the jovial god
  To tend. Those rites to conscious shade alone
  Confided. Rhodope, the brazen sound
  Shrill tinkling, hears by night;--by night the queen
  The palace quits, attir'd as Bacchus' rites
  Demand; and weapon'd with the Bacchant arms.
  A vine her forehead girds; the nimble deer
  Clothes with his skin her sides; her shoulder bears
  A slender spear. Thus maddening, Procne seeks
  The woods in ire terrific, crowded round
  By all her followers: rack'd by inward pangs,
  The furious rant of Bacchus veils her woes.
  The lonely stable seen at length, she howls
  Aloud,--"Evoe, ho!"--and bursts the door;
  Drags thence her sister;--her thence dragg'd, invests        I
  In Bacchanalian robes; her face inshrouds
  In ivy foliage; and astonish'd leads
  The trembling damsel o'er the palace steps.
  The horrid dome when Philomela saw,
  Perforce she enter'd; through her frame she shook;
  The blood her face deserted. Procne sought
  A spot retir'd, and from her features flung
  The sacred trappings, and her sister's face,
  Sorrowing and blushing, to the light unveil'd;
  Then ran to clasp her. She the sight not bore;
  Her eyes she rais'd not; her dejected brows
  Bent to the ground; thus by her sister seen,
  Encroacher on her bed. Her hands still spoke,
  When oaths she wish'd to utter, and to call
  Th' attesting gods, her foul disgrace by force
  To prove accomplish'd. Furious, Procne burns,
  Nor curbs her ire; her sister's streaming tears
  Reproving checks, and cries;--"no period now
  "For tears, we ask the sword! But if than sword
  "Vengeance more keen thou hop'st for, sister dear,
  "Behold me for most horrid deeds prepar'd.
  "Shall I with flaming torches blaze on high
  "His hall imperial, and the villain king
  "Heave in the conflagration? Shall I rend
  "As thine his tongue? or from his sockets tear,
  "His eye-balls? or what other member maim?
  "Or this, or instant send his guilty soul
  "Thro' thousand wounds to judgment? What thou speak'st
  "Be mighty. I for mightiest acts prepare.
  "To fix I hesitate." As Procne speaks,
  Lo! infant Itys to his mother runs;
  His sight her mind determines; cruel turn
  Her eyes, exclaiming;--"See, how like his sire's
  "Appear his features!"--More she spoke not, fixt
  Was straight her dread resolve: now fiercer burn'd
  Within her smother'd rage;--yet when the boy
  Approach'd, and round her neck his infant arms
  Threw, and his kisses printed on her lips,
  With bland caresses mingled, even the soul
  Of Procne melted. Mollify'd her rage,
  Tears hard constrain'd flow'd from unwilling eyes.
  Soon as the mother's feelings softening seem
  To melt in extreme fondness; Procne quits
  The sight, and to her sister's face reverts
  Again her visage; then on each in turn
  Full bent her view, she cries;--"Must one me melt
  "With blandish'd soothings? Must the other mute,
  "With tongue dismember'd stand? Must he exclaim
  "O, mother!--she, O, sister! never more?
  "To what a spouse, Pandion's daughter, see
  "Art thou, degenerate wife, conjoin'd! Thy sin
  "A spouse like Tereus to have us'd too well."
  More she delays not, infant Itys drags,
  Swift as the Indian tiger sweeps the fawn
  Through shady forests. Then the lofty dome,
  For rooms remote well search'd, in one arrives,
  Where she the infant pierces; 'twixt the breast
  And side the weapon enters, while his hands,
  Suppliant, his fate foreseeing, he extends,
  And,--"mother! O, my mother!"--loudly cries.
  Nor mov'd her countenance fell;--the single wound
  Was deadly. Philomela, with her steel
  The throat divided, and the quivering limbs
  Dissever'd, whilst of animation still
  Some glimmering sparks remain'd. Of these, they part
  In brazen cauldrons boil: part on the spit
  Crackling they turn: with gore the secret rooms
  Offensive float. Her unsuspecting spouse
  Procne to feast invites; delusive feigns
  Her country's customs,--where 'twas given, but one
  The husband should be nigh; all menial slaves
  Far distant. On his ancestorial seat
  High-lifted, Tereus sate, and feasted there:
  And in his bowels deep he there entomb'd
  Bowels his own. So blind are human souls,--
  "Call Itys to the feast,"--he cries. No more
  Could Procne veil her savage joy;--full bent
  The slaughter to announce, she loud proclaim'd
  "Thou seek'st who with thee rests!"--Around he looks.
  Wondering where rests he. Philomela rush'd,
  Her tresses sprinkled with the ireful blood,
  As griev'd he, Itys calling loud, and flung,
  With savage fury Itys' gory head
  Full in his father's face; nor ever mourn'd
  Lost speech so much; her well-earn'd joy to show,
  More griev'd lost power. With outcry loud the king
  O'er-turn'd the table; from the Stygian vale,
  Invok'd the viper'd sisters: hard he strove
  To tear his bosom, and from thence disgorge
  The dire repast, the half-digested mass
  Of Itys' limbs. Now weeping, wild he mourns,
  Himself his offspring's tomb. Now fierce pursues
  Pandion's daughters with his unsheath'd sword.
  From him escaping, on light wings upborne
  Th' Athenians seem'd; light wings their limbs upbore!
  One sheltering in the woods: protecting roofs
  The other seeking; still the murderous deed,
  Mark'd on her breast remains; still on her plumes
  The teint of blood is seen. Rapid in rage
  And hope of vengeance, Tereus too is chang'd,
  And flits a bird; a plumy crest he bears,
  High on his head: the lengthen'd sword he bore,
  A beak enormous grows. A lapwing now
  With fierce-arm'd face he flies.

                                  Untimely sought
  Pandion, when the mournful tale he heard,
  The Stygian shades, ere yet the lengthen'd date
  Of years commanded. Next th' Athenian realm
  Erechtheus rul'd, the sceptre dubious held
  By right or forceful arms. Proud could he boast
  Four sons;--and daughters four to him were given.
  Beauteous the maids; in beauty equal two:
  Of these AEoelian Cephalus was bless'd
  With thee as spouse, O, Procris!--Tereus long,
  Boreas withstanding, with the power of Thrace,
  Long Orithyia, by the god belov'd,
  Was lov'd in vain; while soft beseechings more
  And prayers, the power to strenuous force preferr'd.
  But now those soothings bland so vainly try'd,
  Fierce swol'n with rage, his most accustom'd feel
  (Too much that passion knows this wind) he cries;--
  "Well I deserve it, all my proper arms
  "Relinquish'd: savage fierceness, strength, stern rage,
  "And threatening force. With humble softening prayers
  "Fool have I su'd; in each attempt have fail'd.
  "More apt to me is force! by force I drive
  "The lowering clouds before me: Ocean's waves
  "Forceful I turn; forceful the knotted oak
  "Root from its deep foundation; hard the frost
  "I bind; and beat the sounding earth with hail:
  "I when in open sky, for there our field
  "Lies in display, my blustering brethren meet,
  "Oppose such might, that midmost sky resounds
  "Echoing our forceful conflict; flashing flames
  "From the cleft bodies of the hollow clouds,
  "Elicited: I too, earth's secret womb
  "Fierce entering, in her deepest caverns strain
  "My strength, 'till trembling wide through all her frame,
  "The ghosts below are troubled. These the aid
  "My nuptial wish should seek; no longer pray
  "Erechtheus for my sire;--my sire by force,
  "The monarch shall be made."--So spoke the god,
  Or thus, or more in fury, as he shook
  His plumes, whose motion sweep'd through earth's extent,
  And made the wide main tremble. Lofty hills
  His dusty mantle covers; as the plains
  Rapid he brushes; shrouded deep in mist,
  In his dark wings the furious lover clasps
  His Orithyia, trembling, pale with fear:
  Flying his flames were fann'd, and fiercer blaz'd.
  Nor check'd the ravisher his lofty flight,
  Till seen the town of Cicones, whose walls
  Receiv'd him. There th' Athenian nymph became
  The freezing monarch's bride: a mother there,
  A double birth she brought, whose shoulders bear
  The father's pinions; all their semblance else
  Their mother's. Not at first, 'tis said, appear'd
  The feathers: Calais and Zethes, boys
  Were yet unplum'd; when yet with ruddy hair,
  Their beards appear'd not. From each shoulder shot
  The feathers bird-like, at the self-same time,
  Their manly cheeks were thick with yellow down.
  Now when their youth matur'd to man appear'd,
  Through seas unplough'd before, they sought the fleece
  Splendid with glittering wool; with all the train
  Of Minyae, in the first-built vessel borne.


*The Seventh Book.*


    Expedition of the Argonauts. Jason obtains the golden fleece, by
    the assistance of Medea. AEson restored to youth by her magic
    powers. Murder of Pelias by his daughters. Medea's flight to
    Corinth. Murder of her rival and infants. Marriage with AEgeus.
    Adventures of Theseus. War with Minos. Plague in AEgina. Change of
    ants into Myrmidons. Cephalus and Procris.


THE *Seventh Book* OF THE METAMORPHOSES OF OVID.


    Now in the Pagasaean vessel borne,
  Plough'd the wide sea the Argonauts, and saw
  The fate of Phineus; whose old age the curse
  Of hunger felt, and felt perpetual night.
  The youths from Boreas sprung, quick sped to flight
  The virgin-featur'd birds, his hapless face,
  Far distant. 'Neath great Jason's rule much toil
  They bore ere on the oozy banks they stay'd
  Of rapid Phasis. Here the king they seek;
  And here demand the golden fleece; and here
  An answer big with fearful labors learn
  The Grecian crew. Meantime the royal maid
  Burns with fierce fires: with reason struggling long,
  Still her hot flame to quench unable, cries
  Aloud Medea;--"vainly I oppose!
  "Some unknown god controls. Perhaps 'tis love!
  "If love 'tis not, no sentiment more near
  "To love can come. Why else my sire's commands
  "So harsh appear? But harsh in truth they are.
  "But why his failing dread? Why dread his death,
  "But barely seen? What cause such fear can give?
  "O, hapless maid! would from my virgin breast
  "Those flames to fling were given. If mine the power
  "More wisdom would I use. But me this force,
  "Before unknown, unwilling drags; this love
  "Persuades, oppos'd to reason: plain I see
  "The better track,--approve it most, yet swerv'd,
  "I tread the worse. Why, royal virgin, burn
  "Thus for a stranger guest? Why long'st thou thus,
  "A foreign partner in the marriage bed
  "To clasp? Thy country well can thee supply
  "What e'er thou lovest. In the gods' decree
  "His death or safety rests. Yet may he live!
  "Pray may'st thou for him sure,--love unconcern'd.
  "But what has Jason done? Savage, indeed!
  "Were those his youth, his birth, and brilliant deeds
  "Not touch'd: how savage too the soul must be
  "His beauty touch'd not, were there nought beside;
  "My bosom sure it moves. But were my aid
  "Deny'd, the furious bulls with flaming breath
  "His fate would compass; or the foes that spring
  "From earth, his harvest, slay him in the fight;
  "Or last, he'd fall the ravenous dragon's prey.
  "If this I suffer, from the tiger sprung
  "Believe me; steel and marble in my breast,
  "Deem me to wear. Why not his death behold?
  "Why not mine eyes with the dread sight pollute!
  "Why not the bulls, the earth-born foes incite,
  "And sleepless dragon, with redoubled ire?
  "Heaven wills it better. But let deeds, not prayers
  "My time employ. How! shall I then betray
  "My parent's realm? an unknown stranger aid
  "With all my power? who by my power preserv'd,
  "Loos'd to the wind his sails, another's spouse
  "Becomes,--me left for punishment behind?
  "If this to do,--another nymph to me
  "Born to prefer, let him, ingrate! be slain.
  "But no! his face denies it; his great soul,
  "And graceful form forbid the fear of fraud;
  "Or benefits forgot. Yet shall he plight
  "His solemn faith first, call th' attesting gods
  "To witness what he vows. What fear I more?
  "All's safe. Medea, hasten, spurn delay,--
  "Jason, remaining life to thee shall owe;
  "Join'd to his state, the annual torch shall flame
  "To thee, preserver! through the Grecian towns
  "By crowds of mothers hail'd. Shall I for this
  "My sister leave, my brother, and my sire;
  "My gods, and natal land? Yes,--fierce my sire;
  "My country barbarous; and my brother young:
  "With all my wishes, warm my sister joins;
  "And dwells within my breast the mightiest god.
  "Much I relinquish not, but much I seek.
  "The glorious title of the Grecian youth
  "Deliverer! gain'd; the sight of lands and towns
  "Whose fame even here has journey'd; manners mild,
  "And cultur'd arts; and Jason for my spouse,
  "For whom all earth's possessions were too small
  "To change. His spouse become, supremely blest,
  "Dear to the gods, the loftiest stars I'll reach.
  "What are those rocks, they tell, which 'mid the waves
  "Meet in encounter? Fell Charybdis what,--
  "Hostile to ships, now sucking in the tide,
  "Now fierce discharging? What the savage bounds,
  "Which compass greedy Scylla 'mid the main
  "Sicilian? O'er the wide-spread ocean borne,
  "Him whom I love embracing; sheltering close
  "In Jason's bosom; clasp'd by him, no fear
  "My soul could harbor. Or if fear I felt,
  "For him alone I'd tremble; for my spouse.
  "Spouse, dost thou say, Medea? hid'st thou thus,
  "With specious names thy crime? Behold the load
  "Of guilt thou goest to bear! While power remains
  "The sin avoid."--She said, and duty, shame,
  And rectitude, before her eyes appear'd;
  And vanquish'd love address'd his wings to flight.
  Now to an ancient altar Hecat' own'd,
  By shady trees dark veil'd from day, she came:
  Her flames abated, and her eager pulse
  Subsided. Here AEsonides she saw,
  And bright her love reblaz'd. Warm flush'd her cheeks,
  Deep all her visage glow'd. The smallest spark
  Thus low in embers hid, its vigor shews;
  Help'd by the feeding blast, increasing burns,
  And stirr'd in all its wonted fury glows.
  Just so the languid passion which but now
  All but extinct appear'd, the hero seen
  Fresh at his beauteous presence flam'd. By chance
  More beauteous Jason on that morn appear'd;
  Well might a lover all her love excuse.
  She looks, his countenance with her eyes devours
  As then first seen; and madly fond, she deems
  His features more than mortal: bashful turn'd
  Her forehead not from his. But when her guest
  Address'd her: when he gently took her hands;
  And crav'd assistance in an humble tone,
  The nuptial promise giving. Plenteous flow'd
  Her tears, exclaiming;--"What I should perform
  "Plainly I see: not ignorance me misleads
  "But love. My gifts shall aid you, you but keep
  "The promise pledg'd."--Sacred the hero swears
  By her, the tri-form'd goddess, whom that grove
  Acknowledges divine; and by the god,
  Whence sprung the sire-in-law he hopes to claim;
  The god who all beholds; by all his deeds
  Atchiev'd; and by his perils all he swears.
  His words believ'd, immediate he receives
  The magic plants, their use well taught, and seeks
  The roof rejoicing. Now the morn had driven
  The glimmering stars far distant, crowding press'd
  The people in the sacred field of Mars,
  The king himself amidst them, seated high,
  In purple clad, with ivory sceptre grac'd.
  Lo! come the brazen-footed bulls, who breathe
  Through nostrils fenc'd with adamant hot flames:
  Parch'd by their breath, the herbage blacken'd burns.
  Loud as the blazing forge's chimney roars;
  Or loud as lime in earthy furnace laid,
  Bursts into heat by watery sprinklings touch'd:
  So loud, within their flaming chests contain'd,
  The struggling fires loud bellow'd. Scorch'd their throats
  The sound transmitted. Boldly AEson's son
  March'd onward; fiercely as the youth approach'd,
  His foes dark lower'd, and bent their steel-tipt horns,
  Paw'd with their clefted hoofs the dusty ground,
  And fill'd with smoky bellowings all the air.
  Pale grew each Grecian face; advancing on
  The fiery blasts he feels not, such the power
  The mighty charms possess, but boldly strokes
  Their dewlaps pendulous, and to the yoke
  Subjected, makes them drag the ponderous plough;
  And with the iron cut th' uncustom'd soil.
  The Colchians wondering gaze; the Grecians loud
  Applaud, and with fresh courage fill his soul.
  Then from his brazen helmet pluck'd, he sows
  The serpent's teeth, deep in the furrow'd ground:
  The ground, the teeth with powerful venom ting'd,
  Soften'd and swell'd them, and a novel shape
  Imparted. Thus within the parent's womb,
  An human shape the infant mass receives,
  Completed perfect in the dark recess;
  Nor till mature, to air external given.
  So when the manly forms were perfect made
  Within earth's pregnant bowels, up they sprung
  Thick in the fruitful field; more wonderous still
  Their arms they clash'd when born. Then when the Greeks
  Their keenly-pointed spears preparing saw
  To hurl at Jason's head, low sunk their souls,
  And pallid grew their cheeks; Medea ev'n,
  Whose art insur'd his safety, trembling fear'd,
  When single she the youth beheld assail'd
  By foes in hosts; bloodless her face became,
  And tremor seiz'd her limbs: then lest the herbs
  Presented first, should fail in power, she sings
  An helping magic song, and all her arts
  Latent, calls forth. Amidst the hostile crowd
  A mighty rock he flings; their martial rage
  From him diverted, on each other turns.
  By mutual wounds the earth-born brothers fall;
  In civil discord perish. Joy'd again
  The Grecians clasp the conqueror in their arms.
  Thou too, Medea, wish'd thine arms to fill
  With him victorious. (Shame at first repress'd
  Thy open fondness, though thou wast embrac'd)
  Now reputation awes thee, now prevents
  That bliss. What honor gives,--silent to joy,
  And pour glad thanks to all thy magic arts,
  And gods their authors, those thou dar'st indulge.
  Now sole remains by powerful herbs to lull
  The wakeful dragon, whose high-crested head
  A triple tongue contains, whose crooked fangs
  Dreadful the golden fleece protecting guards.
  Him when be sprinkled with the juices prest
  From plants Lethean; and repeated thrice,
  The words which placid sleep inspire; which still
  The ruffled ocean; and arrest the course
  Of rapid torrents; sleep before unknown
  Stole o'er his eyelids, and th' AEsonian youth
  Seiz'd on the golden prize. Proud with the spoil,
  (A second spoil possessing) she who gave
  The power to conquer, as his wife he bears,
  And lands triumphant on Thessalia's shores.

    Mothers of Thessaly, and aged sires
  For sons restor'd, glad offerings bring: bright flames
  The high-heap'd incense; votive victims deck'd
  With gilded horns are slain: but AEson, far
  The grateful crowd avoids, now near his fate,
  Bent by a weight of years. Hence Jason spoke;--
  "O, spouse! to thee my life and safety ow'd;
  "To me, thou all hast given; the high swol'n sum
  "Of all thy favors might belief surpass:
  "This more attempt, if this thou can'st,--and what
  "Thy magic power defies? My years curtail,
  "And to my sire's existence add the term."
  Fast flow'd his tears while speaking;--while he spoke,
  His pious duty mov'd Medea; quick
  Her sire AEeta, so deserted, sprung
  To thought, and shew'd the two contrasting souls.
  But, veil'd her secret thoughts, she thus replies;--
  "What impious accents hear I from thy tongue,
  "O, spouse religious? Can I then transfer
  "Of thy existence part? Not Hecat's power
  "Fateful, would sanction this; nor stands thy wish
  "In equity. Yet, Jason, will I try
  "More than thou seek'st to give. With all my skill
  "Thy sire's existence to prolong, thy years
  "Unshorten'd; should the tri-form'd goddess aid
  "Propitious my designs."--Three nights were now
  Deficient, ere the full-form'd horns could meet
  The lunar orb to fill. Complete her round;
  A solid sphere of light from earth beheld,
  Medea wanders forth; loose all her robes;
  Naked her feet; bare-headed; while her hair
  Wild o'er her shoulders floats; and thus array'd,
  Untended, while deep midnight silence reigns
  She bends her devious way. Men, beasts, and birds,
  In bonds of sleep were chain'd; the hedges still,
  No murmur breath'd; nor wav'd the silent trees;
  Hush'd was the humid sky; the stars alone
  Twinkled: to them her arms extending, thrice
  She turn'd around; thrice from the flowing stream
  Her tresses sprinkled; thrice with yelling noise
  The silence broke; then with her bended knee
  The hard earth pressing, cry'd;--"O, night! thou friend
  "Of secret deeds; ye glittering stars! whose rays
  "With Luna's, Sol's diurnal light succeed;
  "And thou, O, Hecat'! tripleform'd, who know'st
  "My undertaking, and approaching aid'st
  "With incantations, and with magic powers:
  "And thou, O, earth! whose bosom witching plants
  "Affords: ye winds; ye skies; ye mountains; lakes;
  "And flowing streams: O, all ye gods! who dwell
  "In shady woods; and all ye gods of night,
  "Hither approach! by whose high power, at will,
  "Rivers I cause between their wondering banks,
  "Back to their springs to flow; the stormy deep
  "Hush by my song, or lash it into rage;
  "Clouds form, or clouds dispel; raise furious blasts,
  "Or furious blasts allay; smite with my song
  "The dragon's furious jaws: the living rocks
  "I shake;--uproot the oak; the earth upturn;
  "Move forests; bid the trembling mountains leap;
  "Loud roar the ground; and from the tombs the ghosts
  "Affrighted walk. Thee, Luna, too I draw
  "From heaven, by all the threatening clash of brass
  "Deterr'd not: pale the brighter car becomes,
  "My spells once utterr'd: by my poisons charm'd,
  "Pallid Aurora seems. You, plants! for me,
  "Blunted the ardor of the flaming bulls;
  "Press'd with the yoke, their necks impatient bent,
  "And dragg'd the crooked plough. You bade the race
  "Snake-born, upon themselves their warring rage
  "To turn. In sleep the roaring dragon's eyes
  "You steep'd; the guard eluded, sent the prize
  "To glad the towns of Greece. Now have I need
  "Of renovating herbs, to make old age
  "Glow once again in all its youthful bloom.
  "This will you grant, for sure those stars in vain
  "Not sparkle; nor in vain the chariot comes
  "Drawn by the dragons wing'd." The chariot comes
  Swift sweeping through the air. Active she mounts,
  Strokes the rein'd dragons' manes, and shakes the thongs.
  On high they soar:--Thessalian Tempe far
  Beneath she views; then tow'rd the chalky land
  Her snakes directs. On Ossa's top explores
  For plants, and seeks what lofty Pelion bears;
  Othrys, and Pindus, and Olympus huge.
  What please her, part she with their root updrags;
  Part with her crooked brazen sickle mows;
  Apidanus; Amphrysos, on their banks
  Many afforded: nor Enipeus scap'd.
  Peneus, and Spercheus, and the rushy shores
  Of Baebe some contributed. She pluck'd
  In Anthedon the living grass whose power,
  Then Glaucus' form unchang'd, was yet unknown.

    Now had nine days, now had nine nights elaps'd,
  Borne on her dragon wings, and in her car
  Wandering the fields among, ere back she turn'd:
  Unfed her dragons, save by odorous smells;
  Yet had they shed their scales, with youth renew'd.
  Arriv'd, without the palace gate she stays,
  And there sole shelter'd by the sky, all touch
  Of man denying; altars two she rears
  Of turf; sacred to Hecate stood the right,
  To Youth the left: when these with vervain bound.
  And forest boughs, here sacrifice she makes.
  Hard by, two trenches scoops from out the ground;
  Smites with her weapon in the sable throat,
  A sheep presented; in the open ditch
  Empties the blood; then bowls of wine she pours,
  And bowls of smoking milk; with mystic words
  Invokes the powers terrestrial; begs the king
  Of shades, and begs his ravish'd spouse to aid,
  Nor of his soul the aged king defraud.
  These when with lengthen'd prayers, and murmurings long,
  Appeas'd; she bids them tow'rd the altars bring
  The feeble AEson; his exhausted limbs
  Bound in deep slumber, by her magic power,
  Corse-like, she lays extended on the grass.
  Then Jason bids, and his attendant crew,
  Far thence depart, nor with their view prophane
  Her acts mysterious. As she bids they go.
  Medea then the flaming altars round,
  In Bacchanalian guise her flowing locks,
  Circles; and in the ditch's blackening gore
  Her splinter'd torches dips; with blood imbu'd,
  Burns them upon her altars; thrice with fire,
  With sulphur thrice, and thrice with flowing streams,
  The sire she lustrates. Heated now in brass,
  Her powerful medicines bubble, high and white
  The swelling froth appears. There boils she all
  The roots in vales AEmonian dug; and seeds,
  And flowers, and juices dark: gems unto these,
  Sought in the distant East, she adds; and adds
  What on the sand the refluent ocean leaves:
  More still, the night-long moon collected dew
  She brings; the dismal screech-owl's flesh and wings;
  The entrails of the wolf ambiguous, wont
  His savage face in human guise to wear:
  Nor wanted there, the scaly skin which clothes
  Th' amphibious snake Cyniphian, long and small:
  The beak and head a crow nine ages bore,
  She adds. Now was the foreign dame prepar'd,
  By help of these, and nameless thousands more,
  The promis'd boon to give, the whole she stirs
  Deep from the bottom, with a bough long rent,
  From the mild olive. Lo! the wither'd branch,
  The boiling caldron stirring, sudden shoots
  In virid freshness! shortly leaves bud forth;
  And soon it bends beneath a load of fruit!
  Where'er the fire above the hollow brass,
  The bubbling foam high-rais'd, and boiling drops
  Sprinkled the ground,--the ground with verdure smil'd;
  Flowers and soft herbage sprung. Medea sees,
  And with her weapon ope's the senior's throat;
  His aged blood exhausted sees, and pours
  Her juices copious: part his mouth receives;
  And part the wound. When AEson these had drank,
  Their hoary whiteness lost, his beard and hair,
  An ebon tinge receiv'd; his leanness fled;
  His pallid ghastly face no more was seen;
  His hollow veins with added blood were fill'd;
  And all his limbs in lusty plumpness swell'd.
  The wondering AEson, such himself beheld,
  As the last forty years he ne'er had past.

    Bacchus, from heaven survey'd the mighty change
  Wonderous, and hence that power was given he found;
  His nurses to restore to youthful years:
  The boon from Tethys asking, he obtain'd.

    Nor cease the frauds yet of the Phasian dame:
  Fierce hatred 'gainst her by her spouse she feigns,
  And flies to Pelias' court; a suppliant there,
  His daughters hail her guest:--the sire bent down
  With age. The crafty Colchian these beguiles
  Soon, with her well-dissembled friendship's form.
  Amid her mighty benefits, she tells
  AEson's old age remov'd; relating all,
  On this she chiefly dwells. Hope sudden springs
  Within their virgin breasts: Pelias their sire,
  Such art they trust may yet revivify.
  That art they sue for,--highest claim'd reward
  To her they promise: mute at first she stands,
  And feigning doubt, in hesitation holds,
  And anxious poise their eager minds. At last,
  She says, when promising,--"That in the deed,
  "More faith ye may confide, a leading ram,
  "The oldest in your fleecy flocks, a lamb
  "My medicine shall transform!"--Instant was dragg'd
  The woolly beast, whose wreathing horns around
  His hollow temples curl'd; whose wither'd throat
  The steel Thessalian stabb'd; the scanty blood
  The steel scarce spotting: then th' enchantress steeps
  His mangled body in the caldron deep,
  With juices powerful: smaller grow his limbs;
  Shed are his horns; and vanish'd are his years;
  And from the caldron tender bleatings sound:
  Instant leaps forth to all the wondering crowd
  The bleating lamb, which, frisking, flies and seeks
  The swelling teats. With admiration struck,
  Now Pelias' daughters faith unshaken give;
  More urgent press their wish. Thrice had the sun,
  'Merg'd in th' Iberian sea, unyok'd his steeds;
  And the fourth night the glittering stars had shone;
  When o'er the fire, pure water from the stream,
  And powerless plants, the false Medea plac'd.

    Now all in sleep relax'd, a death-like sleep,
  The monarch's limbs were stretch'd; and with their king,
  His guards lay dormant; so her magic words,
  And magic tongue had doom'd. Medea leads
  Across the steps the daughters; bidd'n by her,
  His couch they compass.--"Why, O, feeble souls!
  "Thus hesitate?"--she said,--"your swords unsheathe!
  "Pour out his far-spent gore, that I may fill
  "With youthful, vigorous blood his empty'd veins.
  "Your father's life, and years, are in your hands:
  "If sways you piety; if empty hopes
  "Wavering deceive you not; then well deserve,
  "By duty to your sire: quickly expel
  "With weapons his old age: let issue forth
  "His now congealing blood with brandish'd steel."
  Exhorted thus, most pious she who feels,
  First impious acts;--a wicked deed performs,
  Lest wicked she were call'd: yet on the blow
  Not one would bend her sight; with eyes averse
  Their savage hands the unseen wounds inflict.
  Flowing with gore, he from the bed uprais'd
  His limbs; and from his posture strove half-torn
  To rise; and stretching forth his pallid arms
  'Mid all their threatening swords;--"Daughters!"--he cries,
  "What do ye? Why against your parent's life
  "Thus arm ye?"--Sink their spirits! drop their hands!
  His throat Medea severing, stay'd the words
  He more had utter'd,--and the mangled corse,
  Deep in the boiling brazen caldron flung.

    She now,--but through the air on dragon wings
  High borne,--their furious vengeance had not scap'd.
  O'er shady Pelion high she flew, and o'er
  The cave of Chiron; Othrys; and the spot
  For old Cerambus' strange adventure known:
  Upborne on wings by kindly-aiding nymphs,
  Here, when the solid earth th' incroaching main
  Wide delug'd, flying, safe Deucalion's flood
  He 'scap'd. AEoelian Pitane to left
  She quits; and sees the dragon huge, to stone
  An image turn'd. And Ida's grove where chang'd
  By Bacchus' power, the steer a stag became,
  To screen the theft. And where beneath the sand,
  A little sand, Corythus' father lies;
  And fields which Maera's new-heard howlings fill.
  Euripylus' fam'd town, where Coaen dames,
  What time the troops of Hercules them left,
  With horns were crown'd: and Phoebus' favor'd Rhodes;
  Jalysian Telchines, whose hateful eyes
  All vitiating, Jove detesting 'whelm'd
  Beneath his brother's waves. She passes next
  Carthaeia' walls in ancient Caeae's isle,
  Where wondering saw Alcidamas the sire,
  A placid dove his daughter's body bear.
  And Hyrie's lake she sees, and Tempe's pool
  Cycneiaen, which the swan so sudden form'd
  Frequented: Phyllius there, a willing slave,
  Birds and fierce beasts, to his capricious boy
  Oft brought--e'en lions tam'd; a furious bull
  He bade him bring, a furious bull he brought;
  But now in choler at his craving soul,
  The bull refus'd, though as the last gift claim'd:
  Indignant, cry'd he,--"soon you'll wish him given!"--
  And from the high rock plung'd: all thought he fell:
  But form'd a swan, lightly he pois'd in air
  On snowy wings. Hyrie, her son thus sav'd,
  Knew not, by constant weeping soon dissolv'd;
  The lake becoming that still bears her name.
  Near this is Pleuron:--Ophian Combe, here
  Wafted on wings, her murderous sons escap'd.
  Thence she beholds Latona's favorite isle;
  Calaurea, where to birds the royal pair
  Were chang'd: Cyllene, on the right is plac'd
  Where like the savage herd, Menephron sought
  His mother's bed. Far hence she spies in tears
  Cephisus, for his nephew's fate who mourn'd,
  Chang'd by Apollo to a sea-calf huge;
  And saw Eumelus' dome, who wept his child,
  A bird become. At length on dragon wings,
  Pirenian Corinth she regain'd; where tell