Produced by Michael Roe, Ted Garvin and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE


In this eBook, a circumflex (^) is used to indicate that the rest of
the word is a superscript. Asterisks (*) are placed around words that
were typeset in a Blackletter typeface in the original book.

     *     *     *     *     *

  _Book 3 p. 105._


  _R. Westall R.A. del^l._      _E. Scriven sculp^t_

  _Caught by the image of his beauteous face,
  He loves th' unbody'd form: a substance thinks
  The shadow:----_

  _Pub. 1807, for the Author._


  THE
  METAMORPHOSES
  OF
  PUBLIUS OVIDIUS NASO
  IN
  *English Blank Verse*


  Translated by
  J. J. HOWARD.

  VOL. 1.


_London 1807. Printed for the Author; & Sold by John Hatchard,
Bookseller to Her Majesty. Piccadilly; H. D. Symonds, Paternoster Row
& James Asperne Cornhill._

  TO
  The Patronage
  OF
  THE RIGHT HONORABLE
  WILLIAM,
  EARL OF LONSDALE,
  KNIGHT
  OF THE
  MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER,
  &c. &c. &c.

THE TRANSLATOR CONFIDES HIS ATTEMPT TO RENDER THE BEAUTIES OF OVID
MORE ACCESSIBLE TO ENGLISH READERS, AND TO CHASTEN THE PRURIENCE OF
HIS IDEAS AND HIS LANGUAGE, SO AS TO FIT HIS WRITINGS FOR MORE
GENERAL PERUSAL.

_Pimlico, Aug. 22, 1807._

  _Bailey & Macdonald, Printers,
  3, Harris's Place, Pantheon, Oxford-Street._


THE *First Book* OF THE METAMORPHOSES OF OVID.


    From bodies various form'd, mutative shapes
  My Muse would sing:--Celestial powers give aid!
  From you those changes sprung,--inspire my pen;
  Connect each period of my venturous song
  Unsever'd, from old Chaoes' rude misrule,
  Till now the world beneath Augustus smiles.

    While yet nor earth nor sea their place possest,
  Nor that cerulean canopy which hangs
  O'ershadowing all, each undistinguish'd lay,
  And one dead form all Nature's features bore;
  Unshapely, rude, and Chaos justly nam'd.
  Together struggling laid, each element
  Confusion strange begat:--Sol had not yet
  Whirl'd through the blue expanse his burning car:
  Nor Luna yet had lighted forth her lamp,
  Nor fed her waning light with borrowed rays.
  No globous earth pois'd inly by its weight,
  Hung pendent in the circumambient sky:
  The sky was not:--Nor Amphitrite had
  Clasp'd round the land her wide-encircling arms.
  Unfirm the earth, with water mix'd and air;
  Opaque the air; unfluid were the waves.
  Together clash'd the elements confus'd:
  Cold strove with heat, and moisture drought oppos'd;
  Light, heavy, hard, and soft, in combat join'd.

    Uprose the world's great Lord,--the strife dissolv'd,
  The firm earth from the blue sky plac'd apart;
  Roll'd back the waves from off the land, and fixt
  Where pure ethereal joins with foggy air.
  Defin'd each element, and from the mass
  Chaoetic, rang'd select, in concord firm
  He bound, and all agreed. On high upsprung
  The fiery ether to the utmost heaven:
  The atmospheric air, in lightness next,
  Upfloated:--dense the solid earth dragg'd down
  The heavier mass; and girt on every side
  By waves circumfluent, seiz'd her place below.

    This done, the mass this deity unknown
  Divides;--each part dispos'd in order lays:
  First earth he rounds, in form a sphere immense,
  Equal on every side: then bids the seas,
  Pent in by banks, spread their rude waves abroad,
  By strong winds vext; and clasp within their arms
  The tortuous shores: and marshes wide he adds,
  Pure springs and lakes:--he bounds with shelving banks
  The streams smooth gliding;--slowly creeping, some
  The arid earth absorbs; furious some rush,
  And in the watery plain their waves disgorge;
  Their narrow bounds escap'd, to billows rise,
  And lash the sandy shores. He bade the plains
  Extend;--the vallies sink;--the groves to bloom;--
  And rocky hills to lift their heads aloft.
  And as two zones the northern heaven restrain,
  The southern two, and one the hotter midst,
  With five the Godhead girt th' inclosed earth,
  And climates five upon its face imprest.
  The midst from heat inhabitable: snows
  Eternal cover two: 'twixt these extremes
  Two temperate regions lie, where heat and cold
  Meet in due mixture; 'bove the whole light air
  Was hung:--as water floats above the land,
  So fire 'bove air ascends. Here he bade lodge,
  Thick clouds and vapors; thunders bellowing loud
  Terrific to mankind, and winds; which mixt
  Sharp cold beget. But these to range at large
  The air throughout, his care forbade. E'en now
  Their force is scarce withstood; but oft they threat
  Wild ruin to the universe, though each
  In separate regions rules his potent blasts.
  Such is fraternal strife! Far to the east
  Where Persian mountains greet the rising sun
  Eurus withdrew. Where sinking Phoebus' rays
  Glow on the western shores mild Zephyr fled.
  Terrific Boreas frozen Scythia seiz'd,
  Beneath the icy bear. On southern climes
  From constant clouds the showery Auster rains.
  The liquid ether high above he spread,
  Light, calm, and undefil'd by dregs terrene.
  Scarce were those bounds immutable arrang'd,
  When upward sprung the stars so long press'd down
  Beneath the heap chaoetic, and along
  The path of heaven their blazing courses ran.

    Next that each separate element might hold
  Appropriate habitants,--the vault of heaven,
  Bright constellations and the gods receiv'd.
  To glittering fish allotted were the waves:
  To earth fierce brutes:--to agitated air,
  Light-plumag'd birds. A being more divine,
  Of soul exalted more, and form'd to rule
  The rest was wanting. Then he finish'd MAN!
  Or by the world's creator, power supreme,
  Form'd from an heavenly seed; or new-shap'd earth
  Late from celestial ether torn, and still
  Congenial warmth retaining, moisten'd felt,
  Prometheus' fire, and moulded took the form
  Of him all-potent. Others earth behold
  Pronely;--to man a face erect was given.
  The heavens he bade him view, and raise his eyes
  High to the stars. Thus earth of late so rude,
  So shapeless, man, till now unknown, became.

    First sprung the age of gold. Unforc'd by laws
  Strict rectitude and faith, spontaneous then
  Mankind inspir'd. No judge vindictive frown'd;
  Unknown alike were punishment and fear:
  No strict decrees on brazen plates were seen;
  Nor suppliant crowd, with trembling limbs low bent,
  Before their judges bow'd. Unknown was law,
  Yet safe were all. Unhewn from native hills,
  The pine-tree knew the seas not, nor had view'd
  Regions unknown, for man not yet had search'd
  Shores distant from his own. The towns ungirt
  By trenches deep, laid open to the plain;
  Nor brazen trump, nor bended horn were seen,
  Helmet, nor sword; but conscious and secure,
  Unaw'd by arms the nations tranquil slept.
  The teeming earth by barrows yet unras'd,
  By ploughs unwounded, plenteous pour'd her stores.
  Content with food unforc'd, man pluck'd with ease
  Young strawberries from the mountains; cornels red;
  The thorny bramble's fruit; and acorns shook
  From Jove's wide-spreading tree. Spring ever smil'd;
  And placid Zephyr foster'd with his breeze
  The flowers unsown, which everlasting bloom'd.
  Untill'd the land its welcome produce gave,
  And unmanur'd its hoary crop renew'd.
  Here streams of milk, there streams of nectar flow'd;
  And from the ilex, drop by drop distill'd,
  The yellow honey fell. But, Saturn down
  To dusky Tartarus banish'd, all the world
  By Jove was govern'd. Then a silver age
  Succeeded; by the golden far excell'd;--
  Itself surpassing far the age of brass.
  The ancient durance of perpetual spring
  He shorten'd, and in seasons four the year
  Divided:--Winter, summer, lessen'd spring,
  And various temper'd autumn first were known.
  Then first the air with parching fervor dry,
  Glow'd hot;--then ice congeal'd by piercing winds
  Hung pendent;--houses then first shelter'd man;
  Houses by caverns form'd, with thick shrubs fenc'd,
  And boughs entwin'd with osiers. Then the grain
  Of Ceres first in lengthen'd furrows lay;
  And oxen groan'd beneath the weighty yoke.
  Third after these a brazen race succeeds,
  More stern in soul, and more in furious war
  Delighting;--still to wicked deeds averse.
  The last from stubborn iron took its name;--
  And now rush'd in upon the wretched race
  All impious villainies: Truth, faith, and shame,
  Fled far; while enter'd fraud, and force, and craft,
  And plotting, with detested avarice.
  To winds scarce known the seaman boldly loos'd
  His sails, and ships which long on lofty hills
  Had rested, bounded o'er the unsearch'd waves.
  The cautious measurer now with spacious line
  Mark'd out the land, in common once to all;
  Free as the sun-beams, or the lucid air.
  Nor would the fruits and aliments suffice,
  The rich earth from her surface threw, but deep
  Within her womb they digg'd, and thence display'd,
  Riches, of crimes the prompter, hid far deep
  Close by the Stygian shades. Now murderous steel,
  And gold more murderous enter'd into day:
  Weapon'd with each, war sallied forth and shook
  With bloody grasp his loud-resounding arms.
  Now man by rapine lives;--friend fears his host;
  And sire-in-law his son;--e'en brethren's love
  Is rarely seen: wives plot their husbands' death;
  And husbands theirs design: step-mothers fierce
  The lurid poisons mix: th' impatient son
  Enquires the limits of his father's years:--
  Piety lies neglected; and Astraea,
  Last of celestial deities on earth,
  Ascends, and leaves the sanguine-moisten'd land.

    Nor high-rais'd heaven was more than earth secure.
  Giants, 'tis said, with mad ambition strove
  To seize the heavenly throne, and mountains pile
  On mountains till the loftiest stars they touch'd.
  But with his darted bolt all-powerful Jove,
  Olympus shatter'd, and from Pelion's top
  Dash'd Ossa. There with huge unwieldy bulk
  Oppress'd, their dreadful corses lay, and soak'd
  Their parent earth with blood; their parent earth
  The warm blood vivify'd, and caus'd assume
  An human form,--a monumental type
  Of fierce progenitors. Heaven they despise,
  Violent, of slaughter greedy; and their race
  From blood deriv'd, betray.

                               Saturnian Jove
  This from his lofty seat beheld, and sigh'd;
  The recent bloody fact revolving deep,
  The Lycaoenian feast, to few yet known.
  Incens'd with mighty rage, rage worthy Jove,
  He calls the council;--none who hear delay.
  A path sublime, in cloudless skies fair seen,
  They tread when tow'rd the mighty thunderer's dome,
  His regal court, th' immortals bend their way.
  On right and left by folding doors enclos'd,
  Are halls where gods of rank and power are set;
  Plebeians far and wide their place select:
  More potent deities, in heaven most bright,
  Full in the front possess their shining seats.
  This place, (might words so bold a form assume)
  I'd term Palatium of the lofty sky.
  Here in his marble niche each god was plac'd
  And on his eburn sceptre leaning, Jove
  O'er all high tower'd; the dread-inspiring locks
  Three times he shook; and ocean, earth, and sky,
  The motion felt and trembled. Then in rage
  The silence thus he broke:--"Not more I fear'd
  "Our kingdom's fate in those tempestuous times,
  "When monsters serpent-footed furious strove,
  "To clasp within their hundred arms the heavens,
  "Already captive deem'd. Though fierce our foe,
  "One race alone warr'd with us, sprung from one.
  "Now all must perish; all within the bounds
  "By Nereus circled with his roaring waves.
  "I swear by Styx, by those infernal streams,
  "Through shades slow creeping. All I could I've try'd.
  "But lest to parts unsound the taint should spread,
  "What baffles cure, the knife must lop away.
  "Our demi-gods we have,--we have our nymphs,
  "Our rustic deities,--our satyrs,--fawns,
  "And mountain sylvans--whose deserts we grant
  "Celestial honors claim not,--yet on earth,
  "By us assign'd, they safely sure should rest.
  "But, oh! ye sacred powers,--but oh! how safe
  "Are these, when fierce Lycaoen plots for me!
  "Me! whom the thunders and yourselves obey?"

    Loud murmurs fill the skies--swift vengeance all
  With eager voice demand. When impious hands
  With Caesar's blood th' immortal fame of Rome,
  Rag'd to extinguish--all the world aghast,
  With horror shook, and trembled through its frame.
  Nor was thy subjects' loyalty to thee
  More sweet, Augustus, than was theirs to Jove.
  His hand and voice, to still their noise he rais'd:
  Their clamors loud were hush'd, all silence kept;
  When thus the thunderer ends his angry tale:
  "Dismiss your care, his punishment is o'er;
  "But hear his crimes, and hear his well-earn'd fate.
  "Of human vice the fame had reach'd mine ear,
  "With hop'd exaggeration; gliding down,
  "From proud Olympus' brow, I veil'd the god,
  "And rov'd the world in human form around.
  "'Twere long to tell what turpitude I saw
  "On every side, for rumor far fell short,
  "Of what I witness'd. Through the dusky woods
  "Of Maenalus I pass'd, where savage lurk
  "Fierce monsters; o'er the cold Lycean hill,
  "With pine-trees waving; and Cyllene's height.
  "Thence to th' Arcadian monarch's roof I came,
  "As dusky twilight drew on sable night.
  "Gave signs a god approach'd. The people crowd
  "In adoration: but Lycaoen turns
  "Their reverence and piety to scorn.
  "Then said,--not hard the task to ascertain,
  "If god or mortal, by unerring test:
  "And plots to slay me when oppress'd with sleep.
  "Such proof his soul well suited. Impious more,
  "An hostage from Molossus sent he slew;
  "His palpitating members part he boil'd,
  "And o'er the glowing embers roasted part:
  "These on the board he serves. My vengeful flames
  "Consume his roof;--for his deserts, o'erwhelm
  "His household gods. Lycaoen trembling fled
  "And gain'd the silent country; loud he howl'd,
  "And strove in vain to speak; his ravenous mouth
  "Still thirsts for slaughter; on the harmless flocks
  "His fury rages, as it wont on man:
  "Blood glads him still; his vest is shaggy hair;
  "His arms sink down to legs; a wolf he stands.
  "Yet former traits his visage still retains;
  "Grey still his hair; and cruel still his look;
  "His eyes still glisten; savage all his form.
  "Thus one house perish'd, but not one alone
  "The fate deserves. Wherever earth extends,
  "The fierce Erinnys reigns; men seem conspir'd
  "In impious bond to sin; and all shall feel
  "The scourge they merit: fixt is my decree."