XIV.


De nouveau Rishyaçringa tint ce langage au Monarque: “Je vais célébrer un
autre sacrifice, afin que le ciel accorde à tes vœux les enfants que tu
souhaites.” Cela dit, cherchant le bonheur du roi et pour
l’accomplissement de son désir, le fils puissant de Vibhándaka se mit à
célébrer ce nouveau sacrifice.

Là auparavant, étaient venus déjà recevoir une part de l’ offrande les
Dieux, accompagnés des Gaudharvas, et les Siddhas avec les Mounis divins,
Brahma, le monarque des Souras, l’ immuable Śiva, et l’ auguste Náráyana,
et les quatre gardiens vigilants du monde, et les mères des Immortels, et
tous les Dieux, escortés des Yakshas, et le maître éminent du ciel, Indra,
qui se manifestait aux yeux, environné par l’ essaim des Maroutes. Alors
ce jeune anachorète avait supplié tous les Dieux, que le désir d’une part
dans l’ offrande avait conduits á l’ açwamédha, cette grande cérémonie de
ce roi magnanime; _et, dans ce moment, l’ époux de Śántá les conjurait
ainsi pour la seconde fois_: “Cet homme _en prières_, c’est le roi
Daçaratha, qui est privé de fils. Il est rempli d’ une foi vive; il s’est
infligé de pénibles austérités; il vous a déjà servi, divinités augustes,
le sacrifice d’un açwa-médha, et maintenant il s’étudie encore à vous
plaire avec ce nouveau sacrifice dans l’espérance que vous lui donnerez
les fils, où tendent ses désirs. Versez donc sur lui votre bienveillance
et daignez sourire à son vœu pour des fils. C’est pour lui que moi ici,
les mains jointes, je vous adresse à tous mes supplications: envoyez-lui
quatre fils, qui soient vantés dans les trois mondes!”

“Ouí! répondirent les Dieux au fils suppliant du rishi; tu mérites que
nous t’écoutions avec faveur, toi, brahme saint, et même, en premier lieu,
ce roi. Comme récompense de ces différents sacrifices, le monarque
obtendra cet objet le plus cher de ses désirs.”

Ayant aussi parlé et vu que le grand saint avait mis fin suivant les rites
à son _pieux_ sacrifice, les Dieux, Indra à leur tête, s’évanouissent dans
le vide des airs et se rendent vers l’ architecte des mondes, le souverain
des créatures, le donateur des biens, vers Brahma enfin, auquel tous, les
mains jointes, ils adressent les paroles suivantes: “O Brahma, un
rakshasa, nommé Râvana, tourne su mal les grâces, qu’il a reçues de toi.
Dans son orgueil, il nous opprime tous; il opprime avec nous les grands
anchorètes, qui se font un bonheur des macérations: car jadis, ayant su te
plaire, O Bhagavat, il a reçu de toi ce don incomparable. ‘Oui, as-tu dit,
exauçant le vœu du mauvais Génie; Dieu. Yaksha ou Démon ne pourra jamais
causer ta mort!’ Et nous, par qui ta parole est respectée, nous avons tout
supporté de ce roi des rakshasas, qui écrase de sa tyrannie les trois
mondes, ou il promène l’ injure impunément. Enorgueilli de ce don
victorieux, il opprime indignement les Dieux, les rishis, les Yakshas, les
Gandharvas, les Asouras et les enfants de Manou. Là ou se tient Râvana, la
peur empêche le soleil d’échauffer, le vent craint de souffler, et le feu
n’ose flamboyer. A son aspect, la guirlande même des grands flots tremble
au sein de la mer. Accablé par sa vigueur indomptable, Kouvéra défait lui
a cédé Lanká. Suave-nous donc, ô toi, qui reposes daus le bonheur absolu;
sauve-nous de Râvana, le fléau des mondes. Daigne, ô toi, qui souris aux
vœux du suppliant, daigne imaginer un expedient pour ôter la vie à ce
cruel Démon.” Les Dieux ayant ainsi dénoncé leurs maux à Brahma, il
réfléchit un instant et leur tint ce langage: “Bien, voici que j’ai
découvert un moyen pour tuer ce Génie scélérat. Que ni les Dieux, a-t-il
dit, ni les rishis, ni les Gandharvas ni les Yakshas, ni les rakshasas, ni
les Nágas même ne puissent me donner la mort! Soit lui ai-je répondu.
Mais, par dédain pour la force humaine, les hommes n’ont pas été compris
daus sa demande. C’est donc par la main d’ un homme, qu’il faut immoler ce
méchant.” Ainsi tombée de la bouche du créateur, cette parole salutaire
satisfit pleinement le roi des habitants du ciel et tous les Dieux avec
lui. Lá, dans ce même instant, survint le fortuné Visnou, revêtu d’ une
splendeur infinie; car c’était a lui, que Brahma avait pensé dans son âme
pour la mort du tyran. Celui-ci donc avec l’essaim des Immortels adresse à
Vishnou ces paroles: “Meurtrier de Madhou, comme tu aimes á tirer de
l’affliction les êtres malheureux, nous te supplions, nous qui sommes
plongés dans la tristesse, Divinité auguste, sois notre asyle!” “Dites!
reprit Vishnou; que dois-je faire?” “Ayant oui les paroles de l’ineffable,
tous les Dieux repondirent: Il est un roi nommé Daçaratha; il a embrassé
une très-duré pénitence; il a célébré même le sacrifice d’un açwa-medha,
parce qu’il n’a point de fils et qu’il veut en obtenir du ciel. Il est
inébranlable dans sa piété, il est vanté pour ses vertus; la justice est
son caractère, la verite est sa parole. Acquiesce donc à notre demande, ô
toi, Vishnou, et consens à naître comme son fils. Divisé en quatre
portions de toi-même, daigne, ô toi, qui foules aux pieds tes ennemis,
daigne t’ incarner dans le sein de ses trois épouses, belles comme la
déesse de la beauté.” Náráyana, le maître, _non perceptible aux sens, mais
qui alors s’ était rendu_ visible, Náráyana répondit cette parole
salutaire aux Dieux, qui i invitaient à cet _heroique avatára_. Quelle
chose, une fois revêtu de cette incarnation, faudra-t-il encore que je
fasse pour vous, et de quelle part vient la terreur, qui vous trouble
ainsi? A ces mots du grand Vishnou: “C’est le démon Rávana, reprirent les
Dieux; c’est lui, Vishnou, cette désolation des mondes, qui nous inspire
un tel effroi. Enveloppe-toi d’un corps, humain, et qu’il te plaise
arrâcher du monde cette blessante epine; car nul autre que toi parmi les
habitants du ciel n’est capable d’immoler ce pécheur. _Sache que_
longtemps il s’est imposé la plus austére pénitence, et _que_ par elle il
s’est rendu agreable au suprême ayeul de toutes les créatures. Aussi le
distributeur ineffable des gràces lui a-t-il accordé ce don insigne d’être
invulnérable à tous les êtres, l’ homme seul excepté. Puisque, doué ainsi
de cette faveur, la mort terrible et sûre ne peut venir à lui de nulle
autre part que de l’homme, va, dompteur _puissant_ de tes ennemis, va dans
la condition humaine, et tue-le. Car ce don, auquel on ne peut résister,
élevant au plus haut point l’ivresse de sa force, le vil rakshasa
tourmente les Dieux, les rishis, les Gandharvas, les hommes sanctifiés par
la pénitence; et, quoique, destructeur des sacrifices, lacérateur des
Saintes Ecritures, ennemi des brahmes, dévorateur des hommes, cette faveur
incomparable sauve de la mort Rávana le triste fléau des mondes. Il ose
attaquer les rois, que défendant les chars de guerre, que remparent les
élephants: d’autres blessés et mis en fuite, sont dissipés ça et là devant
lui. Il a dévoré des saints, il a dévoré même une foule d’apsaras. Sans
cesse, dans son délire, il s’amuse à tourmenter les sept mondes. Comme _on
vient de nous apprendre qu’_ il n’a point daigné parler d’eux ce jour, que
lui fut donnée cette faveur, _dont il abuse_, entre dans un corps humain,
ô toi, qui peux briser tes ennemis, et jette sans vie à tes pieds, roi
puissant des treize Dieux, ce Rávana superbe, d’une force épouvantable,
d’un orgueil immense, l’ennemi de tous les ascètes, ce ver, _qui les
ronge_, cette cause de leurs gémissements.”

_Ici, dans le premier tome du saint Râmâyana_, Finit le quatorzième
chapitre, nommé: UN EXPÉDIENT POUR TUER RÁVANA.

HIPPOLYTE FAUCHE.


Uttarakánda.


The Rámáyan ends, epically complete, with the triumphant return of Ráma
and his rescued queen to Ayodhyá and his consecration and coronation in
the capital of his forefathers. Even if the story were not complete, the
conclusion of the last Canto of the sixth Book, evidently the work of a
later hand than Válmíki’s, which speaks of Ráma’s glorious and happy reign
and promises blessings to those who read and hear the Rámáyan, would be
sufficient to show that, when these verses were added, the poem was
considered to be finished. The Uttarakáṇḍa or Last Book is merely an
appendix or a supplement and relates only events antecedent and subsequent
to those described in the original poem. Indian scholars however, led by
reverential love of tradition, unanimously ascribe this Last Book to
Válmíki, and regard it as part of the Rámáyan.

Signor Gorresio has published an excellent translation of the Uttarakáṇḍa,
in Italian prose, from the recension current in Bengal;(1030) and Mr. Muir
has epitomized a portion of the book in the Appendix to the Fourth Part of
his Sanskrit Texts (1862). From these scholars I borrow freely in the
following pages, and give them my hearty thanks for saving me much
wearisome labour.

“After Ráma had returned to Ayodhyá and taken possession of the throne,
the rishis [saints] assembled to greet him, and Agastya, in answer to his
questions recounted many particulars regarding his old enemies. In the
Krita Yuga (or Golden Age) the austere and pious Brahman rishi Pulastya, a
son of Brahmá, being teased with the visits of different damsels,
proclaimed that any one of them whom he again saw near his hermitage
should become pregnant. This had not been heard by the daughter of the
royal rishi Triṇavindu, who one day came into Pulastya’s neighbourhood,
and her pregnancy was the result (Sect. 2, vv. 14 ff.). After her return
home, her father, seeing her condition, took her to Pulastya, who accepted
her as his wife, and she bore a son who received the name of Viśravas.
This son was, like his father, an austere and religious sage. He married
the daughter of the muni Bharadvája, who bore him a son to whom Brahmá
gave the name of Vaiśravaṇ-Kuvera (Sect. 3, vv. 1 ff.). He performed
austerities for thousands of years, when he obtained from Brahmá as a boon
that he should be one of the guardians of the world (along with Indra,
Varuṇa, and Yáma) and the god of riches. He afterwards consulted his
father Viśravas about an abode, and at his suggestion took possession of
the city of Lanká, which had formerly been built by Viśvakarmán for the
Rákshasas, but had been abandoned by them through fear of Vishṇu, and was
at that time unoccupied. Ráma then (Sect. 4) says he is surprised to hear
that Lanká had formerly belonged to the Rákshasas, as he had always
understood that they were the descendants of Pulastya, and now he learns
that they had also another origin. He therefore asks who was their
ancestor, and what fault they had committed that they were chased away by
Vishṇu. Agastya replies that when Brahmá created the waters, he formed
certain beings,—some of whom received the name of Rákshasas,—to guard
them. The first Rákshasas kings were Heti and Praheti. Heti married a
sister of Kála (Time). She bore him a son Vidyutkeśa, who in his turn took
for his wife Lankatanka[t.]á, the daughter of Sandhyá (V. 21). She bore
him a son Sukeśa, whom she abandoned, but he was seen by Śiva as he was
passing by with his wife Párvatí, who made the child as old as his mother,
and immortal, and gave him a celestial city. Sukeśa married a Gandharví
called Devavatí who bore three sons, Mályavat, Sumáli and Máli. These sons
practised intense austerities, when Brahmá appeared and conferred on them
invincibility and long life. They then harassed the gods. Viśvakarmá gave
them a city, Lanká, on the mountain Trikúṭa, on the shore of the southern
ocean, which he had built at the command of Indra.… The three Rákshasa,
Mályavat and his two brothers, then began to oppress the gods, rishis,
etc.; who (Sect. 6, v. 1 ff.) in consequence resort for aid to Mahádeva,
who having regard to his protégé Sukeśa the father of Mályavat, says that
he cannot kill the Rákshasas, but advises the suppliants to go to Vishṇu,
which they do, and receive from him a promise that he will destroy their
enemies. The three Rákshasa kings, hearing of this, consult together, and
proceed to heaven to attack the gods. Vishṇu prepares to meet them. The
battle is described in the seventh section. The Rákshasas are defeated by
Vishṇu with great slaughter, and driven back to Lanká, one of their
leaders, Máli, being slain. Mályavat remonstrates with Vishṇu, who was
assaulting the rear of the fugitives, for his unwarrior-like conduct, and
wishes to renew the combat (Sect. 8, v. 3 ff.). Vishṇu replies that he
must fulfil his promise to the gods by slaying the Rákshasas, and that he
would destroy them even if they fled to Pátála. These Rákshasas, Agastya
says, were more powerful than Rávaṇa, and, could only be destroyed by
Náráyaṇa, _i.e._ by Ráma himself, the eternal, indestructible god. Sumáli
with his family lived for along time in Pátála, while Kuvera dwelt in
Lanká. In section 9 it is related that Sumáli once happened to visit the
earth, when he observed Kuvera going in his chariot to see his father
Viśravas. This leads him to consider how he might restore his own
fortunes. He consequently desires his daughter Kaikasí to go and woo
Viśravas, who receives her graciously. She becomes the mother of the
dreadful Rávaṇa, of the huge Kumbhakarṇa, of Śúrpaṇakhá, and of the
righteous Vibhishaṇa, who was the last son. These children grow up in the
forest. Kumbhakarṇa goes about eating rishis. Kuvera comes to visit his
father, when Kaikasí takes occasion to urge her son Rávaṇa to strive to
become like his brother (Kuvera) in splendour. This Rávaṇa promises to do.
He then goes to the hermitage of Gokarna with his brothers to perform
austerity. In section 10 their austere observances are described: after a
thousand years’ penance Rávaṇa throws his head into the fire. He repeats
this oblation nine times after equal intervals, and is about to do it the
tenth time, when Brahmá appears, and offers a boon. Rávaṇa asks
immortality, but is refused. He then asks that he may be indestructible by
all creatures more powerful than men; which boon is accorded by Brahmá
together with the recovery of all the heads he had sacrificed and the
power of assuming any shape he pleased. Vibhishaṇa asks as his boon that
even amid the greatest calamities he may think only of righteousness, and
that the weapon of Brahmá may appear to him unlearnt, etc. The god grants
his request, and adds the gift of immortality. When Brahmá is about to
offer a boon to Kumbhakarṇa, the gods interpose, as, they say, he had
eaten seven Apsarases and ten followers of Indra, besides rishis and men;
and beg that under the guise of a boon stupefaction may be inflicted on
him. Brahmá thinks on Sarasvatí, who arrives and, by Brahmá’s command,
enters into Kumbhakarṇa’s mouth that she may speak for him. Under this
influence he asks that he may receive the boon of sleeping for many years,
which is granted. When however Sarasvatí has left him, and he recovers his
own consciousness, he perceives that he has been deluded. Kuvera by his
father’s advice, gives up the city of Lanká to Rávaṇ.”(1031) Rávaṇa
marries (Sect. 12) Mandodarí the beautiful daughter of the Asur Maya whose
name has several times occurred in the Rámáyan as that of an artist of
wonderful skill. She bears a son Meghanáda or the Roaring Cloud who was
afterwards named Indrajít from his victory over the sovereign of the
skies. The conquest of Kuvera, and the acquisition of the magic
self-moving chariot which has done much service in the Rámáyan, form the
subject of sections XIII., XIV. and XV. “The rather pretty story of
Vedavatí is related in the seventeenth section, as follows: Rávaṇa in the
course of his progress through the world, comes to the forest on the
Himálaya, where he sees a damsel of brilliant beauty, but in ascetic garb,
of whom he straightway becomes enamoured. He tells her that such an
austere life is unsuited to her youth and attractions, and asks who she is
and why she is leading an ascetic existence. She answers that she is
called Vedavatí, and is the vocal daughter of Vṛihaspati’s son, the rishi
Kuśadhwaja, sprung from him during his constant study of the Veda. The
gods, gandharvas, etc., she says, wished that she should choose a husband,
but her father would give her to no one else than to Vishṇu, the lord of
the world, whom he desired for his son-in-law. Vedavatí then proceeds: ‘In
order that I may fulfil this desire of my father in respect of Náráyaṇa, I
wed him with my heart. Having entered into this engagement I practise
great austerity. Náráyaṇa and no other than he, Purushottama, is my
husband. From the desire of obtaining him, I resort to this severe
observance.’ Rávaṇa’s passion is not in the least diminished by this
explanation and he urges that it is the old alone who should seek to
become distinguished by accumulating merit through austerity, prays that
she who is so young and beautiful shall become his bride; and boasts that
he is superior to Vishṇu. She rejoins that no one but he would thus
contemn that deity. On receiving this reply he touches the hair of her
head with the tip of his finger. She is greatly incensed, and forthwith
cuts off her hair and tells him that as he has so insulted her, she cannot
continue to live, but will enter into the fire before his eyes. She goes
on ‘Since I have been insulted in the forest by thee who art
wicked-hearted, I shall be born again for thy destruction. For a man of
evil desire cannot be slain by a woman; and the merit of my austerity
would be lost if I were to launch a curse against thee. But if I have
performed or bestowed or sacrificed aught may I be born the virtuous
daughter, not produced from the womb, of a righteous man.’ Having thus
spoken she entered the blazing fire. Then a shower of celestial flowers
fell (from every part of the sky). It is she, lord, who, having been
Vedavatí in the Krita age, has been born (in the Treta age) as the
daughter of the king of the Janakas, and (has become) thy [Ráma’s] bride;
for thou art the eternal Vishṇu. The mountain-like enemy who was
[virtually] destroyed before by her wrath, has now been slain by her
having recourse to thy superhuman energy.” On this the commentator
remarks: “By this it is signified that Sítá was the principal cause of
Rávaṇa’s death; but the function of destroying him is ascribed to Ráma.”
On the words, “thou art Vishṇu,” in the preceding verse the same
commentator remarks: “By this it is clearly affirmed that Sítá was
Lakshmí.” This is what Paráśara says: “In the god’s life as Ráma, she
became Sítá, and in his birth as Krishṇa [she became] Rukminí.”(1032)

In the following section (XVIII.) “Rávaṇa is described as violently
interrupting a sacrifice which is being performed by king Marutta, and the
assembled gods in terror assume different shapes to escape; Indra becomes
a peacock, Yáma a crow, Kuvera a lizard, and Varuṇa a swan; and each deity
bestows a boon on the animal he had chosen. The peacock’s tail recalls
Indra’s thousand eyes; the swan’s colour becomes white, like the foam of
the ocean (Varuṇa being its lord); the lizard obtains a golden colour; and
the crow is never to die except when killed by a violent death, and the
dead are to enjoy the funeral oblations when they have been devoured by
the crows.”(1033)

Rávaṇ then attacks Arjuna or Kárttavírya the mighty king of Máhishmati on
the banks of the Narmadá, and is defeated, captured and imprisoned by
Arjuna. At the intercession of Pulastya (Sect. XXII.) he is released from
his bonds. He then visits Kishkindhá where he enters into alliance with
Báli the King of the Vánars: “We will have all things in common,” says
Rávaṇ, “dames, sons, cities and kingdoms, food, vesture, and all
delights.” His next exploit is the invasion of the kingdom of departed
spirits and his terrific battle with the sovereign Yáma. The poet in his
description of these regions with the detested river with waves of blood,
the dire lamentations, the cries for a drop of water, the devouring worm,
all the tortures of the guilty and the somewhat insipid pleasures of the
just, reminds one of the scenes in the under world so vividly described by
Homer, Virgil, and Dante. Yáma is defeated (Sect. XXVI.) by the giant, not
so much by his superior power as because at the request of Brahmá Yáma
refrains from smiting with his deadly weapon the Rákshas enemy to whom
that God had once given the promise that preserved him. In the
twenty-seventh section Rávaṇ goes “under the earth into Pátála the
treasure-house of the waters inhabited by swarms of serpents and Daityas,
and well defended by Varuṇ.” He subdues Bhogavatí the city ruled by Vásuki
and reduces the Nágas or serpents to subjection. He penetrates even to the
imperial seat of Varuṇ. The God himself is absent, but his sons come forth
and do battle with the invader. The giant is victorious and departs
triumphant. The twenty-eighth section gives the details of a terrific
battle between Rávaṇ and Mándhátá King of Ayodhyá, a distinguished
ancestor of Ráma. Supernatural weapons are employed on both sides and the
issue of the conflict is long doubtful. But at last Mándhátá prepares to
use the mighty weapon “acquired by severe austerities through the grace
and favour of Rudra.” The giant would inevitably have been slain. But two
pre-eminent Munis Pulastya and Gálava beheld the fight through the power
given by contemplation, and with words of exhortation they parted King
Mándhátá and the sovereign of the Rákshases. Rávaṇ at last (Sect. XXXII.)
returns homeward carrying with him in his car Pushpak the virgin daughters
of kings, of Rishis, of Daityas, and Gandharvas whom he has seized upon
his way. The thirty-sixth section describes a battle with Indra, in which
the victorious Meghanáda son of the giant, makes the King of the Gods his
prisoner, binds him with his magic art, and carries him away (Sect.
XXVII.) in triumph to Lanká. Brahmá intercedes (Sect. XXXVIII.) and
Indrajít releases his prisoner on obtaining in return the boon that
sacrifice to the Lord of Fire shall always make him invincible in the
coming battle. In sections XXXIX., XL, “we have a legend related to Ráma
by the sage Agastya to account for the stupendous strength of the monkey
Hanumán, as it had been described in the _Rámáyaṇa_. Rama naturally
wonders (as perhaps many readers of the _Rámáyaṇa_ have done since) why a
monkey of such marvellous power and prowess had not easily overcome Báli
and secured the throne for his friend Sugríva. Agastya replies that
Hanumán was at that time under a curse from a Rishi, and consequently was
not conscious of his own might.”(1034) The whole story of the marvellous
Vánar is here given at length, but nothing else of importance is added to
the tale already given in the Rámáyaṇa. The Rishis or saints then (Sect.
XL.) return to their celestial seats, and the Vánars, Rákshases and bears
also (Sect. XLIII.) take their departure. The chariot Pushpak is restored
to its original owner Kuvera, as has already been related in the Rámáyaṇ.