The story of Ráma and Sítá is then continued, and we meet with matter of
more human interest. The winter is past and the pleasant spring-time is
come, and Ráma and Sítá sit together in the shade of the Aśoka trees happy
as Indra and Śachí when they drink in Paradise the nectar of the Gods.
“Tell me, my beloved,” says Ráma, “for thou wilt soon be a mother, hast
thou a wish in thy heart for me to gratify?” And Sítá smiles and answers:
“I long, O son of Raghu, to visit the pure and holy hermitages on the
banks of the Ganges and to venerate the feet of the saints who there
perform their rigid austerities and live on roots and berries. This is my
chief desire, to stand within the hermits’ grove were it but for a single
day.” And Ráma said: “Let not the thought trouble thee: thou shalt go to
the grove of the ascetics.” But slanderous tongues have been busy in
Ayodhyá, and Sítá has not been spared. Ráma hears that the people are
lamenting his blind folly in taking back to his bosom the wife who was so
long a captive in the palace of Rávaṇ. Ráma well knows her spotless purity
in thought, word, and deed, and her perfect love of him; but he cannot
endure the mockery and the shame and resolves to abandon his unsuspecting
wife. He orders the sad but still obedient Lakshmaṇ to convey her to the
hermitage which she wishes to visit and to leave her there, for he will
see her face again no more. They arrive at the hermitage, and Lakshmaṇ
tells her all. She falls fainting on the ground, and when she recovers her
consciousness sheds some natural tears and bewails her cruel and
undeserved lot. But she resolves to live for the sake of Ráma and her
unborn son, and she sends by Lakshmaṇ a dignified message to the husband
who has forsaken her: “I grieve not for myself,” she says “because I have
been abandoned on account of what the people say, and not for any evil
that I have done. The husband is the God of the wife, the husband is her
lord and guide; and what seems good unto him she should do even at the
cost of her life.”

Sítá is honourably received by the saint Válmíki himself, and the holy
women of the hermitage are charged to entertain and serve her. In this
calm retreat she gives birth to two boys who receive the names of Kuśa and
Lava. They are carefully brought up and are taught by Válmíki himself to
recite the Rámáyaṇ. The years pass by: and Ráma at length determines to
celebrate the Aśvamedha or Sacrifice of the Steed. Válmíki, with his two
young pupils, attends the ceremony, and the unknown princes recite before
the delighted father the poem which recounts his deeds. Ráma inquires into
their history and recognizes them as his sons. Sítá is invited to return
and solemnly affirm her innocence before the great assembly.

“But Sítá’s heart was too full; this second ordeal was beyond even her
power to submit to, and the poet rose above the ordinary Hindu level of
women when he ventured to paint her conscious purity as rebelling:
‘Beholding all the spectators, and clothed in red garments, Sítá clasping
her hands and bending low her face, spoke thus in a voice choked with
tears: “as I, even in mind, have never thought of any other than Ráma, so
may Mádhaví the goddess of Earth, grant me a hiding-place.” As Sítá made
this oath, lo! a marvel appeared. Suddenly cleaving the earth, a divine
throne of marvellous beauty rose up, borne by resplendent dragons on their
heads: and seated on it, the goddess of Earth, raising Sítá with her arm,
said to her, “Welcome to thee!” and placed her by her side. And as the
queen, seated on the throne, slowly descended to Hades, a continuous
shower of flowers fell down from heaven on her head.’(1035)”

“Both the great Hindu epics thus end in disappointment and sorrow. In the
_Mahábhárata_ the five victorious brothers abandon the hardly won throne
to die one by one in a forlorn pilgrimage to the Himálaya; and in the same
way Ráma only regains his wife, after all his toils, to lose her. It is
the same in the later Homeric cycle—the heroes of the _Iliad_ perish by
ill-fated deaths. And even Ulysses, after his return to Ithaca, sets sail
again to Thesprotia, and finally falls by the hand of his own son. But in
India and Greece alike this is an afterthought of a self-conscious time,
which has been subsequently added to cast a gloom on the strong
cheerfulness of the heroic age.”(1036)

“The termination of Ráma’s terrestrial career is thus told in Sections 116
ff. of the Uttarakáṇda. Time, in the form of an ascetic, comes to his
palace gate, and asks, as the messenger of the great rishi (Brahmá) to see
Ráma. He is admitted and received with honour, but says, when he is asked
what he has to communicate, that his message must be delivered in private,
and that any one who witnesses the interview is to lose his life. Ráma
informs Lakshmaṇ of all this, and desires him to stand outside. Time then
tells Ráma that he has been sent by Brahmá, to say that when he (Ráma,
_i.e._ Vishṇu) after destroying the worlds was sleeping on the ocean, he
had formed him (Brahmá) from the lotus springing from his navel, and
committed to him the work of creation; that he (Brahmá) had then entreated
Ráma to assume the function of Preserver, and that the latter had in
consequence become Vishṇu, being born as the son of Aditi, and had
determined to deliver mankind by destroying Rávaṇa, and to live on earth
ten thousand and ten hundred years; that period, adds Time, was now on the
eve of expiration, and Ráma could either at his pleasure prolong his stay
on earth, or ascend to heaven and rule over the gods. Ráma replies, that
he had been born for the good of the three worlds, and would now return to
the place whence he had come, as it was his function to fulfil the
purposes of the gods. While they are speaking the irritable rishi Durvásas
comes, and insists on seeing Ráma immediately, under a threat, if refused,
of cursing Ráma and all his family.”

Lakshmaṇ, preferring to save his kinsman, though knowing that his own
death must be the consequence of interrupting the interview of Ráma with
Time, enters the palace and reports the rishi’s message to Ráma. Ráma
comes out, and when Durvásas has got the food he wished, and departed,
Ráma reflects with great distress on the words of Time, which require that
Lakshmaṇ should die. Lakshmaṇ however exhorts Ráma not to grieve, but to
abandon him and not break his own promise. The counsellors concurring in
this advice, Ráma abandons Lakshmaṇ, who goes to the river Sarayú,
suppresses all his senses, and is conveyed bodily by Indra to heaven. The
gods are delighted by the arrival of the fourth part of Vishṇu. Ráma then
resolves to install Bharata as his successor and retire to the forest and
follow Lakshmaṇ. Bharata however refuses the succession, and determines to
accompany his brother. Ráma’s subjects are filled with grief, and say they
also will follow him wherever he goes. Messengers are sent to Śatrughna,
the other brother, and he also resolves to accompany Ráma; who at length
sets out in procession from his capital with all the ceremonial
appropriate to the “great departure,” silent, indifferent to external
objects, joyless, with Śrí on his right, the goddess Earth on his left,
Energy in front, attended by all his weapons in human shapes, by the Vedas
in the forms of Bráhmans, by the Gáyatrí, the Omkára, the Vashaṭkára, by
rishis, by his women, female slaves, eunuchs, and servants. Bharata with
his family, and Śatrughna, follow together with Bráhmans bearing the
sacred fire, and the whole of the people of the country, and even with
animals, etc., etc. Ráma, with all these attendants, comes to the banks of
the Sarayú. Brahmá, with all the gods and innumerable celestial cars, now
appears, and all the sky is refulgent with the divine splendour. Pure and
fragrant breezes blow, a shower of flowers falls. Ráma enters the waters
of the Sarayú; and Brahmá utters a voice from the sky, saying: “Approach,
Vishṇu; Rághava, thou hast happily arrived, with thy godlike brothers.
Enter thine own body as Vishṇu or the eternal ether. For thou art the
abode of the worlds: no one comprehends thee, the inconceivable and
imperishable, except the large-eyed Máyá thy primeval spouse.” Hearing
these words, Ráma enters the glory of Vishṇu with his body and his
followers. He then asks Brahmá to find an abode for the people who had
accompanied him from devotion to his person, and Brahmá appoints them a
celestial residence accordingly.(1037)


ADDITIONAL NOTES.


Queen Fortune.


“A curious festival is celebrated in honour of this divinity (Lakshmî) on
the fifth lunar day of the light half of the month Mâgha (February), when
she is identified with Saraswatí the consort of Brahmá, and the goddess of
learning. In his treatise on festivals, a great modern authority,
Raghunandana, mentions, on the faith of a work called
_Samvatsara-sandipa_, that Lakshmî is to be worshipped in the forenoon of
that day with flowers, perfumes, rice, and water; that due honour is to be
paid to inkstand and writing-reed, and no writing to be done. Wilson, in
his essay on the _Religious Festivals of the Hindus_ (works, vol. ii, p.
188. ff.) adds that on the morning of the 2nd February, the whole of the
pens and inkstands, and the books, if not too numerous and bulky, are
collected, the pens or reeds cleaned, the inkstands scoured, and the books
wrapped up in new cloth, are arranged upon a platform, or a sheet, and
strewn over with flowers and blades of young barley, and that no flowers
except white are to be offered. After performing the necessary rites, …
all the members of the family assemble and make their prostrations; the
books, the pens, and ink having an entire holiday; and should any
emergency require a written communication on the day dedicated to the
divinity of scholarship, it is done with chalk or charcoal upon a black or
white board.”

CHAMBERS’S ENCYCLOPÆDIA. _Lakshmî_.


Indra.


“The Hindu Jove or Jupiter Tonans, chief of the secondary deities. He
presides over swarga or paradise, and is more particularly the god of the
atmosphere and winds. He is also regent of the east quarter of the sky. As
chief of the deities he is called Devapati, Devadeva, Surapati, etc.; as
lord of the atmosphere Divaspati; as lord of the eight Vasus or demigods,
Fire, etc., Vásava; as breaking cities into fragments, Purandara, Puranda;
as lord of a hundred sacrifices (the performance of a hundred Aśvamedhas
elevating the sacrificer to the rank of Indra) Śatakratu, Śatamakha; as
having a thousand eyes, Sahasráksha; as husband of Śachí, Śachípati. His
wife is called Śachí, Indráṇí, Sakráṇí, Maghoni, Indraśakti, Pulomajá, and
Paulomí. His son is Jayanta. His pleasure garden or elysium is Nandana;
his city, Amarávatí; his palace, Vaijayanta; his horse, Uchchaihśravas,
his elephant, Airávata; his charioteer, Mátali.”

PROFESSOR M. WILLIAMS’S English-Sanskrit Dictionary. _Indra_.


Vishnu.


“The second person of the Hindu triad, and the most celebrated and popular
of all the Indian deities. He is the personification of the preserving
power, and became incarnate in nine different forms, for the preservation
of mankind in various emergencies. Before the creation of the universe,
and after its temporary annihilation, he is supposed to sleep on the
waters, floating on the serpent Śesha, and is then identified with
Náráyaṇa. Brahmá, the creator, is fabled to spring at that time from a
lotus which grows from his navel, whilst thus asleep.… His ten avatárs or
incarnations are:

“1. The Matsya, or fish. In this avatár Vishṇu descended in the form of a
fish to save the pious king Satyavrata, who with the seven Rishis and
their wives had taken refuge in the ark to escape the deluge which then
destroyed the earth. 2, The Kúrma, or Tortoise. In this he descended in
the form of a tortoise, for the purpose of restoring to man some of the
comforts lost during the flood. To this end he stationed himself at the
bottom of the ocean, and allowed the point of the great mountain Mandara
to be placed upon his back, which served as a hard axis, whereon the gods
and demons, with the serpent Vásuki twisted round the mountain for a rope,
churned the waters for the recovery of the amrita or nectar, and fourteen
other sacred things. 3. The Varáha, or Boar. In this he descended in the
form of a boar to rescue the earth from the power of a demon called
‘golden-eyed,’ Hiraṇyáksha. This demon had seized on the earth and carried
it with him into the depths of the ocean. Vishṇu dived into the abyss, and
after a contest of a thousand years slew the monster. 4. The Narasinha, or
Man-lion. In this monstrous shape of a creature half-man, half-lion,
Vishṇu delivered the earth from the tyranny of an insolent demon called
Hiraṇyakaśipu. 5. Vámana, or Dwarf. This avatár happened in the second age
of the Hindús or Tretáyug, the four preceding are said to have occurred in
the first or Satyayug; the object of this avatár was to trick Bali out of
the dominion of the three worlds. Assuming the form of a wretched dwarf he
appeared before the king and asked, as a boon, as much land as he could
pace in three steps. This was granted; and Vishṇu immediately expanding
himself till he filled the world, deprived Bali at two steps of heaven and
earth, but in consideration of some merit, left Pátála still in his
dominion. 6. Paraśuráma. 7. Rámchandra. 8. Krishṇa, or according to some
Balaráma. 9. Buddha. In this avatár Vishṇu descended in the form of a sage
for the purpose of making some reform in the religion of the Brahmins, and
especially to reclaim them from their proneness to animal sacrifice. Many
of the Hindús will not allow this to have been an incarnation of their
favourite god. 10. Kalki, or White Horse. This is yet to come. Vishṇu
mounted on a white horse, with a drawn scimitar, blazing like a comet,
will, according to prophecy, end this present age, viz. the fourth or
Kaliyug, by destroying the world, and then renovating creation by an age
of purity.”

WILLIAM’S DICTIONARY. _Vishṇu._


Siva.


“A celebrated Hindú God, the Destroyer of creation, and therefore the most
formidable of the Hindú Triad. He also personifies reproduction, since the
Hindú philosophy excludes the idea of total annihilation without
subsequent regeneration. Hence he is sometimes confounded with Brahmá, the
creator or first person of the Triad. He is the particular God of the
Tántrikas, or followers of the books called Tantras. His worshippers are
termed Śaivas, and although not so numerous as the Vaishṇavas, exalt their
god to the highest place in the heavens, and combine in him many of the
attributes which properly belong to the other deities. According to them
Śiva is Time, Justice, Fire, Water, the Sun, the Destroyer and Creator. As
presiding over generation, his type is the Linga, or Phallus, the origin
probably of the Phallic emblem of Egypt and Greece. As the God of
generation and justice, which latter character he shares with the god
Yama, he is represented riding a white bull. His own colour, as well as
that of the bull, is generally white, referring probably to the unsullied
purity of Justice. His throat is dark-blue; his hair of a light reddish
colour, and thickly matted together, and gathered above his head like the
hair of an ascetic. He is sometimes seen with two hands, sometimes with
four, eight, or ten, and with five faces. He has three eyes, one being in
the centre of his forehead, pointing up and down. These are said to denote
his view of the three divisions of time, past, present, and future. He
holds a trident in his hand to denote, as some say, his relationship to
water, or according to others, to show that the three great attributes of
Creator, Destroyer, and Regenerator are combined in him. His loins are
enveloped in a tiger’s skin. In his character of Time, he not only
presides over its extinction, but also its astronomical regulation. A
crescent or half-moon on his forehead indicates the measure of time by the
phases of the moon; a serpent forms one of his necklaces to denote the
measure of time by years, and a second necklace of human skulls marks the
lapse and revolution of ages, and the extinction and succession of the
generations of mankind. He is often represented as entirely covered with
serpents, which are the emblems of immortality. They are bound in his
hair, round his neck, wrists, waist, arms and legs; they serve as rings
for his fingers, and earrings for his ears, and are his constant
companions. Śiva has more than a thousand names which are detailed at
length in the sixty-ninth chapter of the Śiva Puráṇa.”—WILLIAMS’S
DICTIONARY, _Śiva_.


Apsarases.


“Originally these deities seem to have been personifications of the
vapours which are attracted by the sun, and form into mist or clouds:
their character may be thus interpreted in the few hymns of the Rigveda
where mention is made of them. At a subsequent period when the Gandharva
of the Rigveda who personifies there especially the Fire of the Sun,
expanded into the Fire of Lightning, the rays of the moon and other
attributes of the elementary life of heaven as well as into pious acts
referring to it, the Apsarasas become divinities which represent phenomena
or objects both of a physical and ethical kind closely associated with
that life; thus in the _Yajurveda_ Sunbeams are called the Apsarasas
associated with the Gandharva who is the Sun; Plants are termed the
Apsarasas connected with the Gandharva Fire: Constellations are the
Apsarasas of the Gandharva Moon: Waters the Apsarasas of the Gandharva
Wind, etc. etc.… In the last Mythological epoch when the Gandharvas have
saved from their elementary nature merely so much as to be musicians in
the paradise of Indra, the Apsarasas appear among other subordinate
deities which share in the merry life of Indra’s heaven, as the wives of
the Gandharvas, but more especially as wives of a licentious sort, and
they are promised therefore, too, as a reward to heroes fallen in battle
when they are received in the paradise of Indra; and while, in the
Rigveda, they assist Soma to pour down his floods, they descend in the
epic literature on earth merely to shake the virtue of penitent Sages and
to deprive them of the power they would otherwise have acquired through
unbroken austerities.”—GOLDSTÜCKER’S _Sanskrit Dictionary_.


Vishnu’s Incarnation As Ráma.


“Here is described one of the _avatárs_, descents or manifestations of
Vishṇu in a visible form. The word _avatár_ signifies literally _descent_.
The _avatár_ which is here spoken of, that in which, according to Indian
traditions, Vishṇu descended and appeared upon earth in the corporeal form
of Ráma, the hero of the Rámáyana, is the seventh in the series of Indian
_avatárs_. Much has been said before now of these avatárs, and through
deficient knowledge of the ideas and doctrines of India, they have been
compared to the sublime dogma of the Christian Incarnation. This is one of
the grossest errors that ignorance of the ideas and beliefs of a people
has produced. Between the _avatárs_ of India and the Christian Incarnation
there is such an immensity of difference that it is impossible to find any
reasonable analogy that can approximate them. The idea of the _avatárs_ is
intimately united with that of the Trimúrti; the bond of connection
between these two ideas is an essential notion common to both, the notion
of Vishṇu. What is the Trimúrti? I have already said that it is composed
of three Gods, Brahmá (masculine), Vishṇu the God of _avatárs_, and Śiva.
These three Gods, who when reduced to their primitive and most simple
expression are but three cosmogonical personifications, three powers or
forces of nature, these Gods, I say, are here found, according to Indian
doctrines, entirely external to the true God of India, or Brahma in the
neuter gender. Brahma is alone, unchangeable in the midst of creation: all
emanates from him, he comprehends all, but he remains extraneous to all:
he is Being and the negation of beings. Brahma is never worshipped; the
indeterminate Being is never invoked; he is inaccessible to the prayers as
the actions of man; humanity, as well as nature, is extraneous to him.
External to Brahma rises the Trimúrti, that is to say, Brahmá (masculine)
the power which creates, Vishṇu the power which preserves, and Śiva the
power which destroys: theogony here commences at the same time with
cosmogony. The three divinities of the Trimúrti govern the phenomena of
the universe and influence all nature. The real God of India is by himself
without power; real efficacious power is attributed only to three
divinities who exist externally to him. Brahmá, Vishṇu, and Śiva,
possessed of qualities in part contradictory and attributes that are
mutually exclusive, have no other accord or harmony than that which
results from the power of things itself, and which is found external to
their own thoughts. Such is the Indian Trimúrti. What an immense
difference between this Triad and the wonderful Trinity of Christianity!
Here there is only one God, who created all, provides for all, governs
all. He exists in three Persons equal to one another, and intimately
united in one only infinite and eternal substance. The Father represents
the eternal thought and the power which created, the Son infinite love,
the Holy Spirit universal sanctification. This one and triune God
completes by omnipotent power the great work of creation which, when it
has come forth from His hands, proceeds in obedience to the laws which He
has given it, governed with certain order by His infinite providence.

“The immense difference between the Trimúrti of India and the Christian
Trinity is found again between the _avatárs_ of Vishṇu and the Incarnation
of Christ. The _avatár_ was effected altogether externally to the Being
who is in India regarded as the true God. The manifestation of one
essentially cosmogonical divinity wrought for the most part only material
and cosmogonical prodigies. At one time it takes the form of the gigantic
tortoise which sustains Mount Mandar from sinking in the ocean; at another
of the fish which raises the lost Veda from the bottom of the sea, and
saves mankind from the waters. When these _avatárs_ are not cosmogonical
they consist in some protection accorded to men or Gods, a protection
which is neither universal nor permanent. The very manner in which the
_avatár_ is effected corresponds to its material nature, for instance the
mysterious vase and the magic liquor by means of which the _avatár_ here
spoken of takes place. What are the forms which Vishṇu takes in his
descents? They are the simple forms of life; he becomes a tortoise, a
boar, a fish, but he is not obliged to take the form of intelligence and
liberty, that is to say, the form of man. In the _avatár_ of Vishṇu is
discovered the inpress of pantheistic ideas which have always more or less
prevailed in India. Does the _avatár_ produce a permanent and definitive
result in the world? By no means. It is renewed at every catastrophe
either of nature or man, and its effects are only transitory.… To sum up
then, the Indian _avatár_ is effected externally to the true God of India,
to Brahma; it has only a cosmogonical or historical mission which is
neither lasting nor decisive; it is accomplished by means of strange
prodigies and magic transformations; it may assume promiscuously all the
forms of life; it may be repeated indefinitely. Now let the whole of this
Indian idea taken from primitive tradition be compared with the
Incarnation of Christ and it will be seen that there is between the two an
irreconcilable difference. According to the doctrines of Christianity the
Everlasting Word, Infinite Love, the Son of God, and equal to Him, assumed
a human body, and being born as a man accomplished by his divine act the
great miracle of the spiritual redemption of man. His coming had for its
sole object to bring erring and lost humanity back to Him; this work being
accomplished, and the divine union of men with God being re-established,
redemption is complete and remains eternal.

“The superficial study of India produced in the last century many
erroneous ideas, many imaginary and false parallels between Christianity
and the Brahmanical religion. A profounder knowledge of Indian
civilization and religion, and philological studies enlarged and guided by
more certain principles have dissipated one by one all those errors. The
attributes of the Christian God, which by one of those intellectual
errors, which Vico attributes to the vanity of the learned, had been
transferred to Vishṇu, have by a better inspired philosophy been reclaimed
for Christianity, and the result of the two religions, one immovable and
powerless, the other diffusing itself with all its inherent force and
energy, has shown further that there is a difference, a real opposition,
between the two principles.”—GORRESIO.


Kusa and Lava.


As the story of the banishment of Sítá and the subsequent birth in
Válmíki’s hermitage of Kuśa and Lava the rhapsodists of the Rámáyan, is
intimately connected with the account in the introductory cantos of
Válmíki’s composition of the poem, I shall, I trust, be pardoned for
extracting it from my rough translation of Kálidása’s Raghuvaṇśa, parts
only of which have been offered to the public.

“Then, day by day, the husband’s hope grew high,
Gazing with love on Sítá’s melting eye:
With anxious care he saw her pallid cheek,
And fondly bade her all her wishes speak.
“Once more I fain would see,” the lady cried,
“The sacred groves that rise on Gangá’s side,
Where holy grass is ever fresh and green,
And cattle feeding on the rice are seen:
There would I rest awhile, where once I strayed
Linked in sweet friendship to each hermit maid.”
And Ráma smiled upon his wife, and sware,
With many a tender oath, to grant her prayer.
It chanced, one evening, from a lofty seat
He viewed Ayodhyá stretched before his feet:
He looked with pride upon the royal road
Lined with gay shops their glittering stores that showed,
He looked on Sarjú’s silver waves, that bore
The light barks flying with the sail and oar;
He saw the gardens near the town that lay,
Filled with glad citizens and boys at play.
Then swelled the monarch’s bosom with delight,
And his heart triumphed at the happy sight.
He turned to Bhadra, standing by his side,—
Upon whose secret news the king relied.—
And bade him say what people said and thought
Of all the exploits that his arm had wrought.
The spy was silent, but, when questioned still,
Thus spake, obedient to his master’s will:
“For all thy deeds in peace and battle done
The people praise thee, King, except for one:
This only act of all thy life they blame,—
Thy welcome home of her, thy ravished dame.”
Like iron yielding to the iron’s blow,
Sank Ráma, smitten by those words of woe.
His breast, where love and fear for empire vied,
Swayed, like a rapid swing, from side to side.
Shall he this rumour scorn, which blots his life,
Or banish her, his dear and spotless wife?
But rigid Duty left no choice between
His perilled honour and his darling queen.
Called to his side, his brothers wept to trace
The marks of anguish in his altered face.
No longer bright and glorious as of old,
He thus addressed them when the tale was told:
“Alas! my brothers, that my life should blot
The fame of those the Sun himself begot:
As from the labouring cloud the driven rain
Leaves on the mirror’s polished face a stain.
E’en as an elephant who loathes the stake
And the strong chain he has no power to break,
I cannot brook this cry on every side,
That spreads like oil upon the moving tide.
I leave the daughter of Videha’s King,
And the fair blossom soon from her to spring,
As erst, obedient to my sire’s command,
I left the empire of the sea-girt land.
Good is my queen, and spotless; but the blame
Is hard to bear, the mockery and the shame.
Men blame the pure Moon for the darkened ray,
When the black shadow takes the light away.
And, O my brothers, if ye wish to see
Ráma live long from this reproach set free,
Let not your pity labour to control
The firm sad purpose of his changeless soul.”

  Thus Ráma spake. The sorrowing brothers heard
His stern resolve, without an answering word;
For none among them dared his voice to raise,
That will to question:—and they could not praise.
“Beloved brother,” thus the monarch cried
To his dear Lakshmaṇ, whom he called aside.—
Lakshmaṇ, who knew no will save his alone
Whose hero deeds through all the world were known:—
“My queen has told me that she longs to rove
Beneath the shade of Saint Válmíki’s grove:
Now mount thy car, away my lady bear;
Tell all, and leave her in the forest there.”

  The car was brought, the gentle lady smiled,
As the glad news her trusting heart beguiled.
She mounted up: Sumantra held the reins;
And forth the coursers bounded o’er the plains.
She saw green fields in all their beauty dressed,
And thanked her husband in her loving breast.
Alas! deluded queen! she little knew
How changed was he whom she believed so true;
How one she worshipped like the Heavenly Tree
Could, in a moment’s time, so deadly be.
Her right eye throbbed,—ill-omened sign, to tell
The endless loss of him she loved so well,
And to the lady’s saddening heart revealed
The woe that Lakshmaṇ, in his love, concealed.
Pale grew the bloom of her sweet face,—as fade
The lotus blossoms,—by that sign dismayed.
“Oh, may this omen,”—was her silent prayer,—
“No grief to Ráma or his brothers bear!”

  When Lakshmaṇ, faithful to his brother, stood
Prepared to leave her in the distant wood,
The holy Gangá, flowing by the way,
Raised all her hands of waves to bid him stay.
At length with sobs and burning tears that rolled
Down his sad face, the king’s command he told;
As when a monstrous cloud, in evil hour,
Rains from its labouring womb a stony shower.
She heard, she swooned, she fell upon the earth,
Fell on that bosom whence she sprang to birth.
As, when the tempest in its fury flies,
Low in the dust the prostrate creeper lies,
So, struck with terror sank she on the ground,
And all her gems, like flowers, lay scattered round.
But Earth, her mother, closed her stony breast,
And, filled with doubt, denied her daughter rest.
She would not think the Chief of Raghu’s race
Would thus his own dear guiltless wife disgrace.
Stunned and unconscious, long the lady lay,
And felt no grief, her senses all astray.
But gentle Lakshmaṇ, with a brother’s care,
Brought back her sense, and with her sense, despair.
But not her wrongs, her shame, her grief, could wring
One angry word against her lord the King:
Upon herself alone the blame she laid,
For tears and sighs that would not yet be stayed.
To soothe her anguish Lakshmaṇ gently strove;
He showed the path to Saint Válmíki’s grove;
And craved her pardon for the share of ill
He wrought, obedient to his brother’s will.
“O, long and happy, dearest brother, live!
I have to praise,” she cried, “and not forgive:
To do his will should be thy noblest praise;
As Vishṇu ever Indra’s will obeys.
Return, dear brother: on each royal dame
Bestow a blessing in poor Sítá’s name,
And bid them, in their love, kind pity take
Upon her offspring, for the father’s sake.
And speak my message in the monarch’s ear,
The last last words of mine that he shall hear:
“Say, was it worthy of thy noble race
Thy guiltless queen thus lightly to disgrace?
For idle tales to spurn thy faithful bride,
Whose constant truth the searching fire had tried?
Or may I hope thy soul refused consent,
And but thy voice decreed my banishment?
Hope that no care could turn, no love could stay
The lightning stroke that falls on me to-day?
That sins committed in the life that’s fled
Have brought this evil on my guilty head?
Think not I value now my widowed life,
Worthless to her who once was Ráma’s wife.
I only live because I hope to see
The dear dear babe that will resemble thee.
And then my task of penance shall be done,
With eyes uplifted to the scorching sun;
So shall the life that is to come restore
Mine own dear husband, to be lost no more.”
And Lakshmaṇ swore her every word to tell,
Then turned to go, and bade the queen farewell.
Alone with all her woes, her piteous cries
Rose like a butchered lamb’s that struggling dies.
The reverend sage who from his dwelling came
For sacred grass and wood to feed the flame,
Heard her loud shrieks that rent the echoing wood,
And, quickly following, by the mourner stood.
Before the sage the lady bent her low,
Dried her poor eyes, and strove to calm her woe.
With blessings on her hopes the blameless man
In silver tones his soothing speech began:
“First of all faithful wives, O Queen, art thou;
And can I fail to mourn thy sorrows now?
Rest in this holy grove, nor harbour fear
Where dwell in safety e’en the timid deer.
Here shall thine offspring safely see the light,
And be partaker of each holy rite.
Here, near the hermits’ dwellings, shall thou lave
Thy limbs in Tonse’s sin-destroying wave,
And on her isles, by prayer and worship, gain
Sweet peace of mind, and rest from care and pain.
Each hermit maiden with her sweet soft voice,
Shall soothe thy woe, and bid thy heart rejoice:
With fruit and early flowers thy lap shall fill,
And offer grain that springs for us at will.
And here, with labour light, thy task shall be
To water carefully each tender tree,
And learn how sweet a nursing mother’s joy
Ere on thy bosom rest thy darling boy.…”

That very night the banished Sítá bare
Two royal children, most divinely fair.…

The saint Válmíki, with a friend’s delight,
Graced Sítá’s offspring with each holy rite.
Kuśa and Lava—such the names they bore—
Learnt, e’en in childhood, all the Vedas’ lore;
And then the bard, their minstrel souls to train,
Taught them to sing his own immortal strain.
And Ráma’s deeds her boys so sweetly sang,
That Sítá’s breast forgot her bitterest pang.…

Then Sítá’s children, by the saint’s command,
Sang the Rámáyan, wandering through the land.
How could the glorious poem fail to gain
Each heart, each ear that listened to the strain!
So sweet each minstrel’s voice who sang the praise
Of Ráma deathless in Válmíki’s lays.
Ráma himself amid the wondering throng
Marked their fair forms, and loved the noble song,
While, still and weeping, round the nobles stood,
As, on a windless morn, a dewy wood.
On the two minstrels all the people gazed,
Praised their fair looks and marvelled as they praised;
For every eye amid the throng could trace
Ráma’s own image in each youthful face.
Then spoke the king himself and bade them say
Who was their teacher, whose the wondrous lay.
Soon as Válmíki, mighty saint, he saw,
He bowed his head in reverential awe.
“These are thy children” cried the saint, “recall
Thine own dear Sítá, pure and true through all.”
“O holy father,” thus the king replied,
“The faithful lady by the fire was tried;
But the foul demon’s too successful arts
Raised light suspicions in my people’s hearts.
Grant that their breasts may doubt her faith no more,
And thus my Sítá and her sons restore.”

_Raghuvaṇśa Cantos XIV, XV._


Parasuráma, Page 87.


“He cleared the earth thrice seven times of the Kshatriya caste, and
filled with their blood the five large lakes of Samanta, from which he
offered libations to the race of Bhrigu. Offering a solemn sacrifice to
the King of the Gods Paraśuráma presented the earth to the ministering
priests. Having given the earth to Kaśyapa, the hero of immeasurable
prowess retired to the Mahendra mountain, where he still resides; and in
this manner was there enmity between him and the race of the Kshatriyas,
and thus was the whole earth conquered by Paraśuráma.” The destruction of
the Kshatriyas by Paraśuráma had been provoked by the cruelty of the
Kshatriyas. _Chips from a German Workshop_, _Vol._ II. p. 334.

The scene in which he appears is probably interpolated for the sake of
making him declare Ráma to be Vishṇu. “Herr von Schlegel has often
remarked to me,” says Lassen, “that without injuring the connexion of the
story all the chapters [of the Rámáyan] might be omitted in which Ráma is
regarded as an incarnation of Vishṇu. In fact, where the incarnation of
Vishṇu as the four sons of Daśaratha is described, the great sacrifice is
already ended, and all the priests remunerated at the termination, when
the new sacrifice begins at which the Gods appear, then withdraw, and then
first propose the incarnation to Vishṇu. If it had been an original
circumstance of the story, the Gods would certainly have deliberated on
the matter earlier, and the celebration of the sacrifice would have
continued without interruption.” LASSEN, _Indische Alterthumskunde, Vol.
I._ p. 489.


Yáma, Page 68.


Son of Vivasvat=Jima son of Vivanghvat, the Jamshíd of the later Persians.


Fate, Page 68.


“The idea of fate was different in India from that which prevailed in
Greece. In Greece fate was a mysterious, inexorable power which governed
men and human events, and from which it was impossible to escape. In India
Fate was rather an inevitable consequence of actions done in births
antecedent to one’s present state of existence, and was therefore
connected with the doctrine of metempsychosis. A misfortune was for the
most part a punishment, an expiation of ancient faults not yet entirely
cancelled.” GORRESIO.


Visvámitra, Page 76.


“Though of royal extraction, Viśvámitra conquered for himself and his
family the privileges of a Brahman. He became a Brahman, and thus broke
through all the rules of caste. The Brahmans cannot deny the fact, because
it forms one of the principal subjects of their legendary poems. But they
have spared no pains to represent the exertions of Viśvámitra, in his
struggle for Brahmanhood, as so superhuman that no one would easily be
tempted to follow his example. No mention is made of these monstrous
penances in the Veda, where the struggle between Viśvámitra, the leader of
the Kuśikas or Bharatas, and the Brahman Vaśishtha, the leader of the
white-robed Tritsus, is represented as the struggle of two rivals for the
place of Purohita or chief priest and minister at the court of King Sudás,
the son of Pijavana.” _Chips from a German Workshop_, _Vol. II._ p. 336.


Household Gods, Page 102.


“No house is supposed to be without its tutelary divinity, but the notion
attached to this character is now very far from precise. The deity who is
the object of hereditary and family worship, the _Kuladevatá_, is always
one of the leading personages of the Hindu mythology, as Śiva, Vishṇu or
Durgá, but the _Grihadevatá_ rarely bears any distinct appellation. In
Bengal, the domestic god is sometimes the _Sálagrám_ stone, sometimes the
_tulasi_ plant, sometimes a basket with a little rice in it, and sometimes
a water-jar—to either of which a brief adoration is daily addressed, most
usually by the females of the family. Occasionally small images of Lakshmi
or Chaṇdi fulfil the office, or should a snake appear, he is venerated as
the guardian of the dwelling. In general, however, in former times, the
household deities were regarded as the unseen spirits of ill, the ghosts
and goblins who hovered about every spot, and claimed some particular
sites as their own. Offerings were made to them in the open air, by
scattering a little rice with a short formula at the close of all
ceremonies to keep them in good humour.

“The household gods correspond better with the genii locorum than with the
lares or penates of autiquity.”

H. H. WILSON.


Page 107.


_Śaivya, a king whom earth obeyed,_
_Once to a hawk a promise made._

The following is a free version of this very ancient story which occurs
more than once in the _Mahábhárat_:

THE SUPPLIANT DOVE.

Chased by a hawk there came a dove
  With worn and weary wing,
And took her stand upon the hand
  Of Káśí’s mighty king.
The monarch smoothed her ruffled plumes
  And laid her on his breast,
And cried, “No fear shall vex thee here,
  Rest, pretty egg-born, rest!
Fair Káśí’s realm is rich and wide,
  With golden harvests gay,
But all that’s mine will I resign
  Ere I my guest betray.”
But panting for his half won spoil
  The hawk was close behind.
And with wild cry and eager eye
  Came swooping down the wind:
“This bird,” he cried, “my destined prize,
  ’Tis not for thee to shield:
’Tis mine by right and toilsome flight
  O’er hill and dale and field.
Hunger and thirst oppress me sore,
  And I am faint with toil:
Thou shouldst not stay a bird of prey
  Who claims his rightful spoil.
They say thou art a glorious king,
  And justice is thy care:
Then justly reign in thy domain,
  Nor rob the birds of air.”
Then cried the king: “A cow or deer
  For thee shall straightway bleed,
Or let a ram or tender lamb
  Be slain, for thee to feed.
Mine oath forbids me to betray
  My little twice-born guest:
See how she clings with trembling wings
  To her protector’s breast.”
“No flesh of lambs,” the hawk replied,
  “No blood of deer for me;
The falcon loves to feed on doves
  And such is Heaven’s decree.
But if affection for the dove
  Thy pitying heart has stirred,
Let thine own flesh my maw refresh,
  Weighed down against the bird.”
He carved the flesh from off his side,
  And threw it in the scale,
While women’s cries smote on the skies
  With loud lament and wail.
He hacked the flesh from side and arm,
  From chest and back and thigh,
But still above the little dove
  The monarch’s scale stood high.
He heaped the scale with piles of flesh,
  With sinews, blood and skin,
And when alone was left him bone
  He threw himself therein.
Then thundered voices through the air;
  The sky grew black as night;
And fever took the earth that shook
  To see that wondrous sight.
The blessed Gods, from every sphere,
  By Indra led, came nigh:
While drum and flute and shell and lute
  Made music in the sky.
They rained immortal chaplets down,
  Which hands celestial twine,
And softly shed upon his head
  Pure Amrit, drink divine.
Then God and Seraph, Bard and Nymph
  Their heavenly voices raised,
And a glad throng with dance and song
  The glorious monarch praised.
They set him on a golden car
  That blazed with many a gem;
Then swiftly through the air they flew,
  And bore him home with them.
Thus Káśí’s lord, by noble deed,
  Won heaven and deathless fame:
And when the weak protection seek
  From thee, do thou the same.

_Scenes from the Rámáyan, &c._


Page 108.


The ceremonies that attended the consecration of a king (_Abhikshepa lit.
Sprinkling over_) are fully described in Goldstücker’s Dictionary, from
which the following extract is made: “The type of the inauguration
ceremony as practised at the Epic period may probably be recognized in the
history of the inauguration of _Ráma_, as told in the _Rámáyana_, and in
that of the inauguration of _Yudhishṭhira_, as told in the _Mahábháratha_.
Neither ceremony is described in these poems with the full detail which is
given of the vaidik rite in the _Aitareya-Bráhmaṇam_; but the allusion
that Ráma was inaugurated by _Vaśishṭha_ and the other Bráhmanas in the
same manner as Indra by the Vasus … and the observation which is made in
some passages that a certain rite of the inauguration was performed
‘according to the sacred rule’ … admit of the conclusion that the ceremony
was supposed to have taken place in conformity with the vaidik
injunction.… As the inauguration of _Ráma_ was intended and the necessary
preparations for it were made when his father Daśaratha was still alive,
but as the ceremony itself, through the intrigues of his step-mother
_Kaikeyí_, did not take place then, but fourteen years later, after the
death of _Daśaratha_, an account of the preparatory ceremonies is given in
the _Ayodhyákáṇḍa_ (Book II) as well as in the _Yuddha-Káṇḍa_ (Book VI.)
of the Rámáyaṇa, but an account of the complete ceremony in the latter
book alone. According to the _Ayodhyákáṇḍa_, on the day preceding the
intended inauguration _Ráma_ and his wife _Sítá_ held a fast, and in the
night they performed this preliminary rite: _Ráma_ having made his
ablutions, approached the idol of _Náráyaṇa_, took a cup of clarified
butter, as the religious law prescribes, made a libation of it into the
kindled fire, and drank the remainder while wishing what was agreeable to
his heart. Then, with his mind fixed on the divinity he lay, silent and
composed, together with _Sítá_, on a bed of Kuśa-grass, which was spread
before the altar of Vishṇu, until the last watch of the night, when he
awoke and ordered the palace to be prepared for the solemnity. At
day-break reminded of the time by the voices of the bards, he performed
the usual morning devotion and praised the divinity. In the meantime the
town Ayodhyá had assumed a festive appearance and the inauguration
implements had been arranged … golden water-jars, an ornamented
throne-seat, a chariot covered with a splendid tiger-skin, water taken
from the confluence of the Ganges and Jumna, as well as from other sacred
rivers, tanks, wells, lakes, and from all oceans, honey, curd, clarified
butter, fried grain, Kuśa-grass, flowers, milk; besides, eight beautiful
damsels, and a splendid furious elephant, golden and silver jars, filled
with water, covered with _Udumbara_ branches and various lotus flowers,
besides a white jewelled _chourie_, a white splendid parasol, a white
bull, a white horse, all manner of musical instruments and bards.… In the
preceding chapter … there are mentioned _two_ white _chouries_ instead of
one, and all kinds of seeds, perfumes and jewels, a scimitar, a bow, a
litter, a golden vase, and a blazing fire, and amongst the living
implements of the pageant, instead of the bards, gaudy courtesans, and
besides the eight damsels, professors of divinity, Bráhmaṇas, cows and
pure kinds of wild beasts and birds, the chiefs of town and country-people
and the citizens with their train.”


Page 109.


_Then with the royal chaplains they_
_Took each his place in long array._

_The twice born chiefs, with zealous heed,_
_Made ready what the rite would need._

“Now about the office of a Purohita (house priest). The gods do not eat
the food offered by a king, who has no house-priest (Purohita). Thence the
king even when (not) intending to bring a sacrifice, should appoint a
Bráhman to the office of house-priest.” HAUG’S _Autareya Bráhmanam. Vol.
II. p. 528_.


Page 110.


_There by the gate the Sáras screamed._

The Sáras or Indian Crane is a magnificent bird easily domesticated and
speedily constituting himself the watchman of his master’s house and
garden. Unfortunately he soon becomes a troublesome and even dangerous
dependent, attacking strangers with his long bill and powerful wings, and
warring especially upon “small infantry” with unrelenting ferocity.


Page 120.


_My mothers or my sire the king._

All the wives of the king his father are regarded and spoken of by Ráma as
his mothers.


Page 125.


_Such blessings as the Gods o’erjoyed_
_Poured forth when Vritra was destroyed._

“Mythology regards Vritra as a demon or Asur, the implacable enemy of
Indra, but this is not the primitive idea contained in the name of Vritra.
In the hymns of the Veda Vritra appears to be the thick dark cloud which
Indra the God of the firmament attacks and disperses with his
thunderbolt.” GORRESIO.

“In that class of Rig-veda hymns which there is reason to look upon as the
oldest portion of Vedic poetry, the character of Indra is that of a mighty
ruler of the firmament, and his principal feat is that of conquering the
demon _Vritra_, a symbolical personification of the cloud which obstructs
the clearness of the sky, and withholds the fructifying rain from the
earth. In his battles with Vritra he is therefore described as ‘opening
the receptacles of the waters,’ as ‘cleaving the cloud’ with his
‘far-whirling thunderbolt,’ as ‘casting the waters down to earth,’ and
‘restoring the sun to the sky.’ He is in consequence ‘the upholder of
heaven, earth, and firmament,’ and the god ‘who has engendered the sun and
the dawn.’ ” CHAMBERS’S CYCLOPÆDIA, _Indra_.

“Throughout these hymns two images stand out before us with overpowering
distinctness. On one side is the bright god of the heaven, as beneficent
as he is irresistible: on the other the demon of night and of darkness, as
false and treachorous as he is malignant.… The latter (as his name Vritra,
from var, to veil, indicates) is pre-eminently the thief who hides away
the rain-clouds.… But the myth is yet in too early a state to allow of the
definite designations which are brought before us in the conflicts of Zeus
with Typhôn and his monstrous progeny, of Apollôn with the Pythôn, of
Bellerophôn with Chimaira of Oidipous with the Sphinx, of Hercules with
Cacus, of Sigurd with the dragon Fafnir; and thus not only is Vritra known
by many names, but he is opposed sometimes by Indra, sometimes by Agni the
fire-god, sometimes by Trita, Brihaspati, or other deities; or rather
these are all names of one and the same god.” COX’S _Mythology of the
Aryan Nations. Vol. II. p. 326_.


Page 125.


_And that prized herb whose sovereign power_
_Preserves from dark misfortune’s hour._
“And yet more medicinal is it than that Moly,
That Hermes once to wise Ulysses gave;
He called it Hæmony, and gave it me,
And bade me keep it as of sovereign use
’Gainst all enchantment, mildew, blast, or damp,
Or ghastly furies’ apparition.” _Comus._

The _Moly_ of Homer, which Dierbach considers to have been the _Mandrake_,
is probably a corruption of the Sanskrit _Múla_ a root.


Page 136.


_True is the ancient saw: the Neem_
_Can ne’er distil a honeyed stream._

The Neem tree, especially in the Rains, emits a strong unpleasant smell
like that of onions. Its leaves however make an excellent cooling
poultice, and the Extract of Neem is an admirable remedy for cutaneous
disorders.


Page 152.


_Who of Nisháda lineage came._

The following account of the origin of the Nishádas is taken from Wilson’s
_Vishṇu Puráṇa_, Book I. Chap. 15. “Afterwards the Munis beheld a great
dust arise, and they said to the people who were nigh: ‘What is this?’ And
the people answered and said: ‘Now that the kingdom is without a king, the
dishonest men have begun to seize the property of their neighbours. The
great dust that you behold, excellent Munis, is raised by troops of
clustering robbers, hastening to fall upon their prey.’ The sages, hearing
this, consulted, and together rubbed the thigh of the king (Vena), who had
left no offspring, to produce a son. From the thigh, thus rubbed, came
forth a being of the complexion of a charred stake, with flattened
features like a negro, and of dwarfish stature. ‘What am I to do,’ cried
he eagerly to the Munis. ‘Sit down (nishída),’ said they. And thence his
name was Nisháda. His descendants, the inhabitants of the Vindhyá
mountain, great Muni, are still called Nishádas and are characterized by
the exterior tokens of depravity.” Professor Wilson adds, in his note on
the passage: “The Matsya says that there were born outcast or barbarous
races, Mlechchhas, as black as collyrium. The Bhágavata describes an
individual of dwarfish stature, with short arms and legs, of a complexion
as black as a crow, with projecting chin, broad flat nose, red eyes, and
tawny hair, whose descendants were mountaineers and foresters. The Padma
(Bhúmi Khaṇḍa) has a similar deccription; adding to the dwarfish stature
and black complexion, a wide mouth, large ears, and a protuberant belly.
It also particularizes his posterity as Nishádas, Kirátas, Bhillas, and
other barbarians and Mlechchhas, living in woods and on mountains. These
passages intend, and do not much exaggerate, the uncouth appearance of the
Gonds, Koles, Bhils, and other uncivilized tribes, scattered along the
forests and mountains of Central India from Behar to Khandesh, and who
are, not improbably, the predecessors of the present occupants of the
cultivated portions of the country. They are always very black,
ill-shapen, and dwarfish, and have countenances of a very African
character.”

Manu gives a different origin of the Nishádas as the offspring of a
Bráhman father and a Súdra mother. See Muir’s _Sanskrit Texts_, Vol. I. p.
481.


Page 157.


_Beneath a fig-tree’s mighty shade,_
_With countless pendent shoots displayed._
“So counselled he, and both together went
Into the thickest wood; there soon they chose
The fig-tree: not that kind for fruit renowned,
But such as at this day, to Indians known,
In Malabar or Deccan spreads her arms
Branching so broad and long, that in the ground
The bended twigs take root, and daughters grow
About the mother tree, a pillared shade
High overarched, and echoing walks between.”

_Paradise Lost_, Book IX.


Page 161.


_Now, Lakshmaṇ, as our cot is made,_
_Must sacrifice be duly paid._

The rites performed in India on the completion of a house are represented
in modern Europe by the familiar “house-warming.”


Page 169.


_I longed with all my lawless will_
_Some elephant by night to kill._

One of the regal or military caste was forbidden to kill an elephant
except in battle.

_Thy hand has made no Bráhman bleed._

“The punishment which the Code of Manu awards to the slayer of a Brahman
was to be branded in the forehead with the mark of a headless corpse, and
entirely banished from society; this being apparently commutable for a
fine. The poem is therefore in accordance with the Code regarding the
peculiar guilt of killing Brahmans; but in allowing a hermit who was not a
_Divija_ (twice-born) to go to heaven, the poem is far in advance of the
Code. The youth in the poem is allowed to read the Veda, and to accumulate
merit by his own as well as his father’s pious acts; whereas the exclusive
Code reserves all such privileges to _Divijas_ invested with the sacred
cord.” Mrs. SPEIR’S _Life in Ancient India_, p. 107.


Page 174. The Praise Of Kings


“Compare this magnificent eulogium of kings and kingly government with
what Samuel says of the king and his authority: And Samuel told all the
words of the LORD unto the people that asked of him a king.

And he said, This will be the manner of the king that shall reign over
you: He will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his
chariots, and to be his horsemen: and some shall run before his chariots.

And he will appoint him captains over thousands, and captains over
fifties, and will set them to work his ground, and to reap his harvest,
and to make his instrument of war, and instruments of his chariots.

And he will take your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be cooks,
and to be bakers.

And he will take your fields, and your vineyards and your oliveyards, even
the best of them, and give them to his servants.

And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give
to his officers, and to his servants.

And he will take your men-servants, and your maid-servants, and your
goodliest young men, and your asses, and put them to his work.

He will take the tenth of your sheep: and ye shall be his servants.

And ye shall cry out in that day because of your king which ye shall have
chosen you. I. _Samuel_, VIII.

In India kingly government was ancient and consecrated by tradition:
whence to change it seemed disorderly and revolutionary: in Judæa
theocracy was ancient and consecrated by tradition, and therefore the
innovation which would substitute a king was represented as full of
dangers.” GORRESIO.


Page 176. Sálmalí.


According to the Bengal recension Śálmalí appears to have been another
name of the Vipáśá. Śálmalí may be an epithet signifying rich in Bombax
heptaphyllon. The commentator makes another river out of the word.


Page 178. Bharat’s Return.


“Two routes from Ayodhyá to Rájagriha or Girivraja are described. That
taken by the envoys appears to have been the shorter one, and we are not
told why Bharat returned by a different road. The capital of the Kekayas
lay to the west of the Vipáśá. Between it and the Śatadru stretched the
country of the Báhíkas. Upon the remaining portion of the road the two
recensions differ. According to that of Bengal there follow towards the
east the river Indamatí, then the town Ajakála belonging to the Bodhi,
then Bhulingá, then the river Śaradaṇḍá. According to the other instead of
the first river comes the Ikshumatí … instead of the first town Abhikála,
instead of the second Kulingá, then the second river. According to the
direction of the route both the above-mentioned rivers must be tributaries
of the Śatadrú.… The road then crossed the Yamuná (Jumna), led beyond that
river through the country of the Panchálas, and reached the Ganges at
Hástinapura, where the ferry was. Thence it led over the Rámagangá and its
eastern tributaries, then over the Gomati, and then in a southern
direction along the Málini, beyond which it reached Ayodhyá. In Bharat’s
journey the following rivers are passed from west to east: _Kutikoshṭiká_,
_Uttániká_, _Kuṭiká_, _Kapívatí_, _Gomatí_ according to Schlegel, and
_Hiraṇyavatí_, _Uttáriká_, _Kuṭilá_, _Kapívatí_, _Gomatí_ according to
Gorresio. As these rivers are to be looked for on the east of the Ganges,
the first must be the modern _Koh_, a small affluent of the Rámagangá,
over which the highway cannot have gone as it bends too far to the north.
The Uttániká or Uttáriká must be the Rámagangá, the Kuṭiká or Kuṭilá its
eastern tributary, Kośilá, the Kapívatí the next tributary which on the
maps has different names, _Gurra_ or above Kailas, lower down _Bhaigu_.
The Gomatí (Goomtee) retains its old name. The Máliní, mentioned only in
the envoys’ journey, must have been the western tributary of the Sarayú
now called Chuká.” LASSEN’S _Indische Alterthumskunde_, Vol. II. P. 524.


Page 183.


_What worlds await thee, Queen, for this?_

“Indian belief divided the universe into several worlds (_lokáh_). The
three principal worlds were heaven, earth, and hell. But according to
another division there were seven: Bhúrloka or the earth, Bhuvarloka or
the space between the earth and the sun, the seat of the Munis, Siddhas,
&c., Svarloka or the heaven of Indra between the sun and the polar star,
and the seventh Brahmaloka or the world of Brahma. Spirits which reached
the last were exempt from being born again.” GORRESIO.


Page 203.


_When from a million herbs a blaze_
_Of their own luminous glory plays._

This mention of lambent flames emitted by herbs at night may be compared
with Lucan’s description of a similar phenomenon in the Druidical forest
near Marseilles, (_Pharsalia_, III. 420.).

_Non ardentis_ fulgere incendia silvae.

Seneca, speaking of Argolis, (Thyestes, Act IV), says:—

Tota solet

Micare flamma silva, et excelsae trabes
_Ardent sine igni_.

Thus also the bush at Horeb (Exod. II.) flamed, but was not consumed.

The Indian explanation of the phenomenon is, that the sun before he sets
deposits his rays for the night with the deciduous plants. See _Journal of
R. As. S. Bengal_, Vol. II. p. 339.


Page 219.


_We rank the Buddhist with the thief._

Schlegel says in his Preface: “Lubrico vestigio insistit V. Cl.
_Heerenius, prof. Gottingensis_, in libro suo de commerciis veterum
populorum (OPP. Vol. HIST. XII, pag. 129,) dum putat, ex mentione
sectatorum Buddhae secundo libro Rameidos iniecta de tempore, quo totum
carmen sit conditum, quicquam legitime concludi posse.… Sunt versus
spurii, reiecti a Bengalis in sola commentatorum recensione leguntur.
Buddhas quidem mille fere annis ante Christum natun vixit: sed post multa
demumsecula, odiointernecivo inter Brachmanos et Buddhae sectatores orto,
his denique ex India pulsis, fingi potuit iniquissima criminatio, eos
animi immortalitatem poenasque et praemia in vita futura negare. Praeterea
metrum, quo concinnati sunt hi versus, de quo metro mox disseram,
recentiorem aetatem arguit.… Poenitet me nunc mei consilii, quod non
statim ab initio, … eiecerim cuncta disticha diversis a sloco vulgari
metris composita. Metra sunt duo: pariter ambo constant quatuor
hemistichiis inter se aequalibus, alterum undenarum syllabarum, alterum
duodenarum, hunc in modum:

[-)] [-] [)] [-] | [-] [)] [)] [-] | [)] [-] [-)]
[)] [-] [)] [-] | [-] [)] [)] [-] | [)] [-] [)] [-)]

Cuius generis versus in primo et secundo Rameidos libro nusquam nisi ad
finem capitum apposita inveniuntur, et huic loco unice sunt accommodata,
quasi peroratio, lyricis numeris assurgens, quo magis canorae cadant
clausulae: sicut musici in concentibus extremis omnium vocum
instrumentorumque ictu fortiore aures percellere amant. Igitur disticha
illa non ante divisionem per capita illatam addi potuerunt: hanc autem
grammaticis deberi argumento est ipse recensionum dissensus, manifesto
inde ortus, quod singuli editores in ea constituenda suo quisque iudicio
usi sunt; praeterquam quod non credibile est, poetam artis suae peritum
narrationem continuam in membra tam minuta dissecuisse. Porro discolor est
dictio: magniloquentia affectatur, sed nimis turgida illa atque effusa,
nec sententiarum pondere satis suffulta. Denique nihil fere novi affertur:
ampli ficantur prius dicta, rarius aliquid ex capite sequente anticipatur.
Si quis appendices hosce legendo transiliat, sentiet slocum ultimum cum
primo capitis proximi apte coagmentatum, nec sine vi quadam inde avulsum.
Eiusmodi versus exhibet utraque recensio, sed modo haec modo illa plures
paucioresve numero, et lectio interdum magnopere variat.”

“The narrative of Ráma’s exile in the jungle is one of the most obscure
portions of the Rámáyana, inasmuch as it is difficult to discover any
trace of the original tradition, or any illustration of actual life and
manners, beyond the artificial life of self-mortification and selfdenial
said to have been led by the Brahman sages of olden time. At the same
time, however, the story throws some light upon the significance of the
poem, and upon the character in which the Brahmanical author desired to
represent Ráma; and consequently it deserves more serious consideration
than the nature of the subject-matter would otherwise seem to imply.

“According to the Rámáyana, the hero Ráma spent more than thirteen years
of his exile in wandering amongst the different Brahmanical settlements,
which appear to have been scattered over the country between the Ganges
and the Godáveri; his wanderings extending from the hill of Chitra-kúṭa in
Bundelkund, to the modern town of Nasik on the western side of India, near
the source of the Godáveri river, and about seventy-five miles to the
north-west of Bombay. The appearance of these Brahmanical hermitages in
the country far away to the south of the Raj of Kasala, seems to call for
critical inquiry. Each hermitage is said to have belonged to some
particular sage, who is famous in Brahmanical tradition. But whether the
sages named were really contemporaries of Ráma, or whether they could
possibly have flourished at one and the same period, is open to serious
question. It is of course impossible to fix with any degree of certainty
the relative chronology of the several sages, who are said to have been
visited by Ráma; but still it seems tolerably clear that some belonged to
an age far anterior to that in which the Rámáyana was composed, and
probably to an age anterior to that in which Ráma existed as a real and
living personage; whilst, at least, one sage is to be found who could only
have existed in the age during which the Rámáyana was produced in its
present form. The main proofs of these inferences are as follows. An
interval of many centuries seems to have elapsed between the composition
of the Rig-Veda and that of the Rámáyana: a conclusion which has long been
proved by the evidence of language, and is generally accepted by Sanskrit
scholars. But three of the sages, said to have been contemporary with
Ráma, namely, Viśvámitra, Atri and Agastya, are frequently mentioned in
the hymns of the Rig-Veda; whilst Válmíki, the sage dwelling at
Chitra-kúṭa, is said to have been himself the composer of the Rámáyana.
Again, the sage Atri, whom Ráma visited immediately after his departure
from Chitra-kúṭa, appears in the genealogical list preserved in the Mahá
Bhárata, as the progenitor of the Moon, and consequently as the first
ancestor of the Lunar race: whilst his grandson Buddha [Budha] is said to
have married Ilá, the daughter of Ikhsváku who was himself the remote
ancestor of the Solar race of Ayodhyá, from whom Ráma was removed by many
generations. These conclusions are not perhaps based upon absolute proof,
because they are drawn from untrustworthy authorities; but still the
chronological difficulties have been fully apprehended by the Pundits, and
an attempt has been made to reconcile all contradictions by representing
the sages to have lived thousands of years, and to have often re-appeared
upon earth in different ages widely removed from each other. Modern
science refuses to accept such explanations; and consequently it is
impossible to escape the conclusion that if Válmíki composed the Rámáyana
in the form of Sanskrit in which it has been preserved, he could not have
flourished in the same age as the sages who are named in the Rig-Veda.”
WHEELER’S _History of India, Vol._ II, 229.


Page 249.


_And King Himálaya’s Child._

Umá or Párvatí, was the daughter of Himálaya and Mená. She is the heroine
of Kálidása’s _Kumára-Sambhava_ or _Birth of the War-God_.


Page 250.


_Strong Kumbhakarṇa slumbering deep_
_In chains of never-ending sleep._

“Kumbhakarṇa, the gigantic brother of the titanic Rávaṇ,—named from the
size of his ears which could contain a _Kumbha_ or large water-jar—had
such an appetite that he used to consume six months’ provisions in a
single day. Brahmá, to relieve the alarm of the world, which had begun to
entertain serious apprehensions of being eaten up, decreed that the giant
should sleep six months at a time and wake for only one day during which
he might consume his six months’ allowance without trespassing unduly on
the reproductive capabilities of the ” _Scenes front the Rámáyan_, p. 153,
2nd Edit.


Page 257.


_Like Śiva when his angry might_
_Stayed Daksha’s sacrificial rite._

The following spirited version of this old story is from the pen of Mr. W.
Waterfield:

“This is a favorite subject of Hindú sculpture, especially on the temples
of Shiva, such as the caves of Elephanta and Ellora. It, no doubt, is an
allegory of the contest between the followers of Shiva and the worshippers
of the Elements, who observed the old ritual of the Vedas; in which the
name of Shiva is never mentioned.

Daksha for devotion
  Made a mighty feast:
Milk and curds and butter,
  Flesh of bird and beast,
Rice and spice and honey,
  Sweetmeats ghí and gur,(1038)
Gifts for all the Bráhmans,
  Food for all the poor.
At the gates of Gangá(1039)
  Daksha held his feast;
Called the gods unto it,
  Greatest as the least.
All the gods were gathered
  Round with one accord;
All the gods but Umá,
  All but Umá’s lord.
Umá sat with Shiva
  On Kailása hill:
Round them stood the Rudras
  Watching for their will.
Who is this that cometh
  Lilting to his lute?
All the birds of heaven
  Heard his music, mute.
Round his head a garland
  Rich of hue was wreathed:
Every sweetest odour
  From its blossoms breathed.
’Tis the Muni Nárad;
  ’Mong the gods he fares,
Ever making mischief
  By the tales he bears.
“Hail to lovely Umá!
  Hail to Umá’s lord!
Wherefore are they absent
  For her father’s board?
Multiplied his merits
  Would be truly thrice,
Could he gain your favour
  For his sacrifice.”
Worth of heart was Umá;
  To her lord she spake:—
“Why dost thou, the mighty,
  Of no rite partake?
Straight I speed to Daksha
  Such a sight to see:
If he be my father,
  He must welcome thee.”
Wondrous was in glory
  Daksha’s holy rite;
Never had creation
  Viewed so brave a sight.
Gods, and nymphs, find fathers,
  Sages, Bráhmans, sprites,—
Every diverge creature
  Wrought that rite of rites.
Quickly then a quaking
  Fell on all from far;
Umá stood among them
  On her lion car.
“Greeting, gods and sages,
  Greeting, father mine!
Work hath wondrous virtue,
  Where such aids combine.
Guest-hall never gathered
  Goodlier company:
Seemeth all are welcome.
  All the gods but me.”
Spake the Muni Daksha,
  Stern and cold his tone:—
“Welcome thou, too, daughter,
  Since thou com’st alone.
But thy frenzied husband
  Suits another shrine;
He is no partaker
  Of this feast of mine.
He who walks in darkness
  Loves no deeds of light:
He who herds with demons
  Shuns each kindly sprite.
Let him wander naked.—
  Wizard weapons wield,—
Dance his frantic measure
  Round the funeral field.
Art thou yet delighted
  With the reeking hide,
Body smeared with ashes.
  Skulls in necklace tied?
Thou to love this monster?
  Thou to plead his part!
Know the moon and Gangá
  Share that faithless heart
Vainly art thou vying
  With thy rivals’ charms.
Are not coils of serpents
  Softer than thine arms?”
Words like these from Daksha
  Daksha’s daughter heard:
Then a sudden passion
  All her bosom stirred.
Eyes with fury flashing.
  Speechless in her ire,
Headlong did she hurl her
  ’Mid the holy fire.
Then a trembling terror
  Overcame each one,
And their minds were troubled
  Like a darkened sun;
And a cruel Vision,
  Face of lurid flame,
Umá’s Wrath incarnate,
  From the altar came.
Fiendlike forms by thousands
  Started from his side,
’Gainst the sacrificers
  All their might they plied:
Till the saints availed not
  Strength like theirs to stay,
And the gods distracted
  Turned and fled away.
Hushed were hymns and chanting,
  Priests were mocked and spurned;
Food defiled and scattered;
  Altars overturned.—
Then, to save the object
  Sought at such a price,
Like a deer in semblance
  Sped the sacrifice.
Soaring toward the heavens,
  Through the sky it fled?
But the Rudras chasing
  Smote away its head.
Prostrate on the pavement
  Daksha fell dismayed:—
“Mightiest, thou hast conquered
  Thee we ask for aid.
Let not our oblations
  All be rendered vain;
Let our toilsome labour
  Full fruition gain.”
Bright the broken altars
  Shone with Shiva’s form;
“Be it so!” His blessing
  Soothed that frantic storm.
Soon his anger ceases,
  Though it soon arise;—
But the Deer’s Head ever
  Blazes in the skies.”

_Indian Ballads and other Poems._


Page 286. Urvasí.


“The personification of Urvasî herself is as thin as that of Eôs or
Selênê. Her name is often found in the Veda as a mere name for the
morning, and in the plural number it is used to denote the dawns which
passing over men bring them to old age and death. Urvasî is the bright
flush of light overspreading the heaven before the sun rises, and is but
another form of the many mythical beings of Greek mythology whose names
take us back to the same idea or the same root. As the dawn in the Vedic
hymns is called Urûkî, the far-going (Têlephassa, Têlephos), so is she
also Uruasî, the wide-existing or wide-spreading; as are Eurôpê,
Euryanassa, Euryphassa, and many more of the sisters of Athênê and
Aphroditê. As such she is the mother of Vasishtha, the bright being, as
Oidipous is the son of Iokastê; and although Vasishtha, like Oidipous, has
become a mortal bard or sage, he is still the son of Mitra and Varuṇa, of
night and day. Her lover Purûravas is the counterpart of the Hellenic
Polydeukês; but the continuance of her union with him depends on the
condition that she never sees him unclothed. But the Gandharvas, impatient
of her long sojourn among mortal men resolved to bring her back to their
bright home; and Purûravas is thus led unwitingly to disregard her
warning. A ewe with two lambs was tied to her couch, and the Gandharvas
stole one of them; Urvasî said, ‘They take away my darling, as if I lived
in a land where there is no hero and no man.’ They stole the second, and
she upbraided her husband again. Then Purûravas looked and said, ‘How can
that be a land without heroes or men where I am?’ And naked he sprang up;
he thought it was too long to put on his dress. Then the Gandharvas sent a
flash of lighting, and Urvasî saw her husband naked as by daylight. Then
she vanished. ‘I come back,’ she said, and went. ‘Then he bewailed his
vanished love in bitter grief.’ Her promise to return was fulfilled, but
for a moment only, at the Lotos-lake, and Purûravas in vain beseeches her
to tarry longer. ‘What shall I do with thy speech?’ is the answer of
Urvasî. ‘I am gone like the first of the dawns. Purûravas, go home again.
I am hard to be caught like the winds.’ Her lover is in utter despair; but
when he lies down to die, the heart of Urvasî was melted, and she bids him
come to her on the last night of the year. On that night only he might be
with her; but a son should be born to him. On that day he went up to the
golden seats, and there Urvasî told him that the Gandharvas would grant
him one wish, and that he must make his choice. ‘Choose thou for me,’ he
said: and she answered, ‘Say to them, Let me be one of you.’ ”

COX’S _Mythology of the Aryan Nations._ Vol. I. p. 397.


Page 324.


_The sovereign of the Vánar race._

“Vánar is one of the most frequently occurring names by which the poem
calls the monkeys of Ráma’s army. Among the two or three derivations of
which the word Vánar is susceptible, one is that which deduces it from
vana which signifies a wood, and thus Vánar would mean a forester, an
inhabitant of the wood. I have said elsewhere that the monkeys, the
Vánars, whom Ráma led to the conquest of Ceylon were fierce woodland
tribes who occupied the mountainous regions of the south of India, where
their descendants may still be seen. I shall hence forth promiscuously
employ the word _Vánar_ to denote those monkeys, those fierce combatants
of Ráma’s army.” GORRESIO.


Page 326.


_No change of hue, no pose of limb_
_Gave sign that aught was false in him._
_Concise, unfaltering, sweet and clear,_
_Without a word to pain the ear,_
_From chest to throat, nor high nor low,_
_His accents came in measured flow._

Somewhat similarly in _The Squire’s Tale_:

“He with a manly voice said his message,
After the form used in his language,
Withouten vice of syllable or of letter.
And for his talë shouldë seem the better
Accordant to his wordës was his chere,
As teacheth art of speech them that it lere.”


Page 329. Ráma’s Alliance With Sugríva.


“The literal interpretation of this portion of the Rámáyana is indeed
deeply rooted in the mind of the Hindu. He implicitly believes that Ráma
is Vishnu, who became incarnate for the purpose of destroying the demon
Rávana: that he permitted his wife to be captured by Rávana for the sake
of delivering the gods and Bráhmans from the oppressions of the Rákshasa;
and that he ultimately assembled an army of monkeys, who were the progeny
of the gods, and led them against the strong-hold of Rávana at Lanká, and
delivered the world from the tyrant Rákshasa, whilst obtaining ample
revenge for his own personal wrongs.

One other point seems to demand consideration, namely, the possibility of
such an alliance as that which Ráma is said to have concluded with the
monkeys. This possibility will of course be denied by modern critics, but
still it is interesting to trace out the circumstances which seem to have
led to the acceptance of such a wild belief by the dreamy and marvel
loving Hindi. The south of India swarms with monkeys of curious
intelligence and rare physical powers. Their wonderful instinct for
organization, their attachment to particular localities, their occasional
journeys in large numbers over mountains and across rivers, their
obstinate assertion of supposed rights, and the ridiculous caricature
which they exhibit of all that is animal and emotional in man, would
naturally create a deep impression.… Indeed the habits of monkeys well
deserve to be patiently studied; not as they appear in confinement, when
much that is revolting in their nature is developed, but as they appear
living in freedom amongst the trees of the forest, or in the streets of
crowded cities, or precincts of temples. Such a study would not fail to
awaken strange ideas; and although the European would not be prepared to
regard monkeys as sacred animals he might be led to speculate as to their
origin by the light of data, which are at present unknown to the
naturalist whose observations have been derived from the menagerie alone.

Whatever, however, may have been the train of ideas which led the Hindú to
regard the monkey as a being half human and half divine, there can be
little doubt that in the Rámáyana the monkeys of southern India have been
confounded with what may be called the aboriginal people of the country.
The origin of this confusion may be easily conjectured. Perchance the
aborigines of the country may have been regarded as a superior kind of
monkeys; and to this day the features of the Marawars, who are supposed to
be the aborigines of the southern part of the Carnatic, are not only
different from those of their neighbours, but are of a character
calculated to confirm the conjecture. Again, it is probable that the army
of aborigines may have been accompanied by outlying bands of monkeys
impelled by that magpie-like curiosity and love of plunder which are the
peculiar characteristics of the monkey race; and this incident may have
given rise to the story that the army was composed of Monkeys.”

WHEELER’S _History of India. Vol. II. pp. 316 ff._


Page 342. The Fall Of Báli.


“As regards the narrative, it certainly seems to refer to some real event
amongst the aboriginal tribes: namely, the quarrel between an elder and
younger brother for the possession of a Ráj; and the subsequent alliance
of Ráma with the younger brother. It is somewhat remarkable that Ráma
appears to have formed an alliance with the wrong party, for the right of
Báli was evidently superior to that of Sugríva; and it is especially
worthy of note that Ráma compassed the death of Báli by an act contrary to
all the laws of fair fighting. Again, Ráma seems to have tacitly
sanctioned the transfer of Tárá from Báli to Sugríva, which was directly
opposed to modern rule, although in conformity with the rude customs of a
barbarous age; and it is remarkable that to this day the marriage of both
widows and divorced women is practised by the Marawars, or aborigines of
the southern Carnatic, contrary to the deeply-rooted prejudice which
exists against such unions amongst the Hindús at large.”

WHEELER’S _History of India, Vol. II. 324_.


Page 370. The Vánar Host.


“The splendid Marutas form the army of Indras, the red-haired monkeys and
bears that of Râmas; and the mythical and solar nature of the monkeys and
bears of the Râmâyaṇam manifests itself several times. The king of the
monkeys is a sun-god. The ancient king was named Bâlin, and was the son of
Indras. His younger brother Sugrívas, he who changes his shape at pleasure
(Kâmarúpas), who, helped by Râmas, usurped his throne, is said to be own
child of the sun. Here it is evident that the Vedic antagonism between
Indras and Vishṇus is reproduced in a zoological and entirely apish form.
The old Zeus must give way to the new, the moon to the sun, the evening to
the morning sun, the sun of winter to that of spring; the young son
betrays and overthrows the old one.… Râmas, who treacherously kills the
old king of the monkeys, Bâlin, is the equivalent of Vishṇus, who hurls
his predecessor Indras from his throne; and Sugrívas, the new king of the
monkeys resembles Indras when he promises to find the ravished Sítá, in
the same way as Vishṇus in one of his incarnations finds again the lost
vedás. And there are other indications in the Râmâyaṇam of opposition
between Indras and the monkeys who assist Râmas. The great monkey
Hanumant, of the reddish colour of gold, has his jaw broken, Indras having
struck him with his thunderbolt and caused him to fall upon a mountain,
because, while yet a child, he threw himself off a mountain into the air
in order to arrest the course of the sun, whose rays had no effect upon
him. (The cloud rises from the mountain and hides the sun, which is unable
of itself to disperse it; the tempest comes, and brings flashes of
lightning and thunder-bolts, which tear the cloud in pieces.)

The whole legend of the monkey Hanumant represents the sun entering into
the cloud or darkness, and coming out of it. His father is said to be now
the wind, now the elephant of the monkeys (Kapikunjaras), now Keśarin, the
long-haired sun, the sun with a mane, the lion sun (whence his name of
_Keśariṇah putrah_). From this point of view, Hanumant would seem to be
the brother of Sugrívas, who is also the offspring of the sun.…

All the epic monkeys of the _Râmâyaṇam_ are described in the twentieth
canto of the first book by expressions which very closely resemble those
applied in the Vedic hymns to the Marutas, as swift as the tempestuous
wind, changing their shape at pleasure, making a noise like clouds,
sounding like thunder, battling, hurling mountain-peaks, shaking great
uprooted trees, stirring up the deep waters, crushing the earth with their
arms, making the clouds fall. Thus Bâlin comes out of the cavern as the
sun out of the cloud.…

But the legend of the monkey Hanumant presents another curious resemblance
to that of Samson. Hanumant is bound with cords by Indrajit, son of
Rávaṇas; he could easily free himself, but does not wish to do so. Rávaṇas
to put him to shame, orders his tail to be burned, because the tail is the