Canto xxiii. These incorporeal weapons are partly represented
      according to the fashion of those ascribed to the Gods and the
      different orders of demi-gods, partly are the mere creations of
      fancy; and it would not be easy to say what idea the poet had of
      them in his own mind, or what powers he meant to assign to each.”
      SCHLEGEL.

  166 “In Sanskrit _Sankára_, a word which has various significations but
      the primary meaning of which is _the act of seizing_. A magical
      power seems to be implied of employing the weapons when and where
      required. The remarks I have made on the preceding Canto apply with
      still greater force to this. The MSS. greatly vary in the
      enumeration of these _Sankáras_, and it is not surprising that
      copyists have incorrectly written the names which they did not well
      understand. The commentators throw no light upon the subject.”
      SCHLEGEL. I have taken the liberty of omitting four of these which
      Schlegel translates “Scleromphalum, Euomphalum, Centiventrem, and
      Chrysomphalum.”

  167 I omit, after this line, eight _ślokes_ which, as Schlegel allows,
      are quite out of place.

  168 This is the fifth of the _avatárs_, descents or incarnations of
      Vishṇu.

  169 This is a solar allegory. Vishṇu is the sun, the three steps being
      his rising, culmination, and setting.

  170 Certain ceremonies preliminary to a sacrifice.

  171 A river which rises in Budelcund and falls into the Ganges near
      Patna. It is called also _Hiraṇyaráhu_, Golden-armed, and
      _Hiraṇyaráha_, Auriferous.

  172 The modern Berar.

  173 According to the Bengal recension the first (Kuśámba) is called
      Kuśáśva, and his city Kauśáśví. This name does not occur elsewhere.
      The reading of the northern recension is confirmed by Foê Kouê Ki;
      p. 385, where the city _Kiaoshangmi_ is mentioned. It lay 500 _lis_
      to the south-west of _Prayága_, on the south bank of the Jumna.
      _Mahodaya_ is another name of Kanyakubja: _Dharmáraṇya_, the wood to
      which the God of Justice is said to have fled through fear of Soma
      the Moon-God was in Magadh. Girivraja was in the same neighbourhood.
      See Lasson’s I, A. Vol. I. p. 604.

  174 That is, the City of the Bent Virgins, the modern Kanauj or Canouge.

  175 Literally, Given by _Brahma_ or devout contemplation.

  176 Now called Kośí (Cosy) corrupted from Kauśikí, daughter of Kuś]a.

      “This is one of those personifications of rivers so frequent in the
      Grecian mythology, but in the similar myths is seen the impress of
      the genius of each people, austere and profoundly religious in
      India, graceful and devoted to the worship of external beauty in
      Greece.” GORRESIO.

  177 One of the names of the Ganges considered as the daughter of Jahnu.
      See Canto XLIV.

  178 The Indian Crane.

  179 Or, rather, geese.

  180 A name of the God Śiva.

  181 Garuḍa.

  182 Ikshváku, the name of a king of Ayodhyá who is regarded as the
      founder of the Solar race, means also a _gourd_. Hence, perhaps, the
      myth.

  183 “The region here spoken of is called in the Laws of Manu
      _Madhyadeśa_ or the middle region. ‘The region situated between the
      Himálaya and the Vindhya Mountains … is called _Madhyadeśa_, or the
      middle region; the space comprised between these two mountains from
      the eastern to the western sea is called by sages Áryávartta, _the
      seat of honourable men_.’ (MANU, II, 21, 22.) The Sanskrit Indians
      called themselves Áryans, which means _honourable_, _noble_, to
      distinguish themselves from the surrounding nations of different
      origin.” GORRESIO.

  184 Said to be so called from the Jambu, or Rose Apple, abounding in it,
      and signifying according to the Puránas the central division of the
      world, the known world.

  185 Here used as a name of Vishṇu.

  186 Kings are called the husbands of their kingdoms or of the earth;
      “She and his kingdom were his only brides.” _Raghuvaṅśa._

        “Doubly divorced! Bad men, you violate
      A double marriage, ’twixt my crown and me,
      And then between me and my married wife.”

      King Richard II. Act V. Sc. I.

  187 The thirty-three Gods are said in the _Aitareya Bráhmaṇa_, Book I.
      ch. II. 10. to be the eight Vasus, the eleven Rudras, the twelve
      Ádityas, Prajápati, either Brahmá or Daksha, and Vashatkára or
      deified oblation. This must have been the actual number at the
      beginning of the Vedic religion gradually increased by successive
      mythical and religious creations till the Indian Pantheon was
      crowded with abstractions of every kind. Through the reverence with
      which the words of the Veda were regarded, the immense host of
      multiplied divinities, in later times, still bore the name of the
      Thirty-three Gods.

  188 “One of the elephants which, according to an ancient belief popular
      in India, supported the earth with their enormous backs; when one of
      these elephants shook his wearied head the earth trembled with its
      woods and hills. An idea, or rather a mythical fancy, similar to
      this, but reduced to proportions less grand, is found in Virgil when
      he speaks of Enceladus buried under Ætna:”

      “adi semiustum fulmine corpus
      Urgeri mole hac, ingentemque insuper Ætnam
      Impositam, ruptis flammam expirare caminis;
      Et fessum quoties mutat latus, intre mere omnem
      iam, et cœlum subtexere fumo.”

      Æneid. Lib. III. GORRESIO.

  189 “The Devas and Asuras (Gods and Titans) fought in the east, the
      south, the west, and the north, and the Devas were defeated by the
      Asuras in all these directions. They then fought in the
      north-eastern direction; there the Devas did not sustain defeat.
      This direction is _aparájitá_, _i.e._ unconquerable. Thence one
      should do work in this direction, and have it done there; for such a
      one (alone) is able to clear off his debts.” HAUG’S _Aitareya
      Bráhmanam_, Vol. II, p. 33.

      The debts here spoken of are a man’s religious obligations to the
      Gods, the Pitaras or Manes, and men.

  190 Vishṇu.

  191 “It appears to me that this mythical story has reference to the
      volcanic phenomena of nature. Kapil may very possibly be that hidden
      fiery force which suddenly unprisons itself and bursts forth in
      volcanic effects. Kapil is, moreover, one of the names of Agni the
      God of Fire.” GORRESIO.

  192 Garuḍ was the son of Kaśyap and Vinatá.

  193 Garuḍ.

  194 A famous and venerated region near the Malabar coast.

  195 That is four fires and the sun.

  196 Heaven.

  197 Wind-Gods.

  198 Śiva.

  199 The lake Vindu does not exist. Of the seven rivers here mentioned
      two only, the Ganges and the Sindhu or Indus, are known to
      geographers. Hládiní means the Gladdener, Pávaní the Purifier,
      Naliní the Lotus-Clad, and Suchakshu the Fair-eyed.

  200 The First or Golden Age.

  201 Diti and Aditi were wives of Kaśyap, and mothers respectively of
      Titans and Gods.

  202 One of the seven seas surrounding as many worlds in concentric
      rings.

  203 Śankar and Rudra are names of Śiva.

  204 “Śárṅgin, literally _carrying a bow of horn_, is a constantly
      recurring name of Vishṇu. The Indians also, therefore, knew the art
      of making bows out of the hons of antelopes or wild goats, which
      Homer ascribes to the Trojans of the heroic age.” SCHLEGEL.

  205 Dhanvantari, the physician of the Gods.

  206 The poet plays upon the word and fancifully derives it from _apsu_,
      the locative case plural of _ap_, water, and _rasa_, taste.… The
      word is probably derived from _ap_, water, and _sri_, to go, and
      seems to signify _inhabitants of the water_, nymphs of the stream;
      or, as Goldstücker thinks (Dict. s.v.) these divinities were
      originally personifications of the vapours which are attracted by
      the sun and form into mist or clouds.

  207 “_Surá_, in the feminine comprehends all sorts of intoxicating
      liquors, many kinds of which the Indians from the earliest times
      distilled and prepared from rice, sugar-cane, the palm tree, and
      various flowers and plants. Nothing is considered more disgraceful
      among orthodox Hindus than drunkenness, and the use of wine is
      forbidden not only to Bráhmans but the two other orders as well.… So
      it clearly appears derogatory to the dignity of the Gods to have
      received a nymph so pernicious, who ought rather to have been made
      over to the Titans. However the etymological fancy has prevailed.
      The word _Sura_, a God, is derived from the indeclinable _Swar_
      heaven.” SCHLEGEL.

  208 Literally, high-eared, the horse of Indra. Compare the production of
      the horse from the sea by Neptune.

        209 “And Kaustubha the best
      Of gems that burns with living light
      Upon Lord Vishṇu’s breast.”

      _Churning of the Ocean._

  210 “That this story of the birth of Lakshmí is of considerable
      antiquity is evident from one of her names _Kshírábdhi-tanayá_,
      daughter of the Milky Sea, which is found in _Amarasinha_ the most
      ancient of Indian lexicographers. The similarity to the Greek myth
      of Venus being born from the foam of the sea is remarkable.”

      “In this description of Lakshmí one thing only offends me, that she
      is said to have four arms. Each of Vishṇu’s arms, single, as far as
      the elbow, there branches into two; but Lakshmí in all the brass
      seals that I possess or remember to have seen has two arms only. Nor
      does this deformity of redundant limbs suit the pattern of perfect
      beauty.” SCHLEGEL. I have omitted the offensive epithet.

  211 Purandhar, a common title of Indra.

  212 A few verses are here left untranslated on account of the subject
      and language being offensive to modern taste.

  213 “In this myth of Indra destroying the unborn fruit of Diti with his
      thunderbolt, from which afterwards came the Maruts or Gods of Wind
      and Storm, geological phenomena are, it seems, represented under
      mythical images. In the great Mother of the Gods is, perhaps,
      figured the dry earth: Indra the God of thunder rends it open, and
      there issue from its rent bosom the Maruts or exhalations of the
      earth. But such ancient myths are difficult to interpret with
      absolute certainty.” GORRESIO.

  214 Wind.

  215 Indra, with _mahá_, great, prefixed.

  216 The Heavenly Twins.

  217 Not banished from heaven as the inferior Gods and demigods sometimes
      were.

  218 Kumárila says: “In the same manner, if it is said that Indra was the
      seducer of Ahalyá this does not imply that the God Indra committed
      such a crime, but Indra means the sun, and Ahalyá (from ahan and lí)
      the night; and as the night is seduced and ruined by the sun of the
      morning, therefore is Indra called the paramour of Ahalyá.” MAX
      MULLER, _History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 530_.

  219 “The preceding sixteen lines have occurred before in Canto XLVIII.
      This Homeric custom of repeating a passage of several lines is
      strange to our poet. This is the only instance I remember. The
      repetition of single lines is common enough.” SCHLEGEL.

  220 Divine personages of minute size produced from the hair of Brahmá,
      and probably the origin of

            “That small infantry
      Warred on by cranes.”

  221 Sweet, salt, pungent, bitter, acid, and astringent.

  222 “Of old hoards and minerals in the earth, the king is entitled to
      half by reason of his general protection, and because he is the lord
      paramount of the soil.” MANU, Book VIII. 39.

  223 Ghí or clarified butter, “holy oil,” being one of the essentials of
      sacrifice.

  224 “A Bráhman had five principal duties to discharge every day: study
      and teaching the Veda, oblations to the manes or spirits of the
      departed, sacrifice to the Gods, hospitable offerings to men, and _a
      gift of food to all creatures_. The last consisted of rice or other
      grain which the Bráhman was to offer every day outside his house in
      the open air. MANU, Book III. 70.” GORRESIO.

  225 These were certain sacred words of invocation such a _sváhá_,
      _vashaṭ_, etc., pronounced at the time of sacrifice.

  226 “It is well known that the Persians were called Pahlavas by the
      Indians. The _Śakas_ are nomad tribes inhabiting Central Asia, the
      Scythes of the Greeks, whom the Persians also, as Herodotus tells
      us, called Sakæ just as the Indians did. Lib. VII 64 ὁι γὰρ Πέρσαι
      πάντας τοὺς Σύθας. καλέουσι Σάκας. The name Yavans seems to be used
      rather indefinitely for nations situated beyond Persia to the west.…
      After the time of Alexander the Great the Indians as well as the
      Persians called the Greeks also Yavans.” SCHLEGEL.

      Lassen thinks that the Pahlavas were the same people as the Πάκτυες
      of Herodotus, and that this non-Indian people dwelt on the
      north-west confines of India.

  227 See page 13, note 6.

  228 Barbarians, non-Sanskrit-speaking tribes.

  229 A comprehensive term for foreign or outcast races of different faith
      and language from the Hindus.

  230 The Kirátas and Hárítas are savage aborigines of India who occupy
      hills and jungles and are altogether different in race and character
      from the Hindus. Dr. Muir remarks in his Sanskrit Texts, Vol. I. p.
      488 (second edition) that it does not appear that it is the object
      of this legend to represent this miraculous creation as the origin
      of these tribes, and that nothing more may have been intended than
      that the cow called into existence large armies, of the same stock
      with particular tribes previously existing.

  231 The Great God, Śiva.

  232 Nandi, the snow-white bull, the attendant and favourite vehicle of
      Śiva.

  233 “The names of many of these weapons which are mythical and partly
      allegorical have occurred in Canto XXIX. The general signification
      of the story is clear enough. It is a contest for supremacy between
      the regal or military order and Bráhmanical or priestly authority,
      like one of those struggles which our own Europe saw in the middle
      ages when without employing warlike weapons the priesthood
      frequently gained the victory.” SCHLEGEL.

      For a full account of the early contests between the Bráhmans and
      the Kshattriyas, see Muir’s Original Sanskrit Texts (Second edition)
      Vol. I. Ch. IV.

  234 “Triśanku, king of Ayodhyá, was seventh in descent from Ikshváku,
      and Daśaratha holds the thirty-fourth place in the same genealogy.
      See Canto LXX. We are thrown back, therefore, to very ancient times,
      and it occasions some surprise to find Vaśishṭha and Viśvámitra,
      actors in these occurences, still alive in Rama’s time.”

  235 “It does not appear how Triśanku, in asking the aid of Vaśishṭha’s
      sons after applying in vain to their father, could be charged with
      resorting to another _śákhá_ (School) in the ordinary sense of that
      word; as it is not conceivable that the sons should have been of
      another Śákhá from the father, whose cause they espouse with so much
      warmth. The commentator in the Bombay edition explains the word
      _Śákhantaram_ as Yájanádiná rakshántaram, ‘one who by sacrificing
      for thee, etc., will be another protector.’ Gorresio’s Gauḍa text,
      which may often be used as a commentary on the older one, has the
      following paraphrase of the words in question, ch. 60, 3. Múlam
      utsṛijya kasmát tvam sákhásv ichhasi lambitum. ‘Why, forsaking the
      root, dost thou desire to hang upon the branches?’ ” MUIR, Sanskrit
      Texts, Vol. I., p. 401.

  236 A Chaṇḍála was a man born of the illegal and impure union of a Śúdra
      with a woman of one of the three higher castes.

  237 “The Chaṇḍála was regarded as the vilest and most abject of the men
      sprung from wedlock forbidden by the law (Mánavadharmaśástra, Lib.
      X. 12.); a kind of social malediction weighed upon his head and
      rejected him from human society.” GORRESIO.

  238 This appellation, occuring nowhere else in the poem except as the
      name of a city, appears twice in this Canto as a name of Vaśishṭha.

  239 “The seven ancient rishis or saints, as has been said before, were
      the seven stars of Ursa Major. The seven other new saints which are
      here said to have been created by Viśvámitra should be seven new
      southern stars, a sort of new Ursa. Von Schlegel thinks that this
      mythical fiction of new stars created by Viśvámitra may signify that
      these southern stars, unknown to the Indians as long as they
      remained in the neighbourhood of the Ganges, became known to them at
      a later date when they colonized the southern regions of India.”
      GORRESIO.

  240 “This cannot refer to the events just related: for Viśvámitra was
      successful in the sacrifice performed for Triśanku. And yet no other
      impediment is mentioned. Still his restless mind would not allow him
      to remain longer in the same spot. So the character of Viśvámitra is
      ingeniously and skilfully shadowed forth: as he had been formerly a
      most warlike king, loving battle and glory, bold, active, sometimes
      unjust, and more frequently magnanimous, such also he always shows
      himself in his character of anchorite and ascetic.” SCHLEGEL.

  241 Near the modern city of Ajmere. The place is sacred still, and the
      name is preserved in the Hindí. Lassen, however, says that this
      Pushkala or Pushkara, called by the Grecian writers Πευκελίτις, the
      earliest place of pilgrimage mentioned by name, is not to be
      confounded with the modern Pushkara in Ajmere.

  242 “Ambarísha is the twenty-ninth in descent from Ikshváku, and is
      therefore separated by an immense space of time from Triśanku in
      whose story Viśvámitra had played so important a part. Yet Richíka,
      who is represented as having young sons while Ambarísha was yet
      reigning being himself the son of Bhrigu and to be numbered with the
      most ancient sages, is said to have married the younger sister of
      Viśvámitra. But I need not again remark that there is a perpetual
      anachronism in Indian mythology.” SCHLEGEL..

      “In the mythical story related in this and the following Canto we
      may discover, I think, some indication of the epoch at which the
      immolation of lower animals was substituted for human sacrifice.… So
      when Iphigenia was about to be sacrificed at Aulis, one legend tells
      us that a hind was substituted for the virgin.” GORRESIO.

      So the ram caught in the thicket took the place of Isaac, or, as the
      Musalmáns say, of Ishmael.

  243 The Indian Cupid.

  244 “The same as she whose praises Viśvámitra has already sung in Canto
      XXXV, and whom the poet brings yet alive upon the scene in Canto
      LXI. Her proper name was _Satyavatí_ (Truthful); the patronymic,
      Kauśikí was preserved by the river into which she is said to have
      been changed, and is still recognized in the corrupted forms Kuśa
      and Kuśí. The river flows from the heights of the Himálaya towards
      the Ganges, bounding on the east the country of Videha (Behar). The
      name is no doubt half hidden in the _Cosoagus_ of Pliny and the
      _Kossounos_ of Arrian. But each author has fallen into the same
      error in his enumeration of these rivers (Condochatem, Erannoboam,
      Cosoagum, Sonum). The Erannoboas, (Hiraṇyaváha) and the Sone are not
      different streams, but well-known names of the same river. Moreover
      the order is disturbed, in which on the right and left they fall
      into the Ganges. To be consistent with geography it should be
      written: Erannoboam sive Sonum, Condochatem (Gandakí), Cosoagum.”
      SCHLEGEL.

  245 “Daksha was one of the ancient Progenitors or Prajápatis created by
      Brahmá. The sacrifice which is here spoken of and in which Śankar or
      Śiva (called also here Rudra and Bhava) smote the Gods because he
      had not been invited to share the sacred oblations with them, seems
      to refer to the origin of the worship of Śiva, to its increase and
      to the struggle it maintained with other older forms of worship.”
      GORRESIO.

  246 Sítá means a furrow.

            “Great Erectheus swayed,
      That owed his nurture to the blue-eyed maid,
      But from the teeming furrow took his birth,
      The mighty offspring of the foodful earth.”

      Iliad, Book II.

  247 “The whole story of Sítá, as will be seen in the course of the poem
      has a great analogy with the ancient myth of Proserpine.” GORRESIO.

  248 A different lady from the Goddess of the Jumna who bears the same
      name.

  249 This is another fanciful derivation, _Sa_—with, and _gara_—poison.

_  250 Purushádak_ means a cannibal. First called _Kalmáshapáda_ on
      account of his spotted feet he is said to have been turned into a
      cannibal for killing the son of Vaśishṭha.

  251 “In the setting forth of these royal genealogies the Bengal
      recension varies but slightly from the Northern. The first six names
      of the genealogy of the Kings of Ayodhyá are partly theogonical and
      partly cosmogonical; the other names are no doubt in accordance with
      tradition and deserve the same amount of credence as the ancient
      traditional genealogies of other nations.” GORRESIO.

  252 The tenth of the lunar asterisms, composed of five stars.

  253 There are two lunar asterisms of this name, one following the other
      immediately, forming the eleventh and twelfth of the lunar mansions.

  254 This is another Ráma, son of Jamadagni, called Paraśuráma, or Ráma
      with the axe, from the weapon which he carried. He was while he
      lived the terror of the Warrior caste, and his name recalls long and
      fierce struggles between the sacerdotal and military order in which
      the latter suffered severely at the hands of their implacable enemy.

  255 “The author of the _Raghuvaṅśa_ places the mountain Mahendra in the
      territory of the king of the Kalingans, whose palace commanded a
      view of the ocean. It is well known that the country along the coast
      to the south of the mouths of the Ganges was the seat of this
      people. Hence it may be suspected that this Mahendra is what Pliny
      calls ‘promontorium Calingon.’ The modern name, _Cape Palmyras_,
      from the palmyras Borassus flabelliformis, which abound there agrees
      remarkably with the description of the poet who speaks of the groves
      of these trees. _Raghuvaṅśa_, VI. 51.” SCHLEGEL.

  256 Śiva.

  257 Siva. God of the Azure Neck.

  258 Śatrughna means slayer of foes, and the word is repeated as an
      intensive epithet.

  259 Alluding to the images of Vishṇu, which have four arms, the four
      princes being portions of the substance of that God.

  260 Chief of the insignia of imperial dignity.

  261 Whisks, usually made of the long tails of the Yak.

  262 Chitraratha, King of the Gandharvas.

  263 The Chandrakánta or Moonstone, a sort of crystal supposed to be
      composed of congealed moonbeams.

  264 A customary mark of respect to a superior.

  265 Ráhu, the ascending node, is in mythology a demon with the tail of a
      dragon whose head was severed from his body by Vishṇu, but being
      immortal, the head and tail retained their separate existence and
      being transferred to the stellar sphere became the authors of
      eclipses; the first especially by endeavouring to swallow the sun
      and moon.

  266 In eclipse.

  267 The seventh of the lunar asterisms.

  268 Kauśalyá and Sumitrá.

  269 A king of the Lunar race, and father of Yayáti.

  270 Literally _the chamber of wrath,_ a “_growlery_,” a small, dark,
      unfurnished room to which it seems, the wives and ladies of the king
      betook themselves when offended and sulky.

  271 In these four lines I do not translate faithfully, and I do not
      venture to follow Kaikeyí farther in her eulogy of the hump-back’s
      charms.

  272 These verses are evidently an interpolation. They contain nothing
      that has not been already related: the words only are altered. As
      the whole poem could not be recited at once, the rhapsodists at the
      beginning of a fresh recitation would naturally remind their hearers
      of the events immediately preceding.

  273 The _śloka_ or distich which I have been forced to expand into these
      nine lines is evidently spurious, but is found in all the commented
      MSS. which Schlegel consulted.

  274 Manmatha, Mind-disturber, a name of Káma or Love.

  275 This story is told in the Mahábhárat. A free version of it may be
      found in _Scenes from the Rámáyan, etc._

  276 Only the highest merit obtains a home in heaven for ever. Minor
      degrees of merit procure only leases of heavenly mansions terminable
      after periods proportioned to the fund which buys them. King Yayáti
      went to heaven and when his term expired was unceremoniously
      ejected, and thrown down to earth.

  277 See _Additional Notes_, THE SUPPLIANT DOVE.

  278 Indra, called also Purandara, Town-destroyer.

  279 Indra’s charioteer.

  280 The elephant of Indra.

  281 A star in the spike of Virgo: hence the name of the mouth Chaitra or
      Chait.

  282 The Rain-God.

  283 In a former life.

  284 One of the lunar asterisms, represented as the favourite wife of the
      Moon. See p. 4, note.

  285 The Sea.

  286 The Moon.

  287 The comparison may to a European reader seem a homely one. But
      Spenser likens an infuriate woman to a cow “That is berobbed of her
      youngling dere.” Shakspeare also makes King Henry VI compare himself
      to the calf’s mother that “Runs lowing up and down, Looking the way
      her harmless young one went.” “Cows,” says De Quincey, “are amongst
      the gentlest of breathing creatures; none show more passionate
      tenderness to their young, when deprived of them, and, in short, I
      am not ashamed to profess a deep love for these gentle creatures.”

  288 The commentators say that, in a former creation, Ocean grieved his
      mother and suffered in consequence the pains of hell.

  289 As described in Book I Canto XL.

  290 Parasúráma.

  291 The Sanskrit word _hasta_ signifies both _hand_, and the trunk of
      “The beast that bears between his eyes a serpent for a head.”

  292 See P. 41.

  293 The first progeny of Brahmá or Brahmá himself.

  294 These are three names of the Sun.

  295 See P. 1.

  296 The saints who form the constellation of Ursa Major.

  297 The regent of the planet Venus.

  298 Kuvera.

_  299 Bali_, or the presentation of food to all created beings, is one of
      the five great sacraments of the Hindu religion: it consists in
      throwing a small parcel of the offering, _Ghee_, or rice, or the
      like, into the open air at the back of the house.

  300 In mythology, a demon slain by Indra.

  301 Called also Garuḍ, the King of the birds, offspring of Vinatá. See
      p. 53.

  302 See P. 56.

  303 See P. 43.

  304 The story of Sávitrí, told in the Mahábhárat, has been admirably
      translated by Rückert, and elegantly epitomized by Mrs. Manning in
      _India, Ancient and Mediæval_. There is a free rendering of the
      story in _Idylls from the Sanskrit_.

  305 Fire for sacrificial purposes is produced by the attrition of two
      pieces of wood.

  306 Kaikeyí.

  307 The chapel where the sacred fire used in worship is kept.

  308 The students and teachers of the Taittiríya portion of the Yajur
      Veda.

  309 Two of the divine personages called _Prajápatis_ and _Brahmádikas_
      who were first created by Brahmá.

  310 It was the custom of the kings of the solar dynasty to resign in
      their extreme old age the kingdom to the heir, and spend the
      remainder of their days in holy meditation in the forest:

      “For such through ages in their life’s decline
      Is the good custom of Ikshváku’s line.”

      _Raghuraṅśa._

  311 See Book I, Canto XXXIX. An Indian prince in more modern times
      appears to have diverted himself in a similar way.

      It is still reported in Belgaum that Appay Deasy was wont to amuse
      himself “by making several young and beautiful women stand side by
      side on a narrow balcony, without a parapet, overhanging the deep
      reservoir at the new palace in Nipani. He used then to pass along
      the line of trembling creatures, and suddenly thrusting one of them
      headlong into the water below, he used to watch her drowning, and
      derive pleasure from her dying agonies.”—History of the Belgaum
      District. By H. J. Stokes, M. S. C.

  312 Chitraratha, King of the celestial choristers.

  313 It is said that the bamboo dies after flowering.

  314 “Thirty centuries have passed since he began this memorable journey.
      Every step of it is known and is annually traversed by thousands:
      hero worship is not extinct. What can Faith do! How strong are the
      ties of religion when entwined with the legends of a country! How
      many a cart creeps creaking and weary along the road from Ayodhyá to
      Chitrakúṭ. It is this that gives the Rámáyan a strange interest, the
      story still lives.” _Calcutta Review: Vol. XXIII._

  315 See p. 72.

  316 Four stars of the sixteenth lunar asterism.

  317 In the marriage service.

  318 The husks and chaff of the rice offered to the Gods.

  319 An important sacrifice at which seventeen victims were immolated.

  320 The great pilgrimage to the Himálayas, in order to die there.

  321 Known to Europeans as the Goomtee.

  322 A tree, commonly called _Ingua_.

  323 Sacrificial posts to which the victims were tied.

  324 Daughter of Jahnu, a name of the Ganges. See p. 55.

  325 The _Mainá_ or Gracula religiosa, a favourite cage-bird, easily
      taught to talk.

  326 The Jumna.

  327 The Hindu name of Allahabad.

  328 The Langúr is a large monkey.

  329 A mountain said to lie to the east of Meru.

  330 Another name of the Jumna, daughter of the Sun.

  331 “We have often looked on that green hill: it is the holiest spot of
      that sect of the Hindu faith who devote themselves to this
      incarnation of Vishṇu. The whole neighbourhood is Ráma’s country.
      Every headland has some legend, every cavern is connected with his
      name; some of the wild fruits are still called _Sítáphal_, being the
      reputed food of the exile. Thousands and thousands annually visit
      the spot, and round the hill is a raised foot-path, on which the
      devotee, with naked feet, treads full of pious awe.” _Calcutta
      Review_, Vol. XXIII.

  332 Deities of a particular class in which five or ten are enumerated.
      They are worshipped particularly at the funeral obsequies in honour
      of deceased progenitors.

  333 “So in Homer the horses of Achilles lamented with many bitter tears
      the death of Patroclus slain by Hector:”

      “Ἵπποι δ’ Αἰακίδαο, μάχης ἀπάνευθεν ἐότες,
      Κλᾶιον, ἐπειδὴ πρῶτα πυθέσθην ἡνιόχοιο
      Ἐν κονίνσι πεσόντος ὑφ’ Ἕκτορος ἀνδροφόνοιο”

      ILIAD. XVII. 426.

      “Ancient poesy frequently associated nature with the joys and
      sorrows of man.” GORRESIO.

  334 The lines containing this heap of forced metaphors are marked as
      spurious by Schlegel.

  335 The southern region is the abode of Yama the Indian Pluto, and of
      departed spirits.

  336 The five elements of which the body consists, and to which it
      returns.

  337 So dying York cries over the body of Suffolk:

          “Tarry, dear cousin Suffolk!
      My soul shall thine keep company to heaven:
      Tarry, sweet soul, for mine, then fly abreast.”

      _King Henry V, Act IV, 6._

  338 Kauśalyá, daughter of the king of another Kośal.

  339 Rájagriha, or Girivraja was the capital of Aśvapati, Bharat’s
      maternal grandfather.

  340 The Kekayas or Kaikayas in the Punjab appear amongst the chief
      nations in the war of the Mahábhárata; their king being a kinsman of
      Krishṇa.

  341 Hástinapura was the capital of the kingdom of Kuru, near the modern
      Delhi.

  342 The Panchálas occupied the upper part of the Doab.

  343 “Kurujángala and its inhabitants are frequently mentioned in the
      _Mahábhárata_, as in the _Ádi-parv._ 3789, 4337, _et al._” WILSON’S
      _Vishṇu Puráṇa,_ Vol. II. p. 176. DR. HALL’S Note.

  344 “The Ὁξύματις of Arrian. See _As. Res._ Vol. XV. p. 420, 421, also
      _Indische Alterthumskunde_, Vol. I. p. 602, first footnote.”
      WILSON’S _Vishṇu Puráṇa_, Vol. I. p. 421. DR. HALL’S Edition. The
      Ikshumatí was a river in Kurukshetra.

  345 “The Báhíkas are described in the Mahábhárata, Karṇa Parvan, with
      some detail, and comprehend the different nations of the Punjab from
      the Sutlej to the Indus.” WILSON’S _Vishṇu Puráṇa_, Vol. I. p. 167.

  346 The Beas, Hyphasis, or Bibasis.

  347 It would be lost labour to attempt to verify all the towns and
      streams mentioned in Cantos LXVIII and LXXII. Professor Wilson
      observes (_Vishṇu Puráṇa_, p. 139. Dr. Hall’s Edition) “States, and
      tribes, and cities have disappeared, even from recollection; and
      some of the natural features of the country, especially the rivers,
      have undergone a total alteration.… Notwithstanding these
      impediments, however, we should be able to identify at least
      mountains and rivers, to a much greater extent than is now
      practicable, if our maps were not so miserably defective in their
      nomenclature. None of our surveyors or geographers have been
      oriental scholars. It may be doubted if any of them have been
      conversant with the spoken language of the country. They have,
      consequently, put down names at random, according to their own
      inaccurate appreciation of sounds carelessly, vulgarly, and
      corruptly uttered; and their maps of India are crowded with
      appellations which bear no similitude whatever either to past or
      present denominations. We need not wonder that we cannot discover
      Sanskrit names in English maps, when, in the immediate vicinity of
      Calcutta, Barnagore represents Baráhanagar, Dakshineśwar is
      metamorphosed into Duckinsore, Ulubaría into Willoughbury.… There is
      scarcely a name in our Indian maps that does not afford proof of
      extreme indifference to accuracy in nomenclature, and of an
      incorrectness in estimating sounds, which is, in some degree,
      perhaps, a national defect.”

      For further information regarding the road from Ayodhyá to
      Rájagriha, see _Additional Notes_.

  348 “The Śatadrú, ‘the hundred-channeled’—the Zaradrus of Ptolemy,
      Hesydrus of Pliny—is the Sutlej.” WILSON’S _Vishṇu Puráṇa_, Vol. II.
      p. 130.

  349 The Sarasvatí or Sursooty is a tributary of the Caggar or Guggur in
      Sirhind.

_  350 Súryamcha pratimehatu_, adversus solem mingat. An offence expressly
      forbidden by the Laws of Manu.

  351 Bharat does not intend these curses for any particular person: he
      merely wishes to prove his own innocence by invoking them on his own
      head if he had any share in banishing Ráma.

  352 The Sáma-veda, the hymns of which are chanted aloud.

  353 Walking from right to left.

  354 Birth and death, pleasure and pain, loss and gain.

  355 Erected upon a tree or high staff in honour of Indra.

  356 I follow in this stanza the Bombay edition in preference to
      Schlegel’s which gives the tears of joy to the courtiers.

  357 The commentator says “Śatrughna accompanied by the other sons of the
      king.”

  358 Not Bharat’s uncle, but some councillor.

_  359 Śatakratu_, Lord of a hundred sacrifices, the performance of a
      hundred _Aśvamedhas_ or sacrifices of a horse entitling the
      sacrificer to this exalted dignity.

  360 The modern Malabar.

  361 Now Sungroor, in the Allahabad district.

  362 Ráma, Lakshmaṇ, and Sumantra.

  363 The _svastika_, a little cross with a transverse line at each
      extremity.

  364 When an army marched it was customary to burn the huts in which it
      had spent the night.

  365 Yáma, Varuṇa, and Kuvera.

  366 “A happy land in the remote north where the inhabitants enjoy a
      natural pefection attended with complete happiness obtained without
      exertion. There is there no vicissitude, nor decrepitude, nor death,
      nor fear: no distinction of virtue and vice, none of the
      inequalities denoted by the words best, worst, and intermediate, nor
      any change resulting from the succession of the four Yugas.” See
      MUIR’S _Sanskrit Texts_, Vol. I. p. 492.

  367 The Moon.

  368 The poet does not tell us what these lakes contained.

  369 These ten lines are a substitution for, and not a translation of the
      text which Carey and Marshman thus render: “This mountain adorned
      with mango, jumboo, usuna, lodhra, piala, punusa, dhava, unkotha,
      bhuvya, tinisha, vilwa, tindooka, bamboo, kashmaree, urista, uruna,
      madhooka, tilaka, vuduree, amluka, nipa, vetra, dhunwuna, veejaka,
      and other trees affording flowers, and fruits, and the most
      delightful shade, how charming does it appear!”

_  370 Vidyadharis_, Spirits of Air, sylphs.

  371 A lake attached either to Amarávatí the residence of Indra, or Alaká
      that of Kuvera.

  372 The Ganges of heaven.

  373 Naliní, as here, may be the name of any lake covered with lotuses.

  374 This canto is allowed, by Indian commentators, to be an
      interpolation. It cannot be the work of Válmíki.

  375 A fine bird with a strong, sweet note, and great imitative powers.

  376 Bauhinea variegata, a species of ebony.

  377 The rainbow is called the bow of Indra.

  378 Bhogavatí, the abode of the Nágas or Serpent race.

  379 “The order of the procession on these occasions is that the children
      precede according to age, then the women and after that the men
      according to age, the youngest first and the eldest last: when they
      descend into the water this is reversed and resumed when they come
      out of it.” CAREY AND MARSHMAN.

  380 Vṛihaspati, the preceptor of the Gods.

  381 Garuḍ, the king of birds.

  382 To be won by virtue.

  383 The four religious orders, referable to different times of life are,
      that of the student, that of the householder, that of the anchorite,
      and that of the mendicant.

  384 To Gods, men, and Manes.

  385 Gayá is a very holy city in Behar. Every good Hindu ought once in
      his life to make funeral offerings in Gayá in honour of his
      ancestors.

_  386 Put_ is the name of that region of hell to which men are doomed who
      leave no son to perform the funeral rites which are necessary to
      assure the happiness of the departed. _Putra_, the common word for a
      son is said by the highest authority to be derived from _Put_ and
      _tra_ deliverer.

  387 It was the custom of Indian women when mourning for their absent
      husbands to bind their hair in a long single braid.

      Carey and Marshman translate, “the one-tailed city.”

  388 The verses in a different metre with which some cantos end are all
      to be regarded with suspicion. Schlegel regrets that he did not
      exclude them all from his edition. These lines are manifestly
      spurious. See _Additional Notes_.

  389 This genealogy is a repetition with slight variation of that given
      in Book I, Canto LXX.

  390 In Gorresio’s recension identified with Vishṇu. See Muir’s _Sanskrit
      Texts, Vol. IV. pp 29, 30_.

  391 From _sa_ with, and _gara_ poison.

  392 See Book I. Canto XL.

  393 A practice which has frequently been described, under the name of
      _dherna_, by European travellers in India.

  394 Compare Milton’s “_beseeching or beseiging_.”

  395 Ten-headed, ten-necked, ten faced, are common epithets of Rávaṇ the
      giant king of Lanká.

  396 The spouse of Rohiṇí is the Moon: Ráhu is the demon who causes
      eclipses.

  397 “Once,” says the Commentator Tírtha, “in the battle between the Gods
      and demons the Gods were vanquished, and the sun was overthrown by
      Ráhu. At the request of the Gods Atri undertook the management of
      the sun for a week.”

  398 Now Nundgaon, in Oudh.

  399 A part of the great Daṇḍak forest.

  400 When the saint Máṇḍavya had doomed some saint’s wife, who was
      Anasúyá’s friend, to become a widow on the morrow.

  401 Heavenly nymphs.

  402 The _ball_ or present of food to all created beings.

  403 The clarified butter &c. cast into the sacred fire.

  404 The Moon-God: “he is,” says the commentator, “the special deity of
      Bráhmans.”

  405 “Because he was an incarnation of the deity,” says the commentator,
      “otherwise such honour paid by men of the sacerdotal caste to one of
      the military would be improper.”

  406 The king of birds.

_  407 Kálántakayamopamam_, resembling Yáma the destroyer.

  408 Somewhat inconsistently with this part of the story Tumburu is
      mentioned in Book II, Canto XII as one of the Gandharvas or heavenly
      minstrels summoned to perform at Bharadvája’s feast.

  409 Rambhá appears in Book I Canto LXIV as the temptress of Viśvámitra.

  410 The conclusion of this Canto is all a vain repetition: it is
      manifestly spurious and a very feeble imitation of Válmíki’s style.
      See _Additional Notes_.

  411 “Even when he had alighted,” says the commentator: The feet of Gods
      do not touch the ground.

  412 A name of Indra.

  413 Śachí is the consort of Indra.

  414 The spheres or mansions gained by those who have duly performed the
      sacrifices required of them. Different situations are assigned to
      these spheres, some placing them near the sun, others near the moon.

  415 Hermits who live upon roots which they dig out of the earth:
      literally _diggers_, derived from the prefix _vi_ and _khan_ to dig.

  416 Generally, divine personages of the height of a man’s thumb,
      produced from Brahmá’s hair: here, according to the commentator
      followed by Gorresio, hermits who when they have obtained fresh food
      throw away what they had laid up before.

  417 Sprung from the washings of Vishṇuu’s feet.

  418 Four fires burning round them, and the sun above.

  419 The tax allowed to the king by the Laws of Manu.

  420 Near the celebrated Rámagiri or Ráma’s Hill, now Rám-ṭek, near
      Nagpore—the scene of the Yaksha’s exile in the _Messenger Cloud_.

  421 A hundred _Aśvamedhas_ or sacrifices of a horse raise the sacrificer
      to the dignity of Indra.

  422 Indra.

  423 Gorresio observes that Daśaratha was dead and that Sítá had been
      informed of his death. In his translation he substitutes for the
      words of the text “thy relations and mine.” This is quite
      superfluous. Daśaratha though in heaven still took a loving interest
      in the fortunes of his son.

  424 One of the hermits who had followed Ráma.

  425 The lake of the five nymphs.

  426 The holy fig-tree.

  427 The bread-fruit tree, Artocarpus integrifolia.

  428 A fine timber tree, Shorea robusta.

  429 The God of fire.

  430 Kuvera, the God of riches.

  431 The Sun.

  432 Brahmá, the creator.

  433 Śiva.

  434 The Wind-God.

  435 The God of the sea.

  436 A class of demi-gods, eight in number.

  437 The holiest text of the Vedas, deified.

  438 Vásuki.

  439 Garuḍ.

  440 The War-God.

  441 One of the Pleiades generally regarded as the model of wifely
      excellence.

  442 The Madhúka, or, as it is now called, Mahuwá, is the Bassia
      latifolia, a tree from whose blossoms a spirit is extracted.

  443 “I should have doubted whether Manu could have been the right
      reading here, but that it occurs again in verse 29, where it is in
      like manner followed in verse 31 by Analá, so that it would
      certainly seem that the name Manu is intended to stand for a female,
      the daughter of Daksha. The Gauḍa recension, followed by Signor
      Gorresio (III 20, 12), adopts an entirely different reading at the
      end of the line, viz. _Balám Atibalám api_, ‘Balá and Atibilá,’
      instead of Manu and Analá. I see that Professor Roth s.v. adduces
      the authority of the Amara Kosha and of the Commentator on Páṇini
      for stating that the word sometimes means ‘the wife of Manu.’ In the
      following text of the Mahábhárata I. 2553. also, Manu appears to be
      the name of a female: ‘_Anaradyam_, _Manum_, _Vañsám_, _Asurám_,
      _Márgaṇapriyám_, _Anúpám_, _Subhagám_, _Bhásím iti_, _Prádhá
      vyajayata_. Prádhá (daughter of Daksha) bore Anavadyá, Manu, Vanśá,
      Márgaṇapriyá, Anúpá, Subhagá. and Bhásí.’ ” _Muir’s Sanskrit Text_,
      Vol. I. p. 116.

  444 The elephant of Indra.

_  445 Golángúlas_, described as a kind of monkey, of a black colour, and
      having a tail like a cow.

  446 Eight elephants attached to the four quarters and intermediate
      points of the compass, to support and guard the earth.

  447 Some scholars identify the centaurs with the Gandharvas.

  448 The hooded serpents, says the commentator Tírtha, were the offspring
      of Surasá: all others of Kadrú.

  449 The text reads Kaśyapa, “a descendant of Kaśyapa,” who according to
      Rám. II. l0, 6, ought to be Vivasvat. But as it is stated in the
      preceding part of this passage III. 14, 11 f. that Manu was one of
      Kaśyapa’s eight wives, we must here read Kaśyap. The Ganda recension
      reads (III, 20, 30) _Manur manushyáms cha tatha janayámása Rághana_,
      instead of the corresponding line in the Bombay edition. _Muir’s
      Sanskrit Text, Vol I, p. 117._

  450 The original verses merely name the trees. I have been obliged to
      amplify slightly and to omit some quas versu dicere non est; _e.g._
      the _tiniśa_ (Dalbergia ougeiniensis), _punnága_ (Rottleria
      tinctoria), _tilaka_ (not named), _syandana_ (Dalbergia ougeiniensis
      again), _vandana_ (unknown), _nípa_ (Nauclea Kadamba), _lakucha_
      (Artœarpus lacucha), _dhava_ (Grislea tomentosa), Aśvakarna (another
      name for the Sál), _Śamí_ (Acacia Suma), _khadira_ (Mimosa catechu),
      _kinśuka_ (Butea frondosa), _pátala_ (Bignonia suaveolens).

  451 Acacia Suma.

  452 The south is supposed to be the residence of the departed.

  453 The sun.

  454 The night is divided into three watches of four hours each.

  455 The chief chamberlain and attendant of Śiva or Rudra.

  456 Umá or Párvati, the consort of Śiva.

  457 A star, one of the favourites of the Moon.

  458 The God of love.

  459 A demon slain by Indra.

  460 Chitraratha, King of the Gandharvas.

  461 Titanic.

  462 The Sáriká is the Maina, a bird like a starling.

  463 Mahákapála, Sthúláksha, Pramátha, Triśiras.

  464 Vishṇu, who bears a _chakra_ or discus.

  465 Śiva.

  466 See _Additional Notes_—DAKSHA’S SACRIFICE.

  467 Himálaya.

  468 One of the mysterious weapons given to Ráma.

  469 A periphrasis for the body.

  470 Triśirás.

  471 The Three-headed.

  472 The demon who causes eclipses.

  473 “This Asura was a friend of Indra, and taking advantage of his
      friend’s confidence, he drank up Indra’s strength along with a
      draught of wine and Soma. Indra then told the Aśvins and Sarasvatí
      that Namuchi had drunk up his strength. The Aśvins in consequence
      gave Indra a thunderbolt in the form of a foam, with which he smote
      off the head of Namuchi.” GARRETT’S _Classical Dictionary of India_.
      See also Book I. p. 39.

  474 Indra.

  475 Popularly supposed to cause death.

  476 Garuḍ, the King of Birds, carried off the Amrit or drink of Paradise
      from Indra’s custody.

  477 A demon, son of Kaśyap and Diti, slain by Rudra or Śiva when he
      attempted to carry off the tree of Paradise.

  478 Namuchi and Vritra were two demons slain by Indra. Vritra
      personifies drought, the enemy of Indra, who imprisons the rain in
      the cloud.

  479 Another demon slain by Indra.

  480 The capital of the giant king Rávaṇ.

  481 Kuvera, the God of gold.

  482 In the great deluge.

  483 The giant Márícha, son of Táḍaká. Táḍaká was slain by Ráma. See p.
      39.

  484 Indra’s elephant.

  485 Bhogavatí, in Pátála in the regions under the earth, is the capital
      of the serpent race whose king is Vásuki.

  486 the grove of Indra.

  487 Pulastya is considered as the ancestor of the Rakshases or giants,
      as he is the father of Viśravas, the father of Rávaṇ and his
      brethren.

  488 Beings with the body of a man and the head of a horse.

  489 Ájas, Maríchipas, Vaikhánasas, Máshas, and Bálakhilyas are classes
      of supernatural beings who lead the lives of hermits.

  490 “The younger brother of the giant Rávaṇ; when he and his brother had
      practiced austerities for a long series of years, Brahmá appeared to
      offer them boons: Vibhishaṇa asked that he might never meditate any
      unrighteousness.… On the death of Rávaṇ Vibhishaṇa was installed as
      Rája of Lanká.” GARRETT’S _Classical Dictionary of India_.

  491 Serpent-gods.

  492 See p. 33.

  493 The Sanskrit words for car and jewels begin with _ra_.

  494 A race of beings of human shape but with the heads of horses, like
      centaurs reversed.

  495 The favourite wife of the Moon.

  496 The planet Saturn.

  497 Another favourite of the Moon; one of the lunar mansions.

  498 The Rudras, agents in creation, are eight in number; they sprang
      from the forehead of Brahmá.

  499 Maruts, the attendants of Indra.

  500 Radiant demi-gods.

  501 The mountain which was used by the Gods as a churning stick at the
      Churning of the Ocean.

  502 The story will be found in GARRETT’S _Classical Dictionary_. See
      ADDITIONAL NOTES.

  503 Mercury: to be carefully distinguished from Buddha.

  504 The spirits of the good dwell in heaven until their store of
      accumulated merit is exhausted. Then they redescend to earth in the
      form of falling stars.

  505 See The Descent of Gangá, Book I Canto XLIV.

  506 See Book I Canto XXV.

_  507 Aśoka_ is compounded of _a_ not and _śoka_ grief.

  508 See Book I Canto XXXI.

  509 An Asur or demon, king of Tripura, the modern Tipperah.

  510 Śiva.

  511 See Book I, Canto LIX.

  512 The preceptor of the Gods.

  513 From the root _vid_, to find.

  514 Rávaṇ.

  515 Or Curlews’ Wood.

  516 Iron-faced.

  517 Kabandha means a trunk.

  518 A class of mythological giants. In the Epic period they were
      probably personifications of the aborigines of India.

  519 Peace, war, marching, halting, sowing dissensions, and seeking
      protection.

  520 See Book I, Canto XVI.

  521 Or as the commentator Tírtha says, Śilápidháná, rock-covered, may be
      the name of the cavern.

  522 Pampá is said by the commentator to be the name both of a lake and a
      brook which flows into it. The brook is said to rise in the hill
      Rishyamúka.

  523 Who was acting as Regent for Ráma and leading an ascetic life while
      he mourned for his absent brother.

  524 The Indian Cuckoo.

  525 The Cassia Fistula or Amaltás is a splendid tree like a giant
      laburnum covered with a profusion of chains and tassels of gold. Dr.
      Roxburgh well describes it as “uncommonly beautiful when in flower,
      few trees surpassing it in the elegance of its numerous long
      pendulous racemes of large bright-yellow flowers intermixed with the
      young lively green foliage.” It is remarkable also for its curious
      cylindrical black seed-pods about two feet long, which are called
      monkeys’ walking-sticks.

  526 “The Jonesia Asoca is a tree of considerable size, native of
      southern India. It blossoms in February and March with large erect
      compact clusters of flowers, varying in colour from pale-orange to
      scarlet, almost to be mistaken, on a hasty glance, for immense
      trusses of bloom of an Ixora. Mr. Fortune considered this tree, when
      in full bloom, superior in beauty even to the Amherstia.

      The first time I saw the Asoc in flower was on the hill where the
      famous rock-cut temple of Kárlí is situated, and a large concourse
      of natives had assembled for the celebration of some Hindoo
      festival. Before proceeding to the temple the Mahratta women
      gathered from two trees, which were flowering somewhat below, each a
      fine truss of blossom, and inserted it in the hair at the back of
      her head.… As they moved about in groups it is impossible to imagine
      a more delightful effect than the rich scarlet bunches of flowers
      presented on their fine glossy jet-black hair.” FIRMINGER,
      _Gardening for India_.

  527 No other word can express the movements of peafowl under the
      influence of pleasing excitement, especially when after the long
      drought they hear the welcome roar of the thunder and feel that the
      rain is near.

  528 The Dewy Season is one of the six ancient seasons of the Indian
      year, lasting from the middle of January to the middle of March.

  529 Ráma appears to mean that on a former occasion a crow flying high
      overhead was an omen that indicated his approaching separation from
      Sítá; and that now the same bird’s perching on a tree near him may
      be regarded as a happy augury that she will soon be restored to her
      husband.

  530 A tree with beautiful and fragrant blossoms.

  531 A race of semi-divine musicians attached to the service of Kuvera,
      represented as centaurs reversed with human figures and horses’
      heads.

  532 Butea Frondosa. A tree that bears a profusion of brilliant red
      flowers which appear before the leaves.

  533 I omit five _ślokas_ which contain nothing but a list of trees for
      which, with one or two exceptions, there are no equivalent names in
      English. The following is Gorresio’s translation of the
      corresponding passage in the Bengal recension:—

      “Oh come risplendono in questa stagione di primavera i vitici, le
      galedupe, le bassie, le dalbergie, i diospyri … le tile, le
      michelie, le rottlerie, le pentaptere ed i pterospermi, i bombaci,
      le grislee, gli abri, gli amaranti e le dalbergie; i sirii, le
      galedupe, le barringtonie ed i palmizi, i xanthocymi, il pepebetel,
      le verbosine e le ticaie, le nauclee le erythrine, gli asochi, e le
      tapie fanno d’ogni intorno pompa de’ lor fiori.”

  534 A sacred stream often mentioned in the course of the poem. See Book
      II, Canto XCV.

  535 A daughter of Daksha who became one of the wives of Kaśyapa and
      mother of the Daityas. She is termed the general mother of Titans
      and malignant beings. See Book I Cantos XLV, XLVI.

  536 Sugríva, the ex-king of the Vánars, foresters, or monkeys, an exile
      from his home, wandering about the mountain Rishyamúka with his four
      faithful ex-ministers.

  537 The hermitage of the Saint Matanga which his curse prevented Báli,
      the present king of the Vánars, from entering. The story is told at
      length in Canto XI of this Book.

  538 Hanumán, Sugríva’s chief general, was the son of the God of Wind.
      See Book I, Canto XVI.

  539 A range of hills in Malabar; the Western Ghats in the Deccan.

  540 Válmíki makes the second vowel in this name long or short to suit
      the exigencies of the verse. Other Indian poets have followed his
      example, and the same licence will be used in this translation.

  541 I omit a recapitulatory and interpolated verse in a different metre,
      which is as follows:—Reverencing with the words, So be it, the
      speech of the greatly terrified and unequalled monkey king, the
      magnanimous Hanumán then went where (stood) the very mighty Ráma
      with Lakshmaṇ.

  542 The semi divine Hanumán possesses, like the Gods and demons, the
      power of wearing all shapes at will. He is one of the _Kámarúpís_.

      Like Milton’s good and bad angels “as they please
        They limb themselves, and colour, shape, or size
        Assume as likes them best, condense or rare.”

  543 Himálaya is of course _par excellence_ the Monarch of mountains, but
      the complimentary title is frequently given to other hills as here
      to Malaya.

  544 Twisted up in a matted coil as was the custom of ascetics.

  545 The sun and moon.

  546 The rainbow.

  547 The Vedas are four in number, the Rich or Rig-veda, the Yajush or
      Yajur-veda; the Sáman or Sáma-veda, and the Atharvan or
      Atharva-veda. See p. 3. Note.

  548 The chest, the throat, and the head.

  549 “In our own metrical romances, or wherever a poem is meant not for
      readers but for chanters and oral reciters, these _formulæ_, to meet
      the same recurring case, exist by scores. Thus every woman in these
      metrical romances who happens to be young, is described as ‘so
      bright of ble,’ or complexion; always a man goes ‘the mountenance of
      a mile’ before he overtakes or is overtaken. And so on through a
      vast bead-roll of cases. In the same spirit Homer has his eternal
      τον δ’αρ’ ὑποδρα ιδων, or τον δ’απαμειβομενος προσφη, &c.

      To a reader of sensibility, such recurrences wear an air of
      child-like simplicity, beautifully recalling the features of Homer’s
      primitive age. But they would have appeared faults to all
      commonplace critics in literary ages.”

      DE QUINCEY. _Homer and the Homeridæ_.

  550 Bráhmans the sacerdotal caste. Kshatriyas the royal and military,
      Vaiśyas the mercantile, and Śúdras the servile.

  551 A protracted sacrifice extending over several days. See Book I, p.
      24 Note.

  552 Possessed of all the auspicious personal marks that indicate
      capacity of universal sovereignty. See Book I. p. 2, and Note 3.

  553 Kabandha. See Book III. Canto LXXIII.

  554 Fire for sacred purposes is produced by the attrition of two pieces
      of wood. In marriage and other solemn covenants fire is regarded as
      the holy witness in whose presence the agreement is made. Spenser in
      a description of a marriage, has borrowed from the Roman rite what
      he calls the housling, or “matrimonial rite.”

      “His owne two hands the holy knots did knit
      That none but death forever can divide.
      His owne two hands, for such a turn most fit,
      The housling fire did kindle and provide.”

      Faery Queen, Book I. XII. 37.

  555 Indra.

  556 Báli the king _de facto_.

  557 With the Indians, as with the ancient Greeks, the throbbing of the
      right eye in a man is an auspicious sign, the throbbing of the left
      eye is the opposite. In a woman the significations of signs are
      reversed.

  558 The Vedas stolen by the demons Madhu and Kaiṭabha.

      “The text has [Sanskrit text] which signifies literally ‘the lost
      vedic tradition.’ It seems that allusion is here made to the Vedas
      submerged in the depth of the sea, but promptly recovered by Vishṇu
      in one of his incarnations, as the brahmanic legend relates, with
      which the orthodoxy of the Bráhmans intended perhaps to allude to
      the prompt restoration and uninterrupted continuity of the ancient
      vedic tradition.”

      GORRESIO.

  559 Like the wife of a Nága or Serpent-God carried off by an eagle. The
      enmity between the King of birds and the serpent is of very frequent
      occurrence. It seems to be a modification of the strife between the
      Vedic Indra and the Ahi, the serpent or drought-fiend; between
      Apollôn and the Python, Adam and the Serpent.

  560 He means that he has never ventured to raise his eyes to her arms
      and face, though he has ever been her devoted servant.

  561 The wood in which Skanda or Kártikeva was brought up:

                      “The Warrior-God
      Whose infant steps amid the thickets strayed
      Where the reeds wave over the holy sod.”

      See also Book I, Canto XXIX.

  562 “Sugríva’s story paints in vivid colours the manners, customs and
      ideas of the wild mountain tribes which inhabited Kishkindhya or the
      southern hills of the Deccan, of the people whom the poem calls
      monkeys, tribes altogether different in origin and civilization from
      the Indo-Sanskrit race.” GORRESIO.

  563 A fiend slain by Báli.

  564 Báli’s mountain city.

  565 The canopy or royal umbrella, one of the usual Indian regalia.

  566 Whisks made of the hair of the Yak or Bos grunniers, also regal
      insignia.

  567 Righteous because he never transgresses his bounds, and

        “over his great tides
        Fidelity presides.”

  568 Himálaya, the Lord of Snow, is the father of Umá the wife of Śiva or
      Śankar.

  569 Indra’s celestial elephant.

  570 Báli was the son of Indra. See p. 28.

  571 An Asur slain by Indra. See p. 261 Note. He is, like Vritra, a form
      of the demon of drought destroyed by the beneficent God of the
      firmament.

  572 Another name of Indra or Mahendra.

  573 The Bengal recension makes it return in the form of a swan.

  574 Varuṇa is one of the oldest of the Vedic Gods, corresponding in name
      and partly in character to the Οὐρανός of the Greeks and is often
      regarded as the supreme deity. He upholds heaven and earth,
      possesses extraordinary power and wisdom, sends his messengers
      through both worlds, numbers the very winkings of men’s eyes,
      punishes transgressors whom he seizes with his deadly noose, and
      pardons the sins of those who are penitent. In later mythology he
      has become the God of the sea.

  575 Budha, not to be confounded with the great reformer Buddha, is the
      son of Soma or the Moon, and regent of the planet Mercury. Angára is
      the regent of Mars who is called the red or the fiery planet. The
      encounter between Michael and Satan is similarly said to have been
      as if

      “Two planets rushing from aspect malign
      Of fiercest opposition in midsky
      Should combat, and their jarring spheres compound.”

      _Paradise Lost._ Book VI.

  576 The Aśvins or Heavenly Twins, the Dioskuri or Castor and Pollux of
      the Hindus, have frequently been mentioned. See p. 36, Note.

  577 Called respectively Gárhapatya, Áhavaniya, and Dakshiṇa, household,
      sacrificial, and southern.

  578 The store of merit accumulated by a holy or austere life secures
      only a temporary seat in the mansion of bliss. When by the lapse of
      time this store is exhausted, return to earth is unavoidable.

  579 The conflagration which destroys the world at the end of a Yuga or
      age.

  580 Himálaya.

  581 Tárá means “star.” The poet plays upon the name by comparing her
      beauty to that of the Lord of stars, the Moon.

  582 Suparṇa, the Well-winged, is another name of Garuḍa the King of
      Birds. See p. 28, Note.

  583 The God of Death.

  584 The flag-staff erected in honour of the God Indra is lowered when
      the festival is over. Aśvíní in astronomy is the head of Aries or
      the first of the twenty-eight lunar mansions or asterisms.

  585 Indra the father of Báli.

  586 It is believed that every creature killed by Ráma obtained in
      consequence immediate beatitude.

      “And blessed the hand that gave so dear a death.”

  587 “Yayáti was invited to heaven by Indra, and conveyed on the way
      thither by Mátali, Indra’s charioteer. He afterwards returned to
      earth where, by his virtuous administration he rendered all his
      subjects exempt from passion and decay.” GARRETT’S C. D. OF INDIA.

  588 The ascetic’s dress which he wore during his exile.

  589 There is much inconsistency in the passages of the poem in which the
      Vánars are spoken of, which seems to point to two widely different
      legends. The Vánars are generally represented as semi-divine beings
      with preternatural powers, living in houses and eating and drinking
      like men sometimes as here, as monkeys pure and simple, living is
      woods and eating fruit and roots.

  590 For a younger brother to marry before the elder is a gross violation
      of Indian law and duty. The same law applied to daughters with the
      Hebrews: “It must not be so done in our country to give the younger
      before the first-born.” GENESIS xix. 26.

  591 “The hedgehog and porcupine, the lizard, the rhinoceros, the
      tortoise, and the rabbit or hare, wise legislators declare lawful
      food among five-toed animals.” MANU, v. 18.

        592 “He can not buckle his distempered cause
      Within the belt of rule.”

      MACBETH.

  593 The _Ankuś_ or iron hook with which an elephant is driven and
      guided.

  594 Hayagríva, Horse-necked, is a form of Vishṇu.

  595 “Aśvatara is the name of a chief of the Nágas or serpents which
      inhabit the regions under the earth; it is also the name of a
      Gandharva. Aśvatarí ought to be the wife of one of the two, but I am
      not sure that this conjecture is right. The commentator does not say
      who this Aśvatarí is, or what tradition or myth is alluded to.
      Vimalabodha reads Aśvatarí in the nominative case, and explains,
      Aśvatarí is the sun, and as the sun with his rays brings back the
      moon which has been sunk in the ocean and the infernal regions, so
      will I bring back Sítá.” GORRESIO.

  596 That is, “Consider what answer you can give to your accusers when
      they charge you with injustice in killing me.”

  597 Manu, Book VIII. 318. “But men who have committed offences and have
      received from kings the punishment due to them, go pure to heaven
      and become as clear as those who have done well.”

  598 Mándhátá was one of the earlier descendants of Ikshváku. His name is
      mentioned in Ráma’s genealogy, p. 81.

  599 I cannot understand how Válmíki could put such an excuse as this
      into Ráma’s mouth. Ráma with all solemn ceremony, has made a league
      of alliance with Báli’s younger brother whom he regards as a dear
      friend and almost as an equal, and now he winds up his reasons for
      killing Báli by coolly saying: “Besides you are only a monkey, you
      know, after all, and as such I have every right to kill you how,
      when, and where I like.”

  600 A name of Garuḍa the king of birds, the great enemy of the Serpents.

  601 Sugríva’s wife.

  602 “Our deeds still follow with us from afar. And what we have been
      makes us what we are.”

  603 Sugríva and Angad.

  604 Angad himself, being too young to govern, would be Yuvarája or
      heir-apparent.

  605 Susheṇa was the son of Varuṇa the God of the sea.

  606 A demon with the tail of a dragon, that causes eclipses by
      endeavouring to swallow the sun and moon.

  607 The Lord of Stars is the Moon.

  608 Or the passage may be interpreted: “Be neither too obsequious or
      affectionate, nor wanting in due respect or love.”

  609 Sacrifices and all religious rites begin and end with ablution, and
      the wife of the officiating Bráhman takes an important part in the
      performance of the holy ceremonies.

  610 Viśvarúpa, a son of Twashṭri or Viśvakarmá the heavenly architect,
      was a three-headed monster slain by Indra.

  611 The Vánar chief, not to be confounded with Tárá.

  612 Śrávaṇ: July-August. But the rains begin a month earlier, and what
      follows must not be taken literally. The text has _púrvo’ yam
      várshiko másah Śrávaṇah salilágamdh_. The Bengal recension has the
      same, and Gorresio translates: “Equesto ilmese Srâvana
      (luglio-agosto) primo della stagione piovosa, in cui dilagano le
      acque.”

  613 Kártik: October-November.

  614 “Indras, as the nocturnal sun, hides himself, transformed, in the
      starry heavens: the stars are his eyes. The hundred-eyed or
      all-seeing (panoptês) Argos placed as a spy over the actions of the
      cow beloved by Zeus, in the Hellenic equivalent of this form of
      Indras.” DE GUBERNATIS, _Zoological Mythology_, Vol. I, p. 418.

  615 Baudháyana and others.

  616 Sugríva appears to have been consecrated with all the ceremonies
      that attended the _Abhisheka_ or coronation of an Indian prince of
      the Aryan race. Compare the preparations made for Ráma’s
      consecration, Book II, Canto III. Thus Homer frequently introduces
      into Troy the rites of Hellenic worship.

  617 Vitex Negundo.

  618 Mályavat: “The name of this mountain appears to me to be erroneous,
      and I think that instead of Mályavat should be read Malayavat,
      Malaya is a group of mountains situated exactly in that southern
      part of India where Ráma now was, while Mályavat is placed to the
      north east.” GORRESIO.

  619 Mantles of the skin of the black antelope were the prescribed dress
      of ascetics and religious students.

  620 The sacred cord worn as the badge of religious initiation by men of
      the three twice-born castes.

  621 The hum with which students conduct their tasks.

  622 I omit here a long general description of the rainy season which is
      not found in the Bengal recension and appears to have been
      interpolated by a far inferior and much later hand than Valmiki’s.
      It is composed in a metre different from that of the rest of the
      Canto, and contains figures of poetical rhetoric and common-places
      which are the delight of more recent poets.

  623 Praushthapada or Bhadra, the modern Bhadon, corresponds to half of
      August and half of September.

  624 The Sáman or Sáma-veda, the third of the four Vedas, is really
      merely a reproduction of parts of the Rig-veda, transposed and
      scattered about piece-meal, only 78 verses in the whole being, it is
      said, untraceable to the present recension of the Rig-veda.

  625 Áshádha is the month corresponding to parts of June and July.

  626 Bharat, who was regent during Ráma’s absence.

  627 Or with Gorresio, following the gloss of another commentary: “Has
      completed every holy rite and accumulated stores of merit.”

  628 The river on which Ayodhyá was built.

  629 I omit a _śloka_ or four lines on gratitude and ingratitude repeated
      word for word from the last Canto.

  630 The Indian crane; a magnificent bird easily domesticated.

  631 The troops who guard the frontiers on the north, south, east and
      west.

  632 The Chátaka, Cuculus, Melanoleucus, is supposed to drink nothing but
      the water for the clouds.

  633 The time for warlike expeditions began when the rains had ceased.

  634 The rainbow.

  635 Indra’s associates in arms, and musicians of his heaven.

  636 Maireya, a spirituous liquor from the blossoms of the Lythrum
      fruticosum, with sugar, &c.

  637 Their names are as follows: Angad, Maínda, Dwida, Gavaya, Gaváksha,
      Gaja, Śarabha, Vidyunmáli, Sampáti, Súryáksa, Hanumán, Vírabáhu,
      Subáhu, Nala, Kúmuda, Susheṇa, Tára, Jámbuvatu, Dadhivakra, Níla,
      Supátala, and Sunetra.

  638 The Kalpadruma or Wishing-tree is one of the trees of Svarga or
      Indra’s Paradise: it has the power of granting all desires.

  639 The meaning is that if a man promises to give a horse and then
      breaks his word he commits a sin as great as if he had killed a
      hundred horses.

  640 The story is told in Book I, Canto LXIII, but the charmer there is
      called Menaká.

  641 Rohiṇí is the name of the ninth Nakshatra or lunar asterism
      personified as a daughter of Daksha, and the favourite wife of the
      Moon. Aldebaran is the principal star in the constellation.

  642 Válmíki and succeeding poets make the second vowel in this name long
      or short at their pleasure.

  643 Some of the mountains here mentioned are fabulous and others it is
      impossible to identify. Sugríva means to include all the mountains
      of India from Kailás the residence of the God Kuvera, regarded as
      one of the loftiest peaks of the Himálayas, to Mahendra in the
      extreme south, from the mountain in the east where the sun is said
      to rise to Astáchal or the western mountain where he sets. The
      commentators give little assistance: that Maháśaila, &c. are certain
      mountains is about all the information they give.

  644 One of the celestial elephants of the Gods who protect the four
      quarters and intermediate points of the compass.

  645 Váyu or the Wind was the father of Hanumán.

  646 The path or station of Vishṇu is the space between the seven Rishis
      or Ursa Major, and Dhruva or the polar star.

  647 One of the seven seas which surround the earth in concentric
      circles.

  648 The title of Maheśvar or Mighty Lord is sometimes given to Indra,
      but more generally to Śiva whom it here denotes.

  649 See Book I, Canto XVI.

  650 The numbers are unmanageable in English verse. The poet speaks of
      hundreds of _arbudas_; and an _arbuda_ is a hundred millions.

  651 Anuhláda or Anuhráda is one of the four sons of the mighty
      Hiraṇyakaśipu, an Asur or a Daitya son of Kaśyapa and Diti and
      killed by Vishṇu in his incarnation of the Man-Lion _Narasinha_.
      According to the Bhágavata Puráṇa the Daitya or Asur Hiraṇyakaśipu
      and Hiraṇyáksha his brother, both killed by Vishṇu, were born again
      as Rávaṇ and Kumbhakarṇa his brother.

  652 Puloma, a demon, was the father-in-law of Indra who destroyed him in
      order to avert an imprecation. Paulomí is a patronymic denoting
      Śachí the daughter of Puloma.

  653 “Observe the variety of colours which the poem attributes to all
      these inhabitants of the different mountainous regions, some white,
      others yellow, &c. Such different colours were perhaps peculiar and
      distinctive characteristics of those various races.” GORRESSIO.

  654 Susheṇ.

  655 Tára.

  656 Kesarí was the husband of Hanúmán’s mother, and is here called his
      father.

  657 “I here unite under one heading two animals of very diverse nature
      and race, but which from some gross resemblances, probably helped by
      an equivoque in the language, are closely affiliated in the Hindoo
      myth … a reddish colour of the skin, want of symmetry and
      ungainliness of form, strength in hugging with the fore paws or
      arms, the faculty of climbing, shortness of tail(?), sensuality,
      capacity of instruction in dancing and in music, are all
      characteristics which more or less distinguish and meet in bears as
      well as in monkeys. In the _Rámáyaṇam_, the wise Jámnavant, the
      Odysseus of the expedition of Lanká, is called now king of the bears
      (rikshaparthivah), now great monkey (_Mahákapih_).” DE GUBERNATIS:
      _Zoological Mythology_, Vol. II. p. 97.

  658 Gandhamádana, Angad, Tára, Indrajánu, Rambha, Durmukha, Hanumán,
      Nala, Da mukha, Śarabha, Kumuda, Vahni.

  659 Daityas and Dánavas are fiends and enemies of the Gods, like the
      Titans of Greek mythology.

  660 I reduce the unwieldy numbers of the original to more modest
      figures.

  661 Sarayú now Sarjú is the river on which Ayodhyá was built.

  662 Kauśikí is a river which flows through Behar, commonly called Kosi.

  663 Bhagírath’s daughter is Gangá or the Ganges. The legend is told at
      length in Book I Canto XLIV. _The Descent of Gangá_.

  664 A mountain not identified.

  665 The Jumna. The river is personified as the twin sister of Yáma, and
      hence regarded as the daughter of the Sun.

  666 The Sarasvatí (corruptly called Sursooty, is supposed to join the
      Ganges and Jumna at Prayág or Allahabad. It rises in the mountains
      bounding the north-east part of the province of Delhi, and running
      in a south-westerly direction becomes lost in the sands of the great
      desert.

  667 The Sindhu is the Indus, the Sanskrit _s_ becoming _h_ in Persian
      and being in this instance dropped by the Greeks.

  668 The Sone which rises in the district of Nagpore and falls into the
      Ganges above Patna.

  669 Mahí is a river rising in Malwa and falling into the gulf of Cambay
      after a westerly course of 280 miles.

  670 There is nothing to show what parts of the country the poet intended
      to denote as silk-producing and silver-producing.

  671 Yavadwipa means the island of Yava, wherever that may be.

  672 Śiśir is said to be a mountain ridge projecting from the base of
      Meru on the south. Wilson’s _Vishnu Puráṇa_, ed. Hall, Vol. II. p.
      117.

  673 This appears to be some mythical stream and not the well-known Śone.
      The name means red-coloured.

  674 A fabulous thorny rod of the cotton tree used for torturing the
      wicked in hell. The tree gives its name, Śálmalí, to one of the
      seven Dwípas, or great divisions of the known continent: and also to
      a hell where the wicked are tormented with the pickles of the tree.

  675 The king of the feathered creation.

  676 Viśvakarmá, the Mulciber of the Indian heaven.

  677 “The terrific fiends named Mandehas attempt to devour the sun: for
      Brahmá denounced this curse upon them, that without the power to
      perish they should die every day (and revive by night) and therefore
      a fierce contest occurs (daily) between them and the sun.” WILSON’S
      Vishṇu Puráṇa. Vol. II. p. 250.

  678 Said in the _Vishṇu Puráṇa_ to be a ridge projecting from the base
      of Meru to the north.

  679 Kinnars are centaurs reversed, beings with equine head and human
      bodies.

  680 Yakshas are demi-gods attendant on Kuvera the God of wealth.

  681 Aurva was one of the descendants of Bhrigu. From his wrath proceeded
      a flame that threatened to destroy the world, had not Aurva cast it
      into the ocean where it remained concealed, and having the face of a
      horse. The legend is told in the _Mahábhárat_. I. 6802.

  682 The word Játarúpa means gold.

  683 The celebrated mythological serpent king Sesha, called also Ananta
      or the infinite, represented as bearing the earth on one of his
      thousand heads.

  684 Jambudwípa is in the centre of the seven great _dwípas_ or
      continents into which the world is divided, and in the centre of
      Jambudwípa is the golden mountain Meru 84,000 yojans high, and
      crowned by the great city of Brahmá. See WILSON’S _Vishṇu Puráṇa_,
      Vol. II. p. 110.

  685 Vaikhánases are a race of hermit saints said to have sprung from the
      nails of Prajápati.

  686 “The wife of Kratu, Samnati, brought forth the sixty thousand
      Válakhilyas, pigmy sages, no bigger than a joint of the thumb,
      chaste, pious, resplendent as the rays of the Sun.” WILSON’S _Vishṇu
      Puráṇa_.

  687 The continent in which Sudarśan or Meru stands, _i.e._ Jambudwíp.

  688 The names of some historical peoples which occur in this Canto and
      in the Cantos describing the south and north will be found in the
      ADDITIONAL NOTES. They are bare lists, not susceptible of a metrical
      version.

  689 Suhotra, Śarári, Śaragulma, Gayá, Gaváksha, Gavaya, Susheṇa,
      Gandhamádana, Ulkámukha, and Ananga.

  690 The modern Nerbudda.

  691 Krishṇaveṇí is mentioned in the _Vishṇu Puráṇa_ as “the deep
      Krishṇaveṇí” but there appears to be no clue to its identification.

  692 The modern Godavery.

  693 The Mekhalas or Mekalas according to the Paráṇas live in the Vindhya
      hills, but here they appear among the peoples of the south.

  694 Utkal is still the native name of Orissa.

  695 The land of the people of the “ten forts.” Professor Hall in a note
      on WILSON’S _Vishṇu Puráṇa_, Vol. II. p. 160 says: “The oral
      traditions of the vicinity to this day assign the name of Daśárna to
      a region lying to the east of the District of Chundeyree.”

  696 Avantí is one of the ancient names of the celebrated Ujjayin or
      Oujein in Central India.

  697 Not identified.

  698 Ayomukh means iron faced. The mountain is not identified.

  699 The Káverí or modern Cauvery is well known and has always borne the
      same appellation, being the Chaberis of Ptolemy.

  700 One of the seven principal mountain chains: the southern portion of
      the Western Gháts.

  701 Agastya is the great sage who has already frequently appeared as
      Ráma’s friend and benefactor.

  702 Támraparṇí is a river rising in Malaya.

  703 The Páṇḍyas are a people of the Deccan.

  704 Mahendra is the chain of hills that extends from Orissa and the
      northern Sircars to Gondwána, part of which near Ganjam is still
      called Mahendra Malay or hills of Mahendra.

  705 Lanká, Sinhaladvípa, Sarandib, or Ceylon.

  706 The Flowery Hill of course is mythical.

  707 The whole of the geography south of Lanká is of course mythical.
      Súryaván means Sunny.

  708 Vaidyut means connected with lightning.

  709 Agastya is here placed far to the south of Lanká. Earlier in this
      Canto he was said to dwell on Malaya.

  710 Bhogavatí has been frequently mentioned: it is the capital of the
      serpent Gods or demons, and usually represented as being in the
      regions under the earth.

  711 Vásuki is according to some accounts the king of the Nágas or
      serpent Gods.

  712 Śailúsha, Gramiṇi, Siksha, Suka, Babhru.

  713 The distant south beyond the confines of the earth is the home of
      departed spirits and the city of Yáma the God of Death.

  714 Suráshṭra, the “good country,” is the modern Sura

  715 A country north-west of Afghanistan, Baíkh.

  716 The Moon-mountain here is mythical.

  717 Sindhu is the Indus.

  718 Páriyátra, or as more usually written Páripátra, is the central or
      western portion of the Vindhya chain which skirts the province of
      Malwa.

  719 Vajra means both diamond and thunderbolt, the two substances being
      supposed to be identical.

  720 Chakraván means the discus-bearer.

  721 The discus is the favourite weapon of Vishṇu.

  722 The Indian Hephaistos or Vulcan.

  723 Panchajan was a demon who lived in the sea in the form of a conch
      shell. WILSON’S _Vishṇu Puráṇa_, V. 21.

  724 Hayagríva, Horse-necked, is the name of a Daitya who at the
      dissolution of the universe caused by Brahmá’s sleep, seized and
      carried off the Vedas. Vishṇu slew him and recovered the sacred
      treasures.

  725 Meru stands in the centre of Jambudwípa and consequently of the
      earth. “The sun travels round the world, keeping Meru always on his
      right. To the spectator who fronts him, therefore, as he rises Meru
      must be always on the north; and as the sun’s rays do not penetrate
      beyond the centre of the mountain, the regions beyond, or to the
      north of it must be in darkness, whilst those on the south of it
      must be in light: north and south being relative, not absolute,
      terms, depending on the position of the spectator with regard to the
      Sun and Meru.” WILSON’S _Vishṇu Puráṇa_, Vol. II. p. 243. Note.

  726 The Viśvadevas are a class of deities to whom sacrifices should be
      daily offered, as part of the ordinary worship of the householder.
      According to the _Váyu Puráṇa_, this is a privilege conferred on
      them by Brahmá and the Pitris as a reward for religious austerities
      practised by them upon Himálaya.

  727 The eight Vasus were originally personifications like other Vedic
      deities, of natural phenomena, such as Fire, Wind, &c. Their
      appellations are variously given by different authorities.

  728 The Maruts or Storm-Gods, frequently addressed and worshipped as the
      attendants and allies of Indra.

  729 The mountain behind which the sun sets.

  730 One of the oldest and mightiest of the Vedic deities; in later
      mythology regarded as the God of the sea.

  731 The knotted noose with which he seizes and punishes transgressors.

  732 Sávarṇi is a Manu, offspring of the Sun by Chháyá.

  733 The poet has not said who the sons of Yáma are.

  734 The Lodhra or Lodh (Symplocos Racemosa) and the Devadáru or Deodar
      are well known trees.

  735 The hills mentioned are not identifiable. Soma means the Moon. Kála,
      black; Sudaraśan, fair to see; and Devasakhá friend of the Gods.

  736 The God of Wealth.

  737 The nymphs of Paradise.

  738 Kuvera the son of Viśravas.

  739 A class of demigods who, like the Yakshas, are the attendants of
      Kuvera, and the guardians of his treasures.

  740 Situated in the eastern part of the Himálaya chain, on the north of
      Assam. The mountain was torn asunder and the pass formed by the
      War-God Kártikeya and Paraśuráma.

  741 “The Uttara Kurus, it should be remarked, may have been a real
      people, as they are mentioned in the Aitareya Bráhmaṇa, VIII. 14.…
      Wherefore the several nations who dwell in this northern quarter,
      beyond the Himavat, the Uttara Kurus and the Uttara Madras are
      consecrated to glorious dominion, and people term them the glorious.
      In another passage of the same work, however, the Uttara Kurus are
      treated as belonging to the domain of mythology.” MUIR’S _Sanskrit
      Texts_. Vol. I. p. 494. See ADDITIONAL NOTES.

  742 The Moon-mountain.

  743 The Rudras are the same as the storm winds, more usually called
      Maruts, and are often associated with Indra. In the later mythology
      the Rudras are regarded as inferior manifestations of Śiva, and most
      of their names are also names of Śiva.

  744 Canto IX.

  745 Udayagiri or the hill from which the sun rises.

  746 Asta is the mountain behind which the sun sets.

  747 Himálaya, the Hills of Snow.

  748 Canto XI.

  749 Hanumán was the leader of the army of the south which was under the
      nominal command of Angad the heir apparent.

  750 The Bengal recension—Gorresio’s edition—calls this Asur or demon the
      son of Márícha.

  751 The skin of the black antelope was the ascetic’s proper garb.

  752 Uśanas is the name of a sage mentioned in the Vedas. In the epic
      poems he is identified with Śukra, the regent of the planet Venus,
      and described as the preceptor of the Asuras or Daityas, and
      possessor of vast knowledge.

  753 Hemá is one of the nymphs of Paradise.

  754 Merusávarṇi is a general name for the last four of the fourteen
      Manus.

  755 Svayamprabhá, the “self-luminous,” is according to DE GUBERNATIS the
      moon: “In the _Svayamprabhá_ too, we meet with the moon as a good
      fairy who, from the golden palace which she reserves for her friend
      Hemá (the golden one:) is during a month the guide, in the vast
      cavern of Hanumant and his companions, who have lost their way in
      the search of the dawn Sítá.” This is is not quite accurate: Hanumán
      and his companions wander for a month in the cavern without a guide,
      and then Svayamprabhá leads them out.

  756 Purandara, the destroyer of cities; the cities being the clouds
      which the God of the firmament bursts open with his thunderbolts, to
      release the waters imprisoned in these fortresses of the demons of
      drought.

  757 Perceived that Angad had secured, through the love of the Vánars,
      the reversion of Sugríva’s kingdom; or, as another commentator
      explains it, perceived that Angad had obtained a new kingdom in the
      enchanted cave which the Vánars, through love of him, would consent
      to occupy.

  758 Vṛihaspati, Lord of Speech, the Preceptor of the Gods.

  759 Śukra is the regent of the planet Venus, and the preceptor of the
      Daityas.

  760 The name of various kinds of grass used at sacrificial ceremonies,
      especially, of the Kuśa grass, Poa cynosuroides, which was used to
      strew the ground in preparing for a sacrifice, the officiating
      Brahmans being purified by sitting on it.

  761 Sampáti is the eldest son of the celebrated Garuḍa the king of
      birds.

  762 Vivasvat or the Sun is the father of Yáma the God of Death.

  763 Book III, Canto LI.

  764 Daśaratha’s rash oath and fatal promise to his wife Kaikeyí.

  765 Vritra, “the coverer, hider, obstructer (of rain)” is the name of
      the Vedic personification of an imaginary malignant influence or
      demon of darkness and drought supposed to take possession of the
      clouds, causing them to obstruct the clearness of the sky and keep
      back the waters. Indra is represented as battling with this evil
      influence, and the pent-up clouds being practically represented as
      mountains or castles are shattered by his thunderbolt and made to
      open their receptacles.

  766 Frequent mention has been made of the three steps of Vishṇu
      typifying the rising, culmination, and setting of the sun.

  767 For the _Churning of the Sea_, see Book I, Canto XLV.

  768 Kuvera, the God of Wealth.

  769 The architect of the gods.

  770 Garuḍa, son of Vinatá, the sovereign of the birds.

  771 “The well winged one,” Garuḍa.

  772 The god of the sea.

  773 Mahendra is chain of mountains generally identified with part of the
      Gháts of the Peninsula.

  774 Mátariśva is identified with Váyu, the wind.

  775 Of course not equal to the whole earth, says the Commentator, but
      equal to Janasthán.

  776 This appears to be the Indian form of the stories of Phaethon and
      Dædalus and Icarus.

  777 According to the promise, given him by Brahmá. See Book I, Canto