Canto CXXX. The Consecration.


Then, reverent hand to hand applied,
Thus Bharat to his brother cried:
“Thy realm, O King, is now restored,
Uninjured to the rightful lord.
This feeble arm with toil and pain,
The weighty charge could scarce sustain.
And the great burthen wellnigh broke
The neck untrained to bear the yoke.
The royal swan outspeeds the crow:
The steed is swift, the mule is slow,
Nor can my feeble feet be led
O’er the rough ways where thine should tread.
Now grant what all thy subjects ask:
Begin, O King, thy royal task.
Now let our longing eyes behold
The glorious rite ordained of old,
And on the new-found monarch’s head
Let consecrating drops be shed.”

  He ceased; victorious Ráma bent
His head in token of assent.
He sat, and tonsors trimmed with care
His tangles of neglected hair
Then, duly bathed, the hero shone
With all his splendid raiment on.
And Sítá with the matrons’ aid
Her limbs in shining robes arrayed,
Sumantra then, the charioteer,
Drew, ordered by Śatrughna near,
And stayed within the hermit grove
The chariot and the steeds he drove.
Therein Sugríva’s consorts, graced
With gems, and Ráma’s queen were placed,
All fain Ayodhyá to behold:
And swift away the chariot rolled.
Like Indra Lord of Thousand Eyes,
Drawn by fleet lions through the skies.
Thus radiant in his glory showed
King Ráma as he homeward rode,
In power and might unparalleled.
The reins the hand of Bharat held.
Above the peerless victor’s head
The snow-white shade Śatrughna spread,
And Lakshmaṇ’s ever-ready hand
His forehead with a chourie fanned.
Vibhishaṇ close to Lakshmaṇ’s side
Sharing his task a chourie plied.
Sugríva on Śatrunjay came,
An elephant of hugest frame:
Nine thousand others bore, behind,
The chieftains of the Vánar kind
All gay, in forms of human mould,
With rich attire and gems and gold.
Thus borne along in royal state
King Ráma reached Ayodbyá’s gate
With merry noise of shells and drums
And joyful shouts, He comes, he comes,
A Bráhman host with solemn tread,
And kine the long procession led,
And happy maids in ordered bands
Threw grain and gold with liberal hands.
Neath gorgeous flags that waved in rows
On towers and roofs and porticoes.
Mid merry crowds who sang and cheered
The palace of the king they neared.
Then Raghu’s son to Bharat, best
Of duty’s slaves, these words addressed:
“Pass onward to the monarch’s hall.
The high-souled Vánars with thee call,
And let the chieftains, as is meet,
The widows of our father greet.
And to the Vánar king assign
Those chambers, best of all, which shine
With lazulite and pearl inlaid,
And pleasant grounds with flowers and shade.”

  He ceased: and Bharat bent his head;
Sugríva by the hand he led
And passed within the palace where
Stood couches which Śatrughna’s care,
With robes and hangings richly dyed,
And burning lamps, had seen supplied.
Then Bharat spake: “I pray thee, friend,
Thy speedy messengers to send,
Each sacred requisite to bring
That we may consecrate our king.”
Sugríva raised four urns of gold,
The water for the rite to hold,
And bade four swiftest Vánars flee
And fill them from each distant sea.
Then east and west and south and north
The Vánar envoys hastened forth.
Each in swift flight an ocean sought
And back through air his treasure brought,
And full five hundred floods beside
Pure water for the king supplied.
Then girt by many a Bráhman sage,
Vaśishṭha, chief for reverend age,
High on a throne with jewels graced
King Ráma and his Sítá placed.
There by Jábáli, far revered,
Vijay and Kaśyap’s son appeared;
By Gautam’s side Kátváyan stood,
And Vámadeva wise and good,
Whose holy hands in order shed
The pure sweet drops on Ráma’s head.
Then priests and maids and warriors, all
Approaching at Vaśishṭha’s call,
With sacred drops bedewed their king,
The centre of a joyous ring,
The guardians of the worlds, on high,
And all the children of the sky
From herbs wherewith their hands were filled
Rare juices on his brow distilled.
His brows were bound with glistering gold
Which Manu’s self had worn of old,
Bright with the flash of many a gem
His sire’s ancestral diadem.
Śatrughna lent his willing aid
And o’er him held the regal shade:
The monarchs whom his arm had saved
The chouries round his forehead waved.
A golden chain, that flashed and glowed
With gems the God of Wind bestowed:
Mahendra gave a glorious string
Of fairest pearls to deck the king,
The skies with acclamation rang,
The gay nymphs danced, the minstrels sang.
On that blest day the joyful plain
Was clothed anew with golden grain.
The trees the witching influence knew,
And bent with fruits of loveliest hue,
And Ráma’s consecration lent
New sweetness to each flowret’s scent.
The monarch, joy of Raghu’s line,
Gave largess to the Bráhmans, kine
And steeds unnumbered, wealth untold
Of robes and pearls and gems and gold.
A jewelled chain, whose lustre passed
The glory of the sun, he cast
About his friend Sugríva’s neck;
And, Angad Báli’s son to deck,
He gave a pair of armlets bright
With diamond and lazulite.
A string of pearls of matchless hue
Which gleams like tender moonlight threw
Adorned with gems of brightest sheen,
He gave to grace his darling queen.
The offering from his hand received
A moment on her bosom heaved;
Then from her neck the chain she drew,
A glance on all the Vánars threw,
And wistful eyes on Ráma bent
As still she held the ornament.
Her wish he knew, and made reply
To that mute question of her eye:
“Yea, love; the chain on him bestow
Whose wisdom truth and might we know,
The firm ally, the faithful friend
Through toil and peril to the end.”

  Then on Hanúmán’s bosom hung
The chain which Sítá’s hand had flung:
So may a cloud, when winds are still
With moon-lit silver gird a hill.

  To every Vánar Ráma gave
Rich treasures from the mine and wave.
And with their honours well content
Homeward their steps the chieftains bent.
Ten thousand years Ayodhyá, blest
With Ráma’s rule, had peace and rest,
No widow mourned her murdered mate,
No house was ever desolate.
The happy land no murrain knew,
The flocks and herds increased and grew.
The earth her kindly fruits supplied,
No harvest failed, no children died.
Unknown were want, disease, and crime:
So calm, so happy was the time.(1029)


APPENDIX.


Section XIII. Rávan Doomed.


Afterwards Rishyaśring said again to the King “I will perform another
sacrificial act to secure thee a son.” Then the son of Vibháṇdak, of
subdued passions, seeking the happiness of the king, proceeded to perform
the sacrifice for the accomplishment of his wishes. Hither were previously
collected the gods, with the Gandharvas, the Siddhas and the sages, for
the sake of receiving their respective shares, Brahmá too, the sovereign
of the gods, with Stháṇu, and Náráyaṇa, chief of beings and the four
supporters of the universe, and the divine mothers of all the celestials,
met together there. To the Aśvamedha, the great sacrifice of the
magnanimous monarch, came also Indra the glorious one, surrounded by the
Maruts. Rishyaśring then supplicated the gods assembled for their share of
the sacrifice (saying), “This devout king Daśaratha, who, through the
desire of offspring, confiding in you, has performed sacred austerities,
and who has offered to you the sacrifice called Aśvamedha, is about to
perform another sacrifice for the sake of obtaining sons: To him thus
desirous of offspring be pleased to grant the blessing: I supplicate you
all with joined hands. May he have four sons, renowned through the
universe.” The gods replied to the sage’s son supplicating with joined
hands, “Be it so: thou, O Bráhman, art ever to be regarded by us, as the
king is in a peculiar manner. The lord of men by this sacrifice shall
obtain the great object of his desires.” Having thus said, the gods
preceded by Indra, disappeared.

They all then having seen that (sacrifice) performed by the great sage
according to the ordinance went to Prajápati the lord of mankind, and with
joined hands addressed Brahmá the giver of blessings, “O Brahmá, the
Ráksha Rávaṇa by name, to whom a blessing was awarded by thee, through
pride troubleth all of us the gods, and even the great sages, who
perpetually practise sacred austerities. We, O glorious one, regarding the
promise formerly granted by thy kindness that he should be invulnerable to
the gods, the Dánavas and the Yakshas have born (_sic_) all, (his
oppression); this lord of Rákshas therefore distresses the universe; and,
inflated by this promise unjustly vexes the divine sages, the Yakshas, and
Gandharvas, the Asuras, and men: where Rávaṇa remains there the sun loses
his force, the winds through fear of him do not blow; the fire ceases to
burn; the rolling ocean, seeing him, ceases to move its waves. Viśravas,
distressed by his power, has abandoned Lanká and fled. O divine one save
us from Rávaṇa, who fills the world with noise and tumult. O giver of
desired things, be pleased to contrive a way for his destruction.”

Brahmá thus informed by the devas, reflecting, replied, “Oh! I have
devised the method for slaying this outrageous tyrant. Upon his
requesting, ‘May I be invulnerable to the divine sages, the Gaundharvas,
the Yakshas, the Rákshasas and the serpents,’ I replied ‘Be it so.’ This
Ráksha, through contempt, said nothing respecting man; therefore this
wicked one shall be destroyed by man.” The gods, preceded by Śakra,
hearing these words spoken by Brahmá, were filled with joy.

At this time Vishṇu the glorious, the lord of the world, arrayed in
yellow, with hand ornaments of glowing gold, riding on Vinateya, as the
sun on a cloud, arrived with his conch, his discus, and his club in his
hand. Being adored by the excellent celestials, and welcomed by Brahmá, he
drew near and stood before him. All the gods then addressed Vishṇu, “O
Madhusudana, thou art able to abolish the distress of the distressed. We
intreat thee, be our sanctuary, O Vishṇu.” Vishṇu replied, “Say, what
shall I do?” The celestials hearing these his words added further. “The
virtuous, the encourager of excellence, eminent for truth, the firm
observer of his vows, being childless, is performing an Aśvamedha for the
purpose of obtaining offspring. For the sake of the good of the universe,
we intreat thee, O Vishṇu, to become his son. Dividing thyself into four
parts, in the wombs of his three consorts equal to Hari, Śrí, and Kirti,
assume the sonship of king Daśaratha, the lord of Ayodhyá, eminent in the
knowledge of duty, generous and illustrious, as the great sages. Thus
becoming man, O Vishṇu, conquer in battle Rávaṇa, the terror of the
universe, who is invulnerable to the gods. This ignorant Rákshasa Rávaṇa,
by the exertion of his power, afflicts the gods, the Gandharvaa, the
Siddhas, and the most excellent sages; these sages, the Gandharvas, and
the Apsaras, sporting in the forest Nandana have been destroyed by that
furious one. We, with the sages, are come to thee seeking his destruction.
The Siddhas, the Gandharvas, and the Yakshas betake themselves to thee,
thou art our only refuge; O Deva, afflicter of enemies, regard the world
of men, and destroy the enemy of the gods.”

Vishṇu, the sovereign of the gods, the chief of the celestials, adored by
all beings, being thus supplicated, replied to all the assembled gods
(standing) before Brahmá, “Abandon fear; peace be with you; for your
benefit having killed Rávaṇa the cruel, destructively active, the cause of
fear to the divine sages, together with all his posterity, his courtiers
and counsellors, and his relations, and friends, protecting the earth, I
will remain incarnate among men for the space of eleven thousand years.”

Having given this promise to the gods, the divine Vishṇu, ardent in the
work, sought a birth-place among men. Dividing himself into four parts, he
whose eyes resemble the lotus and the pulasa, the lotus petal-eyed, chose
for his father Daśaratha the sovereign of men. The divine sages then with
the Gandharvas, the Rudras, and the (different sorts of) Apsaras, in the
most excellent strains, praised the destroyer of Madhu, (saying) “Root up
Rávaṇa, of fervid energy, the devastator, the enemy of Indra swollen with
pride. Destroy him, who causes universal lamentation, the annoyer of the
holy ascetics, terrible, the terror of the devout Tapaswis. Having
destroyed Rávaṇa, tremendously powerful, who causes universal weeping,
together with his army and friends, dismissing all sorrow, return to
heaven, the place free from stain and sin, and protected by the sovereign
of the celestial powers.”

Thus far the Section, containing the plan for the death of Rávaṇ.

CAREY AND MARSHMAN.


Caput XIV. RATIO NECANDI RAVANAE EXCOGITATA.


Prudens ille, voluminum sacrorum gnarus, responsum quod dederat aliquamdiu
meditatus, mente ad se revocata regem deuno est effatus: Parabo tibi aliud
sacrum, genitale, prolis masculae adipiscendae gratia, cum carminibus in
ATHARVANIS exordio expressis rite peragendum. Tum coepit modestus
Vibhândaci filius, regis commodis intentus, parare sacrum, quo eius
desiderium expleret. Iam’antea eo convenerant, ut suam quisque portionem
acciperent, Dî cum fidicinum coelestium choris, Beatique cum Sapientibus;
Brachman Superûm regnator, Sthânus nec non augustus Nârâyanus, Indrasque
almus, coram visendus Ventorum cohorte circumdatus, in magno isto
sacrificio equino regis magnanimi. Ibidem vates ille deos, qui portiones
suas accipiendi gratia advenerant, apprecatus, En inquit, hicce ex
Dasarathus filiorum desiderio castimoniis adstrictus, fidei plenus,
vestrum numen adoravit sacrificio equino. Nunc iterum accingit se ad aliud
sacrum peragendum: quamobrem aequum est, ut filios cupienti vos faveatis.
Ille ego, qui manus supplices tendo, vos universos pro eo apprecor:
nascantur ei filii quatuor, faina per triplicem mundum clari. Divi
supplicem vatis filium invicem affari: Fiat quod petis! Tu nobis,
virsancte, imprimis es venerandus, nee minus rex ille; compos fiet voti
sui egregii hominum princeps. Ita locuti Dî Indra duce, ex oculis
evanuerunt.

Superi vero, legitime in concilio congregati. BRACHMANEM mundi creatorem
his verbis compellarunt: Tuo munere auctus, O Brachman! gigas nomine
Râvanas, prae superbia nos omnes vexat, pariterque Sapientes castimoniis
gaudentes. A te propitio olim ex voto ei hoc munus concessum fuit, ut ne a
diis, Danuidis, Geniisve necari posset. Nos, oraculum tuum reveriti,
facinora eius qualiacunque toleramus. At ille gigantum tyrannus ternos
mundos gravibus iniuriis vexat Deos, Sapientes, Genios, Fidicines
coelestes, Titanes, mortales denique, exsuperat ille aegre cohibendus,
tuoque munere demens. Non ibi calet sol, neque Ventus prae timore spirat,
nee flagrat ignis, ubi Râvanas versatur. Ipse oceanus, vagis fluctibus
redimitus, isto viso stat immotus; eiectus fuit e sede sua Cuvêrus, huius
robore vexatus. Ergo ingens nobis periculum imminet ab hoc gigante visu
horribili; tuum est, alme Parens! auxilium parare, quo hic deleatur. Ita
admonitus ille a diis universis, paulisper meditatus, Ehem! inquit, hancce
inveni rationem nefarium istum necandi. Petierat is a me, ut a Gandharvis,
a Geniis, a Divis, Danuibus Gigantibusque necari non posset et me annuente
voto suo potitus est. Prae contemptu vero monstrum illud homines non
commemoravit: ideo ab homine est necandus: nullum aliud exstat leti genus,
quod ei sit fatale. Postquam audiverant gratum hunc sermonem BRACHMANIS
ore prolatum, Dî cum duce suo Indra summopere gaudio erecti sunt. Eodem
temporis momento Vishnus, istuc accessit, splendore insignis, concham,
discum et clavum manibus gestans, croceo vestitu, mundi dominus, vulturis
Vinateii dorso, sicuti sol nimbo, vectus, armillas ex auro candente
gerens, salutatus a Superûm primoribus. Quem laudibus celebratum
reverenter Dî universi compellarunt. Tu animantium afflictorum es vindex,
Madhûs interfector! quamobrem nos afflicti te apprecamur. Sis praesidio
nobis numine tuo inconcusso. Dicite, inquit Vishnus, quid pro vobis facere
me oporteat. Audito eius sermone, Dî hunc in modum respondent: Rex quidam,
nomine Dasarathus, austeris castimoniis sese castigavit, litavit
sacrificio equino, prolis cupidus et prole carens. Nostro hortatu tu,
Vishnus, conditionem natorum eius subeas: ex tribus eius uxoribus,
Pudicitiae, Venustatis et Famae similibus, nasci, velis, temetipsum
quadrifariam dividens. Ibi tu in humanam naturam conversus Râvanam,
gravissimam mundi pestem, diis insuperabilem, O Vishnus! proelio caede.
Gigas ille vecors Râvanas Deos cum Fidicinum choris, Beatos et Sapientes
praestantissimos vexat, audacia superbiens. Etenim ab hoc furioso
Sapientes Fidicines et nymphae, ludentes in Nandano viridario, sunt
proculcati. Tu es nostrum omnium summa salus, divine bellator! Ut deoram
hostes extinguas, ad sortem humanam animum converte. Augustus ille
Nârâyanus, diis hunc in modum coram hortantibus, eosdem apto hoc sermone
compellavit: Quare, quaeso, hac in re negotium vestrum a me potissimum,
corporea specie palam facto, est peragendum aut unde tantus vobis terror
fuit iniectus? His verbis a Vishnû interrogati Dî talia proferre: Terror
nobis instat, O Vishnus! a Râvana mundi direptore; a quo nos vindicare,
corpore humano assumpto, tuum est. Nemo alius coelicoiarum praeter te hunc
scelestum enecare potis est. Nimirum ille, O hostium domitor! per
diuturnum tempus sese excruciaverat severissima abstinentia, qua magnus
hicce rerum Parens propitius ipsi redditus est. Itaque almus votorum
sponsor olim ei concessit securitatem ab ommibus animantibus, hominibus
tamen exceptis. Hinc ilium, voti compotem, non aliunde quam ab homine
necis periculum urget: tu ergo, humanitate assumpta eum intertice. Sic
monitus Vishnus, Superûm princeps, quem mundus universus adorat, magnum
Parentem oeterosque deos, in concilio congregatos, recti auctores,
affatur: Mittite timorem; bene bobis eveniat! Vestrae salutis gratia,
postquam praelio necavero Râvanam cum filiis nepotibusque, cum amicis,
ministris, cognatis sociisque, crudelem istum aegre cohibendum, qui
divinis Sapientibus terrorem meutit, per decem millia annorum decies
centenis additis, commorabor in mortalium sedibus, orbem terrarum imperio
regens. Tum divini sapientes et Fidicines conjuncti cum Rudris
nympharumque choris celebravere Madhûs interfectorem hymnis, quales sedem
aetheriam decent.

“Râvanam ilium insolentem, acri impetu actum, superbia elatum, Superûm
hostem, tumultus cientem, bonorum piorumque pestem, humanitate assumpta
pessamdare tuum est.”

SCHLEGEL.


Caput XIV. IL MEZZO STABILITO PER UCCIDERE RÁVANO.


Ma Riseyasringo soggiunse poscia al re: Tappresterò io un altro rito
santissimo, genitale, onde tu conseguisca la prole che tu bramí. E in quel
punto stesso il saggio figliulo di Vibhândaco, intento alla prosperità del
re, pose mano al sacro rito per condurre ad effetto il suo desiderio. Già
erano prima, per ricevere ciascuno la sua parte, qui convenuti al gran
sacrifizio del re magnanimo l’Asvamedha, i Devi coi Gandharvi, i Siddhi e
i Muni, Brahma Signor dei Sari, Sthânu e l’ Augusto Nârâyana, i quattio
custodi dell’ universo e le Madri degli Iddu, i Yacsi insieme cogli Dei, e
il sovrano, venerando Indra, visibile, circondato dalla schiera dei
Maruti. Quivi così parlò Riscyasringo agli Dei venuti a partecipare del
sacrifizio: Questo è il re Dasaratha, che per desiderio di progenie già s’
astrinse ad osservanze austeré, e testè pieno di fede ha a voi, O eccelsi,
sacrificato con un Asvamedha. Ora egli, sollecito d’ aver figli, si
dispone ad adempiere un nuovo rito; vogliate essere favorevole a lui che
sospira progenie. Io alzo a voi supplici le mani, e voi tutti per lui
imploro: nascano a lui quattro figli degni d’essere celebrati pei tre
mondi. Risposero gli Dei al supplichevole figliuolo del Risci: Sia fatto
ciò che chiedi; a te ed al re parimente si debbe da noi, O Brahmano, sommo
pregio; canseguirà il re per questo sacro rito il suo suppremo desiderio.
Ciò detto disparvero i Numi preceduti da Indra.

Poichè videro gli Dei compiersi debitamente dal gran Risci l’oblazione,
venuti al cospetto di Brahma facitor del mondo, signor delle creature,
così parlarono reverenti a lui dator di grazie: O Brahma, un Racsaso per
nome Râvano, eui tu fosti largo del tuo favore, è per superbia infesto a
noi tutti e ai grandi Saggi penitenti. Un di, O Nume, augusto, tu propizio
a lui gli accordasti il favore, ch’ egli bramava, di non poter essere
ucciso dagli Dei, dai Dânavi nè dai Yacsi: noi venerando i tuoi oracoli,
ogni cosa sopportiamo da costui. Quindi il signor dei Racsasi infesta con
perpetue offese i tre mondi, i Devi, i Risci, i Yacsi ed i Gandharvi, gli
Asuri e gli uomini: tutti egli opprime indegnamente inorgoglito pel tuo
dono. Colà dove si trova Râvano, più non isfavilla per timore il sole, più
non spira il vento, più non fiammeggia il fuoco: l’ oceano stesso cui fan
corona i vasti flutti, veggendo costui, tutto si turba e si commuove.
Stretto dalla forza di costui e ridotto allo stremo dovette Vaisravano
abbandonare Lancâ. Da questo Râvano, terror del mondo, tu ne proteggi, O
almo Nume: degna, O dator d’ogni bene, trovar modo ad estirpar costui.
Fatto di queste cose conscio dai Devi, stette alquanto meditando, poi
rispose Brahma: Orsù! è stabilito il modo onde distruggere questo iniquo.
Egli a me chiese, ed io gliel concessi, di non poter essere ucciso dai
Devi, dai Risci, dai Gandharvi, dai Yacsi, dai Racsasi nè dai Serpenti; ma
per disprezzo non fece menzione degli uomini quel Racso: or bene, sarà
quell’ empio ucciso da un uomo. Udite le fauste parole profferte da
Brahma, furono per ogni parte liete gli Iddii col loro duce Indra. In
questo mezzo quì sopravvenne raggiante d’immensa luce il venerando Visnu,
pensato da Brahma nell’ immortal sua mente, siccome atto ad estirpar
colui; Allora Brahma colla schiera de’ Celesti così parlò a Visnu: Tu sei
il conforto delle gente oppresse, O distruttor di Madhu: noi quindi a te
supplichiamo afflitti: sia tu nostro sostegno, O Aciuto. Dite, loro
rispose Visnu, quale cosa io debba far per voi; e gli Dei, udite queste
parole, cosi soggiunsero: Un re per nome Dasaratha, giusto, virtuoso,
veridico e pio, non ha progenie e la desidera: ei già s’ impose durissime
penitenze, ed ora ha sacrificato con un Asvamedha: tu, per nostro
consiglio, O Visnu, consenti a divenir suo figlio: fatte di te quattro
parti, ti manifesta, O invocato dalle genti, nel seno delle quattro sue
consorti, simili alla venusta Dea. Così esortato dagli Dei quivi presenti,
l’augusto Nârâyana loro rispose queste opportune parole: Quale opra s’ha
da me, fatto visible nel mondo, a compiere per voi, O Devi? e d’onde in
voi cotal terrore? Intese le parole di Visnu, così risposero gli Dei: Il
nostro terrore. O Visnu, nasce da un Racsaso per nome Râvano, spavento
dell’ universo. Vestendo umano corpo, tu debbi esterminar costui. Nessuno
fra i Celesti, fuorchè tu solo, è valevole ad uccidere quell’ iniquo.
Egli, O domator de’ tuoi nemici, sostenne per lungo tempo acerbissime
macerazioni: per esse fu di lui contento l’augusto sommo Genitore: e un di
gli accordò propizio la sicurezza da tutti gli esseri, eccettutine gli
uomini. Per questo favore a lui concesso nou ha egli a temere offesa da
alcuna parte, fuorchè dall’ uomo, perciò, assumendo la natura umana,
costui tu uccidi. Egli, il peggior di tutti i Racsasi, insano per la forza
che gli infonde il dono avuto, da travaglio ai Devi ed ai Gaudharvi, ai
Risci, ai Muni ed ai mortali. Egli, sicuro da morte pel favore ottenuto, è
turbatore dei sacrifizj, nemico ed uccisor dei Brahmi, divoratore degli
uomini, peste del mondo. Da lui furono assaliti re coi loro carri ed
elefanti; altri percessi e fugati si dispersero per ogni dove. Da lui
furono divorati Risci ed Apsarase: egli insomma oltracotato continuamente
e quasi per ischerzo tutti travaglia i sette mondi. Perciò, O terribile ai
nemici è stabilita la morte di costui per opra d’un uomo; poich’ un di per
superbia del dono tutti sprezzò gli uomini. Tu, O supremo fra i Numi, dei,
umanandoti, estirpare questo tremendo, superbo Ràvano, oltracotato, a noi
nemico, terrore e flagello dei penitenti.

GORRESIO.