XIV.

  778 In the Bengal recension the fourth Book ends here, the remaining
      Cantos being placed in the fifth.

  779 Each chief comes forward and says how far he can leap. Gaja says he
      can leap ten yojans. Gavaksha can leap twenty. Gavaya thirty, and so
      on up to ninety.

  780 Prahláda, the son of Hiraṇyakaśipu, was a pious Datya remarkable for
      his devotion to Vishṇu, and was on this account persecuted by his
      father.

  781 The Bengal recension calls him Aríshṭanemi’s brother. “The
      commentator says ‘Aríshṭanemi is Aruṇa.’ Aruṇa the charioteer of the
      sun is the son of Kaśyapa and Vinatá and by consequence brother of
      Garuḍa, called Vainateya from Vinatá, his mother.” GORRESSIO.

  782 A nymph of Paradise.

  783 Hanu or Hanú means jaw. Hanumán or Hanúmán means properly one with a
      large jaw.

  784 Vishṇu, the God of the Three Steps.

  785 Náráyaṇ, “He who moved upon the waters,” is Vishnu. The allusion is
      to the famous three steps of that God.

  786 The Milky Way.

  787 This Book is called Sundar or the Beatiful. To a European taste it
      is the most intolerably tedious of the whole poem, abounding in
      repetition, overloaded description, and long and useless speeches
      which impede the action of the poem. Manifest interpolations of
      whole Cantos also occur. I have omitted none of the action of the
      Book, but have occasionally omitted long passages of common-place
      description, lamentation, and long stories which have been again and
      again repeated.

  788 Brahmá the Self-Existent.

  789 Maináka was the son of Himálaya and Mená or Menaká.

  790 Thus Milton makes the hills of heaven self-moving at command:

      “At his command the uprooted hills retired
      Each to his place, they heard his voice and went
      Obsequious”

  791 The spirit of the mountain is separable from the mountain. Himalaya
      has also been represented as standing in human form on one of his
      own peaks.

  792 Ságar or the Sea is said to have derived its name from Sagar. The
      story is fully told in Book I, Cantos XLII, XLIII, and XLIV.

  793 Kritu is the first of the four ages of the world, the golden age,
      also called Satya.

_  794 Parvata_ means a mountain and in the Vedas a cloud. Hence in later
      mythology the mountains have taken the place of the clouds as the
      objects of the attacks of Indra the Sun-God. The feathered king is
      Garuḍa.

  795 “The children of Surasá were a thousand mighty many-headed serpents,
      traversing the sky.” WILSON’S _Vishṇu Puráṇa_, Vol. II. p. 73.

  796 She means, says the Commentator, pursue thy journey if thou can.

  797 If Milton’s spirits are allowed the power of infinite self-extension
      and compression the same must be conceded to Válmíki’s supernatural
      beings. Given the power as in Milton the result in Válmíki is
      perfectly consistent.

  798 “Daksha is the son of Brahmá and one of the Prajápatis or divine
      progenitors. He had sixty daughters, twenty-seven of whom married to
      Kaśyapa produced, according to one of the Indian cosmogonies, all
      mundane beings. Does the epithet, Descendant of Daksha, given to
      Surasá, mean that she is one of those daughters? I think not. This
      epithet is perhaps an appellation common to all created beings as
      having sprung from Daksha.” GORRESSIO.

  799 Sinhiká is the mother of Ráhu the dragon’s head or ascending node,
      the chief agent in eclipses.

  800 According to De Gubernatis, the author of the very learned,
      ingenious, and interesting though too fanciful _Zoological
      Mythology_. Hanumán here represents the sun entering into and
      escaping from a cloud. The biblical Jonah, according to him,
      typifies the same phenomenon. Sá’dí, speaking of sunset, says _Yùnas
      andar-i-dihán-imáhi shud_: Jonas was within the fish’s mouth. See
      ADDITIONAL NOTES.

  801 The Buchanania Latifolia.

  802 The Bauhinia Variegata.

  803 Through the power that Rávaṇ’s stern mortifications had won for him
      his trees bore flowers and fruit simultaneously.

  804 Viśvakarmá is the architect of the Gods.

  805 So in Paradise Lost Satan when he has stealthily entered the garden
      of Eden assumes the form of a cormorant.

  806 Priests who fought only with the weapons of religion, the sacred
      grass used like the verbena of the Romans at sacred rites and the
      consecrated fire to consume the offering of ghee.

  807 One of the Rákshas lords.

  808 The brother Rávaṇ.

  809 Indra’s elephant.

  810 Rávaṇ’s palace appears to have occupied the whole extent of ground,
      and to have contained within its outer walls the mansions of all the
      great Rákshas chiefs. Rávaṇ’s own dwelling seems to have been
      situated within the enchanted chariot Pushpak: but the description
      is involved and confused, and it is difficult to say whether the
      chariot was inside the palace or the palace inside the chariot.

  811 Pushpak from _pushpa_ a flower. The car has been mentioned before in
      Rávaṇ’s expedition to carry off Sítá, Book III, Canto XXXV.

  812 Lakshmí is the wife of Vishṇu and the Goddess of Beauty and
      Felicity. She rose, like Aphrodite, from the foam of the sea. For an
      account of her birth and beauty, see Book I, Canto XLV.

  813 Viśvakarmá is the architect of the Gods, the Hephaestos or Mulciber
      of the Indian heaven.

  814 Rávaṇ in the resistless power which his long austerities had endowed
      him with, had conquered his brother Kuvera the God of Gold and taken
      from him his greatest treasure this enchanted car.

  815 Like Milton’s heavenly car, “Itself instinct with spirit.”

  816 Women, says Válmíki. But the Commentator says that automatic figures
      only are meant. Women would have seen Hanumán and given the alarm.

  817 Rávaṇ had fought against Indra and the Gods, and his body was still
      scarred by the wounds inflicted by the tusks of Indra’s elephant and
      by the fiery bolts of the Thunderer.

  818 The Vasus are a class of eight deities, originally personifications
      of natural phenomena.

  819 The Maruts are the winds or Storm-Gods.

  820 The Ádityas originally seven deities of the heavenly sphere of whom
      Varuṇa is the chief. The name Áditya was afterwards given to any
      God, specially to Súrya the Sun.

  821 The Aśvins are the Heavenly Twins, the Castor and Pollux of the
      Hindus.

  822 The poet forgets that Hanumán has reduced himself to the size of a
      cat.

  823 Sítá “not of woman born,” was found by King Janak as he was turning
      up the ground in preparation for a sacrifice. See Book II, Canto