The Story of Sayen [69]

_Tinguian_

In the depths of a dark forest where people seldom went, lived a
wizened old Alan. [70] The skin on her wrinkled face was as tough
as a carabao hide, and her long arms with fingers pointing back from
the wrist were horrible to look at. Now this frightful creature had
a son whose name was Sayen, and he was as handsome as his mother was
ugly. He was a brave man, also, and often went far away alone to fight.

On these journeys Sayen sometimes met beautiful girls, and though
he wanted to marry, he could not decide upon one. Hearing that one
Danepan was more beautiful than any other, he determined to go and
ask her to be his wife.

Now Danepan was very shy, and when she heard that Sayen was coming
to her house she hid behind the door and sent her servant, Laey,
out to meet him. And so it happened that Sayen, not seeing Danepan,
married Laey, thinking that she was her beautiful mistress. He took
her away to a house he had built at the edge of the forest, for though
he wished to be near his old home, he dared not allow his bride to
set eyes on his ugly mother.

For some time they lived happily together here, and then one day when
Sayen was making a plow under his house, he heard Laey singing softly
to their baby in the room above, and this is what she sang:

"Sayen thinks I am Danepan, but Laey I am. Sayen thinks I am Danepan,
but Laey I am."

When Sayen heard this he knew that he had been deceived, and he
pondered long what he should do.

The next morning he went to the field to plow, for it was near the
rice-planting time. Before he left the house he called to his wife:

"When the sun is straight above, you and the baby bring food to me,
for I shall be busy in the field."

Before he began to plow, however, he cut the bamboo supports of the
bridge which led to the field, so that when Laey and the baby came
with his food, they had no sooner stepped on the bridge than it went
down with them and they were drowned. Sayen was again free. He took
his spear and his shield and head-ax and went at once to the town of
Danepan, and there he began killing the people on all sides.

Terror spread through the town. No one could stop his terrible work
of destruction until Danepan came down out of her house, and begged
him to spare part of the people that she might have some from whom to
borrow fire. [71] Her great beauty amazed him and he ceased killing,
and asked her to prepare some betel-nut for him to chew, as he was
very tired. She did so, and when he had chewed the nut he spat on
the people he had killed and they came to life again. Then he married
Danepan and took her to his home.

Now it happened about this time that the people of Magosang were
in great trouble. At the end of a successful hunt, while they were
dividing the meat among themselves, the Komow, [72] a murderous spirit
that looks like a man, would come to them and ask how many they had
caught. If they answered, "Two," then he would say that he had caught
two also; and when they went home, they would find two people in the
town dead. As often as they went to hunt the Komow did this, and many
of the people of Magosang were dead and those living were in great
fear. Finally they heard of the brave man, Sayen, and they begged
him to help them. Sayen listened to all they told, and then said:

"I will go with you to hunt, and while you are dividing the meat,
I will hide behind the trees. When the Komow comes to ask how many
deer you have, he will smell me, but you must say that you do not
know where I am,"

So the people went to hunt, and when they had killed two deer, they
singed them over a fire and began to divide them. Just then the Komow
arrived and said:

"How many have you?"

"We have two," replied the people.

"I have two also," said the Komow, "but I smell Sayen."

"We do not know where Sayen is," answered the people; and just then he
sprang out and killed the Komow, and the people were greatly relieved.

Now when Kaboniyan, [73] a great spirit, heard what Sayen had done,
he went to him and said:

"Sayen you are a brave man because you have killed the Komow, Tomorrow
I will fight with you. You must remain on the low ground by the river,
and I will go to the hill above."

So the following day Sayen went to the low ground by the river. He
had not waited long before he heard a great sound like a storm, and
he knew that Kaboniyan was coming. He looked up, and there stood the
great warrior, poising his spear which was as large as a big tree.

"Are you brave, Sayen?" called he in a voice like thunder as he threw
the weapon.

"Yes," answered Sayen, and he caught the spear.

This surprised Kaboniyan, and he threw his head-ax which was as large
as the roof of a house, and Sayen caught that also. Then Kaboniyan
saw that this was indeed a brave man, and he went down to Sayen and
they fought face to face until both were tired, but neither could
overcome the other.

When Kaboniyan saw that in Sayen he had found one as strong and brave
even as himself, he proposed that they go together to fight the people
of different towns. And they started out at once. Many people were
killed by this strong pair, and why they themselves could never be
captured was a great mystery. For it was not known that one was the
spirit Kaboniyan, and the other the son of an Alan.

If he was surrounded in a river, Sayen would become a fish [74]
and hide so that people could not find him. And if he was entrapped
in a town, he would become a chicken and go under the house in a
chicken-coop. In this way he escaped many times.

Finally one night after he had killed many in one town, the
people decided to watch him, and they saw him go to roost with the
chickens. The next day they placed a fish trap under the house near
the chicken-coop, and that night when Sayen went under the house he
was caught in the trap and killed.


The Sun and the Moon

_Tinguian_


Once the Sun and the Moon quarreled with each other, and the Sun said:

"You are only the Moon and are not much good. If I did not give you
light, you would be no good at all."

But the Moon answered:

"You are only the Sun, and you are very hot. The women like me better,
for when I shine at night, they go out doors and spin."

These words of the Moon made the Sun so angry that he threw sand in
her face, and you can still see the dark spots on the face of the Moon.


How the Tinguian Learned to Plant

_Tinguian_


In the very old times the Tinguian did not know how to plant and
harvest as they now do. For food they had only the things that grew
in the forests and fish from the streams. Neither did they know how
to cure people who became ill or were injured by evil spirits, and
many died who might otherwise have lived. [75]

Then Kadaklan, the Great Spirit who lives in the sky, saw that the
people often were hungry and sick, and he sent one of his servants,
Kaboniyan, to the earth to teach them many things. And it happened
this way:

Dayapan, a woman who lived in Caalang, had been sick for seven
years. One day when she went to the spring to bathe, there entered her
body a spirit who had rice and sugar-cane with him, and he said to her:

"Dayapan, take these to your home and plant them in the ground, and
after a while they will grow large enough to reap. Then when they are
ripe, build a granary to put the rice in until you shall need it,
and a sugar-press to crush the cane. And when these are finished,
make the ceremony Sayung, and you will be well."

Dayapan was filled with wonder at these strange things, but she took
the rice and the sugar-cane and went home as she was commanded. While
she was trying to plant them in the ground the Spirit again entered
her body and showed her just what to do. Since then the Tinguian
have planted crops every year, and because they do as Kaboniyan [76]
taught the woman they have plenty to eat.

When Dayapan had reaped the first rice and cane, she began to make
the ceremony Sayung, and the Spirit came again and directed her. And
when it was finished and she was cured, he told her to take a dog
and a cock and go to bathe in the river as a sign that the ceremony
was finished. So she went to the river and tied the dog and the cock
near the water, but while she was bathing the dog ate the cock.

Dayapan wept bitterly at this and waited a long time for Kaboniyan,
and when at last he came, he said:

"If the dog had not killed the cock, no person would die when you
make this ceremony; but this is a sign, and now some will die and
some will get well."

Dayapan called all the people together, and told them the things that
the spirit had taught her; and they could see that she had been made
well. After that, when people became ill they called Dayapan to treat
them. And it was as the Spirit had said; some died and others were
made well.


Magsawi

_Tinguian_


A great many years ago some Tinguian left their little village in the
valley early one morning and made their way toward the mountains. They
were off on a deer hunt, [77] and each carried his spear and head-ax,
while one held in leash a string of lean dogs eager for the chase.

Part way up the mountainside the dogs were freed, and the men
separated, going different ways in search of game. But ere long the
sharp barking of a dog called all in his direction, for they believed
that he had a deer at bay. As they approached the spot, however,
the object did not look like a deer, and as they drew nearer they
were surprised to find that it was a large jar. [78]

Filled with curiosity they pressed on, but the jar evaded them. Faster
and faster they ran, but the object, disappearing at times and then
coming into view again, always escaped them. On and on they went
until at last, tired out, they sat down on a wooded hill to rest and
to refresh themselves with betel-nut which they took from brass boxes
attached to their belts.

As they slowly cut the nuts and wrapped them in the lime and leaf
ready for chewing, they talked of nothing but the wonderful jar and
the mysterious power it possessed. Then just as they were about to
put the tempting morsels into their mouths they stopped, startled by
a strange soft voice which seemed to be near them. They turned and
listened, but could see no person.

"Find a pig which has no young," said the voice, "and take its blood,
for then you will be able to catch the jar which your dog pursued."

The men knew then that the mysterious jar belonged to a spirit, so
they hastened to do as the voice commanded, and when they had secured
the blood the dog again brought the jar to bay. The hunters tried to
seize it, but it entered a hole in the ground and disappeared. They
followed, and found themselves in a dark cave [79] where it was easy
to catch the jar, for there was no outlet save by the hole through
which they had entered.

Though that was many years ago, the jar still lives, and its name
is Magsawi. Even now it talks; but some years ago a crack appeared
in its side, and since then its language has not been understood by
the Tinguian. [80]

Sometimes Magsawi goes on long journeys alone when he visits his wife,
a jar in Ilocos Norte, or his child, a small jar in San Quintin;
but he always returns to Domayco on the hillside near the cave.


The Tree with the Agate Beads

_Tinguian_


More than a hundred seasons ago, a Tinguian went one day to the
mountains to hunt. Accompanied by his faithful dog, he made his way
steadily up the mountain side, only halting where it was necessary
to cut a path through the jungle. And the dog ran here and there
searching in the thick underbrush.

On and on he went without seeing any game, and then, when he was
almost at the top of the highest peak, the dog gave a sharp yelp,
and out of the brush leaped a fine deer. Zip! went the man's spear,
and it pierced the animal's side. For an instant he waited, but the
deer did not fall. On it ran with unslackened speed, and a moment
later it plunged into a hole in the ground with the man and dog in
close pursuit.

A short distance from the entrance the cave opened out into large,
spacious rooms, and before he realized it the man was hopelessly
lost In the distance he could hear the baying of the dog, and with
no other guide he hurried on through the darkness.

Following the sound, he went for a long time from one unfamiliar room
to another, stumbling in the darkness and striking against the stone
walls, and then suddenly his outstretched hands grasped a small tree
on which berries grew.

Astonished at finding anything growing in this dark place, he broke
off a branch, and as he did so the shrub began to talk in a strange
language. Terrified, the man ran in the direction he had last heard
the dog, and a moment later he found himself in the open air on the
banks of the Abra River, with the dead deer at his feet.

When he examined the twig which he still held in his hand, he saw
to his great surprise that the berries were agate beads of great
value. [81] And packing the deer on his back, he hastened home where
he told his wonderful story.

The sight of the beautiful beads convinced the people that he told
the truth, and a number of men at once returned with him to secure
the tree.

Their quest, however, was unsuccessful, for ere they reached the spot
the evil spirit had taken the tree away and on the walls of the cave
it had made strange carvings which even to this day can be seen.


The Striped Blanket

_Tinguian_


Three Tinguian once went to the mountains to hunt deer. They took
their blankets with them, for they expected to be gone several days,
and the nights in the mountains are cold.

The blankets of two of the men were of the blue-and-white designs
such as are commonly worn by the Tinguian, but that of the third was
covered with red and yellow stripes like the back of a little wild pig.

At night the men rolled up in their blankets and lay down under a
tree to sleep; but while the one in the striped blanket was still
awake two spirits came near and saw him.

"Oh," he heard one spirit say to the other, "here we have something
to eat, for here is a little wild pig."

Then the man quickly took the blanket off one of his sleeping
companions and put his own in its place. Very soon the spirits came
and ate the man under the striped blanket.

Since that time the Tinguian never sleep under that kind of a blanket
if they are where the spirits can get them.


The Alan and the Hunters

_Tinguian_


Two men once went to hunt wild pig in the mountains, and after some
time they speared and killed one, but they had no fire over which to
singe it.

One man climbed a tree to see if there was a fire near by, and
discovering smoke at some distance, he started toward it. When he
reached the place, he found that the fire was in the house of an Alan,
[82] and he was very much afraid; but creeping up into the house,
he found that the Alan and her baby were fast asleep.

He stepped on tip-toe, but nevertheless the Alan was awakened and
called out:

"Epogow, [83] what do you want?"

"I should like to get some fire," said the man, "for we have killed
a wild pig."

The Alan gave him the fire, and then taking her basket she went with
him to the place where the pig was.

After they had singed the animal, the Alan cut it up with her long
nails and handed the liver to the man, telling him to take it to her
house to feed the baby.

The man started, and on the way he ate the liver. When he reached
the Alan's house he did not know what to do. For some time he looked
around, and then seeing a large caldron of hot water on the fire,
he threw the baby into it and went back.

"Did the baby eat well?" asked the Alan.

"Very well," said the man.

Then she put most of the meat into her basket and started home. As
soon as she had gone, the man told his companion what he had done,
and they were so frightened that they ran to hide.

When the Alan reached home and found the baby dead in the hot water,
she was very angry and started back immediately to find the men, who,
in the meantime, had climbed a high tree that stood near the water.

The Alan looked down into the water, and seeing the reflection of
the men, she reached in her long hand with the fingers that pointed
backward, but when she could not touch them, she looked up and saw
them in the tall tree.

"How did you get up there?" she cried angrily.

"We climbed up feet first," called down the men.

The Alan, determined to get them, caught hold of a vine and started
up the tree feet first, but before she quite reached them, they cut
the vine and she fell to the ground and was killed. [84]

Then the men came down and went to the Alan's house, where they found
a jar full of beads and another of gold, and these they brought with
them when they returned home.


Man and the Alan

_Tinguian_


A Tinguian was once walking along a trail in the wood when he heard a
strange sound in a large tree near him, and looking up he was startled
to see that it was the home of the Alan--spirits who live in the wood.

He stopped and gazed for a moment at the horrible creatures, large
as people, hanging from the limbs of the tree with their heads down
like bats. They had wings to fly, and their toes were at the back
of their feet, while their long fingers, which pointed backward,
were fastened at the wrist.

"Surely," thought the man, "these terrible beings will eat me if
they can catch me. I will run away as fast as I can while they are
asleep." He tried to run but he was too frightened, and after a few
steps he fell face down on the ground.

At this the Alan began to wail loudly, for they saw him fall and
believed him dead And they came down out of the tree with gold and
beads which they laid on him.

After a while the man gathered courage and, jumping up, he cried as
loudly as he could, "Go away!"

The Alan did not move, but they looked at him and said: "Give us the
one bead _nagaba_ [a peculiar bead of double effect], and you may
have the rest." When the man refused to do this, they were angry and
turned away, crying, "Then we are going to burn your house, for you
are a bad man."

Thereupon the man went home as fast as he could go, but very soon
after that his house burned, for the Alan kept their word.


Sogsogot

_Tinguian_


One day, a long time ago, some men went to the mountains to hunt deer
and wild pig, and among them was one named Sogsogot.

They all went into the thick forest to look for game, but after a
while Sogsogot called his dog and withdrew to an open spot near by,
where he waited for the deer to come out.

While he stood there eagerly watching, a big bird [85] swooped down,
caught him in its claws, and carried him away. Far off over the
mountains the bird soared, until finally it came to a big tree where
it had its nest, and here it left the man and flew away.

Sogsogot's first thought was to make his escape, but he found that
the tree was so tall that he could not get down, and after a time he
ceased his attempts to get away and began to look over his companions
in the nest--two young birds and three little pigs.

By and by he became hungry, so he cut up the three little pigs, and
after he had eaten all he wished he fed the two birds. When this meat
was gone the mother bird brought more pigs and deer, and the man had
all he could eat. Then he fed the little birds, which grew very fast
and soon were able to fly. One day when they were standing on the
edge of the nest Sogsogot caught hold of the birds' legs, and they
fluttered down and carried him safely to the ground.

He hastened home as fast as he could go and told the people of his
wonderful trip. They made a ceremony for the spirits, and all the
people rejoiced that the lost man had returned.

Some time after this Sogsogot went to a hostile town to fight, and
while he was gone his wife died. On the way back to his town he met
the spirit of his wife driving a cow and two pigs, and not knowing
that she was a spirit he asked her where she was going.

"I am not a person any more," she answered him; "I am dead." And when
he wanted to touch her hand, she gave him only her shortest finger. He
begged to go with her so she said, "Go first to our home and get a
white chicken; then follow the footmarks of the cow and pigs."

He did as she commanded him, and after a while he came to a place
where she was bathing in the river. She said to him:

"Now you may come with me to our spirit town. [86] I shall hide you
in the rice-bin and shall bring food to you every day. But at night
the people in the town will want to eat you, and when they come to
the bin you must take some of the feathers of the white chicken and
throw at them."

The man went with her, and when they arrived at the spirit town she
hid him in the rice-bin. At night the people came to eat him, as she
had said they would; but when he threw the chicken feathers at them
they were frightened away.

For two weeks Sogsogot lived in this place, but when the feathers
were nearly gone he was afraid to stay any longer, for every night
the spirits came to eat him. He begged his wife to allow him to go,
and finally she showed him the way home, giving him rice to eat on
his journey.

As soon as the man arrived home and inquired for his wife, the
people told him that she had died and they had buried her under the
house. Then he knew that it was her spirit that had taken him to the
strange town.


The Mistaken Gifts

_Tinguian_


When Siagon was about eight years old his parents began looking for
a girl who would make a suitable wife. At last when they had decided
on a beautiful maiden, who lived some distance from them, they sent
a man to her parents to ask if they would like Siagon for a son-in-law.

Now when the man arrived at the girl's house the people were all
sitting on the floor eating periwinkle, and as they sucked the meat
out of the shell, they nodded their heads. The man, looking in at
the door, saw them nod, and he thought they were nodding at him. So
he did not tell them his errand, but returned quickly to the boy's
parents and told them that all the people at the girl's house were
favorable to the union.

Siagon's parents were very much pleased that their proposal had been
so kindly received, and immediately prepared to go to the girl's
house to arrange for the wedding.

Finally all was ready and they started for her house, carrying with
them as presents for her parents two carabao, two horses, two cows,
four iron kettles, sixteen jars of basi, two blankets, and two
little pigs.

The surprise of the girl's people knew no bounds when they saw all
this coming to their house, for they had not even thought of Siagon
marrying their daughter. [87]


The Boy who Became a Stone

_Tinguian_


One day a little boy named Elonen sat out in the yard making a bird
snare, and as he worked, a little bird called to him: "Tik-tik-lo-den"
(come and catch me).

"I am making a snare for you," said the boy; but the bird continued
to call until the snare was finished.

Then Elonen ran and threw the snare over the bird and caught it, and he
put it in a jar in his house while he went with the other boys to swim.

While he was away, his grandmother grew hungry, so she ate the bird,
and when Elonen returned and found that his bird was gone, he was so
sad that he wished he might go away and never come back. He went out
into the forest and walked a long distance, until finally he came to
a big stone and said: "Stone, open your mouth and eat me." And the
stone opened its mouth and swallowed the boy.

When his grandmother missed the boy, she went out and looked
everywhere, hoping to find him. Finally she passed near the stone
and it cried out, "Here he is." Then the old woman tried to open the
stone but she could not, so she called the horses to come and help
her. They came and kicked it, but it would not break. Then she called
the carabao and they hooked it, but they only broke their horns. She
called the chickens, which pecked it, and the thunder, which shook it,
but nothing could open it, and she had to go home without the boy.


The Turtle and the Lizard

_Tinguian_


A turtle and a big lizard once went to the field of Gotgotapa to steal
ginger, [88] When they reached the place the turtle said to the lizard:

"We must be very still or the man will hear us and come out."

But as soon as the lizard tasted the ginger he was so pleased that
he said:

"The ginger of Gotgotapa is very good."

"Be still," said the turtle; but the lizard paid no attention to the
warning, and called louder than ever:

"The ginger of Gotgotapa is very good."

Again and again he cried out, until finally the man heard him and
came out of the house to catch the robbers.

The turtle could not run fast, so he lay very still, and the man did
not see him. But the lizard ran and the man chased him. When they
were out of sight, the turtle went into the house and hid under a
cocoanut shell upon which the man used to sit. [89]

The man ran after the lizard for a long distance, but he could not
catch him. After a while he came back to the house and sat down on
the shell.

By and by, the turtle called, "Kook." The man jumped up and looked all
around. Unable to tell where the noise came from, he sat down again,

A second time the turtle called, and this time the man looked
everywhere in the house except under the shell, but could not find
the turtle. Again and again the turtle called, and finally the man,
realizing that all his attempts were unsuccessful, grew so excited
that he died.

Then the turtle ran out of the house, and he had not gone far before
he met the lizard again. They walked along together until they saw
some honey in a tree, and the turtle said:

"I will go first and get some of the honey."

The lizard would not wait, but ran ahead, and when he seized the honey,
the bees came out and stung him. So he ran back to the turtle for help.

After a while they came to a bird snare, and the turtle said:

"That is the silver wire that my grandfather wore about his neck."

Then the lizard ran fast to get it first, but he was caught in the
snare and was held until the man came and killed him. Then the wise
turtle went on alone.


The Man with the Cocoanuts

_Tinguian_


One day a man who had been to gather his cocoanuts loaded his horse
heavily with the fruit. On the way home he _met_ a boy whom he asked
how long it would take to reach the house.

"If you go slowly," said the boy, looking at the load on the horse,
"you will arrive very soon; but if you go fast, it will take you
all day."

The man could not believe this strange speech, so he hurried his
horse. But the cocoanuts fell off and he had to stop to pick them
up. Then he hurried his horse all the more to make up for lost time,
but the cocoanuts fell off again. Many times he did this, and it was
night when he reached home. [90]


The Carabao and the Shell

_Tinguian_


One very hot day, when a carabao went into the river to bathe, he
met a shell and they began talking together.

"You are very slow," said the carabao to the shell.

"Oh, no," replied the shell. "I can beat you in a race."

"Then let us try and see," said the carabao.

So they went out on the bank and started to run.

After the carabao had gone a long distance he stopped and called,
"Shell!"

And another shell lying by the river answered, "Here I am!"

Then the carabao, thinking that it was the same shell with which he
was racing, ran on.

By and by he stopped again and called, "Shell!"

Again another shell answered, "Here I am!"

The carabao was surprised that the shell could keep up with him. But
he ran on and on, and every time he stopped to call, another shell
answered him. But he was determined that the shell should not beat him,
so he ran until he dropped dead. [91]


The Alligator's Fruit

_Tinguian_


Two women went to gather some wild fruit from a vine which belonged
to the alligator.

"You must be careful not to throw the rind with your teeth marks
on it where the alligator can see it," said one of the women to the
other as they sat eating the fruit.

But the other woman paid no attention and threw the rind showing
teeth marks into the river, where the alligator saw it.

Thus he knew at once who had taken his fruit, and he was very angry. He
went to the house of the woman and called to the people:

"Bring out the woman that I may eat her, for she has eaten my fruit"

"Very well," answered the people. "But sit down and wait a little
while."

Then they put the iron soil-turner into the fire, and when it was
red hot, they took it to the door and said to the alligator:

"Here, eat this first."

He opened his mouth, and they pushed the red hot iron down his throat,
and he died.


Dogedog

_Tinguian_


Dogedog had always been very lazy, and now that his father and mother
were dead and he had no one to care for him, he lived very poorly. He
had little to eat. His house was old and small and so poor that it
had not even a floor. Still he would rather sit all day and idle away
his time than to work and have more things.

One day, however, when the rainy season was near at hand, Dogedog
began thinking how cold he would be when the storms came, and he felt
so sorry for himself that he decided to make a floor in his house.

Wrapping some rice in a banana leaf for his dinner, he took his long
knife and went to the forest to cut some bamboo. He hung the bundle
of rice in a tree until he should need it; but while he was working
a cat came and ate it. When the hungry man came for his dinner, there
was none left. Dogedog went back to his miserable little house which
looked forlorn to him even, now that he had decided to have a floor.

The next day he went again to the forest and hung his rice in the
tree as he did before, but again the cat came and ate it. So the man
had to go home without any dinner.

The third day he took the rice, but this time he fixed a trap in the
tree, and when the cat came it was caught.

"Now I have you!" cried the man when he found the cat; "and I shall
kill you for stealing my rice."

"Oh, do not kill me," pleaded the cat, "and I will be of some use
to you."

So Dogedog decided to spare the cat's life, and he took it home and
tied it near the door to guard the house.

Some time later when he went to look at it, he was very much surprised
to find that it had become a cock.

"Now I can go to the cock-fight at Magsingal," cried the man. And he
was very happy, for he had much rather do that than work.

Thinking no more of getting wood for his floor, he started out at
once for Magsingal with the cock under his arm. As he was crossing
a river he met an alligator which called out to him:

"Where are you going, Dogedog?"

"To the cock-fight at Magsingal," replied the man as he fondly stroked
the rooster.

"Wait, and I will go with you," said the alligator; and he drew
himself out of the water.

The two walking along together soon entered a forest where they met
a deer and it asked:

"Where are you going, Dogedog?"

"To the cock-fight at Magsingal," said the man.

"Wait and I will go with you," said the deer; and he also joined them.

By and by they met a mound of earth that had been raised by the ants,
and they would have passed without noticing it had it not inquired:

"Where are you going, Dogedog?"

"To the cock-fight at Magsingal," said the man once more; and the
mound of earth joined them.

The company then hurried on, and just as they were leaving the forest,
they passed a big tree in which was a monkey.

"Where are you going, Dogedog?" shrieked the monkey. And without
waiting for an answer he scrambled down the tree and followed them.

As the party walked along they talked together, and the alligator
said to Dogedog:

"If any man wants to dive into the water, I can stay under longer
than he."

Then the deer, not to be outdone, said:

"If any man wants to run, I can run faster."

The mound of earth, anxious to show its strength, said:

"If any man wants to wrestle, I can beat him."

And the monkey said:

"If any man wants to climb, I can go higher."

They reached Magsingal in good time and the people were ready for the
fight to begin. When Dogedog put his rooster, which had been a cat,
into the pit, it killed the other cock at once, for it used its claws
like a cat.

The people brought more roosters and wagered much money, but Dogedog's
cock killed all the others until there was not one left in Magsingal,
and Dogedog won much money. Then they went outside the town and
brought all the cocks they could find, but not one could win over
that of Dogedog.

When the cocks were all dead, the people wanted some other sport,
so they brought a man who could stay under water for a long time,
and Dogedog made him compete with the alligator. But after a while
the man had to come up first Then they brought a swift runner and he
raced with the deer, but the man was left far behind. Next they looked
around until they found a very large man who was willing to contend
with the mound of earth, but after a hard struggle the man was thrown.

Finally they brought a man who could climb higher than anyone else,
but the monkey went far above him, and he had to give up.

All these contests had brought much money to Dogedog, and now he had
to buy two horses to carry his sacks of silver. As soon as he reached
home, he bought the house of a very rich man and went to live in
it. And he was very happy, for he did not have to work any more. [92]


IGOROT


Introduction


Three or four days' journey to the south and east of the Tinguian live
the Igorot; but so difficult are the trails over the mountains and
through the swift rivers that there is little intercourse between
the two tribes, consequently each believes the other a people to
be feared. Salt, weapons, and jars are sometimes exchanged, but the
customs and beliefs are not similar. Each group leads its own life
and is governed by its own spirits.

From a distance an Igorot village looks like a group of haystacks
nestling among the hills; but viewed more closely, it is found
to consist of houses whose board sides are almost hidden by the
overhanging grass roofs. The upper part of the house is used as a
storehouse, while below, on a ground floor, the family cooks and
eats. In one end there is a tiny boxlike bedroom where the father,
mother, and small children sleep. After they are two or three years
old the girls spend the night in a dormitory, while the boys sleep
in the men's council house.

These people have splendid terraced fields on the mountain sides where
water is brought from the streams through troughs and ditches. Here
both men and women are busy early and late cultivating the rice,
sweet potatoes, and small vegetables on which they live. The men are
head-hunters and ardent warriors, each village demanding a head in
payment for any taken by a hostile village.

Watching over the Igorot, controlling the winds and the rains, and
providing good crops and health for the people, is the Great Spirit,
Lumawig, who lives in the sky. He is believed to have created the
Igorot and even to have lived among them on the earth. He no longer
visits them in person, they say, but each month they perform a ceremony
at which they pray to him to protect them and entreat him to favor
them with health and good crops.