The Story of Benito
        The Adventures of Juan
        Juan Gathers Guavas

    _Visayan_

        The Sun and the Moon
        The First Monkey
        The Virtue of the Cocoanut
        Mansumandig
        Why Dogs Wag Their Tails
        The Hawk and the Hen
        The Spider and the Fly
        The Battle of the Crabs

Pronunciation of Philippine Names


TINGUIAN


Introduction

The dim light of stars filtered through the leafy canopy above us,
and the shadowy form of our guide once more appeared at my horse's
head. It was only for an instant, however, and then we were plunged
again into the inky darkness of a tropical jungle.

We had planned to reach the distant Tinguian village in the late
afternoon, but had failed to reckon with the deliberateness of native
carriers. It was only by urging our horses that we were able to
ford the broad Abra ere the last rays of the sun dropped behind the
mountains. And then, in this land of no twilights, night had settled
quickly over us.

We had made our way up the mountain-side, through the thick jungle,
only to find that the trail, long imperceptible to us, had escaped
even the keen eyes of our guide. For several hours we wandered about,
lost in the darkness.

On and on we went, through narrow paths, steep in places, and made
rough and dangerous by sharp rocks as well as by those long creepers
of the jungle whose thorny fingers are ever ready to seize horse or
rider. Occasionally we came out of the forest, only to cross rocky
mountain streams; or perhaps it was the same stream that we crossed
many times. Our horses, becoming weary and uncertain of foot, grew more
and more reluctant to plunge into the dark, swiftly flowing water. And
our patience was nearly exhausted when we at last caught sight of
dim lights in the valley below. Half an hour later we rode into Manabo.

I shall never forget that first picture. It was a weird
spectacle. Coming out of the darkness, we were almost convinced that
we had entered a new world. Against the blackness of the night,
grass-roofed houses stood outlined in the dim light of a bonfire;
and squatting around that fire, unclad save for gay blankets wrapped
about their shoulders, were brown-skinned men smoking long pipes,
while women bedecked with bright beads were spinning cotton. As they
worked in the flickering light, they stretched their distaffs at
arm's length into the air like witches waving their wands; and with
that the elfland picture was complete.

In the stillness of the night a single voice could be heard reciting
some tale in a singsong tone, which was interrupted only when peals
of laughter burst forth from the listeners, or when a scrawny dog rose
to bark at an imaginary noise until the shouts of the men quieted him
and he returned to his bed in the warm ashes. Later we learned that
these were the regular social gatherings of the Tinguian, and every
night during the dry season one or more of these bonfires were to be
seen in the village.

After we had attained to the footing of welcome guests in these
circles, we found that a good story-teller was always present,
and, while the men smoked, the women spun, and the dogs slept,
he entertained us with tales of heroes who knew the magic of the
betel-nut, or with stories of spirits and their power over the lives
of men.

The following are some of the tales heard first around the camp fire
of the distant mountain village.


Aponibolinayen and the Sun

_Tinguian_

One day Aponibolinayen and her sister-in-law went out to gather
greens. They walked to the woods to the place where the siksiklat grew,
for the tender leaves of this vine are very good to eat. Suddenly while
searching about in the underbrush, Aponibolinayen cried out with joy,
for she had found the vine, and she started to pick the leaves. Pull
as hard as she would, however, the leaves did not come loose, and all
at once the vine wound itself around her body and began carrying her
upward. [1]

Far up through the air she went until she reached the sky, and there
the vine set her down under a tree. Aponibolinayen was so surprised
to find herself in the sky that for some time she just sat and looked
around, and then, hearing a rooster crow, she arose to see if she
could find it. Not far from where she had sat was a beautiful spring
surrounded by tall betel-nut trees whose tops were pure gold. Rare
beads were the sands of the spring, and the place where the women set
their jars when they came to dip water was a large golden plate. As
Aponibolinayen stood admiring the beauties of this spring, she beheld
a small house nearby, and she was filled with fear lest the owner
should find her there. She looked about for some means of escape and
finally climbed to the top of a betel-nut tree and hid.

Now the owner of this house was Ini-init, [2] the Sun, but he was
never at home in the daylight, for it was his duty to shine in the
sky and give light to all the world. At the close of the day when
the Big Star took his place in the sky to shine through the night,
Ini-init returned to his house, but early the next morning he was
always off again.

From her place in the top of the betel-nut tree, Aponibolinayen saw
the Sun when he came home at evening time, and again the next morning
she saw him leave. When she was sure that he was out of sight she
climbed down and entered his dwelling, for she was very hungry. She
cooked rice, and into a pot of boiling water she dropped a stick
which immediately became fish, [3] so that she had all she wished to
eat. When she was no longer hungry, she lay down on the bed to sleep.

Now late in the afternoon Ini-init returned from his work and went
to fish in the river near his house, and he caught a big fish. While
he sat on the bank cleaning his catch, he happened to look up toward
his house and was startled to see that it appeared to be on fire. [4]
He hurried home, but when he reached the house he saw that it was
not burning at all, and he entered. On his bed he beheld what looked
like a flame of fire, but upon going closer he found that it was a
beautiful woman fast asleep.

Ini-init stood for some time wondering what he should do, and then
he decided to cook some food and invite this lovely creature to eat
with him. He put rice over the fire to boil and cut into pieces the
fish he had caught. The noise of this awakened Aponibolinayen, and
she slipped out of the house and back to the top of the betel-nut
tree. The Sun did not see her leave, and when the food was prepared
he called her, but the bed was empty and he had to eat alone. That
night Ini-init could not sleep well, for all the time he wondered who
the beautiful woman could be. The next morning, however, he rose as
usual and set forth to shine in the sky, for that was his work.

That day Aponibolinayen stole again to the house of the Sun and cooked
food, and when she returned to the betel-nut tree she left rice and
fish ready for the Sun when he came home. Late in the afternoon
Ini-init went into his home, and when he found pots of hot rice
and fish over the fire he was greatly troubled. After he had eaten
he walked a long time in the fresh air. "Perhaps it is done by the
lovely woman who looks like a flame of fire," he said. "If she comes
again I will try to catch her."

The next day the Sun shone in the sky as before, and when the afternoon
grew late he called to the Big Star to hurry to take his place, for he
was impatient to reach home. As he drew near the house he saw that it
again looked as if it was on fire. He crept quietly up the ladder, and
when he had reached the top he sprang in and shut the door behind him.

Aponibolinayen, who was cooking rice over the fire, was surprised and
angry that she had been caught; but the Sun gave her betel-nut [5]
which was covered with gold, and they chewed together and told each
other their names. Then Aponibolinayen took up the rice and fish,
and as they ate they talked together and became acquainted.

After some time Aponibolinayen and the Sun were married, and every
morning the Sun went to shine in the sky, and upon his return at night
he found his supper ready for him. He began to be troubled, however,
to know where the food came from, for though he brought home a fine
fish every night, Aponibolinayen always refused to cook it.

One night he watched her prepare their meal, and he saw that, instead
of using the nice fish he had brought, she only dropped a stick into
the pot of boiling water.

"Why do you try to cook a stick?" asked Ini-init in surprise.

"So that we can have fish to eat," answered his wife.

"If you cook that stick for a month, it will not be soft," said
Ini-init. "Take this fish that I caught in the net, for it will
be good."

But Aponibolinayen only laughed at him, and when they were ready to
eat she took the cover off the pot and there was plenty of nice soft
fish. The next night and the next, Aponibolinayen cooked the stick,
and Ini-init became greatly troubled for he saw that though the stick
always supplied them with fish, it never grew smaller.

Finally he asked Aponibolinayen again why it was that she cooked the
stick instead of the fish he brought, and she said:

"Do you not know of the woman on earth who has magical power and can
change things?"

"Yes," answered the Sun, "and now I know that you have great power."

"Well, then," said his wife, "do not ask again why I cook the stick."

And they ate their supper of rice and the fish which the stick made.

One night not long after this Aponibolinayen told her husband that
she wanted to go with him the next day when he made light in the sky.

"Oh, no, you cannot," said the Sun, "for it is very hot up there,
[6] and you cannot stand the heat."

"We will take many blankets and pillows," said the woman, "and when
the heat becomes very great, I will hide under them."

Again and again Ini-init begged her not to go, but as often she
insisted on accompanying him, and early in the morning they set out,
carrying with them many blankets and pillows.

First, they went to the East, and as soon as they arrived the Sun began
to shine, and Aponibolinayen was with him. They traveled toward the
West, but when morning had passed into noontime and they had reached
the middle of the sky Aponibolinayen was so hot that she melted and
became oil. Then Ini-init put her into a bottle and wrapped her in
the blankets and pillows and dropped her down to earth.

Now one of the women of Aponibolinayen's town was at the spring dipping
water when she heard something fall near her. Turning to look, she
beheld a bundle of beautiful blankets and pillows which she began to
unroll, and inside she found the most beautiful woman she had ever
seen. Frightened at her discovery, the woman ran as fast as she could
to the town, where she called the people together and told them to
come at once to the spring. They all hastened to the spot and there
they found Aponibolinayen for whom they had been searching everywhere.

"Where have you been?" asked her father; "we have searched all over
the world and we could not find you.'

"I have come from Pindayan," answered Aponibolinayen. "Enemies of
our people kept me there till I made my escape while they were asleep
at night"

All were filled with joy that the lost one had returned, and they
decided that at the next moon [7] they would perform a ceremony for
the spirits [8] and invite all the relatives who were mourning for
Aponibolinayen.

So they began to prepare for the ceremony, and while they were
pounding rice, Aponibolinayen asked her mother to prick her little
finger where it itched, and as she did so a beautiful baby boy popped
out. The people were very much surprised at this, and they noticed
that every time he was bathed the baby grew very fast so that, in
a short time, he was able to walk. Then they were anxious to know
who was the husband of Aponibolinayen, but she would not tell them,
and they decided to invite everyone in the world to the ceremony that
they might not overlook him.

They sent for the betel-nuts that were covered with gold, [9] and
when they had oiled them they commanded them to go to all the towns
and compel the people to come to the ceremony.

"If anyone refuses to come, grow on his knee," said the people,
and the betel-nuts departed to do as they were bidden.

As the guests began to arrive, the people watched carefully for one
who might be the husband of Aponibolinayen, but none appeared and they
were greatly troubled. Finally they went to the old woman, Alokotan,
who was able to talk with the spirits, and begged her to find what town
had not been visited by the betel-nuts which had been sent to invite
the people. After she had consulted the spirits the old woman said:

"You have invited all the people except Ini-init who lives up
above. Now you must send a betel-nut to summon him. It may be that
he is the husband of Aponibolinayen, for the siksiklat vine carried
her up when she went to gather greens."

So a betel-nut was called and bidden to summon Ini-init.

The betel-nut went up to the Sun, who was in his house, and said:

"Good morning, Sun. I have come to summon you to a ceremony which the
father and mother of Aponibolinayen are making for the spirits. If
you do not want to go, I will grow on your head." [10]

"Grow on my head," said the Sun. "I do not wish to go."

So the betel-nut jumped upon his head and grew until it became so
tall that the Sun was not able to carry it, and he was in great pain.

"Oh, grow on my pig," begged the Sun. So the betel-nut jumped upon
the pig's head and grew, but it was so heavy that the pig could not
carry it and squealed all the time. At last the Sun saw that he would
have to obey the summons, and he said to the betel-nut:

"Get off my pig and I will go."

So Ini-init came to the ceremony, and as soon as Aponibolinayen and the
baby saw him, they were very happy and ran to meet him. Then the people
knew that this was the husband of Aponibolinayen, and they waited
eagerly for him to come up to them. As he drew near, however, they saw
that he did not walk, for he was round; and then they perceived that
he was not a man but a large stone. All her relatives were very angry
to find that Aponibolinayen had married a stone; and they compelled
her to take off her beads [11] and her good clothes, for, they said,
she must now dress in old clothes and go again to live with the stone.

So Aponibolinayen put on the rags that they brought her and at once
set out with the stone for his home. No sooner had they arrived there,
however, than he became a handsome man, and they were very happy.

"In one moon," said the Sun, "we will make a ceremony for the spirits,
and I will pay your father and mother the marriage price [12] for you."

This pleased Aponibolinayen very much, and they used magic so that
they had many neighbors who came to pound rice [13] for them and to
build a large spirit house. [14]

Then they sent oiled betel-nuts to summon their relatives to the
ceremony. The father of Aponibolinayen did not want to go, but
the betel-nut threatened to grow on his knee if he did not. So he
commanded all the people in the town to wash their hair and their
clothes, and when all was ready they set out.

When they reached the town they were greatly surprised to find that
the stone had become a man, and they chewed the magic betel-nuts to
see who he might be. It was discovered that he was the son of a couple
in Aponibolinayen's own town, and the people all rejoiced that this
couple had found the son whom they had thought lost. They named him
Aponitolau, and his parents paid the marriage price for his wife--the
spirit house nine times full of valuable jars. [15]

After that all danced and made merry for one moon, and when the people
departed for their homes Ini-init and his wife went with them to live
on the earth.


Aponibolinayen

_Tinguian_


The most beautiful girl in all the world was Aponibolinayen of
Nalpangan. Many young men had come to her brother, Aponibalagen,
to ask for her hand in marriage, but he had refused them all, for he
awaited one who possessed great power. Then it happened that the fame
of her beauty spread over all the world till it reached even to Adasen;
and in that place there lived a man of great power named Gawigawen.

Now Gawigawen, who was a handsome man, had sought among all the pretty
girls but never, until he heard of the great beauty of Aponibolinayen,
had he found one whom he wished to wed. Then he determined that she
should be his wife; and he begged his mother to help him win her. So
Dinawagen, the mother of Gawigawen, took her hat which looked like
a sunbeam and set out at once for Nalpangan; and when she arrived
there she was greeted by Ebang, the mother of the lovely maiden,
who presently began to prepare food for them. [16]

She put the pot over the fire, and when the water boiled she broke
up a stick and threw the pieces into the pot, and immediately they
became fish. Then she brought basi [17] in a large jar, and Dinawagen,
counting the notches in the rim, [18] perceived that the jar had been
handed down through nine generations. They ate and drank together,
and after they had finished the meal, Dinawagen told Aponibalagen of
her son's wishes, and asked if he was willing that his sister should
marry Gawigawen. Aponibalagen, who had heard of the power of the
suitor, at once gave his consent. And Dinawagen departed for home,
leaving a gold cup as an engagement present. [19]

Gawigawen was watching at the door of his house for his mother's
return, and when she told him of her success, he was so happy that
he asked all the people in the town to go with him the next day to
Nalpangan to arrange the amount he must pay for his bride. [20]

Now the people of Nalpangan wanted a great price for this girl
who was so beautiful, and the men of the two towns debated for a
long time before they could come to an agreement. Finally, however,
it was decided that Gawigawen should fill the spirit house eighteen
times with valuable things; and when he had done this, they were all
satisfied and went to the yard where they danced and beat on the copper
gongs. [21] All the pretty girls danced their best, and one who wore
big jars about her neck made more noise than the others as she danced,
and the jars sang "Kitol, kitol, kanitol; inka, inka, inkatol."

But when Aponibolinayen, the bride of Gawigawen, came down out of
the house to dance, the sunshine vanished, so beautiful was she;
and as she moved about, the river came up into the town, and striped
fish bit at her heels.

For three months the people remained here feasting and dancing, and
then early one morning they took Aponibolinayen to her new home in
Adasen. The trail that led from one town to the other had become very
beautiful in the meantime: the grass and trees glistened with bright
lights, and the waters of the tiny streams dazzled the eyes with their
brightness as Aponibolinayen waded across. When they reached the spring
of Gawigawen, they found that it, too, was more beautiful than ever
before. Each grain of sand had become a bead, and the place where the
women set their jars when they came to dip water had become a big dish.

Then said Aponibalagen to his people, "Go tell Gawigawen to bring an
old man, for I want to make a spring for Aponibolinayen."

So an old man was brought and Aponibalagen cut off his head and put
it in the ground, and sparkling water bubbled up. [22] The body he
made into a tree to shade his sister when she came to dip water,
and the drops of blood as they touched the ground were changed into
valuable beads. Even the path from the spring to the house was covered
with big plates, and everything was made beautiful for Aponibolinayen.

Now during all this time Aponibolinayen had kept her face covered so
that she had never seen her husband, for although he was a handsome
man, one of the pretty girls who was jealous of the bride had told
her that he had three noses, and she was afraid to look at him.

After her people had all returned to their homes, she grew very
unhappy, and when her mother-in-law commanded her to cook she had
to feel her way around, for she would not uncover her face. Finally
she became so sad that she determined to run away. One night when all
were asleep, she used magical power and changed herself into oil. [23]
Then she slid through the bamboo floor and made her escape without
anyone seeing her.

On and on she went until she came to the middle of the jungle, and
then she met a wild rooster who asked her where she was going.

"I am running away from my husband," replied Aponibolinayen, "for he
has three noses and I do not want to live with him."

"Oh," said the rooster, "some crazy person must have told you that. Do
not believe it. Gawigawen is a handsome man, for I have often seen
him when he comes here to snare chickens." [24]

But Aponibolinayen paid no heed to the rooster, and she went on
until she reached a big tree where perched a monkey, and he also
asked where she was going.

"I am running away from my husband," answered the girl, "for he has
three noses and I do not want to live with him."

"Oh, do not believe that," said the monkey. "Someone who told you
that must have wanted to marry him herself, for he is a handsome man."

Still Aponibolinayen went on until she came to the ocean, and then,
as she could go no farther, she sat down to rest. As she sat there
pondering what she should do, a carabao [25] came along, and thinking
that she would ride a while she climbed up on its back. No sooner had
she done so than the animal plunged into the water and swam with her
until they reached the other side of the great ocean.

There they came to a large orange tree, and the carabao told her to
eat some of the luscious fruit while he fed on the grass nearby. As
soon as he had left her, however, he ran straight to his master,
Kadayadawan, and told him of the beautiful girl.

Kadayadawan was very much interested and quickly combed his hair and
oiled it, put on his striped coat [26] and belt, and went with the
carabao to the orange tree. Aponibolinayen, looking down from her
place in the tree, was surprised to see a man coming with her friend,
the carabao, but as they drew near, she began talking with him, and
soon they became acquainted. Before long, Kadayadawan had persuaded
the girl to become his wife, and he took her to his home. From that
time every night his house looked as if it was on fire, because of
the beauty of his bride.

After they had been married for some time, Kadayadawan and
Aponibolinayen decided to make a ceremony [27] for the spirits, so
they called the magic betel-nuts [28] and oiled them and said to them,

"Go to all the towns and invite our relatives to come to the ceremony
which we shall make. If they do not want to come, then grow on their
knees until they are willing to attend."

So the betel-nuts started in different directions and one went to
Aponibalagen in Nalpangan and said,

"Kadayadawan is making a ceremony for the spirits, and I have come
to summon you to attend."

"We cannot go," said Aponibalagen, "for we are searching for my sister
who is lost"

"You must come," replied the betel-nut, "or I shall grow on your knee,"

"Grow on my pig," answered Aponibalagen; so the betel-nut went on to
the pig's back and grew into a tall tree, and it became so heavy that
the pig could not carry it, but squealed all the time.

Then Aponibalagen, seeing that he must obey, said to the betel-nut,

"Get off my pig, and we will go."

The betel-nut got off the pig's back, and the people started for the
ceremony. When they reached the river, Gawigawen was there waiting to
cross, for the magic nuts had forced him to go also. Then Kadayadawan,
seeing them, sent more betel-nuts to the river, and the people were
carried across by the nuts.

As soon as they reached the town the dancing began, and while Gawigawen
was dancing with Aponibolinayen he seized her and put her in his
belt. [29] Kadayadawan, who saw this, was so angry that he threw his
spear and killed Gawigawen. Then Aponibolinayen escaped and ran into
the house, and her husband brought his victim back to life, and asked
him why he had seized the wife of his host. Gawigawen explained that
she was his wife who had been lost, and the people were very much
surprised, for they had not recognized her at first.

Then all the people discussed what should be done to bring peace
between the two men, and it was finally decided that Kadayadawan must
pay both Aponibalagen and Gawigawen the price that was first demanded
for the beautiful girl.

After this was done all were happy; and the guardian spirit of
Kadayadawan gave them a golden house in which to live.


Gawigawen of Adasen

_Tinguian_


Aponibolinayen was sick with a headache, and she lay on a mat alone
in her house. Suddenly she remembered some fruit that she had heard
of but had never seen, and she said to herself, "Oh, I wish I had
some of the oranges of Gawigawen of Adasen."

Now Aponibolinayen did not realize that she had spoken aloud, but
Aponitolau, her husband, lying in the spirit house [30] outside,
heard her talking and asked what it was she said. Fearing to tell him
the truth lest he should risk his life in trying to get the oranges
for her, she said: "I wish I had some biw" (a fruit).

Aponitolau at once got up, and, taking a sack, went out to find some of
the fruit for his wife. When he returned with the sack full, she said:

"Put it on the bamboo hanger above the fire, and when my head is
better I will eat it."

So Aponitolau put the fruit on the hanger and returned to the spirit
house, but when Aponibolinayen tried to eat, the fruit made her sick
and she threw it away.

"What is the matter?" called Aponitolau as he heard her drop the fruit.

"I merely dropped one," she replied, and returned to her mat.

After a while Aponibolinayen again said:

"Oh, I wish I had some of the oranges of Gawigawen of Adasen," and
Aponitolau, who heard her from the spirit house, inquired:

"What is that you say?"

"I wish I had some fish eggs," answered his wife; for she did not
want him to know the truth.

Then Aponitolau took his net and went to the river, determined to
please his wife if possible. When he had caught a nice fish he opened
it with his knife and took out the eggs. Then he spat on the place
he had cut, and it was healed and the fish swam away. [31]

Pleased that he was able to gratify his wife's wishes, he hastened home
with the eggs; and while his wife was roasting them over the fire, he
returned to the spirit house. She tried to eat, but the eggs did not
taste good to her, and she threw them down under the house to the dogs.

"What is the matter?" called Aponitolau. "Why are the dogs barking?"

"I dropped some of the eggs," replied his wife, and she went back to
her mat.

By and by she again said:

"I wish I had some of the oranges of Gawigawen of Adasen."

But when her husband asked what she wished, she replied:

"I want a deer's liver to eat"

So Aponitolau took his dogs to the mountains, where they hunted until
they caught a deer, and when he had cut out its liver he spat on the
wound, and it was healed so that the deer ran away.

But Aponibolinayen could not eat the liver any more than she could the
fruit or the fish eggs; and when Aponitolau heard the dogs barking, he
knew that she had thrown it away. Then he grew suspicious and, changing
himself into a centipede, [32] hid in a crack in the floor. And when
his wife again wished for some of the oranges, he overheard her.

"Why did you not tell me the truth, Aponibolinayen?" he asked.

"Because," she replied, "no one Who has gone to Adasen has ever come
back, and I did not want you to risk your life."

Nevertheless Aponitolau determined to go for the oranges, and he
commanded his wife to bring him rice straw. After he had burned it he
put the ashes in the water with which he washed his hair. [33] Then
she brought cocoanut oil and rubbed his hair, and fetched a dark clout,
a fancy belt, and a head-band, and she baked cakes for him to take on
the journey. Aponitolau cut a vine [34] which he planted by the stove,
[35] and told his wife that if the leaves wilted she would know that
he was dead. Then he took his spear and head-ax [36] and started on
the long journey.

When Aponitolau arrived at the well of a giantess, all the betel-nut
trees bowed. Then the giantess shouted and all the world trembled. "How
strange," thought Aponitolau, "that all the world shakes when that
woman shouts." But he continued on his way without stopping.

As he passed the place of the old woman, Alokotan, she sent out her
little dog and it bit his leg.

"Do not proceed," said the old woman, "for ill luck awaits you. If
you go on, you will never return to your home."

But Aponitolau paid no attention to the old woman, and by and by he
came to the home of the lightning.

"Where are you going?" asked the lightning.

"I am going to get some oranges of Gawigawen of Adasen," replied
Aponitolau.

"Go stand on that high rock that I may see what your sign is,"
commanded the lightning.

So he stood on the high rock, but when the lightning flashed Aponitolau
dodged.

"Do not go," said the lightning, "for you have a bad sign, and you
will never come back."

Still Aponitolau did not heed.

Soon he arrived at the place of Silit (loud thunder), [37] who also
asked him:

"Where are you going, Aponitolau?"

"I am going to get oranges of Gawigawen of Adasen," he replied.

Then the thunder commanded:

"Stand on that high stone so that I can see if you have a good sign."

He stood on the high stone, and when the thunder made a loud noise
he jumped. Whereupon Silit also advised him not to go on.

In spite of all the warnings, Aponitolau continued his journey,
and upon coming to the ocean he used magical power, so that when he
stepped on his head-ax it sailed away, carrying him far across the
sea to the other side. Then after a short walk he came to a spring
where women were dipping water, and he asked what spring it was.

"This is the spring of Gawigawen of Adasen," replied the women. "And
who are you that you dare come here?"

Without replying he went on toward the town, but he found that he
could not go inside, for it was surrounded by a bank which reached
almost to the sky.

While he stood with bowed head pondering what he should do, the chief
of the spiders came up and asked why he was so sorrowful.

"I am sad," answered Aponitolau, "because I cannot climb up this bank."

Then the spider went to the top and spun a thread, [38] and upon this
Aponitolau climbed up into town.

Now Gawigawen was asleep in his spirit house, and when he awoke and
saw Aponitolau sitting near, he was surprised and ran toward his house
to get his spear and head-ax, but Aponitolau called to him, saying:

"Good morning, Cousin Gawigawen. Do not be angry; I only came to buy
some of your oranges for my wife."

Then Gawigawen took him to the house and brought a whole carabao [39]
for him to eat, and he said:

"If you cannot eat all the carabao, you cannot have the oranges for
your wife."

Aponitolau grew very sorrowful, for he knew that he could not eat all
the meat, but just at that moment the chief of the ants and flies
came to him and inquired what was the trouble. As soon as he was
told, the chief called all the ants and flies and they ate the whole
carabao. Aponitolau, greatly relieved, went then to Gawigawen and said:

"I have finished eating the food which you gave me."

Gawigawen was greatly surprised at this, and, leading the way to the
place where the oranges grew, he told Aponitolau to climb the tree
and get all he wanted.

As he was about to ascend the tree Aponitolau noticed that the branches
were sharp knives, so he went as carefully as he could. Nevertheless,
when he had secured two oranges, he stepped on one of the knives and
was cut. He quickly fastened the fruit to his spear, and immediately
it flew away straight to his town and into his house.

Aponibolinayen was just going down the bamboo ladder out of the house,
and hearing something drop on the floor she went back to look and found
the oranges from Adasen. She eagerly ate the fruit, rejoicing that
her husband had been able to reach the place where they grew. Then
she thought to look at the vine, whose leaves were wilted, and she
knew that her husband was dead.

Soon after this a son was born to Aponibolinayen, and she called his
name Kanag. He grew rapidly, becoming a strong lad, and he was the
bravest of all his companions. One day while Kanag was playing out
in the yard, he spun his top and it struck the garbage pot of an old
woman, who became very angry and cried:

"If you were a brave boy, you would get your father whom Gawigawen
killed."

Kanag ran to the house crying, and asked his mother what the old woman
meant, for he had never heard the story of his father's death. As
soon as he learned what had happened, the boy determined to search for
his father, and, try as she would, his mother could not dissuade him.

As he was departing through the gate of the town with his spear
and head-ax, Kanag struck his shield and it sounded like a thousand
warriors.

"How brave that boy is!" said the surprised people. "He is braver
even than his father."

When he reached the spring of the giantess, he again struck his shield
and shouted so that the whole world trembled. Then the giantess said:

"I believe that someone is going to fight, and he will have success."

As soon as Kanag reached the place where the old woman, Alokotan,
lived, she sent her dog after him, but with one blow of his head-ax
he cut off the dog's head. Then Alokotan asked where he was going,
and when he had told her, she said:

"Your father is dead, but I believe that you will find him, for you
have a good sign."

He hurried on and arrived at the place where lightning was, and
it asked:

"Where are you going, little boy?"

"I am going to Adasen to get my father," answered Kanag.

"Go stand on that high rock that I may see what your sign is," said
the lightning.

So he stood on the high rock, and when the bright flash came he did
not move, and the lightning bade him hasten on, as he had a good sign.

The thunder, which saw him passing, also called to ask where he was
going, and it commanded him to stand on the high rock. And when the
thunder made a loud noise Kanag did not move, and it bade him go on,
as his sign was good.

The women of Adasen were at the spring of Gawigawen dipping water, when
suddenly they were startled by a great noise. They rose up, expecting
to see a thousand warriors coming near; but though they looked all
around they could see nothing but a young boy striking a shield.

"Good morning, women who are dipping water," said Kanag. "Tell
Gawigawen that he must prepare, for I am coming to fight him."

So all the women ran up to the town and told Gawigawen that a strange
boy was at the spring and he had come to fight.

"Go and tell him," said Gawigawen, "that if it is true that he is
brave, he will come into the town, if he can."

When Kanag reached the high bank outside the town, he jumped like
a flitting bird up the bank into the town and went straight to the
spirit house of Gawigawen. He noticed that the roofs of both the
dwelling and the spirit houses were of hair, and that around the town
were many heads, [40] and he pondered:

"This is why my father did not return. Gawigawen is a brave man,
but I will kill him."

As soon as Gawigawen saw him in the yard he said:

"How brave you are, little boy; why did you come here?"

"I came to get my father," answered Kanag; "for you kept him when
he came to get oranges for my mother. If you do not give him to me,
I will kill you."

Gawigawen laughed at this brave speech and said:

"Why, one of my fingers will fight you. You shall never go back to
your town, but you shall stay here and be like your father."

"We shall see," said Kanag. "Bring your arms and let us fight here
in the yard."

Gawigawen was beside himself with rage at this bold speech, and
he brought his spear and his head-ax which was as big as half the
sky. Kanag would not throw first, for he wanted to prove himself
brave, so Gawigawen took aim and threw his head-ax at the boy. Now
Kanag used magical power, so that he became an ant and was not hit
by the weapon. Gawigawen laughed loudly when he looked around and
could not see the boy, for he thought that he had been killed. Soon,
however, Kanag reappeared, standing on the head-ax, and Gawigawen,
more furious than ever, threw his spear. Again Kanag disappeared,
and Gawigawen was filled with surprise.

Then it was Kanag's turn and his spear went directly through the body
of the giant. He ran quickly and cut off five of the heads, [41] but
the sixth he spared until Gawigawen should have shown him his father.

As they went about the town together, Kanag found that the skin of his
father had been used for a drum-head. His hair decorated the house,
and his head was at the gate of the town, while his body was put
beneath the house. After he had gathered all the parts of the body
together, Kanag used magical power, and his father came to life.

"Who are you?" asked Aponitolau; "how long have I slept?"

"I am your son," said Kanag. "You were not asleep but dead, and here
is Gawigawen who kept you. Take my head-ax and cut off his remaining
head."

So Aponitolau took the head-ax, but when he struck Gawigawen it did
not injure him.

"What is the matter, Father?" asked Kanag; and taking the weapon he
cut off the sixth head of Gawigawen.

Then Kanag and his father used magic so that the spears and head-axes
flew about, killing all the people in the town, and the heads and
valuable things went to their home.

When Aponibolinayen saw all these come into her house, she ran to
look at the vine by the stove, and it was green and looked like a
jungle. Then she knew that her son was alive, and she was happy. And
when the father and son returned, all the relatives came to their house
for a great feast, and all were so happy that the whole world smiled.