the ancient story. [149]


The Poor Fisherman and His Wife

_Ilocano_


Many, many years ago a poor fisherman and his wife lived with their
three sons in a village by the sea. One day the old man set his snare
in the water not far from his house, and at night when he went to look
at it, he found that he had caught a great white fish. This startled
the old man very much, for he had never seen a fish like this before,
and it occurred to him that it was the priest of the town.

He ran to his wife as fast as he could and cried:

"My wife, I have caught the priest."

"What?" said the old woman, terrified at the sight of her frightened
husband.

"I have caught the priest," said the old man again.

They hurried together to the river where the snare was set, and when
the old woman saw the fish, she cried:

"Oh, it is not the priest but the governor."

"No, it is the priest," insisted the old man, and they went home
trembling with fear.

That night neither of them was able to sleep for thought of the
terrible thing that had happened and wondering what they should do. Now
the next day was a great holiday in the town. At four o'clock in the
morning cannons were fired and bells rang loudly. The old man and
woman, hearing all the noise and  not knowing the reason for it,
thought that their crime had been discovered, and the people were
searching for them to punish them, so they set out as fast as they
could to hide in the woods. On and on they went, stopping only to
rest so as to enable them to resume their flight.

The next morning they reached the woods near Pilar, where there also
was a great holiday, and the sexton was ringing the bells to call
the people to mass. As soon as the old man and woman heard the bells
they thought the people there had been notified of their escape,
and that they, too, were trying to catch them. So they turned and
started home again.

As they reached their house, the three sons came home with their one
horse and tied it to the trunk of the caramay tree. Presently the
bells began to ring again, for it was twelve o'clock at noon. Not
thinking what time of day it was, the old man and woman ran out
of doors in terror, and seeing the horse jumped on its back with
the intention of riding to the next town before anyone could catch
them. When they had mounted they began to whip the horse. In their
haste, they had forgotten to untie the rope which was around the
trunk of the caramay tree. As the horse pulled at the rope fruit fell
from the tree upon the old man and woman. Believing they were shot,
they were so frightened that they died. [150]


The Presidente who had Horns

_Ilocano_


Once there was a presidente [151] who was very unjust  to his people,
and one day he became so angry that he wished he had horns so that
he might frighten them. No sooner had he made this rash wish, than
horns began to grow on his head.

He sent for a barber who came to his house to cut his hair, and as
he worked the presidente asked:

"What do you see on my head?"

"I see nothing," answered the barber; for although he could see the
horns plainly, he was afraid to say so.

Soon, however, the presidente put up his hands and felt the horns, and
then when he inquired again the barber told him that he had two horns.

"If you tell anyone what you have seen, you shall be hanged," said the
presidente as the barber started away, and he was greatly frightened.

When he reached home, the barber did not intend to tell anyone, for
he was afraid; but as he thought of his secret more and more, the
desire to tell someone became so strong that he knew he could not keep
it. Finally he went to the field and dug a hole under some bamboo,
and when the hole was large enough he crawled in and whispered that
the presidente had horns. He then climbed out, filled up the hole,
and went home.

By and by some people came along the road on their way to market,
and as they passed the bamboo they stopped in amazement, for surely
a voice came from the trees, and it said that the presidente had
horns. These people hastened to market and told what they had heard,
and the people there went to the bamboo to listen to the strange
voice. They informed others, and soon the news had spread all over the
town. The councilmen were told, and they, too, went to the bamboo. When
they had heard the voice, they ran to the house of the presidente. But
his wife said that he was ill and they could not see him.

By this time the horns had grown until they were one foot in length,
and the presidente was so ashamed that he bade his wife tell the
people that he could not talk. She told this to the councilmen when
they came on the following day, but they replied that they must see
him, for they had heard that he had horns, and if this were true he
had no right to govern the people.

She refused to let them in, so they broke down the door. They saw the
horns on the head of the presidente and killed him. For, they said,
he was no better than an animal. [152]