V.


LEGEND OF THE BIRTH OF HORUS, SON OF ISIS AND OSIRIS.


PLATE XIV.
The Procreation of Horus, son of Isis.


The text which contains this legend is found cut in hieroglyphics upon
a stele which is now preserved in Paris.  Attention was first called to
it by Chabas, who in 1857 gave a translation of it in the Revue
Archeologique, p. 65 ff., and pointed out the importance of its
contents with his characteristic ability.  The hieroglyphic text was
first published by Ledrain in his work on the monuments of the
Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris,[FN#24] and I gave a transcript of the
text, with transliteration and translation, in 1895.[FN#25]


[FN#24]  Les Monuments Egyptiens (Cabinet des Medailles et Antiques),
In the Bibliotheque de l'Ecole des Hautes Etudes, Paris, 1879-1882,
plate xxii. ff.


[FN#25]  First Steps in Egyptian, pp. 179-188.


The greater part of the text consists of a hymn to Osiris, which was
probably composed under the XVIIIth Dynasty, when an extraordinary
development of the cult of that god took place, and when he was placed
by Egyptian theologians at the head of all the gods.  Though unseen in
the temples, his presence filled all Egypt, and his body formed the
very substance of the country.  He was the God of all gods and the
Governor of the Two Companies of the gods, he formed the soul and body
of Ra, he was the beneficent Spirit of all spirits, he was himself the
celestial food on which the Doubles in the Other World lived. He was
the greatest of the gods in On (Heliopolis), Memphis, Herakleopolis,
Hermopolis, Abydos, and the region of the First Cataract, and so.  He
embodied in his own person the might of Ra-Tem, Apis and Ptah, the
Horus-gods, Thoth and Khnemu, and his rule over Busiris and Abydos
continued to be supreme, as it had been for many, many hundreds of
years.  He was the source of the Nile, the north wind sprang from him,
his seats were the stars of heaven which never set, and the
imperishable stars were his ministers.  All heaven was his dominion,
and the doors of the sky opened before him of their own accord when he
appeared.  He inherited the earth from his father Keb, and the
sovereignty of heaven from his mother Nut.  In his person he united
endless time in the past and endless time in the future.  Like Ra he
had fought Seba, or Set, the monster of evil, and had defeated him, and
his victory assured to him lasting authority over the gods and the
dead.  He exercised his creative power in making land and water, trees
and herbs, cattle and other four-footed beasts, birds of all kinds, and
fish and creeping things; even the waste spaces of the desert owed
allegiance to him as the creator.  And he rolled out the sky, and set
the light above the darkness.

The last paragraph of the text contains an allusion to Isis, the sister
and wife of Osiris, and mentions the legend of the birth of Horus,
which even under the XVIIIth Dynasty was very ancient, Isis, we are
told, was the constant protectress of her brother, she drove away the
fiends that wanted to attack him, and kept them out of his shrine and
tomb, and she guarded him from all accidents.  All these things she did
by means of spells and incantations, large numbers of which were known
to her, and by her power as the "witch-goddess."  Her "mouth was
trained to perfection, and she made no mistake in pronouncing her
spells, and her tongue was skilled and halted not."  At length came the
unlucky day when Set succeeded in killing Osiris during the war which
the "good god" was waging against him and his fiends.  Details of the
engagement are wanting, but the Pyramid Texts state that the body of
Osiris was hurled to the ground by Set at a place called Netat, which
seems to have been near Abydos.[FN#26]  The news of the death of Osiris
was brought to Isis, and she at once set out to find his body.  All
legends agree in saying that she took the form of a bird, and that she
flew about unceasingly, going hither and thither, and uttering wailing
cries of grief.  At length she found the body, and with a piercing cry
she alighted on the ground.  The Pyramid Texts say that Nephthys was
with her that "Isis came, Nephthys came, the one on the right side, the
other on the left side, one in the form of a Hat bird, the other in the
form of a Tchert bird, and they found Osiris thrown on the ground in
Netat by his brother Set."  The late form of the legend goes on to say
that Isis fanned the body with her feathers, and produced air, and that
at length she caused the inert members of Osiris to move, and drew from
him his essence, wherefrom she produced her child Horus.


[FN#26]  Pepi I., line 475; Pepi II., line 1263.


This bare statement of the dogma of the conception of Horus does not
represent all that is known about it, and it may well be supplemented
by a passage from the Pyramid Texts,[FN#27] which reads, "Adoration to
thee, O Osiris.[FN#28]  Rise thou up on thy left side, place thyself on
thy right side.  This water which I give unto thee is the water of
youth (or rejuvenation).  Adoration to thee, O Osiris!  Rise thou up on
thy left side, place thyself on thy right side.  This bread which I
have made for thee is warmth.  Adoration to thee, O Osiris!  The doors
of heaven are opened to thee, the doors of the streams are thrown wide
open to thee.  The gods in the city of Pe come [to thee], Osiris, at
the sound (or voice) of the supplication of Isis and Nephthys. . . . .
Thy elder sister took thy body in her arms, she chafed thy hands,
she clasped thee to her breast [when] she found thee [lying] on thy
side on the plain of Netat."  And in another place we read:[FN#29] "Thy
two sisters, Isis and Nephthys, came to thee, Kam-urt, in thy name of
Kam-ur, Uatchet-urt, in thy name of Uatch-ur . . . . . . . Isis and
Nephthys weave magical protection for thee in the city of Saut, for
thee their lord, in thy name of 'Lord of Saut,' for their god, in thy
name of 'God.'  They praise thee; go not thou far from them in thy name
of 'Tua.'  They present offerings to thee; be not wroth in thy name of
'Tchentru.'  Thy sister Isis cometh to thee rejoicing in her love for
thee.[FN#30]  Thou hast union with her, thy seed entereth her.  She
conceiveth in the form of the star Septet (Sothis).  Horus-Sept issueth
from thee in the form of Horus, dweller in the star Septet.  Thou
makest a spirit to be in him in his name 'Spirit dwelling in the god
Tchentru.'  He avengeth thee in his name of 'Horus, the son who avenged
his father.'  Hail, Osiris, Keb hath brought to thee Horus, he hath
avenged thee, he hath brought to thee the hearts of the gods, Horus
hath given thee his Eye, thou hast taken possession of the Urert Crown
thereby at the head of the gods.  Horus hath presented to thee thy
members, he hath collected them completely, there is no disorder in
thee.  Thoth hath seized thy enemy and hath slain him and those who
were with him."  The above words are addressed to dead kings in the
Pyramid Texts, and what the gods were supposed to do for them was
believed by the Egyptians to have been actually done for Osiris.  These
extracts are peculiarly valuable, for they prove that the legend of
Osiris which was current under the XVIIIth Dynasty was based upon
traditions which were universally accepted in Egypt under the Vth and
VIth Dynasties.


[FN#27]  Mer-en-Ra, line 336; Pepi II., line 862.

[FN#28]  I omit the king's names.

[FN#29]  Teta, line 274; Pepi I., line 27; Mer-en-Ra, line 37; and Pepi
II., line 67.

[FN#30]  Pyramid Text, Teta, l. 276.


PLATE XV.


PLATE XVI.
The Stele recording the casting out of a devil from the Princess of
Bekhten.


The hymn concludes with a reference to the accession of Horus, son of
Isis, the flesh and bone of Osiris, to the throne of his grandfather
Keb, and to the welcome which he received from the Tchatcha, or
Administrators of heaven, and the Company of the Gods, and the Lords of
Truth, who assembled in the Great House of Heliopolis to acknowledge
his sovereignty.  His succession also received the approval of Neb-er-
tcher, who, as we saw from the first legend in this book, was the
Creator of the Universe.