CHAPTER II.


II.  This Chapter shall be said over [a figure of] the cow.--The
supporters [called] Heh-enti shall be by her shoulder.  The supporters
[called] Heh-enti shall be at her side, and one cubit and four spans of
hers shall be in colours, and nine stars shall be on her belly, and Set
shall be by her two thighs and shall keep watch before her two legs,
and before her two legs shall be Shu, under her belly, and he shall be
made (i.e., painted) in green qenat colour. His two arms shall be under
the stars, and his name shall be made (i.e., written) in the middle of
them, namely, Shu himself. "A boat with a rudder and a double shrine
shall be therein, and Aten (i.e., the Disk) shall be above it, and Ra
shall be in it, in front of Shu, near his hand, or, as another reading
hath, behind him, near his hand.  And the udders of the Cow shall be
made to be between her legs, towards the left side.  And on the two
flanks, towards the middle of the legs, shall be done in writing [the
words], "The exterior heaven," and "I am what is in me," and "I will
not permit them to make her to turn."  That which is [written] under
the boat which is in front shall read, "Thou shalt not be motionless,
my son;" and the words which are written in an opposite direction shall
read, "Thy support is like life," and "The word is as the word there,"
and "Thy son is with me," and "Life, strength, and health be to thy
nostrils!"  And that which is behind Shu, near his shoulder, shall
read, "They keep ward," and that which is behind him, written close to
his feet in an opposite direction, shall read, "Maat," and "They come
in," and "I protect daily."  And that which is under the shoulder of
the divine figure which is under the left leg, and is behind it shall
read, "He who sealeth all things."  That which is over his head, under
the thighs of the Cow, and that which is by her legs shall read,
"Guardian of his exit."  That which is behind the two figures which are
by her two legs, that is to say, over their heads, shall read, "The
Aged One who is adored as he goeth forth," and The Aged One to whom
praise is given when he goeth in."  That which is over the head of the
two figures, and is between the two thighs of the Cow, shall read,
"Listener," "Hearer," "Sceptre of the Upper Heaven," and "Star" (?).