CHAPTER XXVII. The Wooing of Brynhild.

Now they array them joyously for their journey, and ride over hill and
dale to the house of King Budli, and woo his daughter of him; in a good
wise he took their speech, if so be that she herself would not deny
them; but he said withal that so high-minded was she, that that man
only might wed her whom she would.

Then they ride to Hlymdale, and there Heimir gave them good welcome; so
Gunnar tells his errand; Heimir says, that she must needs wed but him
whom she herself chose freely; and tells them how her abode was but a
little way thence, and that he deemed that him only would she have who
should ride through the flaming fire that was drawn round about her
hall; so they depart and come to the hall and the fire, and see there a
castle with a golden roof-ridge, and all round about a fire roaring up.

Now Gunnar rode on Goti, but Hogni on Holkvi, and Gunnar smote his horse
to face the fire, but he shrank aback.

Then said Sigurd, "Why givest thou back, Gunnar?"

He answered, "The horse will not tread this fire; but lend me thy horse
Grani."

"Yea, with all my good will," says Sigurd.

Then Gunnar rides him at the fire, and yet nowise will Gram stir, nor
may Gunnar any the more ride through that fire. So now they change
semblance, Gunnar and Sigurd, even as Grimhild had taught them; then
Sigurd in the likeness of Gunnar mounts and rides, Gram in his hand, and
golden spurs on his heels; then leapt Grani into the fire when he felt
the spurs; and a mighty roar arose as the fire burned ever madder, and
the earth trembled, and the flames went up even unto the heavens, nor
had any dared to ride as he rode, even as it were through the deep mirk.

But now the fire sank withal, and he leapt from his horse and went into
the hall, even as the song says--

     "The flame flared at its maddest,
     Earth's fields fell a-quaking
     As the red flame aloft
     Licked the lowest of heaven.
     Few had been fain,
     Of the rulers of folk,
     To ride through that flame,
     Or athwart it to tread.

     "Then Sigurd smote
     Grani with sword,
     And the flame was slaked
     Before the king;
     Low lay the flames
     Before the fain of fame;
     Bright gleamed the array
     That Regin erst owned.

Now when Sigurd had passed through the fire, he came into a certain fair
dwelling, and therein sat Brynhild.

She asked, "What man is it?"

Then he named himself Gunnar, son of Giuki, and said--"Thou art awarded
to me as my wife, by the good will and word of thy father and thy
foster-father, and I have ridden through the flames of thy fire,
according to thy word that thou hast set forth."

"I wot not clearly," said she, "how I shall answer thee."

Now Sigurd stood upright on the hall floor, and leaned on the hilt of
his sword, and he spake to Brynhild--

"In reward thereof, shall I pay thee a great dower in gold and goodly
things?"

She answered in heavy mood from her seat, whereas she sat like unto swan
on billow, having a sword in her hand, and a helm on her head, and being
clad in a byrny, "O Gunnar," she says, "speak not to me of such things,
unless thou be the first and best of all men; for then shalt thou slay
those my wooers, if thou hast heart thereto; I have been in battles with
the king of the Greeks, and our weapons were stained with red blood, and for
such things still I yearn."

He answered, "Yea, certes many great deeds hast thou done; but yet call
thou to mind thine oath, concerning the riding through of this fire,
wherein thou didst swear that thou wouldst go with the man who should do
this deed."

So she found that he spoke but the sooth, and she paid heed to his
words, and arose, and greeted him meetly, and he abode there three
nights, and they lay in one bed together; but he took the sword Gram and
laid it betwixt them: then she asked him why he laid it there; and he
answered, that in that wise must he needs wed his wife or else get his
bane.

Then she took from off her the ring Andvari's-loom, which he had given
her aforetime, and gave it to him, but he gave her another ring out of
Fafnir's hoard.

Thereafter he rode away through the same fire unto his fellows, and he
and Gunnar changed semblances again, and rode unto Hlymdale, and told
how it had gone with them.

That same day went Brynhild home to her foster-father, and tells him
as one whom she trusted, how that there had come a king to her; "And he
rode through my flaming fire, and said he was come to woo me, and named
himself Gunnar; but I said that such a deed might Sigurd alone have
done, with whom I plighted troth on the mountain; and he is my first
troth-plight, and my well-beloved."

Heimir said that things must needs abide even as now they had now come
to pass.

Brynhild said, "Aslaug the daughter of me and Sigurd shall be nourished
here with thee."

Now the kings fare home, but Brynhild goes to her father; Grimhild
welcomes the kings meetly, and thanks Sigurd for his fellowship; and
withal is a great feast made, and many were the guests thereat; and
thither came Budli the King with his daughter Brynhild, and his son
Atli, and for many days did the feast endure: and at that feast was
Gunnar wedded to Brynhild: but when it was brought to an end, once more
has Sigurd memory of all the oaths that he sware unto Brynhild, yet
withal he let all things abide in rest and peace.

Brynhild and Gunnar sat together in great game and glee, and drank
goodly wine.