CHAPTER XXXIX. The End of Atli and his Kin and Folk.

Now thought Atli the King that he had gained a mighty victory, and spake
to Gudrun even as mocking her greatly, or as making himself great before
her. "Gudrun," saith he, "thus hast thou lost thy brethren, and thy very
self hast brought it about."

She answers, "In good liking livest thou, whereas thou thrustest these
slayings before me, but mayhappen thou wilt rue it, when thou hast tried
what is to come hereafter; and of all I have, the longest-lived matter
shall be the memory of thy cruel heart, nor shall it go well with thee
whiles I live."

He answered and said, "Let there be peace betwixt us; I will atone for
thy brethren with gold and dear-bought things, even as thy heart may
wish."

She answers, "Hard for a long while have I been in our dealings
together, and now I say, that while Hogni was yet alive thou mightest
have brought it to pass; but now mayest thou never atone for my brethren
in my heart; yet oft must we women be overborne by the might of you men;
and now are all my kindred dead and gone, and thou alone art left to
rule over me: wherefore now this is my counsel that we make a great
feast, wherein I will hold the funeral of my brother and of thy kindred
withal."

In such wise did she make herself soft and kind in words, though far
other things forsooth lay thereunder, but he hearkened to her gladly,
and trusted in her words, whereas she made herself sweet of speech.

So Gudrun held the funeral feast for her brethren, and King Atli for his
men, and exceeding proud and great was this feast.

But Gudrun forgat not her woe, but brooded over it, how she might work
some mighty shame against the king; and at nightfall she took to her the
sons of King Atli and her as they played about the floor; the younglings
waxed heavy of cheer, and asked what she would with them.

"Ask me not," she said; "ye shall die, the twain of you!"

Then they answered, "Thou mayest do with thy children even as thou wilt,
nor shall any hinder thee, but shame there is to thee in the doing of
this deed."

Yet for all that she cut the throats of them.

Then the king asked where his sons were, and Gudrun answered, "I will
tell thee, and gladden thine heart by the telling; lo now, thou didst
make a great woe spring up for me in the slaying of my brethren; now
hearken and hear my rede and my deed; thou hast lost thy sons, and
their heads are become beakers on the board here, and thou thyself hast
drunken the blood of them blended with wine; and their hearts I took and
roasted them on a spit, and thou hast eaten thereof."

King Atli answered, "Grim art thou in that thou hast murdered thy sons,
and given me their flesh to eat, and little space passes betwixt ill
deed of thine and ill deed."

Gudrun said, "My heart is set on the doing to thee of as great shame as
may be; never shall the measure of ill be full to such a king as thou
art."

The king said, "Worser deeds hast thou done than men have to tell of,
and great unwisdom is there in such fearful redes; most meet art thou
to be burned on bale when thou hast first been smitten to death with
stones, for in such wise wouldst thou have what thou hast gone a weary
way to seek."

She answered, "Thine own death thou foretellest, but another death is
fated for me."

And many other words they spake in their wrath.

Now Hogni had a son left alive, hight Niblung, and great wrath of heart
he bare against King Atli; and he did Gudrun to wit that he would
avenge his father. And she took his words well, and they fell to counsel
together thereover, and she said it would be great goodhap if it might
be brought about.

So on a night, when the king had drunken, he gat him to bed, and when he
was laid asleep, thither to him came Gudrun and the son of Hogni.

Gudrun took a sword and thrust it through the breast of King Atli, and
they both of them set their hands to the deed, both she and the son of
Hogni.

Then Atli the king awoke with the wound, and cried out; "no need of
binding or salving here!--who art thou who hast done the deed?"

Gudrun says, "Somewhat have I, Gudrun, wrought therein, and somewhat
withal the son of Hogni."

Atli said, "Ill it beseemed to thee to do this, though somewhat of wrong
was between us; for thou wert wedded to me by the rede of thy kin, and
dower paid I for thee; yea, thirty goodly knights, and seemly maidens,
and many men besides; and yet wert thou not content, but if thou should
rule over the lands King Budli owned: and thy mother-in-law full oft
thou lettest sit a-weeping."

Gudrun said, "Many false words hast thou spoken, and of naught I account
them; oft, indeed, was I fell of mood, but much didst thou add thereto.
Full oft in this thy house did frays befall, and kin fought kin, and
friend fought friend, and made themselves big one against the other;
better days had I whenas I abode with Sigurd, when we slew kings, and
took their wealth to us, but gave peace to whomso would, and the great
men laid themselves under our hands, and might we gave to him of them
who would have it; then I lost him, and a little thing was it that I
should bear a widow's name, but the greatest of griefs that I should
come to thee--I who had aforetime the noblest of all kings, while for
thee, thou never barest out of the battle aught but the worser lot."

King Atli answered, "Naught true are thy words, nor will this our speech
better the lot of either of us, for all is fallen now to naught; but now
do to me in seemly wise, and array my dead corpse in noble fashion."

"Yea, that will I," she says, "and let make for thee a goodly grave, and
build for thee a worthy abiding place of stone, and wrap thee in fair
linen, and care for all that needful is."

So therewithal he died, and she did according to her word: and then they
cast fire into the hall.

And when the folk and men of estate awoke amid that dread and trouble,
naught would they abide the fire, but smote each the other down, and
died in such wise; so there Atli the king, and all his folk, ended their
life-days. But Gudrun had no will to live longer after this deed so
wrought, but nevertheless her ending day was not yet come upon her.

Now the Volsungs and the Giukings, as folk tell in tale, have been the
greatest-hearted and the mightiest of all men, as ye may well behold
written in the songs of old time.

But now with the tidings just told were these troubles stayed.