CHAPTER XXXIII. Gudrun wedded to Atli.

Now so it is, that whoso heareth these tidings sayeth, that no such an
one as was Sigurd was left behind him in the world, nor ever was such a
man brought forth because of all the worth of him, nor may his name ever
minish by eld in the Dutch Tongue nor in all the Northern Lands, while
the world standeth fast.

The story tells that, on a day, as Gudrun sat in her bower, she fell to
saying, "Better was life in those days when I had Sigurd; he who was far
above other men as gold is above iron, or the leek over other grass
of the field, or the hart over other wild things; until my brethren
begrudged me such a man, the first and best of all men; and so they
might not sleep or they had slain him. Huge clamour made Grani when he
saw his master and lord sore wounded, and then I spoke to him even as
with a man, but he fell drooping down to the earth, for he knew that
Sigurd was slain."

Thereafter Gudrun gat her gone into the wild woods, and heard on all
ways round about her the howling of wolves, and deemed death a merrier
thing than life. Then she went till she came to the hall of King Alf,
and sat there in Denmark with Thora, the daughter of Hakon, for seven
seasons, and abode with good welcome. And she set forth her needlework
before her, and did thereinto many deeds and great, and fair plays after
the fashion of those days, swords and byrnies, and all the gear of
kings, and the ship of King Sigmund sailing along the land; yea, and
they wrought there, how they fought, Sigar and Siggeir, south in Fion.
Such was their disport; and now Gudrun was somewhat solaced of her
grief.

So Grimhild comes to hear where Gudrun has take up her abode, and
she calls her sons to talk with her, and asks whether they will make
atonement to Gudrun for her son and her husband, and said that it was
but meet and right to do so.

Then Gunnar spake, and said that he would atone for her sorrows with
gold.

So they send for their friends, and array their horses, their helms,
and their shields, and their byrnies, and all their war-gear; and their
journey was furnished forth in the noblest wise, and no champion who
was of the great men might abide at home; and their horses were clad in
mail-coats, and every knight of them had his helm done over with gold or
with silver.

Grimhild was of their company, for she said that their errand would
never be brought fairly to pass if she sat at home.

There were well five hundred men, and noble men rode with them. There
was Waldemar of Denmark, and Eymod and Jarisleif withal. So they went
into the hall of King Alf, and there abode them the Longbeards and
Franks, and Saxons: they fared with all their war-gear, and had over
them red fur-coats. Even as the song says--

     "Byrnies short cut,
     Strong helms hammered,
     Girt with good swords,
     Red hair gleaming."

They were fain to choose good gifts for their sister, and spake softly
to her, but in none of them would she trow. Then Gunnar brought unto her
a drink mingled with hurtful things, and this she must needs drink, and
with the drinking thereof she had no more memory of their guilt against
her.

But in that drink was blended the might of the earth and the sea with
the blood of her son; and in that horn were all letters cut and reddened
with blood, as is said hereunder--

     "On the horn's face were there
     All the kin of letters
     Cut aright and reddened,
     How should I rede them rightly?
     The ling-fish long
     Of the land of Hadding,
     Wheat-ears unshorn,
     And wild things' inwards.

     In that beer were mingled
     Many ills together,
     Blood of all the wood
     And brown-burnt acorns,
     The black dew of the hearth,
     The God-doomed dead beast's inwards,
     And the swine's liver sodden
     Because all wrongs that deadens.

And so now, when their hearts are brought anigh to each other, great
cheer they made: then came Grimhild to Gudrun, and spake:

"All hail to thee, daughter! I give thee gold and all kinds of good
things to take to thee after thy father, dear-bought rings and bed-gear
of the maids of the Huns, the most courteous and well dight of all
women; and thus is thy husband atoned for: and thereafter shalt thou be
given to Atli, the mighty king, and be mistress of all his might. Cast
not all thy friends aside for one man's sake, but do according to our
bidding."

Gudrun answers, "Never will I wed Atli the King: unseemly it is for us
to get offspring betwixt us."

Grimhild says, "Nourish not thy wrath; it shall be to thee as if Sigurd
and Sigmund were alive when thou hast borne sons."

Gudrun says, "I cannot take my heart from thoughts of him, for he was
the first of all men."

Grimhild says, "So it is shapen that thou must have this king and none
else."

Says Gudrun, "Give not this man to me, for an evil thing shall come
upon thy kin from him, and to his own sons shall he deal evil, and be
rewarded with a grim revenge thereafter."

Then waxed Grimhild fell at those words, and spake, "Do even as we
bid thee, and take therefore great honour, and our friendship, and the
steads withal called Vinbjorg and Valbjorg."

And such might was in the words of her, that even so must it come to
pass.

Then Gudrun spake, "Thus then must it needs befall, howsoever against
the will of me, and for little joy shall it be and for great grief."

Then men leaped on their horses, and their women were set in wains. So
they fared four days a-riding and other four a-shipboard, and yet four
more again by land and road, till at the last they came to a certain
high-built hall; then came to meet Gudrun many folk thronging; and
an exceedingly goodly feast was there made, even as the word had gone
between either kin, and it passed forth in most proud and stately wise.
And at that feast drinks Atli his bridal with Gudrun; but never did her
heart laugh on him, and little sweet and kind was their life together.