CHAPTER V: MYTHS OF THE MAYA


Mythology of the Maya

Our knowledge of the mythology of the Maya is by no means so full and
comprehensive as in the case of Mexican mythology. Traditions are
few and obscure, and the hieroglyphic matter is closed to us. But
one great mine of Maya-Kiche mythology exists which furnishes us
with much information regarding Kiche cosmogony and pseudo-history,
with here and there an interesting allusion to the various deities
of the Kiche pantheon. This is the Popol Vuh, a volume in which a
little real history is mingled with much mythology. It was composed
in the form in which we now possess it by a Christianised native
of Guatemala in the seventeenth century, and copied in Kiche, in
which it was originally written, by one Francisco Ximenes, a monk,
who also added to it a Spanish translation.


The Lost "Popol Vuh"

For generations antiquarians interested in this wonderful compilation
were aware that it existed somewhere in Guatemala, and many were the
regrets expressed regarding their inability to unearth it. A certain
Don Felix Cabrera had made use of it early in the nineteenth century,
but the whereabouts of the copy he had seen could not be discovered. A
Dr. C. Scherzer, of Austria, resolved, if possible, to discover it, and
paid a visit to Guatemala in 1854 for that purpose. After a diligent
search he succeeded in finding the lost manuscript in the University
of San Carlos in the city of Guatemala. Ximenes, the copyist, had
placed it in the library of the convent of Chichicastenango, whence
it passed to the San Carlos library in 1830.


Genuine Character of the Work

Much doubt has been cast upon the genuine character of the Popol Vuh,
principally by persons who were almost if not entirely ignorant of the
problems of pre-Columbian history in America. Its genuine character,
however, is by no means difficult to prove. It has been stated that
it is a mere réchauffé of the known facts of Maya history coloured by
Biblical knowledge, a native version of the Christian Bible. But such
a theory will not stand when it is shown that the matter it contains
squares with the accepted facts of Mexican mythology, upon which the
Popol Vuh throws considerable light. Moreover, the entire work bears
the stamp of being a purely native compilation, and has a flavour of
great antiquity. Our knowledge of the general principles of mythology,
too, prepares us for the unqualified acceptance of the material of the
Popol Vuh, for we find there the stories and tales, the conceptions
and ideas connected with early religion which are the property of no
one people, but of all peoples and races in an early social state.


Likeness to other Pseudo-Histories

We find in this interesting book a likeness to many other works of
early times. The Popol Vuh is, indeed, of the same genre and class
as the Heimskringla of Snorre, the history of Saxo Grammaticus,
the Chinese history in the Five Books, the Japanese Nihongi, and
many other similar compilations. But it surpasses all these in pure
interest because it is the only native American work that has come
down to us from pre-Columbian times.

The name "Popol Vuh" means "The Collection of Written Leaves," which
proves that the book must have contained traditional matter reduced
to writing at a very early period. It is, indeed, a compilation of
mythological character, interspersed with pseudo-history, which, as
the account reaches modern times, shades off into pure history and
tells the deeds of authentic personages. The language in which it was
written, the Kiche, was a dialect of the Maya-Kiche tongue spoken at
the time of the conquest in Guatemala, Honduras, and San Salvador,
and still the tongue of the native populations in these districts.


The Creation-Story

The beginning of this interesting book is taken up with the Kiche