The Myth of Huathiacuri

After the deluge the Indians chose the bravest and richest man
as leader. This period they called Purunpacha (the time without a
king). On a high mountain-top appeared five large eggs, from one of
which Paricaca, father of Huathiacuri, later emerged. Huathiacuri,
who was so poor that he had not means to cook his food properly,
learned much wisdom from his father, and the following story shows
how this assisted him. A certain man had built a most curious house,
the roof being made of yellow and red birds' feathers. He was very
rich, possessing many llamas, and was greatly esteemed on account
of his wealth. So proud did he become that he aspired to be the
creator himself; but when he became very ill and could not cure
himself his divinity seemed doubtful. Just at this time Huathiacuri
was travelling about, and one day he saw two foxes meet and listened
to their conversation. From this he heard about the rich man and
learned the cause of his illness, and forthwith he determined to
go on to find him. On arriving at the curious house he met a lovely
young girl, one of the rich man's daughters. She told him about her
father's illness, and Huathiacuri, charmed with her, said he would
cure her father if she would only give him her love. He looked so
ragged and dirty that she refused, but she took him to her father
and informed him that Huathiacuri said he could cure him. Her father
consented to give him an opportunity to do so. Huathiacuri began his
cure by telling the sick man that his wife had been unfaithful, and
that there were two serpents hovering above his house to devour it,
and a toad with two heads under his grinding-stone. His wife at first
indignantly denied the accusation, but on Huathiacuri reminding her
of some details, and the serpents and toad being discovered, she
confessed her guilt. The reptiles were killed, the man recovered,
and the daughter was married to Huathiacuri.

Huathiacuri's poverty and raggedness displeased the girl's
brother-in-law, who suggested to the bridegroom a contest in dancing
and drinking. Huathiacuri went to seek his father's advice, and the old
man told him to accept the challenge and return to him. Paricaca then
sent him to a mountain, where he was changed into a dead llama. Next
morning a fox and its vixen carrying a jar of chicha came, the fox
having a flute of many pipes. When they saw the dead llama they laid
down their things and went toward it to have a feast, but Huathiacuri
then resumed his human form and gave a loud cry that frightened away
the foxes, whereupon he took possession of the jar and flute. By the
aid of these, which were magically endowed, he beat his brother-in-law
in dancing and drinking.

Then the brother-in-law proposed a contest to prove who was the
handsomer when dressed in festal attire. By the aid of Paricaca
Huathiacuri found a red lion-skin, which gave him the appearance of
having a rainbow round his head, and he again won.

The next trial was to see who could build a house the quickest and
best. The brother-in-law got all his men to help, and had his house
nearly finished before the other had his foundation laid. But here
again Paricaca's wisdom proved of service, for Huathiacuri got animals
and birds of all kinds to help him during the night, and by morning
the building was finished except the roof. His brother-in-law got
many llamas to come with straw for his roof, but Huathiacuri ordered
an animal to stand where its loud screams frightened the llamas away,
and the straw was lost. Once more Huathiacuri won the day. At last
Paricaca advised Huathiacuri to end this conflict, and he asked
his brother-in-law to see who could dance best in a blue shirt with
white cotton round the loins. The rich man as usual appeared first,
but when Huathiacuri came in he made a very loud noise and frightened
him, and he began to run away. As he ran Huathiacuri turned him into
a deer. His wife, who had followed him, was turned into a stone,
with her head on the ground and her feet in the air, because she had
given her husband such bad advice.

The four remaining eggs on the mountain-top then opened, and four
falcons issued, which turned into four great warriors. These warriors
performed many miracles, one of which consisted in raising a storm
which swept away the rich Indian's house in a flood to the sea.


Paricaca

Having assisted in the performance of several miracles, Paricaca set
out determined to do great deeds. He went to find Caruyuchu Huayallo,
to whom children were sacrificed. He came one day to a village where
a festival was being celebrated, and as he was in very poor clothes no
one took any notice of him or offered him anything, till a young girl,
taking pity on him, brought him chicha to drink. In gratitude Paricaca
told her to seek a place of safety for herself, as the village would be
destroyed after five days, but she was to tell no one of this. Annoyed
at the inhospitality of the people, Paricaca then went to a hill-top
and sent down a fearful storm and flood, and the whole village was
destroyed. Then he came to another village, now San Lorenzo. He saw a
very beautiful girl, Choque Suso, crying bitterly. Asking her why she
wept, she said the maize crop was dying for want of water. Paricaca
at once fell in love with this girl, and after first damming up the
little water there was, and thus leaving none for the crop, he told
her he would give her plenty of water if she would only return his
love. She said he must get water not only for her own crop but for all
the other farms before she could consent. He noticed a small rill,
from which, by opening a dam, he thought he might get a sufficient
supply of water for the farms. He then got the assistance of the
birds in the hills, and animals such as snakes, lizards, and so on,
in removing any obstacles in the way, and they widened the channel so
that the water irrigated all the land. The fox with his usual cunning
managed to obtain the post of engineer, and carried the canal to near
the site of the church of San Lorenzo. Paricaca, having accomplished
what he had promised, begged Choque Suso to keep her word, which she
willingly did, but she proposed living at the summit of some rocks
called Yanacaca. There the lovers stayed very happily, at the head of
the channel called Cocochallo, the making of which had united them;
and as Choque Suso wished to remain there always, Paricaca eventually
turned her into a stone.

In all likelihood this myth was intended to account for the invention
of irrigation among the early Peruvians, and from being a local legend
probably spread over the length and breadth of the country.


Conclusion

The advance in civilisation attained by the peoples of America must
be regarded as among the most striking phenomena in the history
of mankind, especially if it be viewed as an example of what can
be achieved by isolated races occupying a peculiar environment. It
cannot be too strongly emphasised that the cultures and mythologies
of old Mexico and Peru were evolved without foreign assistance or
intervention, that, in fact, they were distinctively and solely the
fruit of American aboriginal thought evolved upon American soil. An
absorbing chapter in the story of human advancement is provided
by these peoples, whose architecture, arts, graphic and plastic,
laws and religions prove them to have been the equals of most of the
Asiatic nations of antiquity, and the superiors of the primitive races
of Europe, who entered into the heritage of civilisation through the
gateway of the East. The aborigines of ancient America had evolved for
themselves a system of writing which at the period of their discovery
was approaching the alphabetic type, a mathematical system unique
and by no means despicable, and an architectural science in some
respects superior to any of which the Old World could boast. Their
legal codes were reasonable and founded upon justice; and if their
religions were tainted with cruelty, it was a cruelty which they
regarded as inevitable, and as the doom placed upon them by sanguinary
and insatiable deities and not by any human agency.

In comparing the myths of the American races with the deathless
stories of Olympus or the scarcely less classic tales of India,
frequent resemblances and analogies cannot fail to present themselves,
and these are of value as illustrating the circumstance that in
every quarter of the globe the mind of man has shaped for itself a
system of faith based upon similar principles. But in the perusal of
the myths and beliefs of Mexico and Peru we are also struck with the
strangeness and remoteness alike of their subject-matter and the type
of thought which they present. The result of centuries of isolation
is evident in a profound contrast of "atmosphere." It seems almost
as if we stood for a space upon the dim shores of another planet,
spectators of the doings of a race of whose modes of thought and
feeling we were entirely ignorant.

For generations these stories have been hidden, along with the memory
of the gods and folk of whom they tell, beneath a thick dust of
neglect, displaced here and there only by the efforts of antiquarians
working singly and unaided. Nowadays many well-equipped students
are striving to add to our knowledge of the civilisations of Mexico
and Peru. To the mythical stories of these peoples, alas! we cannot
add. The greater part of them perished in the flames of the Spanish
autos-de-fé. But for those which have survived we must be grateful,
as affording so many casements through which we may catch the glitter
and gleam of civilisations more remote and bizarre than those of the
Orient, shapes dim yet gigantic, misty yet many-coloured, the ghosts
of peoples and beliefs not the least splendid and solemn in the roll
of dead nations and vanished faiths.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


The following bibliography is not intended to be exhaustive, but merely
to indicate to those who desire to follow up the matter provided in
the preceding pages such works as will best repay their attention.


Mexico

Acosta, José de: Historia Natural y Moral de las Yndias. Seville, 1580.

Alzate y Ramirez: Descripcion de las Antiguedades de Xochicalco. 1791.

Bancroft, H. H.: Native Races of the Pacific States of America. 1875. A
compilation of historical matter relating to aboriginal America,
given almost without comment. Useful to beginners.

Boturini Benaduci, L.: Idea de una Nueva Historia General de la
America Septentrional. Madrid, 1746. Contains a number of valuable
original manuscripts.

Bourbourg, Abbé Brasseur de: Histoire des Nations Civilisées du Mexique
et de l'Amérique Centrale. Paris, 1857-59. The Abbé possessed much
knowledge of the peoples of Central America and their ancient history,
but had a leaning toward the marvellous which renders his works of
doubtful value.

Charnay, Désiré: Ancient Cities of the New World. London, 1887. This
translation from the French is readable and interesting, and is of
assistance to beginners. It is, however, of little avail as a serious
work of reference, and has been superseded.

Chevalier, M.: Le Mexique Ancien et Moderne. Paris, 1886.

Clavigero, Abbé: Storia Antica del Messico. Cesena, 1780. English
translation, London, 1787. Described in text.

Diaz, Bernal: Historia Verdadera de la Conquista de Nueva
España. 1837. An eye-witness's account of the conquest of Mexico.

Enock, C. Reginald: Mexico, its Ancient and Modern Civilisation,
&c. London, 1909.

Gomara, F. L. de: Historia General de las Yndias. Madrid, 1749.

Herrera, Antonio de: Historia General de los Hechos de los Castellanos
en las Islas y Tierra Firme del Mar Oceano. 4 vols. Madrid, 1601.

Humboldt, Alex. von: Vues des Cordillères. Paris, 1816. English
translation by Mrs. Williams.

Ixtlilxochitl, F. de Alva: Historia Chichimeca; Relaciones. Edited
by A. Chavero. Mexico, 1891-92.

Kingsborough, Lord: Antiquities of Mexico. London, 1830.

Lumholtz, C.: Unknown Mexico. 1903.

MacNutt, F. C.: Letters of Cortés to Charles V. London, 1908.

Nadaillac, Marquis de: Prehistoric America. Translation. London, 1885.

Noll, A. H.: A Short History of Mexico. Chicago, 1903.

Nuttall, Zelia: The Fundamental Principles of Old and New World
Civilisations. 1901.

Payne, E. J.: History of the New World called America. London,
1892-99. By far the best and most exhaustive work in English upon
the subject. It is, however, unfinished.

Peñafiel, F.: Monumentos del Arte Mexicano Antiguo. Berlin, 1890.

Prescott, W. H.: History of the Conquest of Mexico. Of romantic
interest only. Prescott did not study Mexican history for more than
two years, and his work is now quite superseded from a historical
point of view. Its narrative charm, however, is unassailable.

Sahagun, Bernardino de: Historia General de las Cosas de Nueva
España. Mexico, 1829.

Seler, E.: Mexico and Guatemala. Berlin, 1896.

Serra, Justo (Editor): Mexico, its Social Evolution, &c. 2
vols. Mexico, 1904.

Spence, Lewis: The Civilization of Ancient Mexico. A digest of the
strictly verifiable matter of Mexican history and antiquities. All
tradition is eliminated, the author's aim being to present the beginner
and the serious student with a series of unembellished facts.

Starr, F.: The Indians of Southern Mexico. 1899.

Thomas, Cyrus, and Magee, W. J.: The History of North America. 1908.

Torquemada, Juan de: Monarquia Indiana. Madrid, 1723.

Bulletin 28 of the Bureau of American Ethnology contains translations
of valuable essays by the German scholars Seler, Schellhas, Förstemann,
&c.

Many of the above works deal with Central America as well as with
Mexico proper.


Central America

Cogolludo, D. Lopez: Historia de Yucathan. 1688. Very scarce.

Diego de Landa: Relacion de Cosas de Yucatan. Paris, 1836. Translation
by Brasseur.

Dupaix, Colonel: Antiquités Mexicaines. Paris, 1834-36.

Maudslay, A. P.: Biologia Centrali-Americana. Publication
proceeding. Contains many excellent sketches of ruins, &c.

Spence, Lewis: The Popol Vuh. London, 1908.


Peru

Enock, C. R.: Peru: its Former and Present Civilisation, &c. London,
1908.

Markham, Sir Clements R.: History of Peru. Chicago, 1892.

Prescott, W. H.: History of the Conquest of Peru. 3 vols. Philadelphia,
1868.

Squier, E. G.: Peru: Incidents of Travel and Exploration in the Land
of the Incas. London, 1877.

Tschudi, J. J. von: Reisen durch Südamerika. 5 vols. Leipsic,
1866-68. Travels in Peru. London, 1847.

Vega, Garcilasso el Inca de la: Royal Commentaries of the Incas,
1609. Hakluyt Society's Publications.

In seeking the original sources of Peruvian history we must refer to
the early Spanish historians who visited the country, either at the
period of the conquest or immediately subsequent to it. From those
Spaniards who wrote at a time not far distant from that event we have
gained much valuable knowledge concerning the contemporary condition
of Peru, and a description of the principal works of these pioneers
will materially assist the reader who is bent on pursuing the study
of Peruvian antiquities.

Pedro de Cieza de Leon composed a geographical account of Peru in
1554, devoting the latter part of his chronicle to the subject of the
Inca civilisation. This work has been translated into English by Sir
Clements R. Markham, and published by the Hakluyt Society.

Juan José de Betanzos, who was well acquainted with the Quichua
language, and who married an Inca princess, wrote an account of the
Incas in 1551, which was edited and printed by Señor Jimenes de la
Espada in 1880.

Polo de Ondegardo, a lawyer and politician, wrote his two Relaciones
in 1561 and 1571, making valuable reports on the laws and system of
administration of the Incas. One of these works has been translated
by Sir Clements R. Markham, and printed by the Hakluyt Society.

Augustin de Zarate, accountant, who arrived in Peru with Blasco Nuñez
Vela, the first Viceroy, is the author of the Provincia del Peru,
which was published at Antwerp in 1555.

Fernando de Santillan, judge of the Linia Audience, contributed an
interesting Relacion in 1550, edited and printed in 1879 by Señor
Jimenes de la Espada.

Juan de Matienzo, a lawyer contemporary with Ondegardo, was the author
of the valuable work Gobierno de el Peru, not yet translated.

Christoval de Molina, priest of Cuzco, wrote an interesting story of
Inca ceremonial and religion between 1570 and 1584, which has been
published by the Hakluyt Society. The translator is Sir C. R. Markham.

Miguel Cavello Balboa, of Quito, gives us the only particulars we
possess of Indian coast history, and the most valuable information on
the war between Huascar and Atauhuallpa, in his splendid Miscellanea
Austral, 1576, translated into French in 1840 by Ternaux-Compans.

A Jesuit priest, José de Acosta, compiled a Natural History of the
Indies, which was published for the first time in 1588. An English
translation of the work is provided by the Hakluyt Society.

Fernando Montesinos in his Memorias Antiguas Historiales del Peru and
Anales Memorias Nuevas del Peru quotes a long line of sovereigns who
preceded the Incas. These works were translated into French in 1840.

Relacion de los Costombras Antiguas de los Naturales del Peru, written
by an anonymous Jesuit, records an account of Inca civilisation. The
work was published in Spain in 1879. Another Jesuit, Francisco de
Avila, wrote on the superstitions of the Indians of Huarochiri and
their gods. His work was translated into English and published by
the Hakluyt Society.

Pablo José de Arriaga, a priest who policed the country, destroying
the false gods, compiled in 1621 Extirpacion de la Idolatria del Peru,
describing the downfall of the ancient Inca religion.

Antonio de la Calancha compiled an interesting history of the Incas
in his work on the Order of St. Augustine in Peru (1638-1653).

In his Historia de Copacabana y de su Milagrosa Imagen (1620) Alonzo
Ramos Gavilan disclosed much information concerning the colonists
during the time of the Inca rule.

A valuable history of the Incas is provided by Garcilasso el Inca de
la Vega in his Commentarios Reales. The works of previous authors
are reviewed, and extracts are given from the compilations of the
Jesuit Blas Valera, whose writings are lost. The English translation
is published by the Hakluyt Society.

Relacion de Antiguedades deste Reyno del Peru, by Pachacuti Yamqui
Salcamayhua, an Indian of the Collao, was translated into English by
Sir C. R. Markham, and published by the Hakluyt Society.

The Historia del Reino del Quinto, compiled by Juan de Velasco,
was translated into French by Ternaux-Compans in 1840.

Antonio de Herrera gives a brief account of the history and
civilisation of the Inca people in his General History of the Indies.

In his History of America Robertson was the first to compile a thorough
account of the Incas. Prescott, however, in 1848 eclipsed his work
by his own fascinating account. Sir Arthur Helps has also given a
résumé of Inca progress in his Spanish Conquest (1855).

The Peruvian Sebastian Lorente published in 1860 a history of ancient
Peru, which presents the subject more broadly than the narratives
of the American and English authors, and as the result of many years
of further research he contributed a series of essays to the Revista
Peruana.

One of the best works dealing with the antiquities of the Inca period
is Antiguedades Peruanas, by Don Mariano Rivero (English translation
by Dr. Hawkes, 1853). The compilation on Peru by E. G. Squier (1877),
and a similar narrative by C. Weiner (Paris, 1880), both of which
stand in accuracy above the others, are also worthy of mention.

The work of Reiss and Stubel, narrating their excavations at Ancon,
is richly presented in three volumes, with 119 plates.

The works of Sir Clements Markham are the best guide to English
scholars on the subject.


INDEX AND GLOSSARY

NOTE ON THE PRONUNCIATION OF THE MEXICAN, MAYAN, AND PERUVIAN LANGUAGES


Mexican

As the Spanish alphabet was that first employed to represent Mexican
or Nahuatl phonology, so Mexican words and names must be pronounced,
for the most part, according to the Castilian system. An exception
is the letter x, which in Spanish is sometimes written as j and
pronounced as h aspirate; and in Nahuatl sometimes as in English,
at other times as sh or s. Thus the word "Mexico" is pronounced
by the aboriginal Mexican with the hard x, but by the Spaniard
as "May-hee-co." The name of the native author Ixtlilxochitl is
pronounced "Ishtlilshotshitl," the ch being articulated as tsh,
for euphony. Xochicalco is "So-chi-cal-co." The vowel sounds are
pronounced as in French or Italian. The tl sound is pronounced with
almost a click of the tongue.


Mayan

The Maya alphabet consists of twenty-two letters, of which c, ch,
k, pp, th, tz are peculiar to the language, and cannot be properly
pronounced by Europeans. It is deficient in the letters d, f, g, j, q,
r, s. The remaining letters are sounded as in Spanish. The letter x
occurring at the beginning of a word is pronounced ex. For example,
Xbalanque is pronounced "Exbalanke." The frequent occurrence of
elisions in spoken Maya renders its pronunciation a matter of great
difficulty, and the few grammars on the language agree as to the
hopelessness of conveying any true idea of the exact articulation
of the language by means of written directions. Norman in his work
entitled Rambles in Yucatan remarks: "This perhaps accounts for the
disappearance of all grammars and vocabularies of the Maya tongue from
the peninsula of Yucatan, the priests finding it much easier to learn
the language directly from the Indian than to acquire it from books."


Peruvian

The two languages spoken in Peru in ancient times were the Quichua,
or Inca, and the Aymara. These still survive. The former was the
language of the Inca rulers of the country, but both sprang from one
common linguistic stock. As these languages were first reduced to
writing by means of a European alphabet, their pronunciation presents
but little difficulty, the words practically begin pronounced as they
are written, having regard to the "Continental" pronunciation of the
vowels. In Quichua the same sound is give to the intermediate c before
a consonant and to the final c, as in "chacra" and "Pachacamac." The
general accent is most frequently on the penultimate syllable.


INDEX AND GLOSSARY


A

Aac, Prince. In the story of Queen Móo, 240, 244-245, 246

Acalan. District in Guatemala;
  race-movements and, 150

Acllacuna (Selected Ones). Body of maidens from whom victims for
sacrifice were taken in Peru, 313

Aclla-huasi. Houses in which the Acllacuna lived, 313

Acolhuacan. District in Mexico, 26

Acolhuans (or Acolhuaque) (People of the Broad Shoulder). Mexican
race, 26;
  said to have founded Mexico, 26;
  a pure Nahua race, perhaps the Toltecs, 26;
  their supremacy, 48

Acolhuaque. See Acolhuans

Acosta, José de. Work on Mexican lore, 58

Acsumama. Guardian spirit of the potato plant in Peru, 295

Acxitl. Toltec king, son of Huemac II, 17, 19

Acxopil. Ruler of the Kiche, 158-159

Agoreros (or Mohanes). Members of Peruvian tribes who claimed power
as oracles, 297-298, 314

Ahuizotl. Mexican king, 30

Ah-zotzils. A Maya tribe, 172

Akab-sib (Writing in the Dark). A bas-relief at El Castillo,
Chichen-Itza, 190

Aké. Maya ruins at, 186-187

America. Superficial resemblance between peoples, customs, and
art-forms of Asia and, 1;
  civilisation, native origin of, 1-2, 3, 328;
  animal and plant life peculiar to, 2;
  man, origin of, in, 2;
  geographical connection between Asia and, 3;
  traditions of intercourse between Asia and, 3;
  Chinese Fu-Sang and, 3;
  possible Chinese and Japanese visits to, 3-4;
  Coronado's expedition to, 4;
  legends of intercourse between Europe and, 4;
  "Great Ireland" probably the same as, 4;
  St. Brandan's voyage and, 4;
  reached by early Norsemen, 5;