the Bible story, as short-sighted collators of both aver.


The Septs of Yucatan

The priest-kings of Mayapan, who claimed descent from Kukulcan or
Quetzalcoatl, soon raised their state into a position of prominence
among the surrounding cities. Those who had founded Chichen-Itza,
and who were known as Itzaes, were, on the other hand, a caste of
warriors who do not appear to have cherished the priestly function
with such assiduity. The rulers of the Itzaes, who were known as the
Tutul Xius, seem to have come, according to their traditions, from the
western Maya states, perhaps from Nonohualco in Tabasco. Arriving from
thence at the southern extremity of Yucatan, they founded the city
of Ziyan Caan, on Lake Bacalar, which had a period of prosperity for
at least a couple of generations. At the expiry of that period for
some unaccountable reason they migrated northward, perhaps because
at that particular time the incidence of power was shifting toward
Northern Yucatan, and took up their abode in Chichen-Itza, eventually
the sacred city of the Maya, which they founded.


The Cocomes

But they were not destined to remain undisturbed in their new
sphere. The Cocomes of Mayapan, when at the height of their power,
viewed with disfavour the settlement of the Tutul Xius. After it had
flourished for a period of about 120 years it was overthrown by the
Cocomes, who resolved it into a dependency, permitting the governors
and a certain number of the people to depart elsewhere.


Flight of the Tutul Xius

Thus expelled, the Tutul Xius fled southward, whence they had
originally come, and settled in Potonchan or Champoton, where they
reigned for nearly 300 years. From this new centre, with the aid of
Nahua mercenaries, they commenced an extension of territory northward,
and entered into diplomatic relations with the heads of the other
Maya states. It was at this time that they built Uxmal, and their
power became so extensive that they reconquered the territory they had
lost to the Cocomes. This on the whole appears to have been a period
when the arts flourished under an enlightened policy, which knew how
to make and keep friendly relations with surrounding states, and the
splendid network of roads with which the country was covered and the
many evidences of architectural excellence go to prove that the race
had had leisure to achieve much in art and works of utility. Thus
the city of Chichen-Itza was linked up with the island of Cozumel
by a highway whereon thousands of pilgrims plodded to the temples of
the gods of wind and moisture. From Itzamal, too, roads branched in
every direction, in order that the people should have every facility
for reaching the chief shrine of the country situated there. But the
hand of the Cocomes was heavy upon the other Maya states which were
tributary to them. As in the Yucatan of to-day, where the wretched
henequen-picker leads the life of a veritable slave, a crushing system
of helotage obtained. The Cocomes made heavy demands upon the Tutul
Xius, who in their turn sweated the hapless folk under their sway past
the bounds of human endurance. As in all tottering civilisations, the
feeling of responsibility among the upper classes became dormant, and
they abandoned themselves to the pleasures of life without thought of
the morrow. Morality ceased to be regarded as a virtue, and rottenness
was at the core of Maya life. Discontent quickly spread on every hand.


The Revolution in Mayapan

The sequel was, naturally, revolution. Ground down by the tyranny of
a dissolute oligarchy, the subject states rose in revolt. The Cocomes
surrounded themselves by Nahua mercenaries, who succeeded in beating
off the first wave of revolt, led by the king or regulus of Uxmal,
who was defeated, and whose people in their turn rose against him, a
circumstance which ended in the abandonment of the city of Uxmal. Once
more were the Tutul Xius forced to go on pilgrimage, and this time
they founded the city of Mani, a mere shadow of the splendour of
Uxmal and Chichen.


Hunac Eel

If the aristocracy of the Cocomes was composed of weaklings, its
ruler was made of sterner stuff. Hunac Eel, who exercised royal sway
over this people, and held in subjection the lesser principalities of
Yucatan, was not only a tyrant of harsh and vindictive temperament,
but a statesman of judgment and experience, who courted the assistance
of the neighbouring Nahua, whom he employed in his campaign against the
new assailant of his absolutism, the ruler of Chichen-Itza. Mustering
a mighty host of his vassals, Hunac Eel marched against the devoted
city whose prince had dared to challenge his supremacy, and succeeded
in inflicting a crushing defeat upon its inhabitants. But apparently
the state was permitted to remain under the sovereignty of its
native princes. The revolt, however, merely smouldered, and in the
kingdom of Mayapan itself, the territory of the Cocomes, the fires of
revolution began to blaze. This state of things continued for nearly
a century. Then the crash came. The enemies of the Cocomes effected a
junction. The people of Chichen-Itza joined hands with the Tutul Xius,
who had sought refuge in the central highlands of Yucatan and those
city-states which clustered around the mother-city of Mayapan. A fierce
concerted attack was made, beneath which the power of the Cocomes
crumpled up completely. Not one stone was left standing upon another
by the exasperated allies, who thus avenged the helotage of nearly
300 years. To this event the date 1436 is assigned, but, like most
dates in Maya history, considerable uncertainty must be attached to it.


The Last of the Cocomes

Only a remnant of the Cocomes survived. They had been absent in
Nahua territory, attempting to raise fresh troops for the defence of
Mayapan. These the victors spared, and they finally settled in Zotuta,
in the centre of Yucatan, a region of almost impenetrable forest.

It would not appear that the city of Chichen-Itza, the prince
of which was ever the head and front of the rebellion against the
Cocomes, profited in any way from the fall of the suzerain power. On
the contrary, tradition has it that the town was abandoned by its
inhabitants, and left to crumble into the ruinous state in which the
Spaniards found it on their entrance into the country. The probability
is that its people quitted it because of the repeated attacks made
upon it by the Cocomes, who saw in it the chief obstacle to their
universal sway; and this is supported by tradition, which tells that a
prince of Chichen-Itza, worn out with conflict and internecine strife,
left it to seek the cradle of the Maya race in the land of the setting
sun. Indeed, it is further stated that this prince founded the city
of Peten-Itza, on the lake of Peten, in Guatemala.


The Maya Peoples of Guatemala

When the Maya peoples of Guatemala, the Kiches and the Kakchiquels,
first made their way into that territory, they probably found there
a race of Maya origin of a type more advanced and possessed of more
ancient traditions than themselves. By their connection with this
folk they greatly benefited in the direction of artistic achievement
as well as in the industrial arts. Concerning these people we have
a large body of tradition in the Popol Vuh, a native chronicle, the
contents of which will be fully dealt with in the chapter relating
to the Maya myths and legendary matter. We cannot deal with it as a
veritable historical document, but there is little doubt that a basis
of fact exists behind the tradition it contains. The difference between
the language of these people and that of their brethren in Yucatan was,
as has been said, one of dialect only, and a like slight distinction
is found in their mythology, caused, doubtless, by the incidence of
local conditions, and resulting in part from the difference between a
level and comparatively waterless land and one of a semi-mountainous
character covered with thick forests. We shall note further differences
when we come to examine the art and architecture of the Maya race,
and to compare those of its two most distinctive branches.


The Maya Tulan

It was to the city of Tulan, probably in Tabasco, that the Maya
of Guatemala referred as being the starting-point of all their
migrations. We must not confound this place with the Tollan of the
Mexican traditions. It is possible that the name may in both cases
be derived from a root meaning a place from which a tribe set forth,
a starting-place, but geographical connection there is none. From here
Nima-Kiche, the great Kiche, started on his migration to the mountains,
accompanied by his three brothers. Tulan, says the Popol Vuh, had been
a place of misfortune to man, for he had suffered much from cold and
hunger, and, as at the building of Babel, his speech was so confounded
that the first four Kiches and their wives were unable to comprehend
one another. Of course this is a native myth created to account for the
difference in dialect between the various branches of the Maya folk,
and can scarcely have any foundation in fact, as the change in dialect
would be a very gradual process. The brothers, we are told, divided
the land so that one received the districts of Mames and Pocomams,
another Verapaz, and the third Chiapas, while Nima-Kiche obtained
the country of the Kiches, Kakchiquels, and Tzutuhils. It would be
extremely difficult to say whether or not this tradition rests on any
veritable historical basis. If so, it refers to a period anterior to
the Nahua irruption, for the districts alluded to as occupied by these
tribes were not so divided among them at the coming of the Spaniards.


Doubtful Dynasties

As with the earlier dynasties of Egypt, considerable doubt surrounds
the history of the early Kiche monarchs. Indeed, a period of such
uncertainty occurs that even the number of kings who reigned is
lost in the hopeless confusion of varying estimates. From this chaos
emerge the facts that the Kiche monarchs held the supreme power among
the peoples of Guatemala, that they were the contemporaries of the
rulers of Mexico city, and that they were often elected from among the
princes of the subject states. Acxopil, the successor of Nima-Kiche,
invested his second son with the government of the Kakchiquels, and
placed his youngest son over the Tzutuhils, whilst to his eldest
son he left the throne of the Kiches. Icutemal, his eldest son,
on succeeding his father, gifted the kingdom of Kakchiquel to his
eldest son, displacing his own brother and thus mortally affronting
him. The struggle which ensued lasted for generations, embittered
the relations between these two branches of the Maya in Guatemala,
and undermined their joint strength. Nahua mercenaries were employed
in the struggle on both sides, and these introduced many of the
uglinesses of Nahua life into Maya existence.


The Coming of the Spaniards

This condition of things lasted up to the time of the coming of the
Spaniards. The Kakchiquels dated the commencement of a new chronology
from the episode of the defeat of Cay Hun-Apu by them in 1492. They
may have saved themselves the trouble; for the time was at hand when
the calendars of their race were to be closed, and its records written
in another script by another people. One by one, and chiefly by reason
of their insane policy of allying themselves with the invader against
their own kin, the old kingdoms of Guatemala fell as spoil to the
daring Conquistadores, and their people passed beneath the yoke of
Spain--bondsmen who were to beget countless generations of slaves.


The Riddle of Ancient Maya Writing

What may possibly be the most valuable sources of Maya history
are, alas! sealed to us at present. We allude to the native Maya
manuscripts and inscriptions, the writing of which cannot be deciphered
by present-day scholars. Some of the old Spanish friars who lived in
the times which directly succeeded the settlement of the country by
the white man were able to read and even to write this script, but
unfortunately they regarded it either as an invention of the Father
of Evil or, as it was a native system, as a thing of no value. In
a few generations all knowledge of how to decipher it was totally
lost, and it remains to the modern world almost as a sealed book,
although science has lavished all its wonderful machinery of logic
and deduction upon it, and men of unquestioned ability have dedicated
their lives to the problem of unravelling what must be regarded as
one of the greatest and most mysterious riddles of which mankind ever
attempted the solution.

The romance of the discovery of the key to the Egyptian hieroglyphic
system of writing is well known. For centuries the symbols displayed
upon the temples and monuments of the Nile country were so many
meaningless pictures and signs to the learned folk of Europe, until
the discovery of the Rosetta stone a hundred years ago made their
elucidation possible. This stone bore the same inscription in Greek,
demotic, and hieroglyphics, and so the discovery of the "alphabet" of
the hidden script became a comparatively easy task. But Central America
has no Rosetta stone, nor is it possible that such an aid to research
can ever be found. Indeed, such "keys" as have been discovered or
brought forward by scientists have proved for the most part unavailing.


The Maya Manuscripts

The principal Maya manuscripts which have escaped the ravages of time
are the codices in the libraries of Dresden, Paris, and Madrid. These
are known as the Codex Perezianus, preserved in the Bibliothèque
Nationale at Paris, the Dresden Codex, long regarded as an Aztec
manuscript, and the Troano Codex, so called from one of its owners,
Señor Tro y Ortolano, found at Madrid in 1865. These manuscripts deal
principally with Maya mythology, but as they cannot be deciphered
with any degree of accuracy they do not greatly assist our knowledge
of the subject.


The System of the Writing

The "Tablet of the Cross" gives a good idea of the general appearance
of the writing system of the ancient peoples of Central America. The
style varies somewhat in most of the manuscripts and inscriptions,
but it is generally admitted that all of the systems employed sprang
originally from one common source. The square figures which appear
as a tangle of faces and objects are said to be "calculiform," or
pebble-shaped, a not inappropriate description, and it is known from
ancient Spanish manuscripts that they were read from top to bottom,
and two columns at a time. The Maya tongue, like all native American
languages, was one which, in order to express an idea, gathered a
whole phrase into a single word, and it has been thought that the
several symbols or parts in each square or sketch go to make up such
a compound expression.

The first key (so called) to the hieroglyphs of Central America
was that of Bishop Landa, who about 1575 attempted to set down the
Maya alphabet from native sources. He was highly unpopular with the
natives, whose literary treasures he had almost completely destroyed,
and who in revenge deliberately misled him as to the true significance
of the various symbols.

The first real step toward reading the Maya writing was made in
1876 by Léon de Rosny, a French student of American antiquities, who
succeeded in interpreting the signs which denote the four cardinal
points. As has been the case in so many discoveries of importance,
the significance of these signs was simultaneously discovered by
Professor Cyrus Thomas in America. In two of these four signs was
found the symbol which meant "sun," almost, as de Rosny acknowledged,
as a matter of course. However, the Maya word for "sun" (kin) also
denotes "day," and it was later proved that this sign was also used
with the latter meaning. The discovery of the sign stimulated further
research to a great degree, and from the material now at their disposal
Drs. Förstemann and Schellhas of Berlin were successful in discovering
the sign for the moon and that for the Maya month of twenty days.


Clever Elucidations

In 1887 Dr. Seler discovered the sign for night (akbal), and in 1894
Förstemann unriddled the symbols for "beginning" and "end." These
are two heads, the first of which has the sign akbal, just mentioned,
for an eye. Now akbal means, as well as "night," "the beginning of the
month," and below the face which contains it can be seen footsteps, or
spots which resemble their outline, signifying a forward movement. The
sign in the second head means "seventh," which in Maya also signifies
"the end." From the frequent contrast of these terms there can be
little doubt that their meaning is as stated.

"Union" is denoted by the sting of a rattlesnake, the coils of that
reptile signifying to the Maya the idea of tying together. In contrast
to this sign is the figure next to it, which represents a knife,
and means "division" or "cutting." An important "letter" is the
hand, which often occurs in both manuscripts and inscriptions. It is
drawn sometimes in the act of grasping, with the thumb bent forward,
and sometimes as pointing in a certain direction. The first seems
to denote a tying together or joining, like the rattlesnake symbol,
and the second Förstemann believes to represent a lapse of time. That
it may represent futurity occurs as a more likely conjecture to the
present writer.

The figure denoting the spring equinox was traced because of
its obvious representation of a cloud from which three streams of
water are falling upon the earth. The square at the top represents
heaven. The obsidian knife underneath denotes a division or period
of time cut off, as it were, from other periods of the year. That
the sign means "spring" is verified by its position among the other
signs of the seasons.

The sign for "week" was discovered by reason of its almost constant
accompaniment of the sign for the number thirteen, the number of days
in the Maya sacred week. The symbol of the bird's feather indicates the
plural, and when affixed to certain signs signifies that the object
indicated is multiplied. A bird's feather, when one thinks of it,
is one of the most fitting symbols provided by nature to designate
the plural, if the number of shoots on both sides of the stem are
taken as meaning "many" or "two."

Water is depicted by the figure of a serpent, which reptile typifies
the undulating nature of the element. The sign entitled "the
sacrificial victim" is of deep human interest. The first portion of
the symbol is the death-bird, and the second shows a crouching and
beaten captive, ready to be immolated to one of the terrible Maya
deities whose sanguinary religion demanded human sacrifice. The
drawing which means "the day of the new year," in the month Ceh,
was unriddled by the following means: The sign in the upper left-hand
corner denotes the word "sun" or "day," that in the upper right-hand
corner is the sign for "year." In the lower right-hand corner is the
sign for "division," and in the lower left-hand the sign for the Maya
month Ceh, already known from the native calendars.

From its accompaniment of a figure known to be a deity of the four
cardinal points, whence all American tribes believed the wind to come,
the symbol entitled "wind" has been determined.


Methods of Study

The method employed by those engaged in the elucidation of these
hieroglyphs is typical of modern science. The various signs and symbols
are literally "worn out" by a process of indefatigable examination. For
hours the student sits staring at a symbol, drinking in every detail,
however infinitesimal, until the drawing and all its parts are wholly
and separately photographed upon the tablets of his memory. He then
compares the several portions of the symbol with similar portions in
other signs the value of which is known. From these he may obtain a
clue to the meaning of the whole. Thus proceeding from the known to
the unknown, he advances logically toward a complete elucidation of all
the hieroglyphs depicted in the various manuscripts and inscriptions.

The method by which Dr. Seler discovered the hieroglyphs or
symbols relating to the various gods of the Maya was both simple
and ingenious. He says: "The way in which this was accomplished is
strikingly simple. It amounts essentially to that which in ordinary
life we call 'memory of persons,' and follows almost naturally
from a careful study of the manuscripts. For, by frequently looking
tentatively at the representations, one learns by degrees to recognise
promptly similar and familiar figures of gods by the characteristic
impression they make as a whole or by certain details, and the same
is true of the accompanying hieroglyphs."


The Maya Numeral System

If Bishop Landa was badly hoaxed regarding the alphabet of the Maya,
he was successful in discovering and handing down their numeral system,
which was on a very much higher basis than that of many civilised
peoples, being, for example, more practical and more fully evolved
than that of ancient Rome. This system employed four signs altogether,
the point for unity, a horizontal stroke for the number 5, and two
signs for 20 and 0. Yet from these simple elements the Maya produced a
method of computation which is perhaps as ingenious as anything which
has ever been accomplished in the history of mathematics. In the Maya
arithmetical system, as in ours, it is the position of the sign that
gives it its value. The figures were placed in a vertical line, and
one of them was employed as a decimal multiplier. The lowest figure
of the column had the arithmetical value which it represented. The
figures which appeared in the second, fourth, and each following
place had twenty times the value of the preceding figures, while
figures in the third place had eighteen times the value of those in
the second place. This system admits of computation up to millions,
and is one of the surest signs of Maya culture.

Much controversy has raged round the exact nature of the Maya
hieroglyphs. Were they understood by the Indians themselves as
representing ideas or merely pictures, or did they convey a given sound
to the reader, as does our alphabet? To some extent controversy upon
the point is futile, as those of the Spanish clergy who were able to
learn the writing from the native Maya have confirmed its phonetic
character, so that in reality each symbol must have conveyed a sound
or sounds to the reader, not merely an idea or a picture. Recent
research has amply proved this, so that the full elucidation of the
long and painful puzzle on which so much learning and patience have
been lavished may perhaps be at hand.


Mythology of the Maya

The Maya pantheon, although it bears a strong resemblance to that of
the Nahua, differs from it in so many respects that it is easy to
observe that at one period it must have been absolutely free from
all Nahua influence. We may, then, provisionally accept the theory
that at some relatively distant period the mythologies of the Nahua
and Maya were influenced from one common centre, if they were not
originally identical, but that later the inclusion in the cognate
but divided systems of local deities and the superimposition of the
deities and rites of immigrant peoples had caused such differentiation
as to render somewhat vague the original likeness between them. In
the Mexican mythology we have as a key-note the custom of human
sacrifice. It has often been stated as exhibiting the superior status
in civilisation of the Maya that their religion was free from the
revolting practices which characterised the Nahua faith. This,
however, is totally erroneous. Although the Maya were not nearly
so prone to the practice of human sacrifice as were the Nahua, they
frequently engaged in it, and the pictures which have been drawn of
their bloodless offerings must not lead us to believe that they never
indulged in this rite. It is known, for example, that they sacrificed
maidens to the water-god at the period of the spring florescence,
by casting them into a deep pool, where they were drowned.


Quetzalcoatl among the Maya

One of the most obvious of the mythological relationships between
the Maya and Nahua is exhibited in the Maya cult of the god
Quetzalcoatl. It seems to have been a general belief in Mexico
that Quetzalcoatl was a god foreign to the soil; or at least
relatively aboriginal to his rival Tezcatlipoca, if not to the
Nahua themselves. It is amusing to see it stated by authorities of
the highest standing that his worship was free from bloodshed. But
it does not appear whether the sanguinary rites connected with the
name of Quetzalcoatl in Mexico were undertaken by his priests of
their own accord or at the instigation and pressure of the pontiff of
Huitzilopochtli, under whose jurisdiction they were. The designation by
which Quetzalcoatl was known to the Maya was Kukulcan, which signifies
"Feathered Serpent," and is exactly translated by his Mexican name. In
Guatemala he was called Gucumatz, which word is also identical in
Kiche with his other native appellations. But the Kukulcan of the
Maya appears to be dissimilar from Quetzalcoatl in several of his
attributes. The difference in climate would probably account for most
of these. In Mexico Quetzalcoatl, as we have seen, was not only the
Man of the Sun, but the original wind-god of the country. The Kukulcan
of the Maya has more the attributes of a thunder-god. In the tropical
climate of Yucatan and Guatemala the sun at midday appears to draw the
clouds around it in serpentine shapes. From these emanate thunder and
lightning and the fertilising rain, so that Kukulcan would appear to
have appealed to the Maya more as a god of the sky who wielded the
thunderbolts than a god of the atmosphere proper like Quetzalcoatl,
though several of the stelæ in Yucatan represent Kukulcan as he is
portrayed in Mexico, with wind issuing from his mouth.


An Alphabet of Gods

The principal sources of our knowledge of the Maya deities are the
Dresden, Madrid, and Paris codices alluded to previously, all of
which contain many pictorial representations of the various members
of the Maya pantheon. Of the very names of some of these gods we are
so ignorant, and so difficult is the process of affixing to them the
traditional names which are left to us as those of the Maya gods,
that Dr. Paul Schellhas, a German student of Maya antiquities, has
proposed that the figures of deities appearing in the Maya codices
or manuscripts should be provisionally indicated by the letters of
the alphabet. The figures of gods which thus occur are fifteen in
number, and therefore take the letters of the alphabet from A to P,
the letter J being omitted.


Difficulties of Comparison

Unluckily the accounts of Spanish authors concerning Maya mythology
do not agree with the representations of the gods delineated in
the codices. That the three codices have a mythology in common is
certain. Again, great difficulty is found in comparing the deities of
the codices with those represented by the carved and stucco bas-reliefs
of the Maya region. It will thus be seen that very considerable
difficulties beset the student in this mythological sphere. So few data
have yet been collected regarding the Maya mythology that to dogmatise
upon any subject connected with it would indeed be rash. But much
has been accomplished in the past few decades, and evidence is slowly
but surely accumulating from which sound conclusions can be drawn.


The Conflict between Light and Darkness

We witness in the Maya mythology a dualism almost as complete as that
of ancient Persia--the conflict between light and darkness. Opposing
each other we behold on the one hand the deities of the sun, the
gods of warmth and light, of civilisation and the joy of life,
and on the other the deities of darksome death, of night, gloom,
and fear. From these primal conceptions of light and darkness all
the mythologic forms of the Maya are evolved. When we catch the first
recorded glimpses of Maya belief we recognise that at the period when
it came under the purview of Europeans the gods of darkness were in
the ascendant and a deep pessimism had spread over Maya thought and
theology. Its joyful side was subordinated to the worship of gloomy
beings, the deities of death and hell, and if the cult of light
was attended with such touching fidelity it was because the benign
agencies who were worshipped in connection with it had promised not
to desert mankind altogether, but to return at some future indefinite
period and resume their sway of radiance and peace.


The Calendar

Like that of the Nahua, the Maya mythology was based almost entirely
upon the calendar, which in its astronomic significance and duration
was identical with that of the Mexicans. The ritual year of twenty
"weeks" of thirteen days each was divided into four quarters, each
of these being under the auspices of a different quarter of the
heavens. Each "week" was under the supervision of a particular deity,
as will be seen when we come to deal separately with the various gods.


Traditional Knowledge of the Gods

The heavenly bodies had important representation in the Maya
pantheon. In Yucatan the sun-god was known as Kinich-ahau (Lord of
the Face of the Sun). He was identified with the Fire-bird, or Arara,
and was thus called Kinich-Kakmo (Fire-bird; lit. Sun-bird). He was
also the presiding genius of the north.

Itzamna, one of the most important of the Maya deities, was a
moon-god, the father of gods and men. In him was typified the
decay and recurrence of life in nature. His name was derived from
the words he was supposed to have given to men regarding himself:
"Itz en caan, itz en muyal" ("I am the dew of the heaven, I am the
dew of the clouds"). He was tutelar deity of the west.

Chac, the rain-god, is the possessor of an elongated nose, not unlike
the proboscis of a tapir, which of course is the spout whence comes the
rain which he blows over the earth. He is one of the best represented
gods on both manuscripts and monuments, and presides over the east. The
black god Ekchuah was the god of merchants and cacao-planters. He is
represented in the manuscripts several times.

Ix ch'el was the goddess of medicine, and Ix chebel yax was identified
by the priest Hernandez with the Virgin Mary. There were also several
deities, or rather genii, called Bacabs, who were the upholders
of the heavens in the four quarters of the sky. The names of these
were Kan, Muluc, Ix, and Cauac, representing the east, north, west,
and south. Their symbolic colours were yellow, white, black, and red
respectively. They corresponded in some degree to the four variants of
the Mexican rain-god Tlaloc, for many of the American races believed
that rain, the fertiliser of the soil, emanated from the four points of
the compass. We shall find still other deities when we come to discuss
the Popol Vuh, the saga-book of the Kiche, but it is difficult to say
how far these were connected with the deities of the Maya of Yucatan,
concerning whom we have little traditional knowledge, and it is better
to deal with them separately, pointing out resemblances where these
appear to exist.


Maya Polytheism

On the whole the Maya do not seem to have been burdened with an
extensive pantheon, as were the Nahua, and their polytheism appears
to have been of a limited character. Although they possessed a number
of divinities, these were in a great measure only different forms of
one and the same divine power--probably localised forms of it. The
various Maya tribes worshipped similar gods under different names. They
recognised divine unity in the god Hunabku, who was invisible and
supreme, but he does not bulk largely in their mythology, any more than
does the universal All-Father in other early faiths. The sun is the
great deity in Maya religion, and the myths which tell of the origin
of the Maya people are purely solar. As the sun comes from the east,
so the hero-gods who bring with them culture and enlightenment have
an oriental origin. As Votan, as Kabil, the "Red Hand" who initiates
the people into the arts of writing and architecture, these gods are
civilising men of the sun as surely as is Quetzalcoatl.


The Bat-God

A sinister figure, the prince of the Maya legions of darkness, is
the bat-god, Zotzilaha Chimalman, who dwelt in the "House of Bats,"
a gruesome cavern on the way to the abodes of darkness and death. He
is undoubtedly a relic of cave-worship pure and simple. "The Maya,"
says an old chronicler, "have an immoderate fear of death, and they
seem to have given it a figure peculiarly repulsive." We shall find
this deity alluded to in the Popol Vuh, under the name Camazotz,
in close proximity to the Lords of Death and Hell, attempting to
bar the journey of the hero-gods across these dreary realms. He
is frequently met with on the Copan reliefs, and a Maya clan, the
Ah-zotzils, were called by his name. They were of Kakchiquel origin,
and he was probably their totem.


Modern Research

We must now turn to the question of what modern research has done to
elucidate the character of the various Maya deities. We have already
seen that they have been provisionally named by the letters of the
alphabet until such proof is forthcoming as will identify them with
the traditional gods of the Maya, and we will now briefly examine
what is known concerning them under their temporary designations.


God A

In the Dresden and other codices god A is represented as a figure
with exposed vertebræ and skull-like countenance, with the marks of
corruption on his body, and displaying every sign of mortality. On
his head he wears a snail-symbol, the Aztec sign of birth, perhaps to
typify the connection between birth and death. He also wears a pair of
cross-bones. The hieroglyph which accompanies his figure represents a
corpse's head with closed eyes, a skull, and a sacrificial knife. His
symbol is that for the calendar day Cimi, which means death. He
presides over the west, the home of the dead, the region toward
which they invariably depart with the setting sun. That he is a
death-god there can be no doubt, but of his name we are ignorant. He
is probably identical with the Aztec god of death and hell, Mictlan,
and is perhaps one of those Lords of Death and Hell who invite the
heroes to the celebrated game of ball in the Kiche Popol Vuh, and
hold them prisoners in their gloomy realm.

God B is the deity who appears most frequently in the manuscripts. He
has a long, truncated nose, like that of a tapir, and we find in
him every sign of a god of the elements. He walks the waters, wields
fiery torches, and seats himself on the cruciform tree of the four
winds which appears so frequently in American myth. He is evidently a
culture-god or hero, as he is seen planting maize, carrying tools, and
going on a journey, a fact which establishes his solar connection. He
is, in fact, Kukulcan or Quetzalcoatl, and on examining him we feel
that at least there can be no doubt concerning his identity.

Concerning god C matter is lacking, but he is evidently a god of the
pole-star, as in one of the codices he is surrounded by planetary
signs and wears a nimbus of rays.

God D is almost certainly a moon-god. He is represented as an aged
man, with sunken cheeks and wrinkled forehead on which hangs the
sign for night. His hieroglyph is surrounded by dots, to represent a
starry sky, and is followed by the number 20, to show the duration
of the moon. Like most moon deities he is connected with birth,
for occasionally he wears the snail, symbol of parturition, on his
head. It is probable that he is Itzamna, one of the greatest of Maya
gods, who was regarded as the universal life-giver, and was probably
of very ancient origin.


The Maize-God

God E is another deity whom we have no difficulty in identifying. He
wears the leafed ear of maize as his head-dress. In fact, his head has
been evolved out of the conventional drawings of the ear of maize, so
we may say at once without any difficulty that he is a maize-god pure
and simple, and a parallel with the Aztec maize-god Centeotl. Brinton
calls this god Ghanan, and Schellhas thinks he may be identical with
a deity Yum Kaax, whose name means "Lord of the Harvest Fields."

A close resemblance can be noticed between gods F and A, and it is
thought that the latter resembles the Aztec Xipe, the god of human
sacrifice. He is adorned with the same black lines running over the
face and body, typifying gaping death-wounds.


The Sun-God

In G we may be sure that we have found a sun-god par excellence. His
hieroglyph is the sun-sign, kin. But we must be careful not to
confound him with deities like Quetzalcoatl or Kukulcan. He is, like
the Mexican Totec, the sun itself, and not the Man of the Sun, the
civilising agent, who leaves his bright abode to dwell with man and
introduce him to the arts of cultured existence. He is the luminary
himself, whose only acceptable food is human blood, and who must be
fed full with this terrible fare or perish, dragging the world of men
with him into a fathomless abyss of gloom. We need not be surprised,
therefore, to see god G occasionally wearing the symbols of death.

God H would seem to have some relationship to the serpent, but what
it may be is obscure, and no certain identification can be made.

I is a water-goddess, an old woman with wrinkled brown body and
claw-like feet, wearing on her head a grisly snake twisted into
a knot, to typify the serpent-like nature of water. She holds in
her hands an earthenware pot from which water flows. We cannot say
that she resembles the Mexican water-goddess, Chalchihuitlicue,
wife of Tlaloc, who was in most respects a deity of a beneficent
character. I seems a personification of water in its more dreadful
aspect of floods and water-spouts, as it must inevitably have appeared
to the people of the more torrid regions of Central America, and that
she was regarded as an agent of death is shown from her occasionally
wearing the cross-bones of the death-god.


"The God with the Ornamented Nose"

God K is scientifically known as "the god with the ornamented nose,"
and is probably closely related to god B. Concerning him no two
authorities are at one, some regarding him as a storm-god, whose
proboscis, like that of Kukulcan, is intended to represent the blast of
the tempest. But we observe certain stellar signs in connection with
K which would go to prove that he is, indeed, one of the Quetzalcoatl
group. His features are constantly to be met with on the gateways and
corners of the ruined shrines of Central America, and have led many
"antiquarians" to believe in the existence of an elephant-headed god,
whereas his trunk-like snout is merely a funnel through which he
emitted the gales over which he had dominion, as a careful study of
the pinturas shows, the wind being depicted issuing from the snout
in question. At the same time, the snout may have been modelled on
that of the tapir. "If the rain-god Chac is distinguished in the Maya
manuscript by a peculiarly long nose curving over the mouth, and if
in the other forms of the rain-god, to which, as it seems, the name
of Balon Zacab belongs, the nose widens out and sends out shoots,
I believe that the tapir which was employed identically with Chac,
the Maya rain-god, furnished the model," says Dr. Seler. Is K, then,
the same as Chac? Chac bears every sign of affinity with the Mexican
rain-god Tlaloc, whose face was evolved from the coils of two snakes,
and also some resemblance to the snouted features of B and K. But,
again, the Mexican pictures of Quetzalcoatl are not at all like
those of Tlaloc, so that there can be no affinity between Tlaloc and
K. Therefore if the Mexican Tlaloc and the Maya Chac be identical,
and Tlaloc differs from Quetzalcoatl, who in turn is identical with
B and K, it is clear that Chac has nothing to do with K.


The Old Black God

God L Dr. Schellhas has designated "the Old Black God," from the
circumstance that he is depicted as an old man with sunken face
and toothless gums, the upper, or sometimes the lower, part of his
features being covered with black paint. He is represented in the
Dresden MS. only. Professor Cyrus Thomas, of New York, thinks that
he is the god Ekchuah, who is traditionally described as black, but
Schellhas fits this designation to god M. The more probable theory
is that of Förstemann, who sees in L the god Votan, who is identical
with the Aztec earth-god, Tepeyollotl. Both deities have similar face
markings, and their dark hue is perhaps symbolical of the subterranean
places where they were supposed to dwell.


The Travellers' God

God M is a veritable black god, with reddish lips. On his head he
bears a roped package resembling the loads carried by the Maya porter
class, and he is found in violent opposition with F, the enemy of
all who wander into the unknown wastes. A god of this description
has been handed down by tradition under the name of Ekchuah, and his
blackness is probably symbolical of the black or deeply bronzed skin
of the porter class among the natives of Central America, who are
constantly exposed to the sun. He would appear to be a parallel to
the Aztec Yacatecutli, god of travelling merchants or chapmen.


The God of Unlucky Days

God N is identified by Schellhas with the demon Uayayab, who presided
over the five unlucky days which it will be recollected came at
the end of the Mexican and Maya year. He was known to the Maya as
"He by whom the year is poisoned." After modelling his image in clay
they carried it out of their villages, so that his baneful influence
might not dwell therein.

Goddess O is represented as an old woman engaged in the avocation
of spinning, and is probably a goddess of the domestic virtues,
the tutelar of married females.


The Frog-God

God P is shown with the body and fins of a frog on a blue background,
evidently intended to represent water. Like all other frog-gods
he is, of course, a deity of water, probably in its agricultural
significance. We find him sowing seed and making furrows, and
when we remember the important part played by frog deities in the
agriculture of Anahuac we should have no difficulty in classing him
with these. Seler asserts his identity with Kukulcan, but no reason
except the circumstance of his being a rain-god can be advanced to
establish the identity. He wears the year-sign on his head, probably
with a seasonal reference.


Maya Architecture

It was in the wonderful architectural system which it developed
without outside aid that the Maya people most individually expressed
itself. As has been said, those buildings which still remain, and
which have excited the admiration of generations of archæologists, are
principally confined to examples of ecclesiastical and governmental
architecture, the dwellings of the common people consisting merely
of the flimsiest of wattle-and-daub structures, which would fall to
pieces shortly after they were abandoned.

Buried in dense forests or mouldering on the sun-exposed plains
of Yucatan, Honduras, and Guatemala, the cities which boasted these
edifices are for the most part situated away from modern trade routes,
and are not a little difficult to come at. It is in Yucatan, the old
home of the Cocomes and Tutul Xius, that the most perfect specimens
of Maya architecture are to be found, especially as regards its later
development, and here, too, it may be witnessed in its decadent phase.


Methods of Building

The Maya buildings were almost always erected upon a mound or ku,
either natural or artificial, generally the latter. In this we discover
affinities with the Mexican teocalli type. Often these kus stood alone,
without any superincumbent building save a small altar to prove their
relation to the temple type of Anahuac. The typical Maya temple was
built on a series of earth terraces arranged in exact parallel order,
the buildings themselves forming the sides of a square. The mounds
are generally concealed by plaster or faced with stone, the variety
employed being usually a hard sandstone, of which the Maya had a good
supply in the quarries of Chiapas and Honduras. Moderate in weight,
the difficulty of transport was easily overcome, whilst large blocks
could be readily quarried. It will thus be seen that the Maya had
no substantial difficulties to surmount in connection with building
the large edifices and temples they raised, except, perhaps, the
lack of metal tools to shape and carve and quarry the stone which
they used. And although they exhibit considerable ingenuity in such
architectural methods as they employed, they were still surprisingly
ignorant of some of the first essentials and principles of the art.


No Knowledge of the Arch

For example, they were totally ignorant of the principles upon which
the arch is constructed. This difficulty they overcame by making
each course of masonry overhang the one beneath it, after the method
employed by a boy with a box of bricks, who finds that he can only
make "doorways" by this means, or by the simple expedient--also
employed by the Maya--of placing a slab horizontally upon two
upright pillars. In consequence it will readily be seen that the
superimposition of a second story upon such an insecure foundation
was scarcely to be thought of, and that such support for the roof as
towered above the doorway would necessarily require to be of the most
substantial description. Indeed, this portion of the building often
appears to be more than half the size of the rest of the edifice. This
space gave the Maya builders a splendid chance for mural decoration,
and it must be said they readily seized it and made the most of it,
ornamental façades being perhaps the most typical features in the
relics of Maya architecture.


Pyramidal Structures

But the Maya possessed another type of building which permitted of
their raising more than one story. This was the pyramidal type, of
which many examples remain. The first story was built in the usual
manner, and the second was raised by increasing the height of the
mound at the back of the building until it was upon a level with the
roof--another device well known to the boy with the box of bricks. In
the centre of the space thus made another story could be erected,
which was entered by a staircase outside the building. Hampered by
their inability to build to any appreciable height, the Maya architects
made up for the deficiency by constructing edifices of considerable
length and breadth, the squat appearance of which is counterbalanced
by the beautiful mural decoration of the sides and façade.


Definiteness of Design

He would be a merely superficial observer who would form the conclusion
that these specimens of an architecture spontaneously evolved were
put together without survey, design, or previous calculation. That
as much thought entered into their construction as is lavished upon
his work by a modern architect is proved by the manner in which the
carved stones fit into one another. It would be absurd to suppose
that these tremendous façades bristling with scores of intricate
designs could have been first placed in position and subsequently
laden with the bas-reliefs they exhibit. It is plain that they were
previously worked apart and separately from one entire design. Thus
we see that the highest capabilities of the architect were essential
in a measure to the erection of these imposing structures.


Architectural Districts

Although the mason-craft of the Maya peoples was essentially similar
in all the regions populated by its various tribes and offshoots,
there existed in the several localities occupied by them certain
differences in construction and ornamentation which would almost
justify us in dividing them into separate architectural spheres. In
Chiapas, for example, we find the bas-relief predominant, whether
in stone or stucco. In Honduras we find a stiffness of design which
implies an older type of architecture, along with caryatides and
memorial pillars of human shape. In Guatemala, again, we find traces
of the employment of wood. As the civilisation of the Maya cannot
be well comprehended without some knowledge of their architecture,
and as that art was unquestionably their national forte and the thing
which most sharply distinguished them from the semi-savage peoples
that surrounded them, it will be well to consider it for a space as
regards its better-known individual examples.


Fascination of the Subject

He would indeed be dull of imagination and of spirit who could enter
into the consideration of such a subject as this without experiencing
some thrill from the mystery which surrounds it. Although familiarised
with the study of the Maya antiquities by reason of many years of
close acquaintance with it, the author cannot approach the theme
without a feeling of the most intense awe. We are considering the
memorials of a race isolated for countless thousands of years from
the rest of humanity--a race which by itself evolved a civilisation
in every respect capable of comparison with those of ancient Egypt or
Assyria. In these impenetrable forests and sun-baked plains mighty
works were raised which tell of a culture of a lofty type. We are
aware that the people who reared them entered into religious and
perhaps philosophical considerations their interpretations of which
place them upon a level with the most enlightened races of antiquity;
but we have only stepped upon the margin of Maya history. What dread
secrets, what scenes of orgic splendour have those carven walls
witnessed? What solemn priestly conclave, what magnificence of rite,
what marvels of initiation, have these forest temples known? These
things we shall never learn. They are hidden from us in a gloom as
palpable as that of the tree-encircled depths in which we find these
shattered works of a once powerful hierarchy.


Mysterious Palenque

One of the most famous of these ancient centres of priestly domination
is Palenque, situated in the modern state of Chiapas. This city
was first brought into notice by Don José Calderon in 1774, when he
discovered no less than eighteen palaces, twenty great buildings, and
a hundred and sixty houses, which proves that in his day the primeval
forest had not made such inroads upon the remaining buildings as it
has during the past few generations. There is good evidence besides
this that Palenque was standing at the time of Cortés' conquest of
Yucatan. And here it will be well at once to dispel any conception the
reader may have formed concerning the vast antiquity of these cities
and the structures they contain. The very oldest of them cannot be of
a date anterior to the thirteenth century, and few Americanists of
repute would admit such an antiquity for them. There may be remains
of a fragmentary nature here and there in Central America which
are relatively more ancient. But no temple or edifice which remains
standing can claim a greater antiquity.

Palenque is built in the form of an amphitheatre, and nestles on the
lowest slopes of the Cordilleras. Standing on the central pyramid,
the eye is met by a ring of ruined palaces and temples raised upon
artificial terraces. Of these the principal and most imposing is the
Palace, a pile reared upon a single platform, forming an irregular
quadrilateral, with a double gallery on the east, north, and west
sides, surrounding an inner structure with a similar gallery and
two courtyards. It is evident that there was little system or plan
observed in the construction of this edifice, an unusual circumstance
in Maya architecture. The dwelling apartments were situated on the
southern side of the structure, and here there is absolute confusion,
for buildings of all sorts and sizes jostle each other, and are reared
on different levels.

Our interest is perhaps at first excited by three subterraneous
apartments down a flight of gloomy steps. Here are to be found three
great stone tables, the edges of which are fretted with sculptured
symbols. That these were altars admits of little doubt, although
some visitors have not hesitated to call them dining-tables! These
constitute only one of the many puzzles in this building of 228 feet
frontage, with a depth of 180 feet, which at the same time is only
about 25 feet high!

On the north side of the Palace pyramid the façade of the Palace has
crumbled into complete ruin, but some evidences of an entrance are
still noticeable. There were probably fourteen doorways in all in the
frontage, with a width of about 9 feet each, the piers of which were
covered with figures in bas-relief. The inside of the galleries is
also covered at intervals with similar designs, or medallions, many
of which are probably representations of priests or priestesses who
once dwelt within the classic shades and practised strange rites in
the worship of gods long since forgotten. One of these is of a woman
with delicate features and high-bred countenance, and the frame or rim
surrounding it is decorated in a manner recalling the Louis XV style.

The east gallery is 114 feet long, the north 185 feet, and the west 102
feet, so that, as remarked above, a lack of symmetry is apparent. The
great court is reached by a Mayan arch which leads on to a staircase,
on each side of which grotesque human figures of the Maya type are
sculptured. Whom they are intended to portray or what rite they are
engaged in it would indeed be difficult to say. That they are priests
may be hazarded, for they appear to be dressed in the ecclesiastical
maxtli (girdle), and one seems to be decorated with the beads seen
in the pictures of the death-god. Moreover, they are mitred.

The courtyard is exceedingly irregular in shape. To the south side
is a small building which has assisted our knowledge of Maya mural
decoration; especially valuable is the handsome frieze with which
it is adorned, on which we observe the rather familiar feathered
serpent (Kukulcan or Quetzalcoatl). Everywhere we notice the flat
Maya head--a racial type, perhaps brought about by deformation of the
cranium in youth. One of the most important parts of the Palace from
an architectural point of view is the east front of the inner wing,
which is perhaps the best preserved, and exhibits the most luxurious
ornamentation. Two roofed galleries supported by six pillars covered
with bas-reliefs are reached by a staircase on which hieroglyphic
signs still remain. The reliefs in cement are still faintly to be
discerned on the pillars, and must have been of great beauty. They
represent mythological characters in various attitudes. Above, seven
enormous heads frown on the explorer in grim menace. The effect of the
entire façade is rich in the extreme, even in ruin, and from it we can
obtain a faint idea of the splendours of this wonderful civilisation.


An Architectural Curiosity

One of the few towers to be seen among the ruins of Maya architecture
stands at Palenque. It is square in shape and three stories in height,
with sloping roof, and is not unlike the belfry of some little English
village church.

The building we have been describing, although traditionally known
as a "palace," was undoubtedly a great monastery or ecclesiastical
habitation. Indeed, the entire city of Palenque was solely a
priestly centre, a place of pilgrimage. The bas-reliefs with their
representations of priests and acolytes prove this, as does the
absence of warlike or monarchical subjects.


The Temple of Inscriptions

The Temple of Inscriptions, perched on an eminence some 40 feet
high, is the largest edifice in Palenque. It has a façade 74 feet
long by 25 feet deep, composed of a great gallery which runs along
the entire front of the fane. The building has been named from the
inscriptions with which certain flagstones in the central apartment
are covered. Three other temples occupy a piece of rising ground
close by. These are the Temple of the Sun, closely akin in type to
many Japanese temple buildings; the Temple of the Cross, in which
a wonderful altar-piece was discovered; and the Temple of the Cross
No. II. In the Temple of the Cross the inscribed altar gave its name
to the building. In the central slab is a cross of the American
pattern, its roots springing from the hideous head of the goddess
Chicomecohuatl, the Earth-mother, or her Maya equivalent. Its branches
stretch to where on the right and left stand two figures, evidently
those of a priest and acolyte, performing some mysterious rite. On
the apex of the tree is placed the sacred turkey, or "Emerald Fowl,"
to which offerings of maize paste are made. The whole is surrounded
by inscriptions. (See illustration facing p. 160.)


Aké and Itzamal

Thirty miles east of Merida lies Aké, the colossal and primeval
ruins of which speak of early Maya occupation. Here are pyramids,
tennis-courts, and gigantic pillars which once supported immense
galleries, all in a state of advanced ruin. Chief among these is the
great pyramid and gallery, a mighty staircase rising toward lofty
pillars, and somewhat reminiscent of Stonehenge. For what purpose it
was constructed is quite unknown.


The House of Darkness

One ruin, tradition calls "The House of Darkness." Here no light
enters save that which filters in by the open doorway. The vaulted roof
is lost in a lofty gloom. So truly have the huge blocks of which the
building is composed been laid that not even a needle could be inserted
between them. The whole is coated with a hard plaster or cement.


The Palace of Owls

The Knuc (Palace of Owls), where a beautiful frieze of diamond-shaped
stones intermingling with spheres may be observed, is noteworthy. All
here is undoubtedly of the first Yucatec era, the time when the Maya
first overran the country.

At Itzamal the chief object of interest is the great pyramid of
Kinich-Kakmo (The Sun's Face with Fiery Rays), the base of which
covers an area of nearly 650 square feet. To this shrine thousands
were wont to come in times of panic or famine, and from the summit,
where was housed the glittering idol, the smoke of sacrifice ascended
to the cloudless sky, whilst a multitude of white-robed priests and
augurs chanted and prophesied. To the south of this mighty pile stand
the ruins of the Ppapp-Hol-Chac (The House of Heads and Lightnings),
the abode of the chief priest.


Itzamna's Fane

At Itzamal, too, stood one of the chief temples of the great god
Itzamna, the legendary founder of the Maya Empire. Standing on a
lofty pyramid, four roads radiated from it, leading to Tabasco,
Guatemala, and Chiapas; and here they brought the halt, the maimed,
and the blind, aye, even the dead, for succour and resurrection,
such faith had they in the mighty power of Kab-ul (The Miraculous
Hand), as they designated the deity. The fourth road ran to the
sacred isle of Cozumel, where first the men of Spain found the Maya
cross, and supposed it to prove that St. Thomas had discovered the
American continent in early times, and had converted the natives to
a Christianity which had become debased.


Bearded Gods

To the west arose another pyramid, on the summit of which was built the
palace of Hunpictok (The Commander-in-chief of Eight Thousand Flints),
in allusion, probably, to the god of lightning, Hurakan, whose gigantic
face, once dominating the basement wall, has now disappeared. This face
possessed huge mustachios, appendages unknown to the Maya race; and,
indeed, we are struck with the frequency with which Mexican and Mayan
gods and heroes are adorned with beards and other hirsute ornaments
both on the monuments and in the manuscripts. Was the original
governing class a bearded race? It is scarcely probable. Whence,
then, the ever-recurring beard and moustache? These may have been
developed in the priestly class by constant ceremonial shaving,
which often produces a thin beard in the Mongolians--as witness the
modern Japanese, who in imitating a custom of the West often succeed
in producing quite respectable beards.


A Colossal Head

Not far away is to be found a gigantic head, probably that of the
god Itzamna. It is 13 feet in height, and the features were formed
by first roughly tracing them in rubble, and afterwards coating the
whole with plaster. The figure is surrounded by spirals, symbols of
wind or speech. On the opposite side of the pyramid alluded to above
is found a wonderful bas-relief representing a tiger couchant, with
a human head of the Maya type, probably depicting one of the early
ancestors of the Maya, Balam-Quitze (Tiger with the Sweet Smile),
of whom we read in the Popol Vuh.


Chichen-Itza

At Chichen-Itza, in Yucatan, the chief wonder is the gigantic
pyramid-temple known as El Castillo. It is reached by a steep flight
of steps, and from it the vast ruins of Chichen radiate in a circular
manner. To the east is the market-place, to the north a mighty
temple, and a tennis-court, perhaps the best example of its kind in
Yucatan, whilst to the west stand the Nunnery and the Chichan-Chob,
or prison. Concerning Chichen-Itza Cogolludo tells the following story:
"A king of Chichen called Canek fell desperately in love with a young
princess, who, whether she did not return his affection or whether she
was compelled to obey a parental mandate, married a more powerful
Yucatec cacique. The discarded lover, unable to bear his loss,
and moved by love and despair, armed his dependents and suddenly
fell upon his successful rival. Then the gaiety of the feast was
exchanged for the din of war, and amidst the confusion the Chichen
prince disappeared, carrying off the beautiful bride. But conscious
that his power was less than his rival's, and fearing his vengeance,
he fled the country with most of his vassals." It is a historical
fact that the inhabitants of Chichen abandoned their city, but whether
for the reason given in this story or not cannot be discovered.


The Nunnery

The Nunnery at Chichen is a building of great beauty of outline and
decoration, the frieze above the doorway and the fretted ornamentation
of the upper story exciting the admiration of most writers on the
subject. Here dwelt the sacred women, the chief of whom, like their
male prototypes, were dedicated to Kukulcan and regarded with much
reverence. The base of the building is occupied by eight large figures,
and over the door is the representation of a priest with a panache,
whilst a row of gigantic heads crowns the north façade. Here, too, are
figures of the wind-god, with projecting lips, which many generations
of antiquarians took for heads of elephants with waving trunks! The
entire building is one of the gems of Central American architecture,
and delights the eye of archæologist and artist alike. In El Castillo
are found wonderful bas-reliefs depicting bearded men, evidently the
priests of Quetzalcoatl, himself bearded, and to the practised eye
one of these would appear to be wearing a false hirsute appendage, as
kings were wont to do in ancient Egypt. Were these beards artificial
and symbolical?


The "Writing in the Dark"

The Akab-sib (Writing in the Dark) is a bas-relief found on the lintel
of an inner door at the extremity of the building. It represents a
figure seated before a vase, with outstretched forefinger, and whence
it got its traditional appellation it would be hard to say, unless
the person represented is supposed to be in the act of writing. The
figure is surrounded by inscriptions. At Chichen were found a statue of
Tlaloc, the god of rain or moisture, and immense torsos representing
Kukulcan. There also was a terrible well into which men were cast in
time of drought as a propitiation to the rain-god.


Kabah

At Kabah there is a marvellous frontage which strikingly recalls
that of a North American Indian totem-house in its fantastic wealth
of detail. The ruins are scattered over a large area, and must all
have been at one time painted in brilliant colours. Here two horses'
heads in stone were unearthed, showing that the natives had copied
faithfully the steeds of the conquering Spaniards. Nothing is known of
the history of Kabah, but its neighbour, Uxmal, fifteen miles distant,
is much more famous.


Uxmal

The imposing pile of the Casa del Gobernador (Governor's Palace, so
called) at Uxmal is perhaps the best known and described of all the
aboriginal buildings of Central America. It occupies three successive
colossal terraces, and its frieze runs in a line of 325 feet, and
is divided into panels, each of which frames a gigantic head of
priest or deity. The striking thing concerning this edifice is that
although it has been abandoned for over three hundred years it is
still almost as fresh architecturally as when it left the builder's
hands. Here and there a lintel has fallen, or stones have been removed
in a spirit of vandalism to assist in the erection of a neighbouring
hacienda, but on the whole we possess in it the most unspoiled piece
of Yucatec building in existence. On the side of the palace where
stands the main entrance, directly over the gateway, is the most
wonderful fretwork and ornamentation, carried out in high relief,
above which soar three eagles in hewn stone, surmounted by a plumed
human head. In the plinth are three heads, which in type recall the
Roman, surrounded by inscriptions. A clear proof of the comparative
lateness of the period in which Uxmal was built is found in the
circumstance that all the lintels over the doorways are of wood,
of which much still exists in a good state of preservation. Many of
the joists of the roofs were also of timber, and were fitted into
the stonework by means of specially carved ends.


The Dwarf's House

There is also a nunnery which forcibly recalls that at Chichen, and is
quite as elaborate and flamboyant in its architectural design. But the
real mystery at Uxmal is the Casa del Adivino (The Prophet's House),
also locally known as "The Dwarf's House." It consists of two portions,
one of which is on the summit of an artificial pyramid, whilst the
other, a small but beautifully finished chapel, is situated lower down
facing the town. The loftier building is reached by an exceedingly
steep staircase, and bears every evidence of having been used as a
sanctuary, for here were discovered cacao and copal, recently burnt,
by Cogolludo as late as 1656, which is good evidence that the Yucatecs
did not all at once abandon their ancient faith at the promptings of
the Spanish fathers.