CHAPTER II: MEXICAN MYTHOLOGY


Nahua Religion

The religion of the ancient Mexicans was a polytheism or worship of a
pantheon of deities, the general aspect of which presented similarities
to the systems of Greece and Egypt. Original influences, however,
were strong, and they are especially discernible in the institutions
of ritualistic cannibalism and human sacrifice. Strange resemblances to
Christian practice were observed in the Aztec mythology by the Spanish
Conquistadores, who piously condemned the native customs of baptism,
consubstantiation, and confession as frauds founded and perpetuated
by diabolic agency.

A superficial examination of the Nahua religion might lead to the
inference that within its scope and system no definite theological
views were embraced and no ethical principles propounded, and that
the entire mythology presents only the fantastic attitude of the
barbarian mind toward the eternal verities. Such a conclusion would
be both erroneous and unjust to a human intelligence of a type by no
means debased. As a matter of fact, the Nahua displayed a theological
advancement greatly superior to that of the Greeks or Romans, and quite
on a level with that expressed by the Egyptians and Assyrians. Toward
the period of the Spanish occupation the Mexican priesthood was
undoubtedly advancing to the contemplation of the exaltation of
one god, whose worship was fast excluding that of similar deities,
and if our data are too imperfect to allow us to speak very fully
in regard to this phase of religious advancement, we know at least
that much of the Nahua ritual and many of the prayers preserved by
the labours of the Spanish fathers are unquestionably genuine, and
display the attainment of a high religious level.


Cosmology

Aztec theology postulated an eternity which, however, was not without
its epochs. It was thought to be broken up into a number of æons,
each of which depended upon the period of duration of a separate
"sun." No agreement is noticeable among authorities on Mexican
mythology as to the number of these "suns," but it would appear as
probable that the favourite tradition stipulated for four "suns"
or epochs, each of which concluded with a national disaster--flood,
famine, tempest, or fire. The present æon, they feared, might conclude
upon the completion of every "sheaf" of fifty-two years, the "sheaf"
being a merely arbitrary portion of an æon. The period of time from the
first creation to the current æon was variously computed as 15,228,
2386, or 1404 solar years, the discrepancy and doubt arising because
of the equivocal nature of the numeral signs expressing the period
in the pinturas or native paintings. As regards the sequence of
"suns" there is no more agreement than there is regarding their
number. The Codex Vaticanus states it to have been water, wind,
fire, and famine. Humboldt gives it as hunger, fire, wind, and water;
Boturini as water, famine, wind, and fire; and Gama as hunger, wind,
fire, and water.

In all likelihood the adoption of four ages arose from the sacred
nature of that number. The myth doubtless shaped itself upon the
tonalamatl (Mexican native calendar), the great repository of the
wisdom of the Nahua race, which the priestly class regarded as its
vade mecum, and which was closely consulted by it on every occasion,
civil or religious.


The Sources of Mexican Mythology

Our knowledge of the mythology of the Mexicans is chiefly gained
through the works of those Spaniards, lay and cleric, who entered
the country along with or immediately subsequent to the Spanish
Conquistadores. From several of these we have what might be called
first-hand accounts of the theogony and ritual of the Nahua people. The
most valuable compendium is that of Father Bernardino Sahagun,
entitled A General History of the Affairs of New Spain, which was
published from manuscript only in the middle of last century, though
written in the first half of the sixteenth century. Sahagun arrived in
Mexico eight years after the country had been reduced by the Spaniards
to a condition of servitude. He obtained a thorough mastery of the
Nahuatl tongue, and conceived a warm admiration for the native mind
and a deep interest in the antiquities of the conquered people. His
method of collecting facts concerning their mythology and history
was as effective as it was ingenious. He held daily conferences
with reliable Indians, and placed questions before them, to which
they replied by symbolical paintings detailing the answers which he
required. These he submitted to scholars who had been trained under
his own supervision, and who, after consultation among themselves,
rendered him a criticism in Nahuatl of the hieroglyphical paintings
he had placed at their disposal. Not content with this process, he
subjected these replies to the criticism of a third body, after which
the matter was included in his work. But ecclesiastical intolerance
was destined to keep the work from publication for a couple of
centuries. Afraid that such a volume would be successful in keeping
alight the fires of paganism in Mexico, Sahagun's brethren refused him
the assistance he required for its publication. But on his appealing
to the Council of the Indies in Spain he was met with encouragement,
and was ordered to translate his great work into Spanish, a task he
undertook when over eighty years of age. He transmitted the work to
Spain, and for three hundred years nothing more was heard of it.


The Romance of the Lost "Sahagun"

For generations antiquarians interested in the lore of ancient Mexico
bemoaned its loss, until at length one Muñoz, more indefatigable
than the rest, chanced to visit the crumbling library of the ancient
convent of Tolosi, in Navarre. There, among time-worn manuscripts
and tomes relating to the early fathers and the intricacies of canon
law, he discovered the lost Sahagun! It was printed separately by
Bustamante at Mexico and by Lord Kingsborough in his collection in
1830, and has been translated into French by M. Jourdanet. Thus the
manuscript commenced in or after 1530 was given to the public after
a lapse of no less than three hundred years!


Torquemada

Father Torquemada arrived in the New World about the middle of
the sixteenth century, at which period he was still enabled to
take from the lips of such of the Conquistadores as remained much
curious information regarding the circumstances of their advent. His
Monarchia Indiana was first published at Seville in 1615, and in it
he made much use of the manuscript of Sahagun, not then published. At
the same time his observations upon matters pertaining to the native
religion are often illuminating and exhaustive.

In his Storia Antica del Messico the Abbé Clavigero, who published
his work in 1780, did much to disperse the clouds of tradition which
hung over Mexican history and mythology. The clarity of his style and
the exactness of his information render his work exceedingly useful.

Antonio Gama, in his Descripcion Historica y Cronologica de las
dos Piedras, poured a flood of light on Mexican antiquities. His
work was published in 1832. With him may be said to have ceased the
line of Mexican archæologists of the older school. Others worthy
of being mentioned among the older writers on Mexican mythology (we
are not here concerned with history) are Boturini, who, in his Idea
de una Nueva Historia General de la America Septentrional, gives a
vivid picture of native life and tradition, culled from first-hand
communication with the people; Ixtlilxochitl, a half-breed, whose
mendacious works, the Relaciones and Historia Chichimeca, are yet
valuable repositories of tradition; José de Acosta, whose Historia
Natural y Moral de las Yndias was published at Seville in 1580;
and Gomara, who, in his Historia General de las Indias (Madrid,
1749), rested upon the authority of the Conquistadores. Tezozomoc's
Chronica Mexicana, reproduced in Lord Kingsborough's great work,
is valuable as giving unique facts regarding the Aztec mythology,
as is the Teatro Mexicana of Vetancurt, published at Mexico in 1697-98.


The Worship of One God

The ritual of this dead faith of another hemisphere abounds in
expressions concerning the unity of the deity approaching very nearly
to many of those we ourselves employ regarding God's attributes. The
various classes of the priesthood were in the habit of addressing
the several gods to whom they ministered as "omnipotent," "endless,"
"invisible," "the one god complete in perfection and unity," and
"the Maker and Moulder of All." These appellations they applied not
to one supreme being, but to the individual deities to whose service
they were attached. It may be thought that such a practice would be
fatal to the evolution of a single and universal god. But there is
every reason to believe that Tezcatlipoca, the great god of the air,
like the Hebrew Jahveh, also an air-god, was fast gaining precedence
of all other deities, when the coming of the white man put an end to
his chances of sovereignty.


Tezcatlipoca

Tezcatlipoca (Fiery Mirror) was undoubtedly the Jupiter of the Nahua
pantheon. He carried a mirror or shield, from which he took his name,
and in which he was supposed to see reflected the actions and deeds
of mankind. The evolution of this god from the status of a spirit of
wind or air to that of the supreme deity of the Aztec people presents
many points of deep interest to students of mythology. Originally the
personification of the air, the source both of the breath of life and
of the tempest, Tezcatlipoca possessed all the attributes of a god who
presided over these phenomena. As the tribal god of the Tezcucans who
had led them into the Land of Promise, and had been instrumental in the
defeat of both the gods and men of the elder race they dispossessed,
Tezcatlipoca naturally advanced so speedily in popularity and public
honour that it was little wonder that within a comparatively short
space of time he came to be regarded as a god of fate and fortune,
and as inseparably connected with the national destinies. Thus,
from being the peculiar deity of a small band of Nahua immigrants,
the prestige accruing from the rapid conquest made under his tutelary
direction and the speedily disseminated tales of the prowess of those
who worshipped him seemed to render him at once the most popular and
the best feared god in Anahuac, therefore the one whose cult quickly
overshadowed that of other and similar gods.


Tezcatlipoca, Overthrower of the Toltecs

We find Tezcatlipoca intimately associated with the legends which
recount the overthrow of Tollan, the capital of the Toltecs. His
chief adversary on the Toltec side is the god-king Quetzalcoatl,
whose nature and reign we will consider later, but whom we will now
merely regard as the enemy of Tezcatlipoca. The rivalry between these
gods symbolises that which existed between the civilised Toltecs and
the barbarian Nahua, and is well exemplified in the following myths.


Myths of Quetzalcoatl and Tezcatlipoca

In the days of Quetzalcoatl there was abundance of everything necessary
for subsistence. The maize was plentiful, the calabashes were as
thick as one's arm, and cotton grew in all colours without having
to be dyed. A variety of birds of rich plumage filled the air with
their songs, and gold, silver, and precious stones were abundant. In
the reign of Quetzalcoatl there was peace and plenty for all men.

But this blissful state was too fortunate, too happy to endure. Envious
of the calm enjoyment of the god and his people the Toltecs,
three wicked "necromancers" plotted their downfall. The reference
is of course to the gods of the invading Nahua tribes, the deities
Huitzilopochtli, Titlacahuan or Tezcatlipoca, and Tlacahuepan. These
laid evil enchantments upon the city of Tollan, and Tezcatlipoca in
particular took the lead in these envious conspiracies. Disguised as
an aged man with white hair, he presented himself at the palace of
Quetzalcoatl, where he said to the pages-in-waiting: "Pray present
me to your master the king. I desire to speak with him."

The pages advised him to retire, as Quetzalcoatl was indisposed and
could see no one. He requested them, however, to tell the god that
he was waiting outside. They did so, and procured his admittance.

On entering the chamber of Quetzalcoatl the wily Tezcatlipoca simulated
much sympathy with the suffering god-king. "How are you, my son?" he
asked. "I have brought you a drug which you should drink, and which
will put an end to the course of your malady."

"You are welcome, old man," replied Quetzalcoatl. "I have known for
many days that you would come. I am exceedingly indisposed. The malady
affects my entire system, and I can use neither my hands nor feet."

Tezcatlipoca assured him that if he partook of the medicine which he
had brought him he would immediately experience a great improvement
in health. Quetzalcoatl drank the potion, and at once felt much
revived. The cunning Tezcatlipoca pressed another and still another
cup of the potion upon him, and as it was nothing but pulque, the
wine of the country, he speedily became intoxicated, and was as wax
in the hands of his adversary.


Tezcatlipoca and the Toltecs

Tezcatlipoca, in pursuance of his policy inimical to the Toltec state,
took the form of an Indian of the name of Toueyo (Toveyo), and bent
his steps to the palace of Uemac, chief of the Toltecs in temporal
matters. This worthy had a daughter so fair that she was desired
in marriage by many of the Toltecs, but all to no purpose, as her
father refused her hand to one and all. The princess, beholding the
false Toueyo passing her father's palace, fell deeply in love with
him, and so tumultuous was her passion that she became seriously ill
because of her longing for him. Uemac, hearing of her indisposition,
bent his steps to her apartments, and inquired of her women the
cause of her illness. They told him that it was occasioned by the
sudden passion which had seized her for the Indian who had recently
come that way. Uemac at once gave orders for the arrest of Toueyo,
and he was haled before the temporal chief of Tollan.

"Whence come you?" inquired Uemac of his prisoner, who was very
scantily attired.

"Lord, I am a stranger, and I have come to these parts to sell green
paint," replied Tezcatlipoca.

"Why are you dressed in this fashion? Why do you not wear a
cloak?" asked the chief.

"My lord, I follow the custom of my country," replied Tezcatlipoca.

"You have inspired a passion in the breast of my daughter," said
Uemac. "What should be done to you for thus disgracing me?"

"Slay me; I care not," said the cunning Tezcatlipoca.

"Nay," replied Uemac, "for if I slay you my daughter will perish. Go
to her and say that she may wed you and be happy."

Now the marriage of Toueyo to the daughter of Uemac aroused much
discontent among the Toltecs; and they murmured among themselves, and
said: "Wherefore did Uemac give his daughter to this Toueyo?" Uemac,
having got wind of these murmurings, resolved to distract the
attention of the Toltecs by making war upon the neighbouring state
of Coatepec. The Toltecs assembled armed for the fray, and having
arrived at the country of the men of Coatepec they placed Toueyo
in ambush with his body-servants, hoping that he would be slain
by their adversaries. But Toueyo and his men killed a large number
of the enemy and put them to flight. His triumph was celebrated by
Uemac with much pomp. The knightly plumes were placed upon his head,
and his body was painted with red and yellow--an honour reserved for
those who distinguished themselves in battle.

Tezcatlipoca's next step was to announce a great feast in Tollan,
to which all the people for miles around were invited. Great crowds
assembled, and danced and sang in the city to the sound of the
drum. Tezcatlipoca sang to them and forced them to accompany the rhythm
of his song with their feet. Faster and faster the people danced,
until the pace became so furious that they were driven to madness,
lost their footing, and tumbled pell-mell down a deep ravine, where
they were changed into rocks. Others in attempting to cross a stone
bridge precipitated themselves into the water below, and were changed
into stones.

On another occasion Tezcatlipoca presented himself as a valiant
warrior named Tequiua, and invited all the inhabitants of Tollan
and its environs to come to the flower-garden called Xochitla. When
assembled there he attacked them with a hoe, and slew a great number,
and others in panic crushed their comrades to death.

Tezcatlipoca and Tlacahuepan on another occasion repaired to the
market-place of Tollan, the former displaying upon the palm of
his hand a small infant whom he caused to dance and to cut the most
amusing capers. This infant was in reality Huitzilopochtli, the Nahua
god of war. At this sight the Toltecs crowded upon one another for
the purpose of getting a better view, and their eagerness resulted
in many being crushed to death. So enraged were the Toltecs at this
that upon the advice of Tlacahuepan they slew both Tezcatlipoca and
Huitzilopochtli. When this had been done the bodies of the slain gods
gave forth such a pernicious effluvia that thousands of the Toltecs
died of the pestilence. The god Tlacahuepan then advised them to cast
out the bodies lest worse befell them, but on their attempting to do so
they discovered their weight to be so great that they could not move
them. Hundreds wound cords round the corpses, but the strands broke,
and those who pulled upon them fell and died suddenly, tumbling one
upon the other, and suffocating those upon whom they collapsed.


The Departure of Quetzalcoatl

The Toltecs were so tormented by the enchantments of Tezcatlipoca
that it was soon apparent to them that their fortunes were on the wane
and that the end of their empire was at hand. Quetzalcoatl, chagrined
at the turn things had taken, resolved to quit Tollan and go to the
country of Tlapallan, whence he had come on his civilising mission to
Mexico. He burned all the houses which he had built, and buried his
treasure of gold and precious stones in the deep valleys between the
mountains. He changed the cacao-trees into mezquites, and he ordered
all the birds of rich plumage and song to quit the valley of Anahuac
and to follow him to a distance of more than a hundred leagues. On
the road from Tollan he discovered a great tree at a point called
Quauhtitlan. There he rested, and requested his pages to hand him a
mirror. Regarding himself in the polished surface, he exclaimed, "I am
old," and from that circumstance the spot was named Huehuequauhtitlan
(Old Quauhtitlan). Proceeding on his way accompanied by musicians
who played the flute, he walked until fatigue arrested his steps,
and he seated himself upon a stone, on which he left the imprint
of his hands. This place is called Temacpalco (The Impress of the
Hands). At Coaapan he was met by the Nahua gods, who were inimical
to him and to the Toltecs.

"Where do you go?" they asked him. "Why do you leave your capital?"

"I go to Tlapallan," replied Quetzalcoatl, "whence I came."

"For what reason?" persisted the enchanters.

"My father the Sun has called me thence," replied Quetzalcoatl.

"Go, then, happily," they said, "but leave us the secret of your art,
the secret of founding in silver, of working in precious stones and
woods, of painting, and of feather-working, and other matters."

But Quetzalcoatl refused, and cast all his treasures into the
fountain of Cozcaapa (Water of Precious Stones). At Cochtan he
was met by another enchanter, who asked him whither he was bound,
and on learning his destination proffered him a draught of wine. On
tasting the vintage Quetzalcoatl was overcome with sleep. Continuing
his journey in the morning, the god passed between a volcano and the
Sierra Nevada (Mountain of Snow), where all the pages who accompanied
him died of cold. He regretted this misfortune exceedingly, and wept,
lamenting their fate with most bitter tears and mournful songs. On
reaching the summit of Mount Poyauhtecatl he slid to the base. Arriving
at the sea-shore, he embarked upon a raft of serpents, and was wafted
away toward the land of Tlapallan.

It is obvious that these legends bear some resemblance to those of
Ixtlilxochitl which recount the fall of the Toltecs. They are taken
from Sahagun's work, Historia General de Nueva España, and are included
as well for the sake of comparison as for their own intrinsic value.


Tezcatlipoca as Doomster

Tezcatlipoca was much more than a mere personification of wind,
and if he was regarded as a life-giver he had also the power of
destroying existence. In fact on occasion he appears as an inexorable
death-dealer, and as such was styled Nezahualpilli (The Hungry Chief)
and Yaotzin (The Enemy). Perhaps one of the names by which he was
best known was Telpochtli (The Youthful Warrior), from the fact that
his reserve of strength, his vital force, never diminished, and that
his youthful and boisterous vigour was apparent in the tempest.

Tezcatlipoca was usually depicted as holding in his right hand a dart
placed in an atlatl (spear-thrower), and his mirror-shield with four
spare darts in his left. This shield is the symbol of his power as
judge of mankind and upholder of human justice.

The Aztecs pictured Tezcatlipoca as rioting along the highways in
search of persons on whom to wreak his vengeance, as the wind of
night rushes along the deserted roads with more seeming violence
than it does by day. Indeed one of his names, Yoalli Ehecatl,
signifies "Night Wind." Benches of stone, shaped like those made
for the dignitaries of the Mexican towns, were distributed along the
highways for his especial use, that on these he might rest after his
boisterous journeyings. These seats were concealed by green boughs,
beneath which the god was supposed to lurk in wait for his victims. But
if one of the persons he seized overcame him in the struggle he might
ask whatever boon he desired, secure in the promise of the deity that
it should be granted forthwith.

It was supposed that Tezcatlipoca had guided the Nahua, and especially
the people of Tezcuco, from a more northerly clime to the valley of
Mexico. But he was not a mere local deity of Tezcuco, his worship
being widely celebrated throughout the country. His exalted position
in the Mexican pantheon seems to have won for him especial reverence
as a god of fate and fortune. The place he took as the head of the
Nahua pantheon brought him many attributes which were quite foreign
to his original character. Fear and a desire to exalt their tutelar
deity will impel the devotees of a powerful god to credit him with
any or every quality, so that there is nothing remarkable in the
spectacle of the heaping of every possible attribute, human or divine,
upon Tezcatlipoca when we recall the supreme position he occupied in
Mexican mythology. His priestly caste far surpassed in power and in
the breadth and activity of its propaganda the priesthoods of the
other Mexican deities. To it is credited the invention of many of
the usages of civilisation, and that it all but succeeded in making
his worship universal is pretty clear, as has been shown. The other
gods were worshipped for some special purpose, but the worship of
Tezcatlipoca was regarded as compulsory, and to some extent as a
safeguard against the destruction of the universe, a calamity the
Nahua had been led to believe might occur through his agency. He
was known as Moneneque (The Claimer of Prayer), and in some of the
representations of him an ear of gold was shown suspended from his
hair, toward which small tongues of gold strained upward in appeal
of prayer. In times of national danger, plague, or famine universal
prayer was made to Tezcatlipoca. The heads of the community repaired
to his teocalli (temple) accompanied by the people en masse, and all
prayed earnestly together for his speedy intervention. The prayers
to Tezcatlipoca still extant prove that the ancient Mexicans fully
believed that he possessed the power of life and death, and many of
them are couched in the most piteous terms.


The Teotleco Festival

The supreme position occupied by Tezcatlipoca in the Mexican religion
is well exemplified in the festival of the Teotleco (Coming of the
Gods), which is fully described in Sahagun's account of the Mexican
festivals. Another peculiarity connected with his worship was that
he was one of the few Mexican deities who had any relation to the
expiation of sin. Sin was symbolised by the Nahua as excrement, and
in various manuscripts Tezcatlipoca is represented as a turkey-cock
to which ordure is being offered up.

Of the festival of the Teotleco Sahagun says: "In the twelfth month a
festival was celebrated in honour of all the gods, who were said to
have gone to some country I know not where. On the last day of the
month a greater one was held, because the gods had returned. On the
fifteenth day of this month the young boys and the servitors decked all
the altars or oratories of the gods with boughs, as well as those which
were in the houses, and the images which were set up by the wayside
and at the cross-roads. This work was paid for in maize. Some received
a basketful, and others only a few ears. On the eighteenth day the
ever-youthful god Tlamatzincatl or Titlacahuan arrived. It was said
that he marched better and arrived the first because he was strong
and young. Food was offered him in his temple on that night. Every
one drank, ate, and made merry. The old people especially celebrated
the arrival of the god by drinking wine, and it was alleged that his
feet were washed by these rejoicings. The last day of the month was
marked by a great festival, on account of the belief that the whole
of the gods arrived at that time. On the preceding night a quantity
of flour was kneaded on a carpet into the shape of a cheese, it being
supposed that the gods would leave a footprint thereon as a sign of
their return. The chief attendant watched all night, going to and fro
to see if the impression appeared. When he at last saw it he called
out, 'The master has arrived,' and at once the priests of the temple
began to sound the horns, trumpets, and other musical instruments
used by them. Upon hearing this noise every one set forth to offer
food in all the temples." The next day the aged gods were supposed
to arrive, and young men disguised as monsters hurled victims into
a huge sacrificial fire.


The Toxcatl Festival

The most remarkable festival in connection with Tezcatlipoca was
the Toxcatl, held in the fifth month. On the day of this festival a
youth was slain who for an entire year previously had been carefully
instructed in the rôle of victim. He was selected from among the best
war captives of the year, and must be without spot or blemish. He
assumed the name, garb, and attributes of Tezcatlipoca himself, and
was regarded with awe by the entire populace, who imagined him to be
the earthly representative of the deity. He rested during the day,
and ventured forth at night only, armed with the dart and shield of
the god, to scour the roads. This practice was, of course, symbolical
of the wind-god's progress over the night-bound highways. He carried
also the whistle symbolical of the deity, and made with it a noise
such as the weird wind of night makes when it hurries through the
streets. To his arms and legs small bells were attached. He was
followed by a retinue of pages, and at intervals rested upon the
stone seats which were placed upon the highways for the convenience
of Tezcatlipoca. Later in the year he was mated to four beautiful
maidens of high birth, with whom he passed the time in amusement of
every description. He was entertained at the tables of the nobility as
the earthly representative of Tezcatlipoca, and his latter days were
one constant round of feasting and excitement. At last the fatal day
upon which he must be sacrificed arrived. He took a tearful farewell
of the maidens whom he had espoused, and was carried to the teocalli
of sacrifice, upon the sides of which he broke the musical instruments
with which he had beguiled the time of his captivity. When he reached
the summit he was received by the high-priest, who speedily made him
one with the god whom he represented by tearing his heart out on the
stone of sacrifice.


Huitzilopochtli, the War-God

Huitzilopochtli occupied in the Aztec pantheon a place similar
to that of Mars in the Roman. His origin is obscure, but the myth
relating to it is distinctly original in character. It recounts how,
under the shadow of the mountain of Coatepec, near the Toltec city
of Tollan, there dwelt a pious widow called Coatlicue, the mother
of a tribe of Indians called Centzonuitznaua, who had a daughter
called Coyolxauhqui, and who daily repaired to a small hill with the
intention of offering up prayers to the gods in a penitent spirit of
piety. Whilst occupied in her devotions one day she was surprised by a
small ball of brilliantly coloured feathers falling upon her from on
high. She was pleased by the bright variety of its hues, and placed
it in her bosom, intending to offer it up to the sun-god. Some time
afterwards she learnt that she was to become the mother of another
child. Her sons, hearing of this, rained abuse upon her, being incited
to humiliate her in every possible way by their sister Coyolxauhqui.

Coatlicue went about in fear and anxiety; but the spirit of her unborn
infant came and spoke to her and gave her words of encouragement,
soothing her troubled heart. Her sons, however, were resolved to
wipe out what they considered an insult to their race by the death
of their mother, and took counsel with one another to slay her. They
attired themselves in their war-gear, and arranged their hair after
the manner of warriors going to battle. But one of their number,
Quauitlicac, relented, and confessed the perfidy of his brothers to the
still unborn Huitzilopochtli, who replied to him: "O brother, hearken
attentively to what I have to say to you. I am fully informed of what
is about to happen." With the intention of slaying their mother, the
Indians went in search of her. At their head marched their sister,
Coyolxauhqui. They were armed to the teeth, and carried bundles of
darts with which they intended to kill the luckless Coatlicue.

Quauitlicac climbed the mountain to acquaint Huitzilopochtli with
the news that his brothers were approaching to kill their mother.

"Mark well where they are at," replied the infant god. "To what place
have they advanced?"

"To Tzompantitlan," responded Quauitlicac.

Later on Huitzilopochtli asked: "Where may they be now?"

"At Coaxalco," was the reply.

Once more Huitzilopochtli asked to what point his enemies had advanced.

"They are now at Petlac," Quauitlicac replied.

After a little while Quauitlicac informed Huitzilopochtli that the
Centzonuitznaua were at hand under the leadership of Coyolxauhqui. At
the moment of the enemy's arrival Huitzilopochtli was born, flourishing
a shield and spear of a blue colour. He was painted, his head was
surmounted by a panache, and his left leg was covered with feathers. He
shattered Coyolxauhqui with a flash of serpentine lightning, and then
gave chase to the Centzonuitznaua, whom he pursued four times round
the mountain. They did not attempt to defend themselves, but fled
incontinently. Many perished in the waters of the adjoining lake,
to which they had rushed in their despair. All were slain save a few
who escaped to a place called Uitzlampa, where they surrendered to
Huitzilopochtli and gave up their arms.

The name Huitzilopochtli signifies "Humming-bird to the left," from
the circumstance that the god wore the feathers of the humming-bird,
or colibri, on his left leg. From this it has been inferred that he
was a humming-bird totem. The explanation of Huitzilopochtli's origin
is a little deeper than this, however. Among the American tribes,
especially those of the northern continent, the serpent is regarded
with the deepest veneration as the symbol of wisdom and magic. From
these sources come success in war. The serpent also typifies the
lightning, the symbol of the divine spear, the apotheosis of warlike
might. Fragments of serpents are regarded as powerful war-physic
among many tribes. Atatarho, a mythical wizard-king of the Iroquois,
was clothed with living serpents as with a robe, and his myth throws
light on one of the names of Huitzilopochtli's mother, Coatlantona
(Robe of Serpents). Huitzilopochtli's image was surrounded by serpents,
and rested on serpent-shaped supporters. His sceptre was a single
snake, and his great drum was of serpent-skin.

In American mythology the serpent is closely associated with the
bird. Thus the name of the god Quetzalcoatl is translatable as
"Feathered Serpent," and many similar cases where the conception of
bird and serpent have been unified could be adduced. Huitzilopochtli
is undoubtedly one of these. We may regard him as a god the primary
conception of whom arose from the idea of the serpent, the symbol of
warlike wisdom and might, the symbol of the warrior's dart or spear,
and the humming-bird, the harbinger of summer, type of the season
when the snake or lightning god has power over the crops.

Huitzilopochtli was usually represented as wearing on his head a
waving panache or plume of humming-birds' feathers. His face and limbs
were striped with bars of blue, and in his right hand he carried four
spears. His left hand bore his shield, on the surface of which were
displayed five tufts of down, arranged in the form of a quincunx. The
shield was made with reeds, covered with eagle's down. The spear he
brandished was also tipped with tufts of down instead of flint. These
weapons were placed in the hands of those who as captives engaged in
the sacrificial fight, for in the Aztec mind Huitzilopochtli symbolised
the warrior's death on the gladiatorial stone of combat. As has been
said, Huitzilopochtli was war-god of the Aztecs, and was supposed to
have led them to the site of Mexico from their original home in the
north. The city of Mexico took its name from one of its districts,
which was designated by a title of Huitzilopochtli's, Mexitli (Hare
of the Aloes).


The War-God as Fertiliser

But Huitzilopochtli was not a war-god alone. As the serpent-god of
lightning he had a connection with summer, the season of lightning,
and therefore had dominion to some extent over the crops and fruits
of the earth. The Algonquian Indians of North America believed
that the rattlesnake could raise ruinous storms or grant favourable
breezes. They alluded to it also as the symbol of life, for the serpent
has a phallic significance because of its similarity to the symbol of
generation and fructification. With some American tribes also, notably
the Pueblo Indians of Arizona, the serpent has a solar significance,
and with tail in mouth symbolises the annual round of the sun. The
Nahua believed that Huitzilopochtli could grant them fair weather for
the fructification of their crops, and they placed an image of Tlaloc,
the rain-god, near him, so that, if necessary, the war-god could compel
the rain-maker to exert his pluvial powers or to abstain from the
creation of floods. We must, in considering the nature of this deity,
bear well in mind the connection in the Nahua consciousness between the
pantheon, war, and the food-supply. If war was not waged annually the
gods must go without flesh food and perish, and if the gods succumbed
the crops would fail, and famine would destroy the race. So it was
small wonder that Huitzilopochtli was one of the chief gods of Mexico.

Huitzilopochtli's principal festival was the Toxcatl, celebrated
immediately after the Toxcatl festival of Tezcatlipoca, to which it
bore a strong resemblance. Festivals of the god were held in May and
December, at the latter of which an image of him, moulded in dough
kneaded with the blood of sacrificed children, was pierced by the
presiding priest with an arrow--an act significant of the death of
Huitzilopochtli until his resurrection in the next year.

Strangely enough, when the absolute supremacy of Tezcatlipoca
is remembered, the high-priest of Huitzilopochtli, the Mexicatl
Teohuatzin, was considered to be the religious head of the Mexican
priesthood. The priests of Huitzilopochtli held office by right
of descent, and their primate exacted absolute obedience from the
priesthoods of all the other deities, being regarded as next to the
monarch himself in power and dominion.


Tlaloc, the Rain-God

Tlaloc was the god of rain and moisture. In a country such as Mexico,
where the success or failure of the crops depends entirely upon the
plentiful nature or otherwise of the rainfall, he was, it will be
readily granted, a deity of high importance. It was believed that he
made his home in the mountains which surround the valley of Mexico,
as these were the source of the local rainfall, and his popularity
is vouched for by the fact that sculptured representations of him
occur more often than those of any other of the Mexican deities. He
is generally represented in a semi-recumbent attitude, with the upper
part of the body raised upon the elbows, and the knees half drawn up,
probably to represent the mountainous character of the country whence
comes the rain. He was espoused to Chalchihuitlicue (Emerald Lady),
who bore him a numerous progeny, the Tlalocs (Clouds). Many of the
figures which represented him were carved from the green stone called
chalchiuitl (jadeite), to typify the colour of water, and in some of
these he was shown holding a serpent of gold to typify the lightning,
for water-gods are often closely identified with the thunder, which
hangs over the hills and accompanies heavy rains. Tlaloc, like his
prototype, the Kiche god Hurakan, manifested himself in three forms,
as the lightning-flash, the thunderbolt, and the thunder. Although
his image faced the east, where he was supposed to have originated,
he was worshipped as inhabiting the four cardinal points and every
mountain-top. The colours of the four points of the compass, yellow,
green, red, and blue, whence came the rain-bearing winds, entered
into the composition of his costume, which was further crossed with
streaks of silver, typifying the mountain torrents. A vase containing
every description of grain was usually placed before his idol, an
offering of the growth which it was hoped he would fructify. He dwelt
in a many-watered paradise called Tlalocan (The Country of Tlaloc),
a place of plenty and fruitfulness, where those who had been drowned or
struck by lightning or had died from dropsical diseases enjoyed eternal
bliss. Those of the common people who did not die such deaths went to
the dark abode of Mictlan, the all-devouring and gloomy Lord of Death.

In the native manuscripts Tlaloc is usually portrayed as having a dark
complexion, a large round eye, a row of tusks, and over the lips an
angular blue stripe curved downward and rolled up at the ends. The
latter character is supposed to have been evolved originally from
the coils of two snakes, their mouths with long fangs in the upper
jaw meeting in the middle of the upper lip. The snake, besides
being symbolised by lightning in many American mythologies, is also
symbolical of water, which is well typified in its sinuous movements.

Many maidens and children were annually sacrificed to Tlaloc. If the
children wept it was regarded as a happy omen for a rainy season. The
Etzalqualiztli (When they eat Bean Food) was his chief festival,
and was held on a day approximating to May 13, about which date the
rainy season usually commenced. Another festival in his honour,
the Quauitleua, commenced the Mexican year on February 2. At the
former festival the priests of Tlaloc plunged into a lake, imitating
the sounds and movements of frogs, which, as denizens of water, were
under the special protection of the god. Chalchihuitlicue, his wife,
was often symbolised by the small image of a frog.


Sacrifices to Tlaloc

Human sacrifices also took place at certain points in the mountains
where artificial ponds were consecrated to Tlaloc. Cemeteries were
situated in their vicinity, and offerings to the god interred near the
burial-place of the bodies of the victims slain in his service. His
statue was placed on the highest mountain of Tezcuco, and an old
writer mentions that five or six young children were annually offered
to the god at various points, their hearts torn out, and their remains
interred. The mountains Popocatepetl and Teocuinani were regarded as
his special high places, and on the heights of the latter was built
his temple, in which stood his image carved in green stone.

The Nahua believed that the constant production of food and rain
induced a condition of senility in those deities whose duty it was
to provide them. This they attempted to stave off, fearing that if
they failed in so doing the gods would perish. They afforded them,
accordingly, a period of rest and recuperation, and once in eight
years a festival called the Atamalqualiztli (Fast of Porridge-balls
and Water) was held, during which every one in the Nahua community
returned for the time being to the conditions of savage life. Dressed
in costumes representing all forms of animal and bird life, and
mimicking the sounds made by the various creatures they typified, the
people danced round the teocalli of Tlaloc for the purpose of diverting
and entertaining him after his labours in producing the fertilising
rains of the past eight years. A lake was filled with water-snakes and
frogs, and into this the people plunged, catching the reptiles in their
mouths and devouring them alive. The only grain food which might be
partaken during this season of rest was thin water-porridge of maize.

Should one of the more prosperous peasants or yeomen deem a rainfall
necessary to the growth of his crops, or should he fear a drought,
he sought out one of the professional makers of dough or paste idols,
whom he desired to mould one of Tlaloc. To this image offerings
of maize-porridge and pulque were made. Throughout the night the
farmer and his neighbours danced, shrieking and howling round the
figure for the purpose of rousing Tlaloc from his drought-bringing
slumbers. Next day was spent in quaffing huge libations of pulque,
and in much-needed rest from the exertions of the previous night.

In Tlaloc it is easy to trace resemblances to a mythological conception
widely prevalent among the indigenous American peoples. He is similar
to such deities as the Hurakan of the Kiche of Guatemala, the Pillan
of the aborigines of Chile, and Con, the thunder-god of the Collao of
Peru. Only his thunderous powers are not so apparent as his rain-making
abilities, and in this he differs somewhat from the gods alluded to.


Quetzalcoatl

It is highly probable that Quetzalcoatl was a deity of the pre-Nahua
people of Mexico. He was regarded by the Aztec race as a god of
somewhat alien character, and had but a limited following in Mexico,
the city of Huitzilopochtli. In Cholula, however, and others of the
older towns his worship flourished exceedingly. He was regarded as
"The Father of the Toltecs," and, legend says, was the seventh and
youngest son of the Toltec Abraham, Iztacmixcohuatl. Quetzalcoatl
(whose name means "Feathered Serpent" or "Feathered Staff") became,
at a relatively early period, ruler of Tollan, and by his enlightened
sway and his encouragement of the liberal arts did much to further the
advancement of his people. His reign had lasted for a period sufficient
to permit of his placing the cultivated arts upon a satisfactory basis
when the country was visited by the cunning magicians Tezcatlipoca
and Coyotlinaual, god of the Amantecas. Disentangled from its terms of
myth, this statement may be taken to imply that bands of invading Nahua
first began to appear within the Toltec territories. Tezcatlipoca,
descending from the sky in the shape of a spider by way of a fine web,
proffered him a draught of pulque, which so intoxicated him that
the curse of lust descended upon him, and he forgot his chastity
with Quetzalpetlatl. The doom pronounced upon him was the hard one
of banishment, and he was compelled to forsake Anahuac. His exile
wrought peculiar changes upon the face of the country. He secreted
his treasures of gold and silver, burned his palaces, transformed
the cacao-trees into mezquites, and banished all the birds from
the neighbourhood of Tollan. The magicians, nonplussed at these
unexpected happenings, begged him to return, but he refused on the
ground that the sun required his presence. He proceeded to Tabasco,
the fabled land of Tlapallan, and, embarking upon a raft made of
serpents, floated away to the east. A slightly different version
of this myth has already been given. Other accounts state that the
king cast himself upon a funeral pyre and was consumed, and that the
ashes arising from the conflagration flew upward, and were changed
into birds of brilliant plumage. His heart also soared into the sky,
and became the morning star. The Mexicans averred that Quetzalcoatl
died when the star became visible, and thus they bestowed upon him
the title "Lord of the Dawn." They further said that when he died he
was invisible for four days, and that for eight days he wandered in
the underworld, after which time the morning star appeared, when he
achieved resurrection, and ascended his throne as a god.

It is the contention of some authorities that the myth of Quetzalcoatl
points to his status as god of the sun. That luminary, they say, begins
his diurnal journey in the east, whence Quetzalcoatl returned as to
his native home. It will be recalled that Montezuma and his subjects
imagined that Cortés was no other than Quetzalcoatl, returned to his
dominions, as an old prophecy declared he would do. But that he stood
for the sun itself is highly improbable, as will be shown. First of
all, however, it will be well to pay some attention to other theories
concerning his origin.

Perhaps the most important of these is that which regards Quetzalcoatl
as a god of the air. He is connected, say some, with the cardinal
points, and wears the insignia of the cross, which symbolises
them. Dr. Seler says of him: "He has a protruding, trumpet-like
mouth, for the wind-god blows.... His figure suggests whirls and
circles. Hence his temples were built in circular form.... The
head of the wind-god stands for the second of the twenty day signs,
which was called Ehecatl (Wind)." The same authority, however, in
his essay on Mexican chronology, gives to Quetzalcoatl a dual nature,
"the dual nature which seems to belong to the wind-god Quetzalcoatl,
who now appears simply a wind-god, and again seems to show the true
characters of the old god of fire and light." [8]

Dr. Brinton perceived in Quetzalcoatl a similar dual nature. "He is
both lord of the eastern light and of the winds," he writes (Myths
of the New World, p. 214). "Like all the dawn heroes, he too was
represented as of white complexion, clothed in long, white robes, and,
as many of the Aztec gods, with a full and flowing beard.... He had
been overcome by Tezcatlipoca, the wind or spirit of night, who had
descended from heaven by a spider's web, and presented his rival with
a draught supposed to confer immortality, but in fact producing an
intolerable longing for home. For the wind and the light both depart
when the gloaming draws near, or when the clouds spread their dark
and shadowy webs along the mountains, and pour the vivifying rain
upon the fields."

The theory which derives Quetzalcoatl from a "culture-hero" who once
actually existed is scarcely reconcilable with probability. It is
more than likely that, as in the case of other mythical paladins,