The Legend of the Dwarf

In his Travels in Yucatan Stephens has a legend relating to this house
which may well be given in his own words: "An old woman," he says,
"lived alone in her hut, rarely leaving her chimney-corner. She was
much distressed at having no children, and in her grief one day took an
egg, wrapped it up carefully in cotton cloth, and put it in a corner of
her hut. She looked every day in great anxiety, but no change in the
egg was observable. One morning, however, she found the shell broken,
and a lovely tiny creature was stretching out its arms to her. The
old woman was in raptures. She took it to her heart, gave it a nurse,
and was so careful of it that at the end of a year the baby walked
and talked as well as a grown-up man. But he stopped growing. The good
old woman in her joy and delight exclaimed that the baby should be a
great chief. One day she told him to go to the king's palace and engage
him in a trial of strength. The dwarf begged hard not to be sent on
such an enterprise. But the old woman insisted on his going, and he
was obliged to obey. When ushered into the presence of the sovereign
he threw down his gauntlet. The latter smiled, and asked him to lift
a stone of three arobes (75 lb.). The child returned crying to his
mother, who sent him back, saying, 'If the king can lift the stone, you
can lift it too.' The king did take it up, but so did the dwarf. His
strength was tried in many other ways, but all the king did was as
easily done by the dwarf. Wroth at being outdone by so puny a creature,
the prince told the dwarf that unless he built a palace loftier than
any in the city he should die. The affrighted dwarf returned to the
old woman, who bade him not to despair, and the next morning they
both awoke in the palace which is still standing. The king saw the
palace with amazement. He instantly sent for the dwarf, and desired
him to collect two bundles of cogoiol (a kind of hard wood), with
one of which he would strike the dwarf on the head, and consent to be
struck in return by his tiny adversary. The latter again returned to
his mother moaning and lamenting. But the old woman cheered him up,
and, placing a tortilla on his head, sent him back to the king. The
trial took place in the presence of all the state grandees. The king
broke the whole of his bundle on the dwarf's head without hurting him
in the least, seeing which he wished to save his own head from the
impending ordeal; but his word had been passed before his assembled
court, and he could not well refuse. The dwarf struck, and at the
second blow the king's skull was broken to pieces. The spectators
immediately proclaimed the victorious dwarf their sovereign. After
this the old woman disappeared. But in the village of Mani, fifty
miles distant, is a deep well leading to a subterraneous passage which
extends as far as Merida. In this passage is an old woman sitting
on the bank of a river shaded by a great tree, having a serpent by
her side. She sells water in small quantities, accepting no money,
for she must have human beings, innocent babies, which are devoured
by the serpent. This old woman is the dwarf's mother."

The interpretation of this myth is by no means difficult. The old
woman is undoubtedly the rain-goddess, the dwarf the Man of the Sun
who emerges from the cosmic egg. In Yucatan dwarfs were sacred to the
sun-god, and were occasionally sacrificed to him, for reasons which
appear obscure.


The Mound of Sacrifice

Another building at Uxmal the associations of which render it of more
than passing interest is the Pyramid of Sacrifice, an edifice built
on the plan of the Mexican teocalli. Indeed, it is probably of Aztec
origin, and may even have been erected by the mercenaries who during
the fifteenth century swarmed from Mexico into Yucatan and Guatemala
to take service with the rival chieftains who carried on civil war
in those states. Beside this is another mound which was crowned
by a very beautiful temple, now in an advanced state of ruin. The
"Pigeon House" is an ornate pile with pinnacles pierced by large
openings which probably served as dovecotes. The entire architecture
of Uxmal displays a type more primitive than that met elsewhere in
Yucatan. There is documentary evidence to prove that so late as 1673
the Indians still worshipped in the ruins of Uxmal, where they burnt
copal, and performed "other detestable sacrifices." So that even a
hundred and fifty years of Spanish rule had not sufficed to wean the
natives from the worship of the older gods to whom their fathers had
for generations bowed down. This would also seem conclusive evidence
that the ruins of Uxmal at least were the work of the existing race.


The Phantom City

In his Travels in Central America Stephens recounts a fascinating
story told him by a priest of Santa Cruz del Quiche, to the effect
that four days' journey from that place a great Indian city was to be
seen, densely populated, and preserving the ancient civilisation of
the natives. He had, indeed, beheld it from the summit of a cliff,
shining in glorious whiteness many leagues away. This was perhaps
Lorillard City, discovered by Suarez, and afterwards by Charnay. In
general type Lorillard closely resembles Palenque. Here was found a
wonderfully executed stone idol, which Charnay thought represented a
different racial type from that seen in the other Central American
cities. The chief finds of interest in this ancient city were the
intricate bas-reliefs, one over the central door of a temple, probably
a symbolic representation of Quetzalcoatl, who holds the rain-cross,
in both hands, and is seen vis-à-vis with an acolyte, also holding the
symbol, though it is possible that the individual represented may have
been the high-priest of Quetzalcoatl or Kukulcan. Another bas-relief
represents a priest sacrificing to Kukulcan by passing a rope of
maguey fibre over his tongue for the purpose of drawing blood--an
instance of the substitution in sacrifice of the part for the whole.


The Horse-God

At Peten-Itza, Cortés left his horse, which had fallen sick, to the
care of the Indians. The animal died under their mismanagement and
because of the food offered it, and the terrified natives, fancying
it a divine being, raised an image of it, and called it Izimin Chac
(Thunder and Lightning), because they had seen its rider discharge a
firearm, and they imagined that the flash and the report had proceeded
from the creature. The sight of the idol aroused such wrath in the
zealous bosom of a certain Spanish monk that he broke it with a
huge stone--and, but for the interference of the cacique, would have
suffered death for his temerity. Peten was a city "filled with idols,"
as was Tayasal, close at hand, where in the seventeenth century no
less than nine new temples were built, which goes to prove that the
native religion was by no means extinct. One of these new temples,
according to Villagutierre, had a Spanish balcony of hewn stone! In
the Temple of the Sun at Tikal, an adjoining city, is a wonderful
altar panel, representing an unknown deity, and here also are many of
those marvellously carved idols of which Stephens gives such capital
illustrations in his fascinating book.


Copan

Copan, one of the most interesting of these wondrous city-centres,
the name of which has, indeed, become almost a household word, is in
the same district as the towns just described, and abounds chiefly in
monolithic images. It yielded after a desperate struggle to Hernandez
de Chaves, one of Alvarado's lieutenants, in 1530. The monolithic
images so abundantly represented here are evolved from the stelæ and
the bas-relief, and are not statues in the proper sense of the term,
as they are not completely cut away from the stone background out
of which they were carved. An altar found at Copan exhibits real
skill in sculpture, the head-dresses, ornaments, and expressions of
the eight figures carved on its sides being elaborate in the extreme
and exceedingly lifelike. Here again we notice a fresh racial type,
which goes to prove that one race alone cannot have been responsible
for these marvellous ruined cities and all that they contain and
signify. We have to imagine a shifting of races and a fluctuation
of peoples in Central America such as we know took place in Europe
and Asia before we can rightly understand the ethnological problems
of the civilised sphere of the New World, and any theory which does
not take due account of such conditions is doomed to failure.


Mitla

We now come to the last of these stupendous remnants of a vanished
civilisation--Mitla, by no means the least of the works of civilised
man in Central America. At the period of the conquest the city
occupied a wide area, but at the present time only six palaces and
three ruined pyramids are left standing. The great palace is a vast
edifice in the shape of the letter T, and measures 130 feet in its
greater dimension, with an apartment of a like size. Six monolithic
columns which supported the roof still stand in gigantic isolation,
but the roof itself has long fallen in. A dark passage leads to the
inner court, and the walls of this are covered with mosaic work
in panels which recalls somewhat the pattern known as the "Greek
fret." The lintels over the doorways are of huge blocks of stone
nearly eighteen feet long. Of this building Viollet-le-Duc says:
"The monuments of Greece and Rome in their best time can alone compare
with the splendour of this great edifice."


A Place of Sepulture

The ruins at Mitla bear no resemblance to those of Mexico or Yucatan,
either as regards architecture or ornamentation, for whereas the
Yucatec buildings possess overlapping walls, the palaces of Mitla
consist of perpendicular walls intended to support flat roofs. Of
these structures the second and fourth palaces alone are in such a
state of preservation as to permit of general description. The second
palace shows by its sculptured lintel and two inner columns that the
same arrangement was observed in its construction as in the great
palace just described. The fourth palace has on its southern façade
oblong panels and interesting caryatides or pillars in the shape of
human figures. These palaces consisted of four upper apartments,
finely sculptured, and a like number of rooms on the lower story,
which was occupied by the high-priest, and to which the king came
to mourn on the demise of a relative. Here, too, the priests were
entombed, and in an adjoining room the idols were kept. Into a huge
underground chamber the bodies of eminent warriors and sacrificial
victims were cast. Attempts have been made to identify Mitla with
Mictlan, the Mexican Hades, and there is every reason to suppose
that the identification is correct. It must be borne in mind that
Mictlan was as much a place of the dead as a place of punishment,
as was the Greek Hades, and therefore might reasonably signify a
place of sepulture, such as Mitla undoubtedly was. The following
passages from the old historians of Mitla, Torquemada and Burgoa,
throw much light on this aspect of the city, and besides are full of
the most intense interest and curious information, so that they may
be given in extenso. But before passing on to them we should for a
moment glance at Seler's suggestion that the American race imagined
that their ancestors had originally issued from the underworld through
certain caverns into the light of day, and that this was the reason
why Mitla was not only a burial-place but a sanctuary.


An Old Description of Mitla

Of Mitla Father Torquemada writes:

"When some monks of my order, the Franciscan, passed, preaching
and shriving, through the province of Zapoteca, whose capital city
is Tehuantepec, they came to a village which was called Mictlan,
that is, Underworld [Hell]. Besides mentioning the large number
of people in the village they told of buildings which were prouder
and more magnificent than any which they had hitherto seen in New
Spain. Among them was a temple of the evil spirit and living-rooms
for his demoniacal servants, and among other fine things there was
a hall with ornamented panels, which were constructed of stone in a
variety of arabesques and other very remarkable designs. There were
doorways there, each one of which was built of but three stones,
two upright at the sides and one across them, in such a manner that,
although these doorways were very high and broad, the stones sufficed
for their entire construction. They were so thick and broad that we
were assured there were few like them. There was another hall in these
buildings, or rectangular temples, which was erected entirely on round
stone pillars, very high and very thick, so thick that two grown men
could scarcely encircle them with their arms, nor could one of them
reach the finger-tips of the other. These pillars were all in one
piece, and, it was said, the whole shaft of a pillar measured 5 ells
from top to bottom, and they were very much like those of the Church
of Santa Maria Maggiore in Rome, very skilfully made and polished."

Father Burgoa gives a more exact description. He says:

"The Palace of the Living and of the Dead was built for the use
of this person [the high-priest of the Zapotecs].... They built
this magnificent house or pantheon in the shape of a rectangle, with
portions rising above the earth and portions built down into the earth,
the latter in the hole or cavity which was found below the surface
of the earth, and ingeniously made the chambers of equal size by the
manner of joining them, leaving a spacious court in the middle; and in
order to secure four equal chambers they accomplished what barbarian
heathen (as they were) could only achieve by the powers and skill
of an architect. It is not known in what stone-pit they quarried the
pillars, which are so thick that two men can scarcely encircle them
with their arms. These are, to be sure, mere shafts without capital
or pedestal, but they are wonderfully regular and smooth, and they
are about 5 ells high and in one piece. These served to support the
roof, which consists of stone slabs instead of beams. The slabs are
about 2 ells long, 1 ell broad, and half an ell thick, extending from
pillar to pillar. The pillars stand in a row, one behind the other,
in order to receive the weight. The stone slabs are so regular and so
exactly fitted that, without any mortar or cement, at the joints they
resemble mortised beams. The four rooms, which are very spacious,
are arranged in exactly the same way and covered with the same
kind of roofing. But in the construction of the walls the greatest
architects of the earth have been surpassed, as I have not found this
kind of architecture described either among the Egyptians or among
the Greeks, for they begin at the base with a narrow outline and,
as the structure rises in height, spread out in wide copings at the
top, so that the upper part exceeds the base in breadth and looks
as if it would fall over. The inner side of the walls consists of a
mortar or stucco of such hardness that no one knows with what kind of
liquid it could have been mixed. The outside is of such extraordinary
workmanship that on a masonry wall about an ell in height there are
placed stone slabs with a projecting edge, which form the support
for an endless number of small white stones, the smallest of which
are a sixth of an ell long, half as broad, and a quarter as thick,
and which are as smooth and regular as if they had all come from one
mould. They had so many of these stones that, setting them in, one
beside the other, they formed with them a large number of different
beautiful geometric designs, each an ell broad and running the whole
length of the wall, each varying in pattern up to the crowning piece,
which was the finest of all. And what has always seemed inexplicable
to the greatest architects is the adjustment of these little stones
without a single handful of mortar, and the fact that without tools,
with nothing but hard stones and sand, they could achieve such solid
work that, though the whole structure is very old and no one knows
who made it, it has been preserved until the present day.


Human Sacrifice at Mitla

"I carefully examined these monuments some thirty years ago in the
chambers above ground, which are constructed of the same size and in
the same way as those below ground, and, though single pieces were in
ruins because some stones had become loosened, there was still much
to admire. The doorways were very large, the sides of each being of
single stones of the same thickness as the wall, and the lintel was
made out of another stone which held the two lower ones together at
the top. There were four chambers above ground and four below. The
latter were arranged according to their purpose in such a way that
one front chamber served as chapel and sanctuary for the idols,
which were placed on a great stone which served as an altar. And
for the more important feasts which they celebrated with sacrifices,
or at the burial of a king or great lord, the high-priest instructed
the lesser priests or the subordinate temple officials who served
him to prepare the chapel and his vestments and a large quantity of
the incense used by them. And then he descended with a great retinue,
while none of the common people saw him or dared to look in his face,
convinced that if they did so they would fall dead to the earth as a
punishment for their boldness. And when he entered the chapel they put
on him a long white cotton garment made like an alb, and over that a
garment shaped like a dalmatic, which was embroidered with pictures
of wild beasts and birds; and they put a cap on his head, and on his
feet a kind of shoe woven of many coloured feathers. And when he had
put on these garments he walked with solemn mien and measured step to
the altar, bowed low before the idols, renewed the incense, and then in
quite unintelligible murmurs he began to converse with these images,
these depositories of infernal spirits, and continued in this sort
of prayer with hideous grimaces and writhings, uttering inarticulate
sounds, which filled all present with fear and terror, till he came
out of that diabolical trance and told those standing around the lies
and fabrications which the spirit had imparted to him or which he had
invented himself. When human beings were sacrificed the ceremonies were
multiplied, and the assistants of the high-priest stretched the victim
out upon a large stone, baring his breast, which they tore open with
a great stone knife, while the body writhed in fearful convulsions,
and they laid the heart bare, ripping it out, and with it the soul,
which the devil took, while they carried the heart to the high-priest
that he might offer it to the idols by holding it to their mouths,
among other ceremonies; and the body was thrown into the burial-place
of their 'blessed,' as they called them. And if after the sacrifice
he felt inclined to detain those who begged any favour he sent them
word by the subordinate priests not to leave their houses till their
gods were appeased, and he commanded them to do penance meanwhile,
to fast and to speak with no woman, so that, until this father of sin
had interceded for the absolution of the penitents and had declared
the gods appeased, they did not dare to cross their thresholds.

"The second (underground) chamber was the burial-place of these
high-priests, the third that of the kings of Theozapotlan, whom they
brought hither richly dressed in their best attire, feathers, jewels,
golden necklaces, and precious stones, placing a shield in the left
hand and a javelin in the right, just as they used them in war. And
at their burial rites great mourning prevailed; the instruments which
were played made mournful sounds; and with loud wailing and continuous
sobbing they chanted the life and exploits of their lord until they
laid him on the structure which they had prepared for this purpose.


Living Sacrifices

"The last (underground) chamber had a second door at the rear, which
led to a dark and gruesome room. This was closed with a stone slab,
which occupied the whole entrance. Through this door they threw the
bodies of the victims and of the great lords and chieftains who had
fallen in battle, and they brought them from the spot where they fell,
even when it was very far off, to this burial-place; and so great was
the barbarous infatuation of those Indians that, in the belief of the
happy life which awaited them, many who were oppressed by diseases
or hardships begged this infamous priest to accept them as living
sacrifices and allow them to enter through that portal and roam about
in the dark interior of the mountain, to seek the feasting-places of
their forefathers. And when any one obtained this favour the servants
of the high-priest led him thither with special ceremonies, and after
they allowed him to enter through the small door they rolled the
stone before it again and took leave of him, and the unhappy man,
wandering in that abyss of darkness, died of hunger and thirst,
beginning already in life the pain of his damnation, and on account
of this horrible abyss they called this village Liyobaa.


The Cavern of Death

"When later there fell upon these people the light of the Gospel,
its servants took much trouble to instruct them, and to find out
whether this error, common to all these nations, still prevailed;
and they learned from the stories which had been handed down that
all were convinced that this damp cavern extended more than thirty
leagues underground, and that its roof was supported by pillars. And
there were people, zealous prelates anxious for knowledge, who, in
order to convince these ignorant people of their error, went into this
cave accompanied by a large number of people bearing lighted torches
and firebrands, and descended several large steps. And they soon came
upon many great buttresses which formed a kind of street. They had
prudently brought a quantity of rope with them to use as guiding-lines,
that they might not lose themselves in this confusing labyrinth. And
the putrefaction and the bad odour and the dampness of the earth
were very great, and there was also a cold wind which blew out
their torches. And after they had gone a short distance, fearing
to be overpowered by the stench, or to step on poisonous reptiles,
of which some had been seen, they resolved to go out again, and to
completely wall up this back door of hell. The four buildings above
ground were the only ones which still remained open, and they had
a court and chambers like those underground; and the ruins of these
have lasted even to the present day.


Palace of the High-Priest

"One of the rooms above ground was the palace of the high-priest,
where he sat and slept, for the apartment offered room and opportunity
for everything. The throne was like a high cushion, with a high back
to lean against, all of tiger-skin, stuffed entirely with delicate
feathers, or with fine grass which was used for this purpose. The other
seats were smaller, even when the king came to visit him. The authority
of this devilish priest was so great that there was no one who dared
to cross the court, and to avoid this the other three chambers had
doors in the rear, through which even the kings entered. For this
purpose they had alleys and passage-ways on the outside above and
below, by which people could enter and go out when they came to see
the high-priest....

"The second chamber above ground was that of the priests and the
assistants of the high-priest. The third was that of the king when
he came. The fourth was that of the other chieftains and captains,
and though the space was small for so great a number, and for so
many different families, yet they accommodated themselves to each
other out of respect for the place, and avoided dissensions and
factions. Furthermore, there was no other administration of justice
in this place than that of the high-priest, to whose unlimited power
all bowed.


Furniture of the Temples

"All the rooms were clean, and well furnished with mats. It was not
the custom to sleep on bedsteads, however great a lord might be. They
used very tastefully braided mats, which were spread on the floor,
and soft skins of animals and delicate fabrics for coverings. Their
food consisted usually of animals killed in the hunt--deer, rabbits,
armadillos, &c., and also birds, which they killed with snares
or arrows. The bread, made of their maize, was white and well
kneaded. Their drinks were always cold, made of ground chocolate,
which was mixed with water and pounded maize. Other drinks were
made of pulpy and of crushed fruits, which were then mixed with the
intoxicating drink prepared from the agave; for since the common people
were forbidden the use of intoxicating drinks, there was always an
abundance of these on hand."