CHAPTER IV: THE MAYA RACE AND MYTHOLOGY


The Maya

It was to the Maya--the people who occupied the territory between
the isthmus of Tehuantepec and Nicaragua--that the civilisation of
Central America owed most. The language they spoke was quite distinct
from the Nahuatl spoken by the Nahua of Mexico, and in many respects
their customs and habits were widely different from those of the
people of Anahuac. It will be remembered that the latter were the
heirs of an older civilisation, that, indeed, they had entered the
valley of Mexico as savages, and that practically all they knew of
the arts of culture was taught them by the remnants of the people
whom they dispossessed. It was not thus with the Maya. Their arts
and industries were of their own invention, and bore the stamp of
an origin of considerable antiquity. They were, indeed, the supreme
intellectual race of America, and on their coming into contact with
the Nahua that people assimilated sufficient of their culture to
raise them several grades in the scale of civilisation.


Were the Maya Toltecs?

It has already been stated that many antiquarians see in the Maya
those Toltecs who because of the inroads of barbarous tribes quitted
their native land of Anahuac and journeyed southward to seek a new
home in Chiapas and Yucatan. It would be idle to attempt to uphold
or refute such a theory in the absolute dearth of positive evidence
for or against it. The architectural remains of the older race of
Anahuac do not bear any striking likeness to Maya forms, and if the
mythologies of the two peoples are in some particulars alike, that may
well be accounted for by their mutual adoption of deities and religious
customs. On the other hand, it is distinctly noteworthy that the cult
of the god Quetzalcoatl, which was regarded in Mexico as of alien
origin, had a considerable vogue among the Maya and their allied races.


The Maya Kingdom

On the arrival of the Spaniards (after the celebrated march of Cortés
from Mexico to Central America) the Maya were divided into a number
of subsidiary states which remind us somewhat of the numerous little
kingdoms of Palestine. That these had hived off from an original
and considerably greater state there is good evidence to show, but
internal dissension had played havoc with the polity of the central
government of this empire, the disintegration of which had occurred
at a remote period. In the semi-historical legends of this people
we catch glimpses of a great kingdom, occasionally alluded to as
the "Kingdom of the Great Snake," or the empire of Xibalba, realms
which have been identified with the ruined city-centres of Palenque
and Mitla. These identifications must be regarded with caution,
but the work of excavation will doubtless sooner or later assist
theorists in coming to conclusions which will admit of no doubt. The
sphere of Maya civilisation and influence is pretty well marked,
and embraces the peninsula of Yucatan, Chiapas, to the isthmus of
Tehuantepec on the north, and the whole of Guatemala to the boundaries
of the present republic of San Salvador. The true nucleus of Maya
civilisation, however, must be looked for in that part of Chiapas
which skirts the banks of the Usumacinta river and in the valleys of
its tributaries. Here Maya art and architecture reached a height of
splendour unknown elsewhere, and in this district, too, the strange
Maya system of writing had its most skilful exponents. Although the
arts and industries of the several districts inhabited by people of
Maya race exhibited many superficial differences, these are so small
as to make us certain of the fact that the various areas inhabited
by Maya stock had all drawn their inspiration toward civilisation
from one common nucleus, and had equally passed through a uniform
civilisation and drawn sap from an original culture-centre.


The Maya Dialects

Perhaps the most effectual method of distinguishing the various
branches of the Maya people from one another consists in dividing
them into linguistic groups. The various dialects spoken by the folk
of Maya origin, although they exhibit some considerable difference,
yet display strongly that affinity of construction and resemblance
in root which go to prove that they all emanate from one common
mother-tongue. In Chiapas the Maya tongue itself is the current
dialect, whilst in Guatemala no less than twenty-four dialects are in
use, the principal of which are the Quiche, or Kiche, the Kakchiquel,
the Zutugil, Coxoh Chol, and Pipil. These dialects and the folk who
speak them are sufficient to engage our attention, as in them are
enshrined the most remarkable myths and legends of the race, and by
the men who used them were the greatest acts in Maya history achieved.


Whence Came the Maya?

Whence came these folk, then, who raised a civilisation by no means
inferior to that of ancient Egypt, which, if it had had scope,
would have rivalled in its achievements the glory of old Assyria? We
cannot tell. The mystery of its entrance into the land is as deep
as the mystery of the ancient forests which now bury the remnants
of its mighty monuments and enclose its temples in impenetrable
gloom. Generations of antiquarians have attempted to trace the origin
of this race to Egypt, Phoenicia, China, Burma. But the manifest
traces of indigenous American origin are present in all its works,
and the writers who have beheld in these likenesses to the art of
Asiatic or African peoples have been grievously misled by superficial
resemblances which could not have betrayed any one who had studied
Maya affinities deeply.


Civilisation of the Maya

At the risk of repetition it is essential to point out that
civilisation, which was a newly acquired thing with the Nahua peoples,
was not so with the Maya. They were indisputably an older race,
possessing institutions which bore the marks of generations of use,
whereas the Nahua had only too obviously just entered into their
heritage of law and order. When we first catch sight of the Maya
kingdoms they are in the process of disintegration. Such strong young
blood as the virile folk of Anahuac possessed did not flow in the veins
of the people of Yucatan and Guatemala. They were to the Nahua much
as the ancient Assyrians were to the hosts of Israel at the entrance
of the latter into national existence. That there was a substratum of
ethnical and cultural relationship, however, it would be impossible to
deny. The institutions, architecture, habits, even the racial cast of
thought of the two peoples, bore such a general resemblance as to show
that many affinities of blood and cultural relationship existed between
them. But it will not do to insist too strongly upon these. It may be
argued with great probability that these relationships and likenesses
exist because of the influence of Maya civilisation upon Mexican alone,
or from the inheritance by both Mexican and Maya people of a still
older culture of which we are ignorant, and the proofs of which lie
buried below the forests of Guatemala or the sands of Yucatan.


The Zapotecs

The influence of the Maya upon the Nahua was a process of exceeding
slowness. The peoples who divided them one from another were themselves
benefited by carrying Maya culture into Anahuac, or rather it might be
said that they constituted a sort of filter through which the southern
civilisation reached the northern. These peoples were the Zapotecs,
the Mixtecs, and the Kuikatecs, by far the most important of whom were
the first-mentioned. They partook of the nature and civilisation of
both races, and were in effect a border people who took from and gave
to both Maya and Nahua, much as the Jews absorbed and disseminated the
cultures of Egypt and Assyria. They were, however, of Nahua race, but
their speech bears the strongest marks of having borrowed extensively
from the Maya vocabulary. For many generations these people wandered
in a nomadic condition from Maya to Nahua territory, thus absorbing
the customs, speech, and mythology of each.


The Huasteca

But we should be wrong if we thought that the Maya had never
attempted to expand, and had never sought new homes for their surplus
population. That they had is proved by an outlying tribe of Maya,
the Huasteca, having settled at the mouth of the Panuco river, on
the north coast of Mexico. The presence of this curious ethnological
island has of course given rise to all sorts of queer theories
concerning Toltec relationship, whereas it simply intimates that
before the era of Nahua expansion the Maya had attempted to colonise
the country to the north of their territories, but that their efforts
in this direction had been cut short by the influx of savage Nahua,
against whom they found themselves unable to contend.


The Type of Maya Civilisation

Did the civilisation of the Maya differ, then, in type from that of
the Nahua, or was it merely a larger expression of that in vogue in
Anahuac? We may take it that the Nahua civilisation characterised
the culture of Central America in its youth, whilst that of the Maya
displayed it in its bloom, and perhaps in its senility. The difference
was neither essential nor radical, but may be said to have arisen for
the most part from climatic and kindred causes. The climate of Anahuac
is dry and temperate, that of Yucatan and Guatemala is tropical,
and we shall find even such religious conceptions of the two peoples
as were drawn from a common source varying from this very cause,
and coloured by differences in temperature and rainfall.


Maya History

Before entering upon a consideration of the art, architecture, or
mythology of this strange and highly interesting people it will
be necessary to provide the reader with a brief sketch of their
history. Such notices of this as exist in English are few, and their
value doubtful. For the earlier history of the people of Maya stock we
depend almost wholly upon tradition and architectural remains. The net
result of the evidence wrung from these is that the Maya civilisation
was one and homogeneous, and that all the separate states must have
at one period passed through a uniform condition of culture, to which
they were all equally debtors, and that this is sufficient ground for
the belief that all were at one time beneath the sway of one central
power. For the later history we possess the writings of the Spanish
fathers, but not in such profusion as in the case of Mexico. In fact
the trustworthy original authors who deal with Maya history can almost
be counted on the fingers of one hand. We are further confused in
perusing these, and, indeed, throughout the study of Maya history,
by discovering that many of the sites of Maya cities are designated
by Nahua names. This is due to the fact that the Spanish conquerors
were guided in their conquest of the Maya territories by Nahua, who
naturally applied Nahuatlac designations to those sites of which the
Spaniards asked the names. These appellations clung to the places
in question; hence the confusion, and the blundering theories which
would read in these place-names relics of Aztec conquest.


The Nucleus of Maya Power

As has been said, the nucleus of Maya power and culture is probably
to be found in that part of Chiapas which slopes down from the steep
Cordilleras. Here the ruined sites of Palenque, Piedras Negras, and
Ocosingo are eloquent of that opulence of imagination and loftiness
of conception which go hand in hand with an advanced culture. The
temples and palaces of this region bear the stamp of a dignity
and consciousness of metropolitan power which are scarcely to be
mistaken, so broad, so free is their architectural conception, so
full to overflowing the display of the desire to surpass. But upon
the necessities of religion and central organisation alone was this
architectural artistry lavished. Its dignities were not profaned by
its application to mere domestic uses, for, unless what were obviously
palaces are excepted, not a single example of Maya domestic building
has survived. This is of course accounted for by the circumstance
that the people were sharply divided into the aristocratic and
labouring classes, the first of which was closely identified with
religion or kingship, and was housed in the ecclesiastical or royal
buildings, whilst those of less exalted rank were perforce content
with the shelter afforded by a hut built of perishable materials,
the traces of which have long since passed away. The temples were,
in fact, the nuclei of the towns, the centres round which the Maya
communities were grouped, much in the same manner as the cities of
Europe in the Middle Ages clustered and grew around the shadow of
some vast cathedral or sheltering stronghold.


Early Race Movements

We shall leave the consideration of Maya tradition until we come to
speak of Maya myth proper, and attempt to glean from the chaos of
legend some veritable facts connected with Maya history. According to
a manuscript of Kuikatec origin recently discovered, it is probable
that a Nahua invasion of the Maya states of Chiapas and Tabasco took
place about the ninth century of our era, and we must for the present
regard that as the starting-point of Maya history. The south-western
portions of the Maya territory were agitated about the same time by
race movements, which turned northward toward Tehuantepec, and, flowing
through Guatemala, came to rest in Acalan, on the borders of Yucatan,
retarded, probably, by the inhospitable and waterless condition of
that country. This Nahua invasion probably had the effect of driving
the more peaceful Maya from their northerly settlements and forcing
them farther south. Indeed, evidence is not wanting to show that
the warlike Nahua pursued the pacific Maya into their new retreats,
and for a space left them but little peace. This struggle it was
which finally resulted in the breaking up of the Maya civilisation,
which even at that relatively remote period had reached its apogee,
its several races separating into numerous city-states, which bore
a close political resemblance to those of Italy on the downfall of
Rome. At this period, probably, began the cleavage between the Maya
of Yucatan and those of Guatemala, which finally resolved itself
into such differences of speech, faith, and architecture as almost
to constitute them different peoples.


The Settlement of Yucatan

As the Celts of Wales and Scotland were driven into the less hospitable
regions of their respective countries by the inroads of the Saxons,
so was one branch of the Maya forced to seek shelter in the almost
desert wastes of Yucatan. There can be no doubt that the Maya did not
take to this barren and waterless land of their own accord. Thrifty
and possessed of high agricultural attainments, this people would
view with concern a removal to a sphere so forbidding after the rich
and easily developed country they had inhabited for generations. But
the inexorable Nahua were behind, and they were a peaceful folk,
unused to the horrors of savage warfare. So, taking their courage
in both hands, they wandered into the desert. Everything points to
a late occupation of Yucatan by the Maya, and architectural effort
exhibits deterioration, evidenced in a high conventionality of design
and excess of ornamentation. Evidences of Nahua influence also are
not wanting, a fact which is eloquent of the later period of contact
which is known to have occurred between the peoples, and which alone
is almost sufficient to fix the date of the settlement of the Maya in
Yucatan. It must not be thought that the Maya in Yucatan formed one
homogeneous state recognising a central authority. On the contrary, as
is often the case with colonists, the several Maya bands of immigrants
formed themselves into different states or kingdoms, each having its
own separate traditions. It is thus a matter of the highest difficulty
to so collate and criticise these traditions as to construct a history
of the Maya race in Yucatan. As may be supposed, we find the various
city-sites founded by divine beings who play a more or less important