CHAPTER I: THE CIVILISATION OF MEXICO


The Civilisations of the New World

There is now no question as to the indigenous origin of the
civilisations of Mexico, Central America, and Peru. Upon few subjects,
however, has so much mistaken erudition been lavished. The beginnings
of the races who inhabited these regions, and the cultures which they
severally created, have been referred to nearly every civilised or
semi-civilised nation of antiquity, and wild if fascinating theories
have been advanced with the intention of showing that civilisation was
initiated upon American soil by Asiatic or European influence. These
speculations were for the most part put forward by persons who
possessed but a merely general acquaintance with the circumstances
of American aboriginal civilisation, and who were struck by the
superficial resemblances which undoubtedly exist between American and
Asiatic peoples, customs, and art-forms, but which cease to be apparent
to the Americanist, who perceives in them only such likenesses as
inevitably occur in the work of men situated in similar environments
and surrounded by similar social and religious conditions.

The Maya of Yucatan may be regarded as the most highly civilised
of the peoples who occupied the American continent before the
advent of Europeans, and it is usually their culture which we are
asked to believe had its seat of origin in Asia. It is unnecessary
to refute this theory in detail, as that has already been ably
accomplished. [1] But it may be remarked that the surest proof of
the purely native origin of American civilisation is to be found in
the unique nature of American art, the undoubted result of countless
centuries of isolation. American language, arithmetic, and methods of
time-reckoning, too, bear no resemblance to other systems, European
or Asiatic, and we may be certain that had a civilising race entered
America from Asia it would have left its indelible impress upon
things so intensely associated with the life of a people as well as
upon the art and architecture of the country, for they are as much
the product of culture as is the ability to raise temples.


Evidence of Animal and Plant Life

It is impossible in this connection to ignore the evidence in favour of
native advancement which can be adduced from the artificial production
of food in America. Nearly all the domesticated animals and cultivated
food-plants found on the continent at the period of the discovery were
totally different from those known to the Old World. Maize, cocoa,
tobacco, and the potato, with a host of useful plants, were new to
the European conquerors, and the absence of such familiar animals
as the horse, cow, and sheep, besides a score of lesser animals,
is eloquent proof of the prolonged isolation which the American
continent underwent subsequent to its original settlement by man.


Origin of American Man

An Asiatic origin is, of course, admitted for the aborigines of
America, but it undoubtedly stretched back into that dim Tertiary Era
when man was little more than beast, and language as yet was not, or at
the best was only half formed. Later immigrants there certainly were,
but these probably arrived by way of Behring Strait, and not by the
land-bridge connecting Asia and America by which the first-comers found
entrance. At a later geological period the general level of the North
American continent was higher than at present, and a broad isthmus
connected it with Asia. During this prolonged elevation vast littoral
plains, now submerged, extended continuously from the American to the
Asiatic shore, affording an easy route of migration to a type of man
from whom both the Mongolian branches may have sprung. But this type,
little removed from the animal as it undoubtedly was, carried with it
none of the refinements of art or civilisation; and if any resemblances
occur between the art-forms or polity of its equal descendants in Asia
and America, they are due to the influence of a remote common ancestry,
and not to any later influx of Asiatic civilisation to American shores.


Traditions of Intercourse with Asia

The few traditions of Asiatic intercourse with America are,
alas! easily dissipated. It is a dismal business to be compelled to
refute the dreams of others. How much more fascinating would American
history have been had Asia sowed the seeds of her own peculiar
civilisation in the western continent, which would then have become
a newer and further East, a more glowing and golden Orient! But
America possesses a fascination almost as intense when there
falls to be considered the marvel of the evolution of her wondrous
civilisations--the flowers of progress of a new, of an isolated world.

The idea that the "Fu-Sang" of the Chinese annals alluded to America
was rendered illusory by Klaproth, who showed its identity with
a Japanese island. It is not impossible that Chinese and Japanese
vessels may have drifted on to the American coasts, but that they
sailed thither of set purpose is highly improbable. Gomara, the Mexican
historian, states that those who served with Coronado's expedition
in 1542 saw off the Pacific coast certain ships having their prows
decorated with gold and silver, and laden with merchandise, and these
they supposed to be of Cathay or China, "because they intimated by
signs that they had been thirty days on their voyage." Like most of
these interesting stories, however, the tale has no foundation in
fact, as the incident cannot be discovered in the original account
of the expedition, published in 1838 in the travel-collection of
Ternaux-Compans.


Legends of European Intercourse

We shall find the traditions, one might almost call them legends,
of early European intercourse with America little more satisfactory
than those which recount its ancient connection with Asia. We may
dismiss the sagas of the discovery of America by the Norsemen, which
are by no means mere tradition, and pass on to those in which the
basis of fact is weaker and the legendary interest more strong. We
are told that when the Norsemen drove forth those Irish monks who
had settled in Iceland, the fugitives voyaged to "Great Ireland,"
by which many antiquarians of the older school imagine the author of
the myth to have meant America. The Irish Book of Lismore recounts the
voyage of St. Brandan, Abbot of Cluainfert, in Ireland, to an island
in the ocean which Providence had intended as the abode of saints. It
gives a glowing account of his seven years' cruise in western waters,
and tells of numerous discoveries, among them a hill of fire and an
endless island, which he quitted after an unavailing journey of forty
days, loading his ships with its fruits, and returning home. Many Norse
legends exist regarding this "Greater Ireland," or "Huitramanna Land"
(White Man's Land), among them one concerning a Norseman who was
cast away on its shores, and who found there a race of white men
who went to worship their gods bearing banners, and "shouting with
a loud voice." There is, of course, the bare possibility that the
roving Norsemen may have on occasions drifted or have been cast away
as far south as Mexico, and such an occurrence becomes the more easy
of belief when we remember that they certainly reached the shores of
North America.