CHAPTER III: MYTHS AND LEGENDS OF THE ANCIENT MEXICANS


The Mexican Idea of the Creation

"In the year and in the day of the clouds," writes Garcia in his Origin
de los Indias, professing to furnish the reader with a translation
of an original Mixtec picture-manuscript, "before ever were years
or days, the world lay in darkness. All things were orderless, and
a water covered the slime and ooze that the earth then was." This
picture is common to almost all American creation-stories. [9]
The red man in general believed the habitable globe to have been
created from the slime which arose above the primeval waters, and
there can be no doubt that the Nahua shared this belief. We encounter
in Nahua myth two beings of a bisexual nature, known to the Aztecs
as Ometecutli-Omeciuatl (Lords of Duality), who were represented as
the deities dominating the genesis of things, the beginning of the
world. We have already become acquainted with them in Chapter II (see
p. 104), but we may recapitulate. These beings, whose individual names
were Tonacatecutli and Tonacaciuatl (Lord and Lady of our Flesh),
occupy the first place in the calendar, a circumstance which makes
it plain that they were regarded as responsible for the origin of all
created things. They were invariably represented as being clothed in
rich, variegated garments, symbolical of light. Tonacatecutli, the male
principle of creation or world-generation, is often identified with the
sun- or fire-god, but there is no reason to consider him as symbolical
of anything but the sky. The firmament is almost universally regarded
by American aboriginal peoples as the male principle of the cosmos,
in contradistinction to the earth, which they think of as possessing
feminine attributes, and which is undoubtedly personified in this
instance by Tonacaciuatl.

In North American Indian myths we find the Father Sky brooding upon
the Mother Earth, just as in early Greek creation-story we see the
elements uniting, the firmament impregnating the soil and rendering
it fruitful. To the savage mind the growth of crops and vegetation
proceeds as much from the sky as from the earth. Untutored man beholds
the fecundation of the soil by rain, and, seeing in everything the
expression of an individual and personal impulse, regards the genesis
of vegetable growth as analogous to human origin. To him, then, the
sky is the life-giving male principle, the fertilising seed of which
descends in rain. The earth is the receptive element which hatches
that with which the sky has impregnated her.


Ixtlilxochitl's Legend of the Creation

One of the most complete creation-stories in Mexican mythology is
that given by the half-blood Indian author Ixtlilxochitl, who, we
cannot doubt, received it directly from native sources. He states
that the Toltecs credited a certain Tloque Nahuaque (Lord of All
Existence) with the creation of the universe, the stars, mountains,
and animals. At the same time he made the first man and woman, from
whom all the inhabitants of the earth are descended. This "first
earth" was destroyed by the "water-sun." At the commencement of the
next epoch the Toltecs appeared, and after many wanderings settled
in Huehue Tlapallan (Very Old Tlapallan). Then followed the second
catastrophe, that of the "wind-sun." The remainder of the legend
recounts how mighty earthquakes shook the world and destroyed the
earth-giants. These earth-giants (Quinames) were analogous to the Greek
Titans, and were a source of great uneasiness to the Toltecs. In the
opinion of the old historians they were descended from the races who
inhabited the more northerly portion of Mexico.


Creation-Story of the Mixtecs

It will be well to return for a moment to the creation-story of the
Mixtecs, which, if emanating from a somewhat isolated people in the
extreme south of the Mexican Empire, at least affords us a vivid
picture of what a folk closely related to the Nahua race regarded
as a veritable account of the creative process. When the earth had
arisen from the primeval waters, one day the deer-god, who bore the
surname Puma-Snake, and the beautiful deer-goddess, or Jaguar-Snake,
appeared. They had human form, and with their great knowledge (that
is, with their magic) they raised a high cliff over the water, and
built on it fine palaces for their dwelling. On the summit of this
cliff they laid a copper axe with the edge upward, and on this edge
the heavens rested. The palaces stood in Upper Mixteca, close to
Apoala, and the cliff was called Place where the Heavens Stood. The
gods lived happily together for many centuries, when it chanced that
two little boys were born to them, beautiful of form and skilled
and experienced in the arts. From the days of their birth they were
named Wind-Nine-Snake (Viento de Neuve Culebras) and Wind-Nine-Cave
(Viento de Neuve Cavernas). Much care was given to their education,
and they possessed the knowledge of how to change themselves into
an eagle or a snake, to make themselves invisible, and even to pass
through solid bodies.

After a time these youthful gods decided to make an offering and a
sacrifice to their ancestors. Taking incense vessels made of clay,
they filled them with tobacco, to which they set fire, allowing it to
smoulder. The smoke rose heavenward, and that was the first offering
(to the gods). Then they made a garden with shrubs and flowers,
trees and fruit-bearing plants, and sweet-scented herbs. Adjoining
this they made a grass-grown level place (un prado), and equipped
it with everything necessary for sacrifice. The pious brothers lived
contentedly on this piece of ground, tilled it, burned tobacco, and
with prayers, vows, and promises they supplicated their ancestors to
let the light appear, to let the water collect in certain places and
the earth be freed from its covering (water), for they had no more
than that little garden for their subsistence. In order to strengthen
their prayer they pierced their ears and their tongues with pointed
knives of flint, and sprinkled the blood on the trees and plants with
a brush of willow twigs.

The deer-gods had more sons and daughters, but there came a flood in
which many of these perished. After the catastrophe was over the god
who is called the Creator of All Things formed the heavens and the
earth, and restored the human race.


Zapotec Creation-Myth

Among the Zapotecs, a people related to the Mixtecs, we find a similar
conception of the creative process. Cozaana is mentioned as the creator
and maker of all beasts in the valuable Zapotec dictionary of Father
Juan de Cordova, and Huichaana as the creator of men and fishes. Thus
we have two separate creations for men and animals. Cozaana would
appear to apply to the sun as the creator of all beasts, but, strangely
enough, is alluded to in Cordova's dictionary as "procreatrix," whilst
he is undoubtedly a male deity. Huichaana, the creator of men and
fishes, is, on the other hand, alluded to as "water," or "the element
of water," and "goddess of generation." She is certainly the Zapotec
female part of the creative agency. In the Mixtec creation-myth we can
see the actual creator and the first pair of tribal gods, who were also
considered the progenitors of animals--to the savage equal inhabitants
of the world with himself. The names of the brothers Nine-Snake and
Nine-Cave undoubtedly allude to light and darkness, day and night. It
may be that these deities are the same as Quetzalcoatl and Xolotl
(the latter a Zapotec deity), who were regarded as twins. In some
ways Quetzalcoatl was looked upon as a creator, and in the Mexican
calendar followed the Father and Mother, or original sexual deities,
being placed in the second section as the creator of the world and man.


The Mexican Noah

Flood-myths, curiously enough, are of more common occurrence among
the Nahua and kindred peoples than creation-myths. The Abbé Brasseur
de Bourbourg has translated one from the Codex Chimalpopoca, a work
in Nahuatl dating from the latter part of the sixteenth century. It
recounts the doings of the Mexican Noah and his wife as follows:

"And this year was that of Ce-calli, and on the first day all was
lost. The mountain itself was submerged in the water, and the water
remained tranquil for fifty-two springs.

"Now toward the close of the year Titlacahuan had forewarned the
man named Nata and his wife Nena, saying,  'Make no more pulque,
but straightway hollow out a large cypress, and enter it when in the
month Tozoztli the water shall approach the sky.' They entered it,
and when Titlacahuan had closed the door he said,  'Thou shalt eat
but a single ear of maize, and thy wife but one also.'

"As soon as they had finished eating, they went forth, and the water
was tranquil; for the log did not move any more; and opening it they
saw many fish.

"Then they built a fire, rubbing together pieces of wood, and they
roasted fish. The gods Citallinicue and Citallatonac, looking below,
exclaimed, 'Divine Lord, what means that fire below? Why do they thus
smoke the heavens?'

"Straightway descended Titlacahuan-Tezcatlipoca, and commenced to
scold, saying, 'What is this fire doing here?' And seizing the fishes
he moulded their hinder parts and changed their heads, and they were
at once transformed into dogs."