the legend of a mighty hero arose from the somewhat weakened idea
of a great deity. Some of the early Spanish missionaries professed
to see in Quetzalcoatl the Apostle St. Thomas, who had journeyed to
America to effect its conversion!


The Man of the Sun

A more probable explanation of the origin of Quetzalcoatl and a more
likely elucidation of his nature is that which would regard him as the
Man of the Sun, who has quitted his abode for a season for the purpose
of inculcating in mankind those arts which represent the first steps
in civilisation, who fulfils his mission, and who, at a late period,
is displaced by the deities of an invading race. Quetzalcoatl was
represented as a traveller with staff in hand, and this is proof of his
solar character, as is the statement that under his rule the fruits of
the earth flourished more abundantly than at any subsequent period. The
abundance of gold said to have been accumulated in his reign assists
the theory, the precious metal being invariably associated with
the sun by most barbarous peoples. In the native pinturas it is
noticeable that the solar disc and semi-disc are almost invariably
found in connection with the feathered serpent as the symbolical
attributes of Quetzalcoatl. The Hopi Indians of Mexico at the present
day symbolise the sun as a serpent, tail in mouth, and the ancient
Mexicans introduced the solar disc in connection with small images of
Quetzalcoatl, which they attached to the head-dress. In still other
examples Quetzalcoatl is pictured as if emerging or stepping from
the luminary, which is represented as his dwelling-place.

Several tribes tributary to the Aztecs were in the habit of imploring
Quetzalcoatl in prayer to return and free them from the intolerable
bondage of the conqueror. Notable among them were the Totonacs, who
passionately believed that the sun, their father, would send a god who
would free them from the Aztec yoke. On the coming of the Spaniards
the European conquerors were hailed as the servants of Quetzalcoatl,
thus in the eyes of the natives fulfilling the tradition that he
would return.


Various Forms of Quetzalcoatl

Various conceptions of Quetzalcoatl are noticeable in the mythology
of the territories which extended from the north of Mexico to the
marshes of Nicaragua. In Guatemala the Kiches recognised him as
Gucumatz, and in Yucatan proper he was worshipped as Kukulcan, both
of which names are but literal translations of his Mexican title of
"Feathered Serpent" into Kiche and Mayan. That the three deities are
one and the same there can be no shadow of doubt. Several authorities
have seen in Kukulcan a "serpent-and-rain god." He can only be such
in so far as he is a solar god also. The cult of the feathered snake
in Yucatan was unquestionably a branch of sun-worship. In tropical
latitudes the sun draws the clouds round him at noon. The rain falls
from the clouds accompanied by thunder and lightning--the symbols
of the divine serpent. Therefore the manifestations of the heavenly
serpent were directly associated with the sun, and no statement that
Kukulcan is a mere serpent-and-water god satisfactorily elucidates
his characteristics.


Quetzalcoatl's Northern Origin

It is by no means improbable that Quetzalcoatl was of northern
origin, and that on his adoption by southern peoples and tribes
dwelling in tropical countries his characteristics were gradually
and unconsciously altered in order to meet the exigencies of his
environment. The mythology of the Indians of British Columbia,
whence in all likelihood the Nahua originally came, is possessed of a
central figure bearing a strong resemblance to Quetzalcoatl. Thus the
Thlingit tribe worship Yetl; the Quaquiutl Indians, Kanikilak; the
Salish people of the coast, Kumsnöotl, Quäaqua, or Släalekam. It is
noticeable that these divine beings are worshipped as the Man of the
Sun, and totally apart from the luminary himself, as was Quetzalcoatl
in Mexico. The Quaquiutl believe that before his settlement among
them for the purpose of inculcating in the tribe the arts of life,
the sun descended as a bird, and assumed a human shape. Kanikilak
is his son, who, as his emissary, spreads the arts of civilisation
over the world. So the Mexicans believed that Quetzalcoatl descended
first of all in the form of a bird, and was ensnared in the fowler's
net of the Toltec hero Hueymatzin.

The titles bestowed upon Quetzalcoatl by the Nahua show that in his
solar significance he was god of the vault of the heavens, as well as
merely son of the sun. He was alluded to as Ehecatl (The Air), Yolcuat
(The Rattlesnake), Tohil (The Rumbler), Nanihehecatl (Lord of the Four
Winds), Tlauizcalpantecutli (Lord of the Light of the Dawn). The whole
heavenly vault was his, together with all its phenomena. This would
seem to be in direct opposition to the theory that Tezcatlipoca was
the supreme god of the Mexicans. But it must be borne in mind that
Tezcatlipoca was the god of a later age, and of a fresh body of Nahua
immigrants, and as such inimical to Quetzalcoatl, who was probably
in a similar state of opposition to Itzamna, a Maya deity of Yucatan.


The Worship of Quetzalcoatl

The worship of Quetzalcoatl was in some degree antipathetic to
that of the other Mexican deities, and his priests were a separate
caste. Although human sacrifice was by no means so prevalent among
his devotees, it is a mistake to aver, as some authorities have
done, that it did not exist in connection with his worship. A more
acceptable sacrifice to Quetzalcoatl appears to have been the blood
of the celebrant or worshipper, shed by himself. When we come to
consider the mythology of the Zapotecs, a people whose customs and
beliefs appear to have formed a species of link between the Mexican and
Mayan civilisations, we shall find that their high-priests occasionally
enacted the legend of Quetzalcoatl in their own persons, and that their
worship, which appears to have been based upon that of Quetzalcoatl,
had as one of its most pronounced characteristics the shedding of
blood. The celebrant or devotee drew blood from the vessels lying
under the tongue or behind the ear by drawing across those tender
parts a cord made from the thorn-covered fibres of the agave. The
blood was smeared over the mouths of the idols. In this practice we
can perceive an act analogous to the sacrificial substitution of the
part for the whole, as obtaining in early Palestine and many other
countries--a certain sign that tribal or racial opinion has contracted
a disgust for human sacrifice, and has sought to evade the anger of
the gods by yielding to them a portion of the blood of each worshipper,
instead of sacrificing the life of one for the general weal.


The Maize-Gods of Mexico

A special group of deities called Centeotl presided over the
agriculture of Mexico, each of whom personified one or other of the
various aspects of the maize-plant. The chief goddess of maize,
however, was Chicomecohuatl (Seven-serpent), her name being an
allusion to the fertilising power of water, which element the Mexicans
symbolised by the serpent. As Xilonen she typified the xilote, or
green ear of the maize. But it is probable that Chicomecohuatl was the
creation of an older race, and that the Nahua new-comers adopted or
brought with them another growth-spirit, the "Earth-mother," Teteoinnan
(Mother of the Gods), or Tocitzin (Our Grandmother). This goddess had
a son, Centeotl, a male maize-spirit. Sometimes the mother was also
known as Centeotl, the generic name for the entire group, and this fact
has led to some confusion in the minds of Americanists. But this does
not mean that Chicomecohuatl was by any means neglected. Her spring
festival, held on April 5, was known as Hueytozoztli (The Great Watch),
and was accompanied by a general fast, when the dwellings of the
Mexicans were decorated with bulrushes which had been sprinkled with
blood drawn from the extremities of the inmates. The statues of the
little tepitoton (household gods) were also decorated. The worshippers
then proceeded to the maize-fields, where they pulled the tender
stalks of the growing maize, and, having decorated them with flowers,
placed them in the calpulli (the common house of the village). A
mock combat then took place before the altar of Chicomecohuatl. The
girls of the village presented the goddess with bundles of maize
of the previous season's harvesting, later restoring them to the
granaries in order that they might be utilised for seed for the coming
year. Chicomecohuatl was always represented among the household deities
of the Mexicans, and on the occasion of her festival the family placed
before the image a basket of provisions surmounted by a cooked frog,
bearing on its back a piece of cornstalk stuffed with pounded maize
and vegetables. This frog was symbolic of Chalchihuitlicue, wife
of Tlaloc, the rain-god, who assisted Chicomecohuatl in providing
a bountiful harvest. In order that the soil might further benefit,
a frog, the symbol of water, was sacrificed, so that its vitality
should recuperate that of the weary and much-burdened earth.


The Sacrifice of the Dancer

A more important festival of Chicomecohuatl, however, was the
Xalaquia, which lasted from June 28 to July 14, commencing when
the maize plant had attained its full growth. The women of the
pueblo (village) wore their hair unbound, and shook and tossed it
so that by sympathetic magic the maize might take the hint and grow
correspondingly long. Chian pinolli was consumed in immense quantities,
and maize-porridge was eaten. Hilarious dances were nightly performed
in the teopan (temple), the central figure in which was the Xalaquia, a
female captive or slave, with face painted red and yellow to represent
the colours of the maize-plant. She had previously undergone a long
course of training in the dancing-school, and now, all unaware of
the horrible fate awaiting her, she danced and pirouetted gaily
among the rest. Throughout the duration of the festival she danced,
and on its expiring night she was accompanied in the dance by the
women of the community, who circled round her, chanting the deeds of
Chicomecohuatl. When daybreak appeared the company was joined by the
chiefs and headmen, who, along with the exhausted and half-fainting
victim, danced the solemn death-dance. The entire community then
approached the teocalli (pyramid of sacrifice), and, its summit
reached, the victim was stripped to a nude condition, the priest
plunged a knife of flint into her bosom, and, tearing out the still
palpitating heart, offered it up to Chicomecohuatl. In this manner
the venerable goddess, weary with the labours of inducing growth in
the maize-plant, was supposed to be revivified and refreshed. Hence
the name Xalaquia, which signifies "She who is clothed with the
Sand." Until the death of the victim it was not lawful to partake of
the new corn.

The general appearance of Chicomecohuatl was none too pleasing. Her
image rests in the National Museum in Mexico, and is girdled with
snakes. On the underside the symbolic frog is carved. The Americanists
of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries were unequal to the
task of elucidating the origin of the figure, which they designated
Teoyaominqui. The first to point out the error was Payne, in his
History of the New World called America, vol. i. p. 424. The passage
in which he announces his discovery is of such real interest that it
is worth transcribing fully.


An Antiquarian Mare's-Nest

"All the great idols of Mexico were thought to have been destroyed
until this was disinterred among other relics in the course of making
new drains in the Plaza Mayor of Mexico in August 1790. The discovery
produced an immense sensation. The idol was dragged to the court of
the University, and there set up; the Indians began to worship it and
deck it with flowers; the antiquaries, with about the same degree of
intelligence, to speculate about it. What most puzzled them was that
the face and some other parts of the goddess are found in duplicate at
the back of the figure; hence they concluded it to represent two gods
in one, the principal of whom they further concluded to be a female,
the other, indicated by the back, a male. The standard author on
Mexican antiquities at that time was the Italian dilettante Boturini,
of whom it may be said that he is better, but not much better, than
nothing at all. From page 27 of his work the antiquaries learned
that Huitzilopochtli was accompanied by the goddess Teoyaominqui,
who was charged with collecting the souls of those slain in war and
sacrifice. This was enough. The figure was at once named Teoyaominqui
or Huitzilopochtli (The One plus the Other), and has been so called
ever since. The antiquaries next elevated this imaginary goddess to
the rank of the war-god's wife. 'A soldier,' says Bardolph, 'is better
accommodated than with a wife': a fortiori, so is a war-god. Besides,
as Torquemada (vol. ii. p. 47) says with perfect truth, the Mexicans
did not think so grossly of the divinity as to have married gods
or goddesses at all. The figure is undoubtedly a female. It has no
vestige of any weapon about it, nor has it any limbs. It differs
in every particular from the war-god Huitzilopochtli, every detail
of which is perfectly well known. There never was any goddess
called Teoyaominqui. This may be plausibly inferred from the fact
that such a goddess is unknown not merely to Sahagun, Torquemada,
Acosta, Tezozomoc, Duran, and Clavigero, but to all other writers
except Boturini. The blunder of the last-named writer is easily
explained. Antonio Leon y Gama, a Mexican astronomer, wrote an
account of the discoveries of 1790, in which, evidently puzzled
by the name of Teoyaominqui, he quotes a manuscript in Mexican,
said to have been written by an Indian of Tezcuco, who was born
in 1528, to the effect that Teoyaotlatohua and Teoyaominqui were
spirits who presided over the fifteenth of the twenty signs of the
fortune-tellers' calendar, and that those born in this sign would
be brave warriors, but would soon die. (As the fifteenth sign was
quauhtli, this is likely enough.) When their hour had come the former
spirit scented them out, the latter killed them. The rubbish printed
about Huitzilopochtli, Teoyaominqui, and Mictlantecutli in connection
with this statue would fill a respectable volume. The reason why
the features were duplicated is obvious. The figure was carried in
the midst of a large crowd. Probably it was considered to be an evil
omen if the idol turned away its face from its worshippers; this the
duplicate obviated. So when the dance was performed round the figure
(cf. Janus). This duplication of the features, a characteristic of
the very oldest gods, appears to be indicated when the numeral ome
(two) is prefixed to the title of the deity. Thus the two ancestors
and preservers of the race were called Ometecuhtli and Omecihuatl
(two-chief, two-woman), ancient Toltec gods, who at the conquest
become less prominent in the theology of Mexico, and who are best
represented in that of the Mexican colony of Nicaragua."


The Offering to Centeotl

During her last hours the victim sacrificed at the Xalaquia
wore a ritual dress made from the fibres of the aloe, and with
this garment the maize-god Centeotl was clothed. Robed in this
he temporarily represented the earth-goddess, so that he might
receive her sacrifice. The blood of victims was offered up to him
in a vessel decorated with that brilliant and artistic feather-work
which excited such admiration in the breasts of the connoisseurs and
æsthetes of the Europe of the sixteenth century. Upon partaking of this
blood-offering the deity emitted a groan so intense and terrifying that
it has been left on record that such Spaniards as were present became
panic-stricken. This ceremony was followed by another, the nitiçapoloa
(tasting of the soil), which consisted in raising a little earth on
one finger to the mouth and eating it.

As has been said, Centeotl the son has been confounded with Centeotl
the mother, who is in reality the earth-mother Teteoinnan. Each of
these deities had a teopan (temple) of his or her own, but they were
closely allied as parent and child. But of the two, Centeotl the son
was the more important. On the death of the sacrificed victim her
skin was conveyed to the temple of Centeotl the son, and worn there
in the succeeding ritual by the officiating priests. This gruesome
dress is frequently depicted in the Aztec pinturas, where the skin
of the hands, and in some instances the feet, of the victims can be
seen dangling from the wrists and ankles of the priest.


Importance of the Food-Gods

To the Mexicans the deities of most importance to the community as
a whole were undoubtedly the food-gods. In their emergence from the
hunting to the agricultural state of life, when they began to exist
almost solely upon the fruits of the earth, the Mexicans were quick
to recognise that the old deities of the chase, such as Mixcoatl,
could not now avail them or succour them in the same manner as the
guardians of the crops and fertilisers of the soil. Gradually we see
these gods, then, advance in power and influence until at the time of
the Spanish invasion we find them paramount. Even the terrible war-god
himself had an agricultural significance, as we have pointed out. A
distinct bargain with the food-gods can be clearly traced, and is
none the less obvious because it was never written or codified. The
covenant was as binding to the native mind as any made betwixt god
and man in ancient Palestine, and included mutual assistance as
well as provision for mere alimentary supply. In no mythology is the
understanding between god and man so clearly defined as in the Nahuan,
and in none is its operation better exemplified.


Xipe

Xipe (The Flayed) was widely worshipped throughout Mexico, and
is usually depicted in the pinturas as being attired in a flayed
human skin. At his special festival, the "Man-flaying," the skins
were removed from the victims and worn by the devotees of the god
for the succeeding twenty days. He is usually represented as of a
red colour. In the later days of the Aztec monarchy the kings and
leaders of Mexico assumed the dress or classical garments of Xipe. This
dress consisted of a crown made of feathers of the roseate spoonbill,
the gilt timbrel, the jacket of spoonbill feathers, and an apron of
green feathers lapping over one another in a tile-like pattern. In the
Cozcatzin Codex we see a picture of King Axayacatl dressed as Xipe in
a feather skirt, and having a tiger-skin scabbard to his sword. The
hands of a flayed human skin also dangle over the monarch's wrists,
and the feet fall over his feet like gaiters.

Xipe's shield is a round target covered with the rose-coloured feathers
of the spoonbill, with concentric circles of a darker hue on the
surface. There are examples of it divided into an upper and lower
part, the former showing an emerald on a blue field, and the latter
a tiger-skin design. Xipe was imagined as possessing three forms,
the first that of the roseate spoonbill, the second that of the
blue cotinga, and the last that of a tiger, the three shapes perhaps
corresponding to the regions of heaven, earth, and hell, or to the
three elements, fire, earth, and water. The deities of many North
American Indian tribes show similar variations in form and colour,
which are supposed to follow as the divinity changes his dwelling
to north, south, east, or west. But Xipe is seldom depicted in the
pinturas in any other form but that of the red god, the form in which
the Mexicans adopted him from the Yopi tribe of the Pacific slope. He
is the god of human sacrifice par excellence, and may be regarded as
a Yopi equivalent of Tezcatlipoca.


Nanahuatl, or Nanauatzin

Nanahuatl (Poor Leper) presided over skin diseases, such as leprosy. It
was thought that persons afflicted with these complaints were set
apart by the moon for his service. In the Nahua tongue the words for
"leprous" and "eczematous" also mean "divine." The myth of Nanahuatl
tells how before the sun was created humanity dwelt in sable and
horrid gloom. Only a human sacrifice could hasten the appearance of
the luminary. Metztli (The Moon) led forth Nanahuatl as a sacrifice,
and he was cast upon a funeral pyre, in the flames of which he was
consumed. Metztli also cast herself upon the mass of flame, and with
her death the sun rose above the horizon. There can be no doubt that
the myth refers to the consuming of the starry or spotted night,
and incidentally to the nightly death of the moon at the flaming hour
of dawn.


Xolotl

Xolotl is of southern, possibly Zapotec, origin. He represents either
fire rushing down from the heavens or light flaming upward. It is
noticeable that in the pinturas the picture of the setting sun being
devoured by the earth is nearly always placed opposite his image. He is
probably identical with Nanahuatl, and appears as the representative
of human sacrifice. He has also affinities with Xipe. On the whole
Xolotl may be best described as a sun-god of the more southerly
tribes. His head (quaxolotl) was one of the most famous devices for
warriors' use, as sacrifice among the Nahua was, as we have seen,
closely associated with warfare.

Xolotl was a mythical figure quite foreign to the peoples of Anahuac
or Mexico, who regarded him as something strange and monstrous. He
is alluded to as the "God of Monstrosities," and, thinks Dr. Seler,
the word "monstrosity" may suitably translate his name. He is depicted
with empty eye-sockets, which circumstance is explained by the myth
that when the gods determined to sacrifice themselves in order to
give life and strength to the newly created sun, Xolotl withdrew,
and wept so much that his eyes fell out of their sockets. This was the
Mexican explanation of a Zapotec attribute. Xolotl was originally the
"Lightning Beast" of the Maya or some other southern folk, and was
represented by them as a dog, since that animal appeared to them to
be the creature which he most resembled. But he was by no means a
"natural" dog, hence their conception of him as unnatural. Dr. Seler
is inclined to identify him with the tapir, and indeed Sahagun speaks
of a strange animal-being, tlaca-xolotl, which has "a large snout,
large teeth, hoofs like an ox, a thick hide, and reddish hair"--not
a bad description of the tapir of Central America. Of course to the
Mexicans the god Xolotl was no longer an animal, although he had
evolved from one, and was imagined by them to have the form shown in
the accompanying illustration.


The Fire-God

This deity was known in Mexico under various names, notably Tata
(Our Father), Huehueteotl (Oldest of Gods), and Xiuhtecutli (Lord
of the Year). He was represented as of the colour of fire, with a
black face, a headdress of green feathers, and bearing on his back
a yellow serpent, to typify the serpentine nature of fire. He also
bore a mirror of gold to show his connection with the sun, from which
all heat emanates. On rising in the morning all Mexican families made
Xiuhtecutli an offering of a piece of bread and a drink. He was thus
not only, like Vulcan, the god of thunderbolts and conflagrations,
but also the milder deity of the domestic hearth. Once a year the fire
in every Mexican house was extinguished, and rekindled by friction
before the idol of Xiuhtecutli. When a Mexican baby was born it passed
through a baptism of fire on the fourth day, up to which time a fire,
lighted at the time of its birth, was kept burning in order to nourish
its existence.


Mictlan

Mictlantecutli (Lord of Hades) was God of the Dead and of the grim and
shadowy realm to which the souls of men repair after their mortal
sojourn. He is represented in the pinturas as a grisly monster
with capacious mouth, into which fall the spirits of the dead. His
terrible abode was sometimes alluded to as Tlalxicco (Navel of the
Earth), but the Mexicans in general seem to have thought that it was
situated in the far north, which they regarded as a place of famine,
desolation, and death. Here those who by the circumstances of their
demise were unfitted to enter the paradise of Tlaloc--namely, those
who had not been drowned or had not died a warrior's death, or,
in the case of women, had not died in childbed--passed a dreary and
meaningless existence. Mictlan was surrounded by a species of demons
called tzitzimimes, and had a spouse, Mictecaciuatl. When we come
to discuss the analogous deity of the Maya we shall see that in all
probability Mictlan was represented by the bat, the animal typical of
the underworld. In a preceding paragraph dealing with the funerary
customs we have described the journey of the soul to the abode of
Mictlan, and the ordeals through which the spirit of the defunct had
to pass ere entering his realm (see p. 37).


Worship of the Planet Venus

The Mexicans designated the planet Venus Citlalpol (The Great Star)
and Tlauizcalpantecutli (Lord of the Dawn). It seems to have been
the only star worshipped by them, and was regarded with considerable
veneration. Upon its rising they stopped up the chimneys of their
houses, so that no harm of any kind might enter with its light. A
column called Ilhuicatlan, meaning "In the Sky," stood in the court
of the great temple of Mexico, and upon this a symbol of the planet
was painted. On its reappearance during its usual circuit, captives
were taken before this representation and sacrificed to it. It will be
remembered that the myth of Quetzalcoatl states that the heart of that
deity flew upward from the funeral pyre on which he was consumed and
became the planet Venus. It is not easy to say whether or not this myth
is anterior to the adoption of the worship of the planet by the Nahua,
for it may be a tale of pre- or post-Nahuan growth. In the tonalamatl
Tlauizcalpantecutli is represented as lord of the ninth division of
thirteen days, beginning with Ce Coatl (the sign of "One Serpent"). In
several of the pinturas he is represented as having a white body with
long red stripes, while round his eyes is a deep black painting like a
domino mask, bordered with small white circles. His lips are a bright
vermilion. The red stripes are probably introduced to accentuate the
whiteness of his body, which is understood to symbolise the peculiar
half-light which emanates from the planet. The black paint on the face,
surrounding the eye, typifies the dark sky of night. In Mexican and
Central American symbolism the eye often represents light, and here,
surrounded by blackness as it is, it is perhaps almost hieroglyphic. As
the star of evening, Tlauizcalpantecutli is sometimes shown with the
face of a skull, to signify his descent into the underworld, whither
he follows the sun. That the Mexicans and Maya carefully and accurately
observed his periods of revolution is witnessed by the pinturas.


Sun-Worship

The sun was regarded by the Nahua, and indeed by all the Mexican and
Central American peoples, as the supreme deity, or rather the principal
source of subsistence and life. He was always alluded to as the teotl,
the god, and his worship formed as it were a background to that of
all the other gods. His Mexican name, Ipalnemohuani (He by whom Men
Live) shows that the Mexicans regarded him as the primal source of
being, and the heart, the symbol of life, was looked upon as his
special sacrifice. Those who rose at sunrise to prepare food for the
day held up to him on his appearance the hearts of animals they had
slain for cooking, and even the hearts of the victims to Tezcatlipoca
and Huitzilopochtli were first held up to the sun, as if he had a
primary right to the sacrifice, before being cast into the bowl of
copal which lay at the feet of the idol. It was supposed that the
luminary rejoiced in offerings of blood, and that it constituted the
only food which would render him sufficiently vigorous to undertake
his daily journey through the heavens. He is often depicted in the
pinturas as licking up the gore of the sacrificial victims with his
long tongue-like rays. The sun must fare well if he was to continue
to give life, light, and heat to mankind.

The Mexicans, as we have already seen, believed that the luminary they
knew had been preceded by others, each of which had been quenched by
some awful cataclysm of nature. Eternity had, in fact, been broken
up into epochs, marked by the destruction of successive suns. In the
period preceding that in which they lived, a mighty deluge had deprived
the sun of life, and some such catastrophe was apprehended at the end
of every "sheaf" of fifty-two years. The old suns were dead, and the
current sun was no more immortal than they. At the end of one of the
"sheaves" he too would succumb.


Sustaining the Sun

It was therefore necessary to sustain the sun by the daily food
of human sacrifice, for by a tithe of human life alone would he
be satisfied. Naturally a people holding such a belief would look
elsewhere than within their own borders for the material wherewith
to placate their deity. This could be most suitably found among the
inhabitants of a neighbouring state. It thus became the business of
the warrior class in the Aztec state to furnish forth the altars of
the gods with human victims. The most suitable district of supply was
the pueblo of Tlaxcallan, or Tlascala, the people of which were of
cognate origin to the Aztecs. The communities had, although related,
been separated for so many generations that they had begun to regard
each other as traditional enemies, and on a given day in the year
their forces met at an appointed spot for the purpose of engaging in a
strife which should furnish one side or the other with a sufficiency
of victims for the purpose of sacrifice. The warrior who captured
the largest number of opponents alive was regarded as the champion
of the day, and was awarded the chief honours of the combat. The sun
was therefore the god of warriors, as he would give them victory in
battle in order that they might supply him with food. The rites of this
military worship of the luminary were held in the Quauhquauhtinchan
(House of the Eagles), an armoury set apart for the regiment of that
name. On March 17 and December 1 and 2, at the ceremonies known as
Nauhollin (The Four Motions--alluding to the quivering appearance of
the sun's rays), the warriors gathered in this hall for the purpose of
despatching a messenger to their lord the sun. High up on the wall of
the principal court was a great symbolic representation of the orb,
painted upon a brightly coloured cotton hanging. Before this copal
and other fragrant gums and spices were burned four times a day. The
victim, a war-captive, was placed at the foot of a long staircase
leading up to the Quauhxicalli (Cup of the Eagles), the name of the
stone on which he was to be sacrificed. He was clothed in red striped
with white and wore white plumes in his hair--colours symbolical of
the sun--while he bore a staff decorated with feathers and a shield
covered with tufts of cotton. He also carried a bundle of eagle's
feathers and some paint on his shoulders, to enable the sun, to whom
he was the emissary, to paint his face. He was then addressed by the
officiating priest in the following terms: "Sir, we pray you go to our
god the sun, and greet him on our behalf; tell him that his sons and
warriors and chiefs and those who remain here beg of him to remember
them and to favour them from that place where he is, and to receive
this small offering which we send him. Give him this staff to help
him on his journey, and this shield for his defence, and all the rest
that you have in this bundle." The victim, having undertaken to carry
the message to the sun-god, was then despatched upon his long journey.

A Quauhxicalli is preserved in the National Museum of Mexico. It
consists of a basaltic mass, circular in form, on which are shown in
sculpture a series of groups representing Mexican warriors receiving
the submission of war-captives. The prisoner tenders a flower to his
captor, symbolical of the life he is about to offer up, for lives
were the "flowers" offered to the gods, and the campaign in which
these "blossoms" were captured was called Xochiyayotl (The War of
Flowers). The warriors who receive the submission of the captives are
represented in the act of tearing the plumes from their heads. These
bas-reliefs occupy the sides of the stone. The face of it is covered
by a great solar disc having eight rays, and the surface is hollowed
out in the middle to form a receptacle for blood--the "cup" alluded
to in the name of the stone. The Quauhxicalli must not be confounded
with the temalacatl (spindle stone), to which the alien warrior who
received a chance of life was secured. The gladiatorial combat gave
the war-captive an opportunity to escape through superior address in
arms. The temalacatl was somewhat higher than a man, and was provided
with a platform at the top, in the middle of which was placed a great
stone with a hole in it through which a rope was passed. To this the
war-captive was secured, and if he could vanquish seven of his captors
he was released. If he failed to do so he was at once sacrificed.


A Mexican Valhalla

The Mexican warriors believed that they continued in the service of the
sun after death, and, like the Scandinavian heroes in Valhalla, that
they were admitted to the dwelling of the god, where they shared all
the delights of his diurnal round. The Mexican warrior dreaded to die
in his bed, and craved an end on the field of battle. This explains the
desperate nature of their resistance to the Spaniards under Cortés,
whose officers stated that the Mexicans seemed to desire to die
fighting. After death they believed that they would partake of the
cannibal feasts offered up to the sun and imbibe the juice of flowers.


The Feast of Totec

The chief of the festivals to the sun was that held in spring at the
vernal equinox, before the representation of a deity known as Totec
(Our Great Chief). Although Totec was a solar deity he had been
adopted from the people of an alien state, the Zapotecs of Zalisco,
and is therefore scarcely to be regarded as the principal sun-god. His
festival was celebrated by the symbolical slaughter of all the other
gods for the purpose of providing sustenance to the sun, each of
the gods being figuratively slain in the person of a victim. Totec
was attired in the same manner as the warrior despatched twice a
year to assure the sun of the loyalty of the Mexicans. The festival
appears to have been primarily a seasonal one, as bunches of dried
maize were offered to Totec. But its larger meaning is obvious. It
was, indeed, a commemoration of the creation of the sun. This is
proved by the description of the image of Totec, which was robed and
equipped as the solar traveller, by the solar disc and tables of the
sun's progress carved on the altar employed in the ceremony, and by
the robes of the victims, who were dressed to represent dwellers in
the sun-god's halls. Perhaps Totec, although of alien origin, was
the only deity possessed by the Mexicans who directly represented
the sun. As a borrowed god he would have but a minor position in the
Mexican pantheon, but again as the only sun-god whom it was necessary
to bring into prominence during a strictly solar festival he would
be for the time, of course, a very important deity indeed.


Tepeyollotl

Tepeyollotl means Heart of the Mountain, and evidently alludes
to a deity whom the Nahua connected with seismic disturbances and
earthquakes. By the interpreter of the Codex Telleriano-Remensis he
is called Tepeolotlec, an obvious distortion of his real name. The
interpreter of the codex states that his name "refers to the
condition of the earth after the flood. The sacrifices of these
thirteen days were not good, and the literal translation of their
name is 'dirt sacrifices.' They caused palsy and bad humours.... This
Tepeolotlec was lord of these thirteen days. In them were celebrated
the feast to the jaguar, and the last four preceding days were days
of fasting.... Tepeolotlec means the 'Lord of Beasts.' The four feast
days were in honour of the Suchiquezal, who was the man that remained
behind on the earth upon which we now live. This Tepeolotlec was the
same as the echo of the voice when it re-echoes in a valley from one
mountain to another. This name 'jaguar' is given to the earth because
the jaguar is the boldest animal, and the echo which the voice awakens
in the mountains is a survival of the flood, it is said."

From this we can see that Tepeyollotl is a deity of the earth pure
and simple, a god of desert places. It is certain that he was not a
Mexican god, or at least was not of Nahua origin, as he is mentioned
by none of those writers who deal with Nahua traditions, and we must
look for him among the Mixtecs and Zapotecs.


Macuilxochitl, or Xochipilli

This deity, whose names mean Five-Flower and Source of Flowers, was
regarded as the patron of luck in gaming. He may have been adopted by
the Nahua from the Zapotecs, but the converse may be equally true. The
Zapotecs represented him with a design resembling a butterfly about
the mouth, and a many-coloured face which looks out of the open
jaws of a bird with a tall and erect crest. The worship of this god
appears to have been very widespread. Sahagun says of him that a fête
was held in his honour, which was preceded by a rigorous fast. The
people covered themselves with ornaments and jewels symbolic of the
deity, as if they desired to represent him, and dancing and singing
proceeded gaily to the sound of the drum. Offerings of the blood of
various animals followed, and specially prepared cakes were submitted
to the god. This simple fare, however, was later followed by human
sacrifices, rendered by the notables, who brought certain of their
slaves for immolation. This completed the festival.


Father and Mother Gods

The Nahua believed that Ometecutli and Omeciuatl were the father
and mother of the human species. The names signify Lords of Duality
or Lords of the Two Sexes. They were also called Tonacatecutli and
Tonacaciuatl (Lord and Lady of Our Flesh, or of Subsistence). They
were in fact regarded as the sexual essence of the creative deity,
or perhaps more correctly of deity in general. They occupied the first
place in the Nahua calendar, to signify that they had existed from the
beginning, and they are usually represented as being clothed in rich
attire. Ometecutli (a literal translation of his name is Two-Lord)
is sometimes identified with the sky and the fire-god, the female
deity representing the earth or water--conceptions similar to those
respecting Kronos and Gæa. We refer again to these supreme divinities
in the following chapter (see p. 118).


The Pulque-Gods

When a man was intoxicated with the native Mexican drink of pulque,
a liquor made from the juice of the Agave Americana, he was believed
to be under the influence of a god or spirit. The commonest form
under which the drink-god was worshipped was the rabbit, that animal
being considered to be utterly devoid of sense. This particular
divinity was known as Ometochtli. The scale of debauchery which
it was desired to reach was indicated by the number of rabbits
worshipped, the highest number, four hundred, representing the most
extreme degree of intoxication. The chief pulque-gods apart from
these were Patecatl and Tequechmecauiani. If the drunkard desired
to escape the perils of accidental hanging during intoxication, it
was necessary to sacrifice to the latter, but if death by drowning
was apprehended Teatlahuiani, the deity who harried drunkards to a
watery grave, was placated. If the debauchee wished his punishment
not to exceed a headache, Quatlapanqui (The Head-splitter) was
sacrificed to, or else Papaztac (The Nerveless). Each trade or
profession had its own Ometochtli, but for the aristocracy there
was only one of these gods, Cohuatzincatl, a name signifying "He
who has Grandparents." Several of these drink-gods had names which
connected them with various localities; for example, Tepoxtecatl was
the pulque-god of Tepoztlan. The calendar day Ometochtli, which means
"Two-Rabbit," because of the symbol which accompanied it, was under
the special protection of these gods, and the Mexicans believed that
any one born on that day was almost inevitably doomed to become a
drunkard. All the pulque-gods were closely associated with the soil,
and with the earth-goddess. They wore the golden Huaxtec nose-ornament,
the yaca-metztli, of crescent shape, which characterised the latter,
and indeed this ornament was inscribed upon all articles sacred to
the pulque-gods. Their faces were painted red and black, as were
objects consecrated to them, their blankets and shields. After
the Indians had harvested their maize they drank to intoxication,
and invoked one or other of these gods. On the whole it is safe
to infer that they were originally deities of local husbandry who
imparted virtue to the soil as pulque imparted strength and courage
to the warrior. The accompanying sketch of the god Tepoxtecatl (see
p. 117) well illustrates the distinguishing characteristics of the
pulque-god class. Here we can observe the face painted in two colours,
the crescent-shaped nose-ornament, the bicoloured shield, the long
necklace made from the malinalli herb, and the ear-pendants.

It is of course clear that the drink-gods were of the same class as
the food-gods--patrons of the fruitful soil--but it is strange that
they should be male whilst the food-gods are mostly female.


The Goddesses of Mexico: Metztli

Metztli, or Yohualticitl (The Lady of Night), was the Mexican goddess
of the moon. She had in reality two phases, one that of a beneficent
protectress of harvests and promoter of growth in general, and the
other that of a bringer of dampness, cold, and miasmic airs, ghosts,
mysterious shapes of the dim half-light of night and its oppressive
silence.

To a people in the agricultural stage of civilisation the moon appears
as the great recorder of harvests. But she has also supremacy over
water, which is always connected by primitive peoples with the
moon. Citatli (Moon) and Atl (Water) are constantly confounded in
Nahua myth, and in many ways their characteristics were blended. It
was Metztli who led forth Nanahuatl the Leprous to the pyre whereon
he perished--a reference to the dawn, in which the starry sky of
night is consumed in the fires of the rising sun.


Tlazolteotl

Tlazolteotl (God of Ordure), or Tlaelquani (Filth-eater), was called
by the Mexicans the earth-goddess because she was the eradicator of
sins, to whose priests the people went to make confession so that
they might be absolved from their misdeeds. Sin was symbolised
by the Mexicans as excrement. Confession covered only the sins
of immorality. But if Tlazolteotl was the goddess of confession,
she was also the patroness of desire and luxury. It was, however,
as a deity whose chief office was the eradication of human sin that
she was pre-eminent. The process by which this was supposed to be
effected is quaintly described by Sahagun in the twelfth chapter of
his first book. The penitent addressed the confessor as follows: "Sir,
I desire to approach that most powerful god, the protector of all, that
is to say, Tezcatlipoca. I desire to tell him my sins in secret." The
confessor replied: "Be happy, my son: that which thou wishest to do
will be to thy good and advantage." The confessor then opened the
divinatory book known as the Tonalamatl (that is, the Book of the
Calendar) and acquainted the applicant with the day which appeared
the most suitable for his confession. The day having arrived, the
penitent provided himself with a mat, copal gum to burn as incense,
and wood whereon to burn it. If he was a person high in office the
priest repaired to his house, but in the case of lesser people the
confession took place in the dwelling of the priest. Having lighted
the fire and burned the incense, the penitent addressed the fire in
the following terms: "Thou, lord, who art the father and mother of
the gods, and the most ancient of them all, thy servant, thy slave
bows before thee. Weeping, he approaches thee in great distress. He
comes plunged in grief, because he has been buried in sin, having
backslidden, and partaken of those vices and evil delights which merit
death. O master most compassionate, who art the upholder and defence
of all, receive the penitence and anguish of thy slave and vassal."

This prayer having concluded, the confessor then turned to the penitent
and thus addressed him: "My son, thou art come into the presence of
that god who is the protector and upholder of all; thou art come to
him to confess thy evil vices and thy hidden uncleannesses; thou art
come to him to unbosom the secrets of thy heart. Take care that thou
omit nothing from the catalogue of thy sins in the presence of our
lord who is called Tezcatlipoca. It is certain that thou art before
him who is invisible and impalpable, thou who art not worthy to be
seen before him, or to speak with him...."

The allusions to Tezcatlipoca are, of course, to him in the shape
of Tlazolteotl. Having listened to a sermon by the confessor, the
penitent then confessed his misdeeds, after which the confessor said:
"My son, thou hast before our lord god confessed in his presence thy
evil actions. I wish to say in his name that thou hast an obligation
to make. At the time when the goddesses called Ciuapipiltin descend to
earth during the celebration of the feast of the goddesses of carnal
things, whom they name Ixcuiname, thou shalt fast during four days,
punishing thy stomach and thy mouth. When the day of the feast of
the Ixcuiname arrives thou shalt scarify thy tongue with the small
thorns of the osier [called teocalcacatl or tlazotl], and if that is
not sufficient thou shalt do likewise to thine ears, the whole for
penitence, for the remission of thy sin, and as a meritorious act. Thou
wilt apply to thy tongue the middle of a spine of maguey, and thou
wilt scarify thy shoulders.... That done, thy sins will be pardoned."

If the sins of the penitent were not very grave the priest would
enjoin upon him a fast of a more or less prolonged nature. Only old
men confessed crimes in veneribus, as the punishment for such was
death, and younger men had no desire to risk the penalty involved,
although the priests were enjoined to strict secrecy.

Father Burgoa describes very fully a ceremony of this kind which came
under his notice in 1652 in the Zapotec village of San Francisco de
Cajonos. He encountered on a tour of inspection an old native cacique,
or chief, of great refinement of manners and of a stately presence,
who dressed in costly garments after the Spanish fashion, and who
was regarded by the Indians with much veneration. This man came to
the priest for the purpose of reporting upon the progress in things
spiritual and temporal in his village. Burgoa recognised his urbanity
and wonderful command of the Spanish language, but perceived by certain
signs that he had been taught to look for by long experience that
the man was a pagan. He communicated his suspicions to the vicar of
the village, but met with such assurances of the cacique's soundness
of faith that he believed himself to be in error for once. Shortly
afterwards, however, a wandering Spaniard perceived the chief in
a retired place in the mountains performing idolatrous ceremonies,
and aroused the monks, two of whom accompanied him to the spot where
the cacique had been seen indulging in his heathenish practices. They
found on the altar "feathers of many colours, sprinkled with blood
which the Indians had drawn from the veins under their tongues and
behind their ears, incense spoons and remains of copal, and in the
middle a horrible stone figure, which was the god to whom they had
offered this sacrifice in expiation of their sins, while they made
their confessions to the blasphemous priests, and cast off their
sins in the following manner: they had woven a kind of dish out of
a strong herb, specially gathered for this purpose, and casting this
before the priest, said to him that they came to beg mercy of their
god, and pardon for their sins that they had committed during that
year, and that they brought them all carefully enumerated. They then
drew out of a cloth pairs of thin threads made of dry maize husks,
that they had tied two by two in the middle with a knot, by which
they represented their sins. They laid these threads on the dishes of
grass, and over them pierced their veins, and let the blood trickle
upon them, and the priest took these offerings to the idol, and in a
long speech he begged the god to forgive these, his sons, their sins
which were brought to him, and to permit them to be joyful and hold
feasts to him as their god and lord. Then the priest came back to
those who had confessed, delivered a long discourse on the ceremonies
they had still to perform, and told them that the god had pardoned
them and that they might be glad again and sin anew."


Chalchihuitlicue

This goddess was the wife of Tlaloc, the god of rain and moisture. The
name means Lady of the Emerald Robe, in allusion to the colour of
the element over which the deity partly presided. She was specially
worshipped by the water-carriers of Mexico, and all those whose
avocation brought them into contact with water. Her costume was
peculiar and interesting. Round her neck she wore a wonderful collar
of precious stones, from which hung a gold pendant. She was crowned
with a coronet of blue paper, decorated with green feathers. Her
eyebrows were of turquoise, set in as mosaic, and her garment was a
nebulous blue-green in hue, recalling the tint of sea-water in the
tropics. The resemblance was heightened by a border of sea-flowers
or water-plants, one of which she also carried in her left hand,
whilst in her right she bore a vase surmounted by a cross, emblematic
of the four points of the compass whence comes the rain.


Mixcoatl

Mixcoatl was the Aztec god of the chase, and was probably a deity
of the Otomi aborigines of Mexico. The name means Cloud Serpent,
and this originated the idea that Mixcoatl was a representation of
the tropical whirlwind. This is scarcely correct, however, as the
hunter-god is identified with the tempest and thunder-cloud, and the
lightning is supposed to represent his arrows. Like many other gods
of the chase, he is figured as having the characteristics of a deer or
rabbit. He is usually depicted as carrying a sheaf of arrows, to typify
thunderbolts. It may be that Mixcoatl was an air and thunder deity of
the Otomi, older in origin than either Quetzalcoatl or Tezcatlipoca,
and that his inclusion in the Nahua pantheon becoming necessary in
order to quieten Nahua susceptibilities, he received the status of
god of the chase. But, on the other hand, the Mexicans, unlike the
Peruvians, who adopted many foreign gods for political purposes,
had little regard for the feelings of other races, and only accepted
an alien deity into the native circle for some good reason, most
probably because they noted the omission of the figure in their own
divine system. Or, again, dread of a certain foreign god might force
them to adopt him as their own in the hope of placating him. Their
worship of Quetzalcoatl is perhaps an instance of this.


Camaxtli

This deity was the war-god of the Tlascalans, who were constantly
in opposition to the Aztecs of Mexico. He was to the warriors of
Tlascala practically what Huitzilopochtli was to those of Mexico. He
was closely identified with Mixcoatl, and with the god of the morning
star, whose colours are depicted on his face and body. But in all
probability Camaxtli was a god of the chase, who in later times was
adopted as a god of war because of his possession of the lightning
dart, the symbol of divine warlike prowess. In the mythologies of
North America we find similar hunter-gods, who sometimes evolve into
gods of war for a like reason, and again gods of the chase who have
all the appearance and attributes of the creatures hunted.


Iztlilton

Ixtlilton (The Little Black One) was the Mexican god of medicine
and healing, and therefore was often alluded to as the brother of
Macuilxochitl, the god of well-being or good luck. From the account of
the general appearance of his temple--an edifice of painted boards--it
would seem to have evolved from the primitive tent or lodge of the
medicine-man, or shaman. It contained several water-jars called tlilatl
(black water), the contents of which were administered to children in
bad health. The parents of children who benefited from the treatment
bestowed a feast on the deity, whose idol was carried to the residence
of the grateful father, where ceremonial dances and oblations were
made before it. It was then thought that Ixtlilton descended to
the courtyard to open fresh jars of pulque liquor provided for the
feasters, and the entertainment concluded by an examination by the
Aztec Æsculapius of such of the pulque jars dedicated to his service
as stood in the courtyard for everyday use. Should these be found in
an unclean condition, it was understood that the master of the house
was a man of evil life, and he was presented by the priest with a
mask to hide his face from his scoffing friends.


Omacatl

Omacatl was the Mexican god of festivity and joy. The name signifies
Two Reeds. He was worshipped chiefly by bon-vivants and the rich,
who celebrated him in splendid feasts and orgies. The idol of the
deity was invariably placed in the chamber where these functions were
to take place, and the Aztecs were known to regard it as a heinous
offence if anything derogatory to the god were performed during the
convivial ceremony, or if any omission were made from the prescribed
form which these gatherings usually took. It was thought that if the
host had been in any way remiss Omacatl would appear to the startled
guests, and in tones of great severity upbraid him who had given the
feast, intimating that he would regard him no longer as a worshipper
and would henceforth abandon him. A terrible malady, the symptoms of
which were akin to those of falling-sickness, would shortly afterwards
seize the guests; but as such symptoms are not unlike those connected
with acute indigestion and other gastric troubles, it is probable
that the gourmets who paid homage to the god of good cheer may have
been suffering from a too strenuous instead of a lukewarm worship of
him. But the idea of communion which underlay so many of the Mexican
rites undoubtedly entered into the worship of Omacatl, for prior
to a banquet in his honour those who took part in it formed a great
bone out of maize paste, pretending that it was one of the bones of
the deity whose merry rites they were about to engage in. This they
devoured, washing it down with great draughts of pulque. The idol of
Omacatl was provided with a recess in the region of the stomach, and
into this provisions were stuffed. He was represented as a squatting
figure, painted black and white, crowned with a paper coronet, and
hung with coloured paper. A flower-fringed cloak and sceptre were
the other symbols of royalty worn by this Mexican Dionysus.


Opochtli

Opochtli (The Left-handed) was the god sacred to fishers and
bird-catchers. At one period of Aztec history he must have been a deity
of considerable consequence, since for generations the Aztecs were
marsh-dwellers and depended for their daily food on the fish netted
in the lakes and the birds snared in the reeds. They credited the god
with the invention of the harpoon or trident for spearing fish and the
fishing-rod and bird-net. The fishermen and bird-catchers of Mexico
held on occasion a special feast in honour of Opochtli, at which a
certain liquor called octli was consumed. A procession was afterwards
formed, in which marched old people who had dedicated themselves to
the worship of the god, probably because they could obtain no other
means of subsistence than that afforded by the vocation of which he
was tutelar and patron. He was represented as a man painted black,
his head decorated with the plumes of native wild birds, and crowned
by a paper coronet in the shape of a rose. He was clad in green paper
which fell to the knee, and was shod with white sandals. In his left
hand he held a shield painted red, having in the centre a white flower
with four petals placed crosswise, and in his right hand he held a
sceptre in the form of a cup.


Yacatecutli

Yacatecutli was the patron of travellers of the merchant class, who
worshipped him by piling their staves together and sprinkling on the
heap blood from their noses and ears. The staff of the traveller was
his symbol, to which prayer was made and offerings of flowers and
incense tendered.


The Aztec Priesthood

The Aztec priesthood was a hierarchy in whose hands resided a goodly
portion of the power of the upper classes, especially that connected
with education and endowment. The mere fact that its members possessed
the power of selecting victims for sacrifice must have been sufficient
to place them in an almost unassailable position, and their prophetic
utterances, founded upon the art of divination--so great a feature in
the life of the Aztec people, who depended upon it from the cradle
to the grave--probably assisted them in maintaining their hold upon
the popular imagination. But withal the evidence of unbiased Spanish
ecclesiastics, such as Sahagun, tends to show that they utilised their
influence for good, and soundly instructed the people under their
charge in the cardinal virtues; "in short," says the venerable friar,
"to perform the duties plainly pointed out by natural religion."


Priestly Revenues

The establishment of the national religion was, as in the case of the
mediæval Church in Europe, based upon a land tenure from which the
priestly class derived a substantial though, considering their numbers,
by no means inordinate revenue. The principal temples possessed
lands which sufficed for the maintenance of the priests attached to
them. There was, besides, a system of first-fruits fixed by law for the
priesthood, the surplusage therefrom being distributed among the poor.


Education

Education was entirely conducted by the priesthood, which undertook the
task in a manner highly creditable to it, when consideration is given
to surrounding conditions. Education was, indeed, highly organised. It
was divided into primary and secondary grades. Boys were instructed
by priests, girls by holy women or "nuns." The secondary schools
were called calmecac, and were devoted to the higher branches of
education, the curriculum including the deciphering of the pinturas,
or manuscripts, astrology and divination, with a wealth of religious
instruction.


Orders of the Priesthood

At the head of the Aztec priesthood stood the Mexicatl Teohuatzin
(Mexican Lord of Divine Matters). He had a seat on the emperor's
council, and possessed power which was second only to the royal
authority. Next in rank to him was the high-priest of Quetzalcoatl, who
dwelt in almost entire seclusion, and who had authority over his own
caste only. This office was in all probability a relic from "Toltec"
times. The priests of Quetzalcoatl were called by name after their
tutelar deity. The lesser grades included the Tlenamacac (Ordinary
Priests), who were habited in black, and wore their hair long, covering
it with a kind of mantilla. The lowest order was that of the Lamacazton
(Little Priests), youths who were graduating in the priestly office.


An Exacting Ritual

The priesthood enjoyed no easy existence, but led an austere life
of fasting, penance, and prayer, with constant observance of an
arduous and exacting ritual, which embraced sacrifice, the upkeep
of perpetual fires, the chanting of holy songs to the gods, dances,
and the superintendence of the ever-recurring festivals. They were
required to rise during the night to render praise, and to maintain
themselves in a condition of absolute cleanliness by means of constant
ablutions. We have seen that blood-offering--the substitution of
the part for the whole--was a common method of sacrifice, and in
this the priests engaged personally on frequent occasions. If the
caste did not spare the people it certainly did not spare itself,
and its outlook was perhaps only a shade more gloomy and fanatical
than that of the Spanish hierarchy which succeeded it in the land.