CHAPTER II. THE BATTLE OF TAILLTIN


And three days after the landing of the Gael, they were attacked by
Eriu, wife of Mac Greine, Son of the Sun, and she having a good share of
men with her. And they fought a hard battle, and many were killed on
both sides. And this was the first battle fought between the Sons of the
Gael and the Men of Dea for the kingship of Ireland.

It was in that battle Fais, wife of Un, was killed in a valley at the
foot of the mountain, and it was called after her, the Valley of Fais.
And Scota, wife of Miled, got her death in the battle, and she was
buried in a valley on the north side of the mountain near the sea. But
the Sons of the Gael lost no more than three hundred men, and they beat
back the Men of Dea and killed a thousand of them. And Eriu was beaten
back to Tailltin, and as many of her men as she could hold together; and
when she came there she told the people how she had been worsted in the
battle, and the best of her men had got their death. But the Gael
stopped on the battle-field, and buried their dead, and they gave a
great burial to two of their Druids, Aer and Eithis, that were killed in
the fight.

And after they had rested for a while, they went on to Inver Colpa in
Leinster, and Heremon and his men joined them there. And then they sent
messengers to the three kings of Ireland, the three sons of Cermait
Honey-Mouth, and bade them to come out and fight a battle that would
settle the ownership of the country once for all.

So they came out, and the best of the fighters of the Tuatha de Danaan
with them, to Tailltin. And there they attacked one another, and the
Sons of the Gael remembered the death of Ith, and there was great anger
on them, and they fell on the Men of Dea to avenge him, and there was a
fierce battle fought. And for a while neither side got the better of the
other, but at the last the Gael broke through the army of the Men of Dea
and put them to the rout, with great slaughter, and drove them out of
the place. And their three kings were killed in the rout, and the three
queens of Ireland, Eriu and Fodhla and Banba. And when the Tuatha de
Danaan saw their leaders were dead they fell back in great disorder, and
the Sons of the Gael followed after them. But in following them they
lost two of their best leaders, Cuailgne, son of Breagan, at Slieve
Cuailgne, and Fuad, his brother, at Slieve Fuad. But they were no way
daunted by that, but followed the Men of Dea so hotly that they were
never able to bring their army together again, but had to own themselves
beaten, and to give up the country to the Gael.

And the leaders, the sons of Miled, divided the provinces of Ireland
between them. Heber took the two provinces of Munster, and he gave a
share of it to Amergin; and Heremon got Leinster and Connacht for his
share, and Ulster was divided between Eimhir, son of Ir, son of Miled,
and some others of their chief men. And it was of the sons of Eimhir,
that were called the Children of Rudraighe, and that lived in Emain
Macha for nine hundred years, some of the best men of Ireland came;
Fergus, son of Rogh, was of them, and Conall Cearnach, of the Red Branch
of Ulster.

And from the sons of Ith, the first of the Gael to get his death in
Ireland, there came in the after time Fathadh Canaan, that got the sway
over the whole world from the rising to the setting sun, and that took
hostages of the streams and the birds and the languages.

And it is what the poets of Ireland used to be saying, that every brave
man, good at fighting, and every man that could do great deeds and not
be making much talk about them, was of the Sons of the Gael; and that
every skilled man that had music and that did enchantments secretly,
was of the Tuatha de Danaan. But they put a bad name on the Firbolgs and
the men of Domnand and the Gaileoin, for lies and for big talk and
injustice. But for all that there were good fighters among them, and
Ferdiad, that made so good a stand against Cuchulain, in the war for the
Bull of Cuailgne was one of them. And the Gaileoin fought well in the
same war; but the men of Ireland had no great liking for them, and their
Druids drove them out of the country afterwards.


BOOK FOUR: THE EVER-LIVING LIVING ONES.