CHAPTER III. THE HOUND


One day the three battalions of the Fianna came to Magh Femen, and there
they saw three young men waiting for them, having a hound with them; and
there was not a colour in the world but was on that hound, and it was
bigger than any other hound.

"Where do you come from, young men?" said Finn. "Out of the greater
Iruath in the east," said they; "and our names are Dubh, the Dark, and
Agh, the Battle, and Ilar, the Eagle." "What is it you came for?" "To
enter into service, and your friendship," said they. "What good will it
do us, you to be with us?" said Finn. "We are three," said they, "and
you can make a different use of each one of us." "What uses are those?"
said Finn. "I will do the watching for all the Fianna of Ireland and of
Alban," said one of them. "I will take the weight of every fight and
every battle that will come to them, the way they can keep themselves in
quiet," said the second. "I will meet every troublesome thing that might
come to my master," said the third; "and let all the wants of the world
be told to me and I will satisfy them. And I have a pipe with me," he
said; "and all the men of the world would sleep at the sound of it, and
they in their sickness. And as to the hound," he said, "as long as there
are deer in Ireland he will get provision for the Fianna every second
night. And I myself," he said, "will get it on the other nights." "What
will you ask of us to be with us like that?" said Finn. "We will ask
three things," they said: "no one to come near to the place where we
have our lodging after the fall of night; nothing to be given out to us,
but we to provide for ourselves; and the worst places to be given to us
in the hunting." "Tell me by your oath now," said Finn, "why is it you
will let no one see you after nightfall?" "We have a reason," said they;
"but do not ask it of us, whether we are short or long on the one path
with you. But we will tell you this much," they said, "every third
night, one of us three is dead and the other two are watching him, and
we have no mind for any one to be looking at us."

So Finn promised that; but if he did there were some of the Fianna were
not well pleased because of the ways of those three men, living as they
did by themselves, and having a wall of fire about them, and they would
have made an end of them but for Finn protecting them.

About that time there came seven men of poetry belonging to the people
of Cithruadh, asking the fee for a poem, three times fifty ounces of
gold and the same of silver to bring back to Cithruadh at Teamhair.
"Whatever way we get it, we must find some way to get that," said a man
of the Fianna. Then the three young men from Iruath said: "Well, men of
learning," they said, "would you sooner get the fee for your poem
to-night or to-morrow?" "To-morrow will be time enough," said they.

And the three young men went to the place where the hound had his bed a
little way off from the rath, and the hound threw out of his mouth
before them the three times fifty ounces of gold and three times fifty
of silver, and they gave them to the men of poetry, and they went away.

Another time Finn said: "What can the three battalions of the Fianna do
to-night, having no water?" And one of the men of Iruath said: "How many
drinking-horns are with you?" "Three hundred and twelve," said Caoilte.
"Give me the horns into my hand," said the young man, "and whatever you
will find in them after that, you may drink it." He filled the horns
then with beer and they drank it, and he did that a second and a third
time; and with the third time of filling they were talkative and their
wits confused. "This is a wonderful mending of the feast," said Finn.
And they gave the place where all that happened the name of the Little
Rath of Wonders.

And one time after that again there came to Finn three bald red clowns,
holding three red hounds in their hands, and three deadly spears. And
there was poison on their clothes and on their hands and their feet, and
on everything they touched. And Finn asked them who were they. And they
said they were three sons of Uar, son of Indast of the Tuatha de Danaan;
and it was by a man of the Fianna, Caoilte son of Ronan, their father
was killed in the battle of the Tuatha de Danaan on Slieve nan Ean, the
Mountain of Birds, in the east. "And let Caoilte son of Ronan give us
the blood-fine for him now," they said. "What are your names?" said
Finn. "Aincel and Digbail and Espaid; Ill-wishing and Harm and Want are
our names. And what answer do you give us now, Finn?" they said. "No one
before me ever gave a blood-fine for a man killed in battle, and I will
not give it," said Finn. "We will do revenge and robbery on you so,"
said they. "What revenge is that?" said Finn. "It is what I will do,"
said Aincel, "if I meet with two or three or four of the Fianna, I will
take their feet and their hands from them." "It is what I will do,"
said Digbail, "I will not leave a day without loss of a hound or a
serving-boy or a fighting man to the Fianna of Ireland." "And I myself
will be always leaving them in want of people, or of a hand, or of an
eye," said Espaid. "Without we get some help against them," said
Caoilte, "there will not be one of us living at the end of a year."
"Well," said Finn, "we will make a dun and stop here for a while, for I
will not be going through Ireland and these men following after me, till
I find who are the strongest, themselves or ourselves."

So the Fianna made little raths for themselves all about Slieve Mis, and
they stopped there through a month and a quarter and a year. And through
all that time the three red bald-headed men were doing every sort of
hurt and harm upon them.

But the three sons of the King of Iruath came to speak with Finn, and it
is what they said: "It is our wish, Finn, to send the hound that is with
us to go around you three times in every day, and however many may be
trying to hurt or to rob you, they will not have power to do it after
that. But let there be neither fire nor arms nor any other dog in the
house he goes into," they said. "I will let none of these things go into
the one house with him," said Finn, "and he will go safe back to you."
So every day the hound would be sent to Finn, having his chain of ridges
of red gold around his neck, and he would go three times around Finn,
and three times he would put his tongue upon him. And to the people that
were nearest to the hound when he came into the house it would seem like
as if a vat of mead was being strained, and to others there would come
the sweet smell of an apple garden.

And every harm and sickness the three sons of Uar would bring on the
Fianna, the three sons of the King of Iruath would take it off them
with their herbs and their help and their healing.

And after a while the High King of Ireland came to Slieve Mis with a
great, troop of his men, to join with Finn and the Fianna. And they told