CHAPTER I. THE LAD OF THE SKINS


Besides all the men Finn had in his household, there were some that
would come and join him from one place or another. One time a young man
wearing a dress of skins came to Finn's house at Almhuin, and his wife
along with him, and he asked to take service with Finn.

And in the morning, as they were going to their hunting, the Lad of the
Skins said to Finn: "Let me have no one with me but myself, and let me
go into one part of the country by myself, and you yourself with all
your men go to another part." "Is it on the dry ridges you will go,"
said Finn, "or is it in the deep bogs and marshes, where there is danger
of drowning?" "I will go in the deep boggy places," said he.

So they all went out from Almhuin, Finn and the Fianna to one part, and
the Lad of the Skins to another part, and they hunted through the day.
And when they came back at evening, the Lad of the Skins had killed more
than Finn and all his men together.

When Finn saw that, he was glad to have so good a servant. But Conan
said to him: "The Lad of the Skins will destroy ourselves and the whole
of the Fianna of Ireland unless you will find some way to rid yourself
of him." "I never had a good man with me yet, Conan," said Finn, "but
you wanted me to put him away; and how could I put away a man like
that?" he said. "The way to put him away," said Conan, "is to send him
to the King of the Floods to take from him the great cauldron that is
never without meat, but that has always enough in it to feed the whole
world. And let him bring that cauldron back here with him to Almhuin,"
he said.

So Finn called to the Lad of the Skins, and he said: "Go from me now to
the King of the Floods and get the great cauldron that is never empty
from him, and bring it here to me." "So long as I am in your service I
must do your work," said the Lad of the Skins. With that he set out,
leaping over the hills and valleys till he came to the shore of the sea.
And then he took up two sticks and put one of them across the other, and
a great ship rose out of the two sticks. The Lad of the Skins went into
the ship then, and put up the sails and set out over the sea, and he
heard nothing but the whistling of eels in the sea and the calling of
gulls in the air till he came to the house of the King of the Floods.
And at that time there were hundreds of ships waiting near the shore;
and he left his ship outside them all, and then he stepped from ship to
ship till he stood on land.

There was a great feast going on at that time in the king's house, and
the Lad of the Skins went up to the door, but he could get no farther
because of the crowd. So he stood outside the door for a while, and no
one looked at him, and he called out at last: "This is a hospitable
house indeed, and these are mannerly ways, not to ask a stranger if
there is hunger on him or thirst." "That is true," said the king; "and
give the cauldron of plenty now to this stranger," he said, "till he
eats his fill."

So his people did that, and no sooner did the Lad of the Skins get a
hold of the cauldron than he made away to the ship and put it safe into
it. But when he had done that he said: "There is no use in taking the
pot by my swiftness, if I do not take it by my strength." And with that
he turned and went to land again. And the whole of the men of the army
of the King of the Floods were ready to fight; but if they were, so was
the Lad of the Skins, and he went through them and over them all till
the whole place was quiet.

He went back to his ship then and raised the sails and set out again
for Ireland, and the ship went rushing back to the place where he made
it. And when he came there, he gave a touch of his hand to the ship, and
there was nothing left of it but the two sticks he made it from, and
they lying on the strand before him, and the cauldron of plenty with
them. And he took up the cauldron on his back, and brought it to Finn,
son of Cumhal, at Almhuin. And Finn gave him his thanks for the work he
had done.

One day, now, Finn was washing himself at the well, and a voice spoke
out of the water, and it said: "You must give back the cauldron, Finn,
to the King of the Floods, or you must give him battle in place of it."

Finn told that to the Lad of the Skins, but the answer he got from him
was that his time was up, and that he could not serve on time that was
past. "But if you want me to go with you," he said, "let you watch my
wife, that is Manannan's daughter, through the night; and in the middle
of the night, when she will be combing her hair, any request you make of
her, she cannot refuse it. And the request you will make is that she
will let me go with you to the King of the Floods, to bring the cauldron
to his house and to bring it back again."

So Finn watched Manannan's daughter through the night, and when he saw
her combing her hair, he made his request of her. "I have no power to
refuse you," she said; "but you must promise me one thing, to bring my
husband back to me, alive or dead. And if he is alive," she said, "put
up a grey-green flag on the ship coming back; but if he is dead, put up
a red flag."

So Finn promised to do that, and he himself and the Lad of the Skins set
out together for the dun of the King of the Floods, bringing the
cauldron with them.

No sooner did the king see them than he gave word to all his armies to
make ready. But the Lad of the Skins made for them and overthrew them,
and he went into the king's dun, and Finn with him, and they overcame
him and brought away again the cauldron that was never empty.

But as they were going back to Ireland, they saw a great ship coming
towards them. And when the Lad of the Skins looked at the ship, he said:
"I think it is an old enemy of my own is in that ship, that is trying to
bring me to my death, because of my wife that refused him her love." And
when the ship came alongside, the man that was in it called out: "I know
you well, and it is not by your dress I know you, son of the King of the
Hills." And with that he made a leap on to the ship, and the two fought
a great battle together, and they took every shape; they began young
like two little boys, and fought till they were two old men; they fought
from being two young pups until they were two old dogs; from being two
young horses till they were two old horses. And then they began to fight
in the shape of birds, and it is in that shape they killed one another
at the last. And Finn threw the one bird into the water, but the other,
that was the Lad of the Skins, he brought with him in the ship. And when
he came in sight of Ireland, he raised a red flag as he had promised the
woman.

And when he came to the strand, she was there before him, and when she
saw Finn, she said: "It is dead you have brought him back to me." And
Finn gave her the bird, and she asked was that what she was to get in
the place of her husband. And she was crying over the bird, and she
brought it into a little boat with her, and she bade Finn to push out
the boat to sea.

And he pushed it out, and it was driven by wind and waves till at last
she saw two birds flying, having a dead one between them. And the two
living birds let down the dead one on an island; and it was not long
till it rose up living, and the three went away together.

And when Manannan's daughter saw that, she said: "There might be some
cure for my man on the island, the way there was for that dead bird."

And the sea brought the boat to the island, and she went searching
around, but all she could find was a tree having green leaves. "It might
be in these leaves the cure is," she said; and she took some of the
leaves and brought them to where the Lad of the Skins was, and put them
about him. And on that moment he stood up as well and as sound as ever
he was.

They went back then to Ireland, and they came to Almhuin at midnight,
and the Lad of the Skins knocked at the door, and he said: "Put me out
my wages." "There is no man, living or dead, has wages on me but the Lad
of the Skins," said Finn; "and I would sooner see him here to-night," he
said, "than the wages of three men." "If that is so, rise up and you
will see him," said he.

So Finn rose up and saw him, and gave him a great welcome, and paid him
his wages.

And after that he went away and his wife with him to wherever his own
country was; but there were some said he was gone to the country of his
wife's father, Manannan, Son of the Sea.