CHAPTER IV. OISIN'S LAMENTS


And Oisin used to be making laments, and sometimes he would be making
praises of the old times and of Finn; and these are some of them that
are remembered yet:--

     I saw the household of Finn; it was not the household of a soft
     race; I had a vision of that man yesterday.

     I saw the household of the High King, he with the brown,
     sweet-voiced son; I never saw a better man.

     I saw the household of Finn; no one saw it as I saw it; I saw Finn
     with the sword, Mac an Luin. Och! it was sorrowful to see it.

     I cannot tell out every harm that is on my head; free us from our
     trouble for ever; I have seen the household of Finn.

It is a week from yesterday I last saw Finn; I never saw a braver man. A
king of heavy blows; my law, my adviser, my sense and my wisdom, prince
and poet, braver than kings, King of the Fianna, brave in all countries;
golden salmon of the sea, clean hawk of the air, rightly taught,
avoiding lies; strong in his doings, a right judge, ready in courage, a
high messenger in bravery and in music.

His skin lime-white, his hair golden; ready to work, gentle to women.
His great green vessels full of rough sharp wine, it is rich the king
was, the head of his people.

Seven sides Finn's house had, and seven score shields on every side.
Fifty fighting men he had about him having woollen cloaks; ten bright
drinking-cups in his hall; ten blue vessels, ten golden horns.

It is a good household Finn had, without grudging, without lust, without
vain boasting, without chattering, without any slur on any one of the
Fianna.

Finn never refused any man; he never put away any one that came to his
house. If the brown leaves falling in the woods were gold, if the white
waves were silver, Finn would have given away the whole of it.

Blackbird of Doire an Chairn, your voice is sweet; I never heard on any
height of the world music was sweeter than your voice, and you at the
foot of your nest.

The music is sweetest in the world, it is a pity not to be listening to
it for a while, O son of Calphurn of the sweet bells, and you would
overtake your nones again.

If you knew the story of the bird the way I know it, you would be crying
lasting tears, and you would give no heed to your God for a while.

In the country of Lochlann of the blue streams, Finn, son of Cumhal, of
the red-gold cups, found that bird you hear now; I will tell you its
story truly.

Doire an Chairn, that wood there to the west, where the Fianna used to
be delaying, it is there they put the blackbird, in the beauty of the
pleasant trees.

The stag of the heather of quiet Cruachan, the sorrowful croak from the
ridge of the Two Lakes; the voice of the eagle of the Valley of the
Shapes, the voice of the cuckoo on the Hill of Brambles.

The voice of the hounds in the pleasant valley; the scream of the eagle
on the edge of the wood; the early outcry of the hounds going over the
Strand of the Red Stones.

The time Finn lived and the Fianna, it was sweet to them to be listening
to the whistle of the blackbird; the voice of the bells would not have
been sweet to them.


There was no one of the Fianna without his fine silken shirt and his
soft coat, without bright armour, without shining stones on his head,
two spears in his hand, and a shield that brought victory.

If you were to search the world you would not find a harder man, best of
blood, best in battle; no one got the upper hand of him. When he went
out trying his white hound, which of us could be put beside Finn?

One time we went hunting on Slieve-nam-ban; the sun was beautiful
overhead, the voice of the hounds went east and west, from hill to hill.
Finn and Bran sat for a while on the hill, every man was jealous for the
hunt. We let out three thousand hounds from their golden chains; every
hound of them brought down two deer.

Patrick of the true crozier, did you ever see, east or west, a greater
hunt than that hunt of Finn and the Fianna? O son of Calphurn of the
bells, that day was better to me than to be listening to your
lamentations in the church.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is no strength in my hands to-night, there is no power within me;
it is no wonder I to be sorowful, being thrown down in the sorrow of old
age.

Everything is a grief to me beyond any other man on the face of the
earth, to be dragging stones along to the church and the hill of the
priests.

I have a little story of our people. One time Finn had a mind to make a
dun on the bald hill of Cuailgne, and he put it on the Fianna of Ireland
to bring stones for building it; a third on the sons of Morna, a third
on myself, and a third on the sons of Baiscne.

I gave an answer to Finn, son of Cumhal; I said I would be under his
sway no longer, and that I would obey him no more.

When Finn heard that, he was silent a long time, the man without a He,
without fear. And he said to me then: "You yourself will be dragging
stones before your death comes to you."

I rose up then with anger on me, and there followed me the fourth of the
brave battalions of the Fianna. I gave my own judgments, there were many
of the Fianna with me.

Now my strength is gone from me, I that was adviser to the Fianna; my
whole body is tired to-night, my hands, my feet, and my head, tired,
tired, tired.

It is bad the way I am after Finn of the Fianna; since he is gone away,
every good is behind me.

Without great people, without mannerly ways; it is sorrowful I am after
our king that is gone.

I am a shaking tree, my leaves gone from me; an empty nut, a horse
without a bridle; a people without a dwelling-place, I Oisin, son of
Finn.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is long the clouds are over me to-night! it is long last night was;
although this day is long, yesterday was longer again to me; every day
that comes is long to me!

That is not the way I used to be, without fighting, without battles,
without learning feats, without young girls, without music, without
harps, without bruising bones, without great deeds; without increase of
learning, without generosity, without drinking at feasts, without
courting, without hunting, the two trades I was used to; without going
out to battle, Ochone! the want of them is sorrowful to me.

No hunting of deer or stag, it is not like that I would wish to be; no
leashes for our hounds, no hounds; it is long the clouds are over me
to-night!

Without rising up to do bravery as we were used, without playing as we
had a mind; without swimming of our fighting men in the lake; it is long
the clouds are over me to-night!

There is no one at all in the world the way I am; it is a pity the way I
am; an old man dragging stones; it is long the clouds are over me
to-night!

I am the last of the Fianna, great Oisin, son of Finn, listening to the
voice of bells; it is long the clouds are over me to-night!


NOTES

I. THE APOLOGY


The Irish text of the greater number of the stories in this book has
been published, and from this text I have worked, making my own
translation as far as my scholarship goes, and when it fails, taking the
meaning given by better scholars. In some cases the Irish text has not
been printed, and I have had to work by comparing and piecing together
various translations. I have had to put a connecting sentence of my own
here and there, and I have fused different versions together, and
condensed many passages, and I have left out many, using the choice that
is a perpetual refusing, in trying to get some clear outline of the
doings of the heroes.

I have found it more natural to tell the stories in the manner of the
thatched houses, where I have heard so many legends of Finn and his
friends, and Oisin and Patrick, and the Ever-Living Ones, and the
Country of the Young, rather than in the manner of the slated houses,
where I have not heard them.

Four years ago, Dr Atkinson, a Professor of Trinity College, Dublin, in
his evidence before the Commission of Intermediate Education, said of
the old literature of Ireland:--"It has scarcely been touched by the
movements of the great literatures; it is the untrained popular feeling.
Therefore it is almost intolerably low in tone--I do not mean naughty,
but low; and every now and then, when the circumstance occasions it, it
goes down lower than low ... If I read the books in the Greek, the Latin
or the French course, in almost every one of them there is something
with an ideal ring about it--something that I can read with positive
pleasure--something that has what the child might take with him as a
[Greek: ktêma eis dei]--a perpetual treasure; but if I read the Irish
books, I see nothing ideal in them, and my astonishment is that through
the whole range of Irish literature that I have read (and I have read
an enormous range of it), the smallness of the element of idealism is
most noticeable ... And as there is very little idealism there is very
little imagination ... The Irish tales as a rule are devoid of it
fundamentally."

Dr Atkinson is an Englishman, but unfortunately not only
fellow-professors in Trinity but undergraduates there have been
influenced by his opinion, that Irish literature is a thing to be
despised. I do not quote his words to draw attention to a battle that is
still being fought, but to explain my own object in working, as I have
worked ever since that evidence was given, to make a part of Irish
literature accessible to many, especially among my young countrymen, who
have not opportunity to read the translations of the chief scholars,
scattered here and there in learned periodicals, or patience and time to
disentangle overlapping and contradictory versions, that they may judge
for themselves as to its "lowness" and "want of imagination," and the
other well-known charges brought against it before the same Commission.

I believe that those who have once learned to care for the story of
Cuchulain of Muirthemne, and of Finn and Lugh and Etain, and to
recognise the enduring belief in an invisible world and an immortal life
behind the visible and the mortal, will not be content with my
redaction, but will go, first to the fuller versions of the best
scholars, and then to the manuscripts themselves. I believe the forty
students of old Irish lately called together by Professor Kuno Meyer
will not rest satisfied until they have explored the scores and scores
of uncatalogued and untranslated manuscripts in Trinity College Library,
and that the enthusiasm which the Gaelic League has given birth to will
lead to much fine scholarship.

A day or two ago I had a letter from one of the best Greek scholars and
translators in England, who says of my "Cuchulain": "It opened up a
great world of beautiful legend which, though accounting myself as an
Irishman, I had never known at all. I am sending out copies to Irish
friends in Australia who, I am sure, will receive the same sort of
impression, almost an impression of pride in the beauty of the Irish
mind, as I received myself." And President Roosevelt wrote to me a
little time ago that after he had read "Cuchulain of Muirthemne," he had
sent for all the other translations from the Irish he could get, to take
on his journey to the Western States.

I give these appreciative words not, I think, from vanity, for they are
not for me but for my material, to show the effect our old literature
has on those who come fresh to it, and that they do not complain of its
"want of imagination." I am, of course, very proud and glad in having
had the opportunity of helping to make it known, and the task has been
pleasant, although toil-some. Just now, indeed, on the 6th October, I am
tired enough, and I think with sympathy of the old Highland piper, who
complained that he was "withered with yelping the seven Fenian
battalions."


II. THE AGE AND ORIGIN OF THE STORIES OF THE FIANNA


Mr Alfred Nutt says in _Ossian and the Ossianic Literature,_ No. 3 of
his excellent series of sixpenny pamphlets, _Popular Studies in
Mythology, Romance, and Folklore_:--

"The body of Gaelic literature connected with the name of Ossian is of
very considerable extent and of respectable antiquity. The oldest texts,
prose for the most part, but also in verse, are preserved in Irish MSS.
of the eleventh and twelfth centuries, and go back to a period from one
hundred and fifty to two hundred and fifty years older at least. The
bulk of Ossianic literature is, however, of later date as far as the
form under which it has come down to us is concerned. A number of
important texts, prose for the most part, are preserved in MSS. of the
fourteenth century, but were probably redacted in the thirteenth and
twelfth centuries. But by far the largest mass consists of narrative
poems, as a rule dramatic in structure. These have come down to us in
MSS. written in Scotland from the end of the fifteenth to the middle of
the seventeenth century, in Ireland from the sixteenth down to the
middle of the nineteenth century. The Gaelic-speaking peasantry, alike
in Ireland and Scotland, have preserved orally a large number of these
ballads, as also a great mass of prose narratives, the heroes of which
are Ossian and his comrades.

"Were all Ossianic texts preserved in MSS. older than the present
century to be printed, they would fill some eight to ten thousand octavo
pages. The mere bulk of the literature, even if we allow for
considerable repetition of incident, arrests attention. If we further
recall that for the last five hundred years this body of romance has
formed the chief imaginative recreation of Gaeldom, alike in Ireland and
Scotland, and that a peasantry unable to read or write has yet preserved
it almost entire, its claims to consideration and study will appear
manifest."

He then goes on to discuss how far the incidents in the stories can be
accepted as they were accepted by Irish historical writers of the
eleventh century as authentic history:--

"Fortunately there is little need for me to discuss the credibility or
otherwise of the historic records concerning Finn, his family, and his
band of warriors. They may be accepted or rejected according to
individual bent of mind without really modifying our view of the
literature. For when we turn to the romances, whether in prose or verse,
we find that, although the history is professedly the same as that of
the Annals, firstly, we are transported to a world entirely romantic, in
which divine and semi-divine beings, ungainly monsters and giants, play a
prominent part, in which men and women change shapes with animals, in
which the lives of the heroes are miraculously prolonged--in short, we
find ourselves in a land of Faery; secondly, we find that the historic
conditions in which the heroes are represented as living do not, for the
most part, answer to anything we know or can surmise of the third
century. For Finn and his warriors are perpetually on the watch to guard
Ireland against the attacks of over-sea raiders, styled Lochlannac by
the narrators, and by them undoubtedly thought of as Norsemen. But the
latter, as is well known, only came to Ireland at the close of the
eighth century, and the heroic period of their invasions extended for
about a century, from 825 to 925; to be followed by a period of
comparative settlement during the tenth century, until at the opening of
the eleventh century the battle of Clontarf, fought by Brian, the great
South Irish chieftain, marked the break-up of the separate Teutonic
organisations and the absorption of the Teutons into the fabric of Irish
life. In these pages then we may disregard the otherwise interesting
question of historic credibility in the Ossianic romances: firstly,
because they have their being in a land unaffected by fact; secondly,
because if they ever did reflect the history of the third century the
reflection was distorted in after-times, and a pseudo-history based upon
events of the ninth and tenth centuries was substituted for it. What the
historian seeks for in legend is far more a picture of the society in
which it took rise than a record of the events which it commemorates."

In a later part of the pamphlet Mr Nutt discusses such questions as
whether we may look for examples of third-century customs in the
stories, what part of the stories first found their way into writing,
whether the Oisin and Patrick dialogues were written under the influence
of actual Pagan feeling persisting from Pagan times, or whether "a
change came over the feeling of Gaeldom during the fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries," when the Oisin and Patrick dialogues in their
present form began to be written. His final summing-up is that
"well-nigh the same stories that were told of Finn and his warrior
braves by the Gael of the eleventh century are told in well-nigh the
same way by his descendant to-day." Mr Nutt does not enquire how long
the stories may have been told before the first story was written down.
Larminie, however, whose early death was the first great loss of our
intellectual movement, pushes them backward for untold ages in the
introduction to his _West Irish Folk Tales and Romances_. He builds up a
detailed and careful argument, for which I must refer readers to his
book, to prove that the Scottish Highlands and Ireland have received
their folk-lore both from "Aryan and Non-Aryan sources," and that in the
Highlands there is more non-Aryan influence and more non-Aryan blood
than in Ireland. He argues that nothing is more improbable than that all
folk-tales are Aryan, as has sometimes been supposed, and sums up as
follows:--

"They bear the stamp of the genius of more than one race. The pure and
placid but often cold imagination of the Aryan has been at work on some.
In others we trace the more picturesque fancy, the fierceness and
sensuality, the greater sense of artistic elegance belonging to races
whom the Aryan, in spite of his occasional faults of hardness and
coarseness, has, on the whole, left behind him. But as the greatest
results in the realm of the highest art have always been achieved in the
case of certain blends of Aryan with other blood, I should hardly deem
it extravagant if it were asserted that in the humbler regions of the
folk-tale we might trace the working of the same law. The process which
has gone on may in part have been as follows:--Every race which has
acquired very definite characteristics must have been for a long time
isolated. The Aryans during their period of isolation probably developed
many of their folk-germs into their larger myths, owing to the greater
constructiveness of their imagination, and thus, in a way, they used up
part of their material. Afterwards, when they became blended with other
races less advanced, they acquired fresh material to work on. We have in
Ireland an instance to hand, of which a brief discussion may help to
illustrate the whole race theory.

"The larger Irish legendary literature divides itself into three
cycles--the divine, the heroic, the Fenian. Of these three the last is
so well-known orally in Scotland that it has been a matter of dispute to
which country it really belongs. It belongs, in fact, to both. Here,
however, comes in a strange contrast with the other cycles. The first
is, so far as I am aware, wholly unknown in Scotland, the second
comparatively unknown. What is the explanation? Professor Zimmer not
having established his late-historical view as regards Finn, and the
general opinion among scholars having tended of recent years towards the
mythical view, we want to know why there is so much more community in
one case than in the other. Mr O'Grady long since seeing this
difficulty, and then believing Finn to be historical, was induced to
place the latter in point of time before Cuchulain and his compeers. But
this view is of course inadmissible when Finn is seen not to be
historical at all. There remains but one explanation. The various bodies
of legend in question are, so far as Ireland is concerned, only earlier
or later, as they came into the island with the various races to which
they belonged. The wider prevalence, then, of the Finn Saga would
indicate that it belonged to an early race occupying both Ireland and
Scotland. Then entered the Aryan Gael, and for him henceforth, as the
ruler of the island, his own gods and heroes were sung by his own bards.
His legends became the subject of what I may call the court poetry, the
aristocratic literature. When he conquered Scotland, he took with him
his own gods and heroes; but in the latter country the bardic system
never became established, and hence we find but feeble echoes of the
heroic cycle among the mountains of the North. That this is the
explanation is shown by what took place in Ireland. Here the heroic
cycle has been handed down in remembrance almost solely by the bardic
literature. The popular memory retains but few traces of it. Its
essentially aristocratic character is shown by the fact that the people
have all but forgotten it, if they ever knew it. But the Fenian cycle
has not been forgotten. Prevailing everywhere, still cherished by the
conquered peoples, it held its ground in Scotland and Ireland alike,
forcing its way in the latter country even into the written literature,
and so securing a twofold lease of existence ... The Fenian cycle, in a
word, is non-Aryan folk-literature partially subjected to Aryan
treatment."

The whole problem is extremely complex, and several other writers have
written upon it. Mr Borlase, for instance, has argued in his big book on
the Dolmens that the cromlechs, and presumably the Diarmuid and Crania
legend, is connected with old religious rites of an erotic nature coming
down from a very primitive state of society.

I have come to my own conclusion not so much because of any weight of
argument, as because I found it impossible to arrange the stories in a
coherent form so long as I considered them a part of history. I tried to
work on the foundation of the Annalists, and fit the Fianna into a
definite historical epoch, but the whole story seemed trivial and
incoherent until I began to think of them as almost contemporaneous with
the battle of Magh Tuireadh, which even the Annalists put back into
mythical ages. In this I have only followed some of the story-tellers,
who have made the mother of Lugh of the Long Hand the grandmother of
Finn, and given him a shield soaked with the blood of Balor. I cannot
think of any of the stories as having had a modern origin, or that the
century in which each was written down gives any evidence as to its age.
"How Diarmuid got his Love-Spot," for instance, which was taken down
only a few years ago from some old man's recitation by Dr Hyde, may well
be as old as "Finn and the Phantoms," which is in one of the earliest
manuscripts. It seems to me that one cannot choose any definite period
either from the vast living mass of folk-lore in the country or from the
written text, and that there is as good evidence of Finn being of the
blood of the gods as of his being, as some of the people tell me, "the
son of an O'Shaughnessy who lived at Kiltartan Cross."

Dr Douglas Hyde, although he placed the Fenian after the Cuchulain cycle
in his _History of Irish Literature_, has allowed me to print this
note:--

"While believing in the real objective existence of the Fenians as a
body of Janissaries who actually lived, ruled, and hunted in King
Cormac's time, I think it equally certain that hundreds of stories,
traits, and legends far older and more primitive than any to which they
themselves could have given rise, have clustered about them. There is
probably as large a bulk of primitive mythology to be found in the Finn
legend as in that of the Red Branch itself. The story of the Fenians was
a kind of nucleus to which a vast amount of the flotsam and jetsam of a
far older period attached itself, and has thus been preserved."

As I found it impossible to give that historical date to the stories, I,
while not adding in anything to support my theory, left out such names
as those of Cormac and Art, and such more or less historical personages,
substituting "the High King." And in the "Battle of the White Strand," I
left out the name of Caelur, Tadg's wife, because I had already followed
another chronicler in giving him Ethlinn for a wife. In the earlier part
I have given back to Angus Og the name of "The Disturber," which had, as
I believe, strayed from him to the Saint of the same name.


III. THE AUTHORITIES


The following is a list of the authorities I have been chiefly helped by
in putting these stories together and in translation of the text. But I
cannot make it quite accurate, for I have sometimes transferred a mere
phrase, sometimes a whole passage from one story to another, where it
seemed to fit better. I have sometimes, in the second part of the book,
used stories preserved in the Scottish Gaelic, as will be seen by my
references. I am obliged to write these notes away from libraries, and
cannot verify them, but I think they are fairly correct.