the High King the whole story, and how the sons of Uar were destroying
them, and the three sons of the King of Iruath were helping them against
them. "Why would not the men that can do all that find some good spell
that would drive the sons of Uar out of Ireland?" said the High King.

With that Caoilte went looking for the three young men from Iruath and
brought them to the High King. "These are comely men," said the High
King, "good in their shape and having a good name. And could you find
any charm, my sons," he said, "that will drive out these three enemies
that are destroying the Fianna of Ireland?" "We would do that if we
could find those men near us," said they; "and it is where they are
now," they said, "at Daire's Cairn at the end of the raths." "Where are
Garb-Cronan, the Rough Buzzing One, and Saltran of the Long Heel?" said
Finn. "Here we are, King of the Fianna," said they. "Go out to those men
beyond, and tell them I will give according to the judgment of the King
of Ireland in satisfaction for their father." The messengers went out
then and brought them in, and they sat down on the bank of the rath.

Then the High King said: "Rise up, Dubh, son of the King of Iruath, and
command these sons of Uar with a spell to quit Ireland." And Dubh rose
up, and he said: "Go out through the strength of this spell and this
charm, you three enemies of the Fianna, one-eyed, lame-thighed,
left-handed, of the bad race. And go out on the deep bitter sea," he
said, "and let each one of you strike a blow of his sword on the head
of his brothers. For it is long enough you are doing harm and
destruction on the King of the Fianna, Finn, son of Cumhal."

With that the hound sent a blast of wind under them that brought them
out into the fierce green sea, and each of them struck a blow on the
head of the others. And that was the last that was seen of the three
destroying sons of Uar, Aincel and Digbail and Espaid.

But after the time of the Fianna, there came three times in the one
year, into West Munster, three flocks of birds from the western sea
having beaks of bone and fiery breath, and the wind from their wings was
as cold as a wind of spring. And the first time they came was at reaping
time, and every one of them brought away an ear of corn from the field.
And the next time they came they did not leave apple on tree, or nut on
bush, or berry on the rowan; and the third time they spared no live
thing they could lift from the ground, young bird or fawn or silly
little child. And the first day they came was the same day of the year
the three sons of Uar were put out in the sea.

And when Caoilte, that was one of the last of the Fianna, and that was
living yet, heard of them, he remembered the sons of Uar, and he made a
spell that drove them out into the sea again, and they perished there by
one another.

It was about the length of a year the three sons of the King of Iruath
stopped with Finn. And at the end of that time Donn and Dubhan, two sons
of the King of Ulster, came out of the north to Munster. And one night
they kept watch for the Fianna, and three times they made a round of the
camp. And it is the way the young men from Iruath used to be, in a place
by themselves apart from the Fianna, and their hound in the middle
between them; and at the fall of night there used a wall of fire to be
around them, the way no one could look at them.

And the third time the sons of the King of Ulster made the round of the
camp, they saw the fiery wall, and Donn said: "It is a wonder the way
those three young men are through the length of a year now, and their
hound along with them, and no one getting leave to look at them."

With that he himself and his brother took their arms in their hands, and
went inside the wall of fire, and they began looking at the three men
and at the hound. And the great hound they used to see every day at the
hunting was at this time no bigger than a lap-dog that would be with a
queen or a high person. And one of the young men was watching over the
dog, and his sword in his hand, and another of them was holding a vessel
of white silver to the mouth of the dog; and any drink any one of the
three would ask for, the dog would put it out of his mouth into the
vessel.

Then one of the young men said to the hound: "Well, noble one and brave
one and just one, take notice of the treachery that is done to you by
Finn." When the dog heard that he turned to the King of Ulster's sons,
and there rose a dark Druid wind that blew away the shields from their
shoulders and the swords from their sides into the wall of fire. And
then the three men came out and made an end of them; and when that was
done the dog came and breathed on them, and they turned to ashes on the
moment, and there was never blood or flesh or bone of them found after.

And the three battalions of the Fianna divided themselves into companies
of nine, and went searching through every part of Ireland for the King
of Ulster's two sons.

And as to Finn, he went to Teamhair Luachra, and no one with him but the
serving-lads and the followers of the army. And the companies of nine
that were looking for the King of Ulster's sons came back to him there
in the one night; but they brought no word of them, if they were dead or
living.

But as to the three sons of the King of Iruath and the hound that was
with them, they were seen no more by Finn and the Fianna.