CHAPTER II. THE CAVE OF CEISCORAN


Finn called for a great hunt one time on the plains of Magh Chonaill and
in the forest parts of Cairbre of the Nuts. And he himself went up to
the top of Ceiscoran, and his two dogs Bran and Sceolan with him.

And the Fianna were shouting through the whole country where they were
hunting, the way the deer were roused in their wild places and the
badgers in their holes, and foxes in their wanderings, and birds on the
wing.

And Conaran, son of Imidd, of the Tuatha de Danaan, had the sway in
Ceiscoran at that time, and when he heard the shouting and the cry of
the hounds all around, he bade his three daughters that had a great
share of enchantments, to do vengeance on Finn for his hunting.

The three women went then to the opening of a cave that was in the
hills, and there they sat down together, and they put three strong
enchanted hanks of yarn on crooked holly-sticks, and began to reel them
off outside the cave.

They were not long there till Finn and Conan came towards them, and saw
the three ugly old hags at their work, their coarse hair tossed, their
eyes red and bleary, their teeth sharp and crooked, their arms very
long, their nails like the tips of cows' horns, and the three spindles
in their hands.

Finn and Conan passed through the hanks of yarn to get a better look at
the hags. And no sooner had they done that, than a deadly trembling came
on them and a weakness, and the bold hags took hold of them and put them
in tight bonds.

Two other men of the Fianna came up then, and the sons of Menhann along
with them, and they went through the spindles to where Finn and Conan
were, and their strength went from them in the same way, and the hags
tied them fast and carried them into the cave.

They were not long there till Caoilte and Lugaidh's Son came to the
place, and along with them the best men of the sons of Baiscne. The sons
of Morna came as well, and no sooner did they see the hanks than their
strength and their bravery went out of them the same as it went from the
others.

And in the end the whole number of them, gentle and simple, were put in
bonds by the hags, and brought into the cave. And there began at the
mouth of the cave a great outcry of hounds calling for their masters
that had left them there. And there was lying on the hillside a great
heap of deer, and wild pigs, and hares, and badgers, dead and torn, that
were brought as far as that by the hunters that were tied up now in the
cave.

Then the three women came in, having swords in their hands, to the place
where they were lying, to make an end of them. But first they looked out
to see was there ever another man of the Fianna to bring in and to make
an end of with the rest.

And they saw coming towards them a very tall man that was Goll, son of
Morna, the Flame of Battle. And when the three hags saw him they went to
meet him, and they fought a hard battle with him. And great anger came
on Goll, and he made great strokes at the witches, and at the last he
raised up his sword, and with one blow he cut the two that were nearest
him through and through.

And then the oldest of the three women wound her arms about Goll, and he
beheading the two others, and he turned to face her and they wrestled
together, till at last Goll gave her a great twist and threw her on the
ground. He tied her fast then with the straps of a shield, and took his
sword to make an end of her. But the hag said: "O champion that was
never worsted, strong man that never went back in battle, I put my body
and my life under the protection of your bravery. And it is better for
you," she said, "to get Finn and the Fianna safe and whole than to have
my blood; and I swear by the gods my people swear by," she said, "I will
give them back to you again."

With that Goll set her free, and they went together into the hill where
the Fianna were lying. And Goll said: "Loose off the fastenings first
from Fergus of the True Lips and from the other learned men of the
Fianna; and after that from Finn, and Oisin, and the twenty-nine sons of
Morna, and from all the rest."

She took off the fastenings then, and the Fianna made no delay, but rose
up and went out and sat down on the side of the hill. And Fergus of the
Sweet Lips looked at Goll, son of Morna, and made great praises of him,
and of all that he had done.