CHAPTER XV. THE HUNT OF SLIEVE CUILINN


Finn was one time out on the green of Almhuin, and he saw what had the
appearance of a grey fawn running across the plain. He called and
whistled to his hounds then, but neither hound nor man heard him or came
to him, but only Bran and Sceolan. He set them after the fawn, and near
as they kept to her, he himself kept nearer to them, till at last they
reached to Slieve Cuilinn in the province of Ulster.

But they were no sooner at the hill than the fawn vanished from them,
and they did not know where was she gone, and Finn went looking for her
eastward, and the two hounds went towards the west.

It was not long till Finn came to a lake, and there was sitting on the
brink of it a young girl, the most beautiful he had ever seen, having
hair of the colour of gold, and a skin as white as lime, and eyes like
the stars in time of frost; but she seemed to be some way sorrowful and
downhearted. Finn asked her did she see his hounds pass that way. "I did
not see them," she said; "and it is little I am thinking of your hounds
or your hunting, but of the cause of my own trouble." "What is it ails
you, woman of the white hands?" said Finn; "and is there any help I can
give you?" he said. "It is what I am fretting after," said she, "a ring
of red gold I lost off my finger in the lake. And I put you under bonds,
Finn of the Fianna," she said, "to bring it back to me out of the lake."

With that Finn stripped off his clothes and went into the lake at the
bidding of the woman, and he went three times round the whole lake and
did not leave any part of it without searching, till he brought back the
ring. He handed it up to her then out of the water, and no sooner had he
done that than she gave a leap into the water and vanished.

And when Finn came up on the bank of the lake, he could not so much as
reach to where his clothes were; for on the moment he, the head and the
leader of the Fianna of Ireland, was but a grey old man, weak and
withered.

Bran and Sceolan came up to him then, but they did not know him, and
they went on round the lake, searching after their master.


In Almhuin, now, when he was missed, Caoilte began asking after him.
"Where is Finn," he said, "of the gentle rule and of the spears?" But no
one knew where was he gone, and there was grief on the Fianna when they
could not find him. But it is what Conan said: "I never heard music
pleased me better than to hear the son of Cumhal is missing. And that he
may be so through the whole year," he said, "and I myself will be king
over you all." And downhearted as they were, it is hardly they could
keep from laughing when they heard Conan saying that.

Caoilte and the rest of the chief men of the Fianna set out then looking
for Finn, and they got word of him; and at last they came to Slieve
Cuilinn, and there they saw a withered old man sitting beside the lake,
and they thought him to be a fisherman. "Tell us, old man," said
Caoilte, "did you see a fawn go by, and two hounds after her, and a tall
fair-faced man along with them?" "I did see them," he said, "and it is
not long since they left me." "Tell us where are they now?" said
Caoilte. But Finn made no answer, for he had not the courage to say to
them that he himself was Finn their leader, being as he was an ailing,
downhearted old man, without leaping, without running, without walk,
grey and sorrowful.

Caoilte took out his sword from the sheath then, and he said: "It is
short till you will have knowledge of death unless you will tell us what
happened those three."

Then Finn told them the whole story; and when the seven battalions of
the Fianna heard him, and knew it was Finn that was in it, they gave
three loud sorrowful cries. And to the lake they gave the name of Loch
Doghra, the Lake of Sorrow.

But Conan of the sharp tongue began abusing Finn and all the Fianna by
turns. "You never gave me right praise for my deeds, Finn, son of
Cumhal," he said, "and you were always the enemy of the sons of Morna;
but we are living in spite of you," he said, "and I have but the one
fault to find with your shape, and that is, that it was not put on the
whole of the Fianna the same as on yourself." Caoilte made at him then;
"Bald, senseless Conan," he said, "I will break your mouth to the bone."
But Conan ran in then among the rest of the Fianna and asked protection
from them, and peace was made again.

And as to Finn, they asked him was there any cure to be found for him.
"There is," he said; "for I know well the enchantment was put on me by a
woman of the Sidhe, Miluchradh, daughter of Cuilinn, through jealousy of
her sister Aine. And bring me to the hill that belongs to Cuilinn of
Cuailgne," he said, "for he is the only one can give me my shape again."

They came around him then, and raised him up gently on their shields,
and brought him on their shoulders to the hill of the Sidhe in Cuailgne,
but no one came out to meet them. Then the seven battalions began
digging and rooting up the whole hill, and they went on digging through
the length of three nights and three days. And at the end of that time
Cuilinn of Cuailgne, that some say was Manannan, son of Lir, came out of
the hill, holding in his hand a vessel of red gold, and he gave the
vessel into Finn's hand. And no sooner did Finn drink what was in the
vessel than his own shape and his appearance came back to him. But only
his hair, that used to be so fair and so beautiful, like the hair of a
woman, never got its own colour again, for the lake that Cuilinn's
daughter had made for Finn would have turned all the men of the whole
world grey if they had gone into it.

And when Finn had drunk all that was in the vessel it slipped from his
hand into the earth, that was loosened with the digging, and he saw it
no more. But in the place where it went into the earth, a tree grew up,
and any one that would look at the branches of that tree in the morning,
fasting, would have knowledge of all that was to happen on that day.

That, now, is the way Finn came by his grey hair, through the jealousy
of Miluchradh of the Sidhe, because he had not given his love to her,
but to her sister Aine.


BOOK FIVE: OISIN'S CHILDREN


Now as to Oisin, that was so brave and so comely, and that could
overtake a deer at its greatest speed, and see a thistle thorn on the
darkest night, the wife he took was Eibhir of the plaited yellow hair,
that was the foreign sweetheart of the High King of Ireland.

It is beyond the sea she lived, in a very sunny place; and her father's
name was lunsa, and her sunny house was thatched with the feathers of
birds, and the doorposts were of gold, and the doors of ribbed grass.
And Oisin went there looking for her, and he fought for her against the
High King and against an army of the Firbolgs he had helping him; and he
got the better of them all, and brought away Eibhir of the yellow hair
to Ireland.

And he had a daughter that married the son of Oiliol, son of Eoghan, and
of Beara, daughter of the King of Spain. It was that Eoghan was driven
out of Ireland one time, and it is to Spain he went for safety. And
Beara, that was daughter of the King of Spain, was very shining and
beautiful, and her father had a mind to know who would be her husband,
and he sent for his Druid and asked the question of him. "I can tell you
that," said the Druid, "for the man that is to be her husband will come
to land in Spain this very night. And let your daughter go eastward to
the river Eibhear," he said, "and she will find a crimson-spotted salmon
in that river, having shining clothing on him from head to tail. And let
her strip that clothing off him," he said, "and make with it a shining
shirt for her husband."

So Beara went to the river Eibhear, and found the golden salmon as the
Druid had said, and she stripped him of his crimson clothing and made a
shining shirt of it.

And as to Eoghan, the waves of the shore put a welcome before him, and
he came the same night to the king's house. And the king gave him a
friendly welcome; and it is what all the people said, that there was
never seen a comelier man than Eoghan, or a woman more beautiful than
Beara, and that it was fitting for them to come together. And Eoghan's
own people said they would not be sorry for being sent away out of
Ireland, if only Eoghan could get her for his wife.

And after a while the king sent his Druid to ask Eoghan why he did not
ask for Beara. "I will tell you that," said Eoghan; "it would not be
fitting for me to be refused a wife, and I am but an exile in this
country, and I have brought no treasures or goods with me out of Ireland
for giving to learned men and to poets. But for all that," he said, "the
king's daughter is dear to me, and I think I have the friendship of the
king."

The Druid went back with that message. "That is the answer of a king,"
said the King of Spain; "and bid my daughter to sit at Eoghan's right
hand," he said, "and I will give her to him this very night." And when
Beara, the king's daughter, heard that, she sent out her serving-maid to
bring the shirt she had made for Eoghan, and he put it on him over his
armour, and its shining was seen in every place; and it was from wearing
that shirt he got the name of Eoghan the Bright.

And Oiliol was the first son they had; it was he that had his ear bitten
off by Aine of the Sidhe in revenge for her brother, and it was his son
married Oisin's daughter afterwards.

And as to Osgar, that was Oisin's son, of all the young men of the
Fianna he was the best in battle. And when he was but a young child he
was made much of by the whole of the Fianna, and it is for him they used
to keep the marrow bones, and they did not like to put any hardship on
him. And he grew up tall and idle, and no one thought he would turn out
so strong as he did. And one day there was an attack made on a troop of
the Fianna, and all that were in it went out to fight, but they left
Osgar after them. And when he knew the fight was going on, he took a log
of wood that was the first thing he could find, and attacked the enemy
and made a great slaughter, and they gave way and ran before him. And
from that out there was no battle he did not go into; and he was said to
be the strongest of all the Fianna, though the people of Connacht said
that Goll was the strongest. And he and Diarmuid, grandson of Duibhne,
were comrades and dear friends; and it was Diarmuid taught him feats of
arms and of skill, and chess-playing. And Oisin his father took great
pride in him, and his grandfather Finn. And one time Finn was holding a
feast at Almhuin, and he asked the chief men of the Fianna that were
there what was the music they thought the best. "To be playing at
games," said Conan, "that is the best music I ever heard;" for though
Conan was a good hand against an enemy, there never was a man had less
sense. "The music I like the best is to be talking with a woman," said
Diarmuid. "My music is the outcry of my hounds, and they putting a deer
to its last stand," said Lugaidh's Son. "The music of the woods is best
to me," said Oisin; "the sound of the wind and of the cuckoo and the
blackbird, and the sweet silence of the crane."

And then Osgar was asked, and he said: "The best music is the striking
of swords in a battle." And it is likely he took after Finn in that, for
in spite of all the sweet sounds he gave an account of the time he was
at Conan's house, at Ceann Slieve, it used to be said by the Fianna that
the music that was best with Finn was what happened.

This now is the way Osgar met with his wife.

One time Finn and his men came to Slieve Crot, and they saw a woman
waiting there before them, having a crimson fringed cloak, and a gold
brooch in it, and a band of yellow gold on her forehead. Finn asked her
name, and where she came from. "Etain of the Fair Hair is my name," she
said, "daughter of Aedh of the White Breast, of the hill of the Sidhe at
Beinn Edair, son of Angus Og." "What is it brought you here, girl?" said
Finn. "To ask a man of the Fianna of Ireland to run a race with me."
"What sort of a runner are you?" said Diarmuid. "I am a good runner,"
said the girl; "for it is the same to me if the ground is long or short
under my feet."

All of the Fianna that were there then set out to run with her, and they
ran to the height over Badhamair and on to Ath Cliath, and from that on
to the hill of the Sidhe at Beinn Edair.

And there was a good welcome before them, and they were brought meat and
wine for drinking, and water for washing their feet. And after a while
they saw a nice fair-haired girl in front of the vats, and a cup of
white silver in her hand, and she giving out drink to every one. "It
seems to me that is the girl came asking the Fianna to race against her
at Slieve Crot," said Finn. "It is not," said Aedh of the White Breast,
"for that is the slowest woman there is among us." "Who was it so?" said
Finn. "It was Be-mannair, daughter of Ainceol, woman-messenger of the
Tuatha de Danaan. And it is she that changes herself into all shapes;
and she will take the shape of a fly, and of a true lover, and every one
leaves their secret with her. And it was she outran you coming from the
east," he said, "and not this other girl that was drinking and making
merry here in the hall." "What is her name?" said Finn. "Etain of the
Fair Hair," he said; "a daughter of my own, and a darling of the Tuatha
de Danaan. And it is the way with her, she has a lover of the men of the
Fianna." "That is well," said Finn; "and who is that lover?" "It is
Osgar, son of Oisin," said Aedh; "and it is she herself sent her
messenger for you," he said, "in her own shape, to Slieve Crot in the
south. And the son of the High King of Ireland has offered a great
bride-price to the Men of Dea for her," he said, "three hundreds of the
land nearest to Bregia and to Midhe, and to put himself and his weight
of gold into a balance, and to give it all to her. But we did not take
it," he said, "since she had no mind or wish for it herself, and so we
made no dealing or agreement about her." "Well," said Finn, "and what
conditions will you ask of Osgar?" "Never to leave me for anything at
all but my own fault," said the girl. "I will make that agreement with
you indeed," said Osgar. "Give me sureties for it," said she; "give me
the sureties of Goll for the sons of Morna, and of Finn, son of Cumhal,
for the Fianna of Ireland."

So they gave those sureties, and the wedding-feast was made, and they
stopped there for twenty nights. And at the end of that time Osgar asked
Finn where would he bring his wife. "Bring her to wide Almhuin for the
first seven years," said Finn.

But a while after that, in a great battle at Beinn Edair, Osgar got so
heavy a wound that Finn and the Fianna were as if they had lost their
wits. And when Etain of the Fair Hair came to the bed where Osgar was
lying, and saw the way he was, and that the great kinglike shape he had
was gone from him, greyness and darkness came on her, and she raised
pitiful cries, and she went to her bed and her heart broke in her like a
nut; and she died of grief for her husband and her first love.

But it was not at that time Osgar got his death, but afterwards in the
battle of Gabhra.


BOOK SIX: DIARMUID.