CHAPTER V. THE HELP OF THE MEN OF DEA


Then Taistellach that was one of Finn's messengers came to the White
Strand asking news; and Conn bade him go back to where Finn was and tell
him the way things were. But Taistellach would not go until he had
wetted his sword in the blood of one of the enemies of Ireland, the same
as the others had done. And he sent a challenge to the ships, and
Coimhleathan, a champion that was very big and tall, came and fought
with him on the strand, and took him in his arms to bring him back
living to the ship of the High King; but Taistellach struck his head off
in the sea and brought it back to land.

"Victory and blessing be with you!" said Conn Crither. "And go now
to-night," he said, "to the house of Bran, son of Febal my father at
Teamhair Luachra, and bid him to gather all the Tuatha de Danaan to help
us; and go on to-morrow to the Fianna of Ireland." So Taistellach went
on to Bran's house, and he told him the whole story and gave him the
message.

Then Bran, son of Febal, went out to gather the Tuatha de Danaan, and he
went to Dun Sesnain in Ui Conall Gabra, where they were holding a feast
at that time. And there he found three of the best young men of the
Tuatha de Danaan, Ilbrec the Many Coloured, son of Manannan, and
Nemanach the Pearly, son of Angus Og, and Sigmall, grandson of Midhir,
and they made him welcome and bade him to stop with them. "There is a
greater thing than this for you to do, Men of Dea," said Bran; and he
told them the whole story, and the way Conn Crither his son was. "Stop
with me to-night," said Sesnan, "and my son Dolb will go to Bodb Dearg,
son of the Dagda, and gather in the Tuatha de Danaan to us."

So he stopped there, and Dolb, son of Sesnan, went to Sidhe Bean Finn
above Magh Femen, and Bodb Dearg was there at that time, and Dolb gave
him his message. "Young man," said Bodb Dearg, "we are no way bound to
help the men of Ireland out of that strait." "Do not say that," said
Dolb, "for there is not a king's son or a prince or a leader of the
Fianna of Ireland without having a wife or a mother or a foster-mother
or a sweetheart of the Tuatha de Danaan; and it is good help they have
given you every time you were in want of it." "I give my word," said
Bodb Dearg, "it is right to give a good answer to so good a messenger."
With that he sent word to the Tuatha de Danaan in every place where they
were, and they gathered to him. And from that they went on to Dun
Sesnain, and they stopped there through the night And they rose up in
the morning and put on their shirts of the dearest silk and their
embroidered coats of rejoicing, and they took their green shields and
their swords and their spears. And their leaders at that time besides
Bodb Dearg were Midhir of Bri Leith, and Lir of Sidhe Finnachaidh, and
Abarthach, son of Ildathach, and Ilbrec, son of Manannan, and Fionnbhar
of Magh Suil, and Argat Lamh, the Silver Hand, from the Sionnan, and the
Man of Sweet Speech from the Boinn.

And the whole army of them came into Ciarraighe Luachra, and to
red-haired Slieve Mis, and from that to the harbour of the White Strand.
"O Men of Dea," said Abarthach then, "let a high mind and high courage
rise within you now in the face of the battle. For the doings of every
one among you," he said, "will be told till the end of the world; and
let you fulfil now the big words you have spoken in the
drinking-houses." "Rise up, Glas, son of Dremen," said Bodb Dearg then,
"and tell out to the King of the World that I am come to do battle."
Glas went then to the King of the World. "Are those the Fianna of
Ireland I see?" said the king. "They are not," said Glas, "but another
part of the men of Ireland that do not dare to be on the face of the
earth, but that live in hidden houses under the earth, and it is to give
warning of battle from them I am come." "Who will answer the Tuatha de
Danaan for me?" said the King of the World. "We will go against them,"
said two of the kings that were with him, Comur Cromchenn, King of the
Men of the Dog-Heads, and Caitchenn, King of the Men of the Cat-Heads.
And they had five red-armed battalions with them, and they went to the
shore like great red waves. "Who is there to match with the King of the
Dog-Heads for me?" said Bodb Dearg. "I will go against him," said Lir of
Sidhe Finnachaidh, "though I heard there is not in the world a man with
stronger hands than himself." "Who will be a match for the King of the
Cat-Heads?" said Bodb Dearg. "I will be a match for him," said
Abarthach, son of Ildathach.

So Lir and the King of the Dog-Heads attacked one another, and they made
a hard fight; but after a while Lir was getting the worst of it. "It is
a pity the way Lir is," said Bodb Dearg; "and let some of you rise up
and help him," he said. Then Ilbrec, son of Manannan, went to his help;
but if he did, he got a wound himself and could do nothing. Then Sigmal,
grandson of Midhir, went to his help, and after him the five sons of
Finnaistucan, and others of the Men of Dea, but they were all driven off
by the King of the Dog-Heads. But at that time Abarthach had made an end
of the King of the Cat-Heads, and he rose on his spear, and made a leap,
and came down between Lir and his enemy. "Leave off now and look on at
the fight," he said to Lir, "and leave it to me and the foreigner." With
that he took his sword in his left hand and made a thrust with his spear
in through the king's armour. And as the king was raising up his shield,
he struck at him with the sword that was in his left hand, and cut off
both his legs at the knees, and the king let fall his shield then, and
Abarthach struck off his head. And the two kings being dead, their
people broke away and ran, but the Men of Dea followed them and made an
end of them all; but if they did, they lost a good many of their own
men.