CHAPTER XVIII

RUPERT BRINGS HOME HIS MARCHIONESS


"Such a nice domestic scene," Val observed.

Ricky looked up from the bowl into which she was shelling peas. "Now
just what do you mean by that?" she asked suspiciously.

"Nothing, nothing at all. It's getting so I can't say a word around here
without you suspecting some sort of a catch in it," her brother
complained. He shifted the drawing-board Rod had fixed up for him an
inch or two. Although Val's arm was at last out of the sling, he was not
supposed to use it unless absolutely necessary.

"Well, after that afternoon when you made the missing heir appear like a
rabbit out of a hat--" began his sister.

"Rod," Val called down to where their cousin was busied over the
stretching of the new badminton net, "did you hear that? She referred to
you as a rabbit--deliberately."

"Hm-m," Rod answered in absent-minded fashion. "That cat of Miss
Charity's just walked away with one of those feathered things yo' bat
'round."

"Let us hope that he returns it in time," Val said; "otherwise I can
prophesy that you are going to spend the rest of the morning crawling
around under hedges and things hunting for him and it. Ricky will not be
balked. If she says that we are going to play badminton--well, we are
going to play badminton."

"I think that you might help too." Ricky attacked a fresh pod viciously
as their cousin came up on the terrace. He stopped for a moment by
Ricky's chair, long enough to gather the pods together on the paper she
had put down for them, piling them up in a more orderly fashion than she
was capable of.

"Doing what?" Val inquired. "You know that Lucy has chased everyone out
of the house. And now that Rod has finished setting out the lawn sports,
what is there left to do? By the way, did Sam mend that croquet mallet,
the one with the loose head?"

"The one that you broke hitting the stone with when you aimed at your
ball yesterday?" she asked sweetly. "Yes, I saw to that this morning."

"Then what more is there to worry about? Let the party begin." Val
reached for his box of pencils.

That afternoon promptly at three-thirty the Ralestones of Pirate's Haven
were going to give their first party. They had lived, eaten, and slept
with the idea of a party for the past week until Rupert rebelled and
disappeared for the morning, taking Charity with him. He declared before
he left that the house was no longer habitable for anyone above the
mental level of a party-mad monomaniac, a statement with which Val
privately agreed. But Ricky did trap him before he got the roadster out
and made him promise to bring home two pounds of salted nuts and some
more ice, because she simply knew that they wouldn't have enough.

Ricky dropped the last of the peas into the bowl and leaned back in her
canvas deck-chair. "I'm going to wear green," she murmured dreamily,
"with that leaf thing in my hair. And Charity's going to wear her rose,
the one that swishes when she walks."

"I think I'll appear in saffron," Val announced firmly. "Somehow I feel
like saffron. How about you, Rod?"

The thin, efficient, brown-faced person who was Roderick St. Jean de
Roche Ralestone, to grant him his full name, stretched lazily and
transferred a fistful of Ricky's peas to his mouth, a mouth which was no
longer sullen. At Val's question he raised his shoulders in one of his
French shrugs and considered.

"Yellow, with lilies behind mah ears," he grinned at Ricky. "Bettah give
them somethin' to stare at; they'll all be powerful interested, anyway."

"Yes, the lost viscount," Val agreed. "Of course, you're really only a
Lord like me, but it sounds better to say 'the lost viscount.' You'll
share the limelight with Rupert and the Luck, so you'd better take that
pair of my flannels which haven't turned quite yellow yet."

Rod shook his head. "This time Ah have mah own. Ah went in town shoppin'
yesterday. It's mah turn to share clothes. Youah brothah told me to get
yo' some shirts. So Ah did. Lucy put them in the top drawer."

"Don't tell me," Val begged, aroused by this news, "that we are actually
able to afford some new clothes again?"

Rod nodded and Ricky sat up. "Don't be silly," she said, "we're
comfortably well off. With Rupert writing books, and a lot of oil or
something in the swamp, why, what have we got to worry about? And next
fall Rod's going to college and I'm taking that course in dress
designing and Rupert's going to write another book and--and--" Her
inventive powers failed as Holmes came out on the terrace.

"Hello there." Val glanced at his watch. "I don't want to seem
inhospitable, but you're about four hours too early. We haven't even
crawled into our party duds."

"So I see. But this isn't a social call. By the way, where's Charity?"

"Oh, she went off with Rupert this morning," answered Ricky. "And I
think it was mean of them, running out on us that way, when there was so
much to do."

It seemed to Val that there was a faint shadow of irritation across the
open good nature of Holmes' smile when he heard her answer. "That damsel
is becoming very elusive nowadays," he observed as he sat down. "But now
for business."

"More business? Not another oil-well!" Ricky expressed her surprise
vividly with upflung hands.

"Not an oil-well, no. Just this--" He pulled Val's black note-book from
his pocket. "Now I am not going to tell you that I have shown them to a
publisher and that he wants fifty thousand or so at five dollars apiece.
But I did show them to that friend I spoke of. He isn't very well known
at present but he will be some day. His name is Fenly Moss and he is
interested in animated cartoons. He has some ideas that sound rather big
to me.

"Fen says that these animal drawings of yours show promise and he wants
to know whether you ever thought of trying something along his line?"

Val shook his head, impatient to hear the rest.

"Well, he's in town right now on his vacation and he's coming out to see
you tomorrow. I advise you, Ralestone, that if Fen makes you the
proposition I think he's going to, to grab it. It'll mean hard work for
you and plenty of it, but there is a future to it."

"I don't know how to thank you," the boy began when Holmes frowned at
him half-seriously. "None of that. I was really doing Fen a favor, but
you needn't tell him that. Do you know how long Charity and your brother
are going to be gone?"

"No. But they'll be back for lunch," Ricky said. "If they remember
lunch--they're getting so vague lately. Val went out to call them to
dinner last night and it took him a good five minutes to get them out of
the garden."

"Five? Nearer ten," scoffed her brother.

Holmes got up abruptly. "Well, I'll be drifting. When is this binge of
yours?"

"Three-thirty, which really means four," answered Ricky. "Aren't you
going to stay to lunch?"

The New Yorker shook his head. "Sorry, I've another engagement. Thanks
just the same."

"Thank _you_!" Val waved the note-book as he vanished. "Wonder why he
hurried off that way?"

"Mad to think that Miss Charity was gone," answered Rod shrewdly. "Yo've
had that board long enough." He calmly possessed himself of Val's
drawing equipment. "Time to rest."

"Yes, grandfather," his cousin assented meekly.

Ricky slapped at a fly. "It seems to get hotter and hotter," she said.
From the breast pocket of her sport dress she produced a handkerchief
and mopped her face. Then she looked at the handkerchief in surprise.

"What's the matter? Some face come off along with the paint?" asked Val.

"No. But I just remembered what this is--our clue!"

"You mean the handkerchief we found in the hall? I wonder who--"

Rod reached up and took it out of her hand.

"Mine. Miss Charity gave me a dozen last Christmas."

"Then you left it there," Ricky laughed. "Well, that solves the last of
our mysteries."

"All present or accounted for," Val agreed as around the house came
Rupert and their tenant.

"So there you are," began Ricky. "And I'd like to know what you've been
doing all morning--"

"Would you really?" asked Rupert.

Ricky stared at him for a long moment and then she arose before
transferring her gaze to Charity. It might have been sunburn or the heat
Ricky had complained of which colored the cheeks of the Boston Biglow.

"Rod! Val!" cried Ricky. "Where are your manners?" As she sank forward
in a deep and graceful curtsy she added, "Can't you see that Rupert has
brought home his Marchioness?"

"Now that," said Val, as he held out his hand to the new mistress of
Pirate's Haven, "is what I call 'Ralestone Luck.'"