CHAPTER VIII

GREAT-UNCLE RICK WALKS THE HALL


Sam had produced a horse complete with saddle and a reputed
skittishness. That horse was the pride of Sam's big heart. It had once
won a small purse at some country fair or something of the sort, and
since then it had been kept only to wear the saddle at rare intervals.
Not that Sam ever rode. He drove a spring-board behind a thin, sorrowful
mule called "Suggah." But the saddle horse was rented at times to white
folk of whom Sam approved.

Soon after the arrival of the Ralestones at Pirate's Haven, Sam had
brought this four-footed prodigy to their attention. But claiming that
the family were his "folks," he indignantly refused to accept hire and
was hurt if one of them did not ride at least once a day. Ricky had
developed an interest in the garden and had accepted the loan of Sam's
eldest son, an earth-brown child about as tall as the spade, to help her
mess about. Rupert spent the largest part of his days shut up in
Bluebeard's chamber. Which of course left the horse to Val.

And Val was becoming slightly bored with Louisiana, at least with that
portion of it which immediately surrounded them. Charity was hard at
work on her picture of the swamp hunter, for Jeems had come back without
warning from his mysterious concerns in the swamp. There was no one to
talk to and nowhere to go.

LeFleur had notified them that he believed he was on the track of some
discreditable incident in the past of their rival which would banish him
from their path. And no more handkerchiefs had been found, ownerless, in
their hall. It was a serene morning.

But, Val thought long afterwards, he should have been warned by that
very serenity and remembered the old saying, that it was always calmest
before a storm. On the contrary, he was riding Sam's horse along the
edge of that swamp, wondering what lay hidden back in that dark jungle.
Some day, he determined, he would do a little exploring in that
direction.

A heron arose from the bayou and streaked across the metallic blue of
the sky. Another was wading along, intent upon its fishing. Sam's yellow
dog, which had followed horse and rider, set up a barking, annoyed at
the haughty carriage of the bird. He scrambled down the steep bank,
drove it into flight after its fellow.

Val pulled his shirt away from his sticky skin and wondered if he would
ever feel really cool again. There was something about this damp heat
which seemed to remove all ambition. He marveled how Ricky could even
think of trimming roses that morning.

Sam's dog began to bark deafeningly again, and Val looked around for the
heron which must have aroused his displeasure. There was none. But
across the swamp crawled an ungainly monster.

Four great rubber-tired wheels, ten feet high, as he later learned,
supported a metal framework upon which squatted two men and the driver
of the monstrosity. With the ponderous solemnity of a tank it came on to
the bayou.

Val's mount snorted and his ears pricked back. He began to have very
definite ideas about what he saw. The thing slipped down the marshy bank
and took to the water with ease, turning its square nose downstream and
sending waves shoreward.

"Ride 'em, cowboy!" yelled one of the men derisively as Sam's horse
decided to stand on his hind legs and wave at the strange apparition as
it went by. Val brought him down upon four feet again, and he stood
sweating, his ears still back.

"What do you call that?" the boy shouted back.

"Prospecting engine for swamp use," answered the driver. "Don't you
swampers ever get the news?"

The car, or whatever it was, moved on downstream and so out of sight.

"Now I wonder what that was," Val said aloud as his mount sidled toward
the center of the road. The hound-dog came up and sat down to kick a
patch of flea-invaded territory which lay behind his left ear. Again the
morning was quiet.

But not for long. A mud-spattered car came around the bend in the road
and headed at Val, going a good pace for the dirt surfacing. Before it
quite reached him it stopped and the driver stuck his head out of the
window.

"Hey, you, move over! Whatya tryin' to do--break somebody's neck?"

Val surveyed him with interest. The man was, perhaps, Rupert's age, a
small, thin fellow with thick black hair and the white seam of an old
scar beneath his left eye.

"This is," the boy replied, "a private road."

"Yeah," he snarled, "I know. And I'm the owner. So get your hobby-horse
going and beat it, kid."

Val shifted in the saddle and stared down at him.

"And what might your name be?" he asked softly.

"What d'yuh think it is? Hitler? I'm Ralestone, the owner of this place.
On your way, kid, on your way."

"So? Well, good morning, cousin." Val tightened rein.

The invader eyed him cautiously. "What d'yuh mean--cousin?"

"I happen to be a Ralestone also," the boy answered grimly.

"Huh? You the guy who thinks he owns this?" he asked aggressively.

"My brother is the present master of Pirate's Haven--"

"That's what _he_ thinks," replied the rival with a relish. "Well, he
isn't. That is, not until he pays me for my half. And if he wants to get
tough, I'll take it all," he ended, and withdrew into the car like a
lizard into its rock den.

Val sat by the side of the road and watched the car slide along toward
the plantation. As it passed him he caught a glimpse of a second
passenger in the back seat. It was the red-faced man he had seen with
LeFleur's clerk on the street in New Orleans. Resolutely Val turned back
and started for the house in the wake of the rival.

By making use of a short-cut, he reached the front of the house almost
as soon as the car. Ricky had been working with the morning-glory vines
about the terrace steps, young Sam standing attendance with a rusty
trowel and one of the kitchen forks.

At the sound of the car she stood up and tried to brush a smear of
sticky earth from the front of her checked-gingham dress. When the rival
got out she smiled at him.

"Hello, sister," he smirked.

She stood still for a moment and her smile faded. When she answered, her
voice was chill. "You wished to see Mr. Ralestone?" she asked distantly.

"Sure. But not just yet, sister. You better be pleasant, you know. I'm
the new owner here--"

Val rode out of the bushes and swung out of the saddle, coming up behind
him. Although the boy was one of the smaller "Black" Ralestones, he
topped the invader by a good two inches, and he noted this with delight
as he came up to him.

"Ricky," he said briefly, "go in. And send Sam for Rupert."

She nodded and was gone. The man turned to face Val. "You again, huh?"
he demanded.

"Yes. And Ralestone or no Ralestone, I would advise you to keep a civil
tongue in your head," he began hotly, when Rupert appeared at the door.

"Well, Val," he asked, a frown creasing his forehead, "what is it?"

The rival advanced a short step and looked up. "So this is the guy who's
trying to do me out of my rights?"

Rupert reached behind him and closed the screen before coming to the
head of the terrace steps. "I presume that you are Mr. Ralestone?" he
asked quietly.

"'Course I'm Ralestone," asserted the other. "And I'm part owner of this
place."

"That has not yet been decided," answered Rupert calmly. "But suppose
you tell me to what we owe the honor of this visit?"

Now, however, the passenger took a hand in the game. He crawled out of
the car, taking off his soiled panama to wipe his bald head with a gaudy
silk handkerchief.

"Here, here, Mr. Ralestone," he addressed his companion, "let us have no
unpleasantness. We have merely come here today, sir," he explained to
Rupert, "to see if matters could not be settled amicably without having
to take recourse to a court of law. Your Mr. LeFleur will give us very
little satisfaction, you see. I am a plain and honest man, sir, and I
believe an affair of this kind may be best agreed upon between
principals. My client, Mr. Ralestone, is a reasonable man; he will be
moderate in his demands. It will be to your advantage to listen to our
proposal. After all, you cannot contest his rights--"

"But that is just what I am going to do." Rupert smiled down at them, if
a slight twist of the lips may be called a smile. "Have you ever heard
that old saying that 'possession is nine points of the law'? I am the
Ralestone in residence, and I shall continue to be the Ralestone in
residence until after this case is heard. Now, as I am a busy man and
this is the middle of the morning, I shall have to say good-bye--"

"So that's the way you're going to take it?" The visiting Ralestone
glared at Rupert. "All right. Play it that way and you won't be here a
month from now. Nor," he turned on Val, "this kid brother of yours,
either. You can't pull this lord-of-the-land stuff on me and get away
with it. I'll--" But he did not finish his threat. Instead, his jaws
clamped shut on mid-word. In silence he turned and got into the car to
which his counselor had already withdrawn.

The car leaped forward into a rose bush. With a savage twist of the
wheel the driver brought it back to the drive, leaving deep prints in
the front lawn. Then it was gone, down the drive, as they stood staring
after it.

"So that's that," Val commented. "Well, all I've got to say is that
Rick's branch of the family has sadly gone to seed--"

"Being a southern gentleman has made you slightly snobbish." Ricky came
out from her lurking place behind the door.

"Snobbish!" her brother choked at the injustice. "I suppose that that is
your idea of a perfect gentleman, a diamond in the rough--"

He pointed down the drive.

Ricky laughed. "It's so easy to tease you, Val. Of course he is a--a
wart of the first class. But Rupert will fix him--won't you?"

Her older brother grinned. "After that example of your trust in me, I'll
have to. I agree, he is not the sort you would care to introduce to your
more particular friends. But this visit seems to suggest something--"

"That he has the wind up?" Val asked.

"There are indications of that, I think. Something LeFleur has done has
stirred our friends into direct action. We shall probably have more of
it within the immediate future. So I want you, Ricky, to go to town.
Madame LeFleur has very kindly offered to put you up--"

Each tiny curl on Ricky's head seemed to bristle with indignation. "Oh,
no you don't, Rupert Ralestone! You don't get me away from here when
there are exciting things going on. I hardly think that our friend with
the slimy manner will use machine-guns to blast us out. And if he
does--well, it wouldn't be the first time that this house was used as a
fortress. I'm not going one step out of here unless you two come with
me."

Rupert shrugged. "As I can't very well hog-tie you to get you to town, I
suppose you will have to stay. But I _am_ going to send for Lucy." With
that parting shot he turned and went in.

Lucy arrived shortly before noon. She was accompanied by a portion of
her large family--four, Val counted, including that Sam who had become
Ricky's faithful shadow.

"What's all dis Ah heah 'bout some mans sayin' he am de Ralestone?" she
demanded of Ricky. "De policemans oughta lock him up. Effen he comes
botherin' 'roun' heah agin I'll ten' to him!"

With that she marched majestically into the kitchen, elbowed Letty-Lou
out of her way, and proceeded to stir up a batch of brown molasses
cookies. "'Cause dey is fillin' fo' boys. An' Mistuh Val, heah, he needs
some moah fat 'crost dose skinny ribs. Letty-Lou, yo'all ain't feedin'
dese men-folks ri'. Now yo' chillens," she swooped down upon her own
family, "yo'all gits outa heah an' don't fuss me."

"They can come with me," offered Ricky. "I'm trying to find that maze
which is marked on the garden plans."

"Miss 'Chanda, yo'all ain't a'goin' 'way 'afo' yoah brothah gits through
his wo'k. He done tol' me to keep an eye on yo'all. Why don't yo'all go
visit wi' Miss Charity?"

Ricky looked at her watch. "All right. She'll be through her morning
work by now. I'll take the children, Lucy."

To Val's open surprise, she obeyed Lucy, meekly moving off without a
single protest. One of the boys remained behind and offered shyly to
take the horse back to Sam's place. When Lucy agreed that it would be
all right, Val boosted him into the saddle where he clung like a jockey.

"An' wheah is yo'all goin', Mistuh Val?" asked Lucy, cutting out round
cookies with a downward stroke of the drinking glass she had pressed
into service. The regular cutter was, in her opinion, too small.

"Down toward the bayou. I'll be back before lunch," he said, and hurried
out before she could as definitely dispose of him as she had of Ricky.

Val struck off into the bushes until he came to one of the paths that
crossed the wilderness. As it ran in the direction of the bayou, he
turned into it. Then for the second time he came into the glen of the
pool and passed along the path Jeems had known. So somehow Val was not
surprised, when he came out upon the edge of the bayou levee, to see
Jeems sitting there.

"Hello!"

The swamper looked up at Val's hail but this time he did not leave.

"Hullo," he answered sullenly.

Val stood there, ill at ease, while the swamper eyed him composedly.
What could he say now? Val's embarrassment must have been very apparent,
for after a long moment Jeems smiled derisively.

"Yo' goin' ridin' in them funny pants?" he asked, pointing to the
other's breeches.

"Well, that's what they are intended for," Val replied.

"Wheah's youah hoss?"

"I sent him back to Sam's." Val was beginning to feel slightly warm. He
decided that Jeems' manners were not all that they might be.

"Sam!" the swamp boy spat into the water. "He's a--"

But what Sam was, in the opinion of the swamper, Val never learned, for
at that moment Ricky burst from between two bushes.

"Well, at last," she panted, "I've gotten rid of my army. Val, do you
think that Lucy is going to be like this all the time--order us about, I
mean?"

"Who's that?" Jeems was on his feet looking at Ricky.

"Ricky," her brother said, "this is Jeems. My sister Richanda."

"Yo' one of the folks up at the big house?" he asked her directly.

"Why, yes," she answered simply.

"Yo' don' act like yo' was." He stabbed his finger at both of them. "Yo'
don't walk with youah noses in the air looking down at us--"

"Of course we don't!" interrupted Ricky. "Why should we, when you know
more about this place than we do?"

"What do yo' mean by that?" he flashed out at her, his sullen face
suddenly dark.

"Why--why--" Ricky faltered, "Charity Biglow said that you knew all
about the swamp--"

His tense position relaxed a fraction. "Oh, yo' know Miss Charity?"

"Yes. She showed us the picture she is painting, the one you are posing
for," Ricky went on.

"Miss Charity is a fine lady," he returned with conviction. He shifted
from one bare foot to the other. "Ah'll be goin' now." With no other
farewell he slipped over the side of the levee into his canoe and headed
out into midstream. Nor did he look back.

Lucy departed after dinner that evening to bed down her family before
returning with Letty-Lou to occupy one of the servant's rooms over the
side wing. Rupert had gone with her to interview Sam. Val gathered that
Sam had some notion of trying to reintroduce the growing of indigo, a
crop which had been forsaken for sugar-cane at the beginning of the
nineteenth century when a pest had destroyed the entire indigo crop of
that year all over Louisiana.

"Let's go out in the garden," suggested Ricky.

"What for?" asked her brother. "To provide a free banquet for
mosquitoes? No, thank you, let's stay here."

"You're lazy," she countered.

"You may call it laziness; I call it prudence," he answered.

"Well, I'm going anyway," she made a decision which brought Val
reluctantly to his feet. For mosquitoes or no mosquitoes, he was not
going to allow Ricky to be outside alone.

They followed the path which led around the side of the house until it
neared the kitchen door. When they reached that point Ricky halted.

"Listen!"

A plaintive miaow sounded from the kitchen.

"Oh, bother! Satan's been left inside. Go and let him out."

"Will you stay right here?" Val asked.

"Of course. Though I don't see why you and Rupert have taken to acting
as if Fu Manchu were loose in our yard. Now hurry up before he claws the
screen to pieces. Satan, I mean, not the worthy Chinese gentleman."

But Satan did not meet Val at the door. Apparently, having received no
immediate answer to his plea, he had withdrawn into the bulk of the
house. Speaking unkind things about him under his breath, Val started
across the dark kitchen.

Suddenly he stopped. He felt the solid edge of the table against his
thigh. When he put out his hand he touched the reassuring everyday form
of Lucy's stone cooky jar. He was in their own pleasant everyday
kitchen.

But--

He was not alone in that house!

There had been the faintest of sounds from the forepart of the main
section, a sound such as Satan might have caused. But Val knew--knew
positively--that Satan was guiltless. Someone or something was in the
Long Hall.

He crept by the table, hoping that he could find his way without running
into anything. His hand closed upon the knob of the door opening upon
the back stairs used by Letty-Lou. If he could get up them and across
the upper hall, he could come down the front stairs and catch the
intruder.

It took Val perhaps two minutes to reach the head of the front stairs,
and each minute seemed a half-hour in length. From below he could hear a
regular _pad, pad_, as if from stocking feet on the stone floor. He drew
a deep breath and started down.

When he reached the landing he looked over the rail. Upright before the
fireplace was a dim white blur. As he watched, it moved forward. There
was something uncanny about that almost noiseless movement.

The blur became a thin figure clad in baggy white breeches and loose
shirt. Below the knees the legs seemed to fade into the darkness of the
hall and there was something strange about the outlines of the head.

Again the thing resumed its padding and Val saw now that it was pacing
the hall in a regular pattern. Which suggested that it was human and was
there with a very definite purpose.

He edged farther down the stairs.

"And just what are you doing?"

If his voice quavered upon the last word, it was hardly his fault. For
when the thing turned, Val saw--

It had no face!

With a startled cry he lunged forward, clutching at the banister to
steady his blundering descent. The thing backed away; already it was
fading into the darkness beside the stairs. As Val's feet touched the
floor of the hall he caught his last glimpse of it, a thin white patch
against the solid paneling of the stairway's broad side. Then it was
gone. When Rupert and Ricky came in a few minutes later and turned on
the lights, Val was still staring at that blank wall, with Satan rubbing
against his ankles.