The Tale of the Argonauts had been told often before in verse and
prose, and many authors’ names are given in the Scholia to Apollonius,
but their works have perished. The best known earlier account that we
have is that in Pindar’s fourth Pythian ode, from which Apollonius has
taken many details. The subject was one for an epic poem, for its unity
might have been found in the working out of the expiation due for the
crime of Athamas; but this motive is barely mentioned by our author.

As we have it, the motive of the voyage is the command of Pelias to
bring back the golden fleece, and this command is based on Pelias’
desire to destroy Jason, while the divine aid given to Jason results
from the intention of Hera to punish Pelias for his neglect of the
honour due to her. The learning of Apollonius is not deep but it is
curious; his general sentiments are not according to the Alexandrian
standard, for they are simple and obvious. In the mass of material from
which he had to choose the difficulty was to know what to omit, and
much skill is shown in fusing into a tolerably harmonious whole
conflicting mythological and historical details. He interweaves with
his narrative local legends and the founding of cities, accounts of
strange customs, descriptions of works of art, such as that of Ganymede
and Eros playing with knucklebones,[3] but prosaically calls himself
back to the point from these pleasing digressions by such an expression
as “but this would take me too far from my song.” His business is the
straightforward tale and nothing else. The astonishing geography of the
fourth book reminds us of the interest of the age in that subject,
stimulated no doubt by the researches of Eratosthenes and others.

The language is that of the conventional epic. Apollonius seems to have
carefully studied Homeric glosses, and gives many examples of isolated
uses, but his choice of words is by no means limited to Homer. He
freely avails himself of Alexandrian words and late uses of Homeric
words. Among his contemporaries Apollonius suffers from a comparison
with Theocritus, who was a little his senior, but he was much admired
by Roman writers who derived inspiration from the great classical
writers of Greece by way of Alexandria. In fact Alexandria was a useful
bridge between Athens and Rome. The _Argonautica_ was translated by
Varro Atacinus, copied by Ovid and Virgil, and minutely studied by
Valerius Flaccus in his poem of the same name. Some of his finest
passages have been appropriated and improved upon by Virgil by the
divine right of superior genius.[4] The subject of love had been
treated in the romantic spirit before the time of Apollonius in
writings that have perished, for instance, in those of Antimachus of
Colophon, but the _Argonautica_ is perhaps the first poem still extant
in which the expression of this spirit is developed with elaboration.
The Medea of Apollonius is the direct precursor of the Dido of Virgil,
and it is the pathos and passion of the fourth book of the “Aeneid”
that keep alive many a passage of Apollonius.


THE ARGONAUTICA