BOOK III


Come now, Erato, stand by my side, and say next how Jason brought back
the fleece to Iolcus aided by the love of Medea. For thou sharest the
power of Cypris, and by thy love-cares dost charm unwedded maidens;
wherefore to thee too is attached a name that tells of love.

Thus the heroes, unobserved, were waiting in ambush amid the thick
reed-beds; but Hera and Athena took note of them, and, apart from Zeus
and the other immortals, entered a chamber and took counsel together;
and Hera first made trial of Athena:

“Do thou now first, daughter of Zeus, give advice. What must be done?
Wilt thou devise some scheme whereby they may seize the golden fleece
of Aeetes and bear it to Hellas, or can they deceive the king with soft
words and so work persuasion? Of a truth he is terribly overweening.
Still it is right to shrink from no endeavour.”

Thus she spake, and at once Athena addressed her: “I too was pondering
such thoughts in my heart, Hera, when thou didst ask me outright. But
not yet do I think that I have conceived a scheme to aid the courage of
the heroes, though I have balanced many plans.”

She ended, and the goddesses fixed their eyes on the ground at their
feet, brooding apart; and straightway Hera was the first to speak her
thought: “Come, let us go to Cypris; let both of us accost her and urge
her to bid her son (if only he will obey) speed his shaft at the
daughter of Aeetes, the enchantress, and charm her with love for Jason.
And I deem that by her device he will bring back the fleece to Hellas.”

Thus she spake, and the prudent plan pleased Athena, and she addressed
her in reply with gentle words:

“Hera, my father begat me to be a stranger to the darts of love, nor do
I know any charm to work desire. But if the word pleases thee, surely I
will follow; but thou must speak when we meet her.”

So she said, and starting forth they came to the mighty palace of
Cypris, which her husband, the halt-footed god, had built for her when
first he brought her from Zeus to be his wife. And entering the court
they stood beneath the gallery of the chamber where the goddess
prepared the couch of Hephaestus. But he had gone early to his forge
and anvils to a broad cavern in a floating island where with the blast
of flame he wrought all manner of curious work; and she all alone was
sitting within, on an inlaid seat facing the door. And her white
shoulders on each side were covered with the mantle of her hair and she
was parting it with a golden comb and about to braid up the long
tresses; but when she saw the goddesses before her, she stayed and
called them within, and rose from her seat and placed them on couches.
Then she herself sat down, and with her hands gathered up the locks
still uncombed. And smiling she addressed them with crafty words:

“Good friends, what intent, what occasion brings you here after so
long? Why have ye come, not too frequent visitors before, chief among
goddesses that ye are?”

And to her Hera replied: “Thou dost mock us, but our hearts are stirred
with calamity. For already on the river Phasis the son of Aeson moors
his ship, he and his comrades in quest of the fleece. For all their
sakes we fear terribly (for the task is nigh at hand) but most for
Aeson’s son. Him will I deliver, though he sail even to Hades to free
Ixion below from his brazen chains, as far as strength lies in my
limbs, so that Pelias may not mock at having escaped an evil
doom—Pelias who left me unhonoured with sacrifice. Moreover Jason was
greatly loved by me before, ever since at the mouth of Anaurus in
flood, as I was making trial of men’s righteousness, he met me on his
return from the chase; and all the mountains and long ridged peaks were
sprinkled with snow, and from them the torrents rolling down were
rushing with a roar. And he took pity on me in the likeness of an old
crone, and raising me on his shoulders himself bore me through the
headlong tide. So he is honoured by me unceasingly; nor will Pelias pay
the penalty of his outrage, unless thou wilt grant Jason his return.”

Thus she spake, and speechlessness seized Cypris. And beholding Hera
supplicating her she felt awe, and then addressed her with friendly
words: “Dread goddess, may no viler thing than Cypris ever be found, if
I disregard thy eager desire in word or deed, whatever my weak arms can
effect; and let there be no favour in return.”

She spake, and Hera again addressed her with prudence: “It is not in
need of might or of strength that we have come. But just quietly bid
thy boy charm Aeetes’ daughter with love for Jason. For if she will aid
him with her kindly counsel, easily do I think he will win the fleece
of gold and return to Iolcus, for she is full of wiles.”

Thus she spake, and Cypris addressed them both: “Hera and Athena, he
will obey you rather than me. For unabashed though he is, there will be
some slight shame in his eyes before you; but he has no respect for me,
but ever slights me in contentious mood. And, overborne by his
naughtiness, I purpose to break his ill-sounding arrows and his bow in
his very sight. For in his anger he has threatened that if I shall not
keep my hands off him while he still masters his temper, I shall have
cause to blame myself thereafter.”

So she spake, and the goddesses smiled and looked at each other. But
Cypris again spoke, vexed at heart: “To others my sorrows are a jest;
nor ought I to tell them to all; I know them too well myself. But now,
since this pleases you both, I will make the attempt and coax him, and
he will not say me nay.”

Thus she spake, and Hera took her slender hand and gently smiling,
replied: “Perform this task, Cytherea, straightway, as thou sayest; and
be not angry or contend with thy boy; he will cease hereafter to vex
thee.”

She spake, and left her seat, and Athena accompanied her and they went
forth both hastening back. And Cypris went on her way through the glens
of Olympus to find her boy. And she found him apart, in the blooming
orchard of Zeus, not alone, but with him Ganymedes, whom once Zeus had
set to dwell among the immortal gods, being enamoured of his beauty.
And they were playing for golden dice, as boys in one house are wont to
do. And already greedy Eros was holding the palm of his left hand quite
full of them under his breast, standing upright; and on the bloom of
his cheeks a sweet blush was glowing. But the other sat crouching hard
by, silent and downcast, and he had two dice left which he threw one
after the other, and was angered by the loud laughter of Eros. And lo,
losing them straightway with the former, he went off empty handed,
helpless, and noticed not the approach of Cypris. And she stood before
her boy, and laying her hand on his lips, addressed him:

“Why dost thou smile in triumph, unutterable rogue? Hast thou cheated
him thus, and unjustly overcome the innocent child? Come, be ready to
perform for me the task I will tell thee of, and I will give thee Zeus’
all-beauteous plaything—the one which his dear nurse Adrasteia made for
him, while he still lived a child, with childish ways, in the Idaean
cave—a well-rounded ball; no better toy wilt thou get from the hands of
Hephaestus. All of gold are its zones, and round each double seams run
in a circle; but the stitches are hidden, and a dark blue spiral
overlays them all. But if thou shouldst cast it with thy hands, lo,
like a star, it sends a flaming track through the sky. This I will give
thee; and do thou strike with thy shaft and charm the daughter of
Aeetes with love for Jason; and let there be no loitering. For then my
thanks would be the slighter.”

Thus she spake, and welcome were her words to the listening boy. And he
threw down all his toys, and eagerly seizing her robe on this side and
on that, clung to the goddess. And he implored her to bestow the gift
at once; but she, facing him with kindly words, touched his cheeks,
kissed him and drew him to her, and replied with a smile:

“Be witness now thy dear head and mine, that surely I will give thee
the gift and deceive thee not, if thou wilt strike with thy shaft
Aeetes’ daughter.”

She spoke, and he gathered up his dice, and having well counted them
all threw them into his mother’s gleaming lap. And straightway with
golden baldric he slung round him his quiver from where it leant
against a tree-trunk, and took up his curved bow. And he fared forth
through the fruitful orchard of the palace of Zeus. Then he passed
through the gates of Olympus high in air; hence is a downward path from
heaven; and the twin poles rear aloft steep mountain tops the highest
crests of earth, where the risen sun grows ruddy with his first beams.
And beneath him there appeared now the life-giving earth and cities of
men and sacred streams of rivers, and now in turn mountain peaks and
the ocean all around, as he swept through the vast expanse of air.

Now the heroes apart in ambush, in a back-water of the river, were met
in council, sitting on the benches of their ship. And Aeson’s son
himself was speaking among them; and they were listening silently in
their places sitting row upon row: “My friends, what pleases myself
that will I say out; it is for you to bring about its fulfilment. For
in common is our task, and common to all alike is the right of speech;
and he who in silence withholds his thought and his counsel, let him
know that it is he alone that bereaves this band of its home-return. Do
ye others rest here in the ship quietly with your arms; but I will go
to the palace of Aeetes, taking with me the sons of Phrixus and two
comrades as well. And when I meet him I will first make trial with
words to see if he will be willing to give up the golden fleece for
friendship’s sake or not, but trusting to his might will set at nought
our quest. For so, learning his frowardness first from himself, we will
consider whether we shall meet him in battle, or some other plan shall
avail us, if we refrain from the war-cry. And let us not merely by
force, before putting words to the test, deprive him of his own
possession. But first it is better to go to him and win his favour by
speech. Oftentimes, I ween, does speech accomplish at need what prowess
could hardly catty through, smoothing the path in manner befitting. And
he once welcomed noble Phrixus, a fugitive from his stepmother’s wiles
and the sacrifice prepared by his father. For all men everywhere, even
the most shameless, reverence the ordinance of Zeus, god of strangers,
and regard it.”

Thus he spake, and the youths approved the words of Aeson’s son with
one accord, nor was there one to counsel otherwise. And then he
summoned to go with him the sons of Phrixus, and Telamon and Augeias;
and himself took Hermes’ wand; and at once they passed forth from the
ship beyond the reeds and the water to dry land, towards the rising
ground of the plain. The plain, I wis, is called Circe’s; and here in
line grow many willows and osiers, on whose topmost branches hang
corpses bound with cords. For even now it is an abomination with the
Colchians to burn dead men with fire; nor is it lawful to place them in
the earth and raise a mound above, but to wrap them in untanned oxhides
and suspend them from trees far from the city. And so earth has an
equal portion with air, seeing that they bury the women; for that is
the custom of their land.

And as they went Hera with friendly thought spread a thick mist through
the city, that they might fare to the palace of Aeetes unseen by the
countless hosts of the Colchians. But soon when from the plain they
came to the city and Aeetes’ palace, then again Hera dispersed the
mist. And they stood at the entrance, marvelling at the king’s courts
and the wide gates and columns which rose in ordered lines round the
walls; and high up on the palace a coping of stone rested on brazen
triglyphs. And silently they crossed the threshold. And close by garden
vines covered with green foliage were in full bloom, lifted high in
air. And beneath them ran four fountains, ever-flowing, which
Hephaestus had delved out. One was gushing with milk, one with wine,
while the third flowed with fragrant oil; and the fourth ran with
water, which grew warm at the setting of the Pleiads, and in turn at
their rising bubbled forth from the hollow rock, cold as crystal. Such
then were the wondrous works that the craftsman-god Hephaestus had
fashioned in the palace of Cytaean Aeetes. And he wrought for him bulls
with feet of bronze, and their mouths were of bronze, and from them
they breathed out a terrible flame of fire; moreover he forged a plough
of unbending adamant, all in one piece, in payment of thanks to Helios,
who had taken the god up in his chariot when faint from the Phlegraean
fight.[22] And here an inner-court was built, and round it were many
well-fitted doors and chambers here and there, and all along on each
side was a richly-wrought gallery. And on both sides loftier buildings
stood obliquely. In one, which was the loftiest, lordly Aeetes dwelt
with his queen; and in another dwelt Apsyrtus, son of Aeetes, whom a
Caucasian nymph, Asterodeia, bare before he made Eidyia his wedded
wife, the youngest daughter of Tethys and Oceanus. And the sons of the
Colchians called him by the new name of Phaethon,[23] because he
outshone all the youths. The other buildings the handmaidens had, and
the two daughters of Aeetes, Chalciope and Medea. Medea then [they
found] going from chamber to chamber in search of her sister, for Hera
detained her within that day; but beforetime she was not wont to haunt
the palace, but all day long was busied in Hecate’s temple, since she
herself was the priestess of the goddess. And when she saw them she
cried aloud, and quickly Chalciope caught the sound; and her maids,
throwing down at their feet their yarn and their thread, rushed forth
all in a throng. And she, beholding her sons among them, raised her
hands aloft through joy; and so they likewise greeted their mother, and
when they saw her embraced her in their gladness; and she with many
sobs spoke thus:

“After all then, ye were not destined to leave me in your heedlessness
and to wander far; but fate has turned you back. Poor wretch that I am!
What a yearning for Hellas from some woeful madness seized you at the
behest of your father Phrixus. Bitter sorrows for my heart did he
ordain when dying. And why should ye go to the city of Orchomenus,
whoever this Orchomenus is, for the sake of Athamas’ wealth, leaving
your mother alone to bear her grief?”

Such were her words; and Aeetes came forth last of all and Eidyia
herself came, the queen of Aeetes, on hearing the voice of Chalciope;
and straightway all the court was filled with a throng. Some of the
thralls were busied with a mighty bull, others with the axe were
cleaving dry billets, and others heating with fire water for the baths;
nor was there one who relaxed his toil, serving the king.

Meantime Eros passed unseen through the grey mist, causing confusion,
as when against grazing heifers rises the gadfly, which oxherds call
the breese. And quickly beneath the lintel in the porch he strung his
bow and took from the quiver an arrow unshot before, messenger of pain.
And with swift feet unmarked he passed the threshold and keenly glanced
around; and gliding close by Aeson’s son he laid the arrow-notch on the
cord in the centre, and drawing wide apart with both hands he shot at
Medea; and speechless amazement seized her soul. But the god himself
flashed back again from the high-roofed hall, laughing loud; and the
bolt burnt deep down in the maiden’s heart like a flame; and ever she
kept darting bright glances straight up at Aeson’s son, and within her
breast her heart panted fast through anguish, all remembrance left her,
and her soul melted with the sweet pain. And as a poor woman heaps dry
twigs round a blazing brand—a daughter of toil, whose task is the
spinning of wool, that she may kindle a blaze at night beneath her
roof, when she has waked very early—and the flame waxing wondrous great
from the small brand consumes all the twigs together; so, coiling round
her heart, burnt secretly Love the destroyer; and the hue of her soft
cheeks went and came, now pale, now red, in her soul’s distraction.

Now when the thralls had laid a banquet ready before them, and they had
refreshed themselves with warm baths, gladly did they please their
souls with meat and drink. And thereafter Aeetes questioned the sons of
his daughter, addressing them with these words:

“Sons of my daughter and of Phrixus, whom beyond all strangers I
honoured in my halls, how have ye come returning back to Aea? Did some
calamity cut short your escape in the midst? Ye did not listen when I
set before you the boundless length of the way. For I marked it once,
whirled along in the chariot of my father Helios, when he was bringing
my sister Circe to the western land and we came to the shore of the
Tyrrhenian mainland, where even now she abides, exceeding far from
Colchis. But what pleasure is there in words? Do ye tell me plainly
what has been your fortune, and who these men are, your companions, and
where from your hollow ship ye came ashore.”

Such were his questions, and Argus, before all his brethren, being
fearful for the mission of Aeson’s son, gently replied, for he was the
elder-born:

“Aeetes, that ship forthwith stormy blasts tore asunder, and ourselves,
crouching on the beams, a wave drove on to the beach of the isle of
Enyalius [24] in the murky night; and some god preserved us. For even
the birds of Ares that haunted the desert isle beforetime, not even
them did we find. But these men had driven them off, having landed from
their ship on the day before; and the will of Zeus taking pity on us,
or some fate, detained them there, since they straightway gave us both
food and clothing in abundance, when they heard the illustrious name of
Phrixus and thine own; for to thy city are they faring. And if thou
dost wish to know their errand, I will not hide it from time. A certain
king, vehemently longing to drive this man far from his fatherland and
possessions, because in might he outshone all the sons of Aeolus, sends
him to voyage hither on a bootless venture; and asserts that the stock
of Aeolus will not escape the heart-grieving wrath and rage of
implacable Zeus, nor the unbearable curse and vengeance due for
Phrixus, until the fleece comes back to Hellas. And their ship was
fashioned by Pallas Athena, not such a one as are the ships among the
Colchians, on the vilest of which we chanced. For the fierce waves and
wind broke her utterly to pieces; but the other holds firm with her
bolts, even though all the blasts should buffet her. And with equal
swiftness she speedeth before the wind and when the crew ply the oar
with unresting hands. And he hath gathered in her the mightiest heroes
of all Achaea, and hath come to thy city from wandering far through
cities and gulfs of the dread ocean, in the hope that thou wilt grant
him the fleece. But as thou dost please, so shall it be, for he cometh
not to use force, but is eager to pay thee a recompense for the gift.
He has heard from me of thy bitter foes the Sauromatae, and he will
subdue them to thy sway. And if thou desirest to know their names and
lineage I will tell thee all. This man on whose account the rest were
gathered from Hellas, they call Jason, son of Aeson, whom Cretheus
begat. And if in truth he is of the stock of Cretheus himself, thus he
would be our kinsman on the father’s side. For Cretheus and Athamas
were both sons of Aeolus; and Phrixus was the son of Athamas, son of
Aeolus. And here, if thou hast heard at all of the seed of Helios, thou
dost behold Augeias; and this is Telamon sprung from famous Aeacus; and
Zeus himself begat Aeacus. And so all the rest, all the comrades that
follow him, are the sons or grandsons of the immortals.”

Such was the tale of Argus; but the king at his words was filled with
rage as he heard; and his heart was lifted high in wrath. And he spake
in heavy displeasure; and was angered most of all with the son of
Chalciope; for he deemed that on their account the strangers had come;
and in his fury his eyes flashed forth beneath his brows:

“Begone from my sight, felons, straightway, ye and your tricks, from
the land, ere someone see a fleece and a Phrixus to his sorrow. Banded
together with your friends from Hellas, not for the fleece, but to
seize my sceptre and royal power have ye come hither. Had ye not first
tasted of my table, surely would I have cut out your tongues and hewn
off both hands and sent you forth with your feet alone, so that ye
might be stayed from starting hereafter. And what lies have ye uttered
against the blessed gods!”

Thus he spake in his wrath; and mightily from its depths swelled the
heart of Aeacus’ son, and his soul within longed to speak a deadly word
in defiance, but Aeson’s son checked him, for he himself first made
gentle answer:

“Aeetes, bear with this armed band, I pray. For not in the way thou
deemest have we come to thy city and palace, no, nor yet with such
desires. For who would of his own will dare to cross so wide a sea for
the goods of a stranger? But fate and the ruthless command of a
presumptuous king urged me. Grant a favour to thy suppliants, and to
all Hellas will I publish a glorious fame of thee; yea, we are ready
now to pay thee a swift recompense in war, whether it be the Sauromatae
or some other people that thou art eager to subdue to thy sway.”

He spake, flattering him with gentle utterance; but the king’s soul
brooded a twofold purpose within him, whether he should attack and slay
them on the spot or should make trial of their might. And this, as he
pondered, seemed the better way, and he addressed Jason in answer:

“Stranger, why needest thou go through thy tale to the end? For if ye
are in truth of heavenly race, or have come in no wise inferior to me,
to win the goods of strangers, I will give thee the fleece to bear
away, if thou dost wish, when I have tried thee. For against brave men
I bear no grudge, such as ye yourselves tell me of him who bears sway
in Hellas. And the trial of your courage and might shall be a contest
which I myself can compass with my hands, deadly though it be. Two
bulls with feet of bronze I have that pasture on the plain of Ares,
breathing forth flame from their jaws; them do I yoke and drive over
the stubborn field of Ares, four plough-gates; and quickly cleaving it
with the share up to the headland, I cast into the furrows the seed,
not the corn of Demeter, but the teeth of a dread serpent that grow up
into the fashion of armed men; them I slay at once, cutting them down
beneath my spear as they rise against me on all sides. In the morning
do I yoke the oxen, and at eventide I cease from the harvesting. And
thou, if thou wilt accomplish such deeds as these, on that very day
shalt carry off the fleece to the king’s palace; ere that time comes I
will not give it, expect it not. For indeed it is unseemly that a brave
man should yield to a coward.”

Thus he spake; and Jason, fixing his eyes on the ground, sat just as he
was, speechless, helpless in his evil plight. For a long time he turned
the matter this way and that, and could in no way take on him the task
with courage, for a mighty task it seemed; and at last he made reply
with crafty words:

“With thy plea of right, Aeetes, thou dost shut me in overmuch.
Wherefore also I will dare that contest, monstrous as it is, though it
be my doom to die. For nothing will fall upon men more dread than dire
necessity, which indeed constrained me to come hither at a king’s
command.”

Thus he spake, smitten by his helpless plight; and the king with grim
words addressed him, sore troubled as he was: “Go forth now to the
gathering, since thou art eager for the toil; but if thou shouldst fear
to lift the yoke upon the oxen or shrink from the deadly harvesting,
then all this shall be my care, so that another too may shudder to come
to a man that is better than he.”

He spake outright; and Jason rose from his seat, and Augeias and
Telamon at once; and Argus followed alone, for he signed to his
brothers to stay there on the spot meantime; and so they went forth
from the hall. And wonderfully among them all shone the son of Aeson
for beauty and grace; and the maiden looked at him with stealthy
glance, holding her bright veil aside, her heart smouldering with pain;
and her soul creeping like a dream flitted in his track as he went. So
they passed forth from the palace sorely troubled. And Chalciope,
shielding herself from the wrath of Aeetes, had gone quickly to her
chamber with her sons. And Medea likewise followed, and much she
brooded in her soul all the cares that the Loves awaken. And before her
eyes the vision still appeared—himself what like he was, with what
vesture he was clad, what things he spake, how he sat on his seat, how
he moved forth to the door—and as she pondered she deemed there never
was such another man; and ever in her ears rung his voice and the
honey-sweet words which he uttered. And she feared for him, lest the
oxen or Aeetes with his own hand should slay him; and she mourned him
as though already slain outright, and in her affliction a round tear
through very grievous pity coursed down her cheek; and gently weeping
she lifted up her voice aloud:

“Why does this grief come upon me, poor wretch? Whether he be the best
of heroes now about to perish, or the worst, let him go to his doom.
Yet I would that he had escaped unharmed; yea, may this be so, revered
goddess, daughter of Perses, may he avoid death and return home; but if
it be his lot to be o’ermastered by the oxen, may he first learn this,
that I at least do not rejoice in his cruel calamity.”

Thus then was the maiden’s heart racked by love-cares. But when the
others had gone forth from the people and the city, along the path by
which at the first they had come from the plain, then Argus addressed
Jason with these words:

“Son of Aeson, thou wilt despise the counsel which I will tell thee,
but, though in evil plight, it is not fitting to forbear from the
trial. Ere now thou hast heard me tell of a maiden that uses sorcery
under the guidance of Hecate, Perses’ daughter. If we could win her aid
there will be no dread, methinks, of thy defeat in the contest; but
terribly do I fear that my mother will not take this task upon her.
Nevertheless I will go back again to entreat her, for a common
destruction overhangs us all.”

He spake with goodwill, and Jason answered with these words: “Good
friend, if this is good in thy sight, I say not nay. Go and move thy
mother, beseeching her aid with prudent words; pitiful indeed is our
hope when we have put our return in the keeping of women.” So he spake,
and quickly they reached the back-water. And their comrades joyfully
questioned them, when they saw them close at hand; and to them spoke
Aeson’s son grieved at heart:

“My friends, the heart of ruthless Aeetes is utterly filled with wrath
against us, for not at all can the goal be reached either by me or by
you who question me. He said that two bulls with feet of bronze pasture
on the plain of Ares, breathing forth flame from their jaws. And with
these he bade me plough the field, four plough-gates; and said that he
would give me from a serpent’s jaws seed which will raise up earthborn
men in armour of bronze; and on the same day I must slay them. This
task—for there was nothing better to devise—I took on myself outright.”

Thus he spake; and to all the contest seemed one that none could
accomplish, and long, quiet and silent, they looked at one another,
bowed down with the calamity and their despair; but at last Peleus
spake with courageous words among all the chiefs: “It is time to be
counselling what we shall do. Yet there is not so much profit, I trow,
in counsel as in the might of our hands. If thou then, hero son of
Aeson, art minded to yoke Aeetes’ oxen, and art eager for the toil,
surely thou wilt keep thy promise and make thyself ready. But if thy
soul trusts not her prowess utterly, then neither bestir thyself nor
sit still and look round for some one else of these men. For it is not
I who will flinch, since the bitterest pain will be but death.”

So spake the son of Aeacus; and Telamon’s soul was stirred, and quickly
he started up in eagerness; and Idas rose up the third in his pride;
and the twin sons of Tyndareus; and with them Oeneus’ son who was
numbered among strong men, though even the soft down on his cheek
showed not yet; with such courage was his soul uplifted. But the others
gave way to these in silence. And straightway Argus spake these words
to those that longed for the contest:

“My friends, this indeed is left us at the last. But I deem that there
will come to you some timely aid from my mother. Wherefore, eager
though ye be, refrain and abide in your ship a little longer as before,
for it is better to forbear than recklessly to choose an evil fate.
There is a maiden, nurtured in the halls of Aeetes, whom the goddess
Hecate taught to handle magic herbs with exceeding skill all that the
land and flowing waters produce. With them is quenched the blast of
unwearied flame, and at once she stays the course of rivers as they
rush roaring on, and checks the stars and the paths of the sacred moon.
Of her we bethought us as we came hither along the path from the
palace, if haply my mother, her own sister, might persuade her to aid
us in the venture. And if this is pleasing to you as well, surely on
this very day will I return to the palace of Aeetes to make trial; and
perchance with some god’s help shall I make the trial.”

Thus he spake, and the gods in their goodwill gave them a sign. A
trembling dove in her flight from a mighty hawk fell from on high,
terrified, into the lap of Aeson’s son, and the hawk fell impaled on
the stern-ornament. And quickly Mopsus with prophetic words spake among
them all:

“For you, friends, this sign has been wrought by the will of heaven; in
no other way is it possible to interpret its meaning better, than to
seek out the maiden and entreat her with manifold skill. And I think
she will not reject our prayer, if in truth Phineus said that our
return should be with the help of the Cyprian goddess. It was her
gentle bird that escaped death; and as my heart within me foresees
according to this omen, so may it prove! But, my friends, let us call
on Cytherea to aid us, and now at once obey the counsels of Argus.”

He spake, and the warriors approved, remembering the injunctions of
Phineus; but all alone leapt up Apharcian Idas and shouted loudly in
terrible wrath: “Shame on us, have we come here fellow voyagers with
women, calling on Cypris for help and not on the mighty strength of
Enyalius? And do ye look to doves and hawks to save yourselves from
contests? Away with you, take thought not for deeds of war, but by
supplication to beguile weakling girls.”

Such were his eager words; and of his comrades many murmured low, but
none uttered a word of answer back. And he sat down in wrath; and at
once Jason roused them and uttered his own thought: “Let Argus set
forth from the ship, since this pleases all; but we will now move from
the river and openly fasten our hawsers to the shore. For surely it is
not fitting for us to hide any longer cowering from the battle-cry.”

So he spake, and straightway sent Argus to return in haste to the city;
and they drew the anchors on board at the command of Aeson’s son, and
rowed the ship close to the shore, a little away from the back-water.

But straightway Aeetes held an assembly of the Colchians far aloof from
his palace at a spot where they sat in times before, to devise against
the Minyae grim treachery and troubles. And he threatened that when
first the oxen should have torn in pieces the man who had taken upon
him to perform the heavy task, he would hew down the oak grove above
the wooded hill, and burn the ship and her crew, that so they might
vent forth in ruin their grievous insolence, for all their haughty
schemes. For never would he have welcomed the Aeolid Phrixus as a guest
in his halls, in spite of his sore need, Phrixus, who surpassed all
strangers in gentleness and fear of the gods, had not Zeus himself sent
Hermes his messenger down from heaven, so that he might meet with a
friendly host; much less would pirates coming to his land be let go
scatheless for long, men whose care it was to lift their hands and
seize the goods of others, and to weave secret webs of guile, and harry
the steadings of herdsmen with ill-sounding forays. And he said that
besides all that the sons of Phrixus should pay a fitting penalty to
himself for returning in consort with evildoers, that they might
recklessly drive him from his honour and his throne; for once he had
heard a baleful prophecy from his father Helios, that he must avoid the
secret treachery and schemes of his own offspring and their crafty
mischief. Wherefore he was sending them, as they desired, to the
Achaean land at the bidding of their father—a long journey. Nor had he
ever so slight a fear of his daughters, that they would form some
hateful scheme, nor of his son Apsyrtus; but this curse was being
fulfilled in the children of Chalciope. And he proclaimed terrible
things in his rage against the strangers, and loudly threatened to keep
watch over the ship and its crew, so that no one might escape calamity.

Meantime Argus, going to Aeetes’ palace, with manifold pleading
besought his mother to pray Medea’s aid; and Chalciope herself already
had the same thoughts, but fear checked her soul lest haply either fate
should withstand and she should entreat her in vain, all distraught as
she would be at her father’s deadly wrath, or, if Medea yielded to her
prayers, her deeds should be laid bare and open to view.

Now a deep slumber had relieved the maiden from her love-pains as she
lay upon her couch. But straightway fearful dreams, deceitful, such as
trouble one in grief, assailed her. And she thought that the stranger
had taken on him the contest, not because he longed to win the ram’s
fleece, and that he had not come on that account to Aeetes’ city, but
to lead her away, his wedded wife, to his own home; and she dreamed
that herself contended with the oxen and wrought the task with
exceeding ease; and that her own parents set at naught their promise,
for it was not the maiden they had challenged to yoke the oxen but the
stranger himself; from that arose a contention of doubtful issue
between her father and the strangers; and both laid the decision upon
her, to be as she should direct in her mind. But she suddenly,
neglecting her parents, chose the stranger. And measureless anguish
seized them and they shouted out in their wrath; and with the cry sleep
released its hold upon her. Quivering with fear she started up, and
stared round the walls of her chamber, and with difficulty did she
gather her spirit within her as before, and lifted her voice aloud:

“Poor wretch, how have gloomy dreams affrighted me! I fear that this
voyage of the heroes will bring some great evil. My heart is trembling
for the stranger. Let him woo some Achaean girl far away among his own
folk; let maidenhood be mine and the home of my parents. Yet, taking to
myself a reckless heart, I will no more keep aloof but will make trial
of my sister to see if she will entreat me to aid in the contest,
through grief for her own sons; this would quench the bitter pain in my
heart.”

She spake, and rising from her bed opened the door of her chamber,
bare-footed, clad in one robe; and verily she desired to go to her
sister, and crossed the threshold. And for long she stayed there at the
entrance of her chamber, held back by shame; and she turned back once
more; and again she came forth from within, and again stole back; and
idly did her feet bear her this way and that; yea, as oft as she went
straight on, shame held her within the chamber, and though held back by
shame, bold desire kept urging her on. Thrice she made the attempt and
thrice she checked herself, the fourth time she fell on her bed face
downward, writhing in pain. And as when a bride in her chamber bewails
her youthful husband, to whom her brothers and parents have given her,
nor yet does she hold converse with all her attendants for shame and
for thinking of him; but she sits apart in her grief; and some doom has
destroyed him, before they have had pleasure of each other’s charms;
and she with heart on fire silently weeps, beholding her widowed couch,
in fear lest the women should mock and revile her; like to her did
Medea lament. And suddenly as she was in the midst of her tears, one of
the handmaids came forth and noticed her, one who was her youthful
attendant; and straightway she told Chalciope, who sat in the midst of
her sons devising how to win over her sister. And when Chalciope heard