part in poverty , but such is the end of our ill-fated love. Since  there is no
other remedy , let us kiss and part, each taking two of the children.”
Chosin consented, though he grieved deeply at the thought of parting
from his loving wife and two of his children. “Farewell, husband,” said his
wife. “I am going to my old home in the north; you go south.” At this bitter
parting, Chosin gave a great cry , and awoke.
It had all been a dream. He la y in the Buddha hall, before the altar ,
where the candle he had lighted had burned down to a stump. In one night
he had tasted all the sweetness and bitterness of life. T ears o f disillusion
stood in  his eyes. As the dying moon sank into the bosom of the sea, the
dawn light revealed that his hair and beard had turned white in a few hours.

W ith his disenchantment with l ove came a turning away from  all worldly
ambition. He was tired of work, and the hot flame of greed in his heart
melted away as if it had been cold ice. In shame and remorse he turned his
eyes from the holy Buddha images to the frost-covered tiles of the temple
roof, which shone like spearhe ads. Chosin then went to Haehyon-nyong
(Crab Pass) where he had buried his son in the dream. Digging in the place
of the imagined  grave, he disco vered a stone image of Maitreya Buddha,
which h e enshrined in a nearby temple. After this he returned to his home
temple i n the capital and resigned from the position of caretaker of the
country manor at Myongju. Bef ore his death he built Chongt'o -sa (T emple
of the Purified Land) with funds from his private fortune.
Reading this story , we realize that not only Chosin but many people like
him dream the same dream, and we give them warning in the following
lines.

Y outh and beauty may meet in love for a moment's joy ,
But rosy cheeks soon pale in sadness, like autumn leaves;
W ealth and nobility are like floating clouds,
And this temporal life of desire is only an empty dream;
Men's good or bad behavior stems from their inner minds,
Y et young men dream of fair brows and thieves of treasure;
Behold how one night's dreaming under the autumn sky
Can lead a man to enjoy the cool air with closed eyes.

86. The Reflection of Buddha on Fish Mountain
(In what follows, Ilyon first tells a story which was evidently taken from
Indian sources and applied to K orea, then quotes the Indian s ource itself.
The pla ce-names he uses, however , are mainly Korean, perhaps derived
from the  Chinese versions of Indian place names. The country of Buddha's
birth, fo r example, is given as “Nakal.” Buddhist tradition plac es Buddha's
birth at the town of Lumbini in the present kingdom of Nepal.)
In an antique record it is written that the site of Man-o-sa (T e mple of
T en Thousand Fish) was formerly called Mt. Chasong or Mt A yasa
(Mayasa, meaning fish). Nearby was Karakuk, where an egg descended
from heaven on the seacoast fro m which came a man who ruled over that
country . This was King Suro.

In those days th ere was a pois onous dragon in the mountains which
lived in a jade p ond and carried on with five female ogres (Nach'al-nyo) on
the sapphire waves, calling up thunderstorms and devastating crops of the
five grains throughout the four seasons.
Using h is magic art, the King pronounced spells against the dragon to
stop his mischief, but to no avail. It was not until he prayed to  Buddha to
enforce his Five Commandmen ts on the monsters that they ceased to do
harm. Then the fish and dragons of the Eastern Sea came to these
mountains and filled a valley with water and lived there, making music by
striking jade stones with their heads and tails.
In the eleventh year of King Myongjong of Koryo (1 180). Man-o-sa
was first built on this mountain , It had been reported to the K ing by the
monk Po rim tha t there were thre e wonders in this area that resembled those
of Karak uk in North Ch'onch'uk (India) where a reflection of Buddha is
found. These wonders were a jade pond where a poisonous dragon lived; an
auspicious rainbow stretching from the jade pond to the mountaintop and
illuminating the  clouds with orchestral music; and to the northwest of the
reflection of Buddha a shining rock where Buddha washed h is robe in a
basin wh ich ever since has been filled with crystal water all the  year round,
so the tradition goes.
This is the story  told by Porim. During my pilgrimage to this mo untain I
saw with my own eyes two awe-inspiring things. First, two thirds of the
rocks on hill an d dale emitted musical sounds like gold and jade bells.
Second, there was a mysteriou s image which was seen at a d istance but
disappeared when approached.