Table of Contents
SAMGUK YUSA
PREF ACE
BOOK ONE
I. Wonder I (the Founding of the Kingdoms)
BOOK TWO
II. Wonder 2. (United Silla)
BOOK THREE
III. The Rise of Buddhism
IV. Pagodas and Buddhist Images
BOOK FOUR
V. Anecdotes of Renowned Monks
BOOK FIVE
VI. Miracles
VII. T ales of Devotion
VIII. Seclusion
IX. Filial Piety
Epilogue
APPENDIX

S A MGU K  Y U S A
Ilyon
This page copyright © 2006 Silk Pagoda.
Legends and History of the Thr ee Kingdoms of Ancient Kor ea
PREFACE
I
Modern civiliza tions developed from the beliefs and customs of people
in prehistoric times. It is thus essential, if we are to understand a
civilization, to study these ancient practices. The dif ficulty is usually that
source materials are very scarce, and most of our understandin g of ancient
times is based on the findings of archaeology .
In the case of K orea we are fo rtunate to have two documents which,
while by  no means contemporary with the events they describe, rely on
ancient sources which by now have mostly disappeared. The first of these,
Samguk Sagi  (History of the Three Kingdoms) was compiled by Kim Pu-sik
(1075-1 151), a high of ficial of the Koryo court, as the of ficially sanctioned
history o f that ancient period. It has the faults of most of ficial  chronicles,
forcing events into a framework pleasing to the government and omitting all
matter thought to be embarrassing or indecorous.
The second such document is the present work,  Samguk Y usa  (roughly ,
Legends of the Three Kingdo ms) compiled by Ilyon (1206— 1289),
National Priest (Pogak kukjon) of Koryo. One of the chief values of this
book is that it includes a great deal of material omitted by the of ficial
history , so that t hrough it we can gain an understanding of the beliefs and
practices of the people of anc ient times, if somewhat distorted by the
author's Buddhist point of view .
For that matter , the introduction of Buddhism itself dates from the Three
Kingdoms period, and Buddhis m has had a strong influence on Korean
culture ever since. The book is thus also valuable in that it gives us an
insight into the way this religion developed in the course of Korean history .

The book was written at a time when Korea was under the domination
of the Mongols, who at that time ruled all China and Central Asia.
Ilyon m akes ha rdly any mention of this fact, but the very wr iting of
such a book at such a time is  significant, and the author's love for his
country shines through every page.
Since the termination of the Pac ific W ar (1941-1945) Oriental scholars
have undertaken restudy of  Samguk Y usa  in orde r to discover historical
developments o f peoples in the East buried in mythology an d the  sagas
such as  Samguk Y usa.  Bot h Korean and Japanese sc holars naturally take
special interest in the reinterpre tation of the tales in the book as a part of
Oriental studies in history , early  poetry in archaic language, and  customs in
addition to lar ge portions of the book on Buddhism and also interregional
contacts between Korea and Japan.
During t he past year I had a booklet “T ales from the Three Kin gdoms"
published containing selected materials from Samguk Y usa, Samguk Sagi
and some other old literature to  give preliminary information on the Three
Kingdoms, befo re I completed the unabridged translation of  Samguk Y usa.
If this volume can be of service to W estern scholars and general readers
interested in Korea and Korean culture I shall have attained my purpose.
Like all such books of its time,  Samguk Y usa  was written in literary
Chinese. In preparing this Engli sh version, I have been greatly aided by Mr .
Y i C hae-ho's translation of the book into modern Korean, and by a similar
work by Dr . Y i Pyung-do. I would also like to thank Dr . L. Geor ge Paik,
President Emeritus of Y onsei University , who inspired me to undertake this
work, and Mr . G rafton K. Mintz of the Korea T imes for language of the
manuscript and for his suggestions concerning the general arrangement of
the book . Finall y , I am deeply grateful to the Y onsei Universi ty Press for
agreeing to publish the book and for its help and understanding during the
preparation of the volume.
T ae-Hung Ha
October , 1971 Seoul, Korea
II
In preparing this version of the  Samguk Y usa  my chie f care has been to
make th e text easily accessible to the reader . For this reason I have kept
footnotes to a minimum and have supplied explanations in parentheses
where necessary . Except where indicated, therefore, the material in
parentheses has been added by me. It should be added that almost all this

information is taken from the very full annotations made by Mr . Ha in his
original manuscript.
Ilyon, like his c ontemporaries, d ates events in two ways, by the reigns
of Chine se emp erors and by th e twelve-year cycle of the ani mals of the
zodiac. E ach suc ceeding empero r had an of ficial name for the p eriod of his
reign, an d some times he might have more than one for dif ferent periods. I
have let  these stand, though mostly in abbreviated form, and have added
Christian-era da tes in parentheses. All dates are A.D. unles s otherwise
noted.
Certain suf fixes occur rather frequently in place-names. I have
explained them in the text, but for the convenience of the reader will also
translate a few o f the most frequ ent ones here. Thus  sa  means “temple”  jon
means “pavilion,”  song  m eans  “wall or fortress,” and  san  means
“mountain.” I should like to acknowledge here the kind cooper ation of Mr .
Ha and also of Professor Jun Hyung-kook, the director of the Y onsei
University Press . Their cordial attitude and their toleration of m y crochets
about the English language have  made my work on this book a joy . It is my
hope that the reader will find equal pleasure in it.
G. K. M
INTRODUCTION
FOR THE READERS
Our kno wledge of the ancient h istory of Korea is scanty . Contemporary
documents are few , and consis t mainly of Chinese writings w hich allude
here and  there to Korea. Other documents we know only by q uotations in
later wri tings, for wars and invasions destroyed the originals an d they have
not surv ived. During the Koryo dynasty (935-1392) two chronicles of
Korea's earliest period were com piled. The first,  Samguk Sagi,  was written
by Kim Pu-sik, a high government of ficial, in the twelfth century . It
followed the pattern of Chinese dynastic histories and the conventions of
Confucian histor iography , the idea being that one may learn from history by
studying the virtues and vices of the rulers of the past.
The Confucian tendency was to  “humanize” the myths and leg ends of
the past, to int erpret them as early distortions of events th at actually
occurred, and thus much of what was actually mythology and folklore has
been ob scured b y attempts to fit it into the framework of ac tual events.
Thus the  Samguk Sagi,  while it contains considerable material that is

obviously legen dary , attempts to fit the legends of early Korea into the
framework of Confucian attitudes.
The sec ond such document is t he  Samguk Y usa,  the present work, Its
author was a Bu ddhist priest who was interested in the early history of his
country . The book had no of ficial sanction and was thus not at the mercy of
the of fi cial philosophy of history , While the writer subscribed to the
Confucian idea of history to a great extent, he was also intelligent enough to
see that history could not be fo rced into a predetermined framework and
was con tent to set down the old stories as he found them, wi thout much
ef fort at interpretation.
The title is dif fi cult to translate.  Y usa  doe s not mean precisely legends,
although that idea is implied by the word. It also carries the ideas of
anecdotes, mem orabilia and the like. It was not conceived as a set piece of
scholarship but was written in  the author's leisure hours as  a kind of
diversion. Its value is not so much historical in the strict sense of a
chronicle of events as it is an account of the beliefs and folklore of
medieval Korea,  much of it dating back to earlier times. It is thus a valuable
supplement to the of ficially san ctioned view of history found in  Samguk
Sagi,  and is of the highest value to the student of folklore and religion.
The title  of the book is somewh at of a misnomer , for it is not really an
account of the histories of the three ancient kingdoms of Korea. It is
concerned primarily with only one of them, Silla, which in time conquered
the othe r two with the help of C hina. Moreover , it covers the pe riod during
which Silla ruled the peninsula down to its fall to the Koryo dynasty in 935.
For a proper understanding of th e book, a brief account of the events of
the period it covers as modern history sees them is necessary . As we have
mentioned, materials for this early period are scanty . Contemporary Chinese
documents mention the Korean peninsula from time to time, and a region in
the nort heast was colonized during the Han dynasty and continued under
Chinese rule until as late as 313, over a century after Han rule had collapsed
in China proper .
Three ki ngdoms developed on the peninsula, probably during the course
of the first century A.D. The traditional founding dates are 57 B.C. for Silla,
37 B .C. for Kog uryo and 18 B. C. for Paekje. These dates are unsupported
by c ontemporar y evidence, however , and most scholars think they are too
early . In any ca se, these kingdoms were certainly in existence  during the

period of Chinese history know n as the Later Han dynasty (25-220 A.D.)
and afterwards.
Koguryo was initially the lar gest and most powerful of the three. The
tribes w hich orig inally compose d it lived along the banks of the  Y alu river ,
which forms the present northw estern boundary of Korea, and may have
been related to the stock-breed ing nomads of the central As ian steppes.
They are known to have been ex cellent horsemen. When they emer ge upon
the s cene of history we find them ruling an area which extended  from south
of the Han River across the pr esent Korean boundary and far north into
Manchuria and west to the Liaotung peninsula.
The two  kingdo ms of the south  are thought to have been founded by
migrants from the north, since  civilization was more highly developed
there, mainly because of closer contacts with China. Paekje in the southwest
is know n to have been dominated by a northern tribe called P uyo, which
had com e origin ally from Manchuria and had been dominated f or a time by
Koguryo. Paekje played an important part in the transmission of Chinese
civilization to Japan. Its rule rs are frequently pictured as ef fete and
dissolute, but this is probably because its history has been written mainly by
its enemies.
Silla in the southeast is given the earliest founding date, but this is
probably because it conquered  the others. In any case, there is clear
evidence that it was the latest to develop. W e are told that it was the last to
set u p Chinese-style institution s of government and the last to adopt the
Buddhist religion.
In additi on to these three there w as for a time a relatively small area in
the sout h, on the coast and alo ng the Naktong River , known as Kaya or
Karak, w hich persisted as a kingdom until it was absorbed by Silla in 562
A.D. Li ttle is known of it exc ept that it was considerably in fluenced by
Japan.
The thre e kingd oms were in a state of more or less constant conflict
throughout their  existence, with frequent alliances of two of th em against
the third. In the  earlier part of the three kingdoms period it w as usual for
Silla and Paekje to be in alliance  against the more powerful Koguryo, and a
rough ba lance of power was thu s created. But during the latter  part of the
period S illa pow er grew and she began to expand at the expense  of both her
rivals. O f particular significance was the Silla seizure of the territory along
the Han River , for this drove a wedge between her two rivals.

Even so, Silla power alone might not have enabled her to conquer the
whole p eninsula. Events in China now began to influence Korea, however ,
and to these events we must now turn.
After th e fall of the Han dynasty in 220 A.D. China was divided into
numerous states. There were frequent wars and revolts and consequent
changes of boundaries and governments during a period of abo ut three and
a h alf centuries,  and thus, while  Chinese cultural influence continued, there
was hardly any Chinese political or military intervention in K orea. In the
year 589 , howev er , China was o nce more unified under the Sui dynasty , and
the rule rs promptly began to concern themselves with subduing the
“barbarians” on China's borders.
One of the resul ts of this policy  was a series of attacks upon Koguryo.
These were successfully beaten of f, and their failure was one of the causes
of th e fall of the Sui dynasty in 618. But China was not to suf fer another
period of disunity . The T'ang d ynasty immediately succeeded the Sui and
ruled Ch ina for  the next three centuries. This was the period  of China's
greatest cultural influence upon her neighbors, so much so that the word
“T'ang” was used as a name for China long after the dynasty had perished.
From the Chinese point of view the main problem of foreign relations
was to prevent attacks by the nomadic tribes whose territories bordered
China, particularly in the north. T o this end it was Chinese poli cy to set up
subordinate states in border areas which acknowledged suzerainty to the
Emperor or , where possible, to conquer these areas and incorporate them
into the empire.
Observing that the Sui attacks on Koguryo along its northern borders in
Manchuria had failed, the T'an g rulers entered into an alliance with Silla
whose o bject w as to subdue th e entire peninsula and if possi ble bring it
under Chinese rule. This policy succeeded to a certain extent. Coordinated
attacks by T'ang and Silla troo ps destroyed Paekje in 663, an d Koguryo
finally fell in 668. In both instances the Chinese set up provincial
governments and  stationed military garrisons in the conquered t erritory , and
when Koguryo had been conquered appeared ready to turn upon Silla.
But even at thi s early date the Korean people had a long hi story of
resistance to foreign rule and the Chinese found Silla unexpectedly dif ficult
to conquer . Moreover , revolts  broke out in the previously conquered
territory , which Silla supported. Eventually an arrangement was worked out
whereby the Silla dynasty ru led all of Korea but acknow ledged the

superiority of the Chinese Em peror . It became the custom for each
succeeding Kore an King to app ly to the Chinese court for confirmation of
his legitimacy , in token of which he received a golden seal from the
Emperor . This practice persisted throughout the Korean monarchy .
In p ractice there was little Ch inese interference in domestic Korean
af fairs and the Korean government did pretty much as it liked, but Chinese
cultural influence was profoun d. During the period when Silla ruled the
peninsula, which  roughly corresponded to the period of T'ang rule in China,
Korean monks and scholars vi sited China in lar ge numbers, and Korean
social, p olitical and religious institutions, while not slavish imitations, were
or ganized lar gely along Chinese lines.
The mat ter of language is an imp ortant case in point. When cont act with
Chinese civiliza tion began Korea had not yet developed a system  of writing
her lang uage. Naturally the script of the more highly developed Chinese
civilization was taken over , but here a dif ficulty arose. Korean is a highly
inflected language, verb suf fixes being of particular importance. Chinese,
on t he other han d, resembles English in this respect, its inflec tions being
few and simple. Moreover , Chinese was not written in a phonetic script but
in id eographs, signs representin g ideas rather than sounds. It was thus all
but impossible to convey the K orean language in the Chinese script, and
literacy became a matter of learning the Chinese language.
In time a system was worked out, called  Idu,  of using some Chinese
ideographs phonetically in ord er to represent the sounds of the Korean
language, and a few songs and poems were thus preserved, some of which
are quoted in the present volum e. But this was clumsy and dif ficult to use,
and in general Korean scholars  wrote in Chinese. In time, of course, the
Koreans gave their own peculiar pronunciations to the Chinese words, but
what they wrote remained Chin ese in syntax and vocabulary . All Korean
writing down to the invention of Hangul, the Korean alpha bet, in the
fifteenth century , is therefore in the Chinese language. The sam e holds true
for t he l iterature of several other nations in the Chinese sphere o f influence,
including Japan and V ietnam.
This led also, of course, to a m assive influx of Chinese words into the
Korean vocabulary , although th ere was no particular influence on Korean
grammar . This borrowing is so mewhat comparable to the borrowing of
Latin words by the English language.

Another important result of Chinese cultural influence was the
introduction of the Buddhist religion. The present work describes this as
happening in the late fourth ce ntury , which corresponds well  with other
evidence. It seems unlikely , however , that Buddhism became really
influential until well into the period of united Silla rule.
Buddhism was already about eight hundred years old when  it first
reached Korea, and had changed a great deal from the austere doctrines of
the o riginal Buddha. The sect k nown as Mahayana had developed in north
India in the religion's earlier centuries, and it was this sect which  penetrated
China, a nd subsequently Korea. Of particular importance was the doctrine
of Bodh isattvas. These were supposed to be persons who had attained the
state of enlightenment which made it possible for them to escape the eternal
round of death and rebirth whic h is the fate of all creatures, bu t who chose
rather to remain in existence in order to help others.
Buddhism had, in other words, developed a doctrine of salvation by
grace, w hereas its founder had held that a person attained enlightenment
and eventually Nirvana solely by his own ef forts. This meant a vast increase
in th e religion's popular appeal and a multiplication of its deities. There
were believed to have been a s uccession of Buddhas, one for each era of
history , and there is even a Buddha of the future, Maitreya, who
paradoxically also exists in the present.
Another characteristic of Buddhism is its easy adaptation to local beliefs
when it enters new areas. Bud dhism is not an exclusivist, a uthoritarian
religion like Christianity or Islam . Doctrinal purity is of far less importance,
and various dif ferent sects live amicably side by side. In like manner , the
gods an d spirits of primitive religion were simply given the trappings of
Bodhisattvas an d adopted into the pantheon. Thus in the present work we
find several allusions to the Mountain Spirit, a survivor of ancient Korean
animistic beliefs. Even today this Mountain Spirit has a shrin e in almost
every Buddhist temple in Korea . He is always portrayed as an old man, and
is usually accompanied by a tiger .
The author of  Samguk Y usa  was a man of the Kim family who was born
in Kyon gju, whi ch had been the Silla capital, in 1206. He entered the order
of Budd hist mo nks while still a child, and was given the reli gious name
Ilyon. He passed the national examinations for monks of the Son (Zen) sect
with the  highest  distinction at th e age of 22, and thereafter devoted himself
to teaching and study , residing at various temples at dif ferent times.

There ar e few details available about his life, but it is said that  he was
greatly admired not only for his knowledge of the Buddhist scriptures but
also for his mas tery of the Conf ucian Classics, which were the basis of all
secular learning in his time. He was also a very diligent author , and a stone
monument erected in his honor on his death at 83 gives a list o f his works.
Samguk Y usa  is not on the list, which leads one to suppose that the book
was not printed until after his death, a supposition which is supported by the
fact that at least two short sections of the work are added by Muguk, one of
Uyon's disciples.
Knowledge of his authorship barely survived. In the sixteenth century it
was found that the carved w ooden plates from which the book had
originally been printed were so worn as to be nearly useless. A nobleman
named Y i Kye-pok, however , managed to obtain a copy of an earlier
printing, and from this he had a new edition prepared. It was found that
Ilyon was named as author only at the beginning of the fifth volume, his
name having been dropped, probably by accident, from the other four .
Modern texts of the work are ba sed on this 1512 edition, the earliest in
existence. The translator has been permitted to consult an actual copy of
this 1512 edition in making the present English version, based on the reprint
of a n original book of Chinese  composition, known as “Chongdok-Pon”
(Cheng-te T ext) , printed from hand-carved wooden blocks in the reign of
King Chungjong  (1488-1544) of the Y i Dynasty which corresponds to the
reign of Emperor Cheng-te of Ming China, according to the postscript
written by Y i Kye-pok.
Samguk Y usa had a wide audi ence in former times as a reliable source
of inform ation for academic and popular interest, as its stories are included
in  Koryosa  (Hi story of Koryo),  Y oji-sungnam  (Places of Interest in the
Eastern Nation) and  T aedong-Unpu-kun-ok  (Great Eastern Galaxy of
Rhythmic Gems). Thus it was highlighted as an important work of literature
although some Confucian sch olars like Y i Kyukyong in the reign of
Honjong, in his book “Demonstrative Essays on Historical W orks” called it
a collection of fantastic stories.
More recently , in his book “Ou tline of Eastern History” Ahn Chong-
hwa made an analysis of  Samguk Y usa,  but  after that time its traces w ere
lost to the world. Ch'oe Nam-son obtained only three of its volumes on
Buddhist stories from temples. Then its treasured volumes in the possession
of Sunam-Ahnsi were discovered and passed into the hands of a Japanese

named I manishi in Aichi. These were a full set of the five volumes of
Chongdok Reprints,  w hich appear ed in about th e 7th year of King
Chungjong of the Y i Dynasty . In 1921 these volumes were reproduced in
reduced size on glass plates as Facsimiles in V ol. VI, History S eries of the
Literary Depart ment, Kyoto Imperial University , and in 1932 they were
reprinted in the original lar ge size by the Old Classics Publishing Society in
Seoul. B efore th is, in 1928, its type-printed copies appeared in the name of
the Cho sun Sahak Hoe (Korean History Science Society) with Imanishi's
proof reading.
It is not clear when  Samguk Y usa  was first introduced into Japan, but
according to  “Samguk Y usa Haeje”  by Cho e Nam-s on, one volume carried
of f during the Hideyoshi Invasion (l592-98) has been handed down in the
families of T okugawa in Owari and Kanda in T okyo, with two leaves of the
Royal Chronolo gical T ables and several leaves in the text missing and some
letters b lank. Th is volume was p ublished as research material in the History
Series, L iterary Department, T okyo Imperial University in 1904 . The Kanda
copy bears the seal of  Y oanin Library ,  signifying the house of a medical
doctor in the T o kugawa shogunate, because this copy was give n the doctor
by U kida Hideiye, one of the Ja panese field generals fighting in Korea, in
gratitude for the doctor's marvellous cure of his wife's singular  malady , on
his trium phal return from Korea after the Hideyoshi W ar with trophies
including thousands of treasured books from Korea.
Since Il yon was greatly interested in preserving legends and f olklore,
some knowledge of ancient beliefs and society is necessary for a full
understanding of his book. Underlying the more sophisticated faiths which
came fr om other countries there has always been in Korea a tenacious
native animism.  Mountains, rivers, trees and the like are all inhabited by
spirits w hich frequently take a hand in human af fairs. These blended
inextricably with Chinese lore , with some T aoist ideas, and with the
numerous supernatural beings of popular Buddhism. Many of the events of
which Il yon wrote were as rem ote in time from him as he is from us, and
the b eliefs and p ractices which he describes were frequently very ancient.
As will be seen  in the text, a good many of them probably a ntedate the
coming of Buddhism to Korea.
A good case in point is the T angun story , which is found near the
beginning of Book One. T angun is often described as the “founder” of
Korea, b ut it would be more accurate to say “ancestor of the Koreans.” The

fact that his mot her is said to have been a bear transformed into  a woman is
clear evi dence o f the existence i n very ancient times of totemism , the belief
that a given tribe or clan is id entified with or descended from a certain
animal. Moreover , the fact that this clan symbol, the bear , is fem ale may be
evidence of the existence of a m atriarchal, or at any rate matrilin eal, society
in ancient times.
Another element in ancient Korean religion was sun worship. This is
shown b y the fact that several of the legendary founders of s tates in this
book are described as having been born from divine eggs which descended
from heaven, the egg in this case being a sun symbol.
T urning to the social structure of Silla, there are two matters of
importance. Firs t of all, this was a highly aristocratic society , much more so
than Ch ina. The dif ferent classes of society were carefully di stinguished,
and cros sing class lines was almost unheard of. The highest class consisted
of the members of the royal clan and the important court and government
posts we re held  by them exclus ively . This was the Kim clan of Kyongju,
whose founding legend is found in Book One.
Secondly , mention must be made of the Order of Hwarang. The word
may be translated “Flower Y ou th” and describes an institution resembling
the order of knighthood in medieval Europe. It consisted of specially
selected youths of aristocratic lineage and of superior mental and physical
attainments. The y were trained in the martial arts, but also in  intellectual
and relig ious ma tters, and then became the nation s military elite. Kim Y u-
sin, who commanded the armie s that helped conquer Paekje an d Koguryo,
is a good example.
The book itself is not a systema tic work. It was, we are told, an activity
of the author's le isure hours and was probably put together bit by bit over a
rather lo ng period. The accounts are grouped by subjects, but within each
section they vary extremely . Some consist of entirely legendary material,
some ar e factua l history , and a lar ge number are a blend of the two. The
first two  parts relate to the fou ndations of the various kingdoms and to
various events during the histor y of the Silla kingdom. The last three parts
are devoted mainly to Buddhism, especially to the lives and miracles of
famous monks.
Ilyon is very particular as to na mes and dates, and frequently records
disagreements on these matte rs in his source material. He is not,
unfortunately , so meticulous in the citation of the sources themselves. He

refers often to the  Samguk Sagi,  and since this book still ex ists the
references can be checked. But for the rest, he is vague, For exa mple, early
in B ook One he refers to a book which he calls the  W ei Shu  (“W ei W riting,”
that is, the history of the Chinese kingdom of W ei). A book of th is title does
exist, but none of the quotation s Ilyon uses are to be found in  it. One can
only con clude t hat there was more than one  W ei Shu  (as there was more
than one W ei state) and that Ilyon has not indicated which one he means.
In other  places he is content si mply to cite “an old book” or “an old
Silla book.” It is certain in any case that he had access to many documents
which a re no longer in existence. There appear to have been, f or example,
several collections of the lives of famous monks, some Korea n and some
Chinese, and these he quotes frequently .
But perh aps mor e important even than his use of now lost docu ments is
the fact that Ilyon records many  of the beliefs and practices of th e people of
thirteenth-century Korea, a fact which makes his book extremely important
for t he study of that period as well as earlier ones. The T ang un story as
given h ere, for example, is th e earliest documentary evidence for this
legend.
One must add finally that this is a book which can be read simply for
pleasure. Its tales are comparab le, though on a more sophisticated level, to