The following interesting story is written in detail in the language of
North Ch'onch'uk (Probably meaning Sanskrit). The passage quoted is
found in V olume VII of the “Kaham” Kwanbul Sammae-gyong.
“When Buddha visited the Olive Farm Flower Forest of the Poison
Dragon on Kosonsan Mountain in Y akon-Karakuk, he came to the southern
side of Anasa H ill and stood in  the Nach'al cave, whose entrance is to the
north of the Blu e Lotus Fountain in that forest. Here he saw five female
ogres called Nach'al who had been turned into dragons twisting and twining
with the poisonous dragon in lo ve embraces, dancing and yelling for joy .
Amid th is ecstasy the poison d ragon sent down hail and the man-eating
ogres committed all kinds of outrages, devastating farms and spreading
plagues throughout the four seasons.

“Seized with fear , the King of fered sacrifices to the gods of hea ven and
earth to stop these calamities, but his prayers went unanswered. Then a wise
Brahman priest said to the King, 'The crown prince of King C hongpan in
Kapira-kuk has attained spiritual enlightenment and is now called
Sakyamuni Buddha. He is working wonders.'
“The Ki ng was delighted at these words and prayed to Buddha, saying,
'T oday t hy brill iant sun shines over all the universe; wilt thou not come
down to  this kingdom on earth?' And suddenly Sakyamuni, fo llowed by a
fairy youth who commanded the six elements of nature, appear ed to fulfill
the wish es of the King of Nakon-Kara. From his forehead flashed ten
thousand rays like sunbeams, w hich all became Buddhas and appeared in
the cave.
“The poison dragon and the fe male ogres prostrated themselves and
begged Buddha to give them h is commandments. In response the august
Buddha preached them a sermon on the Three T reasures an d the Five
Prohibitions.24 The  dra gon kin g fell on his knees with hands palm to palm
and desired Buddha to remain permanently , saying, 'If you g o away bad
thoughts will take root again in  my heart and I will never beco me an A yo-
Bodhi (attain enlightenment).'
“But the heavenly king of the Brahmans bowed to Buddha and said,
'Pakapa (honorific term for Buddha) should think of the myriad creatures to
come in the wor ld above and no t a small dragon on earth. Leave him alone.'
And hundreds of thousands of Brahman kings shouted in chorus, 'Leave
him alone!'
“The dragon king presented to B uddha a seven-treasure stand decorated
with gold, silver and jewels, but Buddha shook his head and said, 'I have no
need of gold or jewels. I would rather you of fered me the stone cave of the
Nach'al.' The dragon king agree d with a glad heart, and Buddha comforted
him with a promise to stay in the cave in a seated posture for one thousand
five hundred years.
“So sayi ng, Buddha entered the stone chamber , which instantly became
a h all of mirrors, reflecting the images of the dragons inside b ut allowing
the visage of Buddha to pass through and be seen from outs ide. All the
dragons knelt and worshipped Buddha with clasped hands, beholding his
radiant face both day and night. Buddha sat erect beside the stone wall with
his c alves folded against his thighs (the “lotus position” in which Buddha is
usually represented in sculpture), and his image appeared on it when seen

from afar , but vanished on a nearer view . When the heav ens of fered
sacrifice to this reflection a voice was heard preaching and when Buddha
moved his feet the mountains resounded with the sound of gold and jade
bells.”
In the Kosting-j on (Biographies of Great Monks) we read, “H ye-won
heard that in Ch'onch'uk there w as a reflection of Buddha whic h remained
on the Mirror Rock at the reque st of the dragon king long, long ago. This
reflection was found in the stone  chamber of an ancient divinity to the south
of Nakalkasong in W oljikuk, North Ch'onch'uk (India).”
According to Pophyon's Soyok -jon (History of India) there is  on the
Nakal border about half a yusun's distance south of Nakal city a stone
chamber southw est of Paksan. In this chamber there is a reflection of
Buddha which appears bright an d lifelike at a distance of ten foo t-spans, but
which b ecomes dimmer and dimmer as one retreats, until it vanishes
altogether . The kings of many nations have sent their best painters to try to
make true representations of thi s reflection, but all have failed.  The people
of th e co untry say that a thousand Buddhas have left their reflec tions on the
wall of this cham ber , including Sakyamuni, who descended from heaven to
save the  souls of all the myriad  creatures of the earth. They also say that
about a hundred  foot-spans west of the reflection is a rock wh ere Buddha
used to shave his head and cut his fingernails when he lived in  the human
world. I n volum e II of Songha m's Soyok-ki (A T rip to India ), we read,
“During the lifetime of Buddha  a poison dragon changed into a cowherd
who of fered milk and butter to the king. One day he of fended His Majesty
and was  severel y reprimanded. T o vent his spite he bought a b ouquet and
of fered it at a stupa, swearing that he would be reborn as a devil-dragon, kill
the king and ruin his kingdom.
“He the n committed suicide by dashing himself against a stone wall,
and, reborn as a  dragon king, made mischief until he was subdued by the
spiritual power of Buddha. Whe n the dragon saw Buddha he repented of his
sins, and after receiving Buddha's commandment against killing, prayed
Buddha to stay in his cave and accept his of ferings. But Buddh a replied, 'I
shall surely die, but I will lea ve my reflection in your cave . Whenever
wicked thoughts rise in your heart, look on this reflection and they will
subside.'
“So sayi ng Bud dha entered the stone chamber and became a god. Ever
afterward his reflection would c ome into sight at a distance and vanish on a

closer vi ew . The  local inhabitants call the footprints of Buddha on the rocks
the seven treasures.”
This stor y is found in the Buddhist scriptures. The people of the Land of
Haedong (Korea) named the mountain (mentioned at the beginning of this
section) Anasa, but it should be called Manasa, meaning fish, since it is
supposed to be named after the mountain in North Ch'onch'uk.
87. The Fifty Thousand Images of Buddha on Mt. Odae
According to an old mountain l egend, it was Chajang Popsa who first
called Mt. Odae the abode of Bu ddha. In the tenth year of T'ang Chen-kuan
(636) w hen Queen Sondok was on the throne, Chajang visited China in
order to see the Munsu Buddha at W utaishan. (Ilyon notes that the T'ang
Biographies of Monks makes t his the twelfth year , (638), bu t says he is
following the dating in Samguk Sagi.)
Arriving at T'aiho-chih in Chin a, he prayed before a stone image of
Munsu beside a pond there, in fulfillment of a long-cherished desire. On the
seventh night of his worship, h e had a dream in which Buddha recited to
him a verse co mposed of four phrases. He awoke in wond erment and
recited t he verse  from memory , but he could not understand it because it
was in Sanskrit.
On the followin g morning a stra nge monk appeared, bringing with him
a r obe of gold-s hot red brocade, a Buddhist begging bowl and a relic of the
Buddha. Addressing Chajang h e said, “Y ou look pale with anxiety . What
ails you? T ell me and perhaps I can help you.”
Chajang replied that he had received a verse from Buddha but th at since
it wa s in  Sanskr it he could not interpret the sense of it. He recited the verse
to the monk.
“O I see,” the monk said quickly . “Listen to my translation:
'Karapajwarang' means T understand all the laws of Buddha'; 'T alsa-takoya'
means 'My own mind is void'; 'Nangkasakarang' means 'I interpret the
Buddha's mind in this way'; a nd 'T alsanosana' means 'Soon  I will see
Nosana(i.e. Bud dha).'“ The monk then gave the robe and other things to
Chajang and said, “These were the personal ef fects of Sakyamuni; you are
expected to preserve them as heavenly treasures. On Odae-san (Korean
Pronunciation o f W utaishan), which rises on the border of Myo ngju to the
northeast of your country (Silla), ten thousand Munsu Buddhas make their
permanent abode; go there and see them.” And with these words he
disappeared like a mist.

Chajang could find no trace of the mysterious monk, and so w as about
to b egin his homeward journey when the dragon of the T'aiho-chih (pond)
appeared and asked him to sacrifice to Buddha for seven days, a nd Chajang
did so. While he was sacrificing the dragon said to him, “The old monk
who inte rpreted the verse to you the other day was the true Munsu Buddha,
so you must build a temple and a pagoda in his honor .” (Ilyon notes that this
paragraph is found in a separate biography of monks, but gives no title.)
In th e seventeenth year of T'ang Chen-kuan (643) Chajang climbed
Odae-san in order to see Munsu Buddha, but due to a thick fog which veiled
the whole mountain in darkness  for three days he returned to W onyong-sa,
where he met M unsu Buddha in person. Some years later he went to live at
Kalbonch'o, which is now called Chongam-sa. (Ilyon notes that this
paragraph is also found in a separate biography of monks.)
Many y ears passed, during which a friar named Sinui, a disciple of
Pomil, came to this mountain and lived in a cell which he built near
Chajang's old hermitage. After Sinui's death his cell became dilapidated, so
the famo us monk Y uyon of Su ta-sa repaired it and lived ther e. It is now
called W oljong-sa.
When Chajang returned from China to Silla, Poch'on and Hyomyong,
the t wo sons of the great King C hongsin, traveled to Haso-pu (in Myongju)
and stay ed over night at the hou se of Sehon Kakkan. (Ilyon in serts a long
note here to the following ef fect: In the Samguk Sagi there is no  record of a
King Chongsin or of Princes Poch'on and Hyomyong. However , at the end
of that book it is written that a temple was built in the first year of T'ang
Shen-lung, in the year of the snake (705), when King Songdok had been on
the throne for fo ur years. This K ing's personal name was Hung-kwang, his
childhood name  was Y ung-ki, a nd he was the second son of Ki ng Sinmun.
King So ngdok's elder brother , Hyojo, was called I-kong or Hong. King
Sinmun's childh ood name was Chong-myong and his nickname was Il-jo.
“Chongsin” in this paragraph is probably a contraction of Chongmyong-
Sinmun, and “Hyomyong” is a mistake for Hyo-jo or Hyo-so. There is also
no record in the Samguk Sagi of the building of a temple by Hyo-myong as
described below , during the years of Shen-lung. It must have been King
Songdok who erected this temple.)
On the following day they cros sed a high mountain called T a ery-ong
(Great Pass), each leading a tho usand followers to Song-o-p'yo ng to enjoy
the beau ty of the mountain s cenery . There suddenly the two brothers

decided to leave this sensual world and escape to the sacred Mt. Odae.
(Here th ere is another long note by Ilyon: An antique record says that in
early August of the first year of  T'aehwa (647) the King hid himself in the
mountains, but this seems to be an error because King Hyojo or Hyoso
ascended the throne in the third year of T'ien-shou in the year of the dragon
(692) at  the age of sixteen, and died in the second year of Chang-an in the
year of the tiger (702) at the ag e of twenty-six and was succe eded by the
twenty-two-year -old King Songdok. Thus the old record errs by forty-five
years an d places these events in  the reign of King Munmu (Actually it errs
more than that. The year 647 was the first year of Queen Chindok.)
The young men who had been  accompanying the two princes on the
excursion could  not find them anywhere, and so returned to Kyong-ju in
disappointment.
When the two p rinces were deep in the mountains, suddenly a graceful
blue lotus appeared from the ground and opened its golden heart in the
fragrant air . The elder prince built a hermitage near this lotus, calling it
Poch'on-am. Ab out six hundred foot-spans further to the northeast another
blue lotu s bloomed at the southern foot of the North T errace, an d here Hyo-
myong, the younger prince, liv ed in a hermitage which he built with his
own hands.
Living thus solitary , they both became engrossed in the study  of the
deep truths proclaimed by Bu ddha. One day the two princes made a
pilgrimage to Obong (Five Peak s) high in the mountains. Here they beheld
a v ision  of Buddhas through th e unveiling clouds: ten thousand Kwanums
on Manwol-san  (Full Moon Mountain) above the Eastern T errace; ten
thousand Chijan g (earth gods) headed by the eight great Bod hisattvas on
Kirin-san (moun tain of the Giraf fe, a fabulous monster) above t he Southern
T errace; ten thousand Seji gods led by Buddhas of everlasting life on
Changnyong-san (Mountain of the Long Pass) above the W estern T errace;
five hun dred Nahan (disciples  of Sakyamuni) led by their master on
Sangwang-san (Mountain of the King Elephant) above the Northern
T errace; and ten thousand Muns u Buddhas led by Piro Ch'ana on P'ungno-
san (Mountain of the W ind Furnace) otherwise called Chiro-san (Mountain
of the Earth Furnace) above the Central T errace.
W ith wondering  eyes the two princes worshipped the fifty thousand
Buddhas who thus appeared in their real persons. But the greatest wonder
was that  every morning at daybreak the great Buddha of Munsu descended

to Chiny owon (now Sangwon) and appeared in thirty-six dif ferent shapes,
changing from one to anothe r: jewels, Buddha's face, Buddha's eyes,
Buddha's hands , Buddha's feet, ten thousand Buddha heads, ten thousand
lanterns, treasure pagodas, golden bridges, golden drums, golden bells,
golden castles, golden wheels, golden barrels, golden hairpins, diamond
pestles, five-colored lights, fiv e-colored coronas, auspicious grass, blue
lotus flowers, gold and silver f arms, lightning, gushing Buddhas, gushing
earth-gods, a golden phoenix, golden crows, magpies, horse-born lions,
cow-born lions, a chicken-born phoenix, blue dragons, white elephants,
running wild boars and twisting blue snakes.
Every morning the two princes drew water from a mountain stream and
made tea to of fer to the Buddhas, and in the evening they medi tated on the
spiritual world.
At th is time the  younger brother of King Chongsin (Sinmun) q uarreled
with the King over the succession to the throne. The people of Silla deposed
the K ing and sent four generals into the mountains to bring b ack the two
princes. The generals approached the hermitage of Hyomyon g first, and
shouted, “Manse i!” (long live the prince!) upon which five-colored clouds
veiled the mountains for seven d ays-Seeing these auspicious clo uds, a lar ge
multitude gather ed in the mountains with palanquins and horses to escort
the r oyal brothers back to the p alace. Poch'on wept and refused to go, so
they placed Hyomyong in a car riage and returned to Kyongju, where they
seated him on the throne.
(L yon n otes her e a record that says this King ruled twenty years, and
points out that this is a mistake, since he only ruled ten years and died at
twenty-six. The same record, he notes, says that the younger  brother of
King Sin mun tried to take the throne for himself, but there is no  mention of
this in the Samguk Sagi.)
A fe w y ears late r , in the first year of Shen-lung, when King S ong-dok
had ruled for four years (705) on the fourth of March the King and his
courtiers civil and military ascended the mountain and had a Buddhist
palace called Chinyowon built there with a statue of Munsu Buddha seated
in its Golden Hall. Moreover , the King ordered five learned monks to
transcribe the Hwaom Sutra and  to or ganize the Hwaom sect. (This was a
syncretic sect that attempted to harmonize various conflicting Buddhist
doctrines.) T o pay the expens es of perpetual of ferings to Buddha, he
ordered the magistrates of the neighboring prefectures to contribute one

hundred lar ge bags of rice and o ne lar ge barrel of purified oil regularly each
spring a nd autum n. The King al so established a lar ge manor of fifteen kyol
(unit of land me asure) plus six k yol of forest land and two kyol o f farmland,
yielding firewoo d, chestnuts and grain. This land extended ov er Monijom
and Koi-hyon, 6,000 foot-spans to the west of Chinyowon, and these
supplies were suf ficient to maintain the Buddhist palace.
Prince Poch'on drank from the sacred springs in the mountains , so that
later in life he flew through the air and landed at Changch'on-k ul (Cave of
the Heavenly Palm) in Uljinkuk  beyond the Y usa River (Y ongh ae in North
Kyongsang Prov ince). There he made it a daily practice to rec ite Dharani
(Buddhist spells) which enabled him to accomplish his every wish.
The god  of the cave appeared before the Prince and said, “I have lived
in this cave for two thousand years, but today I have heard the truth of
Dharani for the first time in my life. I wish you to tell me the
commandments of the Bodhisattvas.” The Prince expounded the law to him
as h e desired, and on the foll owing day the cave disappeared, leaving
neither form nor shadow . Princ e Poch'on was surprised. He stayed in a
wonderland for twenty days an d then moved to another holy cave on Mt.
Odae. T here he pursued the truth  for fifty years, during which time the gods
of th e T orich'on heaven listene d to his sermons three times a day . The
heavenly hosts served him hot tea, the forty sages flew ten fee t above his
head to protect him day and nig ht, and his metal staf f spun in h is chamber
like a top, with a  musical sound, revolving three times a day so that he used
it as  a clock to mark the time during his studies. From time to time Munsu
Buddha poured water on his brow and gave him esoteric scriptures for his
spiritual enlightenment.
At last the days of Prince Poch' on drew to a close. On his death he left
behind a list of  annual events to be observed in the mountains for the
benefit of the country . It contained the following passage.
“This mountain  (Odae-san) is part of the great mountain ran ge that
extends down from Paektu-san (The Ever -White Mountain in n orth Korea)
and each of its peaks and terraces is an abode of Buddhas. Blue  is the color
of the eastern te rrace below its northern peak and the northern terrace at its
southern foot. Here you shall build a hall for Kwanum Buddha with a
sculptured image seated in the hall. Decorate the hall with ten thousand
portraits of Kwanum painted on blue backgrounds and station here five
charity farm overseers to read aloud eight volumes of the Golden Scriptures

and the Inwang and Panya Sutras by day and to chant the Kwanum
Ceremonial Repentance by night. Y ou shall call this hall W ont'ong-sa
(Shrine of A wakening).
“Red is the color of the Southe rn T errace facing south, Here y ou shall
build a hall for the Chijang (ea rth god) with a sculptured image seated in
the hall.  Decora te the hall with  ten thousand portraits of Chi jang led by
eight Bo dhisattvas on red backgrounds and station here five charity farm
overseers to read aloud the Chij ang Sutra and the Kumgang-Panya Sutra by
day and to chan t the Fortune-T elling Ceremonial Repentance by  night. Y ou
shall call this hall Kumgang-sa (Diamond Shrine).
“White i s the color of the W este rn T errace facing south. Here y ou shall
erect a hall for Maitreya, with a sculptured image of the Buddha of
Everlasting Life  seated in it. Decorate this hall with ten thousand portraits
of Seji gods led by the Buddha  of Everlasting Life on white backgrounds
and station here five charity farm overseers to read aloud eight volumes of
the Poph wa Sutr a by day and to chant the Maitreya Ceremonial Repentance
by night. Y ou shall call this hall Sujong-sa (Crystal W ater Shrine).
“Black i s the color of the North ern T errace facing south. Here y ou shall
build a hall for the Nahan with a sculptured image of Sakyamu ni seated in
it. D ecorate the hall with five hu ndred portraits of Nahan led by  Sakyamuni
Buddha on black backgrounds a nd station here five charity far m overseers
to r ead aloud the Pul-Poun-gy ong (Sutra of Buddha's Favor) and the
Y olban-gyong (Nirvana Sutra) b y day and to chant the Nirvana Ceremonial
Repentance by night. Y ou shall call this hall Paeknyon-sa (White Lotus
Shrine).
“Y ellow is the color of the Central T errace at Chinyowon. H ere you
shall build a hall for the unmoving Buddha of Munsu with his s tatue seated
in it. Decorate the hall with pictures of the thirty-six changing forms of
Munsu led by Piro-ch'ana and station here five charity farm overseers to
read aloud the H waom Sutra and the six hundred Panya by day and to chant
the Mun su Ceremonial Repentance by night. Y ou shall call this hall Hwaom
Shrine.
“Y ou shall also found Poch'on Hermitage, calling it Hwajang-sa, with
three sculptured figures of Piro-Ch'ana seated in the hall and the T aejang-
gyong (B uddhist scriptures) preserved therein and station there five charity
farm overseers to read aloud the Changmunjang-gyong by day a nd to chant
the H waom-Sinj ung (myriad gods of Hwaom) by night. Y ou shall see to it

that a Hwaom meeting is held here for a hundred days each year and call
this temple Popnyun-sa (Shrine of the Sacred Wheel).
“Y ou shall make Hwajang-sa th e cathedral of these five Buddh ist halls.
If you keep incense burning in  it day and night through the services of
purified oversee rs of charity farm s, the King will enjoy long life, the people
will hav e peace and happiness, civil and military of ficials will work
together in harmony and all the food grains will be abundant in their
seasons.
“Y ou sh all add Munsu-Kapsa in Hawon, and order seven charity farm
overseers to chant the Ceremonial Repentance of Hwaom-Sinjung. The
funds for the of f erings by these thirty-seven charity farm overse ers shall be
supplied from taxes in kind co llected in the eight prefectures of Haso-pu
(Kangnung, Kangwon-do). If m y words are observed the successive Kings
will have good fortune without fail.”
88. Cr own Prince Pojilto on Myongju-Odae Mountain
(This is mainly a retelling of the previous section, perhaps because
Ilyon found it in a dif ferent source.)
Pojilto, the crown prince of King  Chongsin of Silla, accompanied by his
younger brother  Prince Hyo-myong, traveled to the north a nd stopped
overnight at the house of Sehon Kakkan. On the following day , each
accompanied by  a thousand youths, they crossed the high mo untain pass
called T ae-ryong  and arrived at Song-o-p'yong, where they paused to enjoy
the scen ic beauty of the mounta ins for several days. On the fifth of August
in T'aeh wa the two princes hid themselves in a forest on Mt. Odae. Their
astonished escort searched but  could not find them, and so returned to
Kyongju without their royal chiefs.
The crown prince, seeing a blue  lotus blooming on the mountainside at
Chinyowon to the south of t he Central T errace, built a grass-roofed
hermitage there with his own h ands. Prince Hyo-myong saw another blue
lotus op ening on  the mountainside to the south of the Northern T errace and
settled there in a separate hermitage of his own building.
The two princes studied the scriptures daily and performed regular
Buddhist cerem onies. They also visited various places in the mountains
where they saw the thousands of Buddhas who lived there: ten thousand
Kwamim Buddh as above the H ill of the Full Moon on the b lue Eastern
T errace; ten thousand Chijang led by eighty thousand Bodhisattvas above
the Hill of the  Kirin on the red Southern T errace; ten thousand Seji

Bodhisattvas led by the Buddha of Everlasting Life above the Hill of the
Long P ass on the white W estern T errace; five hundred Na han led by
Sakyamuni above the Hill of the King Elephant on the black Northern
T errace; and ten thousand Munsu Buddhas led by Piro-Ch'ana above the
Hill of the W ind Furnace (or Ea rth Furnace) on the yellow Cen tral T errace.
And wo nder of wonders, the great Munsu Buddha appeared at dawn in the
mountains arou nd Chinyowon with a myriad of faces and i n thirty-six
forms. ( These are described in the previous section.)25 The  two princes
worshipped these forms and every morning they drew water from a fountain
to make tea, which they of fered to the ten thousand Munsu Buddhas.
At t his time the  younger brother of King Chongsin of Silla q uarreled
with the  King over the successi on to the throne and was put to  death. The
people of Silla s ent four generals to Mt. Odae to bring back the two princes.
The gen erals ap proached the hermitage of Hyo-myong and shouted “Long
live the prince! ” whereupon all at once clouds of five colors veiled the
mountaintops and their radiance shone all over Silla.
The gen erals fo llowed these auspicious clouds up the mountains until
they found the two princes, and asked them to return to Ky ongju. But
Crown Prince Pojilto (Poch'on)  wept and refused to go, so th ey brought
Hyo-myong alone to the capital and elevated him to the throne. On the
eighth o f March in the first year of T'ang Shen-lung (705) when the King
had been on t he throne for twenty years, a monastery was built at
Chinyowon. (This is a chronological error . King Hyoso ruled for only ten
years, and the date referred to is in the fourth year of King Songdok's
reign.)
Pojilto d rank reg ularly from a ho ly fountain for a long time, after which
he fl ew high into  the blue sky and landed at the Cave of the Hea venly Palm
in Uljin-T aeguk  after flying ov er the Y usa River . After medita ting in this
cave for  some days, he returne d to Mt. Odae and lived in another cave
where he studied the scriptures for fifty years. Odae-san (the Mountain of
Five T e rraces) rises in the gre at mountain range stretching down from
Paektu-san (Ever -White Mountain) and on each terrace of th is mountain
living Buddhas have their permanent abodes.
89. The Five Saints of W oljong T emple on Mt. Odae
According to an antique record of W oljong T emple, Chajang Popsa once
said he had visited Odae-san an d lived under a thatched roof at the foot of
the mou ntain in  order to see the holy image of the living Buddha. When it

had not appeared to him after seven days he went to Myopom-san, where he
built a new temple called Chongam-sa.
Some ye ars later a hermit nam ed Sinhyo-Kosa (who was believed to
have been an incarnation of Y udong Bodhisattva)26 lived in Kyongju, where
he dutif ully care d for his old mother . Since his mother had to have meat
with her meals or she would n ot eat, Kosa often went out hunting in the
mountains and fields. One day h e saw five cranes alighting on a rice paddy
near a mountain  path. He shot an arrow at them, but the startled birds flew
quickly away , leaving a single feather behind. Kosa picked up  the feather
and covered his eyes with it, whereupon all the people he saw seemed to be
birds and beasts. W ithout sayin g a word he cut a pound of flesh from his
thigh and gave it to his mother to eat. He soon became a monk and made his
house a temple which is now called Hyoga-won (T emple of the Dutiful
Son.)
(This st ory combines the Confucian virtue of filial piety with the
Buddhist prohibition against taking life. It was believed that the souls of the
dead were reborn as various c reatures according to the degree of their
virtue, which is why Kosa saw p eople as birds and animals when he looked
through the feather . This was, in ef fect, an admonition agains t his killing
animals to feed his mother .)
When Kosa came to Hasol (K angnung) from Kyongju and looked at
people through the feather , they all seemed to be dolls. He saw an old
woman and asked her where he could find a good place to settle  down. She
pointed to Soryong (W est Pass)  and said, “If you cross the mo untain pass,
you will come to a village facing north. There you will find a cozy cottage
to live in.” And with these words she vanished like a mist. Kosa thought she
must have been an incarnation of Kwanum who had come to guide him.
W ith a light heart he went on his way through Song-o-p'yong and came
to the thatched cottage, which he made his home. One day five strange
monks c ame up  to him and one of them said, “Y ou tore a piece from the
train of my robe, didn't you? Where do you keep it?” Kosa was
dumbfounded. “ Y ou picked it u p and looked at people throug h it all the
time,” the monk went on.
“Oh, I see!” nodded Kosa. He fumbled in his sleeve and brough t out the
feather .
The monk fixed it between the torn seams of his robe, exclaiming, “This
is exactly what I had lost and was looking for!” When Kosa lo oked at the

feather again he saw that it was a piece of hemp cloth, but it was not until
he h ad said farewell to the monks that he realized that they  were five
incarnate saints.
W oljong-sa was first built with a thatched roof by Chajang and then
inhabited by Sinhyo-Kosa. Sinui Dut'a (Dhuta in Sanskrit, which means
friar) the n built a hermitage over its ruins, and finally Y uyon, t he abbot of
Suta-sa, made it a famous tem ple. The nine-storeyed stone pagoda in its
precincts is a relic of the five sa ints. Many distinguished geom ancers have
admired the site of W oljong-sa,  saying that it is the most auspicious of the
nation's mountains, where Bud dha rose to power and glory for ages to
come.
90. Kamsan T emple on Namwol-san (South Moon Mountain)
Kamsan-sa is situated approxi mately twenty li to the southeast of
Kyongju. In an antique record (Postscript to the Firelight of the Master of
the Golden Hall Maitreya Image) we read as follows:
“On the fifteenth of February in the year of the goat, the seventieth year
of Kaiyuan of Hsuan-tsung of T'ang (719) Chon Mang-song built Kamsan-
sa an d p laced a stone image of M aitreya in its Golden Hall. It was dedicated
to th e spirits of  his father Inchang Ilkilkan, his mother Lady Kwanch'ori
Kaewon Ich'an, his two brother s Kansong-Sosa and Hyonto (a monk), his
two siste rs Kopa ri and Supunmae, his two wives Korori and Ahori, and his
relatives by illicit unions Makil-Kilch'an, Iltang-Salch'an and Ch'ongmin-
T aesa. The ashes of his mother Lady Ch'ori were scattered over the eastern
sea.”
In the postscript to the Firelight of Maitreya it is written, “Chung Ach'an
Kim Ch i-chon ( a mistake for K im Chi-song) attended the King as Sang-ui
(a title) and was  later promoted to Chipsa Sirang (an of ficial post). At the
age of sixty-sev en he retired from court and contributed his manor in
Kamsan to a te mple in memory of Kukju-T aewang and Ich' an-Kaewon,
Inchang Ilkilkan  (his father), his mother , Y ang-song and Hyonto the monk
(his bro thers), K orori (his wife) and Kopari (his sister), and also that of
Ahori (h is second wife). In addition he placed a stone image of Maitreya in
this temple, dedicated to the spirit of Inchang Ilkilkan his father , whose
ashes were scattered over the eastern sea.
“According to the royal geneology of Silla, Prince Kaewon Kakkan was
T'aejong Kim Ch'un-ch'u's younger son born of Queen Munhui. Kim Chi-
chon see ms to be a mistake for Kim Chi-song, the son of Incha ng Ilkilkan.

'Scattering ashes' probably refers to the funeral at sea of Popmin (King
Munmu) in the Eastern Sea.” (K im Ch'un-ch'u was King Muryol, 654-660,
the predecessor of King Munmu.)
91. Ch'onnyong-sa (T emple of the Heavenly Dragon)
Rising t o the south of Namsan (South Mountain) in Kyongju is a sky-
kissing peak which the people call Eagle Mountain. T o the south of this
peak stands a temple which the people call the T emple of the Heavenly
Dragon. In the book T'oron-Samhan-chip it is written, “There are three
streams of guest water and one stream of backward-flowing water in Kerim;
if th e sources of these stream s cannot suppress natural calamities, the
Heavenly Dragon will bring about a catastrophic overturn of the country .”
Folk-tales relate that the backward-flowing water , falling in a cataract from
a pool above the temple, runs into a stream on the southern outskirts of
Madung-o-ch'on, a small village facing south.
Lo P 'eng-kuei, a Chinese envoy , once visited this temple and remarked,
“Should it be destroyed, the nation will soon fall into ruin.”
T radition says the donor had two daughters named Ch'on-nyo
(Heavenly Maid) and Y ong-nyo (Dragon Maid) for whom their parents built
this tem ple and called it Ch'onn yong-sa (T emple of the Heavenly Dragon)
to help the people cultivate the Buddhist religion in the midst of the awe-
inspiring scenery . At the close of the Silla kingdom the lon g-neglected
temple fell into ruins.
(The restoration  of the temple came about in the following manner .)
Sung-no the son of Ch'oe Un-so ng had drunk of the milk of the  Goddess of
Mercy at Chungsaeng T emple. He was the father of Suk and Suk was the
father of  Che-an  the Prime Min ister . By order of the King Che-an restored
the tem ple to its former glor y , with a ten-thousand-day monastery of
Sakyamuni in its precincts, and deposited a copy of his will there. After his
death he became a guardian deity of the temple and worked many wonders.

The W ill

I, C h'oe Che-an, His Majesty's  Prime Minister and President of the
Privy Council, the donor of this temple, hereby make known my will.
Seeing the prolonged dilapidation of Ch'onnyong-sa on Eagle Mountain
at K yongju, I, C he-an, a disciple of the holy Buddha, wishing for the long
life of the King and the everlasting prosperity of the nation, have erected a

Golden Hall in the temple with a stone image and several plaster statues of
Buddha enshrined therein, and a ten-thousand-day monastery of Sakyamuni
established within its precincts  in addition to the living quarters of the
monks.
Since th e rehabi litation of the temple is for the welfare of the nation, it
is proper for the government to  appoint an abbot to preside over the rites
and to manage the af fairs of the temple. However , the monks a re likely to
be conce rned over whether the right sort of person will be cho sen. I have
observed the practices of other temple such as Chijang-sa in Ko ngsan with
its donat ed farm of 200 kyol, T oson-sa on Pisul-san with its donated farm of
twenty kyol, and Samyonsan-sa in Sogyong with its donated farm of twenty
kyol, an d seen that the products  of these farms are suf ficient to support the
temples. I took note of the fact that these temples make it a permanent rule
to ch oose as abb ots only prelates who keep Buddha's commandments and
who possess outstanding administrative ability , whether they hold of ficial
positions or not, to comply with the wishes of the Holy Order .
I, Che-an, a disciple of the Buddha, being pleased with this custom, do
hereby e stablish as a standard r ule for our Ch'onnyong-sa that its abbot be
chosen from among priests possessing both virtue and accomplishments,
worthy of being pillars of the state. For this purpose, I leave this document
with the chief of ficial of the temple. The assembly of the monk s are hereby
notified of a certificate deposited with the local government indicating that
such is my will.
(The wi ll ends here and Ilyon c omments: The will is dated in June of
the nint h year of Chung-hsi, and is countersigned by the competent
authorities. Chung-hsi was the reign title of Hsing-tsung of the  Khitan and
the date corresponds to the seventh year of King Chongjong of Koryo
(1040, actually the sixth year of Chongjong.)
92. The Palace of Amitabha at Mujang T emple
T o the north of Amgok-ch'on, about twenty  li  northeast of Kyong-ju,
there is a temple called Mujang-sa, It was built by T ae Agan  Hyo-yang
(posthumously entitled Myongdok-T aewang, the father of Kin g W onsong,
785-798) and dedicated to P'ajinch'an, his uncle. It stands between soaring
clouds and great trees on a tall c lif f overlooking a valley that str etches away
to the horizon, so that it is an ideal place for a solitary monk to pursue the
way of Buddha.

Above the temple there was o nce a palace of Amitabha wh ich was
connected with a sad event. When King Sosong died (800) his Queen
Kyehwa grieved  exceedingly , weeping over the body of her ro yal husband
until blo od flow ed from her sw ollen eyes and beating her rosy  breast with
her white hands. And indeed th e days of their love had been a ll too brief,
for the King had hardly ascended the throne when he was struck down.
Reflecting on the bright virtues of her husband, the Queen thought of a
way in which her prayers for the repose of his soul might be perpetuated.
She had heard that Amitabha, the Buddha of the W est, would clasp to
himself the soul of anyone who prayed to him from a sincere h eart. Drying
her tears , she donated six of he r royal gowns and treasures from the privy
purse fo r the carving of an imag e of Amitabha and of several statues of the
lesser d ivinities associated wit h him, to be enshrined in a palace. She
summoned the most skilful sculptors in the land to do this work.
(The cu lt of the Bodhisattva A mitabha was an extremely popular one
,for obvi ous reasons. It was said  that anyone who called upon his name with
sincerity was sure to be received into the “W estern Paradise” at death, and
thus would escape being reborn  into the world or condemned to one of the
numerous Buddhist hells.)
At the aforemen tioned Mujang temple there lived an old monk. Some
time before these events he had had a dream in which he saw a living
Buddha sitting on a hill to the southeast of the temple's stone pagoda and
delivering a sermon to a multitude which was gathered in the west. The
monk th erefore believed that this would be an auspicious; p lace for the
habitation of a B uddha, but kept the idea to himself until the con struction of
the Amitabha palace was planned.
(The mo nk evid ently pointed out the place of his dream and suggested
that the palace b e built there.) S eeing the tall, rugged clif f and the mountain
streams roaring down the ravines, the carpenters and sculptors complained
that it would be very dif ficult e ven to carry their building mat erials to the
site. But the monks persisted, te lling them that this was the ideal place. And
when th ey investigated further ,  and dug behind some of the rocks, there
indeed w as a lar ge piece of leve l ground, and there they built the palace of
Amitabha. All the people who came to visit it admired its holy site.
The palace of A mitabha stood for many hundred years, a fl ower of
Buddhist art, but at last it cru mbled to the ground, although the temple
survived. Acco rding to folk tales, T'aejong (King Muryol), after the

unification of the three kingdom s under his single rule, stored his weapons
and helmets in the valley beneath the clif f, and so the peopl e called the
temple Mujang-sa, which means Helmet T emple.
(The rui ns of this temple are s till to be seen in Amgok-ni, Naetong-
myon, W olsong county . It is a bit dif ficult to interpret the word “palace” in
this section. Obviously , however , it is not to be taken literally b ut means a
religious building of some sort.)
93. The Buddha Relics (Sari) in the Stone Pagoda at Paegom
T emple
On the twenty-ninth of October in the third year of Hou T sin Kai-yun, in
the year of the horse (946) this inscription was placed on the Im do T aegam
milestone on the border of Kangju (now Chinju); “Paegom T e mple of the
Son (Zen) sect w as situated in C h'op'al-hyon (now Ch'ogye), an d Kanyu, its
chief monk, was 39 years old, but the history of this temple is unknown.”
According to an antique biogra phy , during the days of old Silla this
temple was built over the ruins of the Of fice of Northern Hous es. (That is,
the local government of fice for the northern quarter of Kyong- ju. The city
was renowned for its palatial mansions, of which there are said to have been
thirty-five, whic h were known a s the Golden Houses.) After a  time it was
closed, and remained so for many years.
(The temple must have been reo pened, but the text gives no date.) In the
year of the tiger (1026) Y angpu, a monk from Samok-kok, became abbot of
this temple and remained in the  post until his death in the yea r of the ox
(1037). In the year of the cock (1045) Kung-yang, a monk from Huiyang
(now M ungyong) stayed at the t emple for ten years, returning to  Huiyang in
the y ear of the goat (1055). In th e same year Sint'ak, a monk from Paegam-
sa in Namwon, became abbot.
In N ovember of the first year  of Hsien-weng (1065) Surip the new
abbot (better known under his posthumous name T ugomi jong-T aesa)
proclaimed permanent regulations for the temple in ten arti cles. These
included the building of a five-s torey pagoda with forty-two sari enshrined
therein; the of fering of sacrifices  to Buddha and to the holy monks Om Hun
and Paek Hun (who became the guardian deities of the temple) and to
another holy monk, Kunak, the expenses of these sacrifices to be defrayed
from the private purse of a financial guild; and the grinding of rice (for the
sacrifices) in a wooden bowl with a miniature pestle before the image of

Bhechadjagura (the Buddha of healing) in the Golden Hall early each
month.
T radition says that Om Hun an d Paek Hun donated their dwe llings to
this tem ple, whence the name Paegom-sa, and that the two monks were
honored as its guardian deities.
94. Y oungch'u-sa (T emple of the Holy Eagle)
According to an old record at Y o ungch'u-sa, in the second year of Y ing-
shun of T'ang K ao-tsung (683; Samguk Sagi says the first year , but this is a
mistake) when King Sinmun was on the throne, Ch'ung-won-kong the
Prime Minister went to bathe in the hot springs at Chang-san-ku k (T ongnae,
near Pusan; there are indeed hot springs there). While he was resting at
T ongji-ya near Kuljong post-st ation (near Changgi) on his w ay back to
Kyongju, he saw a fowler launch his falcon after a pheasant. The startled
pheasant flew over Kumak (Golden Mountain) and was lost to view .
Seized with curiosity , the Prime  Minister followed as the fow ler went
along a winding  mountain path ringing his bell and chasing his falcon. At
length they reached a well to the north of the Kuljong-hyon local
government of fi ce. Here they fo und the falcon perched in a tree above the
well and  the pheasant fluttering in the bloodstained water , covering two
little ones with its wings. The falcon looked down with pitying eyes and
would not swoop upon the bird to kill it.
Ch'ungwon-kong's heart was also moved with pity at this sight.  He told