The heroine of this story was an incarnation of Buddha in a woman's
body . In  the Buddhist book Hw aom-gyong it is written, “Lady Mahamaya
of goodness and mercy shining over the 'eleven lands' gave birth to
Sakyamuni Bud dha with a vision of the gate of Buddhist salvation, casting
of f worl dly passions.” (In the Indian legends Buddha's mother is named
Maya. “Maha” is a Sanskrit p refix meaning “great.”) Thus the birth of
Buddha was re-enacted by the goddess in the White Moon Mountains.

She sang her s ong to the herm its in a plaintive tone like that of a
lovesick fairy from heaven. Had she not taken the form of a  young and
beautiful woma n and talked to them in “Dharani” (Buddhist spells in
Sanskrit), she could not have communicated with them in working this
wonder . In her song of temptation she might have said, “The winds of
heaven mingle forever in sweet  emotion; why can I not mingle with thee
into a single be ing?” But because she was a goddess she coul d not allow
herself to sound like a vulgar woman in a ballad.

Song of Praise to the Northern Hermitage
In the twilight who knocks at this silent stone door in the dee p, deep
mountains?
Ah, it is a woman, a phantom of delight, a moment's ornament!
Y ou may go to the Southern Cloister , which is not far away—
Do not tread on the green moss of my doorstep,
Do not stain my clean cot with your woman's presence.

Song of Praise to the Southern Hermitage
In the deep dusky valley from whence comes this fair lady
Who like the radiant moon shines on my solitary cot?
W elcome, lady , rest thy weary feet under my southern window .
As the night deepens my perplexed heart with thy beauty brightens,
Only the baby's cries keep my pretty guest awake the whole night.

Song of Praise to the Holy W oman
She wandered over hill and dale and under the lonely ten- li  pine grove
T o tempt the lonely monks in the night cells;
When she had borne two babies, she rose from her bath at dawn
And flew far , far away into the western sky .
84. The  Goddess of Mer cy and the Blind Child at Pu nhwang
T emple
During the reign of King Kyongdok (742-765) there lived at Hanki-ri a
woman whose name was Hui-m yong. She had a son, but he beca me blind at
the age of five. One day this un happy mother carried her child in her arms
to the Left Hall of Punhwang T e mple. There she had him sing a song before
the port rait of the Thousand-Handed Goddess of Mercy on the northern
wall while she of fered a prayer . Immediately , the child recovered his sight.


Song of the Blind Child
I fall on my knees and clasp both my hands
T o pray thee to have mercy on me, O Kwanum Bodhisattva!
Thou hast touched so many dark eyes with thy thousand hands
And made them bright as daylight;
Pray give me one eye for love and another for charity .
If thou givest me mine eyes, I will sing thy great mercy .
Song of Praise to the Goddess of Mer cy
Riding a bamboo horse, playing an onion pipe.
I played on hills and streams.
But alas, in a twinkling I lost t he sight of both eyes! Had the goddess
not give n me back my bright e yes, How many springs would have come
and gone without my seeing the pussy-willows!
85. The two Buddhas of Naksan and Chosin, the Lovesick Monk
In the olden days, when Uisang Popsa had returned from his first visit to
China, h e heard  that the godde ss of mercy (Kwanum) had ta ken up her
abode in a cave on the seacoast. He therefore called the place N aksan, after
the I ndian mountain Pota-Nakka-san, which is better known as So-Paekhwa
(Small White Flower) because the graceful white-clad image of Kwanum
Bodhisattva there resembled a white flower on a slender stem.
(Uisang evidently went to this place for a religious retreat of some sort).
On the seventh day of his pur ification, Uisang stood up and pushed his
cushion into the sea so that it w ould float away on the morning  tide. Eight
gods from the F our Deva Kings then conducted him into the cave. There he
looked up to he aven and worshipped Buddha, and a crystal rosary was
given to  him. He took it, and a s he stepped backward the Dr agon of the
Eastern Sea of fered him a beadlike gem (Cintamani), which he also
accepted. Uisang purified himself for a further seven days, after which he
beheld the splendid face and graceful figure of the living Buddha.
The Buddha said, “If you climb this mountain you will see a pair of
bamboos growin g at the top. There build a palace for me.” W hen Uisang
had left the presence of the Budd ha he climbed the mountain, and above the
cave tw o bamboo plants shot suddenly out of the ground and then
disappeared. Uisang therefore knew that this was the holy abode  of Buddha,
and on this spot  he built a temple called Naksan-sa with a lifeli ke image of

the g raceful Buddha in its Golden Hall, where he also deposited the crystal
rosary before his departure.
Soon afterward W onhyo, another famous Silla monk, made a pilgrimage
to w orship this Buddha. Whe n he arrived at the southern foot of the
mountain, he saw a woman harvesting rice in a field. W onhyo liked women
and pleasantry , so he said to her jestingly , “W ill you give me some rice?”
“No, I am sorry ,  I cannot,” she replied. “It is a lean year and beg gars are
not welcome.”
Proceeding furth er , he met a woman washing her menstrual band in
running water under a bridge. She too he addressed in jest: “Let me have a
drink of the cool water .”
“All right, come and drink,” rang out her clarion voice, and she scooped
up some  of the u nclean water in a half-moon-shaped gourd and pressed it to
his lips.  W onhyo drained the gourd and dipped more wate r from the
mountain stream to quench his thirst.
As he did so, a blue bird in a pine tree nearby called to him “Come on,
my good monk Huiche-Hwasang!” and disappeared, leaving a woman's
shoe un der the tree. When W onhyo reached the temple he found another
shoe, of the s ame size and shape, by the pedestal of th e Kwanum
Bodhisattva. He then realized that these shoes belonged to the two women
whom h e had met, and that the y were both incarnate Buddhas. From that
time on people c alled the pine from which the bird had called t he Kwanum
pine.
W onhyo wished  to enter the cave and see the graceful figure of the
living B uddha there, but a storm  was raging at sea and his little boat almost
capsized, so he was forced to desist.
Many y ears later Pomil, the f ounder of Kulsan T emple, traveled to
China in  the years of T'ai-huo (827-835) and visited Kaikuo  T emple in
Mingchow . There, occupying the lowest place in the temple, he met a
strange monk whose left ear was missing. This monk said to Pomil, “I am
one of your fellow countrymen. My home is in T okki-pang, Iknyong-hyon,
on the boundary of Myongju (Y angyang in Kangwon Province). When you
return home, visit my native place and build a house for me.”
Pomil visited all the famous Chinese temples and learned much esoteric
Buddhist doctrine. When he returned home in the seventh ye ar of T'ang
Hui-ch'ang, the year of the hare (847) he founded Kulsan-sa. On the night
of the fifteenth of February in the twelfth year of T'ang T a-ch ung, in the

year of the tiger  (858), Pomil ha d a dream about the one-eared monk whom
he had met years before in China. The monk stood under his bedroom
window and said, “Y ou made me a promise at the temple in Mingchow .
Why are you s o late in keepi ng it?” In great surprise Pomil arose and
gathered a party of fellow monks to seek the native place of the one-eared
monk near Iknyong (W ing Pass).
In a vill age at the foot of Naksa n he met a woman named T okki whose
eight-year -old so n was accustomed to play near a stone bridge south of the
village. One day the child said t o her , “Mother , one of my playmates has a
face that shines with golden rays.” The woman told this to Pomil, who in
great joy took the child with him to the stone bridge. Under th e bridge in
midstream he found a stone Buddha image. When it was taken from the
stream he saw th at it exactly resembled the monk he had met in  China—its
left ear was mis sing. This was th e noble image of Chongch'wi B odhisattva.
Pomil selected an auspicious sit e on Naksan and built a temple, enshrining
the holy image in its Golden Hall.
(Ilyon n otes here: In an old book the stories of Pomil are place d before
those of Uisang and W onhyo. B ut since Uisang and W onhyo lived during
the reign of T'ang Kao-tsung in China(649-683) and Pomil in the days of
Hui-ch'ang 170 years later , this  is a mistake in chronology . Some scholars
say that Pomil was a disciple of Uisang, but this also is a mistake.)
In a forest fire which broke out a hundred years after these events, all
the temp les and shrines on Naks an went up in flames except the temples of
the Kwanum and Chongch'wi Bodhisattvas.
After th e Invasion of the W est Mountain (the Mongol invasion , 1253-
1254) the images of the two Bodhisattvas together with the two jewels were
moved t o Y angj u-song (Y angya ng, Kangwondo). When the city was about
to fall to the Mongols, Ahaeng the abbot (formerly called Hoi-ko) tried to
save the  rosaries  by hiding them in a brass vessel. Kolsung, a temple slave,
buried th is vessel in the ground and swore an oath: “If I do not e scape death
in this war these treasures will vanish from the human world forever , but if I
survive I will present them to the King.”
Finally , on the twenty-second of October in the year of the tiger (1254)
Ahaeng was killed when the c ity fell, but Kolsung escaped. When the
enemy had evacuated the ruin ed city he dug up the brass vessel and
presented it to Y i Nok-yu, the keeper of the royal treasury , to b e preserved
under strong guard. In October of the year of the horse (1258) Kakyu, the

abbot of  Chirim -sa, said to the King, “The two rosaries are sacred treasures
of the nation. Before the fall of Y angju Kolsung the temple slave buried
them in the city , and after the enemy left he dug them up and presented
them to the roy al treasury in Myongju. Now Myongju is i n imminent
danger o f falling  into enemy ha nds, so they should be transfer red to Y our
Majesty's inner palace.”
The Kin g appro ved this plan an d sent ten soldiers to Myongju by night
to fetch the rosa ries and bring th em to his inner palace. He rewarded the ten
soldiers with one pound of silver and five lar ge bags of rice each.
During t he Silla  period when th e Kings ruled in Kyongju there  was in
Nalli county in Myongju prefe cture a manor belonging to Se kyu T emple
(now called Honggyo-sa). The  abbot of this temple appoint ed a young
monk na med Ch osin caretaker of the manor . No sooner had he arrived to
take up his duti es than Chosin fell in love with the daughter of Kim Hun-
kong, the county magistrate. She was a girl of sixteen, fairer than the moon
and more charming than all the flowers put together . But though she smiled
on him she was unyielding, like a bell-flower growing between rocks too
high for his hands to reach.
At length he knelt before the goddess of mercy , who now appeared to
him in the semblance of his love, and prayed, “Oh great Buddha! Only
make this girl m y wife for even a moment's joy if not for life, fo r she is my
jewel, which I wish to cherish in my bosom in love's palace on earth before
I enter the lotus paradise in heaven. So be it, Namu-amitabul!”
Thus he  prayed all through the flowering spring and the rainy autumn,
but a ll in vain, for the girl was betrothed to another man. When he thought
of the blooming  bride in her glittering jewels and compared  the richly-
dressed bridegro om with himself—a poor monk in a grey hem p robe—he
shed tears of bitter despair .
At last the wedding day arrived, and as Chosin knelt for his evening
prayers he saw in his mind's eye the magnificent wedding feast and the
lovemaking of the young couple. A flame of jealousy rose in hi s heart, and
he said to himse lf, “Go and kill  the bridegroom! Set fire to the rich man's
house! D estroy everything and jump into the flames! If you die you will
for get the girl and everything else in this tragic world.”
Chosin w rithed in an agony like that of death, complaining to Buddha
for not answering his prayer . At last, worn out with weeping, he fell asleep
in the Buddha Hall.

Suddenly an autumn breeze blew out the candles. Chosin looked toward
the d oor , which was ajar , and as  he did so it was flung open and there in the
moonlight stood the bride, fresh as a rosebud in her wedding dress. She
threw he r arms around his neck and pressed her face to his boso m, sobbing
softly .
Chosin was dumbfounded with joy and surprise. “This is your wedding
night,” he said. “Why have you forsaken your bridegroom?”
“He is my paren ts' choice,” she said softly through her tears. “ I do not
want him . Y ou have my love.” And her slender body moved in h is arms like
a butterfly dancing on a flower .
“Y ou love me?” Chosin asked.
“A wom an is kept within her g arden walls,” the girl replied. “She is
forbidden to meet young men. T hough I am a girl of gentle bir th, since we
met in the roseb ed under the tun nel of wildflowers, eye to eye and lip to lip,
I have not for gotten you for a moment. I am yours, and I have come to live
with you and be your love until we go together to the same grave.”
Chosin c lasped his bride in his arms and danced for joy . Then he took
her hand and led  her from the Buddha Hall and down a mountai n path, until
they reached a quiet valley ne ar his native place. Here he built a snug
cottage i n the green forest. It wa s only a one-room cabin but it w as sweet to
Chosin, for he a nd his wife love d each other passionately . He w as familiar
with the forest a nd made his living by cutting wood and hunting hare and
deer , wh ich he and his love-mate  cooked in a pan over crackling flames and
ate with good appetite.
T ime sp ed by like a warrior's arrow , and at last they had lived together
in the forest for forty years, during which five children were bo rn to them.
They ha d been able to live for s ome time by selling the bride's jewelry , but
at last it was all  gone and they were reduced to abject poverty . There was
not a grain of rice or barley in the house and the family had to subsist on
grass an d roots.  Chosin hunted and cut wood as diligently as he was able,
but he could not supply his now  lar ge family with even the bare necessities
of life. He kne w that killing the mountain creatures was against the
commandment o f Buddha, not t o speak of the sin of living with a woman,
but now he would have killed even human beings to keep h is wife and
children from starvation.
The whole family wandered i n rags through the mountain villages
begging for food. As they were crossing Haehyon-nyong (Crab Pass) their

fifteen-year -old eldest son fell dead of hunger . W ith many tears  Chosin and
his wife buried the beloved child on the mountainside and continued with
the rema ining four to Ugok-hyon (now U-hyon), where they b uilt a lowly
cottage with a thatched roof.
More years passed. Now Chosin and his wife were as grey as if snow
had fallen on th eir heads, and th in and pale as death. Both of them fell ill,
while their children cried for food. The ten-year -old daughter walked fifteen
miles th rough the mountain villages begging for food for the family . She
was bitt en by a stray dog an d collapsed in pain on her return. T ears
streamed down the sunken cheeks of the aged couple.
At l ast, wiping away her tears, the old wife spoke to her husband:
“When I  married you in the flower of my youth and beauty , yo u kissed my
blushing cheeks  and called them  roses. Then we had fine clothes to wear
and good food t o eat, and our married love deepened as long as  the mellow
wine flo wed fro m our barrels, But now my rosy cheeks and cherry lips and
the g low of strength in your eyes are gone. Nothing is left to us  but sunken
stomachs, the pains of old age, sorrow and the fear of death. No one in this
wide wo rld will  give us so much as a night's sojourn in a storeroom or a
bottle of soy-sauce. W e have become a laughing-stock.
“If we cannot feed our own children, how can we enjoy our remaining
years in love? Coquettish smiles  have vanished like the dew , and the pledge
of o ur love ha s fled like the  pussy-willows on the four winds. The
passionate, carnal desires of our green youth have led o nly to this
bottomless grief of the grey w inter . It would be better to be a lone bird
pecking at a mir ror and calling for its mate than a pair dying with its young
in hunger and cold. It is intolerable that lovers should meet in wealth and