the story of the falcon and the p heasant to a fortune-teller and asked for his
advice. The latter replied the place must be an auspicious site for a temple.
When Ch'ungwo n-kong returned to Kyongju he reported his experience to
the K ing and suggested that the Kuljong-hyon of fice be removed to another
place to make w ay for a temple by the well. The King gladly ap proved this
plan, and  when the temple was b uilt it was named Y ongch'u-sa (the T emple
of the Holy Eagle), substituting an eagle for the falcon.
95. Y udok-sa (the T emple of V irtue)
Ch'oe Y u-dok the T ae-tae-kakkan (highest of ficial rank) of Silla,
contributed his private residenc e to the building of a temple, which was
given his name, Y udok (man of virtue). Long afterward his descendant
Ch'oe 6n-wi, a meritorious vas sal of Samhan, enshrined a po rtrait of his
ancestor the founder in this temple and erected a stone monument to his
memory in its precincts.
96. The Stone Pagoda at Munsu T emple on Mt. Odae

The ston e pagoda which stands on the grounds of Munsu T emple was
probably built by the people of Silla. Even though it is simp le, without
elaborate workm anship, this monument has worked indescribable wonders.
Among others I heard the following story from some old people.
“Long, long ago, a man from Y on'gok-hyon (Kangnung) fitte d out a
boat with fishing tackle and put out to sea to fish. But a pagoda followed his
boat, an d its shadow so startled  the fish that they scattered and fled in all
directions and he was unable to catch a single one. T ransported with rage,
he chased the sh adow until he f ound the real pagoda on land. He took his
heavy a x and struck it repeate dly and then sailed home em pty-handed,
leaving scars on the corners of the pagoda.”
As I gazed upon this pagoda with awe and admiration, my attention was
drawn to the fact that it stood on the eastern side of the courtyard and not in
the cent er (as is usual). As I pondered this, I noticed a panel with the
following inscription:
“Ch'ohyon, a lonely monk who lived at this temple in celibacy , wished
that good luck might come to him, He therefore moved the pago da from the
east side  of the c ourtyard to the center , and waited for twenty ye ars, but the
pagoda worked  no wonders. One day an astrologer visited the temple
looking for a for tunate site. He b reathed a deep sigh and said, 'The center of
the c ourtyard is not the proper place for a pagoda. Why don't you move it to
the east?' The monks, astonished at his wisdom, moved the pagoda back to
its original position in the east, where it now stands.”
Though not a lo ver of wonders, as a son of Buddha I could not remain
silent wh en I saw the majestic sp irit of Buddha in the shadow of the pagoda
to bestow merciful benefits on ten thousand living creatures so ef fectively ,
hence the above note.
W ritten in October of the first year of Cheng-p'eng in the year of Pyong-
ja (1 156) by White Cloud.
(This section, as indicated above, was added by one of Ilyon's d isciples.
In giving the date, he refers to the ruler of the semi-barbarian Kin or Chin
state. Th e prope r title of this reign era is Cheng-lung, but White Cloud
wrote Cheng-p'eng because the character “Lung” (Pronounced “nyung” in
Korean) was the personal name  of W ang Nyung, the father of W ang Kon
the Koryo founder , and thus taboo.)
Footnotes to Book Thr ee

1 . Compiled in 1215 with the authorization of King Kojong
2 . Mentioned in the Nihon Shok i, one of the most ancient Japanese
chronicles as King Ahwa, perhaps due to a clerical slip or a
misreading.
3 . There are records of a Liang  monarch sending gifts of Bu ddhist
scriptures and incense to a Silla King but it cannot have been  Nulji,
who-lived before the Liang state was founded.
4 . This is an allusion to an ancien t Chinese belief that the Y ellow  River ,
notorious for its muddiness, tur ned clear to presage the comin g of a
sage-king.
5 . Chinese names Kai-tzu-t'sui and  Hung Y en, legendary heroes. The first
fed his starving king with his o wn flesh, while the second com mitted
suicide a fter rep orting in due form to all that was left of his dea d lord,
a liver .
6 . This is a mistake, for Ungch'on at this time was in Paekje territory .
7 . This is both a symbol of the heavenly vehicles of ancient kings and of
Buddhism. The “wheel of the law” is one of the commonest sy mbols
in Buddhist iconography from the earliest times.
8 . “T sita” in Sanskrit. This is the fo urth of the “Six Heavens of Desire” in
Mahayana Buddhism. It is ruled by Maitreya.
9 . The Koryo government designated the capitals of the ancient
kingdoms by their directions from Kaesong, the Koryo capital.
Kyongju is meant here.
10 . Kasop w as the last of the seven Buddhas who preceded Saky amuni,
the historical Buddha, in Mahayana doctrine.
1 1 . “Agana” in Sanskrit. It contains the sayings of Sakyamuni.
12 . The present world, as distinct from the two other major realms.
13 . This is a reference to the Emper or Asoka, who ruled over the Maurya
Empire in India from 269 to 236 B. C. He was converted to Bud dhism
and bec ame one of its most enthusiastic supporters and propa gators.
Obviously his reputation had become somewhat inflated by the time it
reached Korea.
14 . Jawhu Dripa, one of the four geo graphical divisions of India, also used
as a name for India as a whole.
15 . A sermon preached by Sakyamuni immediately before his death.
16 . The traditional dates for Buddha's life are 563-483 B. C, which would
put Asoka two centuries later rather than one.

17 . The Buddha of W isdom, who traditionally sits to Sakyamuni's left.
18 . This is not a place at all, but a reading of “Kashatreya,” the s econd,
warrior caste in India, to which Sakyamuni's family belonged. The
implication is that the Queen was an incarnation of Sakyamuni.
19 . This was a Buddhist rite customary in China.
20 . A re ference to t he “third eye” o ften seen on the foreheads of Buddha
images. Here it is thought of as a white hair growing between Buddha's
eyebrows. It is one of the distinguishing features of a Buddha and
symbolizes his enlightenment.
21 . An Indian divinity described as “ruler of the thirty-three heavens.”
22 . Sanskrit name Samantabhadra, described in scripture as working
together with Munsu to aid Sakyamuni in the work of salvation.
23 . The reference is to the abode of V airocana, the Buddha of Illumination.
24 . The Three T reasures are the Bu ddha, Buddhist teaching and the order
of monks. The Five Prohibition s are against killing, stealing, sexual
indulgence, taki ng the name of Buddha in vain and drinking alcoholic
beverages.
25 . This happens to be the number of arrangements of the eight tri grams,
composed of broken and unbrok en lines, described in the Confu cian I-
Ching (C lassic of Changes, a b ook of divination and prophecy). Four
of them  can be seen on the Korean national flag. (T'aegu k and
P'alkwae).
26 . Actually the name of Sakyamuni in one of his previous lives.

BOOK FOUR
V. Anecdotes of Renowned Monks
91. W onkwang, Who Studied in the W est
In the thirteenth volume of the T'ang Biographies of the High Monks we
find the  following information. The family name of W onkwang (Round
Light, i.e. Buddha's Halo), th e monk of Huanglung T emple in Silla
(Hwangnyong-sa) was Pak, and  his home was in Chin-han, one of the three
Han nations—Pyonhan, Chinhan and Mahan. (These are very ancient
designations for certain parts of southern Korea.) His family h ad lived in
Haedong (East of the Sea, i.e. Korea) for many generations, and he
inherited the noble and magnanimous traditions of his ancestors. From his
youth he loved to read history and biographies of monks, and so on began to
write such compositions himsel f, and his literary fame quickl y spread all
over Hankuo (Hankuk, Korea). But though he had established a reputation
for erudition and strong memor y in Silla, he felt the need to obtain wider
knowledge by studying in the Middle Kingdom (China). For this purpose he
set sail for Chinling (Nanking) at the age of twenty-five.
(The following is somewhat mis leading. Chen was not a dynasty in the
sense that it rule d all China. It was one of the last of the evane scent states
which appeared during the period after the breakup of the Han dynasty in
220. It lasted ab out thirty years and was conquered in 589 by the Sui, who
briefly r uled all  China and wer e succeeded by the great T'ang  dynasty in
618. Als o W onk wang is here des cribed as visiting “W u.” There was no such
state at the time, but this may be simply a geographical expression.)
In those days China, under the rule of the Chen dynasty , was flourishing
in li terature and the arts. Whe n W onkwang attended the lectures of the
disciples of Chang-yen wen-ku ng on Buddhism, he realized t hat his own
unsurpassed talent in the study of worldly books was as valueless as a
withered flower , and asked the Emperor for permission to beco me a monk.
This the  Emperor granted, and he was thus enabled to attend lec tures on the
more es oteric as pects of the reli gion (to which laymen were not admitted).
In a short time he had commi tted to memory the golden sayings of the
Nirvana Sutra and had skimmed through the essays on the three sections of

the Buddhist scriptures (the T ripitaka or “Three Baskets"). He visited
Hushan (T iger Mountain) in W u, where he continued his studies on the a-
wakening of the Buddhist mind, and the people there would gather around
him like  clouds  to listen to his spiritual teaching. After he had finished
reading the Aham Sutra his mi nd became vacant of worldly g reed, round
and straight like a bamboo tube . He resolved to live on this m ountain and
make pilgrimages to various holy monasteries.
At this time a Chinese hermit who lived at the foot of the m ountain
invited h im to give a series of l ectures. At first he stood on ceremony , but
after repeated requests he lectu red on Panyagyong (Prajna in Sanskrit), a
book on intelligence, and gave  such correct interpretations in such fine
rhetoric that his audience was moved to tears of gratitude. Soon his fame
had spread all over China, and multitudes came from afar to hear him
lecture on the teachings of Buddha.
After a time the  Sui Emperor conquered Chen and destroyed it. When
the Sui army entered Y angtu (the capital), W onkwang was taken captive and
was abo ut to be killed. But just at that moment, the Sui general noticed that
the temple pagoda was in flames. He rushed forward to save the historic
treasure from fire, but on a nearer view he saw that the pago da was not
burning despite the flames which enveloped it, and that W onkwang, bound
hand and foot, was kneeling before its holy pedestal. The general was awe-
struck b y the Silla monk, who n o doubt was working wonders through the
providence of Buddha even in a time of emer gency , and set him free at
once.
W onkwang was praised in W u and Y ueh in South China as a holy monk
of th e hi ghest learning. But as he wished to see the old civilizati ons of Chou
and Ch'i n (the names of two an cient Chinese dynasties) in north China, he
visited t he Sui capital of Changan in the ninth year of Kai-h uang (589).
There he expounded the mys teries of Buddhism and quoted from its
scriptures to the admiration of the Chinese people, among whom Buddhism
was just  beginn ing to grow at that time. W onkwang wished to  spread the
same enlightenm ent in his own country , and asked the E mperor for
permission to return to Kyongju. The Emperor granted his requ est and sent
him of f after a sumptuous farewell banquet in the inner palace.
When W onkwang returned home after his long absence (Samguk Sagi
says twe lve yea rs) the people of Silla, men and women, young and old,

welcomed him heartily , and the King received him in audien ce with the
highest respect, treating him as a sage.
W onkwang was a quiet man devoid of passion, loving and giving by
nature. H is face always wore a w arm smile and never gave the least sign of
anger . All the K ing's personal letters to the Emperor , the credentials issued
to envo ys to China, and othe r state correspondence with the Celestial
Empire were drafted by this learned monk, from whose brush poured
elegant phrases like a cataract falling from the Milky W ay . The King
entrusted him with the moral government of the state, and the n oble monk,
who nev er wore the court dre ss of embroidered brocade, presented the
throne w ith wise  counsels and was a living model for fine deeds. When he
was bent and hoary with age, he entered the palace in a carriag e drawn by
richly caparison ed horses, and the King entertained him in p erson with
nourishing food and medicine and gave him the warmest clothes . Before his
death the King asked him ho w to achieve good government, and he
revealed the signs of good or evil fortune for the state from the t hrone to the
plow , according to whether the administration was moral or immoral.
In the fifty-eighth year of Konpok during the reign of King Chinp'yong
(640, but this must be a mistake. Chinp'yong ruled from 579 to  632) when
he was  ninety-nine years old, W onkwang complained of a mild
indisposition, an d after seven da ys passed away , sitting in an erect posture
at Hwangnyong T emple where he had resided for so long, leaving behind an
earnest w ill. This was in the fourth year of T'ang Chen-kuan (this must be a
mistake for the fourteenth year ). When he breathed his last the sound of
music w as heard to the northeast of the temple and the air was filled with a
strange fragranc e. All who gath ered in the hall to pay their last respects to
him were moved to tears at his inspired spirit, working such wonders even
after his  death. His ashes were buried in the suburbs of Kyongju with the
funeral ceremony due a prince.
Many years later a worldly man whose child had been bor n dead,
believing the vulgar superstition that if such a child were buried in the grave
of a person who had lived a goo d life the same good fortune would descend
to its family , bur ied the embryo in W onkwang's tomb. But on the same day
the little  corpse was struck by a thunderbolt and hurled out of the tomb.
Seeing this punishment, all the people worshipped his spirit with still
greater respect.

W onkwang's disciple W onan w as a man of great intelligence and a
seeker of truth. He traveled to Hwanto in the north and Pullae in the east
(the first of these was an ancient capital of Koguryo on the Y alu and the
second is modern Anbyon in the old lands of the Y e tribe) and to Y en-wei
(in north China) in the west. When he visited Changan, the ca pital of the
T'ang Em pire, h e studied the cu stoms of the Chinese and variou s essays on
religion. Later on he became engrossed in the study of Buddhism, following
in the footsteps of his master W o nkwang. While he was residing at a temple
in Changan the T'ang Emperor , on the recommendation of the courtier Su
W u, invited him to live at T sinliang T emple, where he was given
comfortable accommodations and the four necessities were furnished him
six times daily . (This last is a conventional Chinese expression. The four
necessities were  housing, clothing, food and herb medicine and the six
times were sunrise, midday , su nset, early evening, midnight and before
going to bed.)
In a memorand um about his master W onkwang, W onan wrote, “The
King of  Silla was taken seriou sly ill and no medicine could do him any
good. His Majesty called on W onkwang to stay in the palace and expound
the myst eries of  Buddhism to hi m. W onkwang obeyed, and explained to the
King Bu ddha's commandments of repentance and faith. One evening the
King glanced at W onkwang and was astonished to see th at he was
enveloped in a shining halo. The Queen and the court ladies begged the
holy monk not to leave the royal presence. Shining like the evening sun,
W onkwang obeyed, and soon the King's malady was cured.
“W onkwang gav e lectures on Buddhism in Chinhan and Mahan (old
names fo r south ern Korea) in or der to lead the younger generatio n along the
path of Buddhism. When he rec eived personal gifts from people he always
gave them away to be used for the maintenance of temples, so that when he
died he left behind only his rob e and tableware.” (Quoted from T al-ham, a
Buddhist Book.)
In an antique r ecord preserved in the home of Chong-hyo, a retired
of ficial in the Eastern Capital (Kyongju), there are the following stories
about the life of W onkwang:
W onkwang's secular family na me was Sol and he was a n ative of
Kyongju. At the age of thirty he began a solitary life in a quiet h ermitage on
Mt. Samgi (southwest of moder n Ankang) to pursue his studies. Four years
later ano ther mo nk built a herm itage nearby and lived there fo r two years.

This monk was of a ferocious temperament and loved to chant spells and
work magic. One night while W onkwang was reciting the scriptures to
himself a ghost suddenly called his name and said, “Fine monk! Fine deed!
Monks m ay recite the scriptures, but few act in accordance with Buddhist
principles. Look  at the monk next door . He is shouting all kind s of spells,
but he gains nothing. On the contrary , his loud noise interferes with the
quiet meditations of his neighbors. Still worse, his house bloc ks my way ,
forcing me to make a long detour in my nightly rounds, so I hate him. I
wish you to te ll him to move  to another place, or he will be terribly
punished.”
The following morning W onkw ang warned the monk as the ghost had
asked, but he o nly laughed and said, “What a hermit you are! Y ou are
enchanted with a devil. Don't worry about the words of the ghost of a
female fox.”
That nig ht the ghost reappeared and asked “What did the monk say
about my warning?”
W onkwang feared that the ghost might vent its anger on him, so he
answered in a roundabout way , “I have not yet told him, but if I deliver your
warning he will not dare to disobey .”
“Never mind,” the ghost interposed, “I have already heard your
conversation. W hy do you not speak the truth? Now be silent and watch
what I shall do.”
At m idnight that night W onkwa ng heard a thunderous sound th at shook
heaven and earth, and in the morning he saw that a mountain ha d collapsed
and buri ed the other monk's dwelling. The ghost appeared for the third time
and said, “How do you feel about this?”
“I am quite surprised,” W onkwang answered.
“I am three hund red thousand years old,” the ghost said, “and in magic I
am seco nd to none. T o destroy a mountain is a simple trick and  nothing to
be s urprised at. I know all coming events, for I am familiar wit h the af fairs
of both heaven and earth.
“Y ou live here now in solitude,  and this may be of benefit to you, but
not t o ot her people. If you do no t make yourself known you wil l never reap
the f ruits of your hard study . Y ou must go to the Middle Kingdo m and study
Buddhism there  so that you may become a guiding light to the people of
your dark country .”

“It is my cheris hed hope to study Buddhism in the Middle Kin gdom,”
W onkwang repli ed, “but I canno t travel to a land so far away across the sea,
nor am I well informed about that country .”
The gho st laughed and gave him an itinerary for a trip to China which
contained all the information he needed. W onkwang took courage and
sailed to  China where he stayed for eleven years, during which he mastered
the major Buddhist scriptures as well as the Confucian Classics. In the
twenty-second year of King Chinp'yong (600) he returned in the party of a
T'ang en voy . (S light confusion here since the T'ang rulers wer e not in full
control of China until 618.) He went to his old residence on Mt. Samgi in
order to thank the ghost, and when night fell it appeared.
“Did you enjoy your visit to the Middle Kingdom?” the ghost asked.
“By you r grace,”  said W onkwang, “I had a successful visit to Ch ina and
a pleasant voyage home.”
“Good!” said the ghost. “Now I will give you my promise con cerning
mutual salvation from rebirth.”
“Can I see your true appearance?” W onkwang asked.
“If you wish to see my true appearance,” the ghost replied, “look up into
the eastern sky tomorrow morning.”
When W onkwang looked at the eastern sky next morning he saw a long
rainbow-like arm  in the clouds building a bridge from earth to h eaven. That
evening the ghost appeared again. “Did you see my long arm?” it asked.
“Y es, it was ma gnificent,” W on kwang said. (Ilyon says that from this
time the name of the place  was changed to Pijang-san, Long-arm
Mountain.)
“Even though I h ave stayed long on this earth,” the ghost said, “ I cannot
escape death some day , and so soon I must throw myself f rom yonder
mountain pass. Come and bid my parting soul farewell.”
When W onkwang arrived on the mountain pass at the appointed time,
he found an old black female fox, which panted its last breath and died,
stretching out its four limbs and long tail. (The account in t he “antique
record” ends here and Ilyon resumes.)
When W onkwang returned from  China the King and court honored him
as a  great teach er and attended his lectures on the T aesung Sutra. At this
time Ko guryo and Paekje were attacking Silla border towns and disturbing
peace and order . The King was greatly worried and wished to ask the Sui
government for  aid. He summ oned W onkwang and comman ded him to

write an  of ficial  letter to the Emperor . So well did W onkwang execute this
task that the Emperor ordered out 300,000 troops and led them in person
against Koguryo. After this W onkwang was also praised for his
accomplishments in Chinese literature, and the writing skill  capable of
moving the hearts of men. He d ied at the age of eighty-four and his ashes
were buried on a hill west of Myonghwal Castle.
In the book Samguk Y oljon it is  written that Kwisan, a country squire in
Saryang-pu had a friend named Ch'uhang. One day as they were conversing
one of them said, “If we are to mingle in polite society we mus t learn how
to behave like gentlemen with honest hearts in order not to bring dishonor
upon ourselves.”  They heard that W onkwang Popsa had just re turned from
China and was living at Kasul-g ot. (Ch'ongdo. Uyon says that about 9,000
footspans east of Unmun T empl e there is a mountain called Kasul-hyon and
north of this mo untain are the ru ins of Kasfil-got, which is also called Kaso
T emple.)
The two men vi sited the eminent monk and asked him to give them a
golden maxim which would s erve to guide their behavior t hrough life.
W onkwang replied, “There are ten commandments of the Bodhisattvas, but
since you are the subjects of a king you can hardly keep them . (That is,
these co mmandments would require them to become monks .) The five
secular commandments are: 1) Serve the King with loyalty , 2) Honor your
parents with filial piety , 3) T reat friends with sincerity , 4) Fight the enemy
with bra very , and 5) Kill livin g animals with discriminating mercy . Y ou
should observe these commandments consistently , without the least
neglect.”
Kwisan said, “W e can understand all the other commandments, but we
do not know how to kill living animals with discriminating mercy .”
W onkwang repl ied, “This means no killing on the six purificati on days
(six day s each month on which certain Buddhist rituals were performed) or
in the spring and summer months; no killing of domestic animals such as
horses, cattle, fowl or dogs; and no killing of small fish or fish eggs.
Moreover , there  should be no killing of other animals for food b eyond what
is ab solutely necessary . These ar e the commandments for doing good in this
world.”
Kwisan and his friend pledged that they would keep these
commandments without fail. So me years later they were called to the colors
and performed many a feat of arms with unexcelled valor .

In the autumn of the thirtieth year of Konpok when King Chin-p'yong
had bee n on the throne for thi rty-five years, the Sui envoy W ang Shih-i
came to  Silla and sponsored a  hundred-seat seminar at which eminent
monks lectured on the Buddhis t scriptures. W onkwang presided over this
seminar .
. Si nce the time when W onj ong (King Pophung) had established
Buddhism as a bridge of salvat ion, the deeper meaning of Bu ddhism had
not yet been expounded to the people in order to lead them to  reliance on
the Thre e T reasures (Buddha, Buddhist doctrine and the order of monks)
and to repent the ir sins. Therefore a foundation was established  to interpret
the sign s by which the state of  the believers' souls might be interpreted.
(Ilyon a ctually says “divination  foundation.”) At that time a pious monk
donated a farm o f a hundred kyol for the foundation's support. This farm is
located in T ongp'yong county .
W onkwang was  a quiet man of mild temperament who always  smiled
and neve r showed anger in his looks. In his old age the King gave him free
access to the p alace in a car riage. He was unexcelled in virtue and
accomplishment. His deep knowledge of both Buddhist and Confucian
literature and his great ability as a writer were much admired by his
contemporaries. He died in his eighties during the years of T'ang Chen-
kuan. Hi s tomb is at Kumgok T emple on Mt, Samgi, to the wes t of Myong-
hwal Castle (Sonam-dong, Ankang. This was a stone mausoleum in which
relics of eminent monks were enshrined).
The T'an g and Silla biographies dif fer as to W onkwang's family name,
one saying it was Pak and he b ecame a monk in the East (Korea) and the
other sa ying it was Sol and he became a monk in the W est (China), as if
they were describing two dif fe rent people. In neither biography is any
mention made of Chakgot, Imok or Unmun. Kim Ch'ok-myong, a Silla
writer , i ncluded in his Biography of W onkwang Popsa quotations from
folktales and confused the deed s of W onkwang with those of Poyang, the
founder of Unmun T emple. Later the author of the Biographies of the
Monks o f Korea  confused his r eaders by repeating the same er rors. I have
therefore quoted extensively fro m both accounts. In the days of Chen-Sui
few men from Haedong (Korea) crossed the sea to study Buddhism in the
Middle Kingdom until W onkwang made himself famous in the W est
(China) and opened the way for other monks to follow him.


Song of Praise to W onkwang
He crossed the sea and climbed the clouds
T o open a new road in the land of Han;
How many people came and went to build virtue!
The antique traces remain in the blue hills—
The old shadow in Kumgok-Kaso tells his long story .
98. Poyang, the Pear -T r ee and the Dragon
The Biography of Poyang con tains no information about his family
background or his native place. According to an old record in th e Ch'ongdo
county of fice for January in the eighth year of T'ien-fu (943) when T'aejo
(W ang K on) had  been on the throne for twenty-six years, the monastery on
Mt. Unmun was bounded on th e east by Kaso-hyon and on the south by
Anijom. The temple and its forest land were managed by Poyang Hwasang
(High P riest), Hyon-hoe (Abbot) and Chikse Sinwon Sonsa (priest). This
statement is based on the land register of Ch'ongdo county of fice.
In the third year of Kai-yuan it was inscribed on the boundary tower that
the temple had eleven landmarks, including Anijom, Kaso-hyon, Myo-
hyon, Sopuk-mae-hyon and Puk-chojok-mun.
In th e Chinyang-pu Record (dated the year of the tiger) a s urveyor
named Y i Son recorded the f oundation dates and condition of all the
monasteries of the Son (Zen) sect in each province. In September of the
sixth year of Cheng-p'eng, (1 161) when King Uijong was on the throne, an
old reco rd was found in the ho use of Y i Ch'uk-chong (a form er military
of ficer in Ch'ongdo) in which t his survey was certified by Kim  Y ang-sin,
Min Y uk , Y un Ung, Chin Ki and Y ong Song, all retired local of ficials. At
that time the country magistrate, Y i Sa-ro, was eighty-nine years old.
The five old temples of Silla—Greater Chakgot, Lesser Chakgot,
Sobogot, Ch'onm ungot and Kasdgot—were all destroyed during the wars of
Samhan (the conflicts leading to the fall of Silla) and the burnt timbers were
piled on the ruin s of Greater Ch akgot T emple. When Chisik (Poyang), the
founder of this temple, was returning to Silla from the Middle Kingdom, the
King Dragon of the W estern Sea welcomed him to his watery palace. The
dragon chanted Buddhist script ures, gave Poyang a gold-laced robe, and
commanded his son Imok to e scort the monk on his homewa rd journey ,
saying, “ At pres ent the three kingdoms in your country are at war and are
without a king w ho believes in Buddha, but if you go home with my son
and build a temple at Chakgot (Magpie Cape) and live there, you will be

safe from attack until a wise king appears who worships Buddha and will
pacify the nation.”
Poyang bade the King Dragon farewell and returned to Chakgot. Here
he m et a n aged monk calling himself W onkwang who gave him a seal-box
and disa ppeared. In fact, W onkwang went to China in the closing days of
the Che n state and returned to  the East (Silla) during the years of Kai-
huang. He resided at Kasdgot and died at Hwang-nyong T em ple. Had he
been alive at th e time mentioned he would have been 300 years old. It
would seem, therefore, that Poy ang, upon returning home, lamented over
the r uins of the temples of Silla and had a vision of their restor ation in the
future.
Poyang wished to reconstruct a dilapidated temple and climbed the
Northern Peak, where he had seen a five-storeyed yellow pagod a. But when
he c ame closer it vanished, and  in its place there was a flock of magpies
pecking at the g round. Remembering what the King Dragon had  said about
Chakgot (Magpie Cape), he dug a hole where the birds had bee n and soon
found g reat qua ntities of ancient bricks. He built a pagoda of these and
founded a new temple nearby , calling it Chakgot-sa. Soon King T'aejo
(W ang K on) uni fied the country and donated 500 kyol of farmland on the
five capes to this temple, honoring Poyang, who lived there.
In th e fo urth year of Ch'ing-t'ai (937) Imok, the son of the King Dragon
of the W estern S ea, took up resid ence in a deep pool near the temple to help
Buddhism flouri sh in the kingdo m. One year a drought withered  all the fruit
trees an d there were not even any vegetables to eat. Poyang commanded
Imok to bring rain to refresh the withered vegetation.
One day  Imok told Poyang that a heavenly god was trying to kill him,
so the good priest hid the dragon under his bed. Suddenly an angel appeared
before P oyang and demanded that he surrender the dragon, bu t the quick-
witted priest pointed to a pear -tree in his garden. Immediately a deafening
thunderbolt struc k the tree and the angel vanished. The dragon knit together
the broken branches and gave  new life to the tree. (Some say , Ilyon
remarks, that Poyang revived th e tree by his magic art.) In recent years this
tree fell  to the g round, so a ma n made two staf fs from it and placed one
each in the Golden Hall and the dining hall of the temple. The  staf fs bear
inscriptions concerning this story .
When Poyang returned to Silla from China he first lived at Pon g-song-
sa in Ch'uhwa (Miryang). At that time King T'aejo had set out on his

eastern expedition and arrive d at Ch'ongdo, where he laid siege to
Kyonsong, or Dog Fortress. (Ily on says it was so called because it was near
a projecting rock in the shape o f a dog's muzzle on the mountainside.) The
men in the fortre ss refused to su rrender , and T'aejo was at his wits' end. He
visited Poyang, who lived at the foot of the mountain, and asked him how
the stubborn defenders might be brought to submission.
“The do g keeps vigil by night and sleeps by day ,” Poyang told him. “It
watches in front but does not lo ok back. If you attack the fortress from the
north in broad d aylight you will defeat the outlaws who now bark their war -
cries at night whenever your soldiers come near .” T'aejo took this advice
and, just as the wise monk had f oretold, surprised the outlaws in their sleep
and forced them to sue for peace. T'aejo admired Poyang's wisdom even in
military strategy  and conferred a nnual gifts of fifty lar ge bags of rice on the
temple, to keep the censer burning before the portraits of the two sage
monks i n its Golden Hall, and named the temple Pongsong-sa  (T emple of
the Sages).
Some ye ars later Poyang moved to Chakgot. These anecdotes about him
are not found in the old biograph y but there is a Silla legend that he became
the blood-brothe r of Sokkul Pih osa, known also as Piro. The three temples
—Pongsong, Sokkul and Unmun—stood above the clouds o n the three
peaks of the mountain, and communicated frequently with each other .
W riters in later generations ascribed the stories of the Magpie Pagoda
and the dragon's  son to the life of W onkwang and that of the D og Fortress
to P iho, basing themselves o n Silla sources and thus cre ating great
confusion. Moreover the author of Haedong Sungjon (Biographies of the
Monks of the East) has greatly falsified the life of Poyang with his
embellishments.
99. Y angji's Magic Staff
(One of the rules  of conduct for Buddhist monks is that they sha ll not be
gainfully employed or handle money , but support themselves by begging
their foo d. The layman who give s food to a monk improves his c hances of a
better life in his next incarnation.)
Nobody knows who Y angji's an cestors were or where he was born, but
the follo wing sto ry is told about him. During the reign of Queen Sondok in
Silla (632-647) there lived a monk whose name was Y angji . He had a
magical metal staf f. He tied a lar ge bag to the end of it and pronounced a
spell ov er it ending with the Buddhist invocation, “Namuami T abul.” The

staf f the n walke d away by itself  and visited each house in the neighboring
villages. When the housewives heard it clacking on the road they came out
and put rice and money in the b ag, smiling happily . When the b ag was full
the staf f  returne d to its master . This went on every day of the monk's life
until he died, and the temple wh ere he lived was therefore call ed Sokjang-
sa, the T emple of the Metal Staf f.
Y angji worked many wonders o f this sort and was also an artist of great
talent, adept at painting, sculpt ure and calligraphy . The three sixteen-foot
images o f Buddh a and the statue  of the heavenly king, besides the roof-tiles
and pagodas at Y ongmyo-sa (T emple of the Holy Shrine) , the eight
heavenly genera ls beneath the pagoda at Ch'Sn-wang-sa (T emple of the
Heavenly King) , the three images of Buddha at Popnim-sa (T emple of the
Buddha Forest), and the Herculean wrestlers guarding the gate of this last
temple are all his work. He wrote the inscriptions for the panels at
Y ongmyo-sa and Popnim-sa, and modeled three thousand Buddhas in
beautiful designs on bricks from which he built a small pagoda f or his home
temple and worshipped it.
While he was working on the sixteen-foot Buddha image at Y ongmyo-
sa h e modeled the clay while keeping his mind as vacant as a clear mirror
(the bas ic prerequisite for Buddhist meditation). The people of Kyongju
competed in supplying him w ith clay , singing a ballad as they did so:
“Coming, coming, this body is coming! Oh how heavy and sad was my
heart, but now it is light and gay , for I see Buddha with my own eyes.”
Even today the country folk sing this ballad while pounding rice.
The images Y angji made cost 23,000 lar ge bags of rice. (This may
actually be the cost of regilding  the images, Ilyon says.) Indeed he was a
hidden national treasure both in virtue and accomplishments.

Song of Praise to Y angji
When the Buddhist ceremony was duly over ,
The metal staf f lay idle in the Golden Hall;
After burning sandalwood with many incantations,
There was no more work to do;
He sculptured statues of perfect beauty
And gazed upon them with folded hands.
100. The Monks Who T raveled to India

(As wil l have been seen in other sections, knowledge of In dia was
vague ev en in Ilyon's own time. The name Ch'onch'uk-kuk me ans land of
the hea venly b amboos, and its division into five kingdoms simply
corresponds to the five direction s—the four points of the comp ass plus the
center .)
In th e Kwangham Kupop-jon ( Biographies of the High Monks) it is
written t hat Arina (Ariya) Palma, the monk, was a native of Si lla. In order
to s tudy the Bu ddhist religion he first traveled to China, where he was
encouraged to make an extensiv e pilgrimage to various holy places in India.
During the years of Chen-kuan  (627-650) he departed from C hangan and
made hi s way to the five Ch'onch'uk kingdoms of India. There he stayed at
Naranta T emple  and studied books of Buddhist doctrine and commentaries,
which he copied out on the leav es of the Paitara tree in order t o take them
back to Silla. Bu t unfortunately he was taken ill on the eve of his departure
and died at the temple. He was then more than seventy years old.
Later other Silla monks including Hyeop, Hyont'ae, Kupon, Hyonkak,
Hyeryun, Hyon yu and two others (whose names are lost) jo urneyed to
Middle India to study Buddhism . Some died on the way and s ome arrived
safely and resided at temples, b ut none ever returned to Kerim (Silla) or to
China except Hyont'ae. However , nobody knows where he died.
The peo ple of Ch'onch'uk called Haedong (Silla) Kukuta- Y esolla.
Kukuta means chicken and Y eso lla means dear . The combination of the two
Chinese charact ers for these w ords is Kekwi, which is anothe r name for
Kerim. The Indians said that the Silla people worshipped the god of
chickens and wore cocks' feathers about their persons as decorations.

Song of Praise to the Monks who T raveled to India
Over ten thousand peaks far away to Ch'onch'uk
The pilgrims climbed and climbed on weary feet:
How many times have their lone ships sailed from the east!
Once gone, they returned no more;
Y ear after year the floating clouds sail back
Y et we never hear the tap of their staf fs journeying homeward.
101. Miracles of Hyesuk and Hyegong
The monk Hyesuk was in his youth a follower of Hoserang, on e of the
most ren owned of the Hwarang of Silla. When his master was excluded
from this order , Hyesuk retired  to a mountain villa called Chokson-ch'on

(Chokkok-ch'on in Ankang-hyon), where he led the life of a religious
recluse for twenty years.
One day Kugam, a noble Hwarang came riding to hunt in the mountains
near his  residence. Hyesuk ran out to meet him and held his horse's head.
“W elcome, master ,” he said. “Permit me to follow you in the hunt. I can
keep up with your steed on my flying feet.”
“Fine!” said Kugam. “Come alo ng, then.” They had a long chase-over
the hills, and w hen they had killed many birds and animals with their
arrows they sat down to rest while the meat was cooked a nd fell into
conversation.
“I have some meat more delicious than this,” Hyesuk said. “May I serve
it to you?”
“Good, bring it,” said Kugam. “I have a good appetite today .'*
Hyesuk thereupo n cut a piece of flesh from his thigh with a sharp knife
and set it before Kugam. “Please help yourself,” he said.
“What are you doing?” Kugam exclaimed in astonishment.
Then Hyesuk admonished him. “I thought you were a kind-hearted
gentleman and merciful to your fellow creatures, so I follow ed you in
admiration of your high virtues. But now I see that you are a cruel and
selfish man who likes to kill liv ing creatures, doing harm to oth ers in order
to fill your stomach. This is no t the way of benevolence and you do not
belong to our order .” And with these words he went away .
“Ah, the  sad day ,” said Kugam, blushing with shame. “But what is this?
I h ave eaten my fill, and yet th e table is still spread with the s ame dishes
and appears untouched.”
Kugam returned  and told his strange story to King Chinp'yong-The
King thought that Hyesuk must be an uncommon monk, and sent an of ficial
to fetch him to t he court. When the of ficial arrived he found Hy esuk (as he
thought) lying in bed with a woman, and cursing him for his shameless
breach of Buddhist law turned back. But he had gone only seven or eight li
when he  met the same monk coming from the opposite direct ion. “Hello,
good mo nk,” he  said, “where have you been?” ' “I have been at a rich man's
house in the city .” Hyesuk said. “I of ficiated at a memorial service and
of fered p rayers for the departed soul for seven days, and now I am returning
to my home in the mountains.”
The of fi cial went and reported his experience at court. Puzzled, the-
King sent a messenger to the house Hyesuk had mentioned and found that

indeed the monk had been there when he said he was.
Not long  after this Hyesuk died  and the village people buried him on a
hill east of E-hyon (Ear Pass). But while his friends were still crowded
around the grave a traveler arriv ed from the other side of E-hyon who said
that he had just met Hyesuk ove r the hill. When asked where he was going,
Hyesuk had said, “I have lived too long in this mountain village and now I
am goin g on a sight-seeing trip.” Then, the traveller said, the monk had
mounted a cloud and soared int o the sky about half a mile fro m where he
had said  goodby e. Amazed, the villagers dug into the grave they had just
finished, and found in it only one of the monk's old shoes.
Even tod ay there is a temple called Hyesuk-sa north of Ankan g-hyon,
where the mysterious monk lived, and visitors can see his image in bas-
relief on one of its walls.
Another famous  Silla monk wa s named Hyegong. He was the son of a
woman servant in the house of Ch'onjin-kong and his childhoo d name was
Ujo. On e day the master of the house was taken seriously  ill with a
malignant grow th, and felt that death was approaching. The house was
constantly full of people, noble and common, who came to enquire after his
health. Ujo was only seven years old, but he knew that something unusual
had happened.
“O my mother ,” the child said, “What has brought so many people into
this house?”
“Don't y ou kno w ,” she replied, “that the master of the house is very
sick, and lies upon his deathbed?”
“I can cure his disease,” said Ujo.
“What! Y ou can, can you?”
“Y es I can.”
W ith a wonderi ng heart the wo man told Ch'onjin-kong what her child
had said, and the nobleman se nt a servant to fetch the lad. When Ujo
appeared he sat down at the foot of the sick man's bed with his mouth shut
tight. Th en suddenly the abscess burst and the patient was saved. Ch'onjin-
kong did not wonder greatly at this, however , considering it to have been a
mere coincidence.
When Ujo had g rown into a youth he tamed Ch'onjin-kong's pe t falcon,
and was such a good fowler that his master could not help likin g him. One
day Ch'o njin-kong's younger brother set out on a long journey to take up a
new of ficial post in the country and took this hawk with him by  permission

of the nobleman . But one night Ch'onjin-kong bethought him of  his faraway
falcon and decided to send Ujo to bring it back early the next morning.
Ujo knew the mind of his master . Magically , he brought the falcon back
in an instant and  presented it to  Ch'onjin-kong before daybreak . The latter
reflected that this was the same lad who had cured his abscess earlier . “I did
not know a great sage was living in my house,” he exclaimed, “and I abused
him with mad words and discourtesy . How can I apologize enough to you?
And he stepped down into the c ourtyard and made a low bow to the fowler
boy .
When U jo's wonder -workings had become widely known in the world
he becam e a monk, changing h is name to Hyegong, and went  to live at a
small te mple. H e often drank w ine like a whale and staggere d about the
streets singing and dancing like a madman, with a pan-shaped refuse basket
slung ov er his shoulder . The people called him Pugwe-Hwasang (Basket-
carrying monk) and named his temple Pugae-sa (a corruption of Pugwe-sa).
He often went down into the temple well and would not come out for
two or three months, so this we ll was named after him. When he did come
out a heavenly being dressed in blue was sure to precede him. S tranger still,
even tho ugh he had been sitting in the water for so long, his robe never got
wet.
Late in life he w ent to live at Hangsa-sa (now Oo-sa in Y ongi l-hyon),
where he associated with the gre at monk W onhyo, who was the n compiling
a comm entary on the Buddhist scriptures. W onhyo asked him all sorts of
dif ficult questio ns which he did not understand, but he wo uld always
answer q uickly and in jest. One day the two monks went fishing and made a
good ca tch. While they were eating some of the fish on a rock, Hyegong
laughingly said,  “Y ou eat my fish.” From that time the people called the
temple 05-sa (My Fish T emple.)
One day  when Kugam-kong wa s out on a picnic he found the body of
Hyegong on a m ountain path, mouldering in the open air and in fested with
maggots. He mourned over the body of the faithful follower of h is Hwarang
days an d returned to Kyongju, where he found Hyegong singing and
dancing merrily  in his cups. (This sounds as if Hyegong had gotten
confused with Hyesuk.)
Another time Hyegong twisted r ice-straw into a long rope and wrapped
it round and round the Golden Hall and the south gate tower o f Y ongmyo-
sa. Then  he said to the chief mo nk, “Undo this fastening in thr ee days and

you will see a miracle.” The dumbfounded monk followed his directions
and sure enough, in three day s the beautiful Queen Sondok visited the
temple and the f lames of Chigwi, the “Love fire of the heart” sw allowed the
temple pagoda, but the Golden Hall and the tower were not damaged.1
Myongnang, the founder of Sinin-sa (Heavenly Seal T emple) also
founded Kumgang-sa (Diamond T emple) and held a ceremo ny on this
occasion in which the nation's m ost eminent monks participated. Hyegong
was abs ent, and  it was not until after Myongnang had lighted incense and
chanted prayers that he appeared in the temple. He came through a heavy
downpour but his robe was not wet, nor were his feet soiled with mud. He
smiled at Myongnang and said, “Y ou called me, so here I am.”
After working countless wonde rs like this he disappeared into the sky ,
from which thousands of sari fell to earth. While in this life he read the
“Commentary o n Buddha” by on e Cho, an illustrious monk, and said, “This
book wa s written by myself long, long ago.” From this it would  appear that
Cho was one of his previous incarnations.
(Some o f the antics of Hyegong are strongly suggestive of the t enets of
the S on (Zen) sect, which held that the study of scripture was worthless and
that only  pure meditation could bring salvation. The apparently pointless
tricks of the monks of this sect w ere intended to detach the neophyte's mind
from the  logic and conventions of the material world so that it might more
readily penetrat e to the spiritual reality behind it and th us achieve
enlightenment.)

Song of Praise to Hyesuk and Hyegong
Suk! Y ou go out hunting birds in the fields
And return to sleep in a woman's bed.
Gong! Going out, you drink, sing and dance,
And returning, sleep in the well.
Where are your buried shoe and your floating body?
Y ou are a pair of treasures, like two lotus blossoms in a flame.
102. Chajang Establishes the Buddhist Laws
The family name of the great monk Chajang was Kim-ssi and he was
the son of Murim, a nobleman of Chingol (royal) stock who was honored
with the  third-ra nk title of Sopa n in Chinhan. His father was an important
court of ficial who, since he had no son, prayed to Kwanum Boddhisattva,
pledging, “If I have a son I will make him a bridge to the world of Buddha.”

On the night wh en he ended his  prayer , his wife dreamed that a star fell
from heaven and entered her bosom. She conceived that very night and in
due time  bore a son. This was Chajang. Because he was born on Buddha's
birthday he was named Sonjongnang.
Chajang was pure of heart and keen of mind. He had no use for worldly
pleasures and occupied himself  solely with literature and art. In his youth
fine vers es rich in noble conceptions already flowed from his brush. He was
orphaned early in life. T ired of the annoyances of worldly society he took
leave of his wife  and children a nd gave away his estates to found a temple
called W onyong -sa. There he lived a hermit's life in the deep mountains,
unafraid of tigers and wolves, and meditated on the transience  of this life,
seeing all human beings as no more than withered bones.
In order to combat weariness and idleness he built a small cell whose
four walls were covered with brambles and thorns and whose ceiling
consisted of chestnut burrs. He s at naked and erect in the middle of this cell
with his head tied to a roof-beam to help keep his mind in full awareness.
At that time a ministerial post fell vacant at court and Chaja ng was
repeatedly asked  to fill it in view of his noble birth,2 b ut he consistently
refused. The King was displease d and sent a message saying, “If you do not
accept th is of fici al position I will have your head cut of f for disobedience to
your King.”
But the dauntless monk replied , “I would rather die in one day  for the
sake of keeping Buddha's commandments than live for a hundred years
while breaking them.” When th e King received this reply , he finally gave
formal permission for Chajang to remain a monk for life.
There was nothing to eat among the rocks and trees where he lived, and
he w ould surely have starved t o death had it not been for a strange bird
which b rought h im dainty and n ourishing fruit for his daily foo d. One day
he f ell into a trance in which a heavenly being appeared to him and
expounded the Five Commandments of Buddha. After this he walked down
into the valley and began expla ining these commandments to the people,
who gathered from near and far with great rejoicing.
Chajang lament ed that his development was hampered in the Eastern
corner o f little learning (Korea) and so decided to study in the W est (China)
in or der to obtai n wider knowledge. Having received Queen Sondok's royal
sanction in the third year of Inp'yong (the Queen's reign title), that is in the
tenth ye ar of Chen-kuan of T'ang T'ai-tsung (636) he set out for  China with

ten attendants including his dis ciple Sil and went to Ch'inglia ngshan. On
this mou ntain th ere was a clay statue of Munsu Buddha said to have been
made by heavenly sculptors und er the personal direction of the Chesok god,
according to Chinese legends.
Chajang bowed to this image and worshipped it. As he meditated lie fell
into a deep tran ce, in which the  image stroked his head and taught him a
verse in Sanskrit. When he aw oke he remembered this verse exactly but
could not understand its mean ing. The next morning a str ange monk
appeared and interpreted the verse for him, adding “'Even thoug h you study
ten thousand texts, none of them will excel these four lines.” The monk then
gave him a robe and some sari and vanished. (The details of th is story are
found in  Book Three. Ilyon says that because Chajang at first kept this
event to himself, it was not recorded in the T'ang Biographies of Monks.)
Chajang realized that he had re ceived a precious saying of Bu ddha in
that verse. He climbed down Peitai, passed T'aiho pool and reached
Changan, the T'ang capital. Emperor T'ai-tsung sent an imperial messenger
to co nduct him to a monastery named Shengkuang-pieh-yuan, s howing him
special favor , bestowing gifts  upon him, and giving him  the finest
accommodations. But Chajang disliked splendor and state, and eventually
he built himself a low cottage under a rock on Nanshan (South Mountain) to
the east of Y unchi T emple. There he lived for three years, du ring which
time he worked many wonders. When he returned to Changan t he Emperor
presented him with 200 rolls (of 40 yards each) of silk for use as clothing.
In th e seventeenth year of Chen -kuan (643) Queen Sondok of Silla sent
a pe rsonal letter to the Emper or requesting that Chajang be allowed to
return home, and the Emperor granted this wish. His Majesty invited
Chajang to a farewell banquet in  the inner palace and bestowed on the great
monk on e suit of silk and 500 suits of brocade. The T'ang Crown Prince
also gav e him 200 suits of brocade in addition to many other gifts. Chajang
wished to take with him a copy of the Buddhist scriptures (T aejang-gyong),
various Buddhist banners and certain flowers, and these also were given
him. So with a lar ge car go of pre cious gifts from China Chajang returned to
Silla and received an enthusiastic welcome.
The Que en estab lished him in P unhwang T emple (the T'ang Biography
says W angfen-s zu) with regular provisions for his daily life a nd personal
guards. One summer he was invited to the palace to lecture on the way to
achieve the ideals of the living B uddha. On another occasion he lectured at

Hwangnyong T emple for seven  days and nights on the commandments of
the B oddhisattvas. During this time sweet rain fell from heave n and mild
clouds covered the hall, causing the-audience to admire his wonder -working
power .
At this time the court gave Chaja ng the title of Great National Priest and
made hi m the head of all Buddhist or ganizations in the kin gdom, with
power to  draft a set of uniform regulations by which they should henceforth
be ruled.
(Here fo llows a list of precedents for this action, first Chinese a nd then
Korean.) During the years of T'ien-pao Pei-ch'i divided each di ocese in the
kingdom into ten districts and appointed priests and great priests. Liang and
Chen appointed national priests, provincial priests, country priests and
abbots a f filiated with the Chao-hsien T s'ao (Supervisor of monks and nuns).
The T'ang rulers named ten great priests.
In th e el eventh y ear of King Ch inhung of Silla (550) Anjang Po psa was
named T aesoson g with two Sososong under him. In the foll owing year
Hyeryang Popsa  of Koguryo was appointed national priest and entitled
temple master . Poryang Popsa was appointed T aedoyuna with nine
provincial priests and eighteen country priests under him.
Chajang was appointed great national priest, but this was not an active
administrative post but an honorary title like T'ae-T ae-Kakkan (Elder
Statesman), a title conferred on Kim Y u-sin when Puyerang was appointed
T ae-Kakkan (Prime Minister). Later King W onsong (785-798) appointed
monk of ficials with one T aesa and two Sa (master teacher and teachers) on
the p ermanent working staf f. Th erefore, the purple-robed monk s belong to
separate branches of the temples.
In a  local biog raphy from Silla it is written, “When Chaja ng was
visiting China Emperor T'ai-tsu ng invited him to the palace (W uch'ientien)
to lecture on Hwaom doctrine a nd in the midst of his lecture heaven sent
down honeydew , so the Emperor made him a national priest.” But neither
the T'ang biographies nor the Samguk Sagi makes any men tion of this
incident.
Chajang availed himself of this appointment to propagate Buddhism
throughout Silla by establishing the following regulations: 1) In the five
monasteries and  nunneries more of the ancient scriptures were t o be taught;
2) Semi nars on the Buddhist commandments were to be held  for a half-
moon period in winter and spring each year , and all monks and nuns were to

under go examinations on these commandments; 3) An administrative of fice
was to be set up and of ficials  sent regularly on tours to ascertain the
condition of temple property and to warn the cler gy against error , while
encouraging them to care for the images in the temples and to conduct
religious ceremonies regularly .
As a result, a new order of B uddhism flourished in Silla, like the
flourishing of Confucianism in China when the great sage (Confucius)
returned to Lu from W ei to revive the elegant odes of Y a  and Sung,
eliminating lewd  ballads and publishing artistic lyrics which ennobled the
human heart. (This refers to Confucius' decision to abandon his attempts at
a political career , return to his native place (Lu) and turn his attention to
editing the books which later be came known as the Confucian C lassics. His
traditional dates are 551-479 B.C.)
At this time eight or nine of every ten families in Silla wanted to have
their sons and daughters become monks and nuns, and the number
increased yearly . T'ongdo T emple (near Pusan) was therefore established (as
a pla ce o f initia tion) where applicants to join the order were re ceived after
taking an oath and purifying themselves.
Chajang donated his country home to the foundation of a temple called
W onyong-sa, an d on the day of its completion gave a lecture on the verses
of B uddha (T en Thousand So ngs of Flowers), at which tim e fifty-two
heavenly maiden s appeared in the audience. Chajang had his dis ciples plant
memorial trees according to the  number of these maidens and named them
Chisik-su (T rees of Knowledge) to commemorate this miracle of Buddha.
Chajang proposed to the royal court the use of the T'ang court dress
because of its elegance and dignity . Queen Chindok approved of the plan,
and in the third year of her reign  (649) the T'ang costume was first worn by
herself a nd her court, In the foll owing year the T'ang calendar w as adopted
in S illa and events were thenc eforth dated by the T'ang Emp erors' reign
titles and eras beginning with Y ing-hui of T'ang Kao-tsung (third T'ang
Emperor , 649-6 83) in both of ficial and unof ficial records, From this time
the Silla envoy t ook precedence over those of all other tributary states at the
T'ang court.
When Chajang had reached an advanced age he bade farewell to
Kyongju and went to Kangnung county (now Myongju), where he founded
Suta T emple as a place to live q uietly . One night in a dream a st range monk
resembling the one he had met at Peitai (W utaishan) appeared and said he

wanted to meet Chajang at T aesongjong the next day . Chajang arose in
wonder and went to the appointed place, where the Munsu Buddha
appeared to him in human shape and said, “I will see you again at
Kalbonchi in the T'aebaek Mou ntains,” and then vanished from sight. (In
Songjong, Ilyon  says, no bramb les grow and no hawks make their nests to
this day .)
Chajang climbed the T'aebaek mountains and found a lar ge snake coiled
under a tree. “T his is Kalbonchi,” he told his attendants. He bu ilt a temple
there cal led Soknamwon (now Chongam-sa), and awaited the descent of the
sage. After a while a ragged old hermit carrying a dead p uppy in an
arrowroot baske t appeared and said to an attendant, “I have c ome to see
Chajang.”
“Who ar e you,” the attendant retorted, “and why this mad calling on the
name of our master?”
The stranger cooly replied, “Go and tell your master that I am here to
see him—only that and nothing more.”
When the incident was describe d to Chajang he wondered if the fellow
were a madman . But when they shouted at him to go, the old man said
“How can a Narcissus see me?” and turned his basket upside down. Out of
it ca me, not a dead puppy but a  lion on a throne, radiating a da zzling light
for a moment, and then the old man vanished. (A symbol of  Buddha as
preeminent among both men and beasts.)
Informed of this miracle, Chaja ng hastened to pursue the light until he
reached Namnyong (South Pass ), where it vanished in a mist. As it did so,
Chajang fell dead. He was cremated there and his bones enshrined in a
cave.
During his lifetime Chajang founded more than a dozen temples and
pagodas, and on each such occ asion unusually auspicious signs appeared.
This brought faithful followers to him in crowds to help complete the
sacred buildings quickly . His personal ef fects, including, his wooden pillow
(carved with a d uck design) and his robe (once worn by Bud dha), which
had been presented to him by the dragon of T'aiho pool in China, are now
preserved in T'ongdo T emple.
In Hony ang-hyon (now Onyang ) there is a temple called Apyu-sa. It
was so named in honor of the duck carved on Chajang's pillow which used
to p lay there an d did some miracles. A monk named W onsun g preceded

Chajang to China and returned to Silla with him to help in the propagation
of Buddhism there.

Song of Praise to Chajang
When he awoke from a dream at Ch'ingliangshan and returned home,
Seven volumes and three collections of commandments opened before
his inward eye.
Ashamed of the coarse robes of the courtiers.
He reformed the dress of the East to that of the W est.
103. W onhyo, the Unbridled Monk
The family name of the sacr ed monk W onhyo was Sol-ssi, His-
grandfather was Ingp'i-kong, ot herwise called Choktae-kong, w hose shrine
now stands near Choktaeyon pool. His great-grandfather was T amnal-
naemal.
The birt h of W onhyo came about in this manner , When his mot her was
near her time she was passing under a chestnut tree to the southwest of
Y ulgok (Chestnut V alley) north of Puljich'on (V illage of the Buddha Mind)
south of Apnyang county . Ther e suddenly her labor pains came upon her .
As t here was no  time to reach shelter her husband's clothes were  hung from
the branches of the tree to hide her from view . The local fo lk call this
chestnut tree Sala-su and its fru it Sala-yul. It has a peculiar shape and an
uncommon flavor .
(This story is r emarkably simi lar to that of the birth of Bu ddha as
recorded in the scriptures. “Sa la” is the name of the tree u nder which
Buddha is said to have departed this life and entered Nirvana.)
There is a legend  that long, long  ago an abbot gave his temple slave two
chestnuts for his supper . The ind ignant slave brought suit against the abbot
because of his meager rations. The local magistrate ordered t he slave to
produce the chestnuts, and when he did so it was observed that one of them
was lar g e enoug h to fill a wooden bowl. The magistrate therefo re ruled that
henceforth only one chestnut should be given for a meal. Since t hat time the
place where these chestnuts grew has been called Y ulgok (Chestnut V alley).
When W onhyo became a monk he gave away his house for the
foundation of a temple called Ch'ogae-sa (T emple of First Opening) and
near a tree in his garden he built another temple named Sala-sa.
In his biography  W onhyo is represented as a man of Kyongju because
his gran dfather lived there, but the T'ang Biographies of Monks describes

him as a native of Ha-Sangju. In the second year of Lin-te (665) King
Munmu of Silla divided the old land of Sangju and Haju to create
Sapnyangju in the new territor y . Haju is now Ch'ang-nyong county and
Apnyang county was originally a sub-prefecture of Haju. Pulchich'on was
part of the Chain-hyon of today , a sub-prefecture of Apnyang county .
W onhyo's childhood names were So-tang (Pledging Flag) and Sin-tang
(New Flag). On the night he w as conceived his mother dreamed that a
shooting star entered her bosom, and when he was born five-colored clouds
covered the earth. This was in t he thirty-ninth year of King Ch inp'yong of
Silla (617).
As the boy grew  into a healthy and handsome youth he proved to be an
uncommon person. He did not study with a teacher , but knew everything
already . He was a playboy . His companions, his adventures, his wits and his
great achievements are all described in detail in the T'ang Biographies of
the Mon ks and in his autobiog raphy , so here we will include only a few
anecdotes from the Biographies of Silla.
One day W onhyo saw bees and butterflies flitting from flower to  flower ,
and he felt a strong desire for a woman. He walked through the streets of
Kyongju singing , “Who will len d me an axe that has lost its handle? I wish
to c ut a heave n-supporting pole.” The passers-by laughed at him, not
realizing the real meaning of h is song, but T'aejong (King M uryol) said
when he  heard it, “The love-lorn  monk wants to marry a noble l ady and get
a wise son by her . If a sage is born, so much the better for the country .”
(W onhyo's song alludes to a p oem in the Book of Odes, one of the
Confucian Classics. In this poem the axe-handle symbolizes the male sexual
or gan, so that an axe without a handle means a widow . W onhy o is looking
for a  go-between to find a wid ow to be his lover , and the Kin g agrees to
play this part. This is one more example of W onhyo's d isregard of
convention, since Confucian custom forbade widows to remarry or
otherwise have to do with men.)
There w as at this time a widowe d princess living in Y osok Pala ce (now
a mo nastery , Ilyon says). The King told his servants to conduct W onhyo to
that palace, and they found that  he had already descended Namsan (South
Mountain) and reached Munch'on-gyo, the Mosquito Stream Bridge. Here
he deliberately fell into the stream and got his clothes wet. When he
reached the palace the princess, already in bridal attire, suf fered him to

change into a bridegroom's robes, and so they were married and passed the
night together .3
The prin cess be came pregnant as a result, and bore a son who se name
was Sol  Ch'ong . He was so intelligent that he mastered all the classical
histories in his youth. He composed books on folk customs and the place-
names of China and Silla, usin g the “Idu” system of simplif ied Chinese
characters as phonetic signs to convey the Korean language. Until then
there ha d been no method of w riting the Korean language and people who
wished to be educated had to read and write in Chinese, although the
spoken Korean language is distinctly dif ferent from Chinese.
Sol Ch'ong also translated the  Six Chinese Classics (Probably the
Confucian Classics are meant)  into Korean by this method and wrote
commentaries on them. All these have been handed down to the scholars of
the East (Korea). For his virtuous deeds and literary accomplishments, Sol
Ch'ong is acclaimed as one of the ten sages of Silla. (Unfortunately , all but
one of Sol Chong's works are lost.)
Having broken a Buddhist comm andment by his union with the princess
and the birth of Sol Ch'ong, W onhyo dof fed his monk's robe and put on
secular d ress, ad opting the punning nickname Sosong Kosa (Little Hermit).
One day  he met an actor and performed a gourd dance, wearing  a grotesque
mask on his face. He made a utensil in the shape of a gourd and called it
Mu-ae (Boundless; this is an all usion to the Hwaom sect script ural phrase,
“Both lif e and death are Nirvana  and paradise when a sage king rules within
the bounds of decorum and music"). He composed a song about the gourd
for t his dance. W earing the mask and carrying the gourd he pe rformed his
dance in every corner of the country , so that even usurers an d poor old
bachelors (both  much despised) could understand the golden sayings of
Buddha and the Buddhist invocation, Namuami-tabul. His native  place Pulji
(Buddha Land), his temple Ch'ogae (First Opening) and his religious name
W onhyo (Breaking Dawn) all refer to the first dawning of the Buddhist faith
on earth.
When he  wrote a commentary on the Hwaom scripture he stopped at the
fortieth chapter , and when he lived at Punhwang temple in early life he was
constantly occu pied with public af fairs. For these reasons he never rose
above the lowest ranks of the m onks. Guided by a sea dragon, he received a
commandment f rom Buddha to write while traveling a song abo ut Sammae-
gyong. He put h is ink-stone and his writing brush on the two horns of the

ox h e ro de, and therefore people  called him Kaksung (Horn Rid er). The two
horns represente d the awakening of his inner self and of the inn er selves of
others. He met T aean Popsa, another famous monk, who presented W onhyo
with writing paper , and they chanted the song together .
When W onhyo died his bones were crushed and incorporated into a
lifelike image of him which his son Sol Ch'ong enshrined in Pun-hwang-sa,
where he held a memorial service and chanted a dir ge in his father's
memory . As Sol Ch'ong prostrated himself to one side of the image, it
suddenly turned  its head toward him This image is still to be seen, with its
head tur ned to one side. Legend  says that Sol Ch'ong lived in a cottage near
a cave where his father had once lived. The ruins of this cottage are still
there.

Song of Praise to W onhyo
His Ox-horns unveiled the mystery of Sammae-gyong;
His gourd dance awoke the underworld to holy things.
In the moonlit Jade Palace he enjoyed a spring dream and was gone;
Over the closed Punhwang T emple his shadow dances alone.
104. Uisang T ransmits the Hwaom Sutra to the Cardinal T emples
Uisang's father was Han-sin and  his family name was Kim. At the age
of t wenty-nine he shaved his  head and became a monk, residing at
Hwangpok T em ple. Soon afterward he decided to go to China to study
Buddhist doctrine, and set out on his journey with W onhyo. But when he
reached Liaotun g he was arrested by Koguryo border guards a nd detained
for t en days, aft er which he wa s allowed to return home. (Ilyon says this
account is found in Ch'oe Hu's Chronicles and in W onhyo's Autobiography .)
In the first year of Y ing-hui (650) he joined the party of a T'ang envoy
returning to China and entered the Middle Kingdom. When h e arrived at
Y angchow , the Chinese military commander there gave him a luxurious
reception and provided him with living quarters in the government
headquarters. After a few days he visited the monk Chih-yen on the South
Mountain of Changan. Chih-yen had had a dream the night befo re in which
he had seen a g reat tree growing in Haedong (Silla) whose boughs and
leaves covered the whole of Shenchow (Land of God, i.e. China) and in the
top of which was a phoenix nest. He climbed the tree, and hi s eyes were
dazzled by Manipao (jewels said to have been emitted from the brain of a
king dragon) whose light radiated far and wide. W aking in wonder and

surprise, he tidied his house and waited until Uisang knocked at his door .
After receiving his guest with special ceremony he said, “In a dream last
night I saw sig ns of your com ing.” The two sat facing each other and
discussed the mysteries of the Hwaom Sutra to the profoundest depths.
Chih-yen was glad to hear the in telligent words of Uisang, and d eclared that
his visitor outshone, him on many points of Buddhist scripture.
At t his time the  Silla ministers Kim Hum-sun (another book sa ys Kim
In-mun, Ilyon notes) and Y ang-to were detained in Changan by T'ang
Emperor Kao-tsung, who was planning to attack Silla with a lar ge army .
Uisang was informed of this by Hum-sun, who ur ged him to return home at
once and  warn the court. Therefore, in the first year of Hsien- heng (670),
Uisang returned to Silla and told King Munmu of the imminent danger . At
the s ame time h e ordered Myongnang, a clever monk, to improvise a secret
Buddhist altar to deceive a Chinese envoy who had come to K yongju for
purposes of espionage. Thus the King was able to surmount the crisis.
Hsuan-shou Fa- tsang, a Chinese monk and fellow student of U isang at
Chih-yen's monastery , sent Uis ang a copy of his Selections from Sou-
hsuan-shu and a personal letter  in the most cordial terms which read as
follows:
“Fa-tsang, a monk at Ch'un gfu T emple in the W estern Capital
(Changan) presents this letter to the attendant of Hwaom Popsa in Silla.
Since we two parted twenty years ago you have been ever in my mind, but
the w ide seas h ave kept us ten  thousand li apart, separated by the sailing
clouds and rolling waves. My longing to see you knows no bounds. By
Karma (Sanskrit; the accumulation of merits and demerits by which future
incarnations are determined) we have often been acquainted, and we studied
under the same teacher who, b y divine ordinance, transmitted to us his
knowledge of the great mysteries of the Buddhist scriptures.
“I h ave learned with great joy t hat after your return you held seminars
on the Hwaom Sutra in order to  enhance the glories of Buddha. Y ou have
reflected the heavenly jewels of the Chesok Palace in your Buddhist nation
to share the bles sings of Buddha with all people. This, news shows me that
it is you  who have brought Buddha's sunlight and turned the W heel of the
Law to propagate his gospel on earth since Sakyamuni entere d the Lotus
Paradise.
“I, Fa-tsang, have made few achievements in my studies. I am a shamed
when with my inward eye I see you and our textbook, the Hw aom Sutra.

The stat ements of Hwasang (a Buddhist priest) in the Sou-hsuan-shu have
rich mea nings, but are too brief, so that the younger generation will find it
dif ficult to understand their full significance. I have therefore recorded his
dark sayings and added commen taries for novices to read. Sung chon Popsa
will soo n finish  copying my manuscript and deliver it to you. I will be
fortunate if you will read it and correct the errors I have made.
“In our next incarnations, when together we receive the supreme,
inexhaustible law of Buddha in the universally illumined kingdom of
Nosana and perform the precepts of Pohyon, my sins will be redeemed.
Please do not fo r get our long ac quaintance and continue to lead me on the
righteous path.  Hoping to hear from you through messengers or
correspondence from time to time....”
(Ilyon says this letter is included in the T aemun-nyu, the Collection of
Great Men's Letters.)
Uisang ordered the ten cardinal temples, including Pusok-sa on Mt.
T'aebaek, Pimara-sa in W onju, Haein-sa on Mt. Kaya, Okch'on-sa in Pistil,
Pomo-sa in Kumjong and Hwao m-sa in Namak, to propagate B uddhism on
the p rinciples of the Hwaom Sutra. In addition, he made a sche matic chart
of Budd hist doctrine (Mandala) for the temples to keep for the instruction
of monks for a thousand years. He left no other writings, but one piece of
meat is enough  to flavor the soup. This chart and explanatio n, his only
literary work, were made in the first year of T sung-chang (668, the year that
Chih-yen died), just as Confuci us wrote the final chapter of his book after
receiving the gift of a Kirin. (C onfucius is said to have composed the final
chapter of the C h'unchiu (Spring and Autumn Annals) after receiving the
gift of a Kirin (Giraf fe), a fabulous monster said to symbolize benevolence.)
Legend says that Uisang was an incarnation of the Bodhisattv a on the
Jeweled Throne. His ten disciples were Ochin, Chit'ong, P'yohun, Chinjong,
Chinjang, T oyung, Y angto, Sangwon, Nungin and Uijok. T hey are all
known as sages of the second rank and each has a biography .
Ochin li ved at Koram T emple on Mt. Haga, from which he stret ched his
arm each  night to light the lamp at Pusok T emple. Chit'ong wrote the book
Ch'udong-gi (Th e V illage of Gimlets) in which he told many  interesting
stories i n clever phrases. P'yohun lived at Pulguk T emple and traveled to
and from the heavenly palace.
When U isang was at Hwangpok T emple he used to mount the pagoda
and turn around in the air , without touching the steps. When the other

monks f ollowed him, all floating three feet of f the ground, he l ooked back
and said, “If the  commoners should see us flying this way they would think
us monsters, so we had better not teach them this heavenly art.”

Song of Praise to Uisang
He pushed through brambles and war -dust,
Sailing on and on till the Chihshang T emple door opened;
When he planted Hwaom's flowering trees in his own garden,
Nanshan (China) and Mt. T'aebaek (Silla) sang the same spring.
105. The W idow and her Dumb Son
In a remote village called Manson-Pungni in the vicinity of Kyong-ju a
widow conceived without sleepi ng with a man and bore a son. Until the age
of twelve he did  not speak a word or walk a step, and people  called him
Sapok or Sadong (Snake Boy) because he wriggled about on his belly . His
mother died while the great monk W onhyo was living at Koson T emple.
Sadong appeare d in a vision to W onhyo, who rose to meet him  with palms
pressed together in a Buddhist salute. The young visitor did not return the
courtesy but addressed him in a dignified voice.
“The cow (meaning his moth er) on which you and I loaded our
Buddhist scriptu res long ago is now dead. Let us go together and hold a
funeral service for her .”
“Let us do so,” W onhyo replied.
When th ey came to the place where the dead woman was, W onhyo
recited an Uposatta (Sanskrit prayer for the dead): “Do not be reborn, for
death is pain; do not die, for birth is pain.”
But Sad ong interrupted: “Y our prayer is too clumsy . It should be, 'Both
life and death a re pain.'“ They carried the cof fin to the eastern  hill called
Hwalli-san.
“W ould it not be fitting,” W onhy o said, “to bury the Chihye-ho (T igress
of W isdom, the dead woman's B uddhist name) in the Chihye-rim (Forest of
W isdom)?”
“Y ou are  right,”  Sadong replied. “I will sing an elegy (Gatha) i n praise
of the Buddha: A s Sakyamuni Buddha entered Nirvana under t he Sala tree
long ago, so no w his kindred goes to the magnificent palace in the lotus
paradise of Nirvana.”
As h e sp oke he pulled up grass by the roots. Beneath these roots there
opened a  bright, clean empty world with a seven-treasure bridg e leading to

dazzling pavilio ns of gold and jewels such as are not to be found in this
world. S adong took his mother's body on his back and descended this
subterranean sta ircase, whereupon the earth closed above his head as waves
rush together , leaving W onhyo in darkness on the quivering ground.
Long af terward devout Buddhis ts erected a temple called T ojan g-sa on
the e astern side of Mt. Kumgang in Kyongju in honor of Sad ong and his
mother . On the fourteenth day of the third month each year they held
memorial services for the two human Buddhas who returned to eternity .

Song in Praise of the Snake Boy
A sleeping dragon in the depths cannot be idle:
When he wakes and twists his body the womb of earth op ens and
closes.
The pains of both life and death are lasting grief;
There is floating rest in the lotus paradise of eternal peace.

(This is plainly a tale of reinca rnation, though of whom is n ot clear .
Uposatta and Gatha are Sanskr it ritual texts, and the lotus paradise is, of
course, one of the many Buddhist heavens.)
106. Chinp'yo Receives Divination Sticks fr om Maitr eya
The monk Chinp'yo was a na tive of Mangyong-hyon in W ansan-ju
(Chonju) who lived at Kumsan T emple. His father was Chinnaemal, his
mother w as Kilb orang and his fa mily name was Chong. He beca me a monk
at th e ag e of twelve and was a disciple of Sungche Popsa, who had studied
under Shantao Santsang in China and later gone to W utaishan, where he
saw the living Munsu Bodhisattva and received from him the Five
Commandments.
One day Chinp'yo asked his ma ster , “When can I receive the B uddha's
commandments?”
“If y our devotion is sincere, you can receive them within a ye ar ,” was
the r eply . Encouraged by his ma ster's words, Chinp'yo made a pilgrimage to
various famous mountains and then settled at Pulsaui-am (W onder
Hermitage) on Mt. Son'gye. There he underwent various ordeals for the
confession of his sins. First he s truck his head and his four limbs against a
rock for  seven nights, with earne st prayers. His arms and legs were torn and
his b lood rained on the rock, but no sign came. He continued this practice
for anot her wee k, until the end  of the fortnight's prayer , and the Chijang

Bodhisattva (a spirit of mercy and protector of children) appear ed and gave
him his comma ndments of purification. This happened in the hour of the
dragon and the year of the dragon, on the fifteenth of the third moon in the
twenty-eighth year of Kai-yuan, when Chinp'yo was twenty-three years old.
W ishing to see M aitreya, he moved to Y ongsan T emple, also known as
Pyonsan or T'ongga san. There,  after further ordeals, Maitreya appeared to
him and gave hi m the two volu mes of the Chomch'al-gyong, the Buddhist
book of divinati on. (Ilyon says t his was a Chinese version compiled toward
the beginning of the Sui dynasty , whose rule began in 589.) Maitreya also
gave him 189 divination sticks, saying “The eighth and ninth sticks are my
fingerbones and  the rest are made of aloewood and sandalwood. They will
predict the annoyances of the mortal world. Y ou are to use them as rafts of
salvation by the gospel of Buddha" Chinp'yo thereafter held annual
divination services on a newly built altar before lar ge multitudes of
Buddhist believers.
(Divination with sticks was not originally a Buddhist practice. It is
mentioned in some of the earlies t Chinese documents and was a ssociated in
China mainly with T aoism.)
When Chinp'yo arrived at Asullaju, the fish and turtles of the sea
formed a  long bridge between the islands and conducted him to the dragon
palace at the bottom, where he delivered the commandments of Buddha to
the dragons in a sermon. This was in the eleventh year of T'ien-pao (752).
King Kyongdok of Silla heard of Chinp'yo's fame and summoned him
to the palace. The King received the commandments of the Bodhisattvas
from the  monk and gave him 77,000 lar ge bags of rice. The Qu een and her
family received the same commandments and presented him with 500 rolls
of silk and 50 yang of gold. Chinp'yo distributed all these gifts to various
temples for the support of Buddhist services.
When Chinp'yo died his bones w ere enshrined in Pohyon T emple-on the
seacoast, near the place where he had given the Buddha's commandments to
the fish and turtles. His chief disciples were Y ong-sim, Pojong, Sinpang,
Ch'ejin, Chinhae , Chinson and C h'ung, who all founded temples in the deep
mountains. He left the divination sticks to Y ongsim, who took them to Mt.
Songni t o contin ue the services at the Buddhist altar , upon which were the
six whe els of divination. (A mandala is indicated here, but again there is
some co nfusion. A mandate is a  sort of cosmic diagram connec ted with the

esoteric doctrines of certain Buddhist sects. Its original purpose was not
divination.)
According to the T'ang Seng-chuan (Biographies of Monks) in the
thirteenth year of Kai-huang (5 93) there lived at Kwangchow (Canton) a
monk who performed confession ceremonies for Buddhist devotees. He
made two leather tablets inscribed respectively with the-Chinese characters
for good and ev il. People would toss them into the-air , and those for whom
the “good” character turned u p were declared! lucky . Furthermore this
monk cl aimed to  be able to redeem the sins of all people by a self-torturing
method of confession. Crowds  of fanatics, men and women, gathered
around him to have their fortunes told.
In time this custom spread as far north as T singchow (in Shantung). The
government authorities condemned it as witchcraft, but the Buddhist
believers said it was based on the Book of Divination and that th e “pagoda”
method of confession was desc ribed in another scripture which said that
striking the head and four limbs  on the ground made a thundering noise like
the crumbling of a mountain.
The Emperor heard about this matter and sent an of ficial na med Li
Y uan-shan to T ahsing T emple to seek an explanation from the monks. T wo
of th em, Fa-ching and Y en-tsung, replied that there were two volumes of
the B ook of Div ination and that the first chapter , on the “Lantern of Bodhi”
(enlightenment) had been translated from Sanskrit into Chinese in a foreign
country , but that the real title of the book, the name of the translator and the
place w here it had been translated were all unknown. They said that the
“pagoda” confession was dif ferent in performance from other confessions.
The Emperor prohibited the practice by imperial decree.
The account given by the monks of T singchow somewhat resembles the
story told by some Confucian sc holars, who say that the Shih Ching and the
Shu Ching (the Book of Odes and the Book of Kings, two of the Confucian
Classics) were discovered in an old tomb. (Chinese documents do allude to
such a discovery .) But this comparison is like trying to draw a tiger and
producing a dog, and is exactly what Buddha forbids. If people doubt the
authenticity of the Book of Div ination because its translator and place of
translation are unknown, they are like a magician who picks up a coil of
hemp and calls it a gold ring.
T o d o it  justice,  the Book of Divination expounds the mysterie s of the
Bodhisattva alta r (Mandala), and nothing excels it in expunging all flaws

and unc lean thin gs from the tho ughts of idle fellows. It is therefore called
T aesung-ch'am (Great Ferry C onfession, i.e. a conveyor of the soul to
paradise) dealing with the six roots (eyes, ears, nose, tongue , body and
mind). In the B uddhist docume nt of Kai-yuan and Chen-yuan it is called
Chongjang, to indicate Buddha's presence if not his nature. It must not be
compared to the T'ap-pak-i-ch 'am (pagoda confession and self-torture
confession).
In th e b ook, Qu estions of Sarina Buddha it is written, “Buddha said to
Changjajapunya-Dala, 'Y ou should confess your sins for seven days and
seven n ights to cleanse all evil from your heart.' Dala performed the
confession ceremony with devotion, and on the fifth night many  things such
as towels, dusters, brooms, knives, gimlets and axes fell like rain into his
room. Joyfully he asked Buddha  what this signified, and Buddh a answered
'These cutting and wiping instru ments signify the phase of dep arture from
worldly dust.' ”
This appears to be the same phase as that attained by throwing the
wheel in the Bo ok of Divination. W e can therefore understand Chinp'yo's
obtaining the sticks after making  his confession and receiving t he Buddhist
law . Had  this been false Maitreya would not have conferred the sticks on
him in person. If the Book of Divination is condemned then the Questions
of S arina Buddha should be c ondemned also. Y en-tsung and  his fellow
monks were blinded to man by gold.

Song in Praise of Chinp'yo
Born in a corrupt generation, he aroused the deaf and the idle;
Holy mountains and fairy streams responded to his inspiration.
He spread the Pagoda Confession far and wide in earnest;
The converted fish and turtles o f the eastern sea made a bridge for him
to tread.

107. The Stone Monument at Ponyon T emple in Kwantong-P'ung-
ak (Maple Mountain)
(This is a variant account of the life of Chinp'yo. A note  at the
beginning says it is based on a n inscription composed by Y ongcham, the
abbot of  Ponyon T emple, for a stone monument erected in the fourth year of
Chen-an (1 199) . Kwantong is Kangwon Province on the East Coast and
P'ung-ak is a poetic name for Kumgang-san, the Diamond Mountains.)

Chinp'yo Y ulsa was a native of T aejong-ni, Nasanch'on, Pyokkol-gun,
Chonju. At the a ge of twelve, w ith his father's consent, he went to Sunche
Popsa th e abbot  of Kumsan T e mple and became a monk. The  abbot gave
him the Sami (S anskrit Sraman era, a catechism used by novices) together
with one  volum e on the secret sacrificial of ferings and two vol umes of the
Book of  Divinat ion on good and evil and the law of causation, saying “Go
to Maitr eya and Chijang with th ese laws and confess your sins  to the two
Buddhas. When  they have taught you a further law you must spread it over
the w orld.” Chinp'yo departed a nd visited all the famous temple s at the age
of twenty-seven.
In the first year of Shang-yuan (760), at the age of twenty-seven,
Chinp'yo entered a hermitage called Pulsaui-bang (Room of W onder) in
Pyonsan, Poan-hyon (North Cholla Province) with twenty mal (five
bushels) of steamed and dried rice for his food. He ate five hop (about a
handful) daily and gave one hop to the rats. He prostrated him self before
the image of Maitreya and prayed for three years to be blessed with the holy
commandments, but the Buddha gave no sign. In shame and remorse he
tried to kill him self by leaping from a tall clif f, but a blue boy caught him
with both hands in midair before he could be crushed in the valley below
and seated him on a rock.
Filled w ith ne w resolution, Chinp'yo resumed his self-t orturing
confession on a twenty-one-day  program, striking his body against a rock.
By the third day his hands and arms had been torn from his body , but on the
night of the seventh day Chijang Bodhisattva waved a golden wand over the
monk's h ead and his hands and arms grew back and his body was restored
to it s normal c ondition. The Bodhisattva gave him a robe and a bowl
(signifying his full admission to the order of monks) and his hea rt was filled
with a deep and holy inspiration.
When th e twenty-one-day period  was fully over his heavenly eyes were
opened (he achieved the insigh t into reality which is the goal of Buddhist
meditation) and he saw a host o f saints coming toward him from the T osol
heaven. Chijang  and Maitreya smoothed his brow and said, “ W ell done,
strong monk! Y our earnest con fession and self-sacrifice have  made you
worthy to receive Buddha's commandments.” Chijang gave him a copy of
the commandments and also two wooden tablets, one inscribed Kuja (nine
men) and the other Palja (eight men).

“These,” Chijang said, “are the finger bones of my two hands,
bespeaking my two previous awakenings. Nine laws and eight are my
reborn s eeds, and you shall understand all retributions by looki ng on them.
Y ou shall cast of f your flesh and fly up to the T osol heaven in th e body of a
great kin g.” And  with these wor ds the two Buddhas disappeared. It was the
twenty-seventh day of the fourth moon in the year of the tiger .
Chinp'yo Y ulsa decided to found Komsan T emple. When he had
descended the mountain (from h is hermitage) as far as T aeyon Pool, a King
dragon emer ged from the water and presented him with a robe of jade, and
guided h im to Kumsan Forest with an escort of 80,000 dragons. Men and
women gathered from all directions to help him, and within a f ew days the
temple was completed in perfect beauty . Maitreya descended from the T osol
heaven on a c loud to accompany Chinp'yo as he received Buddha's
commandments. Chinp'yo Y ulsa was filled with a heavenly spirit. He had a
sixteen-foot image of Maitreya  cast in iron and enshrined in the Golden
Hall, while a picture (showing the descent of Maitreya and the monk's
reception of Buddha's commands, Ilyon says) adorned the southern wall.
Both of these were the work of an artist who also donat ed building
materials to the temple. The image was begun on June 9 in the year of the
dragon ( 764) an d was enshrined on May I in the year of the h orse (766).
This was the first year of the T ali era of T'ang T ai-tsung.
While C hinp'yo Y ulsa was climbing down Kumsan, he met a man riding
at th e head of a long train of ox-carts. (When he appeared) the lead ox
suddenly knelt before him, bello wing and shedding tears, and all the other
oxen fol lowed s uit. The man jum ped down from his cart in surprise. “Who
are you and where are you coming from, my good monk?” he a sked. “Why
do my oxen bellow at the sight of you?”
“I am  C hinp'yo, a monk from t he forest of the Golden Mounta in,” the
other explained. “I entered the Room of W onder at Pyonsa n, where I
received the Buddha's commandments in the presence of Maitreya and
Chijang, who also gave me two sacred tablets. After building a temple in
the forest, I have started on a journey to seek a quieter place to live out my
days. Though foolish in outward appearance, these oxen are w ise in their
inward s ouls. T hey know that I have received the laws of Buddha and so
they worship him, weeping for joy .”
“If e ven the be asts of burden have faith, how much more s hould a
man!” e xclaimed the ox-driver . “I cannot remain unfeeling and idle.” And

he to ok up his scythe and began to shave his head. Deeply moved, Y ulsa
shaved the man's head for him and helped him to receive the Buddha's
commandments.
Arriving at Mt. Songni, Chinp'y o came upon a host of emerald clover ,
or Kilsa ng-ch'o (emblem of heavenly beauty). He marked the spot and
continued his journey along th e coast of Myongju. An army of fish and
turtles appeared  on the seashore  and formed a bridge from the earth to the
sea. He passed over this bridge  into the depths, and there he recited the
Buddhist commandments. Emer ging from the waves, he traveled on
through Kosong county and reached Kaegol-san, the mountains of all bones
(another name for the Diamond Mountains), where he founded temples in
the Ponyon Forest and held seminars on the land of divination.
After Ch inp'yo had lived seven years in the forest the crops f ailed in
Myongju and there was a great f amine. He preached a sermon on the law of
the Buddha of mercy to a l ar ge audience of believers in the Three
T reasures. Suddenly fish all along the seacoast leaped ashore and died in
countless numbers. The people  danced for joy and collected the fish for
food, thus escaping starvation.
It was not until he returned to his old hermitage (the Room of W onder)
at Pyonsan that he visited his parents at his childhood home an d stayed in
the house of Chinmun, a famous monk.
At this time Y ongsim, Y ungjong and Pult'a came to him and said. “W e
have walked a thousand li to receive the laws of Buddha from you.”
Chinp'yo remain ed silent. The three thereupon climbed a tall tree nearby
and dashed themselves to the ground head first, with a courageous
confession of their sins. Then C hinp'yo Y ulsa consented to teach them. He
anointed their brows and gave them robes and bowls (that is, initiated them
into the order of monks). He also gave them a book on the secret sacrifices,
two boo ks on the daily divin ation of rewards and punishments, 189
inscribed tablets of Buddha, and the “eight-man" and “nine-man” tablets of
Maitreya, repres enting the laws of Buddha and his rebirths. He gave them
this instruction: “I have given you these sacred treasures. T ake  them with
you to Mt. Songni, where you will find a hill of emerald clo ver which I
have marked conspicuously . Build a temple on that hill in order to spread
Buddhism accor ding to the Lord's teachings for ages to come .” Chinp'yo
held regular meetings there on the law of divination.

Chinp'yo Y ulsa returned to Ponyon with his father late in life to worship
Buddha and honor his parents. When his life was drawing to a close he
climbed a tall rock to the east of Ponyon T emple, and there he fell dead.
His disc iples of fered sacrifices for his soul but did not move h is body
until his bones lay scattered on  the ground. When at last the bones were
conveyed to the dark regions under ground, a pine tree suddenly shot up
nearby a nd quickly grew high into the sky . As the years pass ed this tree
withered, and a young tree grew from the same root. This happe ned several
times, a nd even  today twin pin es stand near the grave and lucky pilgrims
find fragments of Chinp'yo's bones under it.
I feared that these sacred bones might be lost altogether , and s o in the
ninth moon of the year of the snake (1 197) I filled a tube with three hop of
his r elics. I built a stone monument under the twin pine on t he tall rock
where Chinp'yo died and enshrined his sari under it.
The history of C hinp'yo Y ulsa in this record is somewhat dif ferent from
that in the inscri ption on the stone monument at Ponyon T empl e, so I have
here sum marized the record of Y ongcham for the information of our wise
readers.
—Muguk
(It a ppears from the above statement that this entire section is t he work
of Ilyon's chief disciple. As be fore, the date given is about a century too
early .)
108. The Monk Sungchon Pr eaches to Stone Skeletons
Little is  known about the monk  Sungchon except some adventures in
China. E arly in  life he sailed to the Middle Kingdom and studied under
Hsien-shou until he had penetrated the depths of esoteric Buddhist doctrine.
Hsien-shou had been a fellow student of Uisang when they both received
instruction from Chih-yen Hoshang in Changan.
Hsien-shou wro te a letter to Uisang and entrusted it to Sungchon, who
was retu rning to Silla. (The two frequently corresponded in this  way , Ilyon
says.) Enclosed in the letter we re some essays on righteousness, written in
his own  hand and based on th e teachings of his master . Und er separate
cover h e sent a parcel of man uscripts which he had copied out of the
Buddhist scriptures, including twenty volumes of the Search for Mystery
(of w hich two were unfinished, Hyon says), three volumes of the T eachings
of B uddha, one volume of the  Mystical Definitions, one Hwaom text in

Sanskrit, two on the beliefs, one on the T welve Gates and one on non-
discrimination in the W orld of Buddha.
The letter read as follows: ”... The other day Hyoch'ung, a Silla monk,
brought me nine pun of gold a nd said it was your gift to me. Thank you
very much. In return I send you an Indian water -bottle (for purification of
the hands) through the kindness  of Sungchon Popsa to express  my sincere
wishes for your good health. If you accept it I shall be very happy .”
When U isang received these manuscripts he felt as if he were again
receiving instru ction from his old teacher Chih-yen. He finis hed reading
them in a month and gave them to his disciples to use in teaching these
subjects through out the kingdom. Thanks to the good monk Su ngchon the
perfect teachings of Buddha spread in the East.
Later an other monk named Pomsu brought a second series of Hwaom
scriptures from China to Silla a nd lectured on it in the year of  Chen-yuan
(799).
Sungchon found ed a temple on the borders of Kaenyong count y in the
Sangju territory and gave lectures on Hwaom doctrine to a lar ge audience of
government of ficials represented by stone skeletons. Kagwi, an intelligent
Silla monk and Sungchon's successor as a Buddhist teacher , wrote a book
called Fountain of Thought in which he described these lec tures of his
master and the various topics he discussed with his stone audience at
Kalgyong-sa T emple. According to his account, about eighty of the stone
skeletons are still at the temple working wonders. Other tales of Sungchon,
the uncommon monk who did uncommon things, are inscribed on his stone
monument, and this inscription is identical with the account given in the
Authentic Reco rd of T aegak Kuksa, the National Priest of the Great
A wakening.
(This business of the stone skeletons is extremely mysterious. There are
two possible explanations, but t hese are only speculative. First, it was the
custom to place inscribed stone tablets in lines before the audience hall of a
royal pa lace to mark the places where of ficials were to stand d uring court
ceremonies. This would have Sungchon lecturing before the royal court,
which is quite possible. Second, a double row of stone statues of of ficials
and various animals often leads up to a royal grave. This would have
Sungchon lecturing at a king's tomb, which is less likely .)
109. Simji and the Bamboo Sticks

The monk Simji was a son of King Hondok (809-826). He was
intelligent, good-natured, filial to his royal parents and af fectionate to his
brothers and sisters from his ch ildhood. At the age of fifteen he shaved his
head and entered Chung-ak (Kong-san) to become a monk.
Simji heard that Y ongsim had re ceived the sticks representing Buddha's
finger bones from Chinp'yo Y ul sa and was holding confession m eetings on
Mt. Songni. He therefore went to the mountain to participate, but being late
arriving he was not admitted in to the lecture hall. Simji sat on the ground
and beat his breast as he confessed with the monks within.
After seven days there was a he avy snow which covered the courtyard,
but not a single flake fell within ten feet of Simji's seat. Then finally the
wonder -struck a udience invited him into the hall. Simji, however , pretended
illness a nd retire d into a guest room where he worshipped Budd ha with his
eyes fixe d on the lecture hall. B lood flowed from his brow and arms just as
Chinp'yo had bled on Son'gy e-san. The Chijang Bodhisattv a came to
comfort him every day .
When the confession meeting w as over Simji started his return journey ,
but on the way  he found two bamboo sticks (the ones menti oned at the
beginning of this section) caug ht in the hem of his robe. He retraced his
steps and gave the sticks to Y ongsim, who exclaimed, “Impossible! I keep
them in a seal ed box.” But when the box was opened it was empty .
W onderingly Y o ngsim wrapped the sticks carefully and put them away
under lock and key .
Simji se t of f again, but again he found the bamboo sticks in the  hem of
his robe  and brought them back. Admiring the great virtue of the royal
monk, Y ongsim  said, “It is the will of Buddha. Y ou had better take them
with you.”
Carrying the two sticks on his head, Simji returned to Chung-ak. There
the Mou ntain Spirit and two fai ries came to meet him. The Spirit led Simji
to a high  rock and prostrated himself beneath it with the fairies until he had
received the commandments of  Buddha from the royal monk. Then Simji
said to him. “Now we must ensh rine these divine treasures in an  appropriate
place. Let us t hrow the bamboo sticks from the highest peak of this
mountain and mark the spot where they fall.” They climbed the peak and
threw th e sticks high into the air  toward the west. As they flew into the blue
sky , the Mountain Spirit sang a song:


Rugged rocks become smooth floors;
Scattered leaves sweep the ground.
W e find the Buddha-bone sticks wherever they fall;

W e e nshrine them on a clean spo t and worship them. As the Spirit sang,
the s ticks fell in to a well in the forest. A hall was duly built ove r the well to
enshrine the sticks. Even today this well is found to the north of  the Hall of
Divination at T onghwa-sa (T emple of the Paulownia Flowers).
King Y e jong of  Koryo (1078-1 122) received these bamboo sticks into
his pala ce and worshipped them  as divine treasures, but he lost one and
replaced it with a tooth of the  Buddha before he sent them back to the
temple. Now it has turned a dif ferent color , appearing to be neither bone nor
jade.
According to the first volume of the Book of Divination there are 189
methods of fortune-telling, of which the ten most important indicate 1)
Seeking the highest and deepest place in the Kingdom of Buddha; 2)
Demonstrating t he results obtained from this seeking; 3, 4) Seeking the
middle and low places in the Kingdom of Buddha; 5) Achieving the end
through spiritual power; 6) Achieving the end through mercy and charity; 7)
Achieving the end through the power of divine beings; 8) Choosing what is
to be received and what is to be  given; 9) Keeping what has been received;
10) Seeking the lowest place in  the Kingdom of Buddha without strongly
rooted belief. The next is seeking the middle place in the Kingdom of
Buddha without  a strongly rooted belief. (Uyon notes after 9 that this
explains the saying of Maitreya  that new commandments are given in this
life, old  commandments we re given in former lives, a nd further
commandments will be given in the future, but these ol d and new
commandments have nothing to do with the old and new commandments
inherent in the minds of monks and nuns.)
The first 172 steps are concerned with good and evil, gain and loss in
the past and present world. The 173rd step is abandoning oneself and going
to hell. These are all retribution s in the coming world. The 174th step is
becoming a beast in one's next l ife. The 189 classes include dem on (Preta),
cutthroat, Herculean wrestler (Asura), man, king, heaven, heavenly king
(Deva), hearing Buddha, mon k, sage monk, living in T osol, living in
paradise, seeing  Buddha, low ri der , high rider , middle rider (on  the ship of

souls) and deliverance of soul, which means ascending from lower to higher
and entering paradise without retrogression.
These things show the dif ferences between the rewards and
punishments of  three lives. If we apply them we obtain the following
results: When a man's mind is equal to his deeds, Buddha works wonders
through him; if this is not so his mind will collapse in error . The two
bamboo sticks inscribed with th e figures “eight” and “nine” are  among the
189 sticks. The Seng-chuan (Bio graphies of Monks) mentions 108 sticks of
divination, for unknown reasons. Perhaps this refers to the 108 annoyances
of worldly passion rather than to the Buddhist scriptures.
In th e two volumes of royal chronology compiled by Kim Kwa n-Gi of
Koryo it  is written “Ch'ung, a great monk of Silla in the closing days of that
kingdom, presented the robe of Chinp'yo Y ulsa and 189 bamb oo sticks of
Buddha's comm andments to T'aejo (W ang Kon) of Koryo.” It is doubtful,
however , whether these are identical with those presently preserved at
T onghwa-sa.

Song in Praise of Simji
Born in the golden palace, he left the cage of worldly glory;
Diligence, intelligence and civility were his heaven-sent virtues.
In snowdrifts in the courtyard the divine bamboo sticks flew into his
robe,
And came to rest on the top of the Paulownia-Flower T emple.
1 10. T aehyon and Pophae and Their Doctrines
T aehyon, the founder of the Y uga sect (in Korea) lived at Y o ng-jang
T emple on Namsan in Kyongju. It was his regular practice to
circumambulate a sixteen-foot stone image of Maitreya in the c ourtyard of
the temp le, and the image would  always turn its head to face the  monk. The
doctrines of the Y uga sect (Fa-s hang-tsung in Chinese) were so dif ficult to
understand that Pai Chu-i (a fam ous T'ang poet) and other Chin ese scholars
gave up its study , saying that the y were unable to follow the labyrinth of its
reasoning. But T aehyon, by his s uperhuman wisdom and intelligence, easily
mastered it, and soon his mind was enlightened concerning its obscurities,
enabling him to perceive what was wicked and corrupt in the light of its
revelations. For this reason all his juniors in the East followed h is teachings
and many scholars in the Middle Kingdom took him as a model.

When rain did not fall as usual during the twelfth year of T'ien-pao
(753) King Kyongdok summon ed T aehyon to the inner palace to chant the
Kumgwang-gyong (Golden Light Sutra) and to pray for rain.  As he was
chanting the scripture and of fering sacrifices to Buddha one day , he
uncovered his wooden bowl s o that it could be filled with water for
purification. Bu t the King's ser vant was late in bringing the water , and a
palace o f ficial rebuked him. The servant excused himself, saying “The
palace w ell is drained to the bottom, and I had to go to a spring deep in the
mountains.”
When T a ehyon h eard this, he rai sed the burning censer in his hands, and
fresh, cool water leaped from the palace well seventy feet into the sky in a
solid jet like the  flagpole at a temple, to the amazement of the K ing and the
palace o f ficials. From that time the well was known as Kumgwang-jong
(W ell of the Golden Light).
T aehyon adopted the nickname Ch'onggu Samun (Monk of the Blue
Hill. Samun—Sramana in Sanskrit—means monk).

Song in Praise of T aehyon
Round the Buddha image he walked on South Mountain
And the image turned its head to follow him;
In the sky above the Blue Hill the Buddha's sun hangs high.
People saw him command the palace well to spout water;
W ell he knew the mystery in a plume of smoke from the cense r . In the
summer of the following year , the year of the horse (754), the King
summoned the monk Pophae (Sea of Buddha) to Hwangnyong-sa to chant
the H waom Sutra and pray for rain. His Majesty in person bur ned incense
on the altar and said to the monk . “Last summer T aehyon Popsa chanted the
Kumgwang-gyong and the dry well at the palace spouted cool, fresh water
seventy feet into the sky . What can you do today?”
“That is  a small miracle and n othing to be wondered at,” rep lied the
monk. “ It would  be easy for me to cause the blue sea to overflow the East
Mountain and sweep away the whole capital city .”
The King laughed this of f as a pleasantry but that afternoon, as the
monk continued  to chant the scripture and burn incense, loud weeping was
heard fro m the inner palace and  a servant of the Queen ran into  the Golden
Hall of Hwangnyong-sa and announced, “The East Pool has overflowed and
washed away fifty rooms of the palace!”

The King was a stonished and at a loss what to do, but Pophae  smiled
and said, “This is only the beginning of the deluge. I have just opened the
water valve on land in order to pour the sea into it, and the valve leaked a
little.” The King was awed by this remark.
On the followin g day the abbot of Kamun-sa on the eastern seacoast
reported to the King, “Early yesterday afternoon the sea rose and flooded
the temple courtyard up to the stone steps of Buddha's palace and did not
subside until nightfall.” The Kin g honored Pophae and worshipped Buddha
with deeper devotion.
Song of Praise to Pophae
The tide of Pophae filled the Buddha's world:
The four seas rose and fell at his will.
Do not say ten billion Sumi Mountains are high—
When our master's finger moves, the sea will cover the highest
peaks. (The Sumi Mountains or Snow Mountains are the Himalayas.)
Footnotes to Book Four
(1). The  story of Chigwi will be found in the translator's Folk T ales of
Old Korea. Korean Cultural Series V ol. VI, in the chapter “The Queen and
the Beggar .”
(2). Only aristocrats could fill important of ficial posts in Silla.
(3). W on hyo's love-story is told in detail also in the translator's Folk
T ales of Old Korea.

BOOK FIVE
VI. Miracles
1 1 1. Milbon the Exorcist
Queen Sondok (T ok-man, 632-6 47) fell seriously ill. Popch'ok, a monk
from Hungnyun-sa, was summo ned to attend her , but his treatment had no
ef fect, and so the courtiers called on Milbon Popsa, a monk of great virtue.
Milbon stood at the door of the  Queen's chamber and read alo ud from
the Y aksa-gyon g, the Book of  Bhechadjagura (the Buddha of Healing).
Then he cast his magical staf f with its six metal rings into the r oom, and it
pierced the hearts of an old fox and of Popch'ok and hurl ed the two
monsters into the courtyard. The Queen was cured of her malady from that
moment. A five-colored light flashed from the forehead of M ilbon as he
retired, saying “Long live the Queen!”
Once when Kim Y ang-to, who later became a high of ficial at court, was
a s mall boy , he suddenly lost the powers of speech and motion at the sight
of a lar ge ghost followed by a t rain of smaller ones, which sampled all the
food in the house and showered curses on the sorceress who danced and
screamed in an ef fort to chase them away . The father summoned a monk
from Popnyu-sa to read from an exorcist text, but the lar ge ghost
commanded the others to strike the monk on the head with heavy iron
hammers. This they did, and the monk fell dead, swimming in blood.
A fe w d ays later Milbon was sent for . When the servant who had been
sent to fetch him returned to announce his coming the sm aller ghosts
trembled with fear and said, “When Milbon Popsa comes we must escape.”
“Y ou little cowards,” said their leader , “don't you have your iron
hammers to hit him on the head and send him to hell?”
Suddenly gigantic spirits wearing golden armor and brandishing long
spears appeared and bound the g hosts hand and foot with red cords. Then a
host of warriors  descended from heaven and stood at attention as an honor
guard fo r Milbo n, who now en tered the sick boy's room. Even  before the
monk had finished reading from his mysterious book, the lad rose from his
bed restored and told the story of his adventure with the ghosts.

From that time until the end of his life he worshipped Buddha, and in
later years had images representing Gautama Buddha, Maitreya and a
Bodhisattva placed in Hungnyun -sa and a golden mural painted  in the main
hall of the temple in honor of Milbon Popsa, who had saved his life.
When Milbon lived at Kumgok-sa General Kim Y u-sin, the famous Silla
soldier , had a friend, a hermit whose name has been lost. Once  the general
asked th e hermit to come and care for his kinsman Such'on, wh o had been
suf fering for some time from a malignant disease. When Inhyesa, a monk
friend o f Such'o n who had com e a long journey from Chung-ak (P'algong-
san near  T aegu) to treat the sick man, saw this hermit, he spoke to him
contemptuously . “Y ou look like a cunning fox,” he said. “How can you cure
a man's disease?”
“I am a poor doctor indeed,” the hermit replied, “but I have been
obliged to come at the special request of the general.”
“Never m ind, fellow ,” said Inhyesa. “Stand aside and observe my magic
power o f communication with the spirits.” And he held up an incense-
burner and chanted a spell, at  which five-colored clouds gathered and
heavenly flowers fell about the head of the patient.
“The power of your spell is wonderful,” the hermit said, “but I also have
a little magic art  which I will show you. Stand up!” The hermit made a ring
with the thumb and forefinger of his left hand and flicked the forefinger
against t he prou d monk's forehead. The monk instantly rose ten  feet in the
air , turne d a somersault and cras hed to earth with his head stuck like a peg
in the ground and his trembling feet stretching heavenward. The people in
the hous e rushed  out and tried to free the monk but he was as sti f f as a post,
as if fixed in cement, with his feet in the air .
The herm it laug hed and went aw ay , leaving the arrogant monk to spend
the who le night  in this position . The next day Suchon sent an errand-boy
with a request that the hermit relieve his magical punishment. He returned
and said “Upside down!” where upon the monk rose in another  somersault
and fell at the hermit's feet.
“I swear upon m y honor ,” the m onk said, “that I will never boast of my
small magic again. I swear in the name of Buddha. Namuami T abul!”

Song in Praise of Milbon
Deep red and purple mixed are confused with vermilion;
Fish eyes delude foolish men and women.

Had the hermit not flicked his finger lightly ,
All the people would have put pretty stones into their jade boxes.

(Fish ey es look like pearls and people are easily deceived by their
luster .)
1 12. Hyet'ong Conquers the Evil Dragon
Nobody knows the family name  of Hyet'ong. When he was still wearing
white clothes (before he put on the robe of a monk) he lived in a village on
the b ank of a stream called Unch'on (Silver Stream) which flows along the
western side of Namsan near Kyongju. One day while playing in this stream
he k illed an otter . After stripping of f its soft pelt he threw the b ody into his
garden.
The nex t morning the body was missing and there was a trail of blood
leading to the st ream. Hyet'ong followed it and found that the sk inless otter
had returned to her den and stood guarding her five young o nes. As he
beheld this mysterious spectacle he was awakened. He forsook his home
and adopted the Buddhist nam e Hyet'ong (A wakened W isdom). He then
went to China an d asked a famous monk named W uwei San-tsang to be his
teacher .
“How can a man from W u-i (the Eastern Barbarian Land) expec t to be a
disciple of Buddha?” San-tsang asked. The young Silla monk w as hurt, but
he did not give up. However , though he served the haughty Chinese monk
for three  years he was still not allowed to attend the lectures on esoteric
Buddhist doctrine.
Finally Hyet'ong decided to resolve matters. He went and stood erect
before th e Chine se monk with a  burning charcoal brazier on his  head. After
a time the crown  of his head burst with a thunderous sound. San -tsang came
and removed the brazier of glo wing coals. T ouching the wound with his
fingers he chanted a spell, and it healed, leaving a scar in the shape of the
character “wang ” (king)—three horizontal strokes joined by a v ertical one.
The gre at priest nicknamed Hyet'ong W ang Hoshang (King Monk), and
cherished him thereafter and taught him all the esoteric Buddhist doctrines.
At t hat time the favorite daught er of the T'ang Emperor Kao-ts ung fell
sick, and the Emperor asked  W uwei San-tsang to cure her . But he
recommended Hyet'ong in his place, and so Hyet'ong was received in
audience by the Emperor and ordered to cure the princess.

He poured a bushel of white beans into a silver bowl, and immediately
they cha nged into white-armored heavenly warriors and attack ed the devil
which w as tormenting the princess, but fell back without victo ry . Then he
poured a  bushel of black beans into a golden bowl and they bec ame black-
armored heaven ly warriors, whom he ordered to join the white army in the
attack. W hen th is was done a monstrous dragon suddenly flew out of the
princess' bedchamber , and her  royal body was freed of its monstrous
af fliction.
Resentful of being driven out of its luxurious home near the b eautiful
princess, the dragon went to live  in a forest (Muning-nim) in Silla, where it
did much harm and preyed upon human lives for revenge.
When H yet'ong heard of this from Chong Kong, who had come to
China as an envoy , he returned to Silla in the second year of Lin-te (665)
and agai n defeat ed the monster . The dragon was now angry at C hong Kong
for havin g repor ted it to Hyet'ong, and entered a big willow tree that stood
at the gate of Chong Kong's house. Chong Kong, who loved the thick
foliage a nd the slender branches  swinging in the breeze, was unaware that a
resentful dragon was hiding in their shade.
About th is time King Sinmun d ied (692) and was succeeded by King
Hyoso. The new king ordered th e willow tree cut down, for it stood in the
way of a road that was being built to accommodate processions between the
palace and the ro yal tombs. Chong Kong was very angry , and shouted at the
workmen from the palace, “Cu t of f my head rather than cut down my
willow tree.”
Enraged at this n ews, the King s aid, “Chong Kong, relying on th e magic
art o f W ang Hos hang, dares to d isobey the King's command and even asks
to have his head cut of f. V ery well, he shall have his wish.” So they cut of f
his head and des troyed his house. The courtiers advised that W ang Hoshang
should also be e xecuted because  of his close association with Chong Kong.
The King ordered a company o f soldiers to arrest Hyet'ong at W angmang
T emple.
When th e great monk saw his e nemies approaching he went up to the
roof of the temple, taking with him a white bottle and an ink-stone with
vermilion ink and a brush. When the soldiers drew near he sa id to them,
“Look w hat I am doing. I draw a red line around the neck o f my white
bottle; n ow let every man look at his neck.” The soldiers looked, and indeed
each man had a red line around his neck. As they paused in alarm, Hyet'ong

shouted, “If I br eak the neck of this bottle all of your necks will  be instantly
broken.”
The soldiers retreated with cri es of alarm and returned to the King.
When th ey had showed their red-lined necks to him, he sighed deeply and
said, “W ang Hoshang possesses the power of spirits. Human strength is no
match for it. Let him be.”
Not long after this event the  King's daughter was stricken by a
mysterious malady and Hyet'on g was summoned to the palace  to ef fect a
remedy . The monk approached her bed and uttered a spell, and she rose as if
she were awakening from sleep, to the great joy of the King.
Hyet'ong explained to the King that Chong Kong had perished because
of th e dr agon's r esentment. The King repented a d cancelled the sentence of
execution against Chong Kong's wife and children. He also promoted
Hyet'ong to the rank of Royal Monk. (In Chinese legal practice the family
of a condemned criminal was punished with him.)
The dragon, having avenged himself on Chong Kong, retreated to a
forest in  Kijang-san, where he ch anged to a giant bear and did m ore harm to
human c reatures. Hyet'ong ente red forest, found the bear and commanded,
“Kill no more,” From that time there were no more bear -bites in that forest.
Before t his, Kin g Sinmun had a n ulcer on his back and asked H yet'ong
to cure him. The monk uttered a short spell and the King was healed
immediately . Th en Hyet'ong said, “Y our Majesty , in a previous incarnation
you were the grand vizier of a king. By mistake you employed a man of
good fam ily nam ed Sin-ch'ung as a slave and held him in bondage too long.
Whenever this resentful soul is reborn into this world he brings mischief on
you in retaliatio n. I suggest that  you build a temple and pray fo r the repose
of his soul, which now wanders in the nether regions.”
The King followed Hyet'ong's advice and immediately had a temple
built, ca lling it Sinch'ung Pong song-sa. On the day of its dedication, as a
lar ge tab le of sacrifice was being of fered to the slave's departed spirit, a
voice was heard from the sky—
“The King has built a new temple for me;
I can escape from the hell of pain.
Now my soul is free—my enmity has melted away .”
A hall named C holwon-tang (Enmity Melting Shrine) was built where
this song was heard. The temple and the shrine, weather -beaten and
over grown with moss, still stand on the mountain.

After Milbon, a high monk n amed Myongnang entered the dragon
palace to  receive  a holy seal (Munduru in Sanskrit) and founded a temple in
Sinyurim (God's Forest, now Ch'onwang-sa, the Deva T emple) to pray for
the r epulse of frequent invasions from neighboring nations. (This paragraph
is probably out of place as it refers to the previous section.)
Hyet'ong the W ang Hoshang traveled throughout the country exorcising
devils an d building temples to mollify the grudges of oppresse d souls. He
preached the spirit of W u-wei (No Fear , the name of his Chin ese mentor)
and brought moral reform to th e corrupt world. Buddhist institutions such
as Ch'on gji-am on Ch'onma-san  and Chusogwon in Mo-ak all belonged to
the school handed down from Milbon (by Hyet'ong, presumably .)
Some pe ople say that Hyet'ong w as Chonsung Kakkan, a prime minister
of Silla, but his actual services t o the court were not seen or heard (i.e. were
of a  spiritual nature). Others s ay that he killed a wolf and a jackal by
shooting them, but that is an unreliable story .

Song in Praise of Hyet'ong
The mountain peach and the brook apricot reflect on the hedge—
Spring is deep on the hilly paths and flowers are red on both banks.
Fortunately our young lord caught the otter by his strength,
And chased the devil dragon far away from the King's capital.
1 13. Myongnang and the Holy Seal
According to an antique record a t Kumgwang-sa (T emple of the Golden
Light). Myongn ang was born in Silla and went to China for Buddhist
studies. During his return voyage he was invited to enter the p alace of the
King Dr agon of the Sea, and instructed the dragon in esoteric Buddhist
prayers. The dragon gave him 1,000 yang (pounds) of gold and escorted
him thro ugh a submarine tunne l which ended under a well from which he
sprang i nto his home garden. He then donated his home for con version into
a t emple  and decorated its pago da with the gold given him by the dragon.
The glit tering gold shone far a nd wide to the four directions,  and so the
temple was named Kumgwang-sa, the T emple of Golden Light. The
biographies of the Monks erroneously calls it Kumu-sa (T emple of the
Golden Feather).
Myongnang was the son of Ch ae-ryang, a Sagan of ficial of Silla. His
mother was Lady Namgan, otherwise called Popsungnang (Maid of the
Buddha Boat), a daughter of Sop an Murim, Kim-ssi and a sister of the great

monk Chajang. Chae-ryang had three sons—Kukkyo, Uian and Myongnang
—who all became monks. Myongnang was the youngest. His mother
dreamed that she swallowed a blue jewel when she conceived him.
In the first year of Queen Son dok (632) Myongnang went to China,
returning in the ninth year of C hen-kuan (635). In the first yea r of T sung-
chang (6 68) the  Chinese general Li Chi led a lar ge army again st Koguryo
and dest royed th at kingdom with the aid of Silla. The T'ang g eneral then
stationed his troops in (the former territory of) Paekje in order to destroy
Silla also, but the brave Silla soldiers, inspired by the Hwarang spirit,
hurled back the invaders. Infuriated, the Emperor (T'ang Kao-tsung)
commanded Hsueh Pang, a fierce general, to launch a second attack on Silla
by sea.
King M unmu of Silla, fearful of this formidable enemy , called upon
Myongnang to use his esoteric prayers and thus the attack was forestalled,
as it is w ritten in  the biography of that king. From that time on Myongnang
was hon ored by  the whole nati on as the founder of Sinin-jon g (the Holy
Seal Sect).
Early in  the reign of King T'ae jo (W ang Kon, the founder of  Koryo)
there we re frequent attacks on the country's shores by pirates. The King
requested two famous monks, K wanghak and T aeyon, the heirs of Anhye
and Nangyung, to suppress the disturbances by means of the esoteric
prayers handed down from Myongnang. At the same time, King T'aejo
elevated Myong nang to the sam e rank as the nine royal fathers of Silla
beginning with Y ong-su, and founded Hyonsong-sa (T emple of the
Appearing Sage) to perpetuate the sect which he had founded.
About tw enty li to the southeast of Kyongju is a temple called W onwon-
sa. F olk tales relate that it was f ounded at the desire of four monks (Anhye,
Nangnyung, Kw anghak and T aeyon) and also of Kim Y u-sin, K im Ui-won
and Kim Sul-jong. They also say that the bones of the four monks are
buried o n the eastern peak above the temple, which is called Chosa-am
(Rock o f the Founder Monks) on Saryong-san (Mountain of the Four
Spirits), honoring them as high monks of Silla.
The mile stone at T olbaek T emple bears the following inscription: “Long
ago there lived in Kyongju a petty of ficial whose title was Ho-jang and
whose n ame was Koch'on. His mother was Ajinyo, her mother was
Myongjunyo, and her grandmother was Chokninyo. Chokninyo had two
sons, Kwanghak T aedok and T aeyon Samjung (childhood name Sonhoe)

who both became monks. In th e second year of Chang-hsing (931) these
two bro thers followed T'aejo to Songdo (Kaesong), where they burned
incense on the a ltar and prayed for the prosperity of the royal  household.
T'aejo praised their loyalty and  donated a farm for a 'Po' fo undation to
support annual memorial services for the parents of the two monks.” 1
It is  clea r from this inscription that Kwanghak and T aeyon were in the
train of T'aejo and that Anhye co llaborated with Kim Y u-sin in t he founding
of W onwon T emple. Although  the two brother monks are buried in the
tombs of the fou r holy men, this  does not mean that all four were concerned
in th e fo undation of W onwon-sa, or that all four of them went with T'aejo to
Songdo on his triumphant return.
VII. Tales of Devotion
1 14. The Goddess Mother of the Fairy Peach
During the reign of King Chin p'yong (579-632) a nun named Chihye
lived at  Anhung T emple, which she wished to have repaired and
redecorated. On e night in a dream she saw a beautiful fairy be decked with
jewels and necklaces who said t o her in a kind but solemn voic e, “I am the
goddess-mother of Fairy Peach  Mountain and I am very pleased to know
that you  are going to repair the palace of Buddha. I will give y ou ten keun
of gold for the project. T ake it from under my seat and decorate the three
main images of the temple. On the walls paint fifty-three Buddh as, together
with hea venly saints, goddesses , and the god-kings of the five mountains
(T'oham-san in the east, Chiri-s an in the south, Keryong-san in the west,
T'aebaek-san in the north and Pu -ak or Kong-san in the center of Silla). On
the tenth day of each month in spring and autumn, let all the devoted
followers of Buddha gather in the temple for prayer .” (Ilyon notes here that
this story has a strong resemblan ce to one from China which relates that the
dragon of Kulbul-chi appeared to the Emperor in a dream and asked him to
establish a seminary in honor of Bhedjagura, the Buddha of healing, on
Y ongch'u-san, the Holy Eagle Mountain in order to open a smooth sea
passage—that is, a means of entering paradise.)
Chihye awoke in amazement. E arly the next morning she fo und one
hundred and sixty yang of gold under the seated image of the goddess-
mother in her shrine and carried out her plan.

The goddess-mo ther first came to Chinhan and gave birth to a heavenly
son, Kyokkose, who became the first King of Silla, and a daughter , Aryong,
whom he married. This is why she was called the goddess-mother . She
lived on Sondo-san (Fairy Peac h Mountain) where she wove r ed silk into
court robes with the assistance  of all the heavenly fairies and presented
them to her husb and. Chinhan was called Keryong, Kerim or Paekma (Cock
Dragon, Cock's Forest or White Horse) because the cock bel ongs to the
west.
The goddess-mo ther was a Chinese princess named Shasu. She learned
the magic of the fairies and flew through the air to visit the scenic beauties
of t he Land of  the Morning Calm, often staying long. Her father the
Emperor tied a letter to the foot of a hawk and sent it to her . The message
read: “B uild you r new palace o n the mountain where the hawk  perches to
rest.”
The princess flew with the hawk and saw it stop on So-ak (W est Hill in
Kyongju). She landed there and  became the mountain spirit, calling the hill
Soyon-san (W est Hawk Mountain). From then on she did many wonders.
King Kyongmyong (917-924) w ent hunting on this mountain and lost
his hawk. He therefore prayed to the goddess-mother , saying, “If I should
see my hawk return, I will bestow a title on him.” When he returned to the
palace he found the hawk perched on his jade table, and in great joy gave
his favorite bird the title of Sir Hawk.
In th e Samguk S agi it is written , “When Kim Pu-sik (the author of the
Samguk Sagi) visited China as the King's envoy in the years o f Chen-huo
(1 100-1 125) he worshipped at a shrine of gods and goddesses called
Y ushenkuan, where he saw a seated image of a fairy . The reception of ficial,
W ang-pu, said to him, 'This is a  goddess of your country . Didn't you know
that?' Th e learned of ficial explained as follows: 'Long ago a princess of
China went adrift and was cast u pon the shores of Chinhan, where she gave
birth to a son w ho became the founder of a kingdom in Haedo ng (East of
the Sea). The princess became an earth-spirit and lived long on the
Mountain of the Fairy Peach. Here is her lifelike image.' ”
When W ang Hsiang, a Sung env oy , came to Koryo, he of fered sacrifice
to the goddess-mother and read a memorial which said in part, “She gave
birth to a sage who founded a nation.”
Shasu d onated g old to make a Buddhist image. She lighted the  incense
and established a ferry and bridge, not for herself to enjoy long life, but for

all c reatures to enter paradise. (Here is a perfect example of the way in
which B uddhism assimilated the beliefs which it encountered. The goddess-
mother , who very probably con stitutes a legend antedating the coming of
Buddhism, is incorporated into  the Buddhist scheme of thing s by being
given the attributes of a Bodhisattva.)

Song in Praise of the Goddess-Mother of the Fairy Peach
Many a starry night and frosty day she lived alone on the W es t Hill of
the Hawk;
She called the heavenly empe ror's daughters to weave her rainbow
dress.
How she envied wondrous thrills in her long human life!
She saw the g olden spirit (Buddha) and became a jade empress
(goddess).
1 15. Ukmyon, the Slave Girl who Enter ed the Lotus Paradise
During the reign of King Kyo ngdok (742-765) a group of devoted
Buddhists in Kangju (now Chinju) built a temple called Mita-sa in a grove
of trees and began to worship Buddha for ten thousand days  in order to
enter th e lotus paradise. Among the worshippers was a female slave
belonging to the aristocratic family of Kwi-jin whose name was Ukmyon.
She foll owed he r noble master to the temple every evening and of fered a
prayer , standing outside in the courtyard and bowing toward the august
image in the main hall.
Her unkind master did not like  this. He gave her two lar ge b ags (ten
bushels) of rice to pound to pearly white each day , to keep her busy at
home. B ut she worked so diligently that she was able to att end prayers
before dawn and after sunset each day . Moreover , as a sign of her devotion,
she goug ed hole s in her two hands and passed a straw rope through them,
which was then tied to two pegs on opposite sides of the temple courtyard.
One eve ning the assembled worshippers heard a voice from the sky ,
which sa id, “Uk myon, my faithful maid, enter the main hall of the Buddha
and of fer your prayer .” They  invited the poor girl to enter , and she
approached the image of the merciful Buddha on her knees and murmured
her prayer in a low voice, lifting her eyes in rapture to the half-closed eyes
of B uddha. Suddenly the sound of heavenly music was heard from the west,
and a swift whirlwind swept into the palace of the Buddha. U kmyon was
lifted int o the sky through a gaping hole in the ceiling and roof , higher and

higher a s she flew toward the w estern side of the temple. There her mortal
body fel l away and she became a Kwanum (Goddess of Mercy) seated on a
lotus pedestal and flew to th e lotus paradise while heavenly music
continued from  the sky and brilliant rays illuminated the rapturous
spectators below .
Another version of this story is found in the Book of Monks (Sung-jon).
T ongnyang-P'aljin, an incarnation of Kwanum, or ganized a Hwarang order
of one thousand men and divided them into two groups, one for physical
labor and one fo r mental culture. One of the members of the labor group
violated the Buddhist command ments and in consequence was reborn as a
cow at Pusok T emple. While carrying Buddhist books on her back the cow
died and was reb orn as a human being by the power of the books. This was
Ukmyon, a slave in the household of Kwijin, a nobleman.
One day  Ukmyo n went on an errand to a mountain called Haga-san, and
there she experienced a trance in which she saw Buddha and was possessed
with the holy spirit.
Mita-sa, founded by Hyesuk Popsa, was not far from the house of
Kwijin. For nine years, whenever her master went to worship  Buddha in
that temple, Ukmyon followed him to of fer her prayers.
On the twenty-f irst day of the first month of the tenth year , while she
was worshipping  Buddha, she s oared up into the sky , breaking through the
ceiling and roof of the palace o f Buddha. She flew above the highest peak
of Sobaek-san, where she dropped one of her straw shoes. The first Bo
T emple was built near this mountain crest. The second Bo T emple was built
in a grov e of Bo trees (Bodedrum) below the mountain, where s he shed her
earthly s hell and  her soul entere d the lotus paradise. At Mita-s a there was
hung a gilt panel which read “Ukmyon's Ascension Palace.”
In the roof of the temple there was a hole lar ge enough for a man to pass
through, and wonderful to tell, even during heavy rain and snow the palace
of B uddha where her image was seated never got wet. In later generations,
however , the admirers of Ukmyon filled the hole by building a gilt pagoda
on th e fl oor of the temple, decorated with lotus petals and buds, and on this
pagoda they inscribed the story of Ukmyon the slave girl.
After Ukmyon had gone to the lotus paradise, Kwijin donated h is house
to th e monks, declaring it to be a holy place where an ange l had lived.
When it  had been remodeled into a temple he called it Popwang -sa. He also
donated farmland to the temple.

After m any years, when the temple lay in ruins on a hillside,  a pious
monk named Hoegyong, togethe r with Y usok and Y i W on-chan g, two local
of ficials, promoted its reconstruction. Hoegyong, the strong monk, carried
the timb ers on his shoulders. In a dream one night an old man ga ve him two
pairs of  shoes woven of hemp  and arrowroot vines, led him to the old
shrine, a nd poin ted out some gia nt trees in the forest, giving him instruction
in Buddhist doctrine. (When he awoke) Hoegyong felled the tre es and used
them in building  the temple, which was finished in five years. This was the
famous temple of slaves in the southeast. All the pilgrims who visited it
said that Kwijin had been reborn as Hoegyong, the good monk.
An old local legend book says t he miracle of Ukmyon occurred during
the reign of King Kyongdok, whereas the Biography of Jin says that she
lived du ring the reign of King Aejang and did this wonder in th e third year
of Y uan-huo (808). There wer e four kings between the reigns of Kings
Kyongdok and Aejang during a  period of more than sixty years. In fact,
Kwijin came first and Ukmyon last. The biography dif fers from  the legend
in introducing them the other way around.
(This is  fairly mystifying as the present text represents them as
contemporaries.)

Song in Praise of Ukmyon
When Buddha's lantern was bright in the old western temple,
She finished pounding rice to worship Buddha at midnight;
She punctured her clasped hands with a straw rope to mortify her flesh;
As she murmured softly in prayer she flew to heaven in Buddha's arms.
1 16. Kwangdok and Omjang, T wo Friendly Monks
During t he reign of King Munmu (661-681) two friendly monks  lived in
Kyongju. Kwangdok lived in a quiet place in the western precincts of
Punhwang T emple with his wife and made his living by weaving straw
shoes, and Omjang worked on a farm near a hermitage which he had built
in the valley of Nam-ak.
One eve ning as the last rays of sunlight illuminated the silent t reetops.
Omjang heard a voice: “I am going to the lotus paradise. Be faithful to
Buddha and come to see me there soon. Goodbye.”
Omjang saw that a rainbow had made a bridge from earth to heaven,
while sw eet mus ic played above the clouds. He envied his friend, who had
gone to the world of eternal pe ace and comfort ahead of him, and sighed,

“Ah me! It is his voice telling o f his journey home to paradise. Indeed, we
promised to inform one another of our final departure from earth to heaven,
and now the angels have taken him first.”
Early next morning Omjang vi sited the home of Kwangdok and saw
that he was dead. He helped the  widow with the funeral arrang ements, and
afterward as night came on he sat down and talked with her .
“Now y our husband is no more, would you like to come and live with
me?”
“I am willing,” she replied.
“Come and lie with me! W e will prove all the pleasures imaginable on
the first night of our married joy .” And he began to undress her .
“I am blushing w ith shame,” she said, “and yet I pity you in your heated
passion. Y ou seek the clean paradise with a muddied soul, like a man who
tries to catch fish by climbing a tree.”
“Kwangdok did so,” he objected, “and yet he entered the lotus p aradise.
Why not I? I must enjoy you tonight as he did on many nights as man and
wife.”
“My husband Kwangdok,” the woman said, “lived with me for more
than ten years, but he never slept in the same bed with me or em braced me
in unclean passion. Every night  he and I knelt erect and recite d in unison
the names of Ami-T abul and the sixteen doorways leading to the lotus
paradise. When he saw a vision of the wondrous world we redressed the
balance of our bodies by sitting cross-legged with our thumbs and middle
fingers almost touching, as Buddhist images do. He was a devoted follower
of Buddha. Where else could he have gone but to the home of Buddha in
the lotus paradise? Y ou are running to the east while trying to reach the
west.”
Much ashamed, Omjang apolo gized to the widow and then visited
W onhyo Popsa,  to whom he confessed his advances to this  wonderful
woman. The great monk taught  him how to regain admittance to paradise
by reciting the names of the sixteen doorways.
Omjang repented his sins and gave up his lust, concentrating on
awakening his soul so as to be worthy to enter the gates of heaven, and at
length h e also entered the lotus  paradise. The recital of the names of the
sixteen d oorways is explained in the Biography of W onhyo Pop sa and also
in the Biographies of the Haedong Monks.

As f or the wom an, she was a  nun at Punhwang temple, wh ere she
became one of the nineteen Kwanums. There is a song about her:

Moon, moon, lady moon! Are you sailing to the west?
When you reach home first, tell the heavenly king
There is a man praying to Buddha of everlasting life,
Praying with clasped hands to the Buddha of the eternal vow ,
“I long to go to paradise, I long to go to paradise!”
Ah, if you leav e and forsake me, can you have all your forty-eight
wishes?
1 17. Kyonghung Meets a Holy Man
During the reign of King Sinmun in Silla (681-692) a monk lived in
Ungch'onju who se religious name was Kyonghung and whose family name
was Su. By the time he was eighteen, he had mastered all three  parts of the
teachings of Buddha—sermons, laws, and doctrines—and the world rang
with his praise.
In t he first yea r of Kai-yao ( 681) when King Munmu was on his
deathbed, he said to his succes sor (King Sinmun), “Kyonghu ng Popsa is
worthy of the of fice of Kuksa (National T eacher); do not for get my
command.” When King Sinmun  ascended the throne he therefore appointed
Kyonghung to this of fice, with his residence at Samnang T emple.
But Kyonghung fell ill and was confined to his bed for many months.
Then one day a  nun came to visit him, and said, “In the Hwao m scripture
there is a golden saying: 'A goo d friend heals illness.' Now yo u are ailing
because of the melancholy and anxiety in your heart. If you laugh and
for get everything you will be restored to health.” And she brought out an
eleven-faced puppet and made it perform humorous dances before
Kyonghung, with comic gesture s and sarcastic gestures, scene after scene in
rapid su ccession, until the monk nearly split his sides with laughter , and his
health was immediately restored.
The nun  then bid him goodbye and went to Namhang T emple to the
south of  Kyonghung's temple. There she hid herself, leaving her staf f in
front of the picture of the eleven-faced Dharmas in the Golden Hall.
(Kwanum is often pictured with  eleven faces, and there is a sug gestion here
that Kyonghung had been visited by the Bodhisattva.)
One day  Kyong hung came to v isit the palace mounted on a beautifully
caparisoned hors e and followed by a long train of servants. Eve ryone made

way for the pro cession except a haggard-looking hermit (or m onk) with a
basket containing a fish on his back, who stood leaning upon his staf f on the
dismounting platform in front of the palace.
“Get ou t, fellow!” the servants shouted. “How can you wear a monk's
robe and  carry a fish, which the Buddhist religion forbids you  to touch or
eat?” (Monks are supposed to be strictly vegetarian.)
The monk drew himself up with dignity and said, “Who is more to
blame, a man who carries a dead fish on his back or a man who holds living
flesh between his legs?” And with these words he departed.
Eventually Kyon ghung came out of the palace and was about to mount
his horse when he heard his servants discussing the strange monk. In great
surprise he sent them to find ou t where the man lived. Seeing the servants
coming after him, the monk threw down his basket outside Munsu T emple
and disa ppeared, and they found only his staf f in front of th e image of
Munsu Buddha. In the basket the y found, not a dried fish but a piece of pine
bark
When th e servants told Kyonghung what they had seen, he sighed
deeply a nd said,  “A great sage has descended from heaven to warn me not
to ri de horses.” And from that day until his death he was neve r again seen
mounted on a horse.
A recor d of Kyonghung's virtuous deeds was written by the monk
Hyonpon and inscribed on a stone monument at Samnang-sa.
In th e Po hyon S utra it is written , “The Maitreya Bodhisattva said, T will
be rebor n in Y ompuche (in India ) to save the descendants of the disciples of
Sakyamuni, but I will exclude all mounted monks, for they will never see
Buddha.'

Song in Praise of Kyonghung
Great is the ancient sage's model deed shown to the multitude;
Why should not the descendants diligently follow his example?
If a monk should shamelessly carry a fish on his back,
How could he proudly wear the dragon's flower on his head?

(The last line refers to the flowering tree under which Maitr eya was
sitting when he became a Buddha.)
1 18. T wo Ragged Monks

(The firs t of these moral tales re fers to one of the most famous incidents
in Chine se histo ry , the rebellion of An Lu-shan against the T'ang Emperor
Hsuan-tsung (no t “Ming-wang” as in certain popular ballads). In his sixties
this Emperor took as a concub ine the beautiful Y ang Kuei-fei (“consort”
Y ang) a nd is said to have fallen completely under her influence. She
showed great favor to a general named An Lu-shan, and is rumored to have
been his lover . Eventually he revolted and was at first succ essful. The
Emperor was forced to flee, and his discontented soldiers insisted upon the
execution of Y ang Kuei-fei and her brother . The rebellion was crushed soon
afterwards. Though it survived  for another century and a half, the T'ang
dynasty was permanently weakened by this rebellion.
(The second story has nothing  to do with Korea and is evidently
included simply because of its resemblance to the first.)
After the  reign of the Empress W u, who in the first year of Chang-shou
(692) set aside the rightful sovereign and usurped the throne  for twenty
years in China, Emperor Chung-tsung resumed the throne and ruled for nine
years. At this t ime King Hyoso of Silla came to the throne and began
building Mangdok T emple, which was dedicated to the T'ang royal family .
In t he fourteenth year of Kin g Kyongdok (755) the pagoda in the
courtyard of Mangdok-sa was shaken from top to bottom. T his was the
same year that A n Lu-shan made an alliance of love with Y ang K uei-fei and
led a rebellion, with an attempt upon the life and throne of T'ang Ming-
wang (H suan-tsung). The peop le of Silla denounced the adulation of the
T'ang rulers by their royal family , asserting that it was natural that the
pagoda was shaken to its foundation, since the temple had been built in
flattery of the decadent T'ang royalty .
A festiv al was held at Mangdok-sa on its completion, and the King
attended the ceremony in person . There he saw an unmarried monk, dressed
in rags and bent with age, stan ding in the courtyard. “Y our M ajesty ,” the
monk said, “allow this poor monk to participate in the ceremony .”
“W ith great pleasure,” the King replied. “Please take a seat and worship
the great Buddha on this happy day .”
When the ceremony was over th e King said jokingly , “My good monk,
where do you live?”
“I live under Pip'a-am (Harper's Rock),” he replied.
“When you go home,” the King said, “do not tell anybody that you
of fered sacrifices to the great Buddha in the company of the King.”

“My go od King,” laughed the monk, “please tell nobody that you
of fered sacrifice s to the incarna tion of Buddha.” And he rose into the air
and flew away toward the south.
In great surprise  and shame the  King bowed in that direction and sent
courtiers to find the flying monk. After a time they returned and reported
that they had fo und the monk's bronze staf f and wooden bowl on a rock in
Samsong-gok (T hree Star V alley) near Namsan, but the monk w as nowhere
to be found.
The King had a Sakya T emple built beneath Harper's Rock, and  another
called Pulmu-sa  (No Buddha T emple) on the spot where the monk
disappeared, with his staf f and bowl preserved in it.

***
In volum e IV of Chiron (Book  on Intelligence) we find the following
story . Lo ng, lon g ago there liv ed in Kashmir in India a wandering monk
named Kebin San-tsang (which simply means “learned monk of Kashmir")
who alw ays dre ssed in shabby clothing. One day during a lecture tour to
Aranya (Sanskr it for temple) m eetings, he came to Ilwang-sa (One-King
T emple) and found that a company of rich people were of fering lar ge
quantities of good food and wine as sacrifices to Buddha. Thrice he entered
the temp le gate and thrice he was pushed out by the gatekeepers because his
clothing was not neat and tidy .
After a time he returned wearing a fine robe and the same gatekeepers
let h im pass. Th e worshippers said, “Here comes a noble guest! Come in!
Please b e seated ! Help yourself! The ceremony is over , Buddha  has had his
breakfast, and now we are enjoying a good dinner with the foo d and wine
we of fered him.” (That is, the spiritual essence of the of fering has been
accepted by Buddha and the worshippers are now free to consume its
material part.)
Instead of putting the food and wine into his mouth, the monk p ut them
on his robe, saying, “Eat, drink and be merry!” All the comp any thought
this very strange and asked the monk why this toast to his robe.  “Because,”
he replied, “it is not me but my fine robe to which you are serving all this
good food and wine.”
In this mortal w orld of vainglory men and women are treated ac cording
to their looks, their clothes, their ornaments. People worship Buddha for his
fine image, intricately carved and richly gilded, and small-minded monks

are more interested in eating the food of fered to Buddha than in chanting
prayers to him.
These two stories are written in the same spirit.

Song in Praise of the T wo Ragged Monks
The feasting monks call their rich friends to feed their gilded images,
And to admire their newly made pictures of silver Buddhas;
The living Buddha in the human mind is often lost sight of,
Just as the faint moon over Harper's Rock is overcast with clouds,
And its somber  shadow is refle cted in the pool with dim and broken
rays.
1 19. W olmyong's L yric Songs
On April 1 in the nineteenth year of King Kyongdok (760) two suns
appeared in the sky and remain ed for ten days, an omen of catastrophe on
earth. Alarmed, the King summoned his courtiers together and asked them
what should be done. The royal astrologer said, “In order to avert the
coming disaster we must find a lucky monk to compose and, read aloud the
prayer 'Sanhwa-kongdok' (V irtue of scattering Flowers).”
The King ordered his servants  to build a purified temporary altar in
front of  the audience hall and proceeded to Ch'ongyang-nu (Spring
Pavilion) to await the coming of the lucky monk who was pre destined to
perform this great feat. Just then W olmyong-sa (Moonlight Priest) was seen
walking along the road south of the palace. He was quickly bro ught before
the King.
“My goo d monk ,” the King said , “I command you to compose a prayer
and read it aloud before the Buddhist altar . Perhaps the spiritual power of
your music will charm away my grief over the two suns in the sky .”
“Y our Majesty ,”  W olmyong replied, “I am a monk of the Kukson
Hwarang order (a religious ad junct of the Hwarang). I know  Hyang-ga
(native folksongs) but I am not well versed in Sanskrit music.”
“Never m ind,” s aid the King. “S ince you are the one chosen today , you
may com pose a fine song in our native language rather than an Indian song,
so that all my people can sing it.”
W olmyong then improvised a 'T osol-ga' (Song of the T sita Heaven) as
follows.
I sing as I scatter thee, O flowers!
Fall and obey the decree of a straight mind;

Attend the King Maitreya on his throne. This song may be paraphrased
as follows:
I sing of scattering flowers on the dragon pavilion;
As I send a petal to the blue clouds today
For it to serve a sincere, straight mind
And enter the spiritual home in the faraway heaven of T sita.
In vulg ar language this is called 'Sanhwa-ga' (Song of Sc attering
Flowers) but it s hould be 'T osol-ga' (Song of the T sita Heaven).  Sanhwa-ga
is a dif fe rent song of many verses in vulgar words, and so has been omitted
from these pages.
Soon af ter the song was sung the mysterious sign of calamity in the
heavens disappe ared, and one b lazing sun shone upon the earth  as the sole
ruler of the day .
Greatly delighte d, the King rew arded the monk with a package  of fine
tea a nd a  rosary of 108 crystal b eads. Suddenly a handsome youth appeared
from the western service gate bearing the gifts in his hands. W olmyong
thought he was one of the Queen's pages, while the King guessed he was a
follower of W olmyong, but both were wrong, for he vanished from their
sight like a mist. The King sent servants to fetch him back, but he hid
himself in the N aewon Pagoda , leaving the tea and the rosary before the
southern mural painting of Maitreya.
Seeing h ow W olmyong's devotion thus moved the Buddha, the people
of Silla admired  his virtues. The  King paid him the highest respect and gave
him a gift of one hundred rolls of silk.
One day W olmyong of fered sacrifice to the spirit of his dead sister and
sang an elegy of his own composition to Hyang-ga music:
I depart in tears; farewell.
O.... stay! Why hurry away without saying all your words?
Like leaves in the autumn wind hither and thither
W e scatter from the branch where we grew together .
But don't you know where you are going?
I shall build a road to Amitabha land
And wait there till we meet again.
As he sang this doleful song w ith many tears a mad wind arose in the
sky and blew the  paper money a way to the west. (Special paper money was
used in memorial services for the dead.)

W olmyong played the flute very often when he was living at Sach'on-
wang-sa (T empl e of the Four Deva Kings). One night as he str olled along
the r oad in front of the temple p laying his flute in the moonligh t, the orbed
maiden of the sky paused in her journey across the Milky W ay  and looked
down up on him as if charmed by his heartfelt music. The people named that
part of the roa d W olmyong-ni (Moonlight V illage) and his  fame as a
musician spread  far and wide. W olmyong was a disciple of Nungchun-
T aesa, a renowned monk of S illa. The people loved to sing Hyang-ga
folksongs, whic h moved even t he hearts of spirits in heaven and earth on
many occasions.

Song in Praise of W olmyong
The high winds blew away the paper money to pay for his sister's
journey to the other world;
The trill of his flute moved the lady Moon to make a Heng-o of her .
Do not say that heaven-stretching T osol is far away;
W e reach it with a song of ten-thousand-virtue flowers.

(T osol, T sita in Sanskrit, is the fo urth of the Buddhist heavens, w here all
earthly passions  are for gotten. H eng-o (Hang-a in Korean) is t he name of
the spirit of the moon, here compared to W olmyong's sister .)
120. Sonyul Returns fr om Death
Sonyul, a good monk of Ma ngdok T emple, used the donation he
received from local people to  pay for the copying of the s ix hundred
volumes of the Buddhist scrip ture called Panya-gyong (a book on the
intelligence, Prajna in Sanskrit). But before he could finish th e work the
messenger of death came and took him to the Y ellow Spring (t he world of
the dead).
The sorrowful monk stood be fore the King of Hell in the Hall of
Judgment. Befo re him were a mirror and a scale, which reflected and
weighed the sins of the dead. On the basis of their evidence, the court
decided whether to send the sou l to hell, pur gatory of heaven. (This is not to
be understood in the Christian sense, for every soul is eventually reborn
until it reaches Nirvana in Buddhist doctrine. No other state is permanent.)
The King looked into the mirror  and then at the monk's face an d asked,
“What was your occupation during life in human society?”

“I was a monk, ” Sonyul answered. “I began copying the six hundred
volumes of a Buddhist scripture, but before I could complete it I was
brought to Y our Majesty's dark palace.”
“Hum!” said the King. “Y ou are a good monk and have sinned against
nobody . According to my records your life is now over and your soul must
say fare well to your flesh. But since your long-cherished nob le work has
not been finished, I shall give you a special pardon, and allow you to return
to li fe until all of the sacred vo lumes are compiled and copied. Y ou may
go.”
During his journey back to the land of the living, Sonyul enco untered
the soul of a woman, who, bowing to him and weeping, said, “I was a
native o f Silla in Namyomju. Because my parents stole part of a rice field
belonging to Kumgang T emple , I entered this dark world and have been
subjected to unspeakable torme nt. When you return to life, please tell my
father and mother to return the l and immediately . During my lifetime I hid a
bottle of  sesame  oil under my toilet box and a roll of my han d-spun silk
between the folds of my quilt. If you burn the oil in the temple lantern and
sell the silk to pay for your co pying expenses, I will be freed from the
torments of the Y ellow Spring by your grace.”
“Where was your home on earth?” Sonyul asked.
“Y ou will find it southwest o f Kuwon T emple in Saryang-pu,” she
replied.
Sonyul came to life again after he had been buried at the foot of
Namsan for ten days. He called loudly from his grave for three days, and at
last a cowherd heard him and ran to the temple to tell the strange news.
Soon a group of sturdy monks arrived, dug into the grave, and released the
resurrected mon k from the grassy mound. Breathing a sigh, So nyul related
to them his adventures in the world of the dead.
He visited the home of the woman whom he had met on the banks of the
Y ellow Spring, as she had requested. She had been dead for fifteen years,
but the sesame oil and the silk w ere still there, and as fresh as n ew . Sonyul
prayed t o Buddha for her soul, and one night she came to him  in a dream
and said. “Thanks to your grace, my soul is now at peace.”
All the people admired the great virtue of the resurrected monk and
assisted him in copying the treasured volumes, until the fine  series was
completed. They are now kept in  the archives of the monks of K yongju, and

twice a year , in spring and autumn, the ancient pages are spread in the sun
to banish devils and catastrophes.

Song in Praise of Sonyul
I envy your victory over death;
Y our soul flies home to its old forests and fountains.
When my parents ask about my fate in the lower world,
T ell them to restore a furrow of farmland for me.
121. Kim Hyon and the T igr ess
During the reign of King W on song in Silla (785-799) there lived a
young m an nam ed Kim Hyon. In  those days there was a strange superstition
that any one who had a great wish in his heart could have it granted if he
prayed e very ni ght from the eig hth to the fifteenth of February  every year
while walking around the tall pagoda in the precincts of Hungnyun T emple.
Kim Hyon had such a wish, and one night at midnight as h e paced
around t he pago da whispering his prayer , he heard the rustle of a woman's
dress behind him. Looking back  in surprise, he saw in the faint moonlight a
beautiful maiden, walking and praying as he was.
Now this girl was not so shy as might have been expected. She
approached Kim Hyon and said, “Pardon me for having surpris ed you like
this. T o speak th e truth, I too have a wish, which is why I am he re, but I am
lonely . Please allow me to fo llow in your footsteps.” Kim Hyon was
charmed by her beauty and re adily assented. Every night they walked
around the pagoda hand in hand, and there they fell in love. (Something
more substantial than mere sentiment is implied here.)
Love is sweet, b ut love is sad. Soon the final evening of their  prayers
had come, and t hey were forced to part. Kim Hyon took the girl's hand and
accompanied he r to her home in a forest remote from other human
habitation. It was a low thatched house and there seemed to be no-one about
except an old woman who appeared to be the girl's mother .
The old woman stared hard at Kim Hyon and said to her daughter ,
“Who is this who is so bold as to keep you company?” Feeling that
concealment would be useless , the girl explained what had happened
between herself  and the young man. “That's too bad,” the old woman
grumbled, “but since there's no  help for it we must hide him somewhere
before your three brothers come home.”

Hardly had they hidden him in a corner of the house w hen the
thunderous roars of three tigers in the distance broke the silence of the
night, and made the young man tremble from head to foot. Nearer and
nearer th ey cam e, until the door was flung open and a tiger said, “Oh, good
smell! Human flesh!”
“Nonsense!” the  old woman said angrily . “There's no human flesh in
this hou se. Listen, you fools! A dreadful thing has happened.  T onight an
oracle descende d from heaven, saying that since you have killed so many
living creatures you must be pun ished immediately .” The tigers looked pale
and trembled with fear .
Then the maiden interposed. “My brothers, you have promised the
merciful Buddh a not to harm living creatures any more. But you have
broken t his prom ise time and ag ain, and continue your cruel ol d game, nor
have you heeded my prayer at th e temple to stop your bad habit. Now your
doom is upon y ou. Repent and be gone, and I shall redeem your sins by
suf fering the heavenly punishm ent myself. Go, go quickly or they will kill
you.”
The three tigers looked very sad, hanging their heads and twitching their
long tails nervously . Then, in a twinkling, they were gone. The maiden
woke Kim Hyon from a swoon and said to him, “Through a singular
adventure I have enjoyed your passionate love, but unfortunately I am not
human. Nevertheless, I can never for get your tender caresses. I have
decided to take u pon myself the consequences of my brothers' evil deeds. In
other words, my life will soon be ended by the tigers' victims. It will make
me happ y , there fore, to die by your sword. Perhaps in this way  I can repay
your kindness somewhat. Listen ! T omorrow I will run amuck in the west
market a nd frig hten all the citi zens. Nobody in the kingdom will dare to
fight me and the  King will of fe r a prize to anyone who can. Then have no
fear , but  only chase me into this forest, where I will await the str oke of your
sword.”
Kim Hy on felt alarmed and shamed. “How can I kill my lov er even
though she is no t human?” He r eplied. “I'll not sell the life of my love for
gold or title.” And he chided her gently for wanting him to  commit so
inhuman an act.
“Do not say so,” she responde d. “My death in the prime of life is
heaven's will, your happiness, my family blessing and the nation's joy .
Please listen to me! If you build a temple for me after my death and pray for

my soul, you will do me a great favor .” When he saw that nothing would
avail, the youth embraced his lovely mistress and gave her a long farewell
kiss, as tears rained down her cheeks.
The following day a lar ge tigre ss appeared in the marketplace, roaring
and tearing at p eople, and everybody screamed and ran abou t the streets
crying “ T iger! T iger!” The King was alarmed and ordered a  tiger hunt,
of fering as a pri ze the second or der of nobility . But there was nobody brave
enough to face the tigress.
Kim Hy on then came and prost rated himself before the King, swearing
to e xecute his c ommand and free the people of the tiger . The King was
highly pleased and conferred the title on him in advance.
The young man girded on his sword and ran swiftly into the forest,
where the tigress maid awaited him. She saw him and ran to  meet him.
T aking his hands in hers she pressed them to her breast and said, “Last night
when we said farewell I asked you to come and meet me here today , and my
heart is bright with joy to take your last embrace. Now I may die in peace. I
wish you  long life and happiness . I am sorry to have scratched s ome people,
but if they will anoint their wo unds with the soy sauce of Hungnyun-sa
while lis tening t o the bell of that temple, the sores will heal.” (This remedy
for tiger bites an d scratches is st ill in use, Hyon says.) As quick as lightning
she snatched her lover's sword and plunged it deep into her throat.
Kim Hyon stood aghast over the body swimming in blood, but when his
eyes cle ared he saw that it was no longer a maiden but a beautiful tigress.
Soon a lar ge crowd gathered, shouting “Long live Kim Hyon!” They
brought him to the palace and presented the tigress' skin to the King to
spread u pon his throne. Highly pleased, the King gave Kim Hyon additional
rewards of gold and silver and promoted him to an of ficial position.
Kim Hy on was sad at heart, for though he had gained honor and  riches,
he h ad lost his beautiful lover . He could not for get her gentle love or the
manner in which she had given  her life to bring him happiness. He had a
temple b uilt on the spot where she had died near the western stream, and
there he  chanted passages from the Buddhist sutra Pommang-gyong. The
temple was named Howon-sa, the T emple of the T igress' W ish es. He knelt
in prayer for many days and nights for the repose of her soul.
Just bef ore he died Kim Hyon wrote down the story of his adventure
with the  beautifu l tigress, and it  filled the world with wonder . People called
the grove of trees where she had loved Nonhorim (T iger Forest).

There is  a similar Chinese story  which has a dif ferent tone. In t he ninth
year of Chen-yuan (793) a yellow-cap (commoner) named Shen T ao-cheng
started on a long journey to Hanchow to assume his new post as deputy
magistrate of Shihfang-hsien. Climbing mountains and crossing valleys he
came to a place ten li east of Ch enfu-hsien and there, as night came on, he
lost his way . W o rse still, it bega n to snow heavily . He was glad to halt his
horse at a humble cottage and as k for a night's hospitality . He was led into a
warm-floor room  where he saw  an aged couple and a young girl seated
around a charcoal brazier in the faint light of an oil lamp.
The girl was fourteen or fifte en years old. Though she wo re dirty
clothes her tender skin was smooth and white as snow , her f ace was as
lovely a s a peony under her u nkempt hair , and her movements were as
graceful as a fairy's.
“My hon ored gu est, you must b e very cold,” his host said. “Come near
the fire and warm yourself.”
“The night is dark and snow is falling,” he replied, “and my destination
in the western prefectural of fice is far of f. Suf fer me to rest here.”
“W e have only one room, and it is too humble,” the old man said. “But
if you don't mind that we will obey you.”
Shen un saddled his horse and spread his bedding in the room. As he
was doing this the girl washed her face and changed into fresh c lothing. As
she appeared from behind the rosy curtain her elegant figure was like that of
an Oriental bride coming to her husband on her wedding night.
“Y our daughter is bright and in telligent,” he said to his host. “If she is
not yet engaged, I should like to act as my own go-between.”
“If our honored guest wishes to have her for his wife, it will be a great
honor ,” the man replied.
Shen passed the night with the girl, and on the morrow he took  her on
his h orse with him and proceed ed on his journey to his post i n a country
of fice. H e had only a small sala ry there, but he was happy with his young
wife.
Moons waned and flowers scattered, but love remained. A son and a
daughter were born to them, and  he loved them all with adoration. One day
he gave his wife the following poem:
“When I became an of ficial I made Mei-fu blush;
In three years I made Meng-Kuang envy .
What can be compared to my happiness?

W e are like a pair of mandarin ducks swimming in a silvery stream.”
(Mei-fu was a celebrated of ficial during the Han dynasty , and Meng-
Kuang, a woman, figured in a sort of proverbial symbol of marital
happiness, like the English Darby and Joan.)
His wife  recited  this poem to herself constantly and intended to write an
answer , but kept it in her heart. Eventually Shen quit his of ficial post and
returned to his n ative place with his wife and children to enjoy a quieter life
in hi s ow n fields and gardens. But his wife grew suddenly sad, and one day
she said to him, “I will answer the poem which you gave me. Listen! Even
though our married love is dear ,  I long to see my maiden home  in the deep
forest. My heart grows heavier with the changing seasons as I think of the
burden of a hundred years' love with you!”
Shen sympathized with his wife, and so he took her to her maiden home
in th e green forest. But the house was empty , and she cried a ll day long,
thinking of her parents. But then she spied a tigress' skin han ging on the
wall and burst o ut laughing. “I didn't know it was still here,” she said. She
took the  skin from the wall and draped it around her body , and instantly she
was tra nsformed into a tigress which leaped through the door and
disappeared into the forest. Shen clutched his children to him in
consternation. He searched the  forest for many days calling her name
loudly , but she returned no more.
The her oes of both these stories fell in love with tigresses in  human
shape, b ut one wrote a disloyal poem to her husband and desert ed him with
roars and scratches, whereas the other hurt people only unwillingly and
even so gave he r man a good remedy for tiger bites. If even be asts of prey
can be so kind hearted, why are so many human beings inferior to beasts?
Attracted by the man who prayed at the pagoda and moved by heaven's
call for punishm ent of evil, the loving tigress redeemed the sins of all tigers,
bequeathed a remedy to save hu man lives, and inspired her love r to build a
temple a nd recite the Buddha's commandments. This miracle occurred not
merely because of the beast's go od nature, but by the universal benevolence
of Budd ha, who thus rewarded Kim Hyon and the tigress with eternal
blessings in the life to come.
Song in Praise of the T igr ess
Unable to bear the cruelties of her three brothers in the forest,
The dying orchid breathed a fragrant promise:
Since so many lives lacked righteousness,

She gave her own life for ten thousand deaths.
When she lay stretched out beneath the green trees,
Falling flowers scattered over her bleeding body .
122. Priest Y ungch'on Banishes a Comet
During t he reign  of King Chinp 'yong (579-632), three Hwarang  named
Koyollang, Silch'o-rang and Pod ong-nang once decided to go on  a picnic in
P'ung-ak (Maple Mountains, another name for the Diamond Mountains
because of the autumn foliag e). But they interrupted their journey in
foreboding when  they saw a comet in the constellation called Simtae-song.
It was not until the priest Y un gch'on composed a Hyang-ga and sang it
loudly t hat the mysterious star disappeared and the invading Japanese
soldiers ran away . Thus the pow er of his music turned a misfortune into a
blessing.
The Kin g was highly pleased and sent the Hwarang to P'ung-ak to enjoy
their picnic without having to worry about war or heavenly calamity , at
which times the Hwarang were obliged to take arms to protect the throne
and defend the country .

The Song of the Comet
Long ago there was a castle on an eastern beach where g randma
Kondalpa played;
When the W ai (Japanese) soldiers came, she raised a signal torch toward
the castle.
Now when the three Hwarang climb the mountain in sport
Lady moon gives her light early to show them their way
And a broom-star sweeps the path of her light.
Y et people look on that star and call it a comet.
The moon has sailed down over the hill;
What comet could there be?
123. The Monk Chongsu Saves a Fr eezing W oman
During the reign of King Aejang (800-809) a monk named Chongsu
lived at Hwangnyong T emple. One snowy winter night as he was returning
from Samnang-s a, he saw a beggar woman who had just been de livered of a
child lying uncovered outside the gate of Ch'onom-sa, all bu t frozen to
death. The monk took her in his arms and warmed her with hi s body until
she regained consciousness. T hen he covered her with hi s robe and

underclothes and returned to his temple, where he covered his own
nakedness with some rice-straw .
At midnight a heavenly voice rang out over the royal palace, saying,
“Chongsu, the monk of Hwangn yong T emple, ought to be awar ded the title
of W ang-sa (Royal Priest).” The  King sent servants to the temple to find out
what it was all about, and they s oon returned and reported to him the noble
deed of the monk. The King don ned his dragon robe and received the good
monk in audience in the inner p alace, where he bestowed upon him the title
of National Priest for his uncommonly virtuous deed.
VIII. Seclusion
124. Nangchi, the Cloud-Riding Monk
On Y ongch'u-san  (Holy Eagle Mountain) a strange monk once lived in a
hermitage for many years. Nobo dy in that remote area knew who he was or
even what his name was. He was always reciting the Buddh ist scripture
Pophwa-gyong, and he possessed wonderworking powers.
In the first year of Lung-shuo (661) there lived a novice (Sra mana in
Sanskrit) whose  name was Chit 'ong, who had been a slave in the house of
Iryang-kong. W hen he left his master's house to become a monk at the age
of seven, a crow flew up to h im and cawed, “Go to Y ongch'u-san and
become a disciple of Nangchi.”
Chit'ong accordi ngly went to the  mountain, and as he was resting under
a t ree a strange man appeared before him and said, “I am Po-hyon T aesa (a
Bodhisattva) and I have to give  you Buddha's commandments.” He taught
the l aws of Budd ha to the child and disappeared into the mist. C hit'ong was
mature and perfectly intelligent from that time forward.
Continuing his journey , he met a monk, and asked him, “Where can I
find Nangchi Popsa?”
“Why do you wish to see him?” the monk retorted. Chit'ong re counted
the mess age of the divine bird. T he monk smiled on him and said, “I am he.
The crow  just flew into my herm itage and said, 'A holy child is coming to
see you.  Go and meet him.' So here I am.” And he took Chit'ong by the
hand in admiration, saying, “T oday's miracle is a gift of the mountain
spirit.” ( Ilyon sa ys there was a legend that this spirit was Pyonjae Ch'onnyo,
T alking Spirit, originally an Indian goddess of eloquence and intelligence,
who came to live on the Holy Eagle Mountain in Silla.)

Chit'ong was choked with emotion, but as Nangchi was about  to give
him Buddha's commandments he said, “I have already received the formal
law from Pohyon T aesa under  a tree at the entrance to thi s mountain
village.”
“W onderful!” ex claimed Nangc hi. “From my birth I have wished to
meet a great sage, and have prayed to Buddha morning and evening to
fulfill m y wish.  T oday my wish has been granted. Y ou are far superior to
me.” And he bowed to the child, and called the tree “Pohyon.”
Chit'ong asked the old monk, “How many years have you been living on
this mountain?”
“I fi rst came here in the year of the goat during the reign of King
Pophung (527),” Nangchi replied. “It was a long time ago and I  don't know
how many years have passed since then.”
As Chit'ong came to the mountain in the year of the cock, when King
Munmu ascende d the throne (661), 135 years had passed sin ce Nangchi
arrived at his hermitage.
Later Chit'ong visited Uisang and saw many mysterious things in his
hall. These things were the source material for his book Ch 'u dong-gi.
When W onhyo was living at Pa nko T emple he visited Nangchi, who asked
him to compose two essays, Ch'ojang Kwan-mun and Ansin-Sasim-non.
When W onhyo had finished the work he sent the two volumes to Nangchi
by c ourtesy of M unson, a hermit. Nangchi wrote an epilogue to these books
with an ode in Gatha (Sanskrit) which may be interpreted as follows:

The low monk in the western vale bows low and salutes
The high priest on the eastern hill far above the rock;
He blew little particles of dust and heightened the Holy Eagle Peak;
He sprinkled tiny drops of water and swelled the Dragon's Pool.

T aehwa Stream, which flows to the east of Holy Eagle Mountain, was
called Dragon's  Pool in honor of the blessing dragon of T ahuo pool in
China.
Chit'ong and W onhyo both beca me disciples of Nangchi, which shows
the high standard of his teaching. Nangchi made a daily round trip on the
clouds to Chingliang-shan in China to attend a series of Buddhist lectures
together with a multitude of others. The Chinese monks thought him one of
their fellows from a neighboring  mountain, but none knew whe re he lived.

One day each member of the audience was asked to bring a celebrated
flower and a rare plant from his home place and present t hem in the
auditorium.
On the followi ng morning Nangchi picked a branch from a rare
mountain plant and presented it to the presiding monk, who said, “This
plant is 'T alchek a' from India, c alled Red T ree in China. It grows only on
the two Holy Eagle Mountains in India and in Silla. These two mountains
belong to the ten th Buddhist heaven, inhabited by Bodhisattvas, so the man
who picked this branch must be a saint.” Finally it was seen from his
appearance that  Nangchi came from the Holy Eagle Mountain. His fame
spread throughout the world, and his countrymen named his hermitage
Hyokmok, Red-T ree T emple. Its ruins are still visible on its northern hill.
According to the annals of Y on gch'u T emple. Nangchi once said “This
temple i s built on the ruins of K asop Buddha,” and dug two lan terns out of
the ground then and there.
When w e examine the passage in the Hwaom scripture concerning the
T enth Heaven, it is seen that Nangchi's riding on the cloud s resembles
Buddha's counting on his ring finger and W onhyo's division of his hundred
bodies.

Song in Praise of Nangchi
Though he lived a hundred years in meditation on a high rock,
His fame did not ring out in the low world;
Only the idle mountain birds twittered in endless talk
Where he sailed on the clouds in the boundless skies.
125. Y onhoe and the Munsujom
Y onhoe, a high monk, led a hermit life on the mountain of t he Holy
Eagle, where he studied the Y onhwa-gyong (Book of the Lotus), cultivated
wisdom and meditated on the virtues of the Pohyon Bodhisa ttva. In his
garden p ond two lotuses bloomed throughout the four seasons, never fading
or losing their petals. The Y ongjang-jon or Dragon Palace at the Holy Eagle
T emple is the old residence of Y onhoe.
The reigning King, W onsong (785-799), heard of Y onhoe's auspicious
and wonderful deeds and wished  to summon him to court in order to confer
the title of Na tional Priest upon him. When Y onhoe heard  of this he
abandoned his hermitage and fled toward the rocks of the W estern Peak. On

the way an old man who was pl oughing a field saw him and said, “How far
are you going on your flying feet, my good monk?”
“The King wants to tie me to his court by giving me a high post,”
Y onhoe said, “and so I am making haste to escape and hide myself in a
distant place.”
“I se e,” said the old man. “That is a good market for your trade. Why
take the trouble of fleeing to a distant place? Men like you take  pleasure in
selling their names.”
Y onhoe conside red this an insult, and sped on without heeding the old
man. So me mile s further on he encountered an old woman on th e bank of a
stream, a nd she too asked him w here he was going. He made the same reply
as before, and she asked, “Did you meet an old man on your way here?”
“Y es,” Y onhoe said, “and he insulted me, so I am traveling in great
vexation.”
“That was Munsu Buddha,” th e old woman said. “Why did you not
heed his warning?”
Y onhoe was surprised. He retraced his steps in haste and pr ostrated
himself before the old man. “I am sorry that I did not recogni ze you,” he
said, “and I repent my attempt to escape. By the way , who was the old
woman I saw by the mountain stream?”
“That w as Pyonjae Ch'onnyo, the talking fairy ,” the old man said, and
vanished from sight. (For Pyonjae Ch'onnyo see previous section.)
W ith a light heart and light footsteps Y onhoe returned to his hermitage.
When the royal messenger once more summoned him to court, he felt that
he must obey . H e was received at the palace and given the title of Kuksa
(National Priest). The place where he met Munsu was thereafter called
Munsujom, and the place where he met the old woman was called Anijom.
(Ilyon n otes her e that the Biogr aphies of the Monks place these events
in the reign of King Honan (857-861), adding that Y onhoe was made a
royal priest of the two courts and given the title Cho (Shining), and that he
died “in the four th year of Hsien-tsung.” This makes Y onhoe's c areer much
later tha n the above account, and Uyon says he cannot tell whi ch dating is
correct.)

Song in Praise of Y onhoe
T rying to escape the eyes of the metropolis he fell into error;
A gimlet in a pouch cannot conceal its sharp point.

Because of the blue lotus, he went wrong,
Not because of his remote hermitage under the shrouding clouds.
126. Hyehyon Seeks a Quiet Life
Hyehyon was a man of Paekje who became a monk in his childhood. He
recited the Pophwa-gyong and p rayed to Buddha for blessings, and Buddha
responded with  wonderful communications. At first he lived at Sudok
T emple, where he lectured on Buddhism to the people who came to worship
and reci ted the scriptures when  he was alone. People came from far and
near to listen to his esoteric tea ching, and the temple was alwa ys crowded
with his  admirers. Finally he gr ew tired of this noisy world and retired to
Mt. T all a in the south. The mountain is so high and rugged that few venture
to climb it, and the thick forest was infested with fierce tigers. Hyehyon
lived qu ietly in his hermitage, chanting the scriptures and beating on a
wooden gong in order to for get the world and himself, until at last he died.
When monks from neighboring  temples had laid his body in a stone
chamber , a tiger suddenly app eared and devoured it, leaving only the
tongue. This remained red and tender for three years, despite changes of
temperature, aft er which it changed into a hard, reddish sub stance like
stone. A ll the monks and la ymen in the neighborhood revered this
wonderful tongu e and enshrined it in a stone pagoda. Hyehyon died in the
first year of Chen-kuan (around 600) at the age of fifty-eight.
Even tho ugh he  ended his life in seclusion and never went abroad, his
fame reached China and an a ccount of his life is found in the T'ang
Biographies of monks.
P'ayak, a Koguryo monk, went to T'ientaishan in China, where  he was
inspired by the truth of Buddhist doctrine to do many wonders, until his
death there. Mysterious tales about him are also found in the T'ang
Biographies of monks.

Song in Praise of Hyehyon
He preached Buddha's gospel on the deer's tail until he was weary;
The sound of his recital echoed to the clouds.
His name was sung in the annals of a foreign country .
After -the fire, his fragrant tongue floats in the red lotus.

(In Bud dhist lore carriages drawn by deer , oxen and goats convey the
souls of the dead to paradise, and the deer -drawn carriage is the finest.)

127. Sin-ch'ung and the Pinenut-T r ee
Before he became King, Hyosong (737-742) diverted himself by
playing checkers with Sin-ch'ung, a wise man, under a pinenu t-tree in the
garden o f the palace. One day i n autumn the Prince said to his old friend,
“If I should for g et you when I am king, I shall turn into that pi nenut-tree.”
Sin-ch'ung rose and bowed to the Prince to express his gratitude.
A few months later the Prince succeeded to the throne and wore the
golden c rown, b ut he for got Si n-ch'ung and omitted him from the list of
courtiers entitled  to honors and rewards. The old man complai ned that the
King had for gotten his word. He wrote a poem on a piece of paper and
pasted it to the pinenut-tree, upon which the tree suddenly withered.
W ondering at this, the King ordered his courtiers to investigate. When
they brought him the poem which they had discovered on the tree, he was
greatly astonish ed. “Dear me,” he said, “I have for gotten my  Kak-kung
(Horn Bow),2 my good old friend, more precious than my royal kindred.”
He summ oned S in-ch'ung and bestowed a title and an annual stipend upon
him, and, wonderful to relate, t he pine-nut-tree was restored, its trunk and
foliage as fresh and green as before.

Song of the Pine
When in autumn the pine-nuts withered and fell
Y ou vowed by the pine-tree not to for get me,
And I bowed to your noble person as my joy knew no bounds.
Alas! The moonbeams clasp the ripples in the old pond—
Now all the world is sad, as I gaze at the white-washed sand.
(The second stanza has been lost, Ilyon says.)

After this Sin-ch'ung became a favorite of the King, Finally , in the
twenty-second year (763) of King Kyongdok, the younger brother of King
Hyosong, he retired from the co urt and went to Mt. Chiri, where he shaved
his head  and became a monk. There he built a temple called  T ansok-sa
(A way From the Mortal W orld)  dedicated to the royal Silla household. He
prayed for the K ing and his kindred until he died in a silent valley near that
wonderful mountain, leaving behind his portrait on a wall of the Golden
Hall of the temple.
T o the south of the temple is a v illage once known as Sokhyu, w hich is
now cal led Sohwa-ri. (Ilyon notes here that the Sam Hwasang-jon, the

Biographies of Three Buddhist Priests, confuses T ansok-sa with Sin-ch'ung
Pongsong-sa. Si nce more than a hundred years separate the reign of King
Kyongdok from that of King Sinmun, he says, the Sin-ch'ung represented as
an intimate of King Sinmun in this book must be a dif ferent person.)
In an other book there is a story about Y i Chun (the Biographies  of High
Monks calls him Y i Sun, Ilyon says) who lived in the reign of King
Kyongdok. He always said, “When I am fifty years old I will become a
monk.” And indeed, in the seventh year of T'ien-pao (748), when he had
reached that age, he rebuilt a small temple called Cho-yon-sa, renamed it
T ansok-sa, and shaved his head and became a monk, taking the n ame Kong-
Koeng-Changnoja. He lived at the temple until his death twenty  years later .
This story is at variance with the account given in the Samguk Sagi.

Song in Praise of Sin-ch'ung
Though your service is small, your hair has turned silvery;
Though the King's bounty is great, the furrows deepen on your brow .
Often y ou have looked across the streams for a dreamland  in the
mountains;
Go burn incense and pray to Buddha to bless our King.
128. The T wo Saints on P'osan
During the Silla Dynasty two sa ints, Kwanki and T osong, lived on Mt.
P'o. (Ily on says  the countryfolk called it Mt. Sosul, which is Sanskrit for
Mt. P'o, now Pisul in Hyonp'ung ). Ki had a hermitage on the southern peak
and Song lived i n a cave on the northern peak. They were abou t ten li (four
kilometers) apar t, but the two visited each other often, climbing the cloud-
veiled p eaks and  singing “Moonlight Songs.” When Song wished to call on
Ki all the mountain trees swung their branches to the south, a nd when Ki
went to meet Song they did the opposite. In this way the two friends
associated with one another for many years.
Song used to sit quietly on the brink of a hanging clif f behind his
hermitage. One day his body s lipped down between two rocks and then
flew up into the  air in a robe of feathers. Some people say it landed in
Such'ang county  (now Susong county) and fell dead. Ki soon followed him
on the wing and also fell dead. Beneath the clif f (called T osong-am) and
beside a cave, people built a temple in their memory .
In the seventh year of T'ai-ping (982) a monk named Songpom visited
this tem ple and  founded a scho ol to teach the doctrine of Amita Buddha

which lasted for fifty years, dur ing which many auspicious signs appeared.
At t hat time twe nty converts in Hyonp'ung formed an associat ion to of fer
incense to the temple. They went to the mountain and gathered fragrant red
sticks, w hich they chopped, dried, and piled in bamboo baskets. These
sticks sh one brilliantly at night like burning candles. The local people
donated congrat ulatory funds to the association members, who rejoiced at
this ligh t. They  believed that it was sent by the two saints through the
providence of a mountain spiri t named Chongsong-Ch'onwang (Heavenly
god of silent ho liness) who had received an oracle from the Buddha in the
Kasop-pul period in the remote past. This Buddha had promise d the spirit
that he would ac hieve salvation when a thousand converts appe ared on that
mountain.
At prese nt there  is a legend written at this same mountain relating the
miracles of nine saints—Kwank i, T osong, Pansa, Ch'opsa, T oui (in the ruins
of Paegam T emple), Chayang, Songpom, Kummulnyo and Paegusa.

Song in Praise of the T wo Saints
The two  aged travelers trod the moonlight and played in the cloud-
springs long ago;
The old trees are shrouded in haze over ten thousand vales.
The shadows of the green leaves still wave to and fro in the cold wind,
As if the two friends were calling each other to come and go.

T wo oth er saints, Pansa and C h'opsa, hid themselves in caves, away
from the human world. They se wed leaves together to protect themselves
from th e weather and to cover their nakedness, and therefo re they are
named after the two trees Pan and Ch'op, which the mount aineers call
Umok (Rain T ree) and Kaul-mok respectively . Such names as P'ung-ak
(Maple Mountains, another name for the Diamond Mountains) are
suggestive of the mysterious lives of hermits in ancient days.
When I visited P 'osan I composed a poem in praise of the virtues of the
two saints:

Covering their bellies with purple bark and yellow skins,
Making clothes of green leaves—
There is no silkworm-feeding or hemp-weaving.
When the tall pines swing to the cold wind on the rocky crests,

The sun is down and the woodsmen are gone from the forest.
They meditated long under the bright moon at night;
They flew of f aimlessly on the fluttering wings of the wind.
On the iris bed they lay and fell fast asleep;
Their souls were not tied to earthly cares even in dreams.
The unfeeling clouds sail over the two ruined hermitages as of yore;
In glens untrodden by men only the deer leap in wild joy .
129. Y oungjae and the Thieves
Y oungjae was a humorous monk and a good singer of the folksongs
called Hyang-ga in the golden days of Silla, and he cared little for money .
When he had reached the twilight of his earthly life, he decided to spend
his remaining days quietly in the bosom of nature, and so he started on a
long journey to the forests of M t. Chiri. When he reached the top of the
steep mo untain pass called T aehyollyong, a band of sixty thieves emer ged
from the forest brandishing swords and threatening to kill him.
Y oungjae was quite calm and showed no sign of fear . “Good morning,
my forest gentlemen,” he said. “Y ou are wonderful dancers and I have
never seen such a fine sword-dance in my life.”
“Sword-dance!” said the bandit chief. “Can you say that even as our
great swords whirl above your head? Y ou are a wonderfully humorous grey-
haired old monk. What is your name?”
“Y oungjae is my name,” he replied, “but I am better known as a monk.”
“Ah,” laughed the chieftain, “yo u are the great singing monk. W e have
heard much of y our fame and we are glad to see you. Now that we have
performed our sword dance as you say , it is your turn to sing a song.”

Y oungjae sang:
Here comes an old monk on aimless feet
As he for gets the old shadows in his mind;
He fears lest his frail body should break Buddha's commandments.
Now he has seen these fine sharp swords,
A new day dawns on his poor soul—
A way with all evils and welcome only what is good.

“W onderful!” the chieftain said. “Y ou are a good singer indeed. Y ou
have not only entertained us with your beautiful music but moved our
hearts as well, bringing tears to  our eyes. On behalf of myself and all the

other thieves I a pologize to you and give you a small present. Please accept
two rolls (eighty yards) of our finest brocade.”
“Fine goods and bribery lead men and women to hell,” the monk
admonished them. “I have been awakened to this truth, and now I am on my
way to a remote  mountain to sp end my remaining days. How can I dare to
accept your gift?” And he threw the brocade to the ground.
Much as hamed and deeply moved, the thieves threw down their swords
and spea rs and followed Y oungj ae to Mt. Chiri. There they had their heads
shaved and became faithful disciples of the great monk, never again
appearing in the outside world or harming other people. Y oungjae was
ninety y ears old at this time, which was during the reign of Kin g W onsong
of Silla (785-799).

Song in Praise of Y oungjae
W ith a bamboo staf f and a h arp he was glad to tarry in the deep
mountains;
No brocade or jewels could rule his steadfast heart.
Though the gentlemen of the forest of fered him rich gifts,
He did not wish to carry gold to hell.
130. Mulkeja the Brave Soldier
When K ing Nae hae had been on  the throne of Silla for seventeen years
(212) the allied troops of eight states including Poraguk (now Kosong) and
Samulguk (now  Saju) invaded the border towns of Silla. The King ordered
out a  lar ge army  under the com mand of Crown Prince Nalum a nd General
Ilpol to hurl bac k the enemy . Af ter a fierce battle all eight states surrendered
to Silla.
(These c annot h ave been states i n anything like the modern sense. They
were probably tribal groupings.)
During the battle the brave so ldier Mulkeja performed the greatest
military feats, but the Crown Prince hated him and omitted his name from
the list of those to be rewarded.  His friends said, “Have you no resentment
against the prince? Why don't you appeal to the King?”
“A loya l subject can never com plain of his prince,” Mulkeja replied,
“and a patriotic soldier does not risk his life for reward, much less should he
appeal to the throne in order to gain a reputation at the expense  of others. I
simply do my duty . T ime will tell.”

Three years later the kings of three states, headed by the prince of
Kolp'o-guk (now Happo) attacke d Kalhwa (or Kulbul, now Ulju). The King
of S illa led his army in person and routed them. Mulkeja cut o f f the heads
of more than a score of enemy soldiers, but the court never praised his
valor . H e said to his wife, “I have heard that the way of a loyal subject of a
King is to risk his life in tim e of emer gency , for getting about personal
safety and living only for king a nd country . The battles of Pora and Kalhwa
were na tional cr ises which endangered the life of my King but I failed to
fight for  the King at the risk of  my life so I am a disloyal subject. Since I
have bee n disloy al to my King and brought discredit upon my ancestors, I
am an unfilial son. Since I have lost the way of loyalty and filial piety I can
no longer mingle in the shining circles of the court or even with the lowest
ranks of  society .” Then he shouldered a komungo (a kind of six-stringed
lute) and with disheveled hair he went of f to a remote mou ntain called
Sach'e-san and there composed odes of grief over the fate o f a straight
bamboo, swaying but unyielding . He sang to the accompanimen t of his lute
and of the babbling of a brook, living the life of a hermit. He  returned to
this noisy world no more.
131. Y ongyo, who Disappear ed
No one knows the family background of Y ongyo, the monk of Silje
T emple, although his virtuous deeds were highly praised. King Kyongdok
summoned him to of ficiate at a  sacrificial ceremony at the pala ce. Y ongyo
came and conducted the rites in the presence of His Majesty . After the
ceremony the King appointed servants to escort the monk back to his
temple. The moment they arriv ed at the temple gate Y ongyo disappeared,
and his whereab outs were unknown ever afterward. When this was reported
to th e King he  conferred the title of National Priest upon Y ongyo in
admiration of his virtuous deeds and high principles.
Even today his temple is known as the National Priest's cell.
132. Th e Five Monks of Mt. P'och'on (in the Days of King
Kyongdok)
Rising t o the northeast of Sapnyangju (Y angsan, near Pusan) about
twenty li of f is a high mountain called P'och'on-san, which is f amous for a
beautiful cave which seems to be both carved by nature's hand a nd chiseled
by human sculptors.
Long lo ng ago five unknown monks came to live in this cave , where
they pra yed to Amitabha Buddha to receive them into the pure land in the

W est fo r ten years. At last a host of saints came from the W est to meet
them. The five m onks, each seated upon a lotus, flew through the air until
they came to T'ongdo T emp le. There they stayed for se veral days,
performing heav enly music and preaching to the T'ongdo monks on the
vanities of this ephemeral world. Then they cast of f their mortal shells and
flew on to the W est, while a great light filled the sky . The h earts of the
monks left behind were filled with rapture as they watched t his glorious
flight to the lotus paradise. Afterward they built a pavilion on the spot
where t he five monks had asc ended and named it Ch'iru ( Left-Behind
T ower). It still stands today .
133. The Monk Who Called upon Amitabha
At the eastern foot of Namsan near Kyongju there is a village named
P'irich'on and near it a temple named P'iri-sa. Many years ago a strange
monk li ved at this temple. He told nobody his name, but only prayed to
Amitabha, chanting “Namuami-tabul! Namuami-tabul!” day and night in a
loud yet  musical voice without any variation. The sound filled the whole
city of Kyongju, ringing through all the 170,000 houses in the 360 wards
and subwards. Deeply moved, all the people worshipped B uddha, and
named the monk Y ombul-sa (Buddha-Calling Priest).
After hi s death the people made a lifelike plaster statue of him  which
they placed in M injang T emple. They renamed the temple wh ere he had
lived Y ombul-sa . Near it stands another temple, Y angp'i-sa, named after a
neighboring village.
IX. Filial Piety
134. Chinjong the Filial Monk
Before h is entry into the temple Chinjong was a Silla soldier . He  was so
poor that he co uldn't get married, and during his leaves fro m military
service on engineering work he sold his labor to buy rice for his mother .
They had no kitchen utensils except an iron kettle with broken legs.
One da y a monk came striking a wooden gong and begging for
donations of iron to help build a  new temple. The kind-hearted w oman gave
him her only iron kettle. Soon Chinjong came home.
“My son,” she said, “a monk has just visited our house and a sked for
iron to help build a new temple, so I gave him our cooking kettle.”

“Good!” said Chinjong. “Y ou ha ve done very well. It is a noble deed to
make a gift for the service of B uddha. W e can do our cookin g without a
kettle. See how I cook food on  tiles and in earthen pots to m ake it more
tasty .
“Mother , I have heard good n ews from my comrades in the army .
Uisang Popsa is preaching at h is temple in the lofty T'aebaek mountains,
ennobling the souls of thousand s of people and enabling them to enter the
lotus paradise. When I have fulfilled my duty as a son I wish to enter his
temple, have my head shaved an d study the way of the Buddha under him,
for I admire Uisang very much.”
“The way to Bu ddha is long an d life is short,” his mother said. “If you
wait until you have done your filial duty , will it not be too late? Rather it
would p lease me to know that you had awakened to the way of Buddha
during my lifetime. Say no more but go today .”
“I am the only one who can take  care of you in your old age,” Chinjong
protested. “How can I leave you alone in this bleak house?”
But she was adamant. “If becau se of your mother you do not join the
order , denouncing your home and the world, you are leading me to hell.
Even though you feed me good food, so long as I have no peace of mind or
your mi nd is inclined toward h ell, it cannot be called filial piety . I shall
enjoy m y remaining days begging from door to door , so say no more if you
want to make me happy .” (Some time evidently elapses here.)
“I have cooked seven bowls of rice as provisions for your long journey ,
because cooking on the way wo uld delay you. Eat one bowl before my eyes
and put the oth er six in your knapsack to eat as you travel through the
mountains.”
Chinjong wept. “T o leave an infirm old mother alone is painful to a
son's heart,” he said. “It is muc h worse to take away the little r ice and soy
sauce le ft in the house and le ave her to hunger . Heaven and earth will
censure me for this.” “Don't worry about me,” his mother said. “Go, my
son.” Chinjong could not disobe y his mother's command. He b owed to her
and star ted on his journey , and after traveling three days and three nights
reached the T'aebaek Mountains, where he was warmly received by the
great m onk Uisang Popsa. Having shaved his head, he became Uisang's
disciple.
Three ye ars late r Chinjong heard the sad news of his mother's d eath. He
was so deeply af fected that he sat up seven days and seven n ights in the

posture of a Buddha praying for the repose of her soul, and at length saw
her reborn into a noble life.
Hearing this story , Uisang moved to a new thatched cottage, followed
by three thousand people to whom he lectured on the Hwaom scripture for
ninety d ays. Chit'ong, one of his learned disciples, wrote down the outlines
of these  lectures and published them in two volumes called “Ch'udong
Diary .”
On the last night of the lectures Chinjong saw his mother in a dream and
heard her say . “My good son, I have returned to life in a heavenly paradise.”
135. Kim T ae-song, twice a Dutiful Son (Reign of King Sinmun)
In the small village of Moryan g-ni (otherwise called Pu-un-ch 'on) on
the western outskirts of Kyongj u there lived a poor woman named Kyong-
cho who  had an odd-looking son. The child was the laughingstock of the
village b ecause of his big head and flat forehead, like a wall. The people
called him T ae-song (Big W all).
His mot her was  too poor to feed him, so she gave the lad to a rich
neighbor named Pog-an as a farm laborer . T ae-song worked so hard that his
master liked him very much and gave him a small rice field to feed his
mother and himself.
About th at time  Chomkae, a v irtuous monk from Hungnyun T emple,
visited the house of Pog-an and asked for a donation for a great ceremony at
the temple. Pog-an gave him fif ty rolls of cotton cloth. The monk bowed in
thanks a nd said, “Y ou are loving  and giving. The great Buddha is so pleased
with you r donation that he will give you ten thousand times what you have
donated, and bless you with long life and happiness.”
T ae-song overheard this and ran home and told his mother , “Now we are
poor , an d if we d o not give something to the temple we will be p oorer . Why
not give  our little rice field for the ceremony so that we may h ave a great
reward in our a fterlives?” His kind-hearted mother readily co nsented and
the rice field was donated to the temple through Chomkae.
A few months later T ae-song died. On the night of his death a voice
from he aven was heard above the house of Kim Mun-yang , the prime
minister , saying “T ae-song, the good boy of Moryang-ni, will b e reborn in
your family .”
In great astonishment the prime minister sent servants to the village, and
they fou nd that T ae-song was indeed dead. W onderful to relate,  in the same
hour as the hea venly announcement the prime minister's wife  conceived,

and in due course gave birth to a boy . The child kept the fingers of his left
hand tightly clenched until seve n days after his birth, and when at last he
opened them the characters for T ae-song were seen written in gold on his
palm. They gave him his old nam e again and invited his previous mother to
care for him.
When T ae-song had grown into a strong youth he loved hunting, One
day he climbed high on Mt. T'oh am, and there he killed a big be ar . As night
was com ing he slept in a villag e at the foot of the mountain, a nd dreamed
that the bear's ghost appeared to him and said, “Fellow! Why did you kill
me? I will come back to life and kill and eat you.”
T ae-song trembled with fear and said, “Do not say so! I love sport and I
was only  testing my courage and strength against yours, risking  my life in a
fair fight in which you had an equal chance. Now the game is  over . I beg
your pardon and would gladly shake you by the paw .”
“Y ou ar e a jolly fellow ,” the ghost said, “but no more of you r jokes!
W ill you build a magnificent temple for me?”
“I take your paw and swear ,” T ae-song replied. The bear's ghost gave
him a gentle scratch and he awoke with a loud cry . His bed w as wet with
sweat.
From that time on T ae-song gav e up hunting, and he built a temple on
the spot where h e had killed the bear . He called it Changsu-sa (T emple of
Long Life ) and dedicated it to the bear .3
His hear t moved by heavenly g race, Kim T ae-song built the beautiful
Pulguk T emple in memory of his two sets of parents and also founded the
wonderful grotto of Sokkul-am . He invited the two distinguished monks
Sillim a nd P'yohun to supervise these temples. He had his fathers and
mothers represe nted among the images in these temples in g ratitude for
bringing him up as a useful man.
After th e great stone Buddha f or Sokkul-am was finished, Kim T ae-
song wa s worki ng on the lotus pedestal when suddenly it brok e into three
pieces, H e wept bitterly over thi s, and at length fell into a trance . During the
night go ds and goddesses descended from heaven and restored the stone to
its original condition. T ae-song a woke in joy and climbed the southern peak
of Mt. T'oham, where he burned incense and worshipped the celestial
deities. People thereafter called the place Hyang-nyong (Incense Peak).
The two stone bridges of the blue and white clouds, the seven- treasure
lotus flowers and the two pago das, T abo-t'ap (Pagoda of Many T reasures)

and Sok ka-t'ap (Pagoda of Sakyamuni) at Pulguk-sa, in addition to the
seated image of Buddha and the bas-reliefs of Kwanum on the walls and
ceiling of Sokkul-am, are unsurpassed in exquisite workmanship among the
art works in the temples of Korea.4
In addition to the above account, which is derived from old legends, the
of ficial records of these two temples give the following i nformation:
“During the reign of King Kyo ngdok, T ae-song, the King's first minister ,
commenced the construction o f Pulguk-sa in the tenth year of T'ien-pao
(742). T ae-song died during the reign of King Hyegong, on the second of
December in the ninth year of T a-li (774); the construction of the temple
was finished some years later .”

Song in Praise of Kim T ae-song.
When spring ended in Moryang he donated three furrows of land;
When autumn came to Hyang-nyong he harvested ten thousand pieces
of gold.
His mother knew poverty , wealth and nobility in a hundred years;
Her son rose from a low servant to a high aristocrat in a dream.
136. Hyangduk-Saji Feeds his Father with His Own Flesh
In U ngch'onju a man named Hy angduk-Saji lived on a little fa rm. One
year famine visited the land and the poor soil would yield no crop, so that
his old father w as all but starved to death. Hyangduk cut some flesh from
his t high and fed the old man. Deeply moved, the people of the province
reported this to King Kyongdok. The King praised this unusual deed of
filial piety and gave Hyangduk five hundred lar ge bags of rice as a reward.
137. Son Sun Of fers to Sacrifice his Son.
During the reign of King Hungd ok a poor man named Son Sun lived in
the mou ntain village of Moryang-ni near Kyongju. After the death of his
father (Hak-san) he and his wife worked at a neighboring house as day
laborers and supported his old mother with the rice and vegetables they
earned in this way .
Son Sun had a little son. This baby ate all the food served  to his
grandmother , fo r she was very  fond of her grandson and would put the
dainties she got into his mouth.
“This is good for our son but b ad for my mother ,” Son Sun said. “W e
may hav e anoth er son but we can never have another mother . W e must get

rid of this hindrance to our first  duty .” His wife was deeply moved by her
husband's filial piety and readily agreed.
One nig ht the mother took the ch ild and carried it at her breast w hile her
husband carried a spade on his s houlder , and they climbed the n orthern side
of Mt. Ch'wi northeast of the village. W ith heavy hearts and many tears
they began to dig a grave in w hich to bury their son alive. But Son Sun's
spade st ruck a stone which gave  a musical sound, and when he dug it out he
found it was a sm all bell of exquisite beauty , about the size of th e water jars
which women carry on their heads.
The young couple looked at the bell with wondering eyes. They hung it
on a tree and struck it with a pebble and it rang with a wonderful sound. In
great joy  the wife exclaimed, “W e have discovered a wonderful bell, a God-
sent gift. My good husband, do  not bury my child, but spare h is life.” Son
Sun agr eed. W ith singing hearts and dancing feet they descended the hill
with the bell and the baby .
On reac hing ho me at daybreak they hung the bell under the e aves of
their tha tched h ouse, and it swung in the wind and rang out its music far
and wide. The King heard it in his palace and said, “I hear the wonderful
sound of a bell ringing in the western wind. Who will go and find it?”
“May your majesty live ten tho usand years!” the servants responded,
and wen t in search of the won derful bell. When they had found it they
reported the good news to the throne.
The Kin g greatl y admired the g ood conduct of Son Sun and his wife,
and said , “In the olden days, when Kuo-chu was about to bur y his child,
heaven s ent down a golden caul dron, and now when Son Sun was about to
bury his child earth yielded up a stone bell.5 Suc h m en are good models of
filial piety , sure to be rewarded  by heaven and earth.” The King gave Son
Sun a fine house and fifty lar ge bags of rice annually to encoura ge others to
honor their parents with pure hearts.
Son Sun  donate d his old home for the foundation of a temple. People
called it  Honghy o-sa (T emple of Filial Piety), and the bell was e nshrined in
it.
During t he reign of Queen Chin song (888-898) bandits of Later Paekje
attacked this village and stole the bell, but the temple escaped destruction.
The mountainsid e where the bell was found was called W anho p'yong, but
now the local people call it Chiryangp'yong.
138. The Beggar Girl Who Supported her Mother

Hyojongnang, a  noble Hwarang, gave a banquet in the P'osok-j ong, the
stone abalone pavilion, also called Samhwa-sul; (Three-flower Arbor) at the
foot of Namsan near Kyongju, and all his followers and friends gathered
early ex cept two, who arrived very late. When the noble Hwarang asked
them why they had not arrived on time, they told the following story:
“In the eastern village near P unhwang T emple we saw a g irl who
seemed to be ab out twenty years old holding her blind mother in her arms
and crying loudly .
“W e ask ed the villagers what was going on, and they explained that the
girl was  so poor that she had begged from door to door for years to support
her mother . Then there was a bad harvest and she could no lon ger get any
income from begging, so she sold her labor to a rich man's  house and
entrusted her master with thirty lar ge bags of rice from her wages.
“She wo rked ha rd in that house  every day , and at twilight she brought
home a bowl of rice which she c ooked for her mother and herse lf. She slept
with her  mother and at daybreak  she rose quietly and went back to work in
the rich man's house. She supported her mother in this way for several
years.
“One day her m other said to her . 'I had peace of mind when I ate coarse
food, but my heart is troubled  these days, as if the good fo od hurt my
stomach. Can you tell me why?'
“The good daughter told the truth, whereupon her mother burst out
crying and the daughter cried too, lamenting between sobs that she had fed
her mother's mouth but had failed to comfort her mind. W e stayed to
observe this pitiful sight, which is why we are late for your banquet.”
The Hw arang to ok pity on this  mother and daughter and sent  them a
hundred bushels of grain and some fine clothes, while his followers
collected a thousand lar ge bags of rice to help the needy family .
When this story reached the throne, Queen Chinsong rewarded the
dutiful d aughter with an additional five hundred lar ge bags of rice, and gave
her a fine house  to live in with her mother . She also sent soldi ers to guard
the house. The Queen also orde red the building of a pavilion in the girl's'
honor at the en trance to her village, and named it Hyo-yan g-ni (Filial
Sustenance V illage) to commemorate her good conduct. La ter the girl
donated her house to a templ e called Y angjon-sa (T emple of the T wo
Buddhas).
Footnotes to Book Five

(1). A “Po” was a sort of fund  donated by the pious for some special
religious purpos e. It may be compared to the donation of funds to the
church in medieval Europe to pay for masses for the soul of an individual.
(2). This is a reference to a poem in the Book of Odes, one of the
Confucian Classics, in which the loyal kinsmen complain that K ing Y ao of
Chou pays more attention to flatterers than to his own family .
(3). It is possibl e that this story  is connected with a very ancient folk
belief. It will be recalled that T angun, the legendary founder of Korea, was
born of a woman who had been a bear . Probably this indicates the practise
of totemism in ancient times.
(4). The re is a tradition that the sculptor who carved these ba s-reliefs
was in love with the King's daughter and used her as the mo del for the
image of Kwanum in order to immortalize her beauty .
(5). The Chinese story of Kuo-chu, which dates back to t he Han
dynasty , is almost identical to th e present one, except that Kuo-c hu dug up a
golden cauldron rather than a bell.
Epilogue
The wood blocks for printing t he Samguk Sagi and the Samg uk Y usa
kept in the government archives have become illegible except for four or
five characters to the line. Scholars nowadays wish to widen their
knowledge of peace and war on  earth and the rise and fall of nations and
wonders done in various places. Much research is needed in our country to
broaden knowledge of our national af fairs.
W ith thi s in mind the compiler of this volume has sought for  several
years for one of the original printed copies, but to no avail, for th ey are very
rare. This is most unfortunate, fo r this valuable history is in danger of being
lost, and  we shall be unable to pass on to our descendants the history of this
eastern nation.
Fortunately , his honor Kwon Ch u, the magistrate of Songju, he aring of
my sear ch, obtained a perfect copy and sent it to me. I showed it to
Governor An T ang and Director  Pak Chon, informing them of my printing
project, and they gladly approved of my plan. I have therefore h ad the book
printed in several counties and donated copies to provincial g overnments
for preservation.

It is  natural that old things are lost and lost things are found again as
nations and peoples rise and fall. Realizing this, I have had this book
reprinted to preserve permanently a literary treasure of our sch olars for all
ages to come. Late W inter , Imsin Y ear of Ming Cheng-te (1512)
W ritten by Prince Chon P'yong, Y i Kye-pok, Merit Subject, Lord
Kason, Prefect, Military Commander , Kyongju-chin Area.
(Y i K ye-pok was raised to the ra nk of Merit Subject by King Chungjong
(1488-1544) of the Y i Dynasty for his assistance in the deposition of the
tyrant Prince Y onsan.)
THE END
Chr onology of Kings and Queens of the Thr ee Kingdoms and Karak
The date s here given are traditional ones and may not be accu rate for
the earlier periods. All dates are A.D. unless otherwise noted.
KOGUR YO
1. T ongmyong 37. B.C.-19 B.C.
Founder , son of legendary T ang un. Family name Ko, given nam e Chu-
mong.
2. Y uri 19 B.C.-18 A.D.
Son of T ongmyo ng, but took the family name Hae. In 3 A.D. moved the
court to Kuknae-song, also called Puli-song, on the Y alu River .
3. T aemusin 18-44
Third son of Y uri, family name Hae.
4. Minjung 44—48
Son of T aemusin, given name Upchu.
5. Mobon 48-53
Elder brother of Minjung, given name Aeryu.
6. Kukjo 53-146
Also known as T aejo wang. The of ficial history of the La ter Han
dynasty says, “No sooner did he leave his mother's womb than he opened
his eyes  and looked around hi m.” Abdicated late in life in favor of his
mother's brother .
7. Ch'adae 146-165
Given n ame Su.  Brother of Kuk jo's mother . In 165 when Kukjo was 1 19
years old his two younger brothers were murdered by King Sindae.
8. Sindae 165-179
Given name Paekko or Paekku, See above.
9. Kogukch'on 179-197

Given n ame Na mho or Imo. Po sthumous title is the name of the place
where he was buried.
1 . Sansang 197-227
2 . T ongch'on 227-248
3 . Chungch'on 248-270
4 . Soch'on 270-292
Given name Y akno or Y aku.
14. Pongsang 292-300
Also called King Ch'igal. Given name Sangpu.
15. Mich'on 300-331
Also called King Hoyang, given name Ulpul or Upul.
16. Kugwon 331-371
Also called King Kangsang, given name Soe or Sayu. Extended  the city
wall of P'yongy ang. In 342 m oved the court to Anshih-ch'eng (W antu-
ch'eng).
1 . Sosurim 371-384 Given name Kupu.
2 . Kugyang 384-392
Given name Isok or Ojichi.
1 . Kwanggaet'o 392-413 Given name T amdok.
2 . Changsu 413-491
Given name Sin or Y on. In 427 moved the national capital to P'yong-
yang-song.
21. Munja 491-519
Also named Myong-ni-ho, Naun and Koun.
1 . Anjang 519-531 Given name Hung-an.
2 . Anwon 531-545 Given name Poyong.
3 . Y angwon 545-559
Also called King Y anggang, given name P'yong-song.
25. P'yongwon 559-590
Also called King P'yonggang, given name Y angsong.

26. Y ongyang 590-618
Also called King P'yongyang, given name W on or T aewon.
1 . Y ongnyu 618-642 Given name Konmu.
2 . Pojang 642-668
Koguryo conquered by Silla and T'ang forces 705 years after the
traditional founding date.
P AEKJE
1. Onjo 18 B.C.-28 A.D.
Legendary founder , reputedly the third son (some sources say the
second) of King T ongmyong, the legendary Koguryo founde r . Court in
W irye-song (som e sources say Sach'on, now Chiksan) until 5 B.C., then
moved to Hansan, now Kwangju, Kyonggi Province
1 . T aru 28-77 Second son of Onjo.
2 . Kiru 77-128 Son of T aru.
3 . Kaeru 128-166 Son of Kiru.
4 . Ch'ogo 166-214
Son of Kaeru, also called Sogo.
6. Kusu 214-234
Son of Ch'ogo, also called Kwisu.
7. Saban 234
Son of Kusu; deposed.
8. Koi 234-286
Brother of Ch'ogo's mother .
9. Ch'aekkye 286-298
Son of Koi.
1 . Punso 298-304 Son of Ch'aekkye
2 . Piryu 304-344
Second son of Kusu and younger brother of Saban.
1 . Kye 344-346 Son of Punso
2 . Kunch'ogo 346-375

Second son of Piryu. In 371 moved the court to Puk-Hansan.
1 . Kungusu 375-384 Son of Kunch'ogo.
2 . Ch'imnyu 384-385 Son of Kungusu.
3 . Chinsa 385-392
Y ounger brother of Ch'imnyu.
17. Asin 392-405
Son of Chinsa, also called Abang.
18. Chonji 405-420
Given name Y ong, also titled Chinji; son of Asin.
1 . Kusini 420-427 Son of Chinji.
2 . Piyu 427-455 Son of Kusini
3 . Kaero 455-475 Given name Kyongsa.
4 . Munju 475-477
Son of Kaero. Moved the capital to Ungch'bn.
1 . Samgun 477-479 Son of Munju.
2 . T ongsong 479-501
Given name Motae. Cousin of Samgun.
25. Muryong 501-523
Given name Sama. Second son of T ongsong. In the Nan-shih it is
written, “his name was Puyo-Y ung.” but this is wrong. Y ung was the crown
prince of King P ojang (Uija). His story is told in the T'ang-shih. (A bit of
confusion here. Pojang was the last king of Koguryo and Uija t he last king
of Paekje.)
26. Song 523-554
Son of Muryong, given name M yongnong. In 538 moved the capital to
Saja-song, which he renamed Nam-Puyo.
27. W idok 554-598
Given name Ch'ang, also called Myong.
28. Hye 598-599
Given name Kye or Myong, also called King Hon; son of W idok.
29. Pop 599-600
Given name Hyosun. Son of Hye

30. Mu 600-641
Given name Ilgi-sadok, also called King Mugang.
31. Uija 641-660.
Son of Mu. Paekje conquered by Silla and T'ang 678 years after its
traditional founding date.
KARAK (KA Y A)
1. Suro 42-199
Said to have been born from a golden egg which descend ed from
heaven, hence his family name was Kim (Kum), meaning gold. Also said to
have reigned for 158 years, though this does not correspond to the recorded
dates.
2. Kodung 199-259
Son of Suro and Empress Ho. Again there is some discrepancy in the
dates.
3. Map'um 259-291
Son of Kodung and Lady Mojong, daughter of Sin Po, Lord of Ch'onpu.
4. Kojilmi 291-344
Also called Kummul. Son of Map'um and Lady Hogu.
5. Ip'um 344-407
Son of Kojilmi and Lady Aji.
6. Chwaji 407-421
Also called King Kumt'o. Son of Ip'um and Lady Chongsin.
7. Ch'wihui 421-451
Son of Chwaji and Lady Poksu.
8. Chilji 451-492
Son of Ch'wihui and Lady Indok.
9. Kyomji 492-521
Son of Chilji and Lady Pangwon.
10. Kuhyong 521-532.
Karak absorbed by Silla 490 years after its traditional founding date.
SILLA
1. Hyokkose 57 B.C.-4 A.D.
Pak clan . Said to have been born of a big egg. Queen A yong or Aryong.
Country then called Sorabol or Kerim (but some sources sa y the name
Kerim was adopted in King T 'alhae's reign). In 37 B.C. buil t Kumsong,
meaning golden castle.
2. Namhae 4-24

Son of Hyokkose and Lady Aryong, Pak clan. Queen Lady Unje.
3. Norye 24-57
Also called Y uri. Used the title  Nijilgum. Son of Namhae an d Unje.
Queen Sayo Kimsi, daughter of Horu-wang.
4. T'alhae 57-80
Sok clan. Son o f King Hamdalpa of W anha-kuk and the Princess of
Choknyo. Queen  Lady Aro, dau ghter of King Namhae. When he died his
body was buried on an eastern hill and then his bones were e ncased in a
plaster figure and buried on the same hill.
5. Pasa 80-1 12
Pak clan. Son of Norye and Sayo. Queen Lady Sach'o.
6. Chima 1 12-134
Also called Chimi, son of Pasa a nd Sach'o. Queen Lady Aerye, Princess
of Majekuk. Destroyed Umjilkuk (now Angang) and Apnyangkuk (now
Kyongsan).
7. Ilsong 134-154
Son of Norye's elder brother and Lady Ikan. Queen daughter of Chima.
1 . Adala 154-184
2 . Polhyu 184-196 Sok Clan.
1 . Naehae 196-230
2 . Chobun 230-247
3 . Chomhae 247-262
Also called Ihae. Brother of Cho bun's mother . Established first relations
with Koguryo.
13. Mich'u 262-284
Also called Miso or Mijo. First king from the Kim clan. Son of Kudo
Kalmun-wang a nd Saengho (Lady Sullye), daughter of Ibi Kalm un-wang of
the Pak clan. Queen Lady Kwangmyong, daughter of Chepun-wang.
14. Y urye 284-298
Sok clan. Also called Serichi. Son of Chepun-wang and a woman of the
Pak clan. Reconstructed W olsong (Moon Castle).
15. Kirim 298-310
Also cal led Kiri p. Second son o f Chepun and Lady Aihye. He called his
country Silla.

16. Kolhae 310-356
Son of Urotim-kakkan, the second son of King Naehae. In 329 he had
constructed a huge dam and reservoir for irrigation. During his reign Paekje
soldiers first invaded Silla.
17. Naemul 356-402
Kim cla n. Commencing with his reign the throne became perm anently
hereditary in the Kim clan. Son  of Kudo Kalmun-wang. Some sources say
he was the younger brother of King Miso. His mother was Lady Hyurye.
18. Solsong 402-417
Also called Silju or Pogum. S on of King Mich'u's younger brother ,
T aesoji Kakkan and Lady Y esaeng. Queen Lady Aryu.
19. Nulji 417-458
Also called Naeji. Son of Naem ul and Lady-Naeryehui, the daughter of
King Mich'u.
20. Chabi 458-479
Son of Nulji and Lady Aro, th e daughter of King Silsong. Hi s queen
was the  daughter of P'aho Kalmun-wang, though some say s he was the
daughter of Mijil Kakkan. Open ed commerce with the W u state in China. In
479 Japa nese soldiers invaded Silla, and the King had Myonghwal fortress
built as a refuge . The Japanese laid siege to the castle but were beaten of f
and departed.
21. Soji 479-500
Also called Pich'o. Third son of Chabi and a daughter of Mihun
Kakkan. His queen was a daughter of Kibo Kalmun-wang.
22. Chijung 500-514
Also called Chich'ollo. Son of Kibo Kalmun-wang, King Nulji's
younger brother , and Lady Osaeng, King Nulji's daughter . Queen Lady
Y ongje.
23. Pophung 514-540
Given n ame W onjong. Son of Chijung and Lady Y ongje. The use of
reign titl es (he called his reign ti tle Konwon) and posthumous royal titles in
Chinese fashion  began with this  reign. His mausoleum is north of Aegong
T emple. His queen Lady Pado became a Buddhist nun with the religious
name P opnyu and lived at Y o nghung T emple. This king ordained laws
prohibiting the taking of life on ten days of each month an d permitted
people to become monks and nuns.
24. Chinhung 540-576

Given name Sammaekjong, also Sim (Maekpu). Son of Pophung's
younger brother and Lady Chiso, the daughter of Y onsa Kakkan of the Pak
clan. Became a monk. He a dopted the reign titles, 'Kaeguk' (551),
'T aech'ang' (568), and 'Hongje' (572)
25. Chinji 576-579
Given n ame Sar yun or Kumnyun. Son of Chinhung and Lady Saekto of
the Pak clan. Queen Lady Chido, also of the Pak clan.
26. Chinp'yong 579-632
Given n ame Paekchong. Son of Crown Prince T ongnyun and Lady
Manho o r Mann yong, the daughter of Ipchong Kalmun-wang. Queens first
Lady Maya and second Lady Sungman. He called his reign title, 'Konpok'
(584)
27. Queen Sondok 632-647
Given name T okman, daughter of Chinp'yong and Lady Maya.
Succeeded when her father died without male issue. Prince consort Um
Kalmun-wang. Her reign title was Inp'yong.
28. Queen Chindok 647-654
Given name Sungman, daughter of Chinp'yong's younger brother and
Lady Ani; reign title; T aehwa.
29. Muryol 654-661
Also kn own by the posthumous honorary title T'aejong. Son of Y ong-
ch'un an d grandson of King Ch inji. His mother was Lady Ch'onmyong, a
daughter of King Chin'pyong. Queen Lady Hunje (Kim Y u-sin's younger
sister Munhui).
30. Munmu 661-681
Given name Popmin, son of M uryol and Lady Hunje. Queen Cha-ui,
daughter of Sonp'um Haegan. His tomb is on a rock in the sea east of
Kamun T emple. Paekje and Koguryo were conquered during his reign.
31. Sinmun 681-692
Given-name Ch ongmyong or Ilso. Son of Munmu and Cha-ui . Queen
Sinmok-wanghu, daughter of Kim Un-kong.
32. Hyoso 692-702
Given name I-kong. Son of Sin mun and Sinmok-wanghu. His tomb is
east of Mangdek T emple.
33. Songdok 702-737
Given n ame Hung-kwang, childhood name Y ung-ki, Hyoso's younger
brother . First queen Paeso-wanghu, second Chommul-wanghu. His tomb is

south of T ongch'on (some sources say Y angjang-gok).
34. Hyosong 737-742
Given name Stingkyong. Son  of Songdok and Chommul-wanghu.
Queen Hyemyong-wanghu. Cremated at Popnyu T emple and his ashes
scattered over the eastern sea.
35. Kyongdok 742-765
Son of Songdok  and Chommul-wanghu. First queen Lady Sammo, who
could bear no sons and left the palace. Second queen Lady Manwol. First
buried i n a stone tomb west o f Kyongji T emple and later moved to the
valley of Y angjang-gok.
36. Hyegong 765-780
Son of Kyongdok and Lady Ma nwol. First queen Lady Sinp'a, second
Lady Ch'angsa.
37. Sondok 780-785
Given name Y ang-sang. Son of Hyobang-haegan and Lady Saso, the
daughter of King Songdok. Queen Kujok-wanghu.
38. W onsong 785-799
Given n ame Kyong-sin. Son of Hyoyang T ae-agan and Lady Chio.
Queen Lady Sukjong. His tomb is at Kok-sa (now Sungbok-sa).
39. Sosong 799-800
Son of Hyech'ung T'aeja and Songmok T aehu. Queen Kyehwa-wanghu.
40. Aejang 800-809
Given name Chung-hui or Ch'ongmyong. Son of Sosong and Kyehwa-
wanghu. Murdered by his two uncles Hondok and Hungdok.
41. Hondok 809-826
Given name Onsung. King Sosong's brother . Queen Kwisung-nang. His
tomb is north of Ch'onnimch'on.
42. Hungdok 826-836
Given name Kyonghwi. Hond ok's brother . Queen Lady Ch'anghwa.
King Sosong's daughter . T omb north of Angang, with that of his queen.
43. Huigang 836-838
Given name Kaeryung, also call ed Che-u. Son of Honjong Kak kan and
Lady Mido.
44. Minae 838-839
Son of Ch'unggong Kakkan and Lady Kwip'a, the daughter of
Hyech'ung. Queen Muyong W anghu.
45. Sinmu 839

Given name U-jing. Son of K yunjong Kakkan and Lady Chonggyo.
Queen Chongjong.
46. Munsong 839-857
Given name Kyong-ung. Son of Sinmu and Chongjong-t'aehu. Queen
Somyong-wanghu.
47. Honan 857-861
Given name Uijong. Y ounge r brother of Sinmu, son of Lady
Hunmyong.
48. Kyongmun 861-875
Given n ame Ung-nyom. Son of Kyemong Kakkan, grandson of King
Huigang. Mothe r Lady Kwanghwa, daughter of King Sinmu. Queen Munja
Hwanghu, King Honan's daughter .
49. Hongang 875-886
Given name Chong. Son of Kyongmun and Munja Hwanghu.
50. Chonggang 886-888
Given name Hwang. Minae's brother .
51. Queen Chinsong 888-898
Given name Manhon. King Ch onggang's sister by the same mother .
Spouse W ihong T ae-kakkan. Abdicated in favor of Hyogong, an illegitimate
son of King Hongang, and died soon after . She was cremated an d her ashes
scattered over the western hill in Moryang, otherwise called Mihwang
Mountain.
52. Hyogong 898-913
Given name Y o. Son of Hongan g and Munja-wanghu. He was c remated
on the northern hill of Saja-sa a nd his bones were buried on the eastern hill
of Kujje.
53. Sindok 913-917
Pak clan , a descendant of King Adala. Queen Chasong-wanghu.  He was
cremated and his bones buried south of Chamhyon.
54. Kyongmyong 917-924
Pak Clan Given name Sungyong, son of Sindokand Chasong. Queen
Changsa-taek. C remated at Hwangpok T emple and his bones sc attered over
Songdung Mountain.
55. Kyongae 924-927
Pak clan. Given name W i-ting. King Kyongmyong's brother .
56. Kyongsun 927-935

Kim clan. Given name Pu, son of Hyojong Ikan and Kyea t'aehu, King
Hongang's daughter . In 935 surrendered Silla sovereignty to W ang Kon, the
founder of the Koryo dynasty . He died in 978 and his tomb is in T ong-
hyang-dong. The Silla kingdo m came to an end 992 years after its
traditional founding date
APPENDIX
TRIANGULAR POSITION OF THE THREE KINGDOMS



KOGUYRO A T THE ZENITH OF HER POWER


SILLA A T THE Z EITH OF HER P OWER


P AEKCHE A T THE ZENITH OF HER P OWER


UNIFIED SILLA AND P AEKCHE
T ranslator's Not e: A serious stud y of Samguk Y usa was done by a well-
known historica l scholar Ch'oe Nam-son and published in a Monthly ,
“Kyemyong” (1921-1933), a scholarly journal published by the Kyemyong
Book Company , Seoul, under the editorship of Cho'e Nam- son, whose
articles on Samguk Y usa appea red in it (March, 1927, No. 18), Later , the
same appeared in book form in several editions.

The modern publications of Samguk Y usa are:
1 . Ch'oe Nam-son, Samguk Y usa Haeje (An Introduction to the Book,
Samguk Y usa), 1 vol.
2 . Y i Byung-Do, Samguk Y usa with Hangul T ranslation and Annotations,
1 vol.
3 . Y i Chae-ho, Samguk Y usa in Hangul with Footnotes, 2 vols.
4 . Chosun Sahak-Hoe, Samguk Y usa (Reprint of Cheng-te T ext), 2 vols.