CHAPTER II.

IDUN AND HER APPLES.


2. Brage began his tale by telling how three asas, Odin, Loke and Honer,
went on a journey over mountains and heaths, where they could get
nothing to eat. But when they came down into a valley they saw a herd of
cattle. From this herd they took an ox and went to work to boil it. When
they deemed that it must be boiled enough they uncovered the broth, but
it was not yet done. After a little while they lifted the cover off
again, but it was not yet boiled. They talked among themselves about how
this could happen. Then they heard a voice in the oak above them, and he
who sat there said that he was the cause that the broth did not get
boiled. They looked up and saw an eagle, and it was not a small one.
Then said the eagle: If you will give me my fill of the ox, then the
broth will be boiled. They agreed to this. So he flew down from the
tree, seated himself beside the boiling broth, and immediately snatched
up first the two thighs of the ox and then both the shoulders. This made
Loke wroth: he grasped a large pole, raised it with all his might and
dashed it at the body of the eagle. The eagle shook himself after the
blow and flew up. One end of the pole fastened itself to the body of the
eagle, and the other end stuck to Loke’s hands. The eagle flew just high
enough so that Loke’s feet were dragged over stones and rocks and trees,
and it seemed to him that his arms would be torn from his
shoulder-blades. He calls and prays the eagle most earnestly for peace,
but the latter declares that Loke shall never get free unless he will
pledge himself to bring Idun and her apples out of Asgard. When Loke had
promised this, he was set free and went to his companions again; and no
more is related of this journey, except that they returned home. But at
the time agreed upon, Loke coaxed Idun out of Asgard into a forest,
saying that he had found apples that she would think very nice, and he
requested her to take with her her own apples in order to compare them.
Then came the giant Thjasse in the guise of an eagle, seized Idun and
flew away with her to his home in Thrymheim. The asas were ill at ease
on account of the disappearance of Idun,--they became gray-haired and
old. They met in council and asked each other who last had seen Idun.
The last that had been seen of her was that she had gone out of Asgard
in company with Loke. Then Loke was seized and brought into the council,
and he was threatened with death or torture. But he became frightened,
and promised to bring Idun back from Jotunheim if Freyja would lend him
the falcon-guise that she had. He got the falcon-guise, flew north into
Jotunheim, and came one day to the giant Thjasse. The giant had rowed
out to sea, and Idun was at home alone. Loke turned her into the
likeness of a nut, held her in his claws and flew with all his might.
But when Thjasse returned home and missed Idun, he took on his
eagle-guise, flew after Loke, gaining on the latter with his eagle
wings. When the asas saw the falcon coming flying with the nut, and how
the eagle flew, they went to the walls of Asgard and brought with them
bundles of plane-shavings. When the falcon flew within the burg, he let
himself drop down beside the burg-wall. Then the asas kindled a fire in
the shavings; and the eagle, being unable to stop himself when he missed
the falcon, caught fire in his feathers, so that he could not fly any
farther. The asas were on hand and slew the giant Thjasse within the
gates of Asgard, and that slaughter is most famous.