THE YOUNGER EDDA:

                  also called

       SNORRE’S EDDA, OR THE PROSE EDDA.

      An English Version of the Foreword;
     The Fooling of Gylfe, The Afterword;
 Brage’s Talk, The Afterword to Brage’s Talk,
       and the Important Passages in the
       Poetical Diction (Skaldskaparmal).

                    with an

  Introduction, Notes, Vocabulary, and Index.

         By RASMUS B. ANDERSON, LL.D.,

Formerly Professor of the Scandinavian Languages
        in the University of Wisconsin,
          Ex-U.S. Minister to Denmark,
 Author of “America Not Discovered By Columbus,”
“Norse Mythology,” “Viking Tales Of The North,” etc.


                    Chicago
          Scott, Foresman and Company
                      1901


               Copyright, 1879,
          By S. C. Griggs and Company.


                    Press of
           The Henry O. Shepard Co.
                    Chicago.


                       To

             HON. THOS. F. BAYARD,

     Ambassador to the Court of St. James,
           in Grateful Recollection
        of Pleasant Official Relations.


PREFACE.


In the beginning, before the heaven and the earth and the sea were
created, the great abyss Ginungagap was without form and void, and the
spirit of Fimbultyr moved upon the face of the deep, until the ice-cold
rivers, the Elivogs, flowing from Niflheim, came in contact with the
dazzling flames from Muspelheim. This was before Chaos.

And Fimbultyr said: Let the melted drops of vapor quicken into life, and
the giant Ymer was born in the midst of Ginungagap. He was not a god,
but the father of all the race of evil giants. This was Chaos.

And Fimbultyr said: Let Ymer be slain and let order be established. And
straightway Odin and his brothers--the bright sons of Bure--gave Ymer a
mortal wound, and from his body made they the universe; from his flesh,
the earth; from his blood, the sea; from his bones, the rocks; from
his hair, the trees; from his skull, the vaulted heavens; from his
eye-brows, the bulwark called Midgard. And the gods formed man and woman
in their own image of two trees, and breathed into them the breath of
life. Ask and Embla became living souls, and they received a garden in
Midgard as a dwelling-place for themselves and their children until the
end of time. This was Cosmos.

The world’s last day approaches. All bonds and fetters that bound the
forces of heaven and earth together are severed, and the powers of good
and of evil are brought together in an internecine feud. Loke advances
with the Fenris-wolf and the Midgard-serpent, his own children, with
all the hosts of the giants, and with Surt, who flings fire and flame
over the world. Odin advances with all the asas and all the blessed
einherjes. They meet, contend, and fall. The wolf swallows Odin but
Vidar, the Silent, sets his foot upon the monster’s lower jaw, he
seizes the other with his hand, and thus rends him till he dies. Frey
encounters Surt, and terrible blows are given ere Frey falls. Heimdal
and Loke fight and kill each other, and so do Tyr and the dog Garm from
the Gnipa Cave. Asa-Thor fells the Midgard-serpent with his Mjolner, but
he retreats only nine paces when he himself falls dead, suffocated by
the serpent’s venom. Then smoke wreathes up around the ash Ygdrasil,
the high flames play against the heavens, the graves of the gods, of
the giants and of men are swallowed up by the sea, and the end has come.
This is Ragnarok, the twilight of the gods.

But the radiant dawn follows the night. The earth, completely green,
rises again from the sea, and where the mews have but just been rocking
on restless waves, rich fields unplowed and unsown, now wave their
golden harvests before the gentle breezes. The asas awake to a new life,
Balder is with them again. Then comes the mighty Fimbultyr, the god who
is from everlasting to everlasting; the god whom the Edda skald dared
not name. The god of gods comes to the asas. He comes to the great
judgment and gathers all the good into Gimle to dwell there forever, and
evermore delights enjoy; but the perjurers and murderers and adulterers
he sends to Nastrand, that terrible hall, to be torn by Nidhug until
they are purged from their wickedness. This is Regeneration.

These are the outlines of the Teutonic religion. Such were the doctrines
established by Odin among our ancestors. Thus do we find it recorded in
the Eddas of Iceland.

The present volume contains all of the Younger Edda that can possibly be
of any importance to English readers. In fact, it gives more than has
ever before been presented in any translation into English, German or
any of the modern Scandinavian tongues.

We would recommend our readers to omit the Forewords and Afterwords
until they have perused the Fooling of Gylfe and Brage’s Speech. The
Forewords and Afterwords, it will readily be seen, are written by a
later and less skillful hand, and we should be sorry to have anyone lay
the book aside and lose the pleasure of reading Snorre’s and Olaf’s
charming work, because he became disgusted with what seemed to him mere
silly twaddle. And yet these Forewords and Afterwords become interesting
enough when taken up in connection with a study of the historical
anthropomorphized Odin. With a view of giving a pretty complete outline
of the founder of the Teutonic race we have in our notes given all the
Heimskringla sketch of the Black Sea Odin. We have done this, not only
on account of the material it furnishes as the groundwork of a Teutonic
epic, which we trust the muses will ere long direct some one to write,
but also on account of the vivid picture it gives of Teutonic life as
shaped and controlled by the Odinic faith.

All the poems quoted in the Younger Edda have in this edition been
traced back to their sources in the Elder Edda and elsewhere.

Where the notes seem to the reader insufficient, we must refer him to
our Norse Mythology, where he will, we trust, find much of the
additional information he may desire.

Well aware that our work has many imperfections, and begging our readers
to deal generously with our shortcomings, we send the book out into the
world with the hope that it may aid some young son or daughter of Odin
to find his way to the fountains of Urd and Mimer and to Idun’s
rejuvenating apples. The son must not squander, but husband wisely, what
his father has accumulated. The race must cherish and hold fast and add
to the thought that the past has bequeathed to it. Thus does it grow
greater and richer with each new generation. The past is the mirror that
reflects the future.

  R. B. ANDERSON.
  University of Wisconsin,
  Madison, Wis., _September, 1879_.


CONTENTS.


Preface                                          5

Introduction                                    15

Foreword                                        33


THE FOOLING OF GYLFE.