CHAPTER XVI.

RAGNAROK.


55. Then said Ganglere: What tidings are to be told of Ragnarok? Of this
I have never heard before. Har answered: Great things are to be said
thereof. First, there is a winter called the Fimbul-winter, when snow
drives from all quarters, the frosts are so severe, the winds so keen
and piercing, that there is no joy in the sun. There are three such
winters in succession, without any intervening summer. But before these
there are three other winters, during which great wars rage over all the
world. Brothers slay each other for the sake of gain, and no one spares
his father or mother in that manslaughter and adultery. Thus says the
Vala’s Prophecy:

  Brothers will fight together
  And become each other’s bane;
  Sisters’ children
  Their sib shall spoil.[62]
  Hard is the world,
  Sensual sins grow huge.
  There are ax-ages, sword-ages--
  Shields are cleft in twain,--
  There are wind-ages, wolf-ages,
  Ere the world falls dead.[63]

    [Footnote 62: Commit adultery.]

    [Footnote 63: Elder Edda: The Vala’s Prophecy, 48, 49.]

Then happens what will seem a great miracle, that the wolf[64] devours
the sun, and this will seem a great loss. The other wolf will devour the
moon, and this too will cause great mischief. The stars shall be Hurled
from heaven. Then it shall come to pass that the earth and the mountains
will shake so violently that trees will be torn up by the roots, the
mountains will topple down, and all bonds and fetters will be broken and
snapped. The Fenris-wolf gets loose. The sea rushes over the earth, for
the Midgard-serpent writhes in giant rage and seeks to gain the land.
The ship that is called Naglfar also becomes loose. It is made of the
nails of dead men; wherefore it is worth warning that, when a man dies
with unpared nails, he supplies a large amount of materials for the
building of this ship, which both gods and men wish may be finished as
late as possible. But in this flood Naglfar gets afloat. The giant Hrym
is its steersman. The Fenris-wolf advances with wide open mouth; the
upper jaw reaches to heaven and the lower jaw is on the earth. He would
open it still wider had he room. Fire flashes from his eyes and
nostrils. The Midgard-serpent vomits forth venom, defiling all the air
and the sea; he is very terrible, and places himself by the side of the
wolf. In the midst of this clash and din the heavens are rent in twain,
and the sons of Muspel come riding through the opening. Surt rides
first, and before him and after him flames burning fire. He has a very
good sword, which shines brighter than the sun. As they ride over
Bifrost it breaks to pieces, as has before been stated. The sons of
Muspel direct their course to the plain which is called Vigrid. Thither
repair also the Fenris-wolf and the Midgard-serpent. To this place have
also come Loke and Hrym, and with him all the frost-giants. In Loke’s
company are all the friends of Hel. The sons of Muspel have there
effulgent bands alone by themselves. The plain Vigrid is one hundred
miles (rasts) on each side.

    [Footnote 64: Fenris-wolf.]

56. While these things are happening, Heimdal stands up, blows with all
his might in the Gjallar-horn and awakens all the gods, who thereupon
hold counsel. Odin rides to Mimer’s well to ask advice of Mimer for
himself and his folk. Then quivers the ash Ygdrasil, and all things in
heaven and earth fear and tremble. The asas and the einherjes arm
themselves and speed forth to the battle-field. Odin rides first; with
his golden helmet, resplendent byrnie, and his spear Gungner, he
advances against the Fenris-wolf. Thor stands by his side, but can give
him no assistance, for he has his hands full in his struggle with the
Midgard-serpent. Frey encounters Surt, and heavy blows are exchanged ere
Frey falls. The cause of his death is that he has not that good sword
which he gave to Skirner. Even the dog Garm, that was bound before the
Gnipa-cave, gets loose. He is the greatest plague. He contends with Tyr,
and they kill each other. Thor gets great renown by slaying the
Midgard-serpent, but retreats only nine paces when he falls to the earth
dead, poisoned by the venom that the serpent blows on him. The wolf
swallows Odin, and thus causes his death; but Vidar immediately turns
and rushes at the wolf, placing one foot on his nether jaw. On this foot
he has the shoe for which materials have been gathering through all
ages, namely, the strips of leather which men cut off for the toes and
heels of shoes; wherefore he who wishes to render assistance to the asas
must cast these strips away. With one hand Vidar seizes the upper jaw of
the wolf, and thus rends asunder his mouth. Thus the wolf perishes. Loke
fights with Heimdal, and they kill each other. Thereupon Surt flings
fire over the earth and burns up all the world. Thus it is said in the
Vala’s Prophecy:

  Loud blows Heimdal
  His uplifted horn.
  Odin speaks
  With Mimer’s head.
  The straight-standing ash
  Ygdrasil quivers,
  The old tree groans,
  And the giant gets loose.

  How fare the asas?
  How fare the elves?
  All Jotunheim roars.
  The asas hold counsel;
  Before their stone-doors
  Groan the dwarfs,
  The guides of the wedge-rock.
  Know you now more or not?

  From the east drives Hrym,
  Bears his shield before him.
  Jormungand welters
  In giant rage
  And smites the waves.
  The eagle screams,
  And with pale beak tears corpses,
  Naglfar gets loose.

  A ship comes from the east,
  The hosts of Muspel
  Come o’er the main,
  And Loke is steersman.
  All the fell powers
  Are with the wolf;
  Along with them
  Is Byleist’s brother.[65]

  From the south comes Surt
  With blazing fire-brand,--
  The sun of the war-god
  Shines from his sword.
  Mountains dash together,
  Giant maids are frightened,
  Heroes go the way to Hel,
  And heaven is rent in twain.

  Then comes to Hlin
  Another woe,
  When Odin goes
  With the wolf to fight,
  And Bele’s bright slayer[66]
  To contend with Surt.
  There will fall
  Frigg’s beloved.

  Odin’s son goes
  To fight with the wolf,
  And Vidar goes on his way
  To the wild beast.[67]
  With his hand he thrusts
  His sword to the heart
  Of the giant’s child,
  And avenges his father.

  Then goes the famous
  Son[68] of Hlodyn
  To fight with the serpent.
  Though about to die,
  He fears not the contest;
  All men
  Abandon their homesteads
  When the warder of Midgard
  In wrath slays the serpent.

  The sun grows dark,
  The earth sinks into the sea,
  The bright stars
  From heaven vanish;
  Fire rages,
  Heat blazes,
  And high flames play
  ’Gainst heaven itself.[69]

    [Footnote 65: Loke.]

    [Footnote 66: Frey.]

    [Footnote 67: The Fenris-wolf.]

    [Footnote 68: Thor.]

    [Footnote 69: Elder Edda: The Vala’s Prophecy, 50-52, 54-57, 59,
    60, 62, 63.]

And again it is said as follows:

  Vigrid is the name of the plain
  Where in fight shall meet
  Surt and the gentle god.
  A hundred miles
  It is every way.
  This field is marked out for them.[70]

    [Footnote 70: Elder Edda: Vafthrudner’s Lay, 18.]