CHAPTER II.

GYLFE’S JOURNEY TO ASGARD.


2. King Gylfe was a wise man and skilled in the black art. He wondered
much that the asa-folk was so mighty in knowledge, that all things went
after their will. He thought to himself whether this could come from
their own nature, or whether the cause must be sought for among the gods
whom they worshiped. He therefore undertook a journey to Asgard. He went
secretly, having assumed the likeness of an old man, and striving thus
to disguise himself. But the asas were wiser, for they see into the
future, and, foreseeing his journey before he came, they received him
with an eye-deceit. So when he came into the burg he saw there a hall so
high that he could hardly look over it. Its roof was thatched with
golden shields as with shingles. Thus says Thjodolf of Hvin, that Valhal
was thatched with shields:

  Thinking thatchers
  Thatched the roof;
  The beams of the burg
  Beamed with gold.[9]

    [Footnote 9: Heimskringla: Harald Harfager’s Saga, ch. xix.]

In the door of the hall Gylfe saw a man who played with swords so
dexterously that seven were in the air at one time. That man asked him
what his name was. Gylfe answered that his name was Ganglere;[10] that
he had come a long way, and that he sought lodgings for the night. He
also asked who owned the burg. The other answered that it belonged to
their king: I will go with you to see him and then you may ask him for
his name yourself. Then the man turned and led the way into the hall.
Ganglere followed, and suddenly the doors closed behind him. There he
saw many rooms and a large number of people, of whom some were playing,
others were drinking, and some were fighting with weapons. He looked
around him, and much of what he saw seemed to him incredible. Then
quoth he:

  Gates all,
  Before in you go,
  You must examine well;
  For you cannot know
  Where enemies sit
  In the house before you.[11]

    [Footnote 10: The walker.]

    [Footnote 11: Elder Edda: Havamal.]

He saw three high-seats, one above the other, and in each sat a man. He
asked what the names of these chiefs were. He, who had conducted him in,
answered that the one who sat in the lowest high-seat was king, and
hight Har; the one next above him, Jafnhar; but the one who sat on the
highest throne, Thride. Har asked the comer what more his errand was,
and added that food and drink was there at his service, as for all in
Har’s hall. Ganglere answered that he first would like to ask whether
there was any wise man. Answered Har: You will not come out from here
hale unless you are wiser.

  And stand now forth
  While you ask;
  He who answers shall sit.