CHAPTER X.

THE GODDESSES (ASYNJES).


36. Ganglere asked: Which are the goddesses? Har answered: Frigg is the
first; she possesses the right lordly dwelling which is called Fensaler.
The second is Saga, who dwells in Sokvabek, and this is a large
dwelling. The third is Eir, who is the best leech. The fourth is Gefjun,
who is a may, and those who die maids become her hand-maidens. The fifth
is Fulla, who is also a may, she wears her hair flowing and has a golden
ribbon about her head; she carries Frigg’s chest, takes care of her
shoes and knows her secrets. The sixth is Freyja, who is ranked with
Frigg. She is wedded to the man whose name is Oder; their daughter’s
name is Hnos, and she is so fair that all things fair and precious are
called, from her name, Hnos. Oder went far away. Freyja weeps for him,
but her tears are red gold. Freyja has many names, and the reason
therefor is that she changed her name among the various nations to which
she came in search of Oder. She is called Mardol, Horn, Gefn, and Syr.
She has the necklace Brising, and she is called Vanadis. The seventh is
Sjofn, who is fond of turning men’s and women’s hearts to love, and it
is from her name that love is called Sjafne. The eighth is Lofn, who is
kind and good to those who call upon her, and she has permission from
Alfather or Frigg to bring together men and women, no matter what
difficulties may stand in the way; therefore “love” is so called from
her name, and also that which is much loved by men. The ninth is Var.
She hears the oaths and troths that men and women plight to each other.
Hence such vows are called vars, and she takes vengeance on those who
break their promises. The tenth is Vor, who is so wise and searching
that nothing can be concealed from her. It is a saying that a woman
becomes vor (ware) of what she becomes wise. The eleventh is Syn, who
guards the door of the hall, and closes it against those who are not to
enter. In trials she guards those suits in which anyone tries to make
use of falsehood. Hence is the saying that “syn is set against it,” when
anyone tries to deny ought. The twelfth is Hlin, who guards those men
whom Frigg wants to protect from any danger. Hence is the saying that he
hlins who is forewarned. The thirteenth is Snotra, who is wise and
courtly. After her, men and women who are wise are called Snotras. The
fourteenth is Gna, whom Frigg sends on her errands into various worlds.
She rides upon a horse called Hofvarpner, that runs through the air and
over the sea. Once, when she was riding, some vans saw her faring
through the air. Then said one of them:

  What flies there?
  What fares there?
  What glides in the air?

She answered

  I fly not,
  Though I fare
  And glide through the air
  On Hofvarpner,
  That Hamskerper,
  Begat with Gardrofa.[47]

From Gna’s name it is said that anything that fares high in the air
gnas. Sol and Bil are numbered among the goddesses, but their nature has
already been described.[48]

    [Footnote 47: Elder Edda: Grimner’s Lay, 36]

    [Footnote 48: See page 66.]

37. There are still others who are to serve in Valhal, bear the drink
around, wait upon the table and pass the ale-horns. Thus they are named
in Grimner’s Lay:

  Hrist and Mist
  I want my horn to bring to me;
  Skeggold and Skogul,
  Hild and Thrud,
  Hlok and Heifjoter,
  Gol and Geirahod,
  Randgrid and Radgrid,
  And Reginleif;
  These bear ale to the einherjes.[49]

    [Footnote 49: Elder Edda: Grimner’s Lay, 36.]

These are called valkyries. Odin sends them to all battles, where they
choose those who are to be slain, and rule over the victory. Gud and
Rosta, and the youngest norn, Skuld, always ride to sway the battle and
choose the slain. Jord, the mother of Thor, and Rind, Vale’s mother, are
numbered among the goddesses.