CHAPTER XIV.

The death of Balder is justly regarded as the most beautiful myth in
Teutonic mythology. It is connected with the Lay of Vegtam in the Elder
Edda. Like so many other myths (Frey and Gerd, The Robbing of Idun,
etc.) the myth symbolizes originally the end of summer and return of
spring. Thus Balder dies every year and goes to Hel. But in the
following spring he returns to the asas, and gladdens all things living
and dead with his pure shining light. Gradually, however, the myth was
changed from a symbol of the departing and returning summer, and applied
to the departing and returning of the world year, and thus the death of
Balder prepares the way for Ragnarok and Regeneration. Balder goes to
Hel and does not return to this world. Thokk refuses to weep for him.
His return is promised after Ragnarok. The next spring does not bring
him back, but the rejuvenated earth. Thus the death of Balder becomes
the central thought in the drama of the fate of the gods and of the
world. It is inseparably connected with the punishment of Loke and the
twilight of the gods. The winter following the death of Balder is not an
ordinary winter, but the Fimbul-winter, which is followed by no summer,
but by the destruction of the world. The central idea in the Odinic
religion, the destruction and regeneration of the world, has taken this
beautiful sun-myth of Balder into its service. Balder is then no more
merely the pure holy light of heaven; he symbolizes at the same time the
purity and innocence of the gods; he is changed from a physical to an
ethical myth. He impersonated all that was good and holy in the life of
the gods; and so it came to pass that when the golden age had ceased,
when thirst for gold (Gulveig), when sin and crime had come into the
world, he was too good to live in it. As in Genesis fratricide (Cain and
Abel) followed upon the eating of the forbidden fruit, and the loss of
paradise; so, when the golden age (paradise) had ended among the asas,
Loke (the serpent) brought fratricide (Hoder and Balder) among the gods;
themselves and our ancestors regarded fratricide as the lowest depth of
moral depravity. After the death of Balder

  Brothers slay brothers,
  Sisters’ children
  Shed each other’s blood,
  Hard grows the world,
  Sensual sin waxes huge.

  There are sword-ages, ax-ages--
  Shields are cleft in twain,--
  Storm-ages, murder-ages,--
  Till the world falls dead,
  And men no longer spare
  Or pity one another.

Upon the whole we may say that a sun-myth first represents the death of
the day at sunset, when the sky is radiant as if dyed in blood. In the
flushing morn light wins its victory again. Then this same myth becomes
transferred to the death and birth of summer. Once more it is lifted
into a higher sphere, while still holding on to its physical
interpretation, and is applied to the world year. Finally, it is clothed
with ethical attributes, becomes thoroughly anthropomorphized, and
typifies the good and the evil, the virtues and vices (light and
darkness), in the character and life of gods and of men. Thus we get
four stages in the development of the myth.