CHAPTER V.

In reference to the golden age, see Norse Mythology, pp. 182 and 197.

In the appendix to the German so-called Hero-Book we are told that the
dwarfs were first created to cultivate the desert lands and the
mountains; thereupon the giants, to subdue the wild beasts; and finally
the heroes, to assist the dwarfs against the treacherous giants. While
the giants are always hostile to the gods, the dwarfs are usually
friendly to them.

DWARFS. Both giants and dwarfs shun the light. If surprised by the
breaking forth of day, they become changed to stone. In one of the poems
of the Elder Edda (the Alvismál), Thor amuses the dwarf Alvis with
various questions till daylight, and then cooly says to him: With great
artifices, I tell you, you have been deceived; you are surprised here,
dwarf, by daylight! The sun now shines in the hall. In the Helgakvida
Atle says to the giantess Hrimgerd: It is now day, Hrimgerd! But Atle
has detained you, to your life’s perdition. It will appear a laughable
harbor-mark, where you stand as a stone-image.

In the German tales the dwarfs are described as deformed and diminutive,
coarsely clad and of dusky hue: “a little black man,” “a little gray
man.” They are sometimes of the height of a child of four years,
sometimes as two spans high, a thumb high (hence, Tom Thumb). The old
Danish ballad of Eline of Villenwood mentions a troll not bigger than an
ant. Dvergmál (the speech of the dwarfs) is the Old Norse expression for
the echo in the mountains.

In the later popular belief, the dwarfs are generally called the
subterraneans, the brown men in the moor, etc. They make themselves
invisible by a hat or hood. The women spin and weave, the men are
smiths. In Norway rock-crystal is called dwarf-stone. Certain stones are
in Denmark called dwarf-hammers. They borrow things and seek advice from
people, and beg aid for their wives when in labor, all which services
they reward. But they also lame cattle, are thievish, and will carry off
damsels. There have been instances of dwarf females having married and
had children with men. (Thorpe’s Northern Mythology.)

WAR. It was the first warfare in the world, says the Elder Edda, when
they pierced Gullveig (gold-thirst) through with a spear, and burned her
in Odin’s hall. Thrice they burned her, thrice she was born anew: again
and again, but still she lives. When she comes to a house they call her
Heide (the bright, the welcome), and regard her as a propitious vala or
prophetess. She can tame wolves, understands witchcraft, and delights
wicked women. Hereupon the gods consulted together whether they should
punish this misdeed, or accept a blood-fine, when Odin cast forth a
spear among mankind, and now began war and slaughter in the world. The
defenses of the burgh of the asas was broken down. The vans anticipated
war, and hastened over the field. The valkyries came from afar, ready to
ride to the gods’ people: Skuld with the shield, Skogul, Gunn, Hild,
Gondul and Geirr Skogul. (Quoted by Thorpe.)