CHAPTER VI.

In reference to Ygdrasil, we refer our readers to Norse Mythology, pp.
205-211, and to Thomas Carlyle’s Heroes and Hero-worship.

A connection between the norns Urd, Verdande and Skuld and the weird
sisters in Shakspeare’s _Macbeth_ has long since been recognized; but
new light has recently been thrown upon the subject by the philosopher
Karl Blind, who has contributed valuable articles on the subject in the
German periodical “Die Gegenwart” and in the “London Academy.” We take
the liberty of reproducing here an abstract of his article in the
“Academy”:

      *    *    *    *    *    *

  The fact itself of these Witches being simply transfigurations, or
  later disguises, of the Teutonic Norns is fully established--as may
  be seen from Grimm or Simrock. In delineating these hags, Shakspeare
  has practically drawn upon old Germanic sources, perhaps upon
  current folk-lore of his time.

  It has always struck me as noteworthy that in the greater part of
  the scene between the Weird Sisters, Macbeth and Banquo, and
  wherever the Witches come in, Shakspeare uses the staff-rime in a
  remarkable manner. Not only does this add powerfully to the archaic
  impressiveness and awe, but it also seems to bring the form and
  figure of the Sisters of Fate more closely within the circle of the
  Teutonic idea. I have pointed out this striking use of the
  alliterative system in _Macbeth_ in an article on “An old German
  Poem and a Vedic Hymn,” which appeared in _Fraser_ in June, 1877,
  and in which the derivation of the Weird Sisters from the Germanic
  Norns is mentioned.

  The very first scene in the first act of _Macbeth_ opens strongly
  with the staff-rime:

    _1st Witch_. When shall we three meet again--
    In thunder, lightning or in rain?

    _2d Witch_. When the hurly-burly’s done,
    When the battle’s lost and won.

    _3d Witch_. That will be ere set of sun.

    _1st Witch_. Where the place?

    _2d Witch_.              Upon the heath.

    _3d Witch_. There to meet with Macbeth.

    _1st Witch_. I come, Graymalkin!

    _All_. Paddock calls. Anon.
    Fair is foul, and foul is fair.
    Hover through the fog and filthy air.

  Not less marked is the adoption of the fullest staff-rime--together
  (as above) with the end-rime--in the third scene, when the Weird
  Sisters speak. Again, there is the staff-rime when Banquo addresses
  them. Again, the strongest alliteration, combined with the end-rime,
  runs all through the Witches’ spell-song in Act iv, scene 1. This
  feature in Shakspeare appears to me to merit closer investigation;
  all the more so because a less regular alliteration, but still a
  marked one, is found in not a few passages of a number of his plays.
  Only one further instance of the systematic employment of
  alliteration may here be noted in passing. It is in Ariel’s songs in
  the _Tempest_, Act i, scene 2. Schlegel and Tieck evidently did not
  observe this alliterative peculiarity. Their otherwise excellent
  translation does not render it, except so far as the obvious
  similarity of certain English and German words involuntarily made
  them do so. But in the notes to their version of _Macbeth_ the
  character of the Weird Sisters is also misunderstood, though
  Warburton is referred to, who had already suggested their
  derivations from the Valkyrs or Norns.

  It is an error to say that the Witches in _Macbeth_ “are never
  called witches” (compare Act i, scene 3: “‘Give me!’ quoth I.
  ‘A-roint thee, _witch_!’ the rump-fed ronyon cries”). However, their
  designation as Weird Sisters fully settles the case of their
  Germanic origin.

  This name “Weird” is derived from the Anglo-Saxon Norn Wyrd (Sax.
  _Wurth_; O.H. Ger. _Wurd_; Norse, _Urd_), who represents the Past,
  as her very name shows. Wurd is _die Gewordene_--the “Has Been,” or
  rather the “Has Become,” if one could say so in English.

      *    *    *    *    *    *

  In Shakspeare the Witches are three in number--even as in Norse,
  German, as well as in Keltic and other mythologies. Urd, properly
  speaking, is the Past. Skuld is the Future, or “That Which shall
  Be.” Verdandi, usually translated as the Present, has an even deeper
  meaning. Her name is not to be derived from _vera_ (to be), but from
  _verda_ (Ger. _werden_). This verb, which has a mixed meaning of “to
  be,” “to become,” or to “grow,” has been lost in English. Verdandi
  is, therefore, not merely a representative of present Being, but of
  the process of Growing, or of Evolution--which gives her figure a
  profounder aspect. Indeed, there is generally more significance in
  mythological tales than those imagine who look upon them chiefly as
  a barren play of fancy.

  Incidentally it may be remarked that, though Shakspeare’s Weird
  Sisters are three in number--corresponding to Urd, Verdandi and
  Skuld--German and Northern mythology and folk-lore occasionally
  speak of twelve or seven of them. In the German tale of
  _Dornröschen_, or the Sleeping Beauty, there are twelve good fays;
  and a thirteenth, who works the evil spell. Once, in German
  folk-lore, we meet with but two Sisters of Fate--one of them called
  _Kann_, the other _Muss_. Perhaps these are representatives of man’s
  measure of free will (that which he “can”), and of that which is his
  inevitable fate--or, that which he “must” do.

  Though the word “Norn” has been lost in England and Germany, it is
  possibly preserved in a German folk-lore ditty, which speaks of
  three Sisters of Fate as “Nuns.” Altogether, German folk-lore is
  still full of rimes about three Weird Sisters. They are sometimes
  called Wild Women, or Wise Women, or the Measurers
  (_Metten_)--namely, of Fate; or, euphemistically, like the
  Eumenides, the Advisers of Welfare (_Heil-Räthinnen_), reminding us
  of the counsels given to Macbeth in the apparition scene; or the
  Quick Judges (_Gach-Schepfen_). Even as in the Edda, these German
  fays weave and twist threads or ropes, and attach them to distant
  parts, thus fixing the weft of Fate. One of these fays is sometimes
  called Held, and described as black, or as half dark half
  white--like Hel, the Mistress of the Nether World. That German fay
  is also called Rachel, clearly a contraction of Rach-Hel, i.e. the
  Avengeress Hel.

  Now, in _Macbeth_ also the Weird Sisters are described as “black.”
  The coming up of Hekate with them in the cave-scene might not
  unfitly be looked upon as a parallel with the German Held, or
  Rach-Hel, and the Norse Hel; these Teutonic deities being originally
  Goddesses of Nocturnal Darkness, and of the Nether World, even as
  Hekate.

  In German folk-lore, three Sisters of Fate bear the names of Wilbet,
  Worbet and Ainbet. Etymologically these names seem to refer to the
  well-disposed nature of a fay representing the Past; to the warring
  or worrying troubles of the Present; and to the terrors (_Ain_ =
  _Agin_) of the Future. All over southern Germany, from Austria to
  Alsace and Rhenish Hesse, the three fays are known under various
  names besides Wilbet, Worbet, and Ainbet--for instance, as Mechtild,
  Ottilia, and Gertraud; as Irmina, Adela, and Chlothildis, and so
  forth. The fay in the middle of this trio is always a good fay,
  a white fay--but blind. Her treasure (the very names of Ottilia and
  Adela point to a treasure) is continually being taken from her by
  the third fay, a dark and evil one, as well as by the first. This
  myth has been interpreted as meaning that the Present, being blinded
  as to its own existence, is continually being encroached upon,
  robbed as it were, by the dark Future and the Past. Of this
  particular trait there is no vestige in Shakspeare’s Weird Sisters.
  They, like the Norns, “go hand in hand.” But there is another point
  which claims attention Shakspeare’s Witches are bearded. (“You
  should be women, and yet your beards forbid me to interpret that you
  are so.” Act i, scene 3.)

  It need scarcely be brought to recollection that a commingling of
  the female and male character occurs in the divine and semi-divine
  figures of various mythological systems--including the Bearded
  Venus. Of decisive importance is, however, the fact of a bearded
  Weird Sister having apparently been believed in by our heathen
  German forefathers.

  Near Wessobrunn, in Upper Bavaria, where the semi-heathen fragment
  of a cosmogonic lay, known as “Wessobrunn Prayer,” was discovered,
  there has also been found, of late, a rudely-sculptured three-headed
  image. It is looked upon as an ancient effigy of the German Norns.
  The Cloister of the three Holy Bournes, or Fountains, which stands
  close by the place of discovery, is supposed to have been set up on
  ground that had once served for pagan worship. Probably the later
  monkish establishment of the Three Holy Bournes had taken the place
  of a similarly named heathen sanctuary where the three Sisters of
  Fate were once adored. Indeed, the name of all the corresponding
  fays in yet current German folk-lore is connected with holy wells.
  This quite fits in with the three Eddic Bournes near the great Tree
  of Existence, at one of which--apparently at the oldest, which is
  the very Source of Being--the Norns live, “the maidens that over the
  Sea of Age travel in deep foreknowledge,” and of whom it is said
  that:

    They laid the lots, they ruled the life
    To the sons of men, their fate foretelling.

  Now, curiously enough, the central head of the slab found near
  Wessobrunn, in the neighborhood of the Cloister of the Three Holy
  Bournes, is _bearded_. This has puzzled our archæologists. Some of
  them fancied that what appears to be a beard might after all be the
  hair of one of the fays or Norns, tied round the chin. By the light
  of the description of the Weird Sisters in Shakspeare’s _Macbeth_
  we, however, see at once the true connection.

  In every respect, therefore, his “Witches” are an echo from the
  ancient Germanic creed--an echo, moreover, coming to us in the
  oldest Teutonic verse-form; that is, in the staff-rime.

      KARL BLIND.

ELVES. The elves of later times seem a sort of middle thing between the
light and dark elves. They are fair and lively, but also bad and
mischievous. In some parts of Norway the peasants describe them as
diminutive naked boys with hats on. Traces of their dance are sometimes
to be seen on the wet grass, especially on the banks of rivers. Their
exhalation is injurious, and is called _alfgust_ or _elfblæst_, causing
a swelling, which is easily contracted by too nearly approaching places
where they have spat, etc. They have a predilection for certain spots,
but particularly for large trees, which on that account the owners do
not venture to meddle with, but look on them as something sacred, on
which the weal or woe of the place depends. Certain diseases among their
cattle are attributed to the elves, and are, therefore, called elf-fire
or elf-shot. The dark elves are often confounded with the dwarfs, with
whom they, indeed, seem identical, although they are distinguished in
Odin’s Raven’s Song. The Norwegians also make a distinction between
dwarfs and elves, believing the former to live solitary and in quiet,
while the latter love music and dancing. (Faye, p. 48; quoted by
Thorpe.)

The fairies of Scotland are precisely identical with the above. They are
described as a diminutive race of beings of a mixed or rather dubious
nature, capricious in their dispositions and mischievous in their
resentment. They inhabit the interior of green hills, chiefly those of a
conical form, in Gaelic termed _Sighan_, on which they lead their dances
by moonlight; impressing upon the surface the marks of circles, which
sometimes appear yellow and blasted, sometimes of a deep green hue, and
within which it is dangerous to sleep, or to be found after sunset.
Cattle which are suddenly seized with the cramp, or some similar
disorder, are said to be _elf-shot_. (Scott’s Minstrelsy of the Scottish
Border; quoted by Thorpe.)

Of the Swedish elves, Arndt gives the following sketch: Of giants, of
dwarfs, of the alp, of dragons, that keep watch over treasures, they
have the usual stories; nor are the kindly elves forgotten. How often
has my postillion, when he observed a circular mark in the dewy grass,
exclaimed: See! there the elves have been dancing. These elf-dances play
a great part in the spinning-room. To those who at midnight happen to
enter one of these circles, the elves become visible, and may then play
all kinds of pranks with them; though in general they are little, merry,
harmless beings, both male and female. They often sit in small stones,
that are hollowed out in circular form, and which are called elf-querns
or mill-stones. Their voice is said to be soft like the air. If a loud
cry is heard in the forest, it is that of the Skogsrå (spirit of the
wood), which should be answered only by a _He!_ when it can do no harm.
(Reise durch Sweden; quoted by Thorpe.)

The elf-shot was known in England in very remote times, as appears from
the Anglo-Saxon incantation, printed by Grimm in his Deutsche
Mythologie, and in the appendix to Kemble’s Saxons in England: Gif hit
wœre esa gescot oððe hit wœre ylfa gescot; that is, if it were an
asa-shot or an elf-shot. On this subject Grimm says: It is a very old
belief that dangerous arrows were shot by the elves from the air. The
thunder-bolt is also called elf-shot, and in Scotland a hard, sharp,
wedge-shaped stone is known by the name of elf-arrow, elf-flint,
elf-bolt, which, it is supposed, has been sent by the spirits. (Quoted
by Thorpe.)