CHAPTER IX.

Freyja’s ornament Brising. In the saga of Olaf Tryggvason, there is a
rather awkward story of the manner in which Freyja became possessed of
her ornament. Freyja, it is told, was a mistress of Odin. Not far from
the palace dwelt four dwarfs, whose names were Alfrig, Dvalin, Berling
and Grer; they were skillful smiths. Looking one day into their stony
dwelling, Freyja saw them at work on a beautiful golden necklace, or
collar, which she offered to buy, but which they refused to part with,
except on conditions quite incompatible with the fidelity she owed to
Odin, but to which she, nevertheless, was tempted to accede. Thus the
ornament became hers. By some means this transaction came to the
knowledge of Loke, who told it to Odin. Odin commanded him to get
possession of the ornament. This was no easy task, for no one could
enter Freyja’s bower without her consent. He went away whimpering, but
most were glad on seeing him in such tribulation. When he came to the
locked bower, he could nowhere find an entrance, and, it being cold
weather, he began to shiver. He then transformed himself into a fly and
tried every opening, but in vain; there was nowhere air enough to make
him to get through [Loke (fire) requires air]. At length he found a hole
in the roof, but not bigger than the prick of a needle. Through this he
slipt. On his entrance he looked around to see if anyone were awake, but
all were buried in sleep. He peeped in at Freyja’s bed, and saw that she
had the ornament round her neck, but that the lock was on the side she
lay on. He then transformed himself to a flea, placed himself on
Freyja’s cheek, and stung her so that she awoke, but only turned herself
round and slept again. He then laid aside his assumed form, cautiously
took the ornament, unlocked the bower, and took his prize to Odin. In
the morning, on waking, Freyja seeing the door open, without having been
forced, and that her ornament was gone, instantly understood the whole
affair. Having dressed herself, she repaired to Odin’s hall, and
upbraided him with having stolen her ornament, and insisted on its
restoration, which she finally obtained. (Quoted by Thorpe.)

Mention is also made of the Brósinga-men in the Beowulf (verse 2394).
Here it is represented as belonging to Hermanric, but the legend
concerning it has never been found.