CHAPTER XI.

THE GIANTESS GERD AND SKIRNER’S JOURNEY.[50]

38. Gymer hight a man whose wife was Orboda, of the race of the mountain
giants. Their daughter was Gerd, the fairest of all women. One day when
Frey had gone into Hlidskjalf, and was looking out upon all the worlds,
he saw toward the north a hamlet wherein was a large and beautiful
house. To this house went a woman, and when she raised her hands to open
the door, both the sky and the sea glistened therefrom, and she made all
the world bright. As a punishment for his audacity in seating himself in
that holy seat, Frey went away full of grief. When he came home, he
neither spake, slept, nor drank, and no one dared speak to him. Then
Njord sent for Skirner, Frey’s servant, bade him go to Frey and ask him
with whom he was so angry, since he would speak to nobody. Skirner said
that he would go, though he was loth to do so, as it was probable that
he would get evil words in reply. When he came to Frey and asked him why
he was so sad that he would not talk, Frey answered that he had seen a
beautiful woman, and for her sake he had become so filled with grief,
that he could not live any longer if he could not get her. And now you
must go, he added, and ask her hand for me and bring her home to me,
whether it be with or without the consent of her father. I will reward
you well for your trouble. Skirner answered saying that he would go on
this errand, but Frey must give him his sword, that was so excellent
that it wielded itself in fight. Frey made no objection to this and gave
him the sword. Skirner went on his journey, courted Gerd for him, and
got the promise of her that she nine nights thereafter should come to
Bar-Isle and there have her wedding with Frey. When Skirner came back
and gave an account of his journey, Frey said:

  Long is one night,
  Long are two nights,
  How can I hold out three?
  Oft to me one month
  Seemed less
  Than this half night of love.[51]

    [Footnote 50: This is the Niblung story in a nut-shell.]

    [Footnote 51: Elder Edda: Skirner’s Journey, 42.]

This is the reason why Frey was unarmed when he fought with Bele, and
slew him with a hart’s horn. Then said Ganglere: It is a great wonder
that such a lord as Frey would give away his sword, when he did not have
another as good. A great loss it was to him when he fought with Bele;
and this I know, forsooth, that he must have repented of that gift. Har
answered: Of no great account was his meeting with Bele. Frey could have
slain him with his hand. But the time will come when he will find
himself in a worse plight for not having his sword, and that will be
when the sons of Muspel sally forth to the fight.