CHAPTER VI.

THE FIRST WORKS OF THE ASAS. THE GOLDEN AGE.


14. Then said Ganglere: What did Alfather do when Asgard had been built?
Said Har: In the beginning he appointed rulers in a place in the middle
of the burg which is called Idavold, who were to judge with him the
disputes of men and decide the affairs of the burg. Their first work was
to erect a court, where there were seats for all the twelve, and,
besides, a high-seat for Alfather. That is the best and largest house
ever built on earth, and is within and without like solid gold. This
place is called Gladsheim. Then they built another hall as a home for
the goddesses, which also is a very beautiful mansion, and is called
Vingolf. Thereupon they built a forge; made hammer, tongs, anvil, and
with these all other tools. Afterward they worked in iron, stone and
wood, and especially in that metal which is called gold. All their
household wares were of gold. That age was called the golden age, until
it was lost by the coming of those women from Jotunheim. Then the gods
set themselves in their high-seats and held counsel. They remembered how
the dwarfs had quickened in the mould of the earth like maggots in
flesh. The dwarfs had first been created and had quickened in Ymer’s
flesh, and were then maggots; but now, by the decision of the gods, they
got the understanding and likeness of men, but still had to dwell in the
earth and in rocks. Modsogner was one dwarf and Durin another. So it is
said in the Vala’s Prophecy:

  Then went all the gods,
  The all-holy gods,
  On their judgment seats,
  And thereon took counsel
  Who should the race
  Of dwarfs create
  From the bloody sea
  And from Blain’s bones.
  In the likeness of men
  Made they many
  Dwarfs in the earth,
  As Durin said.

And these, says the Vala, are the names of the dwarfs:

  Nye, Nide,
  Nordre, Sudre,
  Austre, Vestre,
  Althjof, Dvalin,
  Na, Nain,
  Niping, Dain,
  Bifur, Bafur,
  Bombor, Nore,
  Ore, Onar,
  Oin, Mjodvitner,
  Vig, Gandalf,
  Vindalf, Thorin,
  File, Kile,
  Fundin, Vale,
  Thro, Throin,
  Thek, Lit, Vit,
  Ny, Nyrad,
  Rek, Radsvid.

But the following are also dwarfs and dwell in the rocks, while the
above-named dwell in the mould:

  Draupner, Dolgthvare,
  Hor, Hugstare,
  Hledjolf, Gloin,
  Dore, Ore,
  Duf, Andvare,
  Hepte, File,
  Har, Siar.

But the following come from Svarin’s How to Aurvang on Joruvold, and
from them is sprung Lovar. Their names are:

  Skirfer, Virfir,
  Skafid, Ae,
  Alf, Inge,
  Eikinslgalde,
  Fal, Froste,
  Fid, Ginnar.[22]

    [Footnote 22: Elder Edda: The Vala’s Prophecy, 12, 14-16, 18, 19.]