

Table of Contents
SAMGUK YUSA
PREF ACE
BOOK ONE
I. Wonder I (the Founding of the Kingdoms)
BOOK TWO
II. Wonder 2. (United Silla)
BOOK THREE
III. The Rise of Buddhism
IV. Pagodas and Buddhist Images
BOOK FOUR
V. Anecdotes of Renowned Monks
BOOK FIVE
VI. Miracles
VII. T ales of Devotion
VIII. Seclusion
IX. Filial Piety
Epilogue
APPENDIX

S A MGU K  Y U S A
Ilyon
This page copyright © 2006 Silk Pagoda.
Legends and History of the Thr ee Kingdoms of Ancient Kor ea
PREFACE
I
Modern civiliza tions developed from the beliefs and customs of people
in prehistoric times. It is thus essential, if we are to understand a
civilization, to study these ancient practices. The dif ficulty is usually that
source materials are very scarce, and most of our understandin g of ancient
times is based on the findings of archaeology .
In the case of K orea we are fo rtunate to have two documents which,
while by  no means contemporary with the events they describe, rely on
ancient sources which by now have mostly disappeared. The first of these,
Samguk Sagi  (History of the Three Kingdoms) was compiled by Kim Pu-sik
(1075-1 151), a high of ficial of the Koryo court, as the of ficially sanctioned
history o f that ancient period. It has the faults of most of ficial  chronicles,
forcing events into a framework pleasing to the government and omitting all
matter thought to be embarrassing or indecorous.
The second such document is the present work,  Samguk Y usa  (roughly ,
Legends of the Three Kingdo ms) compiled by Ilyon (1206— 1289),
National Priest (Pogak kukjon) of Koryo. One of the chief values of this
book is that it includes a great deal of material omitted by the of ficial
history , so that t hrough it we can gain an understanding of the beliefs and
practices of the people of anc ient times, if somewhat distorted by the
author's Buddhist point of view .
For that matter , the introduction of Buddhism itself dates from the Three
Kingdoms period, and Buddhis m has had a strong influence on Korean
culture ever since. The book is thus also valuable in that it gives us an
insight into the way this religion developed in the course of Korean history .

The book was written at a time when Korea was under the domination
of the Mongols, who at that time ruled all China and Central Asia.
Ilyon m akes ha rdly any mention of this fact, but the very wr iting of
such a book at such a time is  significant, and the author's love for his
country shines through every page.
Since the termination of the Pac ific W ar (1941-1945) Oriental scholars
have undertaken restudy of  Samguk Y usa  in orde r to discover historical
developments o f peoples in the East buried in mythology an d the  sagas
such as  Samguk Y usa.  Bot h Korean and Japanese sc holars naturally take
special interest in the reinterpre tation of the tales in the book as a part of
Oriental studies in history , early  poetry in archaic language, and  customs in
addition to lar ge portions of the book on Buddhism and also interregional
contacts between Korea and Japan.
During t he past year I had a booklet “T ales from the Three Kin gdoms"
published containing selected materials from Samguk Y usa, Samguk Sagi
and some other old literature to  give preliminary information on the Three
Kingdoms, befo re I completed the unabridged translation of  Samguk Y usa.
If this volume can be of service to W estern scholars and general readers
interested in Korea and Korean culture I shall have attained my purpose.
Like all such books of its time,  Samguk Y usa  was written in literary
Chinese. In preparing this Engli sh version, I have been greatly aided by Mr .
Y i C hae-ho's translation of the book into modern Korean, and by a similar
work by Dr . Y i Pyung-do. I would also like to thank Dr . L. Geor ge Paik,
President Emeritus of Y onsei University , who inspired me to undertake this
work, and Mr . G rafton K. Mintz of the Korea T imes for language of the
manuscript and for his suggestions concerning the general arrangement of
the book . Finall y , I am deeply grateful to the Y onsei Universi ty Press for
agreeing to publish the book and for its help and understanding during the
preparation of the volume.
T ae-Hung Ha
October , 1971 Seoul, Korea
II
In preparing this version of the  Samguk Y usa  my chie f care has been to
make th e text easily accessible to the reader . For this reason I have kept
footnotes to a minimum and have supplied explanations in parentheses
where necessary . Except where indicated, therefore, the material in
parentheses has been added by me. It should be added that almost all this

information is taken from the very full annotations made by Mr . Ha in his
original manuscript.
Ilyon, like his c ontemporaries, d ates events in two ways, by the reigns
of Chine se emp erors and by th e twelve-year cycle of the ani mals of the
zodiac. E ach suc ceeding empero r had an of ficial name for the p eriod of his
reign, an d some times he might have more than one for dif ferent periods. I
have let  these stand, though mostly in abbreviated form, and have added
Christian-era da tes in parentheses. All dates are A.D. unles s otherwise
noted.
Certain suf fixes occur rather frequently in place-names. I have
explained them in the text, but for the convenience of the reader will also
translate a few o f the most frequ ent ones here. Thus  sa  means “temple”  jon
means “pavilion,”  song  m eans  “wall or fortress,” and  san  means
“mountain.” I should like to acknowledge here the kind cooper ation of Mr .
Ha and also of Professor Jun Hyung-kook, the director of the Y onsei
University Press . Their cordial attitude and their toleration of m y crochets
about the English language have  made my work on this book a joy . It is my
hope that the reader will find equal pleasure in it.
G. K. M
INTRODUCTION
FOR THE READERS
Our kno wledge of the ancient h istory of Korea is scanty . Contemporary
documents are few , and consis t mainly of Chinese writings w hich allude
here and  there to Korea. Other documents we know only by q uotations in
later wri tings, for wars and invasions destroyed the originals an d they have
not surv ived. During the Koryo dynasty (935-1392) two chronicles of
Korea's earliest period were com piled. The first,  Samguk Sagi,  was written
by Kim Pu-sik, a high government of ficial, in the twelfth century . It
followed the pattern of Chinese dynastic histories and the conventions of
Confucian histor iography , the idea being that one may learn from history by
studying the virtues and vices of the rulers of the past.
The Confucian tendency was to  “humanize” the myths and leg ends of
the past, to int erpret them as early distortions of events th at actually
occurred, and thus much of what was actually mythology and folklore has
been ob scured b y attempts to fit it into the framework of ac tual events.
Thus the  Samguk Sagi,  while it contains considerable material that is

obviously legen dary , attempts to fit the legends of early Korea into the
framework of Confucian attitudes.
The sec ond such document is t he  Samguk Y usa,  the present work, Its
author was a Bu ddhist priest who was interested in the early history of his
country . The book had no of ficial sanction and was thus not at the mercy of
the of fi cial philosophy of history , While the writer subscribed to the
Confucian idea of history to a great extent, he was also intelligent enough to
see that history could not be fo rced into a predetermined framework and
was con tent to set down the old stories as he found them, wi thout much
ef fort at interpretation.
The title is dif fi cult to translate.  Y usa  doe s not mean precisely legends,
although that idea is implied by the word. It also carries the ideas of
anecdotes, mem orabilia and the like. It was not conceived as a set piece of
scholarship but was written in  the author's leisure hours as  a kind of
diversion. Its value is not so much historical in the strict sense of a
chronicle of events as it is an account of the beliefs and folklore of
medieval Korea,  much of it dating back to earlier times. It is thus a valuable
supplement to the of ficially san ctioned view of history found in  Samguk
Sagi,  and is of the highest value to the student of folklore and religion.
The title  of the book is somewh at of a misnomer , for it is not really an
account of the histories of the three ancient kingdoms of Korea. It is
concerned primarily with only one of them, Silla, which in time conquered
the othe r two with the help of C hina. Moreover , it covers the pe riod during
which Silla ruled the peninsula down to its fall to the Koryo dynasty in 935.
For a proper understanding of th e book, a brief account of the events of
the period it covers as modern history sees them is necessary . As we have
mentioned, materials for this early period are scanty . Contemporary Chinese
documents mention the Korean peninsula from time to time, and a region in
the nort heast was colonized during the Han dynasty and continued under
Chinese rule until as late as 313, over a century after Han rule had collapsed
in China proper .
Three ki ngdoms developed on the peninsula, probably during the course
of the first century A.D. The traditional founding dates are 57 B.C. for Silla,
37 B .C. for Kog uryo and 18 B. C. for Paekje. These dates are unsupported
by c ontemporar y evidence, however , and most scholars think they are too
early . In any ca se, these kingdoms were certainly in existence  during the

period of Chinese history know n as the Later Han dynasty (25-220 A.D.)
and afterwards.
Koguryo was initially the lar gest and most powerful of the three. The
tribes w hich orig inally compose d it lived along the banks of the  Y alu river ,
which forms the present northw estern boundary of Korea, and may have
been related to the stock-breed ing nomads of the central As ian steppes.
They are known to have been ex cellent horsemen. When they emer ge upon
the s cene of history we find them ruling an area which extended  from south
of the Han River across the pr esent Korean boundary and far north into
Manchuria and west to the Liaotung peninsula.
The two  kingdo ms of the south  are thought to have been founded by
migrants from the north, since  civilization was more highly developed
there, mainly because of closer contacts with China. Paekje in the southwest
is know n to have been dominated by a northern tribe called P uyo, which
had com e origin ally from Manchuria and had been dominated f or a time by
Koguryo. Paekje played an important part in the transmission of Chinese
civilization to Japan. Its rule rs are frequently pictured as ef fete and
dissolute, but this is probably because its history has been written mainly by
its enemies.
Silla in the southeast is given the earliest founding date, but this is
probably because it conquered  the others. In any case, there is clear
evidence that it was the latest to develop. W e are told that it was the last to
set u p Chinese-style institution s of government and the last to adopt the
Buddhist religion.
In additi on to these three there w as for a time a relatively small area in
the sout h, on the coast and alo ng the Naktong River , known as Kaya or
Karak, w hich persisted as a kingdom until it was absorbed by Silla in 562
A.D. Li ttle is known of it exc ept that it was considerably in fluenced by
Japan.
The thre e kingd oms were in a state of more or less constant conflict
throughout their  existence, with frequent alliances of two of th em against
the third. In the  earlier part of the three kingdoms period it w as usual for
Silla and Paekje to be in alliance  against the more powerful Koguryo, and a
rough ba lance of power was thu s created. But during the latter  part of the
period S illa pow er grew and she began to expand at the expense  of both her
rivals. O f particular significance was the Silla seizure of the territory along
the Han River , for this drove a wedge between her two rivals.

Even so, Silla power alone might not have enabled her to conquer the
whole p eninsula. Events in China now began to influence Korea, however ,
and to these events we must now turn.
After th e fall of the Han dynasty in 220 A.D. China was divided into
numerous states. There were frequent wars and revolts and consequent
changes of boundaries and governments during a period of abo ut three and
a h alf centuries,  and thus, while  Chinese cultural influence continued, there
was hardly any Chinese political or military intervention in K orea. In the
year 589 , howev er , China was o nce more unified under the Sui dynasty , and
the rule rs promptly began to concern themselves with subduing the
“barbarians” on China's borders.
One of the resul ts of this policy  was a series of attacks upon Koguryo.
These were successfully beaten of f, and their failure was one of the causes
of th e fall of the Sui dynasty in 618. But China was not to suf fer another
period of disunity . The T'ang d ynasty immediately succeeded the Sui and
ruled Ch ina for  the next three centuries. This was the period  of China's
greatest cultural influence upon her neighbors, so much so that the word
“T'ang” was used as a name for China long after the dynasty had perished.
From the Chinese point of view the main problem of foreign relations
was to prevent attacks by the nomadic tribes whose territories bordered
China, particularly in the north. T o this end it was Chinese poli cy to set up
subordinate states in border areas which acknowledged suzerainty to the
Emperor or , where possible, to conquer these areas and incorporate them
into the empire.
Observing that the Sui attacks on Koguryo along its northern borders in
Manchuria had failed, the T'an g rulers entered into an alliance with Silla
whose o bject w as to subdue th e entire peninsula and if possi ble bring it
under Chinese rule. This policy succeeded to a certain extent. Coordinated
attacks by T'ang and Silla troo ps destroyed Paekje in 663, an d Koguryo
finally fell in 668. In both instances the Chinese set up provincial
governments and  stationed military garrisons in the conquered t erritory , and
when Koguryo had been conquered appeared ready to turn upon Silla.
But even at thi s early date the Korean people had a long hi story of
resistance to foreign rule and the Chinese found Silla unexpectedly dif ficult
to conquer . Moreover , revolts  broke out in the previously conquered
territory , which Silla supported. Eventually an arrangement was worked out
whereby the Silla dynasty ru led all of Korea but acknow ledged the

superiority of the Chinese Em peror . It became the custom for each
succeeding Kore an King to app ly to the Chinese court for confirmation of
his legitimacy , in token of which he received a golden seal from the
Emperor . This practice persisted throughout the Korean monarchy .
In p ractice there was little Ch inese interference in domestic Korean
af fairs and the Korean government did pretty much as it liked, but Chinese
cultural influence was profoun d. During the period when Silla ruled the
peninsula, which  roughly corresponded to the period of T'ang rule in China,
Korean monks and scholars vi sited China in lar ge numbers, and Korean
social, p olitical and religious institutions, while not slavish imitations, were
or ganized lar gely along Chinese lines.
The mat ter of language is an imp ortant case in point. When cont act with
Chinese civiliza tion began Korea had not yet developed a system  of writing
her lang uage. Naturally the script of the more highly developed Chinese
civilization was taken over , but here a dif ficulty arose. Korean is a highly
inflected language, verb suf fixes being of particular importance. Chinese,
on t he other han d, resembles English in this respect, its inflec tions being
few and simple. Moreover , Chinese was not written in a phonetic script but
in id eographs, signs representin g ideas rather than sounds. It was thus all
but impossible to convey the K orean language in the Chinese script, and
literacy became a matter of learning the Chinese language.
In time a system was worked out, called  Idu,  of using some Chinese
ideographs phonetically in ord er to represent the sounds of the Korean
language, and a few songs and poems were thus preserved, some of which
are quoted in the present volum e. But this was clumsy and dif ficult to use,
and in general Korean scholars  wrote in Chinese. In time, of course, the
Koreans gave their own peculiar pronunciations to the Chinese words, but
what they wrote remained Chin ese in syntax and vocabulary . All Korean
writing down to the invention of Hangul, the Korean alpha bet, in the
fifteenth century , is therefore in the Chinese language. The sam e holds true
for t he l iterature of several other nations in the Chinese sphere o f influence,
including Japan and V ietnam.
This led also, of course, to a m assive influx of Chinese words into the
Korean vocabulary , although th ere was no particular influence on Korean
grammar . This borrowing is so mewhat comparable to the borrowing of
Latin words by the English language.

Another important result of Chinese cultural influence was the
introduction of the Buddhist religion. The present work describes this as
happening in the late fourth ce ntury , which corresponds well  with other
evidence. It seems unlikely , however , that Buddhism became really
influential until well into the period of united Silla rule.
Buddhism was already about eight hundred years old when  it first
reached Korea, and had changed a great deal from the austere doctrines of
the o riginal Buddha. The sect k nown as Mahayana had developed in north
India in the religion's earlier centuries, and it was this sect which  penetrated
China, a nd subsequently Korea. Of particular importance was the doctrine
of Bodh isattvas. These were supposed to be persons who had attained the
state of enlightenment which made it possible for them to escape the eternal
round of death and rebirth whic h is the fate of all creatures, bu t who chose
rather to remain in existence in order to help others.
Buddhism had, in other words, developed a doctrine of salvation by
grace, w hereas its founder had held that a person attained enlightenment
and eventually Nirvana solely by his own ef forts. This meant a vast increase
in th e religion's popular appeal and a multiplication of its deities. There
were believed to have been a s uccession of Buddhas, one for each era of
history , and there is even a Buddha of the future, Maitreya, who
paradoxically also exists in the present.
Another characteristic of Buddhism is its easy adaptation to local beliefs
when it enters new areas. Bud dhism is not an exclusivist, a uthoritarian
religion like Christianity or Islam . Doctrinal purity is of far less importance,
and various dif ferent sects live amicably side by side. In like manner , the
gods an d spirits of primitive religion were simply given the trappings of
Bodhisattvas an d adopted into the pantheon. Thus in the present work we
find several allusions to the Mountain Spirit, a survivor of ancient Korean
animistic beliefs. Even today this Mountain Spirit has a shrin e in almost
every Buddhist temple in Korea . He is always portrayed as an old man, and
is usually accompanied by a tiger .
The author of  Samguk Y usa  was a man of the Kim family who was born
in Kyon gju, whi ch had been the Silla capital, in 1206. He entered the order
of Budd hist mo nks while still a child, and was given the reli gious name
Ilyon. He passed the national examinations for monks of the Son (Zen) sect
with the  highest  distinction at th e age of 22, and thereafter devoted himself
to teaching and study , residing at various temples at dif ferent times.

There ar e few details available about his life, but it is said that  he was
greatly admired not only for his knowledge of the Buddhist scriptures but
also for his mas tery of the Conf ucian Classics, which were the basis of all
secular learning in his time. He was also a very diligent author , and a stone
monument erected in his honor on his death at 83 gives a list o f his works.
Samguk Y usa  is not on the list, which leads one to suppose that the book
was not printed until after his death, a supposition which is supported by the
fact that at least two short sections of the work are added by Muguk, one of
Uyon's disciples.
Knowledge of his authorship barely survived. In the sixteenth century it
was found that the carved w ooden plates from which the book had
originally been printed were so worn as to be nearly useless. A nobleman
named Y i Kye-pok, however , managed to obtain a copy of an earlier
printing, and from this he had a new edition prepared. It was found that
Ilyon was named as author only at the beginning of the fifth volume, his
name having been dropped, probably by accident, from the other four .
Modern texts of the work are ba sed on this 1512 edition, the earliest in
existence. The translator has been permitted to consult an actual copy of
this 1512 edition in making the present English version, based on the reprint
of a n original book of Chinese  composition, known as “Chongdok-Pon”
(Cheng-te T ext) , printed from hand-carved wooden blocks in the reign of
King Chungjong  (1488-1544) of the Y i Dynasty which corresponds to the
reign of Emperor Cheng-te of Ming China, according to the postscript
written by Y i Kye-pok.
Samguk Y usa had a wide audi ence in former times as a reliable source
of inform ation for academic and popular interest, as its stories are included
in  Koryosa  (Hi story of Koryo),  Y oji-sungnam  (Places of Interest in the
Eastern Nation) and  T aedong-Unpu-kun-ok  (Great Eastern Galaxy of
Rhythmic Gems). Thus it was highlighted as an important work of literature
although some Confucian sch olars like Y i Kyukyong in the reign of
Honjong, in his book “Demonstrative Essays on Historical W orks” called it
a collection of fantastic stories.
More recently , in his book “Ou tline of Eastern History” Ahn Chong-
hwa made an analysis of  Samguk Y usa,  but  after that time its traces w ere
lost to the world. Ch'oe Nam-son obtained only three of its volumes on
Buddhist stories from temples. Then its treasured volumes in the possession
of Sunam-Ahnsi were discovered and passed into the hands of a Japanese

named I manishi in Aichi. These were a full set of the five volumes of
Chongdok Reprints,  w hich appear ed in about th e 7th year of King
Chungjong of the Y i Dynasty . In 1921 these volumes were reproduced in
reduced size on glass plates as Facsimiles in V ol. VI, History S eries of the
Literary Depart ment, Kyoto Imperial University , and in 1932 they were
reprinted in the original lar ge size by the Old Classics Publishing Society in
Seoul. B efore th is, in 1928, its type-printed copies appeared in the name of
the Cho sun Sahak Hoe (Korean History Science Society) with Imanishi's
proof reading.
It is not clear when  Samguk Y usa  was first introduced into Japan, but
according to  “Samguk Y usa Haeje”  by Cho e Nam-s on, one volume carried
of f during the Hideyoshi Invasion (l592-98) has been handed down in the
families of T okugawa in Owari and Kanda in T okyo, with two leaves of the
Royal Chronolo gical T ables and several leaves in the text missing and some
letters b lank. Th is volume was p ublished as research material in the History
Series, L iterary Department, T okyo Imperial University in 1904 . The Kanda
copy bears the seal of  Y oanin Library ,  signifying the house of a medical
doctor in the T o kugawa shogunate, because this copy was give n the doctor
by U kida Hideiye, one of the Ja panese field generals fighting in Korea, in
gratitude for the doctor's marvellous cure of his wife's singular  malady , on
his trium phal return from Korea after the Hideyoshi W ar with trophies
including thousands of treasured books from Korea.
Since Il yon was greatly interested in preserving legends and f olklore,
some knowledge of ancient beliefs and society is necessary for a full
understanding of his book. Underlying the more sophisticated faiths which
came fr om other countries there has always been in Korea a tenacious
native animism.  Mountains, rivers, trees and the like are all inhabited by
spirits w hich frequently take a hand in human af fairs. These blended
inextricably with Chinese lore , with some T aoist ideas, and with the
numerous supernatural beings of popular Buddhism. Many of the events of
which Il yon wrote were as rem ote in time from him as he is from us, and
the b eliefs and p ractices which he describes were frequently very ancient.
As will be seen  in the text, a good many of them probably a ntedate the
coming of Buddhism to Korea.
A good case in point is the T angun story , which is found near the
beginning of Book One. T angun is often described as the “founder” of
Korea, b ut it would be more accurate to say “ancestor of the Koreans.” The

fact that his mot her is said to have been a bear transformed into  a woman is
clear evi dence o f the existence i n very ancient times of totemism , the belief
that a given tribe or clan is id entified with or descended from a certain
animal. Moreover , the fact that this clan symbol, the bear , is fem ale may be
evidence of the existence of a m atriarchal, or at any rate matrilin eal, society
in ancient times.
Another element in ancient Korean religion was sun worship. This is
shown b y the fact that several of the legendary founders of s tates in this
book are described as having been born from divine eggs which descended
from heaven, the egg in this case being a sun symbol.
T urning to the social structure of Silla, there are two matters of
importance. Firs t of all, this was a highly aristocratic society , much more so
than Ch ina. The dif ferent classes of society were carefully di stinguished,
and cros sing class lines was almost unheard of. The highest class consisted
of the members of the royal clan and the important court and government
posts we re held  by them exclus ively . This was the Kim clan of Kyongju,
whose founding legend is found in Book One.
Secondly , mention must be made of the Order of Hwarang. The word
may be translated “Flower Y ou th” and describes an institution resembling
the order of knighthood in medieval Europe. It consisted of specially
selected youths of aristocratic lineage and of superior mental and physical
attainments. The y were trained in the martial arts, but also in  intellectual
and relig ious ma tters, and then became the nation s military elite. Kim Y u-
sin, who commanded the armie s that helped conquer Paekje an d Koguryo,
is a good example.
The book itself is not a systema tic work. It was, we are told, an activity
of the author's le isure hours and was probably put together bit by bit over a
rather lo ng period. The accounts are grouped by subjects, but within each
section they vary extremely . Some consist of entirely legendary material,
some ar e factua l history , and a lar ge number are a blend of the two. The
first two  parts relate to the fou ndations of the various kingdoms and to
various events during the histor y of the Silla kingdom. The last three parts
are devoted mainly to Buddhism, especially to the lives and miracles of
famous monks.
Ilyon is very particular as to na mes and dates, and frequently records
disagreements on these matte rs in his source material. He is not,
unfortunately , so meticulous in the citation of the sources themselves. He

refers often to the  Samguk Sagi,  and since this book still ex ists the
references can be checked. But for the rest, he is vague, For exa mple, early
in B ook One he refers to a book which he calls the  W ei Shu  (“W ei W riting,”
that is, the history of the Chinese kingdom of W ei). A book of th is title does
exist, but none of the quotation s Ilyon uses are to be found in  it. One can
only con clude t hat there was more than one  W ei Shu  (as there was more
than one W ei state) and that Ilyon has not indicated which one he means.
In other  places he is content si mply to cite “an old book” or “an old
Silla book.” It is certain in any case that he had access to many documents
which a re no longer in existence. There appear to have been, f or example,
several collections of the lives of famous monks, some Korea n and some
Chinese, and these he quotes frequently .
But perh aps mor e important even than his use of now lost docu ments is
the fact that Ilyon records many  of the beliefs and practices of th e people of
thirteenth-century Korea, a fact which makes his book extremely important
for t he study of that period as well as earlier ones. The T ang un story as
given h ere, for example, is th e earliest documentary evidence for this
legend.
One must add finally that this is a book which can be read simply for
pleasure. Its tales are comparab le, though on a more sophisticated level, to
the fairy tales of Europe. The reader finds himself in a world of dragons,
ghosts and miracles, superhuman kings and monks who can fly through the
air . He also finds the wonderful laughter , the solid, earthy humor of Korea.
Ilyon wa s no doubt a pious Buddhist, but he was no prude for all that, and
he sets down the old tales as he heard them.
This, then, is  Samguk Y usa,  a book of the hi ghest value from every point
of v iew and one  deserving the attention of anyone interested in Korea, or ,
indeed, in East Asian civilization generally .
The rom anized s pelling of Oriental proper nouns in this book is done, in
principle, according to the standardized McCune-Reischauer system for
easy ref erence to the original C hinese characters. The sexagenary years of
the Lunar Calendar in the text and the appendix have been cha nged to the
corresponding years of the Gregorian Calendar .
The chronological list of the Kings and Queens of the Three Kingdoms
and Kar ak, whic h appears at the  beginning of the original work , appears in
the present translation as an appendix.

In the footnotes some identical annotations of Dr . Y i Pyung-do and Mr .
Y i C hae-ho in their  Ko r ean V ersions of Samguk Y usa  are  added, with
quotations from  some parts of Ch'oe Nam-son's  B ibliog raphy o f Samguk
Y usa (Haeje)  in this  Intr oduction  for the benefit of the readers.
—the translators

BOOK ONE
I. Wonder I (the Founding of the
Kingdoms)
Pr ologue
The ancient sages founded nati ons by the use of decorum and music,
and fostered culture with humanity and justice, not claiming marvelous
strength or the aid of treacherous gods. But when a man worth y to receive
the man date of heaven appeared, the event was usually mark ed by some
happy a ugury setting him apart from other people and showin g that here
was one able to ride the changing tide, seize the treasured regalia and
accomplish the great work of founding a state.
Thus in ancient days in China a  dragon-horse with a picture on its back
appeared on the surface of the Y ellow River (Hwang-ho) an d a godlike
turtle with a character carved on its shell appeared on the Lo-sui stream on
the eve of the rising of great sages. 1 Enveloped in a rainbow , the goddess-
mother bore Fu-hsi; touched by a dragon Nu-t'eng gave birth to Y en-ti;
Ohwang fell in love with a celestial boy who called himself the s on of Pai-ti
while sh e was playing in the field of Kung-hsiang, and bor e Hsiao-ho;
Chien-ch'i, after  swallowing an egg, brought forth Ch'i; Chiang -yuan, after
treading in the mark of a footstep, bore Chi; Y ao was born after fourteen
months in his mother's womb; and Peikung was a dragon's love-child, the
result of an embrace in a lar ge lake.
No p en can desc ribe all the won ders attending the births of the founders
of states. These are set down here as precedents for the stories of the
founders of the Three Kingdoms, to be found in the following chapters.
1. Old Chosun (W anggom Chosun)
In the  W ei-shu2 i t is written, “T wo thousand years ago (T raditional date:
2333 B.C.) T angun, otherwise called W anggom, chose Asadal, also
described as Muyop-san in the province of Paekju east of Kae-song, at a
place no w called  Paegak-kung (modern P'yongyang) as his royal residence
and founded a nation, calling  it Chosun, at the same period as Kao
(legendary Chinese Emperor Y ao).”

In the Old Boo k it is written, “In ancient times Hwan-in (H eavenly
King, Chesok or  Sakr odeveendra)  had a young son whose name was Hwan-
ung. The  boy wished to descend  from heaven and live in the hu man world.
His father , after examining thre e great mountains, chose T'aebaek-san (the
Myohyang Mountains in north Korea) as a suitable place for his heavenly
son to bring happiness to human  beings. He gave Hwan-ung thr ee heavenly
treasures, and commanded him to rule over his people.
“W ith th ree tho usand of his loy al subjects Hwan-ung descend ed from
heaven and appeared under a sandalwood tree on T'aebaek Mountain. He
named the place Sin-si (city of god) and assumed the title of Hwan-ung
Ch'onwang (another title meani ng heavenly king). He led his ministers of
wind, ra in and clouds in teaching the people more than 360 useful arts,
including agric ulture and medicine, inculcated moral principles and
imposed a code of law .
“In thos e days there lived a sh e-bear and a tigress in the same cave.
They pr ayed to Sin-ung (another name of Hwan-ung) to be blessed with
incarnation as human beings. T he king took pity on them and gave them
each a bunch of mugwort and twenty pieces of garlic, saying, 'If you eat this
holy foo d and do not see the sunlight for one hundred days, you will
become human beings.'
“The sh e-bear and the tigress to ok the food and ate it, and reti red into
the cave . In twenty-one days the bear , who had faithfully observed the
king's instructio ns, became a woman. But the tigress, who had  disobeyed,
remained in her original form.
“But the  bear -woman could find no husband, so she prayed under the
sandalwood tree to be blessed with a child. Hwan-ung heard her prayers and
married her . She conceived and bore a son who was called T angun
W anggom, the King of Sandalwood.
“In the fiftieth year of the reign of T'ang Kao (legendary Chinese
emperor Y ao, traditional date so me time before 2000 B.C.) in  the year of
Kyong-in (if it was Kyong-in, it must be the 23rd year) T angun came to
P'yongyang (now  Sogyong), set up his royal residence there an d bestowed
the name Chosun upon his kingdom.
“Later T angun moved his capital to Asadal on T'aebaek-san and ruled
1500 ye ars, until king W u of Chou (ancient Chinese dynasty) placed Kija
on t he throne ( traditional date 1 122 B.C.). When Kija arrived, T angun

moved t o Changtang-kyong and  then returned to Asadal, where he became
a mountain god at the age of 1,908.”
In th e book of P'eichu-chuan of T'ang (Chinese dynasty , 618-907 A.D.)
it is writ ten, “K oryo (i.e. Koguryo) was originally Kojuk-kuk (now Haeju)
and was called Chosun by the Chou emperor on the investiture of Kija.
During the Han dynasty (Chines e, 206 B.C.-222 A.D.) Chosun was divided
into three counties—Hyonto, Nangnang and T aebang.” The book T'ung-tien
gives the same account. How ever , the Han-shu tells of fo ur counties
(Chinbon, Imtun, Hyonto and Nangnang) with names dif ferent from those
in the other sources, for some unknown reason.  (This is an allu sion to a
portion of northwestern Kor ea which was under dir ect Chines e rule fr om
108 B.C. to 31 3 A.D. The on ly one of any enduring impo rtance was
Nangnang, called Lolang in Chinese.)
2. W eiman Chosun
(The fol lowing account is a so mewhat mor e detailed and historically
mor e ac curate d escription of the ancient Kingdom of Chosun and its wars
with the  Chinese Han dynasty under the W u-T i Emper or (141-87 B.C.)
which r esulted in the setting up of the Chinese colony of Lolang (Nang-
nang) in northwestern Kor ea. The Y en her e r eferr ed to was one of the
“warring states  “of China during the period immediately befor e China's
unification by the brief Ch'in a nd subsequent Han dynasties. Ther e wer e
r evolts early in the Han dynasty and an attempt was made to r eestablish
Y en, which adjoined Kor ea.)
In th e Chosun-jon (Chao-hsien- chuan) section of the book Ch'ien Han-
shu it is writte n, “At the beg inning of the Y en dynasty t he invaders
conquered Chin bon (part of no rthern Korea), stationed troop s there and
built defense barriers. (After the state of Ch'in conquered all China) Y en
was mad e a frontier territory bo rdering the Liaotung peninsula. (When the
Han dyn asty aro se after the brea kup of Ch'in) the rulers, findin g it dif ficult
to control this remote territory , repaired the old barriers and established the
frontier along the P'aisu River (possibly the Ch'ongchon River).
“When Lu Kwan, King of Y en , rebelled (against Han) and to ok sides
with the Hsiung-nu (nomadic tribes), W eiman, a Y en of fic ial, with a
thousand followers, broke through the border defenses and fled east (i.e. to
Korea). Crossin g the P'aisu Riv er , he took up residence in the buf fer zone
which h ad been established beyond the frontier . Here he gradually
subjugated the native tribes with the aid of refugees from Y en and Ch'i

(another rebellious state) and assumed the title of king, setting up a court at
the c ity of W an ggom (location uncertain, but note the obvious connection
with T angun).
“W eiman attacked the neighboring areas and Chinbon and Imtun (in
present north Korea) were brought under his rule. Eventually he expanded
his territory into a lar ge realm extending several thousand  li  (about a third
of a mile) in the four directions.
“W eiman's son and grandson fo llowed him to the throne withou t undue
incident. During the reign of h is grandson U-ko, Chinbon and Chinkuk
(small principal ities south of the Han River) wished to esta blish direct
relations with the Han dynasty in China. U-ko, however , (probably seeing
this as a threat to his power) in tercepted the envoys and would not allow
them to proceed.
“In the second year of Y uanfeng (reign period of the Han emperor W u-
T i, 109 B.C.) the Emperor sent  She-ho to persuade U-ko to submit to the
Han Empire. U-ko refused. Consequently , when She-ho crossed the P'aisu
River on  his return journey he ordered his coachman to kill the Chosun
general who was escorting him and then hastened back to the Han court to
report to the Emperor .
“The Emperor thereupon appointed She-ho governor of East Liaotung
county (borderin g Chosun). Out of enmity , however , the people of Chosun
killed him in a surprise attack. Incensed, the Emperor ordered admiral
Y angp'u to sail from Ch'i (on the Shantung Peninsula) with a fleet of
warships and transports carrying  50,000 men. At the same time Hsun-che,
his general of the left, was to attack U-ko's kingdom from the Liaotung
peninsula. Determined to meet force with force, U-ko stationed his troops in
the mountain passes leading into his country to meet the Han army .
“Meanwhile admiral Y ang-p'u made a landing and sent an advance force
of 70 0 m en towa rd W anggom. U-ko, who was defending the city , seeing the
small siz e of this force, attacked and defeated it. Deserted by h is retreating
troops, Y ang-p'u was forced to fly for his life to the mountains.
“The Ha n land forces now attacked the Chosun army on the P 'aisu but
were unable to defeat it. When  this lack of success was reported to the
emperor , he sent W eishan to persuade U-ko to surrender . This  time U-ko
was read y for negotiations and s ent his crown prince to meet the Han envoy
with a promise of a gift of ho rses to the Emperor . But when  the crown
prince, followed  by a train of 10 ,000 men armed to the teeth, was about to

cross the P'aisu River , W eishan and Hsun Che (the general), fearing danger ,
asked hi m to disarm his men, si nce he was surrendering. Fearing a trick in
his turn however , the crown prince abandoned his mission and  returned to
the capital.
“When W eishan reported this af fair to the Han court, the Emperor was
transported with rage and had him beheaded.
“(W ar was now resumed.) The Han general, having defeated the army
on the P'aisu, advanced toward  the city of W anggom and laid siege to it
from the northwest. At the same time admiral Y ang-p'u (having presumably
escaped and landed the rest of his forces) reinforced the siege from the
south. U -ko, how ever , defended  the city valiantly and kept the e nemy at bay
for an entire month.
“Disappointed b y this stalemate, the Emperor sent out Kungsun -sui, the
former governor of T sinan, to attack W anggom, giving him overall
command and ordering him to  make the best he could of th e situation.
Kungsun-sui arrested and imprisoned admiral Y ang-p'u and pu t the naval
troops under his own command before launching a lightning attack.
“At this time four Chosun of fic ials—No-in, Han-to, Sam, and general
Hyop—planned to surrender . W hen the king objected, they all deserted and
surrendered at the Han camp, e xcept for No-in, who died on the way , and
Minister Sam.
“In the third yea r of Y uanfeng(108 B.C.) at midsummer Minister Sam
employed a gladiator to murder King U-ko and appeared at the Han camp in
his turn. But th e city of W an ggom still held out and anot her Chosun
minister , Song-ki, attacked the Han forces. The exasperated Han general
made Chang, the son of U-ko and Ch'oe the son of No-in issue a decree
ordering the death of Song-ki.
“This was the last act of the tr agedy . W eiman Chosun was co nquered
and subdued. Four counties (to be integrated into the Chinese administrative
system) were set up—Chinbon, Imtun, Nangnang and Hyonto.”
(These a re the four Chinese colonies previously alluded to. Na ngnang
(Lolang) was the only one to endure under Chinese rule for very long.)
3. Mahan
In W ei-chih3 it is written, “When W eiman attacked Chosun, King Joon,
accompanied by his court ladies, crossed the sea and arrived in the land of
Han in the south , where he established a state, calling it Mahan. ” (This was
evidently southwestern Korea. The name “Han” here, which is still used to

designate Korea , is a dif ferent word from the name of the Han  dynasty of
China and is written with a dif ferent Chinese character .)
In a letter from C hin Hwon (also called Kyon Hwon) we read, “ In olden
days, Mahan was first created a nation in Kummasan before
Hyokkose rose to power .” (The letter was purportedly addressed to
W ang K on, who founded the K oryo dynasty in 918.) Ch'oe Ch'i-won (a
Silla scholar) states in his book that Mahan was Koguryo and Chinhan Silla.
According to the chronicle (the  Samguk Sagi,  t he of fi cial chr onicle of the
Three Kingdoms, written some what earlier than the present work) Silla
arose in  the year Kapcha (57 B.C.) and Koguryo in the year Kapsin (37
B.C.). I t also relates that Mah an rose first under King Joon. But it is
obvious that King T ongmyong (the first recorded Koguryo king) at the
height of his po wer possessed Mahan, hence Koguryo was called Mahan.
Nowadays peop le call Mahan Paekje because of its capital in Kummasan,
but t hat is a mistaken idea. Since there was a mountain known as Maup-san
in the land of Koguryo, they c alled the country Mahan. (Evidence from
other sources indicates that this is mistaken.)
The land was or iginally inhabited by four barbarian tribes whose names
were Kui, Kuhan, Y e and Maek. In the Chouli we read that Chifang-shih
was in char ge o f the four barbarian tribes and nine Maek, these last being
the T ung-i, or nine barbarian tribes of the east.
In S ankuo-shih (History of the Three Chinese Kingdoms) it is written,
“Myongju was the old land of the Y e tribe. The native farmers of Myongju
presented to the throne seals and stamps of the Y e kings which  they found
while pl owing th eir fields. Ch'unju was the old province of Usuju or Maek-
kuk, wh ich was also attributed to Sakju or P'yongyang.” (There is indeed
evidence of tribes called Y e an d Maek in Kangwon province where these
places are located, except the last.)
In th e commentaries of Huinan-tzu it is maintained that the T ung-i were
divided into nine tribes, and tha t the nine barbarian tribes referr ed to m the
Analects of Confucius were Hyonto, Nangnang, Koryo, Mansik, Puyu,
Soka, T ongto, W ai-in (W o-len) and Ch'onp'i.
In t he book T ongdo-songnip-k i (History of the Eastern Capital) by
Haedong-Anhong, the nine Han s are identified as Japan, Chung-hwa. W u
and Y ueh, Maola, Ung-yu, Malgal, T an-guk, Nuchen and Y emaek.  (Ther e is
some co nfusion in this sour ce. “Japan” is an obvious mistake and

“Nuchen” pr obably r efers to the Jur ched tribes of Manchuria. The names
of Y e and Maek have been combined into one.)
4. T wo Pr efectur es
In Ch'ienhan-shu4 it is written, “In the fifth year of Han emperor Chao-ti
(B.C. 82) in the  year of Kihae  two overseas prefectures were or ganized,
P'yongju Prefect ure over the tw o counties of P'yongna and Hyo nto and the
East Prefecture over Imtun and N angnang counties under the administration
of the general go vernment.” But the Chao-hsien-Chuan states, “ The country
was divided into four counties—Chinbon, Hyonto, Imtun and Nangnang.”
The P'yongna mentioned in the Ch'ien han-shu is probably Chinbon. (This
is ye t another ac count of the Ch inese colonies set up in northern Korea by
the Chinese Han dynasty . They were first established in 108 B.C. and
endured until 313 A.D.)
5. Seventy-T wo States
In T 'ung-tien it is written, “The  natives of Chosun inhabited m ore-than
70 local states of an area of 100  li  each.” (A  li  is about a third of a mile.)
The Houhan-shu says “(Hsi-Han, the Chinese Han dynasty) first divided
the l and of old Chosun into four counties which were reor ganized into two
prefectures late r . When more complex laws had to be e nacted, the
administrative districts were again readjusted into 78 states each comprising
10,000 households. Mahan in the west had 54 small cities, Chinhan in the
east had 12 small cities, and Pyonhan in the south had 12 small cities. These
small city-states called themselves nations.”  (A distinction m ust be made
her e. Th e territory ruled by China was effectively limited to the northwest
corner of the pe ninsula. Mahan etc. wer e tribal communities n ot ruled by
the Chinese.)
6. Nangnang (Lolang)
During the early Han (Chinese dynasty) period Nangnang was first
established. Y ing-shao calls it the old Chosun state, and in the c ommentary
on the Hsin T'ang-shu we re ad “P'yongyang-ch'eng is identical with
Nangnang county of the early Han.”
However , in the Samguk Sagi we find the following: “In the 30th year
of th e re ign of King Hyokkose (first recorded Silla king; this w ould be 27
B.C. by the trad itional dating) the men of Nangnang came and surrendered
(to Silla), and i n the fourth year of King Norye of Silla, Ki ng Muhyul
(T aemusin), the third sovereign  of Koguryo (18-44 A.D.) conquered and
destroyed Nang nang, forcing its people together with those of T aebang

(North T aebang) to surrender to Silla. Then in the 27th year of the reign of
King Muhyul (44 A.D.) Emperor Kuangwu (Kuang W u T i of the Han
dynasty) sent an army to invad e Nangnang and establish counties in the
occupied territory . Thus the area north of Salsu (the Ch'ongch'on  River) was
ruled by China.”
These statements seem to indicate that Nangnang may be identified with
P'yongyang-ch'eng. But some scholars maintain that Nangang w as the land
of M algal at the foot of Mt. Chungtu and the Salsu is the T aedo ng River . It
is hard to tell who is right.
King Onjo of Paekje (first P aekje king, 18 B.C.-28 A.D.) said,
“Nangnang is in the east and M algal is in the north.” This would make
Nangnang one of the Chinese colonies during the Han dyna sty . But the
people o f Silla called their own country Nangnang and even  now call a
noble lady a lady of Nangnang . This is well shown by the fac t that King
T'aejo (the founder of the Kor yo dynasty) called his daughter , whom he
gave in marriage to the surrendered king of Silla the Princess of Nangnang.
(The bor ders of the Chinese colonies, of which Nangnang was the only
permanent one , varied at differ ent times and the ar ea c ame under
incr easing attac k as the Thr ee Kingdoms gather ed str ength. T aebang, which
is discussed below , was a southern extension of Nangnang.)
7. T aebang
(T aebang was divided into two parts, north and south.) North T aebang
was orig inally c alled Chuktam-s ong. In the fourth year of the re ign of King
Norye of Silla (B.C. 27) its people, together with those of  Nangnang,
surrendered to Silla. These were the two counties established by the early
Han dynasty . North T aebang assumed the status of a nation, but its king and
subjects all surrendered.
During the T'sao-W ei dynasty5 southern T aebang county (now
Namwon-pu) w as established. It extended over a thousand  li  along the
seacoast called Han Hae to the south of T aebang. This was t he southern
coast of Mahan where T aebang was established during the later Han
dynasty to which W ai and (Korean) Han were subjugated. (“M ahan” is a
mistake, and the county referred to in the last sentence was North T aebang.)
8. Malgal (Mulgil) and Palhae (Pohai)
(Palhae, the Kor ean pr onunciation of Chinese Pohai, was a k ingdom
which in cluded part of north Ko r ea and a sizable chunk of Manchuria. Its
traditional foun ding date is 71 1 A.D., not long after the extinction of

Koguryo. It consider ed itself the successor to Koguryo, a nd Kor ean
historians have  always consider ed it a part of Kor ean hist ory . It was
conquer ed and overrun by the Khitan tribes in 935.)
According to T'ung-tien, Palhae  was originally called Sokmal-Malgal.
During the Hsien-tien era of Hsuan-tsung (eighth-century T'ang dynasty
Chinese emperor) its chief. Choyong, renamed it Palhae and assumed the
title of king. Wh en he died in the seventh year of Kai yuan of T 'ang Hsuan-
tsung (7 19), his son gave him th e posthumous title Kowang (high king) and
was crowned with the acquiesc ence of the Chinese Emperor . But the new
king used his own dynastic era (rather than the Chinese Emperor's, a gesture
of independence) and made his country a flourishing nation in the East.
In her heyday P alhae had five regional capitals, 15 prefectures  and 62
provinces. She was conquered at last in the T'iencheng era of  Hou-T'ang
and ceased to exist.
In th e Sa nkuo-shih it is written “In the third year of I-feng of Ka o-tsung
even in the year of Muin (i.e. about the middle of the 7th century) a
defeated Koguryo general led  his followers north to the land around
T'aebaek mountain, where he established a new state, calling it Palhae. In
the 20th year of Kaiyuan, T'ang Mingwang sent out a general to conquer
Palhae. In the 3 2nd year of the reign of King Songdok (early 8 th century)
during t he reign of Hsuan-tsung the armies of Palhae and Malgal crossed
the sea to attack T'engchow in the T'ang empire but were repu lsed by the
emperor's troops.”
The Old Book o f Silla says “Th e family name of Choyong (a general of
Koguryo) was T ae. He gathered his defeated soldiers on the southern side of
T aebaek mountain and established a new state which he called Palhae.”
These two statements give the im pression that Palhae was another name
for Malg al, even  though the date s when the two kingdoms were established
are dif ferent.
According to an old map drawn by T ungp'o, Palhae was situated beyond
the Great W all (of China), to the northeast.
Katan's Nakuo-ch'ih indicates that four of the prefectures of Palhae
(Amnok, Namhae, Puyo, and Ch'usong) were former Koguryo lands, with
39 post stations between Ch'onjo ng county (in present Hamgyong province)
and Y us ong in Silla. The geogra phy book T ili-chih places Ch'onjong county
in Sakju prefecture. It is now Y ongju.

The Sankuo-shih  says, “At the fall of Paekje, Palhae, Malgal and Silla
divided its lands.” Judging from  this, it appears that Palhae was divided into
two parts.
The people of Silla declared tha t Palhae in the north, W ai (Japan) in the
south and Paekje in the west attacked their country . (There is evidently
some chronological confusion here. Paekje was conquered before the
establishment of  Palhae.) They said “Malgal is a menace to Silla's territorial
integrity due to its geographical propinquity to Asulla province.”
In th e book T on gmyong-gi it is written “The boundary of Chol bonsong
was adjacent to Malgal (now called T ongchin).”
In th e 14th year of the reign of King Chima of Silla a lar ge host from
Malgal invaded the northern frontier , attacking T aeryongch'aek and passing
through Niha.
In th e Houwei-shu Malgal is cal led Mulgil (W uchi) and in the Chijang-
to Palou and W uchi are repres ented as Suksin. It is clear from the map
drawn b y T ungp 'o that to the north of Chinhan lay the territory of Northern
and Southern Huksu (Heisui).
T en years after the coronation of King T ongmyong (of Koguryo, 27
B.C.), Koguryo destroyed Northern Okjo. In the 42nd year of the reign of
King O njo (of Paekje, 14 A .D.) 20 families from Southern Okjo
surrendered to Silla, and in the 52nd year of the reign of Hyokkose (of Silla,
5 B.C.) Eastern Okjo presented  fine horses to Silla. These recorded facts
seem to establish  the existence o f Okjo in the early Three Kingdoms period.
The Chijang-to locates Huksu north of the Great W all and Okjo south of it.
9. Iso-guk
In the fourteenth year of King Norye the men of Iso-guk attacked
Kumsong. In the Old Book of Unmun T emple (a record of farmland
donated to the te mple) it is written, “In the sixth year of Chen-k uan Y ongmi
T emple in Kumo-ch'on village, Iso county , of fered farms.” Ku mo-ch'on is
now Ch'ongdo, which is identical with the old Iso county .
10. The Five Kaya States
According to the “Legends of K arak,” a purple ribbon with si x round
eggs cam e dow n from heaven. Five of these eggs went one to each city
while the sixth stayed in the castle, where it hatched King Suro of
Kumgwan. The  others produced the chiefs of the five K aya tribes.
Naturally , therefore, Kumgwan should not be included in the fi ve states. In
the Out line History of the Ko ryo Dynasty (i.e. the of ficial chronicles

compiled regula rly by the government) Kumgwan is included in the Kaya
states with its ca pital at Ch'angnyong, but this is a mistake. The five Kaya
tribes were Ara-Kaya (Haman), Konyong Kaya (Hamnyong), T ae Kaya
(Koryong), Songsan Kaya (Kyongsan or Pyok-chin) and So Kaya (Kosong).
(The Kaya tribes lived on the south coast and along the Naktong River .
They remained  independent and distinctive for some time, but were
ultimately conquered and absorbed by Silla.)
1 1. Northern Puyo
(This is likely to  cause some co nfusion. “Puyo” is the name of a place
in M anchuria, the name of a Kor ean tribal gr oup prior to the Thr ee
Kingdoms, and the name of a city in southwestern Kor ea which was for
some time the capital of the Paekje kingdom. Mor eover , these thr ee facts ar e
r elated. The ar ea in Manchuria is named for the tribal gr oup, whose
territory lay to the north of K oguryo. After Koguryo defeated the Puyo
people, many of them went sout h and played a part, among other things, in
the founding of Paekje. Generally speaking, the northerners had mor e
political cohesiveness and sophistication than the southerners in ancient
Kor ea, and the movement of civilization was fr om north to south.)
The Old Book quotes the Ch'ienhan-shu as follows: “In the third year of
Shen-chueh of Hsuan-ti (B.C. 58) even on the eighth day of  the fourth
moon in  the year of Imsul, the Heavenly King, riding on a carriage drawn
by f ive dragons, descended to S olsunggol6 Castle (north of the Y alu River),
which h e chose as his royal res idence. There he assumed the title of king,
calling his country Northern Puyo and himself Haimosu. Later , at the
command of heaven, the king moved his residence to Eastern Puyo. King
T ongmyong suc ceeded him on the throne of northern Puyo, and moved his
capital to Cholbon-ju. King T ongmyong was the founder of Koguryo
(traditional date 37 B.C.)”
12. Eastern Puyo
Aranbul, the grand vizier of Haiburu (son of Haimosu, mentioned
above) dreamed  a dream: A most august god descended from heaven and
said to him, “M y heavenly children will reign over a kingdom  on earth in
this land. I com mand you to mo ve to another place. (This foretold the rise
of King T ongmy ong.) On the shore of the Eastern Sea there is a land called
Kasopwon, where milk and honey flow in abundance. Go ther e and settle
down and build your royal residence.” Aranbul told the king about this

dream and the king accordingly moved east and called his nation Eastern
Puyo.
King Haiburu was growing ol d and he had no son, so he  of fered
sacrifices to mountains and strea ms, praying for an heir to be hi s successor .
One day as he was returning to his palace from a mountain, his favorite
steed suddenly halted before a  lar ge stone at Konyon (Pond of Heaven,
Paektu M ountain) and shed tears from both eyes. W ondering at this, the
king had  his servants turn over the stone. Beneath it they found a handsome
little boy who looked like a golden frog. The king was greatly pleased,
saying t hat heav en had blessed him with a son. He named the boy Kumwa
(golden frog), adopted him, and made him crown prince.
Kumwa grew into a strong youth and in due time inherited the throne,
which in his turn he passed on to his son T aiso. But in the third year of
T ihwang of Hsin W ang Mang (1 1 A.D.) Muhyul, king of Koryo (Koguryo)
attacked and killed T aiso, destroying his nation.
(Again ther e seems to be some chr onological confusion. The date given
is much  later than the traditio nal founding dates of both Koguryo and
Paekje.)
13. Koguryo
Koguryo is Cholbon Puyo. Som e say it was situated where Hwaju and
Songju now stand, but this is a mistake. Cholbon-ju is on th e Liao-tung
Peninsula.
The Samguk Sagi states that the sacred ancestor King T ong myong's
family n ame wa s Ko and his given name was Chumong. Before  he founded
Koguryo King Haiburu of No rthern Puyo moved to Eastern Puyo and
adopted Kumwa to succeed him.
One day when Kumwa was hunting on a mountain called T'aebaek he
saw a beautiful woman by the stream known as Ubalsu. When he asked
who she was, she replied, “I am the daughter of Habaek,7 the dragon king in
Soha (W est River) and Y uhwa (W illow Flower) is my name. When I was
out w ith my sisters on a picnic a  strong man came up to me and said, 'I am a
heavenly prince and Haimosu is my name.' He took me into a cottage on the
bank of the Y al u River near Ungsin-san (Bear God Mountain ). There he
enjoyed me and then left me, n ever to return. When my father and mother
learned what had happened they  were angry , and sent me into exile in this
lonely place.”

The Boo k T angun-gi says “T angun fell in love with the daughter of
Habaek and begot a son who was called Puru.” Since the abov e story says
that Haimosu enjoyed the daug hter of Habaek and she bore Chumong, it
would seem that Puru and Chumong were half brothers.
Kumwa was puzzled by the woman's story , and confined her in a dark
room. B ut the blazing sunlight clasped her and cast its warmest rays over
her b ody long and tenderly , till she conceived and gave birth to a  giant egg.8
Kumwa was surprised. He cast the egg before his dogs and swi ne, but they
would not eat it; he cast it on the road, but the horses and cattle would not
tread on it; he cast it in a field, b ut the birds and beasts covered it with their
feathers and fur . The king tried to crack the egg, but to no avail. At last he
gave it back to its mother , who wrapped it in a soft cloth and laid it in a
warm place. Soon the shell cracked, and out sprang a lovely boy who
looked noble and gracious, like a great prince.
By the time he was seven years old the child was as strong as a mature
man. He  made a bow and arrows for himself and used them wit h such good
marksmanship t hat he was called Chumong, the good bowman, according
to the custom of the country in those days.
Kumwa had seven sons, none of whom was a match for Chumong in
any art, civil or m ilitary . T aiso, the eldest, said to the king: “Chu mong is not
the son of a mo rtal man and the  sooner he is killed the better it will be for
the thro ne.” But the king would not listen, and commanded Chumong to
feed the  horses. Now Chumong was a good judge of horseflesh,  and knew a
flying h orse fro m a plodding horse. So he made a steed lean by giving it
little to eat and he made a packhorse fat by giving it much to eat.
The kin g rode the fat horse when he went hunting and gave the lean
horse to Chumong. The lean horse, being fast and strong by nature, carried
its master like the wind, while the good bowman's arrows struck the game
like lightning. For this reason  he was hated even more by the jealous
princes and courtiers, who now resolved to kill him.
Chumong's moth er learned of this horrible conspiracy and said to him,
“My son , your life is in danger . Y ou must go away , anywhere you please.
Y ou have many heavenly gifts w hich will ensure your success.” Chumong
bade a tender farewell to his af fectionate mother and fled with  of and two
other fo llowers. When he reached the stream called Omsu he cried to the
deep water , “I am the son of heaven and Habaek's grandso n. Now the
enemy i s upon my heels, what shall I do?” Immediately a host of fish and

turtles g athered together on the surface to form a bridge so tha t Chumong
and his party c ould cross. Then they dispersed and sank back into the
depths, leaving the pursuers on horseback with no way to cross.
Chumong continued his journey as far as Cholbonju (in Hyonto
Province), wher e he built a temporary palace beside the str eam called
Pullyusu. He gave the name Koguryo to his land, from his famil y name Ko,
meaning high, because he was begotten by the sun on high. (Chu-mong
originally had the family name  Hai, from the royal family with whom he
had live d, but changed it to Ko because of his parentage.) When he was
twelve years old, in the second year of Kien-chao (Kapsin) of H siaoyuan-ti
of Han, he ascended the king's throne. Koryo (i.e. Koguryo) at her zenith
was com posed of 220,580 households. (The traditional d ate for the
founding of Koguryo is 37 B.C.  The population figure given seems to be an
error , for other records state t hat even at her dissolution Koguryo had
697,000 households.)
In th e Churin-chuan (V ol. 21) i t is written, “When a chambermaid of
King Ni ngp'inli was got with c hild, a physiognomist announced that she
would b ear a noble king. The king roared, 'That is none of m y seed and
ought to be killed.' But the chambermaid pleaded, weeping, 'A god of love
from heaven embraced me and then was gone, leaving me pregnant.'
“When the child was born the king declared it to be a threat to the
crown. He cast it into a pigsty , but the sow breathed her warm breath into its
nostrils; he cast it into a horse stable, but the mare suckled it that it might
live. Thus the child grew up to be the king of Puyo.” This is another version
of the story of how Chumong became the first king of Koguryo, with the
dynastic title T ongmyong. Ningp'inli was a nickname of King Puru.
14. Pyonhan and Paekje
Paekje is also called Southern Puyo. In the 19th year after the
coronation of Hyokkose, the fou nder of Silla (38 B.C.), the men of Pyonhan
surrendered to him the sovereignty over the whole of their country .
The Old and N ew T'ang-shu states, “The descendants of P yonhan
inhabited Nangn ang”; but the Houhan-shu says, “Pyonhan is in the south,
Mahan is in the west, and Chinhan is in the east.”
Ch'oe C h'i-won (a scholar during the Silla period) states that Pyonhan
was identical with Paekje.
According to the Main Chronicle (Of ficial records of Paekje) Onjo (the
first king of Pae kje) rose to po wer in the fourth year of Hung-chia, so he

became king more than 40 yea rs later than Hyokkose (Silla founder) and
T ongmyong (Koguryo founder). (This statement corresponds  fairly well
with the  traditio nal foundation dates, which are Silla 57 B.C., Koguryo 37
B.C. and Paekje 18 B.C.)
The T'an g-shu s tates that the an cestors of Pyonhan lived in the  land of
Nangnang because Onjo was descended from T ongmyong. Per haps a hero
of Nang nang origin established  a state in Pyonhan which was in rivalry
with Mahan before the reign of Onjo, but this does not mean that Onjo
himself came from the north of  Nangnang. (The latter statement is purely
conjectural.)
Some scholars call Mt. Kuryong Mt. Pyonna, but this is a mistake.
According to an authentic statement of an ancient sage th ere was a
mountain named Pyon-san in the land of Paekje, hence the country was
called Pyonhan. (This is evidently a mistake.)
In her heyday Paekje had a population of 152,300 households.9
15. Chinhan
In th e H ouhan-shu it is written, “The men of Chinhan said, 'W hen the
refugees from Ch'in (One of the Chinese kingdoms during the W arring
States p eriod in China, previous to the Han dynasty) arrived in Korea,
Mahan c eded th em an area alo ng her eastern frontier , and hos t and guest
called ea ch other 'to,' meaning fellow-man. The Chinese pronunciation was
'tu.' This and oth er similarities led to the writing of the name of Chinhan in
Chinese fashion , using the nam e of the Chinese state of Ch'in plus the
character designating Korea, Han. Chinhan was divided into 12 small states,
each consisting of about 10,000 households.”
16. Kyongju (Pleasur e Gr ound for Each of the Four Seasons)
(This se ction is somewhat out of place chr onologically but is left in its
original place as it sets the scene for much of what is to follow .)
When S illa reached the height of her prosperity the capital, Kyongju,
consisted of 178,936 houses, 1,3 60 sections, fifty-five streets nd thirty-five
mansions. Ther e was a villa and pleasure ground for each of the four
seasons, to which the aristocrats resorted. These were T ongya, t he east field
house, f or spring; Kokyang house, for summer; Kuchi house, for autumn;
and Kai house for winter .
During the reign of the forty-n inth king Hongang, houses with tiled
roofs stood in rows in the capital and, not a thatched roof was to be seen.

Gentle sweet rain came with har monious blessings and all the harvests were
plentiful.
17. King Hyokkose, the Founder of Silla
In an cient times there were six d istricts in Chinhan, each belonging to a
separate clan. They were the Y i,  Chong, Son, Ch'oe, Pae and Sol clans, each
of which claimed to have a divine progenitor .
On the first day of the third mon th of T i-chieh (during the Chinese Han
dynasty) the chieftains of these six clans and their families gathered on the
bank of a stream called Alch'on to discuss problems of common interest.
There was general agreement as follows: “It is not good for u s to live in
scattered village s without protection. W e are in danger of attack by strong
enemies nearby . W e must therefore seek a noble and glorious king to rule
over us and defend us as our commander -in-chief.”
The chieftains and their familie s then climbed a high mountain , where
they worshipped  and prayed to heaven to send them a gracious prince
according to their wish. Suddenly there was a lightning-flash, and an
auspicious rainb ow stretched down from heaven and touched the earth in
the s outh by the well called Najong in the direction of Mt. Y a ng, where a
white horse was seen kneeling and bowing to something.
In g reat wonderment they ran down to the well. When they cam e near ,
the w hite horse neighed loudly and flew up to heaven on the rising veil of
the rainbow , leaving behind a lar ge red egg (some say a blue egg ) lying on a
giant rock near the well. When the people cracked the egg they found
within i t a baby boy whose no ble face shone like the sun. When he was
given a bath in the East Stream  (where T ongch'on T emple stands, to the
north) he looked even more bright and handsome.
The people danced for joy , and the birds and beasts sang and danced
round the boy . Heaven and earth shook, and the sun and m oon shone
brightly (indicating that this was indeed the king they had prayed for). They
named him King Hyokkose, m eaning bright ruler . (Ilyon goes on to cite
similar s tories o f fabulous births such as the goddess mother of the Fairy
Peach from Chinese sources, pe rhaps to authenticate this one. The of ficial
records—compiled, of course, long after the event—list Hyok kose as the
first king of Silla and give his reign dates as 57 B.C. to 3 A.D.)10
They of fered the wonderful boy the royal title “Kostilgam” or
“Kosogan” beca use when he fir st spoke he declared “Alji-Kosogan (baby-
king) is rising.”. For this reaso n succeeding Silla sovereigns all bore the

title Kosogan. (King) All the people in the country welcomed the boy-king
with cheerful acclamations an d hoped that he would marry  a virtuous
queen.
On the same day a she-dragon d escended from heaven to another well,
called A ryongjong in Saryang-n i, and from under her ribs on the left side
produced a baby girl, who burst like a flower from a bud. (Some accounts
say the she-dragon appeared and died, and the baby was found inside when
the body was opened.)
The chil d was fair of face and g raceful of form, but her mouth was like
the beak of a chick. However , when the people bathed her in the North
Stream of Moon Castle, the beak fell of f, revealing her cherry-red lips. The
stream was thenceforth called Palch'on (beak-falling stream).
The people erected a palace at the foot of South Mountain and brought
up t he two babies, who grew to be a noble prince and princes s. Since the
prince h ad been born from an egg in the shape of the gourd call ed “pak” in
the native tongue, they gave him the family name Pak. (Evidently a
foundation-myth of the Pak clan. The of ficial records do indeed indicate
that the first three Silla kings and some later ones were of thi s clan. The
name is a common one in modern Korea.) The princess was named Aryong
after the well where she was born.
When th ey reached the age of thirteen in the first year of W uf eng, the
prince was crowned king with Princess Aryong as his queen c onsort. The
country at this time was called Sorabol or Sobol, a native dialec t word. The
name Silla was not used until  a later time, during the reign of Kirim-
Nijilgum (although some histo rians attribute this naming to the reign of
Chijong Maripkan or King Pophung.)
(Ilyon he r e inserts a brief accou nt of the founding of the Kim c lan. The
original Kim — the w or d means “gold” —  was said to have been found in a
for est w her e a golden cock cr owed. The Kim clan eventually took aver the
Silla thr one and kept it until the end of the kingdom. Kim is the commonest
surname in Kor ea.)
Thus Hy okkose, the Great Chief of the Pak family founded the k ingdom
of Silla and ruled over it for si xty-two years, after which he ascended to
heaven. After seven days the ashes of his body fell to the earth and
scattered, and the soul of his queen ascended to join him in paradise.
All the people wept over the ashes of their good king and que en, and
tried to bury them in the same tomb, but a lar ge snake ap peared and

prevented this. So the royal remains of each were divided into five parts and
interred in pairs in the Northern Mausoleum, within the pre cincts of a
temple c alled T amom-sa. The people called these the Five Mausoleums, or
Sanung (T omb of the Snake). T he Crown Prince succeeded to the throne
and was given the title Namhae-wang (second Silla king in the of ficial
records, reigned 4-24 A.D.)
18. King Namhae
Namhae Kosogan was also called Ch'ach'a Ung or High Chief, a unique
title hon oring this king. His fa ther was King Hyokkose, his mother was
Lady Aryong and his queen wa s Lady Unje. Now to the west of Y ongil-
hyon rises Mt. Unje, where dw elt the queen's goddess mother . She sent
down rain in times of drought when the people of fered prayers to her .
King Namhae ascended the throne in the fourth year of Y uanshih
(Kapcha) during the reign of P'ing-ti of the prior (Chinese) Han dynasty . He
died in the fourth year of T ihwa ng of W ang-Mang after ruling his country
21 years. He was one of the first “Three Hwangs" (Kings) of Silla.
In the Sankuosh ih it is written,  “In Silla the king was called K osogan
(meaning noble person), Ch'ach'a Ung or Chach'ung.”
Kim T ae-mun1 1 writes, “In the national language Ch'ach'a Ung means
'sorcerer .' Since a sorcerer served the spirits and of ficiated at sacrificial
ceremonies, the people honored him with the fear and respect due a high
chief. The king was also call ed Nisagum, which means 'tooth-marks.'
According to an old book, when King Namhae died his son N orye (Y uri,
third king) of fered to give the throne to T'alhae. But T'alhae stood on
ceremony and said, 'A wise sage  has the most teeth.' So they pla yed a tooth
game by biting into a rice cake (presumably to observe the tooth-marks and
determine who had the most teeth).
“Another title for the king was Maripkan. In the Silla dialect Marip
means 's eat mar ker ,' referring to the marks which indicated where the king
and his courtiers were to sit during court ceremonies.”'
A comm ent in Samguk Sagi says, “In the Kingdom of Silla th e kings
had dif fe rent titles— there were one Kosogan, one Chach'ung, 16 Nisagums
and four Maripkans.”
In the Chronological History of Monarchs by Ch'oe Ch'i-won, the
famous Confuci an scholar at th e close of the Silla Kingdom, all the Silla
sovereigns are called “King” (i.e. the Chinese designation “wang") instead
of K osogan or o ther titles. Perhaps he thought such titles were n ot dignified

enough for an o f ficial history . But in describing the history o f Silla it is
instructive to include the old titl es as they were used by the ancient people.
The people of Silla called a p osthumously honored nobleman Kalmun-
wang, but the meaning of this is not clear .
During the reign of King Namhae the people of Nangnang invaded
Kumsong, but were defeated a nd driven away . And in the fifth year of
T'ien-feng (1 1 A.D.?) seven va ssal states of Koguryu surrendered to the
king.
19. King Norye (Y uri 24-57)
Pak Norye-Nijulgum, otherwise called Y uri-wang, at first of fered to
give up his claim to the throne i n favor of T'alhae, his sister's husband. But
T'alhae shook his head, saying  “A virtuous man has more teeth than a
commoner . Let us see who has more teeth.” Each bit into a rice cake, and
on the cake which Norye had bitten were marks of more teeth than on
T'alhae's. In this way he ascended the throne with the title o f Nijilgum
(tooth-game). The title was subsequently used for several other monarchs.
He was enthrone d in the first year of Kengshih of Liusheng-kung, even
in the year of Kemi. During his reign he changed the names of the six
departments, cre ating new administrative districts, conferred fa mily names
on the six tribes,  wrote songs,12 built ice cellars  and made ploug hshares and
carriages.
In the 18th year of Kienwu he attacked and destroyed Isoguk. In the
same year the soldiers of Koguryo invaded Silla.
20. King T'alhae
(57-80)
(One r e ason for this story is  pr obably to explain the temporary
displacement of the Pak clan by the Sok clan on the Silla thr one. The Pak
clan r eturned to the thr one for f our further r eigns, after which i t was again
displaced by Sok. The Sok clan then alternated with the Kim clan for a time,
until the thr one became permanently her editary in the Kim clan  under King
Naemul. 356-402.)
The origin of T'alhae Nijilgum, otherwise called T'alhae Nisagum, was
as follows. During the reign of King Namhae in Silla, a boat ca me drifting
to the shores of the Kingdom of Karak (a relatively small area on the south
coast). K ing Su ro of that kingd om and his people beat drums to welcome
the treasure-boat and its crew with due ceremony , out it sailed away and

anchored at Ajinpo in Hasojich'on, east of Kerim (i.e., Silla)  Even now
there exist near Kyongju two villages called Sang-Soji and Ha-Soji.
An old fisherwoman named A jin-Uison, who had fished for King
Hyokkose, saw a lar ge crowd o f magpies land on the boat with dance and
song. In  great wonder she pulle d the boat to the sand beach an d found on
board it a lar ge b ox, twenty feet long and thirteen feet wide. The  old woman
moored the boat near a grove of trees and prayed to heaven to send her
good luck. Then she opened the box, and to her surprise discovered a
handsome boy , together with seven treasures,13 a manservant and a
maidservant. After being entertained for seven days, the boy told his story:
“W e have come from Y ongsong guk, the Kingdom of the Dragon  Castle,
a thousand  li  (i.e. a very long distance) northeast of W aiguk. There have
been tw enty-eight dragon kings  of that country , all born of th e wombs of
but two women. Each ascended  the throne at the age of five or six. They
gave the thousands of simple people the first lessons in right living.
“King H amdalpa my father married the daughter of the king of
Choknyoguk, bu t she bore no sons to succeed to the throne. Af ter of fering
prayer for a son for seven years she brought forth a lar ge egg from her
womb.
“The king told h is courtiers that the birth of an egg from a woman had
seldom been known throughout the ages and was a bad omen. He had a
lar ge box made, put the egg into it together with seven treasu res and two
servants, and placed it on a bo at. Then he had the boat launched on the
ebbing tide, hoping that it would go drifting to some land where those on
board could live happily . Immediately a red dragon appeared from the
depths o f the sea and convoye d the boat to this place. During the long
journey I was born from the egg and grew up to be a strong boy .”
Finishing his speech the youth , trailing his staf f, climbed up T'oham
Mountain, followed by his two servants. On reaching the top he built a
stone cave with a dome over it to live in while he looked o ver the city
below (K yongju, the Silla capital) to find a suitable habitation. After seven
days he spotted a half-moon-shaped hill with a fine house on it which he
found to be the residence of P'ogong, a nobleman.
The youth decided to play a clev er trick. He ordered his servants  to bury
pieces o f iron and some charcoal dust by the doorstep of the  nobleman's
house. E arly the  next morning he called on the master of the house and said
it was the residence of his forefa thers. P'ogong denied this, and after a long

quarrel a suit was brought in court.  Judge:  L ook here, boy , how can you
prove it is your house?  Y outh:  My grandfather was a blacksmith. One day
he and his fami ly went on a visit to a relative in the neighbo ring village
over the hill. D uring his absence this man (pointing to P'ogon g) illegally
occupied the house and has lived there ever since. Let the ground be dug up
and evidence will be found. The judge ordered the court servants to dig in
the ground at th e doorstep of the house, and, of course, they found the
pieces of iron and the charcoal dust. In this way the youth gained
possession of the house and took up residence in it.
King Namhae was pleased with the wisdom of the youth and gave him
his daug hter in marriage. This w as the lady Ani. One day he ask ed his wife
to bring him a drink of cool water . She dipped the water from a well on the
eastern hill and put the gourd to her mouth in order to taste the w ater herself
first, but it stuck to her mouth a s if a half-moon gourd were growing from
her lips.  The young husband gently chided his wife for having tasted the
water fir st. She promised she would never do it again, whereupon the gourd
dropped from her lips. This wel l still exists on the eastern hill. People now
call it Y onae-jong.
Following the death of King No rye in the sixth month of the si xth year
of C hungyuan of Kuangwu-ti of Hou Han (56 A.D.), T'alhae succeeded to
the thron e as the first king from  the Sok clan. T radition says he devised his
family name by adopting the Chinese character for “old" (pronounced “sok”
by K oreans) because he regained his lost house of old. Another explanation
is th at he adopt ed the Chinese character for “magpie” (also pronounced
“sok") minus the bird radical because the magpies sang and danced to
attract the attention of the fishe rwoman. His given name, T'alhae, means
“throw of f the shell,” alluding to the fact that he came out of an egg.
After ruling twenty-three years , the king died in the fourth j>ear of
Kiench'u of Chang-ti of Hou Han (79 A.D.). His head was found to be three
feet two  inches in circumferenc e and his body nine feet seven inches tall;
his teeth were cl ose-set and even in his mouth like two rows of  pearl-white
seeds in a half-open pomegranate: and his bones were all joined closely like
one mass of jade—all bespeaking a peerless Hercules.
They buried his body on the hi ll of Soch'on. Soon there came  a voice
from heaven, saying “Remove my bones carefully .”
His courtiers broke his skeleton  and preserved it in a plaster ca st in the
palace. B ut agai n there came a voice from heaven, saying “Bur y my bones

on the Eastern Hill.” The courtiers complied with the command.
Some sa y that many years after T alhae's death, during the reign of King
Munmu (661-68 1), a majestic, white-bearded old man appeared  to the king
in a drea m and said “I am T'alh ae, a lonely spirit. Dig out my bones from
the hill of Soch'on, embalmed  them in a plaster image and bury it on
T'oham Mountain.” So his jade-like bones were interred on that hill to
repose forever . From that time until today , annual memorial services and
sacrifices have been held before T'allhae's tomb, and he is “the god of the
eastern hill.”
21. Kim Alji
(This is the foundation legend of the Kim clan of Kyongju, w hich, as
noted above, eventually became the Silla r oyal family).
On the fourth day of the eighth moon of the third year of Y ing-p'ing of
Ming-ti of Hou Han (60 A.D.), P'ogong was traveling to Moon Castle at
night when he saw a bright light illuminating Sirim forest, w hile purple
clouds c ame dow n from heaven to earth. Investigating, he discovered that a
golden box was hanging from a branch of a tree and the light was radiating
from the box. Under the tree a white cock was crowing.
P'ogong reporte d this wonderful sight to the King (T'alhae), w ho went
immediately to the forest and opened the golden box. Out came a beautiful
boy , just as Hyokkose had done long before. The King named him Alji,
meaning infant child in the Silla dialect. He carried the wonderful child in
his arms  to the palace, while b irds and beasts followed him, singing and
dancing for joy .
The Kin g chose an auspicious day and formally named the boy his own
son and  crown prince. But when the King died Alji yielded th e throne to
P'asa (of the Pak clan) as having a more legitimate claim to it. He was given
the family name Kim because this is written with the same character as
Kum (gold) and he had been found in a golden box.
Alji beg at Y olhan, Y ulhan begat Ado, Ado begat Suryu, Suryu begat
Ukpu, Ukpu begat Kudo, and Kudo begat Mich'u, who beca me the first
Silla ruler of the Kim clan (262). Thus the royal Kim family of Silla is
descended from Kim Alji.
22. Y onorang and Syeonyo14
(In c ommenting  on this story , Ilyon points out that Japanese  r ecor ds
contain no mention of a person fr om Silla becoming king. He speculates

that per haps Y onorang became a daimyo, a Japanese nobleman, on the
coast of Japan facing Kor ea.)
In th e fo urth year of the reign of King Adala, the eighth Silla so vereign,
even in the yea r Chong-yu (157), there lived on the eastern seacoast a
married couple named Y onorang and Syeonyo.
One day Y onorang was diving in the ocean to collect seaweed.
Suddenly a monstrous rock (some say a big fish) rose beneath him and
carried him of f to Japan. The people there thought him quite an uncommon
person and made him their king.
Syeonyo, meanw hile, was wondering why her husband did n ot come
back. As she wa s searching for him along the shore, she saw a pair of straw
shoes ly ing on a big rock at the edge of the water . Recognizing them as her
husband's, she jumped onto the  rock and looked about for him. The rock
immediately sho ok gently to and  fro for a moment and then dri fted merrily
of f to Japan as before.
The Japanese in great wonderme nt took her from the rock and presented
her to their king . Thus the coupl e was reunited and Syeono beca me a queen.
The people respected the royal couple and worshiped them l ike sun and
moon.
Just at this time, the sun and m oon ceased to shine in Silla. The King
was asto nished, and sent for th e of ficial astrologer . This of ficial informed
His Maj esty that the spirits of the sun and moon had formerly  resided in
Silla, but some m onths before had bid farewell to this land and departed for
Japan in the east.
The King immediately sent a ro yal messenger to the eastern islands to
find Y o norang and Syeono and bring them back. But Y onorang, when
found, s hook his head and said, “W e drifted to this land by the command of
Heaven. How can we return to our native country? Look! Here is a roll of
fine silk cloth, handspun by my wife the queen. I will give it to you as a
gift. If you take it home and of fe r it as a sacrifice to heaven, you  will see an
astonishing result.”
The disappointe d messenger accepted the gift and returned to Silla,
where he reported the whole story to the court. The king thereupon of fered
the s ilk cloth as a sacrifice to heaven, praying for the return of the sun and
moon in a sole mn ceremony . Hardly had he finished when the dark,
overhanging clouds dispersed and the sun and moon shone brightly in the
sky .

The Kin g worsh iped the silk cloth as a national treasure, and ke pt it in a
special b uilding called Kwibi-k o (the queen's warehouse). He named the
place where he had of fered it to Heaven in Y ongil-hyon (the county of
welcome sun) or T ogiya (the field of prayer).
23. King Mich'u and the Bamboo-leaf Army
(The events of thr ee differ ent r ei gns ar e r ecor ded her e, and King  Mich'u
seems to be pr e sent because he was the first ruler fr om the Kim clan. The
general whose r esentful ghost is  described was Kim Y u-sin, a member of the
r oyal clan whose military leadership was important in establishing Silla as
the rule r of the whole Kor ean peninsula. It is known that a h igh official
named K im Y un g was executed in 771, during the r eign of Kin g Hyegong,
thr ough the machinations of political enemies, but his r elationship to Kim
Y u-sin is not known. This whole account is somewhat at variance with that
given in the Samguk Sagi.)
Mich'u Nijilgum (otherwise called Micho or Miko, 262-284), the
thirteenth Silla sovereign, belonged to the seventh generation of the
descendants of Kim Alji. His an cestors had all occupied distinguished posts
in th e go vernment. He was a noble and virtuous king and was much loved
by h is p eople. H e succeeded King Chomhae (247-262) to the throne as the
first Silla sovereign of the Kim clan. People nowadays call his tomb the
“ancestor's shrin e” because all the Silla kings of the Kim clan (which
occupied the throne exclusively  after 356) were descended from him. He
died afte r a reign of twenty-three years and his tomb is to be found east of
the Hungnyun temple.
During the reign of King Y urye, the fourteenth sovereign (284-298), the
men of Isoguk attacked the Si lla fortress of Kumsong. The Silla troops
fought bravely , but they were o utnumbered and defeat seemed inevitable.
Then su ddenly a host of odd-looking soldiers with bamboo lea ves in their
ears app eared on the battlefield, reinforced the Silla army and  routed the
enemy . When the invaders scatt ered and disappeared, it was fo und that the
mysterious allie s were also gon e, leaving only a pile of bamboo leaves in
front of the to mb of King M ich'u. For this reason the S illa troops
worshipped the spirit of King M ich'u as a protector of the kingdom. T o this
day his tomb is known as Chukhyon-nung, the T omb of Bamboo.
During the reign of King Hyego ng, the thirty-sixth sovereign (765-780),
even in the four th moon of the fourteenth year of T ali of T'ang T ai-tsung
(779), su ddenly a great wind aro se from Kim Y u-sin's tomb, and  amidst the

tumultuous soun d a dignified ge neral mounted on a steed and followed by
forty ho nor guar ds clad in steel armor flew through the sky on the wings of
the w ind and entered the Bamb oo T omb. The following dialogue was then
heard from inside.
General's V oice: I, Y our Majesty's humble subject, in life assisted the
throne as a soldier by destroyin g enemies and enhancing the r oyal power
and afte r death became a prote ctive spirit guarding the kingdom against
catastrophe. Ne vertheless, in the year of Kyongsul (771) my guiltless
descendant was shamefully put to death. It is evident that both  the present
king and  his court have for gotte n my patriotic deeds. I would like to move
to a nother place and cease car ing for these ungrateful creatures. Now I
pause fo r a reply in the hope that Y our Majesty will grant my request.
King's V oice:  If  you and I do not guard this country with our immortal
strength, what will become of our poor people? I command you to continue
to d isplay your patriotic spirit with loyal mind for the welfare of the state.
Thrice the King's spirit spoke persuasively and thrice the angry general's
ghost gr umbled and complained. Then the wind arose once m ore and he
was gone.

King Hyegong was astonished when he heard of this. He sent the grand
vizier K im Kyon g-sin to the tomb of Kim Y u-sin to apologize to his spirit.
In a ddition, he donated a tract of royal land to Ch'uson T emple so that the
income might be used for sacrifices to appease the general's wrath and pray
for the repose of his soul. This  temple had been erected in honor of Kim
Y u-sin's triump hant return from P'yongyang after a great victory over
Koguryo.
Had it not been for the persuasion of the virtuous spirit of King  Mich'u.
Kim Y u -sin's an ger could not h ave been appeased. In this wa y the great
king protected Silla even after his death. For this reason his countrymen
remembered his  august virtue and of fered sacrifices to his spirit with the
same piety with which they worshipped the three sacred mountains.
Moreover they elevated his tom b to the highest rank, even above that of the
founder of the kingdom.
24. King Naemul and Pak Che-sang15
(King Naemul r eigned fr om 356 to 402, so that his thirty-sixth year
would b e 391. Japan at this tim e was not yet unified and historical data on
the perio d ar e extr emely sketchy . The oldest Japanese r ecor ds do mention a

Kor ean who may possibly be id entified with Mihae. Which of the Japanese
islands M ihae was sent to is not specified, but Kyushu seems the most likely .
Thr oughout this story Ilyon consistently r efers to the Japanese with the
contemptuous term wai (dwarfs), pr obably an indication of his own attitude
rather than that of the people whom he describes.)
In the thirty-six th year of Kin g Naemul (391), the seventeenth Silla
King, a Japanes e ruler sent an envoy to Kyongju to pay homage to the
King. Th e envoy  denounced Paekje for her attacks on Silla (there was more
or less constant  war among the  three kingdoms throughout their history)
and conveyed his lord's request that a prince of Silla be sent to return the
courtesy . (All this amounts to an  of fer of alliance.) So King Naemul sent his
third son Mihae,16 w ho was then ten years old, with an elderly courtier
named Pak Sa-ram to take car e of him. But the Japanese ruler did not
respect h is statu s as an envoy and held him hostage. He did not return to his
homeland until he was forty years old.
In the third year of King Nulji  (419; King Nulji reigned from 417 to
458), th e nineteenth sovereign of Silla, King Changsu of Kogu ryo sent an
envoy w ith the request that Pohae (in Samguk Sagi, Pohae is rep resented as
Pokhae), King Nulji's younger brother , be sent to his court for a friendly
visit. The King made peace with Koguryo and sent Pohae to P'yongyang
with Kim Mu-al, an old courtier , to attend him. But King Changsu, like the
Japanese ruler , held the young prince hostage and would not release him.
(Ther e i s some chr onological co nfusion in what follows. Between King
Naemul and King Nulji another sover eign, King Silsong, is r ecor ded to have
ruled fr o m 402 to 417. A possible explanation is that King Silsong was King
Naemul's br other rather than his son, since passing on the thr one to a
br other was a common practice in East Asian monar chies.)
In the tenth year of King Nulji, even in the year of Ulch'uk (426), the
King in vited his courtiers and military leaders to attend a court
entertainment. A mid the flowing of the wine and the singing and dancing
the King suddenly burst into tears and spoke as follows:
“My father (King Naemul, evide ntly) sent his beloved son to Japan and
died wit hout the joy of seeing him again. Since I ascended the throne my
strong neighbor (i.e. Koguryo) has warred against me and attacked our
frontier time and again. Believi ng that the king of Koguryo wanted peace
with me , I sent my own younger brother to his court. But now h e holds my
brother hostage and will not let him return. Though I am rich  and noble,

tears flo w from my eyes day an d night. If only I could see my two brothers
again and we could apologize before the shrine of my father , I would be
most happy . Who can bring the two princes back to my palace?”
“Y our Majesty ,” the courtiers replied, “this is not an easy matter . None
but a wise and b rave man can pe rform such a great mission. W e recommend
Pak Che-sang, the magistrate of Sapna county .”
Pak Che -sang was accordingly brought before the King and char ged
with the  missio n of returning t he two princes. In accepting it  he replied.
“When the King is grieved his subjects are disgraced. If the  King is in
disgrace his subjects must die. I f the subjects do only what is ea sy and will
not undertake what is most dif ficult, they are disloyal, and if they consider
only sav ing thei r own lives the y are cowards. Though I am an unworthy
subject I will faithfully execute this mission, given me by royal command.”
The Kin g was choked with emotion. He drank with Pak Che-sang from
the s ame cup and bid him a fo nd farewell, holding him by th e hand. Pak
took leav e of the court and immediately journeyed northward in  disguise. In
Koguryo he gained access to the place where Pohae was being held. After
explaining his plan of escape and setting a time and place to meet, he
hastened away to the rendezvous on the seacoast at Kosong.
In o rder to disar m suspicion Pohae feigned illness and did not a ppear at
the king's morning audience f or several days. Then on the  appointed
evening he fled secretly to Kosong.
When the king of Koguryo was informed of Pohae's flight he ordered
out a score of soldiers to pursue and bring him back. But the Prince of Silla
was so loved by  Koguryo people for his deeds of kindness that the soldiers
shot at him with headless arrow s and thus he escaped and arrived safely at
the royal palace of Silla.
When t he King saw Pohae he embraced him with the tenderest
af fection, shedding tears of both joy and sorrow , saying “I have regained
one arm of my body , one eye of my face, but I am still sad without the
other .”
“Y our M ajesty ,” Pak Che-sang replied, “only command and I will bring
back Prince Mihae17 also.” He prostrated himself before the throne, striking
his head twice on the floor , a nd took leave of the King. W ithout even
visiting his home he journeyed to the seacoast at Y ulp'o.
His wife  pursued him on a white horse, but when she arrived at  the port
he had already embarked and w as sailing far over the blue sea. She wept

and call ed to him to return for a last farewell, but her loyal husband only
waved his hand and sailed straight on.
Pak soon reached the Japanese island where Mihae was being held, and
was rece ived in audience by the  king. “Who are you and what has brought
you here?” the king asked.
“I am a nobleman of Kerim (another name for Silla)” Pak replied. “The
king of Kerim killed my father and brothers without legitimate reason, so I
escaped and drifted to your shores seeking asylum.”
“The king of Sh iragi (Silla) is not good,” responded the Japane se ruler .
“I will give you a comfortable house to live in.”
Pak Che -sang soon made contact with Prince Mihae and the two began
to g o fishing o n the seashore every morning. They made a practice of
presenting their  catch regularly to the king, who was highly pleased and
suspected nothing. Finally their opportunity came, a day when thick fog
covered the island. As they put  out to sea in their fishing boa t, Pak said,
“Prince, today you must escape. It is now or never .”
“I want you to come with me,” the prince replied.
“If w e g o togeth er ,” counseled Pak, “the Japanese will pursue us. I must
stay behind to prevent them.”
The prince was distressed. “I l ook up to you like my own fa ther and
elder brother . How can I leave you behind and go alone?”
“If I can save your life and com fort my king I will be content. I cannot
think only of myself.”
Pak pou red wine  into a cup and of fered it to the prince in farewe ll. Then
he ordered Kang Ku-ryo, a Silla  boatman, to take the prince with him under
full sail.  He returned to Mihae's quarters and stayed there till th e following
morning. When the Japanese became curious, Pak came out an d told them
that Mihae had been hunting the previous day and was relaxing in bed. At
noon they came again, and Pak at last told them that Mihae had escaped a
long while before.
The king was very angry and ordered cavalrymen to go in pursuit, but to
no avail. He had Pak Che-sang arrested and brought before him.
“Why did you send the prince home without my knowledge  V
“I am a subject of Kerim and no t your vassal. I have simply obeyed the
command of my king. I have no more to say .”
The king  becam e angrier still. “Y ou became my vassal and now  you say
no. What an inso lent fellow you are! Now you must suf fer the fi ve penalties

(extreme torture).”
“But ev en now , if you will become my subject, I will give you big
rewards and make you rich and noble.”
But ther e was no persuading the  loyal Pak. “I would rather be a dog or a
pig in Kerim than a nobleman in Japan. I would rather be beaten with long
whips in Kerim than receive court titles here.”
“Here, m en! Peel of f his skin from thigh to ankle and make him walk on
the swordlike stubble of the harvested reeds.” (Ilyon points out here that an
old tradition attributed the red color of a certain variety of reed to the blood
of Pak Che-sang.)
When P ak had been tortured for  a time the king said, “Now , fel low! Of
what kingdom are you a subject?”
“I am a subject of Kerim.”
“Stand h im on red-hot iron.” The men did so. “Now whose va ssal are
you?”
“I am a vassal of the King of Kerim.”
“Y ou are  straigh t like a bamboo,  unbending and unyielding. But you are
of no  ser vice to me. Hang him, m en.” So the Japanese hanged h im on a tree
on Kishima and burned him to death.
Meanwhile, Mih ae crossed the eastern sea and landed safely in Silla. He
sent Kan g Ku-ryo, the sailor , to the palace to inform the King of  his arrival.
His Majesty expressed great joy  and commanded his courtiers to meet the
returning prince  on the coast. T ogether with Prince Pohae he went out to the
southern outskirts of Kyongju, and when he saw Mihae, fell on h is neck and
wept for joy .
The Kin g gave a great banquet at the palace and proclaimed a  general
amnesty throughout the kingdom. He conferred the title of Grand Duchess
on the wife of Pak Che-sang and married Prince Mihae to her daughter .
The courtiers praised the noble deeds of Pak Che-sang, saying,  “In old
China a vassal o f Han named Ch ou Ko was captured by the soldiers of Ch'u
in Y ingyang. Hsiang Y u said to Chou Ko, 'If you become my vassal I will
make you a gov ernor , rich and noble.' But Chou Ko would not yield and
suf fered death at the hand of H siang Y u. Now Pak Che-sang's unswerving
loyalty outshines that of Chou Ko.”
Pak Che -sang's wife, overwhelm ed with grief, prostrated herself on the
sand beach south of Mangdok  temple gate and cried long and bitterly .
People still call the place Changsa, meaning long sand. The good lady could

not long endure the yearning of her heart for her husband, who would return
no m ore. She to ok her three dau ghters with her to Ch'isul-lyong (Kite Pass)
in th e mountains. There she looked away in the direction of Japan and
wailed for sorrow till she died. She became the tutelary spirit of Kite Pass,
and the people of Silla erected a shrine to her there.
25. King Silsong (402-417)
In the ninth yea r of Ihsi, even in the year of Kyech'uk (414) th e Great
Bridge was built in P'yongyang-ju. King Silsong hated Nulji, the son of the
previous soverei gn because of his virtue and tried to kill him. H e asked the
king of Koguryo  to send troops to Silla, and when they arrived arranged to
meet the m in Nulji's presence as a signal to kill the prince. But the men of
Koguryo, who admired Nulji's high virtue and fine deeds, plunged their
spears in to the king's heart instead and raised Nulji to the th rone before
returning to their country .
26. Shooting of the Harp-case.
In th e te nth year  (Mujin) of Kin g Pich'o (otherwise known as K ing Soji,
479-500) the twenty-first sovere ign of Silla, the King was enjoying a picnic
at Heaven Spring Pavilion whe n he noticed crows and rats making noisy
music in  the flower garden whe re he was seated. Suddenly a rat bowed to
the monarch and said, “Follow the crow wherever she flies.” The King
commanded an of ficer mounted on a swift horse to follow a crow which
was just then flying away .
The of fi cer obey ed, and followed the crow as far as P'ich'on, a mountain
village e ast of Namsan. Here his attention was distracted for a m oment by a
fight between two pigs, and when he looked again at the sky the bird was
gone. As he wan dered on, wondering what to do, an old man emer ged from
a po nd n ear the village and presented to him a sealed letter . On the envelope
were the words, “If opened, tw o people will die; if not opened, one man
will die.”
In w onderment the horseman to ok the letter to the king, who lo oked at
the envelope and said, “If two people are to die, it is better not to open the
letter and let one man die.”
But the royal astrologer18 who was attending the king, said, “The two
people are commoners, but the one man is your majesty .” The King nodded
and open ed the envelope. Inside  he found a strange message: “Shoot at the
harp-case.”

The King returned to the palace  and shot an arrow into the ha rp case.
When it was ope ned he beheld h is Queen in the loving embrace of a monk,
both pierced by the arrow and dead.
From that time i t became the cu stom to stay indoors on the first pig day ,
the first rat day and the first horse day , and to observe the fifte enth of the
first moo n each year as the crow's festival day , On that day glut inous rice is
cooked and of fered as a sacrifice to the black bird that saved the life of the
King and brought death to the adulterous Queen and her lover . In the
common speech  this day is called T aldo, meaning a day of sorrow and
taboo. The King named the po nd Soch'ul chi, which means le tter -issuing
pond.
27. King Chich'ollo (Chijung, 500-514)
The twenty-second sovereign was King Chich'ollo. His family name
was Kim and h is given name was Chitaero or Chitoro. His posthumous
name w as Chijung. The giving of posthumous names to kings and queens
began a t this time. In common  speech his title was Maripkan, the use of
which also began in his reign. (According to other sources  the use of
Maripkan began with King Naemul, 356-402). He ascended the throne in
the second year of Y ingyuan of Nan-chao (Kyongjin), although some say it
was the year Sinsa, which corresponds to the third year of Y ingyuan.
The King was a big man and his  phallus measured one foot five inches,
so th at it was dif ficult to find a suitable queen for him. But it wa s necessary
that he marry , both to live a normal life and to provide an heir to the throne
to whom  he could pass on his jeweled scepter and royal crown. Courtiers
were the refore s ent to every cor ner of the kingdom with instruc tions to find
a giant girl who would be a suitable match for the King.
When one of these courtiers arrived in Moryang-pu, he sat down to rest
under a tree. No t far of f he noticed two dogs contending over s omething in
the grass that l ooked as lar ge and bright as a golden drum . Becoming
curious he asked the villagers w hat it was all about, and a little girl told him
that the daughte r of a noblema n had been washing clothes in a mountain
stream and had relieved herself in the forest.
Now really intrigued, the cour tier visited the nobleman's house and
found that the girl was indeed a giant, seven feet five inches tall. He
hastened to inform the King, who immediately sent a royal carriage drawn
by two horses to bring her to th e court. There they were marrie d and lived

happily . (Anothe r source gives h er family name as Pak. She was popularly
known as Y onje Puin, the lady of the long emperor .)
During King Chich'ollo's reign the people of Ullung-do (Dagelet
Island), two days' sail to the eas t, ceased to pay tribute to the King's court,
boasting that the deep sea was their ally . The King was very angry and
commanded Ge neral Pak I-jong to go to the island and punish its
disobedient inhabitants. Pak had  wooden lions made and mounted them on
the deck s of his ships. Then he sailed to Ullung-do, and said to the
islanders, “If you do not surren der we will set the lions upon you.” Much
afraid, the people fell on their knees and begged for peace. The King
rewarded Pak I-jong and made him governor of Ullung-do.
28. King Chinhung (540-576)
The twe nty-fourth sovereign wa s King Chinhung. He was crown ed king
at th e age of fifteen (the Samguk Sigi says seven), with his  mother as
regent. She was King Pophung's daughter , wife of Ipjong-Kalmun-wang
(Pophung's younger brother .)
On his deathbed , King Chinhung had his head shaved and suf fered his
royal person to be clad in the robe as a Buddhist monk. (An ex traordinary
act of piety which would have been thought beneath the dignity of a king.)
In the ninth moo n of the third year of Chengsheng, an army from  Paekje
invaded Chinsong and carried of f 39.000 people, both male and female,
together with 8,000 horses. Previously Paekje had proposed to S illa that the
two kin gdoms launch a joint attack on Koguryo. King Chinhung flatly
refused, howeve r , saying “The rise and fall of kingdoms de pends upon
heaven. If Koguryo has not provoked the wrath of heaven, how can I dare
to attack her?” When he heard of this the king of Koguryo was deeply
moved, and strengthened his ties with Silla. This caused the exasperated
king of Paekje to vent his anger by attacking Silla.
29. T ohwanyo and Pihyongnang
The twenty-fifth  ruler of Silla was King Saryun (posthumous name
Chinji, 5 76-579). His family name was Kim and his queen was L ady Chido,
a d aught er of Kio-kong. During  his short reign he was hated by the people
for his misgove rnment and sexual indulgence. For these reasons he was
ultimately deposed.
While he was on the throne there lived in Saryang-pu a country woman
who was so be autiful that people called her T ohwarang or T ohwanyo,

meaning Peach Girl. The King heard of her extraordinary bea uty and had
her brought to the inner palace.
“T ohwarang,” h e said, “you are my peach. I love you and I must enjoy
you tonight.” And he attempted to take her in his arms.
“Let me  go!” she cried. “I am a married woman and I canno t accept
your love. My body belongs to my husband and him only . Even a king or an
emperor shall not take away my woman's treasure.”
“What a bold wench!” the King  said angrily . “Don't you know I am an
absolute monarch and everything in the kingdom belongs to me? I can take
any pretty woman I want for my concubine. If you do not obey my
command, I will kill you. Do you still dare to say no?”
But the woman was resolute. “I would rather die than be your mistress.”
The King laughed. “If your husband were to die, would you come to
me?”
She was crying now . “Y es, then it would be possible,”
The Kin g sighe d resignedly and said, “Go home in peace but do not
for get me, for I will keep your beauty in my heart forever .”
The woman sobbed, “May you  live ten thousand years, O King!” and
left the palace.
In that same year the king wa s deposed, and died soon afterwards.
Three y ears late r the woman's husband died, and ten days later the king
appeared to her at midnight, looking just as he had in life.
“Y ou gave me a  promise long ago,” he said, “and now your hu sband is
no more. W ill you come to me and be my lover?”
“Y es, but first I must ask the advice of my parents.”
T ohwarang's pa rents told her that the command of a king must be
obeyed. So she arrayed herself as a bride and entered her bedch amber . She
did not emer ge for seven days and nights, during which time the scent of
incense emanated from the room and five-colored clouds hovered
constantly over the roof of the house. Then she emer ged alone, her royal
lover having vanished, and even tually it was found that she was pregnant.
When th e hour of her confinement drew near heaven and earth shook with
thunder . The child was a boy , whom she named Pihyongnang.
When King Chinp'yong, Chinji's successor (579-632), heard this story ,
he had T ohwara ng and her baby brought to the palace to live, and when the
boy was  fifteen he was made a  knight. (This probably means that he was

enrolled in the order of Hwarang, a quasi-military , quasi-religious
or ganization of aristocratic youth in the Silla kingdom.)
It w as n oticed at court that the boy often wandered far from the palace
at n ight alone a nd the king, becoming curious, one night as signed fifty
soldiers to keep watch over him. Early next morning; the captain of the
soldiers reported to the King as follows:
“Y our M ajesty , we saw Pihyong fly over Moon Castle and land on the
bank of Hwangch'on Stream (we st of Kyongju). There he dispo rted himself
with a crowd of spirits from heaven and goblins from earth until  the ringing
of the temple bell at dawn. Then he dismissed his ghostly crew  and turned
his flying footsteps toward the palace.”
Pihyong was summoned to the t hrone forthwith, and the King e nquired,
“Is it true that you consort with ghosts and goblins?”
“Y es, sire, it is true.”
“Then I command you to build a bridge across the stream north of
Sinwon T emple.”
“I obey , sire.”
He gathered all his ghosts and g oblins together and conveyed the royal
order to them. They fell to at once, and by morning a stone bridge across
the s tream had b een completed.  The King was pleased, and called it Kwi-
gyo, the  Bridge of Ghosts. Thinking to make further use of Pihyong's
supernatural acq uaintances, he then asked, “Do you know any ghost who
could return to life and assist the throne in administration?”
“Y es,” replied Pihyong, “Kildal is a fine statesman.”
“Bring him to me.”
The foll owing m orning Pihyong  presented Kildal before the thro ne. The
King made him a courtier , and  found him to be loyal and s traight as a
bamboo. He commanded Y im Chong, the grand vizier , to adopt Kildal as
his son, since Y im had no son of his own. Y im Chong complied, and later
ordered Kildal to erect a pavilion south of Hung-nyun T emple and to stand
guard th ere day and night, for which reason the temple entrance became
known as Kildal Gate.
But one day Kil dal changed himself into a fox and ran away . (Foxes are
closely associate d with ghosts and spirits in East Asian folklore , somewhat
as cats are in the W est.) Pihyong then sent the other ghosts and goblins to
catch Ki ldal and  kill him instantly . After this all the bad ghosts and goblins

feared Pihyong and came to him no more. The people of Silla praised
Pihyong in a song which goes as follows:

Here stands the house of Pihyong,
Strong son of the love-spirit of our great king.
All dancing devils, do not come but go away;
Fear the ghost-general and do not stay .
It be came a custom to paste up copies of this song on the gates of
commoners' houses as a protection against evil spirits.
30. The Jade Belt fr om Heaven
The twenty-sixth sovereign of Silla was King Paekjong (posthumous
title Chinp'yong , 579-632). He ascended the throne in the eighth moon of
the elev enth yea r of T akien of Hsuan-ti of Chen (579) even in  the year of
Kihae. He was eleven feet tall.
On one occasion  King Chinp'yong visited Ch'onju T emple, which had
been constructed  at his order . As he was ascending the stone ste ps, three of
them broke beneath his weight. He gave no sign of surprise, however , and
told his attendan t to leave the stones as they were to show his  successors.
These stones still exist and are counted among the five “immov able” stones
in the walled city of Kyongju.
In th e year of King Chinp'yong's coronation, an angel from heaven
appeared before the throne and said, “The heavenly emperor has
commanded me to deliver this jade belt to you as his gift. Rise and accept
it.” Whe n the King had accepted the heavenly gift with due d ecorum, the
angel fle w back  to heaven. Silla kings from that time on always wore this
jade belt while attending important sacrificial rites at national shrines.
Long afterward W ang Kon, the founder of the Koryo dynasty
(posthumous titl e T'aejo) cautioned his generals and of ficials o n the eve of
his conquest of Silla (935): “I forbid you to lay hands on the three treasures
of Silla—the sixteen-foot Buddh a image in Hwangnyong T emple, the nine-
story pa goda at the same temple , and the jade belt of king Chin p'yong.” So
these treasures were never touch ed and the jade belt remained the property
of the Silla royal family even after the surrender of the kingdom.
In th e fi fth moo n of the fourth year (Chong-yu) of Ch'ingtai (937), Kim
Pu, the grand vizier (King Kyongsun) presented to King T'aejo (W ang Kon,
the foun der of Koryo) a belt measuring ten arm-spans, carv ed in gold,
studded with jade and glittering with sixty-two jade pendants. T his was the

heavenly belt given to King Chinp'yong. King T'aejo accepted it and kept it
safe in the treasury of his palace.
The court musicians sang:

Heaven has given a long jade belt
T o decorate our king's jeweled waist;
His Majesty's jade body is now heavier than ever—
Rebuild the palace with steel for him to tread!

(Jade was not o nly r egar ded as pr ecious and beautiful but a lso had
r eligious signifi cance, One of t he Chinese deities was known as the Jade
Emper or .)
31. The Thr ee Pr ophesies of Queen Sondok
The twenty-seventh sovereign of Silla was Queen T okman (posthumous
title Sondok, 632-647). She w as the daughter of King Chin p'yong and
ascended the throne in the sixth year (Imjin) of Chen-kuan of T'ang T'ai-
tsung. During her reign she made three remarkable prophecies.
First, the Emperor T'ai-tsung (of the Chinese T'ang dynasty) se nt her a
gift of three han dfuls of peony seeds with a picture of the flowers in red,
white and purple. The Queen looked at the picture for a while and said,
“The flowers will have no fragrance.” The peonies were planted in the
palace garden, and sure enoug h they had no odor from the time they
bloomed until they faded.
Second, in the Jade Gate Pond at the Holy Shrine T emple a crowd of
frogs gathered in winter (when f rogs are normally hibernating) and croaked
for t hree or four days. The people and courtiers wondered at this , and asked
the Q ueen what its significance might be. She immediately commanded two
generals, Alch'on and P'ilt'an, to lead two thousand crack troops to W oman's
Root V alley on the western outskirts of Kyongju to search out and kill
enemy troops hidden in the forest.
The generals set of f with a thousand troops each, and when they reached
the v alley found five hundred Paekje soldiers hidden in the forest there. The
Silla soldiers surrounded them and killed them all.
Then th ey found a Paekje general hiding behind a rock on South
Mountain, whom they also killed. Finally , they intercepted a lar ge Paekje
force marching to invade Silla. This they routed, killing one tho usand three
hundred in the process.

Third, o ne day while the Queen was still in perfect health, she ca lled her
courtiers together and said, “I w ill surely die in a certain year , in a certain
month, on a certain day . When I am gone, bury me in the middle of
T orich'on.” The  courtiers did not know the place and asked  the Queen
where it was, whereupon she pointed to the southern hill called W olf
Mountain.
On t he very day  she had predic ted the Queen died, and her ashes were
interred on the site she had chosen. T en years later (656) the great King
Munmu had Sach'onwang T em ple (the T emple of the Four Deva Kings)
built ben eath the Queen's tomb. Buddhist scripture alludes to two heavens
called—T orich'on and Sach'onwangch'on. All were amazed at the Queen's
prescience and knowledge of the afterlife.
(The second temple was pr esu mably built further down the hill, not
dir ectly under the tomb. The four deva kings ar e the Buddhist guar dian
spirits of the four dir ections, an d r epr esentations of them ar e to be found at
the entrance gates of most Kor ean Buddhist temples. King Munmu (661-
681) cou ld have  been living in 656 but could not have been r eigning as the
date is early in the r eign of his pr edecessor King Muryol. 654-661.)
During her lifetime the courtiers asked the Queen how she had been
able to make these prophecies. She replied: “In the picture there were
flowers but not butterflies, an i ndication that peonies have no smell. The
T'ang Em peror teased my having no husband. As to the frogs a t Jade Gate
Pond, they seemed like soldiers, and Jade gate refers the female genitals
(and so is similar to the name of the valley , which also c ontains the
expression Okm un, jade gate). T he female color is white, which  is also the
color symbolic of the west, so I knew the invaders were coming from the
west (i.e. from Paekje). If a male or gan enters a female or gan i t will surely
die ( lose its erec tion after or gasm), so I knew it would be easy t o defeat the
enemy .19
(The T ang emper or who sent the pictur e of peonies in thr ee colors meant
it to  symbolize the thr ee queens  of Kor ea, Sondok, Chindok and  Chinsong,
so per haps he to o had knowledge of the futur e. Chindok succeeded Sondok,
r eigning fr om 647 to 654, and Queen Chinsong did not ascend the thr one
until 888.)
The book Y angjisa-jon contains a detailed description of Queen
Sondok's erection of Y ongmyo (Holy Shrine) T emple. It was als o this queen

who built the stone astronomical observatory called Ch'omsong-dae. (This
last still stands in Kyongju and is one of the most famous sights in Korea.)
32. Queen Chindok (647-654)
Queen C hindok was the twenty-eighth ruler of Silla. During her reign
she composed a poem called T 'aep'yong-ga, the song of peaceful reign.
This, together with a piece of silk brocade which she had woven and
embroidered, she sent to the T'ang Emperor in China. In great delight, the
Emperor invest ed the Queen with the title of ruler of Kerim.  (Ilyon
mentions a variant account fr om  another sour ce her e, mostly because of a
discr epancy in dates. But the r eal significance of this episode is that Silla
was to conquer the other two kingdoms shortly with the help of T'ang
Chinese armies, and subsequently to acknowledge T'ang suzerainty , though
ther e wa s little Chinese interfer ence at home. The Silla kings, however ,
agr eed to seek official confir mation fr om the Chinese court of their
accession to the thr one, and no K or ean monar ch ther eafter was r egar ded as
a legitimate ruler unless he had the assent of the Chinese Emper or .)
In her poem the Queen praised the power and virtue of the Emperor ,
whose military ability subdued all barbarians abroad and whose civil
administration at home brought long peace and happiness. It was as
follows:

He presides over wide heaven and sends down sweet rain;
He rules over the whole creation and gives luster to everything—
His deep benevolence is matched only by the sun and moon.
His circulating fortunes turn toward the world of Y ao and Shun:
Brightly his banners flutter , co vering the sky , Loudly his go ngs and
drums ring, filling the earth.
Foreign barbarians who disobey the Emperor's commands
Fall to his swords and suf fer heavy penalties;
Love and respect for warm-heartedness under his sway
Shine on myriads in light and shade.
Far and near happy people vie in raising voices
T o praise his august virtues.
The four seasons rotate harmon iously like burning candles; From the
high mountain descend his assisting ministers, The Emperor entrusts his
administration to loyal vassals. The virtues of the five empero rs and three
kings in one Radiant body illuminate our T'ang sovereign.  (A few notes will

be h elpful her e. The seven lights  wer e the sun and moon and the  five planets
then known, which wer e though t to corr espond to the five elements which
the Chinese believed wer e the basic materials of the universe . They wer e
fir e (Ma rs), water (Mer cury), wood (Jupiter), gold (V enus),  and earth
(Earth). The “high mountain" r eferr ed to is in the Kunlun mountains far to
the west, and the line is quoted fr om the Confucian Classic Bo ok of Odes.
Y ao and Shun, together with the five emper ors and thr ee kings, wer e
legendary rulers of China, whom its people believed had intr oduced the arts
of civilization.)
One day six o f the Queen's distinguished courtiers—Alch'on-gong,
Y imjong-gong, Suljong-gong, Horim-gong (father of the famous monk
Chajang). Y omj ang-gong and Y usin-gong—held a meeting on a giant rock
on South  Moun tain to discuss s tate af fairs. Suddenly a big tig er rushed in
among them. The other courtiers shrieked in fear , but Alch'on-gong only
laughed. He seized the tiger by the tail, swung it against a rock and dashed
out its brains.
In respe ct for his great streng th and courage the courtiers of fered
Alch'on-gong th e presiding seat at their meeting, but they admir ed most the
majestic air and wise strategy o f Y usin-gong. (This last was qu ite possibly
the famo us Kim  Y u-sin, who co mes next. “Gong” was evidently a title of
rank.)
Silla had four sacred places where state ministers held councils on
national issues to insure success  (i.e. the sacred nature of the pla ces insured
success). These were Ch'ongson g Mountain in the east, Kaeji Mountain in
the sout h, P'ijon  in the west and Kumgang Mountain in the north. During
the reign of Queen Chindok the first royal audience was given on New
Y ear's D ay . The title of Sirang w as first conferred on high dignit aries during
her reign.
. (S ome Korean historians hol d that these council meetings were a
survival of the m eetings of clan leaders that preceded the formation of the
monarchical government. They ceased after the unification.)
33. Kim Y u-sin
(Kim Y u-sin was a close r elative of the r oyal family and a  famous
general. It was mostly under his dir ection that the kingdoms of Paekje and
Koguryo wer e conquer ed in cooperation with for ces fr om T'ang China and
the peninsula unified under Silla rule.)

In the seventeenth year of King Chinp'yong, even in the year of Ulmyo
(595) Kim Y u-sin was born to the royal Kim family of Sohyon-Kakkan, the
son of Horyok- I Kan. (These last are evidently titles.) Seven star -crests
were seen on the baby's back. His younger brother was Hum-sun and his
two younger sisters were Po-hui (Ahae) and Mun-hui (Aji).
From his childhood he was admired by all who knew him for his
wonderful deeds , and they calle d him the seven-star general. A t the age of
eighteen he mastered the art of s wordsmanship and became a Hwarang (the
patriotic youth or ganization mentioned earlier).20
Now among the Hwarang there  was a doubtful character name d Paek-
sok (Wh ite Stone) who had mingled with them for many years, though
nobody knew his origin. He knew that Y u-sin was making plans day and
night to conque r Koguryo and Paekje. One night he whispered  secretly to
Y u-sin, “ My com rade, we must spy out the enemy's true strength before we
go to attack him.”
Y u-sin g ladly ag reed, and soon thereafter they set out on their journey .
One day  as they paused on a mo untain-top to rest, two girls ap peared from
the fore st and followed after Y u-sin. When they arrived at the village of
Kolhwach'on to put up for the n ight, a third girl appeared, and all three, in a
most engaging manner , presente d delicious cakes for Y u-sin to  eat. (Paek-
sok was  presum ably somewhere  else and knew nothing of this.) Y u-sin was
transported with joy and immediately fell in love with the three of them.
“My beautiful ladies,” he said, “you are three laughing flowers and I am
a humming bee. W ill you suf fer me to suck honey from your golden hearts
the whole night?”
“Y es,” they replied coyly , “we understand. Come to the forest  with us
and ther e we shall have our plea sure in beds of fragrant flowers, unseen and
unheard by the other boy .”
So Y u-sin went into the forest w ith the three girls, but as soon as they
arrived t he girls changed into noble goddesses. “W e are no laughing flowers
or n ymphs,” they told Y u-sin, “but three goddesses who gua rd the three
sacred m ountains—Naerim, Hyollye and Kolhwa. W e have come to warn
you that you are being lured by an enemy spy . Be on your guard! Farewell!”
And with these words the three goddesses rose into the sky and flew away .
Y u-sin prostrated himself in amazement and gratitude before the
departing goddesses and then returned to his tavern in Kolhwa-kwan where
Paek-sok was fast asleep. Early  next morning Y u-sin awakened him and

said, “Look! W e started on a long journey to a foreign country in such a
hurry that I for got my purse, and left it at home. Let's go back and get it
before proceeding any farther .”
Paek-sok suspec ted nothing, and they returned to Kyongju, where Y u-
sin imm ediately had him arrested and bound hand and foot. “Fellow!” he
roared, “drop your Hwarang disguise and confess the truth!”
Completely cowed, Paek-sok confessed. “I am a man of Koguryo. The
of ficials of my king's court believe that Kim Y u-sin of Silla is the
reincarnation of Ch'u-nam, a renowned fortune-teller in my country .
“Listen! On the frontier between  Silla and Koguryo there is a r iver that
flows ba ckwards. So King Pojang (642-668) called Ch'u-nam to the inner
palace and said to him, 'Look h ere! Why does the water of this river flow
backwards, upside down and inside out? Why do they call it Ungja-su (male
and fem ale water) while all other streams are called Jaung-su (female and
male water)? Can you tell me whether this has any unusual significance?'
“'Y our Majesty ,' replied the soothsayer , 'the Queen acts against the
natural course of urn (yin) and yang, and the abnormal situation  in the royal
bed-chamber is reflected on the mirror -like surface of the river .'”
(This is in r efer ence to yin and yang, the male and female principles
whose i nterr elations ar e the basis of all natural pr ocesses in Chinese
philosophy . Ch'u-nam is implying that the Queen is the r eal ruler and not
the King, an evil situation fr om the contemporary point of view .)
“'I am perplexed with shame,' the King said.
“The Queen was angry . 'He talks nonsense,' she said. 'This is a disloyal
libel by a cunning fox to undermine the Queen's position.'
“'I h ave told the  truth, Y our Ma jesty ,' said Ch'u-nam. “What is done in
the shade is brought into the light by my magic art.”
“O King ,' said the Queen, 'if he  knows everything let him ans wer one
more question, and if he is wrong let him suf fer a heavy penalty .' She retired
to her inner cham ber and returned with a box in which she had concealed a
lar ge rat.
“'What is in the box?' the King asked.
“'A rat,' said Ch'u-nam.
“'How many rats?' asked the Queen.
“'Eight.'
“'Y our a nswer is wrong,' the Q ueen said triumphantly , 'and you shall
die.'

“'When I am de ad,' said Ch'u-nam, 'I shall be reborn as a great general
who will destroy Koguryo.'
“So they cut of f  Ch'u-nam's head. But when they slit open the belly of
the rat they found seven unborn rats in it. Then everyone in the palace knew
that Ch'u-nam had told the truth. On that very night King Pojang had a
dream in which he saw the spirit of Ch'u-nam enter the bosom of the wife of
Sohyon-gong (Kim Y u-sin's father) in Silla. The King awoke in
astonishment and discussed the matter with his courtiers. They remembered
Ch'u-nam's vow and sent me to take you to Koguryo. So here I am.”
Y u-sin p ut the Koguryo spy to the sword and of fered sacrifices of a
hundred delicacies to the three goddesses who had saved his life.
When Y u-sin's wife Lady Chaemae died, they buried her in the upper
valley of Ch'ongyon (Blue Pool), which has been known as Chaemae V alley
ever sinc e. Ever y spring when th e birds and flowers returned th e royal Kim
clan used to gather on the bank o f a stream in a pine forest there to feast and
do h onor to he r spirit. They also erected a small temple t here called
Songhwa-bang (Pine-Flower Hermitage) dedicated to her .
During the reign of King Kyong myong the fifty-fourth sovereign (917-
924), the King conferred on Y u-sin the posthumous title of Hungmu-
T aewang (Great  King of Mars).  His tomb now stands on a mou ntain peak,
facing east, to the northeast of Moji T emple on the W est Mountain.
34. T'aejong Ch'unch'u-gong (King Muryol. 654-661)
The twe nty-ninth ruler of Silla w as Kim Ch'un-ch'u, known as T'aejong
the Great. His father was Y ongsu-kakkan, his mother was Lady
Ch'onmyong, a daughter of King Chinp'yong, and his Queen was
Munmyong-hwanghu, Mun-hui, the youngest sister of Kim Y u-sin.
One night Mun-hui's sister Po-hui had a dream in which she climbed up
So-ak M ountain and urinated, and the stream of water from her body rolled
down in cataracts and inundated the whole city of Kyongju. In the morning
she told her sister about it.
“That is very interesting,” said Mun-hui, “I will buy your dream.”
“What will you give me for it?” Po-hui asked.
“I will give you my skirt of embroidered brocade.”
“V ery well, I agree.”
Mun-hui spread her skirt and said, “I am ready to catch your
dream.”

“Fine!” laughed  Po-hui. “I give  you my dream of last night.” M un-hui
smiled. “Thank you, sister . Here  is my skirt. W ear it and you will look more
beautiful.”
T en days later while Y u-sin an d Ch'un-ch'u were playing ball on the
Festival of the Crow (see above. “The shooting of the harp-case"), he
accidentally stepped on a ribbon which was trailing from Ch'un-ch'u's jacket
and tore  it of f. “ I am sorry , “sai d Y u-sin. “Come with me to my house and
we will have your ribbon sewn back on.”
“Don't w orry ab out it,” said Ch 'unch'u, and the two youths we nt of f to
the ladie s' quarters. Y u-sin called to Po-hui to come and sew on  the ribbon,
but she was too shy and said it would be improper for her to be with a
young m an. The n he called to Mun-hui, and she came and sewed on the
ribbon, b lushing deeply all the while. Ch'unch'u fell in love with her on the
spot and from then on visited her day and night.
Somewhat later Y u-sin discover ed that Mun-hui was pregnant, He was
furious and immediately began preparations to have her burned  to death as
an example to all immoral women.
That day  when Queen Sondok went up South Mountain for a pi cnic she
noticed flames and smoke rising to the sky . Upon inquiring of her
attendants, she learned that Y u -sin was about to burn his sister to death
because an illicit love af fair h ad resulted in her pregnancy . The Queen
looked around and noticed that Ch'un-ch'u was as pale as death.
“So it was you!” she said. “Go  quickly and save the girl!” Ch'unch'u
leaped on his horse and gallo ped quickly to Y u-sin's house, shouting,
“Queen's order! Queen's order! Do not put her to death!” And so Mun-hui
was saved.
A few days later Ch'un-ch'u and Mun-hui were formally married.
Following the death of Queen Chindok he was elevated to the throne in
the fifth year of T'ang Kao-tsun g (654) and ruled eight years, dying at the
age of fifty-nin e. They buried him near Aegong T emple an d erected a
magnificent stone monument with beautiful carvings on it which is known
as Muryol-wang-nung (the T omb of King Muryol).
Because this king succeeded in conquering and adding to Silla the three
Han territories (Mahan, Chinhan and Pyonhan, in the south) with the
assistance of Kim Y u-sin, one of the most valiant and skillful generals
Korea h ad ever produced, he was given the posthumous title T'aejong (T'ai-
tsung in Chinese), which mean s “grand ancestor” (and was customarily

given to the sec ond ruler in a dynasty;  Ilyon is pointing out that it was an
exceptional mark of honor to awar d this title to Ch'un-ch'u.)
His six sons, the princes Popmin, Inmun, Munwang, Notan, Chigyong
and Kae won, were all born of Mun-hui, who thus fulfilled her sister's
dream, flooding  the capital wi th the issue of her body . In a ddition she
brought up eight children (three boys and five girls) born to the King of
concubines and court ladies.
As f or m eals, the King ate three bushels of rice and nine pheasants a
day . Aft er the conquest of Paekje in 660 he stopped eating lu nch, but his
daily food amounted to six bush els of rice, six bushels (?) of w ine and ten
pheasants. Durin g his reign on e roll (40 yards) of cotton cloth could be
bartered for thirty to fifty lar ge bags of rice, and all the people  praised his
benevolent rule.  ( It is un likely th at the King alone consumed such quantities
of food. Pr obably the daily supplies of his court ar e intended her e.)
While he was crown prince he  visited Changan, the capital o f T'ang
China, to ask f or military aid in his coming conquest of Ko guryo. The
Emperor admire d his majestic deportment and invited him to  stay at the
Chinese court, but he excused himself and returned to Silla.
In those days the eldest son of King Mu of Paekje (600-641) was
praised for his moral integrity and military valor . But no sooner had he
ascended the throne, in the fifteenth year of T'ang T'ai-tsung (641) than he
gave himself up to drink and de bauchery and forsook the demanding duties
of g overnment. A loyal vassal, Song Ch'ung called Chwap'yong (this is an
of ficial title for Minister of State ) remonstrated with the King, w arning him
of t he imminence of foreign attack, for which patriotic act ion he was
thrown into prison, where he died after sending a memorial to the throne
advising the fortification of the mouth of the Paek-Kang (White River now
Kum-gang) at Kibolp'o (Now Changhang) against the coming of a Chinese
fleet and  the strengthening of fortifications at T'anhyon (Charcoal Pass)
along the border with Silla, but the dissolute King Uija paid no heed to this
prophetic advice.
(The unl ikely events described in the following paragraphs ar e all evil
omens. It will be  r ecalled that foxes especially wer e associated  with ghosts
and spirits, and that white is the color of mourning, and hence of death, in
East Asia.)
In th e fo urth yea r of Hsienking o f the T'ang Emperor Kao-tsung (659), a
lar ge red horse appeared at O hoe-sa (Ohap-sa) T emple in Paekje and

galloped around  the temple six times. In the second moon of that year many
foxes entered the palace of King Uija and a white fox jumped up on the
monarch's jade table and sat there for a long time.
In the fourth mo on a hen in the palace of the crown prince mate d with a
little bird that swooped down from the sky .
In the fifth moon a thirty-foot-lo ng fish leaped out of the water and died
on the bank of Sabi-su (a river i n Puyo), and everyone who ate  the flesh of
this fish died.
In the ninth moon the awe-inspiring giant oaks in the palace gardens
wailed w ith human voices, and during the nights ghosts and goblins cried
on the boulevard south of the palace.
In th e second moon of the fifth year (660), the water in all the wells of
Puyo and in Sabi-su (White-Horse River or Kum-gang) turned blood-red,
and sma ll fish leaped out of the water on the western seashore an d fell dead.
There were so many that the people could not collect and eat them all.
In the fourth moon tens of thousands of frogs appeared in the treetops.
The citiz ens of the capital ran out of their houses in fear , and fell dead by
hundreds as if t hey had been a ttacked from behind, and people lost their
fortunes by thousands.
In the sixth moo n, the monks of  W anghung T emple saw as in a mirage a
forest of  ship's masts rush into th e temple on the rising tide, and dogs as big
as deer leaped f rom the west to  the banks of Sabi-su, barked at the palace
and were gone. The dogs of the  city gathered in packs on the roads, where
they bar ked and  howled in choru s and then scattered with mournful whines.
A te rrifying ghost entered the p alace and cried loudly , “Paekje is ruined!
Paekje is ruined!” and then descended into the bowels of the earth.
King Ui ja ordered his servants to dig in the ground where the ghost had
disappeared and  at a depth of three feet they found a turtle with ten Chinese
characters carved on its back w hich read, “Paekje is a round moonwheel;
Silla is a new m oon.” The King called for a fortuneteller , and  asked him
what the inscription meant. The aged soothsayer replied, “'Round
moonwheel' me ans a full moon , which is about to wane; the 'new moon'
will grow  lar ger  and lar ger night by night.” The king was angry and had the
fortune-teller put to death. Then a courtier flattered him, saying, “Y our
Majesty , 'round moonwheel sig nifies the zenith of power , and 'new moon'
represents the weak and small. This means that Paekje is a lar ge kingdom
and Silla is a small kingdom.” The King laughed for joy .

When King Muryol of Silla (Ki m Ch'un-ch'u) heard of these g rotesque
events, he said “ These are signs of the doom of Paekje.” In the fifth year of
Hsienking (660)  he dispatched Kim In-mun to the T'ang; court to ask for
military aid.
The Emperor Kao-tsung ordered out 130,000 crack troops under the
command of his Left T iger Guard General Su T ing-fang and his
subordinates Liu Po-ying, Feng Shih-kuei and Pang Hsiao-kung. They
crossed the sea o n 1,900 war ves sels and attacked Paekje. (Ilyon notes, here
that loca l record s put the number of T'ang troops at 122,71 1, but that no
definite figure is given in the of ficial T'ang history .) Moreover the Emperor
appointed King Muryol comma nder of ground forces, and as ked him to
send Silla troops to fight on the side of the T'ang army .
When general Su's forces arrived at T okmul Island to the west of Silla,
King M uryol commanded general Kim Y u-sin to lead 50,000 picked
warriors to cooperate with the Chinese army .
General Su landed his troops at the mouth of the White Horse R iver and
quickly defeated the Paekje defenders. At the same time, his warships rode
a favorable tide up the river to t he accompaniment of fifes and drums. The
T'ang cavalry and infantry kille d tens of thousands of Paekje soldiers and
laid siege to Puyu, the capital.
Meanwhile the Silla army crossed the sky-kissing mountains through
the high pass of T'anhyon. The patriotic general Kyebaek led his 5,000
soldiers up to the plains of Hwangsan (now Y onsan), where he ordered
them to hold or die. At first, thr ough valiant ef forts, they were able to halt
the superior Silla force, but not for long. The general fell on the field of
honor , and the last defensive line of Paekje had been broken.
The T'an g and Silla forces now settled down before the gates of Puyo
while the two c ommanders pla nned a coordinated attack. At this time a
fierce bi rd circled around the he ad of general Su, and a fortuneteller said it
was an omen of  his sure death in the coming battle. The gener al trembled
from head to foot and was about to order his men to turn back. But Kim Y u-
sin unsheathed his long sword, s truck the swooping bird dead, and laid it at
the g eneral's feet, saying “A sm all grotesque bird cannot interfere with our
great expedition against a bad king.”
King Ui ja and his crown prince fled to Ungjin, while his sec ond son
Prince T'ae assumed the throne  and fought valiantly against th e invaders.
But seei ng his followers desert him and flee, he opened the cit y gates and

surrendered. General Su captur ed King Uija and Crown Prince Y ung. He
also too k prisoner two further p rinces, the aforesaid T'ae and Prince Y on,
eighty-eight high of ficials and generals, and 12,807 Paekje civilians. All
these he took away to the T'ang capital, Changan.
Originally Paekje was divided into five provinces, thirty-seven counties,
200 towns and 7 60,000 households. But the victorious Chinese reor ganized
it and placed a Chinese military governor in each of the provinces to take
char ge of the local administr ation. General Liu Jen-yuan was put in
command of Chinese forces occ upying Puyo while general W ang W en-tao
was app ointed governor of Ungjin (now Kongju) with the special task of
pacifying the defeated Paekje troops.
(The significance of this was that the T'ang government plainly-intended
to incorporate Paekje into the Chinese empir e, a fact which was not lost
upon Silla.)
General Su presented his prisoners to the T'ang Emperor , who, after
rebuking them, set them free. W hen King Uija died of an illness soon after ,
the E mperor conferred a posthu mous title on him, ordered a royal funeral
and had him buried beside the to mbs of Sun Hao and Chen Shu-pao. (These
were the tombs of the rulers of states during two periods of Chinese
disunity . By his action the Emperor , while recognizing Uija as having been
a l egitim ate ruler , also announced that the Paekje kingdom was now defunct
like the states ruled by the two whose tombs neighbored Uija's and implied
that Paekje was now under Chinese rule.)
In th e second ye ar of Lungshuo (662) Emperor Kao-tsung ordered out
another lar ge force under general Su T ing-fang to attack Koguryo. These
troops d efeated a Koguryo army in the battle of P'ae-gang and surrounded
P'yongyang. Bu t the valiant def enders held them of f and they were unable
to take the city . Finally the Chinese troops were routed in an attack during a
snowstorm and forced to scatter and flee.
Returning defeated to China, general Su was appointed the Emperor's
special envoy to Liangchow , to  pacify the troublesome barbarians in that
border a rea, but died soon after taking up his duties. The Emper or mourned
his deat h and conferred on hi m the posthumous titles of Left Cavalry
Marshal and Military governor of Y aochow . (Ilyon says this last paragraph
was taken from the of ficial T'ang history .)
Previous to this, a T'ang army had been sent under general Su to attack
Koguryo a second time, and had pitched its tents on the outskirts of

P'yonyang. A courier was sent to Silla with a request for food supplies.
This posed something of a problem. The supplies, if sent, would have to
pass thr ough K oguryo territory , and thus there was a risk of their being
captured by the enemy . Not sending them, on the other hand, would be
abandoning an ally in his hour of need. Kim Y u-sin volunteered to take
char ge o f the transport and managed to reach the Chinese camp with 20,000
bushels of grain under heavy guard.
Sometime later Kim Y u-sin dispatched two messengers to general Su,
asking if his ar my should join the T'ang forces in an allied attack on
Koguryo. In return he received a drawing by the T'ang commander of a calf
and a young pho enix. This was a puzzle, and the great monk W onhyo was
asked to interpret it. He said that both young creatures had lost their
mothers, and that this meant the Silla forces operating in Koguryo were in
danger and should be pulled back at once to rejoin their “parent.”
Kim Y u -sin ordered his troops to cross the Pai River (now T ae-dong-
gang) and go north as fast as possible. But while the crossing was in
progress Kogury o troops attacked them from behind, and thou sands were
killed. Kim Y u-sin launched a counterattack the following day and
slaughtered many Koguryo warriors.
An o ld S illa boo k contains the following account. “In the fifth year of
King Mu nmu (665) in the eighth  moon, the King (of Silla) led a  lar ge army
to the fortress of Ungjin, where he met with Prince Y ung, the (T'ang) puppet
ruler of Puyo. The two sovereigns built an altar and killed a white horse as a
sacrifice to the h eavenly gods and guardian deities of mountains and rivers.
Then the y painte d their mouths with the blood of the sacrifice as a symbol
of their pledge of friendship. (A very ancient custom is here recorded.) Next
they rea d aloud the following oath. (The oath is interesting evidence of the
typical Chinese assumption that  because of her superior civilization China
was by right the ruler of all other states and that political virtue consisted
chiefly in submission to the will of the Emperor .)
“'The kings of Paekje hitherto have taken a vacillating course  in their
foreign relations and have neglected good neighborliness with Silla. Instead
of m aintaining amity in accorda nce with the royal marriage tie (there had
been ma rriages between the Silla and Paekje royal houses) they allied
themselves with  Koguryo and Japan in order to commit repeated acts of
brutality , raping  the fair land and massacring the innocent in habitants of
Silla.

“'The Ce lestial Emperor of the M iddle Kingdom (China), mindful of the
welfare of these calamity-stricken people, dispatched celestial envoys to the
scene of conflict to make peace. Nevertheless Paekje, relying on her
remoteness and her fortifications, disdained the Celestial Emperor's
command, thus provoking him to send out an army to subjugate the rebels.
“'The pa laces of  Paekje ought to  be demolished and ponds dug  in their
ruins as an example to posterity . 'Embrace the meek and punish the rebel'
was the splendid practice of our imperial ancestors; 'Raise the vanquished
and heal the broken' was the benevolent rule of our predecessors, whose
noble vi rtues sh ould be copied to add new luster to the royal  chronicles.
Thus th e Emperor made Y ung of Puyo, ex-king of Paekje, governor of
Ungjin to worship the shrines of his ancestors and rule his native land.
“'W e com mand Prince Y ung to rely upon Silla as an ally and friend, to
dispel the old e nmity and create new bonds of amity and la sting peace
between the two countries in order that they may become our loyal vassals.
W e here by send  our right guard  general Liu Jen-yuan to conv ey our wish
that mar riages b e contracted between the two royal houses, and that the two
kings paint their mouths with th e blood of a white horse in to ken of their
pledge to share their joys and sorrows and relieve each other' s calamities
like brothers.
“'This ou r comm and is to be inscribed on an iron plate in letters of gold
and perm anently displayed as a symbol of royal loyalty to the imperial
throne. If either of you disobeys our command and attacks the other , the
spirits o f heaven  will look down  upon your rebellion and send hundreds of
catastrophes upon you, so that you will forfeit the privileges of raising your
children, ruling your native land and worshipping your ancestors.'
“This the Celestial Emperor commanded Prince Y ung of Puyo, and he
now obe ys. In witness whereof  our solemn vow is inscribed in letters of
gold on this iron plate and placed in the royal shrine (of Si lla) for our
posterity to ten thousand generations to know and keep our pledge and
never to violate it. W e pray the gods of heaven and earth to drink  this divine
blood, to partake of the sacrifice and to give us blessings.”
After the ceremony the gifts for the gods were buried on the northern
side of the altar and the oath was inscribed in golden letters on an iron plate
and plac ed in the (Silla) royal shrine. The oath was drafted by Liu Jen-kuei,
military governor of T aebang (i.e. northern Paekje).

The of fi cial chronicle of the T 'ang dynasty states that King Uija and
Crown Prince Y ung were sent to the Chinese capital by general Su T ing-
fang. Th is oath is clear evidence that the Emperor released Prince Y ung and
sent him back to rule Paekje in the Chinese behalf.
An old Paekje book states that King Uija with his concubines and court
ladies leaped from a great clif f north of Puyo into the river rat her than be
captured by the victorious enem y , so that the people call it the Rock of
Falling Deaths. But this is a mistake. Only the court ladies leaped from the
rock, while King Uija died in China as we have seen.
(Ther e is  indeed a sheer cliff on the bank of the White Horse River near
Puyo, fr om which the Paekje court ladies ar e r eputed to have leaped when
the city was taken. It is known today as the Rock of the Falling Flowers.)
A le gend from S illa times says that after the destruction of Pae kje and
Koguryo Chinese forces remained in the Sangju area awaiting an
opportunity to attack Silla and  bring the whole peninsula und er Chinese
rule. Kim Y u-sin, the legend says, forestalled this plot by inviting the
Chinese soldiers to a great banquet and feeding them poisoned birds' meat.
The dea d were then buried unde r a huge mound of earth. Even today there
is a mound near the T'ang bridge in Sangju county northwest of Kyongju
which it is claimed is the grave of the poisoned T'ang soldiers.
But the of ficial T'ang chronicle s contain no mention of this incident,
either to  concea l it or because the legend is groundless. Moreov er , had this
poisoning occurred at the time stated in the legend, Silla could hardly have
asked the T'ang court for help in a later conflict with Koguryo. It seems,
therefore, that this Silla folk-ta le has no basis in fact. It is true that Silla
took pos session of Koguryo territory after the battle of Mujin (668) and was
never subjugated  to China, but there is no evidence of a murder  of Chinese
troops.
Following the defeat of Paekje and the withdrawal of Chinese troops the
King of Silla sent an army to c onduct mopping-up operations. No sooner
had they taken up positions in Hansan Fortress, however , then  they were
completely surrounded by forces from Koguryo and Malgal (a Manchurian
group ru led by Koguryo). Fierc e battles ensued, and by the time the siege
had endured for forty days the situation of the Silla troops seemed hopeless.
In co nsternation , the King of Silla called his courtiers together to ask for
their adv ice, but  they all hung their heads in silent resignation. But general
Kim Y u-sin arose in the royal conference and said to the King, “Y our

Majesty , this is t oo great a crisis  to be warded of f by human strength alone.
Only a miracle can bring succor to our men.”
So s aying he climbed up Songbu -san (Star -floating Mountain) where he
built an altar and prayed for a miracle from heaven. Suddenly a huge
fireball a ppeared above the altar and flew toward the north shooting flames.
Just as the enemy were about t o attack the exhausted troops in the lonely
fortress, it changed into lightnin g and struck their stone-shooting cannons.
(The existence of cannons in the seventh century seems hardly likely .
Perhaps they were catapults.) W ith thunderous sounds it smashed bows,
arrows, spears and projectiles, k nocking many of the enemy tr oops to the
ground. Those who survived thi s heavenly bombing scattered and fled in all
directions, and the Silla troops were saved. This is the reason the place is
named Star -floating Mountain, for the fireball floated above it like a fiery
star .
There is another story about the Star -floating Mountain wh ich has
nothing to do w ith the fireball. It seems there was once a fool ish old man
who planned to become an aristocrat overnight by obtaining a government
position through some marvellous trick. He sent his son to the top of a high
mountain near the capital every  night and instructed him to lift a flaming
torch in  the air at midnight. Th e people of Kyongju thought t hat it was a
fire-star of war floating low in the sky , foretelling a national calamity .
The King also saw it, and ordered the people to pray to heaven for the
removal of this evil omen which had appeared almost over his palace,
of fering a big reward to anyon e who could make it go away . Then the
foolish old man came forward and said that he could do it. But the royal
astrologer said to the King, “Y our Majesty , this is not a sign of national
calamity but of p rivate disaster , foretelling a son's tragic death and a father's
lamentation.” So the King decided to take no further action for the moment
but to wait and see. Sure enoug h, the very next morning as the old man's
son was climbing down the mountain he was caught and killed by a tiger .
During the reign of King Sinmun (681-692) the T'ang Emperor Kao-
tsung se nt an envoy to the Sill a court with the following me ssage: “Our
august father , because of his un ification of the Celestial Empire during his
lifetime in harmony with the universal virtues and by the merits of wise
ministers such as W ei Cheng and Li Shun-feng, who assisted the throne so
well, was honored with the title T'ai-tsung (pronounced T'aejong in
Korean). Silla is a small nation outside China and giving your f ormer King

(Muryol) the same posthumous title as a Chinese Emperor is presumptuous
and disloyal. W e command you to change this royal title at once.”
The King of Silla sent a polite reply to the Emperor as follows: “Though
Silla is a small nation, her King was able to unify the three kingdoms during
his lifetime by the merit of K im Y u-sin, who assisted the throne with
unexcelled valor . Therefore the King was honored with the title T'aejong.”
When th e Empe ror read this lett er he recalled having heard a W ondrous
voice fro m heaven before his accession, saying that one of the g reat men in
the t hirty-three heavens was bo rn in Silla and was called Y u-sin. He could
not help admiring the great war rior and sent a second message to the court
at K yongju, which read “Do not bother to change the royal title  T'ai-tsung.
It is too good a name to change.— from the T'ang Emperor .”
T radition says that when King Muryol ascended the throne (654) a
countryman pres ented to him as  a congratulatory gift a pig with one head,
two bodies and eight legs. A wise man in the court interpreted this as an
omen that the King would annex all the territory in the eight directions
under heaven.
The Sill a royal custom of wearing T'ang court robes and carrying an
ivory sc epter in T'ang fashion began with King Muryol, for whom the
famous monk Chajang brought them back from China.
35. Changch'un-nang and P'arang
At t he battle of Hwang-san (now Y onsan) between the armies  of Silla
and Paekje, two Silla Hwarang named Changch'un-nang and P'arang were
killed. When King Muryol attacked Paekje in a later battle, the two youths
appeared to him in a dream and said, “W e of fered our lives f or king and
country in a form er battle. Though we are now only pale ghosts, we wish to
join Y our Majesty's army to defend the fatherland forever ,  but, being
overshadowed by Su T ing-fan g, the T'ang general, we have to follow
behind him all the time. W e beg you to give us a small unit of crack troops
so that we may attack the enemy and fight for a swift victory .”
The King was deeply moved by their patriotic spirit even in death. He
ordered a memorial service to be held in a pavilion called Mosan-jong, with
a so lemn Buddhist rite and erect ed Chang-ui T emple in Puk-Hansanju (near
modern Seoul) to the memory  of their gallant souls. (The ruins of this
temple a re still to be seen outsid e Ch'ang-ui Mun (gate of righte ousness) in
the old city walls to the northwest of Seoul.)
Footnotes to Book One

1 . Ilyon does not actually give th ese details, but simply alludes to the
Chinese sources in which they are found.
2 . This me ans “writings of W ei.” The passage quoted by Ilyon  is not
found in any extant work of this title, but even the surviving te xts are
in a fragmentary state. It is most likely that he here alludes to a
document that has since vanished.
3 . Properly Sankuo-W eichih, a Chinese book. The passage actually reads
as follow s: “King Joon took his  left and right court ladies with him in
his f light across the sea to the land of Han, and assumed the title of the
King of Han.” The phrase “across the sea” is not to be taken literally; it
simply means “to a foreign country .”
4 . The Ch'ienhan-shu contains no such passage, but a geographical
description of the southern prefecture is found in the chapter
“Somyong-hyon” and one of the eastern prefecture in the chapter “Pul-
i-hyon.”
5 . South T aebang was not established during the T sao-W ei dynasty
(which b egan in 220) but a state of this name did exist for a tim e after
the destruction of Paekje in the seventh century .
6 . This must be Sungsolgol on the north bank of the Y alu in Manchuria.
7 . Habaek was the spirit of the waters of the Y ellow River in China.
8 . This egg myth was widespread in northeast Asia as an explanation of
the div ine origins of founders of dynasties and the like. The
implication in the story that the egg was fathered by the sun indicates
the existence of sun-worship in early Korea.
9 . Evidently a mistake. The Old and New T'ang-shu (Paichi-chuan) says
that “at the time  of the fall of Paekje there were 760,000 households in
that country .”
10 . Ilyon sa ys King Hyokkose was born of “the goddess mother of Sosul.”
A similar Chinese legend says that the goddess mother of Sondo
(Hsien-t'ao, mea ning fairy peach) gave birth to a sage who fou nded a
nation.
1 1 . An e ighth-centu ry Silla scholar . He is known to have written a book of
biographies of famous monks and another concerning the Hwarang,
but neither of these works has survived.
12 . This is a reference to the famous songs of Silla, twenty-five of which
have survived. They were recorded by using Chinese characters for

their phonetic values only , a system called  Idu.  These songs are the
only records extant of the Korean language during this early period.
13 . A re ference to the seven symbol ic treasures of Buddhist lore. Th ey are
represented in the scriptures as gold, silver , glass, the giant pearl-clam
of India, agate, amber arid coral.
14 . Attention is called to the resemblance of this story to the tale of
“Ch'on-ilch'ang (Amanohiboko), the Prince of Silla,” to be found in
Japanese histories. Also see Dr . Y i Pyong-do's  Ou tline of Kor ean
History  under “The Colonization of the Chinhan T ribes.”
15 . The Sam guk Sagi says Pak Che-sang was an of fspring of Pak
Hyokkose and the fifth-generation descendant of King P'asa. Ilyon
gives his family name as Kim, but it is Pak in popular tradition.
16 . In Samguk Sagi (First year of the reign of King Silsong) Mihae is
represented as Misahun, and in the book Nihonshoki (Ninth year  of the
reign of Chuai T enno and Empress Zingu) he is called Mishikoji, a son
of King P'asa of Silla.
17 . In an cient China the five penalties were, in order , cutting of f th e nose,
both feet, the male or gan and finally the head.
18 . An astr ologer who foretold the future by observing the he avenly
bodies.
19 . Samguk Sagi says, “T o the west of the royal palace was a pond called
Okmunji and on the southweste rn outskirts of Kyongju was a  valley
called Okmun-gok.” Okmun, as pointed out in the text, means jade
gate, a reference to the female sex or gan.
20 . Hwarang is lit erally Flower Y outh, representing Silla's knighthood and
chivalry . Chosen from among aristocratic sons of physical beauty and
trained in civil and military arts, they were promoted to of ficial
positions. T o cultivate the spir it of loyalty to King, filial piety to
parents, sincerit y to friends, bravery in war and mercy in killing
animals the Hwarang Order was ordained in the days of King
Chinhung as the flower of Silla's national armies whose morale
reached its zenith during the u nification of the three Kingdoms by
Silla, when that country placed military glory above literary sk ill—all
strong youths wished to be knig hts of the King and to live and die for
the country . Now the campus of the Military Academy near Seoul is
called Hwarang-dae (Hill of the Hwarangs).

BOOK TWO
II. Wonder 2. (United Silla)
36. Munho-wang, Popmin (King Munmu, 661-680)1
During the first year of King Mu nmu's reign the body of a huge woman
came floating on the sea south of Sabi-su. Her body was seventy-three feet
long, her feet six  feet long, and her mount of V enus three feet lo ng. Another
story says her bo dy was eighteen feet long and dates the event in the second
year of Chienfeng (667).
In the first yea r of T sungchang (Mujin, 668) the King, follo wed by
Inmun and Humsun, led his army in person to P'yonyang , which he
occupied in cooperation with T'ang forces, and destroyed Koguryo. Li Chi,
the T'ang commander , took the Koguryo king Kojang back to Changan, the
Chinese capital.
The T'a ng of fic ial records tell us that in the fifth year of Hsien-king
(660) th e Chinese general Su T ing-fang attacked Paekje, and in December
of the same year the T'ang Emperor ordered out a lar ge army un der general
Su, together with Ch'i Ju-ho and Liu Po-ying, to attack Koguryo on three
fronts—the Pai River , the Liaotung Peninsula, and P'yonyan g itself. In
January Hsiao Szu-yeh, commander of the troops occupying Puyo, and Jen
Y a-shang commanding the troops on the Pai River , led an army of 350.000
men in another attack on Koguryo. In August Su T ing-fang was defeated in
the Battle of the Pai River , and fled.
In Ju ne of the first year of Chie nfeng (666) three further T'ang generals
—Fang T ung-shan, Hsueh Jen-kuei and Li Chin-hang—arrived with
reinforcements. In September Fang T ung-shan defeated the Koguryo forces
and in Decembe r Su T ing-fang was replaced by Li Chi as Com mander of
the L iaotung army . Li Chi conce ntrated the entire T'ang fighting strength of
six army groups in a decisive  attack on Koguryo in September , broke
through the last Koguryo defen ses, took King Kojang captive and carried
him of f to be presented to the Chinese Emperor .
In Febru ary of the first year of Shangyuan (Kapsul, 674) Liu Jen-kuei
was made garrison commander of the Kerim army and attacked Silla. The
book Hsiangku-chi says that “the T'ang Emperor sent general Kung Kung

and adm iral Y u Shang to guard the conquered territory of Koguryo side by
side with Kim Y u-sin of Silla. ” However the Silla records m ention only
Inmun and Humsun.
When P aekje and Koguryo had been disposed of, the victorious T'ang
armies tu rned against Silla. King Munmu therefore ordered his t roops out to
fight them. The T'ang Emperor Kao-tsung complained to the Silla envoy
Kim In-mun (King Munmu's br other), saying “Y ou employed our Celestial
army as your al ly in conquering Paekje and Koguryo and now you fight it
as an enemy!” He threw Kim I n-mun into prison and commanded Hsueh
Pang to train fiv e hundred thousand men to attack Silla. (This is not quite so
blatantly hypoc ritical as it seems. Resistance to the Emperor's wishes,
whatever they might be, was felt to be tantamount to a sin against heaven.)
Uisang, a famous Silla monk who was studying in China at t he time,
learned of the Emperor's intentions from Kim In-mun and reported them to
King Munmu on his return  from Changan. The King summoned
Myongnang Popsa, a mysterious monk who studied miraculous  methods of
warfare in the D ragon Palace, and asked him what should be done. The
monk advised the King to erec t Sach'onwang-sa (the T emple of the Four
Deva Kings) in the Forest of the Gods south of W olf Mountain, and to set
up a military training ground within its precincts.
But just  at this t ime news arrived from the western coast near Chongju
that a great host of T'ang vesse ls with troops on board was approaching.
The King again consulted Myongnang Popsa and told him about the
imminent danger of enemy attack. Myongnang advised him to decorate the
temple with silk brocade. The King did so, and in addition had an image of
the five -faced god made of gra ss and ordered twelve monks, headed by
Myongnang, to call upon the spirits of heaven and of the sea. Soon a mighty
typhoon arose, and the angry w aves swallowed the Chinese vessels before
the troops on board could get ashore.
The following year the exasp erated T'ang Emperor sent out fifty
thousand men under the comma nd of Chao Hsien on a second expedition
against Silla, but the fleet that was transporting them went to the bottom
just as the previous one had because of the magic art of the Silla monk.
The Emperor was astonished. He summoned Pak Mun-chun, a Silla
nobleman who had been intern ed in the same prison as Kim I n-mun, and
asked “What magic art do you h ave in Silla? Why did two great expeditions
perish before they reached its shores?”

Pak rep lied, “T he Prince and I  have been away from Silla these ten
years and we kn ow little of wha t is happening at home, but we have heard
that the King of Silla has erected  a temple of the Heavenly Kings on Nang-
san (Mt.) to pray for the long life of the T'ang Emperor in grati tude for his
having sent great hosts to fight for Silla in the war to unify the Three
Kingdoms.”
The Emperor was greatly please d and sent Lo P'eng-kuei, a high of ficial
in the Ministry of Education and External Af fairs, to Silla to inspect this
mysterious temp le. Hearing of h is approach, the King of Silla thought it not
prudent to reveal the actual temple and so had another constructed to the
south of it, and waited.
When the T'ang envoy arrived and wanted to burn incense at the T emple
of the Heavenly Kings, he was conducted to the false temple. But he
stopped at the g ate and turned back, saying, “This is not a T e mple of the
Four De va King s but a temple of Mangdokyo-san.” (The temple  was called
Mangdok-sa ever afterwards.)
The Sill a courtiers gave the en voy a luxurious banquet served by a
galaxy o f beautiful women and presented him with a thousand “yang” of
gold ( a very lar ge sum). When he returned to Changan he reported to the
Emperor that the people of Silla prayed for his long life in a new temple just
as they worshipped in the T emple of the Four Deva Kings.
The Kin g of Silla then dispatched a special envoy to the T'ang Emperor
with a personal letter asking for the release of Kim In-mun, his younger
brother . The letter was written in such touching style that the E mperor read
it w ith tears str eaming down his cheeks. Then he gave Kim In-mun a
farewell banque t and sent him back to Silla. Unfortunately , h owever , he
died du ring the return voyage. The people mourned his death and
worshiped his patriotic soul in t he Kwanum Hall at Inyong T em ple, which
had been erected in Kyongju during his captivity .
King Mu nmu di ed in the second  year of Y inglung (Sinsa, 681) and was
buried o n a big rock in the Eastern Sea, as he had desired. During his
lifetime the monarch had often told his good friend the monk C hiui Popsa,
“When I am dea d and gone, I should like to become a guardia n dragon in
the sea, to worship Buddha and protect the nation when I hav e done with
worldly glories.” (Other records indicate that actually the  King was
cremated and his ashes scattered around a rocky islet. Dragons are
benevolent creatures in Oriental lore, and are often associated with water .)

Early in his re ign King Munmu had a magnificent warehouse and
armory built on South Mountain, fifty foot-spans long and fifteen foot-
spans w ide, for grain and weapons. He called it the Right W a rehouse. He
then had a warehouse of similar magnitude built northwest of the T emple of
Heavenly Grace, which was called the Left W arehouse.
According to an old record, in t he eighth year of Konpok (Sinh ae, 591)
King Chinp'yong commenced construction of Namsan fortress, which was
2,850 foot-spans in circumferen ce, but it was not fully completed until the
reign of King M unmu. Moreover , the King ordered the construction of
Busan Fortress in Kyongju, and that of Ch'olsong,2 a long wall wi th iron
gates for border defense along the Anpuk River .
But when he ordered the buildin g of yet another fortification, t he great
monk Uisang memorialized the throne: “If the King's administration is
bright an d benev olent, the people will not trespass so much as a line drawn
on the ground but remain in t he Kingdom to enjoy its bless ings; if the
King's a dministration is dark and tyrannical, even high walls of iron and
stone will not re strain them, and there will be no way to avert evils from
without.” Deeply moved by the monk's wise counsel, the King stopped
building walls. (The point her e seems to be that public works such as
fortifications were built with forced labor , a heavy burden on the people.)
On the tenth day of the third mo on in the third year of Linte (Py ong-in),
a female slave named Kil-E, belonging to a commoner , gave birth to
triplets; and on the seventh day of the first moon of the third year of
T sungchang (Ky ong-o), a female slave belonging to Ilsan-kupkan in Hanki
Department bore quadruplets—one girl and three boys. The King rewarded
each woman with two hundred lar ge bags of rice.
After th e destruction of Koguryo by Silla, a grandson of the Koguryo
King was raised to royal rank in the Silla court.
One day King M unmu summoned his half brother Cha'duk-kong  (son of
King Muryol by a concubine) and ordered him to become Prime Minister in
order to bring pe ace and prosperity to the kingdom. The latter r eplied. “If it
is the august wish of Y our Maj esty to appoint your humble se rvant to the
Premiership, I wish first to tr avel incognito throughout the country to
observe the living conditions of the people, their labor and leisure, the taxes
and corvee imposed upon them, and whether the local of ficials are good or
evil before I take up such an important post in Y our Majesty's government.”

The Kin g admired his wisdom and intelligence and readily ag reed to the
idea.
Ch'aduk-kong disguised himself as a hermit (unshorn monk), and
carrying a harp d eparted from Kyongju. He visited Asulaju (now Myongju),
Usuju (now Ch'unch'on), Pukwonkyong (now W onju) and Mujinju (now
Haeyang). In Mujinju a local pe tty of ficial named An-gil, perceiving that he
was no ordinary man, invited him to dinner at his home and gave him
cloudy w ine and  many delicacies. As night came on he summoned his two
wives and a concubine and said, “If one of you is willing to share her
beauty and pass the night with the lonely guest in our house I will
nevertheless promise to live with her till death. Who will agree?”
Blushing deeply , the two wives answered, “W e would rather part from
you than take another man even for one night.”
But the concubi ne, who was fa r prettier than the other two, answered
boldly , “If you p romise not to c ast me away for this forced love, but keep
me unde r your roof even if I be come an old hag, I will obey your strange
order .” A nd with downcast eyes like an Oriental bride she came and sat in
beauty before the wondering hermit, as fair as a fresh flower .
On the following morning the departing guest told his host, “I am a
traveler from Kyongju. My home stands between Hwangnyong and
Hwangsong tem ples and my name is T ano (a Korean synonym for Ch'a,
meaning chariot). If you ever have occasion to visit the capital, come and
see me. I shall never for get your hospitality .”
Ch'aduk-kong returned to Kyo ngju and began his duties as Prime
Minister . In those days it was th e rule for an of ficial from each district by
turns to spend a certain period of time in the capital (a kind of hostage
system t o insure  the control of the central government). When it was An-
gil's turn to go to Kyongju, he immediately made inquiries about the house
of a hermit named T ano. He met  with no success, however , until  an old man
told him that the house between  the two temples was the royal palace and
that T an o was Ch'aduk-kong. He  further pointed out that it was the habit of
the Premier to travel incognito in the country .
Out of curiosity the old man ask ed whether An-gil had an appo intment
at the palace or was acquainted with someone there, and An-gil told him
about th e visito r to his country  home and the invitation he had received.
The old man nodded and said, “Go straight to the west gate o f the palace
and speak to any court lady who happens to leave or enter .

An-gil did as he was told, and soon the Prime Minister came out to greet
him. He was inv ited into the pal ace and given a delicious feast of more than
fifty dis hes and the Prime Minister's wife herself filled his cup with good
wine and pressed it to his lips.
When the romantic story of Ch 'aduk-kong and the country beauty was
reported to the K ing, he laughed heartily and ordered the grant o f lar ge tract
of forest land on Songpu mountain to the government of ficials at Mujinju
by way of rewarding An-gil, and prohibited anyone else from felling trees
there. T he good luck of An-gil was much envied, for the trac t included a
lar ge farm whose crops were quite adequate to feed a whole family . And
strange to say , if the harvest of this farm was good then all t he farms in
Mujinju likewise had a good ye ar , but if its crop was poor fami ne was sure
to visit the whole area.
37. The Flute to Calm T en Thousand W aves
The thirty-first sovereign was King Sinmun (681-692), whose personal
name wa s Chon gmyong. He ascended the throne on the seventh  day of the
seventh moon in the first year of Kaiyao (Sin-sa). He had Kamun-sa
(Thanksgiving T emple) erected on the east coast in honor of his  father King
Munmu. (The ruins of this temple are to be found in W olsong-gun, North
Kyongsang Pro vince.) The records of that temple contain th e following
account.
In o rder to repel the Japanese pirates, King Munmu started build ing this
temple. (That is, the temple was  built in order to secure divine aid. Japanese
marauders troub led the coasts of Korea and China for many centuries.) But
he died and beca me a sea-dragon before it was finished, and it was not until
the second year of Kaiyao during the reign of his son King Sinmun that
construction was completed.
Under th e stairw ay leading to the Golden Hall of the temple there is a
submarine cave opening into the Eastern Sea for the sea-dragon to come in
and take  its position in a twisting posture. This is the place whe re the bones
of K ing Munmu are preserved by the august will of that patrioti c sovereign,
and so it is called T aewang-am, the great King's Rock. (Actually “am”
designates a temple or shrine subordinate to a main temple.) The terrace for
viewing the appearance of the dragon is called Igyondae, Dragon-viewing
Hill.
On the first of May in the following year (Imo, 683) a marine of ficial
named Pak Suk-chong reported  to the throne that a small mo untain was

floating to and fro on the rolling waves and drifting from the Eastern Sea
toward K amunsa. The King summoned his astrologer Kim Ch'un-chil and
asked the meaning of this singular event.
“Y our M ajesty ,” the of ficial replied, “Y our august father has become a
sea-dragon and protects Samhan  (the Three Hans, an ancient designation of
Korea) in the se a. General Kim Y u-sin, one of the sons of the Thirty-three
Heavens, has also descended to  earth. These two guardian dei ties wish to
give you a holy treasure which  will protect the kingdom. If you go to the
seashore you will receive an invaluable jewel.”
The King was overjoyed, and on the seventh day of that m onth he
climbed a hill on the coast and viewed the floating mou ntain with
amazement. A courtier was sent to get a closer look, and when  he returned
he s aid, “O King, the top of the  floating mountain looks like a turtle's head
and on it a bamboo grows. The bamboo is separated into two plants by day
and becomes a single plant at night.”
W ith a wonderin g heart the Kin g slept at Kamun-sa that night . On the
following day just at noon the c loven bamboo suddenly united and heaven
and earth shook with thunder . W ind, rain and darkness prevailed for seven
days, and it was not until the sixteenth of the month that the  wind died
down an d the waves grew calm. The King then boarded a boat  and landed
on the sea-mountain, where a monstrous dragon presented him with a belt
of black jade.
“Sir Dra gon,” said the King, “ I wonder why the bamboo sometimes
divides and sometimes unites.”
“My King,” the dragon said, “ one hand cannot make any sound but
when two hands strike each oth er they make music. Likewise the cloven
bamboo makes a good sound w hen its halves unite. This is a h appy omen
that Y our Majesty will make all the people obey your commanding voice. If
you mak e a flute from this bamboo its music will bring peace an d happiness
to y our kingdom. The jade belt and the magic bamboo are gifts from your
august father , who is now the King of dragons in the sea and from General
Kim Y u-sin who is now a god in the Thirty-three Heavens.”
Rejoicing at his good fortune, the King gave gold, precious stones and
five-colored bro cade to the dra gon in return for its kindness . He had a
courtier cut a piece of the bamboo and then rode back t o the land,
whereupon dragon and mountain vanished in the mist.

The King stayed another night at Kamun-sa and had started the return
journey in his carriage when he was met by Crown Prince Ikong on
horseback.
“Congratulations, Y our Majesty!” said the Prince. “Every ornament on
the belt is a living dragon!”
“How do you know?”
“T ake an ornament from the belt and put it in the water , Sire.”
The King removed the second ornament from the left side of the belt
and rolled it into a stream. Immediately it was transformed into a dragon
and flew up to heaven, while the stream became a deep pool w ith sapphire
wavelets which the King named Dragon Pool.
As soon as the royal procession had returned to the palace a fl ute was
made from the bamboo and wa s stored in the Ch'onjon-go (H igh Heaven
V ault) at W olsong (Moon Fortress). When this flute was played attacking
enemies fled, spreading plagues receded, sweet rains came after drought,
the brigh t sun shone in the dow npour , the wind was mild and the sea was
calm. It was called the Flute to C alm T en Thousand W aves, and was prized
as one of the greatest national treasures.
During t he reign  of King Hyoso  (692-702) this flute was mentioned in
connection with the miraculous safe return of the Hwarang Sillye-rang (his
correct name is Puryerang). The full story is to be found in his biography
(in the chronicles of Paengnyul T emple).
38. Chukjirang (Chukman or Chigwan)
During t he reign  of King Hyoso , the thirty-second sovereign (692-702),
there wa s a young man named T ukosil Kupkan, who was a follower of the
noble H warang Chukjirang. T uk osil attended Chukjirang every day in order
to receive physical and mental training as a loyal and patriotic Silla soldier .
But one morning  he did not report to his master as usual, and no body knew
where he was.
When T ukosil h ad not appeared for ten days, Chukjirang inquired of his
mother about her son's whereabouts. The old woman replied that her son
had been appointed warehouse-keeper of Busan Fortress by order of Ikson
—agan, an army commander in  Moryang-pu, and that he had been called
away so suddenly that he had not had time to report to his Hwarang chief.
Chukjirang said , “If your son had gone on private business there would be
no n eed to call him back, but since he went on of ficial busines s I must go
and give him a treat.”

He t ook a basket of cakes and a bottle of wine with him and d eparted
with his servants and 137 youth ful Hwarang in stately procession. Arriving
at B usan Fortress he inquired of the gate-keeper where he might find
T ukosil, and was told that the young man was working on Ikso n's farm as
usual. C hukjirang entertained Ik son with the cakes and wine and requested
that he grant T ukosil a leave o f absence. This Ikson flatly re fused. (The
implication here  is that Ikson was using his of ficial position to o btain forced
labor for his own private purposes.)
Just at this time Kan-jin, an of ficial courier , was delivering to the castle
thirty ba gs of rice which he had collected as ground-rents from Ch'uhwa
County . He admired Chukjirang  for his Hwarang virtues and devotion to his
subordinates, a nd despised Ikson's corruption and stubbornness. He
therefore of fered  Ikson the who le load of rice if he would rele ase T ukosil.
But it was not until he had added the gift of a fine saddle and harness that
the cove tous fortress command er would allow the kidnapped youth to go
home.
Hearing this news, the royal of ficer who supervised the Hwarang sent
out a company o f soldiers to arr est Ikson, only to find that he had gone into
hiding. So they arrested his eldest son and forced him to take a bath (to
wash away his father's guilt) in a pond on the palace grou nds in the
midwinter cold, this causing him to freeze to death.
When th is stran ge af fair of a father's sin and his son's punishment was
reported to the throne, the King issued a decree expelling all natives of
Moryang-pu from government of fice in perpetuity and forbidd ing them to
wear black stoles (part of a mon k's habit) or to enter Buddhist temples even
though they were monks. At the same time, the children of Kan-jin were
awarded the hereditary of fice o f village chief wherever they h appened to
reside. It was in those days that W onch'uk-Popsa was denied the rights of
cler gy even though he was a renowned monk, simply because he was a
native of Moryang-pu.
Many years before these events Suljong-gong, a Silla nobleman, having
been appointed governor of Sak ju, was proceeding to his new post. Because
of an armed revolt on the East  Coast, he was guarded by a long train of
3,000 cavalrymen. When they reached the mountain called Chukjiryong,
they found a s trong youth guarding the pass against the rebels. The
governor praised the youth for his patriotism and wished he had a son like
him.

A month after his arrival at his post, Suljong-kong and his wife both had
a d ream in which they saw this same man, in the flower of his youth, enter
their bedroom. They immediately sent a servant to inquire after the youth,
and lear ned that  he had died a few days before. The governor ascertained
from the servant that the day of the youth's death was the same as that of his
dream. H e therefore told his wif e that the youth might be reborn as their son
(according to the Buddhist doctrine of reincarnation). He sent out soldiers
to b ury the you th on the north ern crest of Chukjiryong and had a stone
image o f Maitre ya (the Buddha of the future) erected before the grave. And
sure eno ugh, it was found that the governor's wife had conceived, and in
due course she gave birth to a boy , whom they named Chukji.
The child grew into a strong man and joined the Hwarang. This was
Chukjirang, one  of the bravest  of the Hwarang. As a subordinate of the
great general Kim Y u-sin he ren dered meritorious service in the unification
of the peninsula, and he served as a state minister under four sovereigns—
Queen Chindok, King Muryol, King Munmu and King Sinmun.
During his service with Chukjir ang, his follower T ukosil composed the
following song in honor of his virtues.

When I sing the memories of spring
My heart is sad and lonely;
In a twinkling all your youthful bloom is gone,
And on your brow deep furrows are carved too soon.
Cheer up, my eternal flower of youth!
On your autumn road of life, with no more earthly cares,
Y ou'll enjoy a night of sleep under the sage-brush roof.

39. King Songdok (702-736)
During t he reign of King Songd ok an unprecedented famine broke out
and brought death to many peop le. The King therefore distributed 300,500
sok  ( ab out five bus hels) of government-held rice and other grains, giving
three  sung  (one hundredth of a  sok)  to each destitute person per day from
January through July of the following year .
King So ngdok erected Pongdok  T emple in memory of King Muryol the
Great, held an  Inwang  s em inar for the  Buddhist cler gy for seven days, and
granted a general amnesty to all prisoners. He also modified the
government or ganization, creating the post of  Sijung  ( Mi nister President of

State). Some historians attribut e this modification to King Hyosong (the
next monarch after Songdok, 737-742).
40. Sur o Puin (the Lady of the W aters)
(This traditional  tale, like that of T ohwarang above and of Ch'o-yong's
wife later in th is book, illustrates the ancient Kor eans' appr eciation of
physical beauty .)
During the reign of King Song dok a Silla nobleman named S unjong-
gong once sat on the seashore with his beautiful wife Lady Suro, having
lunch while en r oute to Kangnung to take up the post of county  magistrate.
Behind them along the sandy beach stood a rocky crest like a windscreen,
soaring high into the sky above undulating ridges. On the hazy crest azaleas
bloomed in full glory , tossing their heads in the breeze.
“O, how lovely!” the lady cried. “Who will pluck some of those azaleas
and bring them to me?”
“Madam,” a servant answered, “the mountain-crest rises on a hanging
rock, un trodden and untouched by human creatures. The azaleas are there to
be gazed at and not plucked.”
But an old man who was leadi ng a cow along the seashore overheard
the word s of the beautiful lady . Quickly he climbed up and p icked some
azaleas, which he of fered to her with a song. Nobody could tell who he was.
On the following day while La dy Suro and her husband wer e eating
lunch in a sea-v iewing pavilion called Imhae-jong, a sea-drago n suddenly
appeared and snatched her of f to his watery palace. The amazed husband
stamped his feet and shrieked at the top of his voice, but to no avail.
Another old man who had seen what happened said to the unhappy
husband, “There  is an old saying—'Many mouths can melt even hard iron.
How much more will the sea-creatures be afraid of myriad voices.' If you
gather all the p eople from the coastal villages and get them to sing and
strike the sea-rocks, you will regain your lost wife.”
Sunjong-gong did exactly as the old man had suggested, and sure
enough, the dragon emer ged fro m the depths of the sea and ret urned Lady
Suro to him. He wept for joy .
“Lady of the W ater ,” he said, “T ell me about the bottom of the sea.”
“O! it was very beautiful. In the  Palace of the Seven T reasures food was
plentiful—all ta sty , clean and fragrant. The best cuisine on land cannot be
compared to it.”

“The wonderful  aromatic perfume of your body and dress pie rces my
heart”
Indeed L ady Suro was a peerle ss beauty , and whenever she traveled,
whether to mountains, lakes or seashore, she would be seized by gods and
dragons because of her charms.
(The following is supposed to be the song the villagers sang. It will be
noted that the d ragon is her e addr essed as “turtle.” Some co mmentators
r ead this wor d as Kuho, meaning a divine being.)

T urtle! T urtle! Let Lady Suro go!
Know your sin of taking a man's wife.
If you don't let her go,
W e'll catch you with a net
And then burn and eat you.

(And her e is the  song the old man sang as he offer ed Lady S ur o the
azaleas.)

I let go my cow's tether
And climb up the purple rock;
If you do not blush at me
I will pick the azaleas for you.
41. King Hyosong (737-742)
(Ther e is again some tr ouble about dates her e. The date given by Ilyon
for the building of the wall is 722, during the r eign of King Songdok.
Similarly , Chinese sour ces show  that the T'ang r equest for aid was also
made during Songdok's r eign. T he ruins of the gates in the wall can still be
seen near Kyongju.)
In th e tenth moo n of the tenth year of Kaiyuan (Imsul) the firs t barrier
wall wa s built in Mohwa County just southeast of Kyongju to block the
attacks of Japanese pirates coming from the eastern sea. The circular wall
was 6,792 feet in circumference and was built with the labor of 39,262
people under the supervision of W onjin-kakkan.
In th e twenty-first year of Kaiy uan (Kyeyu) the T'ang Emperor asked
Silla for military help in conquering the northern barbarians.
A 6 04-man military mission from China visited Kyongju for the
negotiations and then returned home.  (This was an expedition against

Palhae, a state which had taken  over much of the old Koguryo r ealm It was
not conquer ed until towar d the end of the Silla dynasty .)
42. King Kyongdok (742-765), Ch'ungdam-sa and P'yohun-taedok
(Ther e is evidently a sentence or so missing at the beginning of this
section, since it lacks Ilyon's cus tomary intr oduction giving the King's titles
and the date of his ascension to the thr one. The book r eferr ed to in the
opening paragraph is not a C onfucian work as might be supposed but
evidently the T ao T e Ching  of Lao-tzu, the basic scriptur e of T aoism. Some
of the T'ang Emper ors did in fact turn fr om Buddhism to T aoism.)
The T'ang Emperor sent the Cl assic of Morality as a gift to the King,
who received it with due ceremony . In the twenty-fourth year of the King's
reign the gods of the Five Big  Mountains and Three Small Mountains3
appeared from time to time and attended the King in his palace. (Another
dating problem since according to the received records this king ruled only
twenty-two years. The spirits of various places, especially mountains, were
and are a prominent feature of Korean popular religion. T o this day almost
every B uddhist temple in Korea has somewhere on its grounds  a shrine of
the Mou ntain Spirit, usually depicted as an old man accompanied by a
tiger .)
On the third day of the third m oon the King mounted the towe r of his
palace on the Kw ijong gate (?) a nd commanded his courtiers to bring him a
dignified monk. They found a luxuriously robed one loitering on the road
and pres ented him to the King , but His Majesty said this was the wrong
person and sent the man away .
Just then  they noticed another m onk, plainly dressed, coming from the
south an d carrying a barrel on his back. The King was in a good  humor , and
called th e strang e-looking monk  into his presence. His barrel was found to
contain supplies and equipment for making tea.
“Who are you, my good monk?” the King enquired.
“My name is Ch'ungdam, Sire,” he replied.
“And where are you coming from?”
“I am coming fr om the Three-Flower Peak on South Mountain,  where I
have jus t of fered  tea to Maitreya Buddha. It is my annual custom to serve
tea to him on th e third day of the third moon and the ninth day of the ninth
moon. T oday is my tea-service day .”
“W ill you make me a cup of that tea?”

The mon k comp lied. The King sipped the tea with great delight, for it
had an uncommon taste and a wonderful aroma. Then he said to the monk,
“I h ave heard m uch about your song 'Kip'arang.' It is very pop ular among
the people for its beautiful words and deep meaning, is it not?”
“Y es, Sire.”
“W ill you not compose a song for me on the theme 'Peaceful Reign?'”
“W ith great pleasure, Sire.”
The monk composed the song and presented it to the King. His Majesty
was so pleased with the beauty of its words and music that he bestowed
upon Ch'ungdam  the title of W ang-sa (Royal Priest) and want ed to make
him a court favorite. But the m onk held that he was unworthy  of such an
honor , a nd after  prostrating himself before the throne and striking his head
twice upon the floor , he bade t he King farewell. (Here are the two songs
alluded to.)

Song of Peaceful Reign

The King is the august father , the vassal is the af fectionate mother ,
And the people are the happy children.
The people should understand their loving kindness,
Since the noble parents feed and rule myriad creatures.
Who would leave his home and go elsewhere?
The people should remain in our native country .
If the King, vassals and people all do their duty
Peace will reign in the land.

Song of Kip'arang
When the unveiled moon in the Milky W ay sails after silver clouds,
Kirang's face reflects the sapphire waves in the stream;
In the sparkling pebbles in the rills shines his flawless diamond heart,
On a high pine-branch his image in a dew-pearled flower hangs in
eternal glory .
King Kyongdok's male or gan was eight inches long and his queen was
unable t o bear him a son. He t herefore sent her away , giving her the title
Lady Saryang, and took Lady Manwol (Full Moon) in her place. Lady
Manwol was given the posthum ous title of Dowager Queen Ky ongsu. She
was the daughter of Uich'ung Kakkan.

One day the kin g summoned P'yohun-taedok, a famous monk, and said,
“I am not blessed with a son. G o and see God and ask him to give me an
heir to my throne.” (This passage and what follows should not be
interpreted as implying monotheism. It is simply that Ilyon does  not specify
which god is intended.)
P'yohun was received in audience by God in his heavenly palace above
nine clo uds. On his return to earth he reported to the King, “The almighty
one said, 'I can bless your King with a daughter but not with a son.”
“But I want a son,” the King sna pped. “Go again and ask God to change
this daughter into a son.”
P'yohun ascended to heaven once again and conveyed the King's
request. God answered, “It may be possible, but if the King h as a son his
kingdom will be upset.” When P'yohun begged leave to return to earth, he
called ou t from his jewelled throne, “Y ou have traveled to and f rom heaven
quite often, and have revealed my secrets; I therefore forbid you to come to
me any more.”
P'yohun returned  and told the King all the words of God. The King said
cooly , “E ven tho ugh my kingdom is endangered, I cannot be content until I
have a son to succeed me.”
Soon Queen Manwol bore a pr ince, and the King expressed great joy .
However , the King died when his son was only eight years old, and the boy
ascended the throne with his mother as regent. His posthumous title is King
Hyegong (765-780).
The young King had been born  with a feminine character and behaved
like a girl from his cradle. He loved to wear women's embroidered pouches
dangling from his sash, spent all his time with court jesters, an d neglected
his dutie s. The court and government became weak, the kingd om fell into
utter confusion, and thieves were everywhere. Finally the courtiers
conspired to kill him and plac e one of his relatives on the throne. The
leaders of the conspiracy were King Sondok and Kim Y ang-sang. It was
generally believed that after P'yohun no wiser monk was born in Silla.
(Ther e is some confusion in the  text. Kim Y ang-sang was the personal
name of King Sondok. Per haps this is a mistake for Kim Kyong-sin, another
member of the r oyal family who aided King Sondok in the conspiracy and
ultimately succeeded him as King W onsong.)
43. King Hyegong (765-780)

Many grotesque events occurred during the reign of King Hyegong. In
his second year there was a l andslide east of the government of fice in
Kangju which formed a small pond, thirteen feet long and seven feet wide.
Five or six gol den carp in th e pond gradually grew lar ger as its size
increased.
In the next year a fierce dog fell from the sky to the south of the East
Pavilion, with thunder that shoo k heaven and earth. Its head was as lar ge as
a water -jar , its tail was three feet long, and it looked like a burning fire.
In January that same year rice sprouted and grew into long ears on five
of the dikes in a field in Kumpo-hyon. In July two stars fell into the
courtyard of the North Palace, followed by another , and the three stars sank
into the ground. T wo lotus plants bloomed on the dry ground in this
courtyard and more lotus blossoms tossed in the dry field at Pongsong
T emple. A big tiger was seen entering the palace and suddenly disappeared
as it entered th e royal living quarters. Countless sparrows flocked and
twittered in a pear tree in the yard of a nobleman named T aegong.
Since the Old B ook of Strategy says that these are all portents of war ,
the King granted a general amnesty to all prisoners, repented his womanish
ways and prayed for peace.
In t he third ye ar T aegong rose in revolt. Ninety-six com manders
contended with each other in Kyongju and the provinces. Th e civil war
lasted th ree months and cost thousands of lives. T aegong wa s at length
defeated, his house destroyed an d his jewels and brocades conf iscated. The
wealth a nd supplies accumulated by the rebels were likewise t aken by the
court. But the c ourtiers conspired to kill King Hyegong and  place Kim
Y ang-sang on the throne as King Sondok. Thus the prediction of the monk
P'yohun came true.
44. King W onsong (785-789)
Kim Kyong-sin,  the noble Kakk an (minister of state and membe r of the
royal family) had a dream one night. He dreamed that he t ook of f his
nobleman's cap,  put on a commoner's white hat, and entered the well at
Ch'on-gwan T em ple (named after a beautiful singer whom Kim Y u-sin had
loved) holding a twelve-string harp. When he awoke he consulted a fortune-
teller about the significance of this strange dream.
The fortune-teller said, “T aking of f your nobleman's hat means
dischar ge from government of fic e; holding a harp means wearin g a wooden
fetter around your neck; and entering a well means going to prison.”

The Kakkan was greatly worried and did not leave his house for many
days. One day a n Ach'an (third grade senior of ficial) named Y osam came
and aske d to see him, but the Kakkan pretended illness and refused. But
Y osam was persistent and after several visits was at length received.
“I ca n se e by your expression that you are troubled,” Y osam sa id. “T ell
me everything and perhaps I can help you.”
“I ha d a  dream,”  the Kakkam sa id, “in which I changed my nobleman's
cap for a commoner's white ha t and entered a well with a har p of twelve
strings in my hands. A fortune-teller has told me that I am doomed.”
“But thi s is a lucky dream.” said Y osam. “If you promise not to for get
me when you are raised to the jeweled throne I will interpret it for you.”
“I promise,” said the Kakkan. “T ell me the meaning of my dream.”
“Y ou took of f your cap,” said Y osam, “to announce that no man is
above jour head; you put on the white hat as a sign that you will wear the
royal crown; you held a harp of  twelve strings because you will sit on the
jeweled throne as the twelfth descendant of your royal ancestors; you
entered the well of Ch'on-gwan as a sign of your happy entrance into the
palace.”
“Kim Ch u-won is the direct heir  to the throne,” said the Kakkan, “How
can I become King?”
“If you of fer s acrifices in secret to the water -goddess of the North
Stream, you will succeed.”
Kim Kyong-sin  the Kakkan prayed to the water -goddess to m ake the
stream overflow at the hour of his own enthronement. When K ing Sondok
died soon after , the Silla court proclaimed Kim Chu-won his successor and
set out in a body for his home, which was across the stream from the palace.
But sud denly rain fell in torr ents, the stream overflowed, and it was
impossible for either party to get across. Kim Chu-won stood gazing in vain
longing toward the palace.
At this, Kim Kyong-sin put on his court dress and entered th e palace
amid the  cheers of his followers. The court of ficials thereupon declared that
the rain had been an expression of the will of heaven and made Kim
Kyong-sin King , reporting their decision to the Queen Dowager . As his
friend had predicted, he no w sat upon the throne rec eiving the
congratulations of hundreds of of ficials, civil and military . His posthumous
title is W onsong.

The King's friend Y osam had died by the time of his coronation.
However , remembering his promise, he summoned Y osam's children and
conferred titles and of ficial positions on them. Kim Chu-won went to
Myongju, where he spent the rest of his life in seclusion.
King W onsong had three sons and two daughters, the Princes
Hyech'ung, Honp'yong and Y ey ong-Chapkan and the Princesse s T aeryong-
Puin and  Soryong-Puin (the Lady of the Big Dragon and the Lady of the
Little D ragon). He is also known to have composed a song about the ups
and downs of human life. His royal father (Grand Kakkan Hy oyang) had
preserved the Flute to Calm T en Thousand W aves, the hereditary  treasure of
the r oyal household. The King was presented with heavenly gi fts and was
praised far and wide for his noble virtue.
(It is  app r opriate to point out he r e that while King W onsong belo nged to
a co llateral branch of the r oyal Kim clan, he claimed to r e pr esent the
twelfth g eneration in descent fr om King Naemul (356-402), in whose r eign
the monar chy became permanently her editary in the Kim clan.)
In October of that year , Bunkei,  the King of Japan, raised a lar ge army
to attack  Silla, but hearing of the magical flute which Silla possessed,
desisted and sent an envoy instead. (Ilyon points out that the ancient
Japanese chronicle Nihon-T eiki makes no mention of a Japanese Emperor
of this name, but the 55th Emp eror Buntoku may be intended. He quotes
another source which makes Bunkei Buntoku's eldest son.)
On bein g received at court the Japanese envoy said, “My Kin g of fers
you fifty 'yang' of gold for your famous flute.”
King W onsong answered caref ully . He wanted to avoid a Japanese
attack, but at the same time he did not wish to part with the flute. “My royal
ancestor King Chinp'yong possessed that flute,” he said, “bu t it is now
missing.”
In Ju ly of the following year a Japanese envoy again presented  himself
at th e Si lla court. This time he s aid, “My King of fers one thousa nd 'yang' in
gold for your sacred flute, which he only wants to examine and return.”
“My answer is the same as before,” King W onsong replied. “But I give
you three thousand 'yang' of silver to take to your king. I also return his
gold, which I have only looked at.”
The Japa nese en voy left the Sill a court in August and the King ordered
the flute kept in a vault in the Inner Y ellow Palace (Naehwang-jon).

In th e eleventh year of the King 's reign (795) an envoy from the T'ang
court vi sited Silla and stayed i n Kyongju for a month. The day after his
departure two women appeared at the palace and told the follow ing strange
story .
“W e are the wi ves of two drag ons from the East Pond and the Blue
Pond. T he envoy  from China took a man from Haso-guk with him and cast
spells over our husbands and the dragon in the well of Pun-hwang T emple,
changing them into small fish w hich he carried of f in a bowl. W e appeal to
Y our Majesty to command the t wo men to free our husbands and let them
remain here as guardian dragons of Silla.”
(Ilyon says ther e was a drag on pool at T ongch'on-sa (East Pond
T emple) and quotes this passage fr om the temple's history: “The  dragons of
the Eastern Sea fr equented this pond and listened to the Buddhist sermons.
The temple was built by King Chinp'yong, who set up shrines for five
hundr ed saints, built a five-story pagoda, and made many farmers temple
serfs.”)
The Kin g mount ed his carriage and set of f in pursuit of the T'ang envoy ,
overtaking him at Hayang-gwan. He invited them to a banquet, at which he
commanded the man from Haso-guk to return the three dragons under
penalty of death. The man apologized to the King and produced the three
fish, wh ich leap ed for joy above the water on returning to their homes. The
T'ang envoy and his entourage  admired the noble spirit of the King in
regaining the guardian dragons of his kingdom.
King W onsong once invited the famous monk Chihae to his pala ce from
Hwangnyong T emple and listen ed to his recital of Hwaom scriptures for
fifty day s. (Hwa om is  Hua-yen  or  A vatamsaka,  one of the various Buddhist
sects.)
During the King's reign a you ng monk named Myojong lived at the
Y ellow Dragon T emple. After m eals when he went to the well to wash his
ricebowl, it was his habit to throw tidbits to a turtle which lived there. One
day as he was feeding the turt le as usual, he said in a soft voice, “Dear
turtle, I have given you nice foo d every day for a long time now . What will
you give me in return?”
After a few days the turtle cough ed up a small sparkling jewel. Joyfully ,
the monk caught it in his hand and tied it to his girdle, and was never parted
from it thereafter .

(This was a sarira,  a smal l r ound  object believed to be a r elic of
Buddha's body . It was supposed  to confer all sorts of magical powers on its
possessor . The r ed bead in the open mouth of the dragon carv ed on most
Chinese and Kor ean r oyal thr ones r epr esents a  sarira.)
From that day fo rward every man who saw him became deeply attached
to Myoj ong, while women fell passionately in love with him. When King
W onsong heard of this phenomenon he summoned the monk to court. He at
once conceived an af fection for him as deep as that for his own  son, and all
the court including the princes and princesses were similarly af fected.
Just at this time a diplomatic m ission was about to start for China. The
ambassador , wh o was attracted l ike everyone else, secured royal permission
to include Myojong in his party . No sooner had the Chinese Emperor beheld
him than  he too was charmed, an d all the nobles of his court. In this fashion
the young Silla monk enjoyed the imperial favor for many days and nights
in the company of the Chinese p rinces and princesses, as if he were a prince
of the blood himself.
Now the re was among the courtiers a physiognomist who was jealous of
all the af fection lavished upon Myojong. Presenting himself before the
throne a nd strik ing his head th ree times upon the floor in the approved
manner , he said, “Y our Majesty , I am skilled in reading the fa ces of men,
but I can see no special charm in the face of this monk. It is my opinion that
he is loved by all because he is carrying some magic charm on his person.”
(The Ch inese be lieved that a m an's character and destiny could be read in
his face by one skilled in this art.)
The Em peror accordingly had Myojong searched, and the jewel was
found sp arkling in his girdle. “ Here it is!” exclaimed the Emp eror . “I had
four mag ic jewels on my rosary but I lost one last year and immediately lost
one four th of my personal char m, both as a monarch and with my court
ladies. Now I see, my lad, that your jewel is definitely the one I lost.”
Myojong was fairly caught. He told the Emperor all about the jewel,
explaining how  it came into his possession. Strange to say , the day on
which the Emperor lost the jewel was the very same as that on which the
turtle gave it to Myojong in distant Silla. So the jewel was ret urned to its
rightful owner the Emperor , who  gave Myjong a good present and sent him
home.
Once he was parted from the magic jewel no one took any notice of
Myojong any more, and no women fell in love with him. So the lonely

monk re turned once more to his temple and knelt by the well to talk to his
friend, the turtle.
King W o nsong's tomb is at Kok  (now Sungpok) T emple to the  west of
T'oham Mountai n, with a monum ent standing nearby . The epitaph engraved
on this monument was written by the famous scholar Ch'oe Ch'i-won. 4
During his lifetime King W onsong erected Poun T emple and Mangdok
Pavilion. He invested his gran dfather , great-grandfather and great-great-
grandfather with posthumous royal titles—Hung-p'yong-T aewang,
Sinyong-T aewang and Hyonsong-T aewang respectively . (This was a
common practice for a monarch from a collateral line of the royal clan,
whose immediate ancestors had not been kings.)
45. Early Falls of Snow
In A ugust of th e last year of King Aejang (809) snow fell; again in
March in the te nth year of Kin g Hondok (818) heavy snow came; and in
May dur ing the reign of King Munsong (839-857) there was another heavy
snow , and at the beginning of August the heavens and the earth became
dark.
(All thes e would  seem to be portents but Ilyon does not explain their
significance.)
46. King Hungdok and the Parrots
The forty-second sovereign was King Hungdok (826-836). Soon after
his coronation the Silla envoy to the T'ang court in China returned, bringing
with him as a gift a pair of parrots. The birds lived harmoniously at the
court, but after a time the female died and the lonely male c ried with a
heartrending voice.
The King took pity on the bird a nd had a mirror hung before it. At first
the p arrot was d eceived into thinking its mate had returned, and pecked at
the glass . But when there was n o response he again cried mou rnfully and
fell dead.
The Kin g felt sad at this pitiful s ight and composed a poem abou t it, but
unfortunately it has been lost.
47. King Sinmu, Y omjang and Kungp'a
(A bit of explana tion is necessary her e. King Sinmu's pr edecessor King
Minae h ad mur der ed Sinmu's father and also the pr eceding king, Huigang
in or der to usurp  the thr one in 838. Kungp'a was the famous Ch ang Po-ko,
a comm oner wh o had risen to gr eat wealth and power thr oug h trade, so
much so that he had his own pr ivate army and navy , with headquarters on

W ando Island off the southwest coast. But, as this story in dicates, he
cherished dynastic ambitions and this br ought about his downfall.)
The forty-fifth sovereign was King Sinmu, whose childhood name was
U-ching (839—h e reigned for on ly about a year). Before he became king he
summoned Kun gp'a, a man of chivalrous spirit, and said to him, “I have an
enemy w ith whom I cannot live  under the same heaven. It is the  King (who
had mur dered his father). If you avenge me and if I become king in his
place I will make your daughter my queen.”5
“I am your man ,” said Kungp'a. “I will lead my elite soldiers into the
palace and fulfill the mission you have entrusted to me.”
Kungp'a was as good as his wo rd and Sinmu duly ascended the  throne.
But whe n he set about making arrangements to keep his side of the bar gain,
the court aristocrats objected, memorializing the throne as follows:
“Though a brave general, Kungp 'a is a low-ranking commoner , and it is
not fitting or proper for you  to  make his daughter your queen.'”
“I have given Kungp'a a solemn promise,” the King replied, “but if you
forbid the marriage then there is no help for it.”
Kungp'a was then commander o f a naval base at Ch'onghaejin (W ando).
He was very an gry at the King for not keeping his promise and began
making secret plans for an armed rebellion. General Y om-jang learned of
this through his spies and immediately sent a message to the King:
“Y our humble subject memorializes the throne: Kungp'a is now
planning a disloyal coup, and I wish to go and bring back the traitor's head;
only command me.”
“Go, I command you,” the King replied.
Y omjang arrived  at Ch'onghaejin all alone and sent a courier to Kungp'a
with a message.  When Kungp'a received him, he said, “I have o f fended the
King ov er some minor matter , and so I have come to ser ve as your
subordinate in order to save my life.”
“Y ou tr icky fellows persuaded  the King not to make my d aughter
queen,” Kungp'a answered angrily . “Why do you come to me now?”
“It w as the othe r courtiers who said no,” Y omjang explained . “I was
absent from that audience. Please do not blame me.”
Kungp'a had the general shown into an inner room, and the two sat face
to face. When they were alone Kungp'a asked again, “What has brought you
here?”

“I ha ve of fended the King,” Y omjang repeated, “and so I have come to
seek asylum under your command in order to escape death.”
“Y ou are  lucky ,”  Kungp'a said. “Raise your cup. I drink to you r health
and your successful flight.”
When Kungp'a was fairly in his cups, Y omjang, suddenly drew the long
sword from the scabbard which hung at the rebel's waist and  cut of f his
head with a single stroke. When  they heard of this, all of Kungp'a's of ficers
and men prostrated themselves before Y omjang in fear and astonishment.
The general made a triumphant  return to Kyongju with Kungp a's head
and told the King of the successful completion of his mission. Highly
pleased, the King gave Y omjang a lar ge reward and promoted him to the
high of ficial rank of Agan (fourth grade senior of ficial.)
48. King Kyongmun (861-875)
The forty-eighth  sovereign was King Kyongmun, whose ch ildhood
name was Ungnyom. He was admitted into the Hwarang at the age of
eighteen, and when he was tw enty King Honan, the reigning monarch,
invited him to a banquet.
“Y oung man,” said the King, “you have visited many places of interest
in Silla in the c ourse of your physical and mental training, Ha ve you seen
any extraordinary events during your wide travels?”
“Y our Majesty ,”  the youth replied, “I was more interested in men than
in scenic beauty . I saw three men of noble deeds.”
“Noble deeds!” exclaimed the King. “T ell me your story .”
“The fir st was a man who gave his seat to another for the sake of
propriety , even though he was qualified to take the highest place; the second
was a man who wore cotton garments out of frugality , even though he was
rich; and the third was a man w ho would make no display of  his dignity
even though he was noble and powerful by birth.”
At this the King was moved to tears. “I am glad,” he said, “to find in
your per son a fine gentleman of high virtue. I have two daught ers. Choose
whichever you wish for your wife.”
“Oh King,” the youth replied, “I am not worthy of such an honor .” He
then wit hdrew fr om the palace, and on reaching home told his p arents what
the King had said.
“That is good lu ck,” they said. “ The elder princess is not very pretty , but
her sister is a well-known beauty . Why not choose the younger princess?”

When th e monk  of Hungnyun T emple who was the head of Ung-nyom's
Hwarang group heard the news  he hastened to call on the you ng man and
of fer his advice. “I hear that the King has of fered you one of his two
daughters in marriage, whichever you choose. Is this true?” the monk
asked.
“Y es.”
“Which one will you choose?”
“My parents told me to take the younger one.”
“If y ou marry t he younger princess I will die in your presence, but if
you mar ry the elder one I can as sure you of three good things. Beauty is not
everything. T ake care.”
“Then I will choose the elder princess.”
A sh ort time late r the King chos e a propitious day and sent a messenger
to U ngnyom to ask which of the princesses he had chosen. H e chose the
elder , as he had told the monk he would. A date was set and the wedding
took place as planned
Only three months later the K ing became seriously ill. Feeling that
death wa s near , he called the court of ficials into a royal conferen ce and said
to them, “I hav e no male issue . When I am gone, my heir and successor
should be Ungnyom, the husband of my elder daughter .”
The King died the next day , and by the royal will the lucky youth was
raised to  the throne. One of his  first visitors after his coronation was the
monk whose good advice he had followed.
“May our King live ten thousand years!” said the monk in  formal
greeting. “Accep t my congratulations on your success in three g ood things:
by your marriag e to the elder daughter you have pleased her parents; as a
result of your marriage you have inherited the jeweled throne; and now you
are K ing, you ca n easily take th e younger princess for your fav orite among
the palace women.”
“Y ou have made me very happy ,” the King replied. “I hereby promote
you to the of fici al position of T a edok (Great V irtue, title of a position in the
Buddhist hierarchy) and in addition make you a gift of one hundred and
thirty yang of gold.'”
During King Kyongmun's lifeti me countless snakes hissed in the royal
bedchamber every night, and the frightened court ladies shrieked and tried
to chase them a way . But the K ing said, “Do not chase the snakes, but let
them come near , for I cannot sleep in peace without the c ompany of

snakes.” So when the King wen t to bed the snakes would cover his bosom,
with their long tongues darting out in joy and comfort.
One mo rning wh en the King aw oke, he discovered that his two ears had
grown overnigh t into long furry  ones like those of a donkey . His grief and
consternation were beyond desc ription, but nothing could be done. He was
compelled to cover his head with a sort of turban which he wore waking
and slee ping, so  that nobody e ver knew his secret except the  tailor who
made the turban. He, of course, was given the strictest orders to tell nobody .
Faithful servant  of the King though he was, the tailor was con tinually
tormented by his inability to speak of this strange and unique event. Finally
he b ecame ill a nd was obliged to go for a rest to T orim T emple on the
outskirts of Kyongju. One day he came out into the back garden of this
temple alone and unattended, pe ering about him wild-eyed. Seeing that no-
one was  within earshot, he plunged suddenly into a bamboo grove nearby
and shou ted rep eatedly at the top of his voice, “My King has long ears like
a donkey!” Then, having at last won peace of mind, he fell dead on the spot.
Ever aft erward, when the wind blew through this particular bamboo
grove, t he sound it made seemed to say “My King has long  ears like a
donkey .” This strange phenomen on was relayed from mouth to mouth until
at last it reached the King's lon g ears. He was very angry and ordered the
bamboos cut down and palms p lanted in their place. This was done and the
palms g rew rapi dly . But when t he wind blew through them the y sang “My
King has long ears....”dropping the last three words.
The Kin g died at last and T orim-sa fell into decay . But new shoots grew
up fr om the roots of the bamboos which had been cut down and people took
cuttings to plant in their gardens  so that they could hear the son g they sang,
and they did li kewise with the palms. In this manner the citizens of
Kyungju enjoye d the music of their bamboos and palms singing  to the wind
“My king has long ears like a donkey ....My King has long ears...”
During this King's reign four Hwarang—Y owon-nang, Y ehun-nang,
Kyewon and Sukjong-nang—visited Kumnan, a place of scenic beauty ,
where they composed three pat riotic songs. Moreover they sent a Simp'il-
saji (thirteenth grade Silla of f icial) with blank music paper to T aegu-
Hwasang, asking this famous monk to compose three further songs, which
he did—Hyongum P'ogok, T aedo-gok and Mungun-gok. When these songs
were presented to the throne the good King praised the Hwarangs' loyalty
and gave them rich rewards. Unfortunately these songs have not survived.

(It is r ecor ded that this monk, together with W ihong Kakkan, Queen
Chinsong's lover and husband,  compiled a book of these Hyangga (Silla
folksongs) using the Idu system of Chinese characters r ead phonetically so
as to r ecor d the actual sounds of the Kor ean language. T wenty-five
Hyangga survive today .)
49. The Song of Ch'oyong and the Sea-V iewing T emple
The forty-ninth sovereign was King Hongang (875-886). During his
reign houses with tiled roofs stood in rows from the capital to the four seas
and not a thatched roof was to be seen. Soft music was hear d on all the
roadsides. Gentl e sweet rain came with harmonious blessings  and all the
harvests were plentiful.
One day the Kin g went to Kaeu npo (modern Ulsan) for a picnic, and on
his way back s topped to rest on the seashore. Suddenly a dense fog
enveloped the land, so thick that  the King could not find his way . The Royal
Astrologer repor ted that the Ma ster Dragon of the Eastern Sea was at play ,
and due  respect must be paid him in order to avoid his anger . A ccordingly
the King  ordered  a temple to be erected nearby in honor of the dragon, and
as soon as the ro yal edict was pr oclaimed the fog dissolved. Hence the King
named that place on the seashore Kaeunpo (Port of Opening Clouds).
The Dra gon of the Eastern Sea was highly pleased and appeared before
the King  with his seven sons, pr aising the monarch's august virtues, playing
music and performing dances.
One of the dragon's sons followed the King to the capital and  became
his faith ful servant. The King named him Ch'oyong, conferred u pon him the
of fice of “Kupkan” and gave him a lovely woman for his wife.
But her beauty drew the attention of the plague spirit, who, taking the
form of a handsome man, had secret love-meetings with her at night while
Ch'oyong was away . One night Ch'oyong returned unexpectedl y and found
his wife  sleeping with another m an. He thereupon composed the following
song:

Under the moonlight of the Eastern Capital
I reveled late into the night.
When I came home and entered my bedroom
I saw four legs.
T wo legs are mine,
T o whom do the other two belong?

The person below is mine,
But whose body is raping her?

What sh all I do? Thus he sang a nd danced, and then turned to leave, But
the plag ue spirit  rose from the bed and fell on his knees before Ch'oyong,
saying, “I admired your wife for her beautiful person and now I have
despoiled her . When I perceived  you were not angry with me, I  was struck
with wonder and admiration. Hereafter when I see even the picture of your
face I swear I will not enter the house.”
Believing this, all the people be gan hanging Ch'oyong's picture on their
gates as  protection against disease. (Ch'oyong means “dragon's  son.” This
story obviously records a folk belief.)
On r eturning to his palace the King had a scenic spot selected on the
eastern side of Y ongch'u-san (H oly Eagle Mountain) and there erected a
temple called Manghae-sa (Sea-V iewing T emple) or Sinbang-sa (T emple of
the Bridal Chamber) for the dragon as promised.
On a nother occasion the King w ent on a picnic to P'osok-jong (Pavilion
of S tone Abalone). While His Majesty was merrily drinking wine
surrounded by his court ladies, the spirit of South Mountain suddenly
appeared before him and performed a dance. The King danced, too, as did
the l adies, who s ang sweetly , but the mountain spirit was visible only to the
King. When the dance was over  the King ordered his sculptors to portray it
in stone  for the edification of po sterity . This sculpture is called Sang-yom-
mu (Frosty-Bearded Dance).
Again when the King was traveling through Kumgang-nyong (Diamond
Pass) the spirit of the northern peaks came and danced before him. The
King ca lled this dance Ok-do-ryong because it was performed with a jade
sword and a jade ring.  (Ok  means “jade.”)
One eve ning wh en the King wa s making merry at a court banquet the
goddess of the earth and the m ountain spirit appeared and danced before
him, singing “Chi-ri-da-do-pa,” which means, “Many wise men flee the
court; the metropolis will fall  to ruin.” This was a warning from the
guardian deities of the earth and the mountains foretelling the fall of Silla,
but the foolish King and his en tourage regarded it as a happy  omen and
gave themselves  up to revels and debauchery while the kingdom  tottered to
its fall.

(The Mo untain Spirit was, and to some extent still is, a pr ominent
featur e o f Kor ea n folk belief. He is always pictur ed as an old man with a
white bear d, usually accompanied by a tiger .)
50. Queen Chinsong (888-898) and Kotaji
The fifty-first sovereign was Queen Chinsong. Her nurse, Lady Puho,
together with her husband (W ihong kakkan) and a few favored courtiers,
had gre at influence on the co urt, and their machinations brought the
kingdom to the brink of ruin. Patriots who were deeply worried about the
situation began scattering leaflets containing Buddhist spells (Dharani)
cursing the corrupt and immoral court.
When th e Quee n and her favor ites tried to read one of these leaflets,
they fou nd it was composed of highly technical terms in Chinese, and they
could n ot understand it. In K orean pronunciation it went as follows:
Nammu-Mang-guk Ch'alni-Naj e P'anni-P'anni-So-P'anni U-U-Sam-Akan
Pui-Sap'a-ga.
The per plexed Queen called in her chief interpreter and asked  for an
explanation. The interpreter said, “Ch'alni-Naje is the Queen, P'anni-P'anni-
So-P'anni repres ents two high-ranking Of ficials with the titles of Sop'an and
U-U-Sam-Akan and Pui is Puho. The first phrase, Nammu-Mang-guk, is
self-explanatory: it means, “The ruin of the country .”
On hearing this, several peopl e said, “Who could have wri tten the
leaflets i f it was not W ang Ko-in? Throw him into prison!” This the enraged
Queen did.
While in prison, W ang Ko-in composed and sang this song:

Y entan's bloody tears in the rainbow pierce the sun;
Ch'u-yen's deep sorrow descends in frost even in summer .
My grief is the same as theirs;
O Lord of Heaven, why do you show no sign of saving me?

Heaven heard his cry and rent the prison with a thunderbolt, and the
patriotic poet escaped alive.
(W ang K o-in did  in fact oppose  the luxury and corruption of the court,
and r etir ed to his country estate in disgust. Queen Chinsong had taken the
husband of her nurse Lady Puh o as her lover in youth, and ma de him her
official spouse after becoming Queen. The two persons named  in W ang's

poem wer e figur es in Chinese  history who found themselves in similar
situations.)
The Queen sent Prince Y angpa e as her envoy to the T'ang court in
China. T he voya ge was a dif ficu lt one, for the sea-passage was  blocked by
the rebels of Later Paekje (a brief attempt to revive the old Paekje
kingdom). Y angpae was therefo re obliged to take fifty bowmen with him to
repel any attacks on the party .
When Y angpae's ship reached Kokto Island a storm began to rage at sea,
and the party wa s unable to continue its journey for some ten days. W orried
about th e delay , Y angpae consul ted a fortune-teller , who told him there was
a dragon pool o n the island and sacrifice must be of fered to the dragon.
When this was done the blue water of the pool leaped ten feet unto the air .
That night an ol d man with a long beard appeared to Prince Y an gpae in
a dr eam and said, “If you leave a good bowman behind on this  island you
will be blessed with a favorable wind.” When the prince awoke he called
the men together and told them  of his dream. They agreed that each man
should carve his name on a pie ce of wood. When these were cast into the
sea, the one which sank would designate the man who would stay . When
this was done only the name of the bowman Kotaji sank to the bottom.
Obedient to his prince's orders the good bowman took his stand upon
the shore and sa dly watched the ship sail of f across the calm sea toward
China. A s he was choking back his tears the same white-bearded old man
who had appeared in the prince's dream emer ged from the dragon pool and
spoke to him.
“I am a spirit of the W estern Se a,” the old man said. “Every morning at
sunrise f or some time now a grotesque Buddhist monk has descended from
heaven and chanted a Buddhist  spell (Dharani) which obliges me and my
wife and  children to rise to the surface of the water . He has pulled out and
eaten one by one the livers of my children until now only I and my wife and
one daughter are left. Please shoot down this monster .”
“Shooting arrows is my pride,” Kotaji answered. “I will do as you ask.”
After expressing  his thanks the old man reentered the pool while Kotaji
hid b ehind a big  tree to await the coming of the monk. Sure enough, just as
the sun appeared above the eastern horizon the monk descended and began
loudly c hanting his spell. Kotaji sped an arrow swift and true in to his heart,
and he changed into an aged fox and fell dead.

Soon the old man reappeared. “Y ou have saved my life,” he said. “In
gratitude I of fer you my lovely daughter as your wife.”
“That is the best reward and the most precious gift you could gi ve me,”
Kotaji said. “She is lovely .”
Then th e old man instructed him: “I will change my daughter into a
flower which you will clasp in your bosom, and I will com mand two
dragons to carry you to the Silla  ship on which the envoy is sa iling, These
dragons will then convoy the ship to the shores of the T'a ng empire.
Goodbye and good luck to you both.”
Kotaji d id as he was bid, and so on the ship lay at anchor at the seaport
of Changan. When the people of China saw that the Silla ship was
convoyed by dragons they has tened to report this extraordinary event to
their Em peror . Remarking that the Silla envoy was an uncomm on man, the
Emperor invited  Prince Y angpae to a special court banquet at w hich he was
seated above all the T'ang dignit aries. Moreover , the Emperor gave him rich
gifts of gold-laced brocade to present to the Queen of Silla.
When the party returned home the flower Kotaji was carrying changed
into a beautiful woman, and he lived with her happily for many years.
51. King Hyogong (898-913)
During t he reign  of King Hyogo ng, the fifty-second sovereign, magpies
built nests along the twenty-one kan (about six square feet) on the eastern
and wes tern sid es of the outer gate of Pongsong T emple, and  during the
reign of King S indok (913-917) there were thirty-four magpi e nests and
crows' n ests on an outbuilding of Y ongmyo T emple. In March that year
frost cam e twice and in June the water of Ch'ampo Bay flung b ack the tide
and fought it for three days.
(These ar e signs and portents. The Chinese T'ang Empir e was over'
thr own in 907 and Silla itself was in decline, ending in 935. The tides on the
west coa st of Kor ea fluctuate ver y widely , in places by as much a s forty feet,
and tidal bor es ar e not uncommon.)
52. King Kyongmyong (917-924)
During the reign of King Kyongmyong the fifty-fourth sovereign the
dogs in the mural painting at the T emple of the Four Deva Kin gs began to
whine m ournfully . The monks chanted scriptures for three days, until the
dogs stopped, but after a time they again whined for half a day . In February
of 920 the shadow of the pagoda at Hwang-nyong T emple appeared upside
down on  the grounds of the house of Kummo-saji and in October of the

same year the strings of the bows held in the hands of the gods of the five
directions at the T emple of the  Four Deva Kings were mysteriously cut
away and the dogs in the m ural painting rushed out into the temple
courtyard and back into the picture again.
53. King Kyong'ae (924-927)
The fifty-fifth sovereign was K ing Kyong'ae. In the first yea r of his
reign, on the 1 9th of February , the King held a Buddhist seminar at
Hwangnyong T emple, and ente rtained 300 monks of the “Son” sect at a
banquet. This was the beginning  of the Hundred Seat Preaching  of the Son
sect. (Th e practi ce became a da ily one. “Son” is more familiar  to W estern
readers under its Japanese name, “Zen”.)
54. King Kyongsun (927-935, the last king)
The fifty-sixth sovereign of Sil la was Kim Pu, the Great King, whose
posthumous title is Kyongsun. In the year 926, during the reign of his
predecessor Kin g Kyong'ae, Chin Hwon, the tiger -spirited general of Later
Paekje invaded Silla, attacking Koul-pu. King Kyong'ae sent a  request for
military aid to W ang Kon, the King of Koryo, but before the t roops could
arrive Chin Hwon led an attack on Kyongju and took the city .
King Kyong'ae had been enjoy ing a party with his Queen and court
ladies, merrily drinking, singing and dancing. When the re bel soldiers
entered the city the King and Queen hid themselves in the in ner palace,
while th e attendant nobles and their wives scattered in all directions,
prostrating themselves before the victorious enemy and of fering to be slaves
if only their lives were spared.
Chin Hw on set up his headquarters in the royal palace and ord ered his
men to plunder b oth public and private treasures. He forced the King to fall
on his own sword, violated the Queen and loosed his soldiers upon the court
ladies and the King's concubines. After these outrages he chose Kim Pu, a
distant cousin of King Kyong'a e, placed him on the throne, and withdrew
from Kyongju in triumph, carrying of f hundreds of aristocrats and pretty
women together with precious jewels from the palace.
No soon er had the new King emer ged from his coronation than he
changed his dragon robe for mourning clothes and his royal crown for a
hempen hat. Then he ordered th at the body of King Kyong'ae lie in state in
the W est Palace, where he wailed loudly with his courtiers.
The Kin g of Koryo in Songdo (Kaesong) dispatched a special envoy to
Kyongju to convey his condolence and deep sympathy . In M arch of the

following year he visited Kyongju in person, accompanied by fifty
horsemen. King Kyongsun and his court came to the outskirts of the city to
greet him, and invited him to a welcoming banquet at Imhae Pavilion.
After the  formalities had been observed King Kyungsun shed tea rs as he
told his noble vi sitor of Chin Hw on's savage raid and the falling fortunes of
Silla. In  tears himself, the King of Koryo comforted his royal host, and
extended his visit for ten days before returning home. During  his stay in
Kyongju his soldiers behaved li ke gentlemen and not one of them violated
military disciplin e or committed lawless acts. The people of Sill a—men and
women, boys and girls—congratulated each other , comparing Chin Hwon
to a man-eating tiger and W ang Kon to an af fectionate father .
On the day of the mid-autumn moon festival the King of Koryo sent an
envoy to  the Silla court with an embroidered brocade robe and a saddle for
the King and gifts for all the nobles and generals according to their rank.
By O ctober of t he year 935 mo st of the territory of Silla was occupied
by r ebels, and there were mo re uprisings daily . The countryside was
infested with bandits, the royal troops had lost the martial Hw arang spirit,
and famine stalked the land. It seemed to the King that there was no end to
his t roubles and that his decayed kingdom, despite its glorious history of a
thousand years, might collapse at any moment.
In d esperation His Majesty ca lled a royal conference of his  highest
of ficials and said to them, “W e are met to discuss a very grave matter .
Should we surrender to W ang Kon and cede to this kind-hearted
neighboring mo narch our sovereignty over Silla or should we continue to
fight the fierce wardogs at home and prepare for a final battle for
supremacy with  W ang Kon, wh ich it seems to me would mean the total
destruction of Silla?”
Opinions were divided and there was considerable ar gument. The
Crown Prince wished to fight to the end. “The rise or fall of a nation
depends on the will of Heaven,” he said. “W e must rally all loyal subjects
and patr iotic sol diers to defend the fatherland with all our strength, of one
mind wi th our people till the las t minute. Why should we give up without a
fight? H ow can we so easily surrender our thousand-year -old c ountry to a
neighbor?”
“Silla is  now helpless and we cannot hold out any longer ,” t he King
replied. “If we a re neither strong nor weak, we will be caught in the middle.
It is unb earable to see thousands of good people suf fering tragic deaths in a

losing w ar . Rath er , we must los e face and surrender peacefully to save the
people f rom great catastrophe. Kim Pong-hyu, my loyal minister! Go and
present m y of fic ial letter of voluntary surrender to the King of Koryo. All is
over .”
“Ah, sad day!” said the Crow n Prince, weeping bitterly . “Farewell,.
King and kingdom! I am going  to Kaegol-san (the Diamond M ountains)”
So the young prince departed  and entered a deep, rocky valley under
Pirobong, the highest peak in the range. There he dressed himself in hemp
and fed on gras s roots, and rall ied the loyal sons of the Hwa-rang to fight
W ang Kon.
The King's youngest son shaved his head and became a monk of the
Hwaom sect with the religious name Pomgong, residing at Pops u and Heian
temples during the rest of his life.
W ang Kon, the King of Koryo, when he received the letter of surrender ,
immediately dis patched his first minister of state W ang Ch'ol to Kyongju
with orders to conduct King Kyongsun and his entourage to Songdo
(Kaesong) with an honor guard. The King accordingly set out  for Songdo
accompanied by the civil and military of ficials of his cour t. The long
procession of carriages and carts laden with royal treasures stretched over
ten mile s of the highway , which was lined from Kyongju to S ongdo with
vast throngs of spectators.
W ang Kon came to the outskirts of his capital to meet the royal
procession from Silla. He celebrated the day with a great feast on Man-wol-
dae (Fu ll Moon Hill) and ga ve his eldest daughter , the Princess of
Nangnang, to the surrendered Silla king in marriage. He reconfirmed his
title as King and  promoted him to the highest position in the Koryo court,
ranking above even the Crown  Prince. Moreover , W ang Kon granted the
Silla Kin g an annual allowance of one thousand lar ge bags of ri ce and gave
him the old Silla territory (which he called Kyongju) as his fief.
The alliance between the two royal houses was further cemented when
King Kyongsun gave the beautiful daughter of his uncle to W ang Kon as his
wife. (This uncle, Ilyon says, was Ok-nyom, younger brother o f the King's
father Hyojong-Kakkan. This was Queen Sinsong.)
However , according to the royal family tree prepared by Kim Kwan-ui
during t he Koyr o dynasty , Queen Sinsong was of the Y i family and W ang
Kon married her during a trip to Hapju county , of which Y i Chong-on, a
Kyongju nobleman, was magis trate. She bore the King a son who was

known a s Anjong. The day of her death was the 25th of March and her
tomb wa s called Chong-nung, where a temple, Hyonhwa-sa, was erected in
her m emory . Among the twenty- five queens and concubines of the King, no
woman o f the Kim family is recorded in the royal chronicle, but the annalist
does rec ord that  Prince Anjong was a grandson (on the maternal side) of
Silla.
W ang Kon's grandson Sin (King Kyongjong, 975-981) married King
Kyongsun's daughter .
When King Kyongsun died i n 978, his old royal title was again
conferred upon him together with the title Sang-pu (royal father -in-law).
King Kyongjong issued a royal decree as follows:
“Know ye, my loyal subjects: When Chou of the Chi family founded a
new kingdom he first invested Lu W ang with an honorary title and when
Han of the Liu family rose to power he first invested Su H o with an
honorary title. Hence the royal g lory shone far and wide over all the world
and the happiness of the royal h ousehold bloomed for thirty generations of
the D ragon Picture and four hun dred years of the Giraf fe-Hooves, bright as
the sun and moon, coeval with heaven and earth. This institution began with
a ruler assisted by his wise ministers.
(The allusions her e ar e to the Chou and Han dynasties of ancient China.
The r ead er will r ecall the drago n with a pictur e on its back desc ribed in the
pr ologue as the portent of a gr eat king. “Giraffe Hooves” is the title of a
section of the Confucian Book of Odes, but is her e used to allude to the Han
dynasty , which did indeed endur e for about 400 years.)
“Kim Pu, King of Nangnang, who is endowed with a fief o f 8,000
households, hereditarily residing in Kerim (Silla), and honored with a royal
title, pos sessed eminently noble  qualities and was gifted with fine literary
talent.
“Looking forward to greater happiness, he lived comfortably in his fief
with a Military Strategy (a well-known Chinese work on this subject is here
alluded to) in his bosom. The founder of our kingdom, having bound the
two roya l famili es in friendly ti es, gave him a daughter in marriage. Now
the t wo kingdoms are united and the new state ruling over the Three Hans
prospers anew daily , with one patriotic mind from the throne to the plough.
“I he reby confer on him the title  of Royal Father -in-law and incr ease his
fief to 10,000 h ouseholds in consideration of his loyal and meritorious

services to the s tate. I command you, all competent of ficials to execute my
orders with due ceremony .”
“The 10 th mont h of the 8th year of Kaipao (Royal Sign Manual, Royal
Seal) Countersigned by Y ung-son

His Majesty's President
of the Privy Council
and His Majesty's Cabinet Ministers.”

According to 'Saron' the progen itors of the Pak and Sok clans of Silla
were born of eggs, while that of the Kim clan was found in a golden box
which d escended from heaven on a golden chariot. But these stories are too
fantastic to believe, although they have traditionally been accepted by the
populace as facts. The early Silla rulers were frugal in their personal lives
and generous to others. They  maintained few government of fices and
observed the annual rites simply . They sent tribute to and received envoys
from the Middle Kingdom across the sea, and dispatched youths to study in
that kingdom, thereby to culti vate decorum in their nation through the
influence of the refined customs and advanced culture taught by  the ancient
sages. Moreover , with the aid of the military might of the Imperial T'ang
army Si lla subjugated Paekje and Koguryo, making them provinces under
her single rule in her days of greatness.
However , due to the evils of Buddhism, pagodas and temples l ined the
streets and the c ommon people deserted their farms to become  monks and
nuns,. The morale of the army fell into decay , calling down rebellion and
destruction upon the nation. King Kyong'ae gave himself up to merriment
and soft pleasures. He reveled at the Pavilion of the Stone Abalone with his
choicest beauties and flattering courtiers, unaware of his doom until Chin
Hwon, l ike Han  Ch'in-hu, sprang at his throat, and his Queen fell prey to
Hwon, l ike Cha ng li-hua. (The King and Queen are compared to figures in
Chinese history .)
King Kyongsun  surrendered voluntarily to the King of Koryo because
his kingdom was in extremities, but his decision was nevertheless
praiseworthy . H ad he chosen to  fight on until the end the royal Kim clan
would h ave been exterminated and a great catastrophe would have fallen
upon hi s innocent people. His cession of sovereignty over his kingdom,
sealing h is royal treasure vaults without awaiting the King's ord ers, was an

act n ot only of obeisance to our King but of mercy to myria ds of living
creatures. In the olden days Su Tzu-chen praised Chen-shih as a loyal vassal
for s urrendering W u and Y ueh to Sung, but the virtue of the  Silla King
outshines that of Chen-shih. (Y et another Chinese precedent is cited here.)
The founder of the Koryo dynasty had many queens and concubines
who bore him m any children, but ever since King Hyonjong a scended the
throne ( 1009) as the maternal grandson of Silla royalty the successive
Koryo Kings have been his des cendants, with the royal throne transmitted
in an unbroken line thanks to the charity of King Kyongsun.
When Silla fell and the old land passed under the rule of a new dynasty ,
Agan-Sinhoe, a noble-hearted S illa courtier , withdrew from of ficial life and
returned to his n ative place in K yongju. Seeing the desolate condition of the
ruined c apital he  recited the old poem Shu Li-li (The Millet Hangs its Head,
a poem from the Book of Odes about a ruined palace which had been turned
into a millet-fiel d). His heart sank with grief and he wept when  he saw the
millet heads and wild grass toss ing among the ruins of the Silla palace. He
composed a song about the fall of Silla but unfortunately it has been lost.
(This whole last passage, following the decr ee, has a decidedly
Confucian tone. Its r ejection of the old legends and its blaming Buddhism
for the fall of Silla ar e quite unlike Ilyon in other parts of the book.)
55. South Puyo, Early Paekje and North Puyo
Puyo-gun(county) was the cap ital of early Paekje, According to the
Samguk Sagi, in the spring of th e twenty-sixth year of King Song of Paekje
(548) th e King moved his court to Saja (or Sabi), calling his kin gdom Nam
(south) Puyo. (Saja or Sabi was another name for Soburi, now Kosongjin.)
In th e (Koryo) land survey it is registered as Chonjong Chu ch'op in
Soburi-gun and the present Puyo -gun has had its old name restored in honor
of th e name of the Paekje royal family , Pu. Puyo was also call ed Y oju. T o
the west of Puyo is a temple called Chapok-sa on whose curtains the
following is embroidered in Chinese characters: “The Great  T emple of
Merit in  Y oju, May , 15th year of T'ung-huo, year of the chick en (Chong-
yu).” An  old document of the m agistrate of Hanam-Imju says that Imju is
now Karim-gun and Y oju is now Puyo-gun
In the Paichi T i li-chih it is writ ten (quoting the Hou Han-shu), “Paichi
(Paekje) is one of the seventy-eight states of the three Han na tions.” The
Pei-shih says, “Paichi (Paekje) is bounded on the east by S illa, on the
southwest by the Great Sea and on the north by the Han River . Its capital

was in Kobal-song, also called Koma-song and Obang-song.” (The suf fix
“song” means “fortress.”)
The T'ung-tien states, “Paichi  (Paekje) adjoins Silla on the south,
Koguryo on the north, and faces the Great Sea to the west.” The Chiu
T'ang-shu says, “Paichi (Paekje) is another name for Puyo. On i ts northeast
is Silla, on its so uth and west are W o (Japan) and Y uehchow ac ross the sea,
and on its north is Koguryo. Th e King's palaces are surrounded by two city
walls on the eas t and west. The Hsin T'ang-shu also says Paekje  is bounded
on the south and west by W o (J apan) and Y uehchow across the sea and on
the north by Koguryo. According to the Samguk Sagi the royal founder of
Paekje was Onjo, whose father was King Ch'umo, also called Chumong.
When Chumong the good bowman escaped southward from Puk-puyo
to Cholb on-Puyo, the king of that land, who had three daughters but no son,
found C humong a great hero and  gave him his second daughter in marriage.
When the King died soon afte r , Chumong succeeded to the t hrone. T wo
sons—Pullyu and Onjo—were born to him by this queen.
These t wo sons were afraid of Y uri, the crown prince, and fled
southward with ten courtiers including Ogan and Maryo. On reaching Han-
san Onj o settled down at Hana m-W iryesong6, w ith the Han River on the
north, h igh mountains to the ea st, fertile fields to the south, and the Great
Sea to the west, so that the area was a natural fortress fit to become a capital
city . He called his new kingdom Sipje because he founded it with the
assistance often courtiers. (“Sip” is the number ten.)
But Pull yu went  to the seacoast  at Mich'uhol in the wet lowlands, unfit
for com fortable living, and there he soon died of shame and r emorse. His
subjects returned to W iryesong to live under the rule of Onjo, who now
called his kingdom Paekje because his subjects had increased to one
hundred. (A pun. There is a wor d “paek” meaning one hundred, and it is the
same one as the  name of the kingdom.) Because the royal cla n of Paekje
traced its ancestry to the Puyo people (in Koguryo) it was called Hai-ssi,
like the Koguryo royal family . During the reign of King Song (523-554) the
capital was moved to Saja or Sabi and was called Puyo (now Puyo-gun).
Mich'uhol is Inju (Inchon) and W iryesong is now Chiksan (This last is
evidently a mistake).
According to an old book, On jo, the third son of King T ongmyong
(founder of Koguryo) came to W iryesong from Cholbon-Puy o, built his
palaces and assumed the title of king. Eleven years later he mov ed his court

to Hansa n (now Kwangju), where his royal descendants ruled the kingdom
for 389 years. D uring the reign o f King Kunch'ogo (346-375), the thirteenth
sovereign, Paekje took south P'yongyang (modern Seoul) from Koguryo
and moved its c apital to north Han-song (now Y angju), where successive
kings ruled for 105 years. Then King Munju (475-477) moved the court to
Ungch'on (now Kongju), where it stayed for the next sixty-three years.
Finally King Song (as already noted) established the capital at Saja or Sabi,
where it remained for 120 years, until the reign of King Uija (last king, 641-
661).
In th e tw entieth year of King Ui ja the kingdom of Paekje was destroyed
by the allied forces of Silla  and T'ang China under the  command
respectively of Kim Y u-sin and Su T ing-fang.
Originally Paekje consisted of five departments divided into thirty-
seven counties and was inhabite d by 760,000 households. After the fall of
the king dom the Chinese set up  five military districts, establishing military
governments in Ungjin, Mahan, T ongmyong, Kumnyon and T ogan, and
appointing local leaders as administrators under the military . But Silla soon
occupied this territory and divided it into three provinces—Ung, Chon and
Mu.
In Puyo there was a rock called Chongsa-am (Political Rock) at Hoam-
sa (T em ple of the T iger Rock). T radition says that before naming a prime
minister of ficials would write down the names of the candidate s, put them
in a box under seal, and place the box on this rock for some days (hence its
name). Then they would open the box and make their decision.
The Y on g-am (Rock of the Drag on) is so called because of the s tory that
the Chinese general Su T ing-f ang baited a line with a white horse and
hooked a dragon there. Indeed, t his rock still bears the marks of a crouching
dragon.
On the riverbank at Saja is a f lat rock big enough to accomm odate a
dozen people. T radition says the King of Paekje liked to cross the river and
have picnics on this rock, and when he did so he would always prostrate
himself in the di rection of the B uddha at W anghung T emple in t he distance.
Since the cold rock always became warm at the approach of the “jade body”
of the King it was called Nan-sok (W arm Rock).
On both  sides of this river alon g the sandy beaches stand rock y crests
like wind-screen s. This area was called T aewang-p'o, the Great King's Port,
where the Paekje Kings used to enjoy banquets with music and dancing.

Onjo, the founder of Paekje and the third son of King T ongmyong
(Koguryo found er) had a powerf ul physique and noble qualities worthy of a
prince. He loved horseback ridin g and archery . King T aru (Onjo 's successor ,
28-77) was a g enerous prince who won a glorious name. King Sabul
(otherwise calle d Saban or Sai, 234) ascended the throne as a b oy after the
death of King K usu (214-234) but was soon deposed in favor of King Koi
(234-286). Som e historians say that King Sabul died before King Koi
succeeded him.
56. King Mu (600-641)
The thir tieth sovereign of Paekje was King Mu, whose personal name
was Cha ng. His mother was a young widow who lived in a cotta ge beside a
lar ge pond. A dragon fell in love with her , and she conceived and bore a
son. The boy gre w up strong in physique and majestic in manne r , worthy to
be the son of a d ragon. But he w as so poor that he had to dig wild potatoes
from the fields t o feed his mother and himself, so his neighbors called him
Sodong, Potato Boy .
Sodong heard that Sonhwa, the  third daughter of King Chin-p 'yong of
Silla (579-632) was very beau tiful. So he shaved his head and visited
Kyongju, the capital of Silla, w ith a lar ge sack of potatoes slung over his
back. He  made friends with the children by giving them his sw eet potatoes
to eat, and at the same time taught them a song which he had composed:

Princess Sonhwa likes sweet potatoes gray—
She married the Potato Boy while we looked the other way;
Every night she comes to meet her swain
And sleeps in his arms with kisses sweet.

Soon th is song was heard in ev ery quarter of the city and even in the
palace. The courtiers who were  received in royal audience pe rsuaded the
king to send the  princess into ex ile in order to quiet the scandal. The Queen
gave her  daught er a bushel of pure gold to pay her expenses with and bid
her a tearful farewell.
When sh e had set out on her lonely journey , the Potato Boy a ppeared
and of fered to be her bodyguard  and guide. She did not know who he was
or wher e he came from, but in her extremity she was glad of anyone's
companionship. And as they traveled through the wild forests she fell in
love with him, and at length slept in his arms.

The lovers traveled happily tog ether for many days, climbing h ills and
crossing stream s, until they arrived in Paekje. Then Sonhwa said, “My
husband, here is a sack of shinin g gold. W ith it we can make a comfortable
home.”
“What is this?” asked Sodong, laughing.
“Don't you know gold?” Sonh wa said. “It will make us rich for a
hundred years.”
“Since my childhood,” Sodong told her , “I have buried gold in the holes
from which I dug the wild potatoes.”
Sonhwa was amazed. “If that is so,” she said, “you have a lar ge quantity
of the most pre cious treasure under heaven. If you remember  where you
buried it , why don't you dig it up and send it to the palace of m y father and
mother?”
Sodong agreed. He dug up all the gold nuggets from the hun dreds of
holes he had made, and piled them mountain high. Then he went to the
famous monk Chimyong Popsa at Saja T emple on Mt. Y onghwa  and sought
his advice on how to transport his treasure to Kyongju.
“Bring the gold to me,” the monk said. “I will send it on the wings of a
spirit by my magic word.”
When Sonhwa heard this she danced for joy and wrote a letter to her
royal pa rents inf orming them of her happy marriage to the Potato Boy and
of the shipment  of gold as a present to them. The mountain of gold was
moved into the courtyard of Saj a T emple with the letter at sunset, and sure
enough, it rose i nto the air and was transported to the Silla pala ce that very
night.
When he received this gift and read his daughter's letter King
Chinp'yong wondered at the magic power of the Paekje monk and
expressed his joy by sending a reply to Princess Sonhwa, with whom he
frequently corre sponded therea fter . Sodong was so much lo ved by the
people of Paekje for his princely deeds, loving and giving, that in due
course h e was raised to the thr one amidst the acclamations of the whole
nation.
One day  as the new King and Q ueen were returning from a visi t to Saja
temple, followed by a long train of servants, three images of Maitreya (the
Buddha of the future) rose above the surface of a pond. They immediately
halted their procession and worshipped the mysterious images, and the

Queen said, “My husband, I wi sh to have a beautiful temple built on this
pond, where these three Maitreyas arose to meet us.”
“V ery w ell, it shall be done,” the King replied. He again sought the help
of th e m onk Ch imyong, asking him to fill in the pond and prepare it for a
building.
Obedient to the royal command,  the old monk performed the task in one
night by  moving  a distant moun tain and dropping it upside do wn into the
pond. Soon a magnificent te mple called Miruk-sa had been erected.
(“Miruk” is the Korean pronunciation of “Maitreya.”) In the main hall stood
the three  Maitreya images and i n the courtyard was a pagoda built with the
assistance of hundreds of archite cts and sculptors sent by King Chinp'yong.
This great edifice, weather -beaten and moss-covered, is still standing.
(Ilyon notes that the Samguk Sagi designates this temple W anghung-sa.)
(This tra ditional tale obviously  has nothing to do with King Mu, who
was pr ob ably the son of his pr edecessor King Pop, who ruled briefly in 599.
Indeed, this is the account given by the Samguk Sagi. The tale belongs
pr operly to the r eign of Paek je King T ongsong (479-501),  who, it is
r ecor ded, asked  to marry a Silla princess in 493 and had his r equest
granted. Our story is a bit of r omantic embr oidery on this event.  Why it was
attributed to King Mu is a mys tery , but the details have been worked out
with some car e, King Chinp'yong was a contemporary of King Mu and
W anghung T emple was built during King Mu's r eign. The temple in the story
is a much older one.)
57. Chin Hwon of Later Paekje
The Sam guk Sagi states that Chin Hwon was born in Kau n-hyon,
Sangju in 867, His family name was Y i, but he changed it to Chin.
According to the Y i family chronicle the Queen of King Chinhung (540-
576) had a son  named Kuryun-kong who was the father o f P'a-jinkan
Sonp'um, who was the father of Kakkan-Chakjin, who was th e father of
Ajak'ae (by marriage with W an ggyo-Pari). A jak'ae worked on a farm, but
subsequently became a general and occupied Sabulsong (Sangju, North
Kyongsang Prov ince). He became a Silla noble with the title of Kakkan. He
was twic e marri ed, to the Lady Sangwon and Lady Namwon, a nd had five
sons an d one daughter—Sa ngpu-Hwon, General Nung-ae, General
Y ongkae, General Po-kae and General So-kae, and Lady T aechu-T ogum.
The first son, Hwon, possessed heroic qualities and strategic talent.

There is  a legend about Chin H won's birth. In the northern vi llage of
Kwangju there lived a rich man who had a pretty , modest daughter . One day
she said  to her father , “A handsome and noble young man has  entered my
bedroom and made love to me the whole night for the past sev eral nights.
He did not tell me who he was or where he came from, and I was too
ashamed to tell you until now . He is coming again tonight, if I am not
mistaken.”
“Thread a needle,” her father told her , “and pin it to his robe.”
That nig ht the passionate lover came again. Just before daybrea k, as he
embraced her for a farewell kiss, she reached behind him and pinned a
threaded needle to the back of his robe. When she followed the thread
trailing after him, it led her to th e garden wall, where she found  her needle
stuck in the back of a lar ge purp le earthworm with a yellow ban d around its
waist, ju st like the purple robe and golden belt of her lover . Ev entually she
gave birth to a son who at the age of fifteen called himself Chin Hwon.
People laughed and said that Chin Hwon was a corruption of “C hirong-
i,” which means earthworm, because he was the love-child of an
earthworm.  (Th is tale is pr obably derived fr om the pr onunciation of the
man's name, as seen above.)
When C hin Hw on was an infa nt his mother carried him on her back
while taking food to his father , who was plowing a field. She laid the baby
among t he bushes and for got about him for a while, and as he lay there
unnoticed a tigress came and su ckled him, and petted him lovin gly as if he
were her own cub. (Another folktale, this one to explain Chin Hwon's later
ferocity .)
The baby grew up to be a stron g man with a tiger's face and a tiger's
spirit, an d becam e a Silla genera l. He was assigned to defend the southwest
coast. He was a lways ready for battle, and slept with his lance beneath his
head. Soon he was promoted to adjutant in the Queen's royal guard. (Queen
Chinsong, 888-898).
During her reign the Queen had  many lovers and favorites who usurped
and misused her authority , amas sing fortunes for themselves and oppressing
the p eople. Thousands of farmers left their homes and wandere d about the
country , and highway robbers s truck in broad daylight. The nation was in
utter confusion as a result of the Queen's immorality and misrule.
The tige r -spirited general rose in revolt, and followers rallied to  him by
the thousands. He occupied the southwestern area (the old Paekje territory)

and established his headquarters at Mujinju (modern Kwangju) and
assumed the title, “Commander - in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Southwest
Silla and  Found ing Prince of H annam (south of the Han River ).” Later he
was crow ned Ki ng of Later Pae kje at his new fortress of W ansan (modern
Chonju).
At this time Y ang-gil, a fierce captain of war -dogs also rose i n revolt
against Queen Chinsong at Pukwon, and the Silla prince Kung-ye
surrendered to him and became his lieutenant. Chin Hwon praised Y ang-gil
for his valor and made him a field general.
Chin Hwon rode in triumph into W ansanju amidst the enth usiastic
cheers of the c itizens. In order to gain popular support, he made the
following speech: “Our noble  King Onjo established the Kingdom of
Paekje and he and his descendants ruled over the people in peace and
happiness generation after generation for more than six hundred years.
Unfortunately the T'ang Emperor Kao-tsung, at the reque st of Silla,
dispatched 130,000 troops from  across the sea under the command of Su
T ing-fang to attack Paekje by  sea, and Kim Y u-sin of Silla drove his
soldiers into our country after a fierce battle at Hwangsan. Finally the allied
forces v anquished our loyal defenders and destroyed Paekje. I have made
up my mind to reestablish Paekj e and build a new capital in order to avenge
our slaughtered patriotic heroes  and vindicate our national hon or .” In this
way he assumed the title of King of Later Paekje and o r ganized a
government (in 902).
But the n a sudden coup in Ch'orwon-gyong deposed Kung-ye and
brought W ang Kon to power . Chin Hwon sent a congratulatory  message to
him, with peacock fans and bamboo arrows made on Mt. Chiri as gifts.
(W ang K on had taken power in the north, so that the Korean pe ninsula was
now again divided in roughly t he same way it had been during the Three
Kingdoms period.)
Chin Hw on pre tended to maintain friendly relations with W ang Kon,
sending him a p resent of a blue -speckled white horse, but he l ooked upon
him with  jealou s eyes. In October of the third year after his coronation he
led 3 ,000 horsemen in battle arr ay to Chomul-song (near modern Andong).
Accepting this challenge, W ang Kon led a strong force to meet the attack.
However , finding it impossible to inflict a final defeat on Chin Hwon's
swiftly m oving cavalry , he of fered to make peace and sent his c ousin W ang

Sin as a hostage. Chin Hwon accepted the truce and sent his  son-in-law
Chin Ho in exchange.
In Dece mber Chin Hwon took twenty-odd towns to the west of Silla,
and sent an envo y to the court of Later T'ang (one of the evane scent states
that app eared at  the breakup of the T'ang dynasty), calling him self “vassal
to th e Celestial Emperor .” The E mperor was highly pleased, and conferred
upon Ch in Hwon the title, “Ins pector of State and Supreme Commanding
General of the Paekje Army ,” in addition to the reconfirmation of his
former of fice “General Governor , Magistrate of Chonju, Four Direction
Supreme Military Commander in the Eastern Seas and King of Paekje” with
2,500 households as his fief. (Th e said Emperor thus put in a cla im to be the
legitimate successor of the T'ang emperors and maintained the legal fiction
that Chi na was the real ruler of Korea, while Chin Hwon for his part
obtained an ally and to some extent legitimized his rule.)
In the next year Chin Ho sudd enly died. Suspecting that he h ad been
murdered, Chin Hwon imprison ed W ang Sin and demanded tha t W ang Kon
return his blue-speckled white horse. This W ang Kon laughingly did.
Chin Hwon next took Kunp'um-song (now Sanyang-hyon), burning and
plundering the city (probably in 925 or 926). T aken by surprise, the King of
Silla ask ed W an g Kon for help , but before the troops could arrive Chin
Hwon to ok Kou l-pu (now Ulju) and dashed into Sirim (i.e. Kerim, in the
W estern outskirt s of Kyongju) i n a shock attack while the king and Queen
of S illa were enjoying a picnic at the Pavilion of the Stone Abalone. Chin
Hwon forced the King to fall o n his own sword, violated the  Queen and
raised to  the throne a distant cousin of the King named Kim Pu. He took the
King's younger brother Hyoryom and the Prime Minister Y ong-kyong
prisoner and evacuated Kyongj u, taking with him precious jewels, lovely
women and the best artisans.
W ang Kon led five thousand cavalrymen to Kongsan (near T aegu) to
fight Ch in Hwon, but in a fierce battle his generals Kim Nak an d Sin Sung-
kyom w ere killed and the ar my routed. W ang Kon himself narrowly
escaped, leaving  the tiger -spirited Chin Hwon to perpetrate outrages as he
pleased.
Chin Hwon plundered T aemok-song (now Y akmok), Kyongsan-pu (now
Songju), and Kangju (now Chinju), and attacked Pugok-song, where Hong
Sul, the magistrate of Uisong-pu, died in the fighting.

In th e fo rty-second year after his uprising Chin Hwon took up a position
at S oksan in order to attack Koch'ang-gun (now Andong) and W ang Kon
faced hi m at Pyongsan, only about a hundred paces away . After a fierce
battle Chin Hwon's forces w ere driven of f, but the next day they
counterattacked and occupied Sun-song, whose magistrate W on Pong fled
in the night to save his life. In a great rage W ang Kon lowered the status of
this city , calling it Haji-hyon (now P'ung-san-hyon).
By this time t he King and court of Silla, realizing the national
decadence and the impossibility of restoring the kingdom's former
greatness, relied  increasingly on W ang Kon's new Koryo kingdom for
protection, especially against C hin Hwon. The latter was planning a fresh
raid on Kyongj u to repeat his former outrages. Fearing that W ang Kon
might forestall him, he sent the following letter .
“A few days ago Prime Minister Kim Ung-nyom called you to the
King's palace in Kyongju to hold a secret military conference. This is like a
lar ge turtle responding to the call of a small turtle, or two partridges pecking
at th e wings of a hawk. (T wo proverbial expressions. The sm all, female
turtle calls the lar ge male secretly—implying a conspiracy . The two
partridges are Silla and Koryo attacking the hawk, Later Paekj e.) Y our ill-
advised act will only cause mis ery to the people and make the fair land a
ruin.
“In o rder to fore stall your action I pur ged the filthy court of pomp and
luxury a nd pleasure in idleness by holding the whip of T su-sheng and
wielding the battle-axe of Han Ch'in-hu.(T wo Chinese historical precedents
for Chin Hwon's first raid on Kyongju are cited here.) I p unished the
collaborating of ficials, civil and  military , and instructed the people in the
six departments to uphold my righteousness and follow my path.
“Nonetheless the flattering cou rtiers fled from my sight and the King
died, so I chose the maternal cou sin of King Kyongmyong and t he maternal
grandson of King Hongang (King Kyongsun) and lifted him to the throne in
order to rebuild the nation on its ruins and to preserve the roya l lineage of
the King who is no more.
“But yo u did not heed my adv ice. Y ou lent your ears to groundless
rumors and you sought the throne for yourself, invading Silla from the four
directions. But your ef forts have  come to naught. Even you were not brave
enough t o look straight at the head of my steed, nor were you strong enough
to pull a calf from my cow .

“Early la st winter your field marshal Saeksang was bound hand and foot
at th e battle of Songsan, and within the same month your Left General Kim
Nak exposed his skull on the fie ld in front of Miri T emple and your soldiers
were kil led and taken prisoner in countless numbers. The stronger having
thus bee n clearly  dif ferentiated from the weaker , it is clear as fi relight who
will be victor and who vanquish ed. It will be my pleasure to ha ng my bow
from the tower o f Pyongyang and water my horses in the Pai R iver . (These
places were both in W ang Kon's kingdom.)
“On the seventh of last month P an Shang-shu, the envoy from W u-Y ueh
(another success or -state of the T'ang dynasty) presented to me a message
from the Emperor which reads thus: 'Y ou have long maintaine d peace and
amity w ith Kory o, but recently b ecause of the death of your son-in-law who
was hel d hostage you have br oken the ties of good neighborliness and
invaded each other's borders with armed clashes incessan tly . I have
therefore sent my ambassador to your headquarters in the so uth and to
Koryo i n the north to convey t o you my personal wishes. Y ou  are to live
henceforth in peace and amity , o beying my command. Thus you will show
respect for the Emperor and ho nor the power of the high dragon throne in
the celestial palace.'
“In vain  you wish to beat me w hen you are already beaten. Y o u come
forward to fight me but you are  always hurled back. I send you herewith a
copy of the Emp eror's letter and ur ge you to heed his advice. It is ridiculous
to imag ine that a hare and a dog will fight until both fall dead from
exhaustion, or that a clam and a  stork can hold each other's beak and heart
in a cold embrace until both fall prey to a fisherman. Do  not again
thoughtlessly w ar against me, l est one day you sorely repent it. From the
King of Later Paekje.”
W ang Kon wrote a reply to this message as follows.
“Esteemed enemy: I have received a copy of the Emperor's decree from
Pan Shang-shu, the envoy of W u -yueh-kuo, together with a long letter from
you. Thi s was good news which has sweetened my blood, and I thank you
for instr ucting me. However my interpretation of the Emperor's message is
somewhat dif ferent from yours, so I shall ask the returning envoy to convey
to the Emperor my feelings on the matter .
“By the favor of  Heaven and with the support of the people I ascended
the throne as a soldier king. Because of wars and natural calami ties the nine
provinces of Silla were devasta ted, the majority of the people had become

'Y ellow T urbans ' or highway robbers and the fertile fields h ad become
wasteland. (The Y ellow T urban s were a secret society which caused much
trouble in the closing years of the Later Han dynasty .)
“When I entered into friendly relations with you and Silla as a good
neighbor in order to calm the clamorous disturbances and rescu e the nation
from further catastrophe, the farmers returned to agriculture over a thousand
li  and the soldiers slept in peace f or seven or eight years. But in October of
the year  of the cock a grave sit uation suddenly arose which obliged us to
meet on the field of battle.
“At first  you made light of your  strong enemy , like a mantis that raises
its nippe rs again st a cartwheel, and in this manner provoked me to single
combat. Finally you realized the impossible and beat a hasty retreat, but you
are s till a mosquito with a mountain on its back. T ogether with you I wish
to bo w r everently before heaven  and swear never to fight again, on penalty
of death if the vow is broken.
“I w ished to lay down shield and spear , to cease killing innocent  people,
so I lifted the siege and gave my soldiers a good rest. I even sent a hostage
to yo ur camp tha t the people of the south might live in peace. N evertheless,
before t he blood of the sacrificial oath was dry upon our lips  you loosed
your war -dogs once again to run amuck with their cruel fangs. Thus poison
like that  of bees and scorpions inflicted further damage on living creatures.
Finally your tigerish outrages reached their zenith at the King's palace in the
Golden Castle till the Y ellow Roofs were shaken and fallen to the ground.
“In respecting the authority of  the Chou household with loy alty and
upholding the kingly way , who resembles Ch'i Hsuan-kung or T sin W en-
kung, who contested for supremacy? These were villains who, like W ang
Mang an d T ung  Cho, awaited o nly the opportunity to seize co ntrol of the
state.
“Boorish upstart that you are, y ou have violated decorum and ignored
the courtesy due to a prince, f orcing the King to kowtow to you like a
commoner . This violation of the proper relation between higher and lower
was an unpardonable sin against heaven and against man. Only a man of
loyal heart like W on Po can bring peace back to the state.
“I have neither ambition nor wicked designs; I seek only to rescue the
royal court and the nation from danger . But you have broken the laws of
Heaven and earth for material gain and carnal pleasure. Y ou murdered the
King, burned the palaces, massacred the ministers, plundered the royal

treasures, violated the Queen and the court ladies and rode of f with the
choicest beautie s and the most precious jewels loaded on your carriages as
spoils o f war . Y our wickedness  is comparable only to that of Chieh and
Chou and you have outdone owls and eagles in inhuman cruelty .
“I am faithful to  my lord, like a hawk that hunts only small bird s. I play
but the part of  a dog or a horse for the King my master .  W ith deep
resentment and in response to public indignation I rose up again. During the
past two  years my soldiers h ave roared like thunder and moved like
lightning over the land, leaped like tigers and flown like dragons over the
sea, win ning every battle. When Y un-kyong was routed on the seacoast his
army's abandoned armor was piled mountain-high; when Ch'u-cho was
routed u nder the  walls of his city the corpses covered the field and blood
flowed i n streams. In Y onsan our men cut of f the head of Kil-hwan before
our cam p and in Mari-song they killed Su-o under our battle standard. In
Imjon-song Hyong-chok and hundreds of his subordinates had  their heads
cut of f and in Ch'ongch'on-hyon Chik-sim and four or five of his
subordinates laid their heads upon the block. Y our defeated soldiers at
T ongsu, Kyongs an, Kangju and Naju surrendered to our war - camp. (The
persons mentioned in this paragraph were all Later Paekje commanders.)
“Since our attacks are so swift and our victories so sure, the restoration
of the lost territory under your occupation is only a matter of time. As
Chang-erh did at his camp at Ch 'i-sui, we shall before long remove a source
of lastin g regret; we shall win a victory like that of Han-wang o ver Hsiang
Y u at W u-kiang (rather pointed references to the conflicts that l ed up to the
foundation of the Han dynasty in China). Finally the thunders of conflict
will cea se and bright sunlight will shine over heaven and earth. Since
Providence is on our side, who w ill dare to stand in our way or try to rob us
of this blessing?
“Much more, his highness the K ing of W u-yueh has graciously advised
us in a royal message to make pe ace in Ch'ong-gu (land of blue,  the color of
the east, i.e. Ko rea) so we must  obey him. If you lay down your arms you
will not only respond to his wish but will also contribute to the  reunion of
this divi ded lan d in the east. Should you continue fighting m e you will
bring ab out your own destruction and will repent when it is too  late. From
the King of Koryo.”  (Ilyon notes that this letter was drafted by Ch'oe Ch'i-
won, a famous Silla scholar who had studied in China and at tained high

rank. He r esigned in disgust during Queen Chinsong's r eig n when his
pr oposals for r eform wer e r ejected and lived ther eafter in r etir ement.)
In the year 933 Kong-chik, one of the bravest and most intell igent of
Chin Hwon's vassals, surrendere d voluntarily to W ang Kon. Enraged, Chin
Hwon h ad Kong-chik's two sons and daughter arrested and their thighs
burned and the sinews cut with a red-hot iron.
In September of the same year Chin Hwon dispatched a lar ge naval
force to  attack Koryo. The ships sailed up the Y esong River and stayed
three days while the sailors set  fire to a hundred boats plying among the
river ports of Y om, Paek and Chin.
In 935 Chin Hwon, hearing of W ang Kon's arrival at Unju, sent his
warriors there to fight. But while they were setting up defense lines the
Koryo general Y u Kom-p'il sen t his cavalry char ging in among them, and
they whipped of f 3,000 heads. Soon more than thirty cities north of Ungjin
had opened their gates to the Koryo troops. Hearing this news Chin Hwon's
chief of staf f Ch ong-hun, his medical of ficer Chi-kyom and several generals
including Sang-pong and Chak-p'il surrendered to Koryo.
At l ast C hin Hwon said to his sons, “Many years have passed  since I
arose in the clos ing years of Sill a and became King of Later Paekje, and the
number of my s oldiers grew to be twice as great as that of the northern
army . Bu t now many a battle has been lost to them and it seems that Koryo
enjoys th e favor  of Heaven. I see that I must surrender to the no rthern king
in or der to save my life.” But hi s three sons Sin-gom, Y ong-gom and Y ang-
gom objected to their father's defeatism.
According to the Y i Family Chronicle Chin Hwon had nine children: 1)
Sin-gom, otherwise called Chin-song, 2) Kyom-noe, 3) Y ong-sul, 4)
Ch'ong-chi, 5) Chong-u, 6) (name unknown), 7) W i-hung, 8) Ch'ong-gu and
9) Lady Kuk T ae. These were  all children of his first wife, the Lady
Sangwon. In addition he had a d ozen children by concubines. Among these
the four th son, Kum-gang, was tall, handsome and intelligent. Chin Hwon
loved hi m best, and planned to make him the Crown Prince, m uch to the
mortification of his elder brothers Sin-gom, Y ong-gom and Y ang-gom.
By this time Y ang-gom had been made governor of Kangju and Y ong-
gom wa s govern or of Muju, le aving Sin-gom at home to atte nd his aged
father . Ich'an Nung-hwan sent m essengers to Kangju and Muju p roposing to
Y ang-gom and Y ong-gom that they conspire to depose the “Old T iger .”
Nung-hwan together with Y ong- sun then persuaded Sin-gom to detain Chin

Hwon a t Kumsan T emple and sent men to kill Kum-gang. Sing-gom
accordingly ass umed the title of “Great King” and granted a general
amnesty to all the prisoners in the realm.
Chin Hw on had  gone to bed all unsuspecting. He was awaken ed by a
great no ise in the courtyard and asked Sin-gom what it was. His son replied,
“The King is old, and he is weak in administration, so his eldest son has
succeeded to the throne. The generals and admirals are merry with wine in a
banquet to celebrate the new king's accession.” So saying, Sin-gom
conducted his father to a cell in the precincts of Kumsan T emple and
confined him there under the strong guard of general P'adal and thirty men.
From that time the children of Later Paekje began singing a ballad:

O pitiful child of W ansan,
Thou hast lost thy father;
T ears flow down thy cheeks
Like rain falling from heaven.

Chin Hw on was  kept at the temple with his concubines, a court lady
named N ungpunam, a maidserv ant named Kobinyo and a lad and a lass as
companions. On e night in April  he entertained his guards with strong wine,
and when they were drunk and had fallen asleep he fled to Koryo by sea,
accompanied by his own bodyguards Sowonpo Hyang-pu, O T am and
Ch'ung-chil. The King of Koryo received him with due ceremony ,
addressing him as Sangpu (hig h father) as befitted his greater age and
according him more respectful treatment than any of his courtiers or even of
his o wn children. Chin Hwon was given the South Palace (in K aesong) as
his resid ence to gether with a fief and a farm in Y angju, forty slaves male
and fem ale and nine horses. I n addition the King assigned Sin-gang, a
surrendered Later Paekje gen eral, to attend the “Old T iger” as his
bodyguard, that he might live in comfort and dignity .
After Ch in Hwon's flight his so n-in-law general Y ong-kyu said to his
wife, “Forty years' labor by ou r King is lost on the eve of great success
because of a quarrel within the royal family which has obliged him to
surrender to Koryo. A virtuous widow may never take another man and a
loyal mi nister m ay never serve another dynasty . If we betray our King and
serve his traitorous son we shall lose face before the righteous patriots of
this country . Now W ang Kon of Koryo, a magnanimous general and a

benevolent King , has won the love and respect of the people. P erhaps with
the h elp of Prov idence he will b ecome master of the Three-Han nation (i.e.
all of Korea). I suggest that w e write to the King of Koryo in order to
comfort our father , who is now under his protection, Perhaps if we approach
him with civility we will win his favor in the future.”
His wife gladly agreed to this proposal. Accordingly Y ong-kyu sent a
messenger to W ang Kon with a letter which contained the following
significant words: “If you undertake a punitive expedition, I will
communicate secretly with you and the Koryo army .”
King T'aejo (W ang Kon's po sthumous title, which we may now
appropriately gi ve him) was h ighly pleased. He gave a rich  gift to the
returning messe nger and sent th is reply to Y ong-kyu: “If you open the road
for our troops to  pass without hindrance I will first shake hands with you
and then bow to your wife. I will treat you and your wife as my own brother
and sister -in-law in return for y our kindness. Heaven and earth, gods and
goddesses are witnesses.”
In June  Chin Hwon addressed King T'aejo: “Y our old vassal
surrendered to Y our Majesty in  order to cut of f the head of his traitorous
son by means of  your military m ight. If you kill the thief who has usurped
my throne and destroy the co nspirators who have joined him in high
treason, I will not repent even though I should instantly die.”
“Y es, I underst and,” the King replied. “I was only waiting  for an
opportune moment.”
When al l was in readiness for a general attack on Later Paekje, t he King
first sen t Crown  Prince Mu an d General Sul-hui at the head of 100,000
cavalry and infantry to march t oward Ch'onan-pu. Then in September the
King in person led three further army units to join the vanguard.
When the Koryo army had advanced as far as Ilson, Sin-gom sent troops
to st op i t. Attac kers and defenders took up positions at Ich'on, facing each
other northeast and southwest. T hen as King T'aejo, accompanied by Chin
Hwon, was reviewing the troops , suddenly white clouds appeared in the sky
above hi s head shaped like swords and spears, and sailed swiftly toward the
enemy position.
“Char ge!” shout ed the King, and his soldiers leaped forward lik e angry
waves. Frightened at this formidable display of Koryo power , generals Hyo-
pong, T ok-sul, Ae-sul and Myong-gil, commanders on the right and left

wings o f the later Paekje force, whipped of f their armor and surrendered
before the Koryo camp.
King T'a ejo treated them kindly and enquired after the whereabouts of
the usurper Sin-gom. Learning that he was with the central body of his
army , the King ordered general Kong-hwon to launch an atta ck on both
flanks. This Kong-hwon did, an d the enemy soldiers scattered and fled in
all d irections. Hotly pursued an d unable to escape, Sin-gom and his two
brothers, accompanied by generals Pudal and Nung-hwan and forty
soldiers, appeared before the Koryo camp and prostrated himself in
surrender .
King T'aejo treated them kindly and permitted them to come and live
with the ir famil ies at his capita l, except for Nung-hwan. T o h im he said
sternly , “ Y ou ha ve conspired with Y ang-gom to detain your Kin g and to lift
his s on Sin-gom to the throne.  This is high treason and a br each of the
ethical conduct incumbent upo n a subject toward his king. Y our sin is
unpardonable, a nd you shall di e!” And he ordered his soldier s to cut of f
Nung-hwan's head.
King T'aejo spared Sin-gom's life, considering his surrender and
repentance and the fact that he had not usurped the throne vol untarily but
had been  cajoled  and forced into  it by his villainous companion s. But when
Sin-gom escaped death the seventy-two-year -old T iger King of Later Paekje
died of rage, an ulcer bursting on his back, at a temple in Hwangsan.
King T'aejo had his troops observed the strictest military discipline and
committed no crimes against civilians, so peace reigned everywhere and the
people in all the provinces prayed with heart and voice for his long life.
The King said to Chin Hwon's  son-in-law Y ong-kyu, “When  the ex-
King lost his thr one not even the  poorest of his subjects spoke in sympathy ,
but you and you r wife from a thousand  li  away expressed your love and
respect to him in your letters, and did virtuous deeds for me. I can never
for get your sincerity ,” Forthwith , Y ong-kyu was promoted to t he of fice of
Left Min ister an d given a lar ge rice-field as a reward, in addition to thirty-
five coa ches to carry his fam ily and movable property to the capital
(Kaesong). Y ong-kyu's two sons were also given important of ficial
positions.
Chin Hwon rose to power in the year 892 and fell to destruction in 936.
In the book Saron (Review of Koryo History) it is written, “In the
closing days of Silla the national fortune fell because of moral d egradation.

She was  forsaken by Heaven and alienated from the people. Highway
robbers were rampant and am bitious heroes rose like the spines of a
porcupine. Amo ng them Kungye and Chin Hwon were prominent. Kungye
was a Silla prince, yet he made an enemy of his native land and even cut the
portraits of his royal ancestors t o pieces with his sword. His mad and cruel
temperament brought about his destruction.
“Chin Hwon, a farmer's son in Silla, rose from the ranks. He fattened
his belly  with the King and Que en's food, yet he conceived evil in his heart.
A vailing himself of the national crisis he raided the capital and murdered
the King  and his subjects like beasts. For their sins Kungye was forsaken by
his vassa ls and Chin Hwon was  betrayed by his own sons. Even Hsiang Y u
and Li Mi were unable to thwart the rise of Han and T ang. Much less could
the two murdere rs Y e and Hwo n withstand the august power of our great
King T'aejo!”
58. Karak-kuk
(Ilyon sa ys that this is a sketchy description taken fr om Karak-kuk-ki, a
narrative by Munin, magistrate of Kumgwan County during the r eign of the
Koryo K ing Munjong (1046-108 3). It consists mostly of the usual legends,
but some of it is based on fact. Ther e was indeed an ar ea calle d Karak on
Kor ea's southern coast in ancient times, and tribes known as Kaya.)
Since th e creatio n of heaven and  earth there had been no national name
and no king of the people of the  Kimhae region (north of the Naktong River
delta). The nine chiefs Ado-Kan, Y odo-Kan, P'ido-Kan, Odo-Kan, Y usu-
Kan, Y uch'on-Kan, Sinch'on-Kan, Och'on-Kan and Sinkwi-Kan ruled over
the 75,000 natives, who plowed their fields and sank wells to support their
simple lives.
In the eighteenth  year of the Kien-wu era of Emperor Kuang W u of the
Later Han in the year of the tiger (42 A.D.) on the day of the spring festival
in B athing V alley the villagers heard a strange voice calling  from Kuji
(T urtle's Back), the summit of N orth Mountain, saying, “Does anyone live
here?”
“Y es,” the chief replied.
“What is this place?”
“This is  Kuji, the T urtle's Back, the highest peak of our North
Mountain.”
“A h eavenly god has command ed me to descend to earth, establish a
kingdom, and become its king, and therefore I am here. Y ou people must

dig in the earth on the peak, while you dance and sing, 'K uha! Kuha!
(T urtle, turtle)7 P ush out your head! If you don't, we'll burn and eat you.'
Then you will meet a great king.”
The nine  chiefs and all the people danced and sang for joy and looked
up into the sky . Lo! The heavens opened and a purple rope descended to the
earth, with a golden bowl wrapped in a red cloth tied to the end of it. When
the cloth was r emoved the bowl was found to contain six g olden eggs,
round li ke the sun. The people worshipped the eggs, and, having replaced
the cloth , took the heavenly gift s to the house of Ado, the paramount chief,
where th ey laid them on a table and went home to rest. When they returned
at sunris e and removed the cloth  they found that the eggs had hatched into
six b oys of nobl e and handsome appearance. All the people bowed low and
of fered congratulations
The boys grew rapidly day by day , and after ten days the height of the
boy who had ha tched first had reached nine feet. His face was l ike that of a
dragon, his eyebrows were like two eight-colored rainbows (like those of
Y ao, the sage-king of ancient China) and his eyes sparkled w ith double
pupils (like those of Shun, Y ao's son-in-law). On the fifteenth of the same
month he was crowned king with the title “Suro.”8 He named his kingdom
Karak-kuk (or Kayaguk) and the other five men became the rulers of the
five neighboring Kaya tribes.
The kingdom of Karak-kuk was bounded on the east by the Hwangsan
River , on the southwest by Ch'anghae (the Blue Sea), on the northwest by
Mt. Chiri, on the northeast by Mt. Kaya, and on the south by the sea.
The King lived at first in a temporary residence built over an earthen
platform three feet high and roo fed with uncut reeds. In January in the year
after his coronation the King dec lared, “I wish to establish the capital of my
kingdom.” He proceeded south  to a valley and gazed at the surrounding
hills, which rose like embroidered windscreens as far as the eye could
reach.
“Beautiful and wonderful!” the King exclaimed. “Though small and
narrow as a blade of grass, this place is fit to be the abode of the sixteen
Nahans (disciples of Buddha) or the seven sages (legendary Chinese
philosophers). W ith proper development of the surrounding country , this
will make a fine  place for peop le to live.” And he selected the locations of
the outer city walls, the royal palaces, government of fices, armories and
storehouses before returning to his temporary headquarters.

W orkers and artisans from all directions responded to the King's call
and com menced construction a t Kumyang in February . All the sites had
been prepared within a month , and a year later the whole project was
finished. The King was highly p leased. Having selected an auspicious day ,
he moved into his new palace, and there presided personally over the
national administration.
About this time the Queen of King Hamdal in W anha-kuk co nceived
and laid an egg. From the egg a boy was hatched and was named T'alhae
(Remove Shell) because he emer ged from an egg by throwing of f its shell.
When T'alhae was three feet tal l and his head measured one foot across, he
came over the sea to pay a formal visit to King Suro.
“I have come,” T'alhae announced, “to take over your throne and
crown.”
“Heaven has sent me down to rule over this nation in peace,” t he King
replied. “I cannot give up my throne, nor will my people suf fer you to put
my crown on your lar ge head.”
“Let us settle this question by a contest of magic art,” T'alhae proposed,
and the King agreed.
In th e tw inkling of an eye T'alh ae became a hawk, whereupon t he King
became an eagle; T'alhae changed into a sparrow and the King into a falcon.
Finally T'alhae returned to hum an shape and the King also regained his
noble form.
“I su rrender to Y our Majesty ,” T'alhae said, “During our contest  I was a
hawk be fore an eagle and a sparrow before a falcon, but I escaped death
thanks to the kind heart of a noble sovereign who refrains from killing
living creatures. Therefore I am unworthy to dispute your thron e. Long live
the K ing! Farewell!” And he boarded a ship which had arrived from China
and departed.
King Su ro order ed five hundred warships to go in pursuit, for h e feared
that T'al hae mig ht return to wa ge war against him. But seeing  the strange
ship fleeing toward Kerim (Sill a), the King's warships gave up the chase
and returned to port.
In th e tw enty-fourth year of Kien-wu of Kuang W u-ti in the La ter Han
period in the year of the monkey (Mu-sin, 49 A.D.) on the twenty-seventh
day of the seventh month, the n ine chief courtiers of King Suro  repaired to
the palace and were received in royal audience

“It i s not good for the King to be alone,” they said. “Let Y our Majesty
choose the most beautiful and v irtuous maiden from among the girls whom
we shall bring to the palace and make her your queen.”
“I was sent down from heaven t o rule this land,” the King replied, “and
so my spouse will also descend from heaven at divine command. Sail
toward M angsan-do (Mountain-V iewing Island) in the south an d see what
happens.”
The courtiers obeyed. When they were far out at sea, a ship with a red
sail and flying a red flag appear ed on the horizon, darting towa rd the north
like an arrow . The Kaya sailors waved torches and made signs for the
mysterious ship  to come near . When it did so, they found that a beautiful
princess was on board. The sailors escorted her to the shore, where a courier
mounted a swift steed and galloped of f to convey the news to the King.
The King was exceedingly glad. He commanded the nine senior
courtiers to meet the princess on the seashore and conduct her to the palace.
( Th e courtiers pr oceeded to th e coast and encounter ed the p rincess.)
“W elcome, princess!” they said . “The King desires you to enter the palace
and be received in audience immediately .”
“Y ou are strangers,” the prince ss modestly replied. “I cannot follow
you, nor can I  be so unmaidenly as to enter the palace w ithout due
ceremony .”
The courtiers conveyed the pri ncess' words to the King, and  he was
struck by her vir gin modesty and queenly dignity . He ordered a tent pitched
in front of his d etached palace on a hill sixty feet southwest of the royal
residence and awaited her arrival.
The prin cess lef t her ship with  her suite, which consisted of the two
courtiers Sin Po and Cho Kua ng, their wives Mojong and M oryang and
twenty slaves who carried gold, silver , jewels, silk brocade and t ableware in
countless boxes as her trousseau . When she reached the top of the hill she
changed her brocade trousers and of fered them as a gift to the mountain
spirit. Then she approached the tent and the King rose to meet her .
The King bestowed native costumes and jewels upon the suite and bade
them rest on beds covered with embroidered quilts and pillows. Then he
and the princess entered the sleeping chamber .
“I am a princess of A yuta (in India),” the princess said. “My family
name is Ho, my given name is Hwang-Ok (Y ellow Jade), and I  am sixteen
years ol d. In May this year my  royal father and mother said to me, 'Last

night we had a dream, and in our dream we saw a god who said, “I have
sent down Suro to be King of Karak, and Suro is a holy man. He is not yet
married, so send your daughter to become his Queen.” Then he ascended to
heaven. It is the command of the god, and his words are still rin ging in our
ears. My  daught er , bid farewell to your parents and go.' So I started on my
long voy age, with steamed dates of the sea and fairy peaches o f heaven for
my provisions. Now I blush to stand in your noble presence.”
(It i s inter esting to note that the city of A yuthia was at one time the
capital of the kingdom of Thailand.)
“I knew that you  were coming,” the King told her . “so I refused all the
maidens whom my courtiers re commended as my spouse. Now my heart
leaps with joy to receive a most beautiful and virtuous princess as my
Queen.”
The Kin g passed  two nights and  one day with the princess from India.
When it was time for her escort to return home he gave each person thirty
rolls (one roll is  forty yards) of  hempen cloth and ten lar ge bags of rice to
sustain them on their voyage.
On t he f irst day of the eighth mo nth the King and his Queen entered the
royal pa lace in colorful palanquins, accompanied by courtiers in carriages
and on horseback and followed  by a long train of wagons laden with the
trousseau which the princess had brought with her from Ind ia. She was
escorted into the inner palace, and the two courtiers and their wives who
had accompanied her from India were accommodated in separate
apartments. The  rest of her suite were given a guest house of twenty rooms
and given food and drink, and her household articles and prec ious jewels
were put in a store-room for her use at all times.
One day the King said to his courtiers, “The Kans are the chief
government of ficials, but the pronunciation of their titles is vulgar and
unaesthetic and  their written titles in Chinese characters make them a
laughing-stock to foreigners.” He therefore changed the of ficial titles as
follows: Ado to Agung, Y odo to Y ohae, Pido to Pijang, Obang to Osang,
Y usu to Y ukong, Y uch'on to Y u dok, Sinch'on to Sindo, Och'on to Onung,
and Sinkwi to Sinkwi.
(The las t two ar e pr onounced the same but written differ ently . This
would a ppear to be a r efer ence to the adaptation of the Chines e system of
government, tog ether with official titles that would have been r egar ded as
corr ect by the Chinese.)

The King adopted the of ficial or ganization of Kerim (Silla), creating
peers w ith titles such as Kakkan, Ajilkan and Kupkan and reforming his
government on the models of the Chou and Han dynasties of China. He
loved his people like his own children and benevolently taught them the arts
of civilized life.
The marriage of the King and Queen was like the combination of two
harmonious bein gs—heaven and earth, sun and moon, yang and yin (the
two com plementary forces in the universe in Chinese philosophy). She was
a fai thful and true helpmeet to the King, shining like a ruby or a sapphire—
and indeed she was an Indian jewel and rendered valuable service in the rise
of his royal household, like the  vassals who assisted the King of Hsia and
the two  daughters of Y ao wh o attended Shun, their royal husband, in
ancient China. (The customary references to legendary Chinese rulers. Hsia
is th e name of  the earliest C hinese dynasty of which there is actual
evidence.)
The roy al coupl e lived happily for many years. In due time th ey both
dreamed of seeing a bear , and sure enough the Queen conceived  and bore a
son. This was Crown Prince Kodung.
On the first of M arch in the sixth year of Chung-p'ing in the reign of
Ling-ti, the year of the snake, K isa (189) the Queen died at the age of one
hundred and fifty-seven. The pe ople mourned as if they had lost their own
mothers and buried her on a hill northeast of Kuji. They changed the name
of the beach where she first land ed to Chup'och'on, that of the hill on which
she changed her brocade skirt to Nunghyon, and that of the seacoast where
she wav ed her red flag at the s hore to Kich'ulpyon, so that he r arrival in
Karak should always be remembered.
Sin Po and Cho Kuang, who a ttended the Queen on her voya ge from
India, each begat daughters about thirty years after their arriva l, and both
died a few yea rs later . The Queen's male and female slaves  all died of
homesickness w ithin seven or eight years of their arrival and left no
children, so that their guest hall was vacant.
The King spent many lonely hours in deep grief after the death of the
Queen, and at last he also died ten years later at the age of one hundred and
fifty-eight, on the 23rd of Marc h in the fourth year of Kien-an during the
reign of Hsien-t i in the year of t he hare, Ki-myo (199). (There is obviously
some co nfusion in these dates.) The people wailed as if heaven had fallen
and buried him in a mausoleum  ten feet high and 300 feet in circumference

to the northeast  of the palace. A shrine was erected and sacrifices were
of fered annually  on the third and seventh of January , the fifth of May and
the 15th  of August to the spirits  of King Suro and his royal desc endants for
nine generations.
During the reign of Popmin (King Munmu, thirtieth Silla sovereign,
661-681), the King issued a de cree: “When King Kuhyong, in the ninth
generation of descent from the founder of Karak-kuk, surrendered to Silla,
he b rought with him to Kerim ( Kyongju) his crown prince, Sejong. Sejong
begat Solu-kong, Solukong begat Soun-Chapkan, Soun-Chapkan begat
Queen Munmyong, and Queen Munmyong gave birth to me.9 The founder
of Karak -kuk is therefore my a ncestor of fifteen generations ago. Though
Karak w as dest royed long ago, his shrine still exists today . Y e, my loyal
subjects, must enshrine his table t in the national sanctuary with those of my
royal predecessors and of fer annual sacrifice to his noble s pirit at his
shrine.”
The Kin g dispat ched a messenger to the ruins of Karak-kuk to s et apart
thirty 'ky ong' (fu rrows?) of fertile rice land to support the caretaker of the
tomb and pay f or the ceremonies. Kaeng-se Kupkan, in the seventeenth
generation of descent from Kin g Suro, was appointed caretaker , to of fer
wine, rice cakes, tea and sweets to the royal spirits on the five annual
memorial days fixed by King Kodung.
From th e time King Kodung fir st established the royal resting-place at
his p alace until the reign of Kin g Kuhyong the sacrificial of ferings at King
Suro's tomb continued for 330 y ears, after which they were susp ended from
time to time until King Munmu of Silla decreed their resumption.
In th e closing da ys of Silla a local of ficial called Ch'ungji-Chapk an took
control o f Kumg wan fortress and styled himself General-Magi strate of the
city . On e of his subordinates, Y ongkyu-Agan, was in the habit  of of fering
sacrifices to obscene idols at the shrine of King Suro. While he was
engaged in invoking these gods' blessings on his family one day , a heavy
beam fell from the ceiling and crushed him to death.
The General-M agistrate was frightened almost to death. He had a
portrait of King Suro painted o n a three-foot length of silk e mbroidered
with a twisting dragon, hung it o n the wall with an oil lamp bur ning before
it and worshipped it daily , morning and evening. After three days tears of
blood fe ll like rain from both eyes of the portrait and made a d eep pool on
the g round. He then took the p ortrait to King Suro's shrine and burned it

there. S ummoning a descendan t of Suro named Kyurim, He said, “One
misfortune rides on the neck of  another in my family . The King's spirit is
angry at me because of my disrespectful worship of his portrait. I feared to
look at it and burned it, and now perhaps his ghost will strike me dead. I
wish you to resume the sacrificial ceremonies as before.”
Kyurim consented, and conducted the rites regularly thereafter until his
death af ter a long life of eight y-eight years. But while his so n Kanwon-
kyong was worshipping at the shrine on a May Day , Y ong-kyu's son
Chunp'il went mad. He jumped into the shrine, kicked away the sacrificial
food and  spread  another table w ith his own of ferings. Before he  had of fered
the third cup of  wine to his obscene idols he was taken ill, and died of
insanity on the way home.
There is an old saying, “Obscene idols send down calamities instead of
blessings on the of ferer of sacrifice.” This refers to Y ongkyu and Chunp'il,
the disrespectful father and son.
One night a gan g of thieves en tered the shrine to steal the gold and
jeweled ornaments. Immediately a fierce-looking general clad in steel
armor ru shed fro m the shrine an d twanged his bow in all directions, killing
seven or eight of the thieves and putting the rest to flight. A few evenings
later the survivors returned, and this time a tiger more than thirty feet tall
leaped f rom beh ind the shrine roaring loudly and tore eight or nine of them
to pieces with it s sharp claws an d teeth, while the rest were all frightened to
death. These punishments proved the presence of heavenly spirits in the
precincts of King Suro's tomb and shrine, keeping of f all sacrilegious
persons.
Eight hundred and seventy-eight  years have passed since this shrine was
erected in the fourth year of Kienan (193, recorded as the d ate of King
Suro's death) until the thirty-first year of the present monarch (Munjong,
1046-1083) and in all that time not a green sod on the tomb mou nd has died
or faded , not a rare tree in the precincts has died or decayed , and not a
single ja de ornament in the s hrine housing the King's tablet has been
broken.
Hsin Ch 'ieh-p'i (a Chinese scholar during the T'ang dynasty) once said,
“In all ages and times, no nation has escaped ruin and no tomb has escaped
destruction.” This is true of the kingdom of Karak, but not of the
undemolished tomb of King Suro.

Ever since the heyday of Karak, the inhabitants of the region (modern
Kimhae and vicinity) have celebrated the 29th of July each year by
climbing Songch om Mountain, where they pitch tents on the east and west.
There are singing, dancing, ath letic contests, and many a bottle of wine.
The strong young men are divid ed into right and left teams and gallop their
horses f rom Mangsan-do (Mountain-V iewing Island) toward  the shore,
while gaily decorated boats with red sails carry beautifully dressed maidens
toward the old landing-place. This festival celebrates the ar rival of the
Princess of India (Empress Ho) and the setting of f of Y uch'on and Sinkwi,
the two Karak chiefs, to bring the news to the King.
Since th e ruin of Karak-kuk the name of the area has been changed
many times. In the year of the coronation of King Chongmyong of Silla
(posthumous tit le Sinmun, 681) it was called Kumgwan-kyong, with a
magistrate stationed there. Follo wing the reunification of the Three Hans by
King T'aejo (of Koryo, 918) 259 years later it was called Imhae-hyon for
forty-eight years , and had a naval governor . Then it was called Imhae-gun
or Kimh ae-pu. There was an army headquarters there for tw enty-seven
years and a naval headquarters for sixty-four years.
In th e second year of Hsun-hu a (991) a land surveyor in Kim hae-pu
named Cho Mun-son reported to the King that the acreage set aside for the
maintenance of King Suro's sh rine was too lar ge and that it should be
reduced to fifteen 'kyol' (unit of  farmland) as under the old system and the
remainder divided among the corvee laborers employed in Kimhae
prefecture. Whe n the King received this recommendation he rejected it,
saying, “ A sage- king emer ged from an egg from Heaven and ruled over his
people f or 158 years, until he d ied. This was a happy event whose equal is
rarely found in t he history of the  world since the time of the three legendary
emperors (Sui-len, Fu-hsi and Shen-nung) of ancient China. I a m too much
in awe of his memory to reduce the acreage which supports King Suro's
shrine, which has been hallowed ever since his death by his royal
descendants.”
But the surveyo r persisted in h is recommendations, and at length the
court ag reed th at half of the shrine land should be given to the corvee
laborers. When the division had been completed by royal order , the
surveyor suddenly fell ill and was obliged to take to his bed. There he fell
asleep and dreamed that he saw seven or eight ghosts armed with long ropes
and shar p sword s approaching him with a terrible roar: “Y ou have done us

wrong. W e shall cut of f your head!” Down flashed the swords like lightning
upon his neck and up sprang the surveyor from his bed, wa king with a
scream. He was so frightened that he ran out of the house, and fell dead as
he w as p assing t hrough the city gate. His death prevented him fr om af fixing
his seal  to the land-survey re gister (which was necessary to make the
transfer of shrine land legal).
King Kimchil, in the eighth generation of descent from King Suro, was
mindful of the w elfare of his peo ple and upheld moral principles. He prayed
for the repose of the fragrant soul of Queen Ho, the Princess of India, and in
the twen ty-ninth year of Y uan-chia, in the year of the dragon, he had a
Buddhist temple  erected at the place where she took her marriage vows to
King Suro, calling it W anghu- sa (the Queen's T emple), with ten  kyol  of
farmland for its support.
Five hundred years later another temple (Changyu-sa) was erected
nearby w ith a royal donation of 300  kyol  of farm and for est land to provide
food and  firewo od for the monk s. They demolished the Queen's T emple to
the s outheast and built a farmstead on its ruins to store grain and pasture
horses a nd cattle. All the passe rs-by shed hot tears at the desolate state of
the Q ueen's temple. A lone monument, weather -beaten and over grown with
moss, still stands on the ruins. It bears the following inscription:
“In the beginning when heave n and earth were created the re were
people but no k ing to rule over  them in this land. In the Middle Kingdom
(China) there had been kings and emperors for many generation s, and in the
Eastern nations capitals were established, in Kerim first and in Karak later .
But in Karak there was no king who cared for the welfare of the inhabitants.
“Heaven showe d mercy to the myriad creatures. Spirits descended to
place eg gs in the mountains, hiding themselves in the mist. In t he darkness
a vo ice was h eard but no-one was to be seen. The gathe ring crowd
responded to the voice with dance and song.
“After seven days the wind blew hard and the clouds cleared, and from
the blue heavens six round egg s descended at the end of a pu rple string.
People g athered from the neighborhood and made a ring aroun d the eggs.
Five of them were taken to each of five towns and the sixth rem ained in this
castle. The six eggs descende d simultaneously on the same string of
brotherly af fection.
“The he avenly being who remained in this castle brought forth virtue
and gave  laws to the living creat ures of the earth. He ascended the treasured

throne and everything under heaven became clear . He built a palace of
beauty a nd simplicity on a low  earthen platform. He presided over his
government and  ruled the people with impartial love and just ice. Among
other th ings, he taught his pe ople the first lessons of etiquette. Thus
travelers made room for each other on the roads and farmers helped each
other in the fields.
“Noblemen from the four directions of fered their services to assist his
rule, and  the people welcomed  his of ficials to look after their farms and
pastures on high and low lands. But, alas! Like morning dew o n the grass,
he was unable to enjoy the lon g life of the 'Camellia T ree' (referring to a
phenomenally l ong-lived tree in a Chinese legend). When great sorrow
darkened heaven and earth the whole nation mourned with deep grief, as if
they had lost their own father .
“But go ld never loses its sparkl e and jade rings its echo far an d wide.
His royal descendants have flourished to all ages, and their sacrificial
of ferings in his memory will be fragrant ever more. Though the moon
wanes a nd the tides recede, his royal standard of right living will never
change.”
The chro nicles of the nine rulers of Karak descended from Sejo, King
Suro, have been recorded as follows. (Hyon, as usual, gives Chinese
dynastic and cyclic dates. The Christian-era dates given here are deduced
from them, and there may be some slight errors.)
King Kodung: Father King Suro, mother Empress Ho. Crowned on 13
March, 193. Reigned 39 (55) years and died 17 September 232. His Queen
was Moj ong, daughter of Ch'onpu-kyong Sin Po, who bore his son Map'um.
The Kaihuang Calendar says, “His family name was Kim, a corruption of
Kum, meaning gold, because his father King Suro was born from a golden
egg.”
King Map'um: Family name Kim. Crowned in 232, reigned 39 (32)
years and died 29 January , 271. His Queen was Hogu, granddaughter of
Chongjong-gam Cho Kuang, who bore him Crown Prince Kojilmi.
King Kojilmi: Also called Kommul, family name Kim. Crowned in 271,
reigned 56 (55) years, died 8 Ju ly , 327. His Queen was Aji, granddaughter
of Agung-Agan, the mother of Crown Prince I-p'um.
King I-p'um: Family n ame Ki m. Crowned in 327, reigned 62 (60) years,
died 10 April, 3 89. His Queen was Chong-sin, the daughter of Sanong-
kyong Kukch'ung, who bore Crown Prince Chwaji.

King Chwaji: Also called Kimjil. Crowned in  389. He took a servant
girl as concubine and promoted  her relatives to important positions in the
court, ca using disturbance in the nation. A vailing himself of this situation
the K ing of Keri m (Silla) attempted an attack on Karak. An upri ght courtier
of K arak, Pak W on-to, expostu lated with his King: “Even a  grassblade
waves its head in the wind high above the colorful insects which crawl
below , and men are in like case.  If heaven falls and earth sinks, man has no
place to live and no place to keep.”
The King's heart was troubled. He summoned a fortune-teller and asked
his advi ce. After consulting his mysterious book, the diviner said, “Y our
Majesty's fortun e is written in the I-Ching. It says, 'Cut the big toe and the
small to es will recoil.' For an interpretation, please consult th e I-Ching.”
(One of the Confucian Classics,  the I-Ching or Book of Changes is mainly
concerned with divination.)
The Kin g understood: “If the leader of evil, low-class men is k ept at a
distance, his followers will be converted to the right path by a virtuous
man.” He sent his beautiful mistress into exile on a lonely island called
Hasan-do, refor med his corrupt administration and brought peace to his
people. After reigning fifteen ye ars he died in 404. His Queen was Pok-su,
daughter of T onyong T ae-Agan, and she bore his son Ch'wihui.
King Ch'wihui-' Also called Chilka, family name Kim. He was crowned
in 4 04, reigned 31 (30) years and died 3 February , 435. His Queen was
Indok, daughter of Chinsa-Kakkan and mother of Chilji.
King Chilji: Also called King Kumjil. He was crowned in 435 and in
the f ollowing year erected W anghu-sa (the Queen's T emple), dedicated to
Queen Ho, the Princess of Ind ia, to commemorate her marriage to King
Suro and to pray for the repose of her fragrant soul. He reigned 42 (36)
years an d died on 4 October , 47 7. His Queen was Pang-won, t he daughter
of Kumsang-Sagan and the mother of Kyom-chi.
King Kyom-chi: Also called King Kumkyom. He was crowned in 477,
reigned 30 years and died on 7 A pril, 507. His Queen was Suk,  daughter of
Ch'ulch'ung-Kakkan and mother of Kuhyong.
King Kuhyong: Family n ame Kim. He was crowned in 507 and reigned
42 ( 42) years. D uring his reign King Chin-hung of Silla (540-576) raised a
lar ge army and attacked Karak.10 King Kuhyong led his valiant troops
against the enemy , but there was no hope of victory against the heavy odds.
At length he sent his brother T'aljujilgum to the capital (Kyongju) as a

hostage, and finally his royal son Sangson-Cholji-kong went to Silla to
surrender . His Queen was Kyeh wa, the daughter of Punjil-Suijil, and she
bore him  three sons—Sejong-Kakkan, Mudo-Kakkan and Mud uk-Kakkan.
In the book Kaihuang-lu it is written, “In the fourth year of Chu ng T ai-t'ung
(Imja) Karak surrendered to Silla.”
According to the Sankuo Shih K arak was conquered 490 years after its
founding by King Suro. Howeve r the Karak-kuk-ki from which this account
is ta ken makes the conquest thirty years later , giving a total dur ation of 520
years.
(The figur es in brackets in the above table corr espond to the dates
in the chr onological table in the appendix of this book.)
Footnotes to Book T wo
1 . The text actually uses the nam e “Munho,” because the posthumous
title of the second Koryo King, Hyejong, was Mu, written with the
same Ch inese character as the second syllable of the Silla King's title.
It w as thought disrespectful to use a king's title, or any part of it, to
refer to anyone or anything else.
2 . This “Iron Gate of Silla” is de scribed in the T'ang-shu, the of ficial
chronicle of the T'ang dynasty . According to the Japanese scholar Dr .
Ikeuchi it was located at T ogwon.
3 . The Five Great Mountains were T'oham-san in the east, Chiri-san in
the sout h. Kyeryong-san in the west, T'aebaek-san in the north and
Pu'ak (Great Mountain) in the center . The Three Small Mountains were
Naeryok in Kyongju, Kolhwa in Y ongch'on and Hyollye in Ch'ongdo.
4 . The Sam guk Sa gi states. “The c of fin of the royal dead was buried on
the hill south of Pongdok T emple by his august will.”
5 . According to the Samguk Sag i Sinmu's son, who succeeded him,
wished to take this girl as a concubine of the first rank.
6 . There were two fortresses of this name, one north of the Han River and
one sout h of it. The location of the northern fort is now unknow n, but
the sout hern on e was on the site of the old town of Kwangju in
Kyonggi Province, where portions of the walls can still be seen.
7 . The wo rd used here actually r efers to a divinity , and the song is a
magic spell.
8 . “Suro” is an attempt to expres s in Chinese the native Korean  word
“Soori” and “sol,” meaning “supreme” and “holy ,” as is Sunung, the

posthumous title of this king.
9 . The Sam guk Sagi says that K im Y u-sin's sister Munhui was the
consort of King Muryol and the mother of King Munmu. It also states,
however , that Kim Y u-sin's father was Soyon, also called Sohyon. The
“Soun” in the ge neology given here may quite possibly be a cor ruption
of Sohyon.
10 . Actually Karak was conquered by King Pophung (514-539). His
successor King Chinhung attacked the Kaya people who were K arak's
neighbors. The two events are frequently confused in historical
documents.

BOOK THREE
III. The Rise of Buddhism
59. Sundo Brings Buddhism to Koguryo
(Ilyon sa ys that thr ee other mon ks, Popsim, Uiyon, and T amom followed
Sundo to Koguryo, but since no details about them ar e r ecor ded he confines
himself her e to Sundo.)
According to the Koguryo Pon-gi section of Samguk Sagi, in the second
year of King So surim (372), which was also the second year o f the Hsien-
an era in T ung-t sin when Hsiao W u-ti ascended the throne, Fu-chien, King
of Ch'ien-Ch'in (one of the evanescent states which appeared in China
following the breakup of the Han Empire) sent an envoy to Kog uryo with a
Buddhist image and scriptures and also a monk named Sund o from his
capital of Changan.
T wo yea rs later another Buddhist monk named Ado arrived in Koguryo
from T si n (another Chinese state). In February the following ye ar (375) the
King had Ch'omun T emple (ot herwise called Songmun T emple) built for
Sundo and Ibullan T emple built for Ado. This was the beginning of
Buddhism in Koguryo.
The Biographie s of the Monk s (Haedong Kosung-jon)1 states that
Sundo and Ado came from W e i (still another Chinese state) b ut this is a
mistake. They came from Che n-Chin. The same book says that the two
temples are the same as the present Hungguk and Hungpok T emples, but
this also is a mistake. In those days the capital of Koguryo wa s at Anshi-
ch'eng, north of the Y alu Ri ver , now called Anminchiang. Therefore
Hungguk T emple, which is in Songgyong (Kaesong, the Koryo capital),
cannot be one of the temples mentioned here.

Song of Praise to Sundo
On the Y alu banks the spring grass in green kirtle swings,
Across the rippling river the balmy winds from the Lotus
Paradise sing; Over the silvery waves the oars splash softly ,
Far over the sandy beach the seagulls cry;
W ide over the silent water the red sails flutter toward the bay ,

Loud the waterfowl shriek above the leaping spray;
From whence comes this fishing boat to our shore,
Bringing a holy guest over the misty sea?

60. Nanta Brings Buddhism to Paekje
In the Paekje Pon-gi (of ficial records of Paekje) it is written: “In the
year of the coronation of King Ch'imnyu, which was the ninth  year of the
T ai-yuan era of T ung-T sin Hs iao W u-ti (384), an Indian m onk named
Marananta came to Paekje from T sin, and was warmly welcomed by the
King's court with due respect. T emples staf fed by ten monks were erected in
the new capital, Hansanju. This was the beginning of Buddhism in Paekje.
“Upon his coronation in Februa ry in the seventeenth year of T ai-yuan
(392) King Asin of Paekje2 issued a royal decree granting permission to the
people to seek blessings in the worship of Buddha. 'Marananta' means
'Child-Disciple' (of Buddha). He worked many miracles in Paekje,
interesting records of which are found in the Biographies of the Monks.”

Song of Praise to Marananta
From the misty past the wonders of nature descended from heaven—
Though it is hard to show wonders by learning the art,
If you know the truth you will dance and sing with gladness,
Y ou will call your neighbors to see your rejoicing.
61. Ado Brings Buddhism to Silla
The Sil la Pon-gi (of ficial records of Silla) contains the fo llowing
account. During the reign of King Nulji (nineteenth Silla ruler , 417-458), a
famous Indian monk  (Sramana  in Sanskrit) named Mukhoja came to Ilson-
gun in Silla from Koguryo and began to preach Buddhism. But the Silla
people, far from believing his strange teachings about Buddha and the
Lotus P aradise, resented its denial of ancestor worship and of their
traditional customs. The poor monk would have been killed b y an angry
mob but for the  protection of Morye, a kindly villager who invited the
stranger to live in a cave in his garden.
At this time, the Liang Emperor in China sent an envoy with Chinese
clothing and a parcel of incense  to the King of Silla.3 How ever , nobody in
the court knew what the incense was or how to use it. The King therefore
sent a messenger to travel throug hout the kingdom with the ince nse to see if

he could find anyone who knew what it was. Eventually , he came to
Morye's village. (On hearing of his mission, Morye consulted Mukhoja.)
“Listen, my good monk,” Morye said, “a bundle of pink sticks has
arrived i n Silla from China. They have a strong scent which m akes all the
court of f icials fe el strange, and n either King nor courtiers can te ll what they
are called or how they should be used. Have you any idea what they are?”
“When the rose-colored sticks are burned,” Mukhoja replied, “everyone
will smell the sweet fragrance of Buddha Dharma (Buddhist doctrine) and if
they pra y with clasped hands before the curling smoke they will see gods
and goddesses of great love and mercy who will fulfill their wishes.”
At this time the King's young daughter fell ill with a strange malady ,
and no medicine  would cure her . Mukhoja was summoned to the  palace. He
burned incense and conducted a Buddhist ceremony before t he princess,
chanting a strange litany . Soon  the princess rose from her bed with her
health c ompletely restored. Ov erjoyed, the King gave the monk a lar ge
reward, but Mukhoja gave it to Morye and disappeared.
During the reign of King Pich 'o (posthumous title Soji, 479-500) a
monk n amed Ado, the high pr iest, who strongly resembled Mukhoja in
appearance, cam e to Silla with three disciples and resided in Morye's home
while pr eaching Buddhism to the people. Not long after , Ado died without
suf fering any pain or sickness. (This implies that he had achieved Nirvana,
the escape into n on-being from the wheel of death and rebirth which is the
goal of Buddhi sm.) But his d isciples recited the Buddhist chants and
continued preac hing, until gradually they made many converts. (Ilyon here
notes th at the Biographies of th e Monks states that this story is at variance
with oth er sources. It also says that Ado is represented as having come from
Soch'uk kuk in India or from W u in China. In view of the paragraph which
follows, it is dif ficult to know exactly what source he is referring to as the
“Biography of Ado.”)
The Biography of Ado says that he was born in Koguryo and his
mother's name was Ko T o-yong. During the years of the Chen-shih era
(240-248) a man of T'sao W ei (a Chinese kingdom) named W o Ch'u-ma,
who had  come to Koguryo as a n envoy , fell in love with Ko T o-yong and
she bore  him a s on whom she named Ado. When the boy was fi ve years old
she sent him to a monastery to become a monk. When he was sixteen he
visited W ei (another Chinese k ingdom), where he met W o C h'u-ma and
attended the lectures of Hsiench'ang, a high priest in that country .

Three years later , when he returned to Koguryo to visit his mother , she
said to him, “The Koguryo people do not yet know Buddhism but 3,000
months hence a sage-king will a ppear in Kerim who will lead his people to
embrace the faith.
“Seven principal temples will  be erected on seven sites. (In what
follows, it is d if ficult to disentangle Ilyon's own comment s from the
prophecy attributed to Ado's mother . The remarks in parentheses are
presumably his. ) The first is Ch'onkyong-nim east of Kumgyo (where
Hunghyun T emple now stands. Kumgyo (Golden Bridge) is now Soch'on-
gyo, W est Stream Bridge. The s ite of this temple was chosen by Ado, but
construction did  not begin until 528, and the whole project was not
completed until  the reign of King Chinhung, 540-576). The second is
Samch'on-gi (no w Y onghung T emple, constructed simultaneou sly with the
first temple). The third is on the southern side of Y ong-kung, the royal
palace. ( This is Hwangnyong T emple, whose construction star ted in 554.)
The fourth is on the northern side of the royal palace (where Punhwang
T emple now stands. It was constructed in 635, when Queen Sundok was on
the thron e.) The fifth is Sach'on -mi (now Y ongmyo T emple, constructed in
636). The sixth is Sinyu-rim (now Ch'onwang T emple, built in  680 during
King Munmu's reign). And th e seventh is Soch'ong-jon (now T amom
T emple).
“All these temples will be erected during the flowering of Buddhism in
Silla. Th ey wer e predestined to be temple sites from before the days of
Buddha. If you go and preach the great teachings of the Budd ha, Heaven
will send down blessings upon the East (Silla).”
Deeply moved, Ado set out for Kerim, where he took up residence in
Sori (where Omjang T emple now stands). In the year 263, when King
Mich'u had been on the throne for two years, Ado presented himself at court
and aske d perm ission to preach Buddhism to the people. But the courtiers,
repelled by his strange appearance, not only denied his petition but even
threatened to kill him. So Ado bade farewell to the King and came to
Soknim (now Ilson-hyon), whe re he bid himself in a private house, and
heaven a nd eart h trembled with a strange sound. Morye, the master of the
house, received him with the highest respect calling him Adu Samma.
(Ilyon says samma is an ancient Silla word for monk.)
In th e th ird year of the reign of King Mich'u (264) the King's d aughter
Songguk Kong ju was stricken with a strange malady which neither

medicine nor sorcery could cure. Greatly worried, the King sent messengers
throughout the land to seek a physician who could heal the princess.
Finally A do was  summoned to t he palace, where he at once restored the
princess to perfect health. Highl y pleased, the King said, “My good monk,
what is your wish? Y ou shall have it.”
“I h ave no wis h for myself,” Ado replied. “I wish only th at Y our
Majesty erect a temple in the Ch'onkyong-nim (Heavenly Mi rror Forest)
where I may pray to Buddha to send down blessings upon your kingdom.”
The King agreed and erected a temple in the forest, called Hungnyun-sa.
Ado lov ed simp licity and frugality as was the custom in those d ays. He
lived in a small cottage overtopped by reeds and grass. When he preached
Buddhism to the crowds which thronged around him at night, meteors fell
from the skies a nd scattered their illuminating sparks on the temple grounds
like heavenly flowers.
Morye's sister Sa-ssi was conver ted to Buddhism by Ado. She became a
nun and lived in a convent which she had built in Samch'on-gi, called
Y onghung-sa.
When King Mich'u died (284) the people of Silla rose up and tried to
kill Ado , calling  him a wicked  monk. He returned to Morye's  house, and
there he dug his own grave and ended his life, to appear in the mundane
world no more. W ith his death Buddhist evangelism was suspended in Silla.
T wo hun dred an d fifty years (3, 000 months) after the arrival of  Ado in
Silla, during the reign of King Pophung (514-540), Buddhism again arose in
its full glory in Silla, thus fulfi lling the prophecy of Ado's mo ther . (Ilyon
says that other sources are at variance with this account, and in the
following passage comments on the chronological problems which the
sources present.)
In the Biograph ies of the Monk s (Seng-Chuan) compiled in the Liang
and T'ang kingdoms (in China ) and in the Samguk Sagi it is said that
Buddhism was introduced into Koguryo and Paekje during the y ears of T ai-
yuan at the end of T ung-T sin. The above account is therefore correct in
inferring that Ado came to Koguryo in 374, when King Sosurim was on the
throne. Had Ado arrived in Silla  during the reign of King Pich'o, he would
have first to hav e stayed in Koguryo for more than a hundred y ears, which
is unbeli evable, although the great monks had miraculous powers and could
die and be rebo rn as they chose. Again, had Ado arrived in Silla during
King Mich'u's reign he would have to have gone there direc tly , without

stopping in Koguryo. Moreov er , there were in those days no cultural
institutions, no ceremonial teachings and no name of the country in Kerim,
so Ado could hardly have applied to the court for permission to preach
Buddhism. It is also a mistake t o say that Ado went directly to Silla, where
incense was unknown, without stopping in Koguryo.
Since th e eastward spread of B uddhism began in Koguryo and Paekje
and ended in Silla so far as Korea was concerned, and since the reign of
King Nu lji of Silla (417-458) came not long after that of King  Sosurim of
Koguryo (371-3 84), Ado probably arrived in Silla from Kog uryo during
Nulji's reign. Since it has been  traditionally believed that Ado cured the
mysterious malady of a Silla princess, the name Mukho-ja (Black
Barbarian) appears to be a pse udonym, just as the Liang pe ople called
Dharma “blue-eyed Barbarian” and the T sin people called the m onk T aoan
“Lacquerware Man.” Ado conce aled his identity during his travels, in other
words, a nd was identical with Mukhoja, as is also seen from th e comment
that Ado strongly resembled Mukhoja in appearance.
Ado's m other prophesied the seven cardinal temple sites in the order of
their ere ction, but the two biog raphies give the order erroneously , placing
Sach'on-mi in fifth place.
The figu re 3,00 0 months is not exact. From the days of King Nulji to
527 in Pophung 's reign is somew hat over a hundred years, so 1,000 months
would be nearer the mark. 'W o ' as the family name of Ado's father also
seems to be a mistake.
Miracles of T'an-shih
In the Biography of T'an-shih (or Hui-shih) the Monk, it is written that
Shih wa s a man of Kuanchung (Changan, former and future capital of a
unified C hina) w ho worked many miracles. In the ninth year of T ai-yuan of
T sin Hs iao W u-ti, he took ten copies of Buddhist scriptures to Liaotung,
where he preached Buddhism  and won many converts. Th is was the
beginning of Buddhism in Kogu ryo. (Parts of the Liaotung pen insula were
at various times included in Koguryo.)
In the first year  of I-hsi (405) T'an-shih returned to Kuanchung and
preached the gospel of Buddha to the people of Changan and i ts environs.
T'an-shih's snowy feet were whiter than his snowy face, so the people called
him the white-fo oted monk. His feet never got wet, even when he waded
across muddy streams.

In the closing days of the T sin dynasty a fierce leader of the northern
Hsiung-nu named Ho-lien Po-p o led his barbarian army into Kuanchung
from the north, massacring th e inhabitants in countless numbers. (The
Hsiung-nu were a major group of nomadic tribes in north Asia who plagued
China fo r centur ies.) Ho-lien Po-po stabbed T'an-shih through and through
with his  spear , but the strange monk remained unruf fled, rep elling every
thrust with a laugh, and not taking the least harm. The barbarian admired
his superhuman powers and saved the lives of all his fellow monks. T'an-
shih fled through woods and swamps, under going all sorts of ordeals as he
traveled in the habit of a mendicant.
When T 'o Pa-tao, a general in  revolt against the reigning m onarch,
recaptured Chan gan from the Hsiung-nu and seized control of the state
there liv ed in Poling a man named T sui Ho who worshippe d paganism
(T aoism is intended here), hatin g Buddhism with a deep hatred . When T'o
Pa-tao a ppointed him prime minister he immediately persuaded  the usurper
to persecute the followers of Buddha, condemning them as ini mical to the
state and interfering with the daily lives of the people. K'ou Chien-chih,
who called himself a “Heavenly T eacher of T aoism,” abetted him in this.
On New  Y ear's Day in the last y ear of T ap'ing, T'an-shih appeared at the
palace g ate and asked for an audience with T'o Pa-tao in order to convert
him to Buddhism. The usurper became angry and ordered his soldiers to cut
of f t he h ead of the bold monk. The men struck at his neck wit h their long
scimitars and blue dragon swords, but the blades rebounded without doing
the least injury to T'an-shih. I n a towering passion, T'o Pa-tao himself
swung h is great battleaxe, but to  no avail. Finally they threw the monk into
a garden where a pet tiger was kept, but the tiger simply ignored him.
T'o Pa-tao at last realized that the monk was under the protection of
Buddha. He was confined to his  bed with a high fever , while T 'sui Ho and
K'ou Chieu'chih were stricken with pestilence. As soon as he  could, T'o
struck o f f the heads of T'sui and  K'ou and destroyed their famili es, asserting
that they had caused him to fall into the grave crime of persecuting a monk.
T'o Pa-tao repented his sins an d issued a decree granting freedom of
Buddhist belief to the people throughout his domain. The account breaks of f
at this point, and there is no record of the later days of T'an-shih.
According to this account T'an-shih came to the East in the last  year of
T ai-yuan and returned to Kuanc hung in the first year of I-hsi, so  he lived in
the eastern land for ten years, al though this fact is not recorded in the T ung-

shih. The miracles he worked are similar to those of Ado, Mukhoja and
Marananta at about the same pe riod, so it is possible that “T'an-shih” is a
pseudonym of one of these.

Song of Praise to Ado
On Kerim's Golden Bridge the snow is deep and the ice is thick;
When will warm light come to melt them away?
Lovely Queen of green, fair goddess of spring!
Y ou bring love and mercy to human hearts,
Y ou come to a wake the buds on the plum branches in Morang's
(Morye's) garden.
62. The Martyrdom of Y omch'ok (Ech'adon)
According to the Silla Pon-gi, in the fourteenth year of King P ophung
(527), E ch'adon, a petty of ficial of the court, immolated himself for the sake
of Budd ha. This  event occurred in the eighth year of Pao-tung of Hsiao-
Liang W u-ti, when Dharma a rrived in Chinling (Nanking) from W est
Ch'onch'uk (India) and Nangji Popsa the high priest first open ed a lecture
hall on Mt. Y ongch'ui to preach Buddhism.
During t he year s of Y uan-huo o f T'ang Hsien-tsung (806-820). Ilnyom,
a m onk at Nam gan T emple, wrote a eulogy of Ech'adon's ma rtyrdom for
Buddha which may be summarized as follows.
When K ing Pop hung was seated on his throne in the Purple Pa lace one
day , he looked out over his domain in this eastern land and said , “The Han
Emperor Ming-ti received a revelation from Buddha in a dream  before the
flow of Buddhis t teaching to the East. I wish to build a sanctuary in which
all my people can wash away their sins and receive eternal blessings.”
His courtiers did not understan d the inner significance of the  King's
words, and so his desire to build a Buddhist temple went unfulfilled. The
King sighed deeply and said, “Because of my lack of virtue heaven and
earth sh ow no harmonious sign s and my people enjoy no real happiness. I
am therefore minded to turn to  Buddhism for the peace of my heart, but
there is no one who can assist me.”
There was in the  court a minor of ficial of the rank of Sa-in. Hi s family
name was Pak and his nickname was Ech'adon, or Y omch'ok, a pun for
porcupine. Although his father was undistinguished, his grandfather had
held the  rank of Ajinjong (fourth of the seventeen court grades o f Silla) and
his great-grandfather Suppo Kalmun-wang (Kalmun-wang is a title

bestowed on the father of a r eigning king, similar to that o f Hongson
T aewongun, father of King Kojong, during the Y i dynasty).
In th e B iography of Ado the M onk compiled by Kim Y ong-haeng it is
written, ”... By t hat time Y omch'ok was twenty-six years old. His father was
Kil-sung, his grandfather was Kong-han and his great-grandfather was
Kolhae-wang.”
The great-grand son of a noble king who had performed virtuou s deeds,
Y omch'ok's steadfast loyal heart  was like a straight bamboo or a n ever green
pine tree  and his morals were as clear as a water -mirror . He was thus a
likely candidate for promotion to high of fice in the court of the clear river4
to attend the King.
(When he heard of the King's desire to build a temple) the  young
of ficial took courage. He look ed upon the King's face and  said in a
dignified tone, “The sages of ol d would lend their ears even to men of low
degree i f they gave wise counse l. Since I know Y our Majesty's mind, I will
dare to say a few words. As t he song of birds heralds the approach of
spring, s o the gush of blood from my neck will foreshadow the  full bloom
of Buddhism, for in my spouting blood the people will see a miracle.”
“For mercy's sake,” cried the King, “that is not a thing for you to do.”
“A loyal subject will die for h is country ,” Y omch'ok replied, “and a
righteous man will die for his ki ng. If you cut of f my head immediately for
disobeying your orders to erect a temple as an example to the stubborn
courtiers, who will never believe in Buddha unless they ar e shown a
miracle, the myriad people will prostrate themselves before your throne and
will worship Buddha.”
“A g reat and merciful being,” the King said, “will cut his own flesh and
shed his  own blood to atone fo r the sins of the myriad creatures. He will
sacrifice his own life even for the sake of the birds of the air and beasts in
the slaughterhouse. Though I desire to save my people, how can I kill an
innocent man like you? Y ou would do better to avoid this fate.”
Y omch'ok remained steadfast. “ One man's earthly life is dear ,” he said,
“but the eternal lives of many  people are dearer . If I vanish with the
morning dew today , the life-givi ng Buddhist faith will rise with the blazing
sun tomorrow . This will bring peace to your heart.”
Finally the King assented. “The chick of the phoenix, though young,
desires t o fly into the high heave ns. The chick of the ibis, from i ts hatching,

wishes to swim in the strong waves. If you have set your heart on advancing
the spread of Buddhism by the sacrifice of your life, you are a great man.”
After thi s conversation with Y omch'ok the King called the courtiers into
a royal conferen ce and solemnly declared to them, “I wished  to build a
Buddhist temple in order to shar e peace of mind with all my loyal subjects,
but you are too headstrong to execute my orders. I will put you to the rack.”
All t he c ourtiers trembled from head to foot. White with rage, t he King
roared a t Y omch'ok, “Y ou too hindered my orders and miscarried my
messages. Y our crime is unpardonable and you shall die. Y ou  shave your
head and wear a  long robe, you utter strange words—'Buddha  is mystery ,
Buddhism gives life.' Now let your Buddha perform a miracle and save
your life .” (This would seem to indicate that Y omch'ok had actually become
a monk, a fact not indicated in the foregoing.)
On the day app ointed for Y omch'ok's death the executioner lifted his
great sword above the young monk's head. The King, courtiers and citizens
who had gathered to witness the execution all averted their eyes, for they
dared not look on the horrible sight. Looking up to heaven Y omch'ok said “I
die happ y for the sake of Buddh a. If Buddha is worth believing  in, let there
be a wonder after my death.”
Down came the sword on the monk's neck, and up flew his head
spouting blood as white as milk. Suddenly dark clouds covered the sky , rain
poured down and there was th under and lightning. Fish leaped from the
depths o f the streams and flapped in the air , frightened monkeys jumped
and shrieked as the trees swayed in the whistling wind, tigers ran and
dragons flew , ghosts mourned and goblins wept. It seemed that heaven and
earth ha d turned  upside down. From afar came the sound of a  bell as the
goddess of mercy welcomed the martyr's fragrant soul into the Lotus
Paradise.
Hot tear s rolled  down the King 's dragon robe and cold sweat wet the
courtiers to the bone. Y omch'ok's childhood friends clung to his  casket and
wailed as if they  had lost their parents. In tears, the onlookers p raised him,
saying that his glorious death o utshone the heroic deeds of K aijach'u and
Hong-yon in old China.5 They admired him as an imm ortal saint for his
self-sacrificing support of the  King's faith in Buddhism and for the
completion of the missionary task of Ado.
They buried his headless body o n the western peak of North M ountain
(Kumgang-san) m the Diamond Mountains, which were nam ed for the

Diamond Sutra, one of the Buddhist scriptures, and erected a temple in his
memory called Chach'u-sa. Leg end says his body was buried in the place
where his flying head had fallen.
In the fifth year of King Chinhung (544) the King erected Hung-nyun-sa
as o ne o f the cardinal temples of Kyongju where his people mi ght worship
Buddha. Accord ing to the Samguk Sagi and local tales, the construction of
this temple had actually begun  in the fourteenth year of King Pophung's
reign (527). In the twenty-first y ear of this King's reign huge trees were cut
down in Ch'onkyong-nim (Heaven Mirror Forest) and fashioned into
magnificent pillars and other parts of the temple, which sto od on lar ge
foundation stones, facing beautifully carved stone lanterns and pagodas in
the courtyard.
In th e fi rst year of T a-ch'ing of Liang W u-ti the Liang Emperor 's envoy
Shenhu brought a gift of  Sari  (Buddhist relics) and in the sixth year of
T'ien-chia of Chen W en-ti the Chen Emperor's envoy Liu Szu and the monk
Ming-kuan brought Buddhist sc riptures with them to Silla. By that time in
Kyongju and its environs the golden roofs of temples glittered against the
sky like the Mil ky W ay and lotu s-crowned pagodas stood in unending lines
like flig hts of wild geese. There were bell-towers with Sansk rit-inscribed
bronze bells and Buddhist banners flew from every housetop.
Strong, brave monks, like eleph ants on the land and dragons in the sea
carried the blessings of Buddhism to every corner of the l and. Living
Bodhisattvas ap peared, such as Chinna at Punhwang T emple, Pogae at
Pusok T emple and Odae at Nak san T emple, while celebrated monks from
the W es t (China) visited these temples. This heavenly faith mad e the Three
Hans on e nation  and their inhab itants one family , with the name  of Buddha
written on the he avenly door and his merit reflected in the Milky W ay . Thus
Buddhism arose in Silla through the grace of three sages—Ado, Pophung
and Y omch'ok (otherwise called Ech'adon).
Some years later leading Silla monks including Hyeryung, Hyo-won,
Nokp'ung, Chinno and Kumui repaired Y omch'ok's grave and carved an
elegy on him on his monument nearby .
On t he fifteenth of the eighth m oon in the twelfth year of Y uan-huo, the
ninth year of King Hondok (817), when Y ongsu-Sonsa, of the Y uga sect, the
chief priest of Hungnyun-sa of fered sacrifices at Y omch'ok's grave, he
or ganized his fellow monks into a prayer circle and held a memorial service
on the fifth of each month to  pray for the repose of Y omch'ok's soul.

According to a local biography the elders of Kyongju went to H ongnyun-sa
early in the morning of the fifth day of the eighth moon to of fer sacrifices to
Y omch'ok's soul and to mark the day and hour of his martyrdom.
The rise  of Buddhism in Silla was brought about by the harm onious
labors o f King Pophung and Y omch'ok, who were like water and fish in the
kingdom of Buddha, as Liu Pei and Chu Koliang were during the Ch'u-Han
(Ch'ok-Han) working the wonders of a dragon in the clouds.
When Hongnyu n-sa was built, King Pophung dof fed his cro wn and
donned a monk's robe. He made temple slaves of his royal re latives and
himself became chief priest of the temple. Later , during the reign of King
T'aejong (Muryo l, 654-661), Prime Minister Kim Y ang-to became a devout
Buddhist and sent his two daughters Hwapo and Y onpo (Flowe r Jewel and
Lotus Jewel) to be slaves of this temple. The whole family of Moch'ok, a
traitor , were also made temple slaves. All the descendants of these families
remained slaves of Hungnyun-sa, and to this day the slaves of that temple
are called “royal children.”
Upon succeeding King Pophung to the throne, King Chinhung
immediately bestowed upon Hungnyun-sa a panel in the royal calligraphy
bearing the Chinese inscription, “Great King's T emple of Hongn yun.” King
Pophung's family name was Kim and his Buddhist name was Popun or
Popkong (Holy Cloud or Empty Spirit).
The Biographies  of the Monks and various books of legends say that
King Pophung's  Queen became a nun with the Buddhist name Popun. King
Chinhung and his Queen also entered the order and both took this same
name, Popun. Another book, Ch'aek-pu W on-ku, says that King Pophung's
family name was Mo and his g iven name Chin. In the year in which the
construction of Hungnyun-sa began, King Pophung's Queen founded a
temple o f her own called Y onghung-sa. She shaved her head when her royal
husband did and became a nun , taking the religious name My opop (Holy
Mystery), and resided in the temple until she died a few years later .
The Samguk Sagi says that in the thirty-first year of King Chin -p'yong
(614) a Buddha image at Y ong hung-sa fell down, and soon af terward the
nun who had been the consort of King Chinhung passed away . King
Chinhung was King Pophung's nephew and his Queen Sado Puin(Pak-ssi)
was a daughter of Y ongsil Kakkan of Moryang-ni. She also left her palace
and became a nun, but she was not the builder and mistress of Y onghung-sa.

It w as King Po phung's Queen Lady Pado who built Y onghung-sa, with
Buddha images erected in its hall, and she died there as a nun.
The Samguk Sagi makes a ser ious mistake in omitting the fact that
Kings P ophung and Chinhung both renounced the throne to become monks.
It makes another mistake in the  following passage. “In the first  year of T a-
t'ung, in the y ear of the go at (Chong-mi) a temple was erected in
Ungch'onju called T ait'ong-sa ( T emple of T a-t'ung) in honor of the Liang
Emperor in China.” Ungch'on is now Kongju and was then part of Silla.6
But this  temple could not have been erected in the year indicat ed, because
at th at ti me the erection of Hungnyun-sa in Kyongju was in fu ll swing, so
that ther e were neither time nor resources to work on another o ne. Perhaps
T ait'ong-sa was erected in the first year of Chung T a-t'ung (529).

Song of Praise to W onjong (King Pophung)
His holy intelligence ruled the  state for ten thousand genera tions to
come,
His fair judgment allowed no diverse ar gument;
His life-wheel rolled down after the Golden Wheel,7
His reign of peace heightened the sun of Buddha.

Song of Praise to Y omch'ok
He gave up his life for the sake of righteousness.
Who would not wonder at his noble courage?
The white milk of his blood shot high into the sky
And descended in a spray of heavenly flowers;
After he had lost his head by one stroke of the sword,
The beating of drums in many temples rumbled over the metropolis.
63. King Pop Pr ohibits Killing
The twenty-nint h sovereign of Paekje was King Pop. His childhood
name was Son and he was also called Hyosun. He ascended the throne in
the t enth year of Kai-huang of Sui W en-ti (599). In the winter o f that same
year he promulg ated a law prohi biting the taking of life (in accordance with
Buddhist belief)  and commanding his people to free falcons and destroy
fishing tackle in private homes. In the following year he ordained thirty new
monks a nd began the construction of W anghung T emple in his capital,
Sajasong (Sabisong). W ork had  hardly been finished on preparation of the

site, however , when he died, lea ving completion of the task to his son King
Mu, who finally finished it in the thirty-fifth year of his reign.
This temple was also called M iruk-sa (T emple of Maitreya Buddha).
Behind it stood a picturesque mountain like an embroidered w ind-screen,
overlooking the silvery Saja River . The temple was a scene of natural
beauty in all se asons, with rare flowering plants and awe-inspiring trees
within its precincts. The King of ten sailed down the river to visit the temple
and admire its beauty .
This account is at variance with those given in old books of legends,
which say that King Mu was born of a poor woman who had fallen in love
with a pond-dragon and that his childhood name was Sodong (Potato Boy;
see t he a ccount in Book T wo un der this name). After his roman tic marriage
to P rincess Sonhwa of Silla he ascended the throne of Paekje a nd had this
temple built to gladden her heart.

Song of Praise to King Pop
He spared the lives of the fowls of the air and the beasts of the land—
His grace reached a thousand hills and streams;
His beneficence rejoiced a thousand pigs and fish;
The four seas were filled with his benevolence.
Sing to the Great King, for he descended to earth from the Buddha Land
In T osol-ch'on8 above the fragrant spring is in full glory .
64. T aoism and the Downfall of Koguryo
According to the Koryo Pon-gi, in the closing days of that k ingdom,
during the days of W u-te and Chen-kuan (T'ang Emperors Kao-tsu and T ai-
tsung, 618-649), the people of Koguryo turned to the worship  of T aoism,
contributing fiv e bushels of rice each to the priests. When  the T'ang
Emperor Kao-ts u heard of this , he sent a T aoist priest to Ko guryo with
portraits of Lao Tzu to expound his Classic of Morality (probably the T ao
T e Chin g is intended here) to the people. Among those who listened to this
priest w as King  Y ong-nyu of K oguryo, who had been on the  throne for
seven years, the date then being the seventh year of W u-te (624).
In the following  year the King sent an envoy to the T'ang court to seek
knowledge of T aoism and Buddhism and the Emperor (Kao-tsu) granted his
wish.
After his coronation in the sixteenth year of Chen-yuan (642), King
Pojang wished to see Buddhis m, Confucianism and T aoism flourish in

harmony in his kingdom. Thereupon his prime minister Hapsomun (also
called K aesomun; full name Ch'on or Y on Hapsomun or Kaesomun) said,
“Confucianism and Buddhism are popular among the people but there are
only a few believers in the mysterious doctrine of Lao Tzu, even  though the
yellow-capped preachers teach T aoism, telling the people that if they
worship Lao Tzu they can beco me 'Sinson' (divine beings) and ascend to
heaven like the founder of the religion, whose name was T ogyo or Son-gyo.
W e should therefore dispatch an other envoy to China to invite more T aoist
missionaries.”
At this time P odok-Hwasang, a famous Koguryo monk, d welt at
Panyong T emple. He expostulated with the King concerning the importation
of paganism (i.e. T aoism) in  competition with the orthodox religion
(Buddhism), saying that the division of the national spirit caused by
conflicting religious doctrines brought in by heretics jeopardize d the safety
of th e state and of the throne, but the King would not listen to his wise
counsel.
W ith a sigh of resignation, the good monk moved his abode to a high
mountain in the south (Kodae-s an) in W ansanju (now Chonju). He did this
by calling upon his favorite wind and, by his spiritual power , flying through
the air , temple and all, to the new location. This was in the first year of
Y ing-hui (650), although the Samguk Sagi dates it as March 3 in the second
year of Chienfeng (667). Koguryo was destroyed as a kingdom  soon after ,
in the first ye ar of T sung-chang (668), nineteen years after Podok
abandoned it and landed in his flying hermitage on the grounds of
Kyongpok T em ple. According to the Samguk Sagi this temple and the
flying hermitage still exist today .
Chinnak-kong (Y i Cha-hyon, a K oryo poet) wrote a poem on the wall of
Podok's cell in t he marvellous hermitage in praise of his heroic flight, and
Munyol-kong (Kim Pu-sik, the author of the Samguk Sagi) compiled his
biography , which was widely read throughout the country .
According to the T'ang-shu, when the Sui Emperor led his troops in an
attack on Koguryo in Liaotung his lieutenant Y ang-min (Y ang-myong in
Korean) was defeated in a fierce battle and died swearing that h is resentful
spirit would be reborn as the favorite courtier of the Koguryo k ing and ruin
the country . Sure enough, his reborn tiger -spirit acquired the p ower of life
and dea th over the people of Koguryo. He took the family name Hap or

Kae, which is written by combining the two characters of his name in his
former life into one.
An old Koguryo  book states that in the eighth year of T a-yeh (612) the
Sui Emperor Y ang-ti led 300,000 troops in an attack on Koguryo from the
sea. T wo years later in the twenty-fifth year of King Y on g-yang (of
Koguryo, 614), Emperor Y ang -ti mounted a second seaborne attack to
retrieve the failure of the first. K ing Y ongyang sent an of ficial e nvoy to the
enemy c amp, of fering to surrender . In the envoy's party was a strong man
who car ried a small bow and a s harp arrow concealed on his person. While
the E mperor was examining the  envoy's credentials, this bow t wanged and
the arro w struck the Emperor in the breast. He shrieked wildly , and
commanded the ships to retire and return to China.
“I am  th e Celes tial Emperor , the master in the Middle Kingdom of the
world,” he said to his attendants, “but I cannot conquer this sm all kingdom
in the East and now I have received this tragic wound in my br east. I shall
be a laughing-stock for ten thousand generations.”
At this time the Right Minister , Y ang-min, swore to the weeping
Emperor , “When  I die, I shall be reborn in Koguryo, where I shall become
prime minister and ruin the kingdom to avenge my wounded Emperor .”
After th e death of the Emperor Y angmin also died and was re born in
Koguryo. By the time he was fifteen he was famous throughout the country
for h is uncommon intelligence and godlike genius in the civil and military
arts. King Muyang (actually King Y ongnyu, 618-642, Ilyon says)
summoned him to the palace and made him a courtier . He then took the
name K ae-kum, Kae being the f amily name. He was soon prom oted to the
highest of fice in the governm ent, with the title of Somun, which is
equivalent to Sijung, or prime minister .  (Ilyon quotes the T'ang-shu as
saying that “Hap (Kae) Somun  took the title of Mangniji, something like
Chung-shu-ling in the T'ang court.”)
One day Kae-kum said to the King, “As a kettle is three-footed so a
state sho uld have three religions, whereas in our country Confucianism and
Buddhism flourish without T ao ism. Perhaps, like a two-footed kettle, this
kingdom will capsize.” The King understood him and granted favors to
T aoism, accepti ng eight T aoist priests including Hsuta whom the T'ang
Emperor T'ai-ts ung had sent to Koguryo. The King remodeled Buddhist
temples into T aoist lecture halls and placed the T aoist priest s above the
ranks of the Confucian scholars.

The Sam guk Sagi says that in the eighth year of W u-te (625) the King
of K oguryo approached the T'a ng Emperor through an envoy , wishing to
spread th e teach ings of both Bud dha and Lao Tzu, and the Emperor granted
his wish. But if Y ang-min died in 614 and was reborn in Koguryo in the
same ye ar , this account would m ake him prime minister at the  age of ten,
which is ridiculous. There must be a chronological error in the records.
The T aoist priests from China traveled throughout Koguryo, inspecting
mountains and rivers and calling  on genii to guard them against evil spirits.
(Choosing the sites of buildings and graves according to certain
configurations of the landscape  was a T aoist practice.) They declared that
the o ld city wall of P'yonyang was shaped like a new moon, and ordered
Nam Ha-ryong to build a new city wall outside the old one in the shape of a
full mo on, calling it Y ong-on-song (Dragon-Dam W all) to stand for a
thousand years. Moreover , they unearthed and broke up the “Ho ly Stone” in
P'yongyang because it had been worshipped as the T o-je-am (Emperor's
Rock) o r Choch 'on-sok (Heaven-Audience Stone) which sage-emperors in
the mist y past rode like a flying chariot to their audiences with the gods
according to legend.
Kae-kum also persuaded the King to build a great wall from the
northeast to the southwest seacoast, drafting men for the labor and forcing
women to till the fields. This wall took sixteen years to complete.
During the reign of King Pojan g the T'ang Emperor T'ai-tsung led six
armies in  person against Koguryo, but was defeated and forced to withdraw .
However during the reign of his son the Emperor Kao-tsung, in the first
year of T sung-chang (668), th e Right Minister Liu Jen-kuei and Field
General Li-chi, together with Ki m In-mun of Silla, launched a shock attack
on P'yon gyang, destroyed Koguryo, and sent King Pojang a pri soner to the
T'ang court. The King's illegiti mate son (Prince An-sung) then led 4,000
Koguryo households in surrendering to Silla.
In the eighth year of T a-an (1092), Uich'on, the national priest of Koryo
(i.e. the highest-ranking Buddhi st cleric in the kingdom) visite d the flying
hermitage at Kyongpok T emple on Mt. Kodae, bowed deeply to  the portrait
of Podok, and composed the following poem.

He held high the sacred torch to show the way to Nirvana.
Ah pity! His King and people followed yellow-caps and fairymen.
Alas, his holy abode flew to a southern mountain-top,


And his ruined native land illuminates the East no more. The priest
added to this poem the following explanation; “King Pojang of Koguryo,
enchanted by the weird spells of the T aoist priests, rejected the w ise counsel
of Podok and did not believe in Buddha. The King was forsaken  by Buddha
and Pod ok flew  in his abode and descended on this mountain ( Kodae-san)
and lived in a solitary cell. Later a god-man appeared on Maryong (Horse
Peak) in Koguryo and said to the mountaineers, 'Y our countr y has been
forsaken by Buddha. It will fall into ruin very soon.' ” This story is to be
found in the Samguk Sagi. The others are found in the Dynastic Chronicles
and in the Biographies of the Monks.
Podok had eleven disciples, of whom Musang-Hwasang, with his
disciple Kim Ch'wi, created Kumdong-sa; Chokmyol and Uiyung built
Chinku-sa; Chisu built T aesung-sa; listing, together with Simjong and
T aewon, built T aewon-sa; Sujong built Y uma-sa; Sadae, aided by Kyekuk,
built Chungdae -sa; Kaewon-H wasang built Kaewon-sa; and Myongdok
created Y on-gu-sa. The stories of two further disciples, Kaesim and
Pomyong, are found in the their biographies.

Song of Praise to Podok
W ide and deep as the boundless sea is the Buddha's way ,
Narrow and shallow as a hu ndred streams are Confucianism and
T aoism;
Streams flow into the sea to join the waves of its eternal life.
The pitiful King of Koguryo, sitting wet on the beach
For got to watch the Reclining Dragon flying to the southern sea.
65. The T en Saints of Hungnyun T emple in the Eastern Capital9
There w ere ten plaster statues of sainted monks in the Golden Hall of
Hungnyun T em ple. Seated with their backs against the eastern wall and
facing w est wer e Ado, Y omch'ok (Ech'adon), Hyesuk, Anham and Uisang.
Seated with their backs against the western wall and facing east were
P'yohun, Sapa, W onhyo, Hyegong and Chajang.
66. The Pedestal of the Kasop Buddha10”
(The following involves some rather esoteric matters for which a full
understanding would r equir e so me study of Buddhist scriptur es, so I have
not attempted an explanation her e. It may help to point out that in
Mahayana doctrine ther e wer e many Buddhas who had appear ed at various

times an d who had various places and functions in its highly complex
cosmology .)
According to the old book Oknyong-chip (Jade Dragon Collection) and
various biographies of Chajang and other monks, there was a pedestal of a
Kasop Buddha to the south of the royal palace in the eastern part of
W olsong in Silla. This was the  site of an ancient temple dating to pre-
Buddhist times, on the ruins of w hich the present Hwangnyong T emple was
built.
In th e Samguk Sagi it is written, “In February of the third year  of Kae-
kuk, the fourteenth year of King Chinhung (533), while a new palace was
being built to the east of W olsong, a King Dragon was observed to rise from
the grounds. The King therefore converted the intended palace into a temple
(Hwangnyong-sa) with the pedestal of a seated Buddha preserved behind
the Sanctuary . (Hwangnyong means King Dragon.)
“Early pilgrims  who visited the temple testified that the flat-topped
stone wa s 5.6 feet high and thr ee arm-spans around. As the y ears passed,
the temple was twice damaged by fire, which caused the pedestal to crack.
The monks repaired it by spanning the fissures with iron joints.”
W e read in the Buddhist scripture Aham-gyong1 1 that the Kasop Buddha
was the third highest being in Hyon-kop,12 and that he appeared in the
world when he was 20,000 years old by human reckoning. In his first period
of existe nce he enjoyed a long l ife of countless years, but then by the laws
of the universe  his physical b ody grew gradually younger until he had
existed for 80,000 years. When he had reached the physical age of ten, his
age diminished year by year . Then he began to grow older again until he
was an 80,000-year -old man, when one year was added to his grey head.
When he had u nder gone this process twenty times, he had s panned the
period of one “ chu-kop” during which one thousand Buddha s had been
born.
Sakyamuni (Ga utama, the historical Buddha) is one of the fourth
highest beings and appeared du ring the ninth diminishing count. From the
time when Sakyamuni was one hundred years old until Kasop Buddha lived
20,000 years, 2,000,000 years had passed, and as scores of thousand years
passed f urther before the time of Kuryuson Buddha. From the time of
enjoying a long life of countless years in the beginning, how many years
have passed! (There may be  some confusion here. The records are

unanimous in stating that Sakyamuni, the historical Buddha, passed out of
earthly existence when he was eighty years old.)
Already 2,230 years had passed from the birth of Sakyamuni until the
eighteenth year of Chih-yuan of Y uan Shih-tsu (1281) and tens of thousands
of years  have passed from the time of the Kuryuson Buddha until today
through the Kasop Buddha. (Th e traditional date for Buddha's birth is 563
B.C. This would make 1,844 years until 1281.)
In h is book 'Songs of Successiv e Chronicles' O Se-mun of Kor yo said,
“Counting backw ards from the seventh year of Chen-yu (1219) it is 49,600
and odd  years since the year of the tiger in which Panko-ssi cre ated heaven
and earth”. (Referring to a Chinese creation legend.) In the T ae-il Calendar
compiled by Kim Hui-yong, the recorder in Y onhui palace, it is calculated
that 1,937,641 years have passed since the year of the rat Shang-yuan Kap-
ja, which was the time of the creation, and the year of the rat Y uan-feng of
Sung Shen-tsung (1084) In the book T'suan-ku-t'u' the time between the
creation and the Ch'unch'iu Hu ai-lin (477 B.C.) is stated to be 2,760,000
years. B uddhist scriptures state that the age of the stone pedestal at
Hwangnyong-sa corresponds to the time from the appearance o f the Kasop
Buddha until today , which is but the age of an infant compared to the time
since the  creation. The chronological reckonings in the Songs of Successive
Chronicles, the T ae-il Calendar and the 'T'suaniu-t'u' thus make the pedestal
a mere baby stone.

Song of Praise to the Pedestal of the Kasop Buddha
The radiant sun of Buddha has never waned from time immemorial,
His majestic pedestal remains here as a holy being;
How ma ny time s have the mulb erry fields changed to blue sea and back
again!
The great treasure-stone still stands as in days of yore.
IV. Pagodas and Buddhist Images
67. The Y uk-wang Pagoda at Liaotung Fortress
The book Sambo Kamt'ong-nok contains the following passage: “An
old story told by wise old men with white hair and beards say s that when
King Song of K oguryo arrived at the Liaotung Fortress (modern Liaoyang
in so uthern Manchuria) one day  during an inspection of his frontiers he saw

in the distance five-colored clouds above the place where an old monk
stood ho lding a staf f. In great c uriosity the King bent his steps toward the
place, bu t as he came near the monk appeared to recede, reappearing when
he stopped. In this manner the King at length reached a hill, where he
discovered a three-storied earth en pagoda, the top of which looked like a
lar ge inverted kettle.
“More c urious still, the King l ooked about for the old monk  that he
might obtain an explanation, but  he was nowhere to be seen. But a clump of
tall grasses nearby swayed and nodded their heads at the King, and he had
the impression that he was to dig beneath them, The King ordered this done.
When h is serva nts had dug to a depth about equal to a man's height they
came upon a staf f and a pair of old straw shoes. Further digging revealed a
stone monument  with an inscrip tion in Sanskrit. One of the courtiers wiped
the dirt from this monument and interpreted the inscription as follows: 'Here
stands a  pagoda  which formerly belonged to the Han empire. The name of
the p agoda is P'odo-wang, whose former title was Hyudo-wang (Kum-in)
and whose of fice it was to of fer  sacrifices to Heaven.' (These appear to be
names of the pagoda's custodian, not of the pagoda itself.)
“King Song erected a seven-storied wooden pagoda on the ruins of this
old tower . Y ears later , when Buddhism was introduced into Koguryo it
came to light th at King A yuk13 had  tall pagodas erected everyw here in his
domain of Y ompu-che-ju14 and that this pagoda at Liaotung Fortress had
collapsed while its upper stories  were being removed to shorten it. During
the years of T'ang Lung-shuo (661-664) severe battles were fought on the
Liaotung peninsula. The T'ang commander , Hsueh Jen-kuei, while leading
his army through an old battlefield of the Sui emperor , noticed a lonely
mountain which  boasted neither temple nor pagoda. He enquired of the
passers-by the reason for this emptiness, and an old man replied that years
before a  tall pagoda had fallen into ruins on that mountain. T he Chinese
commander made a sketch of the  place and took it with him to Changan. An
explanation of this sketch is given in detail in the book Jo-han.”
According to T ili-chih, Hsi-Han and San-kuo, Liaotung-ch'eng was
located b eyond t he Y alu River and belonged to Han Y aochow . It is not clear
who this King Song was. Some people say he was King T ongmyong (Ko
Chumong, the first Koguryo king), but this is hardly believable.
T ongmyong became King in 37 B.C. and ruled until 19 B.C. and in those
days Bu ddhist scriptures were unknown even in China, so th at there can

hardly have been anyone in Kog uryo who could read Sanskrit. S ince P'odo-
wang re presents Buddha in this story , perhaps it occurred during the Later
Han per iod when some scholars might have recognized the inscription on
the buried monument as Sanskrit.
According to an old legend King A yuk of India ordered his army of
spirits in  heaven and on earth to erect one pagoda for each 900, 000,000
people i n the land. Thus in his domain of Y ompu-che-ju 84,000 pagodas
were hidden under giant stones. Now auspicious clouds appear everywhere
above th ese hidden treasures because of Buddha's divine inspiration, which
is beyond measure.

Song of Praise to the Y uk-wang Pagoda
Y uk-wang's treasured pagoda appeared to the mundane world;
Though it is sh rouded in clouds, weather -beaten and over grown with
moss,
All pilgrims bow before it with reverent hearts.
How many passers-by of yore have halted before it and wor shipped
Buddha!
68. The Pasa Stone Pagoda at Kumgwan Castle
The Pa sa stone pagoda at Hogye T emple in Kumgwan (modern
Kimhae) was brought there from A yuta in India by Princess Hwang-ok
(Empress Ho), who became the Queen of King Suro in the twenty-fourth
year of T ung Han Kien-wu (48).
When the Princess set sail for the east at the command of her royal
parents she was almost drowned, for the angry sea-gods tossed her boat like
a toy on the foaming waves, and at last flung it back on her native shores.
Her pare nts then  had this pagod a loaded on the ship, saying, “My daughter ,
take this pagoda and Buddha will protect you.”
She aga in bade a tearful farewell to her parents and started on ce more
on her journey . This time the sh ip glided like a feather over the mirror -like
water an d arriv ed safely on th e southern coast of Kumgwan. It had red
brocade sails and a white silk banner and was fitted out wi th precious
jewels a s became a bridal yacht. King Suro married her and th ey ruled the
country together for more than a hundred and fifty years.
The people of Kumgwan loved their Queen and named the beach where
she first  landed Chup'o (Princes s' Port), the hill on which she c hanged her

brocade trousers Nunghyon, and the seacoast where she waved her red silk
flag toward the shore Kich'ulpyon.
Buddhism had not yet been introduced into Haedong (East of the Sea, a
Chinese name for Korea) at that time and no Buddhist temples had been
built, so  that the people of Kum gwan did not know the worship of Buddha.
There is  no allusion in the Sam guk Sagi to Buddhist temples in  Kumgwan
until the second year of King Chilji (452), when that King built W anghu-sa
(Queen's T emple) about the same time that Ado visited King Nulji's palace
before th e time of King Pophun g. This temple brought many blessings to
the people of Ku mgwan and warded of f the attacks of the W ai p irates. (W ai,
meaning dwarf, was a contemptuous term for the Japanese.)
The Pasa stone pagoda is a five-story square tower of fine-grained
reddish-speckled stone with exquisite carvings on it, the like of which
cannot be found in this country (Koryo Korea). The color of the stone has
been proved by a test to be that of the blood of a cock's comb.
Kumgwan is another name for  Karak, whose history is foun d in the
Samguk Sagi and also in Book T wo of the present work.

Song of Praise to the Pasa Stone Pagoda
Above the velvety sail of the holy pagoda-laden ship
The silvery flag waved high in the sky;
After prayers to Buddha the billows calmed
For Princess Hwang-ok to come to our shores in peace;
The pagoda erected in Kumgwan became our guardian deity—
Like an angry whale it swallo wed the southern W ai for a thousand
generations.
69. The Y ongt'ap-sa (Holy Pagoda T emple) of Koryo
According to the Kosung-jon (Biographies of Great Monks) Podok's
nickname was Chipop and his n ative place was Y onggang-hyon , though he
always l ived in P'yongyang. On e day an old monk visited his re sidence and
asked him to com e to a temple in the mountains and lecture on t he Buddhist
scriptures. At first Podok stood on ceremony , but at the old man's persistent
request he finally agreed and went to the temple, where he delivered a
series of lectures on forty volumes of the Nirvana Sutra.15
When the lectures were over he visited Son-sa (a convent of spi rits) in a
cave on Mt. T aepo to the west of P'yongyang. There he met a spirit who
invited h im to live in his rock-c ave hermitage. Pointing at the ground, the

spirit sai d, “Down there is an octagonal seven-storied stone pago da.” Podok
dug in the place indicated and found the pagoda just as the spi rit had said.
He thanked the spirit and erecte d a temple near the pagoda which he called
Y ongt'ap-sa (Holy Pagoda T emple) and took up residence in it.
70. The Sixteen-Foot Golden Buddha in Hwangnyong T emple
In the second m onth of the fourteenth year of King Chinhung's reign
(553) a yellow dragon appeared  near the site of the detached Pu rple Palace,
which w as then under construct ion to the south of the royal res idence. The
King th erefore changed the intended palace into a temple, naming it
Hwangnyong-sa. (This means Y ellow Dragon T emple, but it was also called
King Dragon T emple since the words for yellow (hwang) and king (wang)
are pronounced almost the same in Korean.) The pagoda was built in the
thirtieth year of the King's reign (569) and so the whole const ruction was
completed in seventeen years.
About this time a lar ge ship fr om Soch'uk (W est Buddha Nation) in
India dr opped a nchor in the bay  of Hagok-hyon-Sap'o (now Ulju-Kokp'o).
The captain of the ship presente d to the King's of ficers a sealed letter which
read as follows: “King A yuk of Soch'uk gathered 57.000 pound s of yellow
iron and 30,000  pun  of gold  to use in casting three images of Buddha, but
failed. I have therefore placed th ese materials aboard a ship and set it adrift
on the seven seas, with the prayer that it will reach a land of de stiny where
it may be cast in to a sixteen-foot Buddha image. I send also mo dels for the
images of one Buddha and two Bodhisattvas.”
The of ficials reported this matter to the King, who ordered the building
of a new temple , to be called T ong-ch'uk-sa (East Buddha Nation T emple),
where the three models sent by King A yuk were to be kept.
In Mar ch of T a-kien of Nan-Chao, Chen Hsuan-ti (574; the
Hwangnyong T emple records g ive a dif ferent date) the King ordered the
gold and iron fr om India transported to Kyongju to be cast into a sixteen-
foot Buddha image containing 35,007 pounds of iron and 10 ,198  pun  of
gold and two B odhisattva images weighing 12,000 pounds of iron and
10,136  pun  of gold. The images were successfully finished and set up in the
main hall of Hwangnyong-sa.
In th e following year the Gold en Buddha began to shed tears, which
flowed d own to  its feet and dampened the floor for a foot around it. This
weeping of the s tatue was an omen of the King's death, which o ccurred the
next year .

Some say this Buddha image was made during the reign of King
Chinp'yong (579-632), but this is not true. In an old book it is written that
King A yuk was born one hundred years after the death of Saky amuni.16 In
order to honor the Buddha, he attempted three times to cast an image of iron
and gold, and was three times unsuccessful. Noticing that the C rown Prince
did not take pa rt in the projec t, the King asked him the reason for his
indif ference. “I knew that India n iron and gold workers could not succeed
in casting such an image unaided so I kept out of it,” was his reply .
“Y ou are right,” the King declared. “If we cannot do it here in India we
had bett er leave  it to more skillful hands in some other Buddhist nation.”
He had the gold and rion loaded on a ship and ordered the captain to sail
around the Buddhist world of  sixteen lar ge nations, 500 medium-sized
nations and 10,000 small nation s in southern India, calling at 80,000 ports.
But the captain met with no su ccess until he landed in Silla, where King
Chinhung received the gold and iron and had it cast into a Buddha image at
Muning-nim, w ith exquisite workmanship by Silla sculptors and iron and
gold workers. The captain reported this great success to King  A yuk, who
expressed exceeding joy .
Many years later the great Silla monk Chajang went to China to study .
When he arrived at Mt. W utai, he met the incarnate Bodhisattv a Munsu, 17
who pro nounced an oracle to him : “Hwangnyong T emple in Silla is a divine
place where Sakyamuni and the Kasop Buddha abode and lectured on the
holy life. The stone pedestal of the Kasop Buddha is still there. King Muwu
(No Grief, King A yuk) of India sent a boat laden with yellow iron to drift
on the sea for 1,300 years, till  it arrived in your country (Silla) for the
building of Hwang-nyong-sa, for this iron was predestined to guard the site
of that temple.” When the sixteen-foot Golden Buddha was mad e, the three
images in T ongch'uk T emple in Kyongju were moved to the new temple.
In th e R ecords o f Hwangnyong -sa we read, “In the sixth year of King
Chinp'yong, in the year of the d ragon (584) the Golden Hall (main hall) of
the temp le was erected, and du ring the reign of Queen Sondok (632-647)
T'an-hui (a prince of the bloo d), Chajang, Hyehun and Sangnyul were
successively ap pointed chief priests of the temple.” The great Buddha
image and the images of the two Bodhisattvas have melted and disappeared
in th e flames o f war , leaving only a small image of Sakyamuni in the
temple.


Song of Praise to the Sixteen-Foot Golden Buddha
Buddha's palace is everywhere under the sun,
Y et the fire of his incense burns most brightly in our country;
King A yuk's gold and iron came to W olsong
T o become the image of Buddha facing its old pedestal.
71. The Nine-Story Pagoda at Hwangnyong T emple
This pag oda was built on the site of its present ruins in the heart of
Kyongju in the fifth year of Queen Sondok, the tenth year of T 'ang Chen-
kuan (636) by Chajang Popsa, the great Silla monk, upon his return from
China, w here he  received an or acle from a divine being. It was completed
according to the design of A biji of Paekje and two hundred Paekje
architects who followed him to Kyongju. Igan Y ong-ch'un (Y ong-su, father
of King Muryol) supervised the construction.
According to the old book Ch'alju-gi, the pagoda measured forty-two
feet abo ve and 183 feet below  the iron base of the tower . The T ongdo
Songnip-ki (History of the Eastern Capital) compiled by An Hong, a
renowned scholar of Haedong (Korea) says that each of the nine stories
represented a people who had attacked Silla, namely , from bo ttom to top,
Japan, C hunghwa, W u and Y ueh, T akna, Ungyu, Malgal, T ankuk, Y ojok
and Y em aek. Th e tower was ded icated to Buddha with the praye r that these
nations be subdued by Silla and pay her annual tribute.
As t he y ears pas sed the great to wer was damaged by fire and lightning
and was repaired many times u ntil the Mongol invasion (1238), when fire
destroyed it completely . Now  only its foundation stones bespeak its
majestic appearance in bygone days.
T radition says that when the great Silla monk Chajang Popsa was
studying the spiritual world of B uddha with the Bodhisattva Munsu deep in
the W uta i moun tains in China, one day his master said to him, “Y our Queen
is the incarnatio n of the King of Chalichong18 in Ch'onch'uk (India), who
believed in Buddha. Her people are not so wild as the eastern barbarians,
but beca use of the rugged mountains and ugly streams in her k ingdom the
characters of her people are coarse and distorted, and so they w orship evil
spirits, w hich provokes the wrath of Heaven from time to time. However ,
the p resence of enlightened mon ks will bring peace to your country , and all
shall enjoy Buddha's blessing from the throne to the plow .” W ith these
words, the Bodhisattva disappeared from sight.

Spellbound, the Silla monk rose  from his hermitage and wandere d about
the l otus pool called T'aihuo-ch'ih. There he met a divine being who said to
him, “Be cause your country is ruled by a fair frailty (alluding to  the Queen)
who doe s not possess the stamina of royal dignity above her shin ing virtues,
neighboring countries come to attack and rape your fair land. The King
Dragon of Hwangnyong T emple is my eldest son. He is now protecting the
temple under the orders of King  Buddha in India. Go and protect the King
Dragon of Buddha at his temp le by building a nine-story pa goda before
him. Then your neighbors wil l surrender and the Nine Hans (the nine
enemies referred  to earlier) will send tribute to the court of Sil la and pray
that its prosperity be coeval with heaven and earth.
“When the pagoda is finished, see to it that the great festival 19
(P'algwan-hoe) is held and a general amnesty granted to all prisoners. Also
do not for get to erect a shrine in  the southern part of Kyongju dedicated to
my spiri t. Perhaps I can be of h elp to Silla within the limits of my power .”
So sayin g, the divine being pre sented a jade bead to the Silla monk and
vanished like a mist.
The Records of Hwangnyong-sa state that Chajang Popsa received the
construction plans for the pagoda from “W onhyang Sonsa” on the South
Mountain of Changan, the T'ang  capital. (“Sonsa” is the title of a priest of
the Y uga sect.)
After receiving many gifts inclu ding robes and Buddhist scriptures from
the T'an g Emperor , Chajang Popsa returned to Silla in the seventeenth year
of Chen Kuan (643). There he reported his experiences with the
Bodhisattva and the divine being to the Queen and advised Her Majesty to
build a pagoda at the King Drag on's temple. The Queen approved the plan
and called Abiji from Paekje to help build the pagoda.
Accepting the Queen's invitatio n, Abiji arrived in Kyongju with two
hundred Paekje architects and commenced building the pagoda. But one
night he  had an ominous dream in which he saw the Paekje king dom falling
in ruins like a crumbling pagoda. This made him so sad that  he stopped
construction bef ore the great posts supporting the pagoda had been put in
place. But suddenly in the dark ness, amidst thunder and lightning, an old
monk en tered the Golden Palace gate followed by a Herculean wrestler .
They put the tall, heavy posts in their proper places and vanished.
W ith mixed emotions of wonde r and remorse Abiji resumed w ork and
continued until he had complete d a tower of majestic beauty . Chajang, who

had been supervising the great project, buried beneath the front post of the
pagoda one hundred Buddha re lics which he had received from the divine
being in  China. (Ilyon says that some other relics were buried at  T'ongdo-sa
and T aehwa-sa in Ulju, also built by Chajang Popsa. The relics were
reputed bones of Buddha, but th ere were so many of them by th is time that
this is scarcely believable.)
Soon afterward the Silla kingdom increased in power through the
blessing of Buddha, thus paving the way for the unification of the Korean
peninsula under her single rule.
Many ye ars later when the King of Koryo (W ang-Kon, the founder of
the dynasty) took possession of the fallen Silla kingdom, he ordered his
soldiers not to v iolate or lay han ds on the three sacred treasures of Kyongju
—The sixteen-foot Golden Buddha and the nine-story pagoda at
Hwangnyong-sa and the heaven -sent jade belt of King Chinp'yong in the
Ch'onjon-go (High Heaven V ault). These were comparable t o the Nine
Sacred V essels of the kingdom of Chou, for fear of which the men of Ch'u
refrained from attacking that kingdom when it was tottering to its fall in the
north.
According to the Samguk Sagi and an old record of Hwangnyong-sa,
after King Chinhung created th e temple in the year of the cock (553) the
nine-story pago da was built by  Queen Sondok in the ninetee nth year of
Chen-kuan, the year of the snake (645). It was struck by ligh tning in the
seventh year of King Hyoso, in June of the first year of Sheng-li , the year of
the dog (698) and rebuilt during  the reign of King Songdok, the next king,
in the year of the monkey (720).
The pagoda was again struck by lightning during the reign of King
Kyongmun, in June of the year  of the rat (868) and was repa ired by that
King. It was struck by lightning  for the third time in the fifth year of King
Kwangjong of Koryo, in Octobe r of the year of the ox (953) and repaired in
the thirteenth year of King Hyonjong of Koryo in the year of the cock
(1021). It suf fered damage from lightning a fourth time in the second year
of King Chongjong, the year of the boar (1035) and was repaire d during the
reign of King Munjong in the year of the dragon (1064). It was struck by
lightning for the fifth time in the last year of King Honjong, the year of the
boar (1095) and was repaired du ring the reign of King Sukjong  in the year
of the rat (1096).

Five times the pagoda succumbed to lightning and five times  it rose
again, until the whole structure, together with the Golden Buddha and the
temple b uildings, were finally leveled to the ground on the W estern Hill by
great fires set by the Mongol invaders in the sixteenth year of K ing Kojong
(1238).

Song of Praise to the Nine-Story Pagoda
Gods in heaven and earth protect the royal capital with divine spells,
The golden walls heighten the winged eaves with wind-bells;
The Nine Hans bow their heads before Silla's invincible might,
Peace reigns beneath the sun through Buddha's holy light.
72. The Bell of Hwangnyong T emple
In the thirteenth year of T'ien-pao, the year of the horse (754), King
Kyongdok had a bell cast whic h was ten feet three inches high and nine
inches th ick and  weighed 497, 581 pounds and had it hung in the belfry at
Hwangnyong-sa. It was a gift to his first queen, Lady Sammo, and was
designed by a sl ave of a noble family named Isang-taek. During  the reign of
this same king, when Su-tsung, the son of T'ang Hsuan-tsung was on the
throne (i n China ), a new bell (six feet eight inches in height) wa s cast to be
hung in the same temple.
73. The  Image of Bhechadjagura in Punhwang T emple and the Bell
of Pongdok T emple
A year after the casting of the Hwangnyong-sa bell, King Kyong-dok
had a bronze image of Bhechadjagura weighing 306,700 pounds cast and
placed in Punhwang T emple. It was the work of Kanggo-Naem i of Ponp'i-
pu. Mor eover , the King donated 120,000 pounds of copper for  the casting
of a bell to be d edicated to his deceased father King Songdok. When this
bell was completed by his son Kon-un (King Hyegong) in December of T a-
li, the year of th e dog (770), it was hung in the belfry of Pongdok T emple,
which had been built by King Hyo-song in the twenty-sixth year of Kai-
yuan in the yea r of the tiger (738). The bell bears the inscription, “Great
King Songdok's Heavenly Bell.”
King Songdok was the father  of King Kyongdok, King Hyosong's
brother , with whose gift of gold and copper the bell was made.
74. The Sixteen-Foot Golden Buddha at Y ongmyo T emple
The Bio graphy of Y angji Popsa contains a minute description of the
building of Y ongmyo T emple and of the sixteen-foot Golden Buddha there

during the reign of Queen So ndok. In the twenty-third year of King
Kyongdok (764 ) this image was gilded anew and the expenses paid with
23,700  sok  (one  sok  i s about  five bushels) of rice-(The Biography of Y angji
Popsa ac tually says that this amount of rice covered the initial production
cost of the image.)
75. The Four -Buddha Mountain, the Buddha-Digging M ountain
and the T en-Thousand Buddha Mountain
T o the east of C huknyong (Bam boo Pass) about one hundred  li  away ,
soaring high into the sky , there stands a mountain. In the ninth y ear of King
Chinp'yong, the year of the m onkey (587), this mountain shook with a
thundering sound, and from its p eak in the heavens a great rock fell. It was
ten feet square, carved with Bud dhist images on all sides, and wrapped in a
red silk cloth.
Hearing of this marvellous event, the King journeyed to the place. There
he p rostrated himself before the  wonderful rock and ordered a temple built
nearby , calling it T aesong-sa (G reater V ehicle, i.e. Maha-yana). A monk
who had recited the Lotus Sutra all his life was put in char ge of the temple
and told to burn incense before the four Buddhas day and night without
stopping once.  The mountain was called Sabul-san (Four -Buddha
Mountain). When the monk died and was buried, a lotus flower bloomed on
his grave.
One day  while King Kyongdok  was traveling to Paengnyul-sa (T emple
of Pinen uts and Chestnuts) he heard a voice from under ground on a
mountainside cr ying “Namuami T abul! Namuami T abul! Namuami T abul!”
(Ritual c alling o n the name of Buddha). Intrigued,. he ordered his servants
to di g in  the place from whence the sound came. No sooner had  they begun
to d ig than they  unearthed a gr eat rock with Buddha images carved on it
facing in  the four directions. In g reat joy , the King ordered a temple built on
this auspicious site and called it Kulbul-sa (Buddha-Digging T emple). This
temple h as now  fallen in ruins , leaving only the stone with the Buddhas
facing in  the four directions standing by the roadside to remind travelers of
this wonderful story .
King Kyongdok  learned that Emperor T ai-tsung of the T'ang Dy nasty in
China w as a worshipper of Buddha. He therefore had an artificial mountain
made (ten feet high) on a five-colored canvas, with sandalwood, gold and
jewels, and with representation s of hills, streams, flowers, trees, birds,
butterflies, dancers and musician s, and also towers, palaces, whales and fish

(striking bronze  bells), temples, monks, nuns and myriad Buddhas. It was
called Manbul-san (T en Thousand Buddha Mountain).
When th e wind blew there arose  from this beautiful miniature landscape
the harmonious sounds of birdsong, musical instruments, chanting monks,
bells, and rushing cataracts, whi le dancers in quaint costumes s wung round
with the fluttering butterflies.
The King sent t his creation as a gift to the T'ang Emperor , w ho was
astonished at its superhuman workmanship and praised it as a heavenly
treasure. He spread a fan of nine lights above the mountain crests in the
Silla work, which he called Buddha's Light. On the eighth day of the fourth
moon (Buddha's birthday) the Emperor held a great festival during which he
exhibited the Manbul-san in his palace and ordered monks to worship the
ten thousand Buddhas. He also bade the visiting Indian priest Samjang
Pulgong to chant the Diamond Sutra in praise of Silla for her great
achievement in Buddhist art as seen in this creation.

Song of Praise to the T en Thousand Buddhas
Heaven has sent four -direction Buddhas bright as the moon,
Earth sped upward illuminating hills and hair;20
W ondrous hands chiseled ten thousand Buddhas in mercy meet,
Nine holy lights flood heaven, earth and man.
76. The Stone Image of Maitr eya Buddha at Saeng-ui T emple
During the reign of Queen Sondok there lived at T ojung T emple a kind-
hearted monk whose name was Saeng-tu. During a noonday nap  one day he
dreamed that he met a white-h aired monk who led him to the summit of
South M ountain in Kyongju and bade him tie some tall grass in to a knot to
mark the  place where they were . Then when they had climbed down to the
southern foot of the mountain the strange monk said, “I am bu ried deep in
this valley . Dig me up and let me stand on the mountaintop.”
When th e monk  awoke from his  dream he went to South Mountain with
a friend. Sure enough, high on  the summit he found a bunch of knotted
grass. In  great curiosity he hastened to the valley , where he soon  discovered
a stone image of Maitreya buried in the ground. He set it up on the crest of
Samhwa-ryong (Three-Flower Peak).
In the twelfth ye ar of Queen Son dok, in the year of the dragon (644) the
good mo nk built  a temple near this image and lived in it thereafter . After he
died people called it Saeng-ui -sa after his name. It was to this stone

Maitreya that the renowned Silla monk Ch'ungdam of fered tea of his own
making twice a year , on March 3 and September 9.
77. The Pohyon Bodhisattva in the Mural at Hungnyun T emple
During the reign of King Kyo ngmyong (917-924) the south gate of
Hungnyun T emple and the long covered shelters on its two  sides were
destroyed by fire. Chonghwa an d Honggye, two of the temple monks, were
planning to rebuild the gate and its annexes by collecting donations when
on the fifteenth of May in the seventh year of Chen ming, in the year of the
snake (921) the god of Chesok21 descended to the Left Palace of Buddha in
the temp le (i.e. Hongnyun-sa) a nd sat on a lofty throne there for ten days,
covering the halls, pagodas and  trees in the temple precincts with fragrant
five-colored clou ds, while the fi sh and dragons in the South Pond leaped for
joy .
Multitudes of people from far and near gathered in the tem ple and
worshiped Budd ha in gratitude for these unusual and auspicious signs,
of fering him gold, jewels, broc ades and food grain, which w ere heaped
mountain high. Moreover , famous architects came to h elp in the
reconstruction, a nd in a few days the lost buildings were restored to their
former beauty and grandeur .
When th e god of Chesok rose  from his throne to return to his lotus
palace in heaven, the two monks  prostrated themselves before him and said,
“W e wis h to draw thy august fac e so that we may of fer daily sa crifices to it
in recompense for thy heavenly grace. W e pray thee to pose for this drawing
so that thy holy portrait may bring perpetual peace to the human world
under the heavens.”
The voic e of the god rang out: “My power of mercy is no match for the
universal creativ e strength of the Pohyon Bodhisattva,22 the  Buddha of
universal wisdom ; hence thou s halt make a likeness of his figure and of fer
him thy sacrifice s day and night  with devoted hearts.” W ith the se words he
soared high into the sky , riding the same five-colored clouds.
Obeying the command of the Chesok god, the two monks  had a
mysterious port rait of the Pohyon Bodhisattva painted on the wall of
Hungnyun T emple, where it is still to be seen, a fine work of art.
78. The Thr ee Portraits of Kwanum at Chungsaeng-sa
(The divinity r eferr ed to in this section derived fr om the Indian
Bodhisattva A valokitesvara, who was a man. Somehow , as Mahayana
Buddhism developed in China, a change of sex occurr ed, and the divinity ,

whose Chinese name is Kuan Y in , became popularly known and worshipped
as the “goddess of mer cy .” Her name is pr onounced Kwanum  in Kor ean
and Kannon in Japanese.)
An old Silla book contains this story . Once upon a time, the Celestial
Emperor of China had a favorite whose beauty was unexcelled by any other
woman in the ki ngdom, nor was her like to be found in any pictures of girls
as fair as May roses or June peo nies in all ages and climes. W ishing to look
upon he r always  in the bloom of her youth and beauty , the Emperor decided
to have her portrait painted.
The court artist was therefore ordered to paint the portrait. The name of
this artist is not known with certainty , but he is believed to have been Chang
Seng-yao, a renowned painter of the state of W u. During the tim e of Liang
T'ien-chien he served the kingdom of W u-ling as court artist, right general
and mag istrate of W u-hsing. If this be true, then the emperor in the story
must have ruled between the Liang and Chen periods. The Silla book refers
to h im as a T'ang emperor , but this is simply because the peo ple of Silla
were accustomed to refer to C hina as T'ang. (The T'ang Dy nasty ruled
China during most of the Unified Silla period.)
Whoever he was, the artist pai nted a faithful portrait of this peerless
beauty . H owever , while he was adding the finishing touches to the picture,
he was so filled with rapture at the beauty of the woman unfol ding before
him that his hand trembled and let the brush slip, and it made a mark like a
mole just below the portrait's navel. In consternation he tried to paint it out,
but coul d not. “It must be one of her birthmarks,” thought the  artist, “but
even in a picture women are ashamed of moles on the innerm ost parts of
their bodies.”
When the portrait was presented  to the throne the Emperor scrutinized it
closely and then spoke angrily to the artist: “This picture is too realistic!
How could you have known th ere was a mole under her navel, and how
could yo u dare to put it in you r picture?” The infuriated Emperor had the
artist im prisoned and gave orders for his execution the next day , for his
burning jealousy  of the man's evident intimacy with his belov ed knew no
bounds.
The artist was fairly caught. He would have been hanged immediately
but for the intervention of the pr ime minister , who said, “He is as straight as
a bamboo, and has known no woman but his wife.”

The Em peror no dded and spoke again to the artist. “Since you are so
wise as to paint the mole on my woman when you have not seen it, paint a
lifelike picture of the lovely woman whom I saw in a dream last night and
you shall have my special pardon.”
The artist painted the gracefu l figure of the eleven-faced K wanum
Bodhisattva and presented it to the throne. “This is she!” exclaimed the
Emperor . “Now you shall have your liberty .”
After this narrow escape the arti st no longer wished to live in his native
country . Accom panied by a wise man named Pun-chol, he crossed the sea
to Silla, and there he made portraits of the Merciful Goddess in three
incarnations, which were placed in Chungsaeng-sa (T emple of the Myriad
Creatures). The  people of Kyongju admired the holy beauty of these
pictures and prayed to the goddess to fulfill their wishes with heavenly
blessings.
During the closing year of Silla , in the T'ien-cheng period (92 6-'929),
the childless wife of the nobleman Ch'oe Un-song prayed to Buddha at
Chungsaeng-sa to give her a s on. Her prayer was heard, an d she soon
conceived and bore a baby boy . But before the child was three  months old
the tiger general of Later Paekje (Chin Hwon) sacked Kyongju , and many
people lo st their wives and child ren. Carrying the tiny baby in his arms, Un-
song fle d to the temple and im plored the aid of the merciful Bodhisattva,
saying “The enemy soldiers run amuck in the King's capital, attacking
women and killing babies. If my son was born through your holy blessing,
care for  him now and nourish him in your bosom till I come  again.” He
wrapped the child warmly and laid him beside the lotus pedestal of the
seated goddess, said a tearful farewell and departed.
T wo weeks later , when the ene my had evacuated the city , Ch'oe Un-
song returned to the temple and found the child in robust health. His body
was as white as if he had been newly washed, his breath smelled of fresh
milk, and his fac e beamed with a bright smile. Ch'oe picked the child up in
his arms and took him home , where he grew up to be a strong and
intelligent man.
This was Ch'oe Sung-no, who rose to the highest posts  in the
government and had many children who also achieved high position at
court, g eneration after generation. Ch'oe Un-song had follow ed Kim Pu
(King Kyongsun , the last Silla monarch) to Koryo and had been ennobled
by that court.

In M arch of the  tenth year of T'ung-huo (992), Song-t'ae, the abbot of
Chungsaeng-sa, knelt before th e image of the goddess and said, “I have
lived at this temple for many ye ars and I have kept the incense burning in
the c enser day a nd night. But n ow the income from the temple lands has
ceased, so that it is impossible for me to continue this service. I must bid
you farewell and move to another place.”
As he finished speaking, the monk was suddenly attacked by drowsiness
and fell into a trance. In this state, he heard the low , sweet v oice of the
goddess whisper  in his ear: “My good monk, do not leave, but  abide with
me yet. I will go round and get donations for the temple supplies.”
The monk awoke joyfully from  his trance and remained in the temple.
T wo we eks later two stout co untrymen led into the temple grounds a
caravan of horses and oxen fully loaded with supplies. The sexton ran out to
meet them. “Where have you come from?” he enquired.
“W e hav e come from Kumju (Kimhae),” they replied. “A few days ago
a strang e monk came to our village and told us that he had lived at
Chungsaeng T emple in the Eastern Capital (Kyongju) for many years. He
said that he had come to ask f or donations for the temple, w hich was in
great want, and so we collected six lar ge bags of rice and four lar ge bags of
salt as gifts. W e placed them o n the backs of our strong horses and oxen,
and here they are. Please come and help us to unload them.”
“No monk from this temple ha s gone out to ask for alms,” th e abbot
said. “Perhaps you have come to the wrong place.”
“The monk guided us,” the countrymen replied, “as far as a well which
he called Sinkyon-jong (God seeing W ell) below the hill, and pointed to this
temple, saying, 'Go carefully up the mountain, and you will find a temple
above the clouds. I will join you on the temple grounds.' So here we are.”
In wond erment the monk entered the Golden Hall with the two
countrymen. He  was amazed to see them prostrate themselves before the
image o f Kwanu m, whispering to each other that it looked exactly like the
monk who had c ome asking for donations. From that time gifts  of rice and
salt neve r ceased to flow into the temple to nourish the Bodhisa ttva and her
devotees.
One eve ning the temple gate ca ught fire. All the people living nearby
rushed up the hill to help put out the fire, and went into the Golden Hall to
rescue the image of Kwanum first of all. But when they arrived it was not

there, and was found outside in the courtyard. All were astonished at this
wonder -working of the almighty Bodhisattva.
In th e th irteenth year of T a-ting, the year of the snake (1 173) a monk
named C homsung lived at Chungsaeng-sa. He was illiterate, but his inward
eye saw Buddha's mind, and h e kept the incense-burner alight with holy
flame fr om morning till night as he knelt before the image of the merciful
Bodhisattva.
Another monk who wanted the temple for himself appealed to the Angel
of S hirts, saying, “Chungsaeng  T emple was created to invoke Buddha's
grace an d blessi ngs on all the myriad creatures in this nation, and therefore
a learne d person should be its proprietor . This poor monk knows only
enough to say 'Namuami-T abul' and 'Kwanum Bodhisattva' waking and
sleeping. He should be turned out of the temple.”
“V ery w ell,” the  angel replied, “ I will test him.” The written appeal was
presented upsid e down to Cho msung, and he took it and read all the
sentences aloud in a musical voice, without making a mistake.
The ang el was astonished at th is unusual intelligence and clapped his
hands, saying “Again!” But this time Chomsung remained stubbornly silent.
“Thy soul is aflame with holy inspiration. Such a monk as thou art Silla's
boast,” t he ange l exclaimed. “Stay where thou art and be happy , and may
Buddha bless thee!”
This sto ry was told to the village elders near the temple by the  hermit
Kim In- pu, who  had been a bedfellow of the wonderful monk Chomsung. It
has been relayed from mouth to mouth throughout Silla until today .
(Since th e Silla Kingdom had c eased to exist mor e than two centuries
befor e the date given, fly on must be using the name in a pur ely
geographical sense, to indicate  the ar ea of the old kingdom befor e the
unification. This is an excellent example of his efforts to pr eserve oral
traditions which might otherwise have been lost.)
79. Paengnyul-sa (T emple of Pinenuts and Chestnuts)
(T ranslator's no te; The name “Kumgang” used her e is derived fr om the
Kumgang-gyong, the Diamond Sutra, the scriptur e most r e ad in Far
Eastern Buddhis m. The names u sed to describe temples and r o cks ar e also
derived fr om this scriptur e and  have nothing to do with actual pr ecious
stones, although the mountains so named ar e known to for eigners as the
Diamond Mountains. The Kumg ang near Kyongju is a miniatur e version of
the mou ntain range in Kangwon Pr ovince, about fifty miles in diameter ,

wher e the “T welve thousand sky-kissing peaks,” pictur esque r ocks, deep
ravines full of g r een vegetation, sapphir e pools and cataracts  above and
below antique monasteries form a veritable fairyland in all seasons. It was
her e tha t the Hwarang of Silla u sed to go for mental and physical training
so as to incr ease the nation's military power .)
The North Mountain of Kerim (Kyongju) is called Kumgang-nyong
(Mountain of Diamond Peaks). On the southern side of this m ountain is a
monastery called  Paengnyul-sa, and seated in its Golden Hall is a Buddha
image which has worked many wonders. Although the history o f the image
is unknown, tradition says that  it was made by heavenly sculptors from
China as was the image at Chungsaeng-sa, at about the same time. This
Buddha is said to have ascen ded to T ori-ch'on (one of the thirty-three
heavens) and to have re-entered the Golden Hall after stamping his feet on
the s tone steps a t the entrance, le aving footprints which are still there today .
But other accounts claim that the Buddha made these footprin ts when he
returned triump hantly with Puryerang, a renowned Hwara ng (Flower
Y outh) w hom he had rescued fr om a pagan people in the north who were
enemies of Silla. The story is as follows.
On the seventh of September in  the third year of T'ien-shou, in the year
of t he dragon ( 692), King Hyoso of Silla made Puryerang the son of
T aehyon-Salch'an his favorite H warang and placed a thousand y ouths under
his com mand. Among these youths An Sang became his lieutenant and
intimate follower .
In Marc h of the second year o f Chang-shou, in the year of the snake
(693), P uryerang led his youthful followers on a pleasure trip to Kumnan
(T'ongch'on in Kangwon Province). But when the party arrive d at a point
north of Puk-myong (near W ons an Bay) it was attacked by a band of armed
thieves and Puryerang was taken captive. (These appear to h ave been a
group of  Malgal, a fierce nomadic tribe of the north.) There we re so many
of th em that the  Silla youths w ere overwhelmed and had to flee for their
lives. Bu t An Sang stayed and followed his master into the en emy camp.
This happened on March 1 1.
The King was dismayed. He said to his courtiers, “Since my royal father
handed down the sacred flute to me, I have kept it safe in the High Heaven
V ault to gether with the Hyon-gum (a harp with six silk strings), which
protect us from all evils with their holy might. Why has my favorite
Hwarang fallen into the hands of thieves?”

While His Majesty thus lamented, a sea of clouds appeared in the sky
and shro uded the High Heaven V ault. More troubled still, the King ordered
his serva nts to examine it to see if anything was amiss. Sure eno ugh the two
treasures—the h arp and the flute—had disappeared. The King's grief knew
no b ounds. “One misfortune rides on the neck of another ,” he exclaimed.
“First I lost my favorite Hwara ng, and now I have lost the har p and flute,
the most sacred possessions of my royal heritage and the dearest treasures
of the nation. A h, the sad day!”  In great rage he imprisoned the five vault-
keepers, including Kim Chong-ko.
In April the King of fered a reward to anyone who would recover the
harp an d flute, together with a year's exemption from taxes in kind.
Meanwhile, Puryerang's father and mother worshipped in the Golden Hall
of P aengnyul-sa  every night unt il the fifteenth of May , praying for the safe
return of their son. On that night they found the harp and flute on the table
of the incense-burner and Puryerang, attended by An Sang, standing behind
the Buddha image. The old pare nts fell upon the neck of their beloved son
weeping for joy , and asked him how he had returned.
“My honored parents,” he said, “when the enemy carried me away , they
made m e a cowherd of T aedo-k ura, their chief, and I was set t o caring for
his cattl e in the field of T aejo-ra ni. (Ilyon says there was also a rumor that
he w as o rdered t o watch cattle g razing in a meadow called T aem aya.) There
a kind-looking monk holding a  harp in one hand and a flute in the other
appeared and said, 'My good lad, don't you feel homesick?'
“Partly o verawed by his noble face and partly overcome with grateful
emotion at his gentle words, I fell to my knees and answered, 'Honorable
monk, carry me back to Kyongj u. I long to see my King and my parents in
my native land, a thousand  li  far away to the south.'
“'Come with me, my lad,' he in terposed, and took me by the hand and
led me to the seacoast, where I met An Sang once again. Here the monk
broke the flute in two and hand ed each of us a piece, 'Ride o n them!' he
said, while he rode the harp. W e flew high above the clouds and in a
twinkling we had landed here.”
When al l this was reported to th e King he rejoiced exceedingly and sent
out courtiers to receive Puryerang like a prince of the blood. So Puryerang
repaired to the palace, taking the harp and flute with him.
The King praised his valor and  good fortune, and graciously r ewarded
the flyin g monk  from Paegnyul T emple with two sets of gold dishes each

weighing fifty yang, five fine ro bes, 3,000 rolls (one roll was forty yards) of
gray hempen cloth and 1,000  kyong  of farm land to recompense the grace of
the Buddha. Moreover , the King  granted a general amnesty to all prisoners,
promoted each of ficial by three  ranks, exempted the people fr om taxes in
kind for three years, and transferred the abbot of the temple to a higher
ranking monastery named Pong-song-sa.
Puryerang was made T ae-Kakkan (Prime Minister), his father T aehyon
Ach'an was made T ae-tae Kak kan (Supreme Elder Statesman) and his
mother Lady Y ongbo became Princess of Kyongjong in Saryang-pu, while
An Sang was ma de Chief Priest of the State. The five vault-keepers were all
pardoned and promoted to the fifth grade in rank.
On t he twelfth of June a comet appeared in the eastern sky , an d on the
seventeenth ano ther in the west. The royal astrologer reported to the throne
that these signs had appeared because the harp and flute had not been
promoted to the fourth rank of t he higher grade. The King therefore gave to
the f lute the title  Man-man-p'a-p'a-sik-jok (the Flute to Calm T en Thousand
T imes T en Thousand W aves) instead of Man-p'a-sik-jok (the Flute to Calm
T en Thousand W aves), whereupon the comets disappeared.
There are endless tales of the  wonders wrought by the Bu ddha of
Paengnyul-sa, all of them indescribably interesting.
80. Minjang T emple
There w as once  a poor woman  in Ugum-ni named Po-kae wh o had a
son named Chang-ch'un. In order to improve their lot, the boy joined the
crew of a merchant ship, and fo r a long time nothing was heard from him.
His lonely old mother waited long in vain. Finally she visit ed Minjang
T emple (which had been built with funds donated by Minjang  Kakkan, a
Kyongju nobleman), and prayed  for seven days to the Kwanum Bodhisattva
to bring her son home safe. As she rose from her prayers on the seventh day
and rais ed her eyes to heaven, thinking of her son, there he was standing
before her . She greeted him joyfully and asked him how he had come.
Chang-ch'un related his adventures as follows.
“My go od moth er , we set sail before a favorable wind, but when we
were out in the open sea, suddenly dark clouds hid the sky and a great storm
came up, with foaming waves which tossed our ship about like a toy . Then
a wh irlpool appeared which seiz ed the ship, and the valuable car go and all
the crew  except  myself went to the bottom. I managed to cling  to a plank

and floated on the waves until I was cast ashore on the coast of W u in south
China.
“A kind-hearted  old man in that country took me in and set me to
plowing his fields. One day a st range monk came to comfort m e, and bade
me walk  with him as far as the bank of a stream. There he seized me in his
arms, and leaped into the sky , flying higher and higher and then swooping
low aga in until my feet lightly touched the ground. I was dazed, my head
spun like a top, and my ears hummed like a hive of bees. But I heard the
voices of men, w omen and children speaking in Korean, and, opening my
eyes, found I was back in Silla.
“It was interestin g to fly through the air , though I was a little frightened.
W e left W u at the hour of th e monkey (between three and five in the
afternoon) and arrived here early in the hour of the dog (betwee n eight and
nine in the evening).”
Mother and son alike wept with gratitude. Hand in hand they bowed low
before the image of the Kwanu m Bodhisattva and thanked her again and
again.
This eve nt happened on the eighth of April (Buddha's birthday ) in the
fourth y ear of T'ien-pao, the year of the cock (745). When King  Kyongdok
heard this wonderful story , he bestowed rice fields and many other gifts on
Minjang T emple.
81. Buddhist Relics Br ought to Silla
(As has been po inted out befor e, these r elics abounded in the  Orient.
The “sari” (sarira in Sanskrit) w er e generally small white balls, believed to
be fragments of Buddha's bones and also believed, as we have seen earlier ,
to confe r magic powers. The pagodas which ar e common featur es of
Buddhist temples wer e usually built to house such r elics. A genuine tooth of
Buddha would have been extraor dinarily rar e and valuable.
(The Mongols invaded China  early in the thirteenth century and
eventually conq uer ed her , taking the dynastic title Y uan. Th is involved
domination of Kor ea also, and for a time the Koryo government r esisted,
moving the court fr om the capital (Kaesong) to Kanghwa Island at the
mouth o f the Han River . When at last r esistance was seen to b e futile the
court r eturned to Kaesong in 1270. A few die-har ds held out, first on
Kanghwa and later on Cheju Island, but they wer e ultimately wiped out.
Ilyon lived during the period of Mongol domination.)

According to the Samguk Sagi, in the third year of T a-ch'ing, in the year
of the snake (549), the Liang Emperor sent some  sari  (to Silla) with his
envoy S hen-hu. In the seventeenth year of Chen-kuan, in the year of the
Hare (64 3) Cha jang Popsa, the great Silla monk, brought bac k a skull, a
cheek-tooth of Buddha, and a red-striped, gold-embroidered robe which
Buddha had worn. The  sari  were divided into three group s; some were
enshrined in Hwangnyong Pago da and some in T aehwa pagoda, and the rest
were lai d, togeth er with the rob e, on the two-story altar at T'ongdo T emple
(near Pu san). Th e stone urn con taining the  sari  on the upper story had a lid
shaped like an inverted pot.
T radition says that during the early days of Koryo a bold local
magistrate on two occasions bowed before the altar and lifted the lid of the
urn. The  first time a lar ge snake  was seen coiled within and the second time
there was a lar g e toad crouching in the receptacle. No one dared touch it
after that time.
More re cently , general Kim I-saeng, accompanied by the court of ficial
Y usok, proceeded to the south at the command of the King (Kojong of
Koryo) to take command of the army which was fighting the Mongol
invaders east of the Naktong River . One day he visited the templ e (T'ongdo-
sa) and attempted to lift the lid of the urn with his bow , but was warned of f
by t he chief monk lest the snake or the toad be still ther e. He then
commanded his soldiers to lift th e lid, and they obeyed. There was no snake
or to ad inside, but only a stone box enclosing a glass tube containing four
sari.  The  tub e was cracked, so Y usok, who was with the general, presented
the temp le with a crystal tube to  replace it. This account was placed in the
court dia ry for the year of the go at (1235), the fourth year after the removal
of th e court from  Songdo (Kaesong) to Kanghwa Island during the Mongol
invasions.
The old  record says there were  one hundred  sari  which were divided
into thre e group s and preserved in three places, but in the pres ent instance
we find only fou r of them. This  is not greatly to be wondered at, however ,
because the number of  sari  seen depends upon the seer .
Folk tales relate that when Hwangnyong Pagoda caught fire the stone
vessel inside incurred a lar ge sp ot on its side. (It still bears this  mark.) The
fire broke out in the third year of Y ing-li of Liao, in the year of the ox
(953), th e fifth year of King Kwangjong of Koryo, the third time the pagoda
burned. Chogye-Muui-ja (punning nickname for Hyetam, a mon k who lived

during t he reign s of Kings Sin jong and Kojong of Koryo) lam ented in a
poem, “When the King Dragon 's pagoda went up in flames, nothing was
left after the spreading fire.”
After the years of Chin-yuan (1 264) envoys from Y uan (i.e. from the
Mongol court in China) and courtiers from the royal court  at Songdo
(Kaesong) worshipped the  sari  urn at T 'ongdo-sa more frequen tly than ever ,
while pi lgrims th ronged the temple precincts to see the famous relics. It was
found that only the four genuine  sari  had survived, while the counterfeit
ones ha d been crushed to pow der and were scattered outside the urn,
spreading a wonderful perfume to the four winds.
In the fifth year of T'ang T a-ch ung, in the year of the goat (85 1), W on
Hong, a Koryo (obvious mistak e for Silla) envoy brought ba ck a cheek-
tooth of  Buddha from China. Nobody now knows the whereab outs of this
tooth, but it is said to have arrived during the reign of King Munsong of
Silla (839-856).
In th e fi rst year of Hou-T'ang T ung-kuang, in the year of the goat (923),
when T' aejo (th e founder) of Koryo had been on the throne for six years,
Y un Chil, a Koryo envoy , broug ht back from China the images of the Five
Hundred Nahans (disciples of Buddha), and they were placed in Sinkwang
temple o n Mt. Puksung. In the last year of T a-Sung Hsuan-huo , in the year
of the hare (1 1 19), when King Y ejong had been on the throne  for fifteen
years, tw o Koryo tribute envoys, Chong Kuk-yong and Y i Chi-mi, brought
some cheek-teeth of Buddha from China. These were enshrined in the inner
palace of the King.
According to folktales, in the o ld days, when the famous Silla monk
Uisang P opsa w as studying under Chih-yen T sun-tzu at Chih-sang T emple
on th e South Mo untain of Changan, the T'ang capital, there was a holy man
named Hsuan-lu-shu in a neighboring monastery . He subsisted on provision
which were prepared and sent down from heaven each time he performed
the Buddhist service for the dead. One day Hsuan-lu-shu invite d Uisang to
participate in the ceremony , and the Silla monk solemnly took his place in
the Gold en Hall . But the food from heaven did not appear , and after waiting
a long time Uisang rose and departed with an empty bowl.
When Uisang had gone, the an gel came down from heaven w ith the
table spread with of ferings from the heavenly emperor as usual. On being
asked w hy he was so late, the an gel replied, “W e were unable to  gain access
to your monastery because a company of heavenly spirits blocke d the way .”

From th is Hsuan -lu-shu underst ood that Uisang was protected b y heavenly
guards, and admired his superior attainments. Leaving the heavenly food
untouched, he invited both Chih-yen and Uisang to the services next day
and told them what had happened.
Uisang said to h is host in a gentle voice, “I have heard that on e cheek-
tooth of Buddha is being kept in the Chesok T emple in heaven . Since you
are so much loved by the heavenly emperor , would you kindly  ask him to
bless us by sending that tooth to the human world?”
Hsuan-lu-shu fo rwarded Uisang 's wish to heaven through the angel, and
the h eavenly emperor delivered the tooth of Buddha to Uisang on condition
that it be returned after seven days. (This was not to be taken lite rally , as we
shall see .) Uisang thanked heaven and kept the tooth in a sanctu ary near the
palace gate.
When H ui-tsung was on the thro ne of T a-Sung (Sung Dynasty Emperor ,
1 100-1 125), his people worship ped the left-way gods (i.e. were T aoists).
They were encouraged by the yellow turbans (T aoist priests) to spread a
prophecy that the “men of go ld” would ruin the nation. Moreover , the
yellow turbans bribed the royal  astrologer to interpret this prop hecy to the
throne a s meaning that the “men of gold” were the Buddhists, a nd that they
were plo tting th e subversion of the state. The court was alarmed, and the
Emperor contemplated suppressing Buddhism, massacring the monks,
burning the Buddhist scriptures, and placing the tooth of Buddha on a small
boat to drift away on the sea.
A di plomatic mission from Kory o was visiting China at this time. When
they learned of this situation, they bribed the ship's captain with fifty sticks
of “heav en flow er” antlers and 300 rolls of china-grass to give them the
tooth of Buddha. This he did, a nd they returned and presented the tooth to
the K ing. The King (Y ejong) w as greatly rejoiced, and enshrined the tooth
in th e Left Hall of the Palace of T en Saints, under lock an d key , with
incense-burning lanterns hung at the door -posts, and worshipped it
whenever he visited this palace.
In th e ni neteenth year of King K ojong (1232), when the court m oved to
Kanghwa Island, the tooth of Buddha was left behind in the hurry and
confusion of departure. In April  of the year of the monkey (123 6) the King
visited S inhyo T emple to pray to Buddha for the peaceful repose of his
patriotic warriors (who had been slain by the Mongols). On this occasion,
Onkwang, the chief monk aske d the king to pay his respects to Buddha's

tooth. His Majesty ordered the  grand chamberlain to look f or it in the
detached palace, but it was not  there, whereupon Ch'oe Ch'ung, the court
inspector , ordered his man Sol-sin to search the quarters of all the palace
of ficers.
Kim Su ng-no the grand chamberlain, then said, “Look in the Purple
Gate Diary (the of ficial record of daily events at court).” When this was
checked, an entry was found to  the ef fect that the chief eunuch Y i Paek-
chon had the box containing Buddha's tooth. The eunuch, however ,
presented a receipt to the thro ne showing that Kim So-ryong, a palace
of ficer , had the tooth. When th is of ficial was interrogated, he could say
nothing of the m atter . The King then approved a suggestion of Kim Sung-
no a nd imprisoned all the temple and shrine of ficials who had been in
service during the five years between Im-jin and Pyong-sin (i.e . during the
past five years), but all investigation proved fruitless.
On the third night of the interro gations a great noise was heard in the
garden of Kim So-ryong's house by an object apparently throw n over the
wall from outside. In the torchli ght it was found to be the vessel containing
Buddha's tooth. It had originally been protected by layers of aloewood,
gold, sil ver , glass and mother -of-pearl, but now only the glass container
remained, Kim So-ryong took th e glass vessel to the palace and presented it
to th e K ing. The  court authorities planned to behead Kim So-ryong and all
of t he temple a nd shrine of ficials for neglect of their duty to preserve
Buddha's tooth.  However , the Chinyang-pu presided over by Ch'oe W u
opposed killing so many people involved in Buddhist af fairs, and all the
prisoners were released. (The C h'oe family had at this time established a
sort of military dictatorship wi th the King reduced to a figurehead. The
Chinyang-pu was a supra-government or gan through which they ruled.)
The Kin g had a special shrine built in the middle court of th e palace
(Sip-won-jon) in  which he kept  the holy treasure under strong guard. Then
on a n auspicious day he summo ned thirty monks headed by On kwang, the
chief pri est of Sinhyo-sa, to the palace for a ceremony to comm emorate the
happy event. The court secretary  Ch'oe Hong, generals Ch'oe Ko ng-yon and
Y i Y ong -chang, eunuchs and tea of ficials each held the vessel containing
the tooth on their heads in turn in order to pay the highest r espect to it.
There were some  sari  scattere d around the tooth which the Chinyang-pu
placed in a silver vessel on the altar of the shrine.

When these rites had been completed the King said to his c ourtiers,
“When t he tooth  of Buddha was lost, I had four suspicions: firs t, that it had
ascended to its p lace in heaven a fter the expiration of the seven -day period;
second, that during the Mongol  invasion the wonderworking treasure had
moved t o a sanctuary in a quie ter Buddhist nation; third, that thieves had
taken th e valuable container and thrown the tooth away; and fourth, that
some tre asure a nd curio collector had stolen it and later repented, but too
late to confess h is guilt. Now I see that my fourth suspicion w as correct.”
And with these words the King burst into a loud cry and all the courtiers
attending him wept in chorus and shouted “Long live the King!” Some of
the m ore emotional ones burned their foreheads and forearms in token of
their res olution to become monks. Kak-yu, the former chief prie st of Chirim
T emple, who was the ritualist of  the inner palace temple at that t ime, was an
eyewitness of these events and told me about them, and they are also
recorded in the court annals.
Later , in  the year of the horse (eleventh year of King W onjong, 1270),
when the King r eturned with his court to Kaesong, great disturbances arose
on land and sea. Rebels under the command of local heroes who contended
for mastery fought battles fiercer than those in the year of Imjin (when the
court had moved to Kanghwa.  The “rebels" were the leaders  of diehard
resistance to the Mongols, to w hom the government had now submitted.)
Amid the tumult of war a monk named Simgam, braving all dangers, took
Buddha's tooth to a place of safety . The King rewarded him by placing him
in char ge of Ping-san temple. I heard this story from the monk himself.
In th e si xth year  of Chen T'ien-c hia (565) when King Chinhung was on
the thron e of Silla, the Chen sta te in southern China sent to Silla an envoy
named Liu Szu and a monk n amed Ming-kuan, who brought  with them
1,700 volumes of Buddhist commentaries. In the seventeenth year of T'ang
Chen-kuan (643 ) Chajang Popsa brought back from China thr ee Buddhist
scriptures, consisting of the Buddha's teachings, the laws and commentaries
in 400 boxes and preserved them at T'ongdo T emple. (This description
would fit the f ull Buddhist canon, or T ripitaka, the “three baskets” of
Buddhist scriptu res.) During the reign of King Hungdok, in the first year of
T'ang T a-huo (827), Kudok, a former Koguryo monk who had been
studying in China, brought back more boxes of Buddhist scriptures from the
Celestial Empire . The King, fol lowed by Silla monks, received the gift at
Hungnyun T emple.

In th e fi fth year of T a-chung of T'ang (851) W on Hong, the Silla envoy ,
also bro ught back valuable Buddhist books from China, and Po yo Sonsa, a
great Sil la monk , twice visited W u and Y ueh in southern China and returned
with lar ge shipments of Buddhi st books. He was the founder of Haeryong-
wang-sa (Sea Dragon T emple).
In the year of the dog (1094) d uring the reign of T a-sung Y uan-yu, a
poet eul ogized the portrait of P oyo Sonsa: “Glory to the founder priest!
How graceful his noble features  look! T wice he went to W u and Y ueh and
twice he brought back gems of Buddhist books. The King bestowed on him
the glorious title 'Poyo' (Light of the Universe) in a roy al prescript
proclaimed over  the four seas on this happy occasion. His moral integrity
shines above the white moon and the cool breeze.”
During the years of T a-t'ing (in  the reign of King Oijong, 1 14 6-1 170)
another poet, P'aeng Cho-jok, in his book Hannam Kuan-gi, prai sed Poyo in
the follo wing lin es: “Floating between water and cloud is the quiet temple
where dwells the Buddha; prote cted under heavenly wings are its peaceful
precincts, where crouches the sea-dragon. Who in succession will keep this
holy abo de of Buddha, who de scended from the southern heaven to this
eastern land?” In a note added to the poem the writer told the following
story .
While our immortal monk Poy o Sonsa was on his first return voyage
from Nan-Y ueh bringing Buddhist books to Silla, a storm raged at sea and
his tiny ship w as almost swallowed by an angry sea-dragon, which
bellowed at him to throw the treasured books overboard. He pr onounced a
spell ov er the monster , saying, “Sir dragon! No more of your mischievous
frolic! It  is a sin against Buddha and threatens my life. Instead, escort the
ship, and I will  provide you a peaceful abode on land far bet ter than the
sea.” Immediately the howling wind grew calm and the roaring waves
subsided, and the sea became as smooth as a crystal mirror . The white-
sailed sh ip glided over the blue water as swiftly as an arrow  and on the
morrow made port in Silla, with the sea-dragon pushing it to the  shore. The
monk traveled to all the famous mountains (in Silla) to find a quiet place for
the abode of Buddha and of the dragon.
When Poyo Sonsa climbed a certain high mountain, auspicious clouds
descended from  heaven to its top. Aided by Honggyong, his chief disciple,
he b uilt a beauti ful temple under its crest and called it Haeryong -sa (T emple

of th e Sea Drag on). P'aeng Cho-jok concludes, “The eastwar d spread of
Buddhism really began at that time.”
The Hall of the  Sea Dragon K ing at this temple has worke d many
wonders since the dragon escorted the ship carrying Buddhist scriptures.
In the third yea r of Hou T'ang  T'ien-cheng (928) Muk-Hwasang (the
Silent Monk) brought back more  Buddhist scriptures from China, and when
King Y ejong was on the throne of Koryo” (1 105-1 122) the renowned monk
Hyejo purchased  three copies of the same books, which had been compiled
in the state of Liao. These still exist, one copy being preserved at
Chonghye-sa, one at Haein-sa and one at the home of Ho Ch'am-jong.
In the second ye ar of Liao T a-an (1086), during King Sonjong's reign,
Uich'on, anothe r great monk, visited China and brought back a lar ge
shipment of Buddhist books ca lled Ch'ondae Kyo-kuan. In addition many
other mo nks went abroad and br ought back innumerable Buddhist works to
Silla and  Koryo, thus bringing Buddhist religion and Buddhist culture and
art from India to the east through China and making the young Koryo
Kingdom and the two-thousand-year -old India of the Deer Park  one in the
Buddhist world. (The Deer Park at Benares in India is said to have been the
place where Buddha preached his first sermon.)
(The par agraphs which conclud e this section ar e not Ilyon's. A note in
the original informs us that they wer e written by Muguk, his chief disciple.)
According to the account of Uisang in the present work, in the early
T'ang Y ing-hui period (650) he traveled to China, where he visited Chih-
yen, a mysterious monk in that country . But an inscription on a stone
monument at Pusok T emple say s that Uisang was born in the eighth year of
T'ang W u-te (62 5) and became a monk as a young man in the first year of
T'ang Y ing-hui (650). Accompanied by W onhyo (another famous Silla
monk) he started out on the long journey to China by way of Koguryo, but
was forced to turn back because of a war in that country .
In the first year of T'ang Lung-shuo (661) Uisang succeeded in r eaching
China, w here he  studied under Chih-yen until the latter's death  in the first
year of T sung-ch ang (668). In th e second year of T'ang Hsien-he ng (671) he
returned to Silla, where he died in the second year of Chang-an (702) at the
age of seventy-eight. Therefore  he would have received the tooth of the
Buddha from the palace in heaven some time between Sin-yu  (661) and
Mu-jin (668), after he had participated with Chih-yen in the Buddhist
service conducted by Hsuan-lu-shu.

In the year of th e dragon (1232) when King Kojong moved his court to
Kanghwa Island, he thought that the seven-day period of the tooth's sojourn
on earth had expired, but this was a mistake, for in the T orich'on heaven one
day and  one night are equal to a hundred years on earth. Thus at this date
693 year s would have passed since Uisang first arrived in China in the year
of the cock (661). (Here and in  the next paragraph Muguk's a rithmetic is
obviously faulty .)
The year of the  rat (1240) in the reign of King Kojong would  be the
seven-hundredth year , when the heavenly seven-day period expi red, and the
seventh year of Chih-yuan (127 0) when the court moved back to Kaesong
was the 730th year , thirty years after the expiration date. If the Buddha's
tooth returned to heaven on the  seventh day of its sojourn on earth as the
heavenly emperor had stipulat ed, then the tooth which Sin-gam Sonsa
carried from Kanghwa and presented to the King in Kaesong could not have
been the genuine one.
Before leaving Kanghwa for Kaesong the King assembled all the
leading monks in the detached palace and prayed for the discovery of
Buddha's tooth and the  sari  w hich had been  lost, but to no avail. Perhaps
they had already ascended to heaven at the expiration of their stay on earth.
In th e twenty-first year of Chih -yuan (1284), when the Golden Pagoda
of Kukc h'ong T emple was repaired, the King and his Queen Changmok-
W anghu visited Myogak T emple , where he worshipped the tooth  of Buddha
presented by Sim-gam, the Naksan crystal rosary and the Y o-ui- ju (a special
kind of  sari  said to have magical powers). He then placed them in the
pagoda amid the profound reverence of the courtiers and o f the great
multitude of people who had gathered there. I had the honor to be present at
this cere mony , and I saw the Buddha's tooth with my own eyes. It was
about three inches long, but there were no  sari  with it.
—W ritten by Muguk
82. The Fairy Flower of Mait r eya (Miruk Sonhwa), Mirirang and
Chinja
(This is the lege ndary account of the founding of the Hwarang or der .
Modern historians believe it was actually a development fr om ancient tribal
custom. The wor d “fairy” her e is to be understood as indicating a sort of
divine or semi-divine being, not in the sense it has in Eur opean folklor e.)
The family name of King Chinh ung (the twenty-fourth Silla sovereign)
was Kim, and h is childhood name was Sam-nung-jong or Sim -nung-jong.

Upon ascension to the throne in  the sixth year of Liang T ai-t'ung (450) he
devoted himself to the worship of Buddha and had many temples built
throughout the country , as his uncle King Pophung had done.
The Kin g loved elegance and p hysical beauty and believed in Sin-son
and Son-nyo (male and female f airies). He chose pretty maidens by holding
beauty contests and called them W onhwa (original flowers), and taught
them mo desty , l oyalty , filial piety and sincerity so that they would become
good wives and wise mothers.
In one such contest Nammo and Chunjong, two of these “original
flowers,” were the leading contenders among three or four hundred budding
Silla beauties. Becoming jealo us of Nammo, Chunjong invited her to a
party and made her drunk with  strong wine. She then led Nammo to the
bank of the Northern Stream, where she struck her fair brow with a stone
and buried her body in the sand.
Nammo's admirers missed their  queen and could not find her , so they
sang a doleful song and went back to their homes. But someone who knew
of the crime composed an elegy  and had it sung by all the children in the
streets. Finally the followers of the murdered beauty found her body beside
the stream.
Infuriated, the King had Chunjong put to death and issued a royal
decree abolishing W onhwa. In its place he created Hwarang (Flower
Y outh), for which he recruited noble young men of physical beauty and
mental virtue. He believed th at he could enhance the fortunes of the
kingdom by training young me n in a decorous mode of life. They were
taught the five cardinal princip les of human relations (kindness, justice,
courtesy , intelligence and faith ), the six arts (etiquette, music, archery ,
horsemanship, w riting and mathematics), the three scholarly occupations
(royal tutor , instructor and te acher), and the six ways to  serve the
government (holy minister , good minister , loyal minister , wise minister ,
virtuous minister and honest minister). A youth named Sol-W onnang was
made head of th e order with the  title of Kukson. There is a stone monument
at M yongju (now Kang-nung) which was erected in his memor y . This was
the beginning of Hwarang.
During the reign of King Chin ji (576-579) there was a monk  named
Chinja at Hungnyun T emple who worshipped the image of Maitreya
Buddha, praying  that the Budd ha be incarnated as a Hwarang  so that he
might attend him as chief servant. One night he saw an old priest in a

dream. “If you go to Suwon T emple in Ungch'on (Kongju),” the priest said,
“you will meet a Maitreya Flower Y outh.”
Joyfully the monk woke and went immediately to the temple, where he
met a noble youth of great physical beauty . The youth smiled and showed
him into a guest room in the temple.
“I am a stranger to you,” the monk said. “Why this kind reception?”
“I am also a traveler from Kyongju visiting this temple,” th e youth
replied. “It is sim ply my duty to be kind to a fellow human creature.” After
a short conversation the youth left the room and disappeared.
While th e monk was pondering this singular event, the abbo t of the
temple told him to go to Ch'onsan (Thousand Mountains), where he might
meet sup erhuman beings. The monk climbed into the hills, and there he saw
a mount ain-god who changed into a white-bearded old man. “What are you
doing here and whom do you seek?” the old man asked.
“I want to see a Maitreya Flower Y outh,” the monk replied.
“Y ou sa w him at the entrance t o Suwon T emple, didn't you?” said the
old man. Chinja was surprised and returned to his temple in Kyongju.
King Chinji heard this story and summoned the monk to c ourt. “I
understand the Maitreya Flower Y outh told you he lived in Kyongju,” the
King said. “Sages and Buddhas do not lie. Why don't you seek him within
the city?”
Chinja gathered his followers and sought the flower youth. Soon he
caught sight of a handsome youth strolling under a big tree northeast of
Y ongmyo T emple. In rapture the monk approached the youth and said, “Y ou
are the Maitreya Flower Y outh  (Miruk Sonhwa)! What is you r name and
where is your home?”
“My given name is Miri,” the youth replied, “but I do not k now my
family name since I lost my parents in infancy .”
Chinja conducted the youth to the palace in a palanquin. The King loved
Miri and  put him at the head of all the Hwarang. The wond rous youth
taught his Hwarang disciples social etiquette, music and song an d also gave
them les sons in patriotic behavi or , raising the fair name of Hwarang to its
zenith. A fter sev en years he dis appeared into the fairyland of Sin-son, and
the King and all the people missed his noble qualities.
Chinja's grief at the loss of Miri-rang knew no bounds, but when he
meditated on the flower youth, his image in his Maitreya form w as reflected
on his inward eye and he was co mforted in his solitude. Chinja purified his

heart af ter the model of Miri-rang, and finally his awakene d soul was
transported to the spiritual world , leaving his life's end on earth shrouded in
mystery to this day .
Scholars say that this story is partly based on the fact that the Chinese
characters for the name “Miri” c an also be pronounced “Miruk" (Maitreya)
in Korea n. Peop le called a sin-so n (fairy) a Miruk-Sonhwa (Fairy Flower of
Maitreya) and the leader of the Hwarang Kukson. (This last works out to
“National Fairy ,” which sounds a little strange but made s ense in the
traditional Korean scheme of things.) “Miri” was a divine go-between
according to the tradition handed down by the monk Chinja.
Not only moved by the devoted heart of Chinja but also attracted by
predestined af fi nity , the great Buddha often appeared in Silla in human
form.

Song of Praise to the Fairy Flower
I wandered looking for my Fairy Flower , thinking of him with every
footstep.
I've run over hill and dale, but he has vanished from my sight;
W ilt thou not blossom on my breast in the next spring
As Shanglin-hung blooms before her royal lover in his flowery garden?
(“Shanglin-hung" — literally “Upper For est Red” — is a n allusion to
the court beauties of the Han dynasty , who ar e compar ed to r ed flowers
pr essed to the hearts of their r oyal lovers.)
83. Noh il Puduk and T al-tal Pak-pak, the T wo Saints of the White
Moon Mountains
This account is taken from the Biography of the T wo Sain ts who
Became Living Maitreyas in the White Moon Mountains.
Paegwol-san, the White Moon  Mountains, rise in the north of Kusa
County (Uian-gu n) in Silla. Tho usands of grotesque peaks soar into the sky
in a  long undul ating ridge overlooking ten thousand deep rav ines over a
distance of several hundred  li , making the place a veritable fairyland.
White-haired m ountaineers say that long, long ago the T'ang Emperor
carved a lotus pond in a valley , with a lion-rock in the middle, and under the
moonlight the majestic rock cast its shadow over the glimmering wavelets,
which reflected the dancing flowers on the hills all around.
The Emperor commanded a painter to make a picture of the mountain
and the pond an d then dispatched an envoy to compare this picture with the

actual landscape, of renowned grandeur and beauty . The envoy went to Silla
and visited the wonderful mountains, where he found the lotus pool and the
lion-rock, with a three-peaked hill called Hwasan (Flower Mountain)
nearby , just as they were in the picture.
Unable to be completely sure o f the picture's accuracy , the en voy left
one of his shoes on the lion- rock and returned home to report on his
experiences in Silla. The shadow of the T'ang envoy's sho e was also
reflected in the pool under the  full moon, so the Emperor called it (the
picture?) the White Moon Mountains. Strange to say , there were no
shadows on the pool ever afterwards.
Approximately three thousand paces southeast of these mountains there
was a quiet vill age called Sonch'on-ch'on (V illage of the Fairy Stream).
Here lived two men, Nohil Pu duk and T al-tal Pak-pak, who possessed
uncommon phys ical beauty and who meditated deeply on life. At the age of
twenty they both became monk s, shaving their heads and livin g with their
wives at  two temples close to ea ch other , working on their farms  by day and
worshipping Buddha by night. (There were and still are orders  of married
monks in Korea.)
Food wa s plenti ful, the joy of married love was overflowing, a nd their
homes were like paradises on earth. But the two monks re flected that
earthly pleasure s were not half  so good as the joy of the lotus pool in
heaven,23 whe re t hey coul d chant the call of everlasting life with a thousa nd
Buddhas and disport themselves with parrots and peacocks.
The two  men left their homes a nd their wives behind in the mundane
world an d hid themselves in a d eep valley where, after their lo ng journey ,
they fell  fast asleep. The dying  moon in the west flooded their faces with
radiant w hite lig ht, and in its beams a golden hand descended from heaven
and smoothed the foreheads of the sleeping monks. They  awoke in
astonishment an d told each othe r their dreams, and when these  were found
to corres pond exactly they were even more delighted, and enter ed a deeper
valley called Mudung-gok. He re Pak-pak built an eight-foot square log
cabin by  the lion rock under the northern peak in which to live and worship.
Puduk made his cell in a roc ky cave under the eastern p eak. Puduk
worshipped Maitreya and Pak-p ak devoted his heart and soul to Kwanum,
the goddess of mercy .
Three y ears pas sed, and in the eighth year of King Songdok (706) on
Buddha's birthd ay (eighth day of the fourth moon) a young woman of

twenty came to the cell of Pak-p ak. She was not only a graceful and elegant
beauty , but fragrant with the sc ents of rock-orchid and musk-deer which
emanated from her body in the twilight breeze.

“Where the traveler goes the sun sets too soon,
A thousand mountains are veiled in the evening mist;
The way is long and the city is far—
I wish to rest my weary feet in your cell.
O merciful monk, be kind and do not chide me.”

She sang  this song in a beautifu l voice which almost melted th e lonely
heart of the monk after his long celibacy . He replied,

“A Buddhist temple, lar ge or small,
Should be kept clean, and you are not
Qualified to enter my cell;
Go away quickly lest your rosy flesh
T empt my rising passion.”

The woman blushed with sham e, and bent her steps to the cell of the
other monk where she sang her song again,
“My bea utiful lady ,” said Puduk, “where have you come from on this
night so deep?”
“Under the clear sapphire sky I  come and go as I please,” she  said. “I
heard of your w ish and admired your high moral conduct, so I am here to
help you become a Bodhisattva. Listen to my song:
The sun is down and a thousand mountains are dark,
As I travel on my lone heart knows no bounds;
Where the pine and bamboo deepen the green shadows in the valley ,
The blue water sings a fresh tune;
The weary traveler asks for a night's hospitality ,
Not because she has gone astray
But because she wants to lead you to a noblepath—
Listen to my request, but do not ask who I am.”
Surprised, Pudu k answered, “This is a holy place which must not be
defiled by women. But to come to the aid of all creatures is one of Buddha's
commands, muc h more to hear the appeal of a woman who seeks asylum in

this lonely valley . Come in. Y o u can rest in my cell, though it  is too bare
and humble for a noble lady like you.”
The woman entered the cell and the monk lowered the wick of the
burning candle in the niche and chanted Buddhist prayers without stopping
a moment in ord er to keep the temptation of a pretty woman ou t of his pure
mind.
At m idnight the woman called t he monk and said, “I am sorry b ut I am
going to  have a baby unexpec tedly and unfortunately in your presence
tonight. Kindly bring a straw mat for me.”
“W omen are most pitiful when giving birth,” said Puduk. “Let me raise
the wick of the flickering candle before I do as you ask. Ah, the baby is
already born. I hear its loud cry .”
“Y es, th e baby has been born sooner than I expected,” she replied,
“Now please bring me a tub of hot water so I can bathe my self and the
baby .”
Puduk was ashamed at seeing the naked body of a woman and trembled
from head to foot, but he took pity on her , and having prepared a tub of hot
water , p laced her in the middle of it and washed her milk-whit e body with
trembling hands . He was astonis hed to perceive that the tub was filled with
a sweet scent and that the wat er had changed into a golden liquid. “Ah,
wonder of wonders,” he murmured.
“Y ou, to o, bathe  in this water ,”  the woman told him. The monk was
even mo re ashamed to bare his body before a woman, but he ob eyed. As he
bathed, he felt his mind becoming ennobled with a fresh spirit, his skin
turned the color of gold, and the tub became a lotus pedestal.
“Ah, wonderful sight!” said Puduk.
“Dear m onk,” s aid the woman, “be seated on this lotus pedestal. I am
Kwanum Boddh isattva, the goddess of mercy , and I have come to help you
become a great Bodhisattva yourself.” W ith these words the woman
disappeared in the twinkling of an eye.
On the following morning Pak-pak, thinking that Puduk had surely
broken the commandment of Buddha and enjoyed the woman during the
night, called on his fellow monk to remonstrate with h im. T o his
astonishment his friend was seated on a lotus pedestal as a Maitreya
Buddha, radiating brilliant light from his golden body .
Pak-pak bowed respectfully and asked, “Who has made  you a
Bodhisattva?”

“A b eautiful woman,” Puduk re plied. “She wanted to rest in my cell, so
I suf fered her to  come in; she wanted to bathe after childbirth, s o I gave her
a hot bath; she told me to bathe in the same tub and in the same golden
water , so I did, and I became a golden Buddha. As she left she said that she
was the goddess of mercy . Because I showed her mercy , she returned my
kindness by making me an image of mercy .”
“Y ou are  not only a kind-hearted man but a strong-hearted one a s well,”
sighed Pak-pak. “As for me, I was too weak to resist her charm ing beauty ,
and turn ed her away for fear of falling in love with her and g oing to hell
instead of heaven. My inhumane treatment of a fellow creature has lost me
the golden opportunity of becoming a god of mercy .”
“Don't be so sad,” replied Puduk. “There is still some golden water left
in the tub in which you can bathe.”
Pak-pak bathed in the golden, aromatic liquid, and the moment he
emer ged from the tub he was tra nsformed into another Maitreya  and took a
position facing his friend. The villagers flocked around the twin divinities
with wondering  eyes. The two gods of mercy spoke to them, preaching
sermons full of golden sayings. Then they flew up to heaven, riding chariots
above the clouds.
In the first year of King Kyong dok of Silla (755), the King heard this
wonderful story  and in the year of the cock (757) he o rdered the
construction of a lar ge temple o n the scene of these events, to b e called the
South T emple of the White Moon Mountains.
On the fifteenth of July in the second year of T'ang Kuang-te in the year
of the dragon (764), when the temple had been completed, an image of
Maitreya was placed in its Golden Hall with a golden panel above it
inscribed, “Palace of the Incarnate Maitreya.” In the Lecture H all was an
image o f Amitabha with a similar panel above it which read, “P alace of the
Incarnate Amitabha of Everlasting Life.”
The heroine of this story was an incarnation of Buddha in a woman's
body . In  the Buddhist book Hw aom-gyong it is written, “Lady Mahamaya
of goodness and mercy shining over the 'eleven lands' gave birth to
Sakyamuni Bud dha with a vision of the gate of Buddhist salvation, casting
of f worl dly passions.” (In the Indian legends Buddha's mother is named
Maya. “Maha” is a Sanskrit p refix meaning “great.”) Thus the birth of
Buddha was re-enacted by the goddess in the White Moon Mountains.

She sang her s ong to the herm its in a plaintive tone like that of a
lovesick fairy from heaven. Had she not taken the form of a  young and
beautiful woma n and talked to them in “Dharani” (Buddhist spells in
Sanskrit), she could not have communicated with them in working this
wonder . In her song of temptation she might have said, “The winds of
heaven mingle forever in sweet  emotion; why can I not mingle with thee
into a single be ing?” But because she was a goddess she coul d not allow
herself to sound like a vulgar woman in a ballad.

Song of Praise to the Northern Hermitage
In the twilight who knocks at this silent stone door in the dee p, deep
mountains?
Ah, it is a woman, a phantom of delight, a moment's ornament!
Y ou may go to the Southern Cloister , which is not far away—
Do not tread on the green moss of my doorstep,
Do not stain my clean cot with your woman's presence.

Song of Praise to the Southern Hermitage
In the deep dusky valley from whence comes this fair lady
Who like the radiant moon shines on my solitary cot?
W elcome, lady , rest thy weary feet under my southern window .
As the night deepens my perplexed heart with thy beauty brightens,
Only the baby's cries keep my pretty guest awake the whole night.

Song of Praise to the Holy W oman
She wandered over hill and dale and under the lonely ten- li  pine grove
T o tempt the lonely monks in the night cells;
When she had borne two babies, she rose from her bath at dawn
And flew far , far away into the western sky .
84. The  Goddess of Mer cy and the Blind Child at Pu nhwang
T emple
During the reign of King Kyongdok (742-765) there lived at Hanki-ri a
woman whose name was Hui-m yong. She had a son, but he beca me blind at
the age of five. One day this un happy mother carried her child in her arms
to the Left Hall of Punhwang T e mple. There she had him sing a song before
the port rait of the Thousand-Handed Goddess of Mercy on the northern
wall while she of fered a prayer . Immediately , the child recovered his sight.


Song of the Blind Child
I fall on my knees and clasp both my hands
T o pray thee to have mercy on me, O Kwanum Bodhisattva!
Thou hast touched so many dark eyes with thy thousand hands
And made them bright as daylight;
Pray give me one eye for love and another for charity .
If thou givest me mine eyes, I will sing thy great mercy .
Song of Praise to the Goddess of Mer cy
Riding a bamboo horse, playing an onion pipe.
I played on hills and streams.
But alas, in a twinkling I lost t he sight of both eyes! Had the goddess
not give n me back my bright e yes, How many springs would have come
and gone without my seeing the pussy-willows!
85. The two Buddhas of Naksan and Chosin, the Lovesick Monk
In the olden days, when Uisang Popsa had returned from his first visit to
China, h e heard  that the godde ss of mercy (Kwanum) had ta ken up her
abode in a cave on the seacoast. He therefore called the place N aksan, after
the I ndian mountain Pota-Nakka-san, which is better known as So-Paekhwa
(Small White Flower) because the graceful white-clad image of Kwanum
Bodhisattva there resembled a white flower on a slender stem.
(Uisang evidently went to this place for a religious retreat of some sort).
On the seventh day of his pur ification, Uisang stood up and pushed his
cushion into the sea so that it w ould float away on the morning  tide. Eight
gods from the F our Deva Kings then conducted him into the cave. There he
looked up to he aven and worshipped Buddha, and a crystal rosary was
given to  him. He took it, and a s he stepped backward the Dr agon of the
Eastern Sea of fered him a beadlike gem (Cintamani), which he also
accepted. Uisang purified himself for a further seven days, after which he
beheld the splendid face and graceful figure of the living Buddha.
The Buddha said, “If you climb this mountain you will see a pair of
bamboos growin g at the top. There build a palace for me.” W hen Uisang
had left the presence of the Budd ha he climbed the mountain, and above the
cave tw o bamboo plants shot suddenly out of the ground and then
disappeared. Uisang therefore knew that this was the holy abode  of Buddha,
and on this spot  he built a temple called Naksan-sa with a lifeli ke image of

the g raceful Buddha in its Golden Hall, where he also deposited the crystal
rosary before his departure.
Soon afterward W onhyo, another famous Silla monk, made a pilgrimage
to w orship this Buddha. Whe n he arrived at the southern foot of the
mountain, he saw a woman harvesting rice in a field. W onhyo liked women
and pleasantry , so he said to her jestingly , “W ill you give me some rice?”
“No, I am sorry ,  I cannot,” she replied. “It is a lean year and beg gars are
not welcome.”
Proceeding furth er , he met a woman washing her menstrual band in
running water under a bridge. She too he addressed in jest: “Let me have a
drink of the cool water .”
“All right, come and drink,” rang out her clarion voice, and she scooped
up some  of the u nclean water in a half-moon-shaped gourd and pressed it to
his lips.  W onhyo drained the gourd and dipped more wate r from the
mountain stream to quench his thirst.
As he did so, a blue bird in a pine tree nearby called to him “Come on,
my good monk Huiche-Hwasang!” and disappeared, leaving a woman's
shoe un der the tree. When W onhyo reached the temple he found another
shoe, of the s ame size and shape, by the pedestal of th e Kwanum
Bodhisattva. He then realized that these shoes belonged to the two women
whom h e had met, and that the y were both incarnate Buddhas. From that
time on people c alled the pine from which the bird had called t he Kwanum
pine.
W onhyo wished  to enter the cave and see the graceful figure of the
living B uddha there, but a storm  was raging at sea and his little boat almost
capsized, so he was forced to desist.
Many y ears later Pomil, the f ounder of Kulsan T emple, traveled to
China in  the years of T'ai-huo (827-835) and visited Kaikuo  T emple in
Mingchow . There, occupying the lowest place in the temple, he met a
strange monk whose left ear was missing. This monk said to Pomil, “I am
one of your fellow countrymen. My home is in T okki-pang, Iknyong-hyon,
on the boundary of Myongju (Y angyang in Kangwon Province). When you
return home, visit my native place and build a house for me.”
Pomil visited all the famous Chinese temples and learned much esoteric
Buddhist doctrine. When he returned home in the seventh ye ar of T'ang
Hui-ch'ang, the year of the hare (847) he founded Kulsan-sa. On the night
of the fifteenth of February in the twelfth year of T'ang T a-ch ung, in the

year of the tiger  (858), Pomil ha d a dream about the one-eared monk whom
he had met years before in China. The monk stood under his bedroom
window and said, “Y ou made me a promise at the temple in Mingchow .
Why are you s o late in keepi ng it?” In great surprise Pomil arose and
gathered a party of fellow monks to seek the native place of the one-eared
monk near Iknyong (W ing Pass).
In a vill age at the foot of Naksa n he met a woman named T okki whose
eight-year -old so n was accustomed to play near a stone bridge south of the
village. One day the child said t o her , “Mother , one of my playmates has a
face that shines with golden rays.” The woman told this to Pomil, who in
great joy took the child with him to the stone bridge. Under th e bridge in
midstream he found a stone Buddha image. When it was taken from the
stream he saw th at it exactly resembled the monk he had met in  China—its
left ear was mis sing. This was th e noble image of Chongch'wi B odhisattva.
Pomil selected an auspicious sit e on Naksan and built a temple, enshrining
the holy image in its Golden Hall.
(Ilyon n otes here: In an old book the stories of Pomil are place d before
those of Uisang and W onhyo. B ut since Uisang and W onhyo lived during
the reign of T'ang Kao-tsung in China(649-683) and Pomil in the days of
Hui-ch'ang 170 years later , this  is a mistake in chronology . Some scholars
say that Pomil was a disciple of Uisang, but this also is a mistake.)
In a forest fire which broke out a hundred years after these events, all
the temp les and shrines on Naks an went up in flames except the temples of
the Kwanum and Chongch'wi Bodhisattvas.
After th e Invasion of the W est Mountain (the Mongol invasion , 1253-
1254) the images of the two Bodhisattvas together with the two jewels were
moved t o Y angj u-song (Y angya ng, Kangwondo). When the city was about
to fall to the Mongols, Ahaeng the abbot (formerly called Hoi-ko) tried to
save the  rosaries  by hiding them in a brass vessel. Kolsung, a temple slave,
buried th is vessel in the ground and swore an oath: “If I do not e scape death
in this war these treasures will vanish from the human world forever , but if I
survive I will present them to the King.”
Finally , on the twenty-second of October in the year of the tiger (1254)
Ahaeng was killed when the c ity fell, but Kolsung escaped. When the
enemy had evacuated the ruin ed city he dug up the brass vessel and
presented it to Y i Nok-yu, the keeper of the royal treasury , to b e preserved
under strong guard. In October of the year of the horse (1258) Kakyu, the

abbot of  Chirim -sa, said to the King, “The two rosaries are sacred treasures
of the nation. Before the fall of Y angju Kolsung the temple slave buried
them in the city , and after the enemy left he dug them up and presented
them to the roy al treasury in Myongju. Now Myongju is i n imminent
danger o f falling  into enemy ha nds, so they should be transfer red to Y our
Majesty's inner palace.”
The Kin g appro ved this plan an d sent ten soldiers to Myongju by night
to fetch the rosa ries and bring th em to his inner palace. He rewarded the ten
soldiers with one pound of silver and five lar ge bags of rice each.
During t he Silla  period when th e Kings ruled in Kyongju there  was in
Nalli county in Myongju prefe cture a manor belonging to Se kyu T emple
(now called Honggyo-sa). The  abbot of this temple appoint ed a young
monk na med Ch osin caretaker of the manor . No sooner had he arrived to
take up his duti es than Chosin fell in love with the daughter of Kim Hun-
kong, the county magistrate. She was a girl of sixteen, fairer than the moon
and more charming than all the flowers put together . But though she smiled
on him she was unyielding, like a bell-flower growing between rocks too
high for his hands to reach.
At length he knelt before the goddess of mercy , who now appeared to
him in the semblance of his love, and prayed, “Oh great Buddha! Only
make this girl m y wife for even a moment's joy if not for life, fo r she is my
jewel, which I wish to cherish in my bosom in love's palace on earth before
I enter the lotus paradise in heaven. So be it, Namu-amitabul!”
Thus he  prayed all through the flowering spring and the rainy autumn,
but a ll in vain, for the girl was betrothed to another man. When he thought
of the blooming  bride in her glittering jewels and compared  the richly-
dressed bridegro om with himself—a poor monk in a grey hem p robe—he
shed tears of bitter despair .
At last the wedding day arrived, and as Chosin knelt for his evening
prayers he saw in his mind's eye the magnificent wedding feast and the
lovemaking of the young couple. A flame of jealousy rose in hi s heart, and
he said to himse lf, “Go and kill  the bridegroom! Set fire to the rich man's
house! D estroy everything and jump into the flames! If you die you will
for get the girl and everything else in this tragic world.”
Chosin w rithed in an agony like that of death, complaining to Buddha
for not answering his prayer . At last, worn out with weeping, he fell asleep
in the Buddha Hall.

Suddenly an autumn breeze blew out the candles. Chosin looked toward
the d oor , which was ajar , and as  he did so it was flung open and there in the
moonlight stood the bride, fresh as a rosebud in her wedding dress. She
threw he r arms around his neck and pressed her face to his boso m, sobbing
softly .
Chosin was dumbfounded with joy and surprise. “This is your wedding
night,” he said. “Why have you forsaken your bridegroom?”
“He is my paren ts' choice,” she said softly through her tears. “ I do not
want him . Y ou have my love.” And her slender body moved in h is arms like
a butterfly dancing on a flower .
“Y ou love me?” Chosin asked.
“A wom an is kept within her g arden walls,” the girl replied. “She is
forbidden to meet young men. T hough I am a girl of gentle bir th, since we
met in the roseb ed under the tun nel of wildflowers, eye to eye and lip to lip,
I have not for gotten you for a moment. I am yours, and I have come to live
with you and be your love until we go together to the same grave.”
Chosin c lasped his bride in his arms and danced for joy . Then he took
her hand and led  her from the Buddha Hall and down a mountai n path, until
they reached a quiet valley ne ar his native place. Here he built a snug
cottage i n the green forest. It wa s only a one-room cabin but it w as sweet to
Chosin, for he a nd his wife love d each other passionately . He w as familiar
with the forest a nd made his living by cutting wood and hunting hare and
deer , wh ich he and his love-mate  cooked in a pan over crackling flames and
ate with good appetite.
T ime sp ed by like a warrior's arrow , and at last they had lived together
in the forest for forty years, during which five children were bo rn to them.
They ha d been able to live for s ome time by selling the bride's jewelry , but
at last it was all  gone and they were reduced to abject poverty . There was
not a grain of rice or barley in the house and the family had to subsist on
grass an d roots.  Chosin hunted and cut wood as diligently as he was able,
but he could not supply his now  lar ge family with even the bare necessities
of life. He kne w that killing the mountain creatures was against the
commandment o f Buddha, not t o speak of the sin of living with a woman,
but now he would have killed even human beings to keep h is wife and
children from starvation.
The whole family wandered i n rags through the mountain villages
begging for food. As they were crossing Haehyon-nyong (Crab Pass) their

fifteen-year -old eldest son fell dead of hunger . W ith many tears  Chosin and
his wife buried the beloved child on the mountainside and continued with
the rema ining four to Ugok-hyon (now U-hyon), where they b uilt a lowly
cottage with a thatched roof.
More years passed. Now Chosin and his wife were as grey as if snow
had fallen on th eir heads, and th in and pale as death. Both of them fell ill,
while their children cried for food. The ten-year -old daughter walked fifteen
miles th rough the mountain villages begging for food for the family . She
was bitt en by a stray dog an d collapsed in pain on her return. T ears
streamed down the sunken cheeks of the aged couple.
At l ast, wiping away her tears, the old wife spoke to her husband:
“When I  married you in the flower of my youth and beauty , yo u kissed my
blushing cheeks  and called them  roses. Then we had fine clothes to wear
and good food t o eat, and our married love deepened as long as  the mellow
wine flo wed fro m our barrels, But now my rosy cheeks and cherry lips and
the g low of strength in your eyes are gone. Nothing is left to us  but sunken
stomachs, the pains of old age, sorrow and the fear of death. No one in this
wide wo rld will  give us so much as a night's sojourn in a storeroom or a
bottle of soy-sauce. W e have become a laughing-stock.
“If we cannot feed our own children, how can we enjoy our remaining
years in love? Coquettish smiles  have vanished like the dew , and the pledge
of o ur love ha s fled like the  pussy-willows on the four winds. The
passionate, carnal desires of our green youth have led o nly to this
bottomless grief of the grey w inter . It would be better to be a lone bird
pecking at a mir ror and calling for its mate than a pair dying with its young
in hunger and cold. It is intolerable that lovers should meet in wealth and
part in poverty , but such is the end of our ill-fated love. Since  there is no
other remedy , let us kiss and part, each taking two of the children.”
Chosin consented, though he grieved deeply at the thought of parting
from his loving wife and two of his children. “Farewell, husband,” said his
wife. “I am going to my old home in the north; you go south.” At this bitter
parting, Chosin gave a great cry , and awoke.
It had all been a dream. He la y in the Buddha hall, before the altar ,
where the candle he had lighted had burned down to a stump. In one night
he had tasted all the sweetness and bitterness of life. T ears o f disillusion
stood in  his eyes. As the dying moon sank into the bosom of the sea, the
dawn light revealed that his hair and beard had turned white in a few hours.

W ith his disenchantment with l ove came a turning away from  all worldly
ambition. He was tired of work, and the hot flame of greed in his heart
melted away as if it had been cold ice. In shame and remorse he turned his
eyes from the holy Buddha images to the frost-covered tiles of the temple
roof, which shone like spearhe ads. Chosin then went to Haehyon-nyong
(Crab Pass) where he had buried his son in the dream. Digging in the place
of the imagined  grave, he disco vered a stone image of Maitreya Buddha,
which h e enshrined in a nearby temple. After this he returned to his home
temple i n the capital and resigned from the position of caretaker of the
country manor at Myongju. Bef ore his death he built Chongt'o -sa (T emple
of the Purified Land) with funds from his private fortune.
Reading this story , we realize that not only Chosin but many people like
him dream the same dream, and we give them warning in the following
lines.

Y outh and beauty may meet in love for a moment's joy ,
But rosy cheeks soon pale in sadness, like autumn leaves;
W ealth and nobility are like floating clouds,
And this temporal life of desire is only an empty dream;
Men's good or bad behavior stems from their inner minds,
Y et young men dream of fair brows and thieves of treasure;
Behold how one night's dreaming under the autumn sky
Can lead a man to enjoy the cool air with closed eyes.

86. The Reflection of Buddha on Fish Mountain
(In what follows, Ilyon first tells a story which was evidently taken from
Indian sources and applied to K orea, then quotes the Indian s ource itself.
The pla ce-names he uses, however , are mainly Korean, perhaps derived
from the  Chinese versions of Indian place names. The country of Buddha's
birth, fo r example, is given as “Nakal.” Buddhist tradition plac es Buddha's
birth at the town of Lumbini in the present kingdom of Nepal.)
In an antique record it is written that the site of Man-o-sa (T e mple of
T en Thousand Fish) was formerly called Mt. Chasong or Mt A yasa
(Mayasa, meaning fish). Nearby was Karakuk, where an egg descended
from heaven on the seacoast fro m which came a man who ruled over that
country . This was King Suro.

In those days th ere was a pois onous dragon in the mountains which
lived in a jade p ond and carried on with five female ogres (Nach'al-nyo) on
the sapphire waves, calling up thunderstorms and devastating crops of the
five grains throughout the four seasons.
Using h is magic art, the King pronounced spells against the dragon to
stop his mischief, but to no avail. It was not until he prayed to  Buddha to
enforce his Five Commandmen ts on the monsters that they ceased to do
harm. Then the fish and dragons of the Eastern Sea came to these
mountains and filled a valley with water and lived there, making music by
striking jade stones with their heads and tails.
In the eleventh year of King Myongjong of Koryo (1 180). Man-o-sa
was first built on this mountain , It had been reported to the K ing by the
monk Po rim tha t there were thre e wonders in this area that resembled those
of Karak uk in North Ch'onch'uk (India) where a reflection of Buddha is
found. These wonders were a jade pond where a poisonous dragon lived; an
auspicious rainbow stretching from the jade pond to the mountaintop and
illuminating the  clouds with orchestral music; and to the northwest of the
reflection of Buddha a shining rock where Buddha washed h is robe in a
basin wh ich ever since has been filled with crystal water all the  year round,
so the tradition goes.
This is the story  told by Porim. During my pilgrimage to this mo untain I
saw with my own eyes two awe-inspiring things. First, two thirds of the
rocks on hill an d dale emitted musical sounds like gold and jade bells.
Second, there was a mysteriou s image which was seen at a d istance but
disappeared when approached.
The following interesting story is written in detail in the language of
North Ch'onch'uk (Probably meaning Sanskrit). The passage quoted is
found in V olume VII of the “Kaham” Kwanbul Sammae-gyong.
“When Buddha visited the Olive Farm Flower Forest of the Poison
Dragon on Kosonsan Mountain in Y akon-Karakuk, he came to the southern
side of Anasa H ill and stood in  the Nach'al cave, whose entrance is to the
north of the Blu e Lotus Fountain in that forest. Here he saw five female
ogres called Nach'al who had been turned into dragons twisting and twining
with the poisonous dragon in lo ve embraces, dancing and yelling for joy .
Amid th is ecstasy the poison d ragon sent down hail and the man-eating
ogres committed all kinds of outrages, devastating farms and spreading
plagues throughout the four seasons.

“Seized with fear , the King of fered sacrifices to the gods of hea ven and
earth to stop these calamities, but his prayers went unanswered. Then a wise
Brahman priest said to the King, 'The crown prince of King C hongpan in
Kapira-kuk has attained spiritual enlightenment and is now called
Sakyamuni Buddha. He is working wonders.'
“The Ki ng was delighted at these words and prayed to Buddha, saying,
'T oday t hy brill iant sun shines over all the universe; wilt thou not come
down to  this kingdom on earth?' And suddenly Sakyamuni, fo llowed by a
fairy youth who commanded the six elements of nature, appear ed to fulfill
the wish es of the King of Nakon-Kara. From his forehead flashed ten
thousand rays like sunbeams, w hich all became Buddhas and appeared in
the cave.
“The poison dragon and the fe male ogres prostrated themselves and
begged Buddha to give them h is commandments. In response the august
Buddha preached them a sermon on the Three T reasures an d the Five
Prohibitions.24 The  dra gon kin g fell on his knees with hands palm to palm
and desired Buddha to remain permanently , saying, 'If you g o away bad
thoughts will take root again in  my heart and I will never beco me an A yo-
Bodhi (attain enlightenment).'
“But the heavenly king of the Brahmans bowed to Buddha and said,
'Pakapa (honorific term for Buddha) should think of the myriad creatures to
come in the wor ld above and no t a small dragon on earth. Leave him alone.'
And hundreds of thousands of Brahman kings shouted in chorus, 'Leave
him alone!'
“The dragon king presented to B uddha a seven-treasure stand decorated
with gold, silver and jewels, but Buddha shook his head and said, 'I have no
need of gold or jewels. I would rather you of fered me the stone cave of the
Nach'al.' The dragon king agree d with a glad heart, and Buddha comforted
him with a promise to stay in the cave in a seated posture for one thousand
five hundred years.
“So sayi ng, Buddha entered the stone chamber , which instantly became
a h all of mirrors, reflecting the images of the dragons inside b ut allowing
the visage of Buddha to pass through and be seen from outs ide. All the
dragons knelt and worshipped Buddha with clasped hands, beholding his
radiant face both day and night. Buddha sat erect beside the stone wall with
his c alves folded against his thighs (the “lotus position” in which Buddha is
usually represented in sculpture), and his image appeared on it when seen

from afar , but vanished on a nearer view . When the heav ens of fered
sacrifice to this reflection a voice was heard preaching and when Buddha
moved his feet the mountains resounded with the sound of gold and jade
bells.”
In the Kosting-j on (Biographies of Great Monks) we read, “H ye-won
heard that in Ch'onch'uk there w as a reflection of Buddha whic h remained
on the Mirror Rock at the reque st of the dragon king long, long ago. This
reflection was found in the stone  chamber of an ancient divinity to the south
of Nakalkasong in W oljikuk, North Ch'onch'uk (India).”
According to Pophyon's Soyok -jon (History of India) there is  on the
Nakal border about half a yusun's distance south of Nakal city a stone
chamber southw est of Paksan. In this chamber there is a reflection of
Buddha which appears bright an d lifelike at a distance of ten foo t-spans, but
which b ecomes dimmer and dimmer as one retreats, until it vanishes
altogether . The kings of many nations have sent their best painters to try to
make true representations of thi s reflection, but all have failed.  The people
of th e co untry say that a thousand Buddhas have left their reflec tions on the
wall of this cham ber , including Sakyamuni, who descended from heaven to
save the  souls of all the myriad  creatures of the earth. They also say that
about a hundred  foot-spans west of the reflection is a rock wh ere Buddha
used to shave his head and cut his fingernails when he lived in  the human
world. I n volum e II of Songha m's Soyok-ki (A T rip to India ), we read,
“During the lifetime of Buddha  a poison dragon changed into a cowherd
who of fered milk and butter to the king. One day he of fended His Majesty
and was  severel y reprimanded. T o vent his spite he bought a b ouquet and
of fered it at a stupa, swearing that he would be reborn as a devil-dragon, kill
the king and ruin his kingdom.
“He the n committed suicide by dashing himself against a stone wall,
and, reborn as a  dragon king, made mischief until he was subdued by the
spiritual power of Buddha. Whe n the dragon saw Buddha he repented of his
sins, and after receiving Buddha's commandment against killing, prayed
Buddha to stay in his cave and accept his of ferings. But Buddh a replied, 'I
shall surely die, but I will lea ve my reflection in your cave . Whenever
wicked thoughts rise in your heart, look on this reflection and they will
subside.'
“So sayi ng Bud dha entered the stone chamber and became a god. Ever
afterward his reflection would c ome into sight at a distance and vanish on a

closer vi ew . The  local inhabitants call the footprints of Buddha on the rocks
the seven treasures.”
This stor y is found in the Buddhist scriptures. The people of the Land of
Haedong (Korea) named the mountain (mentioned at the beginning of this
section) Anasa, but it should be called Manasa, meaning fish, since it is
supposed to be named after the mountain in North Ch'onch'uk.
87. The Fifty Thousand Images of Buddha on Mt. Odae
According to an old mountain l egend, it was Chajang Popsa who first
called Mt. Odae the abode of Bu ddha. In the tenth year of T'ang Chen-kuan
(636) w hen Queen Sondok was on the throne, Chajang visited China in
order to see the Munsu Buddha at W utaishan. (Ilyon notes that the T'ang
Biographies of Monks makes t his the twelfth year , (638), bu t says he is
following the dating in Samguk Sagi.)
Arriving at T'aiho-chih in Chin a, he prayed before a stone image of
Munsu beside a pond there, in fulfillment of a long-cherished desire. On the
seventh night of his worship, h e had a dream in which Buddha recited to
him a verse co mposed of four phrases. He awoke in wond erment and
recited t he verse  from memory , but he could not understand it because it
was in Sanskrit.
On the followin g morning a stra nge monk appeared, bringing with him
a r obe of gold-s hot red brocade, a Buddhist begging bowl and a relic of the
Buddha. Addressing Chajang h e said, “Y ou look pale with anxiety . What
ails you? T ell me and perhaps I can help you.”
Chajang replied that he had received a verse from Buddha but th at since
it wa s in  Sanskr it he could not interpret the sense of it. He recited the verse
to the monk.
“O I see,” the monk said quickly . “Listen to my translation:
'Karapajwarang' means T understand all the laws of Buddha'; 'T alsa-takoya'
means 'My own mind is void'; 'Nangkasakarang' means 'I interpret the
Buddha's mind in this way'; a nd 'T alsanosana' means 'Soon  I will see
Nosana(i.e. Bud dha).'“ The monk then gave the robe and other things to
Chajang and said, “These were the personal ef fects of Sakyamuni; you are
expected to preserve them as heavenly treasures. On Odae-san (Korean
Pronunciation o f W utaishan), which rises on the border of Myo ngju to the
northeast of your country (Silla), ten thousand Munsu Buddhas make their
permanent abode; go there and see them.” And with these words he
disappeared like a mist.

Chajang could find no trace of the mysterious monk, and so w as about
to b egin his homeward journey when the dragon of the T'aiho-chih (pond)
appeared and asked him to sacrifice to Buddha for seven days, a nd Chajang
did so. While he was sacrificing the dragon said to him, “The old monk
who inte rpreted the verse to you the other day was the true Munsu Buddha,
so you must build a temple and a pagoda in his honor .” (Ilyon notes that this
paragraph is found in a separate biography of monks, but gives no title.)
In th e seventeenth year of T'ang Chen-kuan (643) Chajang climbed
Odae-san in order to see Munsu Buddha, but due to a thick fog which veiled
the whole mountain in darkness  for three days he returned to W onyong-sa,
where he met M unsu Buddha in person. Some years later he went to live at
Kalbonch'o, which is now called Chongam-sa. (Ilyon notes that this
paragraph is also found in a separate biography of monks.)
Many y ears passed, during which a friar named Sinui, a disciple of
Pomil, came to this mountain and lived in a cell which he built near
Chajang's old hermitage. After Sinui's death his cell became dilapidated, so
the famo us monk Y uyon of Su ta-sa repaired it and lived ther e. It is now
called W oljong-sa.
When Chajang returned from China to Silla, Poch'on and Hyomyong,
the t wo sons of the great King C hongsin, traveled to Haso-pu (in Myongju)
and stay ed over night at the hou se of Sehon Kakkan. (Ilyon in serts a long
note here to the following ef fect: In the Samguk Sagi there is no  record of a
King Chongsin or of Princes Poch'on and Hyomyong. However , at the end
of that book it is written that a temple was built in the first year of T'ang
Shen-lung, in the year of the snake (705), when King Songdok had been on
the throne for fo ur years. This K ing's personal name was Hung-kwang, his
childhood name  was Y ung-ki, a nd he was the second son of Ki ng Sinmun.
King So ngdok's elder brother , Hyojo, was called I-kong or Hong. King
Sinmun's childh ood name was Chong-myong and his nickname was Il-jo.
“Chongsin” in this paragraph is probably a contraction of Chongmyong-
Sinmun, and “Hyomyong” is a mistake for Hyo-jo or Hyo-so. There is also
no record in the Samguk Sagi of the building of a temple by Hyo-myong as
described below , during the years of Shen-lung. It must have been King
Songdok who erected this temple.)
On the following day they cros sed a high mountain called T a ery-ong
(Great Pass), each leading a tho usand followers to Song-o-p'yo ng to enjoy
the beau ty of the mountain s cenery . There suddenly the two brothers

decided to leave this sensual world and escape to the sacred Mt. Odae.
(Here th ere is another long note by Ilyon: An antique record says that in
early August of the first year of  T'aehwa (647) the King hid himself in the
mountains, but this seems to be an error because King Hyojo or Hyoso
ascended the throne in the third year of T'ien-shou in the year of the dragon
(692) at  the age of sixteen, and died in the second year of Chang-an in the
year of the tiger (702) at the ag e of twenty-six and was succe eded by the
twenty-two-year -old King Songdok. Thus the old record errs by forty-five
years an d places these events in  the reign of King Munmu (Actually it errs
more than that. The year 647 was the first year of Queen Chindok.)
The young men who had been  accompanying the two princes on the
excursion could  not find them anywhere, and so returned to Kyong-ju in
disappointment.
When the two p rinces were deep in the mountains, suddenly a graceful
blue lotus appeared from the ground and opened its golden heart in the
fragrant air . The elder prince built a hermitage near this lotus, calling it
Poch'on-am. Ab out six hundred foot-spans further to the northeast another
blue lotu s bloomed at the southern foot of the North T errace, an d here Hyo-
myong, the younger prince, liv ed in a hermitage which he built with his
own hands.
Living thus solitary , they both became engrossed in the study  of the
deep truths proclaimed by Bu ddha. One day the two princes made a
pilgrimage to Obong (Five Peak s) high in the mountains. Here they beheld
a v ision  of Buddhas through th e unveiling clouds: ten thousand Kwanums
on Manwol-san  (Full Moon Mountain) above the Eastern T errace; ten
thousand Chijan g (earth gods) headed by the eight great Bod hisattvas on
Kirin-san (moun tain of the Giraf fe, a fabulous monster) above t he Southern
T errace; ten thousand Seji gods led by Buddhas of everlasting life on
Changnyong-san (Mountain of the Long Pass) above the W estern T errace;
five hun dred Nahan (disciples  of Sakyamuni) led by their master on
Sangwang-san (Mountain of the King Elephant) above the Northern
T errace; and ten thousand Muns u Buddhas led by Piro Ch'ana on P'ungno-
san (Mountain of the W ind Furnace) otherwise called Chiro-san (Mountain
of the Earth Furnace) above the Central T errace.
W ith wondering  eyes the two princes worshipped the fifty thousand
Buddhas who thus appeared in their real persons. But the greatest wonder
was that  every morning at daybreak the great Buddha of Munsu descended

to Chiny owon (now Sangwon) and appeared in thirty-six dif ferent shapes,
changing from one to anothe r: jewels, Buddha's face, Buddha's eyes,
Buddha's hands , Buddha's feet, ten thousand Buddha heads, ten thousand
lanterns, treasure pagodas, golden bridges, golden drums, golden bells,
golden castles, golden wheels, golden barrels, golden hairpins, diamond
pestles, five-colored lights, fiv e-colored coronas, auspicious grass, blue
lotus flowers, gold and silver f arms, lightning, gushing Buddhas, gushing
earth-gods, a golden phoenix, golden crows, magpies, horse-born lions,
cow-born lions, a chicken-born phoenix, blue dragons, white elephants,
running wild boars and twisting blue snakes.
Every morning the two princes drew water from a mountain stream and
made tea to of fer to the Buddhas, and in the evening they medi tated on the
spiritual world.
At th is time the  younger brother of King Chongsin (Sinmun) q uarreled
with the King over the succession to the throne. The people of Silla deposed
the K ing and sent four generals into the mountains to bring b ack the two
princes. The generals approached the hermitage of Hyomyon g first, and
shouted, “Manse i!” (long live the prince!) upon which five-colored clouds
veiled the mountains for seven d ays-Seeing these auspicious clo uds, a lar ge
multitude gather ed in the mountains with palanquins and horses to escort
the r oyal brothers back to the p alace. Poch'on wept and refused to go, so
they placed Hyomyong in a car riage and returned to Kyongju, where they
seated him on the throne.
(L yon n otes her e a record that says this King ruled twenty years, and
points out that this is a mistake, since he only ruled ten years and died at
twenty-six. The same record, he notes, says that the younger  brother of
King Sin mun tried to take the throne for himself, but there is no  mention of
this in the Samguk Sagi.)
A fe w y ears late r , in the first year of Shen-lung, when King S ong-dok
had ruled for four years (705) on the fourth of March the King and his
courtiers civil and military ascended the mountain and had a Buddhist
palace called Chinyowon built there with a statue of Munsu Buddha seated
in its Golden Hall. Moreover , the King ordered five learned monks to
transcribe the Hwaom Sutra and  to or ganize the Hwaom sect. (This was a
syncretic sect that attempted to harmonize various conflicting Buddhist
doctrines.) T o pay the expens es of perpetual of ferings to Buddha, he
ordered the magistrates of the neighboring prefectures to contribute one

hundred lar ge bags of rice and o ne lar ge barrel of purified oil regularly each
spring a nd autum n. The King al so established a lar ge manor of fifteen kyol
(unit of land me asure) plus six k yol of forest land and two kyol o f farmland,
yielding firewoo d, chestnuts and grain. This land extended ov er Monijom
and Koi-hyon, 6,000 foot-spans to the west of Chinyowon, and these
supplies were suf ficient to maintain the Buddhist palace.
Prince Poch'on drank from the sacred springs in the mountains , so that
later in life he flew through the air and landed at Changch'on-k ul (Cave of
the Heavenly Palm) in Uljinkuk  beyond the Y usa River (Y ongh ae in North
Kyongsang Prov ince). There he made it a daily practice to rec ite Dharani
(Buddhist spells) which enabled him to accomplish his every wish.
The god  of the cave appeared before the Prince and said, “I have lived
in this cave for two thousand years, but today I have heard the truth of
Dharani for the first time in my life. I wish you to tell me the
commandments of the Bodhisattvas.” The Prince expounded the law to him
as h e desired, and on the foll owing day the cave disappeared, leaving
neither form nor shadow . Princ e Poch'on was surprised. He stayed in a
wonderland for twenty days an d then moved to another holy cave on Mt.
Odae. T here he pursued the truth  for fifty years, during which time the gods
of th e T orich'on heaven listene d to his sermons three times a day . The
heavenly hosts served him hot tea, the forty sages flew ten fee t above his
head to protect him day and nig ht, and his metal staf f spun in h is chamber
like a top, with a  musical sound, revolving three times a day so that he used
it as  a clock to mark the time during his studies. From time to time Munsu
Buddha poured water on his brow and gave him esoteric scriptures for his
spiritual enlightenment.
At last the days of Prince Poch' on drew to a close. On his death he left
behind a list of  annual events to be observed in the mountains for the
benefit of the country . It contained the following passage.
“This mountain  (Odae-san) is part of the great mountain ran ge that
extends down from Paektu-san (The Ever -White Mountain in n orth Korea)
and each of its peaks and terraces is an abode of Buddhas. Blue  is the color
of the eastern te rrace below its northern peak and the northern terrace at its
southern foot. Here you shall build a hall for Kwanum Buddha with a
sculptured image seated in the hall. Decorate the hall with ten thousand
portraits of Kwanum painted on blue backgrounds and station here five
charity farm overseers to read aloud eight volumes of the Golden Scriptures

and the Inwang and Panya Sutras by day and to chant the Kwanum
Ceremonial Repentance by night. Y ou shall call this hall W ont'ong-sa
(Shrine of A wakening).
“Red is the color of the Southe rn T errace facing south, Here y ou shall
build a hall for the Chijang (ea rth god) with a sculptured image seated in
the hall.  Decora te the hall with  ten thousand portraits of Chi jang led by
eight Bo dhisattvas on red backgrounds and station here five charity farm
overseers to read aloud the Chij ang Sutra and the Kumgang-Panya Sutra by
day and to chan t the Fortune-T elling Ceremonial Repentance by  night. Y ou
shall call this hall Kumgang-sa (Diamond Shrine).
“White i s the color of the W este rn T errace facing south. Here y ou shall
erect a hall for Maitreya, with a sculptured image of the Buddha of
Everlasting Life  seated in it. Decorate this hall with ten thousand portraits
of Seji gods led by the Buddha  of Everlasting Life on white backgrounds
and station here five charity farm overseers to read aloud eight volumes of
the Poph wa Sutr a by day and to chant the Maitreya Ceremonial Repentance
by night. Y ou shall call this hall Sujong-sa (Crystal W ater Shrine).
“Black i s the color of the North ern T errace facing south. Here y ou shall
build a hall for the Nahan with a sculptured image of Sakyamu ni seated in
it. D ecorate the hall with five hu ndred portraits of Nahan led by  Sakyamuni
Buddha on black backgrounds a nd station here five charity far m overseers
to r ead aloud the Pul-Poun-gy ong (Sutra of Buddha's Favor) and the
Y olban-gyong (Nirvana Sutra) b y day and to chant the Nirvana Ceremonial
Repentance by night. Y ou shall call this hall Paeknyon-sa (White Lotus
Shrine).
“Y ellow is the color of the Central T errace at Chinyowon. H ere you
shall build a hall for the unmoving Buddha of Munsu with his s tatue seated
in it. Decorate the hall with pictures of the thirty-six changing forms of
Munsu led by Piro-ch'ana and station here five charity farm overseers to
read aloud the H waom Sutra and the six hundred Panya by day and to chant
the Mun su Ceremonial Repentance by night. Y ou shall call this hall Hwaom
Shrine.
“Y ou shall also found Poch'on Hermitage, calling it Hwajang-sa, with
three sculptured figures of Piro-Ch'ana seated in the hall and the T aejang-
gyong (B uddhist scriptures) preserved therein and station there five charity
farm overseers to read aloud the Changmunjang-gyong by day a nd to chant
the H waom-Sinj ung (myriad gods of Hwaom) by night. Y ou shall see to it

that a Hwaom meeting is held here for a hundred days each year and call
this temple Popnyun-sa (Shrine of the Sacred Wheel).
“Y ou shall make Hwajang-sa th e cathedral of these five Buddh ist halls.
If you keep incense burning in  it day and night through the services of
purified oversee rs of charity farm s, the King will enjoy long life, the people
will hav e peace and happiness, civil and military of ficials will work
together in harmony and all the food grains will be abundant in their
seasons.
“Y ou sh all add Munsu-Kapsa in Hawon, and order seven charity farm
overseers to chant the Ceremonial Repentance of Hwaom-Sinjung. The
funds for the of f erings by these thirty-seven charity farm overse ers shall be
supplied from taxes in kind co llected in the eight prefectures of Haso-pu
(Kangnung, Kangwon-do). If m y words are observed the successive Kings
will have good fortune without fail.”
88. Cr own Prince Pojilto on Myongju-Odae Mountain
(This is mainly a retelling of the previous section, perhaps because
Ilyon found it in a dif ferent source.)
Pojilto, the crown prince of King  Chongsin of Silla, accompanied by his
younger brother  Prince Hyo-myong, traveled to the north a nd stopped
overnight at the house of Sehon Kakkan. On the following day , each
accompanied by  a thousand youths, they crossed the high mo untain pass
called T ae-ryong  and arrived at Song-o-p'yong, where they paused to enjoy
the scen ic beauty of the mounta ins for several days. On the fifth of August
in T'aeh wa the two princes hid themselves in a forest on Mt. Odae. Their
astonished escort searched but  could not find them, and so returned to
Kyongju without their royal chiefs.
The crown prince, seeing a blue  lotus blooming on the mountainside at
Chinyowon to the south of t he Central T errace, built a grass-roofed
hermitage there with his own h ands. Prince Hyo-myong saw another blue
lotus op ening on  the mountainside to the south of the Northern T errace and
settled there in a separate hermitage of his own building.
The two princes studied the scriptures daily and performed regular
Buddhist cerem onies. They also visited various places in the mountains
where they saw the thousands of Buddhas who lived there: ten thousand
Kwamim Buddh as above the H ill of the Full Moon on the b lue Eastern
T errace; ten thousand Chijang led by eighty thousand Bodhisattvas above
the Hill of the  Kirin on the red Southern T errace; ten thousand Seji

Bodhisattvas led by the Buddha of Everlasting Life above the Hill of the
Long P ass on the white W estern T errace; five hundred Na han led by
Sakyamuni above the Hill of the King Elephant on the black Northern
T errace; and ten thousand Munsu Buddhas led by Piro-Ch'ana above the
Hill of the W ind Furnace (or Ea rth Furnace) on the yellow Cen tral T errace.
And wo nder of wonders, the great Munsu Buddha appeared at dawn in the
mountains arou nd Chinyowon with a myriad of faces and i n thirty-six
forms. ( These are described in the previous section.)25 The  two princes
worshipped these forms and every morning they drew water from a fountain
to make tea, which they of fered to the ten thousand Munsu Buddhas.
At t his time the  younger brother of King Chongsin of Silla q uarreled
with the  King over the successi on to the throne and was put to  death. The
people of Silla s ent four generals to Mt. Odae to bring back the two princes.
The gen erals ap proached the hermitage of Hyo-myong and shouted “Long
live the prince! ” whereupon all at once clouds of five colors veiled the
mountaintops and their radiance shone all over Silla.
The gen erals fo llowed these auspicious clouds up the mountains until
they found the two princes, and asked them to return to Ky ongju. But
Crown Prince Pojilto (Poch'on)  wept and refused to go, so th ey brought
Hyo-myong alone to the capital and elevated him to the throne. On the
eighth o f March in the first year of T'ang Shen-lung (705) when the King
had been on t he throne for twenty years, a monastery was built at
Chinyowon. (This is a chronological error . King Hyoso ruled for only ten
years, and the date referred to is in the fourth year of King Songdok's
reign.)
Pojilto d rank reg ularly from a ho ly fountain for a long time, after which
he fl ew high into  the blue sky and landed at the Cave of the Hea venly Palm
in Uljin-T aeguk  after flying ov er the Y usa River . After medita ting in this
cave for  some days, he returne d to Mt. Odae and lived in another cave
where he studied the scriptures for fifty years. Odae-san (the Mountain of
Five T e rraces) rises in the gre at mountain range stretching down from
Paektu-san (Ever -White Mountain) and on each terrace of th is mountain
living Buddhas have their permanent abodes.
89. The Five Saints of W oljong T emple on Mt. Odae
According to an antique record of W oljong T emple, Chajang Popsa once
said he had visited Odae-san an d lived under a thatched roof at the foot of
the mou ntain in  order to see the holy image of the living Buddha. When it

had not appeared to him after seven days he went to Myopom-san, where he
built a new temple called Chongam-sa.
Some ye ars later a hermit nam ed Sinhyo-Kosa (who was believed to
have been an incarnation of Y udong Bodhisattva)26 lived in Kyongju, where
he dutif ully care d for his old mother . Since his mother had to have meat
with her meals or she would n ot eat, Kosa often went out hunting in the
mountains and fields. One day h e saw five cranes alighting on a rice paddy
near a mountain  path. He shot an arrow at them, but the startled birds flew
quickly away , leaving a single feather behind. Kosa picked up  the feather
and covered his eyes with it, whereupon all the people he saw seemed to be
birds and beasts. W ithout sayin g a word he cut a pound of flesh from his
thigh and gave it to his mother to eat. He soon became a monk and made his
house a temple which is now called Hyoga-won (T emple of the Dutiful
Son.)
(This st ory combines the Confucian virtue of filial piety with the
Buddhist prohibition against taking life. It was believed that the souls of the
dead were reborn as various c reatures according to the degree of their
virtue, which is why Kosa saw p eople as birds and animals when he looked
through the feather . This was, in ef fect, an admonition agains t his killing
animals to feed his mother .)
When Kosa came to Hasol (K angnung) from Kyongju and looked at
people through the feather , they all seemed to be dolls. He saw an old
woman and asked her where he could find a good place to settle  down. She
pointed to Soryong (W est Pass)  and said, “If you cross the mo untain pass,
you will come to a village facing north. There you will find a cozy cottage
to live in.” And with these words she vanished like a mist. Kosa thought she
must have been an incarnation of Kwanum who had come to guide him.
W ith a light heart he went on his way through Song-o-p'yong and came
to the thatched cottage, which he made his home. One day five strange
monks c ame up  to him and one of them said, “Y ou tore a piece from the
train of my robe, didn't you? Where do you keep it?” Kosa was
dumbfounded. “ Y ou picked it u p and looked at people throug h it all the
time,” the monk went on.
“Oh, I see!” nodded Kosa. He fumbled in his sleeve and brough t out the
feather .
The monk fixed it between the torn seams of his robe, exclaiming, “This
is exactly what I had lost and was looking for!” When Kosa lo oked at the

feather again he saw that it was a piece of hemp cloth, but it was not until
he h ad said farewell to the monks that he realized that they  were five
incarnate saints.
W oljong-sa was first built with a thatched roof by Chajang and then
inhabited by Sinhyo-Kosa. Sinui Dut'a (Dhuta in Sanskrit, which means
friar) the n built a hermitage over its ruins, and finally Y uyon, t he abbot of
Suta-sa, made it a famous tem ple. The nine-storeyed stone pagoda in its
precincts is a relic of the five sa ints. Many distinguished geom ancers have
admired the site of W oljong-sa,  saying that it is the most auspicious of the
nation's mountains, where Bud dha rose to power and glory for ages to
come.
90. Kamsan T emple on Namwol-san (South Moon Mountain)
Kamsan-sa is situated approxi mately twenty li to the southeast of
Kyongju. In an antique record (Postscript to the Firelight of the Master of
the Golden Hall Maitreya Image) we read as follows:
“On the fifteenth of February in the year of the goat, the seventieth year
of Kaiyuan of Hsuan-tsung of T'ang (719) Chon Mang-song built Kamsan-
sa an d p laced a stone image of M aitreya in its Golden Hall. It was dedicated
to th e spirits of  his father Inchang Ilkilkan, his mother Lady Kwanch'ori
Kaewon Ich'an, his two brother s Kansong-Sosa and Hyonto (a monk), his
two siste rs Kopa ri and Supunmae, his two wives Korori and Ahori, and his
relatives by illicit unions Makil-Kilch'an, Iltang-Salch'an and Ch'ongmin-
T aesa. The ashes of his mother Lady Ch'ori were scattered over the eastern
sea.”
In the postscript to the Firelight of Maitreya it is written, “Chung Ach'an
Kim Ch i-chon ( a mistake for K im Chi-song) attended the King as Sang-ui
(a title) and was  later promoted to Chipsa Sirang (an of ficial post). At the
age of sixty-sev en he retired from court and contributed his manor in
Kamsan to a te mple in memory of Kukju-T aewang and Ich' an-Kaewon,
Inchang Ilkilkan  (his father), his mother , Y ang-song and Hyonto the monk
(his bro thers), K orori (his wife) and Kopari (his sister), and also that of
Ahori (h is second wife). In addition he placed a stone image of Maitreya in
this temple, dedicated to the spirit of Inchang Ilkilkan his father , whose
ashes were scattered over the eastern sea.
“According to the royal geneology of Silla, Prince Kaewon Kakkan was
T'aejong Kim Ch'un-ch'u's younger son born of Queen Munhui. Kim Chi-
chon see ms to be a mistake for Kim Chi-song, the son of Incha ng Ilkilkan.

'Scattering ashes' probably refers to the funeral at sea of Popmin (King
Munmu) in the Eastern Sea.” (K im Ch'un-ch'u was King Muryol, 654-660,
the predecessor of King Munmu.)
91. Ch'onnyong-sa (T emple of the Heavenly Dragon)
Rising t o the south of Namsan (South Mountain) in Kyongju is a sky-
kissing peak which the people call Eagle Mountain. T o the south of this
peak stands a temple which the people call the T emple of the Heavenly
Dragon. In the book T'oron-Samhan-chip it is written, “There are three
streams of guest water and one stream of backward-flowing water in Kerim;
if th e sources of these stream s cannot suppress natural calamities, the
Heavenly Dragon will bring about a catastrophic overturn of the country .”
Folk-tales relate that the backward-flowing water , falling in a cataract from
a pool above the temple, runs into a stream on the southern outskirts of
Madung-o-ch'on, a small village facing south.
Lo P 'eng-kuei, a Chinese envoy , once visited this temple and remarked,
“Should it be destroyed, the nation will soon fall into ruin.”
T radition says the donor had two daughters named Ch'on-nyo
(Heavenly Maid) and Y ong-nyo (Dragon Maid) for whom their parents built
this tem ple and called it Ch'onn yong-sa (T emple of the Heavenly Dragon)
to help the people cultivate the Buddhist religion in the midst of the awe-
inspiring scenery . At the close of the Silla kingdom the lon g-neglected
temple fell into ruins.
(The restoration  of the temple came about in the following manner .)
Sung-no the son of Ch'oe Un-so ng had drunk of the milk of the  Goddess of
Mercy at Chungsaeng T emple. He was the father of Suk and Suk was the
father of  Che-an  the Prime Min ister . By order of the King Che-an restored
the tem ple to its former glor y , with a ten-thousand-day monastery of
Sakyamuni in its precincts, and deposited a copy of his will there. After his
death he became a guardian deity of the temple and worked many wonders.

The W ill

I, C h'oe Che-an, His Majesty's  Prime Minister and President of the
Privy Council, the donor of this temple, hereby make known my will.
Seeing the prolonged dilapidation of Ch'onnyong-sa on Eagle Mountain
at K yongju, I, C he-an, a disciple of the holy Buddha, wishing for the long
life of the King and the everlasting prosperity of the nation, have erected a

Golden Hall in the temple with a stone image and several plaster statues of
Buddha enshrined therein, and a ten-thousand-day monastery of Sakyamuni
established within its precincts  in addition to the living quarters of the
monks.
Since th e rehabi litation of the temple is for the welfare of the nation, it
is proper for the government to  appoint an abbot to preside over the rites
and to manage the af fairs of the temple. However , the monks a re likely to
be conce rned over whether the right sort of person will be cho sen. I have
observed the practices of other temple such as Chijang-sa in Ko ngsan with
its donat ed farm of 200 kyol, T oson-sa on Pisul-san with its donated farm of
twenty kyol, and Samyonsan-sa in Sogyong with its donated farm of twenty
kyol, an d seen that the products  of these farms are suf ficient to support the
temples. I took note of the fact that these temples make it a permanent rule
to ch oose as abb ots only prelates who keep Buddha's commandments and
who possess outstanding administrative ability , whether they hold of ficial
positions or not, to comply with the wishes of the Holy Order .
I, Che-an, a disciple of the Buddha, being pleased with this custom, do
hereby e stablish as a standard r ule for our Ch'onnyong-sa that its abbot be
chosen from among priests possessing both virtue and accomplishments,
worthy of being pillars of the state. For this purpose, I leave this document
with the chief of ficial of the temple. The assembly of the monk s are hereby
notified of a certificate deposited with the local government indicating that
such is my will.
(The wi ll ends here and Ilyon c omments: The will is dated in June of
the nint h year of Chung-hsi, and is countersigned by the competent
authorities. Chung-hsi was the reign title of Hsing-tsung of the  Khitan and
the date corresponds to the seventh year of King Chongjong of Koryo
(1040, actually the sixth year of Chongjong.)
92. The Palace of Amitabha at Mujang T emple
T o the north of Amgok-ch'on, about twenty  li  northeast of Kyong-ju,
there is a temple called Mujang-sa, It was built by T ae Agan  Hyo-yang
(posthumously entitled Myongdok-T aewang, the father of Kin g W onsong,
785-798) and dedicated to P'ajinch'an, his uncle. It stands between soaring
clouds and great trees on a tall c lif f overlooking a valley that str etches away
to the horizon, so that it is an ideal place for a solitary monk to pursue the
way of Buddha.

Above the temple there was o nce a palace of Amitabha wh ich was
connected with a sad event. When King Sosong died (800) his Queen
Kyehwa grieved  exceedingly , weeping over the body of her ro yal husband
until blo od flow ed from her sw ollen eyes and beating her rosy  breast with
her white hands. And indeed th e days of their love had been a ll too brief,
for the King had hardly ascended the throne when he was struck down.
Reflecting on the bright virtues of her husband, the Queen thought of a
way in which her prayers for the repose of his soul might be perpetuated.
She had heard that Amitabha, the Buddha of the W est, would clasp to
himself the soul of anyone who prayed to him from a sincere h eart. Drying
her tears , she donated six of he r royal gowns and treasures from the privy
purse fo r the carving of an imag e of Amitabha and of several statues of the
lesser d ivinities associated wit h him, to be enshrined in a palace. She
summoned the most skilful sculptors in the land to do this work.
(The cu lt of the Bodhisattva A mitabha was an extremely popular one
,for obvi ous reasons. It was said  that anyone who called upon his name with
sincerity was sure to be received into the “W estern Paradise” at death, and
thus would escape being reborn  into the world or condemned to one of the
numerous Buddhist hells.)
At the aforemen tioned Mujang temple there lived an old monk. Some
time before these events he had had a dream in which he saw a living
Buddha sitting on a hill to the southeast of the temple's stone pagoda and
delivering a sermon to a multitude which was gathered in the west. The
monk th erefore believed that this would be an auspicious; p lace for the
habitation of a B uddha, but kept the idea to himself until the con struction of
the Amitabha palace was planned.
(The mo nk evid ently pointed out the place of his dream and suggested
that the palace b e built there.) S eeing the tall, rugged clif f and the mountain
streams roaring down the ravines, the carpenters and sculptors complained
that it would be very dif ficult e ven to carry their building mat erials to the
site. But the monks persisted, te lling them that this was the ideal place. And
when th ey investigated further ,  and dug behind some of the rocks, there
indeed w as a lar ge piece of leve l ground, and there they built the palace of
Amitabha. All the people who came to visit it admired its holy site.
The palace of A mitabha stood for many hundred years, a fl ower of
Buddhist art, but at last it cru mbled to the ground, although the temple
survived. Acco rding to folk tales, T'aejong (King Muryol), after the

unification of the three kingdom s under his single rule, stored his weapons
and helmets in the valley beneath the clif f, and so the peopl e called the
temple Mujang-sa, which means Helmet T emple.
(The rui ns of this temple are s till to be seen in Amgok-ni, Naetong-
myon, W olsong county . It is a bit dif ficult to interpret the word “palace” in
this section. Obviously , however , it is not to be taken literally b ut means a
religious building of some sort.)
93. The Buddha Relics (Sari) in the Stone Pagoda at Paegom
T emple
On the twenty-ninth of October in the third year of Hou T sin Kai-yun, in
the year of the horse (946) this inscription was placed on the Im do T aegam
milestone on the border of Kangju (now Chinju); “Paegom T e mple of the
Son (Zen) sect w as situated in C h'op'al-hyon (now Ch'ogye), an d Kanyu, its
chief monk, was 39 years old, but the history of this temple is unknown.”
According to an antique biogra phy , during the days of old Silla this
temple was built over the ruins of the Of fice of Northern Hous es. (That is,
the local government of fice for the northern quarter of Kyong- ju. The city
was renowned for its palatial mansions, of which there are said to have been
thirty-five, whic h were known a s the Golden Houses.) After a  time it was
closed, and remained so for many years.
(The temple must have been reo pened, but the text gives no date.) In the
year of the tiger (1026) Y angpu, a monk from Samok-kok, became abbot of
this temple and remained in the  post until his death in the yea r of the ox
(1037). In the year of the cock (1045) Kung-yang, a monk from Huiyang
(now M ungyong) stayed at the t emple for ten years, returning to  Huiyang in
the y ear of the goat (1055). In th e same year Sint'ak, a monk from Paegam-
sa in Namwon, became abbot.
In N ovember of the first year  of Hsien-weng (1065) Surip the new
abbot (better known under his posthumous name T ugomi jong-T aesa)
proclaimed permanent regulations for the temple in ten arti cles. These
included the building of a five-s torey pagoda with forty-two sari enshrined
therein; the of fering of sacrifices  to Buddha and to the holy monks Om Hun
and Paek Hun (who became the guardian deities of the temple) and to
another holy monk, Kunak, the expenses of these sacrifices to be defrayed
from the private purse of a financial guild; and the grinding of rice (for the
sacrifices) in a wooden bowl with a miniature pestle before the image of

Bhechadjagura (the Buddha of healing) in the Golden Hall early each
month.
T radition says that Om Hun an d Paek Hun donated their dwe llings to
this tem ple, whence the name Paegom-sa, and that the two monks were
honored as its guardian deities.
94. Y oungch'u-sa (T emple of the Holy Eagle)
According to an old record at Y o ungch'u-sa, in the second year of Y ing-
shun of T'ang K ao-tsung (683; Samguk Sagi says the first year , but this is a
mistake) when King Sinmun was on the throne, Ch'ung-won-kong the
Prime Minister went to bathe in the hot springs at Chang-san-ku k (T ongnae,
near Pusan; there are indeed hot springs there). While he was resting at
T ongji-ya near Kuljong post-st ation (near Changgi) on his w ay back to
Kyongju, he saw a fowler launch his falcon after a pheasant. The startled
pheasant flew over Kumak (Golden Mountain) and was lost to view .
Seized with curiosity , the Prime  Minister followed as the fow ler went
along a winding  mountain path ringing his bell and chasing his falcon. At
length they reached a well to the north of the Kuljong-hyon local
government of fi ce. Here they fo und the falcon perched in a tree above the
well and  the pheasant fluttering in the bloodstained water , covering two
little ones with its wings. The falcon looked down with pitying eyes and
would not swoop upon the bird to kill it.
Ch'ungwon-kong's heart was also moved with pity at this sight.  He told
the story of the falcon and the p heasant to a fortune-teller and asked for his
advice. The latter replied the place must be an auspicious site for a temple.
When Ch'ungwo n-kong returned to Kyongju he reported his experience to
the K ing and suggested that the Kuljong-hyon of fice be removed to another
place to make w ay for a temple by the well. The King gladly ap proved this
plan, and  when the temple was b uilt it was named Y ongch'u-sa (the T emple
of the Holy Eagle), substituting an eagle for the falcon.
95. Y udok-sa (the T emple of V irtue)
Ch'oe Y u-dok the T ae-tae-kakkan (highest of ficial rank) of Silla,
contributed his private residenc e to the building of a temple, which was
given his name, Y udok (man of virtue). Long afterward his descendant
Ch'oe 6n-wi, a meritorious vas sal of Samhan, enshrined a po rtrait of his
ancestor the founder in this temple and erected a stone monument to his
memory in its precincts.
96. The Stone Pagoda at Munsu T emple on Mt. Odae

The ston e pagoda which stands on the grounds of Munsu T emple was
probably built by the people of Silla. Even though it is simp le, without
elaborate workm anship, this monument has worked indescribable wonders.
Among others I heard the following story from some old people.
“Long, long ago, a man from Y on'gok-hyon (Kangnung) fitte d out a
boat with fishing tackle and put out to sea to fish. But a pagoda followed his
boat, an d its shadow so startled  the fish that they scattered and fled in all
directions and he was unable to catch a single one. T ransported with rage,
he chased the sh adow until he f ound the real pagoda on land. He took his
heavy a x and struck it repeate dly and then sailed home em pty-handed,
leaving scars on the corners of the pagoda.”
As I gazed upon this pagoda with awe and admiration, my attention was
drawn to the fact that it stood on the eastern side of the courtyard and not in
the cent er (as is usual). As I pondered this, I noticed a panel with the
following inscription:
“Ch'ohyon, a lonely monk who lived at this temple in celibacy , wished
that good luck might come to him, He therefore moved the pago da from the
east side  of the c ourtyard to the center , and waited for twenty ye ars, but the
pagoda worked  no wonders. One day an astrologer visited the temple
looking for a for tunate site. He b reathed a deep sigh and said, 'The center of
the c ourtyard is not the proper place for a pagoda. Why don't you move it to
the east?' The monks, astonished at his wisdom, moved the pagoda back to
its original position in the east, where it now stands.”
Though not a lo ver of wonders, as a son of Buddha I could not remain
silent wh en I saw the majestic sp irit of Buddha in the shadow of the pagoda
to bestow merciful benefits on ten thousand living creatures so ef fectively ,
hence the above note.
W ritten in October of the first year of Cheng-p'eng in the year of Pyong-
ja (1 156) by White Cloud.
(This section, as indicated above, was added by one of Ilyon's d isciples.
In giving the date, he refers to the ruler of the semi-barbarian Kin or Chin
state. Th e prope r title of this reign era is Cheng-lung, but White Cloud
wrote Cheng-p'eng because the character “Lung” (Pronounced “nyung” in
Korean) was the personal name  of W ang Nyung, the father of W ang Kon
the Koryo founder , and thus taboo.)
Footnotes to Book Thr ee

1 . Compiled in 1215 with the authorization of King Kojong
2 . Mentioned in the Nihon Shok i, one of the most ancient Japanese
chronicles as King Ahwa, perhaps due to a clerical slip or a
misreading.
3 . There are records of a Liang  monarch sending gifts of Bu ddhist
scriptures and incense to a Silla King but it cannot have been  Nulji,
who-lived before the Liang state was founded.
4 . This is an allusion to an ancien t Chinese belief that the Y ellow  River ,
notorious for its muddiness, tur ned clear to presage the comin g of a
sage-king.
5 . Chinese names Kai-tzu-t'sui and  Hung Y en, legendary heroes. The first
fed his starving king with his o wn flesh, while the second com mitted
suicide a fter rep orting in due form to all that was left of his dea d lord,
a liver .
6 . This is a mistake, for Ungch'on at this time was in Paekje territory .
7 . This is both a symbol of the heavenly vehicles of ancient kings and of
Buddhism. The “wheel of the law” is one of the commonest sy mbols
in Buddhist iconography from the earliest times.
8 . “T sita” in Sanskrit. This is the fo urth of the “Six Heavens of Desire” in
Mahayana Buddhism. It is ruled by Maitreya.
9 . The Koryo government designated the capitals of the ancient
kingdoms by their directions from Kaesong, the Koryo capital.
Kyongju is meant here.
10 . Kasop w as the last of the seven Buddhas who preceded Saky amuni,
the historical Buddha, in Mahayana doctrine.
1 1 . “Agana” in Sanskrit. It contains the sayings of Sakyamuni.
12 . The present world, as distinct from the two other major realms.
13 . This is a reference to the Emper or Asoka, who ruled over the Maurya
Empire in India from 269 to 236 B. C. He was converted to Bud dhism
and bec ame one of its most enthusiastic supporters and propa gators.
Obviously his reputation had become somewhat inflated by the time it
reached Korea.
14 . Jawhu Dripa, one of the four geo graphical divisions of India, also used
as a name for India as a whole.
15 . A sermon preached by Sakyamuni immediately before his death.
16 . The traditional dates for Buddha's life are 563-483 B. C, which would
put Asoka two centuries later rather than one.

17 . The Buddha of W isdom, who traditionally sits to Sakyamuni's left.
18 . This is not a place at all, but a reading of “Kashatreya,” the s econd,
warrior caste in India, to which Sakyamuni's family belonged. The
implication is that the Queen was an incarnation of Sakyamuni.
19 . This was a Buddhist rite customary in China.
20 . A re ference to t he “third eye” o ften seen on the foreheads of Buddha
images. Here it is thought of as a white hair growing between Buddha's
eyebrows. It is one of the distinguishing features of a Buddha and
symbolizes his enlightenment.
21 . An Indian divinity described as “ruler of the thirty-three heavens.”
22 . Sanskrit name Samantabhadra, described in scripture as working
together with Munsu to aid Sakyamuni in the work of salvation.
23 . The reference is to the abode of V airocana, the Buddha of Illumination.
24 . The Three T reasures are the Bu ddha, Buddhist teaching and the order
of monks. The Five Prohibition s are against killing, stealing, sexual
indulgence, taki ng the name of Buddha in vain and drinking alcoholic
beverages.
25 . This happens to be the number of arrangements of the eight tri grams,
composed of broken and unbrok en lines, described in the Confu cian I-
Ching (C lassic of Changes, a b ook of divination and prophecy). Four
of them  can be seen on the Korean national flag. (T'aegu k and
P'alkwae).
26 . Actually the name of Sakyamuni in one of his previous lives.

BOOK FOUR
V. Anecdotes of Renowned Monks
91. W onkwang, Who Studied in the W est
In the thirteenth volume of the T'ang Biographies of the High Monks we
find the  following information. The family name of W onkwang (Round
Light, i.e. Buddha's Halo), th e monk of Huanglung T emple in Silla
(Hwangnyong-sa) was Pak, and  his home was in Chin-han, one of the three
Han nations—Pyonhan, Chinhan and Mahan. (These are very ancient
designations for certain parts of southern Korea.) His family h ad lived in
Haedong (East of the Sea, i.e. Korea) for many generations, and he
inherited the noble and magnanimous traditions of his ancestors. From his
youth he loved to read history and biographies of monks, and so on began to
write such compositions himsel f, and his literary fame quickl y spread all
over Hankuo (Hankuk, Korea). But though he had established a reputation
for erudition and strong memor y in Silla, he felt the need to obtain wider
knowledge by studying in the Middle Kingdom (China). For this purpose he
set sail for Chinling (Nanking) at the age of twenty-five.
(The following is somewhat mis leading. Chen was not a dynasty in the
sense that it rule d all China. It was one of the last of the evane scent states
which appeared during the period after the breakup of the Han dynasty in
220. It lasted ab out thirty years and was conquered in 589 by the Sui, who
briefly r uled all  China and wer e succeeded by the great T'ang  dynasty in
618. Als o W onk wang is here des cribed as visiting “W u.” There was no such
state at the time, but this may be simply a geographical expression.)
In those days China, under the rule of the Chen dynasty , was flourishing
in li terature and the arts. Whe n W onkwang attended the lectures of the
disciples of Chang-yen wen-ku ng on Buddhism, he realized t hat his own
unsurpassed talent in the study of worldly books was as valueless as a
withered flower , and asked the Emperor for permission to beco me a monk.
This the  Emperor granted, and he was thus enabled to attend lec tures on the
more es oteric as pects of the reli gion (to which laymen were not admitted).
In a short time he had commi tted to memory the golden sayings of the
Nirvana Sutra and had skimmed through the essays on the three sections of

the Buddhist scriptures (the T ripitaka or “Three Baskets"). He visited
Hushan (T iger Mountain) in W u, where he continued his studies on the a-
wakening of the Buddhist mind, and the people there would gather around
him like  clouds  to listen to his spiritual teaching. After he had finished
reading the Aham Sutra his mi nd became vacant of worldly g reed, round
and straight like a bamboo tube . He resolved to live on this m ountain and
make pilgrimages to various holy monasteries.
At this time a Chinese hermit who lived at the foot of the m ountain
invited h im to give a series of l ectures. At first he stood on ceremony , but
after repeated requests he lectu red on Panyagyong (Prajna in Sanskrit), a
book on intelligence, and gave  such correct interpretations in such fine
rhetoric that his audience was moved to tears of gratitude. Soon his fame
had spread all over China, and multitudes came from afar to hear him
lecture on the teachings of Buddha.
After a time the  Sui Emperor conquered Chen and destroyed it. When
the Sui army entered Y angtu (the capital), W onkwang was taken captive and
was abo ut to be killed. But just at that moment, the Sui general noticed that
the temple pagoda was in flames. He rushed forward to save the historic
treasure from fire, but on a nearer view he saw that the pago da was not
burning despite the flames which enveloped it, and that W onkwang, bound
hand and foot, was kneeling before its holy pedestal. The general was awe-
struck b y the Silla monk, who n o doubt was working wonders through the
providence of Buddha even in a time of emer gency , and set him free at
once.
W onkwang was praised in W u and Y ueh in South China as a holy monk
of th e hi ghest learning. But as he wished to see the old civilizati ons of Chou
and Ch'i n (the names of two an cient Chinese dynasties) in north China, he
visited t he Sui capital of Changan in the ninth year of Kai-h uang (589).
There he expounded the mys teries of Buddhism and quoted from its
scriptures to the admiration of the Chinese people, among whom Buddhism
was just  beginn ing to grow at that time. W onkwang wished to  spread the
same enlightenm ent in his own country , and asked the E mperor for
permission to return to Kyongju. The Emperor granted his requ est and sent
him of f after a sumptuous farewell banquet in the inner palace.
When W onkwang returned home after his long absence (Samguk Sagi
says twe lve yea rs) the people of Silla, men and women, young and old,

welcomed him heartily , and the King received him in audien ce with the
highest respect, treating him as a sage.
W onkwang was a quiet man devoid of passion, loving and giving by
nature. H is face always wore a w arm smile and never gave the least sign of
anger . All the K ing's personal letters to the Emperor , the credentials issued
to envo ys to China, and othe r state correspondence with the Celestial
Empire were drafted by this learned monk, from whose brush poured
elegant phrases like a cataract falling from the Milky W ay . The King
entrusted him with the moral government of the state, and the n oble monk,
who nev er wore the court dre ss of embroidered brocade, presented the
throne w ith wise  counsels and was a living model for fine deeds. When he
was bent and hoary with age, he entered the palace in a carriag e drawn by
richly caparison ed horses, and the King entertained him in p erson with
nourishing food and medicine and gave him the warmest clothes . Before his
death the King asked him ho w to achieve good government, and he
revealed the signs of good or evil fortune for the state from the t hrone to the
plow , according to whether the administration was moral or immoral.
In the fifty-eighth year of Konpok during the reign of King Chinp'yong
(640, but this must be a mistake. Chinp'yong ruled from 579 to  632) when
he was  ninety-nine years old, W onkwang complained of a mild
indisposition, an d after seven da ys passed away , sitting in an erect posture
at Hwangnyong T emple where he had resided for so long, leaving behind an
earnest w ill. This was in the fourth year of T'ang Chen-kuan (this must be a
mistake for the fourteenth year ). When he breathed his last the sound of
music w as heard to the northeast of the temple and the air was filled with a
strange fragranc e. All who gath ered in the hall to pay their last respects to
him were moved to tears at his inspired spirit, working such wonders even
after his  death. His ashes were buried in the suburbs of Kyongju with the
funeral ceremony due a prince.
Many years later a worldly man whose child had been bor n dead,
believing the vulgar superstition that if such a child were buried in the grave
of a person who had lived a goo d life the same good fortune would descend
to its family , bur ied the embryo in W onkwang's tomb. But on the same day
the little  corpse was struck by a thunderbolt and hurled out of the tomb.
Seeing this punishment, all the people worshipped his spirit with still
greater respect.

W onkwang's disciple W onan w as a man of great intelligence and a
seeker of truth. He traveled to Hwanto in the north and Pullae in the east
(the first of these was an ancient capital of Koguryo on the Y alu and the
second is modern Anbyon in the old lands of the Y e tribe) and to Y en-wei
(in north China) in the west. When he visited Changan, the ca pital of the
T'ang Em pire, h e studied the cu stoms of the Chinese and variou s essays on
religion. Later on he became engrossed in the study of Buddhism, following
in the footsteps of his master W o nkwang. While he was residing at a temple
in Changan the T'ang Emperor , on the recommendation of the courtier Su
W u, invited him to live at T sinliang T emple, where he was given
comfortable accommodations and the four necessities were furnished him
six times daily . (This last is a conventional Chinese expression. The four
necessities were  housing, clothing, food and herb medicine and the six
times were sunrise, midday , su nset, early evening, midnight and before
going to bed.)
In a memorand um about his master W onkwang, W onan wrote, “The
King of  Silla was taken seriou sly ill and no medicine could do him any
good. His Majesty called on W onkwang to stay in the palace and expound
the myst eries of  Buddhism to hi m. W onkwang obeyed, and explained to the
King Bu ddha's commandments of repentance and faith. One evening the
King glanced at W onkwang and was astonished to see th at he was
enveloped in a shining halo. The Queen and the court ladies begged the
holy monk not to leave the royal presence. Shining like the evening sun,
W onkwang obeyed, and soon the King's malady was cured.
“W onkwang gav e lectures on Buddhism in Chinhan and Mahan (old
names fo r south ern Korea) in or der to lead the younger generatio n along the
path of Buddhism. When he rec eived personal gifts from people he always
gave them away to be used for the maintenance of temples, so that when he
died he left behind only his rob e and tableware.” (Quoted from T al-ham, a
Buddhist Book.)
In an antique r ecord preserved in the home of Chong-hyo, a retired
of ficial in the Eastern Capital (Kyongju), there are the following stories
about the life of W onkwang:
W onkwang's secular family na me was Sol and he was a n ative of
Kyongju. At the age of thirty he began a solitary life in a quiet h ermitage on
Mt. Samgi (southwest of moder n Ankang) to pursue his studies. Four years
later ano ther mo nk built a herm itage nearby and lived there fo r two years.

This monk was of a ferocious temperament and loved to chant spells and
work magic. One night while W onkwang was reciting the scriptures to
himself a ghost suddenly called his name and said, “Fine monk! Fine deed!
Monks m ay recite the scriptures, but few act in accordance with Buddhist
principles. Look  at the monk next door . He is shouting all kind s of spells,
but he gains nothing. On the contrary , his loud noise interferes with the
quiet meditations of his neighbors. Still worse, his house bloc ks my way ,
forcing me to make a long detour in my nightly rounds, so I hate him. I
wish you to te ll him to move  to another place, or he will be terribly
punished.”
The following morning W onkw ang warned the monk as the ghost had
asked, but he o nly laughed and said, “What a hermit you are! Y ou are
enchanted with a devil. Don't worry about the words of the ghost of a
female fox.”
That nig ht the ghost reappeared and asked “What did the monk say
about my warning?”
W onkwang feared that the ghost might vent its anger on him, so he
answered in a roundabout way , “I have not yet told him, but if I deliver your
warning he will not dare to disobey .”
“Never mind,” the ghost interposed, “I have already heard your
conversation. W hy do you not speak the truth? Now be silent and watch
what I shall do.”
At m idnight that night W onkwa ng heard a thunderous sound th at shook
heaven and earth, and in the morning he saw that a mountain ha d collapsed
and buri ed the other monk's dwelling. The ghost appeared for the third time
and said, “How do you feel about this?”
“I am quite surprised,” W onkwang answered.
“I am three hund red thousand years old,” the ghost said, “and in magic I
am seco nd to none. T o destroy a mountain is a simple trick and  nothing to
be s urprised at. I know all coming events, for I am familiar wit h the af fairs
of both heaven and earth.
“Y ou live here now in solitude,  and this may be of benefit to you, but
not t o ot her people. If you do no t make yourself known you wil l never reap
the f ruits of your hard study . Y ou must go to the Middle Kingdo m and study
Buddhism there  so that you may become a guiding light to the people of
your dark country .”

“It is my cheris hed hope to study Buddhism in the Middle Kin gdom,”
W onkwang repli ed, “but I canno t travel to a land so far away across the sea,
nor am I well informed about that country .”
The gho st laughed and gave him an itinerary for a trip to China which
contained all the information he needed. W onkwang took courage and
sailed to  China where he stayed for eleven years, during which he mastered
the major Buddhist scriptures as well as the Confucian Classics. In the
twenty-second year of King Chinp'yong (600) he returned in the party of a
T'ang en voy . (S light confusion here since the T'ang rulers wer e not in full
control of China until 618.) He went to his old residence on Mt. Samgi in
order to thank the ghost, and when night fell it appeared.
“Did you enjoy your visit to the Middle Kingdom?” the ghost asked.
“By you r grace,”  said W onkwang, “I had a successful visit to Ch ina and
a pleasant voyage home.”
“Good!” said the ghost. “Now I will give you my promise con cerning
mutual salvation from rebirth.”
“Can I see your true appearance?” W onkwang asked.
“If you wish to see my true appearance,” the ghost replied, “look up into
the eastern sky tomorrow morning.”
When W onkwang looked at the eastern sky next morning he saw a long
rainbow-like arm  in the clouds building a bridge from earth to h eaven. That
evening the ghost appeared again. “Did you see my long arm?” it asked.
“Y es, it was ma gnificent,” W on kwang said. (Ilyon says that from this
time the name of the place  was changed to Pijang-san, Long-arm
Mountain.)
“Even though I h ave stayed long on this earth,” the ghost said, “ I cannot
escape death some day , and so soon I must throw myself f rom yonder
mountain pass. Come and bid my parting soul farewell.”
When W onkwang arrived on the mountain pass at the appointed time,
he found an old black female fox, which panted its last breath and died,
stretching out its four limbs and long tail. (The account in t he “antique
record” ends here and Ilyon resumes.)
When W onkwang returned from  China the King and court honored him
as a  great teach er and attended his lectures on the T aesung Sutra. At this
time Ko guryo and Paekje were attacking Silla border towns and disturbing
peace and order . The King was greatly worried and wished to ask the Sui
government for  aid. He summ oned W onkwang and comman ded him to

write an  of ficial  letter to the Emperor . So well did W onkwang execute this
task that the Emperor ordered out 300,000 troops and led them in person
against Koguryo. After this W onkwang was also praised for his
accomplishments in Chinese literature, and the writing skill  capable of
moving the hearts of men. He d ied at the age of eighty-four and his ashes
were buried on a hill west of Myonghwal Castle.
In the book Samguk Y oljon it is  written that Kwisan, a country squire in
Saryang-pu had a friend named Ch'uhang. One day as they were conversing
one of them said, “If we are to mingle in polite society we mus t learn how
to behave like gentlemen with honest hearts in order not to bring dishonor
upon ourselves.”  They heard that W onkwang Popsa had just re turned from
China and was living at Kasul-g ot. (Ch'ongdo. Uyon says that about 9,000
footspans east of Unmun T empl e there is a mountain called Kasul-hyon and
north of this mo untain are the ru ins of Kasfil-got, which is also called Kaso
T emple.)
The two men vi sited the eminent monk and asked him to give them a
golden maxim which would s erve to guide their behavior t hrough life.
W onkwang replied, “There are ten commandments of the Bodhisattvas, but
since you are the subjects of a king you can hardly keep them . (That is,
these co mmandments would require them to become monks .) The five
secular commandments are: 1) Serve the King with loyalty , 2) Honor your
parents with filial piety , 3) T reat friends with sincerity , 4) Fight the enemy
with bra very , and 5) Kill livin g animals with discriminating mercy . Y ou
should observe these commandments consistently , without the least
neglect.”
Kwisan said, “W e can understand all the other commandments, but we
do not know how to kill living animals with discriminating mercy .”
W onkwang repl ied, “This means no killing on the six purificati on days
(six day s each month on which certain Buddhist rituals were performed) or
in the spring and summer months; no killing of domestic animals such as
horses, cattle, fowl or dogs; and no killing of small fish or fish eggs.
Moreover , there  should be no killing of other animals for food b eyond what
is ab solutely necessary . These ar e the commandments for doing good in this
world.”
Kwisan and his friend pledged that they would keep these
commandments without fail. So me years later they were called to the colors
and performed many a feat of arms with unexcelled valor .

In the autumn of the thirtieth year of Konpok when King Chin-p'yong
had bee n on the throne for thi rty-five years, the Sui envoy W ang Shih-i
came to  Silla and sponsored a  hundred-seat seminar at which eminent
monks lectured on the Buddhis t scriptures. W onkwang presided over this
seminar .
. Si nce the time when W onj ong (King Pophung) had established
Buddhism as a bridge of salvat ion, the deeper meaning of Bu ddhism had
not yet been expounded to the people in order to lead them to  reliance on
the Thre e T reasures (Buddha, Buddhist doctrine and the order of monks)
and to repent the ir sins. Therefore a foundation was established  to interpret
the sign s by which the state of  the believers' souls might be interpreted.
(Ilyon a ctually says “divination  foundation.”) At that time a pious monk
donated a farm o f a hundred kyol for the foundation's support. This farm is
located in T ongp'yong county .
W onkwang was  a quiet man of mild temperament who always  smiled
and neve r showed anger in his looks. In his old age the King gave him free
access to the p alace in a car riage. He was unexcelled in virtue and
accomplishment. His deep knowledge of both Buddhist and Confucian
literature and his great ability as a writer were much admired by his
contemporaries. He died in his eighties during the years of T'ang Chen-
kuan. Hi s tomb is at Kumgok T emple on Mt, Samgi, to the wes t of Myong-
hwal Castle (Sonam-dong, Ankang. This was a stone mausoleum in which
relics of eminent monks were enshrined).
The T'an g and Silla biographies dif fer as to W onkwang's family name,
one saying it was Pak and he b ecame a monk in the East (Korea) and the
other sa ying it was Sol and he became a monk in the W est (China), as if
they were describing two dif fe rent people. In neither biography is any
mention made of Chakgot, Imok or Unmun. Kim Ch'ok-myong, a Silla
writer , i ncluded in his Biography of W onkwang Popsa quotations from
folktales and confused the deed s of W onkwang with those of Poyang, the
founder of Unmun T emple. Later the author of the Biographies of the
Monks o f Korea  confused his r eaders by repeating the same er rors. I have
therefore quoted extensively fro m both accounts. In the days of Chen-Sui
few men from Haedong (Korea) crossed the sea to study Buddhism in the
Middle Kingdom until W onkwang made himself famous in the W est
(China) and opened the way for other monks to follow him.


Song of Praise to W onkwang
He crossed the sea and climbed the clouds
T o open a new road in the land of Han;
How many people came and went to build virtue!
The antique traces remain in the blue hills—
The old shadow in Kumgok-Kaso tells his long story .
98. Poyang, the Pear -T r ee and the Dragon
The Biography of Poyang con tains no information about his family
background or his native place. According to an old record in th e Ch'ongdo
county of fice for January in the eighth year of T'ien-fu (943) when T'aejo
(W ang K on) had  been on the throne for twenty-six years, the monastery on
Mt. Unmun was bounded on th e east by Kaso-hyon and on the south by
Anijom. The temple and its forest land were managed by Poyang Hwasang
(High P riest), Hyon-hoe (Abbot) and Chikse Sinwon Sonsa (priest). This
statement is based on the land register of Ch'ongdo county of fice.
In the third year of Kai-yuan it was inscribed on the boundary tower that
the temple had eleven landmarks, including Anijom, Kaso-hyon, Myo-
hyon, Sopuk-mae-hyon and Puk-chojok-mun.
In th e Chinyang-pu Record (dated the year of the tiger) a s urveyor
named Y i Son recorded the f oundation dates and condition of all the
monasteries of the Son (Zen) sect in each province. In September of the
sixth year of Cheng-p'eng, (1 161) when King Uijong was on the throne, an
old reco rd was found in the ho use of Y i Ch'uk-chong (a form er military
of ficer in Ch'ongdo) in which t his survey was certified by Kim  Y ang-sin,
Min Y uk , Y un Ung, Chin Ki and Y ong Song, all retired local of ficials. At
that time the country magistrate, Y i Sa-ro, was eighty-nine years old.
The five old temples of Silla—Greater Chakgot, Lesser Chakgot,
Sobogot, Ch'onm ungot and Kasdgot—were all destroyed during the wars of
Samhan (the conflicts leading to the fall of Silla) and the burnt timbers were
piled on the ruin s of Greater Ch akgot T emple. When Chisik (Poyang), the
founder of this temple, was returning to Silla from the Middle Kingdom, the
King Dragon of the W estern Sea welcomed him to his watery palace. The
dragon chanted Buddhist script ures, gave Poyang a gold-laced robe, and
commanded his son Imok to e scort the monk on his homewa rd journey ,
saying, “ At pres ent the three kingdoms in your country are at war and are
without a king w ho believes in Buddha, but if you go home with my son
and build a temple at Chakgot (Magpie Cape) and live there, you will be

safe from attack until a wise king appears who worships Buddha and will
pacify the nation.”
Poyang bade the King Dragon farewell and returned to Chakgot. Here
he m et a n aged monk calling himself W onkwang who gave him a seal-box
and disa ppeared. In fact, W onkwang went to China in the closing days of
the Che n state and returned to  the East (Silla) during the years of Kai-
huang. He resided at Kasdgot and died at Hwang-nyong T em ple. Had he
been alive at th e time mentioned he would have been 300 years old. It
would seem, therefore, that Poy ang, upon returning home, lamented over
the r uins of the temples of Silla and had a vision of their restor ation in the
future.
Poyang wished to reconstruct a dilapidated temple and climbed the
Northern Peak, where he had seen a five-storeyed yellow pagod a. But when
he c ame closer it vanished, and  in its place there was a flock of magpies
pecking at the g round. Remembering what the King Dragon had  said about
Chakgot (Magpie Cape), he dug a hole where the birds had bee n and soon
found g reat qua ntities of ancient bricks. He built a pagoda of these and
founded a new temple nearby , calling it Chakgot-sa. Soon King T'aejo
(W ang K on) uni fied the country and donated 500 kyol of farmland on the
five capes to this temple, honoring Poyang, who lived there.
In th e fo urth year of Ch'ing-t'ai (937) Imok, the son of the King Dragon
of the W estern S ea, took up resid ence in a deep pool near the temple to help
Buddhism flouri sh in the kingdo m. One year a drought withered  all the fruit
trees an d there were not even any vegetables to eat. Poyang commanded
Imok to bring rain to refresh the withered vegetation.
One day  Imok told Poyang that a heavenly god was trying to kill him,
so the good priest hid the dragon under his bed. Suddenly an angel appeared
before P oyang and demanded that he surrender the dragon, bu t the quick-
witted priest pointed to a pear -tree in his garden. Immediately a deafening
thunderbolt struc k the tree and the angel vanished. The dragon knit together
the broken branches and gave  new life to the tree. (Some say , Ilyon
remarks, that Poyang revived th e tree by his magic art.) In recent years this
tree fell  to the g round, so a ma n made two staf fs from it and placed one
each in the Golden Hall and the dining hall of the temple. The  staf fs bear
inscriptions concerning this story .
When Poyang returned to Silla from China he first lived at Pon g-song-
sa in Ch'uhwa (Miryang). At that time King T'aejo had set out on his

eastern expedition and arrive d at Ch'ongdo, where he laid siege to
Kyonsong, or Dog Fortress. (Ily on says it was so called because it was near
a projecting rock in the shape o f a dog's muzzle on the mountainside.) The
men in the fortre ss refused to su rrender , and T'aejo was at his wits' end. He
visited Poyang, who lived at the foot of the mountain, and asked him how
the stubborn defenders might be brought to submission.
“The do g keeps vigil by night and sleeps by day ,” Poyang told him. “It
watches in front but does not lo ok back. If you attack the fortress from the
north in broad d aylight you will defeat the outlaws who now bark their war -
cries at night whenever your soldiers come near .” T'aejo took this advice
and, just as the wise monk had f oretold, surprised the outlaws in their sleep
and forced them to sue for peace. T'aejo admired Poyang's wisdom even in
military strategy  and conferred a nnual gifts of fifty lar ge bags of rice on the
temple, to keep the censer burning before the portraits of the two sage
monks i n its Golden Hall, and named the temple Pongsong-sa  (T emple of
the Sages).
Some ye ars later Poyang moved to Chakgot. These anecdotes about him
are not found in the old biograph y but there is a Silla legend that he became
the blood-brothe r of Sokkul Pih osa, known also as Piro. The three temples
—Pongsong, Sokkul and Unmun—stood above the clouds o n the three
peaks of the mountain, and communicated frequently with each other .
W riters in later generations ascribed the stories of the Magpie Pagoda
and the dragon's  son to the life of W onkwang and that of the D og Fortress
to P iho, basing themselves o n Silla sources and thus cre ating great
confusion. Moreover the author of Haedong Sungjon (Biographies of the
Monks of the East) has greatly falsified the life of Poyang with his
embellishments.
99. Y angji's Magic Staff
(One of the rules  of conduct for Buddhist monks is that they sha ll not be
gainfully employed or handle money , but support themselves by begging
their foo d. The layman who give s food to a monk improves his c hances of a
better life in his next incarnation.)
Nobody knows who Y angji's an cestors were or where he was born, but
the follo wing sto ry is told about him. During the reign of Queen Sondok in
Silla (632-647) there lived a monk whose name was Y angji . He had a
magical metal staf f. He tied a lar ge bag to the end of it and pronounced a
spell ov er it ending with the Buddhist invocation, “Namuami T abul.” The

staf f the n walke d away by itself  and visited each house in the neighboring
villages. When the housewives heard it clacking on the road they came out
and put rice and money in the b ag, smiling happily . When the b ag was full
the staf f  returne d to its master . This went on every day of the monk's life
until he died, and the temple wh ere he lived was therefore call ed Sokjang-
sa, the T emple of the Metal Staf f.
Y angji worked many wonders o f this sort and was also an artist of great
talent, adept at painting, sculpt ure and calligraphy . The three sixteen-foot
images o f Buddh a and the statue  of the heavenly king, besides the roof-tiles
and pagodas at Y ongmyo-sa (T emple of the Holy Shrine) , the eight
heavenly genera ls beneath the pagoda at Ch'Sn-wang-sa (T emple of the
Heavenly King) , the three images of Buddha at Popnim-sa (T emple of the
Buddha Forest), and the Herculean wrestlers guarding the gate of this last
temple are all his work. He wrote the inscriptions for the panels at
Y ongmyo-sa and Popnim-sa, and modeled three thousand Buddhas in
beautiful designs on bricks from which he built a small pagoda f or his home
temple and worshipped it.
While he was working on the sixteen-foot Buddha image at Y ongmyo-
sa h e modeled the clay while keeping his mind as vacant as a clear mirror
(the bas ic prerequisite for Buddhist meditation). The people of Kyongju
competed in supplying him w ith clay , singing a ballad as they did so:
“Coming, coming, this body is coming! Oh how heavy and sad was my
heart, but now it is light and gay , for I see Buddha with my own eyes.”
Even today the country folk sing this ballad while pounding rice.
The images Y angji made cost 23,000 lar ge bags of rice. (This may
actually be the cost of regilding  the images, Ilyon says.) Indeed he was a
hidden national treasure both in virtue and accomplishments.

Song of Praise to Y angji
When the Buddhist ceremony was duly over ,
The metal staf f lay idle in the Golden Hall;
After burning sandalwood with many incantations,
There was no more work to do;
He sculptured statues of perfect beauty
And gazed upon them with folded hands.
100. The Monks Who T raveled to India

(As wil l have been seen in other sections, knowledge of In dia was
vague ev en in Ilyon's own time. The name Ch'onch'uk-kuk me ans land of
the hea venly b amboos, and its division into five kingdoms simply
corresponds to the five direction s—the four points of the comp ass plus the
center .)
In th e Kwangham Kupop-jon ( Biographies of the High Monks) it is
written t hat Arina (Ariya) Palma, the monk, was a native of Si lla. In order
to s tudy the Bu ddhist religion he first traveled to China, where he was
encouraged to make an extensiv e pilgrimage to various holy places in India.
During the years of Chen-kuan  (627-650) he departed from C hangan and
made hi s way to the five Ch'onch'uk kingdoms of India. There he stayed at
Naranta T emple  and studied books of Buddhist doctrine and commentaries,
which he copied out on the leav es of the Paitara tree in order t o take them
back to Silla. Bu t unfortunately he was taken ill on the eve of his departure
and died at the temple. He was then more than seventy years old.
Later other Silla monks including Hyeop, Hyont'ae, Kupon, Hyonkak,
Hyeryun, Hyon yu and two others (whose names are lost) jo urneyed to
Middle India to study Buddhism . Some died on the way and s ome arrived
safely and resided at temples, b ut none ever returned to Kerim (Silla) or to
China except Hyont'ae. However , nobody knows where he died.
The peo ple of Ch'onch'uk called Haedong (Silla) Kukuta- Y esolla.
Kukuta means chicken and Y eso lla means dear . The combination of the two
Chinese charact ers for these w ords is Kekwi, which is anothe r name for
Kerim. The Indians said that the Silla people worshipped the god of
chickens and wore cocks' feathers about their persons as decorations.

Song of Praise to the Monks who T raveled to India
Over ten thousand peaks far away to Ch'onch'uk
The pilgrims climbed and climbed on weary feet:
How many times have their lone ships sailed from the east!
Once gone, they returned no more;
Y ear after year the floating clouds sail back
Y et we never hear the tap of their staf fs journeying homeward.
101. Miracles of Hyesuk and Hyegong
The monk Hyesuk was in his youth a follower of Hoserang, on e of the
most ren owned of the Hwarang of Silla. When his master was excluded
from this order , Hyesuk retired  to a mountain villa called Chokson-ch'on

(Chokkok-ch'on in Ankang-hyon), where he led the life of a religious
recluse for twenty years.
One day Kugam, a noble Hwarang came riding to hunt in the mountains
near his  residence. Hyesuk ran out to meet him and held his horse's head.
“W elcome, master ,” he said. “Permit me to follow you in the hunt. I can
keep up with your steed on my flying feet.”
“Fine!” said Kugam. “Come alo ng, then.” They had a long chase-over
the hills, and w hen they had killed many birds and animals with their
arrows they sat down to rest while the meat was cooked a nd fell into
conversation.
“I have some meat more delicious than this,” Hyesuk said. “May I serve
it to you?”
“Good, bring it,” said Kugam. “I have a good appetite today .'*
Hyesuk thereupo n cut a piece of flesh from his thigh with a sharp knife
and set it before Kugam. “Please help yourself,” he said.
“What are you doing?” Kugam exclaimed in astonishment.
Then Hyesuk admonished him. “I thought you were a kind-hearted
gentleman and merciful to your fellow creatures, so I follow ed you in
admiration of your high virtues. But now I see that you are a cruel and
selfish man who likes to kill liv ing creatures, doing harm to oth ers in order
to fill your stomach. This is no t the way of benevolence and you do not
belong to our order .” And with these words he went away .
“Ah, the  sad day ,” said Kugam, blushing with shame. “But what is this?
I h ave eaten my fill, and yet th e table is still spread with the s ame dishes
and appears untouched.”
Kugam returned  and told his strange story to King Chinp'yong-The
King thought that Hyesuk must be an uncommon monk, and sent an of ficial
to fetch him to t he court. When the of ficial arrived he found Hy esuk (as he
thought) lying in bed with a woman, and cursing him for his shameless
breach of Buddhist law turned back. But he had gone only seven or eight li
when he  met the same monk coming from the opposite direct ion. “Hello,
good mo nk,” he  said, “where have you been?” ' “I have been at a rich man's
house in the city .” Hyesuk said. “I of ficiated at a memorial service and
of fered p rayers for the departed soul for seven days, and now I am returning
to my home in the mountains.”
The of fi cial went and reported his experience at court. Puzzled, the-
King sent a messenger to the house Hyesuk had mentioned and found that

indeed the monk had been there when he said he was.
Not long  after this Hyesuk died  and the village people buried him on a
hill east of E-hyon (Ear Pass). But while his friends were still crowded
around the grave a traveler arriv ed from the other side of E-hyon who said
that he had just met Hyesuk ove r the hill. When asked where he was going,
Hyesuk had said, “I have lived too long in this mountain village and now I
am goin g on a sight-seeing trip.” Then, the traveller said, the monk had
mounted a cloud and soared int o the sky about half a mile fro m where he
had said  goodby e. Amazed, the villagers dug into the grave they had just
finished, and found in it only one of the monk's old shoes.
Even tod ay there is a temple called Hyesuk-sa north of Ankan g-hyon,
where the mysterious monk lived, and visitors can see his image in bas-
relief on one of its walls.
Another famous  Silla monk wa s named Hyegong. He was the son of a
woman servant in the house of Ch'onjin-kong and his childhoo d name was
Ujo. On e day the master of the house was taken seriously  ill with a
malignant grow th, and felt that death was approaching. The house was
constantly full of people, noble and common, who came to enquire after his
health. Ujo was only seven years old, but he knew that something unusual
had happened.
“O my mother ,” the child said, “What has brought so many people into
this house?”
“Don't y ou kno w ,” she replied, “that the master of the house is very
sick, and lies upon his deathbed?”
“I can cure his disease,” said Ujo.
“What! Y ou can, can you?”
“Y es I can.”
W ith a wonderi ng heart the wo man told Ch'onjin-kong what her child
had said, and the nobleman se nt a servant to fetch the lad. When Ujo
appeared he sat down at the foot of the sick man's bed with his mouth shut
tight. Th en suddenly the abscess burst and the patient was saved. Ch'onjin-
kong did not wonder greatly at this, however , considering it to have been a
mere coincidence.
When Ujo had g rown into a youth he tamed Ch'onjin-kong's pe t falcon,
and was such a good fowler that his master could not help likin g him. One
day Ch'o njin-kong's younger brother set out on a long journey to take up a
new of ficial post in the country and took this hawk with him by  permission

of the nobleman . But one night Ch'onjin-kong bethought him of  his faraway
falcon and decided to send Ujo to bring it back early the next morning.
Ujo knew the mind of his master . Magically , he brought the falcon back
in an instant and  presented it to  Ch'onjin-kong before daybreak . The latter
reflected that this was the same lad who had cured his abscess earlier . “I did
not know a great sage was living in my house,” he exclaimed, “and I abused
him with mad words and discourtesy . How can I apologize enough to you?
And he stepped down into the c ourtyard and made a low bow to the fowler
boy .
When U jo's wonder -workings had become widely known in the world
he becam e a monk, changing h is name to Hyegong, and went  to live at a
small te mple. H e often drank w ine like a whale and staggere d about the
streets singing and dancing like a madman, with a pan-shaped refuse basket
slung ov er his shoulder . The people called him Pugwe-Hwasang (Basket-
carrying monk) and named his temple Pugae-sa (a corruption of Pugwe-sa).
He often went down into the temple well and would not come out for
two or three months, so this we ll was named after him. When he did come
out a heavenly being dressed in blue was sure to precede him. S tranger still,
even tho ugh he had been sitting in the water for so long, his robe never got
wet.
Late in life he w ent to live at Hangsa-sa (now Oo-sa in Y ongi l-hyon),
where he associated with the gre at monk W onhyo, who was the n compiling
a comm entary on the Buddhist scriptures. W onhyo asked him all sorts of
dif ficult questio ns which he did not understand, but he wo uld always
answer q uickly and in jest. One day the two monks went fishing and made a
good ca tch. While they were eating some of the fish on a rock, Hyegong
laughingly said,  “Y ou eat my fish.” From that time the people called the
temple 05-sa (My Fish T emple.)
One day  when Kugam-kong wa s out on a picnic he found the body of
Hyegong on a m ountain path, mouldering in the open air and in fested with
maggots. He mourned over the body of the faithful follower of h is Hwarang
days an d returned to Kyongju, where he found Hyegong singing and
dancing merrily  in his cups. (This sounds as if Hyegong had gotten
confused with Hyesuk.)
Another time Hyegong twisted r ice-straw into a long rope and wrapped
it round and round the Golden Hall and the south gate tower o f Y ongmyo-
sa. Then  he said to the chief mo nk, “Undo this fastening in thr ee days and

you will see a miracle.” The dumbfounded monk followed his directions
and sure enough, in three day s the beautiful Queen Sondok visited the
temple and the f lames of Chigwi, the “Love fire of the heart” sw allowed the
temple pagoda, but the Golden Hall and the tower were not damaged.1
Myongnang, the founder of Sinin-sa (Heavenly Seal T emple) also
founded Kumgang-sa (Diamond T emple) and held a ceremo ny on this
occasion in which the nation's m ost eminent monks participated. Hyegong
was abs ent, and  it was not until after Myongnang had lighted incense and
chanted prayers that he appeared in the temple. He came through a heavy
downpour but his robe was not wet, nor were his feet soiled with mud. He
smiled at Myongnang and said, “Y ou called me, so here I am.”
After working countless wonde rs like this he disappeared into the sky ,
from which thousands of sari fell to earth. While in this life he read the
“Commentary o n Buddha” by on e Cho, an illustrious monk, and said, “This
book wa s written by myself long, long ago.” From this it would  appear that
Cho was one of his previous incarnations.
(Some o f the antics of Hyegong are strongly suggestive of the t enets of
the S on (Zen) sect, which held that the study of scripture was worthless and
that only  pure meditation could bring salvation. The apparently pointless
tricks of the monks of this sect w ere intended to detach the neophyte's mind
from the  logic and conventions of the material world so that it might more
readily penetrat e to the spiritual reality behind it and th us achieve
enlightenment.)

Song of Praise to Hyesuk and Hyegong
Suk! Y ou go out hunting birds in the fields
And return to sleep in a woman's bed.
Gong! Going out, you drink, sing and dance,
And returning, sleep in the well.
Where are your buried shoe and your floating body?
Y ou are a pair of treasures, like two lotus blossoms in a flame.
102. Chajang Establishes the Buddhist Laws
The family name of the great monk Chajang was Kim-ssi and he was
the son of Murim, a nobleman of Chingol (royal) stock who was honored
with the  third-ra nk title of Sopa n in Chinhan. His father was an important
court of ficial who, since he had no son, prayed to Kwanum Boddhisattva,
pledging, “If I have a son I will make him a bridge to the world of Buddha.”

On the night wh en he ended his  prayer , his wife dreamed that a star fell
from heaven and entered her bosom. She conceived that very night and in
due time  bore a son. This was Chajang. Because he was born on Buddha's
birthday he was named Sonjongnang.
Chajang was pure of heart and keen of mind. He had no use for worldly
pleasures and occupied himself  solely with literature and art. In his youth
fine vers es rich in noble conceptions already flowed from his brush. He was
orphaned early in life. T ired of the annoyances of worldly society he took
leave of his wife  and children a nd gave away his estates to found a temple
called W onyong -sa. There he lived a hermit's life in the deep mountains,
unafraid of tigers and wolves, and meditated on the transience  of this life,
seeing all human beings as no more than withered bones.
In order to combat weariness and idleness he built a small cell whose
four walls were covered with brambles and thorns and whose ceiling
consisted of chestnut burrs. He s at naked and erect in the middle of this cell
with his head tied to a roof-beam to help keep his mind in full awareness.
At that time a ministerial post fell vacant at court and Chaja ng was
repeatedly asked  to fill it in view of his noble birth,2 b ut he consistently
refused. The King was displease d and sent a message saying, “If you do not
accept th is of fici al position I will have your head cut of f for disobedience to
your King.”
But the dauntless monk replied , “I would rather die in one day  for the
sake of keeping Buddha's commandments than live for a hundred years
while breaking them.” When th e King received this reply , he finally gave
formal permission for Chajang to remain a monk for life.
There was nothing to eat among the rocks and trees where he lived, and
he w ould surely have starved t o death had it not been for a strange bird
which b rought h im dainty and n ourishing fruit for his daily foo d. One day
he f ell into a trance in which a heavenly being appeared to him and
expounded the Five Commandments of Buddha. After this he walked down
into the valley and began expla ining these commandments to the people,
who gathered from near and far with great rejoicing.
Chajang lament ed that his development was hampered in the Eastern
corner o f little learning (Korea) and so decided to study in the W est (China)
in or der to obtai n wider knowledge. Having received Queen Sondok's royal
sanction in the third year of Inp'yong (the Queen's reign title), that is in the
tenth ye ar of Chen-kuan of T'ang T'ai-tsung (636) he set out for  China with

ten attendants including his dis ciple Sil and went to Ch'inglia ngshan. On
this mou ntain th ere was a clay statue of Munsu Buddha said to have been
made by heavenly sculptors und er the personal direction of the Chesok god,
according to Chinese legends.
Chajang bowed to this image and worshipped it. As he meditated lie fell
into a deep tran ce, in which the  image stroked his head and taught him a
verse in Sanskrit. When he aw oke he remembered this verse exactly but
could not understand its mean ing. The next morning a str ange monk
appeared and interpreted the verse for him, adding “'Even thoug h you study
ten thousand texts, none of them will excel these four lines.” The monk then
gave him a robe and some sari and vanished. (The details of th is story are
found in  Book Three. Ilyon says that because Chajang at first kept this
event to himself, it was not recorded in the T'ang Biographies of Monks.)
Chajang realized that he had re ceived a precious saying of Bu ddha in
that verse. He climbed down Peitai, passed T'aiho pool and reached
Changan, the T'ang capital. Emperor T'ai-tsung sent an imperial messenger
to co nduct him to a monastery named Shengkuang-pieh-yuan, s howing him
special favor , bestowing gifts  upon him, and giving him  the finest
accommodations. But Chajang disliked splendor and state, and eventually
he built himself a low cottage under a rock on Nanshan (South Mountain) to
the east of Y unchi T emple. There he lived for three years, du ring which
time he worked many wonders. When he returned to Changan t he Emperor
presented him with 200 rolls (of 40 yards each) of silk for use as clothing.
In th e seventeenth year of Chen -kuan (643) Queen Sondok of Silla sent
a pe rsonal letter to the Emper or requesting that Chajang be allowed to
return home, and the Emperor granted this wish. His Majesty invited
Chajang to a farewell banquet in  the inner palace and bestowed on the great
monk on e suit of silk and 500 suits of brocade. The T'ang Crown Prince
also gav e him 200 suits of brocade in addition to many other gifts. Chajang
wished to take with him a copy of the Buddhist scriptures (T aejang-gyong),
various Buddhist banners and certain flowers, and these also were given
him. So with a lar ge car go of pre cious gifts from China Chajang returned to
Silla and received an enthusiastic welcome.
The Que en estab lished him in P unhwang T emple (the T'ang Biography
says W angfen-s zu) with regular provisions for his daily life a nd personal
guards. One summer he was invited to the palace to lecture on the way to
achieve the ideals of the living B uddha. On another occasion he lectured at

Hwangnyong T emple for seven  days and nights on the commandments of
the B oddhisattvas. During this time sweet rain fell from heave n and mild
clouds covered the hall, causing the-audience to admire his wonder -working
power .
At this time the court gave Chaja ng the title of Great National Priest and
made hi m the head of all Buddhist or ganizations in the kin gdom, with
power to  draft a set of uniform regulations by which they should henceforth
be ruled.
(Here fo llows a list of precedents for this action, first Chinese a nd then
Korean.) During the years of T'ien-pao Pei-ch'i divided each di ocese in the
kingdom into ten districts and appointed priests and great priests. Liang and
Chen appointed national priests, provincial priests, country priests and
abbots a f filiated with the Chao-hsien T s'ao (Supervisor of monks and nuns).
The T'ang rulers named ten great priests.
In th e el eventh y ear of King Ch inhung of Silla (550) Anjang Po psa was
named T aesoson g with two Sososong under him. In the foll owing year
Hyeryang Popsa  of Koguryo was appointed national priest and entitled
temple master . Poryang Popsa was appointed T aedoyuna with nine
provincial priests and eighteen country priests under him.
Chajang was appointed great national priest, but this was not an active
administrative post but an honorary title like T'ae-T ae-Kakkan (Elder
Statesman), a title conferred on Kim Y u-sin when Puyerang was appointed
T ae-Kakkan (Prime Minister). Later King W onsong (785-798) appointed
monk of ficials with one T aesa and two Sa (master teacher and teachers) on
the p ermanent working staf f. Th erefore, the purple-robed monk s belong to
separate branches of the temples.
In a  local biog raphy from Silla it is written, “When Chaja ng was
visiting China Emperor T'ai-tsu ng invited him to the palace (W uch'ientien)
to lecture on Hwaom doctrine a nd in the midst of his lecture heaven sent
down honeydew , so the Emperor made him a national priest.” But neither
the T'ang biographies nor the Samguk Sagi makes any men tion of this
incident.
Chajang availed himself of this appointment to propagate Buddhism
throughout Silla by establishing the following regulations: 1) In the five
monasteries and  nunneries more of the ancient scriptures were t o be taught;
2) Semi nars on the Buddhist commandments were to be held  for a half-
moon period in winter and spring each year , and all monks and nuns were to

under go examinations on these commandments; 3) An administrative of fice
was to be set up and of ficials  sent regularly on tours to ascertain the
condition of temple property and to warn the cler gy against error , while
encouraging them to care for the images in the temples and to conduct
religious ceremonies regularly .
As a result, a new order of B uddhism flourished in Silla, like the
flourishing of Confucianism in China when the great sage (Confucius)
returned to Lu from W ei to revive the elegant odes of Y a  and Sung,
eliminating lewd  ballads and publishing artistic lyrics which ennobled the
human heart. (This refers to Confucius' decision to abandon his attempts at
a political career , return to his native place (Lu) and turn his attention to
editing the books which later be came known as the Confucian C lassics. His
traditional dates are 551-479 B.C.)
At this time eight or nine of every ten families in Silla wanted to have
their sons and daughters become monks and nuns, and the number
increased yearly . T'ongdo T emple (near Pusan) was therefore established (as
a pla ce o f initia tion) where applicants to join the order were re ceived after
taking an oath and purifying themselves.
Chajang donated his country home to the foundation of a temple called
W onyong-sa, an d on the day of its completion gave a lecture on the verses
of B uddha (T en Thousand So ngs of Flowers), at which tim e fifty-two
heavenly maiden s appeared in the audience. Chajang had his dis ciples plant
memorial trees according to the  number of these maidens and named them
Chisik-su (T rees of Knowledge) to commemorate this miracle of Buddha.
Chajang proposed to the royal court the use of the T'ang court dress
because of its elegance and dignity . Queen Chindok approved of the plan,
and in the third year of her reign  (649) the T'ang costume was first worn by
herself a nd her court, In the foll owing year the T'ang calendar w as adopted
in S illa and events were thenc eforth dated by the T'ang Emp erors' reign
titles and eras beginning with Y ing-hui of T'ang Kao-tsung (third T'ang
Emperor , 649-6 83) in both of ficial and unof ficial records, From this time
the Silla envoy t ook precedence over those of all other tributary states at the
T'ang court.
When Chajang had reached an advanced age he bade farewell to
Kyongju and went to Kangnung county (now Myongju), where he founded
Suta T emple as a place to live q uietly . One night in a dream a st range monk
resembling the one he had met at Peitai (W utaishan) appeared and said he

wanted to meet Chajang at T aesongjong the next day . Chajang arose in
wonder and went to the appointed place, where the Munsu Buddha
appeared to him in human shape and said, “I will see you again at
Kalbonchi in the T'aebaek Mou ntains,” and then vanished from sight. (In
Songjong, Ilyon  says, no bramb les grow and no hawks make their nests to
this day .)
Chajang climbed the T'aebaek mountains and found a lar ge snake coiled
under a tree. “T his is Kalbonchi,” he told his attendants. He bu ilt a temple
there cal led Soknamwon (now Chongam-sa), and awaited the descent of the
sage. After a while a ragged old hermit carrying a dead p uppy in an
arrowroot baske t appeared and said to an attendant, “I have c ome to see
Chajang.”
“Who ar e you,” the attendant retorted, “and why this mad calling on the
name of our master?”
The stranger cooly replied, “Go and tell your master that I am here to
see him—only that and nothing more.”
When the incident was describe d to Chajang he wondered if the fellow
were a madman . But when they shouted at him to go, the old man said
“How can a Narcissus see me?” and turned his basket upside down. Out of
it ca me, not a dead puppy but a  lion on a throne, radiating a da zzling light
for a moment, and then the old man vanished. (A symbol of  Buddha as
preeminent among both men and beasts.)
Informed of this miracle, Chaja ng hastened to pursue the light until he
reached Namnyong (South Pass ), where it vanished in a mist. As it did so,
Chajang fell dead. He was cremated there and his bones enshrined in a
cave.
During his lifetime Chajang founded more than a dozen temples and
pagodas, and on each such occ asion unusually auspicious signs appeared.
This brought faithful followers to him in crowds to help complete the
sacred buildings quickly . His personal ef fects, including, his wooden pillow
(carved with a d uck design) and his robe (once worn by Bud dha), which
had been presented to him by the dragon of T'aiho pool in China, are now
preserved in T'ongdo T emple.
In Hony ang-hyon (now Onyang ) there is a temple called Apyu-sa. It
was so named in honor of the duck carved on Chajang's pillow which used
to p lay there an d did some miracles. A monk named W onsun g preceded

Chajang to China and returned to Silla with him to help in the propagation
of Buddhism there.

Song of Praise to Chajang
When he awoke from a dream at Ch'ingliangshan and returned home,
Seven volumes and three collections of commandments opened before
his inward eye.
Ashamed of the coarse robes of the courtiers.
He reformed the dress of the East to that of the W est.
103. W onhyo, the Unbridled Monk
The family name of the sacr ed monk W onhyo was Sol-ssi, His-
grandfather was Ingp'i-kong, ot herwise called Choktae-kong, w hose shrine
now stands near Choktaeyon pool. His great-grandfather was T amnal-
naemal.
The birt h of W onhyo came about in this manner , When his mot her was
near her time she was passing under a chestnut tree to the southwest of
Y ulgok (Chestnut V alley) north of Puljich'on (V illage of the Buddha Mind)
south of Apnyang county . Ther e suddenly her labor pains came upon her .
As t here was no  time to reach shelter her husband's clothes were  hung from
the branches of the tree to hide her from view . The local fo lk call this
chestnut tree Sala-su and its fru it Sala-yul. It has a peculiar shape and an
uncommon flavor .
(This story is r emarkably simi lar to that of the birth of Bu ddha as
recorded in the scriptures. “Sa la” is the name of the tree u nder which
Buddha is said to have departed this life and entered Nirvana.)
There is a legend  that long, long  ago an abbot gave his temple slave two
chestnuts for his supper . The ind ignant slave brought suit against the abbot
because of his meager rations. The local magistrate ordered t he slave to
produce the chestnuts, and when he did so it was observed that one of them
was lar g e enoug h to fill a wooden bowl. The magistrate therefo re ruled that
henceforth only one chestnut should be given for a meal. Since t hat time the
place where these chestnuts grew has been called Y ulgok (Chestnut V alley).
When W onhyo became a monk he gave away his house for the
foundation of a temple called Ch'ogae-sa (T emple of First Opening) and
near a tree in his garden he built another temple named Sala-sa.
In his biography  W onhyo is represented as a man of Kyongju because
his gran dfather lived there, but the T'ang Biographies of Monks describes

him as a native of Ha-Sangju. In the second year of Lin-te (665) King
Munmu of Silla divided the old land of Sangju and Haju to create
Sapnyangju in the new territor y . Haju is now Ch'ang-nyong county and
Apnyang county was originally a sub-prefecture of Haju. Pulchich'on was
part of the Chain-hyon of today , a sub-prefecture of Apnyang county .
W onhyo's childhood names were So-tang (Pledging Flag) and Sin-tang
(New Flag). On the night he w as conceived his mother dreamed that a
shooting star entered her bosom, and when he was born five-colored clouds
covered the earth. This was in t he thirty-ninth year of King Ch inp'yong of
Silla (617).
As the boy grew  into a healthy and handsome youth he proved to be an
uncommon person. He did not study with a teacher , but knew everything
already . He was a playboy . His companions, his adventures, his wits and his
great achievements are all described in detail in the T'ang Biographies of
the Mon ks and in his autobiog raphy , so here we will include only a few
anecdotes from the Biographies of Silla.
One day W onhyo saw bees and butterflies flitting from flower to  flower ,
and he felt a strong desire for a woman. He walked through the streets of
Kyongju singing , “Who will len d me an axe that has lost its handle? I wish
to c ut a heave n-supporting pole.” The passers-by laughed at him, not
realizing the real meaning of h is song, but T'aejong (King M uryol) said
when he  heard it, “The love-lorn  monk wants to marry a noble l ady and get
a wise son by her . If a sage is born, so much the better for the country .”
(W onhyo's song alludes to a p oem in the Book of Odes, one of the
Confucian Classics. In this poem the axe-handle symbolizes the male sexual
or gan, so that an axe without a handle means a widow . W onhy o is looking
for a  go-between to find a wid ow to be his lover , and the Kin g agrees to
play this part. This is one more example of W onhyo's d isregard of
convention, since Confucian custom forbade widows to remarry or
otherwise have to do with men.)
There w as at this time a widowe d princess living in Y osok Pala ce (now
a mo nastery , Ilyon says). The King told his servants to conduct W onhyo to
that palace, and they found that  he had already descended Namsan (South
Mountain) and reached Munch'on-gyo, the Mosquito Stream Bridge. Here
he deliberately fell into the stream and got his clothes wet. When he
reached the palace the princess, already in bridal attire, suf fered him to

change into a bridegroom's robes, and so they were married and passed the
night together .3
The prin cess be came pregnant as a result, and bore a son who se name
was Sol  Ch'ong . He was so intelligent that he mastered all the classical
histories in his youth. He composed books on folk customs and the place-
names of China and Silla, usin g the “Idu” system of simplif ied Chinese
characters as phonetic signs to convey the Korean language. Until then
there ha d been no method of w riting the Korean language and people who
wished to be educated had to read and write in Chinese, although the
spoken Korean language is distinctly dif ferent from Chinese.
Sol Ch'ong also translated the  Six Chinese Classics (Probably the
Confucian Classics are meant)  into Korean by this method and wrote
commentaries on them. All these have been handed down to the scholars of
the East (Korea). For his virtuous deeds and literary accomplishments, Sol
Ch'ong is acclaimed as one of the ten sages of Silla. (Unfortunately , all but
one of Sol Chong's works are lost.)
Having broken a Buddhist comm andment by his union with the princess
and the birth of Sol Ch'ong, W onhyo dof fed his monk's robe and put on
secular d ress, ad opting the punning nickname Sosong Kosa (Little Hermit).
One day  he met an actor and performed a gourd dance, wearing  a grotesque
mask on his face. He made a utensil in the shape of a gourd and called it
Mu-ae (Boundless; this is an all usion to the Hwaom sect script ural phrase,
“Both lif e and death are Nirvana  and paradise when a sage king rules within
the bounds of decorum and music"). He composed a song about the gourd
for t his dance. W earing the mask and carrying the gourd he pe rformed his
dance in every corner of the country , so that even usurers an d poor old
bachelors (both  much despised) could understand the golden sayings of
Buddha and the Buddhist invocation, Namuami-tabul. His native  place Pulji
(Buddha Land), his temple Ch'ogae (First Opening) and his religious name
W onhyo (Breaking Dawn) all refer to the first dawning of the Buddhist faith
on earth.
When he  wrote a commentary on the Hwaom scripture he stopped at the
fortieth chapter , and when he lived at Punhwang temple in early life he was
constantly occu pied with public af fairs. For these reasons he never rose
above the lowest ranks of the m onks. Guided by a sea dragon, he received a
commandment f rom Buddha to write while traveling a song abo ut Sammae-
gyong. He put h is ink-stone and his writing brush on the two horns of the

ox h e ro de, and therefore people  called him Kaksung (Horn Rid er). The two
horns represente d the awakening of his inner self and of the inn er selves of
others. He met T aean Popsa, another famous monk, who presented W onhyo
with writing paper , and they chanted the song together .
When W onhyo died his bones were crushed and incorporated into a
lifelike image of him which his son Sol Ch'ong enshrined in Pun-hwang-sa,
where he held a memorial service and chanted a dir ge in his father's
memory . As Sol Ch'ong prostrated himself to one side of the image, it
suddenly turned  its head toward him This image is still to be seen, with its
head tur ned to one side. Legend  says that Sol Ch'ong lived in a cottage near
a cave where his father had once lived. The ruins of this cottage are still
there.

Song of Praise to W onhyo
His Ox-horns unveiled the mystery of Sammae-gyong;
His gourd dance awoke the underworld to holy things.
In the moonlit Jade Palace he enjoyed a spring dream and was gone;
Over the closed Punhwang T emple his shadow dances alone.
104. Uisang T ransmits the Hwaom Sutra to the Cardinal T emples
Uisang's father was Han-sin and  his family name was Kim. At the age
of t wenty-nine he shaved his  head and became a monk, residing at
Hwangpok T em ple. Soon afterward he decided to go to China to study
Buddhist doctrine, and set out on his journey with W onhyo. But when he
reached Liaotun g he was arrested by Koguryo border guards a nd detained
for t en days, aft er which he wa s allowed to return home. (Ilyon says this
account is found in Ch'oe Hu's Chronicles and in W onhyo's Autobiography .)
In the first year of Y ing-hui (650) he joined the party of a T'ang envoy
returning to China and entered the Middle Kingdom. When h e arrived at
Y angchow , the Chinese military commander there gave him a luxurious
reception and provided him with living quarters in the government
headquarters. After a few days he visited the monk Chih-yen on the South
Mountain of Changan. Chih-yen had had a dream the night befo re in which
he had seen a g reat tree growing in Haedong (Silla) whose boughs and
leaves covered the whole of Shenchow (Land of God, i.e. China) and in the
top of which was a phoenix nest. He climbed the tree, and hi s eyes were
dazzled by Manipao (jewels said to have been emitted from the brain of a
king dragon) whose light radiated far and wide. W aking in wonder and

surprise, he tidied his house and waited until Uisang knocked at his door .
After receiving his guest with special ceremony he said, “In a dream last
night I saw sig ns of your com ing.” The two sat facing each other and
discussed the mysteries of the Hwaom Sutra to the profoundest depths.
Chih-yen was glad to hear the in telligent words of Uisang, and d eclared that
his visitor outshone, him on many points of Buddhist scripture.
At t his time the  Silla ministers Kim Hum-sun (another book sa ys Kim
In-mun, Ilyon notes) and Y ang-to were detained in Changan by T'ang
Emperor Kao-tsung, who was planning to attack Silla with a lar ge army .
Uisang was informed of this by Hum-sun, who ur ged him to return home at
once and  warn the court. Therefore, in the first year of Hsien- heng (670),
Uisang returned to Silla and told King Munmu of the imminent danger . At
the s ame time h e ordered Myongnang, a clever monk, to improvise a secret
Buddhist altar to deceive a Chinese envoy who had come to K yongju for
purposes of espionage. Thus the King was able to surmount the crisis.
Hsuan-shou Fa- tsang, a Chinese monk and fellow student of U isang at
Chih-yen's monastery , sent Uis ang a copy of his Selections from Sou-
hsuan-shu and a personal letter  in the most cordial terms which read as
follows:
“Fa-tsang, a monk at Ch'un gfu T emple in the W estern Capital
(Changan) presents this letter to the attendant of Hwaom Popsa in Silla.
Since we two parted twenty years ago you have been ever in my mind, but
the w ide seas h ave kept us ten  thousand li apart, separated by the sailing
clouds and rolling waves. My longing to see you knows no bounds. By
Karma (Sanskrit; the accumulation of merits and demerits by which future
incarnations are determined) we have often been acquainted, and we studied
under the same teacher who, b y divine ordinance, transmitted to us his
knowledge of the great mysteries of the Buddhist scriptures.
“I h ave learned with great joy t hat after your return you held seminars
on the Hwaom Sutra in order to  enhance the glories of Buddha. Y ou have
reflected the heavenly jewels of the Chesok Palace in your Buddhist nation
to share the bles sings of Buddha with all people. This, news shows me that
it is you  who have brought Buddha's sunlight and turned the W heel of the
Law to propagate his gospel on earth since Sakyamuni entere d the Lotus
Paradise.
“I, Fa-tsang, have made few achievements in my studies. I am a shamed
when with my inward eye I see you and our textbook, the Hw aom Sutra.

The stat ements of Hwasang (a Buddhist priest) in the Sou-hsuan-shu have
rich mea nings, but are too brief, so that the younger generation will find it
dif ficult to understand their full significance. I have therefore recorded his
dark sayings and added commen taries for novices to read. Sung chon Popsa
will soo n finish  copying my manuscript and deliver it to you. I will be
fortunate if you will read it and correct the errors I have made.
“In our next incarnations, when together we receive the supreme,
inexhaustible law of Buddha in the universally illumined kingdom of
Nosana and perform the precepts of Pohyon, my sins will be redeemed.
Please do not fo r get our long ac quaintance and continue to lead me on the
righteous path.  Hoping to hear from you through messengers or
correspondence from time to time....”
(Ilyon says this letter is included in the T aemun-nyu, the Collection of
Great Men's Letters.)
Uisang ordered the ten cardinal temples, including Pusok-sa on Mt.
T'aebaek, Pimara-sa in W onju, Haein-sa on Mt. Kaya, Okch'on-sa in Pistil,
Pomo-sa in Kumjong and Hwao m-sa in Namak, to propagate B uddhism on
the p rinciples of the Hwaom Sutra. In addition, he made a sche matic chart
of Budd hist doctrine (Mandala) for the temples to keep for the instruction
of monks for a thousand years. He left no other writings, but one piece of
meat is enough  to flavor the soup. This chart and explanatio n, his only
literary work, were made in the first year of T sung-chang (668, the year that
Chih-yen died), just as Confuci us wrote the final chapter of his book after
receiving the gift of a Kirin. (C onfucius is said to have composed the final
chapter of the C h'unchiu (Spring and Autumn Annals) after receiving the
gift of a Kirin (Giraf fe), a fabulous monster said to symbolize benevolence.)
Legend says that Uisang was an incarnation of the Bodhisattv a on the
Jeweled Throne. His ten disciples were Ochin, Chit'ong, P'yohun, Chinjong,
Chinjang, T oyung, Y angto, Sangwon, Nungin and Uijok. T hey are all
known as sages of the second rank and each has a biography .
Ochin li ved at Koram T emple on Mt. Haga, from which he stret ched his
arm each  night to light the lamp at Pusok T emple. Chit'ong wrote the book
Ch'udong-gi (Th e V illage of Gimlets) in which he told many  interesting
stories i n clever phrases. P'yohun lived at Pulguk T emple and traveled to
and from the heavenly palace.
When U isang was at Hwangpok T emple he used to mount the pagoda
and turn around in the air , without touching the steps. When the other

monks f ollowed him, all floating three feet of f the ground, he l ooked back
and said, “If the  commoners should see us flying this way they would think
us monsters, so we had better not teach them this heavenly art.”

Song of Praise to Uisang
He pushed through brambles and war -dust,
Sailing on and on till the Chihshang T emple door opened;
When he planted Hwaom's flowering trees in his own garden,
Nanshan (China) and Mt. T'aebaek (Silla) sang the same spring.
105. The W idow and her Dumb Son
In a remote village called Manson-Pungni in the vicinity of Kyong-ju a
widow conceived without sleepi ng with a man and bore a son. Until the age
of twelve he did  not speak a word or walk a step, and people  called him
Sapok or Sadong (Snake Boy) because he wriggled about on his belly . His
mother died while the great monk W onhyo was living at Koson T emple.
Sadong appeare d in a vision to W onhyo, who rose to meet him  with palms
pressed together in a Buddhist salute. The young visitor did not return the
courtesy but addressed him in a dignified voice.
“The cow (meaning his moth er) on which you and I loaded our
Buddhist scriptu res long ago is now dead. Let us go together and hold a
funeral service for her .”
“Let us do so,” W onhyo replied.
When th ey came to the place where the dead woman was, W onhyo
recited an Uposatta (Sanskrit prayer for the dead): “Do not be reborn, for
death is pain; do not die, for birth is pain.”
But Sad ong interrupted: “Y our prayer is too clumsy . It should be, 'Both
life and death a re pain.'“ They carried the cof fin to the eastern  hill called
Hwalli-san.
“W ould it not be fitting,” W onhy o said, “to bury the Chihye-ho (T igress
of W isdom, the dead woman's B uddhist name) in the Chihye-rim (Forest of
W isdom)?”
“Y ou are  right,”  Sadong replied. “I will sing an elegy (Gatha) i n praise
of the Buddha: A s Sakyamuni Buddha entered Nirvana under t he Sala tree
long ago, so no w his kindred goes to the magnificent palace in the lotus
paradise of Nirvana.”
As h e sp oke he pulled up grass by the roots. Beneath these roots there
opened a  bright, clean empty world with a seven-treasure bridg e leading to

dazzling pavilio ns of gold and jewels such as are not to be found in this
world. S adong took his mother's body on his back and descended this
subterranean sta ircase, whereupon the earth closed above his head as waves
rush together , leaving W onhyo in darkness on the quivering ground.
Long af terward devout Buddhis ts erected a temple called T ojan g-sa on
the e astern side of Mt. Kumgang in Kyongju in honor of Sad ong and his
mother . On the fourteenth day of the third month each year they held
memorial services for the two human Buddhas who returned to eternity .

Song in Praise of the Snake Boy
A sleeping dragon in the depths cannot be idle:
When he wakes and twists his body the womb of earth op ens and
closes.
The pains of both life and death are lasting grief;
There is floating rest in the lotus paradise of eternal peace.

(This is plainly a tale of reinca rnation, though of whom is n ot clear .
Uposatta and Gatha are Sanskr it ritual texts, and the lotus paradise is, of
course, one of the many Buddhist heavens.)
106. Chinp'yo Receives Divination Sticks fr om Maitr eya
The monk Chinp'yo was a na tive of Mangyong-hyon in W ansan-ju
(Chonju) who lived at Kumsan T emple. His father was Chinnaemal, his
mother w as Kilb orang and his fa mily name was Chong. He beca me a monk
at th e ag e of twelve and was a disciple of Sungche Popsa, who had studied
under Shantao Santsang in China and later gone to W utaishan, where he
saw the living Munsu Bodhisattva and received from him the Five
Commandments.
One day Chinp'yo asked his ma ster , “When can I receive the B uddha's
commandments?”
“If y our devotion is sincere, you can receive them within a ye ar ,” was
the r eply . Encouraged by his ma ster's words, Chinp'yo made a pilgrimage to
various famous mountains and then settled at Pulsaui-am (W onder
Hermitage) on Mt. Son'gye. There he underwent various ordeals for the
confession of his sins. First he s truck his head and his four limbs against a
rock for  seven nights, with earne st prayers. His arms and legs were torn and
his b lood rained on the rock, but no sign came. He continued this practice
for anot her wee k, until the end  of the fortnight's prayer , and the Chijang

Bodhisattva (a spirit of mercy and protector of children) appear ed and gave
him his comma ndments of purification. This happened in the hour of the
dragon and the year of the dragon, on the fifteenth of the third moon in the
twenty-eighth year of Kai-yuan, when Chinp'yo was twenty-three years old.
W ishing to see M aitreya, he moved to Y ongsan T emple, also known as
Pyonsan or T'ongga san. There,  after further ordeals, Maitreya appeared to
him and gave hi m the two volu mes of the Chomch'al-gyong, the Buddhist
book of divinati on. (Ilyon says t his was a Chinese version compiled toward
the beginning of the Sui dynasty , whose rule began in 589.) Maitreya also
gave him 189 divination sticks, saying “The eighth and ninth sticks are my
fingerbones and  the rest are made of aloewood and sandalwood. They will
predict the annoyances of the mortal world. Y ou are to use them as rafts of
salvation by the gospel of Buddha" Chinp'yo thereafter held annual
divination services on a newly built altar before lar ge multitudes of
Buddhist believers.
(Divination with sticks was not originally a Buddhist practice. It is
mentioned in some of the earlies t Chinese documents and was a ssociated in
China mainly with T aoism.)
When Chinp'yo arrived at Asullaju, the fish and turtles of the sea
formed a  long bridge between the islands and conducted him to the dragon
palace at the bottom, where he delivered the commandments of Buddha to
the dragons in a sermon. This was in the eleventh year of T'ien-pao (752).
King Kyongdok of Silla heard of Chinp'yo's fame and summoned him
to the palace. The King received the commandments of the Bodhisattvas
from the  monk and gave him 77,000 lar ge bags of rice. The Qu een and her
family received the same commandments and presented him with 500 rolls
of silk and 50 yang of gold. Chinp'yo distributed all these gifts to various
temples for the support of Buddhist services.
When Chinp'yo died his bones w ere enshrined in Pohyon T emple-on the
seacoast, near the place where he had given the Buddha's commandments to
the fish and turtles. His chief disciples were Y ong-sim, Pojong, Sinpang,
Ch'ejin, Chinhae , Chinson and C h'ung, who all founded temples in the deep
mountains. He left the divination sticks to Y ongsim, who took them to Mt.
Songni t o contin ue the services at the Buddhist altar , upon which were the
six whe els of divination. (A mandala is indicated here, but again there is
some co nfusion. A mandate is a  sort of cosmic diagram connec ted with the

esoteric doctrines of certain Buddhist sects. Its original purpose was not
divination.)
According to the T'ang Seng-chuan (Biographies of Monks) in the
thirteenth year of Kai-huang (5 93) there lived at Kwangchow (Canton) a
monk who performed confession ceremonies for Buddhist devotees. He
made two leather tablets inscribed respectively with the-Chinese characters
for good and ev il. People would toss them into the-air , and those for whom
the “good” character turned u p were declared! lucky . Furthermore this
monk cl aimed to  be able to redeem the sins of all people by a self-torturing
method of confession. Crowds  of fanatics, men and women, gathered
around him to have their fortunes told.
In time this custom spread as far north as T singchow (in Shantung). The
government authorities condemned it as witchcraft, but the Buddhist
believers said it was based on the Book of Divination and that th e “pagoda”
method of confession was desc ribed in another scripture which said that
striking the head and four limbs  on the ground made a thundering noise like
the crumbling of a mountain.
The Emperor heard about this matter and sent an of ficial na med Li
Y uan-shan to T ahsing T emple to seek an explanation from the monks. T wo
of th em, Fa-ching and Y en-tsung, replied that there were two volumes of
the B ook of Div ination and that the first chapter , on the “Lantern of Bodhi”
(enlightenment) had been translated from Sanskrit into Chinese in a foreign
country , but that the real title of the book, the name of the translator and the
place w here it had been translated were all unknown. They said that the
“pagoda” confession was dif ferent in performance from other confessions.
The Emperor prohibited the practice by imperial decree.
The account given by the monks of T singchow somewhat resembles the
story told by some Confucian sc holars, who say that the Shih Ching and the
Shu Ching (the Book of Odes and the Book of Kings, two of the Confucian
Classics) were discovered in an old tomb. (Chinese documents do allude to
such a discovery .) But this comparison is like trying to draw a tiger and
producing a dog, and is exactly what Buddha forbids. If people doubt the
authenticity of the Book of Div ination because its translator and place of
translation are unknown, they are like a magician who picks up a coil of
hemp and calls it a gold ring.
T o d o it  justice,  the Book of Divination expounds the mysterie s of the
Bodhisattva alta r (Mandala), and nothing excels it in expunging all flaws

and unc lean thin gs from the tho ughts of idle fellows. It is therefore called
T aesung-ch'am (Great Ferry C onfession, i.e. a conveyor of the soul to
paradise) dealing with the six roots (eyes, ears, nose, tongue , body and
mind). In the B uddhist docume nt of Kai-yuan and Chen-yuan it is called
Chongjang, to indicate Buddha's presence if not his nature. It must not be
compared to the T'ap-pak-i-ch 'am (pagoda confession and self-torture
confession).
In th e b ook, Qu estions of Sarina Buddha it is written, “Buddha said to
Changjajapunya-Dala, 'Y ou should confess your sins for seven days and
seven n ights to cleanse all evil from your heart.' Dala performed the
confession ceremony with devotion, and on the fifth night many  things such
as towels, dusters, brooms, knives, gimlets and axes fell like rain into his
room. Joyfully he asked Buddha  what this signified, and Buddh a answered
'These cutting and wiping instru ments signify the phase of dep arture from
worldly dust.' ”
This appears to be the same phase as that attained by throwing the
wheel in the Bo ok of Divination. W e can therefore understand Chinp'yo's
obtaining the sticks after making  his confession and receiving t he Buddhist
law . Had  this been false Maitreya would not have conferred the sticks on
him in person. If the Book of Divination is condemned then the Questions
of S arina Buddha should be c ondemned also. Y en-tsung and  his fellow
monks were blinded to man by gold.

Song in Praise of Chinp'yo
Born in a corrupt generation, he aroused the deaf and the idle;
Holy mountains and fairy streams responded to his inspiration.
He spread the Pagoda Confession far and wide in earnest;
The converted fish and turtles o f the eastern sea made a bridge for him
to tread.

107. The Stone Monument at Ponyon T emple in Kwantong-P'ung-
ak (Maple Mountain)
(This is a variant account of the life of Chinp'yo. A note  at the
beginning says it is based on a n inscription composed by Y ongcham, the
abbot of  Ponyon T emple, for a stone monument erected in the fourth year of
Chen-an (1 199) . Kwantong is Kangwon Province on the East Coast and
P'ung-ak is a poetic name for Kumgang-san, the Diamond Mountains.)

Chinp'yo Y ulsa was a native of T aejong-ni, Nasanch'on, Pyokkol-gun,
Chonju. At the a ge of twelve, w ith his father's consent, he went to Sunche
Popsa th e abbot  of Kumsan T e mple and became a monk. The  abbot gave
him the Sami (S anskrit Sraman era, a catechism used by novices) together
with one  volum e on the secret sacrificial of ferings and two vol umes of the
Book of  Divinat ion on good and evil and the law of causation, saying “Go
to Maitr eya and Chijang with th ese laws and confess your sins  to the two
Buddhas. When  they have taught you a further law you must spread it over
the w orld.” Chinp'yo departed a nd visited all the famous temple s at the age
of twenty-seven.
In the first year of Shang-yuan (760), at the age of twenty-seven,
Chinp'yo entered a hermitage called Pulsaui-bang (Room of W onder) in
Pyonsan, Poan-hyon (North Cholla Province) with twenty mal (five
bushels) of steamed and dried rice for his food. He ate five hop (about a
handful) daily and gave one hop to the rats. He prostrated him self before
the image of Maitreya and prayed for three years to be blessed with the holy
commandments, but the Buddha gave no sign. In shame and remorse he
tried to kill him self by leaping from a tall clif f, but a blue boy caught him
with both hands in midair before he could be crushed in the valley below
and seated him on a rock.
Filled w ith ne w resolution, Chinp'yo resumed his self-t orturing
confession on a twenty-one-day  program, striking his body against a rock.
By the third day his hands and arms had been torn from his body , but on the
night of the seventh day Chijang Bodhisattva waved a golden wand over the
monk's h ead and his hands and arms grew back and his body was restored
to it s normal c ondition. The Bodhisattva gave him a robe and a bowl
(signifying his full admission to the order of monks) and his hea rt was filled
with a deep and holy inspiration.
When th e twenty-one-day period  was fully over his heavenly eyes were
opened (he achieved the insigh t into reality which is the goal of Buddhist
meditation) and he saw a host o f saints coming toward him from the T osol
heaven. Chijang  and Maitreya smoothed his brow and said, “ W ell done,
strong monk! Y our earnest con fession and self-sacrifice have  made you
worthy to receive Buddha's commandments.” Chijang gave him a copy of
the commandments and also two wooden tablets, one inscribed Kuja (nine
men) and the other Palja (eight men).

“These,” Chijang said, “are the finger bones of my two hands,
bespeaking my two previous awakenings. Nine laws and eight are my
reborn s eeds, and you shall understand all retributions by looki ng on them.
Y ou shall cast of f your flesh and fly up to the T osol heaven in th e body of a
great kin g.” And  with these wor ds the two Buddhas disappeared. It was the
twenty-seventh day of the fourth moon in the year of the tiger .
Chinp'yo Y ulsa decided to found Komsan T emple. When he had
descended the mountain (from h is hermitage) as far as T aeyon Pool, a King
dragon emer ged from the water and presented him with a robe of jade, and
guided h im to Kumsan Forest with an escort of 80,000 dragons. Men and
women gathered from all directions to help him, and within a f ew days the
temple was completed in perfect beauty . Maitreya descended from the T osol
heaven on a c loud to accompany Chinp'yo as he received Buddha's
commandments. Chinp'yo Y ulsa was filled with a heavenly spirit. He had a
sixteen-foot image of Maitreya  cast in iron and enshrined in the Golden
Hall, while a picture (showing the descent of Maitreya and the monk's
reception of Buddha's commands, Ilyon says) adorned the southern wall.
Both of these were the work of an artist who also donat ed building
materials to the temple. The image was begun on June 9 in the year of the
dragon ( 764) an d was enshrined on May I in the year of the h orse (766).
This was the first year of the T ali era of T'ang T ai-tsung.
While C hinp'yo Y ulsa was climbing down Kumsan, he met a man riding
at th e head of a long train of ox-carts. (When he appeared) the lead ox
suddenly knelt before him, bello wing and shedding tears, and all the other
oxen fol lowed s uit. The man jum ped down from his cart in surprise. “Who
are you and where are you coming from, my good monk?” he a sked. “Why
do my oxen bellow at the sight of you?”
“I am  C hinp'yo, a monk from t he forest of the Golden Mounta in,” the
other explained. “I entered the Room of W onder at Pyonsa n, where I
received the Buddha's commandments in the presence of Maitreya and
Chijang, who also gave me two sacred tablets. After building a temple in
the forest, I have started on a journey to seek a quieter place to live out my
days. Though foolish in outward appearance, these oxen are w ise in their
inward s ouls. T hey know that I have received the laws of Buddha and so
they worship him, weeping for joy .”
“If e ven the be asts of burden have faith, how much more s hould a
man!” e xclaimed the ox-driver . “I cannot remain unfeeling and idle.” And

he to ok up his scythe and began to shave his head. Deeply moved, Y ulsa
shaved the man's head for him and helped him to receive the Buddha's
commandments.
Arriving at Mt. Songni, Chinp'y o came upon a host of emerald clover ,
or Kilsa ng-ch'o (emblem of heavenly beauty). He marked the spot and
continued his journey along th e coast of Myongju. An army of fish and
turtles appeared  on the seashore  and formed a bridge from the earth to the
sea. He passed over this bridge  into the depths, and there he recited the
Buddhist commandments. Emer ging from the waves, he traveled on
through Kosong county and reached Kaegol-san, the mountains of all bones
(another name for the Diamond Mountains), where he founded temples in
the Ponyon Forest and held seminars on the land of divination.
After Ch inp'yo had lived seven years in the forest the crops f ailed in
Myongju and there was a great f amine. He preached a sermon on the law of
the Buddha of mercy to a l ar ge audience of believers in the Three
T reasures. Suddenly fish all along the seacoast leaped ashore and died in
countless numbers. The people  danced for joy and collected the fish for
food, thus escaping starvation.
It was not until he returned to his old hermitage (the Room of W onder)
at Pyonsan that he visited his parents at his childhood home an d stayed in
the house of Chinmun, a famous monk.
At this time Y ongsim, Y ungjong and Pult'a came to him and said. “W e
have walked a thousand li to receive the laws of Buddha from you.”
Chinp'yo remain ed silent. The three thereupon climbed a tall tree nearby
and dashed themselves to the ground head first, with a courageous
confession of their sins. Then C hinp'yo Y ulsa consented to teach them. He
anointed their brows and gave them robes and bowls (that is, initiated them
into the order of monks). He also gave them a book on the secret sacrifices,
two boo ks on the daily divin ation of rewards and punishments, 189
inscribed tablets of Buddha, and the “eight-man" and “nine-man” tablets of
Maitreya, repres enting the laws of Buddha and his rebirths. He gave them
this instruction: “I have given you these sacred treasures. T ake  them with
you to Mt. Songni, where you will find a hill of emerald clo ver which I
have marked conspicuously . Build a temple on that hill in order to spread
Buddhism accor ding to the Lord's teachings for ages to come .” Chinp'yo
held regular meetings there on the law of divination.

Chinp'yo Y ulsa returned to Ponyon with his father late in life to worship
Buddha and honor his parents. When his life was drawing to a close he
climbed a tall rock to the east of Ponyon T emple, and there he fell dead.
His disc iples of fered sacrifices for his soul but did not move h is body
until his bones lay scattered on  the ground. When at last the bones were
conveyed to the dark regions under ground, a pine tree suddenly shot up
nearby a nd quickly grew high into the sky . As the years pass ed this tree
withered, and a young tree grew from the same root. This happe ned several
times, a nd even  today twin pin es stand near the grave and lucky pilgrims
find fragments of Chinp'yo's bones under it.
I feared that these sacred bones might be lost altogether , and s o in the
ninth moon of the year of the snake (1 197) I filled a tube with three hop of
his r elics. I built a stone monument under the twin pine on t he tall rock
where Chinp'yo died and enshrined his sari under it.
The history of C hinp'yo Y ulsa in this record is somewhat dif ferent from
that in the inscri ption on the stone monument at Ponyon T empl e, so I have
here sum marized the record of Y ongcham for the information of our wise
readers.
—Muguk
(It a ppears from the above statement that this entire section is t he work
of Ilyon's chief disciple. As be fore, the date given is about a century too
early .)
108. The Monk Sungchon Pr eaches to Stone Skeletons
Little is  known about the monk  Sungchon except some adventures in
China. E arly in  life he sailed to the Middle Kingdom and studied under
Hsien-shou until he had penetrated the depths of esoteric Buddhist doctrine.
Hsien-shou had been a fellow student of Uisang when they both received
instruction from Chih-yen Hoshang in Changan.
Hsien-shou wro te a letter to Uisang and entrusted it to Sungchon, who
was retu rning to Silla. (The two frequently corresponded in this  way , Ilyon
says.) Enclosed in the letter we re some essays on righteousness, written in
his own  hand and based on th e teachings of his master . Und er separate
cover h e sent a parcel of man uscripts which he had copied out of the
Buddhist scriptures, including twenty volumes of the Search for Mystery
(of w hich two were unfinished, Hyon says), three volumes of the T eachings
of B uddha, one volume of the  Mystical Definitions, one Hwaom text in

Sanskrit, two on the beliefs, one on the T welve Gates and one on non-
discrimination in the W orld of Buddha.
The letter read as follows: ”... The other day Hyoch'ung, a Silla monk,
brought me nine pun of gold a nd said it was your gift to me. Thank you
very much. In return I send you an Indian water -bottle (for purification of
the hands) through the kindness  of Sungchon Popsa to express  my sincere
wishes for your good health. If you accept it I shall be very happy .”
When U isang received these manuscripts he felt as if he were again
receiving instru ction from his old teacher Chih-yen. He finis hed reading
them in a month and gave them to his disciples to use in teaching these
subjects through out the kingdom. Thanks to the good monk Su ngchon the
perfect teachings of Buddha spread in the East.
Later an other monk named Pomsu brought a second series of Hwaom
scriptures from China to Silla a nd lectured on it in the year of  Chen-yuan
(799).
Sungchon found ed a temple on the borders of Kaenyong count y in the
Sangju territory and gave lectures on Hwaom doctrine to a lar ge audience of
government of ficials represented by stone skeletons. Kagwi, an intelligent
Silla monk and Sungchon's successor as a Buddhist teacher , wrote a book
called Fountain of Thought in which he described these lec tures of his
master and the various topics he discussed with his stone audience at
Kalgyong-sa T emple. According to his account, about eighty of the stone
skeletons are still at the temple working wonders. Other tales of Sungchon,
the uncommon monk who did uncommon things, are inscribed on his stone
monument, and this inscription is identical with the account given in the
Authentic Reco rd of T aegak Kuksa, the National Priest of the Great
A wakening.
(This business of the stone skeletons is extremely mysterious. There are
two possible explanations, but t hese are only speculative. First, it was the
custom to place inscribed stone tablets in lines before the audience hall of a
royal pa lace to mark the places where of ficials were to stand d uring court
ceremonies. This would have Sungchon lecturing before the royal court,
which is quite possible. Second, a double row of stone statues of of ficials
and various animals often leads up to a royal grave. This would have
Sungchon lecturing at a king's tomb, which is less likely .)
109. Simji and the Bamboo Sticks

The monk Simji was a son of King Hondok (809-826). He was
intelligent, good-natured, filial to his royal parents and af fectionate to his
brothers and sisters from his ch ildhood. At the age of fifteen he shaved his
head and entered Chung-ak (Kong-san) to become a monk.
Simji heard that Y ongsim had re ceived the sticks representing Buddha's
finger bones from Chinp'yo Y ul sa and was holding confession m eetings on
Mt. Songni. He therefore went to the mountain to participate, but being late
arriving he was not admitted in to the lecture hall. Simji sat on the ground
and beat his breast as he confessed with the monks within.
After seven days there was a he avy snow which covered the courtyard,
but not a single flake fell within ten feet of Simji's seat. Then finally the
wonder -struck a udience invited him into the hall. Simji, however , pretended
illness a nd retire d into a guest room where he worshipped Budd ha with his
eyes fixe d on the lecture hall. B lood flowed from his brow and arms just as
Chinp'yo had bled on Son'gy e-san. The Chijang Bodhisattv a came to
comfort him every day .
When the confession meeting w as over Simji started his return journey ,
but on the way  he found two bamboo sticks (the ones menti oned at the
beginning of this section) caug ht in the hem of his robe. He retraced his
steps and gave the sticks to Y ongsim, who exclaimed, “Impossible! I keep
them in a seal ed box.” But when the box was opened it was empty .
W onderingly Y o ngsim wrapped the sticks carefully and put them away
under lock and key .
Simji se t of f again, but again he found the bamboo sticks in the  hem of
his robe  and brought them back. Admiring the great virtue of the royal
monk, Y ongsim  said, “It is the will of Buddha. Y ou had better take them
with you.”
Carrying the two sticks on his head, Simji returned to Chung-ak. There
the Mou ntain Spirit and two fai ries came to meet him. The Spirit led Simji
to a high  rock and prostrated himself beneath it with the fairies until he had
received the commandments of  Buddha from the royal monk. Then Simji
said to him. “Now we must ensh rine these divine treasures in an  appropriate
place. Let us t hrow the bamboo sticks from the highest peak of this
mountain and mark the spot where they fall.” They climbed the peak and
threw th e sticks high into the air  toward the west. As they flew into the blue
sky , the Mountain Spirit sang a song:


Rugged rocks become smooth floors;
Scattered leaves sweep the ground.
W e find the Buddha-bone sticks wherever they fall;

W e e nshrine them on a clean spo t and worship them. As the Spirit sang,
the s ticks fell in to a well in the forest. A hall was duly built ove r the well to
enshrine the sticks. Even today this well is found to the north of  the Hall of
Divination at T onghwa-sa (T emple of the Paulownia Flowers).
King Y e jong of  Koryo (1078-1 122) received these bamboo sticks into
his pala ce and worshipped them  as divine treasures, but he lost one and
replaced it with a tooth of the  Buddha before he sent them back to the
temple. Now it has turned a dif ferent color , appearing to be neither bone nor
jade.
According to the first volume of the Book of Divination there are 189
methods of fortune-telling, of which the ten most important indicate 1)
Seeking the highest and deepest place in the Kingdom of Buddha; 2)
Demonstrating t he results obtained from this seeking; 3, 4) Seeking the
middle and low places in the Kingdom of Buddha; 5) Achieving the end
through spiritual power; 6) Achieving the end through mercy and charity; 7)
Achieving the end through the power of divine beings; 8) Choosing what is
to be received and what is to be  given; 9) Keeping what has been received;
10) Seeking the lowest place in  the Kingdom of Buddha without strongly
rooted belief. The next is seeking the middle place in the Kingdom of
Buddha without  a strongly rooted belief. (Uyon notes after 9 that this
explains the saying of Maitreya  that new commandments are given in this
life, old  commandments we re given in former lives, a nd further
commandments will be given in the future, but these ol d and new
commandments have nothing to do with the old and new commandments
inherent in the minds of monks and nuns.)
The first 172 steps are concerned with good and evil, gain and loss in
the past and present world. The 173rd step is abandoning oneself and going
to hell. These are all retribution s in the coming world. The 174th step is
becoming a beast in one's next l ife. The 189 classes include dem on (Preta),
cutthroat, Herculean wrestler (Asura), man, king, heaven, heavenly king
(Deva), hearing Buddha, mon k, sage monk, living in T osol, living in
paradise, seeing  Buddha, low ri der , high rider , middle rider (on  the ship of

souls) and deliverance of soul, which means ascending from lower to higher
and entering paradise without retrogression.
These things show the dif ferences between the rewards and
punishments of  three lives. If we apply them we obtain the following
results: When a man's mind is equal to his deeds, Buddha works wonders
through him; if this is not so his mind will collapse in error . The two
bamboo sticks inscribed with th e figures “eight” and “nine” are  among the
189 sticks. The Seng-chuan (Bio graphies of Monks) mentions 108 sticks of
divination, for unknown reasons. Perhaps this refers to the 108 annoyances
of worldly passion rather than to the Buddhist scriptures.
In th e two volumes of royal chronology compiled by Kim Kwa n-Gi of
Koryo it  is written “Ch'ung, a great monk of Silla in the closing days of that
kingdom, presented the robe of Chinp'yo Y ulsa and 189 bamb oo sticks of
Buddha's comm andments to T'aejo (W ang Kon) of Koryo.” It is doubtful,
however , whether these are identical with those presently preserved at
T onghwa-sa.

Song in Praise of Simji
Born in the golden palace, he left the cage of worldly glory;
Diligence, intelligence and civility were his heaven-sent virtues.
In snowdrifts in the courtyard the divine bamboo sticks flew into his
robe,
And came to rest on the top of the Paulownia-Flower T emple.
1 10. T aehyon and Pophae and Their Doctrines
T aehyon, the founder of the Y uga sect (in Korea) lived at Y o ng-jang
T emple on Namsan in Kyongju. It was his regular practice to
circumambulate a sixteen-foot stone image of Maitreya in the c ourtyard of
the temp le, and the image would  always turn its head to face the  monk. The
doctrines of the Y uga sect (Fa-s hang-tsung in Chinese) were so dif ficult to
understand that Pai Chu-i (a fam ous T'ang poet) and other Chin ese scholars
gave up its study , saying that the y were unable to follow the labyrinth of its
reasoning. But T aehyon, by his s uperhuman wisdom and intelligence, easily
mastered it, and soon his mind was enlightened concerning its obscurities,
enabling him to perceive what was wicked and corrupt in the light of its
revelations. For this reason all his juniors in the East followed h is teachings
and many scholars in the Middle Kingdom took him as a model.

When rain did not fall as usual during the twelfth year of T'ien-pao
(753) King Kyongdok summon ed T aehyon to the inner palace to chant the
Kumgwang-gyong (Golden Light Sutra) and to pray for rain.  As he was
chanting the scripture and of fering sacrifices to Buddha one day , he
uncovered his wooden bowl s o that it could be filled with water for
purification. Bu t the King's ser vant was late in bringing the water , and a
palace o f ficial rebuked him. The servant excused himself, saying “The
palace w ell is drained to the bottom, and I had to go to a spring deep in the
mountains.”
When T a ehyon h eard this, he rai sed the burning censer in his hands, and
fresh, cool water leaped from the palace well seventy feet into the sky in a
solid jet like the  flagpole at a temple, to the amazement of the K ing and the
palace o f ficials. From that time the well was known as Kumgwang-jong
(W ell of the Golden Light).
T aehyon adopted the nickname Ch'onggu Samun (Monk of the Blue
Hill. Samun—Sramana in Sanskrit—means monk).

Song in Praise of T aehyon
Round the Buddha image he walked on South Mountain
And the image turned its head to follow him;
In the sky above the Blue Hill the Buddha's sun hangs high.
People saw him command the palace well to spout water;
W ell he knew the mystery in a plume of smoke from the cense r . In the
summer of the following year , the year of the horse (754), the King
summoned the monk Pophae (Sea of Buddha) to Hwangnyong-sa to chant
the H waom Sutra and pray for rain. His Majesty in person bur ned incense
on the altar and said to the monk . “Last summer T aehyon Popsa chanted the
Kumgwang-gyong and the dry well at the palace spouted cool, fresh water
seventy feet into the sky . What can you do today?”
“That is  a small miracle and n othing to be wondered at,” rep lied the
monk. “ It would  be easy for me to cause the blue sea to overflow the East
Mountain and sweep away the whole capital city .”
The King laughed this of f as a pleasantry but that afternoon, as the
monk continued  to chant the scripture and burn incense, loud weeping was
heard fro m the inner palace and  a servant of the Queen ran into  the Golden
Hall of Hwangnyong-sa and announced, “The East Pool has overflowed and
washed away fifty rooms of the palace!”

The King was a stonished and at a loss what to do, but Pophae  smiled
and said, “This is only the beginning of the deluge. I have just opened the
water valve on land in order to pour the sea into it, and the valve leaked a
little.” The King was awed by this remark.
On the followin g day the abbot of Kamun-sa on the eastern seacoast
reported to the King, “Early yesterday afternoon the sea rose and flooded
the temple courtyard up to the stone steps of Buddha's palace and did not
subside until nightfall.” The Kin g honored Pophae and worshipped Buddha
with deeper devotion.
Song of Praise to Pophae
The tide of Pophae filled the Buddha's world:
The four seas rose and fell at his will.
Do not say ten billion Sumi Mountains are high—
When our master's finger moves, the sea will cover the highest
peaks. (The Sumi Mountains or Snow Mountains are the Himalayas.)
Footnotes to Book Four
(1). The  story of Chigwi will be found in the translator's Folk T ales of
Old Korea. Korean Cultural Series V ol. VI, in the chapter “The Queen and
the Beggar .”
(2). Only aristocrats could fill important of ficial posts in Silla.
(3). W on hyo's love-story is told in detail also in the translator's Folk
T ales of Old Korea.

BOOK FIVE
VI. Miracles
1 1 1. Milbon the Exorcist
Queen Sondok (T ok-man, 632-6 47) fell seriously ill. Popch'ok, a monk
from Hungnyun-sa, was summo ned to attend her , but his treatment had no
ef fect, and so the courtiers called on Milbon Popsa, a monk of great virtue.
Milbon stood at the door of the  Queen's chamber and read alo ud from
the Y aksa-gyon g, the Book of  Bhechadjagura (the Buddha of Healing).
Then he cast his magical staf f with its six metal rings into the r oom, and it
pierced the hearts of an old fox and of Popch'ok and hurl ed the two
monsters into the courtyard. The Queen was cured of her malady from that
moment. A five-colored light flashed from the forehead of M ilbon as he
retired, saying “Long live the Queen!”
Once when Kim Y ang-to, who later became a high of ficial at court, was
a s mall boy , he suddenly lost the powers of speech and motion at the sight
of a lar ge ghost followed by a t rain of smaller ones, which sampled all the
food in the house and showered curses on the sorceress who danced and
screamed in an ef fort to chase them away . The father summoned a monk
from Popnyu-sa to read from an exorcist text, but the lar ge ghost
commanded the others to strike the monk on the head with heavy iron
hammers. This they did, and the monk fell dead, swimming in blood.
A fe w d ays later Milbon was sent for . When the servant who had been
sent to fetch him returned to announce his coming the sm aller ghosts
trembled with fear and said, “When Milbon Popsa comes we must escape.”
“Y ou little cowards,” said their leader , “don't you have your iron
hammers to hit him on the head and send him to hell?”
Suddenly gigantic spirits wearing golden armor and brandishing long
spears appeared and bound the g hosts hand and foot with red cords. Then a
host of warriors  descended from heaven and stood at attention as an honor
guard fo r Milbo n, who now en tered the sick boy's room. Even  before the
monk had finished reading from his mysterious book, the lad rose from his
bed restored and told the story of his adventure with the ghosts.

From that time until the end of his life he worshipped Buddha, and in
later years had images representing Gautama Buddha, Maitreya and a
Bodhisattva placed in Hungnyun -sa and a golden mural painted  in the main
hall of the temple in honor of Milbon Popsa, who had saved his life.
When Milbon lived at Kumgok-sa General Kim Y u-sin, the famous Silla
soldier , had a friend, a hermit whose name has been lost. Once  the general
asked th e hermit to come and care for his kinsman Such'on, wh o had been
suf fering for some time from a malignant disease. When Inhyesa, a monk
friend o f Such'o n who had com e a long journey from Chung-ak (P'algong-
san near  T aegu) to treat the sick man, saw this hermit, he spoke to him
contemptuously . “Y ou look like a cunning fox,” he said. “How can you cure
a man's disease?”
“I am a poor doctor indeed,” the hermit replied, “but I have been
obliged to come at the special request of the general.”
“Never m ind, fellow ,” said Inhyesa. “Stand aside and observe my magic
power o f communication with the spirits.” And he held up an incense-
burner and chanted a spell, at  which five-colored clouds gathered and
heavenly flowers fell about the head of the patient.
“The power of your spell is wonderful,” the hermit said, “but I also have
a little magic art  which I will show you. Stand up!” The hermit made a ring
with the thumb and forefinger of his left hand and flicked the forefinger
against t he prou d monk's forehead. The monk instantly rose ten  feet in the
air , turne d a somersault and cras hed to earth with his head stuck like a peg
in the ground and his trembling feet stretching heavenward. The people in
the hous e rushed  out and tried to free the monk but he was as sti f f as a post,
as if fixed in cement, with his feet in the air .
The herm it laug hed and went aw ay , leaving the arrogant monk to spend
the who le night  in this position . The next day Suchon sent an errand-boy
with a request that the hermit relieve his magical punishment. He returned
and said “Upside down!” where upon the monk rose in another  somersault
and fell at the hermit's feet.
“I swear upon m y honor ,” the m onk said, “that I will never boast of my
small magic again. I swear in the name of Buddha. Namuami T abul!”

Song in Praise of Milbon
Deep red and purple mixed are confused with vermilion;
Fish eyes delude foolish men and women.

Had the hermit not flicked his finger lightly ,
All the people would have put pretty stones into their jade boxes.

(Fish ey es look like pearls and people are easily deceived by their
luster .)
1 12. Hyet'ong Conquers the Evil Dragon
Nobody knows the family name  of Hyet'ong. When he was still wearing
white clothes (before he put on the robe of a monk) he lived in a village on
the b ank of a stream called Unch'on (Silver Stream) which flows along the
western side of Namsan near Kyongju. One day while playing in this stream
he k illed an otter . After stripping of f its soft pelt he threw the b ody into his
garden.
The nex t morning the body was missing and there was a trail of blood
leading to the st ream. Hyet'ong followed it and found that the sk inless otter
had returned to her den and stood guarding her five young o nes. As he
beheld this mysterious spectacle he was awakened. He forsook his home
and adopted the Buddhist nam e Hyet'ong (A wakened W isdom). He then
went to China an d asked a famous monk named W uwei San-tsang to be his
teacher .
“How can a man from W u-i (the Eastern Barbarian Land) expec t to be a
disciple of Buddha?” San-tsang asked. The young Silla monk w as hurt, but
he did not give up. However , though he served the haughty Chinese monk
for three  years he was still not allowed to attend the lectures on esoteric
Buddhist doctrine.
Finally Hyet'ong decided to resolve matters. He went and stood erect
before th e Chine se monk with a  burning charcoal brazier on his  head. After
a time the crown  of his head burst with a thunderous sound. San -tsang came
and removed the brazier of glo wing coals. T ouching the wound with his
fingers he chanted a spell, and it healed, leaving a scar in the shape of the
character “wang ” (king)—three horizontal strokes joined by a v ertical one.
The gre at priest nicknamed Hyet'ong W ang Hoshang (King Monk), and
cherished him thereafter and taught him all the esoteric Buddhist doctrines.
At t hat time the favorite daught er of the T'ang Emperor Kao-ts ung fell
sick, and the Emperor asked  W uwei San-tsang to cure her . But he
recommended Hyet'ong in his place, and so Hyet'ong was received in
audience by the Emperor and ordered to cure the princess.

He poured a bushel of white beans into a silver bowl, and immediately
they cha nged into white-armored heavenly warriors and attack ed the devil
which w as tormenting the princess, but fell back without victo ry . Then he
poured a  bushel of black beans into a golden bowl and they bec ame black-
armored heaven ly warriors, whom he ordered to join the white army in the
attack. W hen th is was done a monstrous dragon suddenly flew out of the
princess' bedchamber , and her  royal body was freed of its monstrous
af fliction.
Resentful of being driven out of its luxurious home near the b eautiful
princess, the dragon went to live  in a forest (Muning-nim) in Silla, where it
did much harm and preyed upon human lives for revenge.
When H yet'ong heard of this from Chong Kong, who had come to
China as an envoy , he returned to Silla in the second year of Lin-te (665)
and agai n defeat ed the monster . The dragon was now angry at C hong Kong
for havin g repor ted it to Hyet'ong, and entered a big willow tree that stood
at the gate of Chong Kong's house. Chong Kong, who loved the thick
foliage a nd the slender branches  swinging in the breeze, was unaware that a
resentful dragon was hiding in their shade.
About th is time King Sinmun d ied (692) and was succeeded by King
Hyoso. The new king ordered th e willow tree cut down, for it stood in the
way of a road that was being built to accommodate processions between the
palace and the ro yal tombs. Chong Kong was very angry , and shouted at the
workmen from the palace, “Cu t of f my head rather than cut down my
willow tree.”
Enraged at this n ews, the King s aid, “Chong Kong, relying on th e magic
art o f W ang Hos hang, dares to d isobey the King's command and even asks
to have his head cut of f. V ery well, he shall have his wish.” So they cut of f
his head and des troyed his house. The courtiers advised that W ang Hoshang
should also be e xecuted because  of his close association with Chong Kong.
The King ordered a company o f soldiers to arrest Hyet'ong at W angmang
T emple.
When th e great monk saw his e nemies approaching he went up to the
roof of the temple, taking with him a white bottle and an ink-stone with
vermilion ink and a brush. When the soldiers drew near he sa id to them,
“Look w hat I am doing. I draw a red line around the neck o f my white
bottle; n ow let every man look at his neck.” The soldiers looked, and indeed
each man had a red line around his neck. As they paused in alarm, Hyet'ong

shouted, “If I br eak the neck of this bottle all of your necks will  be instantly
broken.”
The soldiers retreated with cri es of alarm and returned to the King.
When th ey had showed their red-lined necks to him, he sighed deeply and
said, “W ang Hoshang possesses the power of spirits. Human strength is no
match for it. Let him be.”
Not long after this event the  King's daughter was stricken by a
mysterious malady and Hyet'on g was summoned to the palace  to ef fect a
remedy . The monk approached her bed and uttered a spell, and she rose as if
she were awakening from sleep, to the great joy of the King.
Hyet'ong explained to the King that Chong Kong had perished because
of th e dr agon's r esentment. The King repented a d cancelled the sentence of
execution against Chong Kong's wife and children. He also promoted
Hyet'ong to the rank of Royal Monk. (In Chinese legal practice the family
of a condemned criminal was punished with him.)
The dragon, having avenged himself on Chong Kong, retreated to a
forest in  Kijang-san, where he ch anged to a giant bear and did m ore harm to
human c reatures. Hyet'ong ente red forest, found the bear and commanded,
“Kill no more,” From that time there were no more bear -bites in that forest.
Before t his, Kin g Sinmun had a n ulcer on his back and asked H yet'ong
to cure him. The monk uttered a short spell and the King was healed
immediately . Th en Hyet'ong said, “Y our Majesty , in a previous incarnation
you were the grand vizier of a king. By mistake you employed a man of
good fam ily nam ed Sin-ch'ung as a slave and held him in bondage too long.
Whenever this resentful soul is reborn into this world he brings mischief on
you in retaliatio n. I suggest that  you build a temple and pray fo r the repose
of his soul, which now wanders in the nether regions.”
The King followed Hyet'ong's advice and immediately had a temple
built, ca lling it Sinch'ung Pong song-sa. On the day of its dedication, as a
lar ge tab le of sacrifice was being of fered to the slave's departed spirit, a
voice was heard from the sky—
“The King has built a new temple for me;
I can escape from the hell of pain.
Now my soul is free—my enmity has melted away .”
A hall named C holwon-tang (Enmity Melting Shrine) was built where
this song was heard. The temple and the shrine, weather -beaten and
over grown with moss, still stand on the mountain.

After Milbon, a high monk n amed Myongnang entered the dragon
palace to  receive  a holy seal (Munduru in Sanskrit) and founded a temple in
Sinyurim (God's Forest, now Ch'onwang-sa, the Deva T emple) to pray for
the r epulse of frequent invasions from neighboring nations. (This paragraph
is probably out of place as it refers to the previous section.)
Hyet'ong the W ang Hoshang traveled throughout the country exorcising
devils an d building temples to mollify the grudges of oppresse d souls. He
preached the spirit of W u-wei (No Fear , the name of his Chin ese mentor)
and brought moral reform to th e corrupt world. Buddhist institutions such
as Ch'on gji-am on Ch'onma-san  and Chusogwon in Mo-ak all belonged to
the school handed down from Milbon (by Hyet'ong, presumably .)
Some pe ople say that Hyet'ong w as Chonsung Kakkan, a prime minister
of Silla, but his actual services t o the court were not seen or heard (i.e. were
of a  spiritual nature). Others s ay that he killed a wolf and a jackal by
shooting them, but that is an unreliable story .

Song in Praise of Hyet'ong
The mountain peach and the brook apricot reflect on the hedge—
Spring is deep on the hilly paths and flowers are red on both banks.
Fortunately our young lord caught the otter by his strength,
And chased the devil dragon far away from the King's capital.
1 13. Myongnang and the Holy Seal
According to an antique record a t Kumgwang-sa (T emple of the Golden
Light). Myongn ang was born in Silla and went to China for Buddhist
studies. During his return voyage he was invited to enter the p alace of the
King Dr agon of the Sea, and instructed the dragon in esoteric Buddhist
prayers. The dragon gave him 1,000 yang (pounds) of gold and escorted
him thro ugh a submarine tunne l which ended under a well from which he
sprang i nto his home garden. He then donated his home for con version into
a t emple  and decorated its pago da with the gold given him by the dragon.
The glit tering gold shone far a nd wide to the four directions,  and so the
temple was named Kumgwang-sa, the T emple of Golden Light. The
biographies of the Monks erroneously calls it Kumu-sa (T emple of the
Golden Feather).
Myongnang was the son of Ch ae-ryang, a Sagan of ficial of Silla. His
mother was Lady Namgan, otherwise called Popsungnang (Maid of the
Buddha Boat), a daughter of Sop an Murim, Kim-ssi and a sister of the great

monk Chajang. Chae-ryang had three sons—Kukkyo, Uian and Myongnang
—who all became monks. Myongnang was the youngest. His mother
dreamed that she swallowed a blue jewel when she conceived him.
In the first year of Queen Son dok (632) Myongnang went to China,
returning in the ninth year of C hen-kuan (635). In the first yea r of T sung-
chang (6 68) the  Chinese general Li Chi led a lar ge army again st Koguryo
and dest royed th at kingdom with the aid of Silla. The T'ang g eneral then
stationed his troops in (the former territory of) Paekje in order to destroy
Silla also, but the brave Silla soldiers, inspired by the Hwarang spirit,
hurled back the invaders. Infuriated, the Emperor (T'ang Kao-tsung)
commanded Hsueh Pang, a fierce general, to launch a second attack on Silla
by sea.
King M unmu of Silla, fearful of this formidable enemy , called upon
Myongnang to use his esoteric prayers and thus the attack was forestalled,
as it is w ritten in  the biography of that king. From that time on Myongnang
was hon ored by  the whole nati on as the founder of Sinin-jon g (the Holy
Seal Sect).
Early in  the reign of King T'ae jo (W ang Kon, the founder of  Koryo)
there we re frequent attacks on the country's shores by pirates. The King
requested two famous monks, K wanghak and T aeyon, the heirs of Anhye
and Nangyung, to suppress the disturbances by means of the esoteric
prayers handed down from Myongnang. At the same time, King T'aejo
elevated Myong nang to the sam e rank as the nine royal fathers of Silla
beginning with Y ong-su, and founded Hyonsong-sa (T emple of the
Appearing Sage) to perpetuate the sect which he had founded.
About tw enty li to the southeast of Kyongju is a temple called W onwon-
sa. F olk tales relate that it was f ounded at the desire of four monks (Anhye,
Nangnyung, Kw anghak and T aeyon) and also of Kim Y u-sin, K im Ui-won
and Kim Sul-jong. They also say that the bones of the four monks are
buried o n the eastern peak above the temple, which is called Chosa-am
(Rock o f the Founder Monks) on Saryong-san (Mountain of the Four
Spirits), honoring them as high monks of Silla.
The mile stone at T olbaek T emple bears the following inscription: “Long
ago there lived in Kyongju a petty of ficial whose title was Ho-jang and
whose n ame was Koch'on. His mother was Ajinyo, her mother was
Myongjunyo, and her grandmother was Chokninyo. Chokninyo had two
sons, Kwanghak T aedok and T aeyon Samjung (childhood name Sonhoe)

who both became monks. In th e second year of Chang-hsing (931) these
two bro thers followed T'aejo to Songdo (Kaesong), where they burned
incense on the a ltar and prayed for the prosperity of the royal  household.
T'aejo praised their loyalty and  donated a farm for a 'Po' fo undation to
support annual memorial services for the parents of the two monks.” 1
It is  clea r from this inscription that Kwanghak and T aeyon were in the
train of T'aejo and that Anhye co llaborated with Kim Y u-sin in t he founding
of W onwon T emple. Although  the two brother monks are buried in the
tombs of the fou r holy men, this  does not mean that all four were concerned
in th e fo undation of W onwon-sa, or that all four of them went with T'aejo to
Songdo on his triumphant return.
VII. Tales of Devotion
1 14. The Goddess Mother of the Fairy Peach
During the reign of King Chin p'yong (579-632) a nun named Chihye
lived at  Anhung T emple, which she wished to have repaired and
redecorated. On e night in a dream she saw a beautiful fairy be decked with
jewels and necklaces who said t o her in a kind but solemn voic e, “I am the
goddess-mother of Fairy Peach  Mountain and I am very pleased to know
that you  are going to repair the palace of Buddha. I will give y ou ten keun
of gold for the project. T ake it from under my seat and decorate the three
main images of the temple. On the walls paint fifty-three Buddh as, together
with hea venly saints, goddesses , and the god-kings of the five mountains
(T'oham-san in the east, Chiri-s an in the south, Keryong-san in the west,
T'aebaek-san in the north and Pu -ak or Kong-san in the center of Silla). On
the tenth day of each month in spring and autumn, let all the devoted
followers of Buddha gather in the temple for prayer .” (Ilyon notes here that
this story has a strong resemblan ce to one from China which relates that the
dragon of Kulbul-chi appeared to the Emperor in a dream and asked him to
establish a seminary in honor of Bhedjagura, the Buddha of healing, on
Y ongch'u-san, the Holy Eagle Mountain in order to open a smooth sea
passage—that is, a means of entering paradise.)
Chihye awoke in amazement. E arly the next morning she fo und one
hundred and sixty yang of gold under the seated image of the goddess-
mother in her shrine and carried out her plan.

The goddess-mo ther first came to Chinhan and gave birth to a heavenly
son, Kyokkose, who became the first King of Silla, and a daughter , Aryong,
whom he married. This is why she was called the goddess-mother . She
lived on Sondo-san (Fairy Peac h Mountain) where she wove r ed silk into
court robes with the assistance  of all the heavenly fairies and presented
them to her husb and. Chinhan was called Keryong, Kerim or Paekma (Cock
Dragon, Cock's Forest or White Horse) because the cock bel ongs to the
west.
The goddess-mo ther was a Chinese princess named Shasu. She learned
the magic of the fairies and flew through the air to visit the scenic beauties
of t he Land of  the Morning Calm, often staying long. Her father the
Emperor tied a letter to the foot of a hawk and sent it to her . The message
read: “B uild you r new palace o n the mountain where the hawk  perches to
rest.”
The princess flew with the hawk and saw it stop on So-ak (W est Hill in
Kyongju). She landed there and  became the mountain spirit, calling the hill
Soyon-san (W est Hawk Mountain). From then on she did many wonders.
King Kyongmyong (917-924) w ent hunting on this mountain and lost
his hawk. He therefore prayed to the goddess-mother , saying, “If I should
see my hawk return, I will bestow a title on him.” When he returned to the
palace he found the hawk perched on his jade table, and in great joy gave
his favorite bird the title of Sir Hawk.
In th e Samguk S agi it is written , “When Kim Pu-sik (the author of the
Samguk Sagi) visited China as the King's envoy in the years o f Chen-huo
(1 100-1 125) he worshipped at a shrine of gods and goddesses called
Y ushenkuan, where he saw a seated image of a fairy . The reception of ficial,
W ang-pu, said to him, 'This is a  goddess of your country . Didn't you know
that?' Th e learned of ficial explained as follows: 'Long ago a princess of
China went adrift and was cast u pon the shores of Chinhan, where she gave
birth to a son w ho became the founder of a kingdom in Haedo ng (East of
the Sea). The princess became an earth-spirit and lived long on the
Mountain of the Fairy Peach. Here is her lifelike image.' ”
When W ang Hsiang, a Sung env oy , came to Koryo, he of fered sacrifice
to the goddess-mother and read a memorial which said in part, “She gave
birth to a sage who founded a nation.”
Shasu d onated g old to make a Buddhist image. She lighted the  incense
and established a ferry and bridge, not for herself to enjoy long life, but for

all c reatures to enter paradise. (Here is a perfect example of the way in
which B uddhism assimilated the beliefs which it encountered. The goddess-
mother , who very probably con stitutes a legend antedating the coming of
Buddhism, is incorporated into  the Buddhist scheme of thing s by being
given the attributes of a Bodhisattva.)

Song in Praise of the Goddess-Mother of the Fairy Peach
Many a starry night and frosty day she lived alone on the W es t Hill of
the Hawk;
She called the heavenly empe ror's daughters to weave her rainbow
dress.
How she envied wondrous thrills in her long human life!
She saw the g olden spirit (Buddha) and became a jade empress
(goddess).
1 15. Ukmyon, the Slave Girl who Enter ed the Lotus Paradise
During the reign of King Kyo ngdok (742-765) a group of devoted
Buddhists in Kangju (now Chinju) built a temple called Mita-sa in a grove
of trees and began to worship Buddha for ten thousand days  in order to
enter th e lotus paradise. Among the worshippers was a female slave
belonging to the aristocratic family of Kwi-jin whose name was Ukmyon.
She foll owed he r noble master to the temple every evening and of fered a
prayer , standing outside in the courtyard and bowing toward the august
image in the main hall.
Her unkind master did not like  this. He gave her two lar ge b ags (ten
bushels) of rice to pound to pearly white each day , to keep her busy at
home. B ut she worked so diligently that she was able to att end prayers
before dawn and after sunset each day . Moreover , as a sign of her devotion,
she goug ed hole s in her two hands and passed a straw rope through them,
which was then tied to two pegs on opposite sides of the temple courtyard.
One eve ning the assembled worshippers heard a voice from the sky ,
which sa id, “Uk myon, my faithful maid, enter the main hall of the Buddha
and of fer your prayer .” They  invited the poor girl to enter , and she
approached the image of the merciful Buddha on her knees and murmured
her prayer in a low voice, lifting her eyes in rapture to the half-closed eyes
of B uddha. Suddenly the sound of heavenly music was heard from the west,
and a swift whirlwind swept into the palace of the Buddha. U kmyon was
lifted int o the sky through a gaping hole in the ceiling and roof , higher and

higher a s she flew toward the w estern side of the temple. There her mortal
body fel l away and she became a Kwanum (Goddess of Mercy) seated on a
lotus pedestal and flew to th e lotus paradise while heavenly music
continued from  the sky and brilliant rays illuminated the rapturous
spectators below .
Another version of this story is found in the Book of Monks (Sung-jon).
T ongnyang-P'aljin, an incarnation of Kwanum, or ganized a Hwarang order
of one thousand men and divided them into two groups, one for physical
labor and one fo r mental culture. One of the members of the labor group
violated the Buddhist command ments and in consequence was reborn as a
cow at Pusok T emple. While carrying Buddhist books on her back the cow
died and was reb orn as a human being by the power of the books. This was
Ukmyon, a slave in the household of Kwijin, a nobleman.
One day  Ukmyo n went on an errand to a mountain called Haga-san, and
there she experienced a trance in which she saw Buddha and was possessed
with the holy spirit.
Mita-sa, founded by Hyesuk Popsa, was not far from the house of
Kwijin. For nine years, whenever her master went to worship  Buddha in
that temple, Ukmyon followed him to of fer her prayers.
On the twenty-f irst day of the first month of the tenth year , while she
was worshipping  Buddha, she s oared up into the sky , breaking through the
ceiling and roof of the palace o f Buddha. She flew above the highest peak
of Sobaek-san, where she dropped one of her straw shoes. The first Bo
T emple was built near this mountain crest. The second Bo T emple was built
in a grov e of Bo trees (Bodedrum) below the mountain, where s he shed her
earthly s hell and  her soul entere d the lotus paradise. At Mita-s a there was
hung a gilt panel which read “Ukmyon's Ascension Palace.”
In the roof of the temple there was a hole lar ge enough for a man to pass
through, and wonderful to tell, even during heavy rain and snow the palace
of B uddha where her image was seated never got wet. In later generations,
however , the admirers of Ukmyon filled the hole by building a gilt pagoda
on th e fl oor of the temple, decorated with lotus petals and buds, and on this
pagoda they inscribed the story of Ukmyon the slave girl.
After Ukmyon had gone to the lotus paradise, Kwijin donated h is house
to th e monks, declaring it to be a holy place where an ange l had lived.
When it  had been remodeled into a temple he called it Popwang -sa. He also
donated farmland to the temple.

After m any years, when the temple lay in ruins on a hillside,  a pious
monk named Hoegyong, togethe r with Y usok and Y i W on-chan g, two local
of ficials, promoted its reconstruction. Hoegyong, the strong monk, carried
the timb ers on his shoulders. In a dream one night an old man ga ve him two
pairs of  shoes woven of hemp  and arrowroot vines, led him to the old
shrine, a nd poin ted out some gia nt trees in the forest, giving him instruction
in Buddhist doctrine. (When he awoke) Hoegyong felled the tre es and used
them in building  the temple, which was finished in five years. This was the
famous temple of slaves in the southeast. All the pilgrims who visited it
said that Kwijin had been reborn as Hoegyong, the good monk.
An old local legend book says t he miracle of Ukmyon occurred during
the reign of King Kyongdok, whereas the Biography of Jin says that she
lived du ring the reign of King Aejang and did this wonder in th e third year
of Y uan-huo (808). There wer e four kings between the reigns of Kings
Kyongdok and Aejang during a  period of more than sixty years. In fact,
Kwijin came first and Ukmyon last. The biography dif fers from  the legend
in introducing them the other way around.
(This is  fairly mystifying as the present text represents them as
contemporaries.)

Song in Praise of Ukmyon
When Buddha's lantern was bright in the old western temple,
She finished pounding rice to worship Buddha at midnight;
She punctured her clasped hands with a straw rope to mortify her flesh;
As she murmured softly in prayer she flew to heaven in Buddha's arms.
1 16. Kwangdok and Omjang, T wo Friendly Monks
During t he reign of King Munmu (661-681) two friendly monks  lived in
Kyongju. Kwangdok lived in a quiet place in the western precincts of
Punhwang T emple with his wife and made his living by weaving straw
shoes, and Omjang worked on a farm near a hermitage which he had built
in the valley of Nam-ak.
One eve ning as the last rays of sunlight illuminated the silent t reetops.
Omjang heard a voice: “I am going to the lotus paradise. Be faithful to
Buddha and come to see me there soon. Goodbye.”
Omjang saw that a rainbow had made a bridge from earth to heaven,
while sw eet mus ic played above the clouds. He envied his friend, who had
gone to the world of eternal pe ace and comfort ahead of him, and sighed,

“Ah me! It is his voice telling o f his journey home to paradise. Indeed, we
promised to inform one another of our final departure from earth to heaven,
and now the angels have taken him first.”
Early next morning Omjang vi sited the home of Kwangdok and saw
that he was dead. He helped the  widow with the funeral arrang ements, and
afterward as night came on he sat down and talked with her .
“Now y our husband is no more, would you like to come and live with
me?”
“I am willing,” she replied.
“Come and lie with me! W e will prove all the pleasures imaginable on
the first night of our married joy .” And he began to undress her .
“I am blushing w ith shame,” she said, “and yet I pity you in your heated
passion. Y ou seek the clean paradise with a muddied soul, like a man who
tries to catch fish by climbing a tree.”
“Kwangdok did so,” he objected, “and yet he entered the lotus p aradise.
Why not I? I must enjoy you tonight as he did on many nights as man and
wife.”
“My husband Kwangdok,” the woman said, “lived with me for more
than ten years, but he never slept in the same bed with me or em braced me
in unclean passion. Every night  he and I knelt erect and recite d in unison
the names of Ami-T abul and the sixteen doorways leading to the lotus
paradise. When he saw a vision of the wondrous world we redressed the
balance of our bodies by sitting cross-legged with our thumbs and middle
fingers almost touching, as Buddhist images do. He was a devoted follower
of Buddha. Where else could he have gone but to the home of Buddha in
the lotus paradise? Y ou are running to the east while trying to reach the
west.”
Much ashamed, Omjang apolo gized to the widow and then visited
W onhyo Popsa,  to whom he confessed his advances to this  wonderful
woman. The great monk taught  him how to regain admittance to paradise
by reciting the names of the sixteen doorways.
Omjang repented his sins and gave up his lust, concentrating on
awakening his soul so as to be worthy to enter the gates of heaven, and at
length h e also entered the lotus  paradise. The recital of the names of the
sixteen d oorways is explained in the Biography of W onhyo Pop sa and also
in the Biographies of the Haedong Monks.

As f or the wom an, she was a  nun at Punhwang temple, wh ere she
became one of the nineteen Kwanums. There is a song about her:

Moon, moon, lady moon! Are you sailing to the west?
When you reach home first, tell the heavenly king
There is a man praying to Buddha of everlasting life,
Praying with clasped hands to the Buddha of the eternal vow ,
“I long to go to paradise, I long to go to paradise!”
Ah, if you leav e and forsake me, can you have all your forty-eight
wishes?
1 17. Kyonghung Meets a Holy Man
During the reign of King Sinmun in Silla (681-692) a monk lived in
Ungch'onju who se religious name was Kyonghung and whose family name
was Su. By the time he was eighteen, he had mastered all three  parts of the
teachings of Buddha—sermons, laws, and doctrines—and the world rang
with his praise.
In t he first yea r of Kai-yao ( 681) when King Munmu was on his
deathbed, he said to his succes sor (King Sinmun), “Kyonghu ng Popsa is
worthy of the of fice of Kuksa (National T eacher); do not for get my
command.” When King Sinmun  ascended the throne he therefore appointed
Kyonghung to this of fice, with his residence at Samnang T emple.
But Kyonghung fell ill and was confined to his bed for many months.
Then one day a  nun came to visit him, and said, “In the Hwao m scripture
there is a golden saying: 'A goo d friend heals illness.' Now yo u are ailing
because of the melancholy and anxiety in your heart. If you laugh and
for get everything you will be restored to health.” And she brought out an
eleven-faced puppet and made it perform humorous dances before
Kyonghung, with comic gesture s and sarcastic gestures, scene after scene in
rapid su ccession, until the monk nearly split his sides with laughter , and his
health was immediately restored.
The nun  then bid him goodbye and went to Namhang T emple to the
south of  Kyonghung's temple. There she hid herself, leaving her staf f in
front of the picture of the eleven-faced Dharmas in the Golden Hall.
(Kwanum is often pictured with  eleven faces, and there is a sug gestion here
that Kyonghung had been visited by the Bodhisattva.)
One day  Kyong hung came to v isit the palace mounted on a beautifully
caparisoned hors e and followed by a long train of servants. Eve ryone made

way for the pro cession except a haggard-looking hermit (or m onk) with a
basket containing a fish on his back, who stood leaning upon his staf f on the
dismounting platform in front of the palace.
“Get ou t, fellow!” the servants shouted. “How can you wear a monk's
robe and  carry a fish, which the Buddhist religion forbids you  to touch or
eat?” (Monks are supposed to be strictly vegetarian.)
The monk drew himself up with dignity and said, “Who is more to
blame, a man who carries a dead fish on his back or a man who holds living
flesh between his legs?” And with these words he departed.
Eventually Kyon ghung came out of the palace and was about to mount
his horse when he heard his servants discussing the strange monk. In great
surprise he sent them to find ou t where the man lived. Seeing the servants
coming after him, the monk threw down his basket outside Munsu T emple
and disa ppeared, and they found only his staf f in front of th e image of
Munsu Buddha. In the basket the y found, not a dried fish but a piece of pine
bark
When th e servants told Kyonghung what they had seen, he sighed
deeply a nd said,  “A great sage has descended from heaven to warn me not
to ri de horses.” And from that day until his death he was neve r again seen
mounted on a horse.
A recor d of Kyonghung's virtuous deeds was written by the monk
Hyonpon and inscribed on a stone monument at Samnang-sa.
In th e Po hyon S utra it is written , “The Maitreya Bodhisattva said, T will
be rebor n in Y ompuche (in India ) to save the descendants of the disciples of
Sakyamuni, but I will exclude all mounted monks, for they will never see
Buddha.'

Song in Praise of Kyonghung
Great is the ancient sage's model deed shown to the multitude;
Why should not the descendants diligently follow his example?
If a monk should shamelessly carry a fish on his back,
How could he proudly wear the dragon's flower on his head?

(The last line refers to the flowering tree under which Maitr eya was
sitting when he became a Buddha.)
1 18. T wo Ragged Monks

(The firs t of these moral tales re fers to one of the most famous incidents
in Chine se histo ry , the rebellion of An Lu-shan against the T'ang Emperor
Hsuan-tsung (no t “Ming-wang” as in certain popular ballads). In his sixties
this Emperor took as a concub ine the beautiful Y ang Kuei-fei (“consort”
Y ang) a nd is said to have fallen completely under her influence. She
showed great favor to a general named An Lu-shan, and is rumored to have
been his lover . Eventually he revolted and was at first succ essful. The
Emperor was forced to flee, and his discontented soldiers insisted upon the
execution of Y ang Kuei-fei and her brother . The rebellion was crushed soon
afterwards. Though it survived  for another century and a half, the T'ang
dynasty was permanently weakened by this rebellion.
(The second story has nothing  to do with Korea and is evidently
included simply because of its resemblance to the first.)
After the  reign of the Empress W u, who in the first year of Chang-shou
(692) set aside the rightful sovereign and usurped the throne  for twenty
years in China, Emperor Chung-tsung resumed the throne and ruled for nine
years. At this t ime King Hyoso of Silla came to the throne and began
building Mangdok T emple, which was dedicated to the T'ang royal family .
In t he fourteenth year of Kin g Kyongdok (755) the pagoda in the
courtyard of Mangdok-sa was shaken from top to bottom. T his was the
same year that A n Lu-shan made an alliance of love with Y ang K uei-fei and
led a rebellion, with an attempt upon the life and throne of T'ang Ming-
wang (H suan-tsung). The peop le of Silla denounced the adulation of the
T'ang rulers by their royal family , asserting that it was natural that the
pagoda was shaken to its foundation, since the temple had been built in
flattery of the decadent T'ang royalty .
A festiv al was held at Mangdok-sa on its completion, and the King
attended the ceremony in person . There he saw an unmarried monk, dressed
in rags and bent with age, stan ding in the courtyard. “Y our M ajesty ,” the
monk said, “allow this poor monk to participate in the ceremony .”
“W ith great pleasure,” the King replied. “Please take a seat and worship
the great Buddha on this happy day .”
When the ceremony was over th e King said jokingly , “My good monk,
where do you live?”
“I live under Pip'a-am (Harper's Rock),” he replied.
“When you go home,” the King said, “do not tell anybody that you
of fered sacrifices to the great Buddha in the company of the King.”

“My go od King,” laughed the monk, “please tell nobody that you
of fered sacrifice s to the incarna tion of Buddha.” And he rose into the air
and flew away toward the south.
In great surprise  and shame the  King bowed in that direction and sent
courtiers to find the flying monk. After a time they returned and reported
that they had fo und the monk's bronze staf f and wooden bowl on a rock in
Samsong-gok (T hree Star V alley) near Namsan, but the monk w as nowhere
to be found.
The King had a Sakya T emple built beneath Harper's Rock, and  another
called Pulmu-sa  (No Buddha T emple) on the spot where the monk
disappeared, with his staf f and bowl preserved in it.

***
In volum e IV of Chiron (Book  on Intelligence) we find the following
story . Lo ng, lon g ago there liv ed in Kashmir in India a wandering monk
named Kebin San-tsang (which simply means “learned monk of Kashmir")
who alw ays dre ssed in shabby clothing. One day during a lecture tour to
Aranya (Sanskr it for temple) m eetings, he came to Ilwang-sa (One-King
T emple) and found that a company of rich people were of fering lar ge
quantities of good food and wine as sacrifices to Buddha. Thrice he entered
the temp le gate and thrice he was pushed out by the gatekeepers because his
clothing was not neat and tidy .
After a time he returned wearing a fine robe and the same gatekeepers
let h im pass. Th e worshippers said, “Here comes a noble guest! Come in!
Please b e seated ! Help yourself! The ceremony is over , Buddha  has had his
breakfast, and now we are enjoying a good dinner with the foo d and wine
we of fered him.” (That is, the spiritual essence of the of fering has been
accepted by Buddha and the worshippers are now free to consume its
material part.)
Instead of putting the food and wine into his mouth, the monk p ut them
on his robe, saying, “Eat, drink and be merry!” All the comp any thought
this very strange and asked the monk why this toast to his robe.  “Because,”
he replied, “it is not me but my fine robe to which you are serving all this
good food and wine.”
In this mortal w orld of vainglory men and women are treated ac cording
to their looks, their clothes, their ornaments. People worship Buddha for his
fine image, intricately carved and richly gilded, and small-minded monks

are more interested in eating the food of fered to Buddha than in chanting
prayers to him.
These two stories are written in the same spirit.

Song in Praise of the T wo Ragged Monks
The feasting monks call their rich friends to feed their gilded images,
And to admire their newly made pictures of silver Buddhas;
The living Buddha in the human mind is often lost sight of,
Just as the faint moon over Harper's Rock is overcast with clouds,
And its somber  shadow is refle cted in the pool with dim and broken
rays.
1 19. W olmyong's L yric Songs
On April 1 in the nineteenth year of King Kyongdok (760) two suns
appeared in the sky and remain ed for ten days, an omen of catastrophe on
earth. Alarmed, the King summoned his courtiers together and asked them
what should be done. The royal astrologer said, “In order to avert the
coming disaster we must find a lucky monk to compose and, read aloud the
prayer 'Sanhwa-kongdok' (V irtue of scattering Flowers).”
The King ordered his servants  to build a purified temporary altar in
front of  the audience hall and proceeded to Ch'ongyang-nu (Spring
Pavilion) to await the coming of the lucky monk who was pre destined to
perform this great feat. Just then W olmyong-sa (Moonlight Priest) was seen
walking along the road south of the palace. He was quickly bro ught before
the King.
“My goo d monk ,” the King said , “I command you to compose a prayer
and read it aloud before the Buddhist altar . Perhaps the spiritual power of
your music will charm away my grief over the two suns in the sky .”
“Y our Majesty ,”  W olmyong replied, “I am a monk of the Kukson
Hwarang order (a religious ad junct of the Hwarang). I know  Hyang-ga
(native folksongs) but I am not well versed in Sanskrit music.”
“Never m ind,” s aid the King. “S ince you are the one chosen today , you
may com pose a fine song in our native language rather than an Indian song,
so that all my people can sing it.”
W olmyong then improvised a 'T osol-ga' (Song of the T sita Heaven) as
follows.
I sing as I scatter thee, O flowers!
Fall and obey the decree of a straight mind;

Attend the King Maitreya on his throne. This song may be paraphrased
as follows:
I sing of scattering flowers on the dragon pavilion;
As I send a petal to the blue clouds today
For it to serve a sincere, straight mind
And enter the spiritual home in the faraway heaven of T sita.
In vulg ar language this is called 'Sanhwa-ga' (Song of Sc attering
Flowers) but it s hould be 'T osol-ga' (Song of the T sita Heaven).  Sanhwa-ga
is a dif fe rent song of many verses in vulgar words, and so has been omitted
from these pages.
Soon af ter the song was sung the mysterious sign of calamity in the
heavens disappe ared, and one b lazing sun shone upon the earth  as the sole
ruler of the day .
Greatly delighte d, the King rew arded the monk with a package  of fine
tea a nd a  rosary of 108 crystal b eads. Suddenly a handsome youth appeared
from the western service gate bearing the gifts in his hands. W olmyong
thought he was one of the Queen's pages, while the King guessed he was a
follower of W olmyong, but both were wrong, for he vanished from their
sight like a mist. The King sent servants to fetch him back, but he hid
himself in the N aewon Pagoda , leaving the tea and the rosary before the
southern mural painting of Maitreya.
Seeing h ow W olmyong's devotion thus moved the Buddha, the people
of Silla admired  his virtues. The  King paid him the highest respect and gave
him a gift of one hundred rolls of silk.
One day W olmyong of fered sacrifice to the spirit of his dead sister and
sang an elegy of his own composition to Hyang-ga music:
I depart in tears; farewell.
O.... stay! Why hurry away without saying all your words?
Like leaves in the autumn wind hither and thither
W e scatter from the branch where we grew together .
But don't you know where you are going?
I shall build a road to Amitabha land
And wait there till we meet again.
As he sang this doleful song w ith many tears a mad wind arose in the
sky and blew the  paper money a way to the west. (Special paper money was
used in memorial services for the dead.)

W olmyong played the flute very often when he was living at Sach'on-
wang-sa (T empl e of the Four Deva Kings). One night as he str olled along
the r oad in front of the temple p laying his flute in the moonligh t, the orbed
maiden of the sky paused in her journey across the Milky W ay  and looked
down up on him as if charmed by his heartfelt music. The people named that
part of the roa d W olmyong-ni (Moonlight V illage) and his  fame as a
musician spread  far and wide. W olmyong was a disciple of Nungchun-
T aesa, a renowned monk of S illa. The people loved to sing Hyang-ga
folksongs, whic h moved even t he hearts of spirits in heaven and earth on
many occasions.

Song in Praise of W olmyong
The high winds blew away the paper money to pay for his sister's
journey to the other world;
The trill of his flute moved the lady Moon to make a Heng-o of her .
Do not say that heaven-stretching T osol is far away;
W e reach it with a song of ten-thousand-virtue flowers.

(T osol, T sita in Sanskrit, is the fo urth of the Buddhist heavens, w here all
earthly passions  are for gotten. H eng-o (Hang-a in Korean) is t he name of
the spirit of the moon, here compared to W olmyong's sister .)
120. Sonyul Returns fr om Death
Sonyul, a good monk of Ma ngdok T emple, used the donation he
received from local people to  pay for the copying of the s ix hundred
volumes of the Buddhist scrip ture called Panya-gyong (a book on the
intelligence, Prajna in Sanskrit). But before he could finish th e work the
messenger of death came and took him to the Y ellow Spring (t he world of
the dead).
The sorrowful monk stood be fore the King of Hell in the Hall of
Judgment. Befo re him were a mirror and a scale, which reflected and
weighed the sins of the dead. On the basis of their evidence, the court
decided whether to send the sou l to hell, pur gatory of heaven. (This is not to
be understood in the Christian sense, for every soul is eventually reborn
until it reaches Nirvana in Buddhist doctrine. No other state is permanent.)
The King looked into the mirror  and then at the monk's face an d asked,
“What was your occupation during life in human society?”

“I was a monk, ” Sonyul answered. “I began copying the six hundred
volumes of a Buddhist scripture, but before I could complete it I was
brought to Y our Majesty's dark palace.”
“Hum!” said the King. “Y ou are a good monk and have sinned against
nobody . According to my records your life is now over and your soul must
say fare well to your flesh. But since your long-cherished nob le work has
not been finished, I shall give you a special pardon, and allow you to return
to li fe until all of the sacred vo lumes are compiled and copied. Y ou may
go.”
During his journey back to the land of the living, Sonyul enco untered
the soul of a woman, who, bowing to him and weeping, said, “I was a
native o f Silla in Namyomju. Because my parents stole part of a rice field
belonging to Kumgang T emple , I entered this dark world and have been
subjected to unspeakable torme nt. When you return to life, please tell my
father and mother to return the l and immediately . During my lifetime I hid a
bottle of  sesame  oil under my toilet box and a roll of my han d-spun silk
between the folds of my quilt. If you burn the oil in the temple lantern and
sell the silk to pay for your co pying expenses, I will be freed from the
torments of the Y ellow Spring by your grace.”
“Where was your home on earth?” Sonyul asked.
“Y ou will find it southwest o f Kuwon T emple in Saryang-pu,” she
replied.
Sonyul came to life again after he had been buried at the foot of
Namsan for ten days. He called loudly from his grave for three days, and at
last a cowherd heard him and ran to the temple to tell the strange news.
Soon a group of sturdy monks arrived, dug into the grave, and released the
resurrected mon k from the grassy mound. Breathing a sigh, So nyul related
to them his adventures in the world of the dead.
He visited the home of the woman whom he had met on the banks of the
Y ellow Spring, as she had requested. She had been dead for fifteen years,
but the sesame oil and the silk w ere still there, and as fresh as n ew . Sonyul
prayed t o Buddha for her soul, and one night she came to him  in a dream
and said. “Thanks to your grace, my soul is now at peace.”
All the people admired the great virtue of the resurrected monk and
assisted him in copying the treasured volumes, until the fine  series was
completed. They are now kept in  the archives of the monks of K yongju, and

twice a year , in spring and autumn, the ancient pages are spread in the sun
to banish devils and catastrophes.

Song in Praise of Sonyul
I envy your victory over death;
Y our soul flies home to its old forests and fountains.
When my parents ask about my fate in the lower world,
T ell them to restore a furrow of farmland for me.
121. Kim Hyon and the T igr ess
During the reign of King W on song in Silla (785-799) there lived a
young m an nam ed Kim Hyon. In  those days there was a strange superstition
that any one who had a great wish in his heart could have it granted if he
prayed e very ni ght from the eig hth to the fifteenth of February  every year
while walking around the tall pagoda in the precincts of Hungnyun T emple.
Kim Hyon had such a wish, and one night at midnight as h e paced
around t he pago da whispering his prayer , he heard the rustle of a woman's
dress behind him. Looking back  in surprise, he saw in the faint moonlight a
beautiful maiden, walking and praying as he was.
Now this girl was not so shy as might have been expected. She
approached Kim Hyon and said, “Pardon me for having surpris ed you like
this. T o speak th e truth, I too have a wish, which is why I am he re, but I am
lonely . Please allow me to fo llow in your footsteps.” Kim Hyon was
charmed by her beauty and re adily assented. Every night they walked
around the pagoda hand in hand, and there they fell in love. (Something
more substantial than mere sentiment is implied here.)
Love is sweet, b ut love is sad. Soon the final evening of their  prayers
had come, and t hey were forced to part. Kim Hyon took the girl's hand and
accompanied he r to her home in a forest remote from other human
habitation. It was a low thatched house and there seemed to be no-one about
except an old woman who appeared to be the girl's mother .
The old woman stared hard at Kim Hyon and said to her daughter ,
“Who is this who is so bold as to keep you company?” Feeling that
concealment would be useless , the girl explained what had happened
between herself  and the young man. “That's too bad,” the old woman
grumbled, “but since there's no  help for it we must hide him somewhere
before your three brothers come home.”

Hardly had they hidden him in a corner of the house w hen the
thunderous roars of three tigers in the distance broke the silence of the
night, and made the young man tremble from head to foot. Nearer and
nearer th ey cam e, until the door was flung open and a tiger said, “Oh, good
smell! Human flesh!”
“Nonsense!” the  old woman said angrily . “There's no human flesh in
this hou se. Listen, you fools! A dreadful thing has happened.  T onight an
oracle descende d from heaven, saying that since you have killed so many
living creatures you must be pun ished immediately .” The tigers looked pale
and trembled with fear .
Then the maiden interposed. “My brothers, you have promised the
merciful Buddh a not to harm living creatures any more. But you have
broken t his prom ise time and ag ain, and continue your cruel ol d game, nor
have you heeded my prayer at th e temple to stop your bad habit. Now your
doom is upon y ou. Repent and be gone, and I shall redeem your sins by
suf fering the heavenly punishm ent myself. Go, go quickly or they will kill
you.”
The three tigers looked very sad, hanging their heads and twitching their
long tails nervously . Then, in a twinkling, they were gone. The maiden
woke Kim Hyon from a swoon and said to him, “Through a singular
adventure I have enjoyed your passionate love, but unfortunately I am not
human. Nevertheless, I can never for get your tender caresses. I have
decided to take u pon myself the consequences of my brothers' evil deeds. In
other words, my life will soon be ended by the tigers' victims. It will make
me happ y , there fore, to die by your sword. Perhaps in this way  I can repay
your kindness somewhat. Listen ! T omorrow I will run amuck in the west
market a nd frig hten all the citi zens. Nobody in the kingdom will dare to
fight me and the  King will of fe r a prize to anyone who can. Then have no
fear , but  only chase me into this forest, where I will await the str oke of your
sword.”
Kim Hy on felt alarmed and shamed. “How can I kill my lov er even
though she is no t human?” He r eplied. “I'll not sell the life of my love for
gold or title.” And he chided her gently for wanting him to  commit so
inhuman an act.
“Do not say so,” she responde d. “My death in the prime of life is
heaven's will, your happiness, my family blessing and the nation's joy .
Please listen to me! If you build a temple for me after my death and pray for

my soul, you will do me a great favor .” When he saw that nothing would
avail, the youth embraced his lovely mistress and gave her a long farewell
kiss, as tears rained down her cheeks.
The following day a lar ge tigre ss appeared in the marketplace, roaring
and tearing at p eople, and everybody screamed and ran abou t the streets
crying “ T iger! T iger!” The King was alarmed and ordered a  tiger hunt,
of fering as a pri ze the second or der of nobility . But there was nobody brave
enough to face the tigress.
Kim Hy on then came and prost rated himself before the King, swearing
to e xecute his c ommand and free the people of the tiger . The King was
highly pleased and conferred the title on him in advance.
The young man girded on his sword and ran swiftly into the forest,
where the tigress maid awaited him. She saw him and ran to  meet him.
T aking his hands in hers she pressed them to her breast and said, “Last night
when we said farewell I asked you to come and meet me here today , and my
heart is bright with joy to take your last embrace. Now I may die in peace. I
wish you  long life and happiness . I am sorry to have scratched s ome people,
but if they will anoint their wo unds with the soy sauce of Hungnyun-sa
while lis tening t o the bell of that temple, the sores will heal.” (This remedy
for tiger bites an d scratches is st ill in use, Hyon says.) As quick as lightning
she snatched her lover's sword and plunged it deep into her throat.
Kim Hyon stood aghast over the body swimming in blood, but when his
eyes cle ared he saw that it was no longer a maiden but a beautiful tigress.
Soon a lar ge crowd gathered, shouting “Long live Kim Hyon!” They
brought him to the palace and presented the tigress' skin to the King to
spread u pon his throne. Highly pleased, the King gave Kim Hyon additional
rewards of gold and silver and promoted him to an of ficial position.
Kim Hy on was sad at heart, for though he had gained honor and  riches,
he h ad lost his beautiful lover . He could not for get her gentle love or the
manner in which she had given  her life to bring him happiness. He had a
temple b uilt on the spot where she had died near the western stream, and
there he  chanted passages from the Buddhist sutra Pommang-gyong. The
temple was named Howon-sa, the T emple of the T igress' W ish es. He knelt
in prayer for many days and nights for the repose of her soul.
Just bef ore he died Kim Hyon wrote down the story of his adventure
with the  beautifu l tigress, and it  filled the world with wonder . People called
the grove of trees where she had loved Nonhorim (T iger Forest).

There is  a similar Chinese story  which has a dif ferent tone. In t he ninth
year of Chen-yuan (793) a yellow-cap (commoner) named Shen T ao-cheng
started on a long journey to Hanchow to assume his new post as deputy
magistrate of Shihfang-hsien. Climbing mountains and crossing valleys he
came to a place ten li east of Ch enfu-hsien and there, as night came on, he
lost his way . W o rse still, it bega n to snow heavily . He was glad to halt his
horse at a humble cottage and as k for a night's hospitality . He was led into a
warm-floor room  where he saw  an aged couple and a young girl seated
around a charcoal brazier in the faint light of an oil lamp.
The girl was fourteen or fifte en years old. Though she wo re dirty
clothes her tender skin was smooth and white as snow , her f ace was as
lovely a s a peony under her u nkempt hair , and her movements were as
graceful as a fairy's.
“My hon ored gu est, you must b e very cold,” his host said. “Come near
the fire and warm yourself.”
“The night is dark and snow is falling,” he replied, “and my destination
in the western prefectural of fice is far of f. Suf fer me to rest here.”
“W e have only one room, and it is too humble,” the old man said. “But
if you don't mind that we will obey you.”
Shen un saddled his horse and spread his bedding in the room. As he
was doing this the girl washed her face and changed into fresh c lothing. As
she appeared from behind the rosy curtain her elegant figure was like that of
an Oriental bride coming to her husband on her wedding night.
“Y our daughter is bright and in telligent,” he said to his host. “If she is
not yet engaged, I should like to act as my own go-between.”
“If our honored guest wishes to have her for his wife, it will be a great
honor ,” the man replied.
Shen passed the night with the girl, and on the morrow he took  her on
his h orse with him and proceed ed on his journey to his post i n a country
of fice. H e had only a small sala ry there, but he was happy with his young
wife.
Moons waned and flowers scattered, but love remained. A son and a
daughter were born to them, and  he loved them all with adoration. One day
he gave his wife the following poem:
“When I became an of ficial I made Mei-fu blush;
In three years I made Meng-Kuang envy .
What can be compared to my happiness?

W e are like a pair of mandarin ducks swimming in a silvery stream.”
(Mei-fu was a celebrated of ficial during the Han dynasty , and Meng-
Kuang, a woman, figured in a sort of proverbial symbol of marital
happiness, like the English Darby and Joan.)
His wife  recited  this poem to herself constantly and intended to write an
answer , but kept it in her heart. Eventually Shen quit his of ficial post and
returned to his n ative place with his wife and children to enjoy a quieter life
in hi s ow n fields and gardens. But his wife grew suddenly sad, and one day
she said to him, “I will answer the poem which you gave me. Listen! Even
though our married love is dear ,  I long to see my maiden home  in the deep
forest. My heart grows heavier with the changing seasons as I think of the
burden of a hundred years' love with you!”
Shen sympathized with his wife, and so he took her to her maiden home
in th e green forest. But the house was empty , and she cried a ll day long,
thinking of her parents. But then she spied a tigress' skin han ging on the
wall and burst o ut laughing. “I didn't know it was still here,” she said. She
took the  skin from the wall and draped it around her body , and instantly she
was tra nsformed into a tigress which leaped through the door and
disappeared into the forest. Shen clutched his children to him in
consternation. He searched the  forest for many days calling her name
loudly , but she returned no more.
The her oes of both these stories fell in love with tigresses in  human
shape, b ut one wrote a disloyal poem to her husband and desert ed him with
roars and scratches, whereas the other hurt people only unwillingly and
even so gave he r man a good remedy for tiger bites. If even be asts of prey
can be so kind hearted, why are so many human beings inferior to beasts?
Attracted by the man who prayed at the pagoda and moved by heaven's
call for punishm ent of evil, the loving tigress redeemed the sins of all tigers,
bequeathed a remedy to save hu man lives, and inspired her love r to build a
temple a nd recite the Buddha's commandments. This miracle occurred not
merely because of the beast's go od nature, but by the universal benevolence
of Budd ha, who thus rewarded Kim Hyon and the tigress with eternal
blessings in the life to come.
Song in Praise of the T igr ess
Unable to bear the cruelties of her three brothers in the forest,
The dying orchid breathed a fragrant promise:
Since so many lives lacked righteousness,

She gave her own life for ten thousand deaths.
When she lay stretched out beneath the green trees,
Falling flowers scattered over her bleeding body .
122. Priest Y ungch'on Banishes a Comet
During t he reign  of King Chinp 'yong (579-632), three Hwarang  named
Koyollang, Silch'o-rang and Pod ong-nang once decided to go on  a picnic in
P'ung-ak (Maple Mountains, another name for the Diamond Mountains
because of the autumn foliag e). But they interrupted their journey in
foreboding when  they saw a comet in the constellation called Simtae-song.
It was not until the priest Y un gch'on composed a Hyang-ga and sang it
loudly t hat the mysterious star disappeared and the invading Japanese
soldiers ran away . Thus the pow er of his music turned a misfortune into a
blessing.
The Kin g was highly pleased and sent the Hwarang to P'ung-ak to enjoy
their picnic without having to worry about war or heavenly calamity , at
which times the Hwarang were obliged to take arms to protect the throne
and defend the country .

The Song of the Comet
Long ago there was a castle on an eastern beach where g randma
Kondalpa played;
When the W ai (Japanese) soldiers came, she raised a signal torch toward
the castle.
Now when the three Hwarang climb the mountain in sport
Lady moon gives her light early to show them their way
And a broom-star sweeps the path of her light.
Y et people look on that star and call it a comet.
The moon has sailed down over the hill;
What comet could there be?
123. The Monk Chongsu Saves a Fr eezing W oman
During the reign of King Aejang (800-809) a monk named Chongsu
lived at Hwangnyong T emple. One snowy winter night as he was returning
from Samnang-s a, he saw a beggar woman who had just been de livered of a
child lying uncovered outside the gate of Ch'onom-sa, all bu t frozen to
death. The monk took her in his arms and warmed her with hi s body until
she regained consciousness. T hen he covered her with hi s robe and

underclothes and returned to his temple, where he covered his own
nakedness with some rice-straw .
At midnight a heavenly voice rang out over the royal palace, saying,
“Chongsu, the monk of Hwangn yong T emple, ought to be awar ded the title
of W ang-sa (Royal Priest).” The  King sent servants to the temple to find out
what it was all about, and they s oon returned and reported to him the noble
deed of the monk. The King don ned his dragon robe and received the good
monk in audience in the inner p alace, where he bestowed upon him the title
of National Priest for his uncommonly virtuous deed.
VIII. Seclusion
124. Nangchi, the Cloud-Riding Monk
On Y ongch'u-san  (Holy Eagle Mountain) a strange monk once lived in a
hermitage for many years. Nobo dy in that remote area knew who he was or
even what his name was. He was always reciting the Buddh ist scripture
Pophwa-gyong, and he possessed wonderworking powers.
In the first year of Lung-shuo (661) there lived a novice (Sra mana in
Sanskrit) whose  name was Chit 'ong, who had been a slave in the house of
Iryang-kong. W hen he left his master's house to become a monk at the age
of seven, a crow flew up to h im and cawed, “Go to Y ongch'u-san and
become a disciple of Nangchi.”
Chit'ong accordi ngly went to the  mountain, and as he was resting under
a t ree a strange man appeared before him and said, “I am Po-hyon T aesa (a
Bodhisattva) and I have to give  you Buddha's commandments.” He taught
the l aws of Budd ha to the child and disappeared into the mist. C hit'ong was
mature and perfectly intelligent from that time forward.
Continuing his journey , he met a monk, and asked him, “Where can I
find Nangchi Popsa?”
“Why do you wish to see him?” the monk retorted. Chit'ong re counted
the mess age of the divine bird. T he monk smiled on him and said, “I am he.
The crow  just flew into my herm itage and said, 'A holy child is coming to
see you.  Go and meet him.' So here I am.” And he took Chit'ong by the
hand in admiration, saying, “T oday's miracle is a gift of the mountain
spirit.” ( Ilyon sa ys there was a legend that this spirit was Pyonjae Ch'onnyo,
T alking Spirit, originally an Indian goddess of eloquence and intelligence,
who came to live on the Holy Eagle Mountain in Silla.)

Chit'ong was choked with emotion, but as Nangchi was about  to give
him Buddha's commandments he said, “I have already received the formal
law from Pohyon T aesa under  a tree at the entrance to thi s mountain
village.”
“W onderful!” ex claimed Nangc hi. “From my birth I have wished to
meet a great sage, and have prayed to Buddha morning and evening to
fulfill m y wish.  T oday my wish has been granted. Y ou are far superior to
me.” And he bowed to the child, and called the tree “Pohyon.”
Chit'ong asked the old monk, “How many years have you been living on
this mountain?”
“I fi rst came here in the year of the goat during the reign of King
Pophung (527),” Nangchi replied. “It was a long time ago and I  don't know
how many years have passed since then.”
As Chit'ong came to the mountain in the year of the cock, when King
Munmu ascende d the throne (661), 135 years had passed sin ce Nangchi
arrived at his hermitage.
Later Chit'ong visited Uisang and saw many mysterious things in his
hall. These things were the source material for his book Ch 'u dong-gi.
When W onhyo was living at Pa nko T emple he visited Nangchi, who asked
him to compose two essays, Ch'ojang Kwan-mun and Ansin-Sasim-non.
When W onhyo had finished the work he sent the two volumes to Nangchi
by c ourtesy of M unson, a hermit. Nangchi wrote an epilogue to these books
with an ode in Gatha (Sanskrit) which may be interpreted as follows:

The low monk in the western vale bows low and salutes
The high priest on the eastern hill far above the rock;
He blew little particles of dust and heightened the Holy Eagle Peak;
He sprinkled tiny drops of water and swelled the Dragon's Pool.

T aehwa Stream, which flows to the east of Holy Eagle Mountain, was
called Dragon's  Pool in honor of the blessing dragon of T ahuo pool in
China.
Chit'ong and W onhyo both beca me disciples of Nangchi, which shows
the high standard of his teaching. Nangchi made a daily round trip on the
clouds to Chingliang-shan in China to attend a series of Buddhist lectures
together with a multitude of others. The Chinese monks thought him one of
their fellows from a neighboring  mountain, but none knew whe re he lived.

One day each member of the audience was asked to bring a celebrated
flower and a rare plant from his home place and present t hem in the
auditorium.
On the followi ng morning Nangchi picked a branch from a rare
mountain plant and presented it to the presiding monk, who said, “This
plant is 'T alchek a' from India, c alled Red T ree in China. It grows only on
the two Holy Eagle Mountains in India and in Silla. These two mountains
belong to the ten th Buddhist heaven, inhabited by Bodhisattvas, so the man
who picked this branch must be a saint.” Finally it was seen from his
appearance that  Nangchi came from the Holy Eagle Mountain. His fame
spread throughout the world, and his countrymen named his hermitage
Hyokmok, Red-T ree T emple. Its ruins are still visible on its northern hill.
According to the annals of Y on gch'u T emple. Nangchi once said “This
temple i s built on the ruins of K asop Buddha,” and dug two lan terns out of
the ground then and there.
When w e examine the passage in the Hwaom scripture concerning the
T enth Heaven, it is seen that Nangchi's riding on the cloud s resembles
Buddha's counting on his ring finger and W onhyo's division of his hundred
bodies.

Song in Praise of Nangchi
Though he lived a hundred years in meditation on a high rock,
His fame did not ring out in the low world;
Only the idle mountain birds twittered in endless talk
Where he sailed on the clouds in the boundless skies.
125. Y onhoe and the Munsujom
Y onhoe, a high monk, led a hermit life on the mountain of t he Holy
Eagle, where he studied the Y onhwa-gyong (Book of the Lotus), cultivated
wisdom and meditated on the virtues of the Pohyon Bodhisa ttva. In his
garden p ond two lotuses bloomed throughout the four seasons, never fading
or losing their petals. The Y ongjang-jon or Dragon Palace at the Holy Eagle
T emple is the old residence of Y onhoe.
The reigning King, W onsong (785-799), heard of Y onhoe's auspicious
and wonderful deeds and wished  to summon him to court in order to confer
the title of Na tional Priest upon him. When Y onhoe heard  of this he
abandoned his hermitage and fled toward the rocks of the W estern Peak. On

the way an old man who was pl oughing a field saw him and said, “How far
are you going on your flying feet, my good monk?”
“The King wants to tie me to his court by giving me a high post,”
Y onhoe said, “and so I am making haste to escape and hide myself in a
distant place.”
“I se e,” said the old man. “That is a good market for your trade. Why
take the trouble of fleeing to a distant place? Men like you take  pleasure in
selling their names.”
Y onhoe conside red this an insult, and sped on without heeding the old
man. So me mile s further on he encountered an old woman on th e bank of a
stream, a nd she too asked him w here he was going. He made the same reply
as before, and she asked, “Did you meet an old man on your way here?”
“Y es,” Y onhoe said, “and he insulted me, so I am traveling in great
vexation.”
“That was Munsu Buddha,” th e old woman said. “Why did you not
heed his warning?”
Y onhoe was surprised. He retraced his steps in haste and pr ostrated
himself before the old man. “I am sorry that I did not recogni ze you,” he
said, “and I repent my attempt to escape. By the way , who was the old
woman I saw by the mountain stream?”
“That w as Pyonjae Ch'onnyo, the talking fairy ,” the old man said, and
vanished from sight. (For Pyonjae Ch'onnyo see previous section.)
W ith a light heart and light footsteps Y onhoe returned to his hermitage.
When the royal messenger once more summoned him to court, he felt that
he must obey . H e was received at the palace and given the title of Kuksa
(National Priest). The place where he met Munsu was thereafter called
Munsujom, and the place where he met the old woman was called Anijom.
(Ilyon n otes her e that the Biogr aphies of the Monks place these events
in the reign of King Honan (857-861), adding that Y onhoe was made a
royal priest of the two courts and given the title Cho (Shining), and that he
died “in the four th year of Hsien-tsung.” This makes Y onhoe's c areer much
later tha n the above account, and Uyon says he cannot tell whi ch dating is
correct.)

Song in Praise of Y onhoe
T rying to escape the eyes of the metropolis he fell into error;
A gimlet in a pouch cannot conceal its sharp point.

Because of the blue lotus, he went wrong,
Not because of his remote hermitage under the shrouding clouds.
126. Hyehyon Seeks a Quiet Life
Hyehyon was a man of Paekje who became a monk in his childhood. He
recited the Pophwa-gyong and p rayed to Buddha for blessings, and Buddha
responded with  wonderful communications. At first he lived at Sudok
T emple, where he lectured on Buddhism to the people who came to worship
and reci ted the scriptures when  he was alone. People came from far and
near to listen to his esoteric tea ching, and the temple was alwa ys crowded
with his  admirers. Finally he gr ew tired of this noisy world and retired to
Mt. T all a in the south. The mountain is so high and rugged that few venture
to climb it, and the thick forest was infested with fierce tigers. Hyehyon
lived qu ietly in his hermitage, chanting the scriptures and beating on a
wooden gong in order to for get the world and himself, until at last he died.
When monks from neighboring  temples had laid his body in a stone
chamber , a tiger suddenly app eared and devoured it, leaving only the
tongue. This remained red and tender for three years, despite changes of
temperature, aft er which it changed into a hard, reddish sub stance like
stone. A ll the monks and la ymen in the neighborhood revered this
wonderful tongu e and enshrined it in a stone pagoda. Hyehyon died in the
first year of Chen-kuan (around 600) at the age of fifty-eight.
Even tho ugh he  ended his life in seclusion and never went abroad, his
fame reached China and an a ccount of his life is found in the T'ang
Biographies of monks.
P'ayak, a Koguryo monk, went to T'ientaishan in China, where  he was
inspired by the truth of Buddhist doctrine to do many wonders, until his
death there. Mysterious tales about him are also found in the T'ang
Biographies of monks.

Song in Praise of Hyehyon
He preached Buddha's gospel on the deer's tail until he was weary;
The sound of his recital echoed to the clouds.
His name was sung in the annals of a foreign country .
After -the fire, his fragrant tongue floats in the red lotus.

(In Bud dhist lore carriages drawn by deer , oxen and goats convey the
souls of the dead to paradise, and the deer -drawn carriage is the finest.)

127. Sin-ch'ung and the Pinenut-T r ee
Before he became King, Hyosong (737-742) diverted himself by
playing checkers with Sin-ch'ung, a wise man, under a pinenu t-tree in the
garden o f the palace. One day i n autumn the Prince said to his old friend,
“If I should for g et you when I am king, I shall turn into that pi nenut-tree.”
Sin-ch'ung rose and bowed to the Prince to express his gratitude.
A few months later the Prince succeeded to the throne and wore the
golden c rown, b ut he for got Si n-ch'ung and omitted him from the list of
courtiers entitled  to honors and rewards. The old man complai ned that the
King had for gotten his word. He wrote a poem on a piece of paper and
pasted it to the pinenut-tree, upon which the tree suddenly withered.
W ondering at this, the King ordered his courtiers to investigate. When
they brought him the poem which they had discovered on the tree, he was
greatly astonish ed. “Dear me,” he said, “I have for gotten my  Kak-kung
(Horn Bow),2 my good old friend, more precious than my royal kindred.”
He summ oned S in-ch'ung and bestowed a title and an annual stipend upon
him, and, wonderful to relate, t he pine-nut-tree was restored, its trunk and
foliage as fresh and green as before.

Song of the Pine
When in autumn the pine-nuts withered and fell
Y ou vowed by the pine-tree not to for get me,
And I bowed to your noble person as my joy knew no bounds.
Alas! The moonbeams clasp the ripples in the old pond—
Now all the world is sad, as I gaze at the white-washed sand.
(The second stanza has been lost, Ilyon says.)

After this Sin-ch'ung became a favorite of the King, Finally , in the
twenty-second year (763) of King Kyongdok, the younger brother of King
Hyosong, he retired from the co urt and went to Mt. Chiri, where he shaved
his head  and became a monk. There he built a temple called  T ansok-sa
(A way From the Mortal W orld)  dedicated to the royal Silla household. He
prayed for the K ing and his kindred until he died in a silent valley near that
wonderful mountain, leaving behind his portrait on a wall of the Golden
Hall of the temple.
T o the south of the temple is a v illage once known as Sokhyu, w hich is
now cal led Sohwa-ri. (Ilyon notes here that the Sam Hwasang-jon, the

Biographies of Three Buddhist Priests, confuses T ansok-sa with Sin-ch'ung
Pongsong-sa. Si nce more than a hundred years separate the reign of King
Kyongdok from that of King Sinmun, he says, the Sin-ch'ung represented as
an intimate of King Sinmun in this book must be a dif ferent person.)
In an other book there is a story about Y i Chun (the Biographies  of High
Monks calls him Y i Sun, Ilyon says) who lived in the reign of King
Kyongdok. He always said, “When I am fifty years old I will become a
monk.” And indeed, in the seventh year of T'ien-pao (748), when he had
reached that age, he rebuilt a small temple called Cho-yon-sa, renamed it
T ansok-sa, and shaved his head and became a monk, taking the n ame Kong-
Koeng-Changnoja. He lived at the temple until his death twenty  years later .
This story is at variance with the account given in the Samguk Sagi.

Song in Praise of Sin-ch'ung
Though your service is small, your hair has turned silvery;
Though the King's bounty is great, the furrows deepen on your brow .
Often y ou have looked across the streams for a dreamland  in the
mountains;
Go burn incense and pray to Buddha to bless our King.
128. The T wo Saints on P'osan
During the Silla Dynasty two sa ints, Kwanki and T osong, lived on Mt.
P'o. (Ily on says  the countryfolk called it Mt. Sosul, which is Sanskrit for
Mt. P'o, now Pisul in Hyonp'ung ). Ki had a hermitage on the southern peak
and Song lived i n a cave on the northern peak. They were abou t ten li (four
kilometers) apar t, but the two visited each other often, climbing the cloud-
veiled p eaks and  singing “Moonlight Songs.” When Song wished to call on
Ki all the mountain trees swung their branches to the south, a nd when Ki
went to meet Song they did the opposite. In this way the two friends
associated with one another for many years.
Song used to sit quietly on the brink of a hanging clif f behind his
hermitage. One day his body s lipped down between two rocks and then
flew up into the  air in a robe of feathers. Some people say it landed in
Such'ang county  (now Susong county) and fell dead. Ki soon followed him
on the wing and also fell dead. Beneath the clif f (called T osong-am) and
beside a cave, people built a temple in their memory .
In the seventh year of T'ai-ping (982) a monk named Songpom visited
this tem ple and  founded a scho ol to teach the doctrine of Amita Buddha

which lasted for fifty years, dur ing which many auspicious signs appeared.
At t hat time twe nty converts in Hyonp'ung formed an associat ion to of fer
incense to the temple. They went to the mountain and gathered fragrant red
sticks, w hich they chopped, dried, and piled in bamboo baskets. These
sticks sh one brilliantly at night like burning candles. The local people
donated congrat ulatory funds to the association members, who rejoiced at
this ligh t. They  believed that it was sent by the two saints through the
providence of a mountain spiri t named Chongsong-Ch'onwang (Heavenly
god of silent ho liness) who had received an oracle from the Buddha in the
Kasop-pul period in the remote past. This Buddha had promise d the spirit
that he would ac hieve salvation when a thousand converts appe ared on that
mountain.
At prese nt there  is a legend written at this same mountain relating the
miracles of nine saints—Kwank i, T osong, Pansa, Ch'opsa, T oui (in the ruins
of Paegam T emple), Chayang, Songpom, Kummulnyo and Paegusa.

Song in Praise of the T wo Saints
The two  aged travelers trod the moonlight and played in the cloud-
springs long ago;
The old trees are shrouded in haze over ten thousand vales.
The shadows of the green leaves still wave to and fro in the cold wind,
As if the two friends were calling each other to come and go.

T wo oth er saints, Pansa and C h'opsa, hid themselves in caves, away
from the human world. They se wed leaves together to protect themselves
from th e weather and to cover their nakedness, and therefo re they are
named after the two trees Pan and Ch'op, which the mount aineers call
Umok (Rain T ree) and Kaul-mok respectively . Such names as P'ung-ak
(Maple Mountains, another name for the Diamond Mountains) are
suggestive of the mysterious lives of hermits in ancient days.
When I visited P 'osan I composed a poem in praise of the virtues of the
two saints:

Covering their bellies with purple bark and yellow skins,
Making clothes of green leaves—
There is no silkworm-feeding or hemp-weaving.
When the tall pines swing to the cold wind on the rocky crests,

The sun is down and the woodsmen are gone from the forest.
They meditated long under the bright moon at night;
They flew of f aimlessly on the fluttering wings of the wind.
On the iris bed they lay and fell fast asleep;
Their souls were not tied to earthly cares even in dreams.
The unfeeling clouds sail over the two ruined hermitages as of yore;
In glens untrodden by men only the deer leap in wild joy .
129. Y oungjae and the Thieves
Y oungjae was a humorous monk and a good singer of the folksongs
called Hyang-ga in the golden days of Silla, and he cared little for money .
When he had reached the twilight of his earthly life, he decided to spend
his remaining days quietly in the bosom of nature, and so he started on a
long journey to the forests of M t. Chiri. When he reached the top of the
steep mo untain pass called T aehyollyong, a band of sixty thieves emer ged
from the forest brandishing swords and threatening to kill him.
Y oungjae was quite calm and showed no sign of fear . “Good morning,
my forest gentlemen,” he said. “Y ou are wonderful dancers and I have
never seen such a fine sword-dance in my life.”
“Sword-dance!” said the bandit chief. “Can you say that even as our
great swords whirl above your head? Y ou are a wonderfully humorous grey-
haired old monk. What is your name?”
“Y oungjae is my name,” he replied, “but I am better known as a monk.”
“Ah,” laughed the chieftain, “yo u are the great singing monk. W e have
heard much of y our fame and we are glad to see you. Now that we have
performed our sword dance as you say , it is your turn to sing a song.”

Y oungjae sang:
Here comes an old monk on aimless feet
As he for gets the old shadows in his mind;
He fears lest his frail body should break Buddha's commandments.
Now he has seen these fine sharp swords,
A new day dawns on his poor soul—
A way with all evils and welcome only what is good.

“W onderful!” the chieftain said. “Y ou are a good singer indeed. Y ou
have not only entertained us with your beautiful music but moved our
hearts as well, bringing tears to  our eyes. On behalf of myself and all the

other thieves I a pologize to you and give you a small present. Please accept
two rolls (eighty yards) of our finest brocade.”
“Fine goods and bribery lead men and women to hell,” the monk
admonished them. “I have been awakened to this truth, and now I am on my
way to a remote  mountain to sp end my remaining days. How can I dare to
accept your gift?” And he threw the brocade to the ground.
Much as hamed and deeply moved, the thieves threw down their swords
and spea rs and followed Y oungj ae to Mt. Chiri. There they had their heads
shaved and became faithful disciples of the great monk, never again
appearing in the outside world or harming other people. Y oungjae was
ninety y ears old at this time, which was during the reign of Kin g W onsong
of Silla (785-799).

Song in Praise of Y oungjae
W ith a bamboo staf f and a h arp he was glad to tarry in the deep
mountains;
No brocade or jewels could rule his steadfast heart.
Though the gentlemen of the forest of fered him rich gifts,
He did not wish to carry gold to hell.
130. Mulkeja the Brave Soldier
When K ing Nae hae had been on  the throne of Silla for seventeen years
(212) the allied troops of eight states including Poraguk (now Kosong) and
Samulguk (now  Saju) invaded the border towns of Silla. The King ordered
out a  lar ge army  under the com mand of Crown Prince Nalum a nd General
Ilpol to hurl bac k the enemy . Af ter a fierce battle all eight states surrendered
to Silla.
(These c annot h ave been states i n anything like the modern sense. They
were probably tribal groupings.)
During the battle the brave so ldier Mulkeja performed the greatest
military feats, but the Crown Prince hated him and omitted his name from
the list of those to be rewarded.  His friends said, “Have you no resentment
against the prince? Why don't you appeal to the King?”
“A loya l subject can never com plain of his prince,” Mulkeja replied,
“and a patriotic soldier does not risk his life for reward, much less should he
appeal to the throne in order to gain a reputation at the expense  of others. I
simply do my duty . T ime will tell.”

Three years later the kings of three states, headed by the prince of
Kolp'o-guk (now Happo) attacke d Kalhwa (or Kulbul, now Ulju). The King
of S illa led his army in person and routed them. Mulkeja cut o f f the heads
of more than a score of enemy soldiers, but the court never praised his
valor . H e said to his wife, “I have heard that the way of a loyal subject of a
King is to risk his life in tim e of emer gency , for getting about personal
safety and living only for king a nd country . The battles of Pora and Kalhwa
were na tional cr ises which endangered the life of my King but I failed to
fight for  the King at the risk of  my life so I am a disloyal subject. Since I
have bee n disloy al to my King and brought discredit upon my ancestors, I
am an unfilial son. Since I have lost the way of loyalty and filial piety I can
no longer mingle in the shining circles of the court or even with the lowest
ranks of  society .” Then he shouldered a komungo (a kind of six-stringed
lute) and with disheveled hair he went of f to a remote mou ntain called
Sach'e-san and there composed odes of grief over the fate o f a straight
bamboo, swaying but unyielding . He sang to the accompanimen t of his lute
and of the babbling of a brook, living the life of a hermit. He  returned to
this noisy world no more.
131. Y ongyo, who Disappear ed
No one knows the family background of Y ongyo, the monk of Silje
T emple, although his virtuous deeds were highly praised. King Kyongdok
summoned him to of ficiate at a  sacrificial ceremony at the pala ce. Y ongyo
came and conducted the rites in the presence of His Majesty . After the
ceremony the King appointed servants to escort the monk back to his
temple. The moment they arriv ed at the temple gate Y ongyo disappeared,
and his whereab outs were unknown ever afterward. When this was reported
to th e King he  conferred the title of National Priest upon Y ongyo in
admiration of his virtuous deeds and high principles.
Even today his temple is known as the National Priest's cell.
132. Th e Five Monks of Mt. P'och'on (in the Days of King
Kyongdok)
Rising t o the northeast of Sapnyangju (Y angsan, near Pusan) about
twenty li of f is a high mountain called P'och'on-san, which is f amous for a
beautiful cave which seems to be both carved by nature's hand a nd chiseled
by human sculptors.
Long lo ng ago five unknown monks came to live in this cave , where
they pra yed to Amitabha Buddha to receive them into the pure land in the

W est fo r ten years. At last a host of saints came from the W est to meet
them. The five m onks, each seated upon a lotus, flew through the air until
they came to T'ongdo T emp le. There they stayed for se veral days,
performing heav enly music and preaching to the T'ongdo monks on the
vanities of this ephemeral world. Then they cast of f their mortal shells and
flew on to the W est, while a great light filled the sky . The h earts of the
monks left behind were filled with rapture as they watched t his glorious
flight to the lotus paradise. Afterward they built a pavilion on the spot
where t he five monks had asc ended and named it Ch'iru ( Left-Behind
T ower). It still stands today .
133. The Monk Who Called upon Amitabha
At the eastern foot of Namsan near Kyongju there is a village named
P'irich'on and near it a temple named P'iri-sa. Many years ago a strange
monk li ved at this temple. He told nobody his name, but only prayed to
Amitabha, chanting “Namuami-tabul! Namuami-tabul!” day and night in a
loud yet  musical voice without any variation. The sound filled the whole
city of Kyongju, ringing through all the 170,000 houses in the 360 wards
and subwards. Deeply moved, all the people worshipped B uddha, and
named the monk Y ombul-sa (Buddha-Calling Priest).
After hi s death the people made a lifelike plaster statue of him  which
they placed in M injang T emple. They renamed the temple wh ere he had
lived Y ombul-sa . Near it stands another temple, Y angp'i-sa, named after a
neighboring village.
IX. Filial Piety
134. Chinjong the Filial Monk
Before h is entry into the temple Chinjong was a Silla soldier . He  was so
poor that he co uldn't get married, and during his leaves fro m military
service on engineering work he sold his labor to buy rice for his mother .
They had no kitchen utensils except an iron kettle with broken legs.
One da y a monk came striking a wooden gong and begging for
donations of iron to help build a  new temple. The kind-hearted w oman gave
him her only iron kettle. Soon Chinjong came home.
“My son,” she said, “a monk has just visited our house and a sked for
iron to help build a new temple, so I gave him our cooking kettle.”

“Good!” said Chinjong. “Y ou ha ve done very well. It is a noble deed to
make a gift for the service of B uddha. W e can do our cookin g without a
kettle. See how I cook food on  tiles and in earthen pots to m ake it more
tasty .
“Mother , I have heard good n ews from my comrades in the army .
Uisang Popsa is preaching at h is temple in the lofty T'aebaek mountains,
ennobling the souls of thousand s of people and enabling them to enter the
lotus paradise. When I have fulfilled my duty as a son I wish to enter his
temple, have my head shaved an d study the way of the Buddha under him,
for I admire Uisang very much.”
“The way to Bu ddha is long an d life is short,” his mother said. “If you
wait until you have done your filial duty , will it not be too late? Rather it
would p lease me to know that you had awakened to the way of Buddha
during my lifetime. Say no more but go today .”
“I am the only one who can take  care of you in your old age,” Chinjong
protested. “How can I leave you alone in this bleak house?”
But she was adamant. “If becau se of your mother you do not join the
order , denouncing your home and the world, you are leading me to hell.
Even though you feed me good food, so long as I have no peace of mind or
your mi nd is inclined toward h ell, it cannot be called filial piety . I shall
enjoy m y remaining days begging from door to door , so say no more if you
want to make me happy .” (Some time evidently elapses here.)
“I have cooked seven bowls of rice as provisions for your long journey ,
because cooking on the way wo uld delay you. Eat one bowl before my eyes
and put the oth er six in your knapsack to eat as you travel through the
mountains.”
Chinjong wept. “T o leave an infirm old mother alone is painful to a
son's heart,” he said. “It is muc h worse to take away the little r ice and soy
sauce le ft in the house and le ave her to hunger . Heaven and earth will
censure me for this.” “Don't worry about me,” his mother said. “Go, my
son.” Chinjong could not disobe y his mother's command. He b owed to her
and star ted on his journey , and after traveling three days and three nights
reached the T'aebaek Mountains, where he was warmly received by the
great m onk Uisang Popsa. Having shaved his head, he became Uisang's
disciple.
Three ye ars late r Chinjong heard the sad news of his mother's d eath. He
was so deeply af fected that he sat up seven days and seven n ights in the

posture of a Buddha praying for the repose of her soul, and at length saw
her reborn into a noble life.
Hearing this story , Uisang moved to a new thatched cottage, followed
by three thousand people to whom he lectured on the Hwaom scripture for
ninety d ays. Chit'ong, one of his learned disciples, wrote down the outlines
of these  lectures and published them in two volumes called “Ch'udong
Diary .”
On the last night of the lectures Chinjong saw his mother in a dream and
heard her say . “My good son, I have returned to life in a heavenly paradise.”
135. Kim T ae-song, twice a Dutiful Son (Reign of King Sinmun)
In the small village of Moryan g-ni (otherwise called Pu-un-ch 'on) on
the western outskirts of Kyongj u there lived a poor woman named Kyong-
cho who  had an odd-looking son. The child was the laughingstock of the
village b ecause of his big head and flat forehead, like a wall. The people
called him T ae-song (Big W all).
His mot her was  too poor to feed him, so she gave the lad to a rich
neighbor named Pog-an as a farm laborer . T ae-song worked so hard that his
master liked him very much and gave him a small rice field to feed his
mother and himself.
About th at time  Chomkae, a v irtuous monk from Hungnyun T emple,
visited the house of Pog-an and asked for a donation for a great ceremony at
the temple. Pog-an gave him fif ty rolls of cotton cloth. The monk bowed in
thanks a nd said, “Y ou are loving  and giving. The great Buddha is so pleased
with you r donation that he will give you ten thousand times what you have
donated, and bless you with long life and happiness.”
T ae-song overheard this and ran home and told his mother , “Now we are
poor , an d if we d o not give something to the temple we will be p oorer . Why
not give  our little rice field for the ceremony so that we may h ave a great
reward in our a fterlives?” His kind-hearted mother readily co nsented and
the rice field was donated to the temple through Chomkae.
A few months later T ae-song died. On the night of his death a voice
from he aven was heard above the house of Kim Mun-yang , the prime
minister , saying “T ae-song, the good boy of Moryang-ni, will b e reborn in
your family .”
In great astonishment the prime minister sent servants to the village, and
they fou nd that T ae-song was indeed dead. W onderful to relate,  in the same
hour as the hea venly announcement the prime minister's wife  conceived,

and in due course gave birth to a boy . The child kept the fingers of his left
hand tightly clenched until seve n days after his birth, and when at last he
opened them the characters for T ae-song were seen written in gold on his
palm. They gave him his old nam e again and invited his previous mother to
care for him.
When T ae-song had grown into a strong youth he loved hunting, One
day he climbed high on Mt. T'oh am, and there he killed a big be ar . As night
was com ing he slept in a villag e at the foot of the mountain, a nd dreamed
that the bear's ghost appeared to him and said, “Fellow! Why did you kill
me? I will come back to life and kill and eat you.”
T ae-song trembled with fear and said, “Do not say so! I love sport and I
was only  testing my courage and strength against yours, risking  my life in a
fair fight in which you had an equal chance. Now the game is  over . I beg
your pardon and would gladly shake you by the paw .”
“Y ou ar e a jolly fellow ,” the ghost said, “but no more of you r jokes!
W ill you build a magnificent temple for me?”
“I take your paw and swear ,” T ae-song replied. The bear's ghost gave
him a gentle scratch and he awoke with a loud cry . His bed w as wet with
sweat.
From that time on T ae-song gav e up hunting, and he built a temple on
the spot where h e had killed the bear . He called it Changsu-sa (T emple of
Long Life ) and dedicated it to the bear .3
His hear t moved by heavenly g race, Kim T ae-song built the beautiful
Pulguk T emple in memory of his two sets of parents and also founded the
wonderful grotto of Sokkul-am . He invited the two distinguished monks
Sillim a nd P'yohun to supervise these temples. He had his fathers and
mothers represe nted among the images in these temples in g ratitude for
bringing him up as a useful man.
After th e great stone Buddha f or Sokkul-am was finished, Kim T ae-
song wa s worki ng on the lotus pedestal when suddenly it brok e into three
pieces, H e wept bitterly over thi s, and at length fell into a trance . During the
night go ds and goddesses descended from heaven and restored the stone to
its original condition. T ae-song a woke in joy and climbed the southern peak
of Mt. T'oham, where he burned incense and worshipped the celestial
deities. People thereafter called the place Hyang-nyong (Incense Peak).
The two stone bridges of the blue and white clouds, the seven- treasure
lotus flowers and the two pago das, T abo-t'ap (Pagoda of Many T reasures)

and Sok ka-t'ap (Pagoda of Sakyamuni) at Pulguk-sa, in addition to the
seated image of Buddha and the bas-reliefs of Kwanum on the walls and
ceiling of Sokkul-am, are unsurpassed in exquisite workmanship among the
art works in the temples of Korea.4
In addition to the above account, which is derived from old legends, the
of ficial records of these two temples give the following i nformation:
“During the reign of King Kyo ngdok, T ae-song, the King's first minister ,
commenced the construction o f Pulguk-sa in the tenth year of T'ien-pao
(742). T ae-song died during the reign of King Hyegong, on the second of
December in the ninth year of T a-li (774); the construction of the temple
was finished some years later .”

Song in Praise of Kim T ae-song.
When spring ended in Moryang he donated three furrows of land;
When autumn came to Hyang-nyong he harvested ten thousand pieces
of gold.
His mother knew poverty , wealth and nobility in a hundred years;
Her son rose from a low servant to a high aristocrat in a dream.
136. Hyangduk-Saji Feeds his Father with His Own Flesh
In U ngch'onju a man named Hy angduk-Saji lived on a little fa rm. One
year famine visited the land and the poor soil would yield no crop, so that
his old father w as all but starved to death. Hyangduk cut some flesh from
his t high and fed the old man. Deeply moved, the people of the province
reported this to King Kyongdok. The King praised this unusual deed of
filial piety and gave Hyangduk five hundred lar ge bags of rice as a reward.
137. Son Sun Of fers to Sacrifice his Son.
During the reign of King Hungd ok a poor man named Son Sun lived in
the mou ntain village of Moryang-ni near Kyongju. After the death of his
father (Hak-san) he and his wife worked at a neighboring house as day
laborers and supported his old mother with the rice and vegetables they
earned in this way .
Son Sun had a little son. This baby ate all the food served  to his
grandmother , fo r she was very  fond of her grandson and would put the
dainties she got into his mouth.
“This is good for our son but b ad for my mother ,” Son Sun said. “W e
may hav e anoth er son but we can never have another mother . W e must get

rid of this hindrance to our first  duty .” His wife was deeply moved by her
husband's filial piety and readily agreed.
One nig ht the mother took the ch ild and carried it at her breast w hile her
husband carried a spade on his s houlder , and they climbed the n orthern side
of Mt. Ch'wi northeast of the village. W ith heavy hearts and many tears
they began to dig a grave in w hich to bury their son alive. But Son Sun's
spade st ruck a stone which gave  a musical sound, and when he dug it out he
found it was a sm all bell of exquisite beauty , about the size of th e water jars
which women carry on their heads.
The young couple looked at the bell with wondering eyes. They hung it
on a tree and struck it with a pebble and it rang with a wonderful sound. In
great joy  the wife exclaimed, “W e have discovered a wonderful bell, a God-
sent gift. My good husband, do  not bury my child, but spare h is life.” Son
Sun agr eed. W ith singing hearts and dancing feet they descended the hill
with the bell and the baby .
On reac hing ho me at daybreak they hung the bell under the e aves of
their tha tched h ouse, and it swung in the wind and rang out its music far
and wide. The King heard it in his palace and said, “I hear the wonderful
sound of a bell ringing in the western wind. Who will go and find it?”
“May your majesty live ten tho usand years!” the servants responded,
and wen t in search of the won derful bell. When they had found it they
reported the good news to the throne.
The Kin g greatl y admired the g ood conduct of Son Sun and his wife,
and said , “In the olden days, when Kuo-chu was about to bur y his child,
heaven s ent down a golden caul dron, and now when Son Sun was about to
bury his child earth yielded up a stone bell.5 Suc h m en are good models of
filial piety , sure to be rewarded  by heaven and earth.” The King gave Son
Sun a fine house and fifty lar ge bags of rice annually to encoura ge others to
honor their parents with pure hearts.
Son Sun  donate d his old home for the foundation of a temple. People
called it  Honghy o-sa (T emple of Filial Piety), and the bell was e nshrined in
it.
During t he reign of Queen Chin song (888-898) bandits of Later Paekje
attacked this village and stole the bell, but the temple escaped destruction.
The mountainsid e where the bell was found was called W anho p'yong, but
now the local people call it Chiryangp'yong.
138. The Beggar Girl Who Supported her Mother

Hyojongnang, a  noble Hwarang, gave a banquet in the P'osok-j ong, the
stone abalone pavilion, also called Samhwa-sul; (Three-flower Arbor) at the
foot of Namsan near Kyongju, and all his followers and friends gathered
early ex cept two, who arrived very late. When the noble Hwarang asked
them why they had not arrived on time, they told the following story:
“In the eastern village near P unhwang T emple we saw a g irl who
seemed to be ab out twenty years old holding her blind mother in her arms
and crying loudly .
“W e ask ed the villagers what was going on, and they explained that the
girl was  so poor that she had begged from door to door for years to support
her mother . Then there was a bad harvest and she could no lon ger get any
income from begging, so she sold her labor to a rich man's  house and
entrusted her master with thirty lar ge bags of rice from her wages.
“She wo rked ha rd in that house  every day , and at twilight she brought
home a bowl of rice which she c ooked for her mother and herse lf. She slept
with her  mother and at daybreak  she rose quietly and went back to work in
the rich man's house. She supported her mother in this way for several
years.
“One day her m other said to her . 'I had peace of mind when I ate coarse
food, but my heart is troubled  these days, as if the good fo od hurt my
stomach. Can you tell me why?'
“The good daughter told the truth, whereupon her mother burst out
crying and the daughter cried too, lamenting between sobs that she had fed
her mother's mouth but had failed to comfort her mind. W e stayed to
observe this pitiful sight, which is why we are late for your banquet.”
The Hw arang to ok pity on this  mother and daughter and sent  them a
hundred bushels of grain and some fine clothes, while his followers
collected a thousand lar ge bags of rice to help the needy family .
When this story reached the throne, Queen Chinsong rewarded the
dutiful d aughter with an additional five hundred lar ge bags of rice, and gave
her a fine house  to live in with her mother . She also sent soldi ers to guard
the house. The Queen also orde red the building of a pavilion in the girl's'
honor at the en trance to her village, and named it Hyo-yan g-ni (Filial
Sustenance V illage) to commemorate her good conduct. La ter the girl
donated her house to a templ e called Y angjon-sa (T emple of the T wo
Buddhas).
Footnotes to Book Five

(1). A “Po” was a sort of fund  donated by the pious for some special
religious purpos e. It may be compared to the donation of funds to the
church in medieval Europe to pay for masses for the soul of an individual.
(2). This is a reference to a poem in the Book of Odes, one of the
Confucian Classics, in which the loyal kinsmen complain that K ing Y ao of
Chou pays more attention to flatterers than to his own family .
(3). It is possibl e that this story  is connected with a very ancient folk
belief. It will be recalled that T angun, the legendary founder of Korea, was
born of a woman who had been a bear . Probably this indicates the practise
of totemism in ancient times.
(4). The re is a tradition that the sculptor who carved these ba s-reliefs
was in love with the King's daughter and used her as the mo del for the
image of Kwanum in order to immortalize her beauty .
(5). The Chinese story of Kuo-chu, which dates back to t he Han
dynasty , is almost identical to th e present one, except that Kuo-c hu dug up a
golden cauldron rather than a bell.
Epilogue
The wood blocks for printing t he Samguk Sagi and the Samg uk Y usa
kept in the government archives have become illegible except for four or
five characters to the line. Scholars nowadays wish to widen their
knowledge of peace and war on  earth and the rise and fall of nations and
wonders done in various places. Much research is needed in our country to
broaden knowledge of our national af fairs.
W ith thi s in mind the compiler of this volume has sought for  several
years for one of the original printed copies, but to no avail, for th ey are very
rare. This is most unfortunate, fo r this valuable history is in danger of being
lost, and  we shall be unable to pass on to our descendants the history of this
eastern nation.
Fortunately , his honor Kwon Ch u, the magistrate of Songju, he aring of
my sear ch, obtained a perfect copy and sent it to me. I showed it to
Governor An T ang and Director  Pak Chon, informing them of my printing
project, and they gladly approved of my plan. I have therefore h ad the book
printed in several counties and donated copies to provincial g overnments
for preservation.

It is  natural that old things are lost and lost things are found again as
nations and peoples rise and fall. Realizing this, I have had this book
reprinted to preserve permanently a literary treasure of our sch olars for all
ages to come. Late W inter , Imsin Y ear of Ming Cheng-te (1512)
W ritten by Prince Chon P'yong, Y i Kye-pok, Merit Subject, Lord
Kason, Prefect, Military Commander , Kyongju-chin Area.
(Y i K ye-pok was raised to the ra nk of Merit Subject by King Chungjong
(1488-1544) of the Y i Dynasty for his assistance in the deposition of the
tyrant Prince Y onsan.)
THE END
Chr onology of Kings and Queens of the Thr ee Kingdoms and Karak
The date s here given are traditional ones and may not be accu rate for
the earlier periods. All dates are A.D. unless otherwise noted.
KOGUR YO
1. T ongmyong 37. B.C.-19 B.C.
Founder , son of legendary T ang un. Family name Ko, given nam e Chu-
mong.
2. Y uri 19 B.C.-18 A.D.
Son of T ongmyo ng, but took the family name Hae. In 3 A.D. moved the
court to Kuknae-song, also called Puli-song, on the Y alu River .
3. T aemusin 18-44
Third son of Y uri, family name Hae.
4. Minjung 44—48
Son of T aemusin, given name Upchu.
5. Mobon 48-53
Elder brother of Minjung, given name Aeryu.
6. Kukjo 53-146
Also known as T aejo wang. The of ficial history of the La ter Han
dynasty says, “No sooner did he leave his mother's womb than he opened
his eyes  and looked around hi m.” Abdicated late in life in favor of his
mother's brother .
7. Ch'adae 146-165
Given n ame Su.  Brother of Kuk jo's mother . In 165 when Kukjo was 1 19
years old his two younger brothers were murdered by King Sindae.
8. Sindae 165-179
Given name Paekko or Paekku, See above.
9. Kogukch'on 179-197

Given n ame Na mho or Imo. Po sthumous title is the name of the place
where he was buried.
1 . Sansang 197-227
2 . T ongch'on 227-248
3 . Chungch'on 248-270
4 . Soch'on 270-292
Given name Y akno or Y aku.
14. Pongsang 292-300
Also called King Ch'igal. Given name Sangpu.
15. Mich'on 300-331
Also called King Hoyang, given name Ulpul or Upul.
16. Kugwon 331-371
Also called King Kangsang, given name Soe or Sayu. Extended  the city
wall of P'yongy ang. In 342 m oved the court to Anshih-ch'eng (W antu-
ch'eng).
1 . Sosurim 371-384 Given name Kupu.
2 . Kugyang 384-392
Given name Isok or Ojichi.
1 . Kwanggaet'o 392-413 Given name T amdok.
2 . Changsu 413-491
Given name Sin or Y on. In 427 moved the national capital to P'yong-
yang-song.
21. Munja 491-519
Also named Myong-ni-ho, Naun and Koun.
1 . Anjang 519-531 Given name Hung-an.
2 . Anwon 531-545 Given name Poyong.
3 . Y angwon 545-559
Also called King Y anggang, given name P'yong-song.
25. P'yongwon 559-590
Also called King P'yonggang, given name Y angsong.

26. Y ongyang 590-618
Also called King P'yongyang, given name W on or T aewon.
1 . Y ongnyu 618-642 Given name Konmu.
2 . Pojang 642-668
Koguryo conquered by Silla and T'ang forces 705 years after the
traditional founding date.
P AEKJE
1. Onjo 18 B.C.-28 A.D.
Legendary founder , reputedly the third son (some sources say the
second) of King T ongmyong, the legendary Koguryo founde r . Court in
W irye-song (som e sources say Sach'on, now Chiksan) until 5 B.C., then
moved to Hansan, now Kwangju, Kyonggi Province
1 . T aru 28-77 Second son of Onjo.
2 . Kiru 77-128 Son of T aru.
3 . Kaeru 128-166 Son of Kiru.
4 . Ch'ogo 166-214
Son of Kaeru, also called Sogo.
6. Kusu 214-234
Son of Ch'ogo, also called Kwisu.
7. Saban 234
Son of Kusu; deposed.
8. Koi 234-286
Brother of Ch'ogo's mother .
9. Ch'aekkye 286-298
Son of Koi.
1 . Punso 298-304 Son of Ch'aekkye
2 . Piryu 304-344
Second son of Kusu and younger brother of Saban.
1 . Kye 344-346 Son of Punso
2 . Kunch'ogo 346-375

Second son of Piryu. In 371 moved the court to Puk-Hansan.
1 . Kungusu 375-384 Son of Kunch'ogo.
2 . Ch'imnyu 384-385 Son of Kungusu.
3 . Chinsa 385-392
Y ounger brother of Ch'imnyu.
17. Asin 392-405
Son of Chinsa, also called Abang.
18. Chonji 405-420
Given name Y ong, also titled Chinji; son of Asin.
1 . Kusini 420-427 Son of Chinji.
2 . Piyu 427-455 Son of Kusini
3 . Kaero 455-475 Given name Kyongsa.
4 . Munju 475-477
Son of Kaero. Moved the capital to Ungch'bn.
1 . Samgun 477-479 Son of Munju.
2 . T ongsong 479-501
Given name Motae. Cousin of Samgun.
25. Muryong 501-523
Given name Sama. Second son of T ongsong. In the Nan-shih it is
written, “his name was Puyo-Y ung.” but this is wrong. Y ung was the crown
prince of King P ojang (Uija). His story is told in the T'ang-shih. (A bit of
confusion here. Pojang was the last king of Koguryo and Uija t he last king
of Paekje.)
26. Song 523-554
Son of Muryong, given name M yongnong. In 538 moved the capital to
Saja-song, which he renamed Nam-Puyo.
27. W idok 554-598
Given name Ch'ang, also called Myong.
28. Hye 598-599
Given name Kye or Myong, also called King Hon; son of W idok.
29. Pop 599-600
Given name Hyosun. Son of Hye

30. Mu 600-641
Given name Ilgi-sadok, also called King Mugang.
31. Uija 641-660.
Son of Mu. Paekje conquered by Silla and T'ang 678 years after its
traditional founding date.
KARAK (KA Y A)
1. Suro 42-199
Said to have been born from a golden egg which descend ed from
heaven, hence his family name was Kim (Kum), meaning gold. Also said to
have reigned for 158 years, though this does not correspond to the recorded
dates.
2. Kodung 199-259
Son of Suro and Empress Ho. Again there is some discrepancy in the
dates.
3. Map'um 259-291
Son of Kodung and Lady Mojong, daughter of Sin Po, Lord of Ch'onpu.
4. Kojilmi 291-344
Also called Kummul. Son of Map'um and Lady Hogu.
5. Ip'um 344-407
Son of Kojilmi and Lady Aji.
6. Chwaji 407-421
Also called King Kumt'o. Son of Ip'um and Lady Chongsin.
7. Ch'wihui 421-451
Son of Chwaji and Lady Poksu.
8. Chilji 451-492
Son of Ch'wihui and Lady Indok.
9. Kyomji 492-521
Son of Chilji and Lady Pangwon.
10. Kuhyong 521-532.
Karak absorbed by Silla 490 years after its traditional founding date.
SILLA
1. Hyokkose 57 B.C.-4 A.D.
Pak clan . Said to have been born of a big egg. Queen A yong or Aryong.
Country then called Sorabol or Kerim (but some sources sa y the name
Kerim was adopted in King T 'alhae's reign). In 37 B.C. buil t Kumsong,
meaning golden castle.
2. Namhae 4-24

Son of Hyokkose and Lady Aryong, Pak clan. Queen Lady Unje.
3. Norye 24-57
Also called Y uri. Used the title  Nijilgum. Son of Namhae an d Unje.
Queen Sayo Kimsi, daughter of Horu-wang.
4. T'alhae 57-80
Sok clan. Son o f King Hamdalpa of W anha-kuk and the Princess of
Choknyo. Queen  Lady Aro, dau ghter of King Namhae. When he died his
body was buried on an eastern hill and then his bones were e ncased in a
plaster figure and buried on the same hill.
5. Pasa 80-1 12
Pak clan. Son of Norye and Sayo. Queen Lady Sach'o.
6. Chima 1 12-134
Also called Chimi, son of Pasa a nd Sach'o. Queen Lady Aerye, Princess
of Majekuk. Destroyed Umjilkuk (now Angang) and Apnyangkuk (now
Kyongsan).
7. Ilsong 134-154
Son of Norye's elder brother and Lady Ikan. Queen daughter of Chima.
1 . Adala 154-184
2 . Polhyu 184-196 Sok Clan.
1 . Naehae 196-230
2 . Chobun 230-247
3 . Chomhae 247-262
Also called Ihae. Brother of Cho bun's mother . Established first relations
with Koguryo.
13. Mich'u 262-284
Also called Miso or Mijo. First king from the Kim clan. Son of Kudo
Kalmun-wang a nd Saengho (Lady Sullye), daughter of Ibi Kalm un-wang of
the Pak clan. Queen Lady Kwangmyong, daughter of Chepun-wang.
14. Y urye 284-298
Sok clan. Also called Serichi. Son of Chepun-wang and a woman of the
Pak clan. Reconstructed W olsong (Moon Castle).
15. Kirim 298-310
Also cal led Kiri p. Second son o f Chepun and Lady Aihye. He called his
country Silla.

16. Kolhae 310-356
Son of Urotim-kakkan, the second son of King Naehae. In 329 he had
constructed a huge dam and reservoir for irrigation. During his reign Paekje
soldiers first invaded Silla.
17. Naemul 356-402
Kim cla n. Commencing with his reign the throne became perm anently
hereditary in the Kim clan. Son  of Kudo Kalmun-wang. Some sources say
he was the younger brother of King Miso. His mother was Lady Hyurye.
18. Solsong 402-417
Also called Silju or Pogum. S on of King Mich'u's younger brother ,
T aesoji Kakkan and Lady Y esaeng. Queen Lady Aryu.
19. Nulji 417-458
Also called Naeji. Son of Naem ul and Lady-Naeryehui, the daughter of
King Mich'u.
20. Chabi 458-479
Son of Nulji and Lady Aro, th e daughter of King Silsong. Hi s queen
was the  daughter of P'aho Kalmun-wang, though some say s he was the
daughter of Mijil Kakkan. Open ed commerce with the W u state in China. In
479 Japa nese soldiers invaded Silla, and the King had Myonghwal fortress
built as a refuge . The Japanese laid siege to the castle but were beaten of f
and departed.
21. Soji 479-500
Also called Pich'o. Third son of Chabi and a daughter of Mihun
Kakkan. His queen was a daughter of Kibo Kalmun-wang.
22. Chijung 500-514
Also called Chich'ollo. Son of Kibo Kalmun-wang, King Nulji's
younger brother , and Lady Osaeng, King Nulji's daughter . Queen Lady
Y ongje.
23. Pophung 514-540
Given n ame W onjong. Son of Chijung and Lady Y ongje. The use of
reign titl es (he called his reign ti tle Konwon) and posthumous royal titles in
Chinese fashion  began with this  reign. His mausoleum is north of Aegong
T emple. His queen Lady Pado became a Buddhist nun with the religious
name P opnyu and lived at Y o nghung T emple. This king ordained laws
prohibiting the taking of life on ten days of each month an d permitted
people to become monks and nuns.
24. Chinhung 540-576

Given name Sammaekjong, also Sim (Maekpu). Son of Pophung's
younger brother and Lady Chiso, the daughter of Y onsa Kakkan of the Pak
clan. Became a monk. He a dopted the reign titles, 'Kaeguk' (551),
'T aech'ang' (568), and 'Hongje' (572)
25. Chinji 576-579
Given n ame Sar yun or Kumnyun. Son of Chinhung and Lady Saekto of
the Pak clan. Queen Lady Chido, also of the Pak clan.
26. Chinp'yong 579-632
Given n ame Paekchong. Son of Crown Prince T ongnyun and Lady
Manho o r Mann yong, the daughter of Ipchong Kalmun-wang. Queens first
Lady Maya and second Lady Sungman. He called his reign title, 'Konpok'
(584)
27. Queen Sondok 632-647
Given name T okman, daughter of Chinp'yong and Lady Maya.
Succeeded when her father died without male issue. Prince consort Um
Kalmun-wang. Her reign title was Inp'yong.
28. Queen Chindok 647-654
Given name Sungman, daughter of Chinp'yong's younger brother and
Lady Ani; reign title; T aehwa.
29. Muryol 654-661
Also kn own by the posthumous honorary title T'aejong. Son of Y ong-
ch'un an d grandson of King Ch inji. His mother was Lady Ch'onmyong, a
daughter of King Chin'pyong. Queen Lady Hunje (Kim Y u-sin's younger
sister Munhui).
30. Munmu 661-681
Given name Popmin, son of M uryol and Lady Hunje. Queen Cha-ui,
daughter of Sonp'um Haegan. His tomb is on a rock in the sea east of
Kamun T emple. Paekje and Koguryo were conquered during his reign.
31. Sinmun 681-692
Given-name Ch ongmyong or Ilso. Son of Munmu and Cha-ui . Queen
Sinmok-wanghu, daughter of Kim Un-kong.
32. Hyoso 692-702
Given name I-kong. Son of Sin mun and Sinmok-wanghu. His tomb is
east of Mangdek T emple.
33. Songdok 702-737
Given n ame Hung-kwang, childhood name Y ung-ki, Hyoso's younger
brother . First queen Paeso-wanghu, second Chommul-wanghu. His tomb is

south of T ongch'on (some sources say Y angjang-gok).
34. Hyosong 737-742
Given name Stingkyong. Son  of Songdok and Chommul-wanghu.
Queen Hyemyong-wanghu. Cremated at Popnyu T emple and his ashes
scattered over the eastern sea.
35. Kyongdok 742-765
Son of Songdok  and Chommul-wanghu. First queen Lady Sammo, who
could bear no sons and left the palace. Second queen Lady Manwol. First
buried i n a stone tomb west o f Kyongji T emple and later moved to the
valley of Y angjang-gok.
36. Hyegong 765-780
Son of Kyongdok and Lady Ma nwol. First queen Lady Sinp'a, second
Lady Ch'angsa.
37. Sondok 780-785
Given name Y ang-sang. Son of Hyobang-haegan and Lady Saso, the
daughter of King Songdok. Queen Kujok-wanghu.
38. W onsong 785-799
Given n ame Kyong-sin. Son of Hyoyang T ae-agan and Lady Chio.
Queen Lady Sukjong. His tomb is at Kok-sa (now Sungbok-sa).
39. Sosong 799-800
Son of Hyech'ung T'aeja and Songmok T aehu. Queen Kyehwa-wanghu.
40. Aejang 800-809
Given name Chung-hui or Ch'ongmyong. Son of Sosong and Kyehwa-
wanghu. Murdered by his two uncles Hondok and Hungdok.
41. Hondok 809-826
Given name Onsung. King Sosong's brother . Queen Kwisung-nang. His
tomb is north of Ch'onnimch'on.
42. Hungdok 826-836
Given name Kyonghwi. Hond ok's brother . Queen Lady Ch'anghwa.
King Sosong's daughter . T omb north of Angang, with that of his queen.
43. Huigang 836-838
Given name Kaeryung, also call ed Che-u. Son of Honjong Kak kan and
Lady Mido.
44. Minae 838-839
Son of Ch'unggong Kakkan and Lady Kwip'a, the daughter of
Hyech'ung. Queen Muyong W anghu.
45. Sinmu 839

Given name U-jing. Son of K yunjong Kakkan and Lady Chonggyo.
Queen Chongjong.
46. Munsong 839-857
Given name Kyong-ung. Son of Sinmu and Chongjong-t'aehu. Queen
Somyong-wanghu.
47. Honan 857-861
Given name Uijong. Y ounge r brother of Sinmu, son of Lady
Hunmyong.
48. Kyongmun 861-875
Given n ame Ung-nyom. Son of Kyemong Kakkan, grandson of King
Huigang. Mothe r Lady Kwanghwa, daughter of King Sinmu. Queen Munja
Hwanghu, King Honan's daughter .
49. Hongang 875-886
Given name Chong. Son of Kyongmun and Munja Hwanghu.
50. Chonggang 886-888
Given name Hwang. Minae's brother .
51. Queen Chinsong 888-898
Given name Manhon. King Ch onggang's sister by the same mother .
Spouse W ihong T ae-kakkan. Abdicated in favor of Hyogong, an illegitimate
son of King Hongang, and died soon after . She was cremated an d her ashes
scattered over the western hill in Moryang, otherwise called Mihwang
Mountain.
52. Hyogong 898-913
Given name Y o. Son of Hongan g and Munja-wanghu. He was c remated
on the northern hill of Saja-sa a nd his bones were buried on the eastern hill
of Kujje.
53. Sindok 913-917
Pak clan , a descendant of King Adala. Queen Chasong-wanghu.  He was
cremated and his bones buried south of Chamhyon.
54. Kyongmyong 917-924
Pak Clan Given name Sungyong, son of Sindokand Chasong. Queen
Changsa-taek. C remated at Hwangpok T emple and his bones sc attered over
Songdung Mountain.
55. Kyongae 924-927
Pak clan. Given name W i-ting. King Kyongmyong's brother .
56. Kyongsun 927-935

Kim clan. Given name Pu, son of Hyojong Ikan and Kyea t'aehu, King
Hongang's daughter . In 935 surrendered Silla sovereignty to W ang Kon, the
founder of the Koryo dynasty . He died in 978 and his tomb is in T ong-
hyang-dong. The Silla kingdo m came to an end 992 years after its
traditional founding date
APPENDIX
TRIANGULAR POSITION OF THE THREE KINGDOMS



KOGUYRO A T THE ZENITH OF HER POWER


SILLA A T THE Z EITH OF HER P OWER


P AEKCHE A T THE ZENITH OF HER P OWER


UNIFIED SILLA AND P AEKCHE
T ranslator's Not e: A serious stud y of Samguk Y usa was done by a well-
known historica l scholar Ch'oe Nam-son and published in a Monthly ,
“Kyemyong” (1921-1933), a scholarly journal published by the Kyemyong
Book Company , Seoul, under the editorship of Cho'e Nam- son, whose
articles on Samguk Y usa appea red in it (March, 1927, No. 18), Later , the
same appeared in book form in several editions.

The modern publications of Samguk Y usa are:
1 . Ch'oe Nam-son, Samguk Y usa Haeje (An Introduction to the Book,
Samguk Y usa), 1 vol.
2 . Y i Byung-Do, Samguk Y usa with Hangul T ranslation and Annotations,
1 vol.
3 . Y i Chae-ho, Samguk Y usa in Hangul with Footnotes, 2 vols.
4 . Chosun Sahak-Hoe, Samguk Y usa (Reprint of Cheng-te T ext), 2 vols.