book the sixth chapter, and in the seventh book the twenty-third
chapter, where his body was buried, and after found, and translated
into the said monastery. Ye shall see also in the history of Bochas, in
his book De Casu Principum, part of his noble acts, and also of his
fall. Also Galfridus in his British book recounteth his life: and in
divers places of England many remembrances be yet of him, and shall
remain perpetually, and also of his knights. First in the abbey of
Westminster, at St. Edward’s shrine, remaineth the print of his seal in
red wax closed in beryl, in which is written, Patricius Arthurus
Britannie, Gallie, Germanie, Dacie, Imperator. Item in the castle of
Dover ye may see Gawaine’s skull, and Cradok’s mantle: at Winchester
the Round Table: in other places Launcelot’s sword and many other
things. Then all these things considered, there can no man reasonably
gainsay but there was a king of this land named Arthur. For in all
places, Christian and heathen, he is reputed and taken for one of the
nine worthy, and the first of the three Christian men. And also, he is
more spoken of beyond the sea, more books made of his noble acts, than
there be in England, as well in Dutch, Italian, Spanish, and Greekish,
as in French. And yet of record remain in witness of him in Wales, in
the town of Camelot, the great stones and the marvellous works of iron
lying under the ground, and royal vaults, which divers now living have
seen. Wherefore it is a marvel why he is no more renowned in his own
country, save only it accordeth to the Word of God, which saith that no
man is accepted for a prophet in his own country.

Then all these things aforesaid alleged, I could not well deny but that
there was such a noble king named Arthur, and reputed one of the nine
worthy, and first and chief of the Christian men. And many noble
volumes be made of him and of his noble knights in French, which I have
seen and read beyond the sea, which be not had in our maternal tongue.
But in Welsh be many and also in French, and some in English but
nowhere nigh all. Wherefore, such as have late been drawn out briefly
into English I have after the simple conning that God hath sent to me,
under the favour and correction of all noble lords and gentlemen,
enprised to imprint a book of the noble histories of the said King
Arthur, and of certain of his knights, after a copy unto me delivered,
which copy Sir Thomas Malorye did take out of certain books of French,
and reduced it into English. And I, according to my copy, have done set
it in imprint, to the intent that noble men may see and learn the noble
acts of chivalry, the gentle and virtuous deeds that some knights used
in those days, by which they came to honour, and how they that were
vicious were punished and oft put to shame and rebuke; humbly
beseeching all noble lords and ladies, with all other estates of what
estate or degree they been of, that shall see and read in this said
book and work, that they take the good and honest acts in their
remembrance, and to follow the same. Wherein they shall find many
joyous and pleasant histories, and noble and renowned acts of humanity,
gentleness, and chivalry. For herein may be seen noble chivalry,
courtesy, humanity, friendliness, hardiness, love, friendship,
cowardice, murder, hate, virtue, and sin. Do after the good and leave
the evil, and it shall bring you to good fame and renown. And for to
pass the time this book shall be pleasant to read in, but for to give
faith and belief that all is true that is contained herein, ye be at
your liberty: but all is written for our doctrine, and for to beware
that we fall not to vice nor sin, but to exercise and follow virtue, by
which we may come and attain to good fame and renown in this life, and
after this short and transitory life to come unto everlasting bliss in
heaven; the which He grant us that reigneth in heaven, the blessed
Trinity. Amen.

Then to proceed forth in this said book, which I direct unto all noble
princes, lords and ladies, gentlemen or gentlewomen, that desire to
read or hear read of the noble and joyous history of the great
conqueror and excellent king, King Arthur, sometime king of this noble
realm, then called Britain; I, William Caxton, simple person, present
this book following, which I have enprised to imprint: and treateth of
the noble acts, feats of arms of chivalry, prowess, hardiness,
humanity, love, courtesy, and very gentleness, with many wonderful
histories and adventures. And for to understand briefly the content of
this volume, I have divided it into XXI Books, and every book
chaptered, as hereafter shall by God’s grace follow. The First Book
shall treat how Uther Pendragon gat the noble conqueror King Arthur,
and containeth xxviii chapters. The Second Book treateth of Balin the
noble knight, and containeth xix chapters. The Third Book treateth of
the marriage of King Arthur to Queen Guenever, with other matters, and
containeth xv chapters. The Fourth Book, how Merlin was assotted, and
of war made to King Arthur, and containeth xxix chapters. The Fifth
Book treateth of the conquest of Lucius the emperor, and containeth xii
chapters. The Sixth Book treateth of Sir Launcelot and Sir Lionel, and
marvellous adventures, and containeth xviii chapters. The Seventh Book
treateth of a noble knight called Sir Gareth, and named by Sir Kay
Beaumains, and containeth xxxvi chapters. The Eighth Book treateth of
the birth of Sir Tristram the noble knight, and of his acts, and
containeth xli chapters. The Ninth Book treateth of a knight named by
Sir Kay Le Cote Male Taille, and also of Sir Tristram, and containeth
xliv chapters. The Tenth Book treateth of Sir Tristram, and other
marvellous adventures, and containeth lxxxviii chapters. The Eleventh
Book treateth of Sir Launcelot and Sir Galahad, and containeth xiv
chapters. The Twelfth Book treateth of Sir Launcelot and his madness,
and containeth xiv chapters. The Thirteenth Book treateth how Galahad
came first to king Arthur’s court, and the quest how the Sangreal was
begun, and containeth xx chapters. The Fourteenth Book treateth of the
quest of the Sangreal, and containeth x chapters. The Fifteenth Book
treateth of Sir Launcelot, and containeth vi chapters. The Sixteenth
Book treateth of Sir Bors and Sir Lionel his brother, and containeth
xvii chapters. The Seventeenth Book treateth of the Sangreal, and
containeth xxiii chapters. The Eighteenth Book treateth of Sir
Launcelot and the queen, and containeth xxv chapters. The Nineteenth
Book treateth of Queen Guenever and Launcelot, and containeth xiii
chapters. The Twentieth Book treateth of the piteous death of Arthur,
and containeth xxii chapters. The Twenty-first Book treateth of his
last departing, and how Sir Launcelot came to revenge his death, and
containeth xiii chapters. The sum is twenty-one books, which contain
the sum of five hundred and seven chapters, as more plainly shall
follow hereafter.