CHAPTER XIX. How King Mark sent Sir Tristram for La Beale Isoud toward
Ireland, and how by fortune he arrived into England.

Then when this was done King Mark cast always in his heart how he might
destroy Sir Tristram. And then he imagined in himself to send Sir
Tristram into Ireland for La Beale Isoud. For Sir Tristram had so
praised her beauty and her goodness that King Mark said that he would
wed her, whereupon he prayed Sir Tristram to take his way into Ireland
for him on message. And all this was done to the intent to slay Sir
Tristram. Notwithstanding, Sir Tristram would not refuse the message
for no danger nor peril that might fall, for the pleasure of his uncle,
but to go he made him ready in the most goodliest wise that might be
devised. For Sir Tristram took with him the most goodliest knights that
he might find in the court; and they were arrayed, after the guise that
was then used, in the goodliest manner. So Sir Tristram departed and
took the sea with all his fellowship. And anon, as he was in the broad
sea a tempest took him and his fellowship, and drove them back into the
coast of England; and there they arrived fast by Camelot, and full fain
they were to take the land.

And when they were landed Sir Tristram set up his pavilion upon the
land of Camelot, and there he let hang his shield upon the pavilion.
And that same day came two knights of King Arthur’s, that one was Sir
Ector de Maris, and Sir Morganor. And they touched the shield, and bade
him come out of the pavilion for to joust, an he would joust. Ye shall
be answered, said Sir Tristram, an ye will tarry a little while. So he
made him ready, and first he smote down Sir Ector de Maris, and after
he smote down Sir Morganor, all with one spear, and sore bruised them.
And when they lay upon the earth they asked Sir Tristram what he was,
and of what country he was knight. Fair lords, said Sir Tristram, wit
ye well that I am of Cornwall. Alas, said Sir Ector, now am I ashamed
that ever any Cornish knight should overcome me. And then for despite
Sir Ector put off his armour from him, and went on foot, and would not
ride.