CHAPTER IV. How the battle was finished or he came, and how King Arthur
founded an abbey where the battle was.

Therewithal came one to King Arthur, and told him that King Pellinore
was within three mile with a great host; and he said, Go unto him, and
let him understand how we have sped. So within a while King Pellinore
came with a great host, and saluted the people and the king, and there
was great joy made on every side. Then the king let search how much
people of his party there was slain; and there were found but little
past two hundred men slain and eight knights of the Table Round in
their pavilions. Then the king let rear and devise in the same place
whereat the battle was done a fair abbey, and endowed it with great
livelihood, and let it call the Abbey of La Beale Adventure. But when
some of them came into their countries, whereof the five kings were
kings, and told them how they were slain, there was made great dole.
And all King Arthur’s enemies, as the King of North Wales, and the
kings of the North, [when they] wist of the battle, they were passing
heavy. And so the king returned unto Camelot in haste.

And when he was come to Camelot he called King Pellinore unto him, and
said, Ye understand well that we have lost eight knights of the best of
the Table Round, and by your advice we will choose eight again of the
best we may find in this court. Sir, said Pellinore, I shall counsel
you after my conceit the best: there are in your court full noble
knights both of old and young; and therefore by mine advice ye shall
choose half of the old and half of the young. Which be the old? said
King Arthur. Sir, said King Pellinore, meseemeth that King Uriens that
hath wedded your sister Morgan le Fay, and the King of the Lake, and
Sir Hervise de Revel, a noble knight, and Sir Galagars, the fourth.
This is well devised, said King Arthur, and right so shall it be. Now,
which are the four young knights? said Arthur. Sir, said Pellinore, the
first is Sir Gawaine, your nephew, that is as good a knight of his time
as any is in this land; and the second as meseemeth best is Sir Griflet
le Fise de Dieu, that is a good knight and full desirous in arms, and
who may see him live he shall prove a good knight; and the third as
meseemeth is well to be one of the knights of the Round Table, Sir Kay
the Seneschal, for many times he hath done full worshipfully, and now
at your last battle he did full honourably for to undertake to slay two
kings. By my head, said Arthur, he is best worth to be a knight of the
Round Table of any that ye have rehearsed, an he had done no more
prowess in his life days.