CHAPTER XVII. How Sir Tristram departed from Tintagil, and how he
sorrowed and was so long in a forest till he was out of his mind.

Then Sir Tristram dread sore lest he were discovered unto the king that
he was there; wherefore he drew him to the strength of the Tower, and
armed him in such armour as he had for to fight with them that would
withstand him. And so when Sir Tristram saw there was no resistance
against him he sent Gouvernail for his horse and his spear, and
knightly he rode forth out of the castle openly, that was called the
Castle of Tintagil. And even at gate he met with Gingalin, Sir
Gawaine’s son. And anon Sir Gingalin put his spear in his rest, and ran
upon Sir Tristram and brake his spear; and Sir Tristram at that time
had but a sword, and gave him such a buffet upon the helm that he fell
down from his saddle, and his sword slid adown, and carved asunder his
horse’s neck. And so Sir Tristram rode his way into the forest, and all
this doing saw King Mark. And then he sent a squire unto the hurt
knight, and commanded him to come to him, and so he did. And when King
Mark wist that it was Sir Gingalin he welcomed him and gave him an
horse, and asked him what knight it was that had encountered with him.
Sir, said Gingalin, I wot not what knight he was, but well I wot that
he sigheth and maketh great dole.

Then Sir Tristram within a while met with a knight of his own, that
hight Sir Fergus. And when he had met with him he made great sorrow,
insomuch that he fell down off his horse in a swoon, and in such sorrow
he was in three days and three nights. Then at the last Sir Tristram
sent unto the court by Sir Fergus, for to spere what tidings. And so as
he rode by the way he met with a damosel that came from Sir Palomides,
to know and seek how Sir Tristram did. Then Sir Fergus told her how he
was almost out of his mind. Alas, said the damosel, where shall I find
him? In such a place, said Sir Fergus. Then Sir Fergus found Queen
Isoud sick in her bed, making the greatest dole that ever any earthly
woman made. And when the damosel found Sir Tristram she made great dole
because she might not amend him, for the more she made of him the more
was his pain. And at the last Sir Tristram took his horse and rode away
from her. And then was it three days or that she could find him, and
then she brought him meat and drink, but he would none; and then
another time Sir Tristram escaped away from the damosel, and it happed
him to ride by the same castle where Sir Palomides and Sir Tristram did
battle when La Beale Isoud departed them. And there by fortune the
damosel met with Sir Tristram again, making the greatest dole that ever
earthly creature made; and she yede to the lady of that castle and told
her of the misadventure of Sir Tristram. Alas, said the lady of that
castle, where is my lord, Sir Tristram? Right here by your castle, said
the damosel. In good time, said the lady, is he so nigh me; he shall
have meat and drink of the best; and an harp I have of his whereupon he
taught me, for of goodly harping he beareth the prize in the world. So
this lady and damosel brought him meat and drink, but he ate little
thereof. Then upon a night he put his horse from him, and then he
unlaced his armour, and then Sir Tristram would go into the wilderness,
and brast down the trees and boughs; and otherwhile when he found the
harp that the lady sent him, then would he harp, and play thereupon and
weep together. And sometime when Sir Tristram was in the wood that the
lady wist not where he was, then would she sit her down and play upon
that harp: then would Sir Tristram come to that harp, and hearken
thereto, and sometime he would harp himself. Thus he there endured a
quarter of a year. Then at the last he ran his way, and she wist not
where he was become. And then was he naked and waxed lean and poor of
flesh; and so he fell in the fellowship of herdmen and shepherds, and
daily they would give him some of their meat and drink. And when he did
any shrewd deed they would beat him with rods, and so they clipped him
with shears and made him like a fool.