CHAPTER XVI. How Sir Tristram came to La Beale Isoud, and how Kehydius
began to love Beale Isoud, and of a letter that Tristram found.

And then at a day set Sir Tristram and Sir Lamorak met at the well; and
then they took Kehydius at the forester’s house, and so they rode with
him to the ship where they left Dame Bragwaine and Gouvernail, and so
they sailed into Cornwall all wholly together. And by assent and
information of Dame Bragwaine when they were landed they rode unto Sir
Dinas, the Seneschal, a trusty friend of Sir Tristram’s. And so Dame
Bragwaine and Sir Dinas rode to the court of King Mark, and told the
queen, La Beale Isoud, that Sir Tristram was nigh her in that country.
Then for very pure joy La Beale Isoud swooned; and when she might speak
she said: Gentle knight Seneschal, help that I might speak with him,
outher my heart will brast. Then Sir Dinas and Dame Bragwaine brought
Sir Tristram and Kehydius privily unto the court, unto a chamber
whereas La Beale Isoud had assigned it; and to tell the joys that were
betwixt La Beale Isoud and Sir Tristram, there is no tongue can tell
it, nor heart think it, nor pen write it. And as the French book maketh
mention, at the first time that ever Sir Kehydius saw La Beale Isoud he
was so enamoured upon her that for very pure love he might never
withdraw it. And at the last, as ye shall hear or the book be ended,
Sir Kehydius died for the love of La Beale Isoud. And then privily he
wrote unto her letters and ballads of the most goodliest that were used
in those days. And when La Beale Isoud understood his letters she had
pity of his complaint, and unavised she wrote another letter to comfort
him withal.

And Sir Tristram was all this while in a turret at the commandment of
La Beale Isoud, and when she might she came unto Sir Tristram. So on a
day King Mark played at the chess under a chamber window; and at that
time Sir Tristram and Sir Kehydius were within the chamber over King
Mark, and as it mishapped Sir Tristram found the letter that Kehydius
sent unto La Beale Isoud, also he had found the letter that she wrote
unto Kehydius, and at that same time La Beale Isoud was in the same
chamber. Then Sir Tristram came unto La Beale Isoud and said: Madam,
here is a letter that was sent unto you, and here is the letter that ye
sent unto him that sent you that letter. Alas, Madam, the good love
that I have loved you; and many lands and riches have I forsaken for
your love, and now ye are a traitress to me, the which doth me great
pain. But as for thee, Sir Kehydius, I brought thee out of Brittany
into this country, and thy father, King Howel, I won his lands, howbeit
I wedded thy sister Isoud la Blanche Mains for the goodness she did
unto me. And yet, as I am true knight, she is a clean maiden for me;
but wit thou well, Sir Kehydius, for this falsehood and treason thou
hast done me, I will revenge it upon thee. And therewithal Sir Tristram
drew out his sword and said: Sir Kehydius, keep thee, and then La Beale
Isoud swooned to the earth. And when Sir Kehydius saw Sir Tristram come
upon him he saw none other boot, but leapt out at a bay-window even
over the head where sat King Mark playing at the chess. And when the
king saw one come hurling over his head he said: Fellow, what art thou,
and what is the cause thou leapest out at that window? My lord the
king, said Kehydius, it fortuned me that I was asleep in the window
above your head, and as I slept I slumbered, and so I fell down. And
thus Sir Kehydius excused him.