CHAPTER XXII. How Griflet was made knight, and jousted with a knight.

Thou art full young and tender of age, said Arthur, for to take so high
an order on thee. Sir, said Griflet, I beseech you make me knight. Sir,
said Merlin, it were great pity to lose Griflet, for he will be a
passing good man when he is of age, abiding with you the term of his
life. And if he adventure his body with yonder knight at the fountain,
it is in great peril if ever he come again, for he is one of the best
knights of the world, and the strongest man of arms. Well, said Arthur.
So at the desire of Griflet the king made him knight. Now, said Arthur
unto Sir Griflet, sith I have made you knight thou must give me a gift.
What ye will, said Griflet. Thou shalt promise me by the faith of thy
body, when thou hast jousted with the knight at the fountain, whether
it fall ye be on foot or on horseback, that right so ye shall come
again unto me without making any more debate. I will promise you, said
Griflet, as you desire. Then took Griflet his horse in great haste, and
dressed his shield and took a spear in his hand, and so he rode a great
wallop till he came to the fountain, and thereby he saw a rich
pavilion, and thereby under a cloth stood a fair horse well saddled and
bridled, and on a tree a shield of divers colours and a great spear.
Then Griflet smote on the shield with the butt of his spear, that the
shield fell down to the ground. With that the knight came out of the
pavilion, and said, Fair knight, why smote ye down my shield? For I
will joust with you, said Griflet. It is better ye do not, said the
knight, for ye are but young, and late made knight, and your might is
nothing to mine. As for that, said Griflet, I will joust with you. That
is me loath, said the knight, but sith I must needs, I will dress me
thereto. Of whence be ye? said the knight. Sir, I am of Arthur’s court.
So the two knights ran together that Griflet’s spear all to-shivered;
and there withal he smote Griflet through the shield and the left side,
and brake the spear that the truncheon stuck in his body, that horse
and knight fell down.