CHAPTER XIII. How Sir Lamorak met with Sir Meliagaunce, and fought
together for the beauty of Dame Guenever.

Right so as they stood talking thus Sir Lamorak was ware how Sir
Launcelot came riding straight toward them; then Sir Lamorak saluted
him, and he him again. And then Sir Lamorak asked Sir Launcelot if
there were anything that he might do for him in these marches. Nay,
said Sir Launcelot, not at this time I thank you. Then either departed
from other, and Sir Lamorak rode again thereas he left the two knights,
and then he found them hid in the leaved wood. Fie on you, said Sir
Lamorak, false cowards, pity and shame it is that any of you should
take the high order of knighthood. So Sir Lamorak departed from them,
and within a while he met with Sir Meliagaunce. And then Sir Lamorak
asked him why he loved Queen Guenever as he did: For I was not far from
you when ye made your complaint by the chapel. Did ye so? said Sir
Meliagaunce, then will I abide by it: I love Queen Guenever, what will
ye with it? I will prove and make good that she is the fairest lady and
most of beauty in the world. As to that, said Sir Lamorak, I say nay
thereto, for Queen Morgawse of Orkney, mother to Sir Gawaine, and his
mother is the fairest queen and lady that beareth the life. That is not
so, said Sir Meliagaunce, and that will I prove with my hands upon thy
body. Will ye so? said Sir Lamorak, and in a better quarrel keep I not
to fight. Then they departed either from other in great wrath. And then
they came riding together as it had been thunder, and either smote
other so sore that their horses fell backward to the earth. And then
they avoided their horses, and dressed their shields, and drew their
swords. And then they hurtled together as wild boars, and thus they
fought a great while. For Meliagaunce was a good man and of great
might, but Sir Lamorak was hard big for him, and put him always aback,
but either had wounded other sore.

And as they stood thus fighting, by fortune came Sir Launcelot and Sir
Bleoberis riding. And then Sir Launcelot rode betwixt them, and asked
them for what cause they fought so together: And ye are both knights of
King Arthur!

Sir, said Meliagaunce, I shall tell you for what cause we do this
battle. I praised my lady, Queen Guenever, and said she was the fairest
lady of the world, and Sir Lamorak said nay thereto, for he said Queen
Morgawse of Orkney was fairer than she and more of beauty. Ah, Sir
Lamorak, why sayest thou so? it is not thy part to dispraise thy
princess that thou art under her obeissance, and we all. And therewith
he alighted on foot, and said: For this quarrel, make thee ready, for I
will prove upon thee that Queen Guenever is the fairest lady and most
of bounty in the world. Sir, said Sir Lamorak, I am loath to have ado
with you in this quarrel, for every man thinketh his own lady fairest;
and though I praise the lady that I love most ye should not be wroth;
for though my lady, Queen Guenever, be fairest in your eye, wit ye well
Queen Morgawse of Orkney is fairest in mine eye, and so every knight
thinketh his own lady fairest; and wit ye well, sir, ye are the man in
the world except Sir Tristram that I am most loathest to have ado
withal, but, an ye will needs fight with me I shall endure you as long
as I may. Then spake Sir Bleoberis and said: My lord Sir Launcelot, I
wist you never so misadvised as ye are now, for Sir Lamorak sayeth you
but reason and knightly; for I warn you I have a lady, and methinketh
that she is the fairest lady of the world. Were this a great reason
that ye should be wroth with me for such language? And well ye wot,
that Sir Lamorak is as noble a knight as I know, and he hath ought you
and us ever good will, and therefore I pray you be good friends. Then
Sir Launcelot said unto Sir Lamorak. I pray you forgive me mine evil
will, and if I was misadvised I will amend it. Sir, said Sir Lamorak,
the amends is soon made betwixt you and me. And so Sir Launcelot and
Sir Bleoberis departed, and Sir Meliagaunce and Sir Lamorak took their
horses, and either departed from other.

And within a while came King Arthur, and met with Sir Lamorak, and
jousted with him; and there he smote down Sir Lamorak, and wounded him
sore with a spear, and so he rode from him; wherefore Sir Lamorak was
wroth that he would not fight with him on foot, howbeit that Sir
Lamorak knew not King Arthur.