CONTENTS.

DAY                                                         PAGE
   1. God's Call to Holiness--1 Pet. i. 15, 16,                 11

   2. God's Provision for Holiness--1 Cor. i. 2,                19

   3. Holiness and Creation--Gen. ii. 3,                        28

   4. Holiness and Revelation--Ex. iii. 4-6,                    36

   5. Holiness and Redemption--Ex. xiii. 2,                     46

   6. Holiness and Glory--Ex. xv. 11-17,                        55

   7. Holiness and Obedience--Ex. xix. 5, 6,                    64

   8. Holiness and Indwelling--Ex. xxv. 8,                      73

   9. Holiness and Meditation--Ex. xxviii. 36-38,               81

  10. Holiness and Separation--Lev. xx. 24, 26,                 89

  11. The Holy One of Israel--Lev. xi. 45,                      98

  12. The Thrice Holy One--Isa. vi. 1-3,                       107

  13. Holiness and Humility--Isa. lvii. 15,                    117

  14. The Holy One of God--John vi. 69,                        125

  15. The Holy Spirit--John vii. 39,                           133

  16. Holiness and Truth--John xvii. 17,                       142

  17. Holiness and Crucifixion--John xvii. 19,                 150

  18. Holiness and Faith--Acts xxvi. 18,                       158

  19. Holiness and Resurrection--Rom. i. 4,                    167

  20. Holiness and Liberty--Rom. vi. 18-22,                    175

  21. Holiness and Happiness--Rom. xiv. 17,                    184

  22. In Christ our Sanctification--1 Cor. i. 30, 31,          192

  23. Holiness and the Body--1 Cor. iii. 16,                   201

  24. Holiness and Cleansing--2 Cor. vii. 1,                   210

  25. Holiness and Blamelessness--1 Thess. iii. 12, 13,        219

  26. Holiness and the Will of God--1 Thess. iv. 3,            227

  27. Holiness and Service--2 Tim. ii. 21,                     235

  28. The Way into the Holiest--Heb. x. 19,                    243

  29. Holiness and Chastisement--Heb. xii. 10, 14,             253

  30. The Unction from the Holy One--1 John ii. 20, 27,        262

  31. Holiness and Heaven--2 Pet. iii. 11,                     271

      Notes,                                                   281

First Day.

HOLY IN CHRIST.

God's Call to Holiness.

  'Like as He which called you is _holy_, be ye yourselves also _holy_
  in all manner of living; because it is written, Ye shall be _holy_,
  for I am _holy_.'--1 Pet. i. 15, 16.

The call of God is the manifestation in time of the purpose of eternity:
'Whom He predestinated, them He also _called_.' Believers are 'the
_called_ according to His purpose.' In His call He reveals to us what
His thoughts and His will concerning us are, and what the life to which
He invites us. In His call He makes clear to us what the hope of our
calling is; as we spiritually apprehend and enter into this, our life on
earth will be the reflection of His purpose in eternity.

Holy Scripture uses more than one word to indicate the object or aim of
our calling, but none more frequently than what Peter speaks of
here--God has called us _to be holy_ as He is holy. Paul addresses
believers twice as 'called to be _holy_' (Rom. i. 7; 1 Cor. i. 2). 'God
called us', he says, 'not for uncleanness, but _in sanctification_'
(1 Thess. iv. 7). When he writes, 'The God of peace _sanctify_ you
wholly,' he adds, 'Faithful is He which _calleth_ you, who also will do
it' (1 Thess. v. 24). The calling itself is spoken of as 'a _holy_
calling.' The eternal purpose of which the calling is the outcome, is
continually also connected with holiness as its aim. 'He hath _chosen_
us in Him, that we should be _holy_ and without blame' (Eph. i. 4).
'Whom God _chose_ from the beginning unto _salvation in sanctification_'
(2 Thess. ii. 12). '_Elect_ according to the foreknowledge of the
Father, through _sanctification_ of the Spirit' (1 Pet. i. 2). The call
is the unveiling of the purpose that the Father from eternity had set
His heart upon: that we should be holy.

It needs no proof that it is of infinite importance to know aright what
God has called us to. A misunderstanding here may have fatal results.
You may have heard that God calls you to salvation or to happiness, to
receive pardon or to obtain heaven, and never noticed that all these
were subordinate. It was to 'salvation _in sanctification_,' it was to
Holiness in the first place, as the element in which salvation and
heaven are to be found. The complaints of many Christians as to lack of
joy and strength, as to failure and want of growth, are simply owing to
this--the place God gave Holiness in His call they have not given it in
their response. God and they have never yet come to an agreement on
this.

No wonder that Paul, in the chapter in which he had spoken to the
Ephesians of their being 'chosen to be holy' prays for the spirit of
wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of God to be given to believers,
that they might know 'the hope of their _calling_' (i. 17, 18). Let all
of us, who feel that we have too little realized that we are called to
Holiness, pray this prayer. It is just what we need. Let us ask God to
show us how, as He who hath called us is Himself holy, so we are to be
holy too; our calling is a holy calling, a calling before and above
everything, to Holiness. Let us ask Him to show us what Holiness is, His
Holiness first, and then our Holiness; to show us how He has set His
heart upon it as the one thing He wants to see in us, as being His own
image and likeness; to show us too the unutterable blessedness and glory
of sharing with Christ in His Holiness. Oh! that God by His Spirit would
teach us what it means that we are called to be holy as He is holy. We
can easily conceive what a mighty influence it would exert.

'Like as He which called you is holy, be ye yourselves also holy'. How
this call of God shows us the true _motive_ to Holiness. 'Be ye holy,
for I am holy.' It is as if God said, Holiness is my blessedness and my
glory: without this you cannot, in the very nature of things, see me or
enjoy me. Holiness is my blessedness and my glory: there is nothing
higher to be conceived; I invite you to share with me in it, I invite
you to likeness to myself: 'Be ye holy, for I am holy.' Is it not
enough, has it no attraction, does it not move and draw you mightily,
the hope of being with me, partakers of my Holiness? I have nothing
better to offer--I offer you myself: 'Be holy, for I am holy.' Shall we
not cry earnestly to God to show us the glory of His Holiness, that our
souls may be made willing to give everything in response to this
wondrous call?

As we listen to the call, it shows also the _nature_ of true Holiness.
'_Like as_ He is holy, so be ye also holy.' To be holy is to be Godlike,
to have a disposition, a will, a character like God. The thought almost
looks like blasphemy, until we listen again, 'He hath chosen us _in
Christ_ to be holy.' In Christ the Holiness of God appeared in a human
life: in Christ's example, in His mind and Spirit, we have the Holiness
of the Invisible One translated into the forms of human life and
conduct. To be Christlike is to be Godlike; to be Christlike is to be
holy as God is holy.

The call equally reveals the _power_ of Holiness. 'There is none holy
but the Lord;' there is no Holiness but what He has, or rather what He
is, and gives. Holiness is not something we do or attain: it is the
communication of the Divine life, the inbreathing of the Divine nature,
the power of the Divine Presence resting on us. And our power to become
holy is to be found in the call of God: the Holy One calls us to
Himself, that He may make us holy in possessing Himself. He not only
says 'I am holy,' but 'I am the Lord, who make holy.' It is because the
call to Holiness comes from the God of infinite Power and Love that we
may have the confidence: we can be holy.

The call no less reveals the _standard_ of Holiness. '_Like as He_ is
holy, _so ye also_ yourselves,' or (as in margin, R.V.), 'Like the Holy
One, which calleth you, be ye yourselves also holy.' There is not one
standard of Holiness for God and another for man. The nature of light is
the same, whether we see it in the sun or in a candle: the nature of
Holiness remains unchanged, whether it be God or man in whom it dwells.
The Lord Jesus could say nothing less than, 'Be perfect, even as your
Father in heaven is perfect.' When God calls us to Holiness, He calls us
to Himself and His own life: the more carefully we listen to the voice,
and let it sink into our hearts, the more will all human standards fall
away, and only the words be heard, Holy, as I am holy.

And the call shows us the _path_ to Holiness. The calling of God is one
of mighty efficacy, an effectual calling. Oh! let us but listen to it,
let us but listen to Him, and the call will with Divine power work what
it offers. He calleth the things that are not as though they were: His
call gives life to the dead, and holiness to those whom He has made
alive. He calls us to listen as He speaks of His Holiness, and of our
holiness like His. He calls us to Himself, to study, to fear, to love,
to claim His Holiness. He calls us to Christ, in whom Divine Holiness
became human Holiness, to see and admire, to desire and accept what is
all for us. He calls us to the indwelling and the teaching of the
Spirit of Holiness, to yield ourselves that He may bring home to us and
breathe within us what is ours in Christ. Christian! listen to God
calling thee to Holiness. Come and learn what His Holiness is, and what
thine is and must be.

Yes, be very silent and listen. When God called Abraham, he answered,
Here am I. When God called Moses from the bush, he answered, Here am I,
and he hid his face, for he was afraid to look upon God. God is calling
thee to Holiness, to Himself the Holy One, that He may make thee holy.
Let thy whole soul answer, Here am I, Lord! Speak, Lord! Show Thyself,
Lord! Here am I. As you listen, the voice will sound ever deeper and
ever stiller: Be holy, _as_ I am holy. Be holy, _for_ I am holy. You
will hear a voice coming out of the great eternity, from the
council-chamber of redemption, and as you catch its distant whisper, it
will be, Be holy, I am holy. You will hear a voice from Paradise, the
Creator making the seventh day holy for man whom He had created, and
saying, Be holy. You will hear the voice from Sinai, amid thunderings
and lightnings, and still it is, Be holy, as I am holy. You will hear a
voice from Calvary, and there above all it is, Be holy, for I am holy.

Child of God, have you ever realized it, our Father is calling us to
Himself, to be holy as He is holy? Must we not confess that happiness
has been to us more than holiness, salvation than sanctification? Oh! it
is not too late to redeem the error. Let us now band ourselves together
to listen to the voice that calls, to draw nigh, and find out and know
what Holiness is, or rather, find out and know Himself the Holy One. And
if the first approach to Him fill us with shame and confusion, make us
fear and shrink back, let us still listen to the Voice and the Call, 'Be
holy, as I am holy.' 'Faithful is He which _calleth_, who also _will do
it_.' All our fears and questions will be met by the Holy One who has
revealed His Holiness, with this one purpose in view, that we might
share it with Him. As we yield ourselves in deep stillness of soul to
listen to the Holy Voice that calls us, it will waken within us new
desire and strong faith, and the most precious of all promises will be
to us this word of Divine command:

  BE HOLY, FOR I AM HOLY.