Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts! the whole earth is full of Thy
glory! Let that glory fill the heart of Thy child, as he bows before
Thee. I come now to drink of the river of the water of life that flows
from under the throne of God and of the Lamb. Glory be to God and to the
Lamb for the gift that hath not entered into the heart of man to
conceive--the gift of the Holy indwelling Spirit.

O my Father! in the name of Jesus I ask Thee that I may be strengthened
with might by Thy Spirit in the inner man. Teach me, I pray Thee, to
believe that Thou hast given Him, to accept and expect Him to fill and
rule my whole inner being. Teach me to give up to Him; not to will or to
run, not to think or to work in my strength, but in quiet confidence to
wait and to know that He works in me. Teach me what it is to have no
confidence in the flesh, and to serve Thee in the Spirit. Teach me what
it is in all things to be led by Thy Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Thy
Holiness.

And grant, gracious Father, that through Him I may hear Thee speak and
reveal Thyself to me in power: I AM HOLY. May He glorify to me and in
me, Jesus, in whom Thy command 'BE HOLY' hath been so blessedly
fulfilled on my behalf. And let the Holy Spirit give me the anointing
and the sealing which bring the perfect assurance that in Him Thy
promise is being gloriously fulfilled, 'I MAKE YOU HOLY.' Amen.

1. It it universally admitted that the Holy Spirit has not, in
     the teaching of the Church or the faith of believers, that
     place of honour and power, which becomes Him as the Revealer of
     the Father and the Son. Seek a deep conviction that without the
     Holy Spirit the clearest teaching on holiness, the most fervent
     desires, the most blessed experiences even, will only be
     temporary, will produce no permanent result, will bring no
     abiding rest.

  2. The Holy Spirit dwells within, and works within, in the hidden
     deep of your nature. Seek above everything the clear and
     habitual assurance that He is within you, doing His work.

  3. To this end, deny self and its work in serving God. Your own
     power to think and pray and believe and strive--lay it all down
     expressly and distinctly in God's presence; claim, accept, and
     believe in the hidden workings of the indwelling Spirit.

  4. As the Son ever spake of the Father, so the Spirit ever points
     to Christ. The soul that yields itself to the Spirit will of
     Him learn to know how Christ is our holiness, how we can always
     abide in Christ our Sanctification. What a vain effort it has
     often been without the Spirit! '_As the anointing taught you_,
     ye abide in Him.'

  5. In the temple of thine heart, beloved believer, there is a
     secret place, within the veil, where dwells, often all unknown,
     the Spirit of God. Do bow in deep reverence before the Father,
     and ask that He may work mightily. Expect the Spirit to do His
     work: He will make Thy inner man a fit home, Thy heart a
     throne, for Jesus, and reveal Him there.