Holy, holy, holy, the Lord God Almighty! which wast, and art, and art to
come! I worship Thee as the Triune God. With face veiled and feet
covered, I would bow in deep humility and silence, till Thy mercy lift
me as on eagles' wings to behold Thy glory.

Most merciful God! who hast called me to be holy as Thou art holy, oh,
reveal to me somewhat of Thy Holiness! As it shines upon me and strikes
death into the creature and the flesh, may even the most involuntary
taint of sin, and its slightest movement, become unbearable. As it
shines and revives the hope of being partaker of Thy Holiness, may the
confidence grow strong that Thou Thyself art making me holy, wilt even
make me a messenger of Thy Holiness.

Thrice Holy God! I worship Thee as my God. HOLY! THE FATHER; holy and
making holy; making holy His own Son and sending Him into the world,
that we might behold the very glory of God in a human face, the face of
Jesus Christ. HOLY! THE SON; the Holy One of God, fulfilling the will of
the Father, and so making holy Himself that He might be our holiness.
HOLY! THE SPIRIT; the Spirit of Holiness, dwelling within us, making the
Son and His Holiness our own, and so making us partakers of the Holiness
of God. O my God! I bow down, and worship, and adore.

May even now the worship of heaven that rests not day or night be the
worship my soul renders Thee without ceasing. May its song be, down in
the depths of the heart, the keynote of my life: HOLY, HOLY, HOLY, Lord
God Almighty! which wast, and art, and art to come. Amen.

1. Thought always needs to distinguish and separate: in life
     alone there is perfect unity. The more we know the living God,
     the more we shall realize how truly the Three are One. In each
     act of One Person the other Two are present. There is not a
     prayer rises but the Presence of the Holy Three is needed
     through Christ, in the Spirit, we speak to the Father.

  2. In faith to apprehend this is to have the secret of holiness.
     The Holy God above us, ever giving and working; the Holy One of
     God, the living gift, who has possession of us, in whom we are;
     the Holy Spirit, God within us, through whom the Father works,
     and the Son is revealed: this is the God who says, I am holy, I
     make holy. In the perfect unity of the work of the Three,
     holiness is found.

  3. No wonder that the love of the Father and the grace of the
     Son do not accomplish more, when the fellowship of the Holy
     Spirit is little understood or sought or accepted. The Holy
     Spirit is the fruit and crown of the Divine Revelation, through
     whom the Son and the Father come to us. If you would know God,
     if you would be holy, you must be taught and led of the Spirit.

  4. As often as you worship the Thrice Holy One, hearken if no
     voice be heard: Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? Let
     the answer rise, Here am I, send me, and offer yourself to be
     _a messenger of the holiness of God_ to those around you.

  5. When in meditation and worship you have sought to take in and
     express what God's word has taught, then comes the time for
     confessing how you know nothing, and for waiting on God _to
     reveal Himself_.