O Most Holy God! we do beseech Thee, reveal Thou to Thy children what it
meaneth that Thou hast not only called them to holiness, but even called
them by this name, 'the holy ones in Christ Jesus.' Oh that every child
of Thine might know that He bears this name, might know what it means,
and what power there is in it to make Him what it calls him. Holy Lord
God! oh that the time of Thy visitation might speedily come, and each
child of Thine on earth be known as a holy one!

To this end we pray Thee to reveal to Thy saints what Thy Holiness is.
Teach us to worship and to wait until Thou hast spoken unto our souls
with Divine Power Thy word, 'I am holy.' Oh that it may search out and
convict us of our unholiness!

And reveal to us, we pray Thee, that as holy as Thou art, even a
consuming fire, so holy is Thy command in its determined and
uncompromising purpose to have us holy. O God! let Thy voice sound
through the depth of our being, with a power from which there is no
escape: Be holy, be holy.

And let us thus, between Thine infinite Holiness on the one hand and our
unholiness on the other, be driven and be drawn to accept of Christ as
our sanctification, to abide in Him as our life and our power to be what
Thou wouldst have us--'Holy in Christ Jesus.'

O Father! let Thy Spirit make this precious word life and truth within
us. Amen.

1. You are entering anew on the study of a Divine mystery. 'Trust
     not to your own understanding;' wait for the teaching of the Spirit
     of truth.

  2. _In Christ._ A commentator says, 'The phrase denotes two moral
     facts--first, the act of faith whereby a man lays hold of Christ;
     second, the community of life with Him contracted by means of this
     faith.' There is still another fact, the greatest of all: that it
     is by an act of Divine power that I am in Christ and am kept in
     Him. It is this I want to realize: the Divineness of my position in
     Jesus.
  3. Grasp the two sides of the truth. _You are_ holy in Christ with
     a Divine holiness. In the faith of that, you are to _be holy_, to
     _become holy_ with a human holiness, the Divine Holiness manifest
     in all the conduct of a human life.
  4. This Christ is a Living Person, a Loving Saviour: how He will
     delight to get complete possession, and do all the work in you!
     Keep hold of this all along as we go on: you have a claim on
     Christ, on His Love and Power, to make you holy. As His redeemed
     one, you are at this moment, whatever and wherever you be, _in
     Him_. His Holy Presence and Love are around you. You are _in Him_,
     in the enclosure of that tender love, which ever encircles you with
     His Holy Presence. _In that Presence, accepted and realized, is
     your holiness._