O my God! who hast separated me for Thyself, I beseech Thee, by Thy
mighty power, to make this Divine separation deed and truth to me. May
within, in the depths of my own spirit, and without, in all my
intercourse, the crown of separation of my God be upon me.

I pray Thee especially, O my God, to perfect in power the separation
from self! Let Thy Presence in the indwelling of my Lord Jesus be the
power that banishes self from the throne. I have turned from it with
abhorrence; oh, my Father, reveal Thy Son fully in me! it is His
enthronement in my heart can keep me as Thy own, as Himself takes the
place of myself.

And give me grace, Lord, in my outward life to wait for a Divine wisdom,
that I may know to witness, for Thy glory and for what Thy people need,
to the blessedness of an entire giving up of everything for God, a
separation that holds back nothing, to be His and His alone.

Holy Lord God! visit Thy people. Oh, withdraw Thou them from the world
and conformity to it. Separate, Lord, separate Thine own for Thyself.
Separate, Lord, the wheat from the chaff; separate, as by fire, the gold
from the dross; that it may be seen who are the Lord's, even His holy
ones. Amen.

1. Love separates effectually. With what jealousy a husband claims
     his wife, a mother her children, a miser his possessions! Pray that
     the Holy Spirit may show how God brought you to Himself, that you
     should be His. 'He is a holy God; He is a Jealous God.' God's love
     shed abroad in the heart makes separation easy.

  2. Death separates effectually. If I reckon myself to be indeed
     dead in Christ, I am separated from self by the power of Christ's
     death. Life separates still more mightily. As I say, 'Not I, but
     Christ liveth in me,' I am lifted up out of the life of self.

  3. Separation must be manifest; it is meant as a witness to others
     and ourselves; it must find expression in the external, if
     internally it is to be real and strong. It is the characteristic of
     a symbolic action that it not merely expresses a feeling, but
     nourishes and strengthens the feeling to which it corresponds. When
     the soul enters the fellowship of God, it feels the need of
     external separation, sometimes even from what appears to others
     harmless. If animated by the spirit of lowly consecration to God,
     the external may be a great strengthening of the true separateness.

  4. Separation to God and appropriation by Him go together. This has
     been the blessing that has come to martyrs, confessors,
     missionaries,--all who have given distinct expression to the
     forsaking all.

  5. Separation begins in love, and ends in love. The spirit of
     separation is the spirit of self-sacrifice, of surrender to the
     love of God; the truly separate one will be the most loving and
     love-winning, given up to serve God and man. Is not what separates,
     what distinguishes Jesus from all others, His self-sacrificing
     love? This is His separateness, in which we are to be made like
     Him.

  6. God's holiness is His separateness; let us enter into _His_
     separateness from the world; that will be our holiness. Unite
     thyself to God. Then art thou separate and holy. God separates for
     Himself, not by an act from without, but as His Will and Presence
     take possession of us.