O Thou, who art the Holy One, I come to Thee now for the renewed
anointing. O Father! this is the one gift Thy child may most surely
count on--the gift of Thy Holy Spirit. Grant me now to sing, 'Thou
anointest my head;' 'I am anointed with fresh oil.'

I desire to confess with deep shame that Thy Spirit has been sorely
grieved and dishonoured. How often the fleshly mind has usurped His
place in Thy worship! How much the fleshly will has sought to do His
work! O my Father! let Thy light shine through me to convince me very
deeply of this. Let Thy judgment come on all that there is of human
willing and running.

Blessed Father! grant me, according to the riches of Thy glory, even now
to be strengthened with might by Thy Spirit in the inner man. Strengthen
my faith to believe in Christ for a full share in His anointing. Oh,
teach me day by day to wait for and receive the anointing with fresh
oil!

O my Father! draw me and all Thy children to see that for the abiding in
Christ we need the abiding anointing. Father! we would walk humbly, in
the dependence of faith, counting upon the inner and ever-abiding
anointing. May we so be a sweet savour of Christ to all. Amen.

1. I think I know now the reason why at times we fail in the
     abiding. We think and read, we listen and pray, we try to
     believe and strive to look to Jesus only, and yet we fail. What
     was wanting was this: 'His anointing teacheth you; _even as_ it
     taught you, ye abide in him;' so far, and no farther.

  2. The washing always precedes the anointing: we cannot have the
     anointing if we fail in the cleansing. When cleansed and
     anointed we are fit for use.

  3. Would you have the abiding anointing? Yield yourself wholly
     to be sanctified and made meet for the Master's use: dwell in
     the Holiest of all, in God's presence: accept every
     chastisement as a fellowship in the way of the rent flesh: be
     sure the anointing will flow in union with Jesus. 'It is like
     the precious ointment upon the head of Aaron, that went down to
     the skirts of his garments.'

  4. The anointing is the Divine eye-salve, opening the eyes of the
     heart to know Jesus. So it teaches to abide in Him. I am sure
     most Christians have no conception of the danger and
     deceitfulness of a thought religion, with sweet and precious
     thoughts coming to us in books and preaching, and little power.
     The teaching of the Holy Spirit is in the heart first; man's
     teaching in the mind. Let all our thinking ever lead us to
     cease from thought, and to open the heart and will to the
     Spirit to teach there in His own Divine way, deeper than
     thought and feeling. Unseen, within the veil, the Holy Spirit
     abideth. Be silent and still, believe and expect, and cling to
     Jesus.

  5. Oh that God would visit His Church, and teach His children what
     it is to wait for, and receive, and walk in the full anointing,
     the anointing that abideth and teacheth to abide! Oh that the
     truth of the personal leading of the Holy Spirit in every
     believer were restored in the Church! He is doing it; He will
     do it.