Most Holy Lord God! I do bless Thee that Thy beloved Son, whom Thou
didst sanctify and send into the world, is now to us _the Holy One of
God_. I beseech Thee that my inner life may so be enlightened by the
Spirit that I may in faith fully know what this means.

May I know Him as the revelation of Thy Holiness, the incarnation in
human nature, even unto the death, of Thine infinite and unconquerable
hatred of sin, as of Thy amazing love to the sinner. May my soul be
filled with great fear and trust of Thee.

May I know Him as the exhibition of the Holiness in which we are now to
walk before Thee. He lived in Thy holy will. May I know Him as He
wrought out that holiness, to be communicated to us in a new human
nature, making it possible for us to live a holy life.

May I know Him as Thou hast placed me in Him in heaven, holy in Christ,
and as I may abide in Him by faith.

May I know Him, as He dwells in me, the Holy One of God on the throne of
my heart, breathing His Holy Spirit and maintaining His holy rule. So
shall I live holy in Christ.

O my Father! it pleased Thee that in Thy Son should all the fulness
dwell. In Him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; in Him
dwell the unsearchable riches of grace and holiness. I beseech Thee,
reveal Him to me, reveal Him in me, that I may not have to satisfy
myself with thoughts and desires, without the reality, but that in the
power of an endless life I may know Him, and be known of Him, the Holy
One of God. Amen.

1. In the holiness of Jesus we see what ours must be:
     righteousness, that hates sin and gives everything to have it
     destroyed; love, that seeks the sinner and gives everything to
     have him saved. 'Whosoever doeth not righteousness is not of
     God, neither he that loveth not his brother.'

  2. It is a solemn thought that we may be studying earnestly to
     know what holiness is, and yet have little of it, because we
     have little of Jesus. It is a blessed thought that a man may
     directly be little occupied with the thought of holiness, and
     yet have much of it, because he is full of Jesus.

  3. We need the whole of what God teaches in His Word in regard
     to holiness in all its different aspects. We need still more to
     be ever returning to the living centre where God imparts
     holiness. Jesus is _the Holy One of God_: to have _Him_ truly,
     to love _Him_ fervently, to trust and obey _Him_, to be _in
     Him_--this makes us holy.

  4. Your holiness is thus treasured up in this Divine, Almighty,
     and most gentle Saviour--surely there need to be no fear that
     He will not be ready or able to make you holy.

  5. With such a Sanctifier, how comes it that so many seekers
     after holiness fail so sadly, and know so little of the joy of
     a holy life?

     I am sure it is with very many this one thing: they seek to
     grasp and hold this Christ in their own strength, and know not
     how it is the Holy Spirit within them who must be waited for to
     reveal this Divine Being, the Holy One of God, in their hearts.