Most Holy God! once again I bless Thee for the wondrous revelation of
Thy Holiness. Not only have I heard Thee speak, 'I am holy,' but Thou
hast invited me to fellowship with Thyself: 'Be holy, as I am holy.'
Blessed be Thy name! I have heard more even: 'I make holy,' is Thy word
of promise, pledging Thine own Power to work out the purpose of Thy
Love. I do thank Thee for what Thou hast revealed in Thy Son, in Thy
Spirit, in Thy Word, of the path of Holiness. But how shall I bless Thee
for the lesson of this day, that there is not a loss or sorrow, not a
pain or care, not a temptation or trial, but Thy love also means it, and
makes it, to be a help in working out the holiness of Thy people.
Through each Thou drawest to Thyself, that they may taste how, in
accepting Thy Will of Love, there is blessing and deliverance.

Blessed Father! Thou knowest how often I have looked upon the
circumstances and the difficulties of this life as hindrances. Oh, let
them all, in the light of Thy holy purpose to make us partakers of Thy
Holiness, in the light of Thy Will and Thy Love, from this hour be
helps. Let, above all, the path of Thy Blessed Son, proving how
suffering is the discipline of a Father's love, and surrender the secret
of holiness, and sacrifice the entrance to the Holiest of all, be so
revealed that in the power of His Spirit and His grace that path may
become mine. Let even chastening, even the least, be from Thine own
hand, making me partaker of Thy Holiness. Amen.

1. How wonderful the revelation in the Epistle to the Hebrews of
     the holiness and the holy making power of suffering, as seen in
     the Son of God! 'He _learned obedience_ by the things which He
     suffered.' 'It became God to make the Author of our salvation
     _perfect_ through suffering, for both He that sanctifieth and
     they who are sanctified are all of one.' 'In that He Himself
     hath suffered, He is _able to succour_.' 'We behold Jesus,
     because of the suffering of death, _crowned with glory_ and
     honour.' Suffering is the way of the rent veil, the new and
     living way Jesus walked in and opened for us. Let all sufferers
     study this. Let all who are 'holy in Christ' here learn to know
     the Christ _in whom_ they are holy, and the way in which He
     sanctified Himself and sanctifies us.

  2. If we begin by realizing the sympathy of Jesus with us in our
     suffering, it will lead us on to what is more: sympathy with
     Jesus in His suffering, fellowship with Him to suffer even as
     He did.

  3. Let suffering and holiness be inseparably linked, as in God's
     mind and in Christ's person, so in your life through the
     Spirit. 'It became God to make Him perfect through suffering;
     for both He that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are
     all of one.' Let _every trial_, small or great, be the touch of
     God's hand, laying hold on you, to lead you to holiness. Give
     yourself into that hand.

  4. 'Insomuch as ye are partakers of _Christ's sufferings_,
     rejoice; for _the Spirit of glory_ and of God resteth on you.'