Most glorious God! I pray Thee to open my eyes to this wonderful liberty
with which Christ has made me free. May I enter fully into Thy word,
that sin shall have no dominion over me because I am not under the law
but under grace. May I know my liberty which I have in Christ Jesus, and
stand fast in it.

Father! Thy service is perfect liberty: reveal this too to me. Thou art
the infinitely Free, and Thy will knows no limits but what its own
perfection has placed. And Thou invitest us into Thy will, that we may
be free as Thou art. O my God! show me the beauty of Thy will, as it
frees me from self and from sin, and let it be my only blessedness. Let
the service of righteousness so be a joy and a strength to me, having
its fruit unto sanctification, leading me into Thy Holiness.

Blessed Lord Jesus! my Deliverer and my Liberty, I belong to Thee. I
give myself to Thy will, to know no will but Thine. Master! Thee and
Thee alone would I serve. I have my liberty in Thee! be Thou my Keeper.
I cannot stand for one moment out of Thee. In Thee I can stand fast: in
Thee I put my trust.

Most Holy God! as Thy free, obedient, loving child, Thou wilt make me
holy. Amen.

1. Liberty is the power to carry out unhindered the impulse of our
     nature. In Christ the child of God is free from every power
     that could hinder his acting out the law of his new nature.

  2. This liberty is of faith (Gal. v. 5, 6). By faith in Christ I
     enter into it, and stand in it.

  3. This liberty is of the Holy Spirit. 'Where the Spirit of the
     Lord is, there is liberty.' 'If ye be led of the Spirit, ye are
     not under the law.' A heart filled with the Spirit is made free
     indeed. But we are not made free that we may do our own will.
     No, made _free to follow the leading of the Holy Spirit_.
     'Where the Spirit is, there is liberty.'

  4. This liberty is in love. 'Ye were called for freedom; only use
     not your freedom for an occasion to the flesh, but through love
     be servants, one to another.' The freedom with which the Son
     makes free is a freedom to become like Himself, to love and to
     serve. 'Though I was free from all men, I brought myself under
     bondage to all, that I might gain the more.' This is the
     liberty of love.

  5. 'Being made free from sin, ye became _servants of
     righteousness_ unto sanctification.' 'Let my people go, that
     they may serve me.' It is only the man that doeth righteousness
     that can become holy.

  6. This liberty is a thing of joy and singing.

  7. This liberty is the groundwork of holiness. The Redeemer who
     makes free is God the Holy One. As the Holy Spirit He leads
     into the full possession of it. To be so free from everything
     that God can take complete possession, is to be holy.