Blessed Lord! who art my sanctification, I come to Thee now with a very
special request. O Thou who didst in Thine own body bear our sins on the
tree, and of whom it is written, 'We have been sanctified through the
offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all,' be pleased to reveal
to me how my body may to the full experience the power of Thy wonderful
redemption. I do desire in soul and body to be holy to the Lord.

Lord! I have too little understood that my body is the temple of the
Holy Ghost, that there is nothing in it that can be matter of
indifference, that its every state and function is to be holiness to the
Lord. And where I saw that this should be so, I have still sought myself
to guard from the enemy's approaches these the walls of the city. I
forgot how this part of my being too could alone be kept and sanctified
by faith, by Thy taking and keeping charge of what faith entrusted to
Thee.

Lord Jesus! I come now to surrender this body with all its needs into
Thy hands. In weariness and nervousness, in excitement and enjoyment, in
hunger and want, in health and plenty, O my holy Saviour, let my body be
in Thy keeping every moment. Thou callest us, 'being made free from sin,
to present our members as servants of righteousness unto
sanctification.' Saviour! in the faith of the freedom from sin which I
have in Thee, I present every member of my body to Thee: I believe the
Spirit of life in Thee makes me free from the law of sin in my members.
Whether living or dying, be Thou magnified in my body. Amen.

1. In the tabernacle and temple, the material part was to be in
     harmony with, and the embodiment of, the holiness that dwelt
     within. It was therefore all made according to the pattern
     shown in the mount. In the two last chapters of Exodus, we have
     eighteen times 'as the Lord commanded.' Everything, even in the
     exterior, was the embodiment of the will of God. Even so our
     body, as God's temple, must in everything be regulated by God's
     word, quickened and sanctified by the Holy Spirit.

  2. As part of this holiness in the body, Scripture mentions dress.
     Speaking of the 'outward adorning of plaiting the hair, of
     wearing jewels, or the putting on of apparel,' as inconsistent
     with 'the apparel of a meek and quiet spirit,' Peter says,
     'After this manner aforetime _the holy women_, who hoped in
     God, adorned themselves.' Holiness was seen in their dressing;
     their body was the temple of the Holy Spirit.

  3. 'If ye through the Spirit do make dead the deeds of _the body_,
     ye shall live.' His quickening energy must reign through the
     whole. We are so accustomed to connect the spiritual with the
     ideal and invisible, that it will need time and thought and
     faith to realize how the physical and the sensible influence
     our spiritual life, and must be under the mastery and
     inspiration of God's Spirit. Even Paul says, 'I buffet _my
     body_, and bring it into bondage, lest I myself should be
     rejected.'

  4. If God actually breathed His Spirit into the body of Adam
     formed out of the ground, let it not be thought strange that
     the Holy Spirit should now animate our bodies too with His
     sanctifying energy.

  5. 'Corporeality is the end of the ways of God.' This deep saying
     of an old divine reminds us of a much neglected truth. The
     great work of God's Spirit is to ally Himself with matter, and
     form it into a spiritual body for a dwelling for God. In our
     body the Holy Spirit will do it, if He gets complete
     possession.

  6. It is on this truth of the Holy Spirit's power in the body that
     what is called Faith-healing rests. Through all ages, in times
     of special spiritual quickening, God has given it to some to
     see how Christ would make, even here, the body partaker of the
     life and power of the Spirit. To those who do see it, the link
     between Holiness and Healing is a very close and blessed one,
     as the Lord Jesus takes possession of the body for Himself.