NOTE F.

Note from Bengel on Rom. i. 4.

'_According to the Spirit of Holiness._ The word _hagios_, holy, when
God is spoken of, not only denotes the blameless rectitude in action,
but the very Godhead, or to speak more properly, the _divinity_, or
excellence of the Divine nature. Hence _hagiosune_ (the word here used)
has a kind of middle sense between _hagiotes_, holiness, and
_hagiasmos_, sanctification. Comp. Heb. xii. 10 (_hagiotes_ or
holiness), v. 14 (_hagiasmos_ or sanctification). So that there are, as
it were, three degrees: _sanctification_, _sanctity of life_,
_holiness_. Holiness is ascribed to the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. And since here the Holy Spirit is not mentioned, but the spirit
of holiness (prop. sanctity, _hagiosune_), we must further inquire what
this remarkable expression denotes. The name spirit is expressly and
very frequently given to the Holy Spirit; but God is also called a
spirit; and the Lord Jesus Christ is called a spirit, but in contrast to
the latter. (2 Cor. iii. 17.) With this we must compare the fact that,
as in this passage, so often the antithesis of flesh and spirit is found
where Christ is spoken of. (1 Tim. iii. 16; 1 Pet. iii. 18.) In these
passages the Spirit is applied to whatever belongs to Christ (apart from
the flesh, although this was pure and holy, and above the flesh),
through His generation of the Father, who sanctified Him: in short, His
Godhead itself. For here, _flesh_ and _spirit_, and chap. ix. 5, _flesh_
and _Godhead_, stand in mutual contrast. This spirit is here called not
the spirit of holiness, the usual title of the Holy Spirit; but it is
called in this passage _the spirit of sanctity_, to suggest at once the
efficacy of that holiness or divinity, which led of necessity to the
Saviour's resurrection, and by which it was most forcibly illustrated,
and also that spiritual and holy, or Divine power of Jesus who has been
glorified and yet retained a spiritual body. Before the resurrection the
spirit was concealed under the flesh; after the resurrection the spirit
of sanctity concealed the flesh. In reference to the former, He was wont
to call Himself the Son of man; in reference to the latter, He is known
as the Son of God.'

Beck, in his _Lehrwissenschaft_, p. 604, puts it very clearly, thus--

'Inasmuch as the innocence and purity of Christ were not present in His
sufferings and death as a quiescent attribute, but were in full action
in the indestructible life-power of the Spirit, as He sanctified His own
self to God for us ("through the eternal spirit," Heb. ix.
14--therefore, in Rom. i. 4, _hagiosune_, the habit of holiness in its
action or sanctity, not _hagiotes_, only an inner attribute, or
_hagiasmos_, holiness in its formation)--His suffering effected an
everlasting redemption.'

NOTE G.

'Freed' and 'Possessed'--The Twofold Result of
Redemption.

(_From an address by Pastor Stockmaiev._)

'Who gave Himself for us, that He might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify unto Himself _a people for His own possession_, zealous of good
works.'

'In the redemption work of our Saviour Jesus Christ, there are two
definite parts. You will never find the secret of abiding in Christ, so
long as you cannot see these two definite distinct parts. The first is
"Jesus for me," the other "I for Jesus." Blessed be our Saviour that He
came for sinners. _He for us._ Blessed be the Lord that there is
redemption from penalty; but that is not yet all that redemption means.
You must have a clear apprehension of the second part of redemption, by
that same Holy Ghost who is the guide to introduce us into the full
possession of all that Christ, living and dying, has wrought out for us.
He gave Himself that He might redeem us from all iniquity--not that we
might have the pleasure of being pleased with our own purity or
holiness, or such things; but that He might have us altogether for
Himself, to purify _unto Himself_, for Himself, not for Himself and
themselves, but _unto Himself_, a people of His own possession.

'What is now redemption?--freedom from self, even spiritual self. We are
not to be our own centre, the centre of our joy, our progress, having in
our poor weak hands the threads of our spiritual life. There is no real
spiritual life but Christ's life, and He must have the care of it
altogether from the beginning to the end. Lift up your eyes, dear
brethren, you who were creeping on the ground. We are made for the glory
of God, to be possessed by Jesus. The Lord God found a way, in giving
His Son, the Lamb of God, His Lamb, to get such selfish people, who even
in the line of the Christian life found means to seek and to nourish
self, to get such people into His own real practical possession, to be
possessed by Jesus. That is redemption, and that only; that is liberty,
and that is reality; that is what satisfies, not to be satisfied with
any experiences of your own, but to let go your experiences, and to say,
I am free, so free as the people of Israel were coming out of Egypt,
free to serve God. "Let my people go, that they may serve me." You are
free, free through the blood of Christ, free through the power of the
Holy Ghost--no flesh, no hand, no self being able to keep you back. The
Lord has stretched out His arms upon all the powers who had kept us in
the bondage of Egypt, and He triumphed over them. You are free as the
bird of the air to live in Jesus--that is freedom; you are free in your
daily life, free in the deepest, inmost depths of your being, free for
Jesus, possessed by Him, a people of His own possession. Let my people
go, said God. So, I have given my blood, said Jesus; and no flesh, no
sin, no self can claim against the blood of Jesus. He has redeemed unto
Himself, not for us, a people of His own possession....

'You are inquiring about the secret of abiding in Jesus. Have you not
seen this in the 15th of John, that abiding and bearing fruit are
inseparable? You cannot abide in Jesus for His joy, _and your inward
satisfaction_. The secret of abiding is to stand as a redeemed one, as
firmly in the second part of redemption as the first. I am now living
for Jesus, and I have only to ask, Lord, what wilt Thou have done now? I
am for Thee. I am for Jesus. I have only to follow, to follow as a
sanctified one, as a possessed one, as one who is no more living for
himself, who has given his life up into the hands of Jesus. Oh, how
these questions of abiding become simple! It is not mysticism; it is not
some special experience. It is simply a fact. I need Jesus for every
moment, and my temptations as well as my duties become opportunities of
realizing this life of fellowship with Christ. Oh, yes, this is
redemption! Oh, mighty power of God the Father, God the Son, God the
Holy Ghost, engaged to keep such a weak, helpless, unfaithful thing as
you and myself in the centre of life! Sealed by the Holy Ghost, and God
will never break His own seal.'

THE END.

MORRISON AND GIBB, PRINTERS, EDINBURGH.