We bow our knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus, that He would grant
unto us, according to the riches of His glory, what He Himself has
taught us to ask for. We ask nothing less than this, that Christ may
dwell in our hearts by faith. We long for that most blessed, permanent,
conscious indwelling of the Lord Jesus in the heart, which He so
distinctly promised as the fruit of the Holy Spirit's coming. Father! we
ask for what He meant when He spake of the loving, obedient disciple: 'I
will come and manifest myself to him. We will come and take up our abode
with him.' Oh, grant unto us this indwelling of Christ in the heart by
faith!

And for this, we beseech Thee, grant us to be strengthened with might by
Thy Spirit in the inner man. O Most Mighty God! let the spirit of Thy
Divine Power work mightily within us, renewing our mind, and will, and
affections, so that the heart be all prepared and furnished as a
temple, as a home, for Jesus. Let that Blessed Spirit strengthen us to
the faith that receives the Blessed Saviour and His indwelling Presence.

O Most Gracious Father! hear our cry. We do bow our knee to Thee. We
plead the riches of Thy glory. We praise Thee who art mighty to do above
what we can ask or think. We wait on Thee, O our Father: oh, grant us a
mighty strengthening by the Spirit in the inner man, that this bliss may
be ours in its full blessedness, our Lord Jesus dwelling in the heart.

We ask it in His Name. Amen.

1. God's dwelling in the midst of Israel was the great central
     fact to which all the commands concerning holiness were but
     preparatory and subordinate. So the work of the Holy Spirit
     also culminates in the personal indwelling of Christ. (John
     xiv. 21, 23. Eph. iii. 16, 17.) Aim at this and expect it.

  2. The tabernacle with its three divisions was, as of other
     spiritual truths, so the image of man's threefold nature. Our
     spirit is the Holiest of all, where God is meant to dwell,
     where the Holy Spirit is given. The life of the soul, with its
     powers of feeling, knowing, and willing, is the holy place. And
     the outer life of the body, of conduct and action, is the outer
     court. Begin by believing that the Spirit dwells in the inmost
     sanctuary, where His workings are secret and hidden. Honour Him
     by trusting Him to work, by yielding to Him in silent worship
     before God. From within He will take possession of thought and
     will; He will even fill the outer court, the body, with the
     Holiness of God. 'The God of peace Himself sanctify you wholly;
     and may your spirit, and soul, and body, be preserved entire,
     without blame. Faithful is He which calleth you, who will also
     do it.'

  3. God's indwelling was within the veil, in the unseen, the
     secret place. Faith knew it, and served Him with holy fear. Our
     faith knows that God the Holy Spirit has His abode in the
     hidden place of our inner life. Set open your inmost being to
     Him; bow in lowly reverence before the Holy One as you yield
     yourself to His working. Holiness is the presence of the
     Indwelling One.