O Lord! the alone Holy One, Thou hast called us to be holy, even as Thou
art holy. Lord! how can we, unless Thou reveal to us Thy Holiness. Show
us, we pray Thee, how Thou art holy, how holy Thou art, what Thy
holiness is, that we may know how we are to be holy, how holy we are to
be. And when the sight of Thy Holiness only shows us the more how unholy
we are, teach us that Thou makest partakers of Thy own Holiness those
who come to Thee for it.

O God! we come to Thee, the Holy One. It is in knowing and finding and
having Thyself, that the soul finds Holiness. We do beseech Thee, as we
now come to Thee, establish it in the thoughts of our heart, that the
one object of Thy calling us, and of our coming to Thee, is Holiness.
Thou wouldst have us like Thyself, partakers of Thy Holiness. If ever
our heart becomes afraid, as if it were too high, or rests content with
a salvation less than Holiness, Blessed God! let us hear Thy voice
calling again, Be holy, I am holy. Let that call be our motive and our
strength, because faithful is He that calleth, who also will do it. Let
that call mark our standard and our path; oh! let our life be such as
Thou art able to make it.

Holy Father! I bow in lowly worship and silence before Thee. Let now
Thine own voice sound in the depths of my heart calling me, Be holy, as
I am holy. Amen.

1. Let me press it upon every reader of this little book, that if
     it is to help him in the pursuit of Holiness, he must begin _with
     God Himself_. You must go _to Him who calls you_. It is only in the
     personal revelation of God to you, as He speaks, I am holy, that
     the command, Be ye holy, can have life or power.

  2. Remember, as a believer, you have already accepted God's call,
     even though you did not fully understand it. Let it be a settled
     matter, that whatever you see to be the meaning of the call, you
     will at once accept and carry out. If God calls me to be holy, holy
     I will be.

  3. Take fast hold of the word: 'The God of peace sanctify you wholly:
     faithful is He which _calleth_ you, _who also will do it_.' In that
     faith listen to God calling you.

  4. Do be still now, and listen to your Father calling you. Ask for
     and count upon the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Holiness, to open
     your heart to understand this holy calling. And then speak out the
     answer you have to give to this call.

Second Day.

HOLY IN CHRIST.

God's Provision for Holiness.

  'To those that are _made holy_ in Christ Jesus, called to be
  _holy_.'--1 Cor. i. 2.

  'To all the _holy ones_ in Christ Jesus which are at Philippi. Salute
  every _holy one_ in Christ Jesus.'[1]--Phil. i. 1, iv. 21.