Holy Lord Jesus! Thou didst give Thyself for us, that, having cleansed
us for Thyself as Thine own, Thou mightest sanctify us and present us to
Thyself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing.
Blessed be Thy Name for the wonderful love. Blessed be Thy Name for the
wonderful cleansing. Through the washing by the word and the washing in
the blood, Thou hast made us clean every whit. And as we walk in the
light, Thou cleansest every moment.

With these promises, in the power of Thy word and blood, Thou callest us
to cleanse ourselves from all defilement of flesh and spirit. Blessed
Lord! graciously reveal in Thy Holy Light all that is defilement, even
its most secret working. Let me live as one who is to be presented to
Thee without spot or wrinkle or any such thing--cleansed with a Divine
cleansing, because Thou gavest Thyself to do it. Under the living power
of Thy word and blood, applied by the Holy Spirit, let my way be clean,
and my hands clean, my lips clean, and my heart clean. Cleanse me
thoroughly, that I may walk with Thee in white here on earth, keeping my
garments unspotted and undefiled. For Thy great love's sake, my Blessed
Lord. Amen.

1. Cleansing has almost always one aim: a cleansed vessel is fit
     for use. Spiritual work done for God, with the honest desire
     that He may through His Spirit use us, will give urgency to our
     desire for cleansing. A vessel not cleansed cannot be used: is
     not this the reason that there are some workers God cannot
     bless?

  2. _All_ defilement: one stain defiles. 'Let us cleanse ourselves
     from _all_ defilement.'

  3. No cleansing without Light. Open the heart for the Light to
     shine in.

  4. No cleansing like fire. Give the defilement over to the fire of
     His Holiness, the fire that consumes and purifies. Give it into
     the death of Jesus, to Jesus Himself.

  5. 'Perfecting holiness in _the fear of God_:' it is a solemn
     work. Rejoice with trembling--work out your salvation with fear
     and trembling.

  6. 'Having these promises,' it is a blessed work to cleanse
     ourselves--entering into the promises, the purity, the love of
     our Lord. The fear of God need never hinder the faith in Him.
     And true faith will never hinder the practical work of
     cleansing.

  7. _If we walk in the light, the blood cleanseth._ The light
     reveals; we confess and forsake, and accept the blood; so we
     cleanse ourselves. Let there be a very determined purpose to be
     clean from all defilement, everything that our Father considers
     a stain.

Twenty-fifth Day.

HOLY IN CHRIST.

Holy and Blameless.

  'Ye are witnesses, and God also, how _holily_ and justly and
  _unblameably_ we behaved ourselves among you that believe.--The
  Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward another,
  and toward all men, to the end He may stablish your hearts
  _unblameable in holiness_ before our God and Father at the coming
  of our Lord Jesus with all His _holy ones_.'--1 Thess. ii. 10,
  iii. 12, 13.

  'He chose us in Him before the foundation of the world, that we
  should be _holy and without blemish_ before Him _in love_.'--Eph.
  i. 4.