Blessed Father! I come to say that I see that Thy will is my
sanctification, and there alone I would seek it. Graciously grant that,
by Thy Holy Spirit which dwelleth in me, the glory of that will, and the
blessedness of abiding in it, may be fully revealed to me.

Teach me to know it as the Will of Love, purposing always what is the
very best and most blest for Thy child. Teach me to know it as the Will
of Omnipotence, able to work out its every counsel in me. Teach me to
know it in Christ, fulfilled perfectly on my behalf. Teach me to know it
as what the Spirit wills and works in each one who yields to Him.

O my Father! I acknowledge Thy claim to have Thy will alone done, and am
here for it to do with me as Thou pleasest. With my whole heart I enter
into it, to be one with it for ever. Thy Holy Spirit can maintain this
oneness without interruption. I trust Thee, my Father, step by step, to
let the light of Thy will shine in my heart and on my path, through that
Spirit.

May this be the holiness in which I live, that I forget and lose self in
pleasing and honouring Thee. Amen.

1. Make it a study, in meditation and prayer and worship, to get a
     full impression of the Majesty, the Perfection, the Glory of
     the Will of God, with the privilege and possibility of living
     in it.

  2. Study it, too, as the expression of an infinite Love and
     Fatherliness; its every manifestation full of loving-kindness.
     Every providence is _God's will_; whatever happens, meet God in
     it in humble worship. Every precept is _God's will_; meet God
     in it with loving obedience. Every promise is _God's will_;
     meet God in it with full trust. A life in the will of God is
     rest and strength and blessing.

  3. And forget not, above all, to believe in its Omnipotent Power.
     _He worketh all things after the counsel of His will._ In
     nature and those who resist Him, without their consent. In His
     children, according to their faith, and as far as they will it.
     Do believe that the will of God will work out its counsel in
     you, as you trust it to do so.

  4. This will is Infinite Benevolence and Beneficence revealed in
     the self-sacrifice of Jesus. Live for others: so can you become
     an instrument for the Divine will to use (Matt. xviii. 14; John
     vi. 39, 40). Yield yourselves to this redeeming will of God,
     that it may get full possession, and work out through you too
     its saving purpose.

  5. Christ is just the embodiment of God's will: He is, God's will
     done. Abide in Him, by abiding in, by doing heartily and
     always, the will of God. A Christian is, like Christ, a man
     given up to the Will of God.

Twenty-seventh Day.

HOLY IN CHRIST.

Holiness and Service.

  'If a man therefore cleanse himself from these, he shall be a
  vessel unto honour, _sanctified_, meet _for the Master's use_,
  prepared _unto every good work_.'--2 Tim. ii. 21.

  'A _holy_ priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices. A _holy_
  nation, that ye may _show forth the excellences of Him_ who called
  you out of darkness into His marvellous light.'--1 Pet. ii. 5, 9.