'_Who_ is like unto Thee, O Lord! glorious in holiness, fearful in
praises, doing wonders?' With my whole heart would I join in this song
of redemption, and rejoice in Thee as the God of my salvation.

O my God! let Thy Spirit, from whom these words of holy joy and triumph
came, so reveal within me the great redemption as a personal experience,
that my whole life may be one song of trembling and adoring wonder.

I beseech Thee especially, let my whole heart be filled with Thyself,
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, who alone doest wonders. Let
the fear of Thy Holiness make me tremble at all there is in me of self
and flesh, and lead me in my worship to deny and crucify my own wisdom,
that the Spirit of Thy Holiness may breathe in me. Let the fear of the
Lord give its deep undertone to all my coming in and going out in Thy
Holy Presence. Prepare me thus for giving praise without ceasing at the
remembrance of Thy holiness. O my God! I would rejoice in Thee as my
Redeemer, MY HOLY ONE, with a joy unspeakable and full of glory. As my
Redeemer, Thou makest me holy. With my whole heart do I trust Thee to do
it, to sanctify me wholly. I do believe in Thy promise. I do believe in
Thyself, and believing I receive Thee, the Holy One, my Redeemer.

Who is like unto Thee, O Lord! glorious in holiness, fearful in praises,
doing wonders?

1. _God's Holiness as Glory._ God is glorified in the holiness
     of His people. True holiness always gives glory to God alone.
     Live to the glory of God: that is holiness. Live holily: that
     will glorify God. To lose sight of self, and seek only God's
     glory, is holiness.

  2. _Our Holiness as Praise._ Praise gives glory to God, and is
     thus an element of holiness. 'Thou art holy, Thou that
     inhabitest the praises of Israel.'

  3. God's Holiness, His holy redeeming love, is cause of unceasing
     joy and praise. Praise God every day for it. But you cannot do
     this unless you live in it. May God's holiness become so
     glorious to us, as we understand that whatever we see of His
     glory is just the outshining of His holiness, that we cannot
     help rejoicing in it, and in Him the Holy One.

  4. The spirit of the fear of the Lord and the spirit of praise
     may, at first sight, appear to be at variance. But it is not
     so. The humility that fears the Holy One will also praise Him:
     'Ye that fear the Lord: praise the Lord.' The lower we lie in
     the fear of God, and the fear of self, the more surely will He
     lift us up in due time to praise Him.

Seventh Day.

HOLY IN CHRIST.

Holiness and Obedience.

  'Ye have seen what I did to the Egyptians, and how I bare you on
  eagles' wings, and brought you _unto myself_. Now therefore, if ye
  will _obey my voice indeed_, and keep my covenant, ye shall be a
  peculiar treasure unto me above all people: ye shall be unto me an
  _holy_ nation.'--Ex. xix. 4-6.