The story of Siegfried and Brynhild constitutes the greatest epic in
Teutonic Gothic literature. Its origin is hard to trace, but parts of
the legends carry the investigator back to Iranian sources. Its
greatest development, however, may justly be credited to Icelandic
sagas, in which the mythology of the Norse people has a prominent
place. In both the Gothic and Teutonic versions, while considerable
variation of incident is noticeable, the awakening of Brynhild, a
valkyrie maiden, and daughter of Wotan, is represented as having been
accomplished by Siegfried, who rides through a wall of flames which
surrounds her, and thus breaks the spell which binds her to sleep
until a warrior fearless enough to brave fire shall come to claim her
for a bride.


A FEAST IN VALHALLA.

(_From a painting by Jno. Kellar._)


An admirable description of a feast of the gods, in Valhalla, will be
found on pages 293-94-95 of this volume. It was a strong belief among
the Goths, prior to the introduction of Christianity among them, that
the bodies of all warriors who met their deaths in battle were
transported directly to Valhalla by Valkyrie maidens on the backs of
winged horses. Upon reaching this mythological heaven the dead were
revived and ever thereafter enjoyed drinking mead, eating swine flesh,
and in fighting their battles over again every day.


THE DEATH OF ATLI.

(_From a painting by S. Goldberg._)


Atli has been identified as Attila, called in history "the Scourge of
God," a king of the Huns who twice defeated the Romans under
Theodosius, and plundered the eternal city itself. He was guilty of
many excesses and is reported to have died of a hemorrhage on the day
following his marriage with Ildico (453). In the story of Seigfried
and Brynhild, however, he is represented as having married Gudran,
daughter of Grimhild and King Giuki, who it will be recalled by
readers of the other volumes of this series, beguiled Siegfried by
means of a magic potion, into marriage with her. Her feelings revolted
against an alliance with Atli, but she accepted him for a husband in
order thereby to obtain the power to gratify her vengeance against
Hogni (Hagan), who had assassinated Siegfried.