story of the installation of Bhishma as commander-in-chief. The next is
called the creation of the insular region Jambu; then Bhumi; then the
account about the formation of islands. Then comes the ‘Bhagavat-gita’;
and then the death of Bhishma. Then the installation of Drona; then the
destruction of the ‘Sansaptakas’. Then the death of Abhimanyu; and then
the vow of Arjuna (to slay Jayadratha). Then the death of Jayadratha, and
then of Ghatotkacha. Then, must you know, comes the story of the death of
Drona of surprising interest. The next that comes is called the discharge
of the weapon called Narayana. Then, you know, is Karna, and then Salya.
Then comes the immersion in the lake, and then the encounter (between
Bhima and Duryodhana) with clubs. Then comes Saraswata, and then the
descriptions of holy shrines, and then genealogies. Then comes Sauptika
describing incidents disgraceful (to the honour of the Kurus). Then comes
the ‘Aisika’ of harrowing incidents. Then comes ‘Jalapradana’ oblations
of water to the manes of the deceased, and then the wailings of the
women. The next must be known as ‘Sraddha’ describing the funeral rites
performed for the slain Kauravas. Then comes the destruction of the
Rakshasa Charvaka who had assumed the disguise of a Brahmana (for
deceiving Yudhishthira). Then the coronation of the wise Yudhishthira.
The next is called the ‘Grihapravibhaga’. Then comes ‘Santi’, then
‘Rajadharmanusasana’, then ‘Apaddharma’, then ‘Mokshadharma’. Those that
follow are called respectively ‘Suka-prasna-abhigamana’,
‘Brahma-prasnanusana’, the origin of ‘Durvasa’, the disputations with
Maya. The next is to be known as ‘Anusasanika’. Then the ascension of
Bhishma to heaven. Then the horse-sacrifice, which when read purgeth all
sins away. The next must be known as the ‘Anugita’ in which are words of
spiritual philosophy. Those that follow are called ‘Asramvasa’,
‘Puttradarshana’ (meeting with the spirits of the deceased sons), and the
arrival of Narada. The next is called ‘Mausala’ which abounds with
terrible and cruel incidents. Then comes ‘Mahaprasthanika’ and ascension
to heaven. Then comes the Purana which is called Khilvansa. In this last
are contained ‘Vishnuparva’, Vishnu’s frolics and feats as a child, the
destruction of ‘Kansa’, and lastly, the very wonderful ‘Bhavishyaparva’
(in which there are prophecies regarding the future).

The high-souled Vyasa composed these hundred parvas of which the above is
only an abridgement: having distributed them into eighteen, the son of
Suta recited them consecutively in the forest of Naimisha as follows:

‘In the Adi parva are contained Paushya, Pauloma, Astika, Adivansavatara,
Samva, the burning of the house of lac, the slaying of Hidimba, the
destruction of the Asura Vaka, Chitraratha, the Swayamvara of Draupadi,
her marriage after the overthrow of rivals in war, the arrival of Vidura,
the restoration, Arjuna’s exile, the abduction of Subhadra, the gift and
receipt of the marriage dower, the burning of the Khandava forest, and
the meeting with (the Asura-architect) Maya. The Paushya parva treats of
the greatness of Utanka, and the Pauloma, of the sons of Bhrigu. The
Astika describes the birth of Garuda and of the Nagas (snakes), the
churning of the ocean, the incidents relating to the birth of the
celestial steed Uchchaihsrava, and finally, the dynasty of Bharata, as
described in the Snake-sacrifice of king Janamejaya. The Sambhava parva
narrates the birth of various kings and heroes, and that of the sage,
Krishna Dwaipayana: the partial incarnations of deities, the generation
of Danavas and Yakshas of great prowess, and serpents, Gandharvas, birds,
and of all creatures; and lastly, of the life and adventures of king
Bharata--the progenitor of the line that goes by his name--the son born
of Sakuntala in the hermitage of the ascetic Kanwa. This parva also
describes the greatness of Bhagirathi, and the births of the Vasus in the
house of Santanu and their ascension to heaven. In this parva is also
narrated the birth of Bhishma uniting in himself portions of the energies
of the other Vasus, his renunciation of royalty and adoption of the
Brahmacharya mode of life, his adherence to his vows, his protection of
Chitrangada, and after the death of Chitrangada, his protection of his
younger brother, Vichitravirya, and his placing the latter on the throne:
the birth of Dharma among men in consequence of the curse of Animondavya;
the births of Dhritarashtra and Pandu through the potency of Vyasa’s
blessings (?) and also the birth of the Pandavas; the plottings of
Duryodhana to send the sons of Pandu to Varanavata, and the other dark
counsels of the sons of Dhritarashtra in regard to the Pandavas; then the
advice administered to Yudhishthira on his way by that well-wisher of the
Pandavas--Vidura--in the mlechchha language--the digging of the hole, the
burning of Purochana and the sleeping woman of the fowler caste, with her
five sons, in the house of lac; the meeting of the Pandavas in the
dreadful forest with Hidimba, and the slaying of her brother Hidimba by
Bhima of great prowess. The birth of Ghatotkacha; the meeting of the
Pandavas with Vyasa and in accordance with his advice their stay in
disguise in the house of a Brahmana in the city of Ekachakra; the
destruction of the Asura Vaka, and the amazement of the populace at the
sight; the extra-ordinary births of Krishna and Dhrishtadyumna; the
departure of the Pandavas for Panchala in obedience to the injunction of
Vyasa, and moved equally by the desire of winning the hand of Draupadi on
learning the tidings of the Swayamvara from the lips of a Brahmana;
victory of Arjuna over a Gandharva, called Angaraparna, on the banks of
the Bhagirathi, his contraction of friendship with his adversary, and his
hearing from the Gandharva the history of Tapati, Vasishtha and Aurva.
This parva treats of the journey of the Pandavas towards Panchala, the
acquisition of Draupadi in the midst of all the Rajas, by Arjuna, after
having successfully pierced the mark; and in the ensuing fight, the
defeat of Salya, Kama, and all the other crowned heads at the hands of
Bhima and Arjuna of great prowess; the ascertainment by Balarama and
Krishna, at the sight of these matchless exploits, that the heroes were
the Pandavas, and the arrival of the brothers at the house of the potter
where the Pandavas were staying; the dejection of Drupada on learning
that Draupadi was to be wedded to five husbands; the wonderful story of
the five Indras related in consequence; the extraordinary and
divinely-ordained wedding of Draupadi; the sending of Vidura by the sons
of Dhritarashtra as envoy to the Pandavas; the arrival of Vidura and his
sight to Krishna; the abode of the Pandavas in Khandava-prastha, and then
their rule over one half of the kingdom; the fixing of turns by the sons
of Pandu, in obedience to the injunction of Narada, for connubial
companionship with Krishna. In like manner hath the history of Sunda and
Upasunda been recited in this. This parva then treats of the departure of
Arjuna for the forest according to the vow, he having seen Draupadi and
Yudhishthira sitting together as he entered the chamber to take out arms
for delivering the kine of a certain Brahmana. This parva then describes
Arjuna’s meeting on the way with Ulupi, the daughter of a Naga (serpent);
it then relates his visits to several sacred spots; the birth of
Vabhruvahana; the deliverance by Arjuna of the five celestial damsels who
had been turned into alligators by the imprecation of a Brahmana, the
meeting of Madhava and Arjuna on the holy spot called Prabhasa; the
carrying away of Subhadra by Arjuna, incited thereto by her brother
Krishna, in the wonderful car moving on land and water, and through
mid-air, according to the wish of the rider; the departure for
Indraprastha, with the dower; the conception in the womb of Subhadra of
that prodigy of prowess, Abhimanyu; Yajnaseni’s giving birth to children;
then follows the pleasure-trip of Krishna and Arjuna to the banks of the
Jamuna and the acquisition by them of the discus and the celebrated bow
Gandiva; the burning of the forest of Khandava; the rescue of Maya by
Arjuna, and the escape of the serpent,--and the begetting of a son by
that best of Rishis, Mandapala, in the womb of the bird Sarngi. This
parva is divided by Vyasa into two hundred and twenty-seven chapters.
These two hundred and twenty-seven chapters contain eight thousand eight
hundred and eighty-four slokas.

The second is the extensive parva called Sabha or the assembly, full of
matter. The subjects of this parva are the establishment of the grand
hall by the Pandavas; their review of their retainers; the description of
the lokapalas by Narada well-acquainted with the celestial regions; the
preparations for the Rajasuya sacrifice; the destruction of Jarasandha;
the deliverance by Vasudeva of the princes confined in the mountain-pass;
the campaign of universal conquest by the Pandavas; the arrival of the
princes at the Rajasuya sacrifice with tribute; the destruction of
Sisupala on the occasion of the sacrifice, in connection with offering of
arghya; Bhimasena’s ridicule of Duryodhana in the assembly; Duryodhana’s
sorrow and envy at the sight of the magnificent scale on which the
arrangements had been made; the indignation of Duryodhana in consequence,
and the preparations for the game of dice; the defeat of Yudhishthira at
play by the wily Sakuni; the deliverance by Dhritarashtra of his
afflicted daughter-in-law Draupadi plunged in the sea of distress caused
by the gambling, as of a boat tossed about by the tempestuous waves. The
endeavours of Duryodhana to engage Yudhishthira again in the game; and
the exile of the defeated Yudhishthira with his brothers. These
constitute what has been called by the great Vyasa the Sabha Parva. This
parva is divided into seventh-eight sections, O best of Brahmanas, of two
thousand, five hundred and seven slokas.

Then comes the third parva called Aranyaka (relating to the forest) This
parva treats of the wending of the Pandavas to the forest and the
citizens, following the wise Yudhishthira, Yudhishthira’s adoration of
the god of day; according to the injunctions of Dhaumya, to be gifted
with the power of maintaining the dependent Brahmanas with food and
drink: the creation of food through the grace of the Sun: the expulsion
by Dhritarashtra of Vidura who always spoke for his master’s good;
Vidura’s coming to the Pandavas and his return to Dhritarashtra at the
solicitation of the latter; the wicked Duryodhana’s plottings to destroy
the forest-ranging Pandavas, being incited thereto by Karna; the
appearance of Vyasa and his dissuasion of Duryodhana bent on going to the
forest; the history of Surabhi; the arrival of Maitreya; his laying down
to Dhritarashtra the course of action; and his curse on Duryodhana;
Bhima’s slaying of Kirmira in battle; the coming of the Panchalas and the
princes of the Vrishni race to Yudhishthira on hearing of his defeat at
the unfair gambling by Sakuni; Dhananjaya’s allaying the wrath of
Krishna; Draupadi’s lamentations before Madhava; Krishna’s cheering her;
the fall of Sauva also has been here described by the Rishi; also
Krishna’s bringing Subhadra with her son to Dwaraka; and Dhrishtadyumna’s
bringing the son of Draupadi to Panchala; the entrance of the sons of
Pandu into the romantic Dwaita wood; conversation of Bhima, Yudhishthira,
and Draupadi; the coming of Vyasa to the Pandavas and his endowing
Yudhishthira with the power of Pratismriti; then, after the departure of
Vyasa, the removal of the Pandavas to the forest of Kamyaka; the
wanderings of Arjuna of immeasurable prowess in search of weapons; his
battle with Mahadeva in the guise of a hunter; his meeting with the
lokapalas and receipt of weapons from them; his journey to the regions of
Indra for arms and the consequent anxiety of Dhritarashtra; the wailings
and lamentations of Yudhishthira on the occasion of his meeting with the
worshipful great sage Brihadaswa. Here occurs the holy and highly
pathetic story of Nala illustrating the patience of Damayanti and the
character of Nala. Then the acquirement by Yudhishthira of the mysteries
of dice from the same great sage; then the arrival of the Rishi Lomasa
from the heavens to where the Pandavas were, and the receipt by these
high-souled dwellers in the woods of the intelligence brought by the
Rishi of their brother Arjuna staving in the heavens; then the pilgrimage
of the Pandavas to various sacred spots in accordance with the message of
Arjuna, and their attainment of great merit and virtue consequent on such
pilgrimage; then the pilgrimage of the great sage Narada to the shrine
Putasta; also the pilgrimage of the high-souled Pandavas. Here is the
deprivation of Karna of his ear-rings by Indra. Here also is recited the
sacrificial magnificence of Gaya; then the story of Agastya in which the
Rishi ate up the Asura Vatapi, and his connubial connection with
Lopamudra from the desire of offspring. Then the story of Rishyasringa
who adopted Brahmacharya mode of life from his very boyhood; then the
history of Rama of great prowess, the son of Jamadagni, in which has been
narrated the death of Kartavirya and the Haihayas; then the meeting
between the Pandavas and the Vrishnis in the sacred spot called Prabhasa;
then the story of Su-kanya in which Chyavana, the son of Bhrigu, made the
twins, Aswinis, drink, at the sacrifice of king Saryati, the Soma juice
(from which they had been excluded by the other gods), and in which
besides is shown how Chyavana himself acquired perpetual youth (as a boon
from the grateful Aswinis). Then hath been described the history of king
Mandhata; then the history of prince Jantu; and how king Somaka by
offering up his only son (Jantu) in sacrifice obtained a hundred others;
then the excellent history of the hawk and the pigeon; then the
examination of king Sivi by Indra, Agni, and Dharma; then the story of
Ashtavakra, in which occurs the disputation, at the sacrifice of Janaka,
between that Rishi and the first of logicians, Vandi, the son of Varuna;
the defeat of Vandi by the great Ashtavakra, and the release by the Rishi
of his father from the depths of the ocean. Then the story of Yavakrita,
and then that of the great Raivya: then the departure (of the Pandavas)
for Gandhamadana and their abode in the asylum called Narayana; then
Bhimasena’s journey to Gandhamadana at the request of Draupadi (in search
of the sweet-scented flower). Bhima’s meeting on his way, in a grove of
bananas, with Hanuman, the son of Pavana of great prowess; Bhima’s bath
in the tank and the destruction of the flowers therein for obtaining the
sweet-scented flower (he was in search of); his consequent battle with
the mighty Rakshasas and the Yakshas of great prowess including Hanuman;
the destruction of the Asura Jata by Bhima; the meeting (of the Pandavas)
with the royal sage Vrishaparva; their departure for the asylum of
Arshtishena and abode therein: the incitement of Bhima (to acts of
vengeance) by Draupadi. Then is narrated the ascent on the hills of
Kailasa by Bhimasena, his terrific battle with the mighty Yakshas headed
by Hanuman; then the meeting of the Pandavas with Vaisravana (Kuvera),
and the meeting with Arjuna after he had obtained for the purpose of
Yudhishthira many celestial weapons; then Arjuna’s terrible encounter
with the Nivatakavachas dwelling in Hiranyaparva, and also with the
Paulomas, and the Kalakeyas; their destruction at the hands of Arjuna;
the commencement of the display of the celestial weapons by Arjuna before
Yudhishthira, the prevention of the same by Narada; the descent of the
Pandavas from Gandhamadana; the seizure of Bhima in the forest by a
mighty serpent huge as the mountain; his release from the coils of the
snake, upon Yudhishthira’s answering certain questions; the return of the
Pandavas to the Kamyaka woods. Here is described the reappearance of
Vasudeva to see the mighty sons of Pandu; the arrival of Markandeya, and
various recitals, the history of Prithu the son of Vena recited by the
great Rishi; the stories of Saraswati and the Rishi Tarkhya. After these,
is the story of Matsya; other old stories recited by Markandeya; the
stories of Indradyumna and Dhundhumara; then the history of the chaste
wife; the history of Angira, the meeting and conversation of Draupadi and
Satyabhama; the return of the Pandavas to the forest of Dwaita; then the
procession to see the calves and the captivity of Duryodhana; and when
the wretch was being carried off, his rescue by Arjuna; here is
Yudhishthira’s dream of the deer; then the re-entry of the Pandavas into
the Kamyaka forest, here also is the long story of Vrihidraunika. Here
also is recited the story of Durvasa; then the abduction by Jayadratha of
Draupadi from the asylum; the pursuit of the ravisher by Bhima swift as
the air and the ill-shaving of Jayadratha’s crown at Bhima’s hand. Here
is the long history of Rama in which is shown how Rama by his prowess
slew Ravana in battle. Here also is narrated the story of Savitri; then
Karna’s deprivation by Indra of his ear-rings; then the presentation to
Karna by the gratified Indra of a Sakti (missile weapon) which had the
virtue of killing only one person against whom it might be hurled; then
the story called Aranya in which Dharma (the god of justice) gave advice
to his son (Yudhishthira); in which, besides is recited how the Pandavas
after having obtained a boon went towards the west. These are all
included in the third Parva called Aranyaka, consisting of two hundred
and sixty-nine sections. The number of slokas is eleven thousand, six
hundred and sixty-four.

“The extensive Parva that comes next is called Virata. The Pandavas
arriving at the dominions of Virata saw in a cemetery on the outskirts of
the city a large shami tree whereon they kept their weapons. Here hath
been recited their entry into the city and their stay there in disguise.
Then the slaying by Bhima of the wicked Kichaka who, senseless with lust,
had sought Draupadi; the appointment by prince Duryodhana of clever
spies; and their despatch to all sides for tracing the Pandavas; the
failure of these to discover the mighty sons of Pandu; the first seizure
of Virata’s kine by the Trigartas and the terrific battle that ensued;
the capture of Virata by the enemy and his rescue by Bhimasena; the
release also of the kine by the Pandava (Bhima); the seizure of Virata’s
kine again by the Kurus; the defeat in battle of all the Kurus by the
single-handed Arjuna; the release of the king’s kine; the bestowal by
Virata of his daughter Uttara for Arjuna’s acceptance on behalf of his
son by Subhadra--Abhimanyu--the destroyer of foes. These are the contents
of the extensive fourth Parva--the Virata. The great Rishi Vyasa has
composed in these sixty-seven sections. The number of slokas is two
thousand and fifty.

“Listen then to (the contents of) the fifth Parva which must be known as
Udyoga. While the Pandavas, desirous of victory, were residing in the
place called Upaplavya, Duryodhana and Arjuna both went at the same time
to Vasudeva, and said, “You should render us assistance in this war.” The
high-souled Krishna, upon these words being uttered, replied, “O ye first
of men, a counsellor in myself who will not fight and one Akshauhini of
troops, which of these shall I give to which of you?” Blind to his own
interests, the foolish Duryodhana asked for the troops; while Arjuna
solicited Krishna as an unfighting counsellor. Then is described how,
when the king of Madra was coming for the assistance of the Pandavas,
Duryodhana, having deceived him on the way by presents and hospitality,
induced him to grant a boon and then solicited his assistance in battle;
how Salya, having passed his word to Duryodhana, went to the Pandavas and
consoled them by reciting the history of Indra’s victory (over Vritra).
Then comes the despatch by the Pandavas of their Purohita (priest) to the
Kauravas. Then is described how king Dhritarashtra of great prowess,
having heard the word of the purohita of the Pandavas and the story of
Indra’s victory decided upon sending his purohita and ultimately
despatched Sanjaya as envoy to the Pandavas from desire for peace. Here
hath been described the sleeplessness of Dhritarashtra from anxiety upon
hearing all about the Pandavas and their friends, Vasudeva and others. It
was on this occasion that Vidura addressed to the wise king Dhritarashtra
various counsels that were full of wisdom. It was here also that
Sanat-sujata recited to the anxious and sorrowing monarch the excellent
truths of spiritual philosophy. On the next morning Sanjaya spoke, in the
court of the King, of the identity of Vasudeva and Arjuna. It was then
that the illustrious Krishna, moved by kindness and a desire for peace,
went himself to the Kaurava capital, Hastinapura, for bringing about
peace. Then comes the rejection by prince Duryodhana of the embassy of
Krishna who had come to solicit peace for the benefit of both parties.
Here hath been recited the story of Damvodvava; then the story of the
high-souled Matuli’s search for a husband for his daughter: then the
history of the great sage Galava; then the story of the training and
discipline of the son of Bidula. Then the exhibition by Krishna, before
the assembled Rajas, of his Yoga powers upon learning the evil counsels
of Duryodhana and Karna; then Krishna’s taking Karna in his chariot and
his tendering to him of advice, and Karna’s rejection of the same from
pride. Then the return of Krishna, the chastiser of enemies from
Hastinapura to Upaplavya, and his narration to the Pandavas of all that
had happened. It was then that those oppressors of foes, the Pandavas,
having heard all and consulted properly with each other, made every
preparation for war. Then comes the march from Hastinapura, for battle,
of foot-soldiers, horses, charioteers and elephants. Then the tale of the
troops by both parties. Then the despatch by prince Duryodhana of Uluka
as envoy to the Pandavas on the day previous to the battle. Then the tale
of charioteers of different classes. Then the story of Amba. These all
have been described in the fifth Parva called Udyoga of the Bharata,
abounding with incidents appertaining to war and peace. O ye ascetics,
the great Vyasa hath composed one hundred and eighty-six sections in this
Parva. The number of slokas also composed in this by the great Rishi is
six thousand, six hundred and ninety-eight.

“Then is recited the Bhishma Parva replete with wonderful incidents. In
this hath been narrated by Sanjaya the formation of the region known as
Jambu. Here hath been described the great depression of Yudhishthira’s
army, and also a fierce fight for ten successive days. In this the
high-souled Vasudeva by reasons based on the philosophy of final release
drove away Arjuna’s compunction springing from the latter’s regard for
his kindred (whom he was on the eve of slaying). In this the magnanimous
Krishna, attentive to the welfare of Yudhishthira, seeing the loss
inflicted (on the Pandava army), descended swiftly from his chariot
himself and ran, with dauntless breast, his driving whip in hand, to
effect the death of Bhishma. In this, Krishna also smote with piercing
words Arjuna, the bearer of the Gandiva and the foremost in battle among
all wielders of weapons. In this, the foremost of bowmen, Arjuna, placing
Shikandin before him and piercing Bhishma with his sharpest arrows felled
him from his chariot. In this, Bhishma lay stretched on his bed of
arrows. This extensive Parva is known as the sixth in the Bharata. In
this have been composed one hundred and seventeen sections. The number of
slokas is five thousand, eight hundred and eighty-four as told by Vyasa
conversant with the Vedas.

“Then is recited the wonderful Parva called Drona full of incidents.
First comes the installation in the command of the army of the great
instructor in arms, Drona: then the vow made by that great master of
weapons of seizing the wise Yudhishthira in battle to please Duryodhana;
then the retreat of Arjuna from the field before the Sansaptakas, then
the overthrow of Bhagadatta like to a second Indra in the field, with the
elephant Supritika, by Arjuna; then the death of the hero Abhimanyu in
his teens, alone and unsupported, at the hands of many Maharathas
including Jayadratha; then after the death of Abhimanyu, the destruction
by Arjuna, in battle of seven Akshauhinis of troops and then of
Jayadratha; then the entry, by Bhima of mighty arms and by that foremost
of warriors-in-chariot, Satyaki, into the Kaurava ranks impenetrable even
to the gods, in search of Arjuna in obedience to the orders of
Yudhishthira, and the destruction of the remnant of the Sansaptakas. In
the Drona Parva, is the death of Alambusha, of Srutayus, of Jalasandha,
of Shomadatta, of Virata, of the great warrior-in-chariot Drupada, of
Ghatotkacha and others; in this Parva, Aswatthaman, excited beyond
measure at the fall of his father in battle, discharged the terrible
weapon Narayana. Then the glory of Rudra in connection with the burning
(of the three cities). Then the arrival of Vyasa and recital by him of
the glory of Krishna and Arjuna. This is the great seventh Parva of the
Bharata in which all the heroic chiefs and princes mentioned were sent to
their account. The number of sections in this is one hundred and seventy.
The number of slokas as composed in the Drona Parva by Rishi Vyasa, the
son of Parasara and the possessor of true knowledge after much
meditation, is eight thousand, nine hundred and nine.

“Then comes the most wonderful Parva called Karna. In this is narrated
the appointment of the wise king of Madra as (Karna’s) charioteer. Then
the history of the fall of the Asura Tripura. Then the application to
each other by Karna and Salya of harsh words on their setting out for the
field, then the story of the swan and the crow recited in insulting
allusion: then the death of Pandya at the hands of the high-souled
Aswatthaman; then the death of Dandasena; then that of Darda; then
Yudhishthira’s imminent risk in single combat with Karna in the presence
of all the warriors; then the mutual wrath of Yudhishthira and Arjuna;
then Krishna’s pacification of Arjuna. In this Parva, Bhima, in
fulfilment of his vow, having ripped open Dussasana’s breast in battle
drank the blood of his heart. Then Arjuna slew the great Karna in single
combat. Readers of the Bharata call this the eighth Parva. The number of
sections in this is sixty-nine and the number of slokas is four thousand,
nine hundred and sixty-tour.

“Then hath been recited the wonderful Parva called Salya. After all the
great warriors had been slain, the king of Madra became the leader of the
(Kaurava) army. The encounters one after another, of charioteers, have
been here described. Then comes the fall of the great Salya at the hands
of Yudhishthira, the Just. Here also is the death of Sakuni in battle at
the hands of Sahadeva. Upon only a small remnant of the troops remaining
alive after the immense slaughter, Duryodhana went to the lake and
creating for himself room within its waters lay stretched there for some
time. Then is narrated the receipt of this intelligence by Bhima from the
fowlers: then is narrated how, moved by the insulting speeches of the
intelligent Yudhishthira, Duryodhana ever unable to bear affronts, came
out of the waters. Then comes the encounter with clubs, between
Duryodhana and Bhima; then the arrival, at the time of such encounter, of
Balarama: then is described the sacredness of the Saraswati; then the
progress of the encounter with clubs; then the fracture of Duryodhana’s
thighs in battle by Bhima with (a terrific hurl of) his mace. These all
have been described in the wonderful ninth Parva. In this the number of
sections is fifty-nine and the number of slokas composed by the great
Vyasa--the spreader of the fame of the Kauravas--is three thousand, two
hundred and twenty.

“Then shall I describe the Parva called Sauptika of frightful incidents.
On the Pandavas having gone away, the mighty charioteers, Kritavarman,
Kripa, and the son of Drona, came to the field of battle in the evening
and there saw king Duryodhana lying on the ground, his thighs broken, and
himself covered with blood. Then the great charioteer, the son of Drona,
of terrible wrath, vowed, ‘without killing all the Panchalas including
Drishtadyumna, and the Pandavas also with all their allies, I will not
take off armour.’ Having spoken those words, the three warriors leaving
Duryodhana’s side entered the great forest just as the sun was setting.
While sitting under a large banian tree in the night, they saw an owl
killing numerous crows one after another. At the sight of this,
Aswatthaman, his heart full of rage at the thought of his father’s fate,
resolved to slay the slumbering Panchalas. And wending to the gate of the
camp, he saw there a Rakshasa of frightful visage, his head reaching to
the very heavens, guarding the entrance. And seeing that Rakshasa
obstructing all his weapons, the son of Drona speedily pacified by
worship the three-eyed Rudra. And then accompanied by Kritavarman and
Kripa he slew all the sons of Draupadi, all the Panchalas with
Dhrishtadyumna and others, together with their relatives, slumbering
unsuspectingly in the night. All perished on that fatal night except the
five Pandavas and the great warrior Satyaki. Those escaped owing to
Krishna’s counsels, then the charioteer of Dhrishtadyumna brought to the
Pandavas intelligence of the slaughter of the slumbering Panchalas by the
son of Drona. Then Draupadi distressed at the death of her sons and
brothers and father sat before her lords resolved to kill herself by
fasting. Then Bhima of terrible prowess, moved by the words of Draupadi,
resolved, to please her; and speedily taking up his mace followed in
wrath the son of his preceptor in arms. The son of Drona from fear of
Bhimasena and impelled by the fates and moved also by anger discharged a
celestial weapon saying, ‘This is for the destruction of all the
Pandavas’; then Krishna saying. ‘This shall not be’, neutralised
Aswatthaman’s speech. Then Arjuna neutralised that weapon by one of his
own. Seeing the wicked Aswatthaman’s destructive intentions, Dwaipayana
and Krishna pronounced curses on him which the latter returned. Pandava
then deprived the mighty warrior-in-chariot Aswatthaman, of the jewel on
his head, and became exceedingly glad, and, boastful of their success,
made a present of it to the sorrowing Draupadi. Thus the tenth Parva,
called Sauptika, is recited. The great Vyasa hath composed this in
eighteen sections. The number of slokas also composed (in this) by the
great reciter of sacred truths is eight hundred and seventy. In this
Parva has been put together by the great Rishi the two Parvas called
Sauptika and Aishika.

“After this hath been recited the highly pathetic Parva called Stri,
Dhritarashtra of prophetic eye, afflicted at the death of his children,
and moved by enmity towards Bhima, broke into pieces a statue of hard
iron deftly placed before him by Krishna (as substitute of Bhima). Then
Vidura, removing the distressed Dhritarashtra’s affection for worldly
things by reasons pointing to final release, consoled that wise monarch.
Then hath been described the wending of the distressed Dhritarashtra
accompanied by the ladies of his house to the field of battle of the
Kauravas. Here follow the pathetic wailings of the wives of the slain
heroes. Then the wrath of Gandhari and Dhritarashtra and their loss of
consciousness. Then the Kshatriya ladies saw those heroes,--their
unreturning sons, brothers, and fathers,--lying dead on the field. Then
the pacification by Krishna of the wrath of Gandhari distressed at the
death of her sons and grandsons. Then the cremation of the bodies of the
deceased Rajas with due rites by that monarch (Yudhishthira) of great
wisdom and the foremost also of all virtuous men. Then upon the
presentation of water of the manes of the deceased princes having
commenced, the story of Kunti’s acknowledgment of Karna as her son born
in secret. Those have all been described by the great Rishi Vyasa in the
highly pathetic eleventh Parva. Its perusal moveth every feeling heart
with sorrow and even draweth tears from the eyes. The number of sections
composed is twenty-seven. The number of slokas is seven hundred and
seventy-five.

“Twelfth in number cometh the Santi Parva, which increaseth the
understanding and in which is related the despondency of Yudhishthira on
his having slain his fathers, brothers, sons, maternal uncles and
matrimonial relations. In this Parva is described how from his bed of
arrows Bhishma expounded various systems of duties worth the study of
kings desirous of knowledge; this Parva expounded the duties relative to
emergencies, with full indications of time and reasons. By understanding
these, a person attaineth to consummate knowledge. The mysteries also of
final emancipation have been expatiated upon. This is the twelfth Parva
the favourite of the wise. It consists of three hundred and thirty-nine
sections, and contains fourteen thousand, seven hundred and thirty-two
slokas.

“Next in order is the excellent Anusasana Parva. In it is described how
Yudhishthira, the king of the Kurus, was reconciled to himself on hearing
the exposition of duties by Bhishma, the son of Bhagirathi. This Parva
treats of rules in detail and of Dharma and Artha; then the rules of
charity and its merits; then the qualifications of donees, and the
supreme ride-regarding gifts. This Parva also describes the ceremonials
of individual duty, the rules of conduct and the matchless merit of
truth. This Parva showeth the great merit of Brahmanas and kine, and
unraveleth the mysteries of duties in relation to time and place. These
are embodied in the excellent Parva called Anusasana of varied incidents.
In this hath been described the ascension of Bhishma to Heaven. This is
the thirteenth Parva which hath laid down accurately the various duties
of men. The number of sections, in this is one hundred and forty-six. The
number of slokas is eight thousand.

“Then comes the fourteenth Parva Aswamedhika. In this is the excellent