the tale of our cattle. We have no mind to see the sons of Pandu. We will
not go to that spot where the Pandavas have taken up their residence, and
consequently no exhibition of misconduct can possibly arise on our part.’

Vaisampayana continued, “Thus addressed by Sakuni, that lord of men,
Dhritarashtra, granted permission, but not very willingly, to Duryodhana
and his counsellors to go to the place. And permitted by the monarch the
Bharata prince born of Gandhari started, accompanied by Karna and
surrounded by a large host. And he was also accompanied by Dussasana and
Suvala’s son of great intelligence and by many other brothers of his and
by ladies in thousands. And as the mighty-armed prince started for
beholding the lake that was known by the name of Dwaitavana, the citizens
(of Hastina), also accompanied by their wives began to follow him to that
forest. Eight thousand cars, thirty thousand elephants, nine thousand
horses, and many thousands of foot-soldiers, and shops and pavilions and
traders, bards and men trained in the chase by hundreds and thousands
followed the prince. And as the king started, followed by this large
concourse of people, the uproar that was caused there resembled, O king,
the deep tumult of the ranging winds in the rainy season. And reaching
the lake Dwaitavana with all his followers and vehicles, king Duryodhana
took up his quarters at the distance of four miles from it.”


SECTION CCXXXVIII

Vaisampayana said, “King Duryodhana then moving from forest to forest, at
last approached the cattle-stations, and encamped his troops. And his
attendants, selecting a well-known and delightful spot that abounded in
water and trees and that possessed every convenience constructed an abode
for him. And near enough to the royal residence they also erected
separate abodes for Kama and Sakuni and the brothers of the king. And the
king beheld his cattle by hundreds and thousands and examining their
limbs and marks supervised their tale. And he caused the calves to be
marked and took note of those that required to be tamed. And he also
counted those kine whose calves had not yet been weaned. And completing