the old story regarding the fruit obtained by Mudgala, for having given
away only a drona[85] of corn.’”


SECTION CCLVIII

Yudhishthira said, “Why did that high-souled one give away a drona of
corn? And, O eminently pious one, to whom and in what prescribed way did
he give it? Do thou tell me this. Surely, I consider the life of that
virtuous person as having borne fruit with whose practices the possessor
himself of the six attributes, witnessing everything, was well pleased.”

“Vyasa said, ‘There lived, O king, in Kurukshetra a virtuous man (sage),
Mudgala by name. And he was truthful, and free from malice, and of
subdued senses. And he used to lead the Sila and Unchha modes of
life.[86] And although living like a pigeon, yet that one of mighty
austerities entertained his guests, celebrated the sacrifice called
Istikrita, and performed other rites. And that sage together with his son
and wife, ate for a fortnight, and during the other fortnight led the
life of a pigeon, collecting a drona of corn. And celebrating the Darsa
and Paurnamasya sacrifices, that one devoid of guile, used to pass his
days by taking the food that remained after the deities and the guests
had eaten. And on auspicious lunar days, that lord of the three worlds,
Indra himself, accompanied by the celestials used, O mighty monarch, to
partake of the food offered at his sacrifice. And that one, having
adopted the life of a Muni, with a cheerful heart entertained his guests
also with food on such days. And as that high-souled one distributed his
food with alacrity, the remainder of the drona of corn increased as soon
as a guest appeared. And by virtue of the pure spirit in which the sage
gave a way, that food of his increased so much that hundreds upon
hundreds of learned Brahmanas were fed with it.

“And, O king, it came to pass that having heard of the virtuous Mudgala
observant of vows, the Muni Durvasa, having space alone for his
covering,[87] his accoutrements worn like that of maniac, and his head
bare of hair, came there, uttering, O Pandava various insulting words.
And having arrived there that best of Munis said unto the Brahmana. ‘Know
thou, O foremost of Brahmanas, that I have come hither seeking for food.
Thereupon Mudgala said unto the sage, ‘Thou art welcome!’ And then
offering to that maniac of an ascetic affected by hunger, water to wash
his feet and mouth, that one observant of the vow of feeding guests,
respectfully placed before him excellent fare. Affected by hunger, the
frantic Rishi completely exhausted the food that had been offered unto
him. Thereupon, Mudgala furnished him again with food. Then having eaten
up all that food, he besmeared his body with the unclean orts and went
away as he had come. In this manner, during the next season, he came
again and ate up all the food supplied by that wise one leading the
Unchha mode of life. Thereupon, without partaking any food himself, the
sage Mudgala again became engaged in collecting corn, following the
Unchha mode. Hunger could not disturb his equanimity. Nor could anger,
nor guile, nor a sense of degradation, nor agitation, enter into the
heart of that best of Brahmanas leading the Unchha mode of life along
with his son and his wife. In this way, Durvasa having made up his mind,
during successive seasons presented himself for six several times before
that best of sages living according to the Unchha mode; yet that Muni
could not perceive any agitation in Mudgala’s heart; and he found the
pure heart of the pure-souled ascetic always pure. Thereupon,
well-pleased, the sage addressed Mudgala, saying, There is not another
guileless and charitable being like thee on earth. The pangs of hunger
drive away to a distance the sense of righteousness and deprive people of
all patience. The tongue, loving delicacies, attracteth men towards them.
Life is sustained by food. The mind, moreover, is fickle, and it is hard
to keep it in subjection. The concentration of the mind and of the senses
surely constitutes ascetic austerities. It must be hard to renounce in a
pure spirit a thing earned by pains. Yet, O pious one, all this hath been
duly achieved by thee. In thy company we feel obliged and gratified.
Self-restraint, fortitude, justice, control of the senses and of
faculties, mercy, and virtue, all these are established in thee. Thou
hast by the deeds conquered the different worlds and have thereby
obtained admission into paths of beautitude. Ah! even the dwellers of
heaven are proclaiming thy mighty deeds of charity. O thou observant of
vows, thou shalt go to heaven even in thine own body.

“Whilst the Muni Durvasa was speaking thus, a celestial messenger
appeared before Mudgala, upon a car yoked with swans and cranes, hung
with a neat work of bells, scented with divine fragrance, painted
picturesquely, and possessed of the power of going everywhere at will.
And he addressed the Brahmana sage, saying, ‘O sage, do thou ascend into
this chariot earned by thy acts. Thou hast attained the fruit of thy
asceticism!’

“As the messenger of the gods was speaking thus, the sage told him, ‘O
divine messenger, I desire that thou mayst describe unto me the
attributes of those that reside there. What are their austerities, and
what their purposes? And, O messenger of the gods, what constitutes
happiness in heaven, and what are the disadvantages thereof? It is
declared by virtuous men of good lineage that friendship with pious
people is contracted by only walking with them seven paces. O lord, in
the name of that friendship I ask thee, ‘Do thou without hesitation tell
me the truth, and that which is good for me now. Having heard thee, I
shall, according to thy words, ascertain the course I ought to follow.’”


SECTION CCLIX

“The messenger of the gods said, ‘O great sage, thou art of simple
understanding; since, having secured that celestial bliss which bringeth
great honour, thou art still deliberating like an unwise person. O Muni,
that region which is known as heaven, existeth there above us. Those
regions tower high, and are furnished with excellent paths, and are, O
sage, always ranged by celestial cars. Atheists, and untruthful persons,
those that have not practised ascetic austerities and those that have not
performed great sacrifices, cannot repair thither. Only men of virtuous
souls, and those of subdued spirits, and those that have their faculties
in subjection, and those that have controlled their senses, and those
that are free from malice, and persons intent on the practice of charity;
and heroes, and men bearing marks of battle, after having, with subdued
senses and faculties, performed the most meritorious rites, attain those
regions, O Brahmana, capable of being obtained only by virtuous acts, and
inhabited by pious men. There, O Mudgala, are established separately
myriads of beautiful, shining, and resplendent worlds bestowing every
object of desire, owned by those celestial beings, the gods, the Sadhyas,
and the Vaiswas, the great sages, Yamas, and the Dharmas, and the
Gandharvas and the Apsaras. And there is that monarch of mountains the
golden Meru extending over a space of thirty-three thousand Yojanas. And
there, O Mudgala, are the sacred gardens of the celestials, with Nandana
at their head, where sport the persons of meritorious acts. And neither
hunger, nor thirst, nor lassitude, nor fear, nor anything that is
disgusting or inauspicious is there. And all the odours of that place are
delightful, and all the breezes delicious to the touch. And all the
sounds there are captivating, O sage, to the ear and the heart. And
neither grief, nor decrepitude, nor labour, nor repentance also is there.
That world, O Muni, obtained as the fruit of one’s own acts, is of this
nature. Persons repair thither by virtue of their meritorious deeds. And
the persons of those that dwell there look resplendent, and this, O
Mudgala, solely by virtue of their own acts, and not owing to the merits
of father or mothers. And there is neither sweat, nor stench, nor urine
there. And, there, O Muni, dust doth not soils one’s garments. And their
excellent garlands, redolent of divine fragrance, never fade. And, O
Brahmana, they yoke such cars as this (that I have brought). And, O
mighty sage, devoid of envy and grief and fatigue and ignorance and
malice, men who have attained heaven, dwell in those regions happily.
And, O bull among Munis, higher and higher over such regions there are
others endued with higher celestial virtues. Of these, the beautiful and
resplendent regions of Brahma are the foremost. Thither, O Brahmana,
repair Rishis that have been sanctified by meritorious acts. And there
dwell certain beings named Ribhus. They are the gods of the gods
themselves. Their regions are supremely blessed, and are adored even by
the deities. These shine by their own light, and bestow every object of
desire. They suffer no pangs that women might cause, do not possess
worldly wealth, and are free from guile. The Ribhus do not subsist on
oblations, nor yet on ambrosia. And they are endued with such celestial
forms that they cannot be perceived by the senses. And these eternal gods
of the celestials do not desire happiness for happiness’ sake, nor do
they change at the revolution of a Kalpa. Where, indeed, is their
decrepitude or dissolution? For them there is neither ecstasy, nor joy,
nor happiness. They have neither happiness nor misery. Wherefore should
they have anger or aversion then, O Muni? O Mudgala, their supreme state
is coveted even by the gods. And that crowning emancipation, hard to
attain, can never be acquired by people subject to desire. The number of
those deities is thirty-three. To their regions repair wise men, after
having observed excellent vows, or bestowed gifts according to the
ordinance. Thou also hast easily acquired that success by thy charities.
Do thou, by effulgence displayed by virtue of thy ascetic austerities,
enjoy that condition obtained by thy meritorious acts. Such, O Brahmana,
is the bliss of heaven containing various worlds.

“Thus have I described unto thee the blessing of the celestial regions.
Do thou now hear from me some of the disadvantages thereof. That in the
celestial regions a person, while reaping the fruit of the acts he hath
already performed, cannot be engaged in any others, and that he must
enjoy the consequences of the former until they are completely exhausted,
and, further, that he is subject to fall after he hath entirely exhausted
his merit, form, in my opinion, the disadvantages of heaven. The fall of
a person whose mind hath been steeped in happiness, must, O Mudgala, be
pronounced as a fault. And the discontent and regret that must follow
one’s stay at an inferior seat after one hath enjoyed more auspicious and
brighter regions, must be hard to bear. And the consciousness of those
about to fall is stupefied, and also agitated by emotions. And as the
garlands of those about to fall fade away, fear invadeth their hearts.
These mighty drawbacks, O Mudgala, extend even to the regions of Brahma.
In the celestial regions, the virtues of men who have performed righteous
acts, are countless. And, O Muni, this is another of the attributes of
the fallen that, by reason of their merits, they take birth among men.
And then they attain to high fortune and happiness. If one, however,
cannot acquire knowledge here, one cometh by an inferior birth. The
fruits of acts done in this world are reaped in the next. This world, O
Brahmana, hath been declared to be one of acts; the others, as one of
fruit. Thus have I, O Mudgala, asked by thee, described all unto thee.
Now, O pious one, with thy favour, we shall easily set out with speed.’

“Vyasa continued, ‘Having heard this speech, Mudgala began to reflect in
his mind. And having deliberated well, that best of Munis spake thus unto
the celestial messenger, ‘O messenger of the gods, I bow unto thee. Do
thou, O sire, depart in peace. I have nothing to do with either
happiness, or heaven having such prominent defects. Persons who enjoy
heaven suffer, after all, huge misery and extreme regret in this world.
Therefore, I do not desire heaven. I shall seek for that unfailing region
repairing whither people have not to lament, or to be pained, or
agitated. Thou hast described unto me these great defects belonging to
the celestial regions. Do thou now describe unto me a region free from
faults.’ Thereupon the celestial messenger said, ‘Above the abode of
Brahma, there is the supreme seat of Vishnu, pure, and eternal, and
luminous known by the name of Para Brahma. Thither, O Brahmana, cannot
repair persons who are attached to the objects of the senses: nor can
those subject to arrogance, covetousness, ignorance, anger, and envy, go
to that place. It is only those that are free from affection, and those
free from pride, and those free from conflicting emotions, and those that
have restrained their senses, and those given to contemplation and Yoga,
that can repair thither.’ Having heard these words, the Muni bade
farewell to the celestial messenger, and that virtuous one leading the
Unchha mode of life, assumed perfect contentment. And then praise and
dispraise became equal unto him; and a brickbat, stone, and gold assumed
the same aspect in his eyes. And availing himself of the means of
attaining Brahma, he became always engaged in meditation. And having
obtained power by means of knowledge, and acquired excellent
understanding, he attained that supreme state of emancipation which is
regarded as Eternal. Therefore, thou also, O Kunti’s son, ought not to
grieve. Deprived thou hast truly been of a flourishing kingdom, but thou
wilt regain it by thy ascetic austerities. Misery after happiness, and
happiness after misery, revolve by turns round a man even like the point
of a wheel’s circumference round the axle. After the thirteenth year hath
passed away, thou wilt, O thou of immeasurable might, get back the
kingdom possessed before thee by thy father and grand-father. Therefore,
let the fever of thy heart depart!’”

Vaisampayana continued “Having said this to Pandu’s son, the worshipful
Vyasa went back to his hermitage for the purpose of performing
austerities.”


SECTION CCLX

Janamejaya said, “While the high-souled Pandavas were living in those
woods, delighted with the pleasant conversation they held with the Munis,
and engaged in distributing the food they obtained from the sun, with
various kinds of venison to Brahmanas and others that came to them for
edibles till the hour of Krishna’s meal, how, O great Muni, did
Duryodhana and the other wicked and sinful sons of Dhritarashtra, guided
by the counsels of Dussasana, Karna and Sakuni, deal with them? I ask
thee this. Do thou, worshipful Sir, enlighten me.”

Vaisampayana said, “When, O great king, Duryodhana heard that the
Pandavas were living as happily in the woods as in a city, he longed,
with the artful Karna, Dussasana and others, to do them harm. And while
those evil-minded persons were employed in concerting various wicked
designs, the virtuous and celebrated ascetic Durvasa, following the bent
of his own will, arrived at the city of the Kurus with ten thousand
disciples. And seeing the irascible ascetic arrived, Duryodhana and his
brothers welcomed him with great humility, self-abasement and gentleness.
And himself attending on the Rishi as a menial, the prince gave him a
right worshipful reception. And the illustrious Muni stayed there for a
few days, while king Duryodhana, watchful of his imprecations, attended
on him diligently by day and night. And sometimes the Muni would say, ‘I
am hungry, O king, give me some food quickly.’ And sometimes he would go
out for a bath and, returning at a late hour, would say, ‘I shall not eat
anything today as I have no appetite,’ and so saying would disappear from
his sight. And sometimes, coming all on a sudden, he would say, ‘Feed us
quickly.’ And at other times, bent on some mischief, he would awake at
midnight and having caused his meals to be prepared as before, would carp
at them and not partake of them at all. And trying the prince in this way
for a while, when the Muni found that the king Duryodhana was neither
angered, nor annoyed, he became graciously inclined towards him. And
then, O Bharata, the intractable Durvasa said unto him, ‘I have power to
grant thee boons. Thou mayst ask of me whatever lies nearest to thy
heart. May good fortune be thine. Pleased as I am with thee, thou mayst
obtain from me anything that is not opposed to religion and morals.’

Vaisampayana continued, “Hearing these words of the great ascetic,
Suyodhana felt himself to be inspired with new life. Indeed, it had been
agreed upon between himself and Karna and Dussasana as to what the boon
should be that he would ask of the Muni if the latter were pleased with
his reception. And the evil-minded king, bethinking himself of what had
previously been decided, joyfully solicited the following favour, saying,
‘The great king Yudhishthira is the eldest and the best of our race. That
pious man is now living in the forest with his brothers. Do thou,
therefore, once become the guest of that illustrious one even as, O
Brahmana, thou hast with thy disciples been mine for some time. If thou
art minded to do me a favour, do thou go unto him at a time when that
delicate and excellent lady, the celebrated princess of Panchala, after
having regaled with food the Brahmanas, her husbands and herself, may lie
down to rest.’ The Rishi replied, ‘Even so shall I act for thy
satisfaction.’ And having said this to Suyodhana, that great Brahmana,
Durvasa, went away in the very same state in which he had come. And
Suyodhana regarded himself to have attained all the objects of his
desire. And holding Karna by the hand he expressed great satisfaction.
And Karna, too, joyfully addressed the king in the company of his
brothers, saying, ‘By a piece of singular good luck, thou hast fared well
and attained the objects of thy desire. And by good luck it is that thy
enemies have been immersed in a sea of dangers that is difficult to
cross. The sons of Pandu are now exposed to the fire of Durvasa’s wrath.
Through their own fault they have fallen into an abyss of darkness.’”

Vaisampayana continued, “O king, expressing their satisfaction in this
strain, Duryodhana and others, bent on evil machinations, returned
merrily to their respective homes.”


SECTION CCLXI

(Draupadi-harana Parva)

Vaisampayana said, “One day, having previously ascertained that the
Pandavas were all seated at their ease and that Krishna was reposing
herself after her meal, the sage Durvasa, surrounded by ten thousand
disciples repaired to that forest. The illustrious and upright king
Yudhishthira, seeing that guest arrived, advanced with his mothers to
receive him. And joining the palms of his hands and pointing to a proper
and excellent seat, he accorded the Rishis a fit and respectful welcome.
And the king said unto him, ‘Return quick, O adorable sir, after
performing thy diurnal ablutions and observances.’ And that sinless Muni,
not knowing how the king would be able to provide a feast for him and his
disciples, proceeded with the latter to perform his ablutions. And that
host of the Muni, of subdued passions, went into the stream for
performing their ablutions. Meanwhile, O king, the excellent princess
Draupadi, devoted to her husbands, was in great anxiety about the food
(to be provided for the Munis). And when after much anxious thought she
came to the conclusion that means there were none for providing a feast,
she inwardly prayed to Krishna, the slayer of Kansa. And the princess
said, ‘Krishna, O Krishna, of mighty arms, O son of Devaki, whose power
is inexhaustible, O Vasudeva, O lord of the Universe, who dispellest the
difficulties of those that bow down to thee, thou art the soul, the
creator and the destroyer of the Universe. Thou, O lord, art
inexhaustible and the saviour of the afflicted. Thou art the preserver of
the Universe and of all created beings. Thou art the highest of the high,
and the spring of the mental perceptions Akuli and Chiti![88] O Supreme
and Infinite Being, O giver of all good, be thou the refuge of the
helpless. O Primordial Being, incapable of being conceived by the soul or
the mental faculties or otherwise, thou art the ruler of all and the lord
of Brahma. I seek thy protection. O god, thou art ever kindly disposed
towards those that take refuge in thee. Do thou cherish me with thy
kindness. O thou with a complexion dark as the leaves of the blue lotus,
and with eyes red as the corolla of the lily, and attired in yellow robes
with, besides, the bright Kaustubha gem in thy bosom, thou art the
beginning and the end of creation, and the great refuge of all. Thou art
the supreme light and essence of the Universe! Thy face is directed
towards every point. They call thee Supreme Germ and the depository of
all treasures. Under thy protections, O lord of the gods, all evils lose
their terror. As thou didst protect me before from Dussasana, do thou
extricate me now from this difficulty.”

Vaisampayana continued, “The great and sovereign God, and Lord of the
earth, of mysterious movements, the lord Kesava who is ever kind to the
dependents, thou adored by Krishna, and perceiving her difficulty,
instantly repaired to that place leaving the bed of Rukmini who was
sleeping by his side. Beholding Vasudeva, Draupadi bowed down to him in
great joy and informed him of the arrival of the Munis and every other
thing. And having heard everything Krishna said unto her, ‘I am very much
afflicted with hunger, do thou give me some food without delay, and then
thou mayst go about thy work.’ At these words of Kesava, Krishna became
confused, and replied unto him, saying, ‘The sun-given vessel remains
full till I finish my meal. But as I have already taken my meal today,
there is no food in it now. Then that lotus-eyed and adorable being said
unto Krishna, ‘This is no time for jest, O Krishna.--I am much distressed
with hunger, go thou quickly to fetch the vessel and show it to me.’ When
Kesava, that ornament of the Yadu’s race, had the vessel brought unto
him,--with such persistence, he looked into it and saw a particle of rice
and vegetable sticking at its rim. And swallowing it he said unto her,
‘May it please the god Hari, the soul of the Universe, and may that god
who partaketh at sacrifices, be satiated with this.’ Then the long-armed
Krishna, that soother of miseries, said unto Bhimasena, ‘Do thou speedily
invite the Munis to dinner. Then, O good king, the celebrated Bhimasena
quickly went to invite all those Munis, Durvasa and others, who had gone
to the nearest stream of transparent and cool water to perform their
ablutions. Meanwhile, these ascetics, having plunged into the river, were
rubbing their bodies and observing that they all felt their stomachs to
be full. And coming out of the stream, they began to stare at one
another. And turning towards Durvasa, all those ascetics observed,
‘Having bade the king make our meals ready, we have come hither for a
bath. But how, O regenerate Rishi, can we eat anything now, for our
stomachs seem to be full to the throat. The repast hath been uselessly
prepared for us. What is the best thing to be done now?’ Durvasa replied,
‘By spoiling the repast, we have done a great wrong to that royal sage,
king Yudhishthira. Would not the Pandavas destroy us by looking down upon
us with angry eyes? I know the royal sage Yudhishthira to be possessed of
great ascetic power. Ye Brahmanas, I am afraid of men that are devoted to
Hari. The high-souled Pandavas are all religious men, learned, war-like,
diligent in ascetic austerities and religious observances, devoted to
Vasudeva, and always observant of rules of good conduct. If provoked,
they can consume us with their wrath as fire doth a bale of cotton.
Therefore, ye disciples, do ye all run away quickly without seeing them
(again)!”

Vaisampayana continued, “All those Brahmanas, thus advised by their
ascetic preceptor, became greatly afraid of the Pandavas and fled away in
all directions. Then Bhimasena not beholding those excellent Munis in the
celestial river, made a search after them here and there at all the
landing places. And learning from the ascetics of those places that they
had run away, he came back and informed Yudhishthira of what had
happened. Then all the Pandavas of subdued senses, expecting them to
come, remained awaiting their arrival for some time. And Yudhishthira
said, ‘Coming dead of night the Rishis will deceive us. Oh how, can we
escape from this difficulty created by the facts?’ Seeing them absorbed
in such reflections and breathing long deep sighs at frequent intervals,
the illustrious Krishna suddenly appeared to them and addressed them
these words: ‘Knowing, ye sons of Pritha, your danger from that wrathful
Rishi, I was implored by Draupadi to come, and (therefore) have I come
here speedily. But now ye have not the least fear from the Rishi Durvasa.
Afraid of your ascetic powers, he hath made himself scarce ere this.
Virtuous men never suffer. I now ask your permission to let me return
home. May you always be prosperous!’”

Vaisampayana continued, “Hearing Kesava’s words, the sons of Pritha, with
Draupadi, became easy in mind. And cured of their fever (of anxiety),
they said unto him, ‘As persons drowning in the wide ocean safely reach
the shore by means of a boat, so have we, by thy aid, O lord Govinda,
escaped from this inextricable difficulty. Do thou now depart in peace,
and may prosperity be thine.’ Thus dismissed, he repaired to his capital
and the Pandavas too, O blessed lord, wandering from forest to forest
passed their days merrily with Draupadi. Thus, O king, have I related to
thee the story which thou askedest me to repeat. And it was thus that the
machinations of the wicked sons of Dhritarashtra about the Pandavas in
the forest, were frustrated.”


SECTION CCLXII

Vaisampayana said, “These great warriors of the race of Bharata sojourned
like immortals in the great forest of Kamyaka, employed in hunting and
pleased with the sight of numerous wild tracts of country and wide
reaches of woodland, gorgeous with flowers blossoming in season. And the
sons of Pandu, each like unto Indra and the terror of his enemies, dwelt
there for some time. And one day those valiant men, the conquerors of
their foes, went about in all directions in search of game for feeding
the Brahmanas in their company, leaving Draupadi alone at the hermitage,
with the permission of the great ascetic Trinavindu, resplendent with
ascetic grandeur, and of their spiritual guide Dhaumya. Meanwhile, the
famous king of Sindhu, the son of Vriddhakshatra was, with a view to
matrimony, proceeding to the kingdom of Salwa, dressed in his best royal
apparel and accompanied by numerous princes. And the prince halted in the
woods of Kamyaka. And in that secluded place, he found the beautiful
Draupadi, the beloved and celebrated wife of the Pandavas, standing at
the threshold of the hermitage. And she looked grand in the superb beauty
of her form, and seemed to shed a lustre on the woodland around, like
lightning illuminating masses of dark clouds. And they who saw her asked
themselves, ‘Is this an Apsara, or a daughter of the gods, or a celestial
phantom?’ And with this thought, their hands also joined together. They
stood gazing on the perfect and faultless beauty of her form. And
Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu, and the son of Vriddhakshatra, struck
with amazement at the sight of that lady of faultless beauty, was seized
with an evil intention. And inflamed with desire, he said to the prince
named Kotika, ‘Whose is this lady of faultless form? Is she of the human
kind? I have no need to marry if I can secure this exquisitely beautiful
creature. Taking her with me, I shall go back to my abode, Oh sir, and
enquire who she is and whence she has come and why also that delicate
being hath come into this forest beset with thorns. Will this ornament of
womankind, this slender-waisted lady of so much beauty, endued with
handsome teeth and large eyes, accept me as her lord? I shall certainly
regard myself successful, if I obtain the hand of this excellent lady.
Go, Kotika, and enquire who her husband may be.’ Thus asked, Kotika,
wearing a kundala, jumped out of his chariot and came near her, as a
jackal approacheth a tigress, and spake unto her these words.’”


SECTION CCLXIII

Kotika said, “Excellent lady, who art thou that standest alone, leaning
on a branch of the Kadamva tree at this hermitage and looking grand like
a flame of fire blazing at night time, and fanned by the wind?
Exquisitely beautiful as thou art, how is it that thou feelest not any
fear in these forests? Methinks thou art a goddess, or a Yakshi, or a
Danavi, or an excellent Apsara, or the wife of a Daitya, or a daughter of
the Naga king, or a Rakshasi or the wife of Varuna, or of Yama, or of
Soma, or of Kuvera, who, having assumed a human form, wanderest in these
forests. Or, hast thou come from the mansions of Dhatri, or of Vidhatri,
or of Savitri, or of Vibhu, or of Sakra? Thou dost not ask us who we are,
nor do we know who protects thee here! Respectfully do we ask thee, good
lady, who is thy powerful father, and, O, do tell us truly the names of
thy husband, thy relatives, and thy race, and tell us also what thou dost
here. As for us, I am king Suratha’s son whom people know by the name of
Kotika, and that man with eyes large as the petals of the lotus, sitting
on a chariot of gold, like the sacrificial fire on the altar, is the
warrior known by the name of Kshemankara, king of Trigarta. And behind
him is the famous son of the king of Pulinda, who is even now gazing on
thee. Armed with a mighty bow and endued with large eyes, and decorated
with floral wreaths, he always liveth on the breasts of mountains. The
dark and handsome young man, the scourge of his enemies, standing at the
edge of that tank, is the son of Suvala of the race of Ikshwaku. And if,
O excellent lady, thou hast ever heard the name of Jayadratha, the king
of Sauviras, even he is there at the head of six thousand chariots, with
horses and elephants and infantry, and followed by twelve Sauvira princes
as his standard-bearers, named Angaraka, Kunjara, Guptaka, Satrunjaya,
Srinjaya, Suprabiddha, Prabhankara, Bhramara, Ravi, Sura, Pratapa and
Kuhana, all mounted on chariots drawn by chestnut horses and every one of
them looking like the fire on the sacrificial altar. The brothers also of
the king, viz., the powerful Valahaka, Anika, Vidarana and others, are
among his followers. These strong-limbed and noble youths are the flowers
of the Sauvira chivalry. The king is journeying in the company of these
his friends, like Indra surrounded by the Maruts. O fine-haired lady, do
tell us that are unacquainted (with these matters), whose wife and whose
daughter thou art.”


SECTION CCLXIV

Vaisampayana continued, “The princess Draupadi, thus questioned by that
ornament of Sivi’s race, moved her eyes gently, and letting go her hold
of the Kadamva blanch and arranging her silken apparel she said, I am
aware, O prince, that it is not proper for a person like me to address
you thus, but as there is not another man or woman here to speak with
thee and as I am alone here just now, let me, therefore, speak. Know,
worthy sir, that being alone in this forest here, I should not speak unto
thee, remembering the usages of my sex. I have learned, O Saivya, that
thou art Suratha’s son, whom people know by the name of Kotika.
Therefore, on my part, I shall now tell thee of my relations and renowned
race. I am the daughter of king Drupada, and people know me by the name
of Krishna, and I have accepted as my husbands, five persons of whom you
may have heard while they were living at Kahandavaprastha. Those noble
persons, viz., Yudhishthira, Bhimasena, Arjuna, and the two sons of
Madri, leaving me here and having assigned unto themselves the four
points of the horizon, have gone out on a hunting excursion. The king
hath gone to the east, Bhimasena towards the south, Arjuna to the west,
and the twin brothers towards the north! Therefore, do ye now alight and
dismiss your carriages so that ye may depart after receiving a due
welcome from them. The high-souled son of Dharma is fond of guests and
will surely be delighted to see you!’ Having addressed Saivya’s son in
this way, the daughter of Drupada, with face beautiful as the moon,
remembering well her husband’s character for hospitality, entered her
spacious cottage.”


SECTION CCLXV

Vaisampayana said, “O Bharata, Kotikakhya related to those princes who
had been waiting, all that had passed between him and Krishna. And
hearing Kotikakhya’s words, Jayadratha said to that scion of the race of
Sivi, ‘Having listened only to her speech, my heart has been lovingly
inclined towards that ornament of womankind. Why therefore, hast thou
returned (thus unsuccessful)? I tell thee truly, O thou of mighty arms,
that having once seen this lady, other women now seem to me like so many
monkeys. I having looked at her, she has captivated my heart. Do tell me,
O Saivya, if that excellent lady is of the human kind.’ Kotika replied,
‘This lady is the famous princess Krishna, the daughter of Drupada, and
the celebrated wife of the five sons of Pandu. She is the much esteemed
and beloved and chaste wife of the sons of Pritha. Taking her with thee,
do thou proceed towards Sauvira!’”

Vaisampayana continued, ‘Thus addressed, the evil-minded Jayadratha, the
king of Sindhu, Sauvira and other countries, said, ‘I must see Draupadi.’
And with six other men he entered that solitary hermitage, like a wolf
entering the den of a lion. And he said unto Krishna, ‘Hail to thee,
excellent lady! Are thy husbands well and those, besides, whose
prosperity thou always wishest.’ Draupadi replied, ‘Kunti’s son king
Yudhishthira of the race of Kuru, his brothers, myself, and all those of
whom thou hast enquired of, are well. Is everything right with thy
kingdom, thy government, exchequer, and thy army? Art thou, as sole
ruler, governing with justice the rich countries of Saivya, Sivi, Sindhu
and others that thou hast brought under thy sway? Do thou, O prince,
accept this water for washing thy feet. Do thou also take this seat. I
offer thee fifty animals for thy train’s breakfast. Besides these,
Yudhishthira himself, the son of Kunti, will give thee porcine deer and
Nanku deer, and does, and antelopes, and Sarabhas, and rabbits, and Ruru
deer, and bears, and Samvara deer and gayals and many other animals,
besides wild boars and buffaloes and other animals of the quadruped
tribe.’ Hearing this Jayadratha replied, saying, ‘All is well with me. By
offering to provide our breakfast, thou hast in a manner actually done
it. Come now and ride my chariot and be completely happy. For it becomes
not thee to have any regard for the miserable sons of Pritha who are
living in the woods, whose energies have been paralysed, whose kingdom
hath been snatched and whose fortunes are at the lowest ebb. A woman of
sense like thee doth not attach herself to a husband that is poor. She
should follow her lord when he is in prosperity but abandon him when in
adversity. The sons of Pandu have for ever fallen away from their high
state, and have lost their kingdom for all time to come. Thou hast no
need, therefore, to partake of their misery from any regard for them.
Therefore, O thou of beautiful hips, forsaking the sons of Pandu, be
happy by becoming my wife, and share thou with me the kingdoms of Sindhu
and Sauvira.’”

Vaisampayana continued, “Hearing these frightful words of the king of
Sindhu, Krishna retired from that place, her face furrowed into a frown
owing to the contraction of her eye-brows. But disregarding his words
from supreme contempt, the slender-waisted Krishna reproving said unto
the king of Sindhu, ‘Speak not thus again! Art thou not ashamed? Be on
thy guard!’ And that lady of irreproachable character anxiously expecting
the return of her husband, began, with long speeches, to beguile him
completely.”


SECTION CCLXVI

Vaisampayana said, “The daughter of Drupada, though naturally handsome,
was suffused with crimson arising from a fit of anger. And with eyes
inflamed and eye-brows bent in wrath, she reproved the ruler of the
Suviras, saying, ‘Art thou not ashamed, O fool, to use such insulting
words in respect of those celebrated and terrible warriors, each like
unto Indra himself, and who are all devoted to their duties and who never
waver in fight with even hosts of Yakshas and Rakshasas? O Sauvira, good
men never speak ill of learned persons devoted to austerities and endued
with learning, no matter whether they live in the wilderness or in
houses. It is only wretches that are mean as thou who do so. Methinks
there is none in this assemblage of Kshatriya, who is capable of holding
thee by the hand to save thee from falling into the pit thou openest
under thy feet. In hoping to vanquish king Yudhishthira the just, thou
really hopest to separate, stick in hand, from a herd roaming in
Himalayan valleys, its leader, huge as a mountain peak and with the
temporal juice trickling down its rent temples. Out of childish folly
thou art kicking up into wakefulness the powerful lion lying asleep, in
order to pluck the hair from off his face! Thou shalt, however, have to
run away when thou seest Bhimasena in wrath! Thy courting a combat with
the furious Jishnu may be likened to thy kicking up a mighty, terrible,
full-grown and furious lion asleep in a mountain cave. The encounter thou
speakest of with those two excellent youths--the younger Pandavas--is
like unto the act of a fool that wantonly trampleth on the tails of two
venomous black cobras with bifurcated tongues. The bamboo, the reed, and
the plantain bear fruit only to perish and not to grow in size any
further. Like also the crab that conceiveth for her own destruction, thou
wilt lay hands upon me who am protected by these mighty heroes!’

Jayadratha replied, ‘I know all this, O Krishna, and I am well aware of
the prowess of those princes. But thou canst not frighten us now with
these threats. We, too, O Krishna, belong by birth to the seventeen high
clans, and are endowed with the six royal qualities.[89] We, therefore,
look down upon the Pandavas as inferior men! Therefore, do thou, O
daughter of Drupada, ride this elephant or this chariot quickly, for thou
canst not baffle us with thy words alone; or, speaking less boastfully,
seek thou the mercy of the king of the Sauviras!’

Draupadi replied, “Though I am so powerful, why doth the king of Sauvira
yet consider me so powerless. Well-known as I am, I cannot, from fear of
violence, demean myself before that prince. Even Indra himself cannot
abduct her for whose protection Krishna and Arjuna would together follow,
riding in the same chariot. What shall I say, therefore, of a weak human
being. When Kiriti, that slayer of foes, riding on his car, will, on my
account, enter thy ranks, striking terror into every heart, he will
consume everything around like fire consuming a stack of dry grass in
summer. The warring princes of the Andhaka and the Vrishni races, with
Janardana at their head, and the mighty bowmen of the Kaikeya tribe, will
all follow in my wake with great ardour. The terrible arrows of
Dhananjaya, shot from the string of the Gandiva and propelled by his arms
fly with great force through the air, roaring like the very clouds. And
when thou wilt behold Arjuna shooting from the Gandiva a thick mass of
mighty arrows like unto a flight of locusts, then wilt thou repent of
thine own folly! Bethink thyself of what thou wilt feel when that warrior
armed with the Gandiva, blowing his conch-shell and with gloves
reverberating with the strokes of his bowstring will again and again
pierce thy breast with his shafts. And when Bhima will advance towards
thee, mace in hand and the two sons of Madri range in all directions,
vomiting forth the venom of their wrath, thou wilt then experience pangs
of keen regret that will last for ever. As I have never been false to my
worthy lords even in thought, so by that merit shall I now have the
pleasure of beholding thee vanquished and dragged by the sons of Pritha.
Thou canst not, cruel as thou art, frighten me by seizing me with
violence, for as soon as those Kuru warriors will espy me they will bring
me back to the woods of Kamyaka.’”

Vaisampayana continued, “Then that lady of large eyes, beholding them
ready to lay violent hands on her, rebuked them and said, ‘Defile me not
by your touch!’ And in a great alarm she then called upon her spiritual
adviser, Dhaumya. Jayadratha, however, seized her by her upper garment,
but she pushed him with great vigour. And pushed by the lady, that sinful
wretch fell upon the ground like a tree severed from its roots. Seized,
however, once more by him with great violence, she began to pant for
breath. And dragged by the wretch, Krishna at last ascended his chariot
having worshipped Dhaumya’s feet. And Dhaumya then addressed Jayadratha
and said, ‘Do thou, O Jayadratha, observe the ancient custom of the
Kshatriyas. Thou canst not carry her off without having vanquished those
great warriors. Without doubt, thou shalt reap the painful fruits of this
thy despicable act, when thou encounterest the heroic sons of Pandu with
Yudhishthira the just at their head!’”

Vaisampayana continued, “Having said these words Dhaumya, entering into
the midst of Jayadratha’s infantry, began to follow that renowned
princess who was thus being carried away by the ravisher.”


SECTION CCLXVII

Vaisampayana said, “Meanwhile those foremost of bowmen on the face of the
earth, having wandered separately and ranged in all directions, and
having slain plenty of deer and buffaloes, at length met together. And
observing that great forest, which was crowded with hosts of deer and
wild beasts, resounding with the shrill cries of birds, and hearing the
shrieks and yells of the denizens of the wilderness. Yudhishthira said
unto his brothers. ‘These birds and wild beasts, flying towards that
direction which is illuminated by the sun, are uttering dissonant cries
and displaying an intense excitement. All this only shows that this
mighty forest hath been invaded by hostile intruders. Without a moment’s
delay let us give up the chase. We have no more need of game. My heart
aches and seems to burn! The soul in my body, over-powering the
intellect, seems ready to fly out. As a lake rid by Garuda of the mighty
snake that dwells in it, as a pot drained of its contents by thirsty men,
as a kingdom reft of king and prosperity, even so doth the forest of
Kamyaka seem to me.’ Thus addressed, those heroic warriors drove towards
their abode, on great cars of handsome make and drawn by steeds of the
Saindharva breed exceedingly fleet and possessed of the speed of the
hurricane. And on their way back, they beheld a jackal yelling hideously
on the wayside towards their left. And king Yudhishthira, regarding it
attentively, said unto Bhima and Dhananjaya, ‘This jackal that belongs to
a very inferior species of animals, speaking to our left, speaketh a
language which plainly indicates that the sinful Kurus, disregarding us,
have commenced to oppress us by resorting to violence.’ After the sons of
Pandu had given up the chase and said these words, they entered the grove
which contained their hermitage. And there they found their beloved one’s
maid, the girl Dhatreyika, sobbing and weeping. And Indrasena then
quickly alighting from the chariot and advancing with hasty steps towards
her, questioned her, O king, in great distress of mind, saying, ‘What
makes thee weep thus, lying on the ground, and why is thy face so
woe-begone and colourless? I hope no cruel wretches have done any harm to
the princess Draupadi possessed of incomparable beauty and large eyes and
who is the second self of every one of those bulls of the Kuru race? So
anxious hath been Dharma’s son that if the princess hath entered the
bowels of the earth or hath soared to heaven or dived into the bottom of
the ocean, he and his brothers will go thither in pursuit of her. Who
could that fool be that would carry away that priceless jewel belonging
to the mighty and ever-victorious sons of Pandu, those grinders of foes,
and which is dear unto them as their own lives? I don’t know who the
person could be that would think of carrying away that princess who hath
such powerful protectors and who is even like a walking embodiment of the
hearts of the sons of Pandu? Piercing whose breasts will terrible shafts
stick to the ground to-day? Do not weep for her, O timid girl, for know
thou that Krishna will come back this very day, and the sons of Pritha,
having slain their foes, will again be united with Yagnaseni!’ Thus
addressed by him, Dhatreyika, wiping her beautiful face, replied unto
Indrasena the charioteer, saying, ‘Disregarding the five Indra-like sons
of Pandu, Jayadratha hath carried away Krishna by force. The track
pursued by him hath not yet disappeared, for the broken branches of trees
have not yet faded. Therefore, turn your cars and follow her quickly, for
the princess cannot have gone far by this time! Ye warriors possessed of
the prowess of Indra, putting on your costly bows of handsome make, and
taking up your costly bows and quivers, speed ye in pursuit of her, lest
overpowered by threats or violence and losing her sense and the colour of
her cheeks, she yields herself up to an undeserving wight, even as one
poureth forth, from the sacrificial ladle, the sanctified oblation on a
heap of ashes. O, see that the clarified butter is not poured into an
unigniting fire of paddy chaff; that a garland of flowers is not thrown
away in a cemetery. O, take care that the Soma juice of a sacrifice is
not licked up by a dog through the carelessness of the officiating
priests! O, let not the lily be rudely torn by a jackal roaming for its
prey in the impenetrable forest. O, let no inferior wight touch with his
lips the bright and beautiful face of your wife, fair as the beams of the
moon and adorned with the finest nose and the handsomest eyes, like a dog
licking clarified butter kept in the sacrificial pot! Do ye speed in this
track and let not time steal a march on you.’

Yudhishthira said, ‘Retire, good woman, and control thy tongue. Speak not
this way before us. Kings or princes, whoever are infatuated with the
possession of power, are sure to come to grief!’”

Vaisampayana continued, “With these words, they departed, following the
track pointed out to them, and frequently breathing deep sighs like the
hissing of snakes, and twanging the strings of their large bows. And then
they observed a cloud of dust raised by the hoofs of the steeds belonging
to Jayadratha’s army. And they also saw Dhaumya in the midst of the
ravisher’s infantry, exhorting Bhima to quicken his steps. Then those
princes (the sons of Pandu) with hearts undepressed, bade him be of good
cheer and said unto him, ‘Do thou return cheerfully!’--And then they
rushed towards that host with great fury, like hawks swooping down on
their prey. And possessed of the prowess of Indra, they had been filled
with fury at the insult offered to Draupadi. But at sight of Jayadratha
and of their beloved wife seated on his car, their fury knew no bounds.
And those mighty bowmen, Bhima and Dhananjaya and the twin brothers and
the king, called out Jayadratha to stop, upon which the enemy was so
bewildered as to lose their knowledge of directions.”


SECTION CCLXVIII

Vaisampayana said, “The hostile Kshatriyas, incensed at sight of
Bhimasena and Arjuna, sent up a loud shout in the forest. And the wicked
king Jayadratha, when he saw the standards of those bulls of the Kuru
race, lost his heart, and addressing the resplendent Yagnaseni seated on
his car, said, ‘Those five great warriors, O Krishna, that are coming,
are I believe, thy husbands. As thou knowest the sons of Pandu well, do
thou, O lady of beautiful tresses, describe them one by one to us,
pointing out which of them rideth which car!’ Thus addressed, Draupadi
replied, ‘Having done this violent deed calculated to shorten thy life,
what will it avail thee now, O fool, to know the names of those great
warriors, for, now that my heroic husbands are come, not one of ye will
be left alive in battle. However as thou art on the point of death and
hast asked me, I will tell thee everything, this being consistent with
the ordinance. Beholding king Yudhishthira the just with his younger
brothers, I have not the slighest anxiety or fear from thee! That warrior
at the top of whose flagstaff two handsome and sonorous tabours called
Nanda and Upananda are constantly played upon,--he, O Sauvira chief, hath
a correct knowledge of the morality of his own acts. Men that have
attained success always walk in his train. With a complexion like that of
pure gold, possessed of a prominent nose and large eyes, and endued with
a slender make, that husband of mine is known among people by the name of
Yudhishthira, the son of Dharma and the foremost of the Kuru race. That
virtuous prince of men granteth life to even a foe that yields.
Therefore, O fool, throwing down thy arms and joining thy hands, run to
him for thy good, to seek his protection. And that other man whom thou
seest with long arms and tall as the full-grown Sala tree, seated on his
chariot, biting his lips, and contracting his forehead so as to bring the
two eye-brows together, is he,--my husband Vrikodara! Steeds of the
noblest breed, plump and strong, well-trained and endued with great
might, draw the cars of that warrior! His achievements are superhuman. He
is known, therefore, by the name of Bhima on earth. They that offend him
are never suffered to live. He never forgetteth a foe. On some pretext or
other he wrecketh his vengeance. Nor is he pacified even after he has
wrecked a signal vengeance. And there, that foremost of bowmen, endued
with intelligence and renown, with senses under complete control and
reverence for the old--that brother and disciple of Yudhishthira--is my
husband Dhananjaya! Virtue he never forsaketh, from lust or fear or
anger! Nor doth he ever commit a deed that is cruel. Endued with the
energy of fire and capable of withstanding every foe, that grinder of
enemies is the son of Kunti. And that other youth, versed in every
question of morality and profit, who ever dispelleth the fears of the
affrighted, who is endued with high wisdom, who is considered as the
handsomest person in the whole world and who is protected by all the sons
of Pandu, being regarded by them as dearer to them than their own lives
for his unflinching devotion to them, is my husband Nakula possessed of
great prowess. Endued with high wisdom and having Sahadeva for his
second, possessed of exceeding lightness of hand, he fighteth with the
sword, making dexterous passes therewith. Thou, foolish man, shall
witness today his performances on the field of battle, like unto those of
Indra amid the ranks of Daityas! And that hero skilled in weapons and
possessed of intelligence and wisdom, and intent on doing what is
agreeable to the son of Dharma, that favourite and youngest born of the
Pandavas, is my husband Sahadeva! Heroic, intelligent, wise and ever
wrathful there is not another man equal unto him in intelligence or in
eloquence amid assemblies of the wise. Dearer to Kunti than her own soul,
he is always mindful of the duties of Kshatriyas, and would much sooner
rush into fire or sacrifice his own life than say anything that is
opposed to religion and morals. When the sons of Pandu will have killed
thy warriors in battle, then wilt thou behold thy army in the miserable
plight of a ship on the sea wrecked with its freight of jewels on the
back of a whale. Thus have I described unto thee the prowess of the sons
of Pandu, disregarding whom in thy foolishness, thou hast acted so. If
thou escapest unscathed from them, then, indeed thou wilt have obtained a
new lease of life.’”

Vaisampayana continued, “Then those five sons of Pritha, each like unto
Indra, filled with wrath, leaving the panic-stricken infantry alone who
were imploring them for mercy, rushed furiously upon the charioteers,
attacking them on all sides and darkening the very air with the thick
shower of arrows they shot.”


SECTION CCLXIX

Vaisampayana said, “Meanwhile, the king of Sindhu was giving orders to
those princes, saying, ‘Halt, strike, march, quick’, and like. And on
seeing Bhima, Arjuna and the twin brothers with Yudhishthira, the
soldiers sent up a loud shout on the field of battle. And the warriors of
the Sivi, Sauvira and Sindhu tribes, at the sight of those powerful
heroes looking like fierce tigers, lost heart. And Bhimasena, armed with
a mace entirely of Saikya iron and embossed with gold, rushed towards the
Saindhava monarch doomed to death. But Kotikakhya, speedily surrounding
Vrikodara with an array of mighty charioteers, interposed between and
separated the combatants. And Bhima, though assailed with numberless
spears and clubs and iron arrows hurled at him by the strong arms of
hostile heroes, did not waver for one moment. On the other hand, he
killed, with his mace, an elephant with its driver and fourteen
foot-soldiers fighting in the front of Jayadratha’s car. And Arjuna also,
desirous of capturing the Sauvira king, slew five hundred brave
mountaineers fighting in the van of the Sindhu army. And in that
encounter, the king himself slew in the twinkling of an eye, a hundred of
the best warriors of the Sauviras. And Nakula too, sword in hand, jumping
out of his chariot, scattered in a moment, like a tiller sowing seeds,
the heads of the combatants fighting in the rear. And Sahadeva from his
chariot began to fell with his iron shafts, many warriors fighting on
elephants, like birds dropped from the boughs of a tree. Then the king of
Trigartas, bow in hand descending from his great chariot, killed the four
steeds of the king with his mace. But Kunti’s son, king Yudhishthira the
just, seeing the foe approach so near, and fighting on foot, pierced his
breast with a crescent-shaped arrow. And that hero, thus wounded in the
breast began to vomit blood, and fell down upon the ground besides
Pritha’s son, like an uprooted tree. And king Yudhishthira the just,
whose steeds had been slain taking this opportunity, descended with
Indrasena from his chariot and mounted that of Sahadeva. And the two
warriors, Kshemankara and Mahamuksha, singling out Nakula, began to pour
on him from both sides a perfect shower of keen-edged arrows. The son of
Madri, however, succeeded in slaying, with a couple of long shafts, both
those warriors who had been pouring on him an arrowy shower--like clouds
in the rainy season. Suratha, the king of Trigartas, well-versed in
elephant-charges, approaching the front of Nakula’s chariot, caused it to
be dragged by the elephant he rode. But Nakula, little daunted at this,
leaped out of his chariot, and securing a point of vantage, stood shield
and sword in hand, immovable as a hill. Thereupon Suratha, wishing to
slay Nakula at once, urged towards him his huge and infuriate elephant
with trunk upraised. But when the beast came near, Nakula with his sword
severed from his head both trunk and tusks. And that mail-clad elephant,
uttering a frightful roar, fell headlong upon the ground, crushing its
riders by the fall. And having achieved this daring feat, heroic son of
Madri, getting up on Bhimasena’s car, obtained a little rest. And Bhima
too, seeing prince Kotikakhya rush to the encounter, cut off the head of
his charioteer with a horse-shoe arrow. That prince did not even perceive
that his driver was killed by his strong-armed adversary, and his horses,
no longer restrained by a driver, ran about on the battle-field in all
directions. And seeing that prince without a driver turn his back, that
foremost of smiters, Bhima the son of Pandu, went up to him and slew him
with a bearded dart. And Dhananjaya also cut off with his sharp
crescent-shaped arrows, the heads, as well as the bows of all the twelve
Sauvira heroes. And the great warrior killed in battle, with the arrow,
the leaders of the Ikshwakus and the hosts of Sivis and Trigartas and
Saindhavas. And a great many elephants with their colours, and chariots
with standards, were seen to fall by the hand of Arjuna. And heads
without trunks, and trunks without heads, lay covering the entire field
of battle. And dogs, and herons and ravens, and crows, and falcons, and
jackals, and vultures, feasted on the flesh and blood of warriors slain
on that field. And when Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu, saw that his
warriors were slain, he became terrified and anxious to run away leaving
Krishna behind. And in that general confusion, the wretch, setting down
Draupadi there, fled for his life, pursuing the same forest path by which
he had come. And king Yudhishthira the just, seeing Draupadi with Dhaumya
walking before, caused her to be taken up on a chariot by the heroic
Sahadeva, the son of Madri. And when Jayadratha had fled away Bhima began
to mow down with his iron-arrows such of his followers as were running
away striking each trooper down after naming him. But Arjuna perceiving
that Jayadratha had run away exhorted his brother to refrain from
slaughtering the remnant of the Saindhava host. And Arjuna said, ‘I do
not find on the field of battle Jayadratha through whose fault alone we
have experienced this bitter misfortune! Seek him out first and may
success crown thy effort! What is the good of thy slaughtering these
troopers? Why art thou bent upon this unprofitable business?’

Vaisampayana continued, “Bhimasena, thus exhorted by Arjuna of great
wisdom, turning to Yudhishthira, replied, saying, ‘As a great many of the
enemy’s warriors have been slain and as they are flying in all
directions, do thou, O king, now return home, taking with thee Draupadi
and the twin brothers and high-souled Dhaumya, and console the princess
after getting back to our asylum! That foolish king of Sindhu I shall not
let alone as long as he lives, even if he find a shelter in the internal
regions or is backed by Indra himself! And Yudhishthira replied, saying,
‘O thou of mighty arms remembering (our sister) Dussala and the
celebrated Gandhari, thou shouldst not slay the king of Sindhu even
though he is so wicked!’

Vaisampayana continued, “Hearing these words, Draupadi was greatly
excited. And that highly intelligent lady in her excitement said to her
two husbands, Bhima and Arjuna with indignation mixed with modesty, ‘If
you care to do what is agreeable to me, you must slay that mean and
despicable wretch, that sinful, foolish, infamous and contemptible chief
of the Saindhava clan! That foe who forcibly carries away a wife, and he
that wrests a kingdom, should never be forgiven on the battle-field, even
though he should supplicate for mercy!’ Thus admonished, those two
valiant warriors went in search of the Saindhava chief. And the king
taking Krishna with him returned home, accompanied by his spiritual
adviser. And on entering the hermitage, he found it was laid over with
seats for the ascetics and crowded with their disciples and graced with
the presence of Markandeya and other Brahmanas. And while those Brahmanas
were gravely bewailing the lot of Draupadi, Yudhishthira endued with
great wisdom joined their company, with his brothers. And beholding the
king thus come back after having defeated the Saindhava and the Sauvira
host and recovered Draupadi, they were all elated with joy! And the king
took his seat in their midst. And the excellent princess Krishna entered
the hermitage with the two brothers.

“Meanwhile Bhima and Arjuna, learning the enemy was full two miles ahead
of them urged their horses to greater speed in pursuit of him. And the
mighty Arjuna performed a wonderful deed, killing the horse of Jayadratha
although they were full two miles ahead of them. Armed with celestial
weapons undaunted by difficulties he achieved this difficult feat with
arrows inspired with Mantras. And then the two warriors, Bhima and
Arjuna, rushed towards the terrified king of Sindhu whose horses had been
slain and who was alone and perplexed in mind. And the latter was greatly
grieved on seeing his steeds slain. And beholding Dhananjaya do such a
daring deed, and intent on running away, he followed the same forest
track by which he had come. And Falguna, seeing the Saindhava chief so
active in his fright, overtook him and addressed him saying, ‘Possessed
of so little manliness, how couldst thou dare to take away a lady by
force? Turn round, O prince; it is not meet that thou shouldst run away!
How canst thou act so, leaving thy followers in the midst of thy foes?’
Although addressed by the sons of Pritha thus, the monarch of Sindhu did
not even once turn round. And then bidding him to what he chose the
mighty Bhima overtook him in an instant, but the kind Arjuna entreated
him not to kill that wretch.”


SECTION CCLXX

Vaisampayana said, “Jayadratha flying for his life upon beholding those
two brothers with upraised arms, was sorely grieved and bolted off with
speed and coolness. But the mighty and indignant Bhimasena, descending
from his chariot, ran after him thus fleeing, and seized him by the hair
of his head. And holding him high up in the air, Bhima thrust him on the
ground with violence. And seizing the prince by the head, he knocked him
about. And when the wretch recovered consciousness, he groaned aloud and
wanted to get up on his legs. But that hero endued with mighty arms
kicked him on the head. And Bhima pressed him on the breast with his
knees as well as with his fists. And the prince thus belaboured, soon
became insensible. Then Falguna dissuaded the wrathful Bhimasena from
inflicting further chastisement on the prince, by reminding him of what
Yudhishthira had said regarding (their sister) Dussala. But Bhima
replied, saying, ‘This sinful wretch hath done a cruel injury to Krishna,
who never can bear such treatment. He, therefore, deserveth to die at
hands! But what can I do? The king is always overflowing with mercy, and
thou, too, art constantly putting obstacles in my way from a childish
sense of virtue!’ Having said these words, Vrikodara, with his
crescent-shaped arrow, shaved the hair of the prince’s head, heaving five
tufts in as many places. Jayadratha uttered not a word at this. Then
Vrikodara, addressing the foe said, ‘If thou wishest to live, listen to
me. O fool! I shall tell thee the means to attain that wish! In public
assemblies and in open courts thou must say,--I am the slave of the
Pandavas.--on this condition alone, I will pardon thee thy life! This is
the customary rule of conquest on the field of battle.’ Thus addressed
and treated, king Jayadratha said to the mighty and fierce warrior who
always looked awful, ‘Be it so!’ And he was trembling and senseless and
begrimed with dust. Then Arjuna and Vrikodara, securing him with chains,
thrust him into a chariot. And Bhima, himself mounting that chariot, and
accompanied by Arjuna, drove towards the hermitage. And approaching
Yudhishthira seated there, he placed Jayadratha in that condition before
the king. And the king, smiling, told him to set the Sindhu prince at
liberty. Then Bhima said unto the king, ‘Do thou tell Draupadi that this
wretch hath become the slave of the Pandavas.’ Then his eldest brother
said unto him affectionately, ‘If thou hast any regard for us, do thou
set this wretch at liberty!’ And Draupadi too, reading the king’s mind,
said, ‘Let him off! He hath become a slave of the king’s and thou, too,
hast disfigured him by leaving five tufts of hair on his head.’ Then that
crest-fallen prince, having obtained his liberty, approached king
Yudhishthira and bowed down unto him. And seeing those Munis there, he
saluted them also. Then the kind-hearted king Yudhishthira, the son of
Dharma, beholding Jayadratha in that condition, almost supported by
Arjuna, said unto him, ‘Thou art a free man now; I emancipate thee! Now
go away and be careful not to do such thing again; shame to thee! Thou
hadst intended to take away a lady by violence, even though thou art so
mean and powerless! What other wretch save thee would think of acting
thus?” Then that foremost king of Bharata’s race eyed with pity that
perpetrator of wicked deeds, and believing that he had lost his senses,
said, ‘Mayst thy heart grow in virtue! Never set thy heart again on
immoral deeds! Thou mayst depart in peace now with thy charioteers,
cavalry and infantry.’ Thus addressed by Yudhishthira, the prince, O
Bharata, was overpowered with shame, and bending down his head, he
silently and sorrowfully wended his way to the place where the Ganga
debouches on the plains. And imploring the protection of the god of three
eyes, the consort of Uma, he did severe penance at that place. And the
three-eyed god, pleased with his austerities deigned to accept his
offerings in person. And he also granted him a boon! Do thou listen, O
monarch, how the prince received that boon! Jayadratha, addressing that
god, asked the boon, ‘May I be able to defeat in battle all the five sons
of Pandu on their chariots!’ The god, however, told him ‘This cannot be.’
And Maheswara said, ‘None can slay or conquer them in battle. Save
Arjuna, however, thou shall be able to only check them (once) on the
field of battle! The heroic Arjuna, with mighty arms, is the god
incarnate styled Nara. He practised austerities of old in the Vadari
forest. The God Narayana is his friend. Therefore, he is unconquerable of
the very gods. I myself have given him the celestial weapon called
Pasupata. From the regents also of all the ten cardinal points, he has
acquired the thunder-bolt and other mighty weapons. And the great god
Vishnu who is the Infinite Spirit, the Lord Preceptor of all the gods, is
the Supreme Being without attributes, and the Soul of the Universe, and
existeth pervading the whole creation. At the termination of a cycle of
ages, assuming the shape of the all-consuming fire, he consumed the whole
Universe with mountains and seas and islands and hills and woods and
forests. And after the destruction of the Naga world also in the
subterranean regions in the same way, vast masses of many-coloured and
loud-pealing clouds, with streaks of lightning, spreading along the
entire welkin, had appeared on high. Then pouring down water in torrents
thick as axles of cars, and filling the space everywhere, these
extinguishing that all-consuming fire! When at the close of four thousand
Yugas the Earth thus became flooded with water, like one vast sea, and
all mobile creatures were hushed in death, and the sun and the moon and
the winds were all destroyed, and the Universe was devoid of planets and
stars, the Supreme Being called Narayana, unknowable by the senses,
adorned with a thousand heads and as many eyes and legs, became desirous
of rest. And the serpent Sesha, looking terrible with his thousand hoods,
and shining with the splendour of ten thousand suns, and white as the
Kunda flower or the moon or a string of pearls, or the white lotus, or
milk, or the fibres of a lotus stalk, served for his conch. And that
adorable and omnipotent God thus slept on the bosom of the deep,
enveloping all space with nocturnal gloom. And when his creative faculty
was excited, he awoke and found the Universe denuded of everything. In
this connection, the following sloka is recited respecting the meaning of
Narayana. “Water was created by (the Rishi) Nara, and it formed his
corpus; therefore do we hear it styled as Nara. And because it formed his
Ayana (resting-place) therefore is he known as Narayana.” As soon as that
everlasting Being was engaged in meditation for the re-creation of the
Universe, a lotus flower instantaneously came into existence from his
navel, and the four-faced Brahma came out of that navel-lotus. And then
the Grandsire of all creatures, seating himself on that flower and
finding that the whole Universe was a blank, created in his own likeness,
and from his will, the (nine) great Rishis, Marichi and others. And these
in their turn observing the same thing, completed the creation, by
creating Yakshas, Rakshas, Pisachas, reptiles, men, and all mobile and
immobile creatures. The Supreme Spirit hath three conditions. In the form
of Brahma, he is the Creator, and in the form of Vishnu he is the
Preserver, and in his form as Rudra, he is the Destroyer of the Universe!
O king of Sindhu, hast thou not heard of the wonderful achievements of
Vishnu, described to thee by the Munis and the Brahmanas learned in the
Vedas? When the world was thus reduced to one vast sea of water, with
only the heavens above, the Lord, like a fire-fly at night-time during
the rainy season, moved about hither and thither in search of stable
ground, with the view of rehabilitating his creation, and became desirous
of raising the Earth submerged in water. What shape shall I take to
rescue the Earth from this flood?--So thinking and contemplating with
divine insight, he bethought himself of the shape of a wild boar fond of
sporting in water. And assuming the shape of a sacrificial boar shining
with effulgence and instinct with the Vedas and ten Yojanas in length,
with pointed tusks and a complexion like dark clouds, and with a body
huge as a mountain, and roaring like a conglomeration of clouds, the Lord
plunged into the waters, and lifted up the Earth with one of his tusks,
and replaced it in its proper sphere. At another time, the mighty Lord,
assuming a wonderful form with a body half lion, half man, and squeezing
his hands, repaired to the court of the ruler of the Daityas. That
progenitor of the Daityas, the son of Diti, who was the enemy of the
(gods), beholding the Lord’s peculiar form, burst out into passion and
his eyes became inflamed with rage. And Hiranya-Kasipu, the war-like son
of Diti and the enemy of the gods, adorned with garlands and looking like
a mass of dark clouds, taking up his trident in hand and roaring like the
clouds, rushed on that being half lion, half man. Then that powerful king
of wild beasts, half man, half lion, taking a leap in the air, instantly
rent the Daitya in twain by means of his sharp claws. And the adorable
lotus-eyed Lord of great effulgence, having thus slain the Daitya king
for the well-being of all creatures, again took his birth in the womb of
Aditi as son of Kasyapa. And at the expiration of a thousand years she
was delivered of that superhuman conception. And then was born that
Being, of the hue of rain-charged clouds with bright eyes and of dwarfish
stature. He had the ascetic’s staff and water-pot in hand, and was marked
with the emblem of a curl of hair on the breast. And that adorable Being
wore matted locks and the sacrificial thread, and he was stout and
handsome and resplendent with lustre. And that Being, arriving at the
sacrificial enclosure of Vali, king of the Danavas, entered the
sacrificial assembly with the aid of Vrihaspati. And beholding that
dwarf-bodied Being, Vali was well-pleased and said unto him, ‘I am glad
to see thee, O Brahmana! Say what is it that thou wantest from me!’ Thus
addressed by Vali, the dwarf-god replied with a smile, saying, ‘So be it!
Do thou, lord of the Danavas, give me three paces of ground!’ And Vali
contented to give what that Brahmana of infinite power had asked. And
while measuring with his paces the space he sought. Hari assumed a
wonderful and extraordinary form. And with only three paces he instantly
covered this illimitable world. And then that everlasting God, Vishnu,
gave it away unto Indra. This history which has just been related to
thee, is celebrated as the ‘Incarnation of the Dwarf’, And from him, all
the gods had their being, and after him the world is said to be
Vaishnava, or pervaded by Vishnu. And for the destruction of the wicked
and the preservation of religion, even He hath taken his birth among men
in the race of the Yadus. And the adorable Vishnu is styled Krishna.
These, O king of Sindhu, are the achievements of the Lord whom all the
worlds worship and whom the learned describe as without beginning and
without end, unborn and Divine! They call Him, the unconquerable Krishna
with conchshell, discus and mace, and adorned with the emblem of a curl
of hair, Divine, clad in silken robes of yellow hue, and the best of
those versed in the art of war. Arjuna is protected by Krishna the
possessor of these attributes. That glorious and lotus-eyed Being of
infinite power, that slayer of hostile heroes, riding in the same chariot
with Pritha’s son, protecteth him! He is, therefore, invincible; the very
gods cannot resist his power, still less can one with human attributes
vanquish the son of Pritha in battle! Therefore, O king, thou must let
him alone! Thou shalt, however, be able to vanquish for a single day
only, the rest of Yudhishthira’s forces along with thine enemies--the
four sons of Pandu!”

Vaisampayana continued, “Having said these words unto that prince, the
adorable Hara of three eyes, the destroyer of all sins, the consort of
Uma, and lord of wild beasts, the destroyer of (Daksha’s) sacrifice, the
slayer of Tripura and He that had plucked out the eyes of Bhaga,
surrounded by his dwarfish and hunch-backed and terrible followers having
frightful eyes and ears and uplifted arms, vanished, O tiger among kings,
from that place with his consort Uma! And the wicked Jayadratha also
returned home, and the sons of Pandu continued to dwell in the forest of
Kamyaka.”


SECTION CCLXXI

Janamejaya said, “What did those tigers among men, the Pandavas, do,
after they had suffered such misery in consequence of the ravishment of
Draupadi?”

Vaisampayana said, “Having defeated Jayadratha and rescued Krishna, the
virtuous king Yudhishthira took his seat by the side of that best of
Munis. And among those foremost of ascetics who were expressing their
grief upon bearing Draupadi’s misfortune, Yudhishthira, the son of Pandu,
addressed Markandeya, saying, ‘O adorable Sire, amongst the gods and the
ascetics, thou art known to have the fullest knowledge of both the past
as well as; the future. A doubt existeth in my mind, which I would ask
thee to solve! This lady is the daughter of Drupada; she hath issued from
the sacrificial altar and hath not been begotten of the flesh; and she is
highly blessed and is also the daughter-in-law of the illustrious Pandu.
I incline to think that Time, and human Destiny that dependeth on our
acts, and the Inevitable, are irresistible in respect of creatures. (If
it were not so), how could such a misfortune afflict this wife of ours so
faithful and virtuous, like a false accusation of theft against an honest
man? The daughter of Drupada hath never committed any sinful act, nor,
hath she done anything that is not commendable: on the contrary, she hath
assiduously practised the highest virtues towards Brahmanas. And yet the
foolish king Jayadratha had carried her away by force. In consequence of
this act of violence on her, that sinful wretch hath his hair shaved off
his head and sustained also, with all his allies, defeat in battle. It is
true we have rescued her after slaughtering the troops of Sindhu. But the
disgrace of this ravishment of our wife during our hours of carelessness,
hath stained us, to be sure. This life in the wilderness is full of
miseries. We subsist by chase; and though dwelling in the woods, we are
obliged to slay the denizens thereof that live with us! This exile also
that we suffer is due to the act of deceitful kinsmen! Is there any one
who is more unfortunate than I am? Hath thou ever seen or heard of such a
one before?”


SECTION CCLXXII

“Markandeya said, ‘O bull of the Bharata race, even Rama suffered
unparalleled misery, for the evil-minded Ravana, king of the Rakshasas,
having recourse to deceit and overpowering the vulture Jatayu, forcibly
carried away his wife Sita from his asylum in the woods. Indeed, Rama,
with the help of Sugriva, brought her back, constructing a bridge across
the sea, and consuming Lanka with his keen-edged arrows.’

“Yudhishthira said, ‘In what race was Rama born and what was the measure
of his might and prowess? Whose son also was Ravana and for what was it
that he had any misunderstanding with Rama? It behoveth thee, O
illustrious one, to tell me all this in detail; for I long to hear the