the task of tale by marking and counting every calf that was three years
old, the Kuru prince, surrounded by the cowherds, began to sport and
wander cheerfully. And the citizens also and the soldiers by thousands
began to sport, as best pleased them, in those woods, like the
celestials. And the herdsmen, well skilled in singing and dancing and
instrumental music, and virgins decked in ornaments, began to minister to
the pleasures of Dhritarashtra’s son. And the king surrounded by the
ladies of the royal household began cheerfully to distribute wealth and
food and drinks of various kinds amongst those that sought to please him,
according to their desires.

“And the king, attended by all his followers, began also to slay hyenas
and buffaloes and deer and gayals and bears and boars all around. And the
king, piercing by his shafts those animals by thousands in deep forest,
caused the deer to be caught in the more delightful parts of the woods.
Drinking milk and enjoying, O Bharata, various other delicious articles
and beholding, as he proceeded, many delightful forests and woods
swarming with bees inebriate with floral honey and resounding with the
notes of the peacock, the king at last reached the sacred lake of
Dwaitavana. And the spot which the king reached swarmed with bees
inebriate with floral honey, and echoed with the mellifluous notes of the
blue-throated jay and was shaded by Saptacchadas and punnagas and
Vakulas. And the king graced with high prosperity proceeded thither like
the thunder-wielding chief of the celestials himself. And, O thou best of
the Kuru race, King Yudhishthira the just, endued with high intelligence,
was then, O monarch, residing in the vicinity of that lake at will and
celebrating with his wedded wife, the daughter of Drupada, the diurnal
sacrifice called Rajarshi, according to the ordinance sanctioned for the
celestials and persons living in the wilderness. And, O monarch, having
reached that spot, Duryodhana commanded his men by thousands, saying,
‘Let pleasure-houses be constructed soon.’ Thus commanded, those doers of
the king’s behests replying to the Kruru chief with the words, ‘So be
it,’ went towards the banks of the lake for constructing pleasure-houses.
And as the picked soldiers of Dhritarashtra’s son, having reached the
region of the lake, were about to enter the gates of the wood, a number
of Gandharvas appeared and forbade them to enter. For, O monarch, the
king of the Gandharvas accompanied by his followers, had come thither
beforehand, from the abode of Kuvera. And the king of the Gandharvas had
also been accompanied by the several tribes of Apsaras, as also by the
sons of the celestials And intent upon sport, he had come to that place
for merriment, and occupying it, had closed it against all comers. And
the attendants of the (Kuru) king, finding the lake closed by the king of
the Gandharvas, went back, O monarch, to where the royal Duryodhana was.
And Duryodhana having heard these words, despatched a number of his
warriors difficult of being subjugated in battle, commanding them to
drive away the Gandharvas. And those warriors who formed the vanguard of
the Kuru army, hearing these words of the king, went back to the lake of
Dwaitavana and addressing the Gandharvas, said, ‘The mighty king
Duryodhana--the son of Dhritarashtra--is coming, hither for sport. Stand
ye aside, therefore!’ Thus addressed by them, O king, the Gandharvas
laughed and replied unto those men in these harsh words: ‘Your wicked
king Duryodhana must be destitute of sense. How else could he have thus
commanded us that are dwellers of heaven, as if indeed, we were his
servants? Without forethought, ye also are doubtless on the point of
death; for senseless idiots as ye are, ye have dared to bring us his
message! Return ye soon to where that king of the Kurus is, or else go
this very day to the abode of Yama.’ Thus addressed by the Gandharvas,
the advanced guard of the king’s army ran back to the place where the
royal son of Dhritarashtra was.”


SECTION CCXXXIX

Vaisampayana said, “Those soldiers then, O king, all went back to
Duryodhana and repeated to him every word that the Gandharvas had said.
And, O Bharata, finding that his soldiers had been opposed by the
Gandharvas, Dhritarashtra’s son, endued with energy, was filled with
rage. And the king addressed his soldiers, saying, ‘Punish these wretches
who desire to oppose my will, even if they have come hither to sport,
accompanied by all the celestials with him of a hundred sacrifices. And
hearing these words of Duryodhana, the sons and officers of Dhritarashtra
all endued with great strength, as also warriors by thousands, began to
arm themselves for battle. And filling the ten sides with loud leonine
roars and rushing at those Gandharvas that had been guarding the gates,
they entered the forest. And as the Kuru soldiers entered the forest,
other Gandharvas came up and forbade them to advance. And though gently
forbidden by the Gandharvas to advance, the Kuru soldiers, without
regarding them in the least, began to enter that mighty forest. And when
those rangers of the sky found that the warriors of Dhritarashtra along
with their king could not be stopped by words they all went to their king
Chitrasena and represented everything unto him. And when Chitrasena, the
king of the Gandharvas, came to know all this he became filled with rage,
alluding to the Kuru, and commanded his followers saying, ‘Punish these
wretches of wicked behaviour.’ And, O Bharata, when the Gandharvas were
so commanded by Chitrasena, they rushed weapons in hand, towards the
Dhritarashtra ranks. And beholding the Gandharvas impetuously rushing
towards them with upraised weapons, the Kuru warriors precipitously fled
in all directions at the very sight of Duryodhana. And beholding the Kuru
soldiers all flying from the field with their backs to the foe, the
heroic Radheya alone fled not. And seeing the mighty host of the
Gandharvas rushing towards him, Radheya checked them by a perfect shower
of arrows. And the Suta’s son, owing to his extreme lightness of hand,
struck hundreds of Gandharvas with Kshurapras and arrows and Bhallas and
various weapons made of bones and steel. And that mighty warrior, causing
the heads of numerous Gandharvas to roll down within a short time, made
the ranks of Chitrasena to yell in anguish. And although they were
slaughtered in great numbers by Karna endued with great intelligence, yet
the Gandharvas returned to the charge by hundreds and thousands. And in
consequence of the swarms of Chitrasena’s warriors rushing impetuously to
the field the earth itself became soon covered by the Gandharva host.
Then king Duryodhana, and Sakuni, the son of Suvala, and Dussasana, and
Vikarna, and other sons of Dhritarashtra, seated on cars the clatter of
whose wheels resembled the roars of Garuda, returned to the charge,
following the lead of Karna, and began to slaughter that host. And
desirous of supporting Karna, these princes invested the Gandharva army,
with a large number of cars and a strong body of horses. Then the whole
of the Gandharva host began to fight with the Kauravas. And the encounter
that took place between the contending hosts was fierce in the extreme
and might make one’s hair stand on end. The Gandharvas, at last,
afflicted with the shafts of the Kuru army, seemed to be exhausted. And
the Kauravas beholding the Gandharvas so afflicted sent up a loud sound.

“And seeing the Gandharva host yielding to fear, the angry Chitrasena
sprang from his seat, resolved to exterminate the Kuru army. And
conversant with various modes of warfare, he waged on the fight, aided by
his weapons of illusion. And the Kaurava warriors were then all deprived
of their senses by the illusion of Chitrasena. And then, O Bharata, it
seemed that every warrior of the Kuru army was fallen upon and surrounded
by ten Gandharvas. And attacked with great vigour, the Kuru host was
greatly afflicted and struck with panic. O king, all of them that liked
to live, fled from the field. But while the entire Dhritarashtra host
broke and fled, Karna, that offspring of the Sun, stood there, O king,
immovable as a hill. Indeed, Duryodhana and Karna and Sakuni, the son of
Suvala, all fought with the Gandharvas, although every one of them was
much wounded and mangled in the encounter. All the Gandharvas then,
desirous of slaying Karna, rushed together by hundreds and thousands
towards Karna. And those mighty warriors, desirous of slaying the Suta’s
son, surrounded him on all sides, with swords and battle-axes and spears.
And some cut down the yoke of his car, and some his flagstaff, and some
the shaft of his car, and some his horses, and some his charioteer. And
some cut down his umbrella and some the wooden fender round his car and
some the joints of his car. It was thus that many thousands of
Gandharvas, together attacking his car, broke it into minute fragments.
And while his car was thus attacked, Karna leaped therefrom with sword
and shield in hand, and mounting on Vikarna’s car, urged the steeds for
saving himself.”


SECTION CCXL

Vaisampayana said, “After that great warrior Karna had been routed by the
Gandharvas, the whole of the Kuru army, O monarch, fled from the field in
the very sight of Dhritarashtra’s son. And beholding all his troops
flying from the field of battle with their back to the foe, king
Duryodhana refused to fly. Seeing the mighty host of the Gandharvas
rushing towards him, that represser of foes poured down upon them a thick
shower of arrows. The Gandharvas, however, without regarding that arrowy
shower, and desirous also of slaying him, surrounded that car of his. And
by means of their arrows, they cut off into fragments the yoke, the
shaft, the fenders, the flagstaff, the three-fold bamboo poles, and the
principal turret of his car. And they also slew his charioteer and
horses, hacking them to pieces. And when Duryodhana, deprived of his car,
fell on the ground, the strong-armed Chitrasena rushed towards him and
seized him in such a way that it seemed his life itself was taken. And
after the Kuru king had been seized, the Gandharvas, surrounding
Dussasana, who was seated on his car, also took him prisoner. And some
Gandharvas seized Vivinsati and Chitrasena, and some Vinda and Anuvinda,
while others seized all the ladies of royal household. And the warriors
of Duryodhana, who were routed by the Gandharvas, joining those who had
fled first, approached the Pandavas (who were living in the vicinity).
And after Duryodhana had been made captive, the vehicles, the shops, the
pavilions, the carriages, and the draught animals, all were made over to
the Pandavas for protection. And those soldiers said, ‘The mighty-armed
son of Dhritarashtra, possessed of great strength and handsome mien, is
being taken away captive by the Gandharvas! Ye sons of Pritha, follow
them! Dussasana, Durvishasa, Durmukha, and Durjaya, are all being led
away as captives in chains by the Gandharvas, as also all the ladies of
the royal household!’

“Crying thus, the followers of Duryodhana, afflicted with grief and
melancholy, approached Yudhishthira, desirous of effecting the release of
the king. Bhima then answered those old attendants of Duryodhana, who,
afflicted with grief and melancholy, were thus soliciting (the aid of
Yudhishthira), saying, ‘What we should have done with great efforts,
arraying ourselves in line of battle, supported by horses and elephants
hath, indeed, been done by the Gandharvas! They that come hither for
other purposes, have been overtaken by consequences they had not
foreseen! Indeed, this is the result of the evil counsels of a king who
is fond of deceitful play! It hath been heard by us that the foe of a
person who is powerless, is overthrown by others. The Gandharvas have, in
an extraordinary way illustrated before our eyes the truth of this
saying! It seems that there is still fortunately some person in the world
who is desirous of doing us good who hath, indeed, taken upon his own
shoulders our pleasant load, although we are sitting idly! The wretch had
come hither to cast his eyes on us,--himself in prosperity while
ourselves are sunk in adversity and emaciated by ascetic austerities and
are exposed to wind, cold and heat. They that imitate the behaviour of
that sinful and wretched Kaurava, are now beholding his disgrace! He that
had instructed Duryodhana to do this, had certainly acted sinfully. That
the sons of Kunti are not wicked and sinful, I tell it before you all!”

“And while Bhima, the son of Kunti, was speaking thus in a voice of
sarcasm, king Yudhishthira told him, ‘This is not time for cruel words!’”


SECTION CCXLI

“Yudhishthira said, ‘O child, why dost thou use language such as this,
towards the frightened Kurus, who are now in adversity and who have come
to us, solicitous of protection! O Vrikodara, disunions and disputes do
take place amongst those that are connected in blood. Hostilities such as
these do go on. But the honour of the family is never suffered to be
interfered with. If any stranger seeketh to insult the honour of a
family, they that are good never tolerate such insult coming from the
stranger. The wicked-souled king of the Gandharvas knoweth that we are
living here from some time. Yet disregarding us, he hath done this deed
which is so disagreeable to us! O exalted one, from this forcible seizure
of Duryodhana and from this insult to the ladies of our house by a
stranger, our family honour is being destroyed. Therefore, ye tigers
among men, arise and arm yourselves without delay for rescuing those that
have sought our protection and for guarding the honour of our family. Ye
tigers among men, let Arjuna and the twins and thyself also that art
brave and unvanquished, liberate Duryodhana, who is even now being taken
away a captive! Ye foremost of warriors, these blazing cars, furnished
with golden flagstaff’s and every kind of weapons belonging to
Dhritarashtra’s sons, are ready here. With Indrasena and other
charioteers skilled in arms, for guiding them, ride ye on these
everfurnished cars of deep rattle! And riding on these, exert ye with
activity for fighting with the Gandharvas to liberate Duryodhana. Even an
ordinary Kashatriya (amongst those that are here), would to the height of
his power, protect one that hath come hither for refuge! What then, O
Vrikodara, shall I say of thee! Entreated for assistance in such words as
‘O hasten to my aid!’ Who is there (amongst those standing around me)
that is high-souled enough to assist even his foe, beholding him seeking
shelter with joined hands? The bestowal of a boon, sovereignty, and the
birth of a son are sources of great joy. But, ye sons of Pandu, the
liberation of a foe from distress is equal to all the three put together!
What can be a source of greater joy to you than that Duryodhana sunk in
distress seeketh his very life as depending on the might of your arms? O
Vrikodara, if the vow in which I am engaged had been over, there is
little doubt that I would myself have run to his aid. Strive thou by all
means, O Bharata, to liberate Duryodhana by the arts of conciliation. If,
however, the king of the Gandharvas cannot be managed by the arts of
conciliation, then must thou try to rescue Suyodhana by lightly
skirmishing with the foe. But if the chief of the Gandharvas do not let
the Kurus off even then, they must be rescued by crushing the foe by all
means. O Vrikodara, this is all I can tell thee now, for my vow hath been
begun and is not ended yet!”

Vaisampayana continued, “Hearing these words of Ajatasatru, Dhananjaya
pledged himself, from respect for these commands of his superior, to
liberate the Kauravas. And Arjuna said, ‘If the Gandharvas do not set the
Dhartarashtras free peacefully, the Earth shall this day drink the blood
of the king of the Gandharvas!’ And hearing that pledge of the
truth-speaking Arjuna, the Kauravas then, O king, regained (the lost)
tenor of their minds.”


SECTION CCXLII

Vaisampayana said, “Hearing the words of Yudhishthira, those bulls among
men, headed by Bhimasena, rose up with faces beaming in joy. And those
mighty warriors, O Bharata, then began to case themselves in impenetrable
mail that were besides variegated with pure gold, and armed themselves
with celestial weapons of various kinds. And the Pandavas thus cased in
mail, and mounted on those chariots furnished with flagstaffs and armed
with bows and arrows, looked like blazing fires. And those tigers among
warriors, riding upon those well furnished cars drawn by fleet horses,
proceeded to that spot without losing a moment. And beholding those
mighty warriors--the sons of Pandu--thus proceeding together (for the
liberation of Duryodhana), the Kuru army sent forth a loud shout. And
soon did those rangers of the sky flushed with victory, and those
impetuous warriors, the sons of Pandu, fearlessly encounter each other in
that forest. The Gandharvas were flushed with success, and beholding the
four brave sons of Pandu coming to battle seated on their cars, they all
turned back towards the advancing combatants. And, the dwellers of the
Gandhamadana, beholding the Pandavas looking like blazing guardians of
the world provoked to ire, stood arrayed in order of battle. And, O
Bharata, in accordance with words of king Yudhishthira of great wisdom,
the encounter that took place was a skirmish. But when Arjuna--that
persecutor of foes--saw that the foolish soldiers of the king of
Gandharvas could not be made to understand what was good for them by
means of a light skirmish, he addressed those invincible rangers of the
skies in a conciliatory tone and said, ‘Leave ye my brother king
Suyodhana.’ Thus addressed by the illustrious son of Pandu, the
Gandharvas, laughing aloud, replied unto him saying, ‘O child, there is
but one in the world whose behests we obey and living under whose rule we
pass our days in happiness: O Bharata, we always act as that one only
person commandeth us! Besides that celestial chief there is none that can
command us!’ Thus addressed by the Gandharvas, Dhananjaya, the son of
Kunti, replied unto them, saying, ‘This contact with other people’s wives
and this hostile encounter with human beings are acts that are both
censurable in the king of the Gandharvas and not proper for him.
Therefore, leave ye these sons of Dhritarashtra all endued with mighty
energy. And liberate ye also these ladies, at the command of king
Yudhishthira the just. If, ye Gandharvas, ye do not set the sons of
Dhritarashtra free peacefully, I shall certainly rescue Suyodhana (and
his party) by exerting my prowess.’ And speaking unto them thus, Pritha’s
son, Dhananjaya, capable of wielding the bow with his left hand also,
then rained a shower of sharp pointed sky-ranging shafts upon those
rangers of the firmament. Thus attacked, the mighty Gandharvas then
encountered the sons of Pandu with a shower of arrows equally thick, and
the Pandavas also replied by attacking those dwellers of heaven. And the
battle then, O Bharata, that ranged between the active and agile
Gandharvas and the impetuous son of Pandu was fierce in the extreme.”


SECTION CCXLIII

Vaisampayana said, “Then those Gandharvas decked in golden garlands and
accomplished in celestial weapons, showing their blazing shafts,
encountered the Pandavas from every side. And as the sons of Pandu were
only four in number and the Gandharvas counted by thousands, the battle
that ensued appeared to be extraordinary. And as the cars of Karna and
Duryodhana had formerly been broken into a hundred fragments by the
Gandharvas, so were the cars of the four heroes attempted to be broken.
But those tigers among men began to encounter with their showers of
arrows thousands upon thousands of Gandharvas rushing towards them. Those
rangers of skies endued with great energy, thus checked on all sides by
that arrowy down-pour, succeeded not in even coming near to the sons of
Pandu. Then Arjuna whose ire had been provoked, aiming at the angry
Gandharvas, prepared to hurl against them his celestial weapons. And in
that encounter, the mighty Arjuna, by means of his Agneya weapon, sent
ten hundreds of thousands of Gandharvas to the abode of Yama. And that
mighty bowman, Bhima, also, that foremost of all warriors in battle,
slew, by means of his sharp arrows, Gandharvas by hundreds. And the
mighty sons of Madri also, battling with vigour, encountered hundreds of
Gandharvas, O king, and slaughtered them all. And as Gandharvas were
being thus slaughtered by the mighty warriors with their celestial
weapons, they rose up to the skies, taking with them the sons of
Dhritarashtra. But Dhananjaya, the son of Kunti, beholding them rise up
to the skies, surrounded them on every side by a wide net of arrows. And
confined within that arrowy net like birds within a cage, they showered
in wrath upon Arjuna maces and darts and broad-swords. But Arjuna who was
conversant with the most efficacious weapons, soon checked that shower of
maces and darts and broad-swords, and in return began to mangle the limbs
of the Gandharvas with his crescent-shaped arrows. And heads and legs and
arms began to drop down from above resembling a shower of stones. And at
that sight, the foe was struck with panic. And as the Gandharvas were
being slaughtered by the illustrious son of Pandu, they began to shower
from the skies a heavy downpour of shafts upon Arjuna, who was on the
surface of the earth. But that chastiser of foes, Arjuna, endued with
mighty energy checked that shower of arrows by means of his own weapons
and began, in return, to wound them. Then Arjuna of the Kuru race shot
his well-known weapons called Sthunakarna, Indrajala, Saura, Agneya and
Saumya. And the Gandharvas consumed by the fiery weapons of Kunti’s son,
began to suffer heavily, like the sons of Diti, while being scorched by
Sakra’s thunder-bolt. And when they attacked Arjuna from above, they were
checked by his net of arrows. And while they attacked him from all sides
on the surface of the earth, they were checked by his crescent-shaped
arrows. And beholding the Gandharvas put in fear by Kunti’s son,
Chitrasena rushed, O Bharata, at Dhananjaya, armed with a mace. And as
the king of the Gandharvas was rushing at Arjuna from above with that
mace in hand, the latter cut with his arrows that mace wholly made of
iron into seven pieces. And beholding that mace of his cut into many
pieces by Arjuna of great activity, with his arrows, Chitrasena, by means
of his science, concealed himself from the view of the Pandava and began
to fight with him. The heroic Arjuna, however, by means of his own
celestial weapons checked all the celestial weapons that were aimed at
him by the Gandharvas. And when the chief of the Gandharvas saw that he
was checked by the illustrious Arjuna with those weapons of his he
entirely disappeared from sight by help of his powers of illusion. And
Arjuna, observing that the chief of the Gandharvas was striking at him
concealed from sight, attacked his assailant with celestial weapon
inspired with proper Mantras. And the multiform Dhananjaya filled with
wrath, prevented the disappearance of his foe by means of his weapon
known by the name of Sabda-veda. And assailed with those weapons by the
illustrious Arjuna, his dear friend, the king of the Gandharvas, showed
himself unto him. And Chitrasena said, ‘Behold in me thy friend battling
with thee!’ And beholding his friend Chitrasena exhausted in the battle,
that bull among the sons of Pandu withdrew the weapons he had shot. And
the other sons of Pandu beholding Arjuna withdraw his weapons, checked
their flying steeds and the impetus of their weapons and withdrew their
bows. And Chitrasena and Bhima and Arjuna and the twins enquiring about
one another’s welfare, sat awhile on their respective cars.”


SECTION CCXLIV

Vaisampayana said, “Then that mighty bowman of blazing splendour, Arjuna,
smilingly said unto Chitrasena in the midst of the Gandharva host, ‘What
purpose dost thou serve, O hero, in punishing the Kauravas? O, why also
hath Suyodhana with his wives been thus punished?’

“Chitrasena replied, ‘O Dhananjaya, without stirring from my own abode I
became acquainted with the purpose of the wicked Duryodhana and the
wretched Karna in coming hither. The purpose was even this,--knowing that
ye are exiles in the forest and suffering great afflictions as if ye had
none to take care of you, himself in prosperity, this wretch entertained
the desire of beholding you plunged in adversity and misfortune. They
came hither for mocking you and the illustrious daughter of Drupada. The
lord of the celestials also, having ascertained this purpose of theirs,
told me, ‘Go thou and bring Duryodhana hither in chains along with his
counsellors. Dhananjaya also with his brother should always be protected
by thee in battle, for he is thy dear friend and disciple.’ At these
words of the lord of the celestials I came hither speedily. This wicked
prince hath also been put in chains. I will now proceed to the region of
the celestials, whither I will lead this wicked wight at the command of
the slayer of Paka!’

“Arjuna answered, saying, ‘O Chitrasena, if thou wishest to do what is
agreeable to me, set Suyodhana free, at the command of king Yudhishthira
the just, for he is our brother!’

Chitrasena said, “This sinful wretch is always full of vanity. He
deserveth not to be set free. O Dhananjaya, he hath deceived and wronged
both king Yudhishthira the just and Krishna. Yudhishthira the son of
Kunti as yet knoweth not the purpose on which the wretch came hither. Let
the king, therefore, do what he desires after knowing everything!”

Vaisampayana continued, “After this, all of them went to king
Yudhishthira the just. And going unto the king, they represented unto him
everything about Duryodhana’s conduct. And Ajatasatru, hearing everything
that the Gandharvas had said, liberated all the Kauravas and applauded
the Gandharvas. And the king said, ‘Fortunate it is for us that though
gifted with great strength, ye did not yet slay the wicked son of
Dhritarashtra along with all counsellors and relatives. This, O sir, hath
been an act of great kindness done to me by the Gandharvas. The honour
also of my family is saved by liberating this wicked wight. I am glad at
seeing you all. Command me what I am to do for you. And having obtained
all you wish, return ye soon whence ye came!’

“Thus addressed by the intelligent son of Pandu, the Gandharvas became
well-pleased and went away with the Apsaras. And the lord of the
celestials then, coming to that spot, revived those Gandharvas that had
been slain in the encounter with the Kurus, by sprinkling the celestial
Amrita over them. And the Pandavas also, having liberated their relatives
along with the ladies of the royal household, and having achieved that
difficult feat (the defeat of the Gandharvas host) became well-pleased.
And those illustrious and mighty warriors worshipped by the Kurus along
with their sons and wives, blazed forth in splendour like flaming fires
in the sacrificial compound. And Yudhishthira then addressing the
liberated Duryodhana in the midst of his brothers, from affection, told
him these words: ‘O child, never again do such a rash act. O Bharata, a
rash wight never cometh by happiness. O son of the Kuru race, pleased be
thou with all thy brothers. Go back to thy capital as pleaseth thee,
without yielding thyself to despondency or cheerlessness!”

Vaisampayana continued, “Thus dismissed by the son of Pandu, king
Duryodhana then saluted king Yudhishthira the just and overwhelmed with
shame, and his heart rent in twain, mechanically set out for his capital,
like one destitute of life. And after the Kaurava prince had departed,
the brave Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, along with his brothers, was
worshipped by the Brahmanas, and surrounded by those Brahmanas endued
with the wealth of asceticism, like Sakra himself by the celestials, he
began to pass his days happily in the woods of Dwaita.”


SECTION CCXLV

Janamejaya said, “After his defeat and capture by the foe and his
subsequent liberation by the illustrious sons of Pandu by force of arms,
it seemeth to me that the entry into Hastinapura of the proud, wicked,
boastful, vicious, insolent, and wretched Duryodhana, engaged in
insulting the sons of Pandu and bragging of his own superiority, must
have been exceedingly difficult. Describe to me in detail, O
Vaisampayana, the entry into the capital, of that prince overwhelmed with
shame and unmanned by grief!”

Vaisampayana said, “Dismissed by the king Yudhishthira the just,
Dhritarashtra’s son Suyodhana, bending his head down in shame and
afflicted with grief and melancholy, set out slowly. And the king,
accompanied by his four kinds of forces, proceeded towards his city, his
heart rent in grief and filled with thoughts of his defeat along the way
in a region that abounded in grass and water. The king encamped on a
delightful piece of ground as pleased him best, with his elephants and
cars and cavalry and infantry stationed all around. And as the king
Duryodhana was seated on an elevated bedstead endued with the effulgence
of fire, himself looking like the moon under an eclipse, towards the
small hours of the morning Karna, approaching him, said, ‘Fortunate it
is, O son of Gandhari, that thou art alive! Fortunate it is, that we have
once more met! By good luck it is that thou hast vanquished the
Gandharvas capable of assuming any form at will. And, O son of the Kuru
race, it is by good luck alone, that I am enabled to see thy brothers--
mighty warriors all--come off victorious from that encounter, having
subjugated their foes! As regards myself, assailed by all the Gandharvas,
I fled before thy eyes, unable to rally our flying host. Assailed by the
foe with all his might, my body mangled with their arrows, I sought
safety in flight. This however, O Bharata, seemed to me to be a great
marvel that I behold you all come safe and sound in body, with your
wives, troops, and vehicles, out of that super-human encounter. O
Bharata, there is another man in this world who can achieve what thou, O
king, hast achieved in battle to-day with thy brothers.”

Vaisampayana continued, “Thus addressed by Karna, king Duryodhana replied
unto the ruler of the Angas in a voice choked with tears.”


SECTION CCXLVI

“Duryodhana said, ‘O Radheya, thou knowest not what hath happened.
Therefore, I do not resent thy words. Thou thinkest the hostile
Gandharvas to have been vanquished by me with my own energy. O thou of
mighty arms, my brothers, indeed had for a long time, aided by me fought
with the Gandharvas. The slaughtered, indeed, on both sides were great.
But when those brave Gandharvas, resorting to their many powers of
illusion, ascended the skies and began to fight with us thence, our
encounter with them ceased to be an equal one. Defeat then was ours and
even captivity. And afflicted with sorrow, we along with our attendants
and counsellors and children and wives and troops and vehicles were being
taken by them through the skies. It was then that some soldiers of ours
and some brave officers repaired in grief unto the sons of Pandu--those
heroes that never refuse succour to those that ask for it. And having
gone to them they said, ‘Here is king Duryodhana, the son of
Dhritarashtra, who with his younger brothers and friends and wives is
being led away a captive by the Gandharvas along the sky. Blest be ye.
Liberate the king along with the women of the royal household! Suffer no
insult to be offered unto all the ladies of the Kuru race. And when they
had spoken thus, the eldest of Pandu’s sons, who is endued with a
virtuous soul then conciliated his brothers and commanded them to
liberate us. Then those bulls among men, the Pandavas, overtaking the
Gandharvas, solicited our release in soft words, although fully able to
effect it by force of arms. And when the Gandharvas, addressed in such
conciliatory words, refused to set us at liberty, then Arjuna and Bhima
and the twins endued with mighty energy, shot showers of arrows at the
Gandharvas. Then the Gandharvas, abandoning the fight, fled through the
sky, dragging our melancholy selves after them, filled with joy. Then we
beheld a network of arrows spread all around by Dhananjaya, who was also
shooting celestial weapons upon the foe. And seeing the points of the
horizon covered by Arjuna with a thick network of sharp arrows, his
friend, the chief of the Gandharvas, showed himself. And Chitrasena and
Arjuna, embracing each other, enquired after each other’s welfare. And
the other sons of Pandu also embraced the chief of the Gandharvas and
were embraced by him. And enquiries of courtesy passed between them also.
And the brave Gandharvas then abandoning their weapons and mail mingled
in a friendly spirit with the Pandavas. And Chitrasena and Dhananjaya
worshipped each other with regard.”


SECTION CCXLVII

Duryodhana said, “That slayer of hostile heroes, Arjuna, then approaching
Chitrasena, smilingly addressed him in these manly words: ‘O hero, O
foremost of the Gandharvas, it behoveth thee to set my brothers at
liberty. They are incapable of being insulted as long as the sons of
Pandu are alive.’ ‘Thus addressed by the illustrious son of Pandu, the
chief of the Gandharvas, O Karna, disclosed unto the Pandavas the object
we had in view in proceeding to that place, viz., that we came there for
casting our eyes on the sons of Pandu with their wife, all plunged in
misery. And while the Gandharva was disclosing those counsels of ours,
overwhelmed with shame I desired the earth to yield me a crevice, so that
I might disappear there and then. The Gandharvas then, accompanied by the
Pandavas, went to Yudhishthira, and, disclosing unto him also counsels,
made us over, bound as we were, to him. Alas, what greater sorrow could
be mine than that I should thus be offered as a tribute unto
Yudhishthira, in the very sight of the women of our household, myself in
chains and plunged in misery, and under the absolute control of my
enemies. Alas, they, who have ever been persecuted by me, they unto whom
I have ever been a foe released me from captivity, and wretch that I am,
I am indebted to them for my life. If, O hero, I had met with my death in
that great battle, that would have been far better than that I should
have obtained my life in this way. If I had been slain by the Gandharvas,
my fame would have spread over the whole earth, and I should have
obtained auspicious regions of eternal bliss in the heaven of Indra.
Listen to me therefore, ye bulls among men, as to what I intend to do
now. I will stay here forgoing all food, while ye all return home. Let
all my brothers also go to Hastinapura. Let all our friends, including
Karna, and all our relatives headed by Dussasana, return now to the
capital. Insulted by the foe, I myself will not repair thither. I who had
before wrested from the foe his respect, I who had always enchanced the
respect of my friends, have now become a source of sorrow unto friends
and of joy unto enemies. What shall I now say unto the king, going to the
city named after the elephant? What will Bhishma and Drona, Kripa, and
Drona’s son, Vidura and Sanjaya, Vahuka and Somadatta and other revered
seniors,--what will the principal men of the other orders and men of
independent professions, say to me and what shall I say unto them in
reply? Having hitherto stayed over the heads of my enemies, having
hitherto trod upon their breasts, I have fallen away from my position.
How shall I ever speak with them? Insolent men having obtained prosperity
and knowledge and affluence, are seldom blest for any length of time like
myself puffed up with vanity. Alas, led by folly I have done a highly
improper and wicked act, for which, fool that I am, I have fallen into
such distress. Therefore, will I perish by starving, life having become
insupportable to me. Relieved from distress by the foe, what man of
spirit is there who can drag on his existence? Proud as I am, shorn of
manliness, the foe hath laughed at me, for the Pandavas possessed of
prowess have looked at me plunged in misery!”

Vaisampayana continued, ‘While giving way to such reflections Duryodhana
spoke unto Dussasana thus: ‘O Dussasana, listen to these words of mine, O
thou of the Bharata race! Accepting this installation that I offer thee,
be thou king in my place. Rule thou the wide earth protected by Karna and
Suvala’s sons. Like Indra himself looking after the Maruts, cherish thou
thy brothers in such a way that they may all confide in thee. Let the
friends and relatives depend on thee like the gods depending on him of a
hundred sacrifices. Always shouldst thou bestow pensions on Brahmanas,
without idleness, and be thou ever the refuge of thy friends and
relatives. Like Vishnu looking after the celestials, thou shouldst always
look after all consanguineous relatives. Thou shouldst also ever cherish
thy superiors. Go, rule thou the earth gladdening thy friends and
reproving thy foes.’ And clasping his neck, Duryodhana said, ‘Go!’
Hearing these words of his, Dussasana in perfect cheerlessness and
overwhelmed with great sorrow, his voice choked in tears, said, with
joined hands and bending his head unto his eldest brother, ‘Relent!’ And
saying this he fell down on earth with heavy heart. And afflicted with
grief that tiger among men, shedding his tears on the feet of his brother
again said, ‘This will never be! The earth may split, the vault of heaven
may break in pieces, the sun may cast off his splendour, the moon may
abandon his coolness, the wind may forsake its speed, the Himavat may be
moved from its site, the waters of the ocean may dry up, and fire may
abandon its heat, yet I, O king, may never rule the earth without thee.’
And Dussasana repeatedly said, ‘Relent, O king! Thou alone shall be king
in our race for a hundred years.’ And having spoken thus unto the king,
Dussasana began to weep melodiously catching, O Bharata, the feet of his
eldest brother deserving of worship from him.

“And beholding Dussasana and Duryodhana thus weeping, Karna in great
grief approached them both and said, ‘Ye, Kuru princes, why do you thus
yield to sorrow like ordinary men, from senselessness? Mere weeping can
never ease a sorrowing man’s grief. When weeping can never remove one’s
griefs, what do you gain by thus giving way to sorrow? Summon patience to
your aid to not gladden the foe by such conduct. O king, the Pandavas
only did their duty in liberating thee. They that reside in the dominions
of the king, should always do what is agreeable to the king. Protected by
thee, the Pandavas are residing happily in thy dominion. It behoveth thee
not to indulge in such sorrow like an ordinary person. Behold, thy
uterine brothers are all sad and cheerless at seeing thee resolved to put
an end to thy life by forgoing food. Blest be thou! Rise up and come to
thy city and console these thy uterine brothers.”


SECTION CCXLVIII

“Kama continued, ‘O king, this conduct of thine to-day appeareth to be
childish. O hero, O slayer of foes, what is to be wondered at in this
that the Pandavas liberated thee when thou wert vanquished by the foe? O
son of the Kuru race, those that reside in the territories of the king,
especially those (amongst them) that lead the profession of arms, should
always do what is agreeable to the king whether they happen to be known
to their monarch or unknown to him. It happened often that foremost men
who crush the ranks of the hostile host, are vanquished by them, and are
rescued by their own troops. They that leading the profession of arms,
reside in the king’s realm should always combine and exert themselves to
the best of their power, for the king. If, therefore, O king, the
Pandavas, who live in the territories, have liberated thee, what is there
to be regretted at in this? That the Pandavas, O best of kings, did not
follow thee when thou didst march forth to battle at the head of thy
troops, has been an improper act on their part. They had before this come
under thy power, becoming thy slaves. They are, therefore, bound to aid
thee now, being endued with courage and might and incapable of turning
away from the field of battle. Thou art enjoying all the rich possessions
of the Pandavas. Behold them yet alive, O king! They have not resolved to
die, forgoing all food. Blest be thou! Rise up, O king! It behoveth thee
not to indulge in great sorrow long. O king, it is the certain duty of
those that reside in the king’s realm to do what is agreeable to the
king. Where should the regret be in all this? If thou, O king, dost not
act according to my words I shall stay here employed in reverentially
serving thy feet. O bull among men, I do not desire to live deprived of
thy company. O king, if thou resolvest to slay thyself by forgoing food,
thou wilt simply be an object of laughter with other kings.”

Vaisampayana continued, “Thus addressed by Karna, king Duryodhana, firmly
resolved to leave the world, desired not to rise from where he sat.”


SECTION CCXLIX

Vaisampayana said, “Beholding king Duryodhana, incapable of putting up
with an insult, seated with the resolution of giving up life by forgoing
food, Sakuni, the son of Suvala, said these words to comfort him. Sakuni
said, O son of the Kuru race, you have just heard what Kama hath said.
His words are, indeed fraught with wisdom. Why wouldst thou abandoning
from foolishness the high prosperity that I won for thee, cast off thy
life today, O king, yielding to silliness? It seemeth to me to-day that
thou hast never waited upon the old. He that cannot control sudden
accession of joy or grief, is lost even though he may have obtained
prosperity, like an unburnt earthen vessel in water. That king who is
entirely destitute of courage, who hath no spark of manliness, who is the
slave of procrastination, who always acts with indiscretion, who is
addicted to sensual pleasures, is seldom respected by his subjects.
Benefited as thou has been, whence is this unreasonable grief of thine?
Do not undo this graceful act done by the sons of Pritha, by indulging in
such grief. When thou shouldst joy and reward the Pandavas, thou art
grieving, O king? Indeed, this behaviour of thine is inconsistent. Be
cheerful, do not cast away thy life; but remember with a pleased heart
the good they have done thee. Give back unto the sons of Pritha their
kingdom, and win thou both virtue and renown by such conduct. By acting
in this way, thou mayst be grateful. Establish brotherly relations with
the Pandavas by being friends, and give them their paternal kingdom, for
then thou wilt be happy!’”

Vaisampayana continued, “Hearing these words of Sakuni, and seeing the
brave Dussasana lying prostrate before him unmanned by fraternal love,
the king raised Dussasana and, clasping him in his well round arms, smelt
his head from affection. And hearing these words of Karna and Sauvala,
king Duryodhana lost heart more than ever, and he was overwhelmed with
shame and utter despair overtook his soul. And hearing all that his
friends said, he answered with sorrow, ‘I have nothing more to do with
virtue, wealth, friendship, affluence, sovereignty, and enjoyments. Do
not obstruct my purpose, but leave me all of you. I am firmly resolved to
cast away my life by forgoing food. Return to the city, and treat my
superiors there respectfully.’

“Thus addressed by him, they replied unto that royal grinder of foes,
saying, ‘O monarch, the course that is thine, is also ours, O Bharata.
How can we enter the city without thee?’”

Vaisampayana continued, “Though addressed in all manner of ways by his
friends and counsellors and brothers and relatives, the king wavered not
from his purpose. And the son of Dhritarashtra in accordance with his
purpose spread Kusa grass on the earth, and purifying himself by touching
water, sat down upon that spot. And clad in rags and Kusa grass he set
himself to observe the highest vow. And stopping all speech, that tiger
among kings, moved by the desire of going to heaven, began to pray and
worship internally suspending all external intercourse.

“Meanwhile the fierce Daityas and the Danavas who had been defeated of
old by the celestials and had been dwelling in the nether regions having
ascertained Duryodhana’s purpose and knowing that if the king died their
party would be weakened, commenced a sacrifice with fire for summoning
Duryodhana to their presence. And mantra knowing persons then commenced
with the help of formulae declared by Brihaspati and Usanas, those rites
that are indicated in the Atharva Veda and the Upanishads and which are
capable of being achieved by mantras and prayers. And Brahmins of rigid
vows, well-versed in the Vedas and the branches, began, with rapt soul,
to pour libations of clarified butter and milk into the fire, uttering
mantras. And after those rites were ended, a strange goddess, O king,
with mouth wide open, arose (from the sacrificial fire), saying, ‘What am
I to do?’ And the Daityas with well-pleased hearts, commanded her,
saying, ‘Bring thou hither the royal son of Dhritarashtra, who is even
now observing the vow of starvation for getting rid of his life.’ Thus
commanded, she went away saying, ‘So be it.’ And she went in the
twinkling of an eye to that spot where Suyodhana was. And taking up the
king back to the nether regions, and having brought him thus in a moment,
she apprised the Danavas of it. And the Danavas beholding the king
brought into their midst in the night, united together, and all of them
with well-pleased hearts and eyes expanded in delight addressed these
flattering words to Duryodhana.”


SECTION CCL

“The Danavas said, ‘O Suyodhana, O great king? O perpetuator of the race
of Bharata, thou art ever surrounded by heroes and illustrious men. Why
hast thou, then, undertaken to do such a rash act as the vow of
starvation? The suicide ever sinketh into hell and becometh the subject
of calumnious speech. Nor do intelligent persons like thee ever set their
hands to acts that are sinful and opposed to their best interests and
striking at the very root of their purposes. Restrain this resolve of
thine, therefore, O king, which is destructive of morality, profit, and
happiness, of fame, prowess, and energy, and which enhanceth the joy of
foes O exalted king, know the truth, the celestial origin of thy soul,
and the maker of thy body, and then summon thou patience to thy aid. In
days of old. O king, we have obtained thee, by ascetic austerities from
Maheswara. The upper part of thy body is wholly made of an assemblage of
Vajras, and is, therefore, invulnerable to weapons of every description,
O sinless one. The lower part of thy body, capable of captivating the
female heart by its comeliness was made of flowers by the goddess
herself--the wife of Mahadeva. Thy body is thus, O best of kings, the
creation of Maheswara himself and his goddess. Therefore, O tiger among
kings, thou art of celestial origin, not human. Other brave Kshatriyas of
mighty energy headed by Bhagadatta, and all acquainted with celestial
weapons, will slay thy foes. Therefore, let this grief of thine cease.
Thou hast no cause for fear. For aiding thee, many heroic Danavas have
been born on the earth. Other Asuras will also possess Bhishma and Drona
and Kama and others. Possessed by those Asuras, these heroes will cast
away their kindness and fight with thy foes. Indeed, when the Danavas
will enter their heart and possess them completely, flinging all
affections to a distance, becoming hard-hearted, these warriors will
strike every body opposed to them in battle without sparing sons,
brothers, fathers, friends, disciples, relatives, even children and old
men. Blinded by ignorance and wrath, and impelled by that destiny which
hath been ordained by the Creator, these tigers among men, with hearts
steeped in sin, will, O thou foremost of the Kurus, depopulate the earth
by hurling and shooting all kinds of weapons, with great manliness and
strength and always addressing one another boastfully with words such as
these, ‘Thou shall not escape from me today with life.’ And these
illustrious sons of Pandu also, five in number, will fight with these.
And, endued with mighty strength and favoured by Fate, they will compass
the destruction of these. And, O king, many Daityas and Rakshasas also
that have been born in the Kshatriya order, will fight with great prowess
in the battle with thy foes, using maces and clubs and lances and various
weapons of a superior kind. And, O hero, with respect to the fear that is
in thy heart rising from Arjuna, we have already settled the means for
slaying Arjuna. The soul of the slain Naraka hath assumed the form of
Karna. Recollecting his former hostility he will encounter both Kesava
and Arjuna. And that mighty warrior and foremost of smiters, proud of his
prowess will vanquish Arjuna in battle as also all thy enemies. The
wielder of the thunder-bolt, knowing all this, and desirous of saving
Arjuna, will in disguise take away from Karna his ear-rings and coat of
mail. We also have for that reason appointed hundreds upon hundreds and
thousands upon thousands of Daityas and Rakshasas, viz., those that are
known by the name of Samsaptakas.[83] These celebrated warriors will slay
the heroic Arjuna. Therefore, grieve not, O king. Thou wilt rule the
whole earth, O monarch, without a rival. Do not yield to despondency.
Conduct such as this does not suit thee. O thou of the Kuru race, if thou
diest, our party becometh weak. Go thou, O hero, and let not thy mind be
directed to any other course of action. Thou art ever our refuge as,
indeed, the Pandavas are the refuge of the gods.’

Vaisampayana continued, “Having addressed him thus, those Daityas
embraced that elephant among kings, and those bulls among the Danavas
cheered that irrepressible one like a son. And, O Bharata, pacifying his
mind by soft speech, they permitted him to depart, saying, ‘Go and attain
victory!’ And when they had given leave to the mighty-armed one, that
very goddess carried him back to the spot where he had sat down, intent
upon putting an end to his life. And having set that hero down and paid
him homage, the goddess vanished, taking the king’s permission. O
Bharata, when she had gone, king Duryodhana considered all (that had
happened) as a dream. He then thought within himself, ‘I shall defeat the
Pandavas in battle.’ And Suyodhana thought that Karna and the Samsaptaka
army were both able (to destroy) and intent upon destroying that slayer
of foes, Partha. Thus, O bull of the Bharata race, the hope was
strengthened of the wicked minded son of Dhritarashtra, of conquering the
Pandavas. And Karna also, his soul and faculties possessed by the inmost
soul of Naraka, had at that time cruelly determined to slay Arjuna. And
those heroes--the Samsaptakas also--having their sense possessed by the
Rakshasas, and influenced by the qualities of emotion and darkness, were
desirous of slaying Phalguna. And, O king, others with Bhishma, Drona,
and Kripa at their head, having their faculties influenced by the
Danavas, were not so affectionate towards the sons of Pandu as they had
been. But king Suyodhana did not tell any one of this.

“When the night passed away, Karna, that offspring of the Sun, with
joined hands, smilingly addressed these wise words to king Duryodhana,
‘No dead man conquereth his foes: it is when he is alive that he can see
his good. Where is the good of the dead person; and, O Kauraveya, where
is his victory? Therefore, this is no time for grief, or fear or death.’
And having, with his arms embraced that mighty-armed one, he further
said, ‘Rise up, O king! Why dost thou lie down? Why dost thou grieve, O
slayer of foes? Having afflicted thy enemies by thy prowess, why dost
thou wish for death? Or (perhaps) fear hath possessed thee at the sight
of Arjuna’s prowess. I truly promise unto thee that I will slay Arjuna in
battle. O lord of men, I swear by my weapon that when the three and ten
years shall have passed away, I will bring the sons of Pritha under thy
subjection.’ Thus addressed by Karna, and remembering the words of the
Daityas and supplications made by them (his brothers), Suyodhana rose up.
And having heard those words of the Daityas that tiger among men, with a
firm resolve in his heart arrayed his army, abounding in horses and
elephants and cars and infantry. And, O monarch, immensely swarming with
white umbrellas, and pennons, and white Chamaras, and cars, and
elephants, and foot-soldiers, that mighty army, as it moved like the
waters of the Ganga, looked graceful like the firmament, at a season when
the clouds have dispersed and the signs of autumn have been but partially
developed. And, O foremost of kings, eulogised like a monarch by the best
of the Brahmanas blessing with victory, that lord of men Suyodhana,
Dhritarashtra’s son, receiving honours paid with innumerable joined
palms, and flaming in exceeding splendour, went in the front, accompanied
by Karna, and that gambler, the son of Suvala. And all his brothers with
Dussasana at their head, and Bhurisrava, and Somadatta, and the mighty
king Vahlika, followed that lion among kings on his way, with cars of
various forms, and horses, and the best of elephants. And, O prime among
monarchs, in a short time, those perpetuators of the Kuru race entered
their own city.”


SECTION CCLI

Janamejaya said, “When the high-souled sons of Pritha were living in the
forest, what did those foremost of men and mighty archers--the sons of
Dhritarashtra--do? And what did the offspring of the Sun, Karna, and the
mighty Sakuni, and Bhishma, and Drona, and Kripa do? It behoveth thee to
relate this unto me.”

Vaisampayana said, “When, O mighty king, in this manner the Pandavas had
gone, leaving Suyodhana, and when, having been liberated by Pandu’s sons,
he had come to Hastinapura, Bhishma said these words to the son of
Dhritarashtra, ‘O child, I had told thee before, when thou wert intent
upon going to the hermitage that thy journey did not please me. But thou
didst do so. And as a consequence, O hero, wert thou forcibly taken
captive by the enemy, and wert delivered by the Pandavas versed in
morality. Yet art thou not ashamed. Even in the presence of thee, O son
of Gandhari, together with thy army, did the Suta’s son, struck with
panic, fly from the battle of the Gandharvas, O king. And, O foremost of
kings, O son of the monarch! while thou with thy army wert crying
distressfully, thou didst witness the prowess of the high-souled
Pandavas, and also, O mighty-armed one, of the wicked son of the Suta,
Karna. O best of kings, whether in the science of arms, or heroism, or
morality, Karna, O thou devoted to virtue, is not a fourth part of the
Pandavas. Therefore, for the welfare of this race, the conclusion of
peace is, I think, desirable with the high-souled Pandavas.”

‘Having been thus addressed by Bhishma, Dhritarashtra’s son the king,
laughed a good deal, and then suddenly sailed out with the son of Suvala.
thereupon, knowing that he was gone, those mighty bowmen with Karna, and
Dussasana at their head, followed the highly powerful son of
Dhritarashtra. And seeing them gone, Bhishma, the grandfather of the
Kurus, hung down his head from shame, and then, O king, went to his own
quarters. And, O mighty monarch, when Bhishma had left, that lord of men,
Dhritarashtra’s son came there again, and began to consult with his
counsellors, ‘What is it that is good for me? What remaineth to be done?
And how we can most effectively bring about the good we shall discuss
to-day.’ Karna said, ‘O Kuru’s son, Duryodhana, do thou lay to heart tie
words that I say. Bhishma always blameth us, and praiseth the Pandavas.
And from the ill-will he beareth towards thee, he hateth me also. And, O
lord of men, in thy presence he ever crieth me down. I shall never, O
Bharata, bear these words that Bhishma had said in thy presence in
relation to this matter, extolling the Pandavas, and censuring thee, O
represser of foes! Do thou, O king, enjoin on me, together with servants,
forces, and cars. I shall, O monarch, conquer the earth furnished with
mountains and woods and forests. The earth had been conquered by the four
powerful Pandavas. I shall, without doubt, conquer it for thee
single-handed. Let that wretch of the Kuru race, the exceedingly
wicked-minded Bhishma, see it,--he who vilifies those that do not deserve
censure, and praises those that should not be praised. Let him this day
witness my might, and blame himself. Do thou, O king, command me. Victory
shall surely be thine. By my weapon, O monarch, I swear this before thee.’

“O king, O bull of the Bharata race, hearing those words of Karna, that
lord of men, experiencing the highest delight, spoke unto Karna, saying,
‘I am blessed. I have been favoured by thee,--since thou, endued with
great strength, art ever intent on my welfare. My life hath borne fruit,
to-day. As thou, O hero, intendest to subdue all our enemies, repair
thou. May good betide thee! Do thou command me (what I am to do),’ O
subduer of foes, having been thus addressed by Dhritarashtra’s
intelligent son, Karna ordered all the necessaries for the excursion. And
on an auspicious lunar day, at an auspicious moment, and under the
influence of a star presided over by an auspicious deity, that mighty
bowman, having been honoured by twice-born ones, and been bathed with
auspicious and holy substances and also worshipped by speech set out,
filling with the rattle of his car the three worlds, with their mobile
and immobile objects.”


SECTION CCLII

Vaisampayana continued, “Then, O bull among the Bharatas, that mighty
bowman, Karna, surrounded by a large army, besieged the beautiful city of
Drupada. And he, after a hard conflict, brought the hero under
subjection, and, O best of monarchs, made Drupada contribute silver and
gold and gems, and also pay tribute. And, O foremost of kings, having
subdued him, (Karna) brought under subjection those princes that were
under him (Drupada) and made them pay tribute. Then going to the north,
he subdued the sovereigns (of that quarter) and having effected the
defeat of Bhagadatta, Radha’s son ascended that mighty mountain Himavat,
all along fighting his foes. And ranging all sides, he conquered and
brought under subjection all the kings inhabiting the Himavat, and made
them pay dues. Then descending from the mountain and rushing to the east,
he reduced the Angas, and the Bangas, and the Kalingas, and the Mandikas,
and the Magadhas. the Karkakhandas; and also included with them the
Avasiras, Yodhyas, and the Ahikshatras. Having (thus) conquered the
eastern quarter Karna then presented himself before Batsa-bhumi. And
having taken Batsa-bhumi, he reduced Kevali, and Mrittikavati, and Mohana
and Patrana, and Tripura, and Kosala,--and compelled all these to pay
tribute. Then going to the south, Karna vanquished the mighty charioteers
(of that quarter) and in Dakshinatya, the Suta’s son entered into
conflict with Rukmi. After having fought dreadfully, Rukmi spake to the
Suta’s son saying, ‘O foremost of monarchs, I have been pleased with thy
might and prowess. I shall not do thee wrong: I have only fulfilled the
vow of a Kshatriya. Gladly will I give thee as many gold coins as thou
desirest.’ Having met with Rukmi, Karna, repaired to Pandya and the
mountain, Sri. And by fighting, he made Karala, king Nila, Venudari’s
son, and other best of kings living in the southern direction pay
tribute. Then going to Sisupala’s son, the son of the Suta defeated him
and that highly powerful one also brought under his sway all the
neighbouring rulers. And, O bull of the Bharata race, having subjugated
the Avantis and concluded peace with them, and having met with the
Vrishnis, he conquered the west. And, having come to the quarter of
Varuna, he made all the Yavana and Varvara kings pay tribute. And, having
conquered the entire earth--east, west, north and south--that hero
without any aid brought under subjection all the nations of the
Mlechchhas, the mountaineers, the Bhadras, the Rohitakas, the Agneyas and
the Malavas. And, having conquered the mighty charioteers, headed by the
Nagnajitas, the Suta’s son brought the Sasakas and the Yavanas under his
sway. Having thus conquered and brought under his subjection the world,
the mighty charioteer and tiger among men came (back) to Hastinapura.
That lord of men, Dhritarashtra’s son, accompanied by his father and
brothers and friends, came to that mighty bowman, who had arrived, and
duly paid homage unto Karna crowned with martial merit. And the king
proclaimed his feats, saying, ‘What I have not received from either
Bhishma, or Drona, or Kripa, or Vahlika, I have received from thee. May
good betide thee! What need of speaking at length! Hear my words, O
Karna! In thee, O chief of men, I have my refuge. O mighty-armed one. O
tiger among men, without doubt all the Pandavas and the other kings
crowned with prosperity, come not to a sixteenth part of thee. Do thou, O
mighty bowman, O Karna, see Dhritarashtra, and the illustrious Gandhari,
as the bearer of the thunderbolt did Aditi.’

“Then, O king, there arose in the city of Hastinapura a clamour, and
sounds of Oh! and Alas! and, O lord of men, some of the kings praised him
(Karna), while others censured him, while others, again, remained silent.
Having thus, O foremost of monarchs, in a short time conquered this earth
furnished with mountains and forests and skies, and with oceans, and
fields, and filled with high and low tracts, and cities, and replete also
with islands. O lord of earth, and brought the monarchs under
subjection,--and having gained imperishable wealth, the Suta’s son
appeared before the king. Then, O represser of foes, entering into the
interior of the palace that hero saw Dhritarashtra with Gandhari, O tiger
among men, that one conversant with morality took hold of his feet even
like a son. And Dhritarashtra embraced him affectionately, and then
dismissed him. Ever since that time, O monarch, O Bharata, king
Duryodhana and Sakuni, the son of Suvala, thought that Pritha’s sons had
already been defeated in battle by Karna.”


SECTION CCLIII

Vaisampayana continued, “O king, O lord of men, that slayer of hostile
heroes, the Suta’s son, said these words to Duryodhana, ‘O Kaurava
Duryodhana, do thou lay unto thy heart the words that I shall tell thee;
and, O represser of foes, after having heard my words, it behoveth thee
to act accordingly every way. Now, O best of monarchs, O hero, hath the
earth been rid of foes. Do thou rule her even like the mighty-minded
Sakra himself, having his foes destroyed.”

Vaisampayana continued, “Having been thus addressed by Karna, the king
again spake unto him, saying, ‘O bull among men, nothing whatever is
unattainable to him who hath thee for refuge, and to whom thou art
attached and on whose welfare thou art entirely intent. Now, I have a
purpose, which do thou truly listen to. Having beheld that foremost of
sacrifices, the mighty Rajasuya, performed by the Pandavas, a desire hath
sprung up in me (to celebrate the same). Do thou, O Suta’s son, fulfil
this desire of mine.’ Thus addressed, Karna spake thus unto the king,
‘Now that all the rulers of the earth have been brought under thy
subjection, do thou summon the principal Brahmanas, and, O best of Kurus,
duly procure the articles required for the sacrifice. And, O represser of
foes, let Ritwijas as prescribed, and versed in the Vedas, celebrate thy
rites according to the ordinance, O king. And, O bull of the Bharata
race, let thy great sacrifice also, abounding in meats and drinks, and
grand with parts, commence.’

“O king, having been thus addressed by Karna, Dhritarashtra’s son
summoned the priest, and spake unto him these words, ‘Do thou duly and in
proper order celebrate for me that best of sacrifices, the Rajasuya
furnished with excellent Dakshinas.’ Thus accosted, that best of
Brahmanas spake unto the king, saying, ‘O foremost of the Kauravas, while
Yudhishthira is living, that best of sacrifices cannot be performed in
thy family, O Prince of kings! Further, O monarch, thy father
Dhritarashtra, endued with long life, liveth. For this reason also, O
best of kings, this sacrifice cannot be undertaken by thee. There is, O
lord, another great sacrifice, resembling the Rajasuya. Do thou, O
foremost of kings, celebrate that sacrifice. Listen to these words of
mine. All these rulers of the earth, who have, O king, become tributary
to thee, will pay thee tribute in gold, both pure and impure. Of that
gold, do thou, O best of monarchs, now make the (sacrificial) plough, and
do thou, O Bharata, plough the sacrificial compound with it. At that
spot, let there commence, O foremost of kings, with due rites, and
without any disturbance the sacrifice, sanctified with mantras abounding
in edibles. The name of that sacrifice worthy of virtuous persons, is
Vaishnava. No person save the ancient Vishnu hath performed it before.
This mighty sacrifice vies with that best of sacrifices--the Rajasuya
itself. And, further, it liketh us--and it is also for thy welfare (to
celebrate it). And, moreover, it is capable of being celebrated without
any disturbance. (By undertaking this), thy desire will be fufilled.’

“Having been thus addressed by those Brahmanas, Dhritarashtra’s son, the
king, spake these words to Karna, his brothers and the son of Suvala,
‘Beyond doubt, the words of the Brahmanas are entirely liked by me. If
they are relished by you also, express it without delay.’ Thus appealed,
they all said unto the king, ‘So be it.’ Then the king one by one
appointed persons to their respective tasks; and desired all the artisans
to construct the (sacrificial) plough. And, O best of kings, all that had
been commanded to be done, was gradually executed.”


SECTION CCLIV

Vaisampayana continued, “Then all the artisans, the principal
counsellors, and the highly wise Vidura said unto Dhritarashtra’s son,
“All the preparations for the excellent sacrifice have been made, O king;
and the time also hath come, O Bharata. And the exceedingly precious
golden plough hath been constructed.’ Hearing this, O monarch, that best
of kings, Dhritarashtra’s son commanded that prime among sacrifices to be
commenced. Then commenced that sacrifice sanctified by mantras, and
abounding in edibles, and the son of Gandhari was duly initiated
according to the ordinance. And Dhritarashtra, and the illustrious
Vidura, and Bhishma, and Drona, and Kripa, and Karna, and the celebrated
Gandhari experienced great delight. And, O foremost of kings, Duryodhana
despatched swift messengers to invite the princes and the Brahmanas. And
mounting fleet vehicles they went to the (respective) directions assigned
to them. Then to a certain messenger on the point of setting out,
Dussasana said, ‘Go thou speedily to the woods of Dwaita; and in that
forest duly invite the Brahmanas and those wicked persons, the Pandavas.’
Thereupon, he repaired thither, and bowing down to all the Pandavas,
said, ‘Having acquired immense wealth by his native prowess, that best of
kings and foremost of Kurus, Duryodhana, O monarch, is celebrating a
sacrifice. Thither are going from various directions the kings and the
Brahmanas. O king, I have been sent by the high-souled Kaurava. That king
and lord of men, Dhritarashtra’s son, invites you. It behoveth you,
therefore, to witness the delightful sacrifice of that monarch.’

“Hearing these words of the messenger, that tiger among kings, the royal
Yudhishthira, said, ‘By good luck it is that that enhancer of the glory
of his ancestors, king Suyodhana is celebrating this best of sacrifices.
We should certainly repair thither; but we cannot do now; for till (the
completion of) the thirteenth year, we shall have to observe our vow.’
Hearing this speech of Yudhishthira the just, Bhima said these words,
‘Then will king Yudhishthira the just go thither, when he will cast him
(Duryodhana) into the fire kindled by weapons. Do thou say unto
Suyodhana. ‘When after the expiration of the thirteenth year, that lord
of men, the Pandava, will, in the sacrifice of battle, pour upon the
Dhritarashtras, the clarified butter of his ire, then will I come!’ But
the other Pandavas, O king, did not say anything unpleasant. The
messenger (on his return) related unto Dhritarashtra’s son all as it had
fallen out. Then there came to the city of Dhritarashtra many foremost of
men, lords of various countries, and highly virtuous Brahmanas. And duly
received in order according to the ordinance, those lords of men
experienced great delight and were all well-pleased. And that foremost
among monarchs--Dhritarashtra--surrounded by all the Kauravas,
experienced the height of joy, and spake unto Vidura, saying, ‘Do thou, O
Kshatta, speedily so act that all persons in the sacrificial compound may
be served with food, be refreshed and satisfied.’ Thereupon, O represser
of foes, assenting to that order, the learned Vidura versed in morality,
cheerfully entertained all the orders in proper measure with meat and
beverages to eat and drink, and fragrant garland and various kinds of
attire. And having constructed pavilions (for their accommodation), that
hero and foremost of kings, duly entertained the princes and the
Brahmanas by thousands, and also bestowing upon them wealth of various
kinds, bade them farewell. And having dismissed all the kings, he entered
Hastinapura, surrounded by his brothers, and in company with Karna and
Suvala’s son.”


SECTION CCLV

Vaisampayana said, “While, O great king, Duryodhana was entering (the
city), the panegyrists eulogized the prince of unfailing prowess. And
others also eulogized that mighty bowman and foremost of kings. And
sprinkling over him fried paddy and sandal paste the citizens said, ‘By
good luck it is, O king, that thy sacrifice hath been completed without
obstruction.’ And some, more reckless of speech, that were present there,
said unto that lord of the earth, ‘Surely this thy sacrifice cannot be
compared with Yudhishthira’s: nor doth this come up to a sixteenth part
of that (sacrifice).’ Thus spake unto that king some that were reckless
of consequences. His friends, however, said, This sacrifice of thine hath
surpassed all others. Yayati and Nahusha, and Mandhata and Bharata,
having been sanctified by celebrating such a sacrifice, have all gone to
heaven.’ Hearing such agreeable words from his friends, that monarch, O
bull of the Bharata’s race, well-pleased, entered the city and finally
his own abode. Then, O king, worshipping the feet of his father and
mother and of others headed by Bhishma, Drona and Kripa, and of the wise
Vidura, and worshipped in turn by his younger brothers, that delighter of
brothers sat down upon an excellent seat, surrounded by the latter. And
the Suta’s son, rising up, said, ‘By good luck it is, O foremost of the
Bharata race, that this mighty sacrifice of thine hath been brought to a
close. When, however, the sons of Pritha shall have been slain in battle
and thou wilt have completed the Rajasuya sacrifice, once again, O lord
of men, shall I honour thee thus.’ Then that mighty king, the illustrious
son of Dhritarashtra, replied unto him, ‘Truly hath this been spoken by
thee. When, O foremost of men, the wicked-minded Pandavas have been
slain, and when also the grand Rajasuya hath been celebrated by me, then
thou shalt again, O hero, honour me thus.’ And having said this, O
Bharata, the Kaurava embraced Karna, and began, O mighty king, to think
of the Rajasuya, that foremost of sacrifices. And that best of kings also
addressed the Kurus around him, saying, ‘When shall I, ye Kauravas,
having slain all the Pandavas, celebrate that costly and foremost of
sacrifices, the Rajasuya.’ Then spake Karna unto him, saying, ‘Hear me, O
elephant among kings! So long as I do not slay Arjuna, I shall not allow
any one to wash my feet, nor shall I taste meat. And I shall observe the
Asura vow[84] and whoever may solicit me (for any thing), I never shall
say, ‘I have it not.’ When Karna had thus vowed to slay Phalguna in
battle, those mighty charioteers and bowmen, the sons of Dhritarashtra,
sent up a loud cheer; and Dhritarashtra’s sons thought that the Pandavas
had already been conquered. Then that chief of kings, the graceful
Duryodhana, leaving those bulls among men, entered his apartment, like
the lord Kuvera entering the garden of Chitraratha. And all those mighty
bowmen also, O Bharata, went to their respective quarters.

“Meanwhile those mighty bowmen, the Pandavas, excited by the words the
messenger had spoken, became anxious, and they did not (from that time)
experience the least happiness. Intelligence, further, O foremost of
kings, had been brought by spies regarding the vow of the Suta’s son to
slay Vijaya. Hearing this, O lord of men, Dharma’s son became exceedingly
anxious. And considering Karna of the impenetrable mail to be of
wonderful prowess, and remembering all their woes, he knew no peace. And
that high-souled one filled with anxiety, made up his mind to abandon the
woods about Dwaitavana abounding with ferocious animals.

“Meanwhile the royal son of Dhritarashtra began to rule the earth, along
with his heroic brothers as also with Bhishma and Drona and Kripa. And
with the assistance of the Suta’s son crowned with martial glory,
Duryodhana remained ever intent on the welfare of the rulers of the
earth, and he worshipped the foremost of Brahmanas by celebrating
sacrifices with profuse gifts. And that hero and subduer of foes, O king,
was engaged in doing good to his brothers, concluding for certain in his
mind that giving and enjoying are the only use of riches.”


SECTION CCLVI

Janamejaya said, ‘After having delivered Duryodhana, what did the mighty
sons of Pandu do in that forest? It behoveth thee to tell me this.’

Vaisampayana said, “Once on a time, as Yudhishthira lay down at night in
the Dwaita woods, some deer, with accents choked in tears, presented
themselves before him in his dreams. To them standing with joined hands,
their bodies trembling all over that foremost of monarchs said, ‘Tell me
what ye wish to say. Who are ye? And what do ye desire?’ Thus accosted by
Kunti’s son--the illustrious Pandava, those deer, the remnant of those
that had been slaughtered, replied unto him, saying, ‘We are, O Bharata,
those deer that are still alive after them that had been slaughtered. We
shall be exterminated totally. Therefore, do thou change thy residence. O
mighty king, all thy brothers are heroes, conversant with weapons; they
have thinned the ranks of the rangers of the forest. We few--the
remnants,--O mighty-minded one, remain like seed. By thy favour, O king
of kings, let us increase.’ Seeing these deer, which remained like seed
after the rest had been destroyed trembling and afflicted with fear,
Yudhishthira the just was greatly affected with grief. And the king,
intent on the welfare of all creatures, said unto them, ‘So be it. I
shall act as ye have said.’ Awaking after such a vision, that excellent
king, moved by pity towards the deer, thus spake unto his brothers
assembled there, ‘Those deer that are alive after them that have been
slaughtered, accosted me at night, after I had awakened, saying, ‘We
remain like the cues of our lines. Blest be thou! Do thou have compassion
on us.’ And they have spoken truly. We ought to feel pity for the
dwellers of the forest. We have been feeding on them for a year together
and eight months. Let us, therefore, again (repair) to the romantic
Kamyakas, that best of forests abounding in wild animals, situated at the
head of the desert, near lake Trinavindu. And there let us pleasantly
pass the rest of our time.’ Then, O king, the Pandavas versed in
morality, swiftly departed (thence), accompanied by the Brahmanas and all
those that lived with them, and followed by Indrasena and other
retainers. And proceeding along the roads walked (by travellers),
furnished with excellent corn and clear water, they at length beheld the
sacred asylum of Kamyaka endued with ascetic merit. And as pious men
enter the celestial regions, those foremost of the Bharata race, the
Kauravas, surrounded by those bulls among Brahmanas entered that forest.”


SECTION CCLVII

Vaisampayana continued, “Dwelling in the woods, O bull of the Bharata
race, the high-souled Pandavas spent one and ten years in a miserable
plight. And although deserving of happiness, those foremost of men,
brooding over their circumstances, passed their days miserably, living on
fruits and roots. And that royal sage, the mighty-armed Yudhishthira,
reflecting that the extremity of misery that had befallen his brothers,
was owing to his own fault, and remembering those sufferings that had
arisen from his act of gambling, could not sleep peacefully. And he felt
as if his heart had been pierced with a lance. And remembering the harsh
words of the Suta’s son, the Pandava, repressing the venom of his wrath,
passed his time in humble guise, sighing heavily. And Arjuna and both the
twins and the illustrious Draupadi, and the mighty Bhima--he that was
strongest of all men--experienced the most poignant pain in casting their
eyes on Yudhishthira. And thinking that a short time only remained (of
their exile), those bulls among men, influenced by rage and hope and by
resorting to various exertions and endeavours, made their bodies assume
almost different shapes.

“After a little while, that mighty ascetic, Vyasa, the son of Satyavati,
came there to see the Pandavas. And seeing him approach, Kunti’s son,
Yudhishthira, stepped forward, and duly received that high-souled one.
And having gratified Vyasa by bowing down unto him, Pandu’s son of
subdued senses, after the Rishi had been seated, sat down before him,
desirous of listening to him. And beholding his grandsons lean and living
in the forest on the produce of the wilderness, that mighty sage, moved
by compassion, said these words, in accents choked in tears, ‘O
mighty-armed Yudhishthira, O thou best of virtuous persons, those men
that do not perform ascetic austerities never attain great happiness in
this world. People experience happiness and misery by turns; for surely,
O bull among men, no man ever enjoyeth unbroken happiness. A wise man
endued with high wisdom, knowing that life hath its ups and downs, is
neither filled with joy nor with grief. When happiness cometh, one should
enjoy it; when misery cometh, one should bear it, as a sower of crops
must bide his season. Nothing is superior to asceticism: by asceticism
one acquireth mighty fruit. Do thou know, O Bharata, that there is
nothing that asceticism cannot achieve. Truth, sincerity, freedom from
anger, justice, self-control, restraint of the faculties, immunity from
malice, guilelessness, sanctity, and mortification of the senses, these,
O mighty monarch, purify a person of meritorious acts. Foolish persons
addicted to vice and bestial ways, attain to brutish births in after life
and never enjoy happiness. The fruit of acts done in this world is reaped
in the next. Therefore should one restrain his body by asceticism and the
observance of vows. And, O king, free from guile and with a cheerful
spirit, one should, according to his power, bestow gifts, after going
down to the recipient and paying him homage. A truth-telling person
attaineth a life devoid of trouble. A person void of anger attaineth
sincerity, and one free from malice acquireth supreme contentment. A
person who hath subdued his senses and his inner faculties, never knoweth
tribulation; nor is a person of subdued senses affected by sorrow at the
height of other’s prosperity. A man who giveth everyone his due, and the
bestower of boons, attain happiness, and come by every object of
enjoyment; while a man free from envy reapeth perfect ease. He that
honoureth those to whom honour is due, attaineth birth in an illustrious
line; and he that hath subdued his senses, never cometh by misfortune. A
man whose mind followeth good, after having paid his debt to nature, is
on this account, born again endued with a righteous mind.’

“Yudhishthira said, ‘O eminently virtuous one, O mighty sage, of the
bestowal of gifts and the observance of asceticism, which is of greater
efficacy in the next world, and which, harder of practice?’

“Vyasa said, ‘There is nothing, O child, in this world harder to practise
than charity. Men greatly thirst after wealth, and wealth also is gotten
with difficulty. Nay, renouncing even dear life itself, heroic men, O
magnanimous one, enter into the depths of the sea and the forest for the
sake of wealth. For wealth, some betake themselves to agriculture and the
tending of kine, and some enter into servitude. Therefore, it is
extremely difficult to part with wealth that is obtained with such
trouble. Since nothing is harder to practise than charity, therefore, in
my opinion, even the bestowal of boons is superior to everything.
Specially is this to be borne in mind that well-earned gains should, in
proper time and place, be given away to pious men. But the bestowal of
ill-gotten gains can never rescue the giver from the evil of rebirth. It
hath been declared, O Yudhishthira, that by bestowing, in a pure spirit,
even a slight gift in due time and to a fit recipient, a man attaineth
inexhaustible fruit in the next world. In this connection is instanced