story of Rama of great achievements!’

“Markandeya said, ‘Listen, O prince of Bharata’s race, to this old
history exactly as it happened! I will tell thee all about the distress
suffered by Rama together with his wife. There was a great king named Aja
sprung from me race of Ikshwaku. He had a son named Dasaratha who was
devoted to the study of the Vedas and was ever pure. And Dasaratha had
four sons conversant with morality and profit known by the names,
respectively, of Rama, Lakshmana, Satrughna, and the mighty Bharata. And
Rama had for his mother Kausalya, and Bharata had for his mother Kaikeyi,
while those scourge of their enemies Lakshmana and Satrughna were the
sons of Sumitra. And Janaka was the king of Videha, and Sita was his
daughter. And Tashtri himself created her, desiring to make her the
beloved wife of Rama. I have now told thee the history of both Rama’s and
Sita’s birth. And now, O king, I will relate unto thee birth of Ravana.
That Lord of all creatures and the Creator of the Universe viz., the
Self-create Prajapati himself--that god possessed of great ascetic
merit--is the grandfather of Ravana. And Pulastya hath a mighty son
called Vaisravana begotten of a cow. But his son, leaving his father,
went to his grandfather. And, O king, angered at this, his father then
created a second self of himself. And with half of his own self that
regenerate one became born of Visrava for wrecking a vengeance on
Vaisravana. But the Grandsire, pleased with Vaisravana, gave him
immortality, and sovereignty of all the wealth of the Universe, the
guardianship of one of the cardinal points, the friendship of Isana, and
a son named Nalakuvera. And he also gave him for his capital Lanka, which
was guarded by hosts of Rakshasas, and also a chariot called Pushpaka
capable of going everywhere according to the will of the rider. And the
kingship of the Yakshas and the sovereignty over sovereigns were also
his.’”


SECTION CCLXXIII

Markandeya said, “The Muni named Visrava, who was begotten of half the
soul of Pulastya, in a fit of passion, began to look upon Vaisravana with
great anger. But, O monarch, Kuvera, the king of the Rakshasas, knowing
that his father was angry with him, always sought to please him. And, O
best of Bharata’s race, that king of kings living in Lanka, and borne
upon the shoulders of men, sent three Rakshasa women to wait upon his
father. Their names, O king, were Pushpotkata, Raka and Malini. And they
were skilled in singing and dancing and were always assiduous in their
attentions on that high-souled Rishi. And those slender-waisted ladies
vied with one another, O king, in gratifying the Rishi. And that
high-souled and adorable being was pleased with them and granted them
boons. And to every one of them he gave princely sons according to their
desire. Two sons--those foremost of Rakshasas named Kumvakarna and the
Ten-headed Ravana,--both unequalled on earth in prowess, were born to
Pushpotkata. And Malini had a son named Vibhishana, and Raka had twin
children named Khara and Surpanakha. And Vibhishana surpassed them all in
beauty. And that excellent person was very pious and assiduously
performed all religious rites. But that foremost of Rakshasas, with ten
heads, was the eldest to them all. And he was religious, and energetic
and possessed of great strength and prowess. And the Rakshasa Kumvakarna
was the most powerful in battle, for he was fierce and terrible and a
thorough master of the arts of illusion. And Khara was proficient in
archery, and hostile to the Brahmanas, subsisting as he did on flesh. And
the fierce Surpanakha was constant source of trouble to the ascetics. And
the warriors, learned in the Vedas and diligent in ceremonial rites, all
lived with their father in the Gandhamadana. And there they beheld
Vaisravana seated with their father, possessed of riches and borne on the
shoulders of men. And seized with jealousy, they resolved upon performing
penances. And with ascetic penances of the most severe kind, they
gratified Brahma. And the Ten-headed Ravana, supporting life by means of
air alone and surrounded by the five sacred fires and absorbed in
meditation, remained standing on one leg for a thousand years. And
Kumvakarna with head downwards, and with restricted diet, was constant in
austerities. And the wise and magnanimous Vibhishana, observing fasts and
subsisting only on dry leaves and engaged in meditation, practised severe
austerities for a long period. And Khara and Surpanakha, with cheerful
hearts, protected and attended on them while they were performing those
austerities. And at the close of a thousand years, the invincible
Ten-headed One, cutting off his own heads, offered them as offering to
the sacred fire. And at this act of his, the Lord of the Universe was
pleased with him. And then Brahma, personally appearing to them, bade
them desist from those austerities and promised to grant boons unto every
one of them. And the adorable Brahma said, I am pleased with you, my
sons! Cease now from these austerities and ask boons of me! Whatever your
desires may be, they, with the single exception of that of immortality,
will be fulfilled! As thou hast offered thy heads to the fire from great
ambition, they will again adorn thy body as before, according to thy
desire. And thy body will not be disfigured and thou shall be able to
assume any form according to thy desire and become the conqueror of thy
foes in battle. There is no doubt of this!’ thereupon Ravana said, ‘May I
never experience defeat at the hands of Gandharvas, Celestials, Kinnaras,
Asuras, Yakshas, Rakshasas, Serpents and all other creatures!’ Brahma
said, ‘From those that hast named, thou shalt never have cause of fear;
except from men (thou shalt have no occasion for fear). Good betide thee!
So hath it been ordained by me!’

“Markandeya said, ‘Thus addressed, the Ten-headed (Ravana) was highly
gratified, for on account of his perverted understanding, the man-eating
one slightened human beings. Then the great Grandsire addressed
Kumbhakarna as before. His reason being clouded by darkness, he asked for
long-lasting sleep. Saying, ‘It shall be so’ ‘Brahma then addressed
Vibhishana, ‘O my son, I am much pleased with thee! Ask any boon thou
pleasest!’ Thereupon, Vibhishana replied, ‘Even in great danger, may I
never swerve from the path of righteousness, and though ignorant, may I,
O adorable Sire, be illumined with the light of divine knowledge!’ And
Brahma replied, ‘O scourge of thy enemies, as thy soul inclines not to
unrighteousness although born in the Rakshasa race, I grant thee
immortality!’

“Markandeya continued, ‘Having obtained this boon, the Ten-headed
Rakshasa defeated Kuvera in battle and obtained from him the sovereignty
of Lanka. That adorable Being, leaving Lanka and followed by Gandharvas,
Yakshas, Rakshas, and Kinnaras, went to live on mount Gandhamadana. And
Ravana forcibly took from him the celestial chariot Pushpaka. And upon
this Vaisravana cursed him, saying, ‘This chariot shall never carry thee;
it shall bear him who will slay thee in battle! And as thou hast insulted
me, thy elder brother, thou shalt soon die!’

“The pious Vibhishana, O King, treading in the path followed by the
virtuous and possessed of great glory, followed Kuvera. That adorable
Lord of wealth, highly pleased with his younger brothers, invested him
with the command of the Yaksha and Raksha hosts. On the other hand, the
powerful and man-eating Rakshasas and Pisachas, having assembled
together, invested the Ten-headed Ravana with their sovereignty. And
Ravana, capable of assuming any form at will and terrible in prowess, and
capable also of passing through the air, attacked the gods and the
Daityas and wrested from them all their valuable possessions. And as he
had terrified all creatures, he was called Ravana. And Ravana, capable of
mustering any measure of might inspired the very gods with terror.”


SECTION CCLXXIV

“Markandeya said, ‘Then the Brahmarshis, the Siddhas and the Devarshis,
with Havyavaha as their spokesman, sought the protection of Brahma. And
Agni said, ‘That powerful son of Visrava, the Ten-headed cannot be slain
on account of thy boon! Endued with great might he oppresseth in every
possible way the creatures of the earth. Protect us, therefore, O
adorable one! There is none else save thee to protect us!’

“Brahma said, ‘O Agni, he cannot be conquered in battle by either the
gods or the Asuras! I have already ordained that which is needful for
that purpose. Indeed his death is near! Urged by me, the four-headed God
hath already been incarnate for that object. Even Vishnu, that foremost
of smiters will achieve that object!’

“Markandeya continued, ‘Then the Grandsire also asked Sakra, in their
presence, ‘Be thou, with all the celestials, born on earth! And beget ye
on monkeys and bears, heroic sons possessed of great strength and capable
of assuming any form at will as allies of Vishnu!’ And at this, the gods,
the Gandharvas and the Danavas quickly assembled to take counsel as to
how they should be born on earth according to their respective parts. And
in their presence the boon-giving god commanded a Gandharvi, by name
Dundubhi saying, ‘Go there for accomplishing this object!’ And Dundubhi
hearing these words of the Grandsire was born in the world of men as the
hunchbacked Manthara. And all the principal celestials, with Sakra and
others begot offspring upon the wives of the foremost of monkeys and
bears. And those sons equalled their sires in strength and fame. And they
were capable of splitting mountain peaks and their weapons were stones
and trees of the Sala and the Tala species. And their bodies were hard as
adamant, and they were possessed of very great strength. And they were
all skilled in war and capable of mustering any measure of energy at
will. And they were equal to a thousand elephants in might, and they
resembled the wind in speed. And some of them lived wherever they liked,
while others lived in forests. And the adorable Creator of the Universe,
having ordained all this, instructed Manthara as to what she would have
to do. And Manthara quick as thought, understood all his words, and went
hither and thither ever engaged in fomenting quarrels.”


SECTION CCLXXV

“Yudhishthira said, ‘O adorable one, thou hast described to me in detail
the history of the birth of Rama and others. I wish to learn the cause of
their exile. Do thou, O Brahmana, relate why the sons of Dasaratha--the
brothers Rama and Lakshmana--went to the forest with famous princess of
Mithila.’

“Markandeya said, ‘The pious king Dasaratha, ever mindful of the old and
assiduous in religious ceremonies, was greatly pleased when these sons
were born. And his sons gradually grew up in might and they became
conversant with the Vedas together with all their mysteries, and with the
science of arms. And when after having gone through the Brahmacharyya
vows the princes were married, king Dasaratha became happy and highly
pleased. And the intelligent Rama, the eldest of them all, became the
favourite of his father, and greatly pleased the people with his charming
ways. And then, O Bharata, the wise king, considering himself old in
years took counsel with his virtuous ministers and spiritual adviser for
installing Rama as regent of the kingdom. And all those great ministers
were agreed that it was time to do so. And, O scion of Kuru’s race, king
Dasaratha was greatly pleased to behold his son,--that enhancer of
Kausalya’s delight--possessed of eyes that were red, and arms that were
sinewy. And his steps were like those of a wild elephant. And he had long
arms and high shoulders and black and curly hair. And he was valiant, and
glowing with splendour, and not inferior to Indra himself in battle. And
he was well-versed in holy writ and was equal to Vrihaspati in wisdom. An
object of love with all the people, he was skilled in every science. And
with senses under complete control, his very enemies were pleased to
behold him. And he was terror of the wicked and the protector of the
virtuous. And possessed of intelligence and incapable of being baffled,
he was victorious over all and never vanquished by any. And, O descendant
of Kurus, beholding his son--that enhancer of Kausalya’s joy--king
Dasaratha became highly pleased. And reflecting on Rama’s virtues, the
powerful and mighty king cheerfully addressed the family priest, saying,
‘Blessed be thou, O Brahmana! This night of the Pushya constellation will
bring in a very auspicious conjunction. Let, therefore, materials be
collected and let Rama also be invited. This Pushya constellation will
last till tomorrow. And Rama, therefore, should be invested by me and my
ministers as prince-regent of all my subjects!’

“Meanwhile Manthara (the maid of Kaikeyi), hearing these words of the
king, went to her mistress, and spoke unto her as was suited to the
occasion. And she said, ‘Thy great ill-luck, O Kaikeyi, hath this day
been proclaimed by the king! O unlucky one, mayst thou be bitten by a
fierce and enraged snake of virulent poison! Kausalya, indeed, is
fortunate, as it is her son that is going to be installed on the throne.
Where, indeed, is thy prosperity, when thy son obtaineth not the kingdom?’

“Hearing these words of her maid, the slender-waisted and beautiful
Kaikeyi put on all her ornaments, and sought her husband in a secluded
place. And with a joyous heart, and smiling pleasantly, she addressed
these words to him with all the blandishments of love, ‘O king, thou art
always true to thy promises. Thou didst promise before to grant me an
object of my desire. Do thou fulfil that promise now and save thyself
from the sin of unredeemed pledge!’ The king replied, saying, ‘I will
grant thee a boon. Ask thou whatever thou wishest! What man undeserving
of death shall be slain today and who that deserves death is to be set at
liberty? Upon whom shall I bestow wealth to-day, or whose wealth shall be
confiscated? Whatever wealth there is in this world, save what belongeth
to Brahmanas, is mine! I am the king of kings in this world, and the
protector of all the four classes! Tell me quickly, O blessed lady, what
that object is upon which thou hast set thy heart!’ Hearing these words
of the king, and tying him fast to his pledge, and conscious also of her
power over him, she addressed him in these words, ‘I desire that Bharata
be the recipient of that investiture which thou hast designed for Rama,
and let Rama go into exile living in the forest of Dandaka for fourteen
years as an ascetic with matted locks on head and robed in rags and
deer-skins!’ Hearing these disagreeable words of cruel import, the king,
O chief of the Bharata race, was sorely afflicted and became utterly
speechless! But the mighty and virtuous Rama, learning that his father
had been thus solicited, went into the forest so that the king’s truth
might remain inviolate. And, blessed be thou, he was followed by the
auspicious Lakshmana--that foremost of bowmen and his wife Sita, the
princess of Videha and daughter of Janaka. And after Rama had gone into
the forest, king Dasaratha took leave of his body, agreeably to the
eternal law of time. And knowing that Rama not near and that the king was
dead, queen Kaikeyi, causing Bharata to be brought before her, addressed
him in these words, ‘Dasaratha hath gone to heaven and both Rama and
Lakshmana are in the forest! Take thou this kingdom which is so extensive
and whose peace there is no rival to disturb’. Thereupon the virtuous
Bharata replied unto her saying, ‘Thou hast done a wicked deed, having
slain thy husband and exterminated this family from lust of wealth alone!
Heaping infamy on my head, O accursed woman of our race, thou hast, O
mother, attained this, thy object!’ And having said these words, the
prince wept aloud. And having proved his innocence before all the
subjects of that realm he set out in the wake of Rama, desiring to bring
him back. And placing Kausalya and Sumitra and Kaikeyi in the vehicles at
the van of his train, he proceeded with a heavy heart, in company with
Satrughna. And he was accompanied by Vasishtha and Vamadeva, and other
Brahmanas by thousands and by the people of the cities and the provinces,
desiring to bring back Rama. And he saw Rama with Lakshmana, living on
the mountains of Chitrakuta with bow in hand and decked with the
ornaments of ascetics. Bharata, however, was dismissed by Rama, who was
determined to act according to the words, of his father. And returning,
Bharata ruled at Nandigrama, keeping before him, his brother’s wooden
sandals. And Rama fearing a repetition of intrusion by the people of
Ayodhya, entered into the great forest towards the asylum of Sarabhanga.
And having paid his respects to Sarabhanga, he entered the forest of
Dandaka and took up his abode on the banks of beautiful river Godavari.
And while living there, Rama was inveigled into hostilities with Khara,
then dwelling in Janasthana, on account of Surpanakha. And for the
protection of the ascetics the virtuous scion of Raghu’s race slew
fourteen thousand Rakshasas on earth, and having slain those mighty
Rakshasas, Khara and Dushana, the wise descendant of Raghu once more made
that sacred forest free from danger.’

“And after these Rakshasas had been slain, Surpanakha with mutilated nose
and lips, repaired to Lanka--the abode of her brother (Ravana). And when
that Rakshasa woman, senseless with grief and with dry blood-stains on
her face, appeared before Ravana, she fell down at his feet. And
beholding her so horribly mutilated, Ravana became senseless with wrath
and grinding his teeth sprung up from his seat. And dismissing his
ministers, he enquired of her in private, saying, ‘Blessed sister, who
hath made thee so, forgetting and disregarding me? Who is he that having
got a sharp-pointed spear hath rubbed his body with it? Who is he that
sleepeth in happiness and security, after placing a fire close to his
head? Who is he that hath trodden upon a revengeful snake of virulent
poison? Who indeed, is that person who standeth with his hand thrust into
the mouth of the maned lion!’ Then flames of wrath burst forth from his
body, like those that are emitted at night from the hollows of a tree on
fire. His sister then related unto him the prowess of Rama and the defeat
of the Rakshasas with Khara and Dushana at their head. Informed of the
slaughter of his relatives, Ravana, impelled by Fate, remembered Maricha
for slaying Rama. And resolving upon the course he was to follow and
having made arrangements for the government of his capital, he consoled
his sister, and set out on an aerial voyage. And crossing the Trikuta and
the Kala mountains, he beheld the vast receptacle of deep waters--the
abode of the Makaras. Then crossing the Ocean, the Ten headed Ravana
reached Gokarna--the favourite resort of the illustrious god armed with
the trident. And there Ravana met with his old friend Maricha who, from
fear of Rama himself, had adopted an ascetic mode of life.’”


SECTION CCLXXVI

“Markandeya said, ‘Beholding Ravana come, Maricha received him with a
respectful welcome, and offered him fruits and roots. And after Ravana
had taken his seat, and rested himself a while, Maricha skilled in
speech, sat beside Ravana and addressed him who was himself as eloquent
in speech, saying, ‘Thy complexion hath assumed an unnatural hue; is it
all right with thy kingdom, O king of the Rakshasas? What hath brought
thee here? Do thy subjects continue to pay thee the same allegiance that
they used to pay thee before? What business hath brought thee here? Know
that it is already fulfilled, even if it be very difficult of fulfilment!
Ravana, whose heart was agitated with wrath and humiliation informed him
briefly of the acts of Rama and the measures that were to be taken.’ And
on hearing his story, Maricha briefly replied to him, saying, ‘Thou must
not provoke Rama, for I know his strength! Is there a person who is
capable of withstanding the impetus of his arrows? That great man hath
been the cause of my assuming my present ascetic life. What evil-minded
creature hath put thee up to this course calculated to bring ruin and
destruction on thee?’ To this Ravana indignantly replied, reproaching him
thus, ‘If thou dost not obey my orders, thou shall surely die at my
hands.’ Maricha then thought within himself, ‘When death is inevitable, I
shall do his biddings; for it is better to die at the hands of one that
is superior.’ Then he replied to the lord of the Rakshasas saying, ‘I
shall surely render thee whatever help I can!’ Then the Ten-headed Ravana
said unto him, ‘Go and tempt Sita, assuming the shape of a deer with
golden horns and a golden skin! When Sita will observe thee thus, she
will surely send away Rama to hunt thee. And then Sita will surely come
within my power, and I shall forcibly carry her away. And then that
wicked Rama will surely die of grief at the loss of his wife. Do thou
help me in this way!’

“Thus addressed, Maricha performed his obsequies (in anticipation) and
with a sorrowful heart, followed Ravana who was in advance of him. And
having reached the hermitage of Rama of difficult achievements, they both
did as arranged beforehand. And Ravana appeared in the guise of an
ascetic with head shaven, and adorned with a Kamandala, and a treble
staff. And Maricha appeared in the shape of a deer. And Maricha appeared
before the princess of Videha in that guise. And impelled by Fate, she
sent away Rama after that deer. And Rama, with the object of pleasing
her, quickly took up his bow, and leaving Lakshmana behind to protect
her, went in pursuit of that deer. And armed with his bow and quiver and
scimitar, and his fingers encased in gloves of Guana skin, Rama went in
pursuit of that deer, after the manner of Rudra following the stellar
deer[90] in days of yore. And that Rakshasa enticed away Rama to a great
distance by appearing before him at one time and disappearing from his
view at another. And when Rama at last knew who and what that deer was,
viz., that he was a Rakshasa, that illustrious descendant of Raghu’s race
took out an infallible arrow and slew that Rakshasa, in the disguise of a
deer. And struck with Rama’s arrow, the Rakshasa, imitating Rama’s voice,
cried out in great distress, calling upon Sita and Lakshmana. And when
the princess of Videha heard that cry of distress, she urged Lakshmana to
run towards the quarter from whence the cry came. Then Lakshmana said to
her, “Timid lady, thou hast no cause of fear! Who is so powerful as to be
able to smite Rama? O thou of sweet smiles, in a moment thou wilt behold
thy husband Rama!’ Thus addressed, the chaste Sita, from that timidity
which is natural to women, became suspicious of even the pure Lakshmana,
and began to weep aloud. And that chaste lady, devoted to her husband,
harshly reproved Lakshmana, saying, ‘The object which thou, O fool,
cherishest in thy heart, shall never be fulfilled! I would rather kill
myself with a weapon or throw myself from the top of a hill or enter into
a blazing fire than live with a sorry wretch like thee, forsaking my
husband Rama, like a tigress under the protection of a jackal!--

When the good natured Lakshmana, who was very fond of his brother, heard
these words, he shut his ears (with his hands) and set out on the track
that Rama had taken. And Lakshmana set out without casting a single
glance on that lady with lips soft and red like the Bimba fruit.
Meanwhile, the Rakshasa Ravana, wearing a genteel guise though wicked at
heart, and like unto fire enveloped in a heap of ashes, showed himself
there. And he appeared there in the disguise of a hermit, for forcibly
carrying away that lady of blameless character. The virtuous daughter of
Janaka, seeing him come, welcomed him with fruits and root and a seat.
Disregarding these and assuming his own proper shape, that bull among
Rakshasas began to re-assure the princess of Videha in these words, ‘I
am, O Sita, the king of the Rakshasas, known by the name of Ravana! My
delightful city, known by the name of Lanka is on the other side of the
great ocean! There among beautiful women, thou wilt shine with me! O lady
of beautiful lips, forsaking the ascetic Rama do thou become my wife!’
Janaka’s daughter of beautiful lips, hearing these and other words in the
same strain, shut her ears and replied unto him, saying, ‘Do not say so!
The vault of heaven with all its stars may fall down, the Earth itself
may be broken into fragments, fire itself may change its nature by
becoming cool, yet I cannot forsake the descendant of Raghu! How can a
she-elephant, who hath lived with the mighty leader of a herd with rent
temples forsake him and live with a hog? Having once tasted the sweet
wine prepared from honey or flowers, how can a woman, I fancy, relish the
wretched arrak from rice?’ Having uttered those words, she entered the
cottage, her lips trembling in wrath and her arms moving to and fro in
emotion. Ravana, however, followed her thither and intercepted her
further progress. And rudely scolded by the Rakshasa, she swooned away.
But Ravana seized her by the hair of her head, and rose up into the air.
Then a huge vulture of the name of Jatayu living on a mountain peak,
beheld that helpless lady thus weeping and calling upon Rama in great
distress while being carried away by Ravana.”


SECTION CCLXXVII

“Markandeya said, ‘That heroic king of the vultures, Jatayu, having
Sampati for his uterine brother and Arjuna himself for his father, was a
friend of Dasaratha. And beholding his daughter-in-law Sita on the lap of
Ravana, that ranger of the skies rushed in wrath against the king of the
Rakshasas. And the vulture addressed Ravana, saying, ‘Leave the princess
of Mithila, leave her I say! How canst thou, O Rakshasa, ravish her when
I am alive? If thou dost not release my daughter-in-law, thou shalt not
escape from me with life!’ And having said these words Jatayu began to
tear the king of the Rakshasas with his talons. And he mangled him in a
hundred different parts of his body by striking him with his wings and
beaks. And blood began to flow as copiously from Ravana’s body as water
from a mountain spring. And attacked thus by that vulture desirous of
Rama’s good, Ravana, taking up a sword, cut off the two wings of that
bird. And having slain that king of the vultures, huge as a mountain-peak
shooting forth above the clouds, the Rakshasa rose high in the air with
Sita on his lap. And the princess of Videha, wherever she saw an asylum
of ascetics, a lake, a river, or a tank, threw down an ornament of hers.
And beholding on the top of a mountain five foremost of monkeys, that
intelligent lady threw down amongst them a broad piece of her costly
attire. And that beautiful and yellow piece of cloth fell, fluttering
through the air, amongst those five foremost of monkeys like lightning
from the clouds. And that Rakshasa soon passed a great way through the
firmament like a bird through the air. And soon the Rakshasa beheld his
delightful and charming city of many gates, surrounded on all sides by
high walls and built by Viswakrit himself. And the king of the Rakshasa
then entered his own city known by the name of Lanka, accompanied by
Sita.’

“And while Sita was being carried away, the intelligent Rama, having
slain the great deer, retraced his steps and saw his brother Lakshmana
(on the way). And beholding his brother, Rama reproved him, saying, ‘How
couldst thou come hither, leaving the princess of Videha in a forest that
is haunted by the Rakshasa?’ And reflecting on his own enticement to a
great distance by that Rakshasa in the guise of a deer and on the arrival
of his brother (leaving Sita alone in the asylum), Rama was filled with
agony. And quickly advancing towards Lakshmana while reproving him still,
Rama asked him, ‘O Lakshmana, is the princess of Videha still alive? I
fear she is no more!’ Then Lakshmana told him everything about what Sita
had said, especially that unbecoming language of hers subsequently. With
a burning heart Rama then ran towards the asylum. And on the way he
beheld a vulture huge as a mountain, lying in agonies of death. And
suspecting him to be a Rakshasa, the descendant of the Kakutstha race,
along with Lakshmana rushed towards him, drawing with great force his bow
to a circle. The mighty vulture, however, addressing them both, said,
‘Blessed be ye, I am the king of the vultures, and friend of Dasaratha!’
Hearing these words of his, both Rama and his brother put aside their
excellent bow and said, ‘Who is this one that speaketh the name of our
father in these woods?’ And then they saw that creature to be a bird
destitute of two wings, and that bird then told them of his own overthrow
at the hands of Ravana for the sake of Sita. Then Rama enquired of the
vulture as to the way Ravana had taken. The vulture answered him by a nod
of his head and then breathed his last. And having understood from the
sign the vulture had made that Ravana had gone towards the south, Rama
reverencing his father’s friend, caused his funeral obsequies to be duly
performed. Then those chastisers of foes, Rama and Lakshmana, filled with
grief at the abduction of the princess of Videha, took a southern path
through the Dandaka woods beholding along their way many uninhabited
asylums of ascetics, scattered over with seats of Kusa grass and
umbrellas of leaves and broken water-pots, and abounding with hundreds of
jackals. And in that great forest, Rama along with Sumatra’s son beheld
many herds of deer running in all directions. And they heard a loud
uproar of various creatures like what is heard during a fast spreading
forest conflagration. And soon they beheld a headless Rakshasa of
terrible mien. And that Rakshasa was dark as the clouds and huge as a
mountain, with shoulders broad as those of a Sola tree, and with arms
that were gigantic. And he had a pair of large eyes on his breast, and
the opening of his mouth was placed on his capacious belly. And that
Rakshasa seized Lakshmana by the hand, without any difficulty. And seized
by the Rakshasa the son of Sumitra, O Bharata, became utterly confounded
and helpless. And casting his glances on Rama, that headless Rakshasa
began to draw Lakshmana towards that part of his body where his mouth
was. And Lakshmana in grief addressed Rama, saying, ‘Behold my plight!
The loss of thy kingdom, and then the death of our father, and then the
abduction of Sita, and finally this disaster that hath overwhelmed me!
Alas, I shall not behold thee return with the princess of Videha to
Kosala and seated on thy ancestral throne as the ruler of the entire
Earth! They only that are fortunate will behold thy face, like unto the
moon emerged from the clouds, after thy coronation bath in water
sanctified with Kusa grass and fried paddy and black peas!’ And the
intelligent Lakshmana uttered those and other lamentations in the same
strain. The illustrious descendant, however, of Kakutstha’s race
undaunted amid danger, replied unto Lakshmana, saying, ‘Do not, O tiger
among men, give way to grief! What is this thing when I am here? Cut thou
off his right arm and I shall cut off his left.’ And while Rama was still
speaking so, the left arm of the monster was severed by him, cut off with
a sharp scimitar, as if indeed, that arm were a stalk of the Tila corn.
The mighty son of Sumitra then beholding his brother standing before him
struck off with his sword the right arm also of that Rakshasa. And
Lakshmana also began to repeatedly strike Rakshasa under the ribs, and
then that huge headless monster fell upon the ground and expired quickly.
And then there came out from the Rakshasa’s body a person of celestial
make. And he showed himself to the brothers, staying for a moment in the
skies, like the Sun in his effulgence in the firmament. And Rama skilled
in speech, asked him, saying, ‘Who art thou? Answer me who enquire of
thee? Whence could such a thing happen? All this seems to me to be
exceedingly wonderful!’ Thus addressed by Rama, that being replied unto
him, saying, ‘I am, O prince, a Gandharva of the name of Viswavasu! It
was through the curse of a Brahmana that I had to assume the form and
nature of a Rakshasa. As to thyself, O Rama, Sita hath been carried away
with violence by king Ravana who dwelleth in Lanka. Repair thou unto
Sugriva who will give thee his friendship. There, near enough to the peak
of Rishyamuka is the lake known by the name of Pampa of sacred water and
cranes. There dwelleth, with four of his counsellors, Sugriva, the
brother of the monkey-king Vali decked with a garland of gold. Repairing
unto him, inform of thy cause of sorrow. In plight very much like thy
own, he will render thee assistance. This is all that we can say. Thou
wilt, without doubt, see the daughter of Janaka! Without doubt Ravana and
others are known to the king of the monkeys!’ Having said these words,
that celestial being of great effulgence made himself invisible, and
those heroes, both Rama and Lakshmana, wondered much.”


SECTION CCLXXVIII

“Markandeya said, ‘Afflicted with grief at the abduction of Sita, Rama
had not to go much further before he came upon Pampa--that lake which
abounded with lotuses of various kinds. And fanned by the cool, delicious
and fragrant breezes in those woods, Rama suddenly remembered his dear
spouse. And, O mighty monarch, thinking of that dear wife of his, and
afflicted at the thought of his separation from her, Rama gave way to
lamentations. The son of Sumitra then addressed him saying, ‘O thou that
givest proper respect to those that deserve it, despondency such as this
should not be suffered to approach thee, like illness that can never
touch an old man leading a regular life! Thou hast obtained information
of Ravana and of the princess of Videha! Liberate her now with exertion
and intelligence! Let us now approach Sugriva, that foremost of monkeys,
who is even now on the mountain top! Console thyself, when I, thy
disciple and slave and ally, am near!’ And addressed by Lakshmana in
these and other words of the same import, Rama regained his own nature
and attended to the business before him. And bathing in the waters of
Pampa and offering oblations therewith unto their ancestors, both those
heroic brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, set out (for Rishyamuka). And
arriving at Rishyamuka which abounded with fruits and roots and trees,
those heroes beheld five monkeys on the top of the mountain-peak. And
seeing them approach, Sugriva sent his counsellor the intelligent
Hanuman, huge as the Himavat-mountains, to receive them. And the
brothers, having first exchanged words with Hanuman, approached Sugriva.
And then, O king, Rama made friends with Sugriva. And when Rama informed
Sugriva of the object he had in view, Sugriva showed him the piece of
cloth that Sita had dropped among the monkeys, while being carried away
by Ravana. And having obtained from him those credentials, Rama himself
installed Sugriva--that foremost of monkeys--in sovereignty of all the
monkeys of Earth. And Rama also pledged himself to slay Vali in battle.
And having come to that understanding and placing the fullest confidence
in each other, they all repaired to Kiskindhya, desirous of battle (with
Vali). And arriving at Kiskindhya, Sugriva sent forth a loud roar deep as
that of a cataract. Unable to bear that challenge, Vali was for coming
out (but his wife) Tara stood in way, saying, ‘Himself endued with great
strength, the way in which Sugriva is roaring, showeth, I ween, that he
hath found assistance! It behoveth thee not, therefore, to go out! Thus
addressed by her, that king of the monkeys, the eloquent Vali, decked in
a golden garland replied unto Tara of face beautiful as the moon, saying,
‘Thou understandest the voice of every creature. Tell me after reflection
whose help it is that this brother in name only of mine hath obtained!’
Thus addressed by him Tara endued with wisdom and possessed of the
effulgence of the moon, answered her lord after a moment’s reflection,
saying, ‘Listen, O monarch of the monkeys! That foremost of bowmen,
endued with great might, Rama the son of Dasaratha, whose spouse hath
been ravished, hath made an alliance offensive and defensive with
Sugriva! And his brother the intelligent Lakshmana also of mighty arms,
the unvanquished son of Sumitra, standeth beside him for the success of
Sugriva’s object. And Mainda and Dwivida, and Hanuman the son of Pavana,
and Jamvuman, the king of the bears, are beside Sugriva as his
counsellors. All these illustrious ones are endued with great strength
and intelligence. And these all, depending upon the might and energy of
Rama, are prepared for thy destruction!’ Hearing these words of hers that
were for his benefit, the king of the monkeys disregarded them
altogether. And filled with jealousy, he also suspected her to have set
her heart on Sugriva! And addressing Tara in harsh words, he went out of
his cave and coming before Sugriva who was staying by the side of the
mountains of Malyavat, he spoke unto him thus, ‘Frequently vanquished
before by me, fond as thou art of life, thou art allowed by me to escape
with life owing to thy relationship with me! What hath made thee wish for
death so soon?’ Thus addressed by Vali, Sugriva, that slayer of foes, as
if addressing Rama himself for informing him of what had happened,
replied unto his brother in these words of grave import, ‘O king, robbed
by thee of my wife and my kingdom also, what need have I of life? Know
that it is for this that I have come!’ Then addressing each other in
these and other words of the same import, Vali and Sugriva rushed to the
encounter, fighting with Sala and Tala trees and stones. And they struck
each other down on the earth. And leaping high into the air, they struck
each other with their fists. And mangled by each other’s nail and teeth,
both of them were covered with blood. And the two heroes shone on that
account like a pair of blossoming Kinshukas. And as they fought with each
other, no difference (in aspect) could be observed so as to distinguish
them. Then Hanuman placed on Sugriva’s neck a garland of flowers. And
that hero thereupon shone with that garland on his neck, like the
beautiful and huge peak of Malya with its cloudy belt. And Rama,
recognising Sugriva by that sign, then drew his foremost of huge bows,
aiming at Vali as his mark. And the twang of Rama’s bow resembled the
roar of an engine. And Vali, pierced in the heart by that arrow, trembled
in fear. And Vali, his heart having been pierced through, began to vomit
forth blood. And he then beheld standing before him Rama with Sumatra’s
son by his side. And reproving that descendant of Kakutstha’s race, Vali
fell down on the ground and became senseless. And Tara then beheld that
lord of hers possessed of the effulgence of the Moon, lying prostrate on
the bare earth. And after Vali had been thus slain, Sugriva regained
possession of Kishkindhya, and along with it, of the widowed Tara also of
face beautiful as the moon. And the intelligent Rama also dwelt on the
beautiful breast of the Malyavat hill for four months, duly worshipped by
Sugriva all the while.

“Meanwhile Ravana excited by lust, having reached his city of Lanka,
placed Sita in an abode, resembling Nandana itself, within a forest of
Asokas, that looked like an asylum of ascetics. And the large-eyed Sita
passed her days there in distress, living on fruits and roots, practising
ascetic austerities with fasts, attired in ascetic garb, and waning thin
day by day, thinking of her absent lord. And the king of the Rakshasas
appointed many Rakshasa women armed with bearded darts and swords and
lances and battle-axes and maces and flaming brands, for guarding her.
And some of these had two eyes, and some three. And some had eyes on
their foreheads. And some had long tongues and some had none. And some
had three breasts and some had only one leg. And some had three matted
braids on their heads, and some had only one eye. And these, and others
of blazing eyes and hair stiff as the camel’s, stood beside Sita
surrounding her day and night most watchfully. And those Pisacha women of
frightful voice and terrible aspect always addressed that large-eyed lady
in the harshest tones. And they said, ‘Let us eat her up, let us mangle
her, let us tear her into pieces, her, that is, that dwelleth here
disregarding our lord!’ And filled with grief at the separation from her
lord, Sita drew a deep sigh and answered those Rakshasa women, saying,
‘Reverend ladies, eat me up without delay! I have no desire to live
without that husband of mine, of eyes like lotus-leaves and locks wavy,
and blue in hue! Truly I will, without food and without the least love of
life, emaciate my limbs, like a she-snake (hibernating) within a Tala
tree. Know this for certain that I will never seek the protection of any
other person than the descendant of Raghu. And knowing this, do what ye
think fit!’ And hearing these words of hers, those Rakshasas with
dissonant voice went to the king of the Rakshasas, for representing unto
him all she had said. And when those Rakshasas had gone away, one of
their number known by the name of Trijata, who was virtuous and agreeable
in speech, began to console the princess of Videha. And she said,
‘Listen, O Sita! I will tell thee something! O friend, believe in what I
say! O thou of fair hips, cast off thy fears, and listen to what I say.
There is an intelligent and old chief of the Rakshasas known by the name
of Avindhya. He always seeketh Rama’s good and hath told me these words
for thy sake! ‘Reassuring and cheering her, tell Sita in my name, saying:
‘Thy husband the mighty Rama is well and is waited upon by Lakshmana. And
the blessed descendant of Raghu hath already made friends with Sugriva,
the king of the monkeys, and is ready to act for thee! And, O timid lady,
entertain thou no fear on account of Ravana, who is censured by the whole
world, for, O daughter, thou art safe from him on account of Nalakuvera’s
curse. Indeed, this wretch had been cursed before for his having violated
his daughter-in-law, Rambha. This lustful wretch is not able to violate
any woman by force. Thy husband will soon come, protected by Sugriva and
with the intelligent son of Sumitra in his train, and will soon take thee
away hence! O lady, I have had a most terrible dream of evil omen,
indicating the destruction of this wicked-minded wretch of Pulastya’s
race! This night wanderer of mean deeds is, indeed, most wicked and
cruel. He inspireth terror in all by the defects of his nature and the
wickedness of his conduct. And deprived of his senses by Fate, he
challengeth the very gods. In my vision I have seen every indication of
his downfall. I have seen the Ten-headed, with his crown shaven and body
besmeared with oil, sunk in mire, and the next moment dancing on a
chariot drawn by mules. I have seen Kumbhakarna and others, perfectly
naked and with crowns shaven, decked with red wreaths and unguents, and
running towards the southern direction. Vibhishana alone, with umbrella
over his head, and graced with a turban, and with body decked with white
wreaths and unguents, I beheld ascending the summit of the White hill.
And I saw four of his counsellors also, decked with white wreaths and
unguents, ascending the summit of that hill along with him. All this
bodeth that these alone will be saved from the impending terror. The
whole earth with its oceans and seas will be enveloped with Rama’s
arrows. O lady, thy husband will fill the whole earth with his fame. I
also saw Lakshmana, consuming all directions (with his arrows) and
ascending on a heap of bones and drinking thereon honey and rice boiled
in milk. And thou, O lady, hast been beheld by me running towards a
northernly direction, weeping and covered with blood and protected by a
tiger! And, O princess of Videha, soon wilt thou find happiness, being
united, O Sita, with thy lord, that descendant of Raghu accompanied by
his brother!’ Hearing these words of Trijata, that girl with eyes like
those of a young gazelle, once more began to entertain hopes of a union
with her lord. And when at last those fierce and cruel Pisacha guards
came back, they saw her sitting with Trijata as before.”


SECTION CCLXXIX

“Markandeya said, ‘And while the chaste Sita was dwelling there afflicted
with melancholy and grief on account of her lord, attired in mean garb,
with but a single jewel (on the marital thread on her wrist), and
incessantly weeping, seated on a stone, and waited upon by Rakshasa
women, Ravana, afflicted by the shafts of the god of desire, came to her
and approached her presence. And inflamed by desire, that conquerer in
battle of the gods, the Danavas, the Gandharvas, the Yakshas, and the
Kimpurushas, attired in celestial robes and possessing handsome features,
decked with jewelled earrings and wearing a beautiful garland and crown,
entered the Asoka woods, like an embodiment of the vernal season. And
dressed with care, Ravana looked like the Kalpa tree in Indra’s garden.
But though adorned with every embellishment, that inspired her only with
awe, like a beautified banian in the midst of a cemetery. And that night
wanderer, having approached the presence of that slender-waisted lady,
looked like the planet Saturn in the presence of Rohini. And smitten with
the shafts of the god of the flowery emblem he accosted that fair-hipped
lady then affrighted like a helpless doe, and told her these words, ‘Thou
hast, O Sita, shown thy regard for thy lord too much! O thou of delicate
limbs, be merciful unto me. Let thy person be embellished now (by these
maids in waiting). O excellent lady, accept me as thy lord! And, O thou
of the most beautiful complexion, attired in costly robes and ornaments,
take thou the first place among all the women of my household. Many are
the daughters of the celestials and also the Gandharvas that I possess! I
am lord also of many Danava and Daitya ladies! One hundred and forty
millions of Pisachas, twice as many man-eating Rakshasa of terrible deed,
and thrice as many Yaksha do my bidding! Some of these are under the sway
of my brother who is the lord of all treasures. In my drinking hall, O
excellent lady of beautiful thighs, Gandharvas and Apsaras wait on me as
they do on my brother! I am, again, the son of that regenerate Rishi
Visravas himself of high ascetic merit. I am renowned, again, as the
fifth Regent of the Universe! And, O beautiful lady, of food and edibles
and drinks of the very best kind, I have as much as the Lord himself of
the celestials! Let all thy troubles consequent on a life in the woods
cease! O thou of fair hips, be my Queen, as Mandodari herself!’ Thus
addressed by him, the beautiful princess of Videha, turning away and
regarding him as something less than a straw, replied unto that wanderer
of the night. And at that time the princess of Videha, that girl of
beautiful hips, had her deep and compact bosom copiously drenched by her
inauspicious tears shed ceaselessly. And she who regarded her husband as
her god, answered that mean wretch, saying, ‘By sheer ill-luck it is, O
king of the Rakshasas, that I am obliged to hear such words of grievous
import spoken by thee! Blessed be thou, O Rakshasa fond of sensual
pleasures, let thy heart be withdrawn from me! I am the wife of another,
ever devoted to my husband, and, therefore, incapable of being possessed
by thee! A helpless human being that I am, I cannot be a fit wife for
thee! What joy can be thine by using violence towards an unwilling woman?
Thy father is a wise Brahmana, born of Brahma and equal unto that Lord
himself of the creation! Why dost thou not, therefore, thyself being
equal to a Regent of the Universe, observe virtue? Disgracing thy
brother, that king of the Yakshas, that adorable one who is the friend of
Maheswara himself, that lord of treasures, how is it that thou feelest no
shame?’ Having said these words, Sita began to weep, her bosom shivering
in agitation, and covering her neck and face with her garments. And the
long and well-knit braid, black and glossy, falling from the head of the
weeping lady, looked like a black snake. And hearing these cruel words
uttered by Sita, the foolish Ravana, although thus rejected, addressed
Sita once more, saying, ‘O lady, let the god having the Makara for his
emblem burn me sorely. I will, however, on no account, O thou of sweet
smiles and beautiful hips, approach thee, as thou art unwilling! What can
I do to thee that still feelest a regard for Rama who is only a human
being and, therefore, our food?’ Having said those words unto that lady
of faultless features, the king of the Rakshasa made himself invisible
then and there and went away to the place he liked. And Sita, surrounded
by those Rakshasa women, and treated with tenderness by Trijata,
continued to dwell there in grief.”


SECTION CCLXXX

“Markandeya said, ‘Meanwhile the illustrious descendant of Raghu, along
with his brother, hospitably treated by Sugriva, continued to dwell on
the breast of the Malyavat hill, beholding every day the clear blue sky.
And one night, while gazing from the mountain-top on the bright moon in
the cloudless sky surrounded by planets and stars and stellar bodies,
that slayer of foes was suddenly awakened (to a remembrance of Sita) by
the cold breezes fragrant with the perfumes of the lily, lotus and other
flowers of the same species. And virtuous Rama, dejected in spirits at
the thought of Sita’s captivity in the abode of the Rakshasa, addressed
the heroic Lakshmana in the morning saying, ‘Go, Lakshmana and seek in
Kishkindhya that ungrateful king off the monkeys, who understand well his
own interest and is even now indulging in dissipations, that foolish
wretch of his race whom I have installed on a throne and to whom all apes
and monkeys and bears owe allegiance, that fellow for whose sake, O
mighty-armed perpetuator of Raghu’s race, Vali was slain by me with thy
help in the wood of Kishkindhya! I regard that worst of monkeys on earth
to be highly ungrateful, for, O Lakshmana, that wretch hath now forgotten
me who am sunk in such distress! I think he is unwilling to fulfil his
pledge, disregarding, from dullness of understanding, one who hath done
him such services! If thou findest him lukewarm and rolling in sensual
joys, thou must then send him, by the path Vali hath been made to follow,
to the common goal of all creatures! If, on the other hand, thou seest
that foremost of monkeys delight in our cause, then, O descendant of
Kakutstha, shouldst thou bring him hither with thee! Be quick, and delay
not!’ Thus addressed by his brother, Lakshmana ever attentive to the
behests and welfare of his superiors, set out taking with him his
handsome bow with string and arrows. And reaching the gates of
Kishkindhya he entered the city unchallenged. And knowing him to be
angry, the monkey-king advanced to receive him. And with his wife,
Sugriva the king of the monkeys, with a humble heart, joyfully received
him with due honours. And the dauntless son of Sumitra then told him what
Rama had said. And having heard everything in detail, O mighty monarch,
Sugriva, the king of the monkeys with his wife and servants, joined his
hands, and cheerfully said unto Lakshmana, that elephant among men, these
words: ‘I am, O Lakshmana, neither wicked, nor ungrateful, nor destitute
of virtue! Hear what efforts I have made for finding out Sita’s place of
captivity! I have despatched diligent monkeys in all directions. All of
them have stipulated to return within a month. They will, O hero, search
the whole earth with her forests and hills and seas, her villages and
towns and cities and mines. Only five nights are wanting to complete that
month, and then thou wilt, with Rama, hear tidings of great joy!’

“Thus addressed by that intelligent king of the monkeys, the high-souled
Lakshmana became appeased, and he in his turn worshipped Sugriva. And
accompanied by Sugriva, he returned to Rama on the breast of the Malyavat
hill. And approaching him, Lakshmana informed him of the beginning
already made in respect of his undertaking. And soon thousands of
monkey-chiefs began to return, after having carefully searched the three
quarters of the earth, viz., the North, the East and the West. But they
that had gone towards the South did not make their appearance And they
that came back represented to Rama, saying that although they had
searched the whole earth with her belt of seas, yet they could not find
either the princess of Videha or Ravana. But that descendant of
Kakutstha’s race, afflicted at heart, managed to live yet, resting his
hopes (of hearing Sita’s tidings) on the great monkeys that had gone
towards the South.

“After the lapse of two months, several monkeys seeking with haste the
presence of Sugriva, addressed him, saying, ‘O king, that foremost of
monkeys, the son of Pavana, as also Angada, the son of Vali, and the
other great monkeys whom thou hadst despatched to search the southern
region, have come back and are pillaging that great and excellent orchard
called Madhuvana, which was always guarded by Vali and which hath been
well-guarded by thee also after him!’ Hearing of this act of liberty on
their part, Sugriva inferred the success of their mission, for it is only
servants that have been crowned with success that can act in this way.
And that intelligent and foremost of monkeys communicated his suspicions
to Rama. And Rama also, from this, guessed that the princess of Mithila
had been seen. Then Hanuman and the other monkeys, having refreshed
themselves thus, came towards their king, who was then staying with Rama
and Lakshmana. And, O Bharata, observing the gait of Hanuman and the
colour of his face, Rama was confirmed in the belief that Hanuman had
really seen Sita. Then those successful monkeys with Hanuman at their
head, duly bowed unto Rama and Lakshmana and Sugriva. And Rama then
taking up his bow and quiver, addressed those monkeys, saying, ‘Have you
been successful? Will ye impart life unto me? Will ye once more enable me
to reign in Ayodhya after having slain my enemy in battle and rescued the
daughter of Janaka? With the princess of Videha unrescued, and the foe
unslain in battle, I dare not live, robbed of wife and honour!’ Thus
addressed by Rama, the son of Pavana, replied unto him, saying, ‘I bring
thee good news, O Rama; for Janaka’s daughter hath been seen by me.
Having searched the southern region with all its hills, forests, and
mines for some time, we became very weary. At length we beheld a great
cavern. And having beheld it, we entered that cavern which extended over
many Yojanas. It was dark and deep and overgrown with trees and infested
by worms. And having gone a great way through it, we came upon sun-shine
and beheld a beautiful palace. It was, O Raghava, the abode of the Daitya
Maya. And there we beheld a female ascetic named Prabhavati engaged in
ascetic austerities. And she gave us food and drink of various kinds. And
having refreshed ourselves therewith and regained our strength, we
proceeded along the way shown by her. At last we came out of the cavern
and beheld the briny sea, and on its shores, the Sahya, the Malaya and
the great Dardura mountains. And ascending the mountains of Malaya, we
beheld before us the vast ocean.[91] And beholding it we felt sorely
grieved in mind. And dejected in spirits and afflicted with pain and
famishing with hunger, we despaired of returning with our lives. Casting
our eyes on the great ocean extending over many hundreds of Yojanas and
abounding in whales and alligators and other aquatic animals, we became
anxious and filled with grief. We then sat together, resolved to die
there of starvation. And in course of conversation we happened to talk of
the vulture Jatayu. Just then we saw a bird huge as a mountain, of
frightful form, and inspiring terror into every heart, like a second son
of Vinata.[92] And coming upon us unawares for devouring us, he said,
‘Who are ye that are speaking thus of my brother Jatayu? I am his elder
brother, by name Sampati, and am the king of birds. Once upon a time, we
two, with the desire of outstripping each other, flew towards the sun. My
wings got burnt, but those of Jatayu were not. That was the last time I
saw my beloved brother Jatayu, the king of vultures! My wings burnt, I
fell down upon the top of this great mountain where I still am!’ When he
finished speaking, we informed him of the death of his brother in a few
words and also of this calamity that hath befallen thee! And, O king, the
powerful Sampati heating this unpleasant news from us, was greatly
afflicted and again enquired of us, saying, ‘Who is this Rama and why was
Sita carried off and how was Jatayu slain? Ye foremost of monkeys I wish
to hear everything in detail!’ We then informed him of everything about
this calamity of thine and of the reason also of our vow of starvation.
That king of birds then urged us (to give up our vow) by these words of
his: ‘Ravana is, indeed, known to me. Lanka is his capital. I beheld it
on the other side of the sea in a valley of the Trikuta hills! Sita must
be there. I have little doubt of this!’ Hearing these words of his, we
rose up quickly and began, O chastiser of foes, to take counsel of one
another for crossing the ocean! And when none dared to cross it, I,
having recourse to my father, crossed the great ocean which is a hundred
Yojanas in width. And having slain the Rakshasis on the waters, I saw the
chaste Sita within Ravana’s harem, observing ascetic austerities, eager
to behold her lord, with matted locks on head, and body besmeared with
filth, and lean, and melancholy and helpless. Recognising her as Sita by
those unusual signs, and approaching that worshipful lady while alone, I
said, ‘I am, O Sita, an emissary of Rama and monkey begotten by
Pavana![93] Desirous of having a sight of thee, hither have I come
travelling through the skies! Protected by Sugriva, that monarch of all
the monkeys, the royal brothers Rama and Lakshmana are in peace! And
Rama, O lady, with Sumitra’s son, hath enquired of thy welfare! And
Sugriva also, on account of his friendship (with Rama and Lakshmana)
enquireth of thy welfare. Followed by all the monkeys, thy husband will
soon be here. Confide in me, O adorable lady, I am a monkey and not a
Rakshasa!’ Thus addressed by me, Sita seemed to meditate for a moment and
then replied to me, saying, ‘From the words of Avindhya I know that thou
art Hanuman! O mighty-armed one, Avindhya is an old and respected
Rakshasa! He told me that Sugriva is surrounded by counsellors like thee.
Thou mayst depart now!’ And with these words she gave me this jewel as a
credential. And, indeed, it was by means of this jewel that the faultless
Sita had been able to support her existence. And the daughter of Janaka
further told me as a token from her, that by thee, O tiger among men, a
blade of grass (inspired with Mantras and thus converted into a fatal
weapon) had once been shot at a crow while ye were on the breast of the
mighty hill known by the name of Chitrakuta! And this she said as
evidence of my having met her and hers being really the princess of
Videha. I then caused myself to be seized by Ravana’s soldiers, and then
set fire to the city of Lanka!’”


SECTION CCLXXXI

“Markandeya said, ‘It was on the breast of that very hill where Rama was
seated with those foremost of monkeys that great monkey chiefs at the
command of Sugriva, began to flock together. The father-in-law of Vali,
the illustrious Sushena, accompanied by a thousand crores of active apes,
came to Rama. And those two foremost of monkeys endued with mighty
energy, viz., Gaya and Gavakshya, each accompanied by a hundred crores of
monkeys, showed themselves there. And, O king, Gavakshya also of terrible
mien and endued with a bovine tail, showed himself there, having
collected sixty thousand crores of monkeys. And the renowned
Gandhamadana, dwelling on the mountains of the same name, collected a
hundred thousand crores of monkeys. And the intelligent and mighty monkey
known by the name of Panasa mustered together fifty-two crores of
monkeys.[94] And that foremost and illustrious of monkeys named
Dadhimukha of mighty energy mustered a large army of monkeys possessed of
terrible prowess. And Jamvuvan showed himself there with a hundred
thousand crores of black bears of terrible deeds and faces having the
Tilaka mark.[95] And these and many other chiefs of monkey-chiefs,
countless in number, O king, came there for aiding Rama’s cause. And
endued with bodies huge as mountain-peaks and roaring like lions, loud
was the uproar that was heard there made by those monkeys running
restlessly from place to place. And some of them looked like
mountain-peaks, and some looked like buffaloes. And some were of the hue
of autumnal clouds and the faces of some were red as vermillion. And some
rose high, and some fell down, and some cut capers, and some scattered
the dust, as they mustered together from various directions. And that
monkey army, vast as the sea at full tide, encamped there at Sugriva’s
bidding. And after those foremost of monkeys had mustered from every
direction, the illustrious descendant of Raghu, with Sugriva by his side,
set out in an auspicious moment of a very fair day under a lucky
constellation, accompanied by that host arrayed in order of battle, as if
for the purpose of destroying all the worlds. And Hanuman, the son of the
Wind-god, was in the van of that host, while the rear was protected by
the fearless son of Sumitra. And surrounded by the monkey-chiefs, those
princes of Raghu’s house with fingers cased in guana skin, shone, as they
went, like the Sun and the Moon in the midst of the planets. And that
monkey host armed with stones and Sala and Tala trees, looked very much
like a far-extending field of corn under the morning sun. And that mighty
army, protected by Nala and Nila and Angada and Kratha and Mainda and
Dwivida, marched forth for achieving the purpose of Raghava. And
encamping successively, without interruption of any kind, on wide and
healthy tracts and valleys abounding with fruits and roots and water and
honey and meat, the monkey host at last reached the shores of the briny
sea. And like unto a second ocean, that mighty army with its countless
colours, having reached the shores of sea, took up its abode there. Then
the illustrious son of Dasaratha, addressing Sugriva amongst all those
foremost monkeys, spoke unto him these words that were suited to the
occasion, ‘This army is large. The ocean also is difficult to cross. What
contrivance, therefore, commends itself to thee for crossing the ocean?’
At these words, many vain-glorious monkeys answered, ‘We are fully able
to cross the sea.’ This answer, however, was not of much use, as all
could not avail of that means. Some of the monkeys proposed to cross the
sea in boats, and some in rafts of various kinds. Rama, however,
conciliating them all, said, ‘This cannot be. ‘The sea here is a full
hundred Yojanas in width. All the monkeys, ye heroes, will not be able to
cross it. This proposal, therefore, that ye have made, is not consonant
to reason. Besides we have not the number of boats necessary for carrying
all our troops. How, again, can one like us raise such obstacles in the
way of the merchants? Our army is very large. The foe wilt make a great
havoc if a hole is detected. Therefore, to cross the sea in boats and
rafts doth not recommend itself to me. I will, however, pray to the Ocean
for the necessary means. Foregoing food, I will lie down on the shore. He
will certainly show himself to me. If, however, he doth not show himself,
I will chastise him then by means of my great weapons that are more
blazing than fire itself and are incapable of being baffled!’ Having said
these words, both Rama and Lakshmana touched water[96] and duly laid
themselves down on a bed of kusa grass on the seashore. The divine and
illustrious Ocean then that lord of male and female rivers, surrounded by
aquatic animals, appeared unto Rama in a vision. And addressing Rama in
sweet accents, the genius of the Ocean, surrounded by countless mines of
gems, said, ‘O son of Kausalya, tell me what aid, O bull among men, I am
to render thee! I also have sprung from the race of Ikshwaku[97] and am,
therefore, a relative of thine!’ Rama replied unto him, saying, ‘O lord
of rivers, male and female, I desire thee to grant me a way for my
troops, passing along which I may slay the Ten-headed (Ravana), that
wretch of Pulastya’s race! If thou dost not grant the way I beg of thee,
I will then dry thee up by means of my celestial arrows inspired with
mantras!’ And hearing these words of Rama, the genius of Varuna’s abode,
joining his hands, answered in great affliction, ‘I do not desire to put
any obstacle in thy way. I am no foe of thine! Listen, O Rama, to these
words, and having listened, do what is proper! If, at thy command, I get
a way for the passage of thy army, others then, from strength of their
bows, will command me to do the same! In thy army there is a monkey of
the name of Nala, who is a skilful mechanic. And endued with great
strength, Nala is the son of Tashtri, the divine artificer of the
Universe. And whether it is wood, or grass or stone, that he will throw
into my waters, I will support the same on my surface, and thus wilt thou
have a bridge (over which to pass)!’ And having said these words, the
genius of the Ocean disappeared. And Rama awaking, called Nala unto him
and said, ‘Build thou a bridge over the sea! Thou alone, I am sure, art
able to do it!’ And it was by this means that the descendant of
Kakutstha’s race caused a bridge to be built that was ten Yojanas in
width and a hundred Yojanas in length. And to this day that bridge is
celebrated over all the world by the name of Nala’s bridge. And having
completed that bridge, Nala, of body huge as a hill, came away at the
command of Rama.

“And while Rama was on this side of the ocean, the virtuous Vibhishana,
the brother of the king of the Rakshasas accompanied by four of his
counsellors, came unto Rama. And the high-souled Rama received him with
due welcome. Sugriva, however, feared, thinking he might be a spy. The
son of Raghu, meanwhile perfectly satisfied (with Vibhishana) in
consequence of the sincerity of his exertions and the many indications of
his good conduct, worshipped him with respect. And he also installed
Vibhishana in the sovereignty of all the Rakshasas and made him his own
junior counsellor, and a friend of Lakshmana’s. And it was under
Vibhishana’s guidance, O king, that Rama with all his troops crossed the
great ocean by means of that bridge in course of a month. And having
crossed the ocean and arrived at Lanka, Rama caused its extensive and
numerous gardens to be devastated by his monkeys. And while Rama’s troops
were there, two of Ravana’s counsellors and officers, named Suka and
Sarana, who had come as spies, having assumed the shape of monkeys, were
seized by Vibhishana. And when those wanderers of the night assumed their
real Rakshasa forms, Rama showed them his troop and dismissed them
quietly. And having quartered his troops in those woods that skirted the
city, Rama then sent the monkey Angada with great wisdom as his envoy to
Ravana.”


SECTION CCLXXXII

“Markandeya said, ‘Having quartered his army in those groves abounding
with food and water and with fruits and roots, the descendant of
Kakutstha began to watch over them with care. Ravana, on the other hand,
planted in his city many appliances constructed according to the rules of
military science. And his city, naturally impregnable on account of its
strong ramparts and gate-ways, had seven trenches, that were deep and
full of water to the brim and that abounded with fishes and sharks and
alligators, made more impregnable still by means of pointed stakes of
Khadira wood. And the ramparts, heaped with stones, were made impregnable
by means of catapults. And the warriors (who guarded the walls) were
armed with earthen pots filled with venomous snakes, and with resinous
powders of many kinds. And they were also armed with clubs, and
fire-brands and arrows and lances and swords and battle-axes. And they
had also Sataghnis[98] and stout maces steeped in wax.[99] And at all the
gates of the city were planted movable and immovable encampments manned
by large numbers of infantry supported by countless elephants and horses.
And Angada, having reached one of the gates of the city, was made known
to the Rakshasas. And he entered the town without suspicion or fear. And
surrounded by countless Rakshasas, that hero in his beauty looked like
the Sun himself in the midst of masses of clouds. And having approached
the hero of Pulastya’s race in the midst of his counsellors, the eloquent
Angada saluted the king and began to deliver Rama’s message in these
words, ‘That descendant of Raghu, O king, who ruleth at Kosala and whose
renown hath spread over the whole world, sayeth unto thee these words
suited to the occasion. Accept thou that message and act according to it!
Provinces and towns, in consequence of their connection with sinful kings
incapable of controlling their souls, are themselves polluted and
destroyed. By the violent abduction of Sita, thou alone hast injured me!
Thou, however, wilt become the cause of death to many unoffending
persons. Possessed of power and filled with pride, thou hast, before
this, slain many Rishis living in the woods, and insulted the very gods.
Thou hast slain also many great kings and many weeping women. For those
transgressions of thine, retribution is about to overtake thee! I will
slay thee with thy counsellors. Fight and show thy courage![100] O
wanderer of the night, behold the power of my bow, although I am but a
man! Release Sita, the daughter of Janaka! If thou dost not release her,
I shall make the Earth divested of all Rakshasas with my keen-edged
arrows!’ Hearing these defiant words of the enemy, king Ravana bore them
ill, becoming senseless with wrath. And thereupon four Rakshasas skilled
in reading every sign of their master, seized Angada like four hawks
seizing a tiger. With those Rakshasas, however, holding him fast by his
limbs, Angada leaped upwards and alighted on the palace terrace. And as
he leaped up with a great force, those wanderers of the night fell down
the earth, and bruised by the violence of the fall, had their ribs
broken. And from the golden terrace on which he had alighted, he took a
downward leap. And overleaping the walls of Lanka, he alighted to where
his comrades were. And approaching the presence of the lord of Kosala and
informing him of everything, the monkey Angada endued with great energy
retired to refresh himself, dismissed with due respect by Rama.

The descendant of Raghu then caused the ramparts of Lanka to be broken
down by a united attack of all those monkeys endued with the speed of the
wind. Then Lakshmana, with Vibhishana and the king of the bears marching
in the van, blew up the southern gate of the city that was almost
impregnable. Rama then attacked Lanka with a hundred thousand crores of
monkeys, all possessed of great skill in battle, and endued with reddish
complexions like those of young camels. And those crores of greyish bears
with long arms, and legs and huge paws, and generally supporting
themselves on their broad haunches, were also urged on to support the
attack. And in consequence of those monkeys leaping up and leaping down
and leaping in transverse directions, the Sun himself, his bright disc
completely shaded, became invisible for the dust they raised. And the
citizens of Lanka beheld the wall of their town assume all over a tawny
hue, covered by monkeys of complexions yellow as the ears of paddy, and
grey as Shirisha flowers, and red as the rising Sun, and white as flax or
hemp. And the Rakshasas, O king, with their wives and elders, were struck
with wonders at that sight. And the monkey warriors began to pull down
pillars made of precious stones and the terraces and tops of palatial
mansions. And breaking into fragments the propellers of catapults and
other engines, they began to cast them about in all directions. And
taking up the Sataghnis along with the discs, the clubs, and stones, they
threw them down into the city with great force and loud noise. And
attacked thus by the monkeys, those Rakshasas that had been placed on the
walls to guard them, fled precipitately by hundreds and thousands.

“Then hundreds of thousands of Rakshasas, of terrible mien, and capable
of assuming any form at will, came out at the command of the king. And
pouring a perfect shower of arrows and driving the denizens of the
forest, those warriors, displaying great prowess, adorned the ramparts.
And soon those wanderers of the night, looking like masses of flesh, and
of terrible mien, forced the monkeys to leave the walls. And mangled by
the enemies’ lances, numerous monkey-chiefs fell down from the ramparts,
and crushed by the falling columns and gate-ways, numerous Rakshasas also
fell down to rise no more. And the monkeys and the brave Rakshasas that
commenced to eat up the foe, struggled, seizing one another by the hair,
and mangling and tearing one another with their nails and teeth. And the
monkeys and the Rakshasas roared and yelled frightfully, and while many
of both parties were slain and fell down to rise no more, neither side
gave up the contest. And Rama continued all the while to shower a thick
downpour of arrows like the very clouds. And the arrows he shot,
enveloping Lanka, killed large numbers of Rakshasas. And the son of
Sumitra, too, that mighty bowman incapable of being fatigued in battle,
naming particular Rakshasas stationed on the ramparts, slew them with his
clothyard shafts. And then the monkey host, having achieved success was
withdrawn at the command of Rama, after it had thus pulled down the
fortifications of Lanka and made all objects within the city capable of
being aimed at by the besieging force.”


SECTION CCLXXXIII

“Markandeya said, ‘And while those troops (thus withdrawn) were reposing
themselves in their quarters, many little Rakshasas and Pisachas owning
Ravana as their leader, penetrated amongst them. And among these were
Parvana, Patana, Jambha, Khara, Krodha-vasa, Hari, Praruja, Aruja and
Praghasa, and others. And as these wicked ones were penetrating (the
monkey host) in their invisible forms, Vibhishana, who had the knowledge
thereof, broke the spell of their invisibility. And once seen, O king, by
the powerful and long-leaping monkeys, they were all slain and prostrated
on the earth, deprived of life. And unable to endure this, Ravana marched
out at the head of his troops. And surrounded by his terrible army of
Rakshasas and Pisachas, Ravana who was conversant with the rules of
warfare like a second Usanas invested the monkey host, having disposed
his troops in that array which is named after Usanas himself. And
beholding Ravana advancing with his army disposed in that array, Rama,
following the mode recommended by Vrihaspati, disposed his troops in
counter array for opposing that wanderer of the night. And coming up
quickly, Ravana began to fight with Rama. And Lakshmana singled out
Indrajit, and Sugriva singled out Virupakshya, and Nikharvata fought with
Tara, and Nala with Tunda, and Patusa with Panasa. And each warrior,
advancing up to him whom he regarded as his match, began to fight with
him on that field of battle, relying on the strength of his own arms, and
that encounter, so frightful to timid persons, soon became terrible and
fierce like that between the gods and the Asuras in the days of old. And
Ravana covered Rama with a shower of darts and lances and swords, and
Rama also afflicted Ravana with his whetted arrows of iron furnished with
the sharpest points, and in the same way Lakshmana smote the contending
Indrajit with arrows capable of penetrating into the most vital parts and
Indrajit also smote Sumitra’s son with an arrowy shower. And Vibhishana
showered upon Prahasta and Prahasta showered upon Vibhishana, without any
regard for each other a thick downpour of winged arrows furnished with
the sharpest points. And thus between those mighty warriors there came
about an encounter of celestial weapons of great force, at which the
three worlds with their mobile and immobile creatures were sorely
distressed.”


SECTION CCLXXXIV

“Markandeya said, “Then Prahasta, suddenly advancing up to Vibhishana and
uttering a loud yell, struck him with his mace. But though struck with
that mace of terrible force, the mighty-armed Vibhishana of great wisdom,
without wavering in the least, stood still as the mountains of Himavat.
Then Vibhishana, taking up a huge and mighty javelin furnished with a
hundred bells, inspired it with mantras and hurled it at the head of his
adversary. And by the impetuosity of that weapon rushing with the force
of the thunderbolt, Prahasta’s head was severed off, and he thereupon
looked like a mighty tree broken by the wind. And beholding that wanderer
of the night, Prahasta, thus slain in battle, Dhumraksha rushed with
great impetuosity against the monkey-host. And beholding the soldiers of
Dhumraksha, looking like the clouds and endued with terrible mien,
advancing up towards them, the monkey-chief suddenly broke and fled. And
seeing those foremost of monkeys suddenly give way, that tiger among
monkeys, Hanuman, the son of Pavana, began to advance. And beholding the
son of Pavana staying still on the field of battle, the retreating
monkeys, O king, one and all quickly rallied. Then mighty and great and
fearful was the uproar that arose there in consequence of the warriors of
Rama and Ravana rushing against each other. And in that battle which
raged terribly the field soon became miry with blood. And Dhumraksha
afflicted the monkey-host with volleys of winged shafts. Then that
vanquisher of foes, Hanuman, the son of Pavana, quickly seized that
advancing leader of the Rakshasa. And the encounter that took place
between that monkey and the Rakshasa hero, is desirous of defeating the
other, was fierce and terrible, like that of Indra and Prahlada (in days
of yore). And the Rakshasa struck the monkey with his maces and spiked
clubs while the monkey struck the Rakshasa with trunks of trees unshorn
of their branches. Then Hanuman, the son of Pavana, slew in great wrath
that Rakshasa along with his charioteer and horses and broke his chariot
also into pieces. And beholding Dhumraksha, that foremost of Rakshasa,
thus slain, the monkeys, abandoning all fear, rushed against the Rakshasa
army with great valour. And slaughtered in large numbers by the
victorious and powerful monkeys, the Rakshasas became dispirited and fled
in fear to Lanka. And the surviving wreck of the Rakshasa army, having
reached the city, informed king Ravana of everything that had happened.
And hearing from them that Prahasta and that mighty archer Dhumraksha,
had both, with their armies, been slain by the powerful monkeys, Ravana
drew a deep sigh and springing up from his excellent seat, said,--the
time is come for Kumbhakarna to act.--And having said this, he awake, by
means of various loud-sounding instruments, his brother Kumbhakarna from
his deep and prolonged slumbers. And having awaked him with great
efforts, the Rakshasa king, still afflicted with anxiety, addressed the
mighty Kumbhakarna and said unto him when seated at his ease on his bed,
having perfectly recovered consciousness and self-possession, these
words, ‘Thou, indeed, art happy, O Kumbhakarna, that canst enjoy profound
and undisturbed repose, unconscious of the terrible calamity that hath
overtaken us! Rama with his monkey host hath crossed the Ocean by a
bridge and disregarding us all is waging a terrible war (against us). I
have stealthily brought away his wife Sita, the daughter of Janaka. and
it is to recover her that he hath come hither, after having made a bridge
over the great Ocean. Our great kinsmen also, Prahasta and others, have
already been slain by him. And, O scourge of thy enemies, there is not
another person, save thee, that can slay Rama! Therefore, O warrior,
putting on thy armour, do thou set out this day for the purpose of
vanquishing Rama and his followers! The two younger brothers of Dushana,
viz., Vajravega and Promathin, will join thee with their forces!’ And
having said this unto the mighty Kumbhakarna. the Rakshasa king gave
instructions to Vajravega and Promathin as to what they should do. And
accepting his advice, those two warlike brothers of Dushana quickly
marched out of the city, preceded by Kumbhakarna.”


SECTION CCLXXXV

“Markandeya said, “Then Kumbhakarna set out from the city, accompanied by
his followers. And soon he beheld the victorious monkey troops encamped
before him. And passing them by with the object of seeking out Rama, he
beheld the son of Sumitra standing at his post, bow in hand. Then the
monkey warriors, speedily advancing towards him, surrounded him on all
sides. And then they commenced to strike him with numberless large trees.
And many amongst them fearlessly began to tear his body with their nails.
And those monkeys began to fight with him in various ways approved by the
laws of warfare. And they soon overwhelmed that chief of the Rakshasas
with a shower of terrible weapons of various kinds. And attacked by them
thus, Kumbhakarna only laughed at them and began to eat them up. And he
devoured those foremost of monkeys known by the name of Chala, and
Chandachala, and Vajravahu. And beholding that fearful act of the
Rakshasa, other monkeys were frightened and set forth a loud wail of
fear. And hearing the screams of those monkey-leaders, Sugriva boldly
advanced towards Kumbhakarna. And that high-souled king of the monkeys
swiftly approaching the Rakshasa, violently struck him on the head with
the trunk of a Sala tree. And though the high-souled Sugriva always
prompt in action broke that Sala tree on the head of Kumbhakarna, he
failed to make any impression on that Rakshasa. And then, as if roused
from his torpor by that blow, Kumbhakarna stretching forth his arms
seized Sugriva by main force. And beholding Sugriva dragged away by the
Rakshasa, the heroic son of Sumitra, that delighter of his friends,
rushed towards Kumbhakarna. And that slayer of hostile heroes, Lakshmana,
advancing towards Kumbhakarna, discharged at him an impetuous and mighty
arrow furnished with golden wings. And that arrow, cutting through his
coat of mail and penetrating into his body, passed through it outright
and struck into the earth, stained with the Rakshasa’s blood. Kumbhakarna
then, having his breast thus bored through, released the king of monkeys.
And taking up a huge mass of stone as his weapon, the mighty warrior
Kumbhakarna then rushed towards the son of Sumitra, aiming it at him. And
as the Rakshasa rushed towards him, Lakshmana cut off his upraised arms
by means of a couple of keen-edged shafts furnished with heads resembling
razors. But as soon as the two arms of the Rakshasa were thus cut off,
double that number of arms soon appeared on his person. Sumitra’s son,
however, displaying his skill in weapon, soon by means of similar arrows
cut off those arms also, each of which had seized a mass of stone. At
this, that Rakshasa assumed a form enormously huge and furnished with
numerous heads and legs and arms. Then the son of Sumitra rived, with a
Brahma weapon, that warrior looking like an assemblage of hill. And rent
by means of that celestial weapon, that Rakshasa fell on the field of
battle like a huge tree with spreading branches suddenly consumed by
heaven’s thunderbolt. And beholding Kumbhakarna endued with great
activity and resembling the Asura Vritra himself, deprived of life and
prostrated on the field of battle, the Rakshasa warriors fled in fear.
And beholding the Rakshasa warriors running away from the field of
battle, the younger brother of Dushana, rallying them, rushed in great
wrath upon the son of Sumitra. Sumitra’s son, however, with a loud roar,
received with his winged shafts both those wrathful warriors, Vajravega
and Promathin, rushing towards him. The battle then, O son of Pritha,
that took place between those two younger brothers of Dushana on the one
hand and the intelligent Lakshmana on the other, was exceedingly furious
and made the bristles of the spectators stand on end. And Lakshmana
overwhelmed the two Rakshasas with a perfect shower of arrows. And those
two Rakshasa heroes, on the other hand, both of them excited with fury,
covered Lakshmana with an arrowy hail. And that terrible encounter
between Vajravega and Promathin and the mighty-armed Lakshmana lasted for
a short while. And Hanumana, the son of Pavana, taking up a mountain
peak, rushed towards one of the brothers, and with that weapon took the
life of the Rakshasa Vajravega. And that mighty monkey, Nala, also, with
a large mass of rock, crushed Promathin, that other younger brother of
Dushana. The deadly struggle, however, between the soldiers of Rama and
Ravana, rushing against one another, instead of coming to an end even
after this, raged on as before. And hundreds of Rakshasas were slain by
the denizens of the forest, while many of the latter were slain by the
former. The loss, however, in killed, of the Rakshasas was far greater
than that of the monkeys.


SECTION CCLXXXVI

“Markandeya said, ‘Learning that Kumbhakarna had with his followers,
fallen in battle as also that great warrior Prahasta, and Dhumraksha too
of mighty energy, Ravana then addressed his heroic son Indrajit saying,
‘O slayer of foes, slay thou in battle Rama and Sugriva and Lakshmana. My
good son, it was by thee that this blazing fame of mine had been acquired
by vanquishing in battle that wielder of the thunderbolt, the
thousand-eyed Lord of Sachi! Having the power of appearing and vanishing
at thy will, slay thou, O smiter of foes, my enemies by means, O thou
foremost of all wielders of weapons, of thy celestial arrows received as
boons (from the gods)! Rama and Lakshmana and Sugriva are incapable of
enduring the bare touch of thy weapons. What shall I say, therefore, of
their followers? That cessation of hostilities which could not be brought
about by either Prahasta or Kumbhakarna in battle, be it thine, O
mighty-armed one, to bring about! Slaying my enemies with all their army
by means of thy keen-edged shafts, enhance my joy to-day, O son, as thou
didst once before by vanquishing Vasava!’ Thus addressed by him. Indrajit
said--So be it,--and encased in mail he quickly ascended his chariot, and
proceeded, O king, towards the field of battle. And then that bull
amongst Rakshasas loudly announcing his own name, challenged Lakshmana
endued with auspicious marks, to a single combat. And Lakshmana, thus
challenged, rushed towards that Rakshasa, with his bow and arrows, and
striking terror into his adversary’s heart by means of the flapping of
his bow-string on the leathern case of his left hand. And the encounter
that took place between those warriors that defied each other’s prowess
and each of whom was desirous of vanquishing the other, and both of whom
were conversant with celestial weapons, was terrible in the extreme. But
when the son of Ravana found that he could not by his arrows gain any
advantage over his adversary, that foremost of mighty warriors mustered
all his energy. And Indrajit then began to hurl at Lakshmana with great
force numberless javelins. The son of Sumitra, however, cut them into
fragments by means of his own keen-edged arrows. And those javelins, thus
cut into pieces by the keen-edged arrows of Lakshmana, dropped down upon
the ground. Then the handsome Angada, the son of Vali, taking up a large
tree, rushed impetuously at Indrajit and struck him with it on the head.
Undaunted at this, Indrajit of mighty energy sought to smite Angada with
a lance. Just at that juncture, however, Lakshmana cut into pieces the
lance taken up by Ravana’s son. The son of Ravana then took up a mace and
struck on the left flank that foremost of monkeys, the heroic Angada who
was then staying close beside him. Angada, the powerful son of Vali,
little recking that stroke, hurled at Indrajit a mighty Sal stem. And
hurled in wrath by Angada for the destruction of Indrajit, that tree, O
son of Pritha, destroyed Indrajit’s chariot along with his horses and
charioteer. And thereupon jumping from his horseless and driverless car,
the son of Ravana disappeared from sight, O king, by aid of his powers of
illusion. And beholding that Rakshasa, abundantly endued with powers of
illusion, disappear so suddenly, Rama proceeded towards that spot and
began to protect his troops with care. Indrajit, however, with arrows,
obtained as boons from the gods, began to pierce both Rama and mighty
Lakshmana in every part of their bodies. Then the heroic Rama and
Lakshmana both continued to contend with their arrows against Ravana’s
son who had made himself invisible by his powers of illusion. But
Indrajit continued to shower in wrath all over those lions among men his
keen-edged shafts by hundreds and thousands. And seeking that invisible
warrior who was ceaselessly showering his arrows, the monkeys penetrated
into every part of the firmament, armed with huge masses of stone. Them
as well as the two brothers, however, the invisible Rakshasa began to
afflict with his shafts. Indeed, the son of Ravana, concealing himself by
his powers of illusion, furiously attacked the monkey host. And the
heroic brothers Rama and Lakshmana, pierced all over with arrows, dropped
down on the ground like the Sun and the Moon fallen down from the
firmament.’”


SECTION CCLXXXVII

“Markandeya said, ‘Beholding both the brothers Rama and Lakshmana
prostrate on the ground, the son of Ravana tied them in a net-work of
those arrows of his which he had obtained as boons. And tied by Indrajit
on the field of battle by means of that arrowy net, those heroic tigers
among men resembled a couple of hawks immured in a cage. And beholding
those heroes prostrate on the ground pierced with hundreds of arrows,
Sugriva with all the monkeys stood surrounding them on all sides. And the
king of the monkeys stood there, accompanied by Sushena and Mainda and
Dwivida, and Kumuda and Angada and Hanuman and Nila and Tara and Nala.
And Vibhishana, having achieved success in another part of the field,
soon arrived at that spot, and roused those heroes from insensibility,
awakening them by means of the weapon called, Prajna.[101] Then Sugriva
soon extracted the arrows from their bodies. And by means of that most
efficacious medicine called the Visalya[102], applied with celestial
mantras, those human heroes regained their consciousness. And the arrow
having been extracted from their bodies, those mighty warriors in a
moment rose from their recumbent posture, their pains and fatigue
thoroughly alleviated. And beholding Rama the descendant of Ikshwaku’s
race, quite at his ease, Vibhishana, O son of Pritha, joining his hands;
told him these words, ‘O chastiser of foes, at the command of the king of
the Guhyakas, a Guhyaka hath come from the White mountains, bringing with
him his water![103] O great king, this water is a present to thee from
Kuvera, so that all creatures that are invisible may, O chastiser of
foes, become visible to thee! This water laved over the eyes will make
every invisible creature visible to thee, as also to any other person to
whom thou mayst give it!’--Saying--So be it,--Rama took that sacred
water, and sanctified his own eyes therewith. And the high-minded
Lakshmana also did the same. And Sugriva and Jambuvan, and Hanuman and
Angada, and Mainda and Dwivida, and Nila and many other foremost of the
monkeys, laved their eyes with that water. And thereupon it exactly
happened as Vibhishana had said, for, O Yudhishthira, soon did the eyes
of all these became capable of beholding things that could not be seen by
the unassisted eye!

“Meanwhile, Indrajit, after the success he had won, went to his father.
And having informed him of the feats he had achieved, he speedily
returned to the field of battle and placed himself at the van of his
army. The son of Sumitra then, under Vibhishana’s guidance, rushed
towards that wrathful son of Ravana coming back, from desire of battle,
to lead the attack. And Lakshmana, excited to fury and receiving a hint
from Vibhishana, and desiring to slay Indrajit who had not completed his
daily sacrifice, smote with his arrows that warrior burning to achieve
success. And desirous of vanquishing each other, the encounter that took
place between them was exceedingly wonderful like that (in days of yore)
between the Lord of celestials and Prahrada. And Indrajit pierced the son
of Sumitra with arrows penetrating into his very vitals. And the son of
Sumitra also pierced Ravana’s son with arrows of fiery energy. And
pierced with Lakshmana’s arrows, the son of Ravana became senseless with
wrath. And he shot at Lakshmana eight shafts fierce as venomous snakes.
Listen now, O Yudhishthira, as I tell thee how the heroic son of Sumitra
then took his adversary’s life by means of three winged arrows possessed
of the energy and effulgence of fire! With one of these, he severed from
Indrajit’s body that arm of his enemy which had grasped the bow. With the
second he caused that other arm which had held the arrows, to drop down
on the ground. With the third that was bright and possessed of the
keenest edge, he cut off his head decked with a beautiful nose and bright
with ear-rings. And shorn of arms and head, the trunk became fearful to
behold. And having slain the foe thus, that foremost of mighty men then
slew with his arrows the charioteer of his adversary. And the horses then
dragged away the empty chariot into the city. And Ravana then beheld that
car without his son on it. And hearing that his son had been slain,
Ravana suffered his heart to be overpowered with grief. And under the
influence of extreme grief and affliction, the king of the Rakshasas
suddenly cherished the desire of killing the princess of Mithila. And
seizing a sword, the wicked Rakshasa hastily ran towards that lady
staying within the Asoka wood longing to behold her lord. Then Avindhya
beholding that sinful purpose of the wicked wretch, appeased his fury.
Listen, O Yudhishthira, to the reasons urged by Avindhya! That wise
Rakshasa said, ‘Placed as thou art on the blazing throne of an empire, it
behoveth thee not to slay a woman! Besides, this woman is already slain,
considering that she is a captive in thy power! I think, she would not be
slain if only her body were destroyed. Slay thou her husband! He being
slain, she will be slain too! Indeed, not even he of an hundred
sacrifices (Indra) is thy equal in prowess! The gods with Indra at their
head, had repeatedly been affrighted by thee in battle!’ With these and
many other words of the same import, Avindhya succeeded in appeasing
Ravana. And the latter did, indeed, listen to his counsellor’s speech.
And that wanderer of the night, then, resolved to give battle himself
sheathed his sword, and issued orders for preparing his chariot.’”


SECTION CCLXXXVIII

“Markandeya said, The Ten-necked (Ravana), excited to fury at the death
of his beloved son, ascended his car decked with gold and gems. And
surrounded by terrible Rakshasas with various kinds of weapons in their
hands, Ravana rushed towards Rama, fighting with numerous monkey-chief.
And beholding him rushing in wrath towards the monkey army, Mainda and
Nila and Nala and Angada, and Hanuman and Jamvuman, surrounded him with
all their troops. And those foremost of monkeys and bears began to
exterminate with trunks of trees, the soldiers of the Ten-necked
(Ravana), in his every sight. And beholding the enemy slaughtering his
troops, the Rakshasa king, Ravana, possessed of great powers of illusion,
began to put them forth. And forth from his body began to spring hundreds
and thousands of Rakshasas armed with arrows and lances and double-edged
swords in hand. Rama, however, with a celestial weapon slew all those
Rakshasas. The king of the Rakshasas then once more put forth his prowess
of illusion. The Ten-faced, producing from his body numerous warriors
resembling, O Bharata, both Rama and Lakshmana, rushed towards the two
brothers. And then those Rakshasas, hostile to Rama and Lakshmana and
armed with bows and arrows, rushed towards Rama, and beholding that power
of illusion put forth by the king of Rakshasas, that descendant of
Ikshwaku’s race, the son of Sumitra, addressed Rama in these heroic
words, ‘Slay those Rakshasas, those wretches with forms like thy own!’
And Rama, thereupon slew those and other Rakshasas of forms resembling
his own. And that time Matali, the charioteer of Indra, approached Rama
on the field of battle, with a car effulgent as the Sun and unto which
were yoked horses of a tawny hue. And Matali said, ‘O son of Kakutstha’s
race, this excellent and victorious car, unto which have been yoked this
pair of tawny horses, belonging to the Lord of celestials! It is on this
excellent car, O tiger among men, that Indra hath slain in battle
hundreds of Daityas and Danavas! Therefore, O tiger among men, do thou,
riding on the car driven by me, quickly slay Ravana in battle! Do not
delay in achieving this!’ Thus addressed by him, the descendant of
Raghu’s race, however, doubted the truthful words of Matali, thinking
this is another illusion produced by the Rakshasas--Vibhishana then
addressed him saying, ‘This, O tiger among men, is no illusion of the
wicked Ravana! Ascend thou this chariot quickly, for this, O thou of
great effulgence, belongeth to Indra!’ The descendant of Kakutstha then
cheerfully said unto Vibhishana, ‘So be it’, and riding on that car,
rushed wrathfully upon Ravana. And when Ravana, too, rushed against his
antagonist, a loud wail of woe was set up by the creatures of the Earth,
while the celestials in heaven sent forth a leonine roar accompanied by
beating of large drums. The encounter then that took place between the
Ten-necked Rakshasa and that prince of Raghu’s race, was fierce in the
extreme. Indeed, that combat between them hath no parallel elsewhere. And
Rakshasa hurled at Rama a terrible javelin looking like Indra’s
thunderbolt and resembling a Brahmana’s curse on the point of
utterance.[104] Rama, however, quickly cut into fragments that javelin by
means of his sharp arrows. And beholding that most difficult feat, Ravana
was struck with fear. But soon his wrath was excited and the Ten-necked
hero began to shower on Rama whetted arrows by thousands and tens of
thousands and countless weapons of various kinds, such as rockets and
javelins and maces and battle-axes and darts of various kinds and
Shataghnis and whetted shafts. And beholding that terrible form of
illusion displayed by the Ten-necked Rakshasa, the monkeys fled in fear
in all directions. Then the descendant of Kakutstha, taking out of his
quiver an excellent arrow furnished with handsome wings and golden
feathers and a bright and beautiful head, fixed it on the bow with
Brahmastra mantra. And beholding that excellent arrow transformed by
Rama, with proper mantras into a Brahma weapon, the celestials and the
Gandharvas with Indra at their head, began to rejoice. And the gods and
the Danavas and the Kinnaras were led by the display of that Brahma
weapon to regard the life of their Rakshasa foe almost closed. Then Rama
shot that terrible weapon of unrivalled energy, destined to compass
Ravana’s death, and resembling the curse of a Brahmana on the point of
utterance. And as soon, O Bharata, as that arrow was shot by Rama from
his bow drawn to a circle, the Rakshasa king with his chariot and
charioteer and horses blazed up, surrounded on all sides by a terrific
fire. And beholding Ravana slain by Rama of famous achievements, the
celestials, with the Gandharvas and the Charanas, rejoiced exceedingly.
And deprived of universal dominion by the energy of the Brahma weapon,
the five elements forsook the illustrious Ravana. And were consumed by
the Brahma weapon, the physical ingredients of Ravana’s body. His flesh
and blood were all reduced to nothingness,--so that the ashes even could
not be seen.’”


SECTION CCLXXXIX

“Markandeya said, ‘Having slain Ravana, that wretched king of the
Rakshasas and foe of the celestials, Rama with his friends and Sumitra’s
son rejoiced exceedingly. And after the Ten-necked (Rakshasa) hath been
slain, the celestials with the Rishis at their head, worshipped Rama of
mighty arms, blessing and uttering the word Jaya repeatedly. And all the
celestials and the Gandharvas and the denizens of the celestial regions
gratified Rama of eyes like lotus leaves, with hymns and flowery showers.
And having duly worshipped Rama, they all went away to those regions
whence they had come. And, O thou of unfading glory, the firmament at
that time looked as if a great festival was being celebrated.

“And having slain the Ten-necked Rakshasa, the lord Rama of worldwide
fame, that conqueror of hostile cities, bestowed Lanka on Vibhishana.
Then that old and wise counsellor (of Ravana) known by the name of
Avindhya, with Sita walking before him but behind Vibhishana who was at
the front, came out of the city. And with great humility Avindhya said
unto the illustrious descendant of Kakutstha, ‘O illustrious one, accept
thou this goddess, Janaka’s daughter of excellent conduct!’ Hearing these
words, the descendant of Ikshwaku’s race alighted from his excellent
chariot and beheld Sita bathed in tears. And beholding that beautiful
lady seated within her vehicle, afflicted with grief, besmeared with
filth, with matted locks on head, and attired in dirty robes, Rama,
afraid of the loss of his honour, said unto her, ‘Daughter of Videha, go
withersover thou likest! Thou art now free! What should have been done by
me, hath been done! O blessed lady, owning me for thy husband, it is not
meet that thou shouldst grow old in the abode of the Rakshasa! It is for
this I have slain that wanderer of the night! But how can one like us,
acquainted with every truth of morality embrace even for a moment a woman
that had fallen into other’s hands? O princess of Mithila whether thou
art chaste or unchaste, I dare not enjoy thee, now that thou art like
sacrificial butter lapped by a dog!’ Hearing these cruel words, that
adorable girl suddenly fell down in great affliction of heart, like a
plantain tree severed from its roots. And the colour that was suffusing
her face in consequence of the joy she had felt, quickly disappeared,
like watery particles on a mirror blown thereon by the breath of the
mouth. And hearing these words of Rama, all the monkeys also with
Lakshmana became still as dead. Then the divine and pure-souled Brahma of
four faces, that Creator of the Universe himself sprung from a lotus,
showed himself on his car to Raghu’s son. And Sakra and Agni and Vayu,
and Yama and Varuna and the illustrious Lord of the Yakshas, and the holy
Rishis, and king Dasaratha also in a celestial and effulgent form and on
car drawn by swans, showed themselves. And then the firmament crowded
with celestials and Gandharvas became as beautiful as the autumnal welkin
spangled with stars. And rising up from the ground, the blessed and
famous princess of Videha, in the midst of those present spoke unto Rama
of wide chest, these words, ‘O prince, I impute no fault to thee, for
thou art well acquainted with the behaviour that one should adopt towards
both men and women. But hear thou these words of mine! The ever-moving
Air is always present within every creature. If I have sinned, let him
forsake my vital forces! If I have sinned, Oh, then let Fire, and Water,
and Space, and Earth, like Air (whom I have already invoked), also
forsake my vital forces! And as, O hero, I have never, even in my dreams,
cherished the image of any other person, so be thou my lord as appointed
by the gods.’ After Sita had spoken, a sacred voice, resounding through
the whole of that region, was heard in the skies, gladdening the hearts
of the high-souled monkeys. And the Wind-god was heard to say, O son of
Raghu, what Sita hath said is true! I am the god of Wind. The princess of
Mithila is sinless! Therefore, O king, be united with thy wife!’ And the
god of Fire said, ‘O son of Raghu, I dwell within the bodies of all
creatures! O descendant of Kakutstha, the princess of Mithila is not
guilty of even the minutest fault!’ And Varuna then said, ‘O son of
Raghu, the humours in every creature’s body derive their existence from
me! I tell thee, let the princess of Mithila be accepted by thee!’ And
Brahma himself then said, ‘O descendant of Kakutstha, O son, in thee that
art honest and pure and conversant with the duties of royal sages, this
conduct is not strange. Listen, however, to these words of mine! Thou
hast, O hero, slain this enemy of the gods, the Gandharvas, the Nagas,
the Yakshas, the Danavas, and the great Rishis! It was through my grace
that he had hitherto been unslayable of all creatures. And indeed, it was
for some reason that I had tolerated him for some time! The wretch,
however, abducted Sita for his own destruction. And as regards Sita, I
protected her through Nalakuvera’s curse. For that person had cursed
Ravana of old, saying, that if he ever approached an unwilling woman, his
head should certainly be split into a hundred fragments. Let no
suspicion, therefore, be thine! O thou of great glory, accept thy wife!
Thou hast indeed, achieved a mighty feat for the benefit of the gods, O
thou that art of divine effulgence!’ And last of all Dasaratha said, ‘I
have been gratified with thee, O child! Blessed be thou, I am thy father
Dasaratha! I command thee to take back thy wife, and rule thy kingdom, O
thou foremost of men!’ Rama then replied, ‘If thou art my father, I
salute thee with reverence, O king of kings! I shall indeed, return, at
thy command, to the delightful city of Ayodhya!’

“Markandeya continued, ‘Thus addressed, his father, O bull of the Bharata
race, gladly answered Rama, the corners of whose eyes were of a reddish
hue, saying, ‘Return to Ayodhya and rule thou that kingdom! O thou of
great glory, thy fourteen years (of exile) have been completed.’ Thus
addressed by Dasaratha, Rama bowed to the gods, and saluted by his
friends he was united with his wife, like the Lord of the celestials with
the daughter of Puloman. And that chastiser of foes then gave a boon to
Avindhya. And he also bestowed both riches and honours on the Rakshasa
woman named Trijata. And when Brahma with all the celestials having India
at their head, said unto Rama, ‘O thou that ownest Kausalya for thy
mother, what boons after thy heart shall we grant thee?’ Rama, thereupon,
prayed them to grant him firm adherence to virtues and invincibility in
respect of all foes. And he also asked for the restoration to life of all
those monkeys that had been slain by the Rakshasas, and after Brahma had
said--So be it, those monkeys, O king, restored to life, rose up from the
field of battle, and Sita too, of great good fortune, granted unto
Hanuman a boon, saying, ‘Let thy life, O son, last as long as (the fame
of) Rama’s achievements! And, O Hanuman of yellow eyes, let celestial
viands and drinks be ever available to thee through my grace!’

“Then the celestials with Indra at their head all disappeared in the very
sight of those warriors of spotless achievements. And beholding Rama
united with the daughter of Janaka, the charioteer of Sakra, highly
pleased, addressed him in the midst of friends, and said these words, ‘O
thou of prowess that can never be baffled thou hast dispelled the sorrow
of the celestials, the Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the Asuras, the Nagas,
and human beings! As long, therefore, as the Earth will hold together, so
long will all creatures with the celestials, the Asuras, the Gandharvas,
the Yakshas, the Rakshasas, and the Pannagas, speak of thee.’ And having
said these words unto Rama, Matali worshipped that son of Raghu, and
having obtained the leave of that foremost of wielders of weapons, he
went away, on that same chariot of solar effulgence. And Rama also, with
Sumatra’s son and Vibhishana, and accompanied by all the monkeys with
Sugriva at their head, placing Sita in the van and having made
arrangements for the protection of Lanka, recrossed the ocean by the same
bridge. And he rode on that beautiful and sky-ranging chariot called the
Pushpaka that was capable of going everywhere at the will of the rider.
And that subduer of passions was surrounded by his principal counsellors
in order of precedence. And arriving at that part of the sea-shore where
he had formerly laid himself down, the virtuous king, with all the
monkeys, pitched his temporary abode. And the son of Raghu then, bringing
the monkeys before him in due time, worshipped them all, and gratifying
them with presents of jewels and gems, dismissed them one after another.
And after all the monkey-chiefs, and the apes with bovine tails, and the
bears, had gone away, Rama re-entered Kishkindhya with Sugriva. And
accompanied by both Vibhishana and Sugriva, Rama re-entered Kishkindhya
riding on the Pushpaka car and showing the princess of Videha the woods
along the way. And having arrived at Kishkindhya, Rama, that foremost of
all smiters, installed the successful Angada as prince-regent of the
kingdom. And accompanied by the same friends as also by Sumitra’s son,
Rama proceeded towards his city along the same path by which he had come.
And having reached the city of Ayodhya, the king despatched Hanuman
thence as envoy to Bharata. And Hanuman, having ascertained Bharata’s
intentions from external indications, gave him the good news (of Rama’s
arrival). And after the son of Pavana had come back, Rama entered
Nandigrama. And having entered that town, Rama beheld Bharata besmeared
with filth and attired in rags and seated with his elder brother’s
sandals placed before him. And being united, O bull of Bharata race, with
both Bharata and Shatrughna, the mighty son of Raghu, along with
Sumitra’s son, began to rejoice exceedingly. And Bharata and Shatrughna
also, united with their eldest brother, and beholding Sita, both derived
great pleasure. And Bharata then, after having worshipped his returned
brother, made over to him with great pleasure, the kingdom that had been
in his hands as a sacred trust. And Vasishtha and Vamadeva then together
installed that hero in the sovereignty (of Ayodhya) at the eighth
Muhurta[105] of the day under the asterism called Sravana. And after his
installation was over, Rama gave leave to well-pleased Sugriva the king
of the monkeys, along with all his followers, as also to rejoicing
Vibhishana of Pulastya’s race, to return to their respective abodes. And
having worshipped them with various articles of enjoyment, and done
everything that was suitable to the occasion, Rama dismissed those
friends of his with a sorrowful heart. And the son of Raghu then, having
worshiped that Pushpaka chariot, joyfully gave it back unto Vaisravana.
And then assisted by the celestial Rishi (Vasishtha), Rama performed on
the banks of the Gomati ten horse-sacrifices without obstruction of any
kind and with treble presents unto Brahmanas.’”


SECTION CCLXL

“Markandeya said, ‘It was thus, O mighty-armed one, that Rama of
immeasurable energy had suffered of old such excessive calamity in
consequence of his exile in the woods! O tiger among men, do not grieve,
for, O chastiser of foes, thou art Kshatriya! Thou too treadest in the
path in which strength of arms is to be put forth,--the path that leadeth
to tangible rewards. Thou hast not even a particle of sin. Even the
celestials with Indra at their head, and the Asuras have to tread in the
path that is trod by thee! It was after such afflictions that the wielder
of the thunderbolt, aided by the Maruts, slew Vritra, and the invincible
Namuchi and the Rakshasi of long tongue! He that hath assistance, always
secureth the accomplishment of all his purposes! What is that which
cannot be vanquished in battle by him that hath Dhananjaya for his
brother? This Bhima, also, of terrible prowess, is the foremost of mighty
persons. The heroic and youthful sons of Madravati again are mighty
bowmen. With allies such as these, why dost thou despair, O chastiser of
foes? These are capable of vanquishing the army of the wielder himself of
the thunderbolt with the Maruts in the midst. Having these mighty bowmen
of celestial forms for thy allies, thou, O bull of Bharata race, art sure
to conquer in battle all thy foes! Behold, this Krishna, the daughter of
Drupada, forcibly abducted by the wicked-minded Saindhava from pride of
strength and energy, hath been brought back by these mighty warriors
after achieving terrible feats! Behold, king Jayadratha was vanquished
and lay powerless before thee! The princess of Videha was rescued with
almost no allies by Rama after the slaughter in battle of the Ten-necked
Rakshasa of terrible prowess! Indeed, the allies of Rama (in that
contest) were monkeys and black-faced bears, creatures that were not even
human! Think of all this, O king in thy mind! Therefore, O foremost of
Kurus, grieve not for all (that hath occurred), O bull of the Bharata
race! Illustrious persons like thee never indulge in sorrow, O smiter of
foes!’

Vaisampayana continued, “It was thus that the king was comforted by
Markandeya. And then that high-souled one, casting off his sorrows, once
more spoke unto Markandeya.”


SECTION CCLXLI

(Pativrata-mahatmya Parva)

“Yudhishthira said, ‘O mighty sage, I do not so much grieve for myself or
these my brothers or the loss of my kingdom as I do for this daughter of
Drupada. When we were afflicted at the game of the dice by those
wicked-souled ones, it was Krishna that delivered us. And she was
forcibly carried off from the forest by Jayadratha. Hast thou even seen
or heard of any chaste and exalted lady that resembleth this daughter of
Drupada?’”

“Markandeya said, ‘Listen, O king, how the exalted merit of chaste
ladies, O Yudhishthira, was completely obtained by a princess named
Savitri. There was a king among the Madras, who was virtuous and highly
pious. And he always ministered unto the Brahmanas, and was high-souled
and firm in promise. And he was of subdued senses and given to
sacrifices. And he was the foremost of givers, and was able, and beloved
by both the citizens and the rural population. And the name of that lord
of Earth was Aswapati. And he was intent on the welfare of all beings.
And that forgiving (monarch) of truthful speech and subdued senses was
without issue. And when he got old, he was stricken with grief at this.
And with the object of raising offspring, he observed rigid vows and
began to live upon frugal fare, having recourse to the Brahmacharya mode
of life, and restraining his senses. And that best of kings, (daily)
offering ten thousand oblations to the fire, recited Mantras in honour of
Savitri[106] and ate temperately at the sixth hour. And he passed
eighteen years, practising such vows. Then when the eighteen years were
full, Savitri was pleased (with him). And O king, issuing with great
delight, in embodied form, from the Agnihotra fire, the goddess showed
herself to that king. And intent on conferring boons, she spoke these
words unto the monarch, ‘I have been gratified, O king, with thy
Brahmacharya practices, thy purity and self-restraint and observance of
vows, and all thy endeavours and veneration! Do thou, O mighty king. O
Aswapati, ask for the boon that thou desirest! Thou ought, however, by no
means show any disregard for virtue.’ Thereat Aswapati said, ‘It is with
the desire of attaining virtue that I have been engaged in this task. O
goddess, may many sons be born unto me worthy of my race! If thou art
pleased with me, O goddess, I ask for this boon. The twice-born ones have
assured me that great merit lieth in having offspring!’ Savitri replied,
‘O king, having already learnt this thy intention, I had spoken unto that
lord, the Grandsire, about thy sons. Through the favour granted by the
Self-create, there shall speedily be born unto thee on earth a daughter
of great energy. It behoveth thee not to make any reply. Well-pleased, I
tell thee this at the command of the Grandsire.’

“Markandeya said, ‘Having accepted Savitri’s words and saying, ‘So be
it!’ the king again gratified her and said, ‘May this happen soon!’ On
Savitri vanishing away, the monarch entered his own city. And that hero
began to live in his kingdom, ruling his subjects righteously. And when
some time had elapsed, that king, observant of vows, begat offspring on
his eldest queen engaged in the practice of virtue. And then, O bull of
the Bharata race, the embryo in the womb of the princess of Malava
increased like the lord of stars in the heavens during the lighted
fortnight. And when the time came, she brought forth a daughter furnished
with lotus-like eyes. And that best of monarchs, joyfully performed the
usual ceremonies on her behalf. And as she had been bestowed with delight
by the goddess Savitri by virtue of the oblations offered in honour of
that goddess, both her father, and the Brahmanas named her Savitri. And
the king’s daughter grew like unto Sree herself in an embodied form. And
in due time, that damsel attained her puberty. And beholding that
graceful maiden of slender waist and ample hips, and resembling a golden
image, people thought, ‘We have received a goddess.’ And overpowered by
her energy, none could wed that girl of eyes like lotus-leaves, and
possessed of a burning splendour.’

‘And it came to pass that once on the occasion of a parva, having fasted
and bathed her head, she presented herself before the (family) deity and
caused the Brahmanas to offer oblations with due rites to the sacrificial
fire. And taking the flowers that had been offered to the god, that lady,
beautiful as Sree herself, went to her high-souled sire. And having
reverenced the feet of her father and offering him the flowers she had
brought, that maiden of exceeding grace, with joined hands, stood at the
side of the king. And seeing his own daughter resembling a celestial
damsel arrived at puberty, and unsought by people, the king became sad.
And the king said, ‘Daughter, the time for bestowing thee is come! Yet
none asketh thee. Do thou (therefore) thyself seek for a husband equal to
thee in qualities! That person who may be desired by thee should be
notified to me. Do thou choose for thy husband as thou listest. I shall
bestow thee with deliberation. Do thou, O auspicious one, listen to me as
I tell thee the words which I heard recited by the twice-born ones. The
father that doth not bestow his daughter cometh by disgrace. And the
husband that knoweth not his wife in her season meeteth with disgrace.
And the son that doth not protect his mother when her husband is dead,
also suffereth disgrace. Hearing these words of mine, do thou engage
thyself in search of a husband. Do thou act in such a way that we may not
be censured by the gods!’

“Markandeya said, ‘Having said these words to his daughter and his old
counsellors, he instructed the attendants to follow her, saying,--Go!
Thereat, bashfully bowing down unto her father’s feet, the meek maid went
out without hesitation, in compliance with the words of her sire. And
ascending a golden car, she went to the delightful asylum of the royal
sages, accompanied by her father’s aged counsellors. There, O son,
worshipping the feet of the aged ones, she gradually began to roam over
all the woods. Thus the king’s daughter distributing wealth in all sacred
regions, ranged the various places belonging to the foremost of the
twice-born ones.’”


SECTION CCLXLII

“Markandeya continued, ‘On one occasion, O Bharata, when that king, the
lord of the Madras, was seated with Narada in the midst of his court,
engaged in conversation, Savitri, accompanied by the king’s counsellors,
came to her father’s abode after having visited various sacred regions
and asylums. And beholding her father seated with Narada, she worshipped
the feet of both by bending down her head. And Narada then said, ‘Whither
had this thy daughter gone? And, O king, whence also doth she come? Why
also dost thou not bestow her on a husband, now that she hath arrived at
the age of puberty?’ Aswapati answered, saying, ‘Surely it was on this
very business that she had been sent, and she returneth now (from her
search). Do thou, O celestial sage, listen, even from her as to the
husband she hath chosen herself!’

“Markandeya continued, ‘Then the blessed maid, commanded by her father
with the words,--Relate everything in detail,--regarded those words of
her sire as if they were those of a god, and spoke unto him thus, ‘There
was, amongst the Salwas, a virtuous Kshatriya king known by the name of
Dyumatsena. And it came to pass that in course of time he became blind.
And that blind king possessed of wisdom had an only son. And it so
happened that an old enemy dwelling in the vicinity, taking advantage of
the king’s mishap, deprived him of his kingdom. And thereupon the
monarch, accompanied by his wife bearing a child on her breast, went into
the woods. And having retired into the forests, he adopted great vows and
began to practise ascetic austerities. And his son, born in the city,
began to grow in the hermitage. That youth, fit to be my husband, I have
accepted in my heart for my lord!’ At these words of hers, Narada said,
‘Alas, O king, Savitri hath committed a great wrong, since, not knowing,
she hath accepted for her lord this Satyavan of excellent qualities! His
father speaketh the truth and his mother also is truthful in her speech.
And it is for this that the Brahmanas have named the son Satyavan. In his
childhood he took great delight in horses, and used to make horses of
clay. And he used also to draw pictures of horses. And for this that
youth is sometimes called by the name of Chitraswa.’ The king then asked,
‘And is prince Satyavan, who is devoted to his father, endued with energy
and intelligence and forgiveness and courage?’ Narada replied, saying,
‘In energy Satyavan is like unto the sun, and in wisdom like unto
Vrihaspati! And he is brave like unto the lord of the celestials and
forgiving like unto the Earth herself!’ Aswapati then said, ‘And is the
prince Satyavan liberal in gifts and devoted to the Brahmanas? Is he
handsome and magnanimous and lovely to behold?’ Narada said, ‘In bestowal
of gifts according to his power, the mighty son of Dyumatsena is like
unto Sankriti’s son Rantideva. In truthfulness of speech and devotion
unto Brahmanas, he is like Sivi, the son of Usinara. And he is
magnanimous like Yayati, and beautiful like the Moon. And in beauty of
person he is like either of the twin Aswins. And with senses under
control, he is meek, and brave, and truthful! And with passion in
subjection he is devoted to his friends, and free from malice and modest
and patient. Indeed, briefly speaking, they that are possessed of great
ascetic merit and are of exalted character say that he is always correct
in his conduct and that honour is firmly seated on his brow.’ Hearing
this, Aswapati said, ‘O reverend sage, thou tellest me that he is
possessed of every virtue! Do thou now tell me his defects if, indeed, he
hath any!’ Narada then said, ‘He hath one only defect that hath
overwhelmed all his virtues. That defect is incapable of being conquered
by even the greatest efforts. He hath only one defect, and no other.
Within a year from this day, Satyavan, endued with a short life will cast
off his body!’ Hearing these words of the sage, the king said, ‘Come, O
Savitri, go thou and choose another for thy lord, O beautiful damsel!
That one great defect (in this youth) existeth, covering all his merits.
The illustrious Narada honoured by even the gods, sayeth, that Satyavan
will have to cast off his body within a year, his days being numbered!’
At these words of her father, Savitri said, ‘The death can fall but once;
a daughter can be given away but one; and once only can a person say, I
give away! These three things can take place only once. Indeed, with a
life short or long, possessed of virtues or bereft of them, I have, for
once, selected my husband. Twice I shall not select. Having first settled
a thing mentally, it is expressed in words, and then it is carried out
into practice. Of this my mind is an example!’ Narada then said, ‘O best
of men, the heart of thy daughter Savitri wavereth not! It is not
possible by any means to make her swerve from this path of virtue! In no
other person are those virtues that dwell in Satyavan. The bestowal of
thy daughter, therefore, is approved by me!’ The king said, ‘What thou
hast said, O illustrious one, should never be disobeyed, for thy words
are true! And I shall act as thou hast said, since thou art my
preceptor!’ Narada said, ‘May the bestowal of thy daughter Savitri be
attended with peace! I shall now depart. Blessed be all of ye!’

“Markandeya continued, ‘Having said this, Narada rose up into the sky and
went to heaven. On the other hand, the king began to make preparations
for his daughter’s wedding!’”


SECTION CCLXLIII

“Markandeya said, ‘Having pondered over these words (of Narada) about his
daughter’s marriage, the king began to make arrangements about the
nuptials. And summoning all the old Brahmanas, and Ritwijas together with
the priests, he set out with his daughter on an auspicious day. And
arriving at the asylum of Dyumatsena in the sacred forest, the king
approached the royal sage on foot, accompanied by the twice-born ones.
And there he beheld the blind monarch of great wisdom seated on a cushion
of Kusa grass spread under Sala tree. And after duly reverencing the
royal sage, the king in an humble speech introduced himself. Thereupon,
offering him the Arghya, a seat, and a cow, the monarch asked his royal
guest,--Wherefore is this visit?--Thus addressed the king disclosed
everything about his intentions and purpose with reference to Satyavan.
And Aswapati said, ‘O royal sage, this beautiful girl is my daughter
named Savitri. O thou versed in morality, do thou, agreeably to the
customs of our order, take her from me as thy daughter-in-law!’ Hearing
these words, Dyumatsena said, ‘Deprived of kingdom, and taking up our
abode in the woods, we are engaged in the practice of virtue as ascetics
with regulated lives. Unworthy of a forest life, how will thy daughter,
living in the sylvan asylum, bear this hardship?’ Aswapati said, ‘When my
daughter knoweth, as well as myself, that happiness and misery come and
go (without either being stationary), such words as these are not fit to
be used towards one like me! O king, I have come hither, having made up
my mind! I have bowed to thee from friendship; it behoveth thee not,
therefore, to destroy my hope! It behoveth thee not, also, to disregard
me who, moved by love, have come to thee! Thou art my equal and fit for
an alliance with me, as indeed, I am thy equal and fit for alliance with
thee! Do thou, therefore, accept my daughter for thy daughter-in-law and
the wife of the good Satyavan!’ Hearing these words Dyumatsena said,
‘Formerly I had desired an alliance with thee. But I hesitated, being
subsequently deprived of my kingdom. Let this wish, therefore, that I had
formerly entertained, be accomplished this very day. Thou art, indeed, a
welcome guest to me!’

“Then summoning all the twice-born ones residing in the hermitages of
that forest, the two kings caused the union to take place with due rites.
And having bestowed his daughter with suitable robes and ornaments,
Aswapati went back to his abode in great joy. And Satyavan, having
obtained a wife possessed of every accomplishment, became highly glad,
while she also rejoiced exceedingly upon having gained the husband after
her own heart. And when her father had departed, she put off all her
ornaments, and clad herself in barks and cloths dyed in red. And by her
services and virtues, her tenderness and self-denial, and by her
agreeable offices unto all, she pleased everybody. And she gratified her
mother-in-law by attending to her person and by covering her with robes
and ornaments. And she gratified her father-in-law by worshipping him as
a god and controlling her speech. And she pleased her husband by her
honeyed speeches, her skill in every kind of work, the evenness of her
temper, and by the indications of her love in private. And thus, O
Bharata, living in the asylum of those pious dwellers of the forest, they
continued for some time to practise ascetic austerities. But the words
spoken by Narada were present night and day in the mind of the sorrowful
Savitri.’”


SECTION CCLXLIV

“Markandeya said, ‘At length, O king, after a long time had passed away,
the hour that had been appointed for the death of Satyavan arrived. And
as the words that had been spoken by Narada were ever present in the mind
of Savitri, she had counted the days as they passed. And having
ascertained that her husband would die on the fourth day following, the
damsel fasted day and night, observing the Triratra vow. And hearing of
her vow, the king became exceedingly sorrow and rising up soothed Savitri
and said these words, ‘This vow that thou hast begun to observe, O
daughter of a king, is exceedingly hard; for it is extremely difficult to
fast for three nights together!’ And hearing these words, Savitri said,
‘Thou needst not be sorry, O father! This vow I shall be able to observe!
I have for certain undertaken this task with perseverance; and
perseverance is the cause of the successful observance of vows.’ And
having listened to her, Dyumatsena said, ‘I can by no means say unto
thee, Do thou break thy vow. One like me should, on the contrary,
say,--Do thou complete thy vow!’ And having said this to her, the
high-minded Dyumatsena stopped. And Savitri continuing to fast began to
look (lean) like a wooden doll. And, O bull of the Bharata race, thinking
that her husband would die on the morrow, the woe-stricken Savitri,
observing a fast, spent that night in extreme anguish. And when the Sun
had risen about a couple of hand Savitri thinking within herself--To-day
is that day, finished her morning rites, and offered oblations to the
flaming fire. And bowing down unto the aged Brahmanas, and her
father-in-law, and mother-in-law, she stood before them with joined
hands, concentrating her senses. And for the welfare of Savitri, all the
ascetics dwelling in that hermitage, uttered the auspicious benediction
that she should never suffer widowhood. And Savitri immersed in
contemplation accepted those words of the ascetics, mentally saying,--So
be it!--And the king’s daughter, reflecting on those words of Narada,
remained, expecting the hour and the moment.

Then, O best of the Bharatas, well-pleased, her father-in-law and
mother-in-law said these words unto the princess seated in a corner,
‘Thou hast completed the vow as prescribed. The time for thy meal hath
now arrived; therefore, do thou what is proper!’ Thereat Savitri said,
‘Now that I have completed the purposed vow, I will eat when the Sun goes
down. Even this is my heart’s resolve and this my vow!’

“Markandeya continued, ‘And when Savitri had spoken thus about her meal,
Satyavan, taking his axe upon his shoulders, set out for the woods. And
at this, Savitri said unto her husband, ‘It behoveth thee not to go
alone! I will accompany thee. I cannot bear to be separated from thee!’
Hearing these words of hers, Satyavan said, ‘Thou hast never before
repaired to the forest. And, O lady, the forest-paths are hard to pass!
Besides thou hast been reduced by fast on account of thy vow. How wouldst
thou, therefore, be able to walk on foot?’ Thus addressed, Savitri said,
‘I do not feel langour because of the fast, nor do I feel exhaustion. And
I have made up my mind to go. It behoveth thee not, therefore, to prevent
me!’ At this, Satyavan said, ‘If thou desirest to go, I will gratify that
desire of thine. Do thou, however, take the permission of my parents, so
that I may be guilty of no fault!’

“Markandeya continued, ‘Thus addressed by her lord, Savitri of high vows
saluted her father-in-law and mother-in-law and addressed them, saying,
‘This my husband goeth to the forest for procuring fruits. Permitted by
my revered lady-mother and father-in-law, I will accompany him. For
to-day I cannot bear to be separated from him. Thy son goeth out for the
sake of the sacrificial fire and for his reverend superiors. He ought
not, therefore, to be dissuaded. Indeed, he could be dissuaded if he went
into the forest on any other errand. Do ye not prevent me! I will go into
the forest with him. It is a little less than a year that I have not gone
out of the asylum. Indeed, I am extremely desirous of beholding the
blossoming woods!’ Hearing these words Dyumatsena said, ‘Since Savitri
hath been bestowed by her father as my daughter-in-law, I do not remember
that she hath ever spoken any words couching a request. Let my
daughter-in-law, therefore, have her will in this matter. Do thou,
however, O daughter, act in such a way that Satyavan’s work may not be
neglected!’

“Markandeya continued, ‘Having received the permission of both, the
illustrious Savitri, departed with her lord, in seeming smiles although
her heart was racked with grief. And that lady of large eyes went on,
beholding picturesque and delightful woods inhabited by swarms of
peacocks. And Satyavan sweetly said unto Savitri, ‘Behold these rivers of
sacred currents and these excellent trees decked with flowers!’ But the
faultless Savitri continued to watch her lord in all his moods, and
recollecting the words of the celestial sage, she considered her husband
as already dead. And with heart cleft in twain, that damsel, replying to
her lord, softly followed him expecting that hour.’”


SECTION CCLXLV

“Markandeya said, The powerful Satyavan then, accompanied by his wife,
plucked fruits and filled his wallet with them. And he then began to fell
branches of trees. And as he was hewing them, he began to perspire. And
in consequence of that exercise his head began to ache. And afflicted
with toil, he approached his beloved wife, and addressed her, saying, ‘O
Savitri, owing to this hard exercise my head acheth, and all my limbs and
my heart also are afflicted sorely! O thou of restrained speech, I think
myself unwell, I feel as if my head is being pierced with numerous darts.
Therefore, O auspicious lady, I wish to sleep, for I have not the power
to stand.’ Hearing these words, Savitri quickly advancing, approached her
husband, and sat down upon the ground, placing his head upon her lap. And
that helpless lady, thinking of Narada’s words, began to calculate the
(appointed) division of the day, the hour, and the moment. The next
moment she saw a person clad in red attire with his head decked with a
diadem. And his body was of large proportions and effulgent as the Sun.
And he was of a darkish hue, had red eyes, carried a noose in his hand,
and was dreadful to behold. And he was standing beside Satyavan and was
steadfastly gazing at him. And seeing him, Savitri gently placed her
husband’s head on the ground, and rising suddenly, with a trembling
heart, spake these words in distressful accents, ‘Seeing this thy
superhuman form, I take thee to be a deity. If thou will, tell me, O
chief of the gods, who thou art and what also thou intendst to do!’
Thereat, Yama replied, ‘O Savitri, thou art ever devoted to thy husband,
and thou art also endued with ascetic merit. It is for this reason that I
hold converse with thee. Do thou, O auspicious one, know me for Yama.
This thy lord Satyavan, the son of a king, hath his days run out. I
shall, therefore, take him away binding him in this noose. Know this to
be my errand!’ At these words Savitri said, ‘I had heard that thy
emissaries come to take away mortals, O worshipful one! Why then, O lord,
hast thou come in person?’

“Markandeya continued, ‘Thus addressed by her, the illustrious lord of
Pitris, with a view to oblige her, began to unfold to her truly all about
his intentions. And Yama said, ‘This prince is endued with virtues and
beauty of person, and is a sea of accomplishments. He deserveth not to be
borne away by my emissaries. Therefore is it that I have come
personally.’ Saying this, Yama by main force pulled out of the body of
Satyavan, a person of the measure of the thumb, bound in noose and
completely under subjection. And when Satyavan’s life had thus been taken
out, the body, deprived of breath, and shorn of lustre, and destitute of
motion, became unsightly to behold. And binding Satyavan’s vital essence,
Yama proceeded in a southerly direction. Thereupon, with heart
overwhelmed in grief, the exalted Savitri, ever devoted to her lord and
crowned with success in respect of her vows, began to follow Yama. And at
this, Yama said, ‘Desist, O Savitri! Go back, and perform the funeral
obsequies of thy lord! Thou art freed from all thy obligations to thy
lord. Thou hast come as far as it is possible to come’. Savitri replied,
‘Whither my husband is being carried, or whither he goeth of his own
accord, I will follow him thither. This is the eternal custom. By virtue
of my asceticism, of my regard for my superiors, of my affection for my
lord, of my observance of vows, as well as of thy favour, my course is
unimpeded. It hath been declared by wise men endued with true knowledge
that by walking only seven paces with another, one contracteth a
friendship with one’s companion. Keeping that friendship (which I have
contracted with thee) in view, I shall speak to thee something. Do thou
listen to it. They that have not their souls under control, acquire not
merit by leading the four successive modes of life, viz.,--celibacy with
study, domesticity, retirement into the woods, and renunciation of the
world. That which is called religious merit is said to consist of true
knowledge. The wise, therefore, have declared religious merit to be the
foremost of all things and not the passage through the four successive
modes. By practising the duties of even one of these four modes agreeable
to the directions of the wise, we have attained to true merit, and,
therefore, we do not desire the second or the third mode, viz., celibacy
with study or renunciation. It is for this again that the wise have
declared religious merit to be the foremost of all things!’ Hearing these
words of hers, Yama said, ‘Do thou desist! I have been pleased with these
words of thine couched in proper letters and accents, and based on
reason. Do thou ask for a boon! Except the life of thy husband, O thou of
faultless features, I will bestow on thee any boon that thou mayst
solicit!’ Hearing these words, Savitri said, ‘Deprived of his kingdom and
bereft also of sight, my father-in-law leadeth a life of retirement in
our sylvan asylum. Let that king through thy favour attain his eye-sight,
and become strong ‘like either fire or the Sun!’ Yama said, ‘O thou of
faultless features, I grant thee this boon! It will even be as thou hast
said! It seems that thou art fatigued with thy journey. Do thou desist,
therefore, and return! Suffer not thyself to be weary any longer!’
Savitri said, ‘What weariness can I feel in the presence of my husband?
The lot that is my husband’s is certainly mine also. Whither thou
carriest my husband, thither will I also repair! O chief of the
celestials, do thou again listen to me! Even a single interview with the
pious is highly desirable; friendship with them is still more so. And
intercourse with the virtuous can never be fruitless. Therefore, one
should live in the company of the righteous!’ Yama said, ‘These words
that thou hast spoken, so fraught with useful instruction, delight the
heart and enhance the wisdom of even the learned. Therefore, O lady,
solicit thou a second boon, except the life of Satyavan!’ Savitri said,
‘Sometime before, my wise and intelligent father-in-law was deprived of
his kingdom. May that monarch regain his kingdom. And may that superior
of mine never renounce his duties! Even this is the second boon that I
solicit!’ Then Yama said,--‘The king shall soon regain his kingdom. Nor
shall he ever fall off from his duties. Thus, O daughter of a king have I
fulfilled thy desire. Do thou now desist! Return! Do not take any future
trouble!’ Savitri said, ‘Thou hast restrained all creatures by thy
decrees, and it is by thy decrees that thou takest them away, not
according to thy will. Therefore it is, O god, O divine one, that people
call thee Yama! Do thou listen to the words that I say! The eternal duty
of the good towards all creatures is never to injure them in thought,
word, and deed, but to bear them love and give them their due. As regards
this world, everything here is like this (husband of mine). Men are
destitute of both devotion and skill. The good, however, show mercy to
even their foes when these seek their protection. Yama said, ‘As water to
the thirsty soul, so are these words uttered by thee to me! Therefore, do
thou, O fair lady, if thou will, once again ask for any boon except
Salyavana’s life!’ At these words Savitri replied, That lord of earth, my
father, is without sons. That he may have a hundred sons begotten of his
loins, so that his line may be perpetuated, is the third boon I would ask
of thee!’ Yama said, Thy sire, O auspicious lady, shall obtain a hundred
illustrious sons, who will perpetuate and increase their father’s race!
Now, O daughter of a king, thou hast obtained thy wish. Do thou desist!
Thou hast come far enough.’ Savitri said, ‘Staying by the side of my
husband, I am not conscious of the length of the way I have walked.
Indeed, my mind rusheth to yet a longer way of. Do thou again, as thou
goest on, listen to the words that I will presently utter! Thou art the
powerful son of Vivaswat. It is for this that thou art called Vaivaswata
by the wise. And, O lord, since thou dealest out equal law unto all
created things, thou hast been designated the lord of justice! One
reposeth not, even in one’s own self, the confidence that one doth in the
righteous. Therefore, every one wisheth particularly for intimacy with
the righteous. It is goodness of heart alone that inspireth the
confidence of all creatures. And it is for this that people rely
particularly on the righteous.’ And hearing these words, Yama said, ‘The
words that thou utterest, O fair lady, I have not heard from any one save
thee; I am highly pleased with this speech of thine. Except the life of
Satyavan, solicit thou, therefore, a fourth boon, and then go thy way!’
Savitri then said, ‘Both of me and Satyavan’s loins, begotten by both of
us, let there be a century of sons possessed of strength and prowess and
capable of perpetuating our race! Even this is the fourth boon that I
would beg of thee!’ Hearing these words of hers, Yama replied, ‘Thou
shalt, O lady, obtain a century of sons, possessed of strength and
prowess, and causing thee great delight, O daughter of a king, let no
more weariness be thine! Do thou desist! Thou hast already come too far!’
Thus addressed, Savitri said, ‘They that are righteous always practise
eternal morality! And the communion of the pious with the pious is never
fruitless! Nor is there any danger to the pious from those that are
pious. And verily it is the righteous who by their truth make the Sun
move in the heaven. And it is the righteous that support the earth by
their austerities! And, O king, it is the righteous upon whom both the
past and the future depend! Therefore, they that are righteous, are never
cheerless in the company of the righteous. Knowing this to be the eternal
practice of the good and righteous, they that are righteous continue to
do good to others without expecting any benefit in return. A good office
is never thrown away on the good and virtuous. Neither interest nor
dignity suffereth any injury by such an act. And since such conduct ever
adheres to the righteous, the righteous often become the protectors of
all.’ Hearing these words of hers, Yama replied, ‘The more thou utterest
such speeches that are pregnant with great import, full of honeyed
phrases, instinct with morality, and agreeable to mind, the more is the
respect that I feel for thee! O thou that art so devoted to thy lord, ask
for some incomparable boon!’ Thus addressed, Savitri said, ‘O bestower of
honours, the boon thou hast already given me is incapable of
accomplishment without union with my husband. Therefore, among other
boons, I ask for this, may this Satyavan be restored to life! Deprived of
my husband, I am as one dead! Without my husband, I do not wish for
happiness. Without my husband, I do not wish for heaven itself. Without
my husband, I do not wish for prosperity. Without my husband, I cannot
make up my mind to live! Thou thyself hast bestowed on me the boon,
namely, of a century of sons; yet thou takest away my husband! I ask for
this boon, ‘May Satyavan be restored to life, for by that thy words will
be made true.’”

“Markandeya continued, ‘Thereupon saying,--So be it,--Vivaswat’s son,
Yama, the dispenser of justice, untied his noose, and with cheerful heart
said these words to Savitri, ‘Thus, O auspicious and chaste lady, is thy
husband freed by me! Thou wilt be able to take him back free from
disease. And he will attain to success! And along with thee, he will
attain a life of four hundred years. And celebrating sacrifices with due
rites, he will achieve great fame in this world. And upon thee Satyavan
will also beget a century of sons. And these Kshatriyas with their sons
and grandsons will all be kings, and will always be famous in connection
with thy name. And thy father also will beget a hundred sons on thy
mother Malavi. And under the name of the Malavas, thy Kshatriya brothers,
resembling the celestials, will be widely known along with their sons and
daughters!’ And having bestowed these boons on Savitri and having thus
made her desist, Yama departed for his abode. Savitri, after Yama had
gone away, went back to the spot where her husband’s ash-coloured corpse
lay, and seeing her lord on the ground, she approached him, and taking
hold of him, she placed his head on her lap and herself sat down on the
ground. Then Satyavan regained his consciousness, and affectionately
eyeing Savitri again and again, like one come home after a sojourn in a
strange land, he addressed her thus, ‘Alas, I have slept long! Wherefore
didst thou not awake me? And where is that same sable person that was
dragging me away?’ At these words of his, Savitri said, ‘Thou hast, O
bull among men, slept long on my lap! That restrainer of creatures, the
worshipful Yama, had gone away. Thou art refreshed, O blessed one, and
sleep hath forsaken thee, O son of a king! If thou art able, rise thou
up! Behold, the night is deep!’”

“Markandeya continued, ‘Having regained consciousness, Satyavan rose up
like one who had enjoyed a sweet sleep, and seeing every side covered
with woods, said, ‘O girl of slender waist, I came with thee for
procuring fruits. Then while I was cutting wood I felt a pain in my head.
And on account of that intense pain about my head I was unable to stand
for any length of time, and, therefore, I lay on thy lap and slept. All
this, O auspicious lady, I remember. Then, as thou didst embrace me,
sleep stole away my senses. I then saw that it was dark all around. In
the midst of it I saw a person of exceeding effulgence. If thou knowest
everything, do thou then, O girl of slender waist, tell me whether what I
saw was only a dream or a reality!’ Thereupon, Savitri addressed him,
saying, The night deepens. I shall, O prince, relate everything unto thee
on the morrow. Arise, arise, may good betide thee! And, O thou of
excellent vows, come and behold thy parents! The sun hath set a long
while ago and the night deepens. Those rangers of the night, having
frightful voices, are walking about in glee. And sounds are heard,
proceeding from the denizens of the forest treading through the woods.
These terrible shrieks of jackals that are issuing from the south and the
east make my heart tremble (in fear)!’ Satyavan then said, ‘Covered with
deep darkness, the wilderness hath worn a dreadful aspect. Thou wilt,
therefore, not be able to discern the tract, and consequently wilt not be
able to go!’ Then Savitri replied, ‘In consequence of a conflagration
having taken place in the forest today a withered tree standeth aflame,
and the flames being stirred by the wind are discerned now and then. I
shall fetch some fire and light these faggots around. Do thou dispel all
anxiety. I will do all (this) if thou darest not go, for I find thee
unwell. Nor wilt thou be able to discover the way through this forest
enveloped in darkness. Tomorrow when the woods become visible, we will go
hence, if thou please! If, O sinless one, it is thy wish, we shall pass
this night even here!’ At these words of hers, Satyavan replied, ‘The
pain in my head is off; and I feel well in my limbs. With thy favour I
wish to behold my father and mother. Never before did I return to the
hermitage after the proper time had passed away. Even before it is
twilight my mother confineth me within the asylum. Even when I come out
during the day, my parents become anxious on my account, and my father
searcheth for me, together with all the inhabitants of the sylvan
asylums. Before this, moved by deep grief, my father and mother had
rebuked me many times and often, saying,--Thou comest having tarried
long! I am thinking of the pass they have today come to on my account,
for, surely, great grief will be theirs when they miss me. One night
before this, the old couple, who love me dearly, wept from deep sorrow
and said into me, ‘Deprived of thee, O son, we cannot live for even a
moment. As long as thou livest, so long, surely, we also will live. Thou
art the crutch of these blind ones; on thee doth perpetuity of our race
depend. On thee also depend our funeral cake, our fame and our
descendants! My mother is old, and my father also is so. I am surely
their crutch. If they see me not in the night, what, oh, will be their
plight! I hate that slumber of mine for the sake of which my unoffending
mother and my father have both been in trouble, and I myself also, am
placed in such rending distress! Without my father and mother, I cannot
bear to live. It is certain that by this time my blind father, his mind
disconsolate with grief, is asking everyone of the inhabitants of the
hermitage about me! I do not, O fair girl, grieve so much for myself as I
do for my sire, and for my weak mother ever obedient to her lord! Surely,
they will be afflicted with extreme anguish on account of me. I hold my
life so long as they live. And I know that they should be maintained by
me and that I should do only what is agreeable to them!’

“Markandeya continued, ‘Having said this, that virtuous youth who loved
and revered his parents, afflicted with grief held up his arms and began
to lament in accents of woe. And seeing her lord overwhelmed with sorrow
the virtuous Savitri wiped away the tears from his eyes and said, ‘If I
have observed austerities, and have given away in charity, and have
performed sacrifice, may this night be for the good of my father-in-law,
mother-in-law and husband! I do not remember having told a single
falsehood, even in jest. Let my father-in-law and mother-in-law hold
their lives by virtue of the truth!’ Satyavan said, ‘I long for the sight
of my father and mother! Therefore, O Savitri, proceed without delay. O
beautiful damsel, I swear by my own self that if I find any evil to have
befallen my father and mother, I will not live. If thou hast any regard
for virtue, if thou wishest me to live, if it is thy duty to do what is
agreeable to me, proceed thou to the hermitage!’ The beautiful Savitri
then rose and tying up her hair, raised her husband in her arms. And
Satyavan having risen, rubbed his limbs with his hands. And as he
surveyed all around, his eyes fell upon his wallet. Then Savitri said
unto him, ‘Tomorrow thou mayst gather fruits. And I shall carry thy axe
for thy ease.’ Then hanging up the wallet upon the bough of a tree, and
taking up the axe, she re-approached her husband. And that lady of
beautiful thighs, placing her husband’s left arm upon her left shoulder,
and embracing him with her right arms, proceeded with elephantic gait.
Then Satyavan said, ‘O timid one, by virtue of habit, the (forest) paths
are known to me. And further, by the light of the moon between the trees,
I can see them. We have now reached the same path that we took in the
morning for gathering fruits. Do thou, O auspicious one, proceed by the
way that we had come: thou needst not any longer feel dubious about our
path. Near that tract overgrown with Palasa tree, the way diverges into
two. Do thou proceed along the path that lies to the north of it. I am
now well and have got back my strength. I long to see my father and
mother!’ Saying this Satyavan hastily proceeded towards the hermitage.’”


SECTION CCLXLVI

“Markandeya said, ‘Meanwhile the mighty Dyumatsena, having regained his
sight, could see everything. And when his vision grew clear he saw
everything around him. And, O bull of the Bharata race, proceeding with
his wife Saivya to all the (neighbouring) asylums in search of his son,
he became extremely distressed on his account. And that night the old
couple went about searching in asylums, and rivers, and woods, and
floods. And whenever they heard any sound, they stood rising their heads,
anxiously thinking that their son was coming, and said, ‘O yonder cometh
Satyavan with Savitri!’ And they rushed hither and thither like maniacs,
their feet torn, cracked, wounded, and bleeding, pierced with thorns and
Kusa blades. Then all the Brahmanas dwelling in that hermitage came unto
them, and surrounding them on all sides, comforted them, and brought them
back to their own asylum. And there Dyumatsena with his wife surrounded
by aged ascetics, was entertained with stories of monarchs of former
times. And although that old couple desirous of seeing their son, was
comforted, yet recollecting the youthful days of their son, they became
exceedingly sorry. And afflicted with grief, they began to lament in
piteous accents, saying, ‘Alas, O son, alas, O chaste daughter-in-law,
where are you?’ Then a truthful Brahmana of the name of Suvarchas spake
unto them, saying, ‘Considering the austerities, self-restraint, and
behaviour of his wife Savitri, there can be no doubt that Satyavan
liveth!’ And Gautama said, ‘I have studied all the Vedas with their
branches, and I have acquired great ascetic merit. And I have led a
celibate existence, practising also the Brahmacharya mode of life. I have
gratified Agni and my superiors. With rapt soul I have also observed all
the vows: and I have according to the ordinance, frequently lived upon
air alone. By virtue of this ascetic merit, I am cognisant of all the
doings of others. Therefore, do thou take it for certain that Satyavan
liveth.’ Thereupon his disciple said, ‘The words that have fallen from
the lips of my preceptor can never be false. Therefore, Satyavan surely
liveth.’ And the Rishi said, ‘Considering the auspicious marks that his
wife Savitri beareth and all of which indicate immunity from widowhood,
there can be no doubt that Satyavan liveth!’ And Varadwaja said, ‘Having
regard to the ascetic merit, self-restraint, and conduct of his wife
Savitri, there can be no doubt that Satyavan liveth.’ And Dalbhya said,
‘Since thou hast regained thy sight, and since Savitri hath gone away
after completion of the vow, without taking any food, there can be no
doubt that Satyavan liveth.’ And Apastamba said, ‘From the manner in
which the voices of birds and wild animals are being heard through the
stillness of the atmosphere on all sides, and from the fact also of thy
having regained the use of thy eyes, indicating thy usefulness for
earthly purposes once more, there can be no doubt that Satyavan liveth.’
And Dhauma said, ‘As thy son is graced with every virtue, and as he is
the beloved of all, and as he is possessed of marks betokening a long
life, there can be no doubt that Satyavan liveth.’

“Markandeya continued, ‘Thus cheered by those ascetics of truthful
speech, Dyumatsena pondering over those points, attained a little ease. A
little while after, Savitri with her husband Satyavan reached the
hermitage during the night and entered it with a glad heart. The
Brahmanas then said, ‘Beholding this meeting with thy son, and thy
restoration to eye-sight, we all wish thee well, O lord of earth. Thy
meeting with thy son, the sight of thy daughter-in-law, and thy
restoration to sight--constitute a threefold prosperity which thou hast
gained. What we all have said must come to pass: there can be no doubt of
this. Henceforth thou shalt rapidly grow in prosperity.’ Then, O Pritha’s
son, the twice-born ones lighted a fire and sat themselves down before
king Dyumatsena. And Saivya, and Satyavan, and Savitri who stood apart,
their hearts free from grief, sat down with the permission of them all.
Then, O Partha, seated with the monarch those dwellers of the woods,
actuated by curiosity, asked the king’s son, saying, ‘Why didst thou not,
O illustrious one, come back earlier with thy wife? Why hast thou come so
late in the night? What obstacle prevented thee! We do not know, O son of
a king, why thou hast caused such alarm to us, and to thy father and
mother. It behoveth thee to tell us all about this,’ Thereupon, Satyavan
said, ‘With the permission of my father, I went to the woods with
Savitri. There, as I was hewing wood in the forest, I felt a pain in my
head. And in consequence of the pain, I fell into a deep sleep.--This is
all that I remember. I had never slept so long before I have come so late
at night, in order that ye might not grieve (on my account). There is no
other reason for this.’ Gautama then said, ‘Thou knowest not then the
cause of thy father’s sudden restoration to sight. It, therefore,
behoveth Savitri to relate it. I wish to hear it (from thee), for surely
thou art conversant with the mysteries of good and evil. And, O Savitri,
I know thee to be like the goddess Savitri herself in splendour. Thou
must know the cause of this. Therefore, do thou relate it truly! If it
should not be kept a secret, do thou unfold it unto us!’ At these words
of Gautama Savitri said, ‘It is as ye surmise. Your desire shall surely
not be unfulfilled. I have no secret to keep. Listen to the truth then!
The high-souled Narada had predicted the death of my husband. To-day was
the appointed time. I could not, therefore, bear to be separated from my
husband’s company. And after he had fallen asleep, Yama, accompanied by
his messengers, presented himself before him, and tying him, began to
take him away towards the region inhabited by the Pitris. Thereupon I
began to praise that august god, with truthful words. And he granted me
five boons, of which do ye hear from me! For my father-in-law I have
obtained these two boons, viz., his restoration to sight as also to his
kingdom. My father also hath obtained a hundred sons. And I myself have
obtained a hundred sons. And my husband Satyavan hath obtained a life of
four hundred years. It was for the sake of my husband’s life that I had
observed that vow. Thus have I narrated unto you in detail the cause by
which this mighty misfortune of mine was afterwards turned into
happiness. The Rishis said, ‘O chaste lady of excellent disposition,
observant of vows and endued with virtue, and sprung from an illustrious
line, by thee hath the race of this foremost of kings, which was
overwhelmed with calamities, and was sinking in an ocean of darkness,
been rescued.’

“Markandeya continued, ‘Then having applauded and reverenced that best of
women, those Rishis there assembled bade farewell to that foremost of
kings as well as to his son. And having saluted them thus, they speedily
went, in peace with cheerful hearts, to their respective abodes.’”


SECTION CCLXLVII

“Markandeya continued, ‘When the night had passed away, and the solar orb
had risen, those ascetics, having performed their morning rites,
assembled together. And although those mighty sages again and again spake
unto Dyumatsena of the high fortune of Savitri, yet they were never
satisfied. And it so happened, O king, that there came to that hermitage
a large body of people from Salwa. And they brought tidings of the enemy
of Dyumatsena having been slain by his own minister. And they related
unto him all that had happened, viz., how having heard that the usurper
had been slain with all his friends and allies by his minister, his
troops had all fled, and how all the subjects had become unanimous (on
behalf of their legitimate king), saying, ‘Whether possessed of sight or
not, even he shall be our king!’ And they said, ‘We have been sent to
thee in consequence of that resolve. This car of thine, and this army
also consisting of four kinds of forces, have arrived for thee! Good
betide thee, O King! Do thou come! Thou hast been proclaimed in the city.
Do thou for ever occupy the station belonging to thy lather and
grand-father!’ And beholding the king possessed of sight and able-bodied,
they bowed down their heads, their eyes expanded with wonder. Then having
worshipped those old and Brahmanas dwelling in the hermitage and honoured
by them in return, the king set out for his city. And surrounded by the
soldiers, Saivya also accompanied by Savitri, went in a vehicle furnished
with shining sheets and borne on the shoulders of men. Then the priests
with joyful hearts installed Dyumatsena on the throne with his
high-souled son as prince-regent. And after the lapse of a long time,
Savitri gave birth to a century of sons, all warlike and unretreating
from battle, and enhancing the fame of Salwa’s race. And she also had a
century of highly powerful uterine brothers born unto Aswapati, the lord
of the Madras, by Malavi. Thus, O son of Pritha, did Savitri raise from
pitiable plight to high fortune, herself, and her father and mother, her
father-in-law and mother-in-law, as also the race of her husband. And
like that gentle lady Savitri, the auspicious daughter of Drupada, endued
with excellent character, will rescue you all.”

Vaisampayana said, “Thus exhorted by that high-souled sage, the son of
Pandu, O king, with his mind free from anxiety, continued to live in the
forest of Kamyaka. The man that listeneth with reverence to the excellent