Poor man! where art thou now? thy day is night.
 Good man, be not cast down, thou yet art right,
 Thy way to heaven lies by the gates of Hell;
 Cheer up, hold out, with thee it shall go well.

{161} About the midst of this valley, I perceived the mouth of
hell to be, and it stood also hard by the wayside. Now, thought
Christian, what shall I do? And ever and anon the flame and smoke
would come out in such abundance, with sparks and hideous noises,
(things that cared not for Christian's sword, as did Apollyon
before), that he was forced to put up his sword, and betake himself
to another weapon called All-prayer. [Eph. 6:18] So he cried in my
hearing, "O Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my soul!" [Ps. 116:4]
Thus he went on a great while, yet still the flames would be
reaching towards him. Also he heard doleful voices, and rushings
to and fro, so that sometimes he thought he should be torn in
pieces, or trodden down like mire in the streets. This frightful
sight was seen, and these dreadful noises were heard by him for
several miles together; and, coming to a place where he thought he
heard a company of fiends coming forward to meet him, he stopped,
and began to muse what he had best to do. Sometimes he had half
a thought to go back; then again he thought he might be half way
through the valley; he remembered also how he had already vanquished
many a danger, and that the danger of going back might be much more
than for to go forward; so he resolved to go on. Yet the fiends
seemed to come nearer and nearer; but when they were come even
almost at him, he cried out with a most vehement voice, "I will walk
in the strength of the Lord God!" so they gave back, and came no
further.

{162} One thing I would not let slip. I took notice that now poor
Christian was so confounded, that he did not know his own voice;
and thus I perceived it. Just when he was come over against the
mouth of the burning pit, one of the wicked ones got behind him, and
stepped up softly to him, and whisperingly suggested many grievous
blasphemies to him, which he verily thought had proceeded from his
own mind. This put Christian more to it than anything that he met
with before, even to think that he should now blaspheme him that
he loved so much before; yet, if he could have helped it, he would
not have done it; but he had not the discretion either to stop his
ears, or to know from whence these blasphemies came.

{163} When Christian had travelled in this disconsolate condition
some considerable time, he thought he heard the voice of a man,
as going before him, saying, "Though I walk through the valley of
the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me."
[Ps. 23:4]

{164} Then he was glad, and that for these reasons:

First, Because he gathered from thence, that some who feared God
were in this valley as well as himself.

Secondly, For that he perceived God was with them, though in that
dark and dismal state; and why not, thought he, with me? though,
by reason of the impediment that attends this place, I cannot
perceive it. [Job 9:11]

Thirdly, For that he hoped, could he overtake them, to have company
by and by. So he went on, and called to him that was before; but
he knew not what to answer; for that he also thought to be alone.
And by and by the day broke; then said Christian, He hath turned
"the shadow of death into the morning". [Amos 5:8]

{165} Now morning being come, he looked back, not out of desire to
return, but to see, by the light of the day, what hazards he had
gone through in the dark. So he saw more perfectly the ditch that
was on the one hand, and the mire that was on the other; also how
narrow the way was which led betwixt them both; also now he saw the
hobgoblins, and satyrs, and dragons of the pit, but all afar off,
(for after break of day, they came not nigh;) yet they were discovered
to him, according to that which is written, "He discovereth deep
things out of darkness, and bringeth out to light the shadow of
death." [Job 12:22]

{166} Now was Christian much affected with his deliverance from all
the dangers of his solitary way; which dangers, though he feared
them more before, yet he saw them more clearly now, because the light
of the day made them conspicuous to him. And about this time the
sun was rising, and this was another mercy to Christian; for you
must note, that though the first part of the Valley of the Shadow
of Death was dangerous, yet this second part which he was yet to
go, was, if possible, far more dangerous; for from the place where
he now stood, even to the end of the valley, the way was all along
set so full of snares, traps, gins, and nets here, and so full of
pits, pitfalls, deep holes, and shelvings down there, that, had it
now been dark, as it was when he came the first part of the way,
had he had a thousand souls, they had in reason been cast away; but,
as I said just now, the sun was rising. Then said he, "His candle
shineth upon my head, and by his light I walk through darkness."
[Job 29:3]

{167} In this light, therefore, he came to the end of the valley.
Now I saw in my dream, that at the end of this valley lay blood,
bones, ashes, and mangled bodies of men, even of pilgrims that had
gone this way formerly; and while I was musing what should be the
reason, I espied a little before me a cave, where two giants, POPE
and PAGAN, dwelt in old time; by whose power and tyranny the men
whose bones, blood, and ashes, &c., lay there, were cruelly put
to death. But by this place Christian went without much danger,
whereat I somewhat wondered; but I have learnt since, that PAGAN
has been dead many a day; and as for the other, though he be yet
alive, he is, by reason of age, and also of the many shrewd brushes
that he met with in his younger days, grown so crazy and stiff in
his joints, that he can now do little more than sit in his cave's
mouth, grinning at pilgrims as they go by, and biting his nails
because he cannot come at them.

{168} So I saw that Christian went on his way; yet, at the sight of
the Old Man that sat in the mouth of the cave, he could not tell
what to think, especially because he spake to him, though he could
not go after him, saying, "You will never mend till more of you be
burned." But he held his peace, and set a good face on it, and so
went by and catched no hurt. Then sang Christian:

 O world of wonders! (I can say no less),
 That I should be preserved in that distress
 That I have met with here! O blessed be
 That hand that from it hath deliver'd me!
 Dangers in darkness, devils, hell, and sin
 Did compass me, while I this vale was in:
 Yea, snares, and pits, and traps, and nets, did lie
 My path about, that worthless, silly I
 Might have been catch'd, entangled, and cast down;
 But since I live, let JESUS wear the crown.