{328} So they went on and Ignorance followed. They went then till
they came at a place where they saw a way put itself into their way,
and seemed withal to lie as straight as the way which they should
go: and here they knew not which of the two to take, for both
seemed straight before them; therefore, here they stood still to
consider. And as they were thinking about the way, behold a man,
black of flesh, but covered with a very light robe, came to them,
and asked them why they stood there. They answered they were going
to the Celestial City, but knew not which of these ways to take.
Follow me, said the man, it is thither that I am going. So they
followed him in the way that but now came into the road, which by
degrees turned, and turned them so from the city that they desired
to go to, that, in little time, their faces were turned away from
it; yet they followed him. But by and by, before they were aware,
he led them both within the compass of a net, in which they were
both so entangled that they knew not what to do; and with that the
white robe fell off the black man's back. Then they saw where they
were. Wherefore, there they lay crying some time, for they could
not get themselves out.

{329} CHR. Then said Christian to his fellow, Now do I see myself
in error. Did not the Shepherds bid us beware of the flatterers?
As is the saying of the wise man, so we have found it this day. A
man that flattereth his neighbour, spreadeth a net for his feet.
[Prov. 29:5]

HOPE. They also gave us a note of directions about the way, for
our more sure finding thereof; but therein we have also forgotten
to read, and have not kept ourselves from the paths of the destroyer.
Here David was wiser than we; for, saith he, "Concerning the works
of men, by the word of thy lips, I have kept me from the paths of
the destroyer." [Ps. 17:4] Thus they lay bewailing themselves
in the net. At last they espied a Shining One coming towards them
with a whip of small cord in his hand. When he was come to the
place where they were, he asked them whence they came, and what
they did there. They told him that they were poor pilgrims going
to Zion, but were led out of their way by a black man, clothed in
white, who bid us, said they, follow him, for he was going thither
too. Then said he with the whip, It is Flatterer, a false apostle,
that hath transformed himself into an angel of light. [Prov. 29:5,
Dan. 11:32, 2 Cor. 11:13,14] So he rent the net, and let the men
out. Then said he to them, Follow me, that I may set you in your
way again. So he led them back to the way which they had left to
follow the Flatterer. Then he asked them, saying, Where did you lie
the last night? They said, With the Shepherds upon the Delectable
Mountains. He asked them then if they had not of those Shepherds
a note of direction for the way. They answered, Yes. But did you,
said he, when you were at a stand, pluck out and read your note?
They answered, No. He asked them, Why? They said, they forgot.
He asked, moreover, if the Shepherds did not bid them beware of
the Flatterer? They answered, Yes, but we did not imagine, said
they, that this fine-spoken man had been he. [Rom. 16:18]

{330} Then I saw in my dream that he commanded them to lie down;
which, when they did, he chastised them sore, to teach them the
good way wherein they should walk [Deut. 25:2]; and as he chastised
them he said, "As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten; be zealous,
therefore, and repent." [2 Chron. 6:26,27, Rev. 3:19] This
done, he bid them go on their way, and take good heed to the other
directions of the shepherds. So they thanked him for all his
kindness, and went softly along the right way, singing--