{306} When they were about to depart, one of the Shepherds gave
them a note of the way. Another of them bid them beware of the
Flatterer. The third bid them take heed that they sleep not upon
the Enchanted Ground. And the fourth bid them God-speed. So I
awoke from my dream.

{307} And I slept, and dreamed again, and saw the same two Pilgrims
going down the mountains along the highway towards the city. Now,
a little below these mountains, on the left hand, lieth the country
of Conceit; from which country there comes into the way in which
the Pilgrims walked, a little crooked lane. Here, therefore, they
met with a very brisk lad, that came out of that country; and his
name was Ignorance. So Christian asked him from what parts he
came, and whither he was going.

{308} IGNOR. Sir, I was born in the country that lieth off there
a little on the left hand, and I am going to the Celestial City.

CHR. But how do you think to get in at the gate? for you may find
some difficulty there.

IGNOR. As other people do, said he.

CHR. But what have you to show at that gate, that may cause that
the gate should be opened to you?

IGNOR. I know my Lord's will, and I have been a good liver; I pay
every man his own; I pray, fast, pay tithes, and give alms, and
have left my country for whither I am going.

{309} CHR. But thou camest not in at the wicket-gate that is at the
head of this way; thou camest in hither through that same crooked
lane, and therefore, I fear, however thou mayest think of thyself,
when the reckoning day shall come, thou wilt have laid to thy charge
that thou art a thief and a robber, instead of getting admittance
into the city.

IGNOR. Gentlemen, ye be utter strangers to me, I know you not; be
content and follow the religion of your country, and I will follow
the religion of mine. I hope all will be well. And as for the
gate that you talk of, all the world knows that that is a great way
off of our country. I cannot think that any man in all our parts
doth so much as know the way to it, nor need they matter whether
they do or no, since we have, as you see, a fine, pleasant green
lane, that comes down from our country, the next way into the way.

{310} When Christian saw that the man was "wise in his own conceit",
he said to Hopeful, whisperingly, "There is more hope of a fool
than of him." [Prov. 26:12] And said, moreover, "When he that is
a fool walketh by the way, his wisdom faileth him, and he saith to
every one that he is a fool." [Eccl. 10:3] What, shall we talk
further with him, or out-go him at present, and so leave him to
think of what he hath heard already, and then stop again for him
afterwards, and see if by degrees we can do any good to him? Then
said Hopeful--

 Let Ignorance a little while now muse
 On what is said, and let him not refuse
 Good counsel to embrace, lest he remain
 Still ignorant of what's the chiefest gain.
 God saith, those that no understanding have,
 Although he made them, them he will not save.