{132} So in the morning they all got up; and, after some more
discourse, they told him that he should not depart till they had
shown him the rarities of that place. And first they had him into
the study, where they showed him records of the greatest antiquity;
in which, as I remember my dream, they showed him first the pedigree of
the Lord of the hill, that he was the son of the Ancient of Days,
and came by that eternal generation. Here also was more fully
recorded the acts that he had done, and the names of many hundreds
that he had taken into his service; and how he had placed them in
such habitations that could neither by length of days, nor decays
of nature, be dissolved.

{133} Then they read to him some of the worthy acts that some of
his servants had done: as, how they had "subdued kingdoms, wrought
righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions,
quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out
of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, and turned
to flight the armies of the aliens." [Heb 11:33,34]

{134} They then read again, in another part of the records of the
house, where it was shewed how willing their Lord was to receive
into his favour any, even any, though they in time past had offered
great affronts to his person and proceedings. Here also were
several other histories of many other famous things, of all which
Christian had a view; as of things both ancient and modern; together
with prophecies and predictions of things that have their certain
accomplishment, both to the dread and amazement of enemies, and
the comfort and solace of pilgrims.

{135} The next day they took him and had him into the armoury,
where they showed him all manner of furniture, which their Lord
had provided for pilgrims, as sword, shield, helmet, breastplate,
ALL-PRAYER, and shoes that would not wear out. And there was here
enough of this to harness out as many men for the service of their
Lord as there be stars in the heaven for multitude.

{136} They also showed him some of the engines with which some of
his servants had done wonderful things. They shewed him Moses'
rod; the hammer and nail with which Jael slew Sisera; the pitchers,
trumpets, and lamps too, with which Gideon put to flight the armies
of Midian. Then they showed him the ox's goad wherewith Shamgar
slew six hundred men. They showed him also the jaw-bone with which
Samson did such mighty feats. They showed him, moreover, the sling
and stone with which David slew Goliath of Gath; and the sword,
also, with which their Lord will kill the Man of Sin, in the day
that he shall rise up to the prey. They showed him, besides, many
excellent things, with which Christian was much delighted. This
done, they went to their rest again.

{137} Then I saw in my dream, that on the morrow he got up to go
forward; but they desired him to stay till the next day also; and
then, said they, we will, if the day be clear, show you the Delectable
Mountains, which, they said, would yet further add to his comfort,
because they were nearer the desired haven than the place where at
present he was; so he consented and stayed. When the morning was
up, they had him to the top of the house, and bid him look south;
so he did: and behold, at a great distance, he saw a most pleasant
mountainous country, beautified with woods, vineyards, fruits of
all sorts, flowers also, with springs and fountains, very delectable
to behold. [Isa. 33:16,17] Then he asked the name of the country.
They said it was Immanuel's Land; and it is as common, said they,
as this hill is, to and for all the pilgrims. And when thou comest
there from thence, said they, thou mayest see to the gate of the
Celestial City, as the shepherds that live there will make appear.

{138} Now he bethought himself of setting forward, and they were
willing he should. But first, said they, let us go again into the
armoury. So they did; and when they came there, they harnessed him
from head to foot with what was of proof, lest, perhaps, he should
meet with assaults in the way. He being, therefore, thus accoutred,
walketh out with his friends to the gate, and there he asked the
porter if he saw any pilgrims pass by. Then the porter answered,
Yes.

{139} CHR. Pray, did you know him? said he.

POR. I asked him his name, and he told me it was Faithful.

CHR. Oh, said Christian, I know him; he is my townsman, my near
neighbour; he comes from the place where I was born. How far do
you think he may be before?

POR. He is got by this time below the hill.

CHR. Well, said Christian, good Porter, the Lord be with thee, and
add to all thy blessings much increase, for the kindness that thou
hast showed to me.

{140} Then he began to go forward; but Discretion, Piety, Charity,
and Prudence would accompany him down to the foot of the hill. So
they went on together, reiterating their former discourses, till
they came to go down the hill. Then said Christian, As it was
difficult coming up, so, so far as I can see, it is dangerous going
down. Yes, said Prudence, so it is, for it is a hard matter for
a man to go down into the Valley of Humiliation, as thou art now,
and to catch no slip by the way; therefore, said they, are we come
out to accompany thee down the hill. So he began to go down, but
very warily; yet he caught a slip or two.

{141} Then I saw in my dream that these good companions, when
Christian was gone to the bottom of the hill, gave him a loaf of
bread, a bottle of wine, and a cluster of raisins; and then he went
on his way.

But now, in this Valley of Humiliation, poor Christian was hard put
to it; for he had gone but a little way, before he espied a foul
fiend coming over the field to meet him; his name is Apollyon. Then
did Christian begin to be afraid, and to cast in his mind whether
to go back or to stand his ground. But he considered again that
he had no armour for his back; and therefore thought that to turn
the back to him might give him the greater advantage with ease to
pierce him with his darts.

Christian's resolution at the approach of Apollyon

Therefore he resolved to venture and stand his ground; for, thought
he, had I no more in mine eye than the saving of my life, it would
be the best way to stand.

{142} So he went on, and Apollyon met him. Now the monster was
hideous to behold; he was clothed with scales, like a fish, (and
they are his pride,) he had wings like a dragon, feet like a bear,
and out of his belly came fire and smoke, and his mouth was as the
mouth of a lion. When he was come up to Christian, he beheld him
with a disdainful countenance, and thus began to question with him.

{143} APOL. Whence come you? and whither are you bound?

CHR. I am come from the City of Destruction, which is the place of
all evil, and am going to the City of Zion.

APOL. By this I perceive thou art one of my subjects, for all that
country is mine, and I am the prince and god of it. How is it,
then, that thou hast run away from thy king? Were it not that I
hope thou mayest do me more service, I would strike thee now, at
one blow, to the ground.

{144} CHR. I was born, indeed, in your dominions, but your service
was hard, and your wages such as a man could not live on, "for the
wages of sin is death" [Rom 6:23]; therefore, when I was come to
years, I did, as other considerate persons do, look out, if, perhaps,
I might mend myself.

Apollyon's flattery

APOL. There is no prince that will thus lightly lose his subjects,
neither will I as yet lose thee; but since thou complainest of thy
service and wages, be content to go back: what our country will
afford, I do here promise to give thee.

CHR. But I have let myself to another, even to the King of princes;
and how can I, with fairness, go back with thee?

{145} APOL. Thou hast done in this, according to the proverb,
"Changed a bad for a worse"; but it is ordinary for those that
have professed themselves his servants, after a while to give him
the slip, and return again to me. Do thou so too, and all shall
be well.

CHR. I have given him my faith, and sworn my allegiance to him;
how, then, can I go back from this, and not be hanged as a traitor?

APOL. Thou didst the same to me, and yet I am willing to pass by
all, if now thou wilt yet turn again and go back.

{146} CHR. What I promised thee was in my nonage; and, besides, I
count the Prince under whose banner now I stand is able to absolve
me; yea, and to pardon also what I did as to my compliance with
thee; and besides, O thou destroying Apollyon! to speak truth,
I like his service, his wages, his servants, his government, his
company, and country, better than thine; and, therefore, leave off
to persuade me further; I am his servant, and I will follow him.

{147} APOL. Consider, again, when thou art in cool blood, what thou
art like to meet with in the way that thou goest. Thou knowest
that, for the most part, his servants come to an ill end, because
they are transgressors against me and my ways. How many of them
have been put to shameful deaths! and, besides, thou countest his
service better than mine, whereas he never came yet from the place
where he is to deliver any that served him out of their hands; but
as for me, how many times, as all the world very well knows, have
I delivered, either by power, or fraud, those that have faithfully
served me, from him and his, though taken by them; and so I will
deliver thee.

CHR. His forbearing at present to deliver them is on purpose to try
their love, whether they will cleave to him to the end; and as for
the ill end thou sayest they come to, that is most glorious in their
account; for, for present deliverance, they do not much expect it,
for they stay for their glory, and then they shall have it when
their Prince comes in his and the glory of the angels.

APOL. Thou hast already been unfaithful in thy service to him; and
how dost thou think to receive wages of him?

CHR. Wherein, O Apollyon! have I been unfaithful to him?

{148} APOL. Thou didst faint at first setting out, when thou wast
almost choked in the Gulf of Despond; thou didst attempt wrong ways
to be rid of thy burden, whereas thou shouldst have stayed till
thy Prince had taken it off; thou didst sinfully sleep and lose
thy choice thing; thou wast, also, almost persuaded to go back at
the sight of the lions; and when thou talkest of thy journey, and
of what thou hast heard and seen, thou art inwardly desirous of
vain-glory in all that thou sayest or doest.

CHR. All this is true, and much more which thou hast left out;
but the Prince whom I serve and honour is merciful, and ready to
forgive; but, besides, these infirmities possessed me in thy country,
for there I sucked them in; and I have groaned under them, been
sorry for them, and have obtained pardon of my Prince.

{149} APOL. Then Apollyon broke out into a grievous rage, saying,
I am an enemy to this Prince; I hate his person, his laws, and
people; I am come out on purpose to withstand thee.

CHR. Apollyon, beware what you do; for I am in the King's highway,
the way of holiness; therefore take heed to yourself.

APOL. Then Apollyon straddled quite over the whole breadth of the
way, and said, I am void of fear in this matter: prepare thyself
to die; for I swear by my infernal den, that thou shalt go no
further; here will I spill thy soul.

{150} And with that he threw a flaming dart at his breast; but
Christian had a shield in his hand, with which he caught it, and
so prevented the danger of that.

Then did Christian draw, for he saw it was time to bestir him; and
Apollyon as fast made at him, throwing darts as thick as hail; by
the which, notwithstanding all that Christian could do to avoid it,
Apollyon wounded him in his head, his hand, and foot. This made
Christian give a little back; Apollyon, therefore, followed his work
amain, and Christian again took courage, and resisted as manfully
as he could. This sore combat lasted for above half a day, even
till Christian was almost quite spent; for you must know that
Christian, by reason of his wounds, must needs grow weaker and
weaker.

{151} Then Apollyon, espying his opportunity, began to gather up
close to Christian, and wrestling with him, gave him a dreadful
fall; and with that Christian's sword flew out of his hand. Then
said Apollyon, I am sure of thee now. And with that he had almost
pressed him to death, so that Christian began to despair of life;
but as God would have it, while Apollyon was fetching of his
last blow, thereby to make a full end of this good man, Christian
nimbly stretched out his hand for his sword, and caught it, saying,
"Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy; when I fall I shall arise"
[Micah 7:8];

Christian's victory over Apollyon

and with that gave him a deadly thrust, which made him give back,
as one that had received his mortal wound. Christian perceiving
that, made at him again, saying, "Nay, in all these things we are
more than conquerors through him that loved us". [Rom. 8:37] And
with that Apollyon spread forth his dragon's wings, and sped him
away, that Christian for a season saw him no more. [James 4:7]

{152} In this combat no man can imagine, unless he had seen and
heard as I did, what yelling and hideous roaring Apollyon made all
the time of the fight--he spake like a dragon; and, on the other
side, what sighs and groans burst from Christian's heart. I never
saw him all the while give so much as one pleasant look, till he
perceived he had wounded Apollyon with his two-edged sword; then,
indeed, he did smile, and look upward; but it was the dreadfullest
sight that ever I saw.

A more unequal match can hardly be,--CHRISTIAN must fight an
Angel; but you see,

 The valiant man by handling Sword and Shield,
 Doth make him, tho' a Dragon, quit the field.