{272} Now I saw that, just on the other side of this plain,
the pilgrims came to a place where stood an old monument, hard by
the highway side, at the sight of which they were both concerned,
because of the strangeness of the form thereof; for it seemed
to them as if it had been a woman transformed into the shape of a
pillar; here, therefore they stood looking, and looking upon it,
but could not for a time tell what they should make thereof. At
last Hopeful espied written above the head thereof, a writing in
an unusual hand; but he being no scholar, called to Christian (for
he was learned) to see if he could pick out the meaning; so he came,
and after a little laying of letters together, he found the same
to be this, "Remember Lot's Wife". So he read it to his fellow;
after which they both concluded that that was the pillar of salt into
which Lot's wife was turned, for her looking back with a covetous
heart, when she was going from Sodom for safety. [Gen. 19:26]
Which sudden and amazing sight gave them occasion of this discourse.

{273} CHR. Ah, my brother! this is a seasonable sight; it came
opportunely to us after the invitation which Demas gave us to come
over to view the Hill Lucre; and had we gone over, as he desired
us, and as thou wast inclining to do, my brother, we had, for aught
I know, been made ourselves like this woman, a spectacle for those
that shall come after to behold.

HOPE. I am sorry that I was so foolish, and am made to wonder that
I am not now as Lot's wife; for wherein was the difference betwixt
her sin and mine? She only looked back; and I had a desire to go
see. Let grace be adored, and let me be ashamed that ever such a
thing should be in mine heart.

{274} CHR. Let us take notice of what we see here, for our help
for time to come. This woman escaped one judgment, for she fell
not by the destruction of Sodom; yet she was destroyed by another,
as we see she is turned into a pillar of salt.

HOPE. True; and she may be to us both caution and example; caution,
that we should shun her sin; or a sign of what judgment will overtake
such as shall not be prevented by this caution; so Korah, Dathan,
and Abiram, with the two hundred and fifty men that perished in
their sin, did also become a sign or example to others to beware.
[Num. 26:9,10] But above all, I muse at one thing, to wit, how
Demas and his fellows can stand so confidently yonder to look for
that treasure, which this woman, but for looking behind her after,
(for we read not that she stepped one foot out of the way) was
turned into a pillar of salt; especially since the judgment which
overtook her did make her an example, within sight of where they
are; for they cannot choose but see her, did they but lift up their
eyes.

{275} CHR. It is a thing to be wondered at, and it argueth that
their hearts are grown desperate in the case; and I cannot tell who
to compare them to so fitly, as to them that pick pockets in the
presence of the judge, or that will cut purses under the gallows.
It is said of the men of Sodom, that they were sinners exceedingly,
because they were sinners before the Lord, that is, in his eyesight,
and notwithstanding the kindnesses that he had showed them [Gen.
13:13]; for the land of Sodom was now like the garden of Eden
heretofore. [Gen. 13:10] This, therefore, provoked him the more
to jealousy, and made their plague as hot as the fire of the Lord
out of heaven could make it. And it is most rationally to be
concluded, that such, even such as these are, that shall sin in
the sight, yea, and that too in despite of such examples that are
set continually before them, to caution them to the contrary, must
be partakers of severest judgments.

HOPE. Doubtless thou hast said the truth; but what a mercy is it,
that neither thou, but especially I, am not made myself this example!
This ministereth occasion to us to thank God, to fear before him,
and always to remember Lot's wife.

{276} I saw, then, that they went on their way to a pleasant river;
which David the king called "the river of God", but John, "the
river of the water of life". [Ps. 65:9, Rev. 22, Ezek. 47] Now
their way lay just upon the bank of the river; here, therefore,
Christian and his companion walked with great delight; they drank
also of the water of the river, which was pleasant, and enlivening
to their weary spirits: besides, on the banks of this river, on
either side, were green trees, that bore all manner of fruit; and
the leaves of the trees were good for medicine; with the fruit of
these trees they were also much delighted; and the leaves they eat
to prevent surfeits, and other diseases that are incident to those
that heat their blood by travels. On either side of the river was
also a meadow, curiously beautified with lilies, and it was green
all the year long. In this meadow they lay down, and slept; for
here they might lie down safely. When they awoke, they gathered
again of the fruit of the trees, and drank again of the water
of the river, and then lay down again to sleep. [Ps. 23:2, Isa.
14:30] Thus they did several days and nights. Then they sang--

 Behold ye how these crystal streams do glide,
 To comfort pilgrims by the highway side;
 The meadows green, beside their fragrant smell,
 Yield dainties for them; and he that can tell
 What pleasant fruit, yea, leaves, these trees do yield,
 Will soon sell all, that he may buy this field.