{153} So when the battle was over, Christian said, "I will here
give thanks to him that delivered me out of the mouth of the lion,
to him that did help me against Apollyon." And so he did, saying--

 Great Beelzebub, the captain of this fiend,
 Design'd my ruin; therefore to this end
 He sent him harness'd out: and he with rage
 That hellish was, did fiercely me engage.
 But blessed Michael helped me, and I,
 By dint of sword, did quickly make him fly.
 Therefore to him let me give lasting praise,
 And thank and bless his holy name always.

{154} Then there came to him a hand, with some of the leaves of the
tree of life, the which Christian took, and applied to the wounds
that he had received in the battle, and was healed immediately.
He also sat down in that place to eat bread, and to drink of the
bottle that was given him a little before; so, being refreshed,
he addressed himself to his journey, with his sword drawn in his
hand; for he said, I know not but some other enemy may be at hand.
But he met with no other affront from Apollyon quite through this
valley.

{155} Now, at the end of this valley was another, called the Valley
of the Shadow of Death, and Christian must needs go through it,
because the way to the Celestial City lay through the midst of it.
Now, this valley is a very solitary place. The prophet Jeremiah
thus describes it: "A wilderness, a land of deserts and of pits,
a land of drought, and of the shadow of death, a land that no man"
(but a Christian) "passed through, and where no man dwelt." [Jer.
2:6]

Now here Christian was worse put to it than in his fight with
Apollyon, as by the sequel you shall see.

{156} I saw then in my dream, that when Christian was got to the
borders of the Shadow of Death, there met him two men, children of
them that brought up an evil report of the good land [Num. 13],
making haste to go back; to whom Christian spake as follows:--

{157} CHR. Whither are you going?

MEN. They said, Back! back! and we would have you to do so too,
if either life or peace is prized by you.

CHR. Why, what's the matter? said Christian.

MEN. Matter! said they; we were going that way as you are going,
and went as far as we durst; and indeed we were almost past coming
back; for had we gone a little further, we had not been here to
bring the news to thee.

CHR. But what have you met with? said Christian.

MEN. Why, we were almost in the Valley of the Shadow of Death; but
that, by good hap, we looked before us, and saw the danger before
we came to it. [Ps. 44:19; 107:10]

CHR. But what have you seen? said Christian.

{158} MEN. Seen! Why, the Valley itself, which is as dark as pitch;
we also saw there the hobgoblins, satyrs, and dragons of the pit;
we heard also in that Valley a continual howling and yelling, as of
a people under unutterable misery, who there sat bound in affliction
and irons; and over that Valley hangs the discouraging clouds of
confusion. Death also doth always spread his wings over it. In
a word, it is every whit dreadful, being utterly without order.
[Job 3:5; 10:22]

CHR. Then, said Christian, I perceive not yet, by what you have
said, but that this is my way to the desired haven. [Jer. 2:6]

MEN. Be it thy way; we will not choose it for ours. So, they parted,
and Christian went on his way, but still with his sword drawn in
his hand, for fear lest he should be assaulted.

{159} I saw then in my dream, so far as this valley reached, there
was on the right hand a very deep ditch; that ditch is it into
which the blind have led the blind in all ages, and have both there
miserably perished. [Ps. 69:14,15] Again, behold, on the left
hand, there was a very dangerous quag, into which, if even a good
man falls, he can find no bottom for his foot to stand on. Into
that quag King David once did fall, and had no doubt therein been
smothered, had not HE that is able plucked him out.

{160} The pathway was here also exceeding narrow, and therefore
good Christian was the more put to it; for when he sought, in the
dark, to shun the ditch on the one hand, he was ready to tip over
into the mire on the other; also when he sought to escape the mire,
without great carefulness he would be ready to fall into the ditch.
Thus he went on, and I heard him here sigh bitterly; for, besides
the dangers mentioned above, the pathway was here so dark, and
ofttimes, when he lift up his foot to set forward, he knew not
where or upon what he should set it next.