"Difficulty is behind, Fear is before,
 Though he's got on the hill, the lions roar;
 A Christian man is never long at ease,
 When one fright's gone, another doth him seize."

{111} Then I saw that he went on, trembling for fear of the lions,
but taking good heed to the directions of the porter; he heard
them roar, but they did him no harm. Then he clapped his hands,
and went on till he came and stood before the gate where the porter
was. Then said Christian to the porter, Sir, what house is this?
And may I lodge here to-night? The porter answered, This house
was built by the Lord of the hill, and he built it for the relief
and security of pilgrims. The porter also asked whence he was,
and whither he was going.

{112} CHR. I am come from the City of Destruction, and am going to
Mount Zion; but because the sun is now set, I desire, if I may, to
lodge here to-night.

POR. What is your name?

CHR. My name is now Christian, but my name at the first was Graceless;
I came of the race of Japheth, whom God will persuade to dwell in
the tents of Shem. [Gen. 9:27]

POR. But how doth it happen that you come so late? The sun is set.

{113} CHR. I had been here sooner, but that, "wretched man that
I am!" I slept in the arbour that stands on the hillside; nay, I
had, notwithstanding that, been here much sooner, but that, in my
sleep, I lost my evidence, and came without it to the brow of the
hill and then feeling for it, and finding it not, I was forced with
sorrow of heart, to go back to the place where I slept my sleep,
where I found it, and now I am come.

POR. Well, I will call out one of the virgins of this place, who
will, if she likes your talk, bring you into the rest of the family,
according to the rules of the house. So Watchful, the porter, rang
a bell, at the sound of which came out at the door of the house,
a grave and beautiful damsel, named Discretion, and asked why she
was called.

{114} The porter answered, This man is in a journey from the City
of Destruction to Mount Zion, but being weary and benighted, he
asked me if he might lodge here to-night; so I told him I would call
for thee, who, after discourse had with him, mayest do as seemeth
thee good, even according to the law of the house.

{115} Then she asked him whence he was, and whither he was going,
and he told her. She asked him also how he got into the way; and
he told her. Then she asked him what he had seen and met with
in the way; and he told her. And last she asked his name; so he
said, It is Christian, and I have so much the more a desire to lodge
here to-night, because, by what I perceive, this place was built
by the Lord of the hill for the relief and security of pilgrims.
So she smiled, but the water stood in her eyes; and after a
little pause, she said, I will call forth two or three more of the
family. So she ran to the door, and called out Prudence, Piety,
and Charity, who, after a little more discourse with him, had him
into the family; and many of them, meeting him at the threshold
of the house, said, Come in, thou blessed of the Lord; this house
was built by the Lord of the hill, on purpose to entertain such
pilgrims in. Then he bowed his head, and followed them into the
house. So when he was come in and sat down, they gave him something
to drink, and consented together, that until supper was ready, some
of them should have some particular discourse with Christian, for
the best improvement of time; and they appointed Piety, and Prudence,
and Charity to discourse with him; and thus they began:

{116} PIETY. Come, good Christian, since we have been so loving
to you, to receive you in our house this night, let us, if perhaps
we may better ourselves thereby, talk with you of all things that
have happened to you in your pilgrimage.

CHR. With a very good will, and I am glad that you are so well
disposed.

{117} PIETY. What moved you at first to betake yourself to a
pilgrim's life?

CHR. I was driven out of my native country by a dreadful sound that
was in mine ears: to wit, that unavoidable destruction did attend
me, if I abode in that place where I was.

PIETY. But how did it happen that you came out of your country this
way?

CHR. It was as God would have it; for when I was under the fears
of destruction, I did not know whither to go; but by chance there
came a man, even to me, as I was trembling and weeping, whose name
is Evangelist, and he directed me to the wicket-gate, which else I
should never have found, and so set me into the way that hath led
me directly to this house.

{118} PIETY. But did you not come by the house of the Interpreter?

CHR. Yes, and did see such things there, the remembrance of which
will stick by me as long as I live; especially three things: to
wit, how Christ, in despite of Satan, maintains his work of grace
in the heart; how the man had sinned himself quite out of hopes of
God's mercy; and also the dream of him that thought in his sleep
the day of judgement was come.

PIETY. Why, did you hear him tell his dream?

CHR. Yes, and a dreadful one it was. I thought it made my heart
ache as he was telling of it; but yet I am glad I heard it.

{119} PIETY. Was that all that you saw at the house of the Interpreter?

CHR. No; he took me and had me where he shewed me a stately palace,
and how the people were clad in gold that were in it; and how there
came a venturous man and cut his way through the armed men that
stood in the door to keep him out, and how he was bid to come in,
and win eternal glory. Methought those things did ravish my heart!
I would have stayed at that good man's house a twelvemonth, but
that I knew I had further to go.

{120} PIETY. And what saw you else in the way?

CHR. Saw! why, I went but a little further, and I saw one, as
I thought in my mind, hang bleeding upon the tree; and the very
sight of him made my burden fall off my back, (for I groaned under
a very heavy burden,) but then it fell down from off me. It was
a strange thing to me, for I never saw such a thing before; yea,
and while I stood looking up, for then I could not forbear looking,
three Shining Ones came to me. One of them testified that my sins
were forgiven me; another stripped me of my rags, and gave me this
broidered coat which you see; and the third set the mark which you
see in my forehead, and gave me this sealed roll. (And with that
he plucked it out of his bosom.)

{121} PIETY. But you saw more than this, did you not?

CHR. The things that I have told you were the best; yet some other
matters I saw, as, namely--I saw three men, Simple, Sloth, and
Presumption, lie asleep a little out of the way, as I came, with
irons upon their heels; but do you think I could awake them? I
also saw Formality and Hypocrisy come tumbling over the wall, to
go, as they pretended, to Zion, but they were quickly lost, even
as I myself did tell them; but they would not believe. But above
all, I found it hard work to get up this hill, and as hard to come
by the lions' mouths, and truly if it had not been for the good
man, the porter that stands at the gate, I do not know but that
after all I might have gone back again; but now I thank God I am
here, and I thank you for receiving of me.

{122} Then Prudence thought good to ask him a few questions, and
desired his answer to them.

PRUD. Do you not think sometimes of the country from whence you
came?

Christian's thoughts of his native country

CHR. Yes, but with much shame and detestation: "Truly, if I had
been mindful of that country from whence I came out, I might have
had opportunity to have returned; but now I desire a better country,
that is, an heavenly." [Heb. 11:15,16]

PRUD. Do you not yet bear away with you some of the things that
then you were conversant withal?

CHR. Yes, but greatly against my will; especially my inward and
carnal cogitations, with which all my countrymen, as well as myself,
were delighted; but now all those things are my grief; and might
I but choose mine own things,

Christian's choice

I would choose never to think of those things more; but when I
would be doing of that which is best, that which is worst is with
me. [Rom 7:16-19]

{123} PRUD. Do you not find sometimes, as if those things were
vanquished, which at other times are your perplexity?

Christian's golden hours

CHR. Yes, but that is seldom; but they are to me golden hours in
which such things happen to me.

PRUD. Can you remember by what means you find your annoyances, at
times, as if they were vanquished?

CHR. Yes, when I think what I saw at the cross, that will do it;
and when I look upon my broidered coat, that will do it; also when
I look into the roll that I carry in my bosom, that will do it;
and when my thoughts wax warm about whither I am going, that will
do it.

{124} PRUD. And what is it that makes you so desirous to go to
Mount Zion?

CHR. Why, there I hope to see him alive that did hang dead on the
cross; and there I hope to be rid of all those things that to this
day are in me an annoyance to me; there, they say, there is no
death; and there I shall dwell with such company as I like best.
[Isa. 25:8; Rev. 21:4] For, to tell you truth, I love him,
because I was by him eased of my burden; and I am weary of my inward
sickness. I would fain be where I shall die no more, and with the
company that shall continually cry, "Holy, Holy, Holy!"

{125} Then said Charity to Christian, Have you a family? Are you
a married man?

CHR. I have a wife and four small children.

CHAR. And why did you not bring them along with you?

Christian's love to his wife and children

CHR. Then Christian wept, and said, Oh, how willingly would I have
done it! but they were all of them utterly averse to my going on
pilgrimage.

CHAR. But you should have talked to them, and have endeavoured to
have shown them the danger of being behind.

CHR. So I did; and told them also of what God had shown to me
of the destruction of our city; "but I seemed to them as one that
mocked", and they believed me not. [Gen. 19:14]

CHAR. And did you pray to God that he would bless your counsel to
them?

CHR. Yes, and that with much affection: for you must think that
my wife and poor children were very dear unto me.

CHAR. But did you tell them of your own sorrow, and fear of
destruction? for I suppose that destruction was visible enough to
you.

Christian's fears of perishing might be read in his very countenance

CHR. Yes, over, and over, and over. They might also see my fears
in my countenance, in my tears, and also in my trembling under the
apprehension of the judgement that did hang over our heads; but
all was not sufficient to prevail with them to come with me.

CHAR. But what could they say for themselves, why they came not?

{126} CHR. Why, my wife was afraid of losing this world, and
my children were given to the foolish delights of youth: so what
by one thing, and what by another, they left me to wander in this
manner alone.

CHAR. But did you not, with your vain life, damp all that you by
words used by way of persuasion to bring them away with you?

{127} Christian's good conversation before his wife and children

CHR. Indeed, I cannot commend my life; for I am conscious to myself
of many failings therein; I know also that a man by his conversation
may soon overthrow what by argument or persuasion he doth labour to
fasten upon others for their good. Yet this I can say, I was very
wary of giving them occasion, by any unseemly action, to make them
averse to going on pilgrimage. Yea, for this very thing they would
tell me I was too precise, and that I denied myself of things,
for their sakes, in which they saw no evil. Nay, I think I may
say, that if what they saw in me did hinder them, it was my great
tenderness in sinning against God, or of doing any wrong to my
neighbour.

CHAR. Indeed Cain hated his brother, "because his own works were
evil, and his brother's righteous" [1 John 3:12]; and if thy wife
and children have been offended with thee for this, they thereby
show themselves to be implacable to good, and "thou hast delivered
thy soul from their blood". [Ezek. 3:19]

{128} Now I saw in my dream, that thus they sat talking together
until supper was ready. So when they had made ready, they sat down
to meat. Now the table was furnished "with fat things, and with
wine that was well refined": and all their talk at the table was
about the Lord of the hill; as, namely, about what he had done, and
wherefore he did what he did, and why he had builded that house.
And by what they said, I perceived that he had been a great warrior,
and had fought with and slain "him that had the Power of death",
but not without great danger to himself, which made me love him
the more. [Heb. 2:14,15]

{129} For, as they said, and as I believe (said Christian), he did
it with the loss of much blood; but that which put glory of grace
into all he did, was, that he did it out of pure love to his country.
And besides, there were some of them of the household that said
they had been and spoke with him since he did die on the cross; and
they have attested that they had it from his own lips, that he is
such a lover of poor pilgrims, that the like is not to be found
from the east to the west.

{130} They, moreover, gave an instance of what they affirmed, and
that was, he had stripped himself of his glory, that he might do
this for the poor; and that they heard him say and affirm, "that
he would not dwell in the mountain of Zion alone." They said,
moreover, that he had made many pilgrims princes, though by nature
they were beggars born, and their original had been the dunghill.
[1 Sam 2:8; Ps. 113:7]

{131} Christian's bedchamber

Thus they discoursed together till late at night; and after they had
committed themselves to their Lord for protection, they betook
themselves to rest: the Pilgrim they laid in a large upper
chamber, whose window opened towards the sun-rising: the name of
the chamber was Peace; where he slept till break of day, and then
he awoke and sang--

 "Where am I now? Is this the love and care
 Of Jesus for the men that pilgrims are?
 Thus to provide! that I should be forgiven!
 And dwell already the next door to heaven!"