How Talkative at first lifts up his plumes!
 How bravely doth he speak! How he presumes
 To drive down all before him! But so soon
 As Faithful talks of heart-work, like the moon
 That's past the full, into the wane he goes.
 And so will all, but he that HEART-WORK knows.

{208} Thus they went on talking of what they had seen by the way,
and so made that way easy which would otherwise, no doubt, have
been tedious to them; for now they went through a wilderness.

{209} Now, when they were got almost quite out of this wilderness,
Faithful chanced to cast his eye back, and espied one coming after
them, and he knew him. Oh! said Faithful to his brother, who
comes yonder? Then Christian looked, and said, It is my good friend
Evangelist. Ay, and my good friend too, said Faithful, for it was
he that set me in the way to the gate. Now was Evangelist come up
to them, and thus saluted them:

{210} EVAN. Peace be with you, dearly beloved; and peace be to your
helpers.

CHR. Welcome, welcome, my good Evangelist, the sight of
thy countenance brings to my remembrance thy ancient kindness and
unwearied labouring for my eternal good.

FAITH. And a thousand times welcome, said good Faithful. Thy
company, O sweet Evangelist, how desirable it is to us poor pilgrims!

EVAN. Then said Evangelist, How hath it fared with you, my friends,
since the time of our last parting? What have you met with, and
how have you behaved yourselves?

{211} Then Christian and Faithful told him of all things that had
happened to them in the way; and how, and with what difficulty,
they had arrived at that place.

{212} EVAN. Right glad am I, said Evangelist, not that you have
met with trials, but that you have been victors; and for that you
have, notwithstanding many weaknesses, continued in the way to this
very day.

I say, right glad am I of this thing, and that for mine own sake
and yours. I have sowed, and you have reaped: and the day is
coming, when both he that sowed and they that reaped shall rejoice
together; that is, if you hold out: "for in due season ye shall
reap, if ye faint not." [John 4:36, Gal. 6:9] The crown is before
you, and it is an incorruptible one; so run, that you may obtain
it. [1 Cor. 9:24-27] Some there be that set out for this crown,
and, after they have gone far for it, another comes in, and takes
it from them: hold fast, therefore, that you have; let no man
take your crown. [Rev. 3:11] You are not yet out of the gun-shot
of the devil; you have not resisted unto blood, striving against
sin; let the kingdom be always before you, and believe steadfastly
concerning things that are invisible. Let nothing that is on this
side the other world get within you; and, above all, look well to
your own hearts, and to the lusts thereof, "for they are deceitful
above all things, and desperately wicked"; set your faces like a
flint; you have all power in heaven and earth on your side.

{213} CHR. Then Christian thanked him for his exhortation; but
told him, withal, that they would have him speak further to them
for their help the rest of the way, and the rather, for that they
well knew that he was a prophet, and could tell them of things that
might happen unto them, and also how they might resist and overcome
them. To which request Faithful also consented. So Evangelist
began as followeth:--

EVAN. My sons, you have heard, in the words of the truth of
the gospel, that you must, through many tribulations, enter into
the kingdom of heaven. And, again, that in every city bonds and
afflictions abide in you; and therefore you cannot expect that you
should go long on your pilgrimage without them, in some sort or
other. You have found something of the truth of these testimonies
upon you already, and more will immediately follow; for now, as
you see, you are almost out of this wilderness, and therefore you
will soon come into a town that you will by and by see before you;
and in that town you will be hardly beset with enemies, who will
strain hard but they will kill you; and be you sure that one or
both of you must seal the testimony which you hold, with blood; but
be you faithful unto death, and the King will give you a crown of
life.

{214} He that shall die there, although his death will be unnatural,
and his pain perhaps great, he will yet have the better of his
fellow; not only because he will be arrived at the Celestial City
soonest, but because he will escape many miseries that the other
will meet with in the rest of his journey. But when you are come
to the town, and shall find fulfilled what I have here related,
then remember your friend, and quit yourselves like men, and commit
the keeping of your souls to your God in well-doing, as unto a
faithful Creator.

{215} Then I saw in my dream, that when they were got out of the
wilderness, they presently saw a town before them, and the name of
that town is Vanity; and at the town there is a fair kept, called
Vanity Fair: it is kept all the year long. It beareth the name
of Vanity Fair because the town where it is kept is lighter than
vanity; and, also because all that is there sold, or that cometh
thither, is vanity. As is the saying of the wise, "all that cometh
is vanity." [Eccl. 1; 2:11,17; 11:8; Isa. 11:17]

{216} This fair is no new-erected business, but a thing of ancient
standing; I will show you the original of it.

Almost five thousand years agone, there were pilgrims walking to
the Celestial City, as these two honest persons are: and Beelzebub,
Apollyon, and Legion, with their companions, perceiving by the
path that the pilgrims made, that their way to the city lay through
this town of Vanity, they contrived here to set up a fair; a fair
wherein, should be sold all sorts of vanity, and that it should last
all the year long: therefore at this fair are all such merchandise
sold, as houses, lands, trades, places, honours, preferments, titles,
countries, kingdoms, lusts, pleasures, and delights of all sorts,
as whores, bawds, wives, husbands, children, masters, servants,
lives, blood, bodies, souls, silver, gold, pearls, precious stones,
and what not.

And, moreover, at this fair there is at all times to be seen juggling
cheats, games, plays, fools, apes, knaves, and rogues, and that of
every kind.

Here are to be seen, too, and that for nothing, thefts, murders,
adulteries, false swearers, and that of a blood-red colour.

{217} And as in other fairs of less moment, there are the several
rows and streets, under their proper names, where such and such
wares are vended; so here likewise you have the proper places,
rows, streets, (viz. countries and kingdoms), where the wares of
this fair are soonest to be found. Here is the Britain Row, the
French Row, the Italian Row, the Spanish Row, the German Row, where
several sorts of vanities are to be sold. But, as in other fairs,
some one commodity is as the chief of all the fair, so the ware
of Rome and her merchandise is greatly promoted in this fair; only
our English nation, with some others, have taken a dislike thereat.

{218} Now, as I said, the way to the Celestial City lies just
through this town where this lusty fair is kept; and he that will
go to the city, and yet not go through this town, must needs go out
of the world. [1 Cor. 5:10] The Prince of princes himself, when
here, went through this town to his own country, and that upon a
fair day too; yea, and as I think, it was Beelzebub, the chief lord
of this fair, that invited him to buy of his vanities; yea, would
have made him lord of the fair, would he but have done him reverence
as he went through the town. [Matt. 4:8, Luke 4:5-7] Yea, because
he was such a person of honour, Beelzebub had him from street to
street, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a little
time, that he might, if possible, allure the Blessed One to cheapen
and buy some of his vanities; but he had no mind to the merchandise,
and therefore left the town, without laying out so much as one
farthing upon these vanities. This fair, therefore, is an ancient
thing, of long standing, and a very great fair.

{219} Now these pilgrims, as I said, must needs go through this
fair. Well, so they did: but, behold, even as they entered into
the fair, all the people in the fair were moved, and the town
itself as it were in a hubbub about them; and that for several
reasons: for--

{220} First, The pilgrims were clothed with such kind of raiment
as was diverse from the raiment of any that traded in that fair.
The people, therefore, of the fair, made a great gazing upon them:
some said they were fools, some they were bedlams, and some they
are outlandish men. [1 Cor. 2:7-8]

{221} Secondly, And as they wondered at their apparel, so they did
likewise at their speech; for few could understand what they said;
they naturally spoke the language of Canaan, but they that kept
the fair were the men of this world; so that, from one end of the
fair to the other, they seemed barbarians each to the other.

{222} Thirdly, But that which did not a little amuse the merchandisers
was, that these pilgrims set very light by all their wares; they
cared not so much as to look upon them; and if they called upon them
to buy, they would put their fingers in their ears, and cry, Turn
away mine eyes from beholding vanity, and look upwards, signifying
that their trade and traffic was in heaven. [Ps. 119:37, Phil.
3:19-20]

{223} One chanced mockingly, beholding the carriage of the men, to
say unto them, What will ye buy? But they, looking gravely upon
him, answered, "We buy the truth." [Prov. 23:23] At that there
was an occasion taken to despise the men the more; some mocking,
some taunting, some speaking reproachfully, and some calling upon
others to smite them. At last things came to a hubbub and great
stir in the fair, insomuch that all order was confounded. Now was
word presently brought to the great one of the fair, who quickly
came down, and deputed some of his most trusty friends to take these
men into examination, about whom the fair was almost overturned. So
the men were brought to examination; and they that sat upon them,
asked them whence they came, whither they went, and what they did
there, in such an unusual garb? The men told them that they were
pilgrims and strangers in the world, and that they were going to
their own country, which was the heavenly Jerusalem, [Heb. 11:13-16]
and that they had given no occasion to the men of the town, nor
yet to the merchandisers, thus to abuse them, and to let them in
their journey, except it was for that, when one asked them what
they would buy, they said they would buy the truth. But they that
were appointed to examine them did not believe them to be any other
than bedlams and mad, or else such as came to put all things into
a confusion in the fair. Therefore they took them and beat them,
and besmeared them with dirt, and then put them into the cage, that
they might be made a spectacle to all the men of the fair.