So when they were disposed to go on, (for they were not, as yet,
at their journey's end,) they ate and drank, and departed.

{277} Now, I beheld in my dream, that they had not journeyed far,
but the river and the way for a time parted; at which they were
not a little sorry; yet they durst not go out of the way. Now the
way from the river was rough, and their feet tender, by reason of
their travels; so the souls of the pilgrims were much discouraged
because of the way. [Num. 21:4] Wherefore, still as they went
on, they wished for better way. Now, a little before them, there
was on the left hand of the road a meadow, and a stile to go over
into it; and that meadow is called By-path Meadow. Then said
Christian to his fellow, If this meadow lieth along by our wayside,
let us go over into it. Then he went to the stile to see, and
behold, a path lay along by the way, on the other side of the fence.
It is according to my wish, said Christian. Here is the easiest
going; come, good Hopeful, and let us go over.

{278} HOPE. But how if this path should lead us out of the way?

CHR. That is not like, said the other. Look, doth it not go along
by the wayside? So Hopeful, being persuaded by his fellow, went
after him over the stile. When they were gone over, and were got
into the path, they found it very easy for their feet; and withal,
they, looking before them, espied a man walking as they did, (and
his name was Vain-confidence); so they called after him, and asked
him whither that way led. He said, To the Celestial Gate. Look,
said Christian, did not I tell you so? By this you may see we are
right. So they followed, and he went before them. But, behold,
the night came on, and it grew very dark; so that they that were
behind lost the sight of him that went before.

{279} He, therefore, that went before, (Vain-confidence by name),
not seeing the way before him, fell into a deep pit [Isa. 9:16],
which was on purpose there made, by the Prince of those grounds,
to catch vain-glorious fools withal, and was dashed in pieces with
his fall.

{280} Now Christian and his fellow heard him fall. So they called
to know the matter, but there was none to answer, only they heard
a groaning. Then said Hopeful, Where are we now? Then was his
fellow silent, as mistrusting that he had led him out of the way;
and now it began to rain, and thunder, and lighten in a very dreadful
manner; and the water rose amain.

Then Hopeful groaned in himself, saying, Oh, that I had kept on my
way!

{281} CHR. Who could have thought that this path should have led
us out of the way?

HOPE. I was afraid on it at the very first, and therefore gave you
that gentle caution. I would have spoken plainer, but that you
are older than I.

Christian's repentance for leading of his brother out of the way

CHR. Good brother, be not offended; I am sorry I have brought thee
out of the way, and that I have put thee into such imminent danger;
pray, my brother, forgive me; I did not do it of an evil intent.

HOPE. Be comforted, my brother, for I forgive thee; and believe,
too, that this shall be for our good.

CHR. I am glad I have with me a merciful brother; but we must not
stand thus: let us try to go back again.

HOPE. But, good brother, let me go before.

CHR. No, if you please, let me go first, that if there be any danger,
I may be first therein, because by my means we are both gone out
of the way.

{282} HOPE. No, said Hopeful, you shall not go first; for your
mind being troubled may lead you out of the way again. Then, for
their encouragement, they heard the voice of one saying, "Set thine
heart toward the highway, even the way which thou wentest; turn
again." [Jer. 31:21] But by this time the waters were greatly
risen, by reason of which the way of going back was very dangerous.
(Then I thought that it is easier going out of the way, when we
are in, than going in when we are out.) Yet they adventured to go
back, but it was so dark, and the flood was so high, that in their
going back they had like to have been drowned nine or ten times.

{283} Neither could they, with all the skill they had, get again to
the stile that night. Wherefore, at last, lighting under a little
shelter, they sat down there until the daybreak; but, being weary,
they fell asleep. Now there was, not far from the place where they
lay, a castle called Doubting Castle, the owner whereof was Giant
Despair; and it was in his grounds they now were sleeping: wherefore
he, getting up in the morning early, and walking up and down in his
fields, caught Christian and Hopeful asleep in his grounds. Then,
with a grim and surly voice, he bid them awake; and asked them
whence they were, and what they did in his grounds. They told him
they were pilgrims, and that they had lost their way. Then said
the Giant, You have this night trespassed on me, by trampling in
and lying on my grounds, and therefore you must go along with me.
So they were forced to go, because he was stronger than they. They
also had but little to say, for they knew themselves in a fault.
The Giant, therefore, drove them before him, and put them into his
castle, into a very dark dungeon, nasty and stinking to the spirits
of these two men. [Ps. 88:18] Here, then, they lay from Wednesday
morning till Saturday night, without one bit of bread, or drop of
drink, or light, or any to ask how they did; they were, therefore,
here in evil case, and were far from friends and acquaintance. Now
in this place Christian had double sorrow, because it was through
his unadvised counsel that they were brought into this distress.