Behold Vanity Fair! the Pilgrims there
 Are chain'd and stand beside:
 Even so it was our Lord pass'd here,
 And on Mount Calvary died.

{224} There, therefore, they lay for some time, and were made the
objects of any man's sport, or malice, or revenge, the great one of
the fair laughing still at all that befell them. But the men being
patient, and not rendering railing for railing, but contrariwise,
blessing, and good words for bad, and kindness for injuries done,
some men in the fair that were more observing, and less prejudiced
than the rest, began to check and blame the baser sort for their
continual abuses done by them to the men; they, therefore, in
angry manner, let fly at them again, counting them as bad as the
men in the cage, and telling them that they seemed confederates, and
should be made partakers of their misfortunes. The other replied
that, for aught they could see, the men were quiet, and sober, and
intended nobody any harm; and that there were many that traded in
their fair that were more worthy to be put into the cage, yea, and
pillory too, than were the men they had abused. Thus, after divers
words had passed on both sides, the men behaving themselves all
the while very wisely and soberly before them, they fell to some
blows among themselves, and did harm one to another. Then were
these two poor men brought before their examiners again, and there
charged as being guilty of the late hubbub that had been in the
fair. So they beat them pitifully, and hanged irons upon them,
and led them in chains up and down the fair, for an example and a
terror to others, lest any should speak in their behalf, or join
themselves unto them. But Christian and Faithful behaved themselves
yet more wisely, and received the ignominy and shame that was
cast upon them, with so much meekness and patience, that it won to
their side, though but few in comparison of the rest, several of
the men in the fair. This put the other party yet into greater
rage, insomuch that they concluded the death of these two men.
Wherefore they threatened, that the cage nor irons should serve
their turn, but that they should die, for the abuse they had done,
and for deluding the men of the fair.

Then were they remanded to the cage again, until further order
should be taken with them. So they put them in, and made their
feet fast in the stocks.

{225} Here, therefore, they called again to mind what they had heard
from their faithful friend Evangelist, and were the more confirmed
in their way and sufferings by what he told them would happen to
them. They also now comforted each other, that whose lot it was
to suffer, even he should have the best of it; therefore each man
secretly wished that he might have that preferment: but committing
themselves to the all-wise disposal of Him that ruleth all things,
with much content, they abode in the condition in which they were,
until they should be otherwise disposed of.

{226} Then a convenient time being appointed, they brought them
forth to their trial, in order to their condemnation. When the
time was come, they were brought before their enemies and arraigned.
The judge's name was Lord Hate-good. Their indictment was one and
the same in substance, though somewhat varying in form, the contents
whereof were this:--

{227} "That they were enemies to and disturbers of their trade;
that they had made commotions and divisions in the town, and had
won a party to their own most dangerous opinions, in contempt of
the law of their prince."