{95} I saw then in my dream, that he went on thus, even until he
came at a bottom, where he saw, a little out of the way, three men
fast asleep, with fetters upon their heels. The name of the one
was Simple, another Sloth, and the third Presumption.

{96} Christian then seeing them lie in this case went to them, if
peradventure he might awake them, and cried, You are like them that
sleep on the top of a mast, for the Dead Sea is under you--a gulf
that hath no bottom. [Prov. 23:34] Awake, therefore, and come
away; be willing also, and I will help you off with your irons. He
also told them, If he that "goeth about like a roaring lion" comes
by, you will certainly become a prey to his teeth. [1 Pet. 5:8]
With that they looked upon him, and began to reply in this sort:
Simple said, "I see no danger"; Sloth said, "Yet a little more
sleep"; and Presumption said, "Every fat must stand upon its own
bottom; what is the answer else that I should give thee?" And so
they lay down to sleep again, and Christian went on his way.

{97} Yet was he troubled to think that men in that danger should
so little esteem the kindness of him that so freely offered to help
them, both by awakening of them, counselling of them, and proffering
to help them off with their irons. And as he was troubled thereabout,
he espied two men come tumbling over the wall on the left hand of
the narrow way; and they made up apace to him. The name of the one
was Formalist, and the name of the other Hypocrisy. So, as I said,
they drew up unto him, who thus entered with them into discourse.

{98} CHR. Gentlemen, whence came you, and whither go you?

FORM. and HYP. We were born in the land of Vain-glory, and are
going for praise to Mount Zion.

CHR. Why came you not in at the gate which standeth at the beginning
of the way? Know you not that it is written, that he that cometh
not in by the door, "but climbeth up some other way, the same is
a thief and a robber?" [John 10:1]

FORM. and HYP. They said, That to go to the gate for entrance was,
by all their countrymen, counted too far about; and that, therefore,
their usual way was to make a short cut of it, and to climb over
the wall, as they had done.

CHR. But will it not be counted a trespass against the Lord of the
city whither we are bound, thus to violate his revealed will?

{99} FORM. and HYP. They told him, that, as for that, he needed not
to trouble his head thereabout; for what they did they had custom
for; and could produce, if need were, testimony that would witness
it for more than a thousand years.

CHR. But, said Christian, will your practice stand a trial at law?

FORM. and HYP. They told him, That custom, it being of so long a
standing as above a thousand years, would, doubtless, now be admitted
as a thing legal by any impartial judge; and besides, said they,
if we get into the way, what's matter which way we get in? if we
are in, we are in; thou art but in the way, who, as we perceive,
came in at the gate; and we are also in the way, that came tumbling
over the wall; wherein, now, is thy condition better than ours?

CHR. I walk by the rule of my Master; you walk by the rude working
of your fancies. You are counted thieves already, by the Lord of
the way; therefore, I doubt you will not be found true men at the
end of the way. You come in by yourselves, without his direction;
and shall go out by yourselves, without his mercy.

{100} To this they made him but little answer; only they bid him
look to himself. Then I saw that they went on every man in his
way without much conference one with another, save that these two
men told Christian, that as to laws and ordinances, they doubted
not but they should as conscientiously do them as he; therefore,
said they, we see not wherein thou differest from us but by the coat
that is on thy back, which was, as we trow, given thee by some of
thy neighbours, to hide the shame of thy nakedness.

{101} CHR. By laws and ordinances you will not be saved, since you
came not in by the door. [Gal. 2:16] And as for this coat that
is on my back, it was given me by the Lord of the place whither I
go; and that, as you say, to cover my nakedness with. And I take
it as a token of his kindness to me; for I had nothing but rags
before. And besides, thus I comfort myself as I go: Surely, think
I, when I come to the gate of the city, the Lord thereof will know
me for good since I have this coat on my back--a coat that he
gave me freely in the day that he stripped me of my rags. I have,
moreover, a mark in my forehead, of which, perhaps, you have taken
no notice, which one of my Lord's most intimate associates fixed
there in the day that my burden fell off my shoulders. I will tell
you, moreover, that I had then given me a roll, sealed, to comfort
me by reading as I go on the way; I was also bid to give it in at
the Celestial Gate, in token of my certain going in after it; all
which things, I doubt, you want, and want them because you came
not in at the gate.

{102} To these things they gave him no answer; only they looked
upon each other, and laughed. Then, I saw that they went on all,
save that Christian kept before, who had no more talk but with
himself, and that sometimes sighingly, and sometimes comfortably;
also he would be often reading in the roll that one of the Shining
Ones gave him, by which he was refreshed.

{103} I beheld, then, that they all went on till they came to the
foot of the Hill Difficulty; at the bottom of which was a spring.
There were also in the same place two other ways besides that which
came straight from the gate; one turned to the left hand, and the
other to the right, at the bottom of the hill; but the narrow way
lay right up the hill, and the name of the going up the side of
the hill is called Difficulty. Christian now went to the spring,
and drank thereof, to refresh himself [Isa. 49:10], and then began
to go up the hill, saying--