Brave FAITHFUL, bravely done in word and deed;
 Judge, witnesses, and jury have, instead
 Of overcoming thee, but shown their rage:
 When they are dead, thou'lt live from age to age*.

*In the New Heaven and New Earth. {footnote from one edition}

{243} But as for Christian, he had some respite, and was remanded
back to prison. So he there remained for a space; but He that
overrules all things, having the power of their rage in his own
hand, so wrought it about, that Christian for that time escaped
them, and went his way. And as he went, he sang, saying--

 Well, Faithful, thou hast faithfully profest
 Unto thy Lord; with whom thou shalt be blest,
 When faithless ones, with all their vain delights,
 Are crying out under their hellish plights:
 Sing, Faithful, sing, and let thy name survive;
 For though they kill'd thee, thou art yet alive!

{244} Now I saw in my dream, that Christian went not forth alone,
for there was one whose name was Hopeful (being made so by the
beholding of Christian and Faithful in their words and behaviour,
in their sufferings at the fair), who joined himself unto him, and,
entering into a brotherly covenant, told him that he would be his
companion. Thus, one died to bear testimony to the truth, and
another rises out of his ashes, to be a companion with Christian
in his pilgrimage. This Hopeful also told Christian, that there
were many more of the men in the fair, that would take their time
and follow after.

{245} So I saw that quickly after they were got out of the fair,
they overtook one that was going before them, whose name was By-ends:
so they said to him, What countryman, Sir? and how far go you this
way? He told them that he came from the town of Fair-speech, and
he was going to the Celestial City (but told them not his name).

From Fair-speech! said Christian. Is there any good that lives
there? [Prov. 26:25]

BY-ENDS. Yes, said By-ends, I hope.

CHR. Pray, Sir, what may I call you? said Christian.

BY-ENDS. I am a stranger to you, and you to me: if you be going
this way, I shall be glad of your company; if not, I must be content.

CHR. This town of Fair-speech, said Christian, I have heard of;
and, as I remember, they say it is a wealthy place.

BY-ENDS. Yes, I will assure you that it is; and I have very many
rich kindred there.

{246} CHR. Pray, who are your kindred there? if a man may be so
bold.

BY-ENDS. Almost the whole town; and in particular, my Lord
Turn-about, my Lord Time-server, my Lord Fair-speech, (from whose
ancestors that town first took its name), also Mr. Smooth-man, Mr.
Facing-both-ways, Mr. Any-thing; and the parson of our parish, Mr.
Two-tongues, was my mother's own brother by father's side; and to
tell you the truth, I am become a gentleman of good quality, yet
my great-grandfather was but a waterman, looking one way and rowing
another, and I got most of my estate by the same occupation.

CHR. Are you a married man?

BY-ENDS. Yes, and my wife is a very virtuous woman, the daughter
of a virtuous woman; she was my Lady Feigning's daughter, therefore
she came of a very honourable family, and is arrived to such a
pitch of breeding, that she knows how to carry it to all, even to
prince and peasant. It is true we somewhat differ in religion from
those of the stricter sort, yet but in two small points: first,
we never strive against wind and tide; secondly, we are always most
zealous when religion goes in his silver slippers; we love much
to walk with him in the street, if the sun shines, and the people
applaud him.

{247} Then Christian stepped a little aside to his fellow, Hopeful,
saying, It runs in my mind that this is one By-ends of Fair-speech;
and if it be he, we have as very a knave in our company as dwelleth
in all these parts. Then said Hopeful, Ask him; methinks he should
not be ashamed of his name. So Christian came up with him again,
and said, Sir, you talk as if you knew something more than all the
world doth; and if I take not my mark amiss, I deem I have half a
guess of you: Is not your name Mr. By-ends, of Fair-speech?

BY-ENDS. This is not my name, but indeed it is a nick-name that is
given me by some that cannot abide me: and I must be content to
bear it as a reproach, as other good men have borne theirs before
me.

{247} CHR. But did you never give an occasion to men to call you
by this name?

BY-ENDS. Never, never! The worst that ever I did to give them an
occasion to give me this name was, that I had always the luck to
jump in my judgment with the present way of the times, whatever it
was, and my chance was to get thereby; but if things are thus cast
upon me, let me count them a blessing; but let not the malicious
load me therefore with reproach.

{248} CHR. I thought, indeed, that you were the man that I heard
of; and to tell you what I think, I fear this name belongs to you
more properly than you are willing we should think it doth.

BY-ENDS. Well, if you will thus imagine, I cannot help it; you
shall find me a fair company-keeper, if you will still admit me
your associate.

CHR. If you will go with us, you must go against wind and tide;
the which, I perceive, is against your opinion; you must also own
religion in his rags, as well as when in his silver slippers; and
stand by him, too, when bound in irons, as well as when he walketh
the streets with applause.

BY-ENDS. You must not impose, nor lord it over my faith; leave me
to my liberty, and let me go with you.

CHR. Not a step further, unless you will do in what I propound as
we.

Then said By-ends, I shall never desert my old principles, since
they are harmless and profitable. If I may not go with you, I must
do as I did before you overtook me, even go by myself, until some
overtake me that will be glad of my company.

{249} Now I saw in my dream that Christian and Hopeful forsook him,
and kept their distance before him; but one of them looking back,
saw three men following Mr. By-ends, and behold, as they came up
with him, he made them a very low conge {conge'}; and they also
gave him a compliment. The men's names were Mr. Hold-the-world,
Mr. Money-love, and Mr. Save-all; men that Mr. By-ends had formerly
been acquainted with; for in their minority they were schoolfellows,
and were taught by one Mr. Gripe-man, a schoolmaster in Love-gain,
which is a market town in the county of Coveting, in the north. This
schoolmaster taught them the art of getting, either by violence,
cozenage, flattery, lying, or by putting on the guise of religion;
and these four gentlemen had attained much of the art of their
master, so that they could each of them have kept such a school
themselves.

{250} Well, when they had, as I said, thus saluted each other, Mr.
Money-love said to Mr. By-ends, Who are they upon the road before
us? (for Christian and Hopeful were yet within view).

By-ends' character of the pilgrims

BY-ENDS. They are a couple of far countrymen, that, after their
mode, are going on pilgrimage.

MONEY-LOVE. Alas! Why did they not stay, that we might have had
their good company? for they, and we, and you, Sir, I hope, are
all going on pilgrimage.

BY-ENDS. We are so, indeed; but the men before us are so rigid,
and love so much their own notions, and do also so lightly esteem
the opinions of others, that let a man be never so godly, yet if
he jumps not with them in all things, they thrust him quite out of
their company.

{251} SAVE-ALL. That is bad, but we read of some that are righteous
overmuch; and such men's rigidness prevails with them to judge and
condemn all but themselves. But, I pray, what, and how many, were
the things wherein you differed?

BY-ENDS. Why, they, after their headstrong manner, conclude that
it is duty to rush on their journey all weathers; and I am for
waiting for wind and tide. They are for hazarding all for God at
a clap; and I am for taking all advantages to secure my life and
estate. They are for holding their notions, though all other men
are against them; but I am for religion in what, and so far as the
times, and my safety, will bear it. They are for religion when
in rags and contempt; but I am for him when he walks in his golden
slippers, in the sunshine, and with applause.

{252} HOLD-THE-WORLD. Ay, and hold you there still, good Mr.
By-ends; for, for my part, I can count him but a fool, that, having
the liberty to keep what he has, shall be so unwise as to lose it.
Let us be wise as serpents; it is best to make hay when the sun
shines; you see how the bee lieth still all winter, and bestirs her
only when she can have profit with pleasure. God sends sometimes
rain, and sometimes sunshine; if they be such fools to go through
the first, yet let us be content to take fair weather along with
us. For my part, I like that religion best that will stand with
the security of God's good blessings unto us; for who can imagine,
that is ruled by his reason, since God has bestowed upon us the
good things of this life, but that he would have us keep them for
his sake? Abraham and Solomon grew rich in religion. And Job
says, that a good man shall lay up gold as dust. But he must not
be such as the men before us, if they be as you have described
them.

SAVE-ALL. I think that we are all agreed in this matter, and
therefore there needs no more words about it.

MONEY-LOVE. No, there needs no more words about this matter, indeed;
for he that believes neither Scripture nor reason (and you see we
have both on our side) neither knows his own liberty, nor seeks
his own safety.

{253} BY-ENDS. My brethren, we are, as you see, going all on
pilgrimage; and, for our better diversion from things that are bad,
give me leave to propound unto you this question:--

Suppose a man, a minister, or a tradesman, &c., should have an
advantage lie before him, to get the good blessings of this life,
yet so as that he can by no means come by them except, in appearance
at least, he becomes extraordinarily zealous in some points
of religion that he meddled not with before, may he not use these
means to attain his end, and yet be a right honest man?

{254} MONEY-LOVE. I see the bottom of your question; and, with these
gentlemen's good leave, I will endeavour to shape you an answer.
And first, to speak to your question as it concerns a minister
himself: Suppose a minister, a worthy man, possessed but of a very
small benefice, and has in his eye a greater, more fat, and plump
by far; he has also now an opportunity of getting of it, yet so as
by being more studious, by preaching more frequently and zealously,
and, because the temper of the people requires it, by altering
of some of his principles; for my part, I see no reason but a man
may do this, (provided he has a call), ay, and more a great deal
besides, and yet be an honest man. For why--

{255} 1. His desire of a greater benefice is lawful, (this cannot
be contradicted), since it is set before him by Providence; so then,
he may get it, if he can, making no question for conscience' sake.

{256} 2. Besides, his desire after that benefice makes him more
studious, a more zealous preacher, &c., and so makes him a better
man; yea, makes him better improve his parts, which is according
to the mind of God.

{257} 3. Now, as for his complying with the temper of his people,
by dissenting, to serve them, some of his principles, this argueth,
(1) That he is of a self-denying, temper; (2) Of a sweet and winning
deportment; and so (3) more fit for the ministerial function.

{258} 4. I conclude, then, that a minister that changes a small
for a great, should not, for so doing, be judged as covetous; but
rather, since he has improved in his parts and industry thereby,
be counted as one that pursues his call, and the opportunity put
into his hands to do good.

{259} And now to the second part of the question, which concerns
the tradesman you mentioned. Suppose such a one to have but a poor
employ in the world, but by becoming religious, he may mend his
market, perhaps get a rich wife, or more and far better customers
to his shop; for my part, I see no reason but that this may be
lawfully done. For why--

1. To become religious is a virtue, by what means soever a man
becomes so.

2. Nor is it unlawful to get a rich wife, or more custom to my
shop.

3. Besides, the man that gets these by becoming religious, gets
that which is good, of them that are good, by becoming good himself;
so then here is a good wife, and good customers, and good gain,
and all these by becoming religious, which is good; therefore, to
become religious, to get all these, is a good and profitable design.

{260} This answer, thus made by this Mr. Money-love to Mr. By-ends's
question, was highly applauded by them all; wherefore they concluded
upon the whole, that it was most wholesome and advantageous. And
because, as they thought, no man was able to contradict it, and
because Christian and Hopeful were yet within call, they jointly
agreed to assault them with the question as soon as they overtook
them; and the rather because they had opposed Mr. By-ends before.
So they called after them, and they stopped, and stood still till
they came up to them; but they concluded, as they went, that not Mr.
By-ends, but old Mr. Hold-the-world, should propound the question
to them, because, as they supposed, their answer to him would be
without the remainder of that heat that was kindled betwixt Mr.
By-ends and them, at their parting a little before.

{260} So they came up to each other, and after a short salutation,
Mr. Hold-the-world propounded the question to Christian and his
fellow, and bid them to answer it if they could.

CHR. Then said Christian, Even a babe in religion may answer ten
thousand such questions. For if it be unlawful to follow Christ for
loaves, (as it is in the sixth of John), how much more abominable
is it to make of him and religion a stalking-horse to get and enjoy
the world! Nor do we find any other than heathens, hypocrites,
devils, and witches, that are of this opinion.

{261} 1. Heathens; for when Hamor and Shechem had a mind to the
daughter and cattle of Jacob, and saw that there was no way for them
to come at them, but by becoming circumcised, they say to their
companions, If every male of us be circumcised, as they are circumcised,
shall not their cattle, and their substance, and every beast of
theirs, be ours? Their daughter and their cattle were that which
they sought to obtain, and their religion the stalking-horse they
made use of to come at them. Read the whole story. [Gen. 34:20-23]

{262} 2. The hypocritical Pharisees were also of this religion;
long prayers were their pretence, but to get widows' houses was
their intent; and greater damnation was from God their judgment.
[Luke 20:46-47]

{263} 3. Judas the devil was also of this religion; he was religious
for the bag, that he might be possessed of what was therein; but
he was lost, cast away, and the very son of perdition.

{264} 4. Simon the witch was of this religion too; for he would
have had the Holy Ghost, that he might have got money therewith;
and his sentence from Peter's mouth was according. [Acts 8:19-22]

{265} 5. Neither will it out of my mind, but that that man that
takes up religion for the world, will throw away religion for
the world; for so surely as Judas resigned the world in becoming
religious, so surely did he also sell religion and his Master for
the same. To answer the question, therefore, affirmatively, as I
perceive you have done, and to accept of, as authentic, such answer,
is both heathenish, hypocritical, and devilish; and your reward
will be according to your works. Then they stood staring one upon
another, but had not wherewith to answer Christian. Hopeful also
approved of the soundness of Christian's answer; so there was a great
silence among them. Mr. By-ends and his company also staggered
and kept behind, that Christian and Hopeful might outgo them. Then
said Christian to his fellow, If these men cannot stand before the
sentence of men, what will they do with the sentence of God? And
if they are mute when dealt with by vessels of clay, what will they
do when they shall be rebuked by the flames of a devouring fire?

{266} Then Christian and Hopeful outwent them again, and went till
they came to a delicate plain called Ease, where they went with
much content; but that plain was but narrow, so they were quickly
got over it. Now at the further side of that plain was a little
hill called Lucre, and in that hill a silver mine, which some of
them that had formerly gone that way, because of the rarity of it,
had turned aside to see; but going too near the brink of the pit,
the ground being deceitful under them, broke, and they were slain;
some also had been maimed there, and could not, to their dying day,
be their own men again.

{267} Then I saw in my dream, that a little off the road, over
against the silver mine, stood Demas (gentlemanlike) to call to
passengers to come and see; who said to Christian and his fellow,
Ho! turn aside hither, and I will show you a thing.

CHR. What thing so deserving as to turn us out of the way to see
it?

DEMAS. Here is a silver mine, and some digging in it for treasure.
If you will come, with a little pains you may richly provide for
yourselves.

{268} HOPE. Then said Hopeful, Let us go see.

CHR. Not I, said Christian, I have heard of this place before now;
and how many have there been slain; and besides that, treasure
is a snare to those that seek it; for it hindereth them in their
pilgrimage. Then Christian called to Demas, saying, Is not the
place dangerous? Hath it not hindered many in their pilgrimage?
[Hos. 14:8]

DEMAS. Not very dangerous, except to those that are careless, (but
withal, he blushed as he spake).

CHR. Then said Christian to Hopeful, Let us not stir a step, but
still keep on our way.

HOPE. I will warrant you, when By-ends comes up, if he hath the
same invitation as we, he will turn in thither to see.

CHR. No doubt thereof, for his principles lead him that way, and
a hundred to one but he dies there.

DEMAS. Then Demas called again, saying, But will you not come over
and see?

{269} CHR. Then Christian roundly answered, saying, Demas, thou
art an enemy to the right ways of the Lord of this way, and hast
been already condemned for thine own turning aside, by one of His
Majesty's judges [2 Tim. 4:10]; and why seekest thou to bring us
into the like condemnation? Besides, if we at all turn aside, our
Lord and King will certainly hear thereof, and will there put us
to shame, where we would stand with boldness before him.

Demas cried again, that he also was one of their fraternity; and
that if they would tarry a little, he also himself would walk with
them.

{270} CHR. Then said Christian, What is thy name? Is it not the
same by the which I have called thee?

DEMAS. Yes, my name is Demas; I am the son of Abraham.

CHR. I know you; Gehazi was your great-grandfather, and Judas your
father; and you have trod in their steps. [2 Kings 5:20, Matt.
26:14,15, 27:1-5] It is but a devilish prank that thou usest;
thy father was hanged for a traitor, and thou deservest no better
reward. Assure thyself, that when we come to the King, we will do
him word of this thy behaviour. Thus they went their way.

{271} By this time By-ends and his companions were come again
within sight, and they, at the first beck, went over to Demas. Now,
whether they fell into the pit by looking over the brink thereof,
or whether they went down to dig, or whether they were smothered in
the bottom by the damps that commonly arise, of these things I am
not certain; but this I observed, that they never were seen again
in the way. Then sang Christian--

 By-ends and silver Demas both agree;
 One calls, the other runs, that he may be
 A sharer in his lucre; so these do
 Take up in this world, and no further go.