{295} They went then till they came to the Delectable Mountains,
which mountains belong to the Lord of that hill of which we have
spoken before; so they went up to the mountains, to behold the
gardens and orchards, the vineyards and fountains of water; where
also they drank and washed themselves, and did freely eat of the
vineyards. Now there were on the tops of these mountains Shepherds
feeding their flocks, and they stood by the highway side. The
Pilgrims therefore went to them, and leaning upon their staves, (as
is common with weary pilgrims when they stand to talk with any by
the way), they asked, Whose Delectable Mountains are these? And
whose be the sheep that feed upon them?

Mountains delectable they now ascend,
 Where Shepherds be, which to them do commend
 Alluring things, and things that cautious are,
 Pilgrims are steady kept by faith and fear.

{296} SHEP. These mountains are Immanuel's Land, and they are
within sight of his city; and the sheep also are his, and he laid
down his life for them. [John 10:11]

CHR. Is this the way to the Celestial City?

SHEP. You are just in your way.

CHR. How far is it thither?

SHEP. Too far for any but those that shall get thither indeed.

CHR. Is the way safe or dangerous?

SHEP. Safe for those for whom it is to be safe; but the transgressors
shall fall therein. [Hos. 14:9]

CHR. Is there, in this place, any relief for pilgrims that are
weary and faint in the way?

SHEP. The Lord of these mountains hath given us a charge not to be
forgetful to entertain strangers, therefore the good of the place
is before you. [Heb. 13:1-2]

{297} I saw also in my dream, that when the Shepherds perceived
that they were wayfaring men, they also put questions to them, to
which they made answer as in other places; as, Whence came you?
and, How got you into the way? and, By what means have you so
persevered therein? For but few of them that begin to come hither
do show their face on these mountains. But when the Shepherds heard
their answers, being pleased therewith, they looked very lovingly
upon them, and said, Welcome to the Delectable Mountains.

{298} The Shepherds, I say, whose names were Knowledge, Experience,
Watchful, and Sincere, took them by the hand, and had them to their
tents, and made them partake of that which was ready at present.
They said, moreover, We would that ye should stay here awhile, to
be acquainted with us; and yet more to solace yourselves with the
good of these Delectable Mountains. They then told them, that
they were content to stay; so they went to their rest that night,
because it was very late.

{299} Then I saw in my dream, that in the morning the Shepherds called
up to Christian and Hopeful to walk with them upon the mountains;
so they went forth with them, and walked a while, having a pleasant
prospect on every side. Then said the Shepherds one to another,
Shall we show these pilgrims some wonders? So when they had concluded
to do it, they had them first to the top of a hill called Error,
which was very steep on the furthest side, and bid them look down
to the bottom. So Christian and Hopeful looked down, and saw at
the bottom several men dashed all to pieces by a fall that they
had from the top. Then said Christian, What meaneth this? The
Shepherds answered, Have you not heard of them that were made to
err by hearkening to Hymeneus and Philetus as concerning the faith
of the resurrection of the body? [2 Tim. 2:17,18] They answered,
Yes. Then said the Shepherds, Those that you see lie dashed
in pieces at the bottom of this mountain are they; and they have
continued to this day unburied, as you see, for an example to others
to take heed how they clamber too high, or how they come too near
the brink of this mountain.

{300} Then I saw that they had them to the top of another mountain,
and the name of that is Caution, and bid them look afar off; which,
when they did, they perceived, as they thought, several men walking
up and down among the tombs that were there; and they perceived
that the men were blind, because they stumbled sometimes upon the
tombs, and because they could not get out from among them. Then
said Christian, What means this?

{301} The Shepherds then answered, Did you not see a little below
these mountains a stile, that led into a meadow, on the left hand
of this way? They answered, Yes. Then said the Shepherds, From
that stile there goes a path that leads directly to Doubting Castle,
which is kept by Giant Despair, and these, pointing to them among
the tombs, came once on pilgrimage, as you do now, even till they
came to that same stile; and because the right way was rough in
that place, they chose to go out of it into that meadow, and there
were taken by Giant Despair, and cast into Doubting Castle; where,
after they had been a while kept in the dungeon, he at last did put
out their eyes, and led them among those tombs, where he has left
them to wander to this very day, that the saying of the wise man might
be fulfilled, "He that wandereth out of the way of understanding,
shall remain in the congregation of the dead." [Pro. 21:16] Then
Christian and Hopeful looked upon one another, with tears gushing
out, but yet said nothing to the Shepherds.

{302} Then I saw in my dream, that the Shepherds had them to another
place, in a bottom, where was a door in the side of a hill, and they
opened the door, and bid them look in. They looked in, therefore,
and saw that within it was very dark and smoky; they also thought
that they heard there a rumbling noise as of fire, and a cry of
some tormented, and that they smelt the scent of brimstone. Then
said Christian, What means this? The Shepherds told them, This is
a by-way to hell, a way that hypocrites go in at; namely, such as
sell their birthright, with Esau; such as sell their master, with
Judas; such as blaspheme the gospel, with Alexander; and that
lie and dissemble, with Ananias and Sapphira his wife. Then said
Hopeful to the Shepherds, I perceive that these had on them, even
every one, a show of pilgrimage, as we have now; had they not?

{303} SHEP. Yes, and held it a long time too.

HOPE. How far might they go on in pilgrimage in their day, since
they notwithstanding were thus miserably cast away?

SHEP. Some further, and some not so far, as these mountains.

Then said the Pilgrims one to another, We have need to cry to the
Strong for strength.

SHEP. Ay, and you will have need to use it, when you have it, too.

{304} By this time the Pilgrims had a desire to go forward, and
the Shepherds a desire they should; so they walked together towards
the end of the mountains. Then said the Shepherds one to another,
Let us here show to the Pilgrims the gates of the Celestial City,
if they have skill to look through our perspective glass. The
Pilgrims then lovingly accepted the motion; so they had them to
the top of a high hill, called Clear, and gave them their glass to
look.

{305} Then they essayed to look, but the remembrance of that last
thing that the Shepherds had shown them, made their hands shake;
by means of which impediment, they could not look steadily through
the glass; yet they thought they saw something like the gate, and
also some of the glory of the place. Then they went away, and sang
this song--

 Thus, by the Shepherds, secrets are reveal'd,
 Which from all other men are kept conceal'd.
 Come to the Shepherds, then, if you would see
 Things deep, things hid, and that mysterious be.