The pilgrims now, to gratify the flesh,
 Will seek its ease; but oh! how they afresh
 Do thereby plunge themselves new griefs into!
 Who seek to please the flesh, themselves undo.

{284} Now, Giant Despair had a wife, and her name was Diffidence.
So when he was gone to bed, he told his wife what he had done; to
wit, that he had taken a couple of prisoners and cast them into his
dungeon, for trespassing on his grounds. Then he asked her also
what he had best to do further to them. So she asked him what they
were, whence they came, and whither they were bound; and he told
her. Then she counselled him that when he arose in the morning he
should beat them without any mercy. So, when he arose, he getteth
him a grievous crab-tree cudgel, and goes down into the dungeon
to them, and there first falls to rating of them as if they were
dogs, although they never gave him a word of distaste. Then he
falls upon them, and beats them fearfully, in such sort that they
were not able to help themselves, or to turn them upon the floor.
This done, he withdraws and leaves them there to condole their
misery and to mourn under their distress. So all that day they
spent the time in nothing but sighs and bitter lamentations. The
next night, she, talking with her husband about them further, and
understanding they were yet alive, did advise him to counsel them
to make away themselves. So when morning was come, he goes to them
in a surly manner as before, and perceiving them to be very sore
with the stripes that he had given them the day before, he told
them, that since they were never like to come out of that place,
their only way would be forthwith to make an end of themselves,
either with knife, halter, or poison, for why, said he, should you
choose life, seeing it is attended with so much bitterness? But
they desired him to let them go. With that he looked ugly upon
them, and, rushing to them, had doubtless made an end of them
himself, but that he fell into one of his fits, (for he sometimes, in
sunshiny weather, fell into fits), and lost for a time the use of
his hand; wherefore he withdrew, and left them as before, to consider
what to do. Then did the prisoners consult between themselves
whether it was best to take his counsel or no; and thus they began
to discourse:--

{285} CHR. Brother, said Christian, what shall we do? The life that
we now live is miserable. For my part I know not whether is best,
to live thus, or to die out of hand. "My soul chooseth strangling
rather than life", and the grave is more easy for me than this
dungeon. [Job 7:15] Shall we be ruled by the Giant?

{286} HOPE. Indeed, our present condition is dreadful, and death
would be far more welcome to me than thus for ever to abide;
but yet, let us consider, the Lord of the country to which we are
going hath said, Thou shalt do no murder: no, not to another man's
person; much more, then, are we forbidden to take his counsel to
kill ourselves. Besides, he that kills another, can but commit
murder upon his body; but for one to kill himself is to kill body
and soul at once. And, moreover, my brother, thou talkest of ease
in the grave; but hast thou forgotten the hell, for certain the
murderers go? "For no murderer hath eternal life," &c. And let
us consider, again, that all the law is not in the hand of Giant
Despair. Others, so far as I can understand, have been taken
by him, as well as we; and yet have escaped out of his hand. Who
knows, but the God that made the world may cause that Giant Despair
may die? or that, at some time or other, he may forget to lock
us in? or that he may, in a short time, have another of his fits
before us, and may lose the use of his limbs? and if ever that
should come to pass again, for my part, I am resolved to pluck
up the heart of a man, and to try my utmost to get from under his
hand. I was a fool that I did not try to do it before; but, however,
my brother, let us be patient, and endure a while. The time may
come that may give us a happy release; but let us not be our own
murderers. With these words Hopeful at present did moderate the
mind of his brother; so they continued together (in the dark) that
day, in their sad and doleful condition.

{287} Well, towards evening, the Giant goes down into the dungeon
again, to see if his prisoners had taken his counsel; but when he
came there he found them alive; and truly, alive was all; for now,
what for want of bread and water, and by reason of the wounds they
received when he beat them, they could do little but breathe. But,
I say, he found them alive; at which he fell into a grievous rage,
and told them that, seeing they had disobeyed his counsel, it should
be worse with them than if they had never been born.

{288} At this they trembled greatly, and I think that Christian fell
into a swoon; but, coming a little to himself again, they renewed
their discourse about the Giant's counsel; and whether yet they
had best to take it or no. Now Christian again seemed to be for
doing it, but Hopeful made his second reply as followeth:--

{289} HOPE. My brother, said he, rememberest thou not how valiant
thou hast been heretofore? Apollyon could not crush thee, nor
could all that thou didst hear, or see, or feel, in the Valley of
the Shadow of Death. What hardship, terror, and amazement hast
thou already gone through! And art thou now nothing but fear!
Thou seest that I am in the dungeon with thee, a far weaker man by
nature than thou art; also, this Giant has wounded me as well as
thee, and hath also cut off the bread and water from my mouth; and
with thee I mourn without the light. But let us exercise a little
more patience; remember how thou playedst the man at Vanity Fair,
and wast neither afraid of the chain, nor cage, nor yet of bloody
death. Wherefore let us (at least to avoid the shame, that becomes
not a Christian to be found in) bear up with patience as well as
we can.

{290} Now, night being come again, and the Giant and his wife being
in bed, she asked him concerning the prisoners, and if they had
taken his counsel. To which he replied, They are sturdy rogues, they
choose rather to bear all hardship, than to make away themselves.
Then said she, Take them into the castle-yard to-morrow, and show
them the bones and skulls of those that thou hast already despatched,
and make them believe, ere a week comes to an end, thou also wilt
tear them in pieces, as thou hast done their fellows before them.

{291} So when the morning was come, the Giant goes to them again,
and takes them into the castle-yard, and shows them, as his wife
had bidden him. These, said he, were pilgrims as you are, once,
and they trespassed in my grounds, as you have done; and when I
thought fit, I tore them in pieces, and so, within ten days, I will
do you. Go, get you down to your den again; and with that he beat
them all the way thither. They lay, therefore, all day on Saturday
in a lamentable case, as before. Now, when night was come, and
when Mrs. Diffidence and her husband, the Giant, were got to bed,
they began to renew their discourse of their prisoners; and withal
the old Giant wondered, that he could neither by his blows nor
his counsel bring them to an end. And with that his wife replied,
I fear, said she, that they live in hope that some will come to
relieve them, or that they have picklocks about them, by the means
of which they hope to escape. And sayest thou so, my dear? said
the Giant; I will, therefore, search them in the morning.

{292} Well, on Saturday, about midnight, they began to pray, and
continued in prayer till almost break of day.

Now a little before it was day, good Christian, as one half amazed,
brake out in passionate speech: What a fool, quoth he, am I, thus
to lie in a stinking Dungeon, when I may as well walk at liberty.
I have a Key in my bosom called Promise, that will, I am persuaded,
open any Lock in Doubting Castle. Then said Hopeful, That's good
news; good Brother pluck it out of thy bosom and try.

A key in Christian's bosom, called Promise, opens any lock in
Doubting Castle

Then Christian pulled it out of his bosom, and began to try at the
Dungeon door, whose bolt (as he turned the Key) gave back, and the
door flew open with ease, and Christian and Hopeful both came out.
Then he went to the outward door that leads into the Castle-yard,
and with his Key opened that door also. After he went to the iron
Gate, for that must be opened too, but that Lock went damnable
hard, yet the Key did open it. Then they thrust open the Gate to
make their escape with speed; but that Gate as it opened made such
a creaking, that it waked Giant Despair, who hastily rising to
pursue his Prisoners, felt his limbs to fail, for his Fits took
him again, so that he could by no means go after them. Then they
went on, and came to the King's High-way again, and so were safe,
because they were out of his jurisdiction

{294} Now, when they were over the stile, they began to contrive
with themselves what they should do at that stile to prevent those
that should come after from falling into the hands of Giant Despair.
So they consented to erect there a pillar, and to engrave upon the
side thereof this sentence--"Over this stile is the way to Doubting
Castle, which is kept by Giant Despair, who despiseth the King of
the Celestial Country, and seeks to destroy his holy pilgrims."
Many, therefore, that followed after read what was written, and
escaped the danger. This done, they sang as follows:--

 Out of the way we went, and then we found
 What 'twas to tread upon forbidden ground;
 And let them that come after have a care,
 Lest heedlessness makes them, as we, to fare.
 Lest they for trespassing his prisoners are,
 Whose castle's Doubting, and whose name's Despair.