Now, FAITHFUL, play the man, speak for thy God:
 Fear not the wicked's malice; nor their rod:
 Speak boldly, man, the truth is on thy side:
 Die for it, and to life in triumph ride.

{228} Faithful's answer for himself

Then Faithful began to answer, that he had only set himself against
that which hath set itself against Him that is higher than the
highest. And, said he, as for disturbance, I make none, being
myself a man of peace; the parties that were won to us, were won
by beholding our truth and innocence, and they are only turned from
the worse to the better. And as to the king you talk of, since he
is Beelzebub, the enemy of our Lord, I defy him and all his angels.

{229} Then proclamation was made, that they that had aught to say
for their lord the king against the prisoner at the bar, should
forthwith appear and give in their evidence. So there came in
three witnesses, to wit, Envy, Superstition, and Pickthank. They
were then asked if they knew the prisoner at the bar; and what they
had to say for their lord the king against him.

{230} Then stood forth Envy, and said to this effect: My Lord, I
have known this man a long time, and will attest upon my oath before
this honourable bench, that he is--

JUDGE. Hold! Give him his oath. (So they sware him.) Then he said--

ENVY. My Lord, this man, notwithstanding his plausible name, is
one of the vilest men in our country. He neither regardeth prince
nor people, law nor custom; but doth all that he can to possess all
men with certain of his disloyal notions, which he in the general
calls principles of faith and holiness. And, in particular, I
heard him once myself affirm that Christianity and the customs of
our town of Vanity were diametrically opposite, and could not be
reconciled. By which saying, my Lord, he doth at once not only
condemn all our laudable doings, but us in the doing of them.

JUDGE. Then did the Judge say to him, Hast thou any more to say?

ENVY. My Lord, I could say much more, only I would not be tedious
to the court. Yet, if need be, when the other gentlemen have given
in their evidence, rather than anything shall be wanting that will
despatch him, I will enlarge my testimony against him. So he was
bid to stand by. Then they called Superstition, and bid him look
upon the prisoner. They also asked, what he could say for their
lord the king against him. Then they sware him; so he began.

{231} SUPER. My Lord, I have no great acquaintance with this man,
nor do I desire to have further knowledge of him; however, this I
know, that he is a very pestilent fellow, from some discourse that,
the other day, I had with him in this town; for then, talking with
him, I heard him say, that our religion was naught, and such by
which a man could by no means please God. Which sayings of his, my
Lord, your Lordship very well knows, what necessarily thence will
follow, to wit, that we do still worship in vain, are yet in our
sins, and finally shall be damned; and this is that which I have
to say.

{232} Then was Pickthank sworn, and bid say what he knew, in behalf
of their lord the king, against the prisoner at the bar.

Pickthank's testimony

PICK. My Lord, and you gentlemen all, This fellow I have known of a
long time, and have heard him speak things that ought not to be spoke;
for he hath railed on our noble prince Beelzebub, and hath spoken
contemptibly of his honourable friends, whose names are the Lord Old
Man, the Lord Carnal Delight, the Lord Luxurious, the Lord Desire
of Vain Glory, my old Lord Lechery, Sir Having Greedy, with all
the rest of our nobility; and he hath said, moreover, That if all
men were of his mind, if possible, there is not one of these noblemen
should have any longer a being in this town. Besides, he hath not
been afraid to rail on you, my Lord, who are now appointed to be
his judge, calling you an ungodly villain, with many other such
like vilifying terms, with which he hath bespattered most of the
gentry of our town.

{233} When this Pickthank had told his tale, the Judge directed his
speech to the prisoner at the bar, saying, Thou runagate, heretic,
and traitor, hast thou heard what these honest gentlemen have
witnessed against thee?

FAITH. May I speak a few words in my own defence?

JUDGE. Sirrah! sirrah! thou deservest to live no longer, but to
be slain immediately upon the place; yet, that all men may see our
gentleness towards thee, let us hear what thou, vile runagate, hast
to say.

{234} Faithful's defence of himself

FAITH. 1. I say, then, in answer to what Mr. Envy hath spoken,
I never said aught but this, That what rule, or laws, or customs,
or people, were flat against the Word of God, are diametrically
opposite to Christianity. If I have said amiss in this, convince
me of my error, and I am ready here before you to make my recantation.

{235} 2. As to the second, to wit, Mr. Superstition, and his charge
against me, I said only this, That in the worship of God there is
required a Divine faith; but there can be no Divine faith without
a Divine revelation of the will of God. Therefore, whatever
is thrust into the worship of God that is not agreeable to Divine
revelation, cannot be done but by a human faith, which faith will
not be profitable to eternal life.

{236} 3. As to what Mr. Pickthank hath said, I say (avoiding terms,
as that I am said to rail, and the like) that the prince of this
town, with all the rabblement, his attendants, by this gentleman
named, are more fit for a being in hell, than in this town and
country: and so, the Lord have mercy upon me!

{237} Then the Judge called to the jury (who all this while stood
by, to hear and observe): Gentlemen of the jury, you see this man
about whom so great an uproar hath been made in this town. You
have also heard what these worthy gentlemen have witnessed against
him. Also you have heard his reply and confession. It lieth now
in your breasts to hang him or save his life; but yet I think meet
to instruct you into our law.

{238} There was an Act made in the days of Pharaoh the Great,
servant to our prince, that lest those of a contrary religion should
multiply and grow too strong for him, their males should be thrown
into the river. [Exo. 1:22] There was also an Act made in the
days of Nebuchadnezzar the Great, another of his servants, that
whosoever would not fall down and worship his golden image, should
be thrown into a fiery furnace. [Dan. 3:6] There was also an Act
made in the days of Darius, that whoso, for some time, called upon
any god but him, should be cast into the lions' den. [Dan. 6]
Now the substance of these laws this rebel has broken, not only
in thought, (which is not to be borne), but also in word and deed;
which must therefore needs be intolerable.

{239} For that of Pharaoh, his law was made upon a supposition, to
prevent mischief, no crime being yet apparent; but here is a crime
apparent. For the second and third, you see he disputeth against
our religion; and for the treason he hath confessed, he deserveth
to die the death.

{240} Then went the jury out, whose names were, Mr. Blind-man, Mr.
No-good, Mr. Malice, Mr. Love-lust, Mr. Live-loose, Mr. Heady, Mr.
High-mind, Mr. Enmity, Mr. Liar, Mr. Cruelty, Mr. Hate-light, and
Mr. Implacable; who every one gave in his private verdict against
him among themselves, and afterwards unanimously concluded to bring
him in guilty before the Judge. And first, among themselves, Mr.
Blind-man, the foreman, said, I see clearly that this man is a
heretic. Then said Mr. No-good, Away with such a fellow from the
earth. Ay, said Mr. Malice, for I hate the very looks of him.
Then said Mr. Love-lust, I could never endure him. Nor I, said Mr.
Live-loose, for he would always be condemning my way. Hang him,
hang him, said Mr. Heady. A sorry scrub, said Mr. High-mind. My
heart riseth against him, said Mr. Enmity. He is a rogue, said
Mr. Liar. Hanging is too good for him, said Mr. Cruelty. Let us
despatch him out of the way, said Mr. Hate-light. Then said Mr.
Implacable, Might I have all the world given me, I could not be
reconciled to him; therefore, let us forthwith bring him in guilty
of death. And so they did; therefore he was presently condemned
to be had from the place where he was, to the place from whence
he came, and there to be put to the most cruel death that could be
invented.

{241} They therefore brought him out, to do with him according to
their law; and, first, they scourged him, then they buffeted him,
then they lanced his flesh with knives; after that, they stoned
him with stones, then pricked him with their swords; and, last of
all, they burned him to ashes at the stake. Thus came Faithful to
his end.

{242} Now I saw that there stood behind the multitude a chariot
and a couple of horses, waiting for Faithful, who (so soon as his
adversaries had despatched him) was taken up into it, and straightway
was carried up through the clouds, with sound of trumpet, the
nearest way to the Celestial Gate.