story  of  the  name:


348  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
Years  ago,  long-  before  the  Revolution,  Yahula  was  a  prosperous
stock  trader  among-  the  Cherokee,  and  the  tinkling  of  the  bells  hung
around  the  necks  of  his  ponies  could  lie  heard  on  every  mountain  trail.
Once  there  was  a  great  hunt  and  all  the  warriors  were  out.  hut  when
it  was  over  and  they  were  ready  to  return  to  the  settlement  Yahula
was  not  with  them.  They  waited  and  searched,  hut  lie  could  not  be
found,  and  at  last  they  went  back  without  him,  and  his  friends  grieved
for  him  as  for  one  dead.  Some  time  after  his  people  were  surprised
and  delighted  to  have  him  walk  in  among  them  and  sit  down  as  they
were  at  supper  in  the  evening.  To  their  questions  he  told  them  that  he
had  been  hist  in  the  mountains,  and  that  the  Nunne'hi,  the  Immortals,
had  found  him  and  brought  him  to  their  town,  where  he  had  been  kept
ever  since,  with  the  kindest  care  and  treatment,  until  the  longing  to  see
his  old  friends  had  brought  him  back.  To  the  invitation  of  his  friends
to  join  them  at  supper  lie  said  that  it  was  now  too  late — he  had  tasted
the  fairy  food  and  could  never  again  eat  with  human  kind,  and  for  the
same  reason  lie  could  not  stay  with  his  family,  but  must  go  back  to  the
Nunne'hi.  His  wife  and  children  and  brother  begged  him  to  stay,  but he  said  that  he  could  not;  it  was  either  life  with  the  Immortals  or  death
with  bis  own  people — and  after  some  further  talk  he  rose  to  go.  They
saw  him  as  he  sat  talking  to  them  and  as  he  stood  up.  but  the  moment
he  stepped  out  the  doorway  he  vanished  as  if  he  had  never  been.
After  that  he  came  back  often  to  visit  his  people.  They  would  see
him  first  as  he  entered  the  house,  and  while  he  sat  and  talked  he  was
his  old  self  in  every  way.  but  the  instant  he  stepped  across  the  thresh-
old he  was  gone,  though  a  hundred  eyes  might  be  watching.  He  came
often.  Init  at  last  their  entreaties  grew  so  urgent  that  the  Nunne'hi must  have  been  offended,  and  he  came  no  more.  On  the  mountain  at
the  head  of  the  creek,  about  10  miles  above  the  present  Dahlonega,  is
a  small  square  inclosure  of  uncut  stone,  without  roof  or  entrance.
Here  it  was  said  that  he  lived,  so  the  Cherokee  called  it  Yahula'i  and
called  tlie  stream  by  the  same  name.  Often  at  night  a  belated  traveler
coming  along  the  trail  by  the  creek  would  hear  the  voice  of  Yahula
singing  certain  favorite  old  songs  that  he  used  to  like  to  sing  as  he
drove  his  pack  of  horses  across  the  mountain,  the  sound  of  a  voice  urg-
ing them  on,  and  the  crack  of  a  whip  and  the  tinkling  of  bells  went
with  the  song,  but  neither  driver  nor  horses  could  be  seen,  although  the
sounds  passed  close  by.  The  songs  and  the  bells  were  heard  only  at
night.
There  was  one  man  who  had  been  his  friend,  who  sang  the  same  songs
for  a  time  after  Yahula  had  disappeared,  but  he  died  suddenly,  and
then  the  Cherokee  were  afraid  to  sing  these  songs  any  more  until  it
was  so  long  since  anyone  had  heard  the  sounds  on  the  mountain  that
they  thought  Yahula  must  be  gone  away,  perhaps  to  the  West,  where
others  of  the  tribe  had  already  gone.      It  is  so  long  ago  now  that  even


THE    CANNIBAL    -1'IIUTS  3  19
thr  stone  house  may  have  been  destroyed  by  this  time,  bu1  more  than
one  old  man's  father  -aw  it  and  heard  the  songs  and  the  bells  a  hundred
years  ago.  When  the  Cherokee  went  from  Georgia  to  Indian  Terri-
tory in  1838  some  of  them  said,  "Maybe  Vahula  has  gone  there  and
we  shall  hear  him,"  but  they  have  never  heard  him  again.
87.  THE  WATER  CANNIBALS
Besides  the  friendly  Nunng'hi  of  the  streams  and  mountains  there  isa
race  of  cannibal  spirits,  who  stay  at  the  bottom  of  the  deep  rivers  and
live  upon  human  flesh,  especially  that  of  little  children.  They  come
out  just  after  daybreak  and  go  about  unseen  from  house  to  house  until
they  find  some  one  still  asleep,  when  they  shoot  him  with  their  invisi-
ble arrows  and  carry  the  dead  body  down  under  the  water  to  feast  upon
it.  That  no  one  may  know  what  has  happened  they  leave  in  place
of  the  body  a  shade  or  image  of  the  dead  man  or  little  child,  that  wakes
up  and  talks  ;ln<l  goes  about  just  as  he  did.  hut  there  i-  no  life  in  it.
and  in  seven  days  it  withers  and  dies,  and  the  people  bury  it  and  think
they  are  burying  their  dead  friend.  It  was  a  long  time  before  the
people  found  out  about  this,  but  now  they  always  try  to  he  awake  at
daylight  and  wake  up  the  children,  telling  them  "The  hunters  are
among  you." This  is  the  way  they  first  knew  about  the  water  cannibals:  There  was
a  man  in  Tikwali'tsi  town  who  became  sick  and  grew  worse  until  the
doctors  said  he  could  not  live,  and  then  his  friends  went  away  from
the  house  and  left  him  alone  to  die.  They  were  not  so  kind  to  each
other  in  the  old  times  as  they  are  now  .  because  they  were  afraid  of  the
witches  that  came  to  torment  dying  people.
He  was  alone  several  days,  not  able  to  rise  from  his  bed,  when  one
morning  an  old  woman  came  in  at  the  door.  She  looked  just  like  the
other  women  of  the  settlement,  hut  he  did  not  know  her.  She  came
over  to  tin-  lied  and  -aid.  ••You  are  very  sick  and  your  friends  seem  to
have  left  you.  Come  with  me  and  I  will  make  you  well."  The  man
was  so  near  death  that  he  could  not  move,  hut  now  her  word-  made
him  feel  stronger  at  once,  and  he  asked  her  where  she  wanted  him  to
go.  "We  live  close  by;  come  with  me  and  I  will  show  you."  said  the woman,  so  he  got  up  from  his  bed  and  she  led  the  way  down  to  the
water.  When  she  came  to  the  water  she  stepped  in  and  he  followed,
and  there  was  a  road  under  the  water,  and  another  country  there  just
like  that  above.
They  went  on  until  they  eame  to  a  settlement  with  a  great  many
houses,  and  women  going  about  their  work  and  children  playing.
They  met  a  party  of  hunters  coming  in  from  a  hunt,  hut  instead  of
deer  or  bear  quarters  hanging  from  their  shoulders  the\  carried  the
bodies  of  dead  men  and  children,  and  several  of  the  bodies  the  man
knew  for  those  of   hi-  own    friends   in  Tikwali'tsi".     They  eame  to  a


350  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
house  and  the  woman  said  "This  is  where  I  live,"  and  took  him  in  and fixed  a  bed  for  him  and  made  him  comfortable.
By  this  time  he  was  very  hungry,  but  the  woman  knew  his  thoughts
and  said.  "  We  must  get  him  something  to  eat.*'  She  took  one  of  the bodies  that  the  hunters  had  just  brought  in  and  cut  off  a  slice  to  roast.
The  man  was  terribly  frightened,  but  she  read  his  thoughts  again  and
said.  "I  see  you  can  not  eat  our  food."  Then  she  turned  away  from him  and  held  her  hands  before  her  stomach — so — and  when  she  turned
around  again  she  had  them  full  of  bread  and  beans  such  as  he  used  to
have  at  home.
So  it  was  every  day.  until  soon  he  was  well  and  strong-  again.  Then
she  told  him  he  might  go  home  now,  but  he  must  be  sure  not  to  speak
to  anyone  for  seven  days,  and  if  any  of  his  friends  should  question
him  he  must  make  signs  as  if  his  throat  were  sore  and  keep  silent.
She  went  with  him  along  the  same  trail  to  the  water's  edge,  and  the
water  closed  over  her  and  he  went  back  alone  to  Tikwiili'tsi.  "When
he  came  there  his  friends  were  surprised,  because  they  thought  he
had  wandered  off  and  died  in  the  woods.  They  asked  him  where
he  had  been,  but  he  only  pointed  to  his  throat  and  said  nothing,  so
they  thought  he  was  not  yet  well  and  let  him  alone  until  the  seven
days  were  past,  when  he  began  to  talk  again  and  told  the  whole  story.
Historical  Traditions
88.  first  contact  with  whites
There  are  a  few  stories  concerning  the  first  contact  of  the  Cherokee
with  whites  and  negroes.  They  are  very  modern  and  have  little  value
as  myths,  but  throw  some  light  upon  the  Indian  estimate  of  the  differ-
ent races.
One  story  relates  how  the  first  whites  came  from  the  east  and  tried
to  enter  into  friendly  relations,  but  the  Indians  would  have  nothing  to
do  with  them  for  a  long  time.  At  last  the  whites  left  a  jug  of  whisky
and  a  dipper  near  a  spring  frequented  by  the  Indians.  The  Indians
came  along. -tasted  the  liquor,  which  they  had  never  known  before,
and  liked  it  so  well  that  they  ended  by  all  getting  comfortably  drunk.
While  they  were  in  this  happy  frame  of  mind  some  white  men  came
up.  and  this  time  the  Indians  shook  hands  with  them  and  they  bave
been  friends  after  a  fashion  ever  since.  This  may  possibly  be  a  Chero-
kee adaptation  of  the  story  of  Hudson's  first  landing  on  the  island  of Manhattan.
*  *  *  -x-  *  *  *
At  I  he  creation  an  ulufisu'tl  was  given  to  the  white  man,  and  a  piece
of  silver  to  the  Indian.  But  the  white  man  despised  the  stone  and
threw  it  away,  while  the  Indian  did  the  same  with  the  silver.  In
going  about  the  white  man  afterward  found  the  silver  piece  and  put  it


the  cndian's  and  white  man's  gifts  35]
i 1 1 1 ■  >  his  pockel  and  has  prized  it  ever  since.  The  Lndian,  in  like
manner,  found  the  ulunsu'ti  where  the  white  man  had  thrown  it.  He
picked  it  up  and  has  kepi  it  since  as  his  talisman,  as  money  is  the
talismanic  power  of  the  white  man.  This  story  is  quite  general  and
is  probably  older  than  othei's  of  it-  class. ******
When  Sequoya,  the  inventor  of  the  Cherokee  alphabet,  was  trying
to  introduce  it  among  his  people,  about  Im'1  some  of  them  opposed  it
upon  the  ground  that  Indian-  had  no  business  with  reading.  They
said  that  when  the  Indian  and  the  white  man  were  created,  the  Indian.
being  the  rider,  was  given  a  book,  while  the  white  man  received  a  how
and  arrows.  Each  was  instructed  to  take  good  care  of  his  gift  and
make  the  best  use  of  it.  but  the  Indian  was  so  neglectful  of  his  hook
that  the  white  man  soon  stole  it  from  him.  leaving-  the  how  in  its  place,
so  that  hooks  and  reading  now  belong  of  right  to  the  white  man.
while  the  Indian  ought  to  be  satisfied  to  hunt  for  a  living.  —  <  'heroka
Advocate,  October  26,  Is  ft.
The  negro  made  the  first  locomotive  for  a  toy  and  put  it  mi  a
wooden  track  and  was  having  great  fun  with  it  when  a  white  man
came  along,  watched  until  he  saw  how  to  run  it.  and  then  killed  the
negro  and  took  the  locomotive  for  himself.  This,  also,  although
plainly  of  very  recent  origin,  was  heard  from  several  informants.
89.  THE  IROQUOIS  WARS
Long  wars  were  waged  between  the  Cherokee  and  their  remote
northern  relatives,  the  Iroquois,  with  both  of  whom  the  recollection,
now  nearly  faded,  was  a  vivid  tradition  fifty  years  ago.  The  (Seneca)
Iroquois  know  the  Cherokee  as  Oyada'ge'onnon,  a  name  rather  freelj
rendered  "cave  people."  The  latter  call  the  Iroquois,  or  rather  their
largest  and  most  aggressive  tribe,  the  Seneca,  Nundawe'gi,  Ani'-Nun-
dawe'gl,  or  Ani'-Se'nika,  the  first  forms  being derii  ed  from  Nundawa'ga
or  Nundawa'-ono,  "people  of  the  great  hills.*"  the  name  by  which  the
Seneca  know-  themselves.  According  to  authorities  quoted  bj  - craft,  the  Seneca  claim  to  have  at  one  time  had  a  settlement,  from
which  they  were  afterward  driven,  at  Seneca.  South  Carolina,  known
in  history  a-  one  of  the  principal  towns  of  the  Lower  Cherokee.
The  league  of  the  Iroquois  was  probably  founded  about  the  middle
of  the  sixteenth  century.  Before  L680  they  had  conquered  or  exter-
minated all  the  tribes  upon  their  immediate  borders  and  had  turned
their  arms  against  the  more  distant  Illinois,  ( latawba,  and  ( Jherokee.
According  to  Iroquois  tradition,  the  Cherokee  were  the  aggressors,
having  attacked  and  plundered  a  Seneca  hunting  party  somewhere  in
the  west,  while  in  another  story  they  are  represented  as  having
violated  a  peace  treaty   by  the  murder  of   the    Iroquois  delegates.


352  MYTHS    OF   THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
Whatever  the  cause,  the  war  was  taken  up  by  all  the  tribes  of  the
league.
From  the  Iroquois  country  to  the  Cherokee  frontier  was  considered
a  five  days'  journey  for  a  rapidly  traveling  war  party.  As  the  distance
was  too  great  for  large  expeditions,  the  war  consisted  chiefly  of  a  series
of  individual  exploits,  a  single  Cherokee  often  going  hundreds  of  miles
to  strike  a  blow,  which  was  sure  to  be  promptly  retaliated  by  the  war-
riors from  the  north,  the  great  object  of  every  Iroquois  boy  being  to
go  against  the  Cherokee  as  soon  as  he  was  old  enough  to  take  the  war
path.  Captives  were  made  on  both  sides,  and  probably  in  about  equal
numbers,  the  two  parties  being  too  evenly  matched  for  either  to  gain
any  permanent  advantage,  and  a  compromise  was  finally  made  by  which
the  Tennessee  river  came  to  be  regarded  as  the  boundary  between  their
rival  claims,  all  south  of  that  stream  being  claimed  by  the  Cherokee,
and  being  acknowledged  by  the  Iroquois,  as  the  limit  of  their  own  con-
quests in  that  direction.  This  Indian  boundary  was  recognized  by  the
British  government  up  to  the  time  of  the  Revolution.
Morgan  states  that  a  curious  agreement  was  once  made  between  the
two  tribes,  by  which  this  river  was  also  made  the  limit  of  pursuit.  If
a  returning  war  party  of  the  Cherokee  could  recross  the  Tennessee
before  they  were  overtaken  by  the  pursuing  Iroquois  the}'  were  as  safe
from  attack  as  though  entrenched- behind  a  stockade.  The  pursuers,
if  they  chose,  might  still  invade  the  territory  of  the  enemy,  but  they
passed  by  the  camp  of  the  retreating  Cherokee  without  offering  to
attack  them.  A  similar  agreement  existed  for  a  time  between  the
Seneca  and  the  Erie.
The  Buffalo  dance  of  the  Iroquois  is  traditionally  said  to  have  bad
its  origin  in  an  expedition  against  the  Cherokee.  When  the  war-
riors on  their  way  to  the  south  reached  the  Kentucky  salt  lick  they
found  there  a  herd  of  buffalo,  and  heard  them,  for  the  first  time,
"singing  their  favorite  songs,"  i.  e.,  bellowing  and  snorting.  From
the  bellowing  and  the  movements  of  the  animals  were  derived  the
music  and  action  of  the  dance.
According  to  Cherokee  tradition,  as  given  by  the  chief  Stand  Watie,
the  war  was  finally  brought  to  an  end  by  the  Iroquois,  who  sent  a  dele-
gation to  the  Cherokee  to  propose  a  general  alliance  of  the  southern
and  western  tribes.  The  Cherokee  accepted  the  proposition,  and  in
turn  sent  out  invitations  to  the  other  tribes,  all  of  which  entered  into
the  peace  excepting  the  Osage,  of  whom  it  was  therefore  said  that  they
should  be  henceforth  like  a  wild  fruit  on  the  prairie,  at  which  every
bird  should  pick,  and  so  the  Osage  have  remained  ever  a  predatory
tribe  without  friends  or  allies.  This  may  be  the  same  treaty  described
in  the  story  of  "The  Seneca  Peacemakers."  A  formal  and  final  peace
between  the  two  tribes  was  arranged  through  the  efforts  of  the  British
agent,  Sir  William  Johnson,  in  1768.


THE    [ROQUOIS    W  \  RS  353
In  1847  there  were  -till  living  among  the  Seneca  the  grandchildren
of  Cherokee  captives  taken  in  these  war-.  In  IT'.'d  the  Seneca  pointed
out  to  Colonel  Pickering  a  chief  who  was  a  native  Cherokee,  having
been  taken  when  a  boy  and  adopted  among  the  Seneca,  who  afterward
made  him  chief.    This  was  probably  the  same  man  of  whom  thej  told
Schoolcraft  fift3  years  later.     He  was  a  full-bl   1  Cherokee,  bul  bad
been  captured  when  too  young  to  have  any  memory  of  the  event.
Years  afterward,  when  he  ka<l  grown  to  manhood  and  had  become  a
chief  in  the  tribe,  he  learned  of  bis  foreign  origin,  and  was  filled  at
once  with  an  overpowering  longing  t<>  go  back  to  the  south  to  find
hi-  people  ami  live  and  die  among  them.  He  journeyed  to  the  Chero-
kee country,  bul  on  arriving   there  found    to  his  great  disappoint   nt
that  the  story  of  his  capture  had  been  forgotten  in  the  tribe,  and  that
his  relatives,  if  any  were  left,  failed  to  recognize  him.  Being  unable
to  find  hi-  kindred,  he  made  only  a  short  visit  and  returned  again  to
the  Seneca.
From  Janie-  Wafford,  of  Indian  Territory,  the  author  obtained  a
detailed  account  of  the  Iroquois  peace  embassy  referred  to  by  Stand
Watie,  and  of  the  wampum  belt  that  accompanied  it.  Wafford's
information  concerning  the  proceedings  at  Echota  was  obtained
directly  from  two  eyewitnesses — Sequoya,  the  inventor  of  the  alpha-
bet, and  (JatuiTwulI.  "Hard-mush,"  who  afterward  explained  the  belt
at  the  great  council  near  Tahlequah  seventy  years  later.  Sequoya,  at
the  time  of  the  Echota  conference,  was  a  boy  living  with  his  mother
at  Taskigi  town  a  few  miles  away,  while  GratfLn'wa'lI  was  already  a
young  man.
The  treaty  of  peace  between  the  Cherokee  and  Iroquois,  made  at
Johnson  Hall  in  New  York  in  1768,  appears  from  the  record  to  have
been  brought  about  by  the  Cherokee,  who  sent  for  the  purpose  a
delegation  of  chiefs,  headed  l>v  AganstaYta,  "Groundhog-sausage,"
of  Echota.  their  great  leader  in  the  war  of  1760-61  against  the  Eng-
lish. After  the  treaty  had  been  concluded  the  Cherokee  delegates
invited  some  of  the  Iroquois  chiefs  to  go  home  with  them  for  a  visit,
l>ut  the  latter  declined  on  the  ground  that  it  was  not  yet  safe,  and  in
fact  some  of  their  warrior-  were  at  that  very  time  out  againsi  the
Cherokee,  not  yet  being  aware  of  the  peace  negotiations.  It  is  proba-
ble, therefore,  that  the  Iroquois  delegates  did  not  arrive  at  Echota
until  -ome  considerable  time,  perhaps  three  years,  after  the  formal
preliminaries  had  been  concluded  in  the  north.
According  to  Sequoya's  account,  as  given  to  Wafford,  there  had
been  a  lone-  war  between  the  Cherokee  and  the  northern  Indians,  who
were  never  able  to  conquer  the  Cherokee  or  break  their  spirit,  until
at  last  the  Iroquois  were  tired  of  fighting  and  -cut  a  delegation  to
make  peace.  The  messengers  sel  out  for  the  south  with  their  wam-
pum belts  and  peace  emblem-,  but  lost  their  way  after  passing  Ten-
19  kth—  oi   23


354 MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEBOKEE
nessee  river,  perhaps  from  the  necessity  of  avoiding  the  main  trail,
and  instead  of  arriving  at  Itsa'tl  or  Echota,  the  ancient  peace  town
and  capital  of  the  Cherokee  Nation— situated  <>n  Little  Tennessee  river
below  Citico  creek,  in  the  present  Monroe  county,  Tennessee — they
found  themselves  on  the  outskirts  of  Ta'likwa'  or  Tellico,  on  Tellico
river,  some  10  or  15  miles  to  the  southward.
Concealing  themselves  in  the  neighborhood,  they  sent  one  of  their
number  into  the  town  to  announce  their  coming.     As  it  happened  the
lf'The  Onondagas  retain  the  custody  of  the  wampums  <>f  the  Five  Nations,  and  the  keeper  of  the'
wampums,  Thomas  Webster,  of  the  snipe  tribe,  a  consistent,  thorough  pagan,  is  their  interpreter.
Notwithstanding  the  claims  made  that  the  wampums  can  be  read  as  a  governing  code  of  law,  it  is
evident  that  they  are  simply  monumental  reminders  of  preserved  traditions,  without  any  literal
details  whatever.
"The  first  [of  this]  group  from  left  to  right,  represents  a  convention  of  the  Six  Nations  at  the  adop-
tion of  the  Tuscaroras  into  the  league:  the  second,  the  Five  Nations,  upon  seven  strands,  illustrates  a
treaty  with  seven  Canadian  tribes  before  the  year  ir,u<>:  the  tbird  signifies  the  guarded  approach  of
strangers  to  the  councils  of  the  Five  Nations  (a  guarded  gate,  with  a  long,  white  path  leading  to  the
inner  gate,  where  the  Five  Nations  are  grouped,  with  the  Onondagas  in  the  center  and  a  safe  council
house  behind  all);  the  fourth  represents  a  treaty  when  but  four  of  the  Six  Nations  were  represented,
and  the  fifth  embodies  the  pledge  of  seven  Canadian  christianized  nations  to  abandon  their  crooked
ways  and  keep  an  honest  peace  (having  a  cross  for  each  tribe,  and  with  a  zigzag  line  below,  to  indi-
cate that  their  ways  had  been  crooked  but  would  ever  after  be  as  sacred  as  the  cross).  Above  this
group  is  another,  claiming  to  bear  date  about  1608,  when  Champlain  joined  the  Algonquins  against
the  Iroquois." — Carrington,  in  Six  Nations  of  New  York.  Extra  Bulletin,  Eleventh  Census,  pp.  33-34, 1892.


mou.ney]  THE    IROQUOIS    WARS  355
chief  and  his  family  were  at  work  in  their  cornfield,  and  his  daughter
had  just  gone  up  to  the  house  for  sonic  reason  when  the  Iroquois
entered  and  asked  for  something  to  eat.  Seeing  that  he  was  a
stranger,  she  set  out  food  for  him  according  to  the  old  custom  of  hos-
pitality.    While  he  was  eating  her  father,  the  chief,  came  in  to  sec
what  was  delaying  her,  and  was  surprised  to  find  ther   ie  of  the
hereditary  enemies  of  his  tribe.     By  this  time  the  word  had  got   it
that  an  Iroquois  was  in  the  chief's  house,  and  the  men  of  the  town
had  left  their  work  and  seized  their  guns  to  kill  him,  but  the  chief
heard  them  coming  and  standing  in  the  doorway  kept  them  off,  say-
ing: "This  man  has  come  here  on  a  peace  mission,  and  before  you  kill
him  you  must  first  kill  me.""  They  finally  listened  to  him.  and  allowed
the  messenger  to  go  out  and  bring  his  companions  to  the  chief's  house, where  they  were  all  taken  care  of.
When  they  were  well  rested  after  their  lone-  journey  the  chief  of
Ta'likwa  himself  went  with  them  to  Itsa'ti.  the  capital,  where  lived  the
great  chief  AganstS'ta,  who  was  now  the  civil  ruler  of  the  Nation. The  chiefs  of  the  various  towns  were  summoned  and  a  council  was
held,  at  which  the  speaker  for  the  Iroquois  delegation  delivered  his
message  and  produced  the  wampum  belts  and  pipes,  which  they
brought  as  proofs  of  their  mission  and  had  carried  all  the  way  in  packs
upon  their  backs.
He  said  that  for  three  years  his  people  had  been  wanting  to  make
peace.  There  was  a  spring  of  dark,  cloudy  water  in  their  country,  and
they  had  covered  it  over  for  one  year  and  then  looked,  hut  the  water
was  still  cloudy.  Again  they  had  covered  it  over,  but  when  they
looked  at  the  end  of  another  year  it  was  still  dark  and  troubled.  For
another  year  they  had  covered  the  spring,  and  this  time  when  they
looked  the  water  was  clear  and  sparkling.  Then  they  knew  the  time
had  come,  and  they  left  home  with  their  wampum  belts  to  make  peace
with  their  enemies.
The  friendly  message  was  accepted  by  the  Cherokee,  and  the  belts
and  other  symbolic  peace  tokens  were  delivered  over  to  their  keeping.
Other  belts  in  turn  were  probably  given  to  the  Iroquois,  and  after  the
usual  round  of  feasting  and  dancing  the  messengers  returned  to  their
people  in  the  north  and  the  long  war  was  at  an  end.
For  nearly  a  century  these  symbolic  records  of  the  peace  with  the
Iroquois  were  preserved  by  the  Cherokee,  and  were  carried  with  them
to  the  western  territory  when  the  tribe  was  finally  driven  from  its  old
home  in  1838.  They  were  then  in  the  keeping  of  John  Ross,  principal
chief  at  the  time  of  the  removal,  and  were  solemnly  produced  at  a
ereat  intertribal  council  held  near  Tahlequah,  in  the  Indian  Territory,
in  .Tune,  1843,  when  they  were  interpreted  by  the  Cherokee  speaker,
Gatun'wa'U,  '•Hard-mush."  who  had  seen  them  delivered  to  the  child's  of
his  tribe  at  old  Itsa'ti  seventy  years  before.  Watford  was  present  im thi-  occasion  and  describes  it.


35(1  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [Eih.ans.19
Holding  the  belts  over  his  arm  while  speaking,  Hard-mush  told  of
the  original  treaty  with  the  Iroquois,  and  explained  the  meaning  of
each  belt  in  turn.  According  to  the  best  of  Watford's  recollection,
there  was  one  large  belt,  to  which  the  .smaller  belts  were  fitted.  The
beads  did  not  seem  to  be  of  shell,  and  may  have  been  of  porcelain.
There  were  also  red  pipes  for  the  warriors,  grayish-white  pipes  for
the  chiefs  who  were  foremost  in  making  the  peace,  and  some  fans  or
oilier  ornaments  of  feathers.  There  were  several  of  the  red  pipes,
resembling  the  red-stone  pipes  of  the  Sioux,  but  only  one,  or  perhaps
two,  of  the  white  peace  pipes,  which  may  have  been  only  painted,  and
were  much  larger  than  the  others.  The  pipes  were  passed  around  the
circle  at  the  council,  so  that  each  delegate  might  take  a  whiff.  The
objects  altogether  made  a  considerable  package,  which  was  carefully
guarded  by  the  Cherokee  keeper.  It  is  thought  that  they  were
destroyed  in  the  War  of  the  Rebellion  "when  the  house  of  John  Ross,  a
few  miles  south  of  Tahlequah,  was  burned  by  the  Confederate  Chero-
kee under  their  general,  Stand  Watie.
90.   HIADEONI,   THE  SENECA
"Hiadeoni  was  the  father  of  the  late  chief  Young-king.  He  was  a
Seneca  warrior,  a  man  of  great  prowess,  dexterity,  and  swiftness  of
foot,  and  had  established  his  reputation  for  courage  and  skill  on  many
occasions.  He  resolved  while  the  Seneca  were  still  living  on  the  Gen-
esee river  to  make  an  incursion  alone  into  the  country  of  the  Cherokee.
He  plumed  himself  with  the  idea  that  he  could  distinguish  himself  in
this  daring  adventure,  and  he  prepared  for  it,  according  to  the  custom
of  warriors.  They  never  encumber  themselves  with  baggage.  He
took  nothing  but  his  arms  and  the  meal  of  a  little  parched  and  pounded
corn.     The  forest  gave  him  his  meat.
Hiadeoni  reached  the  confines  of  the  Cherokee  country  in  safety  and
alone.  He  waited  for  evening  before  he  entered  the  precincts  of  a
village.  He  found  the  people  engaged  in  a  dance.  He  watched  his
opportunity,  and  when  one  of  the  dancers  went  out  from  the  ring  into
the  bushes  he  dispatched  him  with  his  hatchet.  In  this  way  he  killed
two  men  that  night  in  the  skirts  of  the  woods  without  exciting  alarm,
and  took  their  scalps  and  retreated.  It  was  late- when  he  came  to  a
lodge,  standing  remote  from  the  rest,  on  his  course  homeward.
Watching  here,  he  saw  a  young  man  come  out,  and  killed  him  as  he
had  done  the  others,  and  took  his  scalp.  Looking  into  the  lodge  cau-
tiously he  saw  it  empty,  and  ventured  in  with  the  hope  of  finding  some
tobacco  and  ammunition  to  serve  him  on  his  way  home.
While  thus  busied  in  searching  the  lodge  he  heard  footsteps  at  the
door,  and  immediately  threw  himself  on  the  bed  from  which  the  young
man  had  risen,  and  covered  his  face,  feigning  sleep.  They  proved  to
be  the  footsteps  of  his  last  victim's  mother.  She.  supposing  him  to be  her  son,  whom  she  had  a  short  time  before  left  lying  there,  said,


5   seyI  HIADEON]       THE    TWO    MOHAWKS  357
■"M\  son,  I  am  going  to  such  a  place  and  will  n<it  In-  back  till  morn-
ing." 11<'  made  a  suitable  response,  and  the  old  woman  went  out.
[nsensibly  he  fell  asleep,  and  knew  nothing  till  morning,  when  the
lirst  thing  he  heard  was  the  mother's  voice.  She.  careful  for  her  son,
was  at  the  fireplace  \er\  early,  pulling  some  roasted  squashes  out  of
the  ashes,  and  after  putting  them  out,  and  telling  him  -he  lel't  them for  him  to  eat.  she  went  away.  He  sprang  up  instantly  ami  fled;  hut
the  early  dawn  hail  revealed  his  inroad,  and  he  was  hotly  pursued.
Light  of  foot,  and  having  the  start,  he  succeeded  in  reaching  ami  con-
cealing himself  in  a  remote  piece  of  woods,  where  he  laid  till  night,
and  then  pursued  his  way  toward  the  Genesee,  which,  in  due  time  he
reached,  bringing  his  three  Cherokee  scalps  as  trophies  of  his  victory
and  prowess." — Schoolcraft.  Notes  on  [roquois,  p.  253,  1*47.
91.   THE   TWO    MOHAWKS
•"In  the  year  17-17  a  couple  of  the  Mohawk  Indians  came  against  the
lower  towns  of  the  Cheerake,  and  so  cunningly  ambuscaded  them
through  most  part  of  the  spring  and  summer,  as  to  kill  above  twenty  in
different  attacks  before  they  were  discovered  by  any  party  of  the
enraged  and  dejected  people.  They  had  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the
most  convenient  ground  for  their  purpose,  and  were  extremely  swift
and  long-winded.  Whenever  they  killed  any  and  got  the  scalp  they
made  off  to  the  neighboring  mountains,  and  ran  over  the  broad  ledges
of  rocks  in  contrary  courses,  as  occasion  offered,  so  as  the  pursuers
could  by  no  means  trace  them.  Once,  when  a  large  company  was  in
chase  of  them,  they  ran  round  a  steep  hill  at  the  head  of  the  main
eastern  branch  of  Savana  river,  intercepted,  killed,  and  scalped  the
hindmost  of  the  party,  and  then  made  off  between  them  and  Keeo-
whee.  As  this  was  the  town  to  which  the  company  belonged,  they
hastened  home  in  a  close  body,  as  the  proper  place  of  security  from
such  enemy  wizards.  In  this  manner  did  those  two  sprightly,  gallant
savages  perplex  and  intimidate  their  foes  for  the  space  of  four  moons
in  the  greatest  security,  though  they  often  were  forced  to  kill  and
barbecue  what  they  chiefly  lived  upon,  in  the  midst  of  their  watchful
enemies.  Having  sufficiently  revenged  their  relations"  blood  and  grat- ified their  own  ambition  with  an  uncommon  number  of  scalps,  they
resolved  to  captivate  one  and  run  home  with  him  as  a  proof  of  their
having  killed  none  but  the  enemies  of  their  country.  Accordingly,
they  approached  very  near  to  Keeowhee,  about  half  a  mile  below  the
late  Fort  Prince  George.  Advancing  with  the  usual  caution  on  such
an  occasion,  one  crawled  along  under  the  best  cover  of  the  place  about
the  distance  of  a  hundred  yards  ahead,  while  the  other  shifted  from
tree  to  tree,  looking  sharply  every  way.  In  the  evening,  however,  an
old.  beloved  man  discovered  them  from  the  top  of  an  adjoining  hill,
and  knew  them  to  he  enemies  by  the  (ait   of  their  hair,  light   trim   for


358  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
running-,  and  their  postures.  He  returned  to  the  town  and  called
first  at  the  house  of  one  of  our  traders  and  informed  him  of  the  affair,
enjoining  him  not  to  mention  it  to  any,  lest  the  people  should  set  off
against  them  without  success  before  their  tracks  were  to  be  discovered
and  he  be  charged  with  having  deceived  them.  But.  contrary  to  the
true  policy  of  traders  among  unforgiving  savages,  that  thoughtless
member  of  the  Choktah  Sphynx  Company  busied  himself,  as  usual,  out
of  his  proper  sphere,  sentfor  the  headmen,  and  told  them  the  story.
As  the  Mohawks  were  allies  and  not  known  to  molest  any  of  the  tra-
ders in  the  paths  and  woods,  he  ought  to  have  observed  a  strict  neu-
trality. The  youth  of  the  town,  by  order  of  their  headmen,  carried
on  their  noisy  public  diversions  in  their  usual  manner  to  prevent  their
foes  from  having  any  suspicion  of  their  danger,  while  runners  were
sent  from  the  town  to  their  neighbors  to  come  silently  and  assist
them  to  secure  the  prey  in  its  state  of  security.  They  came  like  silent
ghosts,  concerted  their  plan  of  operation,  passed  oxer  the  river  at  the
old  trading  ford  opposite  to  the  late  fort,  which  lay  between  two  con-
tiguous commanding  hills,  and,  proceeding  downward  over  a  broad
creek,  formed  a  large  semicircle  from  the  river  bank,  while  the  town
seemed  to  be  taking  its  usual  rest.  They  then  closed  into  a  narrower
compass,  and  at  last  discovered  the  two  brave,  unfortunate  men  lying
close  under  the  tops  of  some  fallen  young  pine  trees.  The  company
gave  the  war  signal,  and  the  Mohawks,  bounding  up,  bravely  repeated
it;  but,  by  their  sudden  spring  from  under  thick  cover,  their  arms  were
useless.  They  made  desperate  efforts,  however,  to  kill  or  be  killed,  as
their  situation  required.  One  of  the  Cheerake,  the  noted  half-breed
of  Istanare  [Ustana'li]  town,  which  lay  ^  miles  from  thence,  was  at  the first  onset  knocked  down  and  almost  killed  with  his  own  cutlass,  which
was  wrested  from  him,  though  he  was  the  strongest  of  the  whole
nation.  But  they  were  overpowered  by  numbers,  captivated,  and  put
to  the  most  exquisite  tortures  of  fire,  amidst  a  prodigious  crowd  of
exulting  foes.
One  of  the  present  Choktah  traders,  who  was  on  the  spot,  told  me  that
when  they  were  tied  to  the  stake  the  younger  of  the  two  discovered  our
traders  on  a  hill  near,  addressed  them  in  English,  and  entreated  them
to  redeem  their  lives.  The  elder  immediately  spoke  to  him,  in  his
own  language,  to  desist.  On  this,  he  recollected  himself,  and  became
composed  like  a  stoic,  manifesting  an  indifference  to  life  or  death,
pleasure  or  pain,  according  to  their  standard  of  martial  virtue,  and
their  dying  behaviour  did  not  reflect  the  least  dishonor  on  their  former
gallant  actions.  All  the  pangs  of  fiery  torture  served  only  to  refine
their  manly  spirits,  and  as  it  was  out  of  the  power  of  the  traders  to
redeem  them  they,  according  to  our  usual  custom,  retired  as  soon  as
the  Indians  began  the  diabolical  tragedy." — Adair,  American  Indians,
p.  383,  1775.


UREAU  OF  AMERICAN    ETHNOLOGY  NINETEENTH   ANNUAL   REPORT     PL.   XVII
ANNIE    AX     'SADAYI




SENECA    TRADITIONS  359
92.   ESCAPE   OF   THE   SENECA  BOYS
Some  Seneca  warrior-  were  hunting  in  the  woods,  and  one  morning,
on  starting  out  for  the  day,  they  lefl  two  boys  behind  to  take  care
of  the  camp.  Soon  after  thej  had  gone,  a  war  party  of  Cherokee
cam.'  up.  and  finding  the  boys  alone  took  them  both  and  started  back
to  the  south,  traveling  at  such  a  rate  thai  when  the  hunters  returned
in  tin-  evening  thej  decided  that  ii  was  of  do  use  t<>  follow  them.
When  the  Cherokee  reached  their  own  country  they  gave  the  boys
in  an  old  man,  whose  sons  had  been  killed  by  the  Seneca.  Betook
the  boys  ami  adopted  them  tor  his  own,  and  they  grew  up  with  him
until  they  were  large  and  strong  enough  to  go  hunting  for  themselves.
Bui  all  the  time  they  remembered  their  own  home,  and  one  day  the
older  one  said  to  his  brother,  "  Let's  kill  the  old  man  and  run  awaj  ."
'•  No."  -aid  the  other,  "we  mighl  get  lost  if  we  ran  away,  we  arc  so
far  from  home."  "  1  remember  the  way,"  said  his  brother,  so  they
made  a  plan  to  escape.  A  few  days  later  the  old  man  took  the  boys
with  him  and  the  three  -d  out  together  for  a  hunt  in  the  mountains.
When  they  were  well  away  from  the  settlement  the  hoys  killed  the
old  man.  took  all  the  meat  and  parched  corn  meal  they  could  easily
carry,  and  started  to  make  their  wa\  hack  to  the  north,  keeping  away
from  the  main  trail  and  following  the  ridge  of  the  mountains.  After
many  days  they  came  to  the  end  of  the  mountains  and  found  a  trail
which  the  older  brother  knew  as  the  one  along  which  they  had  been
taken  when  they  were  first  captured.  They  went  on  bravely  now
until  they  came  to  a  wide  clearing  with  houses  at  the  farther  end.  and
the  older  brother  said.  "  I  believe  there  is  where  we  used  to  live."  It
was  so  lone-  ago  that  they  were  not  quite  sure,  and  besides  they  were
dressed  now  like  Cherokee,  so  they  thought  it  safer  to  wait  until  dark.
They  saw  a  river  ahead  and  went  down  to  it  and  sat  behind  a  large
tree  to  wait.  Soon  several  women  came  down  for  water  and  passed
close  to  the  tree  without  noticing  the  hoys.  Said  the  older  brother,
"I  know  those  women.  One  of  them  is  our  mother."  They  waited
until  the  women  had  tilled  their  buckets  and  started  to  the  village,
when  both  ran  out  to  meet  them  with  the  Seneca  hailing-shout,
•■  i,n,r,'!  l,n,r/:"  At  first  the  women  were  frightened  and  thought
it  a  party  of  Cherokee,  hut  when  they  heard  their  own  language  they
came  nearer.  Then  the  mother  recognized  her  two  sms.  and  -aid.
■■Let  us  go  hack  and  dance  for  the  dead  come  to  life."  and  they  were
all  very  glad  and  went  into  the  village  together.  -Arranged  from
Curtin,  Seneca  manuscript.
93.  THE  UNSEEN   HELPERS
Ganogwioeon,  a  war  chief  of  the  Seneca,  led  a  party  against  the
Cherokee.     When  they  came  near  tin'  first  town  he  left  his  men  outside


360  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
and  went  in  alone.  At  the  first  house  he  found  an  old  woman  and  her
granddaughter.  They  did  not  see  him,  and  he  went  into  the  asl  and
hid  himself  under  some  wood.  When  darkness  came  on  he  heard  the
old  woman  say.  "Maybe  GanogwioeoS  is  near;  I'll  close  the  door." After  a  while  he  heard  them  going  to  bed.  When  he  thought  they
were  asleep  Ik1  went  into  the  house.  The  fire  had  burned  down  low,
but  the  girl  was  still  awake  and  saw  him.     She  was  about  to  scream,
when  he  said.  ""I  am  Ganogwii   5.     If  you  scream  I'll  kill  you.     If
you  keep  quiet  Til  not  hurt  you."  They  talked  together,  and  he  told
her  that  in  the  morning  she  must  bring  the  chief's  daughter  to  him. She  promised  to  do  it,  and  told  him  where  he  should  wait.  Just  before
daylight  he  left  the  house.
In  the  morning  the  girl  went  to  the  chief's  house  and  said  to  his
daughter,  "Let's  go  out  together  for  wood."  The  chief's  daughter got  ready  and  went  with  her.  and  when  they  came  to  the  place  where
Ganogwioeon  was  hiding  he  sprang  out  and  killed  her,  but  did  not
hurt  the  other  girl.  He  pulled  oft  the  scalp  and  gave  such  a  loud
scalp  yell  that  all  the  warriors  in  the  town  heard  it  and  came  running
out  after  him.  He  shook  the  scalp  at  them  and  then  turned  and  ran.
He  killed  the  first  one  that  came  up.  but  when  he  tried  to  shoot  the
next  one  the  bow  broke  and  the  Cherokee  got  him.
They  tied  him  and  carried  him  to  the  two  women  of  the  tribe  who
had  the  power  to  decide  what  should  be  done  with  him.  Each  of  these
women  had  two  snakes  tattooed  on  her  lips,  with  their  heads  opposite
each  other,  in  such  a  way  that  when  she  opened  her  mouth  the  two
snakes  opened  their  mouths  also.  The}'  decided  to  burn  the  soles  of
his  feet  until  they  were  blistered,  then  to  put  grains  of  corn  under
the  skin  and  to  chase  him  with  clubs  until  they  had  beaten  him  to
death.
They  stripped  him  and  burnt  his  feet.  Then  they  tied  a  bark  rope
around  his  waist,  with  an  old  man  to  hold  the  other  end.  and  made  him
run  between  two  lines  of  people,  and  with  clubs  in  their  hands.  When
they  gave  the  word  to  start  Ganogwioeon  pulled  the  rope  away  from
the  old  man  and  broke  through  the  line  and  ran  until  he  had  left  them
all  out  of  sight.  When  night  came  he  crawled  into  a  hollow  log.  He
was  naked  and  unarmed,  with  his  feet  in  a  pitiful  condition,  and
thought  he  could  never  get  away.
He  heard  footsteps  on  the  leaves  outside  and  thought  his  enemies
were  upon  him.  The  footsteps  came  up  to  the  log  and  some  one  said
to  another,  "This  is  our  friend."  Then  the  stranger  said  to  Gano-
gwioeon, "You  think  you  are  the  same  as  dead,  but  it  is  not  so.  We
will  take  care  of  you.  Stick  out  your  feet."  He  put  out  his  feet
from  the  log  and  felt  something  licking  them.  After  a  while  the  voice
said,  "I  think  we  have  licked  his  feet  enough.  Now  we  must  crawl
inside  the  log  and  lie  on  each  side  of  him  to  keep  him  warm."    They


G  ANi  IQW  li  i]:<  >\  36 1
crawled  in  beside  him.  In  the  morning  thej  crawled  out  and  toldhim
to  stick  out  lii—  feel  again.  They  licked  them  again  and  then  said  to
him,  "Now  we  have  done  all  we  can  do  this  time.  Goon  until  you
come  to  tlic  place  where  you  made  a  bark  shelter  a  long  time  ago,  and
under  the  hark  you  will  find  something  to  help  you."  Ganogwioeon
crawled  oul  of  the  log,  hut  they  were  gone.  His  feel  were  better
now  and  he  could  walk  comfortably.  He  went  on  until  about  noun.
when  he  came  to  the  bark  shelter,  and  under  it  he  found  a  knife,  an
awl,  and  a  flint,  that  his  men  had  hidden  there  two  years  before,  lie
to..k  them  and  started  on  again.
Toward  evening  he  looked  around  until  he  found  another  hollow
tree  and  crawled  into  it  to  sleep.  At  night  he  heard  the  footsteps  and
voices  again.  When  he  put  out  his  feet  again,  as  the  strangers  told
him  to  do,  they  licked  his  feet  a-  before  and  then  crawled  in  and  lay
down  on  each  side  of  him  to  keep  him  warm.  Still  he  could  not  see
them.  In  the  morning  after  they  went  out  they  licked  his  feet  again
and  said  to  him.  "At  noon  you  will  find  food."  Then  they  went away.
Ganogwioeon  crawled  out  of  the  tree  and  went  on.  At  noon  he
came  to  a  burning  log,  and  near  it  was  a  dead  hear,  which  was  -till
warm,  as  if  it  had  been  killed  only  a  short  time  before,  lie  skinned
the  hear  and  found  it  very  fat.  He  cut  up  the  meat  and  roasted  as
much  as  he  could  eat  or  carry.  AVhile  it  was  roasting  he  scraped  the
skin  and  rubbed  rotten  wood  dust  on  it  to  clean  it  until  lie  was  tired.
When  night  came  he  lay  down  to  sleep.  He  heard  the  steps  and  the
voices  again  and  one  said,  "  Well,  our  friend  is  lying  down.  He  has
plenty  to  eat.  and  it  does  not  seem  as  if  he  is  going-  to  die.  Let  us  lick
In-  feet  again."  When  they  had  finished  they  said  to  him.  "  You  need
not  worry  any  more  now.  You  will  get  home  all  right."  Before  it
was  day  they  left  him.
When  morning  came  he  put  the  bearskin  around  him  like  a  shirt.
with  the  hair  outside,  and  started  on  again,  taking  as  much  of  the
meat  as  he  could  carry.  That  night  his  friends  came  to  him  again.
They  -aid.  ■•Your  feet  arc  well,  hut  you  will  he  cold."  so  they  lay
again  on  each  side  of  him.  Before  daylight  they  left,  saying.  "About
noon  you  will  find  something  to  wear."  He  went  on  and  about  midday
he  came  to  two  young  hears  just  killed.  He  skinned  them  and  dressed
the  skins,  then  roasted  as  much  meat  as  he  wanted  and  lay  down  to
-leep.  Iii  the  morning  he  made  leggings  of  the  skins,  took  some  of
tin'  meat,  and  started  on.
His  friends  came  again  the  next  night  and  toldhim  that  in  the  morn-
ing he  would  come  upon  something  else  to  wear.  A-  they  -aid.  about
noon  he  found  two  fawns  just  killed.  He  turned  the  skins  and  made
himself  a  pair  of  moccasins,  then  cut  some  of  the  meat,  and  traveled
on  until  evening,  when  he  made  a  tire  and  had  -upper.


362  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
That  night  again  he  heard  the  steps  and  voices,  and  one  said.  "My
friend,  very  soon  now  yon  will  reach  home  safely  and  find  your
friends  all  well.  Now  we  will  tell  yon  why  we  have  helped  you.
Whenever  you  went  hunting  you  always  gave  the  best  part  of  the
meat  to  us  and  kept  only  the  smallest  part  for  yourself.  For  that  we
are  thankful  and  help  you.  In  the  morning  you  will  see  us  and  know
who  we  are."
In  the  morning  when  he  woke  up  they  were  still  there — two  men  as
he  thought — but  after  he  had  said  the  last  words  to  them  and  started
on,  he  turned  again  to  look,  and  one  was  a  white  wolf  and  the  other  a
black  wolf.  That  day  he  reached  home. — Arranged  from  Curtin,
Seneca  manuscript.
94.   HATCINONDON'S   ESCAPE   FROM   THE  CHEROKEE
Hatcinondofi  was  a  great  warrior,  the  greatest  among  the  Seneca.
Once  he  led  a  company  against  the  Cherokee.  They  traveled  until
they  came  to  the  great  ridge  on  the  border  of  the  Cherokee  country,
and  then  they  knew  their  enemies  were  on  the  lookout  on  the  other
side.  Hatcinondofi  told  his  men  to  halt  where  they  were  while  he
went  ahead  to  see  what  was  in  front.  The  enemy  discovered  and
chased  him.  and  he  ran  into  a  canebrake,  where  the  canes  were  in  two
great  patches  with  a  narrow  strip  of  open  ground  between.  They  saw
him  go  into  the  canes,  so  they  set  fire  to  the  patch  and  watched  at  the
open  place  for  him  to  come  out,  but  before  they  got  around  to  it  he
had  run  across  into  the  second  patch  and  escaped.  When  the  canes
had  burned  down  the  Cherokee  looked  for  his  body  in  the  ashes,  but
could  not  find  any  trace  of  it.  so  they  went  home.
When  Hatcinondofi  got  into  the  second  canebrake  he  was  tired  out,
so  he  lay  down  and  fell  asleep.  At  night  while  he  was  asleep  two  men
came  and  took  him  by  the  arm,  saying:  "We  have  come  for  you.
Somebody  has  sent  for  }'ou."  They  took  him  a  long  way.  above  the
sky  vault,  until  they  came  to  a  house.  Then  they  said:  •"This  is
where  the  man  lives  who  sent  for  you."  He  looked,  but  could  see  no
door.  Then  a  voice  from  the  inside  said  ••Come  in."  and  something
like  a  door  opened  of  itself.  He  went  in  and  there  sat  Hawenni'o,  the
Thunder-god.
Hawenni'o  said,  ''I  have  sent  for  you  and  you  are  here.  Are  you
hungry?"  Hatcinondofi  thought:  •"That's  a  strange  way  to  talk;  that's
not  the  way  I  do — I  give  food.''  The  Thunder  knew  his  thoughts,  so
he  laughed  and  said,  "I  said  that  only  in  fun."  lie  rose  and  brought
half  a  cake  of  bread,  half  of  a  wild  apple,  and  half  a  pigeon.  Hatci-
nondofi said,  "'This  is  very  little  to  till  me,"  but  the  Thunder  replied,
"If  you  eat  that,  there  is  more."  He  began  eating,  but.  as  he  ate, everything  became  whole  again,  so  that  he  was  not  able  to  finish  it.
While  he  was  sitting  he  heard  some  one  running  outside,  and  directly


mooney]  HATCINONDOS'S    ES(   \n  363
the  door  was  tin-own  open  and  the  Sun  came  in,  so  bright  thai  1  latci-
Qondon  had  to  hold  his  head  down.  The  two  beings  talked  together,
but  the  Seneca  could  not  understand  a  word,and  soon  the  visitor  wenl
out  again.  Then  the  Thunder  said:  "That  is  the  one  you  call  the  Sun,
who  watches  in  the  world  below.  It  is  night  down  there  now.  and  he
is  hurrying  to  the  east.  Hesaysthere  has  just  been  a  battle,  [love
both  the  Seneca  and  the  Cherokee,  and  when  you  get  back  to  your
warriors  you  must  tell  them  to  stop  fighting  and  go  home."  Again
he  brought  food,  half  of  each  kind,  and  when  Hatcinondofi  bad  eaten,
the  Thunder  said.  "Now  my  messengers  will  take  you  to  your  place."
The  door  opened  again  of   itself,  and    I  Iatcinofidofi  followed  the  two
Sky  People  until  they  brought  him  to  the  place  where  he  had  slept,
and  there  left  him.  He  found  his  party  and  told  the  warriors  what  he
had  seen.  They  held  a  council  over  it  and  decided  to  strike  the  enemy
once  before  going  home.  Hatcinondofi  led  them.  They  met  the
Cherokee  and  went  home  with  scalps.
He  led  another  party  against  the  Cherokee,  but  this  time  lie  was
taken  and  carried  to  the  Cherokee  town.  It  was  the  custom  among
the  Cherokee  to  let  two  women  say  what  should  lie  done  with  captives.
They  decided  that  he  should  lie  tortured  with  tire,  so  he  was  tied  to  a
tree,  and  the  wood  was  piled  around  him.  Hatcinondofi  gave  himself
up  for  lost,  when  a  rain  storm  came  up  and  the  people  concluded  to
■wait  until  it  was  over.     They  went  away  and  left  him  tied  to  the  tree.
Pretty  soon  an  old  woman  came  up  to  him.  and  said.  "My  grandson,
you  think  you  are  going  to  die,  but  you  are  not.  Try  to  stir  your
limbs."  He  struggled  and  finally  got  his  limbs  free.  Then  she  said.
"Now  you  are  free.  I  have  come  to  repay  }rour  kindness.  You
remember  that  you  once  found  a  frog  in  the  middle  of  a  circle  of  tire
and  that  you  picked  it  up  and  put  it  into  the  water.  I  was  that  frog,
and  now  I  help  you.  I  sent  the  rain  storm,  and  now  you  must  go
down  to  the  creek  anil  follow  the  current."
When  the  rain  was  over  the  people  came  back, but  Hatcinondofi  Was
gone.  They  trailed  him  down  to  the  creek,  but  lie  had  found  a  hollow
tree  lying  in  the  water,  with  a  hole  on  the  upper  side  through  which
he  could  breathe,  so  he  crawled  into  it  and  they  could  not  find  him.
Once  two  of  the  Cherokee  came  and  sat  on  the  log  and  he  could  hear
them  talking  about  him.  but  they  did  not  know  that  he  was  inside.
When  they  were  all  gone,  he  came  out  and  kept  on  down  the  stream.
After  dark  he  came  to  a  place  where  three  hunters  had  made  a  fire  and
gone  to  sleep  for  the  night.  Their  hatchets  and  arms  were  hung  up
on  a  tree.  Hatcinondofi  was  naked.  He  listened  until  he  was  sure
tin'  men  were  asleep,  then  he  took  one  of  then-  hatchets  and  killed  all
three,  one  after  another.  .He  dressed  himself  in  the  clothes  of  one.
and  put  on  his  belt,  with  the  knife  and  hatchet.  Then  he  washed
himself   at    the   creek  and  -at  down  bj    the  lire  and  cooked  hi-  supper.


3I>4  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth  ann.19
After  that  he  stretched  and  painted  the  throe  scalps  and  lay  down  by
the  fire  to  sleep.  In  the  morning  he  took  what  provision  he  could
cany  and  traveled  in  a  great  circle  until  he  found  the  road  by  which
he  and  his  warriors  had  come.  He  found  fresh  tracks  and  followed
them  until  he  saw  smoke  ahead.  He  listened  until  he  heard  men
speaking  Seneca,  and  knew  that  it  was  his  party.  Then  he  gave  the
Seneca  shout — Gowd ! — three  times  and  his  friends  ran  out  to  meet
him.  They  had  been  afraid  that  he  was  killed,  but  were  glad  now
that  they  had  waited  for  him.  They  went  home  together.  This  is
their  story. — Arranged  from  Curtin,  Seneca  manuscript.
95.   HEMP-CARRIER
On  the  southern  slope  of  the  ridge,  along  the  trail  from  Robbins-
ville  to  Valley  river,  in  Cherokee  county,  North  Carolina,  are  the
remains  of  a  number  of  stone  cairns.  The  piles  are  leveled  now,  but
thirty  years  ago  the  stones  were  still  heaped  up  into  pyramids,  to  which
every  Cherokee  who  passed  added  a  stone.  According  to  the  tradition
these  piles  marked  the  graves  of  a  number  of  women  and  children  of
the  tribe  who  were  surprised  and  killed  on  the  spot  by  a  raiding  party
of  the  Iroquois  shortly  before  the  final  peace  between  the  two  Nations.
As  soon  as  the  news  was  brought  to  the  settlements  on  Hiwassee  and
Cheowa  a  party  was  made  under  Tale'tanigi'ski,  "Hemp-carrier,"  to
follow  and  take  vengeance  on  the  enemy.  Among  others  of  the  party
was  the  father  of  the  noted  chief  Tsunu'lakun'skl,  or  Junaluska,  who
(Junaluska)  died  on  Cheowa  about  1855.
For  days  they  followed  the  trail  of  the  Iroquois  across  the  Great
Smoky  mountains,  through  forests  and  over  rivers,  until  they  finally
tracked  them  to  their  very  town  in  the  far  northern  Seneca  country.
On  the  way  they  met  another  war  party  headed  for  the  south,  and  the
Cherokee  killed  them  all  and  took  their  scalps.  When  they  came
near  the  Seneca  town  it  was  almost  night,  and  they  heard  shouts  in  the
townhouse,  where  the  women  were  dancing  over  the  fresh  Cherokee
scalps.  The  avengers  hid  themselves  near  the  spring,  and  as  the  dancers
came  down  to  drink  the  Cherokee  silently  killed  one  and  another  until
they  had  counted  as  many  scalps  as  had  been  taken  on  Cheowa,  and
still  the  dancers  in  the  townhouse  never  thought  that  enemies  were
near.  Then  said  the  Cherokee  leader,  "We  have  covered  the  scalps
of  our  women  and  children.  Shall  we  go  home  now  like  cowards,  or
shall  we  raise  the  war  whoop  and  let  the  Seneca  know  that  we  are
men?"  "Let  them  come,  if  they  will,"  said  his  men;  and  they  raised
the  scalp  yell  of  the  Cherokee.  At  once  there  was  an  answering  shout
from  the  townhouse,  and  the  dance  came  to  a  sudden  stop.  The  Seneca
warriors  swarmed  out  with  ready  gun  and  hatchet,  but  the  nimble
Cherokee  were  off  and  away.  There  was  a  hot  pursuit  in  the  dark-
ness, but  the  Cherokee  knew  the  trails  and  were  light  and  active


uooney]  OWL'S    DEATH    SONG  365
runners,  and  managed  to  get  away  with  the  loss  of  only  a  single  man.
The  res!  got  home  safely,  and  the  people  were  so  well  pleased  with
Hemp-carrier's  braver}  and  success  thai  they  gave  him  seven  wives.
96.  THE    SENECA    PEACEMAKERS
In  the  course  of  the  long  war  with  the  Cherokee  it  happened  once
that  eight  Seneca  determined  to  undertake  a  journey  t<>  the  smith  to
sec  if  they  could  make  a  peace  will)  their  enemies.  On  coming  near
the  border  of  the  Cherokee  country  they  met  some  hunters  of  that
tribe  to  whom  they  told  their  purpose.  The  latter  at  once  hurried
ahead  with  the  news,  and  when  the  peacemakers  arrived  they  found
themselves  well  received  by  the  Cherokee  chiefs,  who  called  a  council
to  consider  the  proposition.  All  hut  one  of  the  child's  favored  the peace,  hut  he  demanded  that  the  eighl  delegates  should  first  join  them
in  a  war  party  which  was  just  preparing  to  go  against  a  tribe  farther
south,  probably  the  Creeks.  The  Seneca  agreed, and  set  out  with  the
war  party  for  the  south;  hut  in  the  fight  which  resulted,  the  Seneca
leader.  The  Owl,  was  captured.  The  other  seven  escaped  with  the
Cherokee.
A  council  was  held  in  the  enemy's  camp,  and  it  was  decided  that
The  Owl  should  he  burned  at  the  stake.  The  wood  was  gathered  and
everything  made  ready,  hut  as  they  were  about  to  tie  him  he  claimed
the  warrior's  privilege  to  sing  his  death  song  and  strike  the  post  as  he recited  his  warlike  deed>.  The  request  pleased  his  enemies,  who  put
a  tomahawk  into  his  hands  and  told  him  to  begin.
He  told  first  his  exploits  in  the  north,  and  then  in  the  west,  giving
times  and  places  and  the  number  of  scalps  taken,  until  his  enemies
were  so  pleased  and  interested  that  they  forgot  the  prisoner  in  the
warrior.  It  was  a  long  story,  hut  at  last  he  came  to  the  battle  in
which  he  was  taken.  He  told  how  many  relatives  he  had  killed  of  the
very  men  around  him.  and  then,  striking  the  post  with  his  tomahawk,
"So  many  of  your  people  have  I  killed,  and  so  many  will  I  yet  kill;" and  with  that  he  struck  down  two  men,  sprang  through  the  circle  of
warriors,  and  was  away,  [t  was  all  so  sudden  that  it  was  some  moments
before  his  enemies  could  recover  from  their  surprise.  Then  they
seized  their  weapons  and  were  after  him  through  the  woods,  hut  he  had
had  a  good  start  and  was  running  for  his  life,  so  that  he  outran  the
chase   and    tinalh    reached   the   Cherokee   cam})   in   safety  and    rejoined
his  seven  companions.
On  this  proof  of  good  will  the  Cherokee  then  concluded  the  treaty,
and  the  peacemakers  returned  to  their  own  country. — Arranged  from
Schoolcraft.  Notes  on  Iroquois,  p.  258.
97.   ORIGIN   OF   THE  YONTONWISAS   DANCE
Two  Seneca  women  who  were  sisters,  with  the  baby  hoy  of  the  older
one.  were   in    a    sugar    grove    near    their    home    when   a    war   party  of


366  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.akn.19
Cherokee  came  upon  them  and  carried  them  off.  When  the  people  of
the  town  learned  what  had  happened,  they  decided  not  to  go  after  the
enemy  for  fear  they  would  kill  the  women,  .so  they  made  no  pursuit.
The  Cherokee  carried  the  women  with  them  until  they  were  within
one  day  of  the  Cherokee  towns.  The  elder  sister  learned  this  and
made  up  her  mind  to  try  to  escape.  She  had  a  knife  without  a  handle
hidden  under  her  belt,  and  that  night  when  all  lay  down  to  sleep  by
the  lire  she  kept  awake.  When  they  were  sleeping  soundly,  she  looked
around.  She  and  her  sister  were  tied  together,  and  on  each  side  of
them  was  a  Cherokee  with  the  end  of  the  rope  under  his  body  on  the
ground.  Taking  out  her  knife,  she  cut  the  rope  without  waking  the
men.  and  then  rousing  her  sister  quietly  she  whispered  to  her  to  come.
Tln'\  were  going  to  leave  (lie  little  boy,  but  lie  started  to  cry,  so  she
said,  "■  Let  us  die  together,"  and  took  him  up  on  her  back,  and  the two  women  hurried  away.  In  a  little  while  they  heard  an  alarm
behind  them,  and  knew  that  their  escape  was  discovered,  and  then
they  saw  the  blazing  pine  knots  waving  through  the  trees  where  the
Cherokee  were  coming  on  looking  for  them.  The  women  knew  the
Cherokee  would  hunt  for  them  toward  the  north,  along  the  trail  to
the  Seneca  country,  so  they  made  a  circuit  and  went  around  to  the
south  until  they  came  in  sight  of  a  tire  and  saw  a  man  sitting  by  a
tree,  shaking  a  rattle  and  singing  in  a  low  voice.  They  found  they  had
come  directly  back  to  the  enemy's  camp,  so  the  older  sister  said,  ''This will  never  do;  we  must  try  again.  Let  us  go  straight  ahead  to  that
big  tree  in  front,  and  from  that  straight  on  to  the  next,  and  the  next."
In  this  way  they  kept  on  a  straight  course  until  morning.  When  the
sun  came  up,  they  took  another  direction  toward  home,  and  at  night
they  rested  in  the  woods.
They  traveled  all  the  next  day.  and  at  night  rested  again.  In  the
night  a  voice  spoke  to  the  younger  woman,  "Is  that  where  you  are
resting;"'  and  she  answered,  '•Yes.'''  The  voice  said  again.  '"Keep on,  and  you  will  come  out  at  the  spot  where  you  were  captured.  No
harm  will  come  to  you.  To-morrow  you  will  find  food."  She  roused her  sister  ami  told  her  what  the  voice  had  said.
In  the  morning  they  went  on  and  at  noon  found  a  buck  freshly  killed.
Near  by  they  found  a  log  on  fire,  so  they  roasted  some  of  the  meat,
had  a  good  meal,  and  carried  away  afterwards  as  much  of  the  meat  as
they  could.  They  kept  on.  camping  every  night,  and  when  the  meat
was  nearly  gone  they  saved  the  rest  for  the  little  boy.
At  last  one  night  the  \oice  spoke  again  to  the  younger  sister  and
said.  •"You  are  on  the  right  road,  and  to-morrow  you  will  be  on  the
border  of  the  Seneca  country.     You  will  find  food.     That  is  all." In  the  morning  she  told  her  older  sister.  They  started  on  again  and
walked  until  about  noon,  when  they  came  to  a  patch  of  wild  potatoes.
They  dug  and  found  plenty,  and  as  they  looked  around  they  saw  smoke


THE    yONTOSwiSAS    DANCE  367
where  there  had  been  a  camp  fire.  They  gathered  wood,  made  up  the
fire,  ;tn<!  roasted  the  potatoes.  Then  they  ate  as  many  a~  the}  wanted
and  carried  the  rest  with  them.
They  traveled  on  until  the  potatoes  were  almosl  gone.  Then  at
night  the  voice  came  again  to  the  younger  woman,  saying:  "Al  aoon
tomorrow  yon  will  reach  your  home,  and  the  first  person  you  will
meel  will  be  your  uncle.     When  you  gel  to  the  tow  o,  you  must  call  the
people  toe-ether  and  tell  them  all  that  has  happened.  You  must  go  to
the  long  house  and  take  oil'  your  skirl  and  carry  it  on  your  shoulder.
Then  you  must  go  inside  and  go  around  once,  singing,  'We  have  come
home;  we  are  here.'  This  is  the  Ybntonwisas  song,  and  it  shall  he for  women  only.  Know  now  that  we  are  the  ETadionyageonon,  the
>k\    People,  who  have  watched  n\  er  you  all  this  time."
When  the  girl  awoke,  she  told  her  sister,  and  they  said.  "We  must,
do  all  this."  and  they  began  to  sine'  as  they  went  along.  Aliout  noon
they  heard  the  sound  of  chopping,  and  when  they  went  to  the  place
they  found  it  was  their  uncle  cutting  blocks  to  make  spoons.  He  did
not  see  them  until  they  spoke,  and  at  first  could  hardly  believe  that
they  were  living  women,  because  he  knew  that  they  had  been  taken  by
the  Cherokee.  He  was  very  glad  to  see  them,  and  as  they  walked  on
to  the  town  they  told  him  all  they  had  been  commanded  to  do  by  the
Sky  People.  When  they  arrived  at  the  town,  he  called  all  the  people
toe-ether,  and  they  went  to  the  long  house.  There  the  two  women
sang  their  song  and  did  everything  exactly  as  they  had  been  told  to  do.
and  when  it  was  over  they  said.  ■'This  is  all."  and  sat  down.  This  is
the  same  Yontonwisas  song  that  is  still  sung  by  the  women. — Arranged
from  Curtin,  Seneca  manuscript.
98.   GA'NA'S  ADVENTURES  AMONG   THE  CHEROKEE
Ga'na'  was  a  Seneca  war  chief.  He  called  a  council  and  said.  "We
must  go  to  the  Cherokee  and  see  if  we  can't  agree  to  be  friendly
together  and  live  in  peace  hereafter."  The  people  consented,  and  the
chief  said.  "We  uiu-t  go  to  water  first  before  we  start."  So  they  went,
a  great  party  of  warriors,  far  away  into  the  deep  forest  by  the  river
side.  There  were  no  women  with  them.  For  ten  days  they  drank
medicine  every  morning  to  make  them  vomit  and  washed  and  bathed
in  the  river  each  clay.
Then  the  chief  said.  "  Now  we  must  get  the  eagle  feathers.  "  They
went  i,,  the  top  of  a  high  hill  and  dug  a  trench  there  the  length  of  a
man's  body,  and  put  a  man  into  it.  with  boughs  over  the  top  so  that
he  could  not  be  seen,  and  above  that  they  put  the  whole  body  of  a
deer.  Then  the  people  went  oil'  out  of  sight,  and  said  the  words  to
invite  Shada'ge'a.  the  great  eagle  that  lives  in  the  clouds,  to  come  down.
The  man  under  the  brushwood  heard  a  noise,  and  a  common  eagle
came  and  ate  a  Little  ami  flew  away  again.     Soon  it  came  back,  ate  a


368  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
little  more,  and  flew  off  in  another  direction.  It  told  the  other  birds
and  they  came,  bat  the  man  scared  them  away,  because  he  did  not
want  common  birds  to  eat  the  meat.  After  a  while  he  heard  a  great
noise  coming  through  the  air,  and  he  knew  it  was  Shada'ge'a,  the  bird
he  wanted.  Shada*ge'a  is  very  cautious,  and  looked  around  in  every direction  for  some  time  before  be  began  to  eat  the  meat.  As  soon  as
he  was  eating  the  man  put  his  hand  up  cautiously  and  caught  hold  of
the  bird's  tail  and  held  on  to  it.  Shada'ge'a  rose  up  and  flew  away, and  the  man  had  pulled  out  one  feather.  They  had  to  trap  a  good
many  eagles  in  this  way,  and  it  was  two  years  before  they  could  get
enough  feathers  to  make  a  full  tail,  and  were  ready  to  start  for  the
Cherokee  country.
They  were  many  days  on  the  road,  and  when  they  got  to  the  first
Cherokee  town  they  found  there  was  a  stockade  around  it  so  that  no
enemy  could  enter.  They  waited  until  the  gate  was  open,  and  then
two  Seneca  dancers  went  forward,  carrying  the  eagle  feathers  and
shouting  the  signal  yell.  When  the  Cherokee  heard  the  noise  they
came  out  and  saw  the  two  men  singing  and  dancing,  and  the  chief  said,
"These  men  must  have  come  upon  some  errand."  The  Seneca  mes-
sengers came  up  and  said.  "Call  a  council;  we  have  come  to  talk  on
important  business."  All  turned  and  went  toward  the  townhouse,  the
rest  of  the  Seneca  following  the  two  who  were  dancing.  The  town-
house  was  crowded,  and  the  Seneca  sang  and  danced  until  they  were
tired  before  they  stopped.     The  Cherokee  did  not  dance.
After  tin' dance  the  Seneca  chief  said.  "Now  I  will  tell  you  why
we  have  come  so  far  through  the  forest  to  see  you.  We  have  thought
among  ourselves  that  it  is  time  to  stop  fighting.  Your  people  and
ours  arc  always  on  the  lookout  to  kill  each  other,  and  we  think  it  is
time  for  this  to  stop.  Here  is  a  belt  of  wampum  to  show  that  I  speak
the  truth.  If  your  people  are  willing  to  be  friendly,  take  it,"  and  he
held  up  the  licit.  The  Cherokee  chief  stepped  forward  and  said,  "  I
will  hold  it  in  my  hand,  and  to-morrow  we  will  tell  you  what  we  decide."
He  then  turned  and  said  to  the  people,  '"Go  home  and  bring  food."
They  went  and  brought  so  much  food  that  it  made  a  great  pile  across
the  house,  and  all  of  both  tribes  ate  together,  but  could  not  finish  it.
Next  day  they  ate  together  again,  and  when  all  were  done  the  Cher-
okee chief  said  to  the  Seneca.  "We  have  decided  to  be  friendly  and
to  bury  our  weapons,  these  knives  and  hatchets,  so  that  no  man  may
take  them  up  again."  The  Seneca  chief  replied,  "We  are  glad  you have  accepted  our  offer,  and  now  we  have  all  thrown  our  weapons  in  a
pile  together,  and  the  white  wampum  hangs  between  us,  and  the  belt
shall  be  as  long  as  a  man  and  hang  down  to  the  ground."
Then  the  Cherokee  chief  said  to  his  people,  "Now  is  the  time  for
any  of  you  that  wishes  to  adopt  a  relative  from  among  the  Seneca  to
do  so."     So  some  Cherokee  women  went  and  picked  out  one  man  and


mooney]  GA  N.V  s    ADVENTURES  369
said,  ""  Vmi  shall  be  our  uncle,"  and  some  more  took  another  for  their
brother,  and  so  on  until  only  Ga'na',  the  chief,  was  left,  bul  the  Cher-
okee chief  said,  "  No  one  must  take  Ga'na',  for  a  young  man  is  here  to
claim  him  as  his  father."    Then  the  young  man  rami'  up  to  Ga'na'  and
said.  '"Father.  I  am  glad  to  see  you.     Father,  we  will  go  I   e,"  and
he  led  Ga'na'  to  his  own  mother's  house,  the  house  where  Ga'na'  had
spent  the  first  night.  The  young  man  was  really  his  son.  and  when
Ga'na'  came  to  the  house  he  recognized  the  woman  as  his  wife  who  had
been  carried  off  lone-  ago  by  the  Cherokee.
While  they  were  there  a  messenger  came  from  the  Seoqgwageono
tribe,  that  lived  near  the  great  salt  water  in  the  east,  to  challenge  the
Cherokee  to  a  ball  play.  lie  was  dressed  in  skins  which  were  so  long
that  they  touched  the  ground.  He  said  that  his  people  were  already
on  the  way  and  would  arrive  in  a  certain  number  of  days.  They
came  on  the  appointed  day  and  the  next  morning  began  to  make  the
bets  with  the  Cherokee.  The  Seneca  were  still  there.  The  strangers
bet  two  very  heavy  and  costly  robes,  besides  other  things.  They
began  to  play,  and  the  Cherokee  lost  the  game.  Then  the  Seneca
said.  "We  will  try  this  time.'*  Both  sides  bet  heavily  again,  and  the game  began,  but  after  a  little  running  the  Seneca  carried  the  ball  to
their  goal  and  made  a  point.  Before  lone-  they  made  all  the  points
and  won  the  game.  Then  the  bets  were  doubled,  and  the  Seneca  won
again.  "When  they  won  a  third  game  also  the  Seoqgwageono  said.
••  Let  us  try  a  race."  and  the  Seneca  agreed.
The  course  was  level,  and  the  open  space  was  very  wide.  The
Cherokee  selected  the  Seneca  runner,  and  it  was  agreed  that  they
would  run  the  first  race  without  betting  and  then  make  their  bets  on
the  second  race.  They  ran  the  first  race,  and  when  they  reached  the
post  the  Seneca  runner  was  just  the  measure  of  his  body  behind  the
other.  His  people  asked  him  if  he  had  done  his  best,  but  he  said.
"No;  I  have  not."  so  they  made  their  bets,  and  the  second  race  -the
real  race — began.  When  they  got  to  the  middle  the  Seneca  runner
said  to  the  other.  "Do  your  best  now.  for  I  am  going  to  do  mine." and  as  he  said  it  lie  pulled  out  and  left  the  other  far  behind  and  won
the  race.  Then  the  Seoqgwageono  said.  "There  is  one  more  race
yet  -the  long  race,"  and  they  got  ready  for  it,  but  the  Cherokee
chief  said  to  his  own  men.  "  We  have  won  everything  from  these
people.  I  think  it  will  be  best  to  let  them  have  one  race,  for  if  they
lose  all.  they  may  make  trouble."  They  selected  a  Cherokee  to  run,
and  he  was  beaten,  and  the  Seoqgwageono  went  home.
In  a  few  days  they  sent  a  messenger  to  challenge  the  Cherokee  id
meet  them  halfway  for  a  battle.  When  the  Cherokee  heard  this  they
said  to  the  Seneca.  "There  are  so  few  of  you  here  that  we  don't  want
to  have  you  killed.  It  is  better  for  you  to  go  home."  So  the  Seneca went  back  to  their  own  country.
19    ETH— 01   24


370  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.akk.19
Three  years  later  they  came  again  to  visit  the  Cherokee,  who  told
them  that  the  Seoqgwageono  had  won  the  battle,  and  that  the  chief  of
the  enemy  had  said  afterward.  "  I  should  like  to  fight  the  Seneca,  for
I  am  a  double  man.'1  Before  long  the  enemy  heard  that  the  Seneca were  there  and  sent  them  a  challenge  to  come  and  tight.  The  Seneca
said.  "We  must  try  to  satisfy  them,"  so  with  Cherokee  guides  they set  out  for  the  country  of  the  Seoqgwageono.  They  went  on  until
they  came  to  an  opening  in  the  woods  within  one  day's  journey  of  the
first  village.  Then  they  stopped  and  got  ready  to  send  two  messen-
gers to  notify  the  enemy,  but  the  Cherokee  said,  "You  must  send
them  so  as  to  arrive  about  sundown."  They  did  this,  and  when  the
messengers  arrived  near  the  town  they  saw  all  the  people  out  playing
ball.
The  two  Seneca  went  around  on  the  other  side,  and  began  throwing
sumac  darts  as  they  approached,  so  that  the  others  would  think  they
were  some  of  their  own  men  at  play.  In  this  way  they  got  near
enough  to  kill  a  man  who  was  standing  alone.  They  scalped  him,
and  then  raising  the  scalp  yell  they  rushed  off  through  the  woods,
saying  to  each  other  as  they  ran,  "Be  strong — Be  strong."  Soon  they
saw  the  Seoqgwageono  coming  on  horses,  but  managed  to  reach  a  dry
creek  and  to  hide  under  the  bank,  so  that  the  enemy  passed  on  without
seeing  them.
The  next  morning  they  came  out  and  started  on,  but  the  enemy  was
still  on  the  watch,  and  before  long  the  two  men  saw  the  dust  of  the
horses  behind  them.  The  others  came  up  until  they  were  almost
upon  them  and  began  to  shoot  arrows  at  them,  but  by  this  time  the
two  Seneca  were  near  the  opening  where  their  own  friends  were  hid-
ing, drawn  up  on  each  side  of  the  pass.  As  the  pursuers  dashed  in
the  two  lines  of  the  Seneca  closed  in  and  every  man  of  the  Seoqgwa-
geono was  either  killed  or  taken.
The  Seneca  went  back  to  the  Cherokee  country  and  after  about  a
month  they  returned  to  their  own  homes.     Afterward  the  Cherokee
told  them,  "  We  hear  the  Seoqgwageono  think  you  dangerous  people.
They  themselves  are  conjurers  and  can  tell  what  other  people  are
going  to  do.  but   they  cannot   tell  what  the  Seneca  are  going  to  do.
The  Seneca   medicine  is  stronger." — Arranged  from  Curtin,  Seneca
manuscript.
gg.  THE   SHAWANO   WARS
Among  the  most  inveterate  foes  of  the  Cherokee  were  the  Shawano,
known  to  the  Cherokee  as  Ani'-Sawanu'gi,  who  in  ancient  times,  prob-
ably as  early  as  1680,  removed  from  Savannah  (i.  e.,  Shawano)  river,
in  South  Carolina,  and  occupied  the  Cumberland  river  region  in  mid-
dle Tennessee  and  Kentucky,  from  which  they  were  afterward  driven
by  the  superior  force  of  the  southern  tribes  and  compelled  to  take  ref-
uge north  of  the  Ohio.     On  all   old   maps  we  find  the  Cumberland


iioonby]  THE    SHAWANO    WARS  .".71
marked  as  the  "  river  of  the  Shawano."  Although  the  two  tribes  were
frequently,  and  perhaps  for  long  periods,  on  friendly  terms,  the  ordi-
nary condition  was  one  of  chronic  warfare,  from  an  early  traditional
period  until  the  close  of  the  Revolution.  This  hostile  feeling  was
intensified  by  the  fact  that  the  Shawano  were  usually  the  steady  allies
of  the  Creeks,  the  hereditary  southern  enemies  of  the  Cherokee.  In
174'.».  however,  we  find  a  party  of  Shawano  from  the  north,  accom-
panied by  -e\  era!  ( Iherokee,  making  an  inroad  into  the  ( 'reek  country,
and  afterward  taking  refuge  among  the  Cherokee,  thus  involving  the
latter  in  a  new  war  with  their  southern  neighbors  (Adair,  Am.  Inds.,
276,  177.")).  The  Shawano  made  themselves  respected  for  their  fighting qualities,  gaining  a  reputation  for  valor  which  they  maintained  in  their
later  wars  with  the  whites,  while  from  their  sudden  attack  and  fertil-
ity of  stratagem  they  ca   t<>  be  regarded  as  a  tribe  of  magicians.     By
capture  or  intermarriage  in  the  old  days  there  is  quite  an  admixture  of
Shawano  blood  among  the  Cherokee.
According  to  Haywood,  an  aged  Cherokee  chief,  named  the  Little.
Cornplanter  (Little  Carpenter?),  stated  in  177i'  that  the  Shawano  had
removed  from  the  Savannah  river  a  lone-  time  before  in  consequence
of  a  disastrous  war  with  several  neighboring  tribes,  and  had  settled  upon
the  Cumberland,  by  permission  of  his  people.  A  quarrel  having  after-
ward arisen  between  the  two  tribes,  a  strong  body  of  Cherokee  invaded
the  territory  of  the  Shawano,  and.  treacherously  attacking  them,  killed
a  great  number.  The  Shawano  fortified  themselves  and  a  long  war
ensued,  which  continued  until  the  Chickasaw  came  to  the  aid  of  the
Cherokee,  when  the  Shawano  were  gradually  forced  to  withdraw  north
of  the  Ohio.
At  the  time  of  their  final  expulsion,  about  the  year  1710,  the  boy
Charleville  was  employed  at  a  French  post,  established  for  the  Shawano
trade,  which  occupied  a  mound  on  the  south  side  of  Cumberland  river,
where  now  is  the  city  of  Nashville.  For  a  long  time  the  Shawano  had
been  so  hard  pressed  by  their  enemies  that  they  had  been  withdrawing
to  the  north  in  small  parties  for  several  years,  until  only  a  few  remained
behind,  and  these  also  now  determined  to  leave  the  country  entirely.
In  March  the  trader  sent  Charleville  ahead  with  several  loads  of  -kins,
intending  himself  to  follow  with  the  Shawano  a  few  months  later.  In
the  meantime  the  Chickasaw,  learning  of  the  intended  move,  posted
themselves  on  both  side-  of  Cumberland  river,  above   the   mouth  of
Harpeth.  with  cai   -  tocut  off  escape  by  water,  and  suddenly  attacked
the  retreating  Shawano,  killings  large  part  of  them,  toe-ether  with  the
trader,  and  taking  all  their  skins,  trading  goods,  and  other  property.
Charleville  lived  to  tell  the  story  nearly  seventy  years  later.  As  the
war  was  never  terminated  by  any  formal  treaty  of  peace,  the  hostile
warriors  continued  to  attack  each  other  whenever  they  chanced  to  meet
on  the   rich  hunting  grounds  of  Kentuckv.  until  finally,  from  mutual


372  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.asn.19
dread,  the  region  was  abandoned  by  both  parties,  and  continued  thus
unoccupied  until  its  settlement  by  the  whites.1
According  to  Cherokee  tradition,  a  body  of  Creeks  was  already
established  near  the  mouth  of  Hiwassee  while  the  Cherokee  still  had
their  main  settlements  upon  the  Little  Tennessee.  The  Creeks,  being
near  neighbors,  pretended  friendship,  while  at  the  same  time  secretly
aiding  the  Shawano.  Having  discovered  the  treachery,  the  Cherokee
took  advantage  of  the  presence  of  the  Creeks  at  a  great  dance  at
Itsa'ti,  or  Echota,  the  ancient  Cherokee  capital,  to  fall  suddenly  upon
them  and  kill  nearly  the  whole  party.  The  consequence  was  a  war,
with  the  final  result  that  the  Creeks  were  defeated  and  forced  to
abandon  all  their  settlements  on  the  waters  of  the  Tennessee  river.2
Haywood  says  that  "Little  Cornplanter"  had  seen  Shawano  scalps
brought  into  the  Cherokee  towns.  When  he  was  a  boy,  his  father,
who  was  also  a  chief,  had  told  him  how  he  had  once  led  a  party  against
the  Shawano  and  was  returning  with  several  scalps,  when,  as  they
were  coming  through  a  pass  in  the  mountains,  they  ran  into  another
party  of  Cherokee  warriors,  who,  mistaking  them  for  enemies,  fired
into  them  and  killed  several  before  they  diseovei-ed  their  mistake.3
Schoolcraft  also  gives  the  Cherokee  tradition  of  the  war  with  the
Shawano,  as  obtained  indirectly  from  white,  informants,  but  incorrectly
makes  it  occur  while  the  latter  tribe  still  lived  upon  the  Savannah.
'"The  Cherokees  prevailed  after  a  long  and  sanguinary  contest  and
drove  the  Shawnees  north.  This  event  they  cherish  as  one  of  their
proudest  achievements.  '  What!1  said  an  aged  Cherokee  chief  to  Mr
Barnwell,  who  had  suggested  the  final  preservation  of  the  race  by
intermarriage  with  the  whites.  "What!  Shall  the  Cherokees  perish!
Shall  the  conquerors  of  the  Shawnees  perish!  Never!'"  *
Tribal  warfare  as  a  rule  consisted  of  a  desultory  succession  of  petty
raids,  seldom  approaching  the  dignity  of  a  respectable  skirmish  and
hardly  worthy  of  serious  consideration  except  in  the  final  result.  The
traditions  necessarily  partake  of  the  same  trivial  character,  being  rather
anecdotes  than  narratives  of  historical  events  which  had  dates  and
names.     Lapse  of  time  renders  them  also  constantly  more  vague.
On  the  Carolina  side  the  Shawano  approach  was  usually  made  up  the
Pigeon  river  valley,  so  as  to  come  upon  the  Cherokee  settlements  from
behind,  and  small  parties  were  almost  constantly  lurking  about  waiting
the  favorable  opportunity  to  pick  up  a  stray  scalp.  On  one  occasion
some  Cherokee  hunters  were  stretched  around  the  camp  fire  at  night
when  they  heard  flic  cry  of  a  flying  squirrel  in  the  woods — tsu-u!  tsu-u!
tsu-u!  Always  on  the  alert  for  danger,  they  suspected  it  might  be  the
enemy's  signal,  and  all  but  one  hastily  left  the  fire  and  concealed  them-
selves. That  one,  however,  laughed  at  their  fears  and,  defiantly  throw-
ing some  heavy  logs  on  the  fire,  stretched  himself  out  on  his  blanket
1  Haywood,  Nat.  and  Aborig.  Hist,  of  Tennessee,  pp.  222-224,  1823.
-  Ibid,  p.  241.  3  Ibid,  p.  222.  *  Schoolcraft,  Notes  on  Iroquois,  p.  160,  1847.


THE    SHAWANO    WARS  373
and  began  to  sing.  Soon  he  heard  a  stealthy  step  coming  through  the
bushes  and  gradually  approaching  the  tiiv.  until  suddenly  an  enemy
sprang  out  upon  him  from  the  darkness  and  boie  him  to  the  earth.
But  the  Cherokee  was  watchful,  and  putting  up  his  hands  he  seized
the  other  by  the  anus,  and  with  a  mighty  effort  threw  him  backward
into  the  fire.  The  dazed  Shawano  lay  there  a  moment  squirming  upon
the  coals,  then  bounded  to  Ins  feet  and  ran  into  the  woods,  howling
with  pain.  There  was  an  answering  laugh  from  his  comrades  hidden
in  the  hush.  1  mt  although  the  Cherokee  kept  watch  for  some  time  the
enemy  made  no  further  attack,  probably  led  by  the  very  boldness  of
the  hunter  to  suspect  some  ambush.
On  another  occasion  a  small  hunting  party  in  the  Smoky  mountains
heard  the  gobble  of  a  turkey  (in  telling  the  story  Swimmer  gives  a
good  imitation).  Some  eager  young  hunters  were  for  going  at  once
toward  the  game,  but  others,  more  cautious,  suspected  a  ruse  and
advised  a  reconnaissance.  Accordingly  a  hunter  went  around  to  the
hack  of  the  ridge,  and  on  coming  up  from  the  other  side  found  a
man  posted  in  a  large  tree,  making  the  gobble  call  to  decoy  the  hunters
within  reach  of  a  Shawano  war  party  concealed  behind  some  bushes
midway  between  the  tree  and  the  camp.  Keeping  close  to  the  ground,
the  Cherokee  crept  up  without  being  discovered  until  within  gunshot,
then  springing  to  his  feet  he  shot  tin'  man  in  the  tree,  and  shouting
"•  Kill  them  all,"  rushed  upon  the  enemy,  who.  thinking  that  a  strong force  of  Cherokee  was  upon  them,  fled  down  the  mountain  without
attempting  to  make  a  stand.
Another  tradition  of  these  wars  is  that  concerning  Tun&'i,  a  great
warrior  and  medicine-man  of  old  Itsa'tl.  on  the  Tennessee.  In  one
hard  right  with  the  Shawano,  near  the  town,  he  overpowered  his  man
and  stabbed  him  through  both  arms.  Running  cords  through  the
holes  he  tied  his  prisoner's  arms  and  brought  him  thus  into  Itsa'tl,
where  he  was  put  to  death  by  the  women  with  such  tortures  that  his
courage  broke  and  he  begged  them  to  kill  him  at  once.
A  tier  retiring  to  the  upper  Ohio  the  Shawano  were  received  into  the
protection  of  the  Delawares  and  their  allies,  and  being  thus  strength-
ened felt  encouraged  to  renew  the  war  against  the  Cherokee  with
increased  vigor.  The  latter,  however,  proved  themselves  more  than  a
match  for  their  enemies,  pursuing  them  even  to  their  towns  in  western
Pennsylvania,  and  accidentally  killing  there  some  Delawares  who  occu-
pied the  country  jointly  with  the  Shawano.  This  involved  the  ( 'herokee
in  a  war  with  the  powerful  Delawares.  which  continued  until  brought
to  an  end  in  L768  at  the  request  of  the  Cherokee,  who  made  terms  of
friendship  at  the  same  time  with  the  Iroquois.  The  Shawano  being
thus  left  alone,  and  being,  moreover,  roundly  condemned  by  their
friends,  the  Delawares.  as  the  cause  of  the  whole  trouble,  had  no  heart
t..  continue  the  war  and  were  obliged  to  make  final  peace.1
i  Heckewelder  Indian  Nations,  p.  88,  r. -print  of  L876.


37-4  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
ioo.   THE  RAID   ON   TIKWALI'TSI
The  last  noted  leader  of  the  Shawano  raiding  parties  was  a  chief
known  to  the  Cherokee  as  Tawa'li-ukwanun'ti,  "Punk-plngged-in,"
on  account  of  a  red  spot  on  his  cheek  which  looked  as  though  a  piece
of  punk  (tawa'H)  had  been  driven  into  the  flesh.
The  people  of  Tikwali'tsi  town,  on  Tuckasegee,  heard  rumors  that
a  war  party  under  this  leader  had  come  in  from  the  north  and  was
lurking  somewhere  in  the  neighborhood.  The  Cherokee  conjurer.
whose  name  was  Etawa'ka-tsistatla'ski,  "Dead-wood -lighter,"  resorted
to  his  magic  arts  and  found  that  the  Shawano  were  in  ambush  along  the
trail  on  the  north  side  of  the  river  a  short  distance  above  the  town.
By  his  advice  a  party  was  fitted  out  to  go  up  on  the  south  side  and
come  in  upon  the  enemy's  rear.  A  few  foolhardy  fellows,  however,
despised  his  words  and  boldly  went  up  the  trail  on  the  north  side  until
they  came  to  Deep  Creek,  where  the  Shawano  in  hiding  at  the  ford
took  them  "  like  fish  in  a  trap"  and  killed  nearly  all  of  them.
Their  friends  on  the  other  side  of  the  river  heard  the  firing,  and
crossing  tlic  river  above  Deep  creek  they  came  in  behind  the  Shawano
and  attacked  them,  killing  a  number  and  forcing  the  others  to  retreat
toward  the  Smoky  mountains,  with  the  Cherokee  in  pursuit.  The
invaders  had  with  them  two  Cherokee  prisoners  who  were  not  able  to
keep  up  with  the  rapid  flight,  so  their  captors  took  them,  bound  as
they  were,  and  threw  them  over  a  cliff.  An  old  conjurer  of  their  own
party  finding  himself  unable  to  keep  up  deliberately  sat  clown  against
a  tree  near  the  same  spot  to  wait  for  death.  The  pursuers  coming  up
split  his  head  with  a  hatchet  and  threw  his  body  over  the  same  cliff,
which  takes  its  name  from  this  circumstance.  The  Shawano  continued
to  retreat,  with  the  Cherokee  close  behind  them,  until  they  crossed
the  main  ridge  at  the  gap  just  below  Clingman's  dome.  Here  the
Cherokee  gave  up  the  pursuit  and  returned  to  their  homes.
ioi.   THE  LAST  SHAWANO   INVASION
Perhaps  a  year  after  the  raid  upon  Tikwali'tsi,  the  Shawano  again,
under  the  same  leader,  came  down  upon  the  exposed  settlement  of
Kanuga,  on  Pigeon  river,  and  carried  off  a  woman  and  two  children
whom  they  found  gathering  berries  near  the  town.  Without  waiting
to  make  an  attack  they  hastily  retreated  with  their  prisoners.  The
people  of  Kanuga  sent  for  aid  to  the  other  settlements  farther  south,
and  a  strong  party  was  quickly  raised  to  pursue  the  enemy  and  recover
the  captives.  By  this  time,  however,  the  Shawano  had  had  several
days'  start  and  it  was  necessary  for  the  Cherokee  to  take  a  shorter
course  across  the  mountains  to  overtake  them.  A  noted  conjurer
named  Ka'lanu,  '"The  Raven,"  of  Hiwassee  town,  was  called  upon  to
discover  by  Ids  magic  arts  what  direction  the  Shawano  had  taken  and


booney]  THE    LAST    SHAW  AMI    [NVASION  875
how  far  they  had  already  gone.  Calling  the  chiefs  together  he  told
them  to  till  the  pip''  and  smoke  and  he  would  return  with  the  informa-
tion before  the  pipe  was  smoked  out.  They  sat  down  in  a  circle  around
the  fire  and  lighted  the  pipe,  while  he  went  out  into  the  woods.  Soon
they  heard  the  cry  of  an  owl,  and  after  sonic  interval  they  heard  it
again,  and  the  next  moment  the  conjurer  walked  oul  from  the  trees
before  yet  the  first  smoke  was  finished.
He  reported  that  he  had  trailed  the  Shawano  to  their  camp  and  that
they  were  seven  days  ahead.  The  Cherokee  at  once  followed  as  The
Raven  guided,  and  reached  the  place  in  seven  days  and  found  all  the
marks  of  a  camp,  but  the  enemy  was  already  gone.  Again  and  once
again  the  conjurer  wenl  ahead  in  his  own  mysterious  fashion  to  spy
out  the  country, and  they  followed  as  he  pointed  the  way.  On  return-
ing the  third  time  he  reported  that  their  enemies  had  halted  beside  the
great  river  (the  Ohio),  and  soon  afterward  he  came  in  with  the  news
that  they  were  crossing  it.  The  Cherokee  hurried  on  to  the  river,
but  by  this  time  the  Shawano  were  on  the  other  side.  The  pursuers
hunted  up  and  down  until  they  found  a  favorable  spot  in  the  stream,
and  then  waiting  until  it  was  dark  they  prepared  to  cross,  using  logs
as  rafts  and  tacking  with  the  current,  and  managed  it  so  well  that
they  were  over  long  before  daylight  without  alarming  the  enemy.
The  trail  was  now  fresh,  and  following  it  they  soon  came  upon  the
camp,  which  was  asleep  and  all  unguarded,  the  Shawano,  flunking
themselves  now  safe  in  their  own  country,  having  neglected  to  post
sentinels.  Rushing  in  with  their  knives  and  tomahawks,  the  Cherokee
fell  upon  their  sleeping  foe  and  killed  a  number  of  them  before  the
others  could  wake  and  seize  their  arms  to  defend  themselves.  Then
there  was  a  short,  desperate  encounter,  but  the  Shawano  were  taken
at  a  disadvantage,  their  leader  himself  being  among  the  first  killed.
and  in  a  few  moments  they  broke  and  ran.  every  man  for  himself,  to
exape  as  best  he  could.  The  Cherokee  released  the  captives,  whom
thc\  found  tied  to  trees,  and  after  taking  the  scalps  from  the  dead
Shawano,  with  their  guns  and  other  equipments,  returned  to  their
own  country.
102.   THE   FALSE   WARRIORS   OF   CHILHOWEE
Some  warriors  of  Chilhowee  town,  on  Little  Tennessee,  organized  a
war  party,  as  they  said,  to  go  against  the  Shawano.  They  started  off
north  along  the  great  war  trail,  but  when  they  came  to  Pigeon  river
they  changed  their  course,  and  instead  of  going  on  toward  the  Sha-
wano country  they  went  up  the  river  and  came  in  at  the  back  of  Cowee,
one  of  the  Middle  settlements  of  their  own  tribe.  Here  they  concealed
themselves  near  the  path  until  a  party  of  three  or  four  unsuspecting
townspeople  came  by,  when  thej  rushed  out  and  killed  them,  took  their
scalps  and  a  gun  belonging  to  a   man   named  Gunskali'skl,  and  then


37t)  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  ieth.ann.19
hurriedly  made  their  way  home  by  the  same  roundabout  route  to  Chil-
howee,  where  they  showed  the  fresh  scalps  and  the  gun,  and  told  how
they  had  met  the  Shawano  in  the  north  and  defeated  them  without
losing  a  man.
According  to  custom,  preparations  were  made  at  once  for  a  great
scalp  dance  to  celebrate  the  victory  over  the  Shawano.  The  dance  was
held  in  the  townhouse  and  all  the  people  of  the  settlement  were  there
and  looked  on,  while  the  women  danced  with  the  scalps  and  the  gun,
and  the  returned  warriors  boasted  of  their  deeds.  As  it  happened,
among  those  looking  on  was  a  visitor  from  Cowee,  a  gunstocker,  who
took  particular  notice  of  the  gun  and  knew  it  at  once  as  one  he  had
repaired  at  home  for  Gunskali'ski.  He  said  nothing,  but  wondered
much  how  it  had  come  into  possession  of  the  Shawano.
The  scalp  dance  ended,  and  according  to  custom  a  second  dance  was
appointed  to  be  held  seven  days  later,  to  give  the  other  warriors  also
a  chance  to  boast  of  their  own  war  deeds.  The  gunstocker,  whose
name  was  Gulsadikf,  returned  home  to  Cowee,  and  there  heard  for  the
first  time  how  a  Shawano  war  party  had  surprised  some  of  the  town
people,  killed  several,  and  taken  their  scalps  and  a  gun.  He  under-
stood it  all  then,  and  told  the  chief  that  the  mischief  had  been  done,
not  by  a  hostile  tribe,  but  by  the  false  men  of  Chilhowee.  It  seemed
too  much  to  believe,  and  the  chief  said  it  could  not  be  possible,  until
the  gunstocker  declared  that  he  had  recognized  the  gun  as  one  he  had
himself  repaired  for  the  man  who  had  been  killed.  At  last  they  were
convinced  that  his  story  was  true,  and  all  Cowee  was  eager  for  revenge.
It  was  decided  to  send  ten  of  their  bravest  warriors,  under  the  leader-
ship of  the  gunstocker,  to  the  next  dance  at  Chilhowee,  there  to  take
their  own  method  of  reprisal.  Volunteers  offered  at  once  for  the  service.
They  set  out  at  the  proper  time  and  arrived  at  Chilhowee  on  the  night
the  dance  was  to  begin.  As  they  crossed  the  stream  below  the  town
they  met  a  woman  coming  for  water  and  took  their  first  revenge  by
killing  her.  Men,  women,  and  children  were  gathered  in  the  town-
house,  but  the  Cowee  men  concealed  themselves  outside  and  waited.
In  this  dance  it  was  customary  for  each  warrior  in  turn  to  tell  the