story  of  Jonah,  and  the  Greek  story  of  Hercules,  swallowed  by  a  fish  and  coming  out
afterward  alive,  hut  bald.  For  parallels  and  theories  of  the  origin  and  meaning  of
the  myth  among  the  ancient  nations,  see  chapter  i.x  of  Bouton's  Bible  Myth--.
In  an  <  rjibwa  story,  the  great  Manabozho  is  swallowed,  canoe  and  all,  by  the  king
of  the  fishes.  With  his  war  club  he  strikes  repeated  blows  upon  the  heart  of  the  fish,
which  attempts  to  spew  him  out.  Fearing  that  he  might  drown  in  deep  water,
Manabozho  frustrates  the  endeavor  by  placing  his  canoe  crosswise  in  the  throat  of
the  fish,  and  continues  striking  at  the  heart  until  the  monster  makes  for  the  shore
and  t  line  dies,  when  the  hero  makes  his  escape  through  a  hole  which  the  gulls  have
torn  in  the  side  of  the  carcass  (Schoolcraft,  Algic  Researches,  i,  pp.  145-14H).
69.  AtaGa'hi,  the  enchanted  lake  (p.  321):  This  story  was  heard  from  Swimmer,
Ta'gwadihT',  and  others,  anil  is  a  matter  of  familiar  knowledge  to  every  hunter  among
the  East  Cherokee.  If  Indian  testimony  he  believed  there  is  actually  a  large  bare
flat  of  this  name  in  the  difficult  recesses  of  the  Great  Smoky  mountains  on  the
northern  boundary  of  Swain  county,  North  Carolina,  somewhere  between  the  heads
of  Bradleys  fork  and  Eagle  creek.  It  appears  to  be  a  great  resort  for  bears  and
ducks,  and  is  perhaps  submerged  at  long  intervals,  which  would  account  for  the
legend.
Prayer,  fasting,  and  vigil — In  Indian  ritual,  as  among  the  Orientals  and  in  all
ancient  religions,  these  are  prime  requisites  for  obtaining  clearness  of  spiritual  vision.
In  almost  every  tribe  the  young  warrior  just  entering  manhood  voluntarily  sub-
jected himself  to  an  ordeal  of  this  kind,  of  several  days'  continuance,  in  order  to
obtain  a  vision  of  the  "medicine"  which  was  to  be  his  guide  and  protector  for  the rest  of  his  life.
70.  The  bride  from  the  south  (p.  322):  This  unique  allegory  was  heard  from
both  Swimmer  and  Ta'gwadihl'  in  nearly  the  same  form.  Hagar  also  (MS  Stellar
Legends  of  the  Cherokee)  heard  something  of  it  from  Ayasta,  who,  however,  con-
fused it  with  the  Hagar  variant  of  number  11,  "The  Milky  Way"  (see  notes  to number  11).
In  a  myth  from  British  Columbia,  "  The  Hot  and  the  Cold  Winds,"  the  cold-wind
people  of  the  north  wage  war  with  the  hot-wind  people  of  the  south,  until  the
Indians,  whose  country  lay  between,  and  who  constantly  suffer  from  both  sides,
bring  about  a  peace,  to  be  ratified  by  a  marriage  between  the  two  parties.  Accord-
ingly, the  people  of  the  south  send  their  daughter  to  marry  the  son  of  the  north.
The  two  are  married  and  have  one  child,  whom  the  mother  after  a  time  decides  to
take  with  her  to  visit  her  own  people  in  the  north.  Her  visit  ended,  she  starts  on
her  return,  accompanied  by  her  elder  brother.  "  They  embarked  in  a  bark  canoe
for  the  country  of  the  cold.  Her  brother  paddled.  After  going  a  long  distance,  and
while  crossing  a  great  lake,  the  cold  became  so  intense  that  her  brother  could  not
endure  it  any  longer.  He  took  the  child  from  his  sister  and  threw  it  into  the  water.
Immediately  the  air  turned  warm  and  the  child  floated  on  the  water  as  a  lump  of
ice." — Teit,  Traditions  of  the  Thompson  River  Indians,  pp.  55,  56.
71.  The  Ice  Man  (p.  322):  This  story,  told  by  Swimmer,  maybe  a  veiled  tradi-
tion of  a  burning  coal  mine  in  the  mountains,  accidentally  ignited  in  firing  the  woods
in  the  fall,  according  to  the  regular  Cherokee  practice,  and  finally  extinguished  by  a
providential  rainstorm.  One  of  Buttrick's  Cherokee  informants  told  him  that  "a
great  while  ago  a  part  of  the  world  was  burned,  though  it  is  not  known  now  how,  or
by  whom,  but  it  is  said  that  other  land  was  formed  by  washing  in  from  the  moun-
tains" (  Antiquities,  p.  7).
When  the  French  built  Fort  Caroline,  near  the  present  Charleston,  South  ( Ian  ilina,
in  1562,  an  Indian  villlage  was  in  the  vicinity,  but  shortly  afterward  the  chief,  with
all  his   people,  removed  to  a  considerable  distance  in  consequence  of  a  strange


mooney]  NOTES    AMI    PARALLELS  -1  7  1
accident — "a  large  piece  of  peat  bog  [was]  kindled  by  lightning  and  consumed,  which
he  supposed   to  be  the  work  of  artillery."  ' Volcanic  activities,  some  of  very  recent  date,  have  left  inam  traces  in  the  Carolina
mountains.  A  mountain  in  Haywood  county,  near  the  head  of  Fines  creek,  has
been  noted  for  it-  noises  an. I  uuakings  for  nearly  a  century,  our  particular  explosion
having  split  solid  masses  of  granite  a-  though  bj  a  blast  of  gunpowder.  These
shocks  and  noises  used  to  recur  at  intervals  of  two  or  three  years,  but  have  not  now
been  noticed  for  some  time.  In  1829  a  violent  earthquake  on  Vallej  river  split  open
a  mountain,  leaving  a  chasm  extending  for  several  hundred  yards,  which  is  still  to
be  seen  Satoola  mountain,  near  Highlands,  in  Macon  county,  has  crevices  from
which  smoke  is  said  to  issue  at  intervals.  In  Madison  county  there  is  a  mountain
which  lias  been  known  to  rumble  and  smoke,  a  phenomenon  with  which  the  Warm
Springs  in  the  same  county  may  have  some  connection.  Another  peak,  known  as
Shaking  or  Rumbling  bald,  in  Rutherford   county,  attracted  widespread  attention  in
1S74  by  a  succession  of  shocks  extending  over  a  period  of  six  months  (see  Zeiglei
and  Grosscup,  Heart  of  the  Alleghanies,  pp. 228-229).
72.  The  Hi  nter  vnd  Sblu  (p.  323):  The  explanation  of  this  story,  told  by  Swim-
mer,  lies  in  the  myth    which  derives  corn   from  the    blood  of  the   old  woman    Soln
(see  number  3,  "  Kana'tl  and  Selu  "  I. In  Iroquois  myth  the  spirits  of  Corn,  Beans,  and  Squash  are  three  sisters.     Corn
was  originally  much  more  fertile,  but  was  blighted  by  the  jealousy  of  an  evil  spirit.
"To  this  day,  when  the  rustling  wind  waves  the  corn  leaves  with  a  moaning  sound,
the  pious  Indian  fancies  that  he  hears  the  Spirit  of  Corn,  in  her  compassion  for  the
red  man.  still  bemoaning  with  unavailing  regrets  her  blighted  fruitfulness"  (Morgan,
Leagi   f  the  Iroquois,  p.  L62).  See  number  126,  "Plant  Lore,"  and  accompany-
ing notes.
73.  Tiik  Underground  Panthers  (p.324):  This  story  was  told  by  John  Ax.  For
an  explanation  of  the  Indian  idea  concerning  animals  see  number  15,  "The  Four-
footed  Tribes,"  and  number  7i>,  "The  Bear  Man."
Serernl  daijn — The  strange  lapse  of  time,  by  which  a  period  really  extending  over
days  or  even  years  seems  to  the  stranger  under  the  spell  to  be  only  a  matter  of  a  few
hours,  is  one  of  the  most  common  incidents  of  European  fairy  recitals,  and  has  been
made  equally  familiar  to  American  readers  through  Irving's  story  of  Rip  Van Winkle.
74.  The  Tsundige'wI  (p.  325):  This  curious  story  was  told  by  Swimmer  and
Ta'gwSdihr'  (east)  and  Watford  (west).  Swimmer  says  the  dwarfs  lived  in  the  west,
but  Ta'gwadihi'  and  Wafford  locate  them  south  from  the  Cherokee  country.
\  story  which  seems  to  be  a  variant  of  the  same  myth  was  told  to  the  Spanish
adventurer  Ayllon  by  the  Indians  on  the  South  Carolina  coast  in  1520,  and  is  thus
given  in  translation  from  Peter  Martyr's  Decades,  in  the  Discovery  and  Con-
quest of  Florida,  ninth  volume  of  the  Hakluyt  Society's  publications,  pages  xv-xvi,
London,  1851.
"Another  of  Ayllon's  strange  stories  refers  to  a  country  called  Inzignanin,  .  .  .
The  inhabitauntes,  by  report  of  their  ancestors,  say,  that  a  people  as  tall  as  the  length
of  a  man's arme,  with  tayles  of  a  span nc  long,  sometime  arrived  there,  brought  thither
by  sea,  which  tayle  was  not  movable  or  wavering,  as  in  foure-footed  beastes,  but
solide,  broad  above,  and  sharpe  beneath,  as  wee  see  in  fishes  and  crocodiles,  and
extended  into  a  bony  hardness.  Wherefore,  when  they  desired  to  sill,  they  used
scale-  with  holes  through  them,  or  wanting  them,  digged  upp  the  earth  a  spanne
deepeor  little  more,  they  must  COnvay  their  tayle  into  the  hole  when  they  rest  them."
1  Buckingham  Smith,  Letter  of  Hi  n  eu  dodi  Soto  and  Memoir  of  Hernando  de  Escalante,  translated
Spanish;  Washington,  1854,  p.46.


472  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.amn.19
It  is  given  thus  in  Barcia,  Ensayo,  page  5:  "Tambien  Uegaron  a  la  Provineia  de
Yncignavin'adonde  les  contaron  aquellos  Indios,  que  en  cierto  tiempo,  avian  apor-
tado  a  ella,  unas  Gentes,  que  tenian  Cola  .  .  .  de  una  quarta  de  largo,  flexible,
que  les  estorvaba  tanto,  que  para  sentarse  agujereaban  los  asientos:  que  el  Pellejo  era
muiaspero,  y  coino  escarnoso,  y  quecomian  solo  Peres  erudos:  y  aviendo  estos  muerto,
se  acabo  esta  Nacion,  y  la  Verdad  del  Caso,  eon  ella."
A  close  parallel  to  the  Cherokee  story  is  found  among  the  Nisqualli  of  Washing-
ton, in  a  story  of  three  [four?]  brothers,  who  are  captured  by  a  rnircaculously  strong
dwarf  who  ties  them  and  carries  them  off  in  his  canoe.  "Having  rounded  the  dis-
tant point,  where  they  had  first  descried  him,  they  came  to  a  village  inhabited  by
a  race  of  people  as  small  as  their  captor,  their  houses,  boats  and  utensils  being  all
in  proportion  to  themselves.  The  three  brothers  were  then  taken  out  and  thrown,
bound  as  they  were,  into  a  lodge,  while  a  council  was  convened  to  decide  upon  their
fate.  During  the  sitting  of  the  council  an  immense  flock  of  birds,  resembling  geese,
but  much  larger,  pounced  down  upon  the  inhabitants  and  commenced  a  violent
attack.  These  birds  had  thepowerof  throwing  their  sharp  quills  like  the  porcupine,
and  although  the  little  warriors  fought  with  great  valour,  they  soon  became  covered
with  the  piercing  darts  and  all  sunk  insensible  on  the  ground.  When  all  resistance
has  ceased,  the  birds  took  to  flight  and  disappeared.  The  brothers  had  witnessed
the  conflict  from  their  place  of  confinement,  and  with  much  labour  had  succeeded  in
releasing  themselves  from  their  bonds,  when  they  went  to  the  battle  ground,  and
commenced  pulling  the  quills  from  the  apparently  lifeless  bodies;  but  no  sooner  had
they  done  this,  than  all  instantly  returned  to  consciousness"  (Kane,  Wanderings  of
an  Artict,  pp.  252-253).
75.  Oriuin  of  the  Bear  (p.  325):  This  story  was  told  by  Swimmer,  from  whom
were  also  obtained  the  hunting  songs,  and  was  frequently  referred  to  by  other
informants.  The  Ani'-Tsa'gfthi  are  said  to  have  been  an  actual  clan  in  ancient
times.     For  parallels,  see  number  76,  "The  Bear  Man."
Jlml  mil  taken  human  food — The  Indian  is  a  thorough  believer  in  the  doctrine  that
"man  is  what  he  eats."  Says  Adair  (History  of  the  American  Indians,  p.  133):
"They  believe  that  nature  is  possessed  of  such  a  property  as  to  transfuse  into  men
and  animals  the  qualities,  either  of  the  food  they  use  or  of  those  objects  that  are  pre-
sented to  their  senses.  He  who  feeds  on  venison  is,  according  to  their  physical  sys-
tem, swifter  and  more  sagacious  than  the  man  who  lives  on  the  flesh  of  the  clumsy
bear  or  helpless  dunghill  fowls,  the  slow-footed  tame  cattle,  or  the  heavy  wallowing
swine.  This  is  the  reason  that  several  of  their  old  men  recommend  and  say  that
formerly  their  greatest  chieftains  observed  a  constant  rule  in  their  diet,  and  seldom
ate  of  any  animal  of  a  gross  quality  or  heavy  motion  of  body,  fancying  it  conveyed
a  dullness  through  the  whole  system  and  disabled  them  from  exerting  themselves
with  proper  vigour  in  their  martial,  civil,  and  religious  duties."  A  continuous
adherence  to  the  diet  commonly  used  by  a  bear  wall  finally  give  to  the  eater  the  bear
nature,  if  not  also  the  bear  form  and  appearance.  A  certain  term  of  "  white  man's
food"  will  give  the  Indian  the  white  man's  nature,  so  that  neither  the  remedies  nor
the  spells  of  the  Indian  doctor  will  have  any  effect  upon  him  (see  the  author's
"Sacred  Formulas  of  the  Cherokees,"  in  Seventh  Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of
Ethnology,  1891).
Shall  In,'  always — For  explanation  of  the  doctrine  of  animal  reincarnation,  see
number  15,  "The  Four-footed  Tribes."
Thesongs — These  are  fair  specimens  of  the  hunting  songs  found  in  every  tribe,  and
intended  to  call  up  the  animals  or  to  win  the  favor  of  the  lords  of  the  game  (see  also
deer  songs  in  notes  to  number  3,  "Kana'tland  Selu").  As  usual,  the  word  forms  are
slightly  changed  to  suit  the  requirements  of  the  tune.  The  second  song  was  tirst
published  by  the  author  in  the  paper  on  sacred  formulas,  noted  above.     Tsistu'yl,


hooney]  NOTE8    AM)    PARALLELS  473
Kuwa'hi,  (Jya'hye,and  Gate'gwa  (-hi)  are  foui  mountains,  under  each  of  which  the bears  have  a  townhouse  in  which  they  hold  a  dance  before  retiring  to  their  dens
for  their  winter  sleep.  AtTsistu'yl,  "Rabbit  place,"  known  to  us  as  Gregory  bald,
in  the  i  rreal  Smoky  range,  dwells  the  <  lrea1  Rabbit,  the  chief  of  the  rabbit  tribe.
At  Kuwa'hi.  ■•  Mulberry  place,"  farther  northeast  along  the  same  range,  resides  the
White  Bear,  the  chief  of  the  bear  tribe,  and  near  by  is  the  enchanted  lake  of  Ata-
ga'hl,  to  which  wounded  bears  go  to  bathe  and  be  cured  I  see  number  15,  "The  Four-
footed  Tribes,"  and  number  69,  "Ataga'hl,  the  Enchanted  Lake"  I.  Uyahye  is  also  a
peak  of  the  Great  Smokies,  while  Gategwa'hl,  "Great  swamp  or  thicket  (?),"  is
southeast  of  Franklin,  North  Carolina,  and  is  perhaps  identical  with  Fodderstack
mountain  (see  also  the  glossary).
"ii.  The  Bear  M  vn  I  p.  327  |:  This  story  was  obtained  first  from  John  Ax,  and  has numerous  parallels  in  other  tribes, as  well  as  in  European  and  oriental  folklore.
The  classic  legend  of  Romulus  and  Remus  and  the  stories  of  "  wolf  hoys"  in  India
will  at  one-  suggest  themselves.  Swimmer  makes  the  trial  of  the  hunter's  weapons
by  the  bears  a  part  of  his  story  of  tin- origin  of  disease  and  medicine  (number  4),  but
says  that  it  may  have  happened  on  this  occasion  (see  also  number  15,  "The  Four-
footed  Tribes,"  and  notes  to  number  75J  "Origin  of  the  Bear").
Ina  strikingly  similar  Creek  myth  of  theTuggle  collection,  "Origin  of  the  Bear
Clan,"  a  little  girl  lost  in  the  woods  is  adopted  by  a  she-bear,  with  whom  she  lives
for  four  years,  when  the  bear  is  killed  by  ihe  hunter  and  the  girl  returns  to  her  peo-
ple to  become  the  mother  of  the  Hear  elan.
The  [roquois  have  several  stories  of  children  adopted  by  bears.  In  one,  "The
Man  and  His  Stepson."  a  boy  thus  cared  for  is  afterward  found  by  a  hunter,  who
tames  him  and  teaches  him  to  speak,  until  in  time  he  almost  forgets  that  he  had
lived  like  a  bear.  He  marries  a  daughter  of  the  hunter  and  becomes  a  hunter  him-
self, but  always  refrains  from  molesting  the  bears,  until  at  last,  angered  by  the  taunts
of  his  mother-in-law,  he  shoots  one,  but  is  himself  killed  by  an  accident  while  on
his  return  home  (Smith,  Myths  of  the  Iroquois,  in  Second  Annual  Report  Bureau  of
Ethnology  ).  In  line  with  this  is  the  story  of  a  hunter  who  had  pursued  a  bear  into  its
den.  "  When  some  distance  in  he  could  no  longer  see  the  bear,  but  he  saw  a  fire  and
around  it  sat  several  men.  The  oldest  of  the  three  men  looked  up  and  asked,  'Why
did  you  try  to  shoot  one  of  my  men.  We  sent  him  out  to  entice  you  to  us'"  (Curt  in,
Seneca  Ms  in  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology  archives).
In  a  Pawnee  myth,  "The  Bear  Man,"  a  boy  whose  father  had  put  him  under  the
protection  of  the  bears  grows  up  with  certain  bear  traits  and  frequently  prays  and
sacrifices  to  these  animals.  On  a  war  party  against  the  Sioux  he  is  killed  and  cut  to
pieces,  when  two  bears  timl  and  recognize  the  body,  gather  up  and  arrange  the  pieces
and  re-tore  him  to  life,  after  which  they  take  him  to  their  den,  where  they  care  for
him  and  teach  him  their  secret  knowledge  until  he  is  strong  enough  to  go  home
(Grirmell,  Pawnee  Hero  Stories,  pp.  L21-128).
In  a  Jicarilla  myth,  "Origin  and  Destruction  of  the  Bear,"  a  boy  playing  about
in  animal  fashion  runs  into  a  cave  in  the  hillside.  "When  he  came  out  his  feet  and
hands  had  been  transformed  into  bear's  paws."  Four  times  this  is  repeated,  the
change  each  time  mounting  higher,  until  he  finally  emerges  as  a  terrible  bear
monster  that  devours  human  beings  I  Russell,  Myths  of  the  Jicarilla,  in  Journal
of  American  Folk-Lore,  October,  1898).
Read  th  thoughts — Thought  reading  is  a  very  common  feature  of  Indian  myths.
Certain  medicine  ceremonies  are  believed  to  confer  the  power  upon  those  who  fulfil
the  ordeal  conditions.
Food  wa  </<  ttingscara  — Several  references  in  the  myths  indicate  that,  through  failure
of  the  accustomed  wild  crop-,  famine  seasonswere  as  common  among  the  annual
tribes  as  among  th.-  Indian-  (see  number  33,  "The  Migration  of  the  Animal-''  >.


474  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.
Kalds'-GH.nahVta — See  number  15,   "The  Four-footed  Tribes."
Rubbed  his  stomach — This  very  original  method  of  procuring  food  occurs  also  in
qui  iber  .'!,  "  Kana't!  and  Selu."
Topknotsand  Splitnoses — Tsunl'stsahr,  "Having  topknots" — i.  e.,  Indians,  in  allu-
sion to  the  crests  of  upright  hair  formerly  worn  by  warriors  of  the  Cherokee  and
other  eastern  trihes.  Timberlake  thus  describes  the  Cherokee  warrior's  headdress
in  17<>2 :  "The  hair  of  their  head  is  shaved,  tho'  many  of  the  old  people  have  it
plucked  out  by  the  roots,  except  a  patch  on  the  hinder  part  of  the  head  about  twice
the  bigness  of  a  crown  piece,  which  is  ornamented  with  beads,  feathers,  wampum,
stained  deer's  hair,  and  such  like  baubles"  (Memoirs,  p.  49).  TsuniV'liyu'  sunfi-
stla'ta,  "they  have  split  noses" — i.  e.,  dogs.
<  'over  lln-  blood — The  reincarnation  of  the  slain  animal  from  the  drops  of  blood  spilt
upon  the  ground  or  from  the  bones  is  a  regular  part  of  Cherokee  hunting  belief,  and
the  same  idea  occurs  in  the  folklore  of  many  tribes.  In  the  Omaha  myth,  "Ictinike
and  the  Four  Creators,"  the  hero  visits  the  Beaver,  who  kills  and  cooks  one  of  his
own  children  to  furnish  the  dinner.  When  the  meal  was  over  "the  Beaver  gathered
the  bones  and  put  them  into  a  skin,  which  he  plunged  beneath  the  water.  In  a
moment  the  youngest  beaver  came  up  alive  out  of  the  water"  (Dorsey, in  Contri-
butions to  North  American  Ethnology,  vi,  p.  557).
IAke  a  man  again — It  is  a  regular  article  of  Indian  belief,  which  has  its  parallels  in
European  fairy  lore,  that  one  who  has  eaten  the  food  of  the  spirit  people  or  super-
naturals  can  not  afterward  return  to  his  own  people  and  live,  unless  at  once,  and
sometimes  for  a  long  time,  put  under  a  rigid  course  of  treatment  intended  to  efface
the  longing  for  the  spirit  food  and  thus  to  restore  his  complete  human  nature.  See
also  number  73,  "  The  Underground  Panthers."  In  "A  Yankton  Legend,"  recorded
by  Dorsey,  a  child  falls  into  the  water  and  is  taken  by  the  water  people.  The  father
hears  the  child  crying  under  the  water  and  employs  two  medicine  men  to  bring  it
back.  After  preparing  themselves  properly  they  go  down  into  the  deep  water,  where
they  find  the  child  sitting  beside  the  water  spirit,  who,  when  they  declare  their  mes-
sage, tells  them  that  if  they  had  come  before  the  child  had  eaten  anything  he  might
have  lived,  but  now  if  taken  away  "he  will  desire  the  food  which  I  eat;  that  being
the  cause  of  the  trouble,  he  shall  die."  They  return  and  report:  "We  have  seen
your  child,  the  wife  of  the  water  deity  has  him.  Though  we  saw  him  alive,  he  had
eaten  part  of  the  food  which  the  water  deity  eats,  therefore  the  water  deity  says
that  if  we  bring  the  child  back  with  us  out  of  the  water  he  shall  die,"  and  so  it  hap-
pened.    Some  time  after  the  parents  lose  another  child  in  like  manner,  but  this  time
"she  did  not  eat  any  of  the  f   1  of  the  water  deity  and  therefore  they  took  her
home  alive."  In  each  case  a  white  dog  is  thrown  in  to  satisfy  the  water  spirits  for
the  loss  of  the  child  (Contributions  to  North  American  Ethnology,  VI,  p.  357).
77.  The  Great  Leech  of  Tlanusi'yI  (p.  329):  This  legend  was  heard  first  from
Swimmer  and  Chief  Smith,  the  latter  of  whom  was  born  near  Murphy;  it  was  con-
firmed by  YVafford  (west)  and  others,  being  one  of  the  best  known  myths  in  the  tribe
and  embodied  in  the  Cherokee  name  for  Murphy.  It  is  apparently  founded  upon  a
peculiar  appearance,  as  of  something  alive  or  moving,  at  the  bottom  of  a  deep  hole
in  Valley  river,  just  below  the  old  Unicoi  turnpike  ford,  at  Murphy,  in  Cherokee
county,  North  Carolina.  It  is  said  that  a  tinsmith  of  the  town  once  made  a  tin
bomb  which  he  filled  with  powder  and  sank  in  the  stream  at  this  spot  with  the
intention  of  blowing  up  the  strange  object  to  see  what  it  might  be,  but  the  contrivance
failed  to  explode.  The  hole  is  caused  by  a  sudden  drop  or  split  in  the  rock  bed  of
the  stream,  extending  across  the  river.  Wafford,  who  once  lived  on  Nottely  river,
adds  the  incident  of  t lie  two  women  and  says  that  the  Leech  had  wings  and  could  fly.
He  asserts  also  that  he  found  rich  lead  ore  in  the  hole,  but  that  the  swift  current  pre-
vented working  it.  About  two  miles  above  the  mouth  of  Nottely  river  a  bend  of
the  stream  brings  it  within  about  the  same  distance  of  the  Hiwassee  at  Murphy.


NOTES    AM)    PARALLELS  475
This  nearest  point  of  approach  on  Nottely  is  also  known  to  the  Cherokee  as  Tlanusi'yY,
"leech  place"  ami  from  certain  phenomena  common  to  both  streams  it  is  a  general belief  among  Indians  and  whites  that  they  are  connected  here  by  a  subterranean  water
way.    Tlu-  legend  and  the  popular  belief  are  thus  noted  in  1848  by  Lanman,  who
incorrectly  makes  the  1   It  a  turtle:
"The  little  village  of  Murphy,  whence  I  date  this  letter,  lies  at  the  junction  of  the
Owassaand  Valley  rivers,  and  in  point  of  Location  is  one  of  the  prettiest  places  in
the  world.  Its  Indian  name  was  EClausuna,  or  the  Large  Turtle.  It  was  so  called,
says  a  Cherokee  legend,  on  account  of  its  being  the  sunning  place  of  an  immense
turtle  which  lived  in  its  vicinity  in  ancient  ti   a.    The  turtle  was  particularly  famous
for  its  repelling  power,  having  been  known  not  to  be  at  all  injured  by  a  stroke  of
lightning.  Nothing  on  earth  had  power  to  annihilate  the  creature;  but,  on  account
of  the  many  attempts  made  to  take  its  life,  w  hen  it  was  known  to  he  a  harmless  ami
inoffensive  creature,  it  became  disgusted  with  this  world,  and  burrowed  its  way  into
the  middle  of  the  earth,  w  here  it  now   lives  in  peace.
"In  connection  with  this  legend,  I  may  here  mention  what  must  he  considered  a
remarkable  fact  in  geology.  Kuuiiiutr  directly  across  the  village  of  Murphy  is  a  belt
of  marble,  composed  of  the  black,  grey,  pure  white  and  flesh-colored  varieties,  which
belt  also  crosses  the  Owassa  river.  Just  above  this  marble  causeway  tin-  Owassa,
for  a  space  of  perhaps  two  hundred  feet,  is  said  to  be  over  one  hundred  feet  deep,
and  at  one  point,  in  fact,  a  bottom  has  never  been  found.  All  this  is  simple  truth,
but  I  have  heard  the  opinion  expressed  that  there  is  a  subterranean  communication
between  this  immense  hole  in  (  Iwassa  and  the  river  Xotely,  which  is  some  twomiles
distant  The  testimony  adduced  in  proof  of  this  theory  is,  that  a  certain  log  was
once  marked  on  the  Notely,  which  log  was  subsequently  found  floating  in  the  pool
of  tin-  Keep  Hole  in  the  ( twassa  "  (  Letters,  pp.  63-64).
78.  The  XfSsE'iii  and  other  spirit  folk  (p.  330):  The  belief  in  fairies  and  kin-
dred spirits,  frequently  appearing  as  diminutive  beings  in  human  form,  is  so  universal
among  all  races  as  to  render  citation  of  parallels  unnecessary.  Every  Indian  tribe
has  its  own  spirits  of  the  woods,  the  cliffs,  and  the  waters,  usually  benevolent  and
kindly  when  not  disturbed,  but  often  mischievous,  and  in  rare  cases  malicious  and
revengeful.  These  invisible  spirit  people  are  regarded  as  a  sort  of  supernatural
human  beings,  entirely  distinct  from  ghosts  and  from  the  animal  and  plant  spirits,
as  well  as  from  the  godlike  beings  who  rule  the  sun,  the  rain,  and  the  thunder.
Most  of  the  NunnS'hl  stories  here  given  were  told  by  Watford,  who  believed  them
all  firmly  in  spite  of  his  white  man's  blood  and  education.  The  others,  excepting
that  of  the  offended  spirits  (Wahnenauhi  MS)  and  the  Fire-carrier  ( Watford) .  were
heard  from  various  persons  upon  the  reservation.  For  other  Nunng'hl  references
Bee  the  stories  of  Tsuwe'nahf,  Kana'sta.  Yahula,  etc.
.Woo;/'/// — This  word  uji'iTiul'h'i  in  a  dialectic  form  and  naye'M  in  the  singular)  may
be  rendered  "dwellers  anywhere"  or  "those  who  live  anywhere,"  but  is  under-
Stood  to  mean  "those  who  live  forever."  i.  e.,  Immortals.  It  is  spelled  Nanehi  by
Buttrick  and  Nuhnayie  in  the  Wahnenauhi  manuscript.  The  singular  form.  NayPhl,
occurs  also  as  a  personal  name,  equivalent  to  Edd/hl,  "One  who  goes  about."
Sorm  invisibU  toumhouse — The  ancient  Creek  town  of  Okmulgee,  where  now  is  the
city  of  Macon,  in  Georgia,  was  destroyed  by  the  Carolina  people  about  the  time  of
the  Yamassee  war.  Sixty  years  later  Adair  says  of  the  Creeks:  "They  strenuously
aver  that  when  the  necessity  forces  them  to  encamp  there,  they  always  hear  at  the
dawn  of  the  morning  the  usual  noise  of  Indians  singing  their  joyful  religious  notes
ami  dancing,  as  if  going  down  to  the  river  to  purify  themselves,  and  then  returning
to  the  old  townhouse;  w  ith  a  great  deal  more  to  the  same  effect.  Whenever  I  have
been  there,  however,  all  hath  been  silent  but  they  say  this  was  'because  I
am  an  obdurate  infidel  that  way '  "  (Hist.  Am.  Indians,  p.  36).
Nottely   town — Properly    Na'du'li.    was    on     Nottely   river,   a   short    distance    above


476  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
Raper  creek  in  Cherokee  county,  North  Carolina.  The  old  townhouse  was  upon  a
large  mound  on  the  west  side  of  the  river  and  about  five  miles  below  the  Georgia
line.    The  town  was  practically  deserted  before  the  removal  in  1838  (see  glossary).
Hemptovm — Properly  Gatunlti'yl,  "Hemp  place,"  existed  until  the  Removal,  on
Hemptown  creek,  a  branch  of  Toccoa  river,  a  few  miles  north  of  the  present
Morganton,  in  Fannin  county,  Georgia.
Noted  circular  depression — This  may  have  been  a  circular  earthwork  of  about  thirty
feel  diameter,  described  as  existing  in  1890  a  short  distance  east  of  Soquee  post-office
near  the  head  of  Soquee  creek,  about  ten  miles  northwest  of  Clarkesville,  Haber-
sham county,  Georgia.  There  are  other  circular  structures  of  stone  on  elevated
positions  within  a  few  miles  of  Clarkesville  (see  author's  manuscript  notes  on  Chero-
kee archeology,  in  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology  archives).  The  same  story  about
throwing  logs  and  stones  into  one  of  these  sacred  places,  only  to  have  them  thrown
out  again  by  invisible  hands,  is  told  by  Zeigler  and  Grosscup,  in  connection  with  the
Jutaculla  old  fields  (see  note  under  number  81,  "Tsul'kahV)-"
Bewildered — "Crazy  persons  were  supposed  to  be  possessed  with  the  devil  or
afflicted  with  the  Nanehi"  (Buttrick,  Antiquities,  p.  14).  According  to  Hagar's
inf.  irmant :  "The  little  people  cause  men  to  lose  their  minds  and  run  away  and  wander
in  the  forests.  They  wear  very  long  hair,  down  to  their  heels"  (MS  Stellar  Legends
of  the  Cherokee).  In  Creek  belief,  according  to  the  Tuggle  manuscript,  "Fairies  or
little  people  live  in  hollow  trees  and  on  rocky  cliffs.  They  often  decoy  people  from
their  homes  and  lose  them  in  the  woods.  When  a  man's  mind  becomes  bewil-
dered— not  crazy — this  is  caused  by  the  little  people."
Loaves  seemed  to  shrink— The  deceptive  and  unsatisfactory  character  of  all  fairy
belongings  when  the  spell  is  lifted  is  well  known  to  the  European  peasantry.
'IWuru'si  iiml  Ts&ga'si — These  sprites  are  frequently  named  in  the  hunting  prayers and  other  sacred  formulas.
Scratching — This  is  a  preliminary  rite  of  the  ballplay  and  other  ceremonies,  as
well  as  the  doctor's  method  of  hypodermic  injection.  As  performed  in  connection
with  the  ballplay  it  is  a  painful  operation,  being  inflicted  upon  the  naked  skin  with  a
seven-toothed  comb  of  turkey  bone,  the  scratches  being  drawn  in  parallel  lines  upon
the  breast,  back,  arms  and  legs,  until  the  sufferer  is  bleeding  from  head  to  foot.  In
medical  practice,  in  order  that  the  external  application  may  take  hold  more  effectually,
the  scratching  is  done  with  a  rattlesnake's  tooth,  a  brier,  a  flint,  or  a  piece  of  glass.
See  author's  Cherokee  Ball  Play,  in  American  Anthropologist,  April,  1890,  and
Sacred  Formulas  of  the  Cherokees,  in  Seventh  Annual  Report  Bureau  of  Ethnol-
ogy, 1891.  The  practice  seems  to  have  been  general  among  the  southern  tribes,  and
was  sometimes  used  as  a  punishment  for  certain  delinquents.  According  to  Adair
the  doctor  bled  patients  by  scratching  them  with  the  teeth  of  garfish  after  the  skin
hail  been  first  well  softened  by  the  application  of  warm  water,  while  any  unauthorized
prison  who  dared  to  intrude  upon  the  sacred  square  during  ceremonial  performances
"would  lie  dry-scratched  with  snakes'  teeth,  fixed  in  the  middle  of  a  split  reed  or
piece  of  wood,  without  the  privilege  of  warm  water  to  supple  the  stiffened  skin" (Hist.  Am.  Indians,  pp.  46,  120).
The  Fire-carriei — This  is  probably  the  gaseous  phenomenon  known  as  the  will-
of-the-wisp,  which  has  been  a  thing  of  mystery  and  fear  to  others  beside  Indians.
7'.i.  The  removed  town-houses  (p.  335):  The  first  of  these  stories  was  told  by  John
Ax.  The  second  was  obtained  from  Sala'li,  "Squirrel,"  mentioned  elsewhere  as  a
self-taught  mechanic  oi  the  East  Cherokee.  Watford  (west)  had  also  heard  it,  but
confused  it  with  that  of  Tsal'kahV  (number  81).
Excepting*  Justl',  the  localities  are  all  in  western  North  Carolina.  The  large  mound
of  S£'tsl  is  on  the  south  side  of  Valley  river,  about  three  miles  below  Valleytown,
in  Cherokee  county.  Anisgaya'yl  town  is  not  definitely  located  by  the  story  teller,
but  was  probably  in  the  same  neighborhood.  Tsudaye'h'uVyl.  literally  "where  it
is  isolated,"  or  "isolated  place,"  is  a  solitary  high  peak  near  Cheowa  Maximum,  a


kooney]  NOTKS    AND    PARALLELS  477
few  miles  northeast  of  Robbinsville,  in  Graham  county,  on  the  summit  of  which
theiv  is  sail  1  to  he  a  large  n  n-k  somewhat  resembling  in  appearance  a  circular  town-
house  with  a  part  wanting  from  one  side.  Du'stiya'lufi'yl,  "Where  it  was  shot,"
i.  c,  "Where  it  was  struck  by  lightning,"  is  tin-  territory  on  Hiwassee  ri \ t  r.  about
the  mouth  of  Shooting  creek,  above  Hayesville,  in  Clay  county  (see  also  glossary  ).
W  oru  must  shout — The  same  injunction  occurs  in  the  legend  of  Tsul'k&lu'   bei
si  i.  Tin-  necessity  for  strict  silence  while  under  the  conduct  of  fairy  guides  is  con-
stant!} emphasized  in  European  folklore.
Toumhousi  in  the  water  below — Breton  legend  tells  of  a  submerged  city  which  rises
out  of  the  sea  at  long  intervals,  «  lien  it  ran  lie  seen  by  those  who  possess  the  proper
talisman,  anil  we  know  that  in  Ireland
"On  Lough  Neagh's  hanks  as  the  fisherman  strays,
When  the  clear  eol.l  eve's  declining,
He  sees  tin-  round  lowers  of  other  days
In  the  wave  beneath  him  shining."
•so.  The  spirit  defenders  of  Nikwasi'  (p.336):  This  story  was  obtained  from
Swimmer.  Nikwasi'  or  Nikw'sl',  one  of  the  most  ancient  settlements  of  the  Cherokee,
was  on  the  west  hank  of  Little  Tennessee  river,  where  is  now  the  town  of  Franklin,
in  Macon  county,  North  Carolina.  The  mound  upon  which  the  townhouse  stood,
in  a  field  adjoining  the  river,  is  probably  the  largest  in  western  Carolina  and  has
never  been  explored.  The  Cherokee  believe  that  it  is  the  abode  of  the  Xunne'hl  or
Immortals  (see  number  78)  and  that  a  perpetual  fire  burns  within  it.  The  name,  which
can  not  he  translated,  appears  as  Nueassee  in  old  documents.  The  British  agent  held
a  council  here  with  the  Cherokee  as  early  as  1730.  Although  twice  destroyed,  the
town  was  rebuilt  ami  continued  to  be  occupied  probably  until  the  land  was  sold
in  1819.
Bring  the  news  h<itm- — It  was  a  frequent  custom  in  Indian  warfare  to  spare  a  captive
taken  in  battle  in  order  that  he  might  carry  hack  to  his  people  the  news  of  the  defeat.
After  the  disastrous  defeat  of  the  French  under  D'Artaguette  by  the  Chickasaw  in
upper  Mississippi  in  1736,  D'Artaguette,  Lieutenant  Vincennes,  Father  Senac,  and
fifteen  others  were  burned  at  the  stake  by  the  victors,  but  "one  of  the  soldiers  was
spared  to  carry  the  news  of  the  triumph  of  the  Chickasaws  and  the  death  of  these
unhappy  men  to  the  mortified  Bienville"  (Pickett,  History  of  Alabama,  p.  298, ed.  1896).
81.  Tsul'kalu',  TnE  slaxt-eyed  giant  (p.  337):  The  story  of  Tsul'kahV  is  one  of
the  finest  and  best  known  of  the  Cherokee  legends.  It  is  mentioned  as  early  as  1823
by  Haywood,  who  spells  the  name  Tuli-cula,  and  the  memory  is  preserved  in  the
local  nomenclature  of  western  Carolina.  Hagar  also  alludes  briefly  to  it  in  his
manuscript  Stellar  Legends  of  the  Cherokee.  The  name  .signifies  literally  "he  has
them  slanting,"  being  understood  to  refer  to  his  eyes,  although  the  word  eye  {aktti/,
plural  ilikhV)  is  not  a  part  of  it.  In  the  plural  form  it  is  also  the  name  of  a  traditional
race  of  giants  in  the  far  west  (see  number  106,  "The  Giants  from  the  West"  i.
Tsul'kalu'  lives  in  Tsunegi'nVyf  and  is  the  great  lord  of  the  game,  and  as  such  is  fre- quently invoked  in  the  hunting  formulas.  The  story  was  obtained  from  Swimmer
and  John  Ax,  the  Swimmer  version  being  the  one  here  followed.  For  parallels  to  the
incident  of  the  child  born  from  blood  see  notes  to  number  .'!,  "  Kana'tl  and  Selu."
In  the  John  Ax  version  it  is  the  girl's  father  and  mother,  instead  of  her  mother
and  brother,  who  try  to  bring  her  back.  They  are  told  they  must  fast  seven  days  to
succeed.  They  fast  four  days  before  starting,  and  then  set  out  and  travel  two  days,
when  they  come  to  the  mouth  of  the  cave  and  hear  the  sound  of  the  drum  and  the
dance  within.  They  are  able  to  look  over  the  edge  of  the  rock  ami  see  their  daugh-
ter among  the  dancers,  hut  can  not  enter  until  the  seventh  day  is  arrived.  Unluckily
the  man  is  very  hungry  h\  thi-  time,  and  after  watching  nearly  all  night  he  insists
that  it  is  so  near  daylight  of  the  seventh  morning  that  he  may  safely  take  a  small


478  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
bite.     His  wife  begs  him  to  wait  until  the  sun  appears,  but  hunger  overcomes  him
and  he  takes  a  bite  of  food  from  his  pouch.  Instantly  the  cave  and  the  dancers
disappear,  and  the  man  and  his  wife  find  themselves  alone  on  the  mountain.  John
Ax  was  a  very  old  man  at  the  time  of  the  recital,  with  memory  rapidly  failing,  and
it  is  evident  that  his  version  is  only  fragmentary.
Haywood  notes  the  story  on  the  authority  of  Charles  Hicks,  an  educated  halfbreed
(Nat.  and  Aborig.  Hist.  Tenn.,  p.  280):  "They  have  a  fabulous  tradition  respecting
the  mounds,  which  proves  that  they  are  beyond  the  events  of  their  history.  The
mounds,  they  say.  were  caused  by  the  quaking  of  the  earth  and  great  noise  with  it,
a  ceremony  used  for  the  adoption  of  their  people  into  the  family  of  Tuli-cula,  who
was  an  invisible  person  and  had  taken  a  wife  of  one  of  their  town's  people.  And  at
the  time  when  his  first  son  was  born  the  quaking  of  the  earth  and  noise  had  com-
menced, but  had  ceased  at  the  alarm  whoop,  which  had  been  raised  by  two  impru-
dent young  men  of  the  town,  in  consequence  of  which  the  mounds  had  been  raised
by  the  quaking  noise.  Whereupon  the  father  took  the  child  and  mother  and
removed  to  near  Brasstown,  and  had  made  the  tracks  in  the  rocks  which  are  to  be
seen  there."
From  Buttrick  we  get  the  following  version  of  the  tradition,  evidently  told  fur  the
missionary's  special  benefit:  "God  directed  the  Indians  to  ascend  a  certain  moun-
tain— that  is,  the  warriors — and  he  would  there  send  them  assistance.  They  started
and  had  ascended  far  up  the  mountain,  when  one  of  the  warriors  began  to  talk  about
women.  His  companion  immediately  reproved  him,  but  instantly  a  voice  like
thunder  issued  from  the  side  of  the  mountain  and  God  spoke  and  told  them  to  return,
as  he  could  not  assist  them  on  account  of  that  sin.  They  put  the  man  to  death,  yet
the  Lord  never  returned  to  them  afterwards"  (Antiquities,  p.  14).  On  the  next
page  he  tells  it  in  a  somewhat  different  form:  "It  is  said  that  before  coming  to  this
continent,  while  in  their  own  country,  they  were  in  great  distress  from  their  enemies,
and  God  told  them  to  march  to  the  top  of  a  certain  mountain  and  He  would  come
down  and  afford  them  relief.  They  ascended  far  up  the  mountain  and  thought  they
saw  something  coming  down  from  above,  which  they  supposed  was  for  their  aid.
But  just  then  one  of  the  warriors,"  etc.
Zeigler  and  Grosscup  give  another  version,  which,  although  dressed  up  for  adver-
tising purposes,  makes  a  fairly  good  story:
"But  there  is  another  legend  of  the  Balsams  more  significant  than  any  of  these.
It  is  the  Paradise  I  rained  i  if  Cherokee  mythology,  and  bears  some  distant  resemblance
to  the  Christian  doctrine  of  mediation.  The  Indians  believed  that  they  were  origi-
nally mortal  in  spirit  as  well  as  body,  hut  above  the  blue  vault  of  heaven  there  was,
inhabited  by  a  celestial  race,  a  forest  into  which  the  highest  mountains  lifted  their
dark  summits.     *    *     *
"The  mediator,  by  whom  eternal  life  was  secured  for  the  Indian  mountaineers,
was  a  maiden  of  their  own  tribe.  Allured  by  the  haunting  sound  and  diamond
sparkle  of  a  mountain  stream,  she  wandered  far  up  into  a  solitary  glen,  where  the
azalea,  the  kalmia,  and  the  rhododendron  brilliantly  embellished  the  deep,  shaded
slopes,  and  filled  the  air  with  their  delicate  perfume.  The  crystal  stream  wound  its
crooked  way  between  moss-covered  rocks  over  which  tall  ferns  bowed  their  graceful
stems.  Enchanted  by  the  scene,  she  seated  herself  upon  the  soft  moss,  and,  over-
come by  fatigue,  was  soon  asleep.  The  dream  picture  of  a  fairyland  was  presently
broken  by  the  soft  touch  of  a  strange  hand.  The  spirit  of  her  dream  occupied  a
place  at  her  side,  and,  wooing,  won  her  for  his  bride.
"Her  supposed  abduction  caused  great  excitement  among  her  people,  who  made
diligent  search  for  her  recovery  in  their  own  villages.  Being  unsuccessful,  they
made  war  upon  the  neighboring  tribes  in  the  hope  of  finding  the  place  of  her  con-
cealment. Grieved  because  of  so  much  bloodshed  and  sorrow,  she  besought  the
great  chief  of  the  eternal  hunting  grounds  to  make  retribution.     She  was  accordingly


NOTES    AM)    PARALLELS  IT'.'
appointed  to  call  a  counc'l  of  her  people  at  the  forks  of  the  Wayeh  Pigeon  river.
She  appeared  unto  the  chiefs  in  a  dream,  and  charged  them  to  meet  the  spirits  of  the
hunting  ground  with  fear  and  reverence,
"  \i  the  hour  appointed  the  head  men  of  the  Cherokees  assembled.  The  high Balsam  peaks  were  shaken  by  thunder  and  aglare  with  lightning.  The  cloud,  as
black  as  midnight,  Bettled  over  the  valley,  then  lifted,  leaving  upon  a  large  rock  a
cluster  of  strange  men,  armed  and  painted  as  for  war.  An  enraged  brother  of  the
abducted  maiden  swung  his  tomahawk  and  raised  the  war  whoop,  but  a  swift
thunderbolt  dispatched  him  before  the  echo  had  died  in  the  hills.  The  chiefs,
terror-stricken,  fled  to  their  towns.
"The  bride,  grieved  by  the  death  of  her  brother  and  the  failure  of  the  council,
prepared  to  abandon  her  new  home  and  return  to  her  kindred  in  the  valleys.  To
reconcile  her  the  promise  was  granted  thai  all  brave  warriors  and  their  faithful
women  should  have  an  eternal  home  in  the  happy  hunting  gr   id  above,  after
death.    The  great  chief  of  the  forest  bey   I  the  clouds  became  the  guardian  spirit  oi
the  Cherokees.     All  deaths,  either  from  wounds  in  battle  or  disease,  were  attributed
to  his  desire  to  make  additions  to  the  celestial  hunting  ground,  or,  on  the  other
hand,  to  his  u  rath,  which  might  cause  their  unfortunate  spirits  to  be  turned  over  to
the  disposition  of  the  i'\il  genius  of  the  mountain  tops."  —  Heart  of  the  A  Mechanics,
pp.  22-24.
K&nv/ga — An  ancient  Cherokee  town  on  Pigeon  river,  in  the  present  Haywood
county.  North  Carolina.  It  was  deserted  before  the  beginning  of  the  historic  period,
but  may  have  been  located  about  the  junction  of  the  two  forks  of  Pigeon  river,  a  leu
miles  east  of  Waynesville,  where  there  are  still  a  number  of  mounds  and  ancienl
cemeteries  extending  for  some  miles  down  the  stream.  Being  a  frontier  town,  it  was
probably  abandoned  early  on  account  of  its  exposed  position.  The  name,  signifying
"scratcher,"  is  applied  to  a  comb,  used  for  scratching  the  ballplayers,  and  is  con-
nected with  kd.nngH/'lBi  or  nuffA^ld,,  a  blackberry  bush  or  brier.  There  are  other mounds  on  Richland  creek,  in  the  neighborhood  of  Waynesville.
'l'snf  l;,il,'/  Tsiim  'inu'ii'i — Abbreviated  Tsunegun'yl;  the  mountain  in  which  the giant  is  supposed  to  have  his  residence,  is  Tennessee  bald,  in  North  Carolina,  where
the  Haywood.  Jackson,  and  Transylvania  county  lines  come  together,  on  the  ridge
separating  the  waters  of  Pigeon  river  from  those  flowing  into  Tennessee  .-reek  and
Cany  fork  of  the  Tuckasegee,  southeastward  from  Waynesville  and  Webster.  The
name  seems  to  mean,  "at  the  white  place,"  from  une'ga,  "white,"  and  may  refer  to
a  bald  spot  of  perhaps  a  hundred  acres  on  the  top.  locally  known  among  the  whites
as.Jutaculla  old  fields,  from  a  tradition,  said  to  be  derived  from  the  Indians,  that
u  w  as  a  clearing  made  by  "Jutaculla"  (i.  e.,  Tsul'kahV  i  for  a  farm.  Some  distance farther  west,  on  the  north  side  of  Cany  fork  and  about  ten  miles  above  Webster,  in
Jackson  county,  is  a  rock  known  as  Jutaculla  rock,  covered  with  various  rude  carv-
ings, which,  according  to  the'  same  tradition,  are  scratches  made  by  the  giant  in
jumping  from  his  farm  on  the  mountain  to  the  creek  below.  Zeigler  and  Grosscup
refer  to  the  mountain  under  the  name  of  "  Old  Field  mountain"  and  mention  a  tra-
dition among  the  pioneers  that  it  was  regarded  by  the  Indians  as  tin-  special  abode of  the  Indian  Satan!
"On  the  top  of  the  mountain  there  is  a  prairie-like  tract,  almost  level,  reached  by
steep  -lope-  covered  with  thickets  of  balsam  and  rhododendron,  which  seem  to  garri-
son the  reputed  sacred  domain.  It  was  undersj   1  among  the  Indians  to  be  for-
bidden territory,  but  a  party  one  day  permitted  their  curiosity  to  tempt  them.  They
forced  a  way  through  the  entangled  thickets,  and  with  merriment  entered  the  open
ground.  Aroused  from  sleep  and  enraged  by  their  audacious  intrusion,  the  devil,
taking  the  form  of  an  immense  snake,  assaulted  the  party  and  swallowed  fifty  of
them  before  the  thicket  could  lie  gained.     Among  the  first  whites  who  settled  among
the  Indians,  and  traded  with  them,  was  a  party  of  hunters  w  ho  used  this  superstition


480  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
to  escape  punishment  for  their  reprehensible  conduct.  They  reported  thai  thej
were  in  league  with  the  great  spirit  of  evil,  and  to  prove  that  they  were,  frequented
this  'old  field.'  They  described  his  bed,  under  a  large  overhanging  rock,  as  a
model  of  neatness.  They  had  frequently  thrown  into  it  stones  and  brushwood
during  the  day,  while  the  master  was  out,  but  the  place  was  invariably  as  clean
the  next  morning  'as  if  it  had  been  brushed  with  a  bunch  of  feathers'  "  (  Heart  of the  Alleghanies,  p.  22).
Tin  ft  a  ,t prints  run  still  In-  s,,n — Shining  ruck  or  Cold  mountain,  between  the  Forks
of  Pigeon  river,  in  Haywood  county,  North  Carolina,  is  known  to  the  Cherokee  as
Datsu'natesgufi'yf,  "where  their  tracks  are  this  way,"  on  account  of  a  rock  at  its
base,  toward  Sonoma  and  three  miles  south  of  the  trail,  upon  which  are  impressions
said  to  be  the  footprints  made  by  the  giant  ami  his  children  on  their  way  to
Tsunegufi'yl      \\  ithin  the  mountt'.in  \:  also  the  legendan  abode  c.i  invisible  spirits.
Havw   1  confounds  this  with  Track  Kock  gap,  near  Blairsville,  Georgia,  where  are
other  noted  petroglyphs  (see  number  125,  Minor  Legends  of  Georgia).
The  rapid  growth  of  the  two  children  is  paralleled  in  many  other  tribal  mytholo-
gies. The  sequence  of  growth  as  indicated  by  the  footprints  reminds  us  of  the  con-
cluding incident  of  the  Arabian  Nights,  when  Queen  Scheherazade  stands  before  the
king  to  make  a  last  request:  "And  the  king  answered  her,  'Request,  thou  shalt
receive,  O  Scheherazade.'  So  thereupon  she  called  out  to  the  nurses  and  the  eunuchs
and  said  to  them,  '  Bring  ye  my  children.'  Accordingly  they  brought  them  to  her
quickly,  and  they  were  three  male  children;  one  of  them  walked,  and  one  crawled,
and  one  was  at  the  breast."
Must  nut  raise  the  war  whoop — See  note  under  number  79,  "The  Removed  Town-
houses."
XL'.  K  an  a 'sta,  the  lost  settlement  (p.  341):  This  story,  obtained  from  Swimmer,
bears  resemblance  to  those  of  Tsul'kalu',  Tsuwe'nithl,  The  Removed  Townhouses,
and  others,  in  which  individuals,  or  even  whole  settlements,  elect  to  go  with  the
invisible  spirit  people  in  order  to  escape  hardships  or  coming  disaster.
Kana'sta— Abbreviated  from  Kanastufi'yi,  a  name  which  can  not  be  translated,  is
described  as  an  ancient  Cherokee  town  on  the  French  Broad  where  the  trail  from
Tennessee  creek  of  the  Tuckasegee  comes  in,, near  the  present  Brevard,  in  Transyl-
vania county,  North  Carolina.  No  mounds  are  known  there,  and  we  find  no  notice
of  the  town  in  history,  but  another  of  the  same  name  existed  on  Hiwassee  and  was
destroyed  in  177li.
Tsuwa'tel'da — Abbreviated  from  Tsuwa'telduii'yi,  and  known  to  the  whites  as  Pilot
knoli,  is  a  high  mountain  in  Transylvania  county,  about  eight  miles  north  of  Bre-
vard. On  account  of  the  peculiar  stratified  appearance  of  the  rocks,  the  faces  of  the
cliffs  are  said  frequently  to  present  a  peculiar  appearance  under  the  sun's  rays,  as  of shining  walls  with  doors,  windows,  and  shingled  roofs.
Datsu/nAldsgufl,yt — Shining  rock.     See  note  under  number  81,  "TsuTkahY."
Fust  seven  days — This  injunction  of  a  seven  days'  fast  upon  those  who  would  join
the  spirit  people  appears  in  several  Cherokee  myths,  the  idea  being,  as  we  learn
from  the  priests,  to  spiritualize  the  human  nature  and  quicken  the  spiritual  vision
by  abstinence  from  earthly  food.  The  doctrine  is  exemplified  in  an  incident  of  the
legend  of  Tsuwe'nahl,  q.  v.  In  a  broader  application,  the  same  idea  is  a  foundation
principle  of  every  ancient  religion.  In  ordinary  Cherokee  ceremonial  the  fast  is
kept  loi  one  day— i.  e.,  from  midnight  to  sunset.  On  occasions  of  supreme  importance
it  continues  four  or  even  seven  days.  Among  the  plains  tribes  those  who  volunta-
rily enter  the  Sun  dance  to  make  supplication  and  sacrifice  for  their  people  abstain
entirely  from  food  and  drink  during  the  four  days  and  nights  of  the  ceremony.
The  riminli  rs— See  number  3,  "Kana'tl  and  Selu"  and  notes,  and  number  8,  "The
Moon  and  the  Thunders,"  with  notes.
s:;.  TsrwK'NAui,   a  legend  of  Pilot  knob   (p.  343):  This  story,  from  Swimmer,


moonsy]  NOTES    AN' I)    PARALLELS  1^1
is  of  the  same  order  as  the  legends  of  Tsul'killu',  Kilna'sta,  etc.     The  i   pli   whom the  hunter  met  inside  the  enchanted  mountain  are  evidently  the  same  described  in
the  last-named  story  (number  82),  with  the  guests  from  the  losl  settlement.
The  name  Tsuwe'nah)  can  not  !"•  translated,  but  may  possibly  have  a  connection
With  tnr,  'nnln,    "  rich."
Kanu'ga  "<"/  Tsuwdtel'da — See  notes  under  number  si,  "TsuTkahV,"  and  num-
ber 82,  "  Kana'sta."
Parchedcorn — This  was  the  standard  provision  of  the  warrior  when  on  the  march
among  all  the  tribes  east  of  the  Mississippi  and  probably  a   ngall  the   rn-growing
tribes  of  America.  It  is  the  pinole  of  the  Tarumari  and  other  Mexican  tribes.  The
Cherokee  call  it  gtth&wVsita.  Hawkins  thus  describes  it  as  seen  with  his  Cherokee
guides  in  1796;  "They  are  small  eaters,  use  no  salt  and  but  little  bread.  Thej  carrj
their  parched  corn  meal,  wissactaw,  and  mix  a  handful  in  a  pint  of  water,  w  hich  they
drink.  Although  they  had  plenty  of  corn  and  fowls,  they  made  no  other  provision
than  a  small  bag  of  this  for  the  path.  I  have  plenty  of  provisions  and  give  them
some  at  every  meal.  I  have  several  times  drank  of  the  wissactaw,  and  am  fond  of  it
with  the  addition  of  some  sugar.     To  make  of  the  best  quality,  I  am  (old  the  corn
should  tirst  be  boiled,  then  parched  in  hot  ashes,  silted,  powdered,  and  mad.'  into
flour."1 Tin  seat  nil*  a  turtle — This  incident  also  occurs  in  number  84,  "The  Man  who  Mar-
ied  the  Thunder's  Sister."  The  species  meant  is  the  saligu'gl  or  common  water turtle.
Like  dogs'  paws — No  reason  is  given  for  this  peculiarity,  which  is  nowhere  else
mentioned  as  a  characteristic  of  the  mountain  spirits.
Oldtobacco — Tsal-agSyufi'li,  "ancient  tobacco,"  the  Nicotiana  rustica,  sacred  among
all  the  eastern  tribes.  See  number  6,  "How  they  Brought  back  the  Tobacco,"  and
number  1  :.'(>,  "Plant  Lore."
Thorns  of  honey  locust — This  incident  occurs  also  in  number  63,  " Uiitsaiyl',  The
Gambler."
84.  The  man  who  harried  the  Thunder's  sister  (p.  345) :  This  story  was  heard first  from  John  Ax,  and  afterward  with  additions  and  variants  from  Swimmer  and
others.  It  is  also  briefly  noted  in  Hagar's  manuscript  "Stellar  Legends  of  tin-
Cherokee."
As  explained  elsewhere,  the  Thunder  spirits  are  supposed  to  have  their  favorite
residence  under  cataracts,  of  which  Tallulah  falls  is  probably  the  greatest  in  the
Cherokee  country.  The  connection  of  Thunder  and  Rain  spirits  with  snakes  and
water  animals  is  a  matter  of  universal  primitive  belief  and  has  already  been  noted.
One  Cherokee  informant  told  Hagar  (see  above)  that  "  Thunder  is  a  horned  snake  (?),
and  lightning  its  tongue,  and  it  lives  with  water  and  rains."  It  is  hardly  necessary
to  state  that  the  dance  was,  and  is,  among  all  the  tribes,  not.  only  the  most  frequent,
form  of  social  amusement,  but  also  an  important  part  of  every  great  religious  or
other  ceremonial  function.
SdkuA'yl — Abbreviated  S&kwi',  an  ancient  town  about  on  the  site  of  the  present
village  of  Soquee  on  the  creek  of  the  same  name  near  Clarkesville,  in  Habersham
county,  Georgia.
Marry  him — Among  nearly  all  the  tribes,  with  the  exception  of  the  Pueblo,  the
marriage  ceremony  was  simple,  consisting  chiefly  of  the  giving,  by  the  lover,  of  cer-
tain presents  to  the  parents  of  the  intended  bride,  by  way  of  compensating  them  for
the  loss  of  their  daughter,  after  she  herself  had  tirst  signified  her  consent  to  the  union.
Although  this  has  been  represented  as  a  purchase,  it  was  really  only  a  formal  ratili-
cation  of  the  contract,  which  the  girl  was  free  to  accept  or  reject  as  she  chose.  <  >n
the  other  hand,  should  the  presents  be  insufficient  to  satisfy  the  parents,  they  were
1  Manuscript  Journal.  17'ji;,  with  Georgia  Historical  Society,  Savannah.
19    ETH— 01   31


482  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
refused  or  returned  and  the  marriage  could  not  take  place,  however  willing  the  girl
might  be.     The  young  man  usually  selected  a  friend  to  act  as  go-between  with  the
girl's  family,  and  in  all  tribes — as  now  in  the  West — the  result  seems  to  have  been
largely  at  the  disposal  of  her  brother,  who  continued  to  exercise  some  supervision
and  claim  over  her  even  after  her  marriage.
Lawson's  statement  concerning  the  eastern  Carolina  tribes  in  1700  will  hold  almost
equally  good  to-day  in  any  part  of  the  West:  "As  for  the  Indian  marriages,  I  have
read  and  heard  of  a  great  deal  of  form  and  ceremony  used,  which  I  never  saw;  nor
yet  could  learn  in  the  time  I  have  been  amongst  them  any  otherwise  than  I  shall  here
give  you  an  account  of,  which  is  as  follows:
'•  When  any  young  Indian  has  a  mind  fur  such  a  girl  to  his  wife,  he,  or  some  one
for  him,  goes  to  the  young  woman's  parents,  if  living;  if  not,  to  her  nearest  relations,
where  they  make  offers  of  the  match  betwixt  the  couple.  The  relations  reply,  they
will  consider  of  it;  which  serves  for  a  sufficient  answer,  till  there  be  a  second  meeting
about  the  marriage,  which  is  generally  brought  into  debate  before  all  the  relations
that  are  old  people,  on  both  sides,  and  sometimes  the  king  with  all  his  great  men
give  their  opinions  therein.  If  it  be  agreed  on  and  the  young  woman  approve
thereof — for  these  savages  never  give  their  children  in  marriage  without  their  own
consent — the  man  pays  so  much  for  his  wife,  and  the  handsomer  she  is  the  greater
price  she  bears"  (History  of  Carolina,  pp.  302-303).
According  to  Adair,  who  makes  it  a  little  more  formal  among  the  Gulf  tribes,
"When  an  Indian  makes  his  first  address  to  the  young  woman  he  intends  to  marry,
she  is  obliged  by  ancient  custom  to  sit  by  him  till  he  hath  done  eating  and  drinking,
whether  she  likes  or  dislikes  him;  but  afterward  she  is  at  her  own  choice  whether
to  stay  or  retire"  (Hist.  Am.  Indians,  p.  139).
Would  surely  die — In  Cherokee  myth  and  ritual  we  frequently  meet  the  idea  that
one  who  reveals  supernatural  secrets  will  die.  Sometimes  the  idea  is  reversed,  as
when  the  discovery  of  the  nefarious  doings  of  a  wizard  or  conjurer  causes  his  death.
The  latter  belief  has  its  parallel  in  Europe.
Smooth  as  a  piimjikin — This  is  the  rendering  of  the  peculiar  tautologic  Cherokee
expression,  i'ya  iya'-tdiui'skage — t&wi'skage  i'ya-iyu'stl,  literally,  "pumpkin,  of  pump-
kin smoothness — smooth  like  a  pumpkin."  The  rendering  is  in  line  with  the  repe-
tition in  such  children's  stories  as  that  of  "The  House  that  Jack  Built,"  but  the
translation  fails  to  convey  the  amusing  sound  effect  of  the  original.
A  large  turtle — This  incident  occurs  also  in  number  83,  "Tsuwe'nahl."
A  horse — Although  the  reference  to  the  horse  must  be  considered  a  more  modern
interpolation  it  may  easily  date  back  two  centuries,  or  possibly  even  to  De  Soto's  expe-
dition in  1540.  Among  the  plains  tribes  the  horse  quickly  became  so  essential  a  part
of  Indian  life  that  it  now  enters  into  their  whole  social  ami  mythic  system.
The  bracelets  were  snakes — The  same  concept  appears  also  in  number  63,  "Unt-
saiyl',"  when  the  hero  visits  his  father,  the  Thunder  god.
85.  The  haunted  whirlpool  (p.  347):  This  legend  was  related  by  an  East  Cher-
okee known  to  the  whites  as  Knotty  Tom.  For  a  description  of  the  whirlpool  rapids
known  as  The  Suck,  see  notes  under  number  63,  "  Ufitsaiyi',  the  Gambler."
86.  Yahula  (p.  347):  This  fine  myth  was  obtained  in  the  Territory  from  Watford,
who  had  it  from  his  uncle,  William  Scott,  a  halfbreed  who  settled  upon  Yahoola
creek  shortly  after  the  close  of  the  Revolution.  Scott  claimed  to  have  heard  the
bells  and  the  songs,  and  of  the  story  itself  Watford  said,  "I've  heard  ;t  so  often  and  so
much  that  I'm  inclined  t.  >  believe  it."  It  has  its  explanation  in  the  beliefs  connected
with  the  NunnS'hl  (see  number  78  and  notes),  in  whom  Watford  had  firm  faith.
Yahula — This  is  a  rather  frequent  Cherokee  personal  name,  but  seems  to  be  of
Creek  origin,  having  reference  to  the  song  used  in  the  "black  drink"  or  "busk"
ceremony  of  that  tribe,  and  the  songs  which  the  lost  trader  used  to  sing  may  have
been  those  of  that  ceremony.     See  the  glossary.


moo.ney]  NOTES    AND    PARALLELS  483
Tinkling  of  the  bells — Among  the  southern  tribes  in  the  old  days  the  approach  of  a
trader's  cavalcade  along  tin'  trail  was  always  heralded  by  the  jingling  of  bells  hung
about  tin-  necks  of  the  horses,  somewhat  in  the  manner  of  our  own  winter  sleighing
parties.  Among  the  plains  tribes  the  children's  ponies  are  always  equipped  with
collars  of  sleigh  hells.
In  his  description  of  a  trader's  pack-train  before  the  Revolution,  Bartram  says
(Travels,  p.  139) :  "  Every  horse  has  a  bell  on,  which  being  stopped,  when  we  start  in
the  morning,  with  a  twist  of  grass  or  leaves,  soon  shakes  out,  and  they  are  never
stopped  again  during  the  day.  The  constant  ringing  and  clattering  of  the  bells,
smacking  of  the  whips,  whooping  and  too  frequent  cursing  these  miserable  quadru-
peds, cause  an  incessant  uproar  and  confusion  inexpressibly  disagreeable."
ST.  The  water  cannibals  (p.  349):  This  story  was  obtained  from  Swimmer  and
contains  several  points  of  resemblance  to  other  Cherokee  myths.  The  idea  of  the
spirit  changeling  is  common  to  European  fairy  lore.
Tikw&li'ts't — This  town,  called  by  the  whites  Tuckalechee,  was  on  Tuckasegee  river,
at  the  present  Bryson  City,  in  Swain  county,  North  Carolina,  where  traces  of  the
mound  can  still  be  seen  on  the  south  side  of  the  river.
Afraid  of  the  witches    See  number  120,  "The  Raven  Mocker,"  and  notes.
88.  First  contact  with  whites  (p  350):  The  story  of  the  jug  of  whisky  left  near
a  spring  was  heard  first  from  Swimmer;  the  ulufisu'tl  story  from  Wafford;  the  loco-
motive story  from  David  Blythe.     Each  was  afterward  confirmed  from  other  sources.