The  story  of  the  book  and  the  how,  quoted  from  the  Cherokee  Advocate  of
October  26,  1844,  was  not  heard  on  the  reservation,  but  is  mentioned  by  other  authori-
ties. According  to  an  old  Cherokee  quoted  by  Buttrick,  "God  gave  the  red  man  a  book
and  a  paper  and  told  him  to  write,  but  lie  merely  made  marks  on  the  paper,  and  as  he
could  not  read  or  write,  the  Lord  gave  him  a  how  and  arrows,  and  gave  the  book
to  the  white  man."  Boudinot,  in  "A  Star  in  the  West,"1  quoted  by  the  same
author,  says:  "They  have  it  banded  down  from  their  ancestors,  that  the  book  which
the  white  i   pie  have  was  once  theirs;  that  while  they  had  it  they  prospered  exceed-
ingly; but  that  the  white  people  bought  it  of  them  ami  learned  many  things  from  it,
while  the  Indians  lost  credit,  offended  the  Great  Spirit,  and  suffered  exceedingly
from  the  neighboring  nations;  that  the  Great  Spirit  took  pity  on  them  and  directed
them  to  this  country,"  etc.  It  is  simply  another  version  of  the  common  tale  of  deca-
dent nations,  "We  were  once  as  great  as  you."
89.  The  Ikoquoiswaks  (p.  351):  Thi  Iroquois  league — The  Iroquois  league  consisted
originally  of  a  confederacy  of  five  kindred  tribes,  the  Mohawk,  Oneida,  Onondaga,
Cayuga,  and  Seneca,  in  what  is  now  the  state  of  New  York;  to  these  were  added  the
cognate  Tuscarora  after  their  expulsion  from  Carolina  about  1715.  The  name  Iro-
quois, by  which  they  were  known  to  the  French,  is  supposed  to  be  a  derivative
from  some  Indian  term.  To  the  English  they  were  known  as  the  Five,  afterward  the
Six  Nations.  They  called  themselves  by  a  name  commonly  spelt  Hodenosaunee,  and
interpreted  "People  of  the  Long  House."  Of  this  symbolic  long  house  the  Mohawk
guarded  the  eastern  door,  while  the  Seneca  protected  the  western.  Their  remarkable
governmental  and  clan  system  is  still  well  preserved,  each  tribe,  except  the  Mohan  k
and  i  Ineida,  having  eight  elans,  arranged  in  two  groups  or  phratries.  The  Mohan  k
and  Oneida  are  said  to  have  now  but  three  clans  apiece,  probably  because  of  their
losses  by  withdrawals  to  the  French  missions.  The  Seneca  clans,  which  are  nearly
the  same  for  the  other  tribes,  are  the  Wolf,  Bear,  Turtle,  Beaver,  Deer,  Snipe,
Heron,  and  Hawk.  The  confederacy  is  supposed  to  have  been  formed  about  the
middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,  and  by  16S0  the  Iroquois  had  conquered  and
dest roved  or  incorporated  all  the  surrounding  tribes,  and   had  asserted  a  paramount
'  I>r  El  in?  Boudinot,  A  Star  in  the  West,  or  a  Humble  Attempt  to  Discover  the  Long  Lost  Tun  Tribes
of  Israel,  Preparatory  to  Their  Return  to  Their  Beloved  City.  Jerusalem;  Trenton,  N.  J.,  1816.


484  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
claim  over  the  whole  territory  from  the  Cherokee  border  to  Hudson  bay  and  from
southern  New  England  to  the  Mississippi.  According  to  a  careful  estimate  in  1677
the  Five  Nations  then  numbered  2,150  warriors,  or  about  10,750  persons.  The  Tus-
carora  in  Carolina  were  estimated  a  few  years  later  at  1,200  warriors,  or  5,000  persons,
but  this  is  probably  an  exaggeration.  The  league  afterward  lost  heavily  by  wars
with  the  French,  and  still  more  by  withdrawals  of  Christianized  Indians  to  the
French  Catholic  mission  colonies  at  Caughnawaga,  Saint  Regis,  and  elsewhere,  the
Mohawk  being  the  chief  sufferers.  The  Revolution  brought  about  another  separa-
tion, when  about  two-fifths  of  those  remaining,  including  nearly  all  of  the  Mohawk
and  Cayuga,  removed  in  a  body  to  Canada.  A  mixed  band  of  Seneca  and  Cayuga,
known  as  the  "Seneca  of  Sandusky,"  had  previously  settled  in  Ohio,  whence  they
removed  in  1831  to  Indian  Territory.  Between  1820  and  1826  the  greater  portion
of  the  Oneida  removed  from  New  York  to  lands  in  Wisconsin  purchased  from  the
Menomini.  In  spite,  however,  of  wars  and  removals  the  Iroquois  have  held  their
own  with  a  tenacity  and  a  virility  which  mark  their  whole  history,  and  both  in  this
country  and  in  Canada  they  are  fairly  prosperous  and  are  increasing  in  population,
being  apparently  more  numerous  to-day  than  at  any  former  period.  Those  in  New
York  and  Pennsylvania,  except  the  Saint  Regis,  and  on  the  Grand  River  reservation
in  Canada,  constituting  together  about  one-half  of  the  whole  number,  still  keep  up
the  forms  and  ceremonies  of  the  ancient  league.
According  to  a  special  bulletin  of  the  census  of  1890  the  total  number  of  Indians
then  belonging  to  the  tribes  originally  constituting  the  Six  Nations  was  15,833,  of
whom  8,483  were  living  in  Canada  and  7,350  in  the  United  States,  excluding  from  the
latter  count  37  resident  members  of  other  tribes.  Those  in  the  United  States  were
on  six  reservations  in  the  State  of  New  York,  one  in  Pennsylvania,  one  in  Wisconsin,
and  one  in  the  Indian  Territory,  and  were  classed  as  follows:
Mohawk  (including  Indians  of  Saint  Regis  and  Caughnawaga):  in  New  York.  1,162
Oneida:  in  New  York,  212;  at  Green  Bay  agency,  Wisconsin,  1,716    1,  928
Onondaga:  in  New  York,  470;  on  Cornplanter  reservation,  Pennsylvania,  11  .      481
Cayuga:  in  New  York         183
Seneca:  in  New  York,  2,680;  on  Cornplanter  reservation,  Pennsylvania,  87...  2,  767
Tuscarora:  in  New  York         408
Iroquois  mixed  -bloods,  separately  enumerated,  on  reservations  in  New  York . .  87
Iroquois  outside  reservations  in  New  York,  Connecticut,  and  Massachusetts  . .  79
Mixed  Seneca  and  Cayuga  at  Quapaw  agency,  Indian  Territory        255
7,350 Those  in  Canada  were  at  the  same  time  officially  reported  thus:
Mohawk:  at  Caughnawaga,  1,722;  at  Saint  Regis,  1,190;  on  Grand  River  reser-
vation, 1,344;  at  Bay  of  Quinte,  1,056    5,312
Oneida:  on  Thames  river,  715;  on  Grand  River  reservation,  244        959
Onondaga:  on  Grand  River  reservation         325
Cayuga:  on  Grand  River  reservation          865
Seneca:  on  Grand  River  reservation         183
Tuscarora:  on  Grand  River  reservation         327
Iroquois  of  Lake  of  Two  Mountains         375
Iroquois  of  Gibson          137
8,483 A  few  Algonkin  are  included  among  the  Iroquois  of  Caughnawaga  and  Saint  Regis,
the  Iroquois  of  these  two  settlements  having  been  originally  Catholic  emigrants  from
the  Mohawk  villages  in  New  York,  with  a  few  Oneida  and  Onondaga.  When  the
boundary  line  between  New  York  and  Canada  was  run  it  cut  the  Saint  Regis  reser-
vation in  two.     The  report  of  the  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs  for  1900  shows


>   sey]  NOTES    AMt    PARALLELS  |s.r>
7. Ton  Iroquois  living  on  the  reservations  in  New  York,  Wisconsin,  and  Indian
Territory,  an  increase  \\  ithin  these  limits  of  527  in  nine  years.  Assuming  the  same
rate  of  increase  in  Pennsylvania  and  on  the  Canada  si. K>,  the  whole  number  of
Iroquois  to-day  would  be  approximately  17,000.  For  detailed  information  see
Colden,  History  of  the  Five  Nations;  Schoolcraft,  Notes  on  the  Iroquois;  Morgan,
League  of  the  Hodenosaunee  or  Iroquois;  Parkman's  works;  reports  of  the  commis- sioners of  Indian  affairs  for  both  the  United  States  and  (ana. la.  and  the  excellent
report  on  "The  six  Nations  of  New  York,"  by  Donaldson  and  Carrington,  con- tained in  an  extra  bulletin  of  the  Eleventh  Census  of  the  United  States.
§  catox  ,  South  Carolina  The  statement  given  by  Schoolcraft  (Notes  on  Iroquois,
161  i,  "ii  the  authority  of  Calhoun,  that  the  Seneca  once  live.]  at  Seneca  town,  in
South  Carolina,  has  probably  no  foundation  in  fact,  the  story  having  evidently  arisen
from  a  supposed  similarity  of  name.  The  Cherokee  call  it  fsu'nigti',  and  do  not  con-
nect it  in  any  way  with  A-Se'nika  or  Ani'-Se'nilcQ.,  their  name  for  the  northern  tribe.
/      I  war — ; The  Iroquois  story  of  the  war  between  themselves  and  the  Chero-
kee is  from  Schoolcraft,  Notes  on  Iroquois,  panes  l'.VJ  ami  2.V>.
/  days'  journey — This  statement  is  on  Morgan's  authority,  but  the  distance  was
certainly  greater,  unless  we  are  to  understand  only  the  distance  that  separated  their
extreme  accustomed  hunting  ranges,  not  that  between  the  permanent,  settlements  of
the  two  peoples.
7"//.  T,  nnessee  river  boundary — The  statement  from  Morgan  (League of  the  Iroquois,
p.  337)  in  regard  to  the  truce  line  established  at  Tennessee  river  seems  to  find  con-
firmation in  incidental  references  in  early  documents.  Boundaries  beyond  which
war  parties  might  not  go,  or  neutral  grounds  where  hereditary  enemies  met  in  peace,
were  a  regular  institution  in  ancient  Indian  society,  the  most  notable  instance  being
perhaps  the  famous  pipestone  quarry  in  Minnesota.  Notwithstanding  the  claim  of
the  Iroquois,  backed  by  Sir  William  Johnson,  to  all  the  country  north  of  the  Ten-
nesse  •  river,  it  is  very  plain  from  history  and  the  treaties  that  the  Cherokee  asserted
a  more  or  less  valid  claim  as  far  north  as  the  Ohio.  Their  actual  settlements,  how-
ever, were  all  south  of  the  main  Tennessee.
The  Buffalo  dance— The  origin  ascribed  to  the  Buffalo  dance  of  the  Iroquois  (Mor-
gan, League  of  the  Iroquois,  p.  287)  is  in  agreement  with  the  common  Indian  idea,
according  to  which  dances  named  from  animals  are  performed  in  imitation  of  the
peculiar  actions  and  cries  of  these  animals,  or  in  obedience  to  supposed  commands
from  the  ruling  spirit  animals.
The  peace  embassy — The  story  of  the  proposed  intertribal  alliance,  with  the  state-
ments as  to  Cherokee  captives  among  the  Seneca,  are  from  Schoolcraft  (Notes  on
Iroquois,  pp.  15S,  2o2,  257i.  The  records  of  the  conference  at  Johnson  Hall  in  17tis
are  published  in  the  New  York  Colonial  Documents.  The  account  of  the  Iroquois
peace  embassy  to  Echota  was  given  to  Wafford  by  two  eyew-itnesses,  one  of  whom
was  his  mother's  cousin.  Sequoya.  As  the  old  man  said,  "Sequoya  told  me  all  about
it."'  As  stated  in  the  narrative,  Wafford  himself  had  also  seen  the  belts  broughtout
and  explained  in  a  great  intertribal  council  at  Tahlequah.  By  common  tribal  cus-
tom ambassadors  of  peace  were  secure  from  molestation,  whatever  might  be  the  result
of  the  negotiations,  although,  as  among  more  civilized  nations,  this  rule  was  some-
times violated.  According  to  tradition,  the  ancient  peace  pipe  of  the  Cherokee,  and
probably  of  other  eastern  tribes,  was  of  white  stone,  white  being  the  universal  peace
color.  The  red  stone  pipe  of  the  Sioux  was  also  used  in  peace  ceremonials,  from  the
peculiar  sacredness attached  to  it  among  the  western  tribes.
The  accuracy  of  Wafford's  statement  from  memory  in  1891  is  strikingly  confirmed
by  a  contemporary  account  of  the  great  intertribal  council  at  Tahlequah  in  1843,  bj
the  artist,  Stanley,  who  was  present  and  painted  a  number  of  portraits  on  that
occasion.  The  council  was  convened  by  John  Boss  in  June  and  remained  in  session
tour  weeks,  some  ten  thousand  Indians  being  iii  attendance,  representing  seventeen


486  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
tribes.     "During  the  whole  session  the  utmost  %   1  feeling  and  harmony  prevailed.
The  business  was  brought  to  a  close  at  sundown,  after  which  the  various  tribes
joined  in  dancing,  which  was  usually  kept  up  to  a  late  hour."  The  wampum  belt
was  explained,  according  to  Stanley's  account,  by  Major  (-ieorge  Lowrey  (Agitt,
"Rising"),  second  chief  of  the  Nation,  who  thus  recited  the  tradition  of  its  coming
from  the  Seneca  [i.  e.  Iroquois].  The  talk  abounds  in  Indian  reference  and  sym-
bolism:
"You  will  now  hear  a  talk  from  our  forefathers.  You  must  not  think  hard  if  we
make  a  few  mistakes  in  describing  our  wampum.  If  we  do,  we  will  try  and  rectify
them.
"My  Brothers,  you  will  now  hear  what  our  forefathers  said  to  us.
"  In  the  first  place,  the  Senecas,  a  great  many  years  ago,  devised  a  plan  for  us  to
become  friends.  When  the  plan  was  first  laid,  the  Seneca  rose  up  and  said,  I  fear
the  Cherokee,  because  the  tomahawk  is  stuck  in  several  parts  of  his  head.  The
Seneca  afterwards  remarked,  that  he  saw  the  tomahawk  still  sticking  in  all  parts  of
the  Cherokee's  head,  and  heard  him  whooping  and  hallooing  say  [sir]  that  he  was
too  strong  to  die.  The  Seneca  further  said,  Our  warriors  in  old  times  used  to  go  to
war;  when  they  did  go,  they  always  went  to  tight  the  Cherokees;  sometimes  one  or
two  would  return  home — sometimes  none.  He  further  said,  The  Great  Spirit  must
love  the  Cherokees,  and  we  must  be  in  the  wrong,  going  to  war  with  them.  The
Seneca  then  said,  Suppose  we  make  friends  with  the  Cherokee,  and  wash  his  wounds
and  cause  them  to  heal  up,  that  he  may  grow  larger  than  he  was  before.  The
Seneca,  after  thus  speaking,  sat  down.  The  Wyandot  then  rose  and  said,  You  have
done  right,  and  let  it  be.  I  am  your  youngest  brother,  and  you  our  oldest.  This
word  was  told  to  the  Shawnees;  They  replied,  We  are  glad,  let  it  be;  you  are  our
elder  brothers.  The  Senecas  then  said,  they  would  go  about  and  pray  to  the  Great
Spirit  for  four  years  to  assist  them  in  making  peace,  and  that  they  would  set  aside  a
vessel  of  water  and  cover  it,  and  at  the  end  ot  every  year  they  would  take  the  cover
off,  and  examine  the  water,  which  they  did;  every  time  they  opened  it  they  found
it  was  changed;  at  the  end  of  four  years  they  uncovered  the  vessel  and  found  that
the  water  had  changed  to  a  colour  that  suited  them.  The  Seneca  then  said,  The
Great  Spirit  has  had  mercy  upon  us,  and  the  thing  has  taken  place  just  as  we
wished  it.
"The  Shawnee  then  said,  We  will  make  straight  paths;  but  let  us  make  peace
among  our  neighbouring  tribes  first,  before  we  make  this  path  to  those  afar  off.
"The  Seneca  then  said,  Before  we  make  peace,  we  must  give  our  neighboring  tribes
some  fire;  for  it  will  not  do  to  make  peace  without  it, — they  might  be  traveling  about,
and  run  against  each  other,  and  probably  cause  them  to  hurt  each  other.  These
three  tribes  said,  before  making  peace,  that  this  fire  which  was  to  be  given  to  them
should  be  kindled  in  order  that  a  big  light  may  be  raised,  so  they  may  see  each  other
at  a  long  distance;  this  is  to  last  so  long  as  the  earth  stands;  They  said  further,  that
this  law  of  peace  shall  last  from  generation  to  generation — so  long  as  there  shall  be  a
red  man  living  on  this  earth:  They  also  said,  that  the  fire  shall  continue  among  us
and  shall  never  be  extinguished  as  long  as  one  remains.  The  Seneca  further  said  to
the  Shawnees,  I  have  put  a  belt  around  you,  and  have  tied  up  the  talk  in  a  bundle,
and  placed  it  on  your  backs;  we  will  now  make  a  path  on  which  we  will  pass  to  the
Sioux.  The  Seneca  said  further,  You  shall  continue  your  path  until  it  shall  reach
the  lodge  of  the  Osage.  When  the  talk  was  brought  to  the  Sioux,  they  replied,
we  feel  thankful  to  you  and  will  take  your  talk;  we  can  see  a  light  through  the  path
you  have  made  for  us.
"  When  the  Shawnees  brought  the  talk  to  the  Osages,  they  replied,  By  to-morrow,
by  the  middle  of  the  day,  we  shall  have  finished  our  business.  The  Osage  said
further,  The  (treat  Spirit  has  been  kind  to  me.  lie  has  brought  something  to  me,  I
being  fatigued  hunting  for  it.    When  the  Shawnees  returned  to  the  lodge  of  the  ( >sages,


NOTES     \N'I>    PARALLELS  187
thej  \yere  informed  that  thej  were  to  be  killed,  and  they  ii   Kliately  made  their
escape.
•■When  tin'  Shawnees  returned  to  their  homes  whence  they  ca    they  said  they
had  been  near  being  killed.
"  The  Seneca  then  said  to  the  Shawnees,  that  the  Osages  must  be  mistaken.  The
Shawnees  went  again  to  see  the  Osages  the)  told  them  their  business.  The  Osages
remarked,  The  Great  spirit  Ikis  been  good  to  us,  to-morrow  bj  the  middle  of  the
day  he  will  give  us  something  without  fatigue.  When  the  Shawnees  arrived  at  the
lodge,  an  old  man  of  the  Osages  told  them  that  thej  had  better  make  their  escape;
that  if  they  did  not,  by  the  middle  of  the  following  day,  they  were  all  to  be  destroyed,
and  directed  them  to  the  nearest  point  of  the  woods.  The  Shawnees  made  their
escape  about  midday.  They  discovered  the  Osages  following  them,  and  threw  away
their  packs,  reserving  the  bag  their  talk  was  in,  and  arrived  at  their  camp  safe.
When  the  Shawnees  arrived  home,  they  said  they  had  conic  near  being  killed,  and
the  Osages  refused  to  receive  their  talk.     The  Sei   a  then  said.  If  the  Osages  will
not  take  our  talk,  let  them  remain  as  they  arc;  and  when  the  rising  generation  shall
become  as  one,  the  Osages  shall  be  like  some  herb  standing  alone.  The  Seneca
further  said,  The  Osages  shall  he  like  a  lone  cherry-tree,  standing  in  the  prairies,
where  the  birds  of  all  kinds  shall  light  upon  it  at  pleasure.  The  reason  this  talk  was
made  about  the  Osages  was,  that  they  prided  themselves  upon  their  warriors  and
manhood,  and  .lid  not  wish  to  make  peace.
"The  Seneca   further  said.    \\ c   have  succ   led   in  making    peace  with  all  the
Northern  and  neighbouring  tribes.  The  Seneca  then  said  to  the  Shawnees.  You
must  now  turn  your  course  to  the- South:  you  must  take  your  path  to  tin-  Cherokees,
and  even  make  it  into  their  houses.  When  the  Shawnees  started  at  night  they  took
up  their  camp  and  sat  up  all  night,  praying  to  the  Great  Spirit  to  enable  them  to
arrive  in  peace  and  safety  among  the  Cherokees.  The  Shawnees  still  kept  their
course,  until  they  reached  a  place  called  Tahde-<|uah,  where  they  arrived  in  safety,
as  they  wished,  and  there  met  the  chiefs  ami  warriors  of  the  Cherokees.  When
they  arrived  near  Tah-le-quah,  they  went  to  a  house  and  sent  two  men  to  the  head
chiefs.  The  chief's  daughter  was  the  only  person  in  the  house.  As  soon  as  she
saw  them,  she  went  out  and  met  them,  and  shook  them  by  the  hand  and  asked
them  into  the  house  to  sit  down.  The  men  were  all  in  the  field  at  work — the  girl's
father  was  with  them.  She  ran  and  told  him  that  there  were  two  men  in  the  house,
and  that  they  were  enemies.  The  chief  immediately  ran  to  the  house  and  shook
them  by  the  hand,  and  stood  at  the  door.  The  Cherokees  all  assembled  around  the
house,  and  said,  Let  us  kill  them,  for  they  are  enemies.  Some  of  the  men  said,  No,
the  chief's  daughter  has  taken  them  by  the  hand;  so  also  has  our  chief.  The  men
then  became  better  satisfied.  The  chief  asked  the  two  men  if  they  were  alone
They  answered,  No;  that  there  were  some  more  with  them.  He  told  them  to  go
after  them  and  bringthemto  his  house.  When  these  two  men  returned  with  the
rest  of  their  people,  the  chief  asked  them  what  their  business  was.  They  then
opened  this  valuable  bundle,  and  told  him  that  it  contained  a  talk  forpeace.  The
chief  told  them.  I  cannot  do  business  alone;  all  the  chiefs  are  assembled  at  a  place
called  Cho-qua-ta  [for  E-cho-ta],  where  J  will  attend  to  your  business  in  general
council.  When  the  messengers  of  peace  arrived  at  Cho-qua-ta,  they  were  kindly
received  by  the  chiefs,  who  told  thorn  they  would  gladly  receive  their  talk  of  peace.
The  messengers  Of  peace  then  said  to  the  Cherokees,  We  will  make  a  path  for  you
to  travel  in,  and  the  rising  generation  may  do  tie'  same, — we  also  will  keep  it  swept
I  lean  and  white,  so  that  the   ri>iii'_r  generation    may  travel  in    peace.      The  Shawnee
further  said,  We  will   keep  the  doors  of  our  houses  open,  so  that   when  the  rising
generation   come  among  us  they  shall    be   wel   ne.      He   further  said.    This  talk    is
intended  for  all  the  different  tribes  of  our  led  brothers,  and  i^  to  last  to  the  end
of  time.      He  further  said,  I    have  made  a  lire  out  of  the  dry  elm — this  tire  is  for  all


488  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
the  different  tribes  to  see  by.  I  have  put  one  chunk  toward  the  rising  sun,  one
toward  the  north,  and  one  toward  the  south.  This  fire  is  not  to  he  extinguished  .so
long  as  time  lasts.  I  shall  stick  up  a  stick  close  by  this  fire,  in  order  that  it  may
frequently  lie  stirred,  and  raise  a  light  for  the  rising  generation  to  see  by;  if  any  one
should  turn  in  the  dark,  you  must  catch  him  by  the  hand,  and  lead  him  to  the
light,  so  that  he  can  see  that  he  was  wrong.
"I  have  made  you  a  fire-light,  I  have  stripped  some  white  hickory  bark  and  set  it
up  against  the  tree,  in  order  that  when  you  wish  to  remove  this  fire,  you  can  take
it  and  put  it  on  the  bark;  when  you  kindle  this  fire  it  will  be  seen  rising  up  toward
the  heavens.  I  will  see  it  and  know  it;  lam  your  oldest  brother.  The  messenger
of  peace  further  said,  I  have  prepared  white  benches  for  you,  and  leaned  the  white
pipe  against  them,  and  when  you  eat  you  shall  have  but  one  dish  and  one  spoon.
We  have  done  everything  that  was  good,  but  our  warriors  still  hold  their  tomahawks
in  their  hands,  as  if  they  wished  to  fight  each  other.  We  will  now  take  their  toma-
hawks from  them  and  bury  them;  we  must  bury  them  deep  under  the  earth  where
there  is  water;  and  there  must  be  winds,  which  we  wish  to  blow  them  so  far  that
our  warriors  may  never  see  them  again.
"The  messenger  further  said,  Where  there  is  blood  spilt  I  will  wipe  it  up  clean —
wherever  bones  have  been  scattered,  I  have  taken  them  and  buried  them,  and  cov-
ered them  with  white  hickory  bark  and  a  white  cloth — there  must  be  no  more  blood
spilt;  our  warriors  must  not  recollect  it  any  more.  Our  warriors  said  that  the  Chero-
kees  were  working  for  the  rising  generation  by  themselves;  we  must  take  hold  and
help  them.
"The  messengers  then  said  that  you  Cherokees  are  placed  now  under  the  centre
of  the  sun;  this  talk  1  leave  with  you  for  the  different  tribes,  and  when  you  talk  it,
our  voice  shall  be  loud  enough  to  be  heard  over  this  island.  This  is  all  1  have
to  say." 1 Wampum — The  celebrated  wampum  was  a  species  of  bead  cut  from  the  shell  of  the
clam,  conch,  or  other  shell-bearing  mollusk  of  the  coast  or  the  larger  streams.  The
commi  >n  name  is  derived  from  an  Algonquian  word  signifying  white,  and  was  properly
applied  only  to  one  variety,  the  generic  term  varying  with  the  tribe.  The  beads  were
rather  cylindrical  than  globular,  and  were  of  two  colors,  white  and  purple  or  dark.
They  were  rated  at  definite  values.  The  wampum  was  manufactured  by  the  coast
tribes',  being  traded  by  them  to  those  of  the  interior,  and  was  largely  used  every-
where  east  of  the  Mississippi  for  necklaces,  collars,  belts,  and  other  purposes  of  per-
sonal adornment,  as  well  as  in  connection  with  the  noted  wampum  belts,  by  means
of  which  the  memory  of  treaties  and  tribal  traditions  was  handed  down.  These
belts  were  woven  with  various  designs  in  wampum,  either  pictographic  or  symbolic,
tin-  meaning  of  which  was  preserved  and  explained  on  public  occasions  by  an  officer
appointed  to  that  duty.  In  ancient  times  no  treaty  or  covenant  was  considered  bind-
ing,  and  no  tribal  embassy  was  recognized  as  official,  without  the  delivery  of  a  wam-
pum belt  as  a  guaranty  and  memorial.  The  colonial  documents  are  full  of  references
to  this  custom.  Up  to  the  end  of  the  last  century  the  Cherokee  still  tendered  such
belts  in  their  treaties  with  the  Government,  and  one  was  delivered  in  the  same  man-
ner so  late  as  the  treaty  of  Prairie  des  Chiens  in  1S25.  The  Iroquois  still  preserve
several  ancient  belts,  of  which  a  good  idea  is  afforded  by  the  illustration  and  accom-
panying description  (figure  2,  page  354).  On  account  of  the  high  estimation  in
which  these  shell  beads  were  held  they  were  frequently  used  in  the  East  as  a
standard  of  exchange,  as  eagle  feathers  were  in  the  West,  and  among  the  Cherokee
the  same  word,  atela,  is  used  alike  for  bead  and  for  money.     On  the  Pacific  coast,
'J.  M.  Stanley,  Portraits  of  North  American  Indians,  with  sketches  of  scenery,  etc.,  painted  by
J.  M.  Stanley,  deposited  with  the  Smithsonian  Institution.  Washington:  Smithsonian  Institution,
December,  1S52;  pp.  18-22.  The  Stanley  account  was  not  seen  by  the  present  author  until  after  the
Watford  tradition  was  in  proofs.


NOTES    AND    PARALLELS  189
shells  were  more  generally  shaped  into  pendants  and  gorgets.  Fora  good  eye-witness
account  of  the  manufacture  and  use  of  wampum  and  gorgets  of  shell  among  the  South
Atlantic  tribes.see  Lawson,  History  of  Carolina,  315  316
90.   Hiadeoni,  the  Seneca  (p.  356) :  Of  this  story  Schoolcraft  says:  "Thefollowing
incident  in  the  verbal  annals  of  Iroquois  hardil   I  and  heroism  was  related  to  me
by  the  intelligent  Seneca,  Tetoyoah,  William  Jones  of  Cattaraugus,  along  with  other
reminiscences  of  the  ancient  Cherokee  wars."  Hewitt  thinks  the  proper  Seneca;
form  of  the  nan i.'  maj  be  Hflia'di'ofinl',  signifying  "  His  body  lies  supine."
i  31  ipe  of  the  Seneca  boys  (p.  359) :  The  manuscript  notes  from  which  this
and  several  following  traditions  are  arranged  are  in  the  archives  of  the  Bureau  of
American  Ethnology,  and  were  obtained  in  1886-87  among  the  Seneca  Indians  of
New  York  by  Mr  Jeremiah  Cm-tin,  since  noted  as  the  author  of  several  standard
collections  of  in. Han  and  European  myths  and  the  translator  of  the  works  of  the
Polish  novelist,  Sienkiewicz.
'  —This  is  a  long  drawn  halloo  wit  hunt  significance  except  as  a  signal  to  arrest
attention.  It  strikingly  resembles  the  Australian  "bush  cry"  Coowe< '.'  used  for  the
same  purpose.
93.  The  Unseen  Helpers  (p.  859):  The  meaning  of  the  Seneca  name  can  not  he
given.
Animal  Protectors — The  leading  incident  of  this  tale  is  closely  paralleled  hy  a  Kiowa
story,  told  by  the  old  men  as  an  actual  occurrence  of  some  fifty  years  ago,  concerning
a  warrior  who,  having  been  desperately  wounded  in  an  engagement  with  Mexican
troops  in  southern  Texas,  was  abandoned  to  die  hy  his  retreating  comrades.  At
night,  while  lying  upon  the  ground  awaiting  death,  and  unable  to  move,  he  heard  a
long  howl  in  the  distance,  which  was  repeated  nearer  and  nearer,  until  at  last  lie  heard
tin-  patter  of  feet  in  the  sand,  ami  a  wolf  came  up  and  licked  the  festering  wounds  of
the  warrior  with  such  soothing  effect  that  he  fell  asleep.  This  was  repeated  several
times  until  the  man  was  able  to  sit  up,  when  the  wolf  left  him,  after  telling  him — not
in  the  vision  of  a  dream,  but  as  a  companion  face  to  face — that  he  must  keep  up  his
courage,  and  that  he  would  get  back  in  safety  to  his  tribe.     Soon  afterward   the
wounded  warrior  was  found  bya  party  of  Comanche,  who  restored  him  to  his  ]   pie
At  the  next  Sun  dance  he  made  public  thanksgiving  for  his  rescue  (see  the  author's
Calendar  History  of  the  Kiowa  Indians,  in  Seventeenth  Annual  Report  Bureau  of  Amer-
ican Ethnology,  part  1,  1901).  The  story  is  not  impossible.  A  wolf  may  easily  have
licked  the  wounded  man's  sores,  as  a  dog  might  do,  and  through  the  relief  thus
afforded,  if  not  by  sympathy  of  companionship,  have  enabled  him  to  hold  out  until
rescued  by  friends.  The  rest  is  easy  to  the  imagination  of  an  Indian,  who  believes
that  there  is  no  essential  difference  between  himself  and  other  animals.
Th,  War  Woman — The  women  described  as  having  power  to  decide  tin-  fate  ,,i  cap-
tives, mentioned  also  in  the  next  story  (number  94),  are  evidently  the  female  digni-
taries among  the  ancient  Cherokee  known  to  early  writers  as  "War  Women''  or
"Pretty  Women."  Owing  to  the  decay  of  Cherokee  tradition  and  custom  it  is  now
impossible  to  gather  anything  positive  on  the  subject  from  Indian  informants,  but  from
documentary  references  it  is  apparent  that  there  existed  among  the  Cherokee  a  custom
analogous  to  that  found  among  the  Iroquois  and  probably  other  Eastern  tribes, by
which  the  decision  of  important  questions  relating  to  peace  and  war  was  left  to  a  vote
Of  the  women.      Among  the   Iroquois    this   privilege  •     ercised    hy  a  council   of
matrons,  the  mothers  of  the  tribes.  It  may  have  been  the  same  among  the  I  hero-
kee.  with  the  "Pretty  Woman  "  to  voice  the  decision  of  the  council,  or  the  final  ren-
dering may  have  been  according  to  the  will  of  the  "Pretty  Woman"  herself.  The institution  served  in  a  measure  to  mitigate  the  evils  of  war  and  had  its  origin  in  the
elan   system.      Under   this   system    a  captive   enemy  was  Still   an  enemy  until  he  had
been  adopted  into  the  tribe,  which  could  only  be  done  through  adoption  into  a  clan
and  family.     As  clan  descent  was  reckoned  through  the  women  it  rested  with  them


4.90  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
to  decide  the  question  of  adoption.  If  they  were  favorable  all  was  well,  ami  the  cap-
tive became  at  once  a  member  of  a  family  and  clan  and  of  the  tribe  at  large.  <  >ther-
wise,  as  a  public  enemy,  only  death  remained  to  him,  unless  he  was  ransomed  by
friends.  The  proper  Cherokee  title  of  this  female  arbiter  of  life  and  death  isunknown.
The  clan  of  the  Ani'-Gil&'hl,  or  "Long-hairs,"  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  the.  Pretty-
woman  clan,  and  the  office  may  have  been  hereditary  in  that  clan.  The  Seneca
stories  imply  that  there  were  two  of  these  female  officers,  but  from  Haywoi  id's  ace.  .mil
there  would  seem  to  have  been  hut  one.  An  upper  tributary  of  Savannah  rw  !n
Georgia  bears  the  name  War-woman  creek.
Timberlake  says  in  1765  (Memoirs,  p.  70):  "  These  chiefs  or  headmen  likewise  com-
pose the  assemblies  of  the  nation,  into  which  the  war  women  are  admitted,     .
many  of  the  Indian  women  being  as  famous  in  war  as  powerful  in  the  council."
At  the  Hopewell  treaty  conference  in  1785  the  principal  chief  of  Echota,  after  an
opening  speech,  said:  "I  have  no  more  to  say,  but  one  of  our  beloved  women  has,
who  has  borne  and  raised  up  warriors."  After  delivering  a  string  of  wampum  to
emphasize  the  importance  of  the  occasion,  "the  war  woman  of  Chota  then  addressed
the  commissioners."  Having  expressed  her  pleasure  at  the  peace,  she  continued:
"I  have  a  pipe  and  a  little  tobacco  to  give  to  the  commissioners  to  smoke  in  friend-
ship. I  look  on  you  and  the  red  people  as  my  children.  Your  having  determined
on  peace  is  most  pleasing  to  me,  for  I  have  seen  much  trouble  during  the  late  war.
I  am  old,  but  I  hope  yet  to  bear  children,  who  will  grow  up  and  people  our  nation,
as  we  are  now  to  be  under  the  protection  of  Congress  and  shall  have  no  more  dis-
turbance. The  talk  I  have  given  is  from  the  young  warriors  I  have  raised  in  my
town,  as  well  as  myself.  They  rejoice  that  we  have  peace,  and  we  hope  the  chain
of  friendship  will  never  more  be  broken."  Two  strings  of  wampum,  a  pipe,  and some  tobacco  accompanied  her  words  (American  State  Papers;  Indian  Affairs,  i,
p.  41,  1832).
Haywood  says  in  1823:  "The  Cherokees  had  the  law  or  custom  of  assigning  to  a
certain  woman  the  office  of  declaring  what  punishment  should  be  inflicted  on  great
offenders;  whether,  for  instance,  burning  or  other  death,  or  whether  they  should  be
pardoned.  This  woman  they  called  the  pretty  woman.  Mrs  Ward  exercised  this
office  when  Mrs  Bean,  about  the  year  1776,  was  taken  from  the  white  settlements
mi  the  upper  parts  of  Holston.  Being  bound  and  about  to  be  burned  on  one  of  the
mounds,  the  pretty  woman  interfered  and  pronounced  her  pardon"  (Nat.  and
Aborig.  Hist.  Tenn.,  p.  278).  See  also  historical  note  20,  "Peace  Towns  and  Towns
of  Refuge."
Ililirmi  In;,  lines  nf  jieuple — This  custom,  known  to  colonial  writers  as  "running
the  gauntlet,"  was  very  common  among  the  eastern  tribes,  and  was  intended  not  so
much  to  punish  the  captive  as  to  test  his  courage  and  endurance,  with  a  view  to
adoption  if  he  proved  worthy.  It  was  practiced  only  upon  warriors,  never  upon
women  or  children,  and  although  the  blows  were  severe  they  were  not  intended  to
be  fatal.  The  prisoner  was  usually  unbound  and  made  to  run  along  a  cleared  space
in  the  center  of  the  village  toward  a  certain  goal,  and  was  safe  for  the  time  being  if
he  succeeded  in  reaching  it.
94.  H.vr<  inoniion's  escape  from  the  Chekokee  (p.  362) :  The  Seneca  name  is  not translatable.
Canebrake — The  tall  cane  reed  (Arundinaria),  called  i'hya  by  the  Cherokee,  is
common  along  the  southern  streams,  as  such  names  as  Cany  fork,  Cut-cane  creek,
and  Young-cane  creek  testify.  It  was  greatly  valued  among  the  Indians  for  fishing
rods,  blowguns,  and  baskets,  as  well  as  for  fodder  for  stock.  The  best  canebrakes
were  famous  far  and  wide,  and  were  resorted  to  from  long  distances  in  the  gathering
season.  Most  of  the  cane  now  used  by  the  East  Cherokee  for  blowguns  and  baskets
is  procured  by  long  journeys  on  foot  to  the  streams  of  upper  iSouth  Carolina,  or  to
points  on  the  French  Broad  above  Knoxville,  Tennessee


i   key]  NOTES    AM>    PARALLELS  191
v     vault    See  notes  to  number  I,  "How  the  World  was  Made."
The  Seneca  name  for  the  Thunder  god  ia  in  the  singular  form.     In
the  Cherokee  language  Thunder  and  the  Thunder  spirits  are  always  spoken  of  in  the
plural.    The  messengers  in  the  story  ma)  have  been  Thunder  spirits.
Si  e  uotes  I   imber  76,  "The  Bear  .Man."
Womai   ■biters  Seethe  preceding  story,  number  93,  and  the  note  on  the  "Tin-
War  Woman."
My  grandson — Ann>n'_'  all  the  eastern  and  plain-  tribes  this  is  a  term  of  affectionate
address  to  a  dependent  or  inferior,  as  "grandfather"  is  a  respectful  address  to  one
occupyinga  superior  station,  or  venerable  by  reason  of  age  or  dignity,  both  words
being  thus  used  without  any  reference  t"  kinship.  In  tribal  councils  nearly  all
tin-  eastern  tribes  except  the  [roquois  addressed  the  Delaware  representatives  as
"grandfather,"  ami  in  an  Arapaho  song  of  the  Ghost  dance  the  Whirlwind  is  thus addressed.
95.  Hemp-carrier  (p.  364):  This  story  of  the  ..1.1  wars  was  obtained  from  Colonel
William  H.  Thomas,  who  says  that  T&le'danigi'skl  was  a  chief  formerly  living  near
Valleytown,  in  Cherokee  county.     The  name  is  variously  rendered  "Hemp-carrier,"
"Nettle-carrier,"  or  "Flax-toter,"  fr   Idle'ta,  the  riehweed  I  Pilea  pwnila),  a  plant
with  a  fibrous  stalk  from  which  the  Indians  wove  thread  and  cordage.  The  trail
along  which  the  Seneca  came  ran  from  Valley  river  across  tin-  ridge  to  Cheowa
(Robbinsville)  ami  thenee  aorthwest    to   connect   with    the  "great   war  path"  in
Tennessee     see  historical  note  19).
Stone  cairns  were  formerly  very  common  along  the  trails  throughout  the
Cherokee  country,  hut  are  now  almost  gone,  having  been  demolished  by  treasure
hunters  alter  the  occupation  of  the  country  by  the  whites.  They  were- usually
sepulchral  monuments  built  of  large  stones  piled  loosely  together  above  the  body  to
a  height  of  sometimes  6  feet  or  more,  with  a  corresponding  circumference.  This
method  of  interment  was  used  only  when  there  was  a  desire  to  commemorate  the
death,  and  every  passer-by  was  accustomed  to  add  a  stone  to  the  heap.  The  cus-
tom is  ancient  and  world-wide,  and  is  still  kept  up  in  Mexico  ami  in  many  parts  of
Europe  and  Asia.  Early  references  to  it  among  the  southern  tribes  occur  in  Lederer
I  1670),  Travels,  page  10,  ed.  1891,  and  Lawson  I  L700),  History  of  Carolina,  pages
4:!  and  78,  ed.  1860.  The  latter  mentions  meeting  one  day  "seven  heaps  of  stones,
being  the  monuments  of  seven  Indians  that  were  slain  in  that  place  by  theSinnagers
or  Troquois  [Iroquois].     <  'ur  Indian  guide  added  a  stone  to  each  heap."     Tl   m-
moii  name  is  the  Gaelic  term,  meaning  literally  "a  pile."
wives — Polygamy  was  common  among  the  Cherokee,  as  among  nearly  all
other  tribes,  although  not  often  to  such  an  exaggerated  extent  as  in  this  instance.
The  noted  chief  YanugunskI,  who  died  in  1839,  had  two  wives.  With  the  plains
tribes,  and  perhaps  with  others,  the  man  who  marries  the  eldest  of  several  daughters
has  prior  claim  upon  her  unmarried  sisters.
96.  The  Seneca  peacemakers  (p.365):  This  story  was  told  to  Schoolcraft  by  the
Seneca  i   v  than   fifty   years  ago.      A   somewhat  similar  story  is  related   by  Adair
i  Hist.  American  Indian-,  p.  392)  of  a  young  "Anantooeah"  (i.  e.,  Ni'iudawegl  or Si  ueca  '  warrior  taken  by  the  Shawano.
Death  song — It  seems  to  have  been  a  chivalrous  custom  among  the  eastern  tribes  to
give  to  the  condemned  prisoner  who  requested  it  a  chance  to  recite  his  warlike  deeds
and   to  sing  his  death  song  before  proceeding  to  the   final  torture.      lie  was  allowed
the  widest  latitude  of  boasting,  even  at  the  expense  of  his  captors  and  their  tribe.
The  death  song  was  a  chant    belonging  to  the  warrior  himself  or  to  the  wai  society
of  which  he  wa.-  a  member,  the  burden  being  farewell  to  life  and  defiance  to  death.
When  the  L'reat  Kiowa  war  chief,  Set-angya,  burst  his  shackles  at  Fort  sill  and
sprang  upon  the  soldiers  surrounding  him.  with  the  deliberate  purpose  to  sell  his
life  rather  than  to  remain  a  pris   ■> .  he  iii>i  sang  the  war  song  --i  his  order,  the


492  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEKOKEE  [eth.amn.19
KaitsnVko,  of  which  the  refrain  is:  "O  earth,  you  remain  forever,  but  we  Kaitsefi'ko
must  die"  (see  the  author's  Calendar  History  of  the  Kiowa  Indians,  in  Seventeenth
Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  American  Ethnology,  part  1,  1901).
97.  Origin  of  the  YontoSwisas  dance  (p.  365):  This  is  evidently  the  one  called
by  Morgan  I  League  <>f  Iroquois,  p.  290)  the  Cntowesus.  He  describes  both  this  and
the  Oaskanea  as  a  "shuffle  dance"  fur  women  only.  The  spelling  of  the  Seneca
names  in  the  story  is  that  given  in  the  manuscript.
Not  l"  <j"  after — Morgan,  in  his  work  quoted  above,  asserts  that  the  Iroquois  never
made  any  effort  to  recover  those  of  their  people  who  have  been  captured  by  the
enemy,  choosing  to  consider  them  thenceforth  as  lost  to  their  tribe  and  kindred.
This,  if  true,  is  doubly  remarkable,  in  view  of  the  wholesele  adoption  of  prisoners
and  subjugated  tribes  by  the  Iroquois.
Blazing  pine  knots — Torches  of  seasoned  pine  knots  are  much  in  use  among  the
Cherokee  for  lighting  up  the  way  on  journeys  along  the  difficult  mountain  trails
by  night.  ( »wing  to  the  accumulation  of  resin  in  the  knots  they  burn  with  a  bright
and  enduring  flame,  far  surpassing  the  cloudy  glow  of  a  lantern.
Wild  potatoes — As  is  well  known,  the  potato  is  indigenous  to  America,  and  our  first
knowledge  of  it  came  to  us  from  the  Indians.  Many  other  native  tubers  were  in
use  among  the  tribes,  even  those  which  practiced  no  agriculture,  but  depended  almost
entirely  upon  the  chase.  Favorites  among  the  Cherokee  are  the  Cynara  scolymus  or
wild  artichoke,  and  the  Pltaxruhm  or  pig  potato,  the  name  of  the  latter,  nuna,  being
now  used  to  designate  the  cultivated  potato.
Sky  people — These  spirit  messengers  are  mentioned  also  in  the  story  of  Hatcinondon
(number  94),  another  Seneca  tradition.     Every  tribe  has  its  own  spirit  creation.
Must  do  all  this — Every  sacred  dance  and  religious  rite,  as  well  as  almost  every
important  detail  of  Indian  ceremonial,  is  supposed  to  be  in  accordance  with  direct
instruction  from  the  spirit  world  as  communicated  in  a  vision.
98.  Ga'na's  adventures  among  the  Cherokee  (p.  367):  This  story,  from  Curtin's
Seneca  manuscript,  is  particularly  rich  in  Indian  allusion.  The  purificatory  rite,
the  eagle  capture,  the  peace  ceremonial,  the  ballplay,  the  foot  race,  and  the  bat-
tle are  all  described  in  a  way  that  gives  us  a  vivid  picture  of  the  old  tribal  life.
The  name  of  the  Seneca  hero,  Ga'na',  signifies,  according  to  Hewitt,  "Arrow"  (cf.
Cherokee  gun%  "'arrow"  |,  while  thename  of  the  great  eagle,  Shada'gea,  may,  accord-
ing to  the  same  authority,  lie  rendered  "  Cloud-dweller."  The  Seoqgwageono,  living
east  of  the  Chen  ikee  and  near  the  ocean,  can  not  be  identified.  They  could  m  it  have
been  the  Catawba,  who  were  known  to  the  Iroquois  as  Toderigh-rono,  but  they  may
possibly  have  been  the  Congaree,  Santee,  or  Sewee,  farther  down  in  South  Carolina.
In  the  Seneca  form,  as  here  given,  ge  (ge')  is  a  locative,  and  ono  (ounon)  a  tribal  suffix
qualifying  the  root  <  if  the  word,  the  whole  name  signifying  ' '  people  of,  or  at,  Seoqgwa"
(cf.  Oyadageono,  etc.,  i.  e.,  Cherokee,  p.  186).
Go  to  water — This  rite,  as  practiced  among  the  Cherokee,  has  been  already  noted
in  the  chapter  on  stories  and  story  tellers.  Ceremonial  purification  by  water  or
the  sweat  bath,  accompanied  by  prayer  and  fasting,  is  almost  universal  among  the
tribes  as  a  preliminary  to  every  important  undertaking.  With  the  Cherokee  it  pre-
cedes the  ballplay  and  the  Green-corn  dance,  and  is  a  part  of  the  ritual  for  obtaining
long  life,  for  winning  the  affections  of  a  woman,  for  recovering  from  a  wasting  sick-
ness, and  for  calling  down  prosperity  upon  the  family  at  each  return  of  the  new
moon.
Get  the  riujli-  fmlhi  rs — The  Cherokee  ritual  for  procuring  eagle  feathers  for  ceremo-
nial and  decorative  purposes  has  been  described  in  number  35,  "The  Bird  Tribes."
The  Seneca  method,  as  here  described,  is  practically  that  in  use  among  all  the  Indians  i  if
the  plains,  although  the  hunter  is  not  usually  satisfied  with  a  single  feather  at  a  capture.
Among  certain  western  tribes  the  eagle  was  sometimes  strangled  before  being  stripped


mooneyJ  NOTES     \\l>    PARALLEL8  4'.*.'}
of  it-  feathers,  bu1  it  was  essential  thai  the  body  must  not  be  mangled  or  any  bl   1  be
drawn.     The  Pueblos  were  sometimes  accustomed  to  take  the  young  eagles  fr    the
nest  and  keep  them  in  cages  for  their  feathers.  A  full  tail  contains  twelve  large
feathers  of  the  kind  used  for  war  bonnets  and  on  the  wands  of  the  Eagle  dance
Stockctdt     Stockaded  villages  were  comi   i  to  the  troquois  and  most  of  the  tribes
along  the  Atlantic   ast.     They  are  mentioned  also  i   ng  the  ( Iherokee  in  some  oi
the  exaggerated  narratives  of  the  earl)  Spanish  period,  but  were  entirely  unknown
within  tin'  later  colonial  period,  and  it  is  very  doubtful  if  the  nature  of  the  country
would  permit  such  compact  mode  of  settlement.
Dancers  went  forward— The  method  of  ceremonial  approach  here  described  was
bly  more  or  less  general  among  the  eastern  tribes.  <>n  the  plains  the  visitors
usually  dismount  in  sight  of  the  other  camp  and  advance  on  foot  in  slow  procession,
chantingthe  "visiting  song,"  while  the  leader  holds  out  the  red  stone  pipe,  which
isthesymbol  of  truce  or  friendship.  Foragood  description  of  such  a  ceremonial,
reproduced  from  Battey,  see  the  author's  Calendar  History  of  the  Kiowa  Indians, in  the  Seventeenth  Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology.  In  this
instance  the  visiting  Pawm   arried  a  flag  in  lieu  of  a  pipe.
The  Cherokee  ceremonial  is  thus  described  by  Timberlake  as  witnessed  at  Citicc
inl762:  '  About  100  yards  from  the  town-house  we  were  received  bya  body  of  between
three  and  four  hundred  Indians,  ten  or  twelve  of  which  were  entirely  naked,  except
a  piece  of  cloth  about  their  middle,  ami  painted  all  over  in  a  hideous  manner,  six  of
them  with  eagles'  tails  in  their  hands,  which  they  shook  ami  flourished  as  they
advanced,  danced  in  a  very  uncommon  figure,  singing  in  concert  with  some  drums
of  their  own  make,  and  those  of  the  late  unfortunate  Capt.  Damere;  with  several
other  instruments,  uncouth  beyond  description.     Cheulah,  the  headman  of  the  town.
led  the  procession,  painted  1  >  1   l-red,  except  his  face,  which  was  half  black,  holding
an  old  rusty  broad-sword  in  his  right  hand,  and  an  eagle's  tail  in  his  left.  As  they
approached,  Cheulah,  singling  himself  out.  from  the  rest,  cut  two  or  three  capers,  as
a  signal  to  the  other  eagle-tails,  who  instantly  followed  his  example.  This  violent
exercise,  accompanied  by  the  hand  of  musick,  and  a  loud  yell  from  the  mob,  lasted
about  a  minute,  when  the  headman,  waving  his  sword  over  my  head,  struck  it  into
the  ground,  about  two  inches  from  my  left  foot;  then  directing  himself  to  me,  made
a  short  discourse  (which  my  interpreter  told  me  was  only  to  bid  me  a   hearty  wel-
e   e)  and  presented  me  with  a  string  of  beads.     We  then  proceeded  to  the  door,
where  Cheulah,  and  one  of  the  beloved  men,  taking  me  by  each  arm,  led  me  in,
and  seated  me  in  one  of  the  first  seats:  it  was  so  dark  that  nothing  was  percep-
tible till  a  fresh  supply  of  canes  were  brought,  which  being  burnt  in  the  middle  of
the  house  answers  both  purposes  of  fuel  and  candle.  I  then  discovered  about  five
hundred  faces;  and  Cheulah  addressing  me  a  second  time,  made  a  speech  much  to
the  same  effect  as  the  former.    lgratulating  me  on  my  safe  arrival  thro'  the  numer-
ous parties  of  northern  Indians,  that  generally  haunt  the  way  I  came.  He  then
made  some  professions  of  friendship,  concluding  with  giving  me  another  string  of
bead-,  as  a  token  of  it.  He  had  scarce  finished,  when  four  .if  those  who  had  exhibited
at  the  procession  made  their  second  appearance,  painted  in  milk-white,  their  eagle-
tails  in  one  hand,  and  small  gourds  with  beads  in  them  in  the  other,  which  they
rattled  in  time  to  the  musick.  During  this  dance  the  peace-pipe  was  prepared." —
Timberlake,  Memoirs,  pp.  36    '•'' Adair  also  makes  brief  mention  of  the  ceremony  among  the  I  rulf  tribes  (Hist.  Am.
Indians,  p.  260),  but  his  account  istoobadlj  warped  by  theorizing  to  have  much  value.
Adopt  a  relative— This  seems  to  poinl  to  a  custom  which  has  escaped  the  notice  of
earlier  writers  on   the  eastern  tribes,  but  which   is  well   known  in  Africa  and  other
parts  of  the  world,  and  is  closely  analogous  to  a  still  existing  ceremonj  among  the
plains  Indians  by  which  two  young  men  of  the  same  tribe  formally  agree  to  In   ne
brothers,  and  ratify  the  c   ipact  by  a  public  exchange  of  names  ami  L'itt>.


494  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
White  wampum — As  is  well  known,  white  was  universally  typical  of  peace.  The
traditional  peace-pipe  of  the  Cherokee  was  of  white  stone  and  the  word  itself  is
symbolic  of  peace  and  happiness  in  their  oratory  and  sacred  formulas.  Thus  the
speaker  at  the  Green-corn  dance  invites  the  people  to  come  along  the  white  path  and
enter  the  white  house  of  peace  to  partake  of  the  new  white  food.
Held  iij,  Hi,'  belt — As  already  noted,  every  paragraph  of  an  ambassador's  speech
was  accompanied  by  the  delivery  of  a  string  or  belt  of  wampum  to  give  authority  to
his  words,  and  to  accept  the  belt  was  to  accept  the  condition  or  compact  which  it
typified.     On  the  plains  the  red  stone  pipe  took  the  place  of  the  wampum.
Try  a  nice — Public  foot  races  were  common  among  many  tribes,  more  particularly
in  the  West  among  the  Pueblos,  the  Apache,  and  the  Wichita,  either  as  simple  ath-
letic contests  or  in  connection  with  religious  ceremonials.  On  the  plains  the  horse
race  is  more  in  favor  and  is  always  the  occasion  of  almost  unlimited  betting.
Thrum, hi  Kin,,,, i-  darts — The  throwing  of  darts  and  arrows,  either  at  a  mark  or
simply  to  see  who  can  throw  farthest,  is  a  favorite  amusement  among  the  young
men  and  boys.  The  arrows  used  for  this  purpose  are  usually  longer  and  heavier
than  the  ordinary  ones,  having  carved  wooden  heads  and  being  artistically  painted.
They  are  sometimes  tipped  with  the  end  of  a  buffalo  horn.
99.  The  Shawano  wars  (p.  o70):  The  chief  authority  as  to  the  expulsion  of  the
Shawano  from  Tennessee  is  Haywood  ( Natural  and  Aboriginal  History  of  Tennessee,
pp.  222-224).  The  Schoolcraft  reference  is  from  Notes  on  the  Iroquois,  p.  160,  and  the
notice  of  the  Cherokee- Delaware  war  from  Loskiel,  Mission  of  United  Brethren,
p.  128,  and  Heckewelder,  Indian  Nations,  p.  88.  The  Tuna'I  story  is  from  Wafford; the  other  incidents  from  Swimmer.
Shawano — The  Shawano  or  Shawnee  were  one  of  the  most  important  of  the  Algon-
quian  tribes.  Their  most  noted  chief  was  the  great  Tecumtha.  The  meaning  of  the
name  is  doubtful.  It  is  commonly  interpreted  "Southerners,"  from  the  Algonquian
shawan,  "the  south,"  but  may  have  come  from  another  Algonquian  word  signifying
" salt "  {siutagan,  sewetagan,  etc.,  from  sewan,  "sweet,  pungent " ).  Unlike  the  south-
ern Indians  generally,  the  Shawano  were  great  salt  users,  and  carried  on  an  exten-
sive salt  manufacture  by  boiling  at  the  salt  springs  of  southwestern  Virginia,  furnish-
ing the  product  in  trade  to  other  tribes.  They  have  thirteen  clans — Wolf,  Loon,
Bear,  Buzzard,  Panther,  Owl,  Turkey,  Deer,  Raccoon,  Turtle,  Snake,  Horse,  and
Babbit  (Morgan),  the  clan  of  the  individual  being  indicated  by  his  name.  They  are
organized  also  into  four  divisions  or  bands,  perhaps  originally  independent  allied
tril.es,  viz,  Piqua,  Mequachake,  Kiscopocoke,  and  Chilicothe.  To  the  second  of  these
belonged  the  hereditary  priesthood,  but  the  first  was  most  prominent  and  appar-
ently most  numerous.  The  Shawano  were  of  very  wandering  and  warlike  habit.
Their  earliest  historical  habitat  appears  to  have  been  on  the  middle  Savannah
river,  which  takes  its  name  from  them,  but  before  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century
we  find  a  portion  of  them,  apparently  the  main  body,  occupying  the  basin  of  the  Cum-
berland river  in  Tennessee  and  the  adjacent  region  of  Kentucky.  About  the  year
1692  most  of  those  remaining  in  South  Carolina  moved  northward  anil  settled  upon
the  upper  Delaware  river,  with  their  relatives  and  friends  the  Delaware  and  Mahican.
These  emigrants  appear  to  have  been  of  the  Piqua  division.  Up  to  about  the  year
1730  the  Shawano  still  had  a  town  on  Savannah  river,  near  Augusta,  from  which
they  were  finally  driven  by  the  Cherokee.  From  their  former  intimate  association
with  the  I'chee,  living  in  the  same  neighborhood,  some  early  writers  have  incor- rectly suppi  «ed  the  two  tril  >es  to  1  te  t  he  same.  A  part  of  the  Shawano  joined  the  Creek
confederary,  and  up  to  the  beginning  of  the  last  century,  and  probably  until  the
final  removal  to  the  West,  occupied  a  separate  town  and  retained  their  distinct
language.  Those  settled  upon  the  Cumberland  were  afterward  expelled  by  the
Cherokee  and  Chickasaw,  and  retired  to  the  upper  waters  of  the  Ohio  under  protec-
tion of  the  Delaware,  who  had  given  refuge  to  the  original  emigrants  from  South


mooney]  NOTES    AM)    PARALLELS  195
Carolina.  With  the  advance  of  the  white  settlements  the  two  tribes  moved  west-
ward into  Ohio,  the  Shawano  fixing  themselves  in  the  vicinity  of  the  present  Piqua
and  Chillicothe  aboul  the  year  1750.  They  took  a  leading  pari  in  the  French  and
Indian  war,  Pontiac's  war,  the  Revolution,  and  the  war  of  1812.  In  1793  a  consid-
erable band  settled  in  Missouri  upon  lands  granted  by  the  Spanish  government.  As
a  result  of  successive  sales  and  removals  all  thai  remain  of  the  tribe  are  now  estab-
lished in  Indian  Territory,  about  one-half  being  incorporated  with  the  Cherokee
Nation.  In  1900  they  numbered  about  1,580,  viz,  in  Cherokee  Nation  (in  1898),
790;  Absentee  Shawnee  of  Sac  and  Fox  Agency,  509;  Absentee  Shawnee  of  Big  Jim's
band,  special  agency,  1 s  I :  Eastern  Shawn   i  Quapaw  Agency,  93.     There  arc  also
a  few  scattered  among  other  tribes.  For  detailed  information  consult  Drake,  Life
of  Tecumseh;  Heckewelder,  Indian  Nations;  Brinton,  Lenape  and  Their  Legends;
American  State  Papers:  Indian  Affairs,  i  and  n;  Annual  Reports  of  the  Commissioner
of  Indian  Affairs.
100    The  raid  on  TIkwali'tsi   (p.  374):   Swimmer,  from   wl   i   this  story  was
obtained,  was  of  opinion  that  the  event  occurred  when  his  mother  was  a  little  girl,
say  about  1795,  but  it  must  have  been  earlier.
The  I. .rations  are  all  in  Swain  county,  North  Carolina.  TIkwali'tsi  town  was  on
Tuckasegee  river,  at  the  present  Bryson  City,  immediately  below  and  adjoining  the
more  important  town  of  Kituhwa.  Deep  ereek  enters  the  Tuckasegeefrom  the  north,
about  a  mile  above  Bryson  City.  The  place  where  the  trail  crossed  is  called  Uni-
ga'yata'ti'yl,  "  Where  they  made  a  tish  trap."  a  name  which  may  have  suggested  tin- simile  nseil  by  the  story  teller.  The  place  where  the  Cherokee  crossed,  above  Deep
ereek,  is  called  Uniya'hitufi'yl,  "Where  they  shot  it,"  The  cliff  over  which  the
prisoners  were  thrown  is  called  Kala'asufiyl,  "Where  he  fell  off,"  near  Cold  Spring
knob,  west  of  Deep  creek.  The  Cherokee  halted  for  anight  at  Agitsta'ti'yl,  "Where
they  staid  up  all  night,"  a  few  miles  beyond,  on  the  western  head  fork  of  Deep  creek.
Theypassed  Kunstutsi'yl.  "Sassafras  place,"  a  gap  about  the  head  of  Noland  creek,
near  Clingman's  dome,  and  finally  gave  up  the  pursuit  where  the  trail  crossed  into
Tennessee,  at  a  gap  on  the  main  ridge,  just  below  Clingman's  dome,  known  as  Duni-
ya''ta'lun'vi,  "Where  there  are  shelves,"  so  called  from  an  exposure  of  Hat  rock  on
the  top  of  the  ridge  (see  the  glossary  i.
Magic  arts — It  is  almost  superfluous  to  state  that  no  Indian  war  party  ever  started
out  without  a  vast  deal  of  conjuring  and  "making  medicine"  to  discover  the  where-
abouts and  strength  of  the  enemy  and  to  insure  victory  and  safe  return  to  the  depart-
ing  warriors.
Wail  for  death — The  Indian  usually  meets  inevitable  fate  with  equanimity,  and
n lore  than  once  in  our  Indian  wars  an  aged  warrior  or  helpless  woman,  unable  to
escape,  has  sat  down  upon  the  ground,  ami,  with  blanket  drawn  over  the  head,  calmly
awaited  the  fatal  bullet  or  hatchet  stroke.
101.  The  last  Shawano  invasion  (p.  374):  This  story  also  is  from  Swimmer,
whose  antiquarian  interest  in  the  history  of  these  wars  may  have  been  heightened  by
the  fact  that  he  had  a  slight  strain  of  Shawano  blood  himself.  The  descendants  of
the  old  chief  Sawanu'gi  and  his  brothers,  originally  of  Shawano  stock,  as  tin-  name
indicates,  have  been  prominent  in  the  affairs  of  the  East  Cherokee  for  more  than
half  a  century,  and  one  of  them,  1 'earing  the  ancestral  name,  is  now  second  chief  of
the  band  and  starter  of  the  game  at  every  large  ballplay.
Tht  cry  of  an  owl — One  of  the  commonest  claims  put  forth  by  the  medicine  men
is  that  of  ability  to  understand  the  language  of  birds  and  to  obtain  supernatural
kni  'W  ledge  from  them,  particularly  from  the  owl,  which  is  regarded  with  a  species  of
fear  by  the  laity,  as  the  embodiment  of  a  human  ghost,  on  ace. unit  of  its  nocturnal
habit  and  generally  uncanny  appearance.  A  medicine  man  who  died  a  few  years  ago
among  the  Kiowa  claimed  to  derive  his  powers  from  that  bird.     The  body  of  an  owl,


496  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
wrapped  in  red  cloth  and  decorated  with  various  trinkets,  was  kept  constantly  sus-
pended from  a  tall  pole  set  up  in  front  of  his  tipi,  and  whenever  at  night  the  warn-
ing cry  sounded  from  the  thicket  he  was  accusti  imed  to  leave  his  place  at  the  tire  and
go  out,  returning  in  a  short  while  with  a  new  revelation.
Rafts — The  Cherokee  canoe  is  hewn  from  a  poplar  log  and  is  too  heavy  to  be  car-
ried about  like  the  bark  canoe  of  the  northern  tribes.  As  a  temporary  expedient
the}-  sometimes  used  a  bear  or  buffalo  skin,  tying  the  legs  together  at  each  end  to
fashion  a  rude  boat.  Upon  this  the  baggage  was  loaded,  while  the  owner  swam
behind,  pushing  it  forward  through  the  water.
102.  The  false  warriors  of  Chilhowee  (p.  375):  This  story  was  given  by  Swim-
mer and  corroborated  by  others  as  that  of  an  actual  incident  of  the  old  times.  The
middle  Cherokee  (Kituhwa)  settlements,  on  the  head-streams  of  the  Little  Ten-
nessee, were  separated  from  the  upper  settlements,  about  its  junction  with  the  main
Tennessee,  by  many  miles  of  extremely  rough  mountain  country.  Dialectic  differ-
ences and  local  jealousies  bred  friction,  which  sometimes  brought  the  two  sections
into  collision  and  rendered  possible  such  an  occurrence  as  is  here  narrated.  On
account  of  this  jealousy,  according  to  Adair,  the  first  Cherokee  war,  which  began
in  1760,  concerned  for  some  time  only  a  part  of  the  tribe.  "According  to  the  well-
known  temper  of  the  Cheerake  in  similar  cases  it  might  either  have  remained  so,  or
soon  have  been  changed  into  a  very  hot  civil  war,  had  we  been  so  wise  as  to  have
unproved  the  favourable  opportunity.  There  were  seven  northern  towns,  opposite
to  the  middle  parts  of  the  Cheerake  country,  who  from  the  beginning  of  the  unhappy
grievances,  firmly  dissented  from  the  hostile  intentions  of  their  suffering  and  enraged
countrymen,  and  for  a  considerable  time  before  bore  them  little  goodwill,  on  account
of  some  family  disputes  which  occasioned  each  party  to  be  more  favourable  to  itself
than  to  the  other.  These  would  readily  have  gratified  their  vindictive  disposition
either  by  a  neutrality  or  an  offensive  alliance  with  our  colonists  against  them"
(History  of  the  American  Indians,  page  248).
Chilhowee  (properly  Tsu'luiVweor  Tsu'la'wi)  was  a  noted  settlement  on  the  south bank  of  Little  Tennessee  river,  opposite  the  present  Chilhowee,  in  Monroe  county,
Tennessee.  Cowee  (properly  Kawi'yl,  abbreviated  Kawi')  was  the  name  of  two  or
lucre  former  settlements.  The  one  here  meant  was  at  the  junction  of  Cowee  creek
with  Little  Tennessee  river,  a  short  distance  below  the  present  Franklin,  in  Macon
county,  North  Carolina.  Neither  name  can  be  analyzed.  The  gunstocker's  name,
Gulsadi'hf  or  Gultsadi'hl,  and  that  of  the  original  owner  of  the  gun,  Guiiskali'ski,
are  both  of  doubtful  etymology.
Great  war  l rail — See  historical  note  19.
Scalp  dance — This  dance,  common  to  every  tribe  east  of  the  Rocky  mountains,  was
held  to  celebrate  the  taking  of  fresh  scalps  from  the  enemy.  The  scalps,  painted
red  on  the  fleshy  side,  decorated  and  stretched  in  small  hoops  attached  tot  lie  ends  of
poles,  were  carried  in  the  dance  by  the  wives  and  sweethearts  of  the  warriors,  while
in  the  pauses  of  the  song  each  warrior  in  turn  recited  his  exploits  in  minute  detail.
Among  the  Cherokee  it  was  customary  for  the  warrior  as  he  stepped  into  the  center  of
the  circle  to  suggest  to  the  drummer  an  improvised  song  which  summed  up  in  one
or  two  words  his  own  part  in  the  encounter.  A  new  "war  name"  was  frequently
assumed  after  the  dance  (see  sketch  of  Tsunu'lahuiVskI,  page  164).  Dances  were
held  over  the  same  scalps  on  consecutive  nights  or  sometimes  at  short  intervals  for
weeks  together.
Coming  for  imter — The  getting  of  water  from  the  neighboring  stream  or  spring  was
a  daily  duty  of  the  women,  and  accordingly  we  find  in  Indian  stories  constant  allu-
sion to  ambuscades  or  lovers'  appointments  at  such  places.
To  have  "  ballplay — See  note  under  number  3,  Kana'tl  and  Selu.
103.  Cowee  town:  See  the  preceeding  note


mookby]  NOTES    AND    PARALLELS  41*7
104.  Tin:  i  \mii:\  rsiBES  (p.  378)  Delawan  The  Delawares  derive  their  popular
name  from  the  nver  upon  which,  in  the  earliest  colonial  period,  they  had  their  prin-
cipal settlements.  They  call  themselves  Lena'pe  or  Leni-lena'pe,  a  term  apparently
signifying  "real,  or  original  men,"  or  "men  of  our  kind."  To  the  cognate  tribes
of  the  <  >hio  valley  and  the  lakes  they  were  known  as  Wapanaq'ki,  "easterners,"  the
name  being  extended  to  include  the  closelj  related  tribes,  the  Mahican,  Wappinger
(i.e.  Wapanaq'ki),  Nanticoke,  and  Conoy.  By  all  the  widespread  tribes  of  kindred
Algonquian  stock,  as  well  as  by  the  Winnebago,  Wyandot,  and  Cherokee,  they  were
addressed  under  the  respectful  title  of  "grandfather,"  the  domineering  Iroquois
alone  refusing  to  them  any  higher  designation  than  ••nephew."
Their  various  bands  and  subtribes  seem  originally  to  have  occupied  the  ivhole
basin  of  Delaware  river,  together  with  all  of  New  Jersey,  extending  north  to  the
watershed  of  the  Hudson  and  west  and  southwest  to  the  ridge  separating  the  waters
of  the  Delaware  and  Susquehanna.  Immediately  north  of  them,  along  the  lower
Hudson  and  extending  into  Massachusetts  and  Connecticut,  were  the  closely  affili-
ated Mahican  and  Wappinger,  while  to  the  south  were  their  friends  and  kindred.
the  Nanticoke  and  Conoy,  the  former  in  Delaware  and  .m  the  eastern  shore  of  Mary-
land, the  latter  between  Chesapeake  hay  and  the  lower  Potomac.  All  of  these,
although  speaking  different  languages  of  the  common  Algonquian  stock,  asserted
their  traditional  origin  from  the  Delawares,  with  whom,  in  their  declining  days,
most  of  them  were  again  merged.  The  Delawares  proper  were  organized  into  three
divisions,  which,  according  to  Brinton,  were  subtribes  and  not  elans,  although  each
of  the  three  had  a  totemic  animal  by  whose  name  it  was  commonly  known.     These
three  subtribes  were:   (1)  The  Minsi  or  Munsee  (people  of  the  "stony   mtry"  ".'  ),
otherwise  known  a-  the  Wolf  tribe,  occupying  the  hill  country  about  the  head  of
the  Delaware;  (2)  the  Unami  (people  "downstream"),  or  Turtle  tribe,  on  the
middle  Delaware,  and  (3)  the  Unalachtgo  (people  "near  the  ocean"  ?),  or  Turkey
tribe,   in  the  southern   part   of  the  i   mioti   territory,     (if   these   the   Turtle  tribe
assumed  precedence  in  the  council,  while  to  the  Wolf  tribe  belonged  the  leadership
in  war.  Each  oi  these  three  was  divided  into  twelve  families,  or  embryonic  elans,
bearing  female  names.  In  this  connection  it  may  be  mentioned  that  the  Delawares
now  residing  with  the  Wichita,  in  Oklahoma,  still  use  the  figure  of  a  turtle  as  their
distinctive  cattle  brand.
Of  the  history  of  the  Delawares  it  is  only  possible  to  say  a  very  few  words  here.
Their  earliest  European  relations  were  with  the  Dutch  and  Swedes.  In  1682  they
made  the  famous  treaty  with  William  Pent),  which  was  faithfully  observed  on  both
sides  for  sixty  years.  Gradually  forced  backward  by  the  whites,  they  retired  tir^-t
to  the  Susquehanna,  then  to  the  upper  Ohio,  where,  on  the  breaking  out  of  the
French  and  Indian  war  in  17o4,  they  ranged  themselves  on  the  side  of  the  French.
They  fought  against  the  Americans  in  the  Revolution,  and  in  the  war  of  1812,  hav-
ing by  that  time  been  driven  as  far  west  as  Indiana.  In  ISIS  they  ceded  all  their
lands  in  that  State  and  wen-  assigned  to  a  reservation  in  Kansas,  where  they  were
joined  by  a  considerable  body  that  had  emigrated  to  Missouri,  in  company  with  a
band  of  Shawano,  some  years  before,  by  permission  of  the  Spanish  government.
About  the  close  of  the  Revolution  another  portion  of  the  tribe,  including  most  of
those  who  had  been  Christianized  by  Moravian  missionaries,  had  fled  from  Ohioand
taken  up  a  permanent  abode  on  Canadian  soil.  In  1867  the  main  body  of  those  in
Kansas  removed  to  Indian  Territory  and  became  incorporated  with  the  Cherokee
Nation.  A  smaller  band  settled  on  the  Wichita  reservation  in  Oklahoma.  The  pre-
sent number  of  Delawares  is,  approximately,  1,600,  viz:  "Moravians  and  Munseesof
the  Thames,"  Ontario,  475;  incorporated  in  Cherokee  Nation,  870  (in  1898);  on
Wichita  reservation,  95;  Munsee  in  Kansas  and  incorporated  with  Stockbridges  in
Wisconsin,  perhaps  100;  Delawares,  etc.,  with  Six  Nations,  in  New  York.  50.
Of  their  former  allies,  the  Wappinger  and  Conoy   have   long  sine,  disappeared
19  ETH— 01   32


498  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
through  absorption  into  other  tribes;  the  Mahican  are  represented  by  a  band  of
about  530  Stockbridge  Indians,  including  a  number  of  Munsee,  in  Wisconsin,  while
about  70  mixed  bloods  still  keep  up  the  Nanticoke  name  in  southern  Delaware.
Tuscarora — The  Tuscarora,  a  southern  tribe. of  the  Iroquoian  stock,  formerly  occu-
pied an  extensive  territory  upon  Neuse  river  and  its  branches,  in  eastern  North
Carolina,  and,  like  their  northern  cousins,  seem  to  have  assumed  and  exercised  a
certain  degree  of  authority  over  all  the  smaller  tribes  about  them.  As  early  as  1670
Lederer  described  the  Tuscarora  "emperor"  as  the  haughtiest  Indian  he  had  ever
met.  About  the  year  1700  Lawson  estimated  them  at  1,200  warriors  (6,000  souls?)
in  15  towns.  In  1711  they  rose  against  the  whites,  one  of  their  first  acts  of  hos-
tility being  the  killing  of  Lawson  himself,  who  was  engaged  in  surveying  lands  which
they  claimed  as  their  own.  In  a  struggle  extending  over  about  two  years  they  were
so  terribly  decimated  that  the  greater  portion  fled  from  Carolina  and  took  refuge
with  their  kinsmen  and  friends,  the  Iroquois  of  New  York,  who  were  henceforth
known  as  the  Six  Nations.  The  so-called  "friendly"  party,  under  Chief  Blount,
waa  settled  upon  a  small  reservation  north  of  Roanoke  river  in  what  is  now  Bertie
county,  North  Carolina.  Here  they  gradually  decreased  by  disease  and  emigration
to  the  north,  until  the  few  who  were  left  sold  their  last  remaining  lands  in  1804.
The  history  of  the  tribe  after  the  removal  to  the  north  is  a  part  of  the  history  of  the
Iroquois  or  Six  Nations.  They  number  now  about  750,  of  whom  about  380  are  on
the  Tuscarora  reservation  in  New  York,  the  others  upon  the  Grand  River  reserva-
tion in  Ontario.
Xuala,  Suwali,  Sara  or  Chara/w — For  the  identification  and  earliest  notices  of  the
Sara  see  historical  note  8,  "  De  Soto's  Route."  Their  later  history  is  one  of  almost
constant  hostility  to  the  whites  until  their  final  incorporation  with  the  Catawba,
with  whom  they  were  probably  cognate,  about  the  year  1720.  In  1743  they  still  pre-
served their  distinct  language,  and  appear  to  be  last  mentioned  in  1768,  when  they
numbered  about  50  souls  living  among  the  Catawba.  See  Mooney,  Siouan  Tribes
of  the  East,  bulletin  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  1894.
Catawba — The  origin  and  meaning  of  this  name,  which  dates  back  at  least  two
centuries,  are  unknown.  It  may  possibly  come  from  the  Choctaw  through  the
Mobilian  trade  jargon.  They  call  themselves  Nieye,  which  means  simply  "people"
or  "Indians."  The  Iroquois  call  them  and  other  cognate  tribes  in  their  vicinity
Toderigh-rono,  whence  Tutelo.  In  the  seventeenth  century  they  were  often  known
as  Esawor  Ushery,  apparently  from  iswd',  river,  in  their  own  language.  The  Chero-
kee name  Ata'gwa,  plural  Ani'ta'gwa,  is  a  corruption  of  the  popular  form.  Their
linguistic  affinity  with  the  Siouan  stock  was  established  by  Gatschet  in  1881.  See
Mooney,  Siouan  Tribes  of  the  East.
105.  The  southern  and  western  tribes  (p.  382):  The  Creek  confederacy — Next  in
importance  to  the  Cherokee,  among  the  southern  tribes,  were  the  Indians  of  the  Creek
confederacy,  occupying  the  greater  portion  of  Georgia  and  Alabama,  immediately
south  of  the  Cherokee.  They  are  said  to  have  been  called  Creeks  by  the  early  traders
on  account  of  the  abundance  of  small  streams  in  their  country.  Before  the  whites
began  to  press  upon  them  their  tribes  held  nearly  all  the  territory  from  the  Atlantic
westward  to  about  the  watershed  between  the  Tombigby  and  the  Pearl  and  Pasca-
goula  rivers,  being  cut  off  from  the  Gulf  coast  by  the  Choctaw  tribes,  and  from  the
Savannah,  except  near  the  mouth,  by  the  Uchee,  Shawano,  and  Cherokee.  About
the  year  1800  the  confederacy  comprised  75  towns,  the  people  of  47  of  which  were  the
Upper  Creeks,  centering  about  the  upper  waters  of  the  Alabama,  while  those  of  the
remaining  28  were  the  Lower  Creeks,  upon  the  lower  Chattahoochee  and  its  branches
( Hawkins).  Among  them  were  represented  a  number  of  tribes  formerly  distinct  and
speaking  distinct  languages.  The  ruling  tribe  and  language  was  the  Muscogee  (plu-
ral, Museogiilgee),  which  frequently  gave  its  name  to  the  confederacy.  Other  lan-
guages were  the  Alabama,  Koasati,  Hichitee,  Taskigi,  Uchee,  Natchee,  and  Sawanugi


mooney]  NoTKS    AM)    PARALLELS  499
or  Shawano.  The  Muscogee,  Alabama,  Koasati,  Hichitee,  and  Taskigi  (7  i  belonged  to
the  Muskhogean  atock,  the  Alabama  and  Koasati,  however,  being  nearer  linguisticallj
to  the  Choctaw  than  to  the  Muscogee.  Tlie  Hichitee  represent  the  conquered  or
otherwise  incorporated  Muskhogean  tribes  of  the  Georgia  coast  region.  The  Apa-
lachi  on  Appalachee  bay  in  Florida,  who  were  conquered  by  the  English  about  1705
and  afterward  incorporated  with  the  Creeks,  were  dialectical!  y  closely  akin  to  the
Hichitee;  the  Seminole  also  were  largely  an  offshool  from  this  tribe.  <  >f  the  Taskigi
all  that  i>  known  lias  been  told  elsewhere  i  see  number  105) .
The  Uchee,  Natchee,  and  Sawanugi  were  incorporated  tribes,  differing  radically  in
language  from  each  other  and  from  the  Muskhogean  tribes.  The  territory  of  the
Uchee  included  both  hanks  of  the  middle  Savannah,  below  the  Cherokee,  and
extended  into  middle  Georgia.  They  had  a  strong  race  pride,  claiming  to  be  older
in  the  country  than  the  Muscogee,  and  are  probably  identical  with  the  people  of
Cofitachiqui,  mentioned  in  the  early  Spanish  narratives.  According  to  Hawkins,
their  incorporation  with  the  Creeks  was  brought  about  in  consequence  of  intermar-
riages about  the  year  1729.  The  Natchee  or  Natchez  were  an  important  tribe  residing
in  lower  Mississippi,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  present  town  of  that  name,  until  driven
out  by  the  French  about  the  year  1730,  when  most  of  them  took  refuge  with  the
Creeks,  while  others  joined  the  Chickasaw  and  Cherokee.  The  Sawanugi  were
Shawano  who  kept  their  town  on  Savannah  river,  near  the  present  Augusta,  after
the  main  body  of  their  tribe  had  removed  to  the  north  about  1692.  They  probably
joined  the  Creeks  about  the  same  time  as  their  friends,  the  Uchee.  The  Uchee  still
constitute  a  compact  body  of  about  600  souls  in  the  Creek  Nation,  keeping  up  their
distinct  language  and  tribal  character.  The  Natchee  are  reduced  to  one  or  two  old
men,  while  the  Sawanugi  have  probably  lost  their  identity  long  ago.
According  to  Morgan,  the  Muscogee  proper,  and  perhaps  also  their  incorporated
tribes,  have  22  clans.  Of  these  the  Wind  appears  to  he  the  leading  one,  possessing
privileges  accorded  to  no  other  clan,  including  the  hereditary  guardianship  of  the
aiici.nt  metal  tablets  which  constitute  the  palladium  of  the  tribe.  By  the  treaty  of
Washington  in  1832,  the  Creeks  sold  all  of  their  remaining  lands  in  their  old  country
and  agreed  to  remove  west  of  the  Mississippi  to  what  is  nowthe  Creek  Nation  in  the
Indian  Territory.  The  removal  extended  over  a  period  of  several  years  and  was  not
finally  accomplished  until  1845.  In  1898  the  citizen  population  of  the  Creek  Nation
numbered  14,771,  of  whom  10,014  were  of  Indian  blood  and  the  remainder  were
negroes,  their  former  slaves.     It  appears  that  the  Indian  population  included  about
700  fr   ther  tribes,  chiefly  Cherokee.   There  are  also  about  300  Alabama,  "Cushatta"
|  Koasati  |,  and  Muscogee  in  Texas.  See  also  Hawkins,  Sketch  of  the  Creek  Country;
Gatschet,  Creek  Migration  Legend;  Adair,  History  of  the  American  Indian-;  Bart-
ram,  Travels;  The  Five  Civilized  Tribes,  Bulletin  of  the  Eleventh  Census;  Wyman,
in  Alabama  Historical  Society  Collections.
Chickasaw — This  tribe,  of  Muskhogean  stock,  formerly  occupied  northern  Missis-
sippi and  adjacent  portions  of  Alabama  and  Tennessee,  and  at  an  early  period  had
incorporated  also  several  smaller  tribes  on  Yazoo  river  in  central  Mississippi,  chief
among  which  were  the  cognate  Chokchuma.     The  name  occurs  first  in  the  De  Soto
narrative.     The  Chickasaw  language  was  simply  a  dialect  of  CI   taw,  although  the
two  tribes  were  hereditary  enemies  and  differed  widely  in  character,  the  former  being
active  and  warlike,  while  the  latter  were  notoriously  sluggish.  Throughout  the
colonial  period  the  Chickasaw  were  the  constant  enemies  of  the  French  and  friends
of  the  English,  but  they  remained  neutral  in  the  Revolution.  By  the  treaty  of
Pontotoc  in  1832  they  sold  their  lands  east  of  the  Mississippi  and  agreed  to  remove
to  Indian  Territory,  where  they  are  now  organized  as  the  Chickasaw  Nation.
According  to  Morgan  they  have  12  clans  grouped  into  two  phratries.  In  L890,
the  citizen  population  of  the  Nation  (under  Chickasaw  laws)  consisted  of  3,941  full-
blood  and  mixed-blood  Chickasaw,  6S1  adopted  whites,  131  adopted  negroes,  and  946


500  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [bth.ahn.19
adopted  Indians  from  other  tribes,  chiefly  Choctaws.  Under  the  present  law,  by
which  citizenship  claims  are  decided  by  a  Government  commission,  "Chickasaw  by
blood  "  are  reported  in  1898  to  number  4,230,  while  "  white  and  negro  "  citizens  are
reported  at  4,818.  See  also  Gatschet,  Creek  Migration  Legend;  The  Five  Civilized
Tribes,  Bulletin  of  Eleventh  Census.
The  Choctaw  confederacy — This  was  a  loose  alliance  of  tribes,  chiefly  of  Muskho-
gean  stock,  occupying  southern  Alabama  and  Mississippi,  with  the  adjacent  Gulf
coast  of  western  Florida  and  eastern  Louisiana.  The  Choctaw  proper,  of  Muskho-
gean  stock,  occupying  south  central  Mississippi,  was  the  dominant  tribe.  Smaller
tribes  more  or  less  closely  affiliated  were  the  Mobilian,  Tohome,  Mugulasha,  Pasca-
goula,  Biloxi,  Acolapissa,  Bayagoula,  Houma,  with  others  of  less  note.  It  had  been
assumed  that  all  of  these  were  of  Muskhogean  stock  until  Gatschet  in  1886  estab-
lished the  fact  that  the  Biloxi  were  of  Siouan  affinity,  and  it  is  quite  probable  that
the  Pascagoula  also  were  of  the  same  connection.  All  the  smaller  tribes  excepting
the  Biloxi  were  practically  extinct,  or  had  entirely  lost  their  identity,  before  the
year  1800.
The  Choctaw  were  one  of  the  largest  of  the  eastern  tribes,  being  exceeded  in  num-
bers, if  at  all,  only  by  the  Cherokee;  but  this  apparent  superiority  was  neutralized
by  their  unwarlike  character  and  lack  of  cohesion.  According  to  Morgan,  whose
statement  has,  however,  been  challenged,  they  had  eight  clans  grouped  into  two
phratries.  There  was  also  a  geographic  division  into  "Long  towns,"  "  Potato-eating
towns,"  and  "Six  towns,"  the  last  named  differing  considerably  in  dialect  and  cus-
tom from  the  others.  By  treaties  in  1820  and  1830  the  Choctaw  sold  all  their  lands
east  of  the  Mississippi  and  agreed  to  remove  to  Indian  Territory,  where  they  ru  >W  con-
stitute the  Choctaw  Nation.  A  considerable  number  of  vagrant  Choctaw  who  had
drifted  into  Louisiana  ami  Arkansas  at  an  early  period  have  since  joined  their  kin-
dred in  Indian  Territory,  but  from  1,000  to  2,000  are  still  scattered  along  the  swampy
Gulf  coast  of  Mississippi.  In  1890  those  of  pure  or  mixed  Choctaw  blood  in  the
Choctaw  Nation  were  officially  reported  to  number  10,211.  In  1899,  under  different
conditions  of  citizenship,  the  "Choctaw  by  blood"  were  put  at  14,256,  while  the
adopted  whites  and  negroes  numbered  5,150.  See  also  Gatschet,  Creek  Migration
Legend;  The  Five  Civilized  Tribes,  Bulletin  of  Eleventh  Census.
The  Osage — The  popular  name  is  a  corruption  of  Ouasage,  the  French  spelling  of
Wasash,  the  name  used  by  themselves.  The  Osage  were  the  principal  southern
Siouan  tribe,  claiming  at  one  time  nearly  the  whole  territory  from  the  Missouri  to
the  Arkansas  and  from  the  Mississippi  far  out  into  the  plains.  Their  geographic
position  brought  them  equally  into  contact  with  the  agricultural  and  sedentary  tribes
of  the  eastern  country  and  the  roving  hunters  of  the  prairie,  and  in  tribal  habit
and  custom  they  formed  a  connecting  link  between  the  two.  Whether  or  not  they
deserved  the  reputation,  they  were  considered  by  all  their  neighbors  as  particularly
predatory  and  faithless  in  character,  and  had  consequently  few  friends,  but  were
generally  at  war  with  all  tribes  alike.  They  made  their  first  treaty  with  the  Gov-
ernment in  1808.  In  1825  they  ceded  all  their  claims  in  Missouri  and  Arkansas,
together  with  considerable  territory  in  what  is  now  Kansas.  They  have  decreased
terribly  from  war  and  dissipation,  and  are  now,  to  the  number  of  about  1,780,  gath-
ered upon  a  reservation  in  Oklahoma  just  west  of  the  Cherokee  and  south  of  the
Kansas  line.
106.  The  Giants  from  the  west  (p.  391):  This  may  be  an  exaggerated  account
of  a  visit  from  sonic  warriors  of  a  taller  tribe  from  the  plains,  where  it  is  customary
to  pluck  out  the  eyebrows  and  to  wear  the  hair  in  two  long  side  pendants,  wrapped
round  with  otter  skin  and  reaching  to  the  knees,  thus  giving  a  peculiar  expression
to  the  eyes  and  an  appearance  of  tallness  which  is  sometimes  deceptive.  The  Osage
warriors  have,  however,  long  been  noted  for  their  height.
With  the  exception  of  Tsul'kalu'  there  seem  to  be  no  giants  in  the  mythology  of


mooney]  NOTES    AM)    PARALLELS  501
the  Cherokee,  although  all  their  woods  and  waters  are  peopled  by  invisible  fairy
tribes.  This  appears  to  be  characteristic  of  Indian  mythologies  generally,  the  giants
being  comparatively  few  in  number  while  the  "little  people"  are  legion.  The
Iroquois  have  a  story  of  an  invasion  by  a  race  of  stony-skinned  cannibal  giants  from
the  west  (Schoolcraft,  Notes  on  Iroquois,  p.  266).  Gianl  races  occur  also  in  the
mythologies  of  the  Navaho  (Matthews,  Navaho  Legends),  Choctaw  (Gatschet,  Creek
Migration  Legend),  and  other  tribes.  According  to  the  old  Spanish  chroniclers,
Ayllon  in  1520  met  on  the  coast  of  South  Carolina  a  tribe  of  Indians  whose  chiefs
were  of  gigantic  size,  owing,  as  he  was  told,  to  a  special  course  of  dieting  and  mas-
sage to  which  they  were  subjected  in  infancy.
107.  Tim  losi  Cherokee  (p.  391):  This  tradition  as  hen-  given  is  taken  chiefly
from  the  Wahnenauhi  manuscript.     There  is  a  persistent  belief  among  the  Cherokee
that  a  pert  ion  of  their  people  once  wandered  far  to  the  west  or  south  «  est,  where  they
were  sometimes  heard  of  afterward,  but  were  never  again  reunited  with  their  tribe.  It
was  the  hope  of  verifying  this  tradition  and  restoring  his  lost  kinsmen  to  their  tribe
that  led  Sequoya  to  undertake  the  journey  on  which  he  lost  his  life.  These  tradi-
tional lost  Cherokee  are  entirely  distinct  from  the  historic  emigrants  who  removed
from  the  East  shortly  after  the  Revolution.
Similar  stories  are  common  to  nearly  all  the  tribes.  Thus  the  Kiowa  tell  of  a  chief
who.  manj  years  ago,  quarreled  over  a  division  of  game  and  led  his  people  far  away
across  the  Rocky  mountains,  when-  they  are  still  living  somewhere  about  the  British
border  and  still  keeping  their  old  Kiowa  language.  The  Tonkawa  tell  of  a  band  of
their  people  who  in  some  way  were  cut  off  from  the  tribe  by  a  sudden  inroad  of  the
sea  on  the  Texas  coast,  and,  being  unable  to  return,  gradually  worked  their  way  far
down  into  Mexico.  The  Tuscarora  tell  how,  in  their  early  wanderings,  they  came  to
the  Mississippi  and  were  crossing  over  to  the  west  side  by  means  of  a  grapevine,  when
the  vine  broke,  leaving  those  on  the  farther  side  to  wander  off  until  in  time  they
became  enemies  to  those  on  the  eastern  bank.  See  Mooney,  Calendar  History  of  the
Kiowa  Indians,  Seventeenth  Annual  Report  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  part  1,
and  The  Last  of  Our  Cannibals,  in  Harper's  Magazine,  August,  1901;  Cusick,  quoted in  Schoolcraft,  Notes  on  the  Iroquois,  p.  478.
L08.  The  massacre  of  the  Ani'-Kuta'ni  (p.  392):  Swimmer,  Ta'gwadihl',  Ayasta,
and  Watford  all  knew  this  name,  which  Ayasta  pronounced  AnV-Kw&ta'nl,  but  none
of  them  could  tell  anything  more  definite  than  has  been  stated  in  the  opening  sen-
tence. The  hereditary  transmission  of  priestly  dignities  in  a  certain  clan  or  band  is
rather  the  rule  than  the  exception  among  the  tribes,  both  east  and  west.
109.  The  war  medicine  (p.  393):  The  first  two  paragraphs  are  from  Wafford,  the
rest  from  Swimmer.  The  stories  are  characteristic  of  Indian  belief  and  might  be
paralleled  in  any  tribe.  The  great  Kiowa  chief,  Set-angya, already  mentioned,  was —
and  still  is — believed  by  his  tribe  to  have  possessed  a  magic  knife,  which  lie  carried
in  his  stomach  and  could  produce  from  his  mouth  at  will.  The  Kiowa  assert  that  it
was  this  knife,  which  of  course  the  soldiers  failed  to  find  when  disarming  him,  with
which  lie  attacked  the  guard  in  the  encounter  that  resulted  in  his  death.
110.  Incidents  of  personal  heroism  (p.  394):  The  incident  of  the  fight  at  Waya
gap  is  on  the  authority  of  the  late  Maj.  .lames  Bryson,  of  Dillsboro,  North  Carolina,
born  in  1818,  who  had  it  from  his  great-uncle,  Daniel  Bryson,  a  memberof  YVilliam-
-  n'-  expedition.
Speaking  of  the  Cherokee  "War  Women,"  who  were  admitted  to  the  tribal  councils,
Timberlake  says  (Memoirs,  p.  70):  "The  reader  will  not  be  a  little  surprised  to
find  the  story  of  Amazons  not  so  great  a  fable  as  we  imagined,  many  of  the  Indian
women  being  as  famous  in  war  as  powerful  in  the  council."
111.  The  mounds  and  the  constant  hue:  The  old  sacked  things  (p.  ::ti">  \:  What  is
here  said  concerning  the  mounds,  based  chiefly  upon  Swimmer's  recital,  is  given  solely


50'2  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
as  a  matter  of  popular  belief,  shaped  by  tribal  custom  and  ritual.  The  question  of
fact  is  for  the  archeologist  to  decide.  The  Indian  statement  is  of  value,  however,
in  showing  the  supposed  requirements  for  the  solemn  consecration  of  an  important
work.
A  note  by  John  Howard  Payne  upon  the  sacred  square  of  the  Creeks,  as  observed
by  him  in  1835,  just  before  his  visit  to  the  Cherokee,  may  throw  further  light  on
the  problem:  "In  the  center  of  this  outer  square  was  a  very  high  circular  mound.
This,  it  seems,  was  formed  from  the  earth  accumulated  yearly  by  removing  the
surface  of  the  sacred  square  thither.  At  every  Green-corn  festival  trie  sacred  square
is  strewn  with  soil  yet  untrodden;  the  soil  of  the  year  preceding  being  taken  away,
but  preserved  as  above  explained.  No  stranger's  foot  is  allowed  to  press  the  new
earth  of  the  sacred  square  until  its  consecration  is  complete"  (Letter  of  1835  in
Continental  Monthly,  New  York,  1862,  p.  19).     See  note  on  the  sa«red  fire.
Oiiijitri'd  irit.lt  tlinetixe — The  practice  of  conjuring  certain  favorite  spots  in  order  to
render  them  fatal  to  an  invading  enemy  was  common  to  many  if  not  to  all  tribes.  One
of  the  most  terrible  battles  of  the  Creek  war  was  fought,  upon  the  "Holy  ground,"
so  called  because  it  was  believed  by  the  Indians  that  in  consequence  of  the  mystic
rites  which  had  been  performed  there  for  that  purpose  by  their  prophets,  no  white
troops  could  set  foot  upon  it  and  live.
Tin  surred fire — The  method  described  for  producing  fire  and  keeping  it  constantly
smoldering  in  the  townhouse  appears  to  have  been  that  actually  in  use  in  ancient
times,  as  indicated  by  the  name  given  to  the  plant  (titsil'-stinti),  and  corroborated
by  the  unanimous  testimony  of  the  old  people.  All  the  older  East  Cherokee  believe
that  the  ancient  fire  still  burns  within  the  mounds  at  Franklin  and  Bryson  City,  and
those  men  who  were  stationed  for  a  time  near  the  latter  place  while  in  the  Confed-
erate service,  during  the  Civil  war,  assert  that  they  frequently  saw  the  smoke  rising
from  the  adjacent  mound.
The  missionary  Buttrick,  from  old  Cherokee  authority,  says:  "They  were  obliged
to  make  new  fire  for  sacred  purposes  by  rubbing  two  pieces  of  dry  wood  together,
with  a  certain  weed,  called  golden  rod,  dry,  between  them.  .  .  .  When  their
enemies  destroyed  the  house  in  which  this  holy  fire  was  kept,  it  was  said  the  fire
settled  down  into  the  earth,  where  it  still  lives,  though  unknown  to  the  people.  The
place  where  they  lost  this  holy  fire  is  somewhere  in  one  of  the  Carolinas"
(Antiquities,  p.  9).
The  general  accuracy  of  Swimmer's  account  is  strikingly  confirmed  by  the  descrip-
tion of  the  New-fire  ceremony  given  more  than  half  a  century  before  by  John
Howard  Payne,  the  poet,  who  had  gone  among  the  Cherokee  to  study  their  ethnol-
ogy and  was  engaged  in  that  work  when  arrested,  together  with  John  Ross,  by  the
Georgia  guard  in  1835.  He  makes  the  kindling  of  the  new  fire  a  part  of  the  annual
spring  festival.  At  that  time,  says  Payne,  "the  altar  in  the  center  of  the  national
heptagon  [i.  e.  townhouse]  was  repaired.  It  was  constructed  of  a  conical  shape,  of
fresh  earth.  A  circle  was  drawn  around  the  top  to  receive  the  fire  of  sacrifice.  Upon
this  was  laid,  ready  for  use,  the  inner  bark  of  seven  different  kinds  of  trees.  This
bark  was  carefully  chosen  from  the  east  side  of  the  trees,  and  was  clear  and  free
from  blemish. ' '  After  some  days  of  preliminary  purification,  sacrifice,  and  other  cere-
monial performances,  the  day  appointed  for  the  kindling  of  the  new  fire  arrived.
"  Early  in  the  morning  the  seven  persons  who  were  commissioned  to  kindle  the
fire  commenced  their  operations.  One  was  the  official  fire-maker;  the  remaining  six
his  assistants.  A  hearth  was  carefully  cleared  and  prepared.  A  round  hole  being
made  in  a  block  of  wood,  a  small  quantity  of  dry  golden-rod  weed  was  placed  in  it.
A  stick,  the  end  of  which  just  fitted  the  opening,  was  whirled  rapidly  until  the  weed
took  fire.  The  flame  was  then  kindled  on  the  hearth  and  thence  taken  to  every
bouse  l>y  the  women,  who  collectively  waited  for  that  purpose.  The  old  fires  having
been  everywhere  extinguished,   and  the  hearths  cleansed,  new  fires  were  lighted


mooney]  NOTES    AND    PARALLELS  503
throughout  the  country,  and  a  sacrifice  was  made  in  each  one  of  them  of  the  lii-t
meat  killed  afterwards  by  those  to  whom  they  respectively  belonged." — Payne  MS,
quoted  in  Squier,  Serpent  Symhol,  pp.  I L6  1 18.
Similar  ceii'   nirs  were  common  to   many  tribes,  particularly  the  southern  tribes
and  the  Puehloa,  in  connection  with  the  annual  kindling  of  the  Bacred  new  Bre.    See
Adair,  History  of    the   American    Indians;    I  lawkins,  Sketch  of    the   Creek   Country,
quoted  by  Gatschet,  Creek  Migration  Legend;  Bartram,  Travels;  Fewkes,  The  New-
Bre  Ceremony  at  Walpi,  in  American  Anthropologist  for  January,  1900;  Squier,
Serpent  Symbol.     Going  beyond  our  own  boundaries  it  may  he  said  briefly  that  fire
Worship  was  probablj   as  ancient  as  ritual  itself  and  well-nigh  as  universal.
Wooden  box — The  sacred  ark  of  the  Cherokee  is  described  by  Adair  (  History  of
the  American  Indians,  pp.  161-162),  and  its  capture  by  the  Delaware's  is  mentioned  by
Washburn  (Reminiscences,  pp.  191,  221),  who  states  that  to  its  loss  the  old  priests
of  the  tribe  ascribed  the  later  degeneracy  of  their  people.  They  refused  to  tell  him
the  contents  of  the  ark.     (In  this  subject  Adair  says:
"  \  gentleman  who  was  at  the  Ohio  in  the  year  1756  assured  me  he  saw  a  stranger
there  very  importunate  to  view  the  inside  of  the  Cheerake  ark,  which  was  covered
with  a  drest  deerskin  and  placed  on  a  couple  of  short  blocks.  An  Indian  centinel
watched  it.  armed  with  a  hiccory  buw  and  brass-pointed  barbed  arrows;  and  he  was
faithful  to  his  trust,  for  finding  the  stranger  obtruding  to  pollute  the  supposed  sacred
vehicle,  he  drew  an  arrow  to  the  head,  and  would  have  shot  him  through  the  body
had  he  not  suddenly  withdrawn.  The  interpreter,  when  asked  by  the  gentleman
what  it  contained,  told  him  there  was  nothing  in  it  but  a  bundle  of  ('(injuring  traps.
This  shows  what  conjurers  our  common  interpreters  are,  and  how  much  the  learned
world  have  really  profited  by  their  informations.  "
Such  tribal  palladiums  or  "  mei I icines,"  upon  which  the  existence  and  prosperity
of  the  tribe  are  supposed  to  depend,  are  still  preserved  among  the  plains  Indians,  the
sacred  receptacle  in  each  case  being  confided  to  the  keeping  of  a  priest  appointed  for
the  purpose,  who  alone  is  privileged  to  undo  the  wrappings  or  expose  the  contents.
Among  these  tribal  "medicines"  may  be  mentioned  the  sacred  arrows  of  the  ( Ihey-
enne,  the  "flat  pipe"  of  the  Arapaho,  the  great  shell  of  the  Omaha,  and  the  taime
image  of  the  Kiowa  (see  reference  in  the  author's  Ghost-dance  Religion  and  Calen-
dar History  of  the  Kiowa  Indians).
White  peace  pipe — This  statement  concerning  the  ancient  seven-stem  peace  pipe
carved  from  white  stone  is  given  on  the  authority  of  Swimmer,  who  said  that  the
stone  was  procured  from  a  quarry  near  the  present  town  of  Knoxville,  Tennessee.
A  certain  district  of  western  North  Carolina  has  recently  acquired  an  unenviable
reputation  for  the  manufacture  of  spurious  "Indian  pipes,"  ostensibly  taken  from
the  mounds,  carved  from  soapstone  and  having  from  three  to  half  a  dozen  stem-
holes  encircling  the  bowl.
Turtl  drum — This  statement  is  on  the  authority  of  Wafford,  who  had  talked  with
men  who  claimed  to  have  known  those  who  had  seen  the  drum.  He  was  not  posi-
tive as  to  the  town,  hut  thought  it  was  Keowee.  It  is  believed  that  the  drum  was
hidden  by  the  Indians,  in  anticipation  of  their  speedy  return,  when  the  country  was
invaded   by  Williamson  in   1776,   but  as  the  country  was  never  recovered  hy  the
Cherokee  the  drum  was  lost.
112-115.  Short  humorous  stories  (pp.  397,  399):  These  short  stories  are  fairly
representative  of  Cherokee  humor.  Each  was  heard  repeatedly  from  several
informants,  both  east  and  west.
Ilti.  Tiik  STAR  FEATHERS  (p. 399) :  This  story  was  obtained  from  John  A\.  with
additional  details  from  ( 'hief  Smith  and  others,  to  whom  it  was  equally  familiar.  It
is  told  as  an  actual  happening  in  the  early  days,  before  the  Indian  had  much  acquaint-
ance with  the  whites,  and  is  thoroughly  characteristic  of  the  methods  of  medicine- men.


504  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.iu
The  deception  was  based  upon  the  I  Jherokee  belief  that  the  stars  are  living  creatines
with  feathers  (see  number  9,  "What  the  Stars  are  Like  ").
The  Indian  lias  always  been  noted  for  his  love  of  feather  decorations,  and  more
than  any  from  his  native  birds  he  prized  the  beautiful  feathers  of  the  peacock  when-
ever it  was  possible  to  procure  them  from  the  whites.  80  far  back  as  1670  Lederer
noted  of  a  South  Carolina  tribe:  "The  Oshery  delight  much  in  feather  ornament,  of
which  they  have  great  variety;  but  peacocks  in  most  esteem,  because  rare  in  these
parts"  (Travels,  p.  32,  ed.  1891  1.
117.  The  mother  bear's  song  (p.  400):  The  first  of  these  songs  was  obtained  from
Ayasta,  and  was  unknown  to  Swimmer.  The  second  song  was  obtained  also  from
Ayfista,  who  knew  only  the  verses,  while  Swimmer  knew  both  the  verses  and  the
story  which  gives  them  their  setting.
The  first  has  an  exact  parallel  among  the  Creeks,  which  is  thus  given  in  the  "Baby
Songs"  of  the  Tuggle  manuscript:
All  tan  Down  the  stream
Ah  yah  chokese  if  you  hear
Mali  kah  eho  kofe  chase  going
Hoehe  yoke  saw  up  the  stream
Lit  kahts  chars,  run,
Lit  kahts  chars.  run.
A  thle  poo  Up  the  stream
Ahyohchokese  if  you  hear
Mah  kah  cho  kofe  the  chase  going
Thorne  yoke  saw  to  the  high  mountain
Lit  karts  chars,  run,
Lit  karts  chars.  run.
Translation
If  you  hear  the  noise  of  the  chase
Going  down  the  stream
Then  run  up  the  stream.
If  you  hear  the  noise  of  the  chase
Going  up  the  stream
Then  run  to  the  high  mountain,
Then  run  to  the  high  mountain.
118.  Baby  song,  to  please  the  children  (p.  401):  This  song  is  well  known  to  the
women  and  was  sung  by  both  Ayasta  and  Swimmer.
119.  When  babies  are  born:  The  wren  and  the  cricket  (p.  401):  These  little
bits  of  Indian  folklore  were  obtained  from  Swimmer,  but  are  common  tribal  property.
li>0.  The  Raven  Mocker(p.  401):  The  grewsome  belief  in  the  "Raven  Mocker"  is
universal  among  the  Cherokee  and  has  close  parallels  in  other  tribes.  Very  near  to
it  is  the  Iroquois  belief  in  the  vampire  or  cannibal  ghost,  concerning  which  School-
craft relates  some  blood-curdling  stories.  He  says:  "It  is  believed  that  such  doomed
spirits  creep  into  the  lodges  of  men  at  night,  and  during  sleep  suck  their  blood  and  eat
their  flesh.  They  are  invisible"  (Notes  on  the  Iroquois,  p.  144).  On  one  occasion,
while  the  author  was  among  the  Cherokee,  a  sick  man  was  allowed  to  die  alone  because
his  friends  imagined  they  felt  the  presence  of  the  Raven  Mocker  or  other  invisible
witches  about  the  house,  and  were  consequently  afraid  to  stay  with  him.  The  descrip-
tion of  the  flying  terror  appears  to  be  that  of  a  great  meteor.  It  is  a  universal  prin-
ciple of  folk  belief  that  discovery  or  recognition  while  disguised  in  another  form  brings
disaster  to  the  witch.


mooney]  NOTES    AND    PARALLELS  505
The  "diving"  of  the  raven  while  flying  high  in  air  i-  performed  bj  folding  one
wing  close  to  the  body,  when  the  bird  falls  to  a  lower  plane,  apparently  turning  a  som-
ersaull  in  the  descent.     It  seems  to  be  done  purely  for  amusement.
121.  Herbert's  sprini  p  K)3  The  subject  of  this  old  trader's  legend  must  have
been  oni  of  the  head-springs  of  t  lhattooga  river,  an  upper  branch  of  Savannah,  hav-
ing its  rise  in  the  southern  pari  of  Jackson  county,  North  Carolina,  on  the  eastern
slope  of  tin'  ridge  from  which  other  streams  flow  in  the  opposite  direction  t'i  join
the  waters  of  the  Tennessee.  Ii  was  probably  in  the  vicinity  of  the  present  high-
lands in  Macoi   unty,  where  the  trail  from  Chattooga  river  and  the  settlements  on
Keowee  crossed  the  Blue  ridge,  thence  descending  Cullasagee  to  the  towns  on  Little
Tennessee.
126.  Plani  lore  (p  120):  For  ceremonies,  prayers,  and  precautions  used  by  the
doctors  in  connection  with  the  gathering  and  preparation  of  medicinal  roots,  barks,
and  herbs,  see  the  author's  Sacred  Formulas  of  the  ( Iherokees,  in  the  Seventh  Annual
Report  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  1891.
i  The  Onondaga  name  signifies  "two  heads  entangled,"  referring,  we  are
told,  to  "the  way  so  often  seen  where  the  heads  are  interlocked  and  pulled  apart  by
the. steins"  \  \V.  M.  Beauchamp,  in  Journal  of   American  Folk-Lore,  October,  1888).
i  'edar — For  references  to  the  sane  1  character  of  the  cedar  among  the  plains  tribes,
see  the  author's  Ghost-dance  Religion,  in  the  Fourteenth  Annual  Report  of  the
Bureau  of  Ethnology,  part  2,  1896.
Jjinn  and  basswood — The  ancient  Tuscarora  believed  that  no  tree  but  black  gum
was  immune  from  lightning,  which,  they  declared,  would  run  round  the  tree  a
great  many  times  seeking  in  vain  to  effect  an  entrance.  Lawson,  who  records  the
belief,  adds:  "Now,  you  must  understand  that  sort  of  gum  will  not  split  or  rive:
therefore.  I  suppose  the  story  might  arise  from  thenee"  (Carolina,  pp.  345-346,  ed.
1860).  The  Pawnee  claim  the  same  immunity  for  the  cedar,  and  throw  sprigs  of  it
as  incense  upon  the  tire  during  storms  to  turn  aside  the  lightning  stroke  (Grinnell,
Pawnee  Hero  Stories,  p.  126).
iii,,:',  mi — For  more  concerning  this  plant  see  the  author's  Sacred  Formulas,  above mentioned.


GLOSSARY  OF  CHEROKEE  WORDS
The  Cherokee  language  has  the  continental  vowel  sounds  a,  e,  >.  and
>/,  but  lacks  a.  which  is  replaced  by  a  deep  &.  The  obscure  or  short  u
is  frequently  nasalized,  but  the  nasal  sound  is  seldom  heard  at  the  end
of  a  word.  The  only  labial  is  m,  which  occurs  in  probably  not  more
than  half  a  dozen  words  in  the  Upper  and  Middle  dialects,  and  is
entirely  absent  from  the  Lower  dialect,  in  which  w  takes  its  place.
The  characteristic  I  of  the  Upper  and  Middle  dialects  becomes  /■  in  the
Lower,  but  no  dialect  has  both  sounds.  There  is  also  an  aspirated  1  ;
I-  and  t  have  the  ordinary  sounds  of  these  letters,  but  ;/  and  <7  are
medials,  approximating  the  sounds  of  I-  and  t.  respectively.  A  fre-
quent double  consonant  is  ts,  commonly  rendered  ch  by  the  old  traders
(seep.  188.  ''Dialects"). a         as  in  far.
a         as  in  what,  or  obscure  as  in  showman.
a         as  in  law,  all.
d         medial  (semisonant),  approximating  t.
e         as  in  the}'.
e         as  in  net.
g         medial  (semisonant),  approximating  k.
li         as  in  hat.
i  as  in  pique.
I  as  in  pick.
k         as  in  kick.
1         as  in  lull.
'1         surd  1  (sometimes  written  hi),  nearly  the  Welsh  11. in        as  in  man.
n         as  in  not.
r         takes  place  of  1  in  Lower  dialect.
s         as  in  sin.
t         as  in  top.
u        as  in  rule.
u         as  in  cut.
un       u  nasalized.
w       as  in  wit.
y        as  in  you.
a  slight  aspirate,  sometimes  indicating  the  omission  of  a
vowel.


•   sev  GL08SARY  507
A  number  of  English  words,  with  cross  references,  have  been  intro
duced  into  the  glossary  .  and  these,  together  with  corrupted  Cherokee
forms,  are  indicated  bj  small  capitals.
ada'lanun'stl — a  staff  01  cane.
adan'ta  -soul.
ada'wehl-  a  magician  or  supernatural  being.
ada'wehi'yu    a  very  great  magician;  intensive  form  of  ada'wehl.
groundhog.
\  -jii'U  ta  "Groundhog-sausage,"  from  d'g&nii,  groundhog,  ami  tsixiii'u,  ■■  I  am
pounding  it."  understood  to  refer  to  pounding  meat,  etc.,  in  a  mortar,  after  h  i ing  Brstcrisped  it  before  the  fire.  A  war  chief  noted  in  the  Cherokee  war  of
1760,  and  prominent  until  ahout  the  close  of  the  Revolution;  known  to  the  whites
as  <  iconostota.  Also  the  Cherokee  name  for  Colonel  Gideon  Morgan  of  i  he  war
of  1812,  for  Washington  Morgan,  his  son,  of  the  Civil  war,  and  now  for  a  full-blood
upon  the  reservation,  known  to  the  whites  as  Morgan  <  lalhoun.
A/gan-uni'tsI — "  Groundhogs'  -mother,"  from  d'g&ntt  and  uni'Uli,  their  mother,
plural  of  xitsV,  his  mother  (eUsV,  agitsV,  my  mother).  The  Cherokee  name  of  a
Shawano  captive,  who,  according  to  tradition,  killed  the  greal  [Jktena  serpenl
and  procured  the  Ulunsu'tl.
Agawe'la — "  t  >ld  Woman,"  a  formulistic  name-  for  corn  or  the  spirit  of  corn.
agayun'li — for  agayHfl'lige,  old,  ancient.
agidaYta-   see ed
agidu'tfi — see  edu'tH,.
Agi'll — "  Hi-  is  rising,"  possibly  a  contraction  of  an  old  personal  name,  Agin'-agiU,
"Rising-fawn."  Major  George  Lowrey,  cousin  of  Sequoya,  and  assistant  chief
of  the  Cherokee  Nation  ahout  18-40.  Stanley  incorrectly  makes  it  "  Keeth-la,
or  Dog"  i  for  ./,'!;'.
agini'sl — see  i  ni'tit.
agi'sl — female,  applied  usually  to  quadrupeds.
Agis'-e'gwa — "Great  Female,"  possibly  "Great  Doe."  A  being,  probably  an
animal  god,  invoked  in  the  sacred  formulas.
agitsl' — see  eteJ'.
Agitsta'ti'yl — "  Where  they  stayed  up  all  night,"  from  tsigits&fi'tihii.',  "  I  stay  up  all
night."  A  place  in  the  Great  Smoky  range  about  the  head  of  Noland  creek,  in
Swain  county,   North  Carolina.      See  note-  to  number  100.
AGUAQUIRI — see  <■!   o.'i  ii  I.
Ahalu'na — "Ambush,"    Ahalun&H'yi,   "Ambush  place,"  or    Uni'h&lu'na,   "Where
they  ambushed,"  from  alc&lu'ga,  "I  am  watching".     Soco  gap,  at  the  head  of
Soco  creek,  on  the  line  between  Swain  and  Haywood  counties.  North  Carolina
see  number   122  .     The  name  is  also   applied  to  a  lookout  station  for  deer
hunters,
ahanu'lahi — "he  is  bearded,"  from  ah&nii/UMi,  a  beard.
Ahulude'gl— "He  throws  away    the  drum"    (habitual),    from   ahu'tl,  drum,  and
akw&de'gCi,  "I  am  throwing  it  away"  (round  object).     The  Cherokee  name  of John  Jolly,  a  noted  chief  and  adopted  father  of  Samuel  Houston,  about  1S00.
ahyeli'skt — a  mocker  or  mimic.
akta' — eye;  plural,  diktS,'.
akta'tl — a  telescope  or  field  glass.     The  name  denote-  something  with   which  to
examine  or  look  into  closely,  from  ul.ti'i',  eye.
akwandu'li — a  song  form  for  akwidu'li  (-Mi,  "I  want  it."
Akwan'kl — see  Anal  u  ant  i.
Akwe  ti'yl — a  location  on  Tuckasegee  river,  in  .Tack-on  county.  North  Carolina;  the
meaning  of  the  name  i-  lost.     See  number  122.
Alaska — see  Yaldgt.


508  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
aliga' — the  red-horse  lish  (Moxostoma).
Alkinf — the  last  woman  known  to  1   f  Natchez  descent  and  peculiarity  among  the
East  Cherokee;  died  about  1890.     The  name  has  no  apparent  meaning.
ama/ — water;  in  the  Lower  dialect,  ilinV:  of.  a'm&,  salt.
amayfi'hl — "dwelling  in  the  water,"  from  &md/  [&mS/yi,  "in  the  water")  and  WvCif,
"  I  dwell,"  "I  live."
Amaye'l-e'gwa — "  Great  island,"  from  Q/m&yiU,  island  (from  HinCi',  water,  and
ayiU,  "in  the  middle")  and  -'</"".  great.  A  former  Cherokee  settlement  <>n
Little  Tennessee  river,  at  Big  island,  a  short  distance  below  the  mouth  of
Tellico,  in  Monroe  county,  Tennessee.  Timberlake  writes  it  Mialaquo,  while
Bartram  spells  it  Nilaque.  Not  to  be  confounded  with  Long-island  town  below
Chattanooga.
Amaye'll-gunahi'ta — "Long  island,"  from  Hmdye'lt,  island,  and  gftnahi'la,  long.
A  former  Cherokee  settlement,  known  to  the  whites  as  Long  Island  town,  at  the
Long  island  in  Tennessee  river,  on  the  Tennessee-Georgia  line.  It  was  one  of
the  Chickamauga  towns  (see  Ttilkiima'gl).
ama'ylnS'hi — "dwellers  in  the  water,"  plural  of  ainaye'M.
Anada'duntaskl — "Roasters,"  i.  e.,  Cannibals;  from  g&n'taskiV,  "I  am  putting  it
(round)  into  the  fire  to  roast."  The  regular  word  for  cannibals  is  Ydfi'wini'gisM,
q.  v.     See  number  3.
anagahuiYufisku' — the  Green-corn  dance;  literally,  "they  are  having  a  ( ireen-corn
dance":  anag&k&W'Cun&gti.fi'yi,  "where  they  are  having  the  Green-corn  dance  " ;
the  popular  name  is  not  a  translation  of  the  Cherokee  word,  which  has  no
reference  cither  to  corn  or  dancing.
Anakwan'kl — the  Delaware  Indians;  singular  Akwan'ki,  a  Cherokee  attempt  at
WapanaqkH,  "  Easterners,"  the  Algonquian  name  by  which,  in  various  corrupted forms,  the  Delawares  are  commonly  known  to  the  western  tribes.
Anantooea h — see  A n i'-Xun'iln we'g) .
a'ne'tsa,  or  a'netsa'gl — the  ballplay.
a'netsa'unskl — a  ballplayer;  literally,  "a  lover  of  the  ballplay."
ani' — a  tribal  and  animate  prefix.
ani'da'wehl — plural  of  ada'wehi.
a'niganti'skl — see  d&gantti,.
Ani'-Gatage'wl — one  of  the  seven  Cherokee  clans;  the  name  has  now  no  meaning,
but  has  been  absurdly  rendered  "Blind  savanna,"  from  an  incorrect  idea  that  it
is  derived  from  igd'tt,  a  swamp  or  savanna,  and  dige'wl,  blind.
Ani'-( tilii'hl — "Long-haired  people,"  one  of  the  seven  Cherokee  clans;  singular,
Ai/ilii'lil.  The  word  comes  from  agtt&'M  (  perhaps  connected  with  agilge-nl,  "the
back  of  (his)  neck"),  an  archaic  term  denoting  wearing  the  hair  long  or  flowing
loosely,  and  usually  recognized  as  applying  more  particularly  to  a  woman.
Ani'-Gill' — a  problematic  tribe,  possibly  the  Congaree.  See  page  381.  The  name
is  not  connected  with  giW ,  dog.
Ani'-Gusa — see  Aui'-Kn'm.
a'nigwa — soon  after;  dine'Uana  a'rdgwa,  "soon  after  the  creation."
Ani'-Ilyiin'ttkwala'skl — "The  Thunderers,"  i.  e.,  thunder,  which  in  Cherokee
belief,  is  controlled  and  caused  by  a  family  of  supernatural.  The  word  lias
reference  to  making  a  rolling  sound;  cf.  HkuMe'lu.,  a  wheel,  hence  a  wagon;
tliw'i'-t'ikif.'tli ■Ii'iHi/i,  "rolling  water  place,"  applied  to  a  cascade  where  the  water
falls  along  the  surface  of  the  rock;  alnjiiri'iiknala'atihu',  "it  is  thundering,"
applied  to  the  roar  of  a  railroad  train  or  waterfall.
Ani'-Kawl' — "Deer  people,"  one  of  the  seven  Cherokee  clans;  the  regular  form  for
deer  is  <i'ir}'.
Ani'-Kawi'ta — The  Lower  Creeks,  from  Kawi'tft  or  Coweta,  their  former  principal
town  on  Chattah   ihee  river  near  the  present  Columbus,  Georgia;  the  Upper


hooney]  GLOSSARY  509
Creeks  on  the  head  streams  of    Alabama  river  were  distinguished  as    Ini'-Ku'sa
q.  v.       \    small   creek   of    Little  Tennessee   river  above   Franklin,  in    Macon
county,  North  Carolina,  is  ii"\v  known  as  Coweeta  creek.
Ani'-Kltu'hwagI—  "Kltu'hwa  people,"  fr     KUu'hwS,  (q.  v.),  an  ancient  Cherokee
settlement;  for  explanation  see  page  182.
Ani'-Ku'sfi  or  Ani'-Gu'sa— The  Creek  Indians,  particularly  the  Upper  Creeks  on  the
waters  of  Alabama  river;  singular,  A-Ku'sH,  from  Kusa  or  Coosa  (Spanish,  Coca,
i  !ossa  i  their  principal  ancient  town,
Ani'-Knta'ui  (also  Ani'-Kwdta'rii,  or,  incorrectly,  Nicotani)—a  traditional  Cherokee
priestly  society  or  clan,  exterminated  in  a  popular  uprising.     Sec  number  ins.
anina'hili.lahi     " creatures  that  fly  about,"  from  tslnai'tt,  "I  am  flying,"  tstnd'ilidd'hH,
"  I  am  flying  about."     The  generic  term  for  birds  and  flying  insects.
Ani'-Na'tsl — abbreviated    AninUH,   singular   A-Na'UH.     The  Natchez    [ndians;    from
coincidence  with  na'tsl,  pine,  the  name  has  been  incorrectly  rendered  "Pine
Indians,"  whereas  it   is  really  a  Cherokee  plural  of  the  proper  name  of  the Natchez.
Anin'tsl-  -see  Ani'-NtitsL
Ani'-Nun'dawe'gl-  -singular,  NCun'd&vn  '</<•'  the  Iroquois,  more  particularly  the  Seneca,
from  N&ndawao,  the  name  by  which  the  Seneca  call  themselves.      Adair  spells  it
Anantooeah.    The  tribe  was  also  known  as  Ani'-SPnikH.
Aiii'-Saha'ni — one  of  the  seven  Cherokee  clans;  possibly  an  archaic  form  for  "  nine
people,"  from  sa'ka'ni,  sa'ka'nige'l,  blue.
Ani'-Sa'nl,  Ani'-Sawaha  nl — ee    Ini'-Sawdnu'gl.
Ani'-Sawanu'g)  (singular  Sawanv/gi) — the  Shawano  Indians.     Ani'-Sa'nl  and  Ani'-
Sawahd'nl  (see  page  380)  may  be  the  same.
Ani'-Se'nika — see  Ani'-Ntindiiwt  '(ft.
anisga'ya — plural  of  asga'ya,  man.
Anisga'ya   Tsunsdi'(-ga) — "The     Little    Men";    the    Thunder   Boys   in   Cherokee
mythology.     See  numbers  '■>  ami  8.
Ani'sgaya'yl — "  Men  town"  (?),  a  traditional  Cherokee  settlement  on  Valley  river,  in
Cherokee  county,  North  Carolina,
anisgi'na — plural  of  asgi'na,  q.  v.
Ani'-Skala'll — the  Tuscarora  Indians;  singular,  Skal&'ti  or  A-SklU&'tt.
Ani'skwa'nl — Spaniards;  singular,  Askwa'nl
Ani'-Suwa'li,  or  Ani-'Suwa'la — the  Suala,  Sara,  or  Cheraw  Indians,  formerly  about
the  headwaters  of  Broad  river,  North  Carolina,  the  Xuala  province  of  the  De
Soto  chronicle,  and  Joara  or  Juada  of  the  later  Pardo  narrative.
Ani'ta'gwa — the  Catawba  Indian-;  singular,  Ata'gviS  or  Tagwd.
Ani'-Tsa'guhf — a  traditional  Cherokee  elan,  transformed  to  hears  i  see  number  75).
Swimmer's  daughter  hears  the  name    'I'yiii/i'ihi,  which   is  not  recognized  as  dis-
tinctively belonging  to  either  sex.
Ani'-Tsa'lagi' — the  Cherokee.     See  "Tribal  Synonymy,"  page  ls2.
Ani'-Tsa'ta — the  Choctaw  Indian-;  singular,   Tsa'ta.
Ani'-Tsi'ksn — the  Chickasaw  In. Hans;  singular,   TWksti,.
Ani'-Tsi'skwa — "  Bird  people;  "   one  of  the  seven  ( 'heiokee  clans.
Ani'tsu'tsa — "The  Boys,"  from  ■itsu'txn,  hoy;   the  Pleiades.      See  number  hi.
Ani'-Wa'di — "  Paint  people";  one  of  the  seven  ( Iherokee  clans.
Ani'-Wadiht' — "Place  of  the  Paint  people  or  clan";  faint  town,  a  Cherokee  settle-
ment On  lower  SOCO  creek,  within  the  reservation  in  Jackson  and  Swain  coun-
ties. North  Carolina.      It  takes  its  name  from  the  Ani'-Wd'dX  or  Paint  clan.
ani'wani'skl — the  bugle  weed,  Lycopw  virginicus;  literally,  "they  talk"  or  "talk-
er-." in  mi  tsiwa'nihH,  "I  am  talking,"  awanVtHil,  "hi-  talks  habitually."  See number  26.
Ani'-Wasa'si — the  Osage  Indian-,  singular,   Wasa'st


510  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
Ani'-Wa''ya — "Wolf  people";  the   st  important  of  the  seven  Cherokee  clans.
Ani'-Yu'tsi — the  Yuchi  or  Uchee  Indians;  singular  Yu'tsl.
Ani'-Yufi'wiya' — Indians,  particularly  Cherokee  Indians;  literally  "principal  or  real
people,"  from  yunwl,  person,  yd,  a  suffix  implying  principal  or  real,  and  ani',
the  tribal  prefix.     See  pages  5  and  182.
Annie  Ax — see  SadayV.
Aquone — a  post-office  on  Nantahala  river,  in  Macon  county,  North  Carolina,  site  of
the  former  Fort  Scott.     Probably  a  corruption  of  egwdni,  river.
Arch,  John — sec  At&.
asa/gwalihu/ — a  pack  or  burden;  as&'gvidtlii!,  or  asd'gwl'lV,  "there  is  a  pack  on  him."
Cf  sd'gwdW.
as£hl' — surely.
Ase/nika — singular  of  Ani'-Se/nik&.     See  Am'-Ntind&we'g't.
asga'ya — man.
Asga'ya  Gi'gagel — the  "Red  Man";  the  Lightning  spirit.
asgi'na — a  ghost,  either  human  or  animal;  from  the  fact  that  ghosts  are  commonly
supposed  to  be  malevolent,  the  name  is  frequently  rendered  "devil."
Asheville — see  Kdsdu'yi  and  Unia'HyastVyl.
asl — the  sweat  lodge  and  occasional  winter  sleeping  apartment  of  the  Cherokee  and
other  southern  tribes.  It  was  a  low-built  structure  of  logs  covered  w:ith  earth,
and  from  its  closeness  and  the  fire  usually  kept  smoldering  within  was  known  to
the  old  traders  as  the  "hot  house."
a'siyu'  (abbreviated  sii/ii') — good;  the  common  Cherokee  salute;  gd'svyu',  "I  am
good";  lni'xii/u'.  " thou  art  good" ;  d'siyu,  "he  (it)  is  good";  dstA,  "very  good"
(intensive!.
Askwa'nl — a  Spaniard.     See  Ani'skwa'rit.
astu' — very  good;  dsttt  ttiltet',  very  good,  best  of  all.     Cf  d'siyu'.
Astu'gata/ga — A  Cherokee  lieutenant  in  the  Confederate  service,  killed  in  1862.  See
page  170.  The  name  may  be  rendered,  "  Standing  in  the  doorway"  but  implies
that  the  man  himself  is  the  door  or  shutter;  it  has  no  first  person;  gatd'ga,  "he
is  standing";  stutt,  a  door  or  shutter;  slnhi'i',  a  closed  door  or  passage;  stugi'sti,
a  key,  i.  e.  something  with  which  to  open  a  door.
asufi'tli,  asuntlun'yi — a  footlog  or  bridge;  literally,  "log  lying  across,"  from  asi'ta, log.
ata' — wood;  ata/yd,,  "principal  wood,"  i.  e.  oak;  cf.  Muscogee  iti,  wood.
Ataga'hl — "Gall  place,"  from  a'tugu',  gall,  and  !u,  locative;  a  mythic  lake  in  the
Great  Smoky  mountains.  See  number  69.  The  name  is  also  applied  to  that
part  of  the  Great  Smoky  range  centering  about  Thunderhead  mountain  and
Miry  ridge,  near  the  boundary  between  Swain  county,  North  Carolina,  and
Blount  county,  Tennessee.
a'tagii'— gall.
AtiV-gul'kalu' — a  noted  Cherokee  chief,  recognized  by  the  British  government  as
the  head  chief  or  "emperor"  of  the  Nation,  about  1760  and  later,  and  commonly
known  to  the  whites  as  the  Little  Carpenter  (Little  Cornplanter,  by  mistake,
in  Haywood).  The  name  is  frequently  spelled  Atta-kulla-kulla,  Ata-kullakulla
or  Ata-culculla.  It  may  be  rendered  "Leaning-wood,"  from  at&',  "wood"  and
•li'ifkrtla  a  verb  implying  that  something  long  is  leaning,  without  sufficient
support,  against  some  other  object;  it  has  no  first  person  form.  Bartram
describes  him  as  "a  man  of  remarkably  small  stature,  slender  and  of  a  delicate
frame,  the  only  instance  I  saw  in  the  Nation;  but  he  is  a  man  of  superior
abilities." Ata'gwft — a  Catawba  Indian.     See  Ani'ta'gwd.
A'tahi'ta — abbreviated  from  A'tdhit&fi'yl,  "Place  where  they  shouted,"  from
gatd'hW,  "  I  shout,"  and  yl,  locative.     Waya  gap,  on  the  ridge  west  of  Franklin,


mooney]  GLOSSAR1  511
Ma   i  county,  North  Carolina,     See  number  13.     The  map  name  is  probably
fnmi  the  Cherokee  wa'ya,  wolf.
Ata-kii.i.akii.i.a — see  Atd  '-gOitkaW.
ft'taMI— mountain ;  in  the  Lower  dialect  d'ttirl,  whence  the  "Ottare"  or  Upper
Cherokee  of  Adair.  The  form  .;'/,.'.  i-  used  only  in  composition;  a  mountain  in
situ  is  dUMMy)  or  gatu'sX.
a/tall-gull' — "it  climbs  the  mountain,"  i.e.,  "mountain-climber";  the  ginseng  plant,
iquefolium;  from  d't&tl,  mountain,  an. I  gGXP,  "it  climbs"  i  habitually  );
or  tsW,  "I  am  climbing."     Also  called  in  the  sacred  formulas,  )<
Usdi',  "Little  Man."     See  number  126.
a'talulu' — unfinished, premature,  unsuccessful;  whence  utalu'U,  "it  is  not  yet  time."
Ata'lufiti'ski — a  chief  of  the  Arkansas  Cherokee  al   i  L818,  who  had  originally  emi-
grated from  Tennessee.     The  name,  i   monly  spelled  Tollunteeskee,  Taluntiski,
Tallotiskee,  Tallotuskee,  etc.,  denotes  one  who  throws  si  une  h\  m»  object  I'ri  .n i  a place,  as  an  enemy  from  a  precipice.      See  number  Kill  for  instance.
aVtarl — see  <i'iali.
atasl'  (or  &t&8&',  in  a  dialectic  form) — a  war  club.
atatsun'skl — stinging;   literally,  "hestings"  i  habitually  i.
A'tla/nuwa/— "Tla'nuwa  hole";  the  Cherokee  name  of  Chattanooga,  Tennessee,  (see
Tsatdnu'gi)  originally  applied  to  a  bluff  on  the  south  side  of  the  Tennessee  river
at  the  foot  of  the  present  Market  street.     See  number  124.
A'tsI — the  Cherokee  name  of  John  Arch,  one  of  the  earliest  native  writers  in  the
Sequoya  characters.     The  word  is  simply  an  attempt  at  the  English  name  Arch.
atsi'la — fire;  in  the  Lower  dialect,  atsi'ra.
Atsil'-dihye'gl — "Fire  Carrier":  apparently  the  Cherokee  name  for  the  will-of-the-
wisp.  See  page  335.  As  is  usually  the  case  in  Cherokee  compounds,  the  verbal
form  is  plural  ("it  carries  tires");  the  singular  form  is  akye'gi.
at>il'->un'tl  (abbreviated  M'-stmU) — fieabane  (Eriycnm  >;,,,,,<!, ,,,.,  i;  the  name  sig-
nifies "material  with  which  to  make  fire,"  from  atsi'la,  fire,  and  gas&fCtt,
(gaisufi'n  or  gall ini'ti),  material  with  which  to  make  something;  from  gas&fi'skfi
(or  gatL6.fi' sh6),  "I  make  it."     The  plant  is  also  called  ihyd'ga.     See  number  126.
Atsil'-tluntii'tsI — "Fire  panther."     A  meteor  or  comet.     See  notes  to  number  9.
Atsi'la-wa'I — "Fire   ";  a  mountain,  s   times  known  as  Rattlesnake  knob,  about
two  miles  northeast  of  Cherokee,  Swain  county,  North  Carolina.  See  number
122.
a'tslna' — cedar;  cf.  Muscogee,  achena  or  auchenau.
A'tsina'-k'ta'ufi — "Hanging  cedar  place";  from  a'tsin&',  cedar,  and  Uta6.fl,  "where
it  (long)  hangs  down";  a  Cherokee  name  for  the  old  Taskigi  town  on  Little
Tennessee  river  in  Monroe  county,  Tennessee.     See  number  105.
atsi'ra — see  atsi'la.
AtsuiVsta'ti'yl  (abbreviated  Ats&fl'sta'ti') — "Fire-light  place,"  (cf.  atsil-surt/'l~i),
referring  to  the  "fire-hunting"  method  of  killing  deer  in  the  river  at  night.  The
proper  form  for  Chestatee  river,  near  Dahlonega,  in  Lumpkin  county,  Georgia.
AXTAKtrLLAKCLLA — See  AU'l -gill ' h'llii' . awa' — Se.
awa'hlli — eagle;  particularly  Aquila  ckryssetus,  distinguished  as  the  "pretty-feathered
eagle." a'wl' — deer;  also  sometimes  written  and  pronounced,  ahawV;  the  name  is  sometimes
applied  to  the  large  homed  beetle,  the  "  flying  stag"  of  early  writers,
a'wl'-ahanu'lahl — goat;  literally,  "bearded  deer."
a'wl'-akta' — "deer  eye";  the  Rudbeckia  or  black-eyed  Susan,
a'wl'-ahyeli'skl — "deer  mocker";  the  deer  bleat,  a  sort  of  whistle  used  by  hunters tn  call  the  due  by  imitating  the  cry  of  the  fawn.


512  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.
a'wI'-e'gwS  (abbreviated  aw-e'gxiiQ,) — the  elk,  literally  "great  deer.''
a'wi'-unade'na — sheep;  literally  "woolly  deer."
A'wl'  CJsdi' — "  Little  Deer";  the  mythic  chi(  f  of  the  Deer  tribe.     See  number  15.
Ax,  Annie — see  SadayV .
Ax,  John — see  TUig&'nSM.
Aya'sta — "The  Spoiler,"  from Isiyd'stihti,  "I  spoil  it";  cf.  uyd'i,  bad.  A  prominent woman  and  informant  on  the  East  Cherokee  reservation.
aye'li — half,  middle,  in  the  middle.
Ayrate — see  e'h'uJV .
Ayuhwa'sl — the  proper  form  of  the  name  commonly  written  Hiwassee.  It  signifies
a  savanna  or  meadow  and  was  applied  to  two  (or  more)  former  Cherokee  settle-
ments. The  more  important,  commonly  distinguished  as  Ayuhwa'sl  Egwd'hX  oi
Great  Hiwassee,  was  on  the  north  bank  of  Hiwassee  river  at  the  present  Savan-
nah ford  above  Columbus,  in  Polk  county,  Tennessee.  The  other  was  farther
up  the  same  river,  at  the  junction  of  Peachtree  creek,  above  Murphy,  in  Chero-
kee county,  North  Carolina.     Lanman  writes  it  Owassa.
A'yun'inl — '•Swimmer";  literally,  "lie  is  swimming,"  from  gaijuninY,  "I  am  swim-
ming."    A  principal  priest  and  informant  of  the  East  Cherokee,  died  in  1899.
Ayulsu' — see  liniii'ilxiiu'tfi.
Beaverdam — see  Vy,gUd'gl.
Big-island — see  Am&ye'l-e'gwa.
BlG-COVE — see  Ki'i'hitu'itl't/t. Big-mush— see  GctMifl'wdH.
Big-witch — see  TskU-i  'gwa.
Bird-town — set'  Tsiskwd'hi.
Bloody-fellow — see  Iskagua.
Blythe — see  Diskwdnl.
Black-fox — see  liui'1.1.
Boudinot,  Ei. ias — see  G&l&gi'na.
Bowl,  The;  Bowles,  Colonel — see  Dinu'l'i. Brass — see  UntsaiyV.
BRASSTI iWN — see  Ilxi'i/1.
Breath,  The — see  Unli'hi.
Briertown — see  K&nu'g&'ld'yt.
Buffalo  (creek) — see  YuumVI.
Bull-head — see  Uskmalt  'na.
Butler,  John — see  Tsan'-uga'^UUi,
Cade's  Cove — see  Ts'nja'hl.
Canacaught — "Canacaught,  the  great  Conjurer,"  mentioned  as  a  Lower  Cherokee
chief  in  1HS4;  possibly  kawgwd'ti,  the  water-moccasin  snake.     See  page  31.
CaNALY — see  lii'ifiiul'li'i.
Canas ag  i '  a — see  ( !i'i  nsd'gl.
( '  wnastion,  Cannostee — see  Kana'sta.
<  !anug  \ — see  K&nu'ga.
Cartooga.ia — see  Gain' 'gitse' ';/< '. Cataluchee — see  Gadalu'Ul.
Cauchi — a  place,  apparently  in  the  Cherokee  country,  visted  by  Pardo  in  1567  (see
page  29) .     The  name  may  possibly  have  some  connection  with  Nacoochee  or
Nagu'lsV,  q.  v.
Caun asaita — given  as  the  name  of  a  Lower  Cherokee  chief  in  16S4;  possibly  for
Xiiiii'iNst'ln,  "dogw   1"  [Cornus florida) .     .See  page  31.
Chalaque — see  TsU'layl,  under  "Tribal  Synonymy,"  page  182.


GLOSSARY  513
CHATTANOOGA       See    /
CHA   GA,  <    HATUGA      -ir    Tsutll'gl.
(  Iheeow  iii  i     see  Tsiyd'kl,
tin  i  raki     -it  Ts&'l&gi,  under  "Tribal  Synonymy,"  page  182.
Cheow  \  -sci-  Tsiyd'hi.
Cheowa  M  lximum — see  Sehwalt  'ift.
Cheraqui — see  Tsa'l&gl,  under  "Tribal  Synonymy,"  page  182.
Cheraw— see  Ani'-Suwa'U.
<  in  roeee — see  Ts&'Mgl,  under  "Tribal  Synonymy,"  page  182;  also  EM
Chestatee— see  Atsufl'at&'ti'yt.
ChESTUA — sec    Tsistu'fi).
Cheuconsene  -si-f  !>£' yu-gunsi'ni.
Cheulah — mentioned  by  Timberlake  as  the  chief  of  Settacoo  [Sl'tikd)  in  1762.     The
name  may  be  intended  for  Isu'ld,  "Fox."
( 'mi  kiiniM     see  Tsl'kOma'gl.
Chilhowee— see  Tsu'lufl'we.
<  'imiMi  Tops — see  Duni'skwa'lgAnl.
Chisca — mentioned  in  the  De  Soto  narratives  as  a  mining  region  in  the  Cherokee
country.  The  name  may  have  a  connection  with  T&i'skwa,  "bird,"  possibly
ttiskwd'hl,  "  Bird  plan'."
Cho \mka — see  Tsistu'yl.
Chopped  Oak — see  Digalu'y&lun'yl.
ChOQI  \  ll-sr  Ttsd'tt.
Chota,  Chotte — see  Ttsd'tt.
ClTlCO — see  S'i'tikiV.
Clear-sky — see  Iskagua.
Clennuse — see  Tlanusi'yl.
Cleveland — see  Tsistetsi'yl.
Coca — see  Ani'-Ku'sa.
Coco — see  KnkiY.
Cohi'tta — see  Gahu'Cl.
COLANNEH,  Colon  \ — see   Kii'li'nll'l.
Con  isauga — see  G&nsd'gt.
CoNNEHoss — see  K&wdn' -urd' SUflyl.
Coow  eescoowee — see  i  •  it  'wisguuV .
Coosa     see  Ani'-Ku'sa  and  Kusa'.
( 'cms  uv  ITEE — see  Ku's&weti'yt.
Coram — see  Kd'M-nu.
<  '•  ■: —  \ — see  Ani'-Ku'sa,  Kusa.
Cowee' — see  Kawi'yi.
Coweeta,  Coweta — see  Ani'-Kawi'tib.
Coyatee  i  variously  spelled  Cawatie,  Coiatee,  Coytee,  Coytoy,  Kai-a-tee) — A  former
Cherokee  settlement  on  Little  Tennessee  river,  some  ten  miles  below  the  junc-
tion of  Tellico,  about  the  present  Coytee  post-office  in  Loudon  county.  Tennessee.
The  correct  form  and  etymology  are  uncertain.
Creek-path — sec  Ku'sH-n&nnd'Kt.
Crow-tow  s — see  Kdgufi'yt.
Cuhtahlatah — a  Cherokee  woman  noted  in  the  VVahnenauhi  manuscript  as  having
distinguished  herself  by  bravery  in  battle.  The  proper  form  may  have  some  con-
nection with gatuft'MVt,  "wild  hemp."
Ci  1 1  vsagee — see  Kulst  'tsi'yt.
CiLi.owiiEE.  Corrahee — see  Guldhi'yl.
Ccttaw  i — see  Kltu'hwS,.
19   ETH— 01   33


514  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [kth.aks.19
dSgan'tu — "he  makes  it  rain";  from  aga'skii,  "it  is  raining,"  aga'nii,  "it  has  begun
to  rain";  a  small  variety  of  lizard  whose  cry  is  said  to  presage  rain.  Jt  is  also
called  a/niganti'skl,  "they  make  it  rain"  (plural  form),  or  "rain-maker."  See
number  59.    "
dagufku — the  American  white-fronted  goose  [Anser  albifrons  gambeli).  The  name
may  be  an  onomatope.     See  number  <•.
dagu'nB — the  fresh  water  mussel;  also  a  variety  of  face  pimples.
Daguiia'hi — "Mussel  place,"  from  dagtl'nQ.,  mussel,  ami  In,  locative.  The  Muscle
shoals  on  Tennessee  river,  in  northwestern  Alabama.  It  was  sometimes  called
also  simply  Ihist&nal&n'yl,  "Shoals  place."     Cf.  iTstQma'U.
Oagu'nawe'lahf — "Mussel-liver  place."  from  ilugu'in'i,  mussel,  uwe'ln,  liver,  and  III, locative;  the  Cherokee  name  for  the  site  of  Nashville,  Tennessee.  No  reason
can  now  be  given  for  the  name.
Dahlonega — A  town  in  Lumpkin  County,  Georgia,  near  which  the  first  gold  was
mined.  A  mint  was  established  there  in  1838.  The  name  is  from  the  Cherokee
dal&'nige'i,  yellow,  whence  ate'lA-dald'nige'i,  "yellow  money,"  i.  e.,  gold.
daks&wa'ihu — "he  is  shedding  tears."
dakwa' — a  mythic  great  fish;  also  the  whale.     See  number  68.
Dakwa'I — "Dakwit  place,"  from  a  tradition  of  Adtikwa'  in  the  river  at  that  point.  A
former  Cherokee  settlement,  known  to  the  traders  as  Toqua  or  Toco,  on  Little
Tennessee  river,  about  the  mouth  of  Toco  creek  in  Monroe  county,  Tennessee.
See  number  68.  A  similar  name  and  tradition  attaches  to  a  spot  on  the  French
Broad  river,  about  six  miles  above  the  Warm  springs,  in  Buncombe  county,
North  Carolina.     See  number  122.
dakwa'nitlastestl — "  I  shall  have  them  on  my  legs  for  garters"  ;  from  ariMa'sCi  {  plural
tliiiilla'sll),  garter;  d-,  initial  plural;  akwii,  first  person  particle;  and  estt,  future suffix.     See  number  77.
da'liksta' — "vomiter,"  from  dagik'siihH,',  "I  am  vomiting,"  daliksla',  "he  vomits"
(habitually);  the  form  is  plural.  The  spreading  adder  (Heterodon),  also  some-
times called  kwanMya/hd,  a  word  of  uncertain  etymology.
1  >a''n;lgasta — iorDa''na  wd-gdsta'ya ,  "SI  iarp-\var,"  i.e.  "  Eager-warrior  " ;  a  Cherokee
woman's  name.
l>a''na\va-(a)sa'tsun'yT  "War  ford,"  from  dafnaiDa,  war,  ami  aadtxtfi/yi,  a  crossing- place  or  ford.  A  ford  on  Cheowa  river  about  three  miles  below  Robbinsville,
in  Graham  county,  North  Carolina.     See  number  122.
Danda'ganu' — "Two  looking  at  each  other,"  from  detsi'gtinu',  "I  am  looking  at
him."  A  former  Cherokee  settlement,  commonly  known  as  Lookout  Mountain
town,  on  Lookout  Mountain  creek,  near  the  present  Trenton,  Dade  county,
Georgia.  One  of  the  Chickamauga  towns  (see  TWk&ma'gi),  so  called  on  account
of  the  appearance  of  the  mountains  facing  each  other  across  the  Tennessee  river
at  Chattanooga.
Da'si'giya'gl — an  old  masculine  personal  name,  of  doubtful  etymology,  but  commonly
rendered  by  the  traders  "Shoe-boots,"  possibly  referring  to  some  peculiar  style
of  moccasin  or  leggin.  A  chief  known  to  the  whites  as  Shoe-boots  is  mentioned
in  the  Revolutionary  records.  Chief  Lloyd  Welch,  of  the  eastern  band,  was
known  in  the  tribe  as  Da'si'giya'gl  and  the  same  name  is  now  used  by  the  East
Cherokee  as  the-  equivalenl  of  the  name  Lloyd.
Da'skwltun'yl — "  Rafters  place,"  from  daskiott&fl'l,  "rafters,"  and  iii,  locative.  A
former  settlement  on  Tusquittee  creek,  near  Hayesville,  in  Clay  county,  North
Carolina.
dasuiVtall — ant;  damn'Vdi  atats&n/skl,  "stinging  ant,"  the  large  red  cow-ant  (Myr-
mical),  also  called  sometimes,  on  account  of  its  hard  body-case,  nO/H'yunu/vfl,
"  stone-clad,"  after  the  fabulous  monster.     See  number67.
Datle'yasta'I — "Where  they  fell  down,"  a  point  on  Tuckasegee  river,  a  short  dis-
tance above  Webster,  in  Jackson  county.  North  Carolina.  For  tradition  see
number  122.


GLOSSARY  .r)l")
i l:\t>i    ;i  traditional  water  monster.     See  number  122.
Datsi'yl — " Datsl  place";  .1  place  on  Little  Tennessee  river,  near  the  junction  of
Eagle  creek,  in  Swain  county,  North  Carolina.    See  number  122.
Datsu'n&lasgufi'yl — " where  there  are  tracks  or  footprints,"  from  uld'sintifl'tfl  or
uldsgtifl'y'l,  footprint.  Track  [lock  gap,  near  Blairsville,  Georgia.  Also  some-
tirnes  called  /<.  'g&yi  Uvn'hQ.,  "place  of  branded  marks";  1  digO.li  tQ,n6.fl'hX,  branded,
or  printed  1.     See  number  125.
da'yl— beaver.
Dayulsufi'yl-  "  Place  where  they  cried,"  a  spot  on  the  ridge  at  the-  head  of  Tuckase-
gee  river,  in  Jackson  county,  North  Carolina;  so  called  iron,  an  old  tradition.
See  number  80.
da'yuni'sl — "beaver's  grandchild,"  from  ddyl,  beaver,  and  uni'til,  son's  child,  of
either  sex  (daughter's  child,  either  sex,  uli'el).  The  water  beetle  or  mellow
hug  1  Dhu  uies  discolor).
Degal'gun'yl  a  cairn,  literally  "Where  they  an-  piled  up";  a  scries  of  cairns  on the  south  side  of  Cheowa  river,  in  Graham  county,  North  Carolina.  See  num-
ber 122.
De'gatA'ga— The  Cherokee  name  of  General  stand  Watie  and  of  a  prominent  early western  chief  known  to  the  whites  as  Takatoka.  The  word  is  derived  from
tsitd'gH,  "I  am  standing,"  da'nitd'gA,  "they  are  standing  together,"  and  conveys the  subtle  meaning  of  two  persons  standing  together  and  so  closely  unite. 1  in
sympathy  as  to  form  hut  one  human  body.
De'gayelun'ha — see  DcUsu'naldsgtifi'yl.
detsanun'll — an  iuclosure  or  piece  of  level  ground  cleared  for  ceremonial  purposes;
applied  more  particularly  to  tin-  Green-corn  dance  ground.  Tin-  word  has  a
plural  form,  hut  can  not  he  certainly  analyzed.
De'tsata — a  Cherokee  sprite.     See  number  7s.
detsinu'lahungu' — "I  tried,  hut  failed."
■  Dida'laski'yi — "Showering  place."  In  the  story  (number  17  j  the  name  is  understood
to  mean  •'The  place  where  it  rains  tire."  It  signifies  literally,  however,  the
place  where  it  showers,  or  comes  down,  and  lodges  upon  something  animate
and  has  no  definite  reference  to  live  {atsi'la)  or  rain  {agiXshi,  "it  is  raining");
degaldshA' ',  "they  are   showering  down  and  lodging  upon  him."
Dida'skasti'yl — "Where  they   were  afraid   of  each  other."      A   spot  on   Little  Ten-
'    river,  near  the  mouth  of  Alarka  creek,  in  Swain  county,  North  Carolina.
See  number  122.
diga'gwanl' — the  mud-hen  or  didapper  {Gallimda  galeala).  The  name  is  a  plural
form  and  implies  "lame,"  or  "crippled  in  the  legs"  (cf.  detM/mgw&'vA,  "I  am
kneeling"),  probably  from  the  bouncing  motion  of  the  bird  when  in  the  water. It  is  also  the  name  of  a  dance.
Ihga'kati'yi — see  Gakali'yi.
di'galungun'yi — "where  it  vise,-,  or  comes  up"  ;  the  east.  The  sacred  term  is  Nfiftdd'yl,
q.  v. digalufi'latiyun — a  height,  one  of  a  series,  from  gcMM'liiti,  "above."     See  number  I.
Digalu'yatufi'yi — "Where  it  is  gashed  (with  hatchets)";  from  tsilu'yd,  "I  am  cut-
with  a  chopping  stroke),"  di,  plural  prefix,  and  ///,  locative.     The  ('hopped
t  lak,  formerly  east  of  Clarkesville,  ( reorgia.     See  number  125.
Digane'sk! — "He  picks  them  up"  (habitually),  from  tslne'ii.,  "I  am  picking  il  up." \  Cherokee  Union  soldier  in  the  civil  war.     See  page  171.
igel — the  plural  of  gi'g&ge'i,  red.
digu'lanahi'ta — for  digti/ti-an&hi'la,  "having  long  ears,"  "long-eared";  from  .</»'.".
"ear"  and  g&nahi'ta,  "long."
Dihyufi'dula' — "Sheaths."  or  "Scabbards";  singular  ahyiifi'dvlA.',  "a  gun  sheath."
or  other  scabbard.  The  probable  correct  form  of  a  name  which  appears  in  Rev-
olutionary documents  a.-  "  In  too  la.  -.110111  Rod."


Mil  MYTHS    OK    THE    CHEROKEE  [bth.asx.19
dikta'— plural  otaktil',  eye.
dlla' — skunk.
dilsta'yatl — "scissors"  ;  the  water-spider  (Dolomedes).
dinda'skwate'ski — the  violet;  the  name  signifies,  "they  pull  eachother's  heads  off."
dine'tlana — the  creation.
di'm'iskl — "the  breeder";  a  variety  of  smilax  brier.     See  number  126.
Disga'gisti'yl — "Where  they  gnaw";  a  i>lace  on  Cheowa  river,  in  Graham  county, North  Carolina.     See  number  122.
diskwa'nt — "chestnut  bread,"  i.e., a  variety  of  bread  having  chestnuts  mixed  with it.     The  Cherokee  name  of  James  Blythe,  interpreter  and  agency  clerk.
distai'yl — '-'they  are  strong,"  plural  of  astai'yi,  "strong,  or  tough."  The  Tephrogia
or  devil's-shoestring.     See  number  126,
dista'stl — a  mill  (generic).
dita/stayeski — "a  burlier,"  literally  "one  who  ruts  tilings"  (as  with  a  scissors),  from
Isistit'i/i'i,  ''1  cut,"  (as  with  a  scissors).  The  cricket  [lalu'ln)  is  sometimes  so called.     See  number  59.
Diwa^H — "  Bowl,"  a  prominent  chief  of  the  western  Cherokee,  known  to  the  whites
as  The  Bowl,  or  Colonel  Bowles,  killed  by  the  Texans  in  1839.  The  chief  men-
tioned on  page  100  may  have  been  another  of  the  same  name.
diya'hall  (or  duyd'hOtl ) — the  alligator  lizard  (Sceloporue  undvlatus).     See  number  59.
Diya'hali'yl — "Lizard  place,"  from  diyd'h&U,  lizard,  and  yl,  locative.  Joanna  bald, a  mountaii.  at  the  head  of  Valley  river,  on  the  line  between  Cherokee  and  Graham
counties,  North  Carolina.     For  tradition  see  number  122;  also  number  59.
Double-head — see  T&l-tgu' ghQ,' .
Dragging-caxoe — see  Tsi'yu-gfoigi'rii.
Dudi'nVleksun'yl — "  Where  its  legs  were  broken  off "  ;  a  place  on  Tuckasegee  river, a  few  miles  above  Webster,  in  Jackson  county,  North  Carolina.     See  number  122.
Dugilu'yl  (abbreviated  Dugilu',  and  commonly  written  Tugaloo,  or  sometimes  Too-
gelah  or  Toogoola) — a  name  occurring  in  several  places  in  the  old  Cherokee
country,  the  best  known  being  Tugaloo  river,  so  called  from  a  former  Cherokee
settlement  of  that  name  situated  at  the  junction  of  Toccoa  creek  with  the  main
stream,  in  Habersham  county,  Georgia.  The  word  is  of  uncertain  etymology,
but  seems  to  refer  to  a  place  at  the  forks  of  a  stream.
Duksa'I.  Dukw'sa'I — The  correct  form  of  the  name  commonly  written  Toxaway,
applied  to  a  former  Cherokee  settlement  in  South  Carolina,  and  the  creek  upon
which  it  stood,  an  extreme  head-stream  of  Keowee  river  having  its  source  in
Jackson  county,  North  Carolina.  The  meaning  of  the  name  is  lost,  although
it  has  been  wrongly  interpreted  to  mean  "Place  of  shedding  tears."  See  number 123.
DulastuiVyl — "  Potsherd  place."  A  former  Cherokee  settlement  on  Nottely  river  in
Cherokee  county,  North  Carolina.     See  number  122.
dule'tsl — "kernels,"  a  goitrous  swelling  upon  the  throat.
dulu'sl — a  variety  of  frog  found  upon  the  headwaters  of  Savannah  river.  See  number 125.
Duniya'ta'luiVyl — "Where  there  are  shelves,  or  flat  places,"  from  aija'te'iu,  Hat,
whence  da/ydtaruxWH'V ',  a  shelf,  and  yV,  the  locative.  A  gap  on  the  Great
Smoky  range,  near  Clingman's  dome,  Swain  county,  North  Carolina.  See  notes to  number  100.
Dunidu/lahuVyl — "Where  they  made  arrows";  a  place  on  Straight  creek,  ahead-
stream  of  Oconaluftee  river,  in  Swain  county,  North  Carolina.     See  number  122.
Duni'skwa'lgufi'I — the  double  peak  known  as  the  Chimney  Tops,  in  the  Great
Smoky  mountains  about  the  head  of  Deep  creek,  in  Swain  county,  North  Caro-
lina. On  the  north  side  is  the  pass  known  as  Indian  gap.  The  name  signifies  a
"forked  antler,"  from  uskmdlgu,  antler,  but  indicates  that  the  antler  is  attached
in  place,  as  though  the  deer  itself  were  concealed  below.


GLOSSARY  517
Dti'stilyaliln'y)     "Where  ii   made  a   noise  a-  of   thunder  or  shooting,"  apparently
referring  to  a  lightning  stroke  [detsiMya'hlhu,     ■  I  make  a  si   ting,  <>v  tliun-
dering,  noise,"  miirlit  In- a  first  person  form  used  by  tin-  personified  Thundei
;.'"'!   :  a  spot  on  rliwassee  river,  about  the  junction  of  SI   ting  creek,  near  Hayes
villc,  in  (.'lay  county.  North  Carolina.  A  former  settlement  along  the  creek bore  tlu'  same  name.    See  imimiI.it  79.
ilu'stu'  a  species  of  frog,  appearing  very  early  in  spring;  the  name  is  intended  lor
an  onomatope.  It  ii  in  the  correct  form  of  the  nam.'  of  tin-  chief  noted  by
VIcKenney  and  I  [all  as  "Tooantnh  or  Spring  Frog."
Dutch— see  ZHtel".
duwe'gS — t lie  sprint.'  lizard.     See  number  59.
Eagle  dance — see  TsugiduW  Uhgi'stt.
Eastinaulee    see  Wxttlna'li.
Echoee — see  lise^yt.
K.    Ill.l    \         -IT     ll.lli'll.
Eiia'lii     "  He  goes  about "  (habitually);  a  masculine  name.
Echota,  New— see  G&md'gt.
eda'ta — my  father  (Upper  dialect) ;  the  Mi. I. lie  ami  Lower  dialect  form  is  agid&'tS,.
edu'tu — my  maternal  grandfather  (Upper  dialect);  the  Middle  and   Lower  dialect
form  is  ai/idii'ln;    cf  rni'xi.
e'gwa — great;  cf  u'tdnu.
egwa'nl — river.
Egwanul'tl — "By  the  river,  from  egwd'nt,  river,  and  nu'UUi  or  nuftt,  near,  beside.
The  proper  form  of  ( tconaluftee,  the  name  of  the  river  flowing  through  the  East
Cherokee  reservation  in  Swain  and  Jackson  counties.  North  Carolina.  The
Cherokee  town,  "Oconalufte,"  mentioned  by  Bartram  as  existing  about  I77"i,
was  probably  on  the  lower  course  of  the  river  at  the  present  Birdtown,  on  the
reservation,  where  was  formerly  a  considerable  mound.
ela — earth,  ground.
e'ladl' — low.  below;  in  the  Lower  dialect  e'r&dl',  whence  the  Ayrate  or  Lower
Cherokee  of  A. lair  a-  distinguished  from  the  Ottare  {d't&rl,  d'tOM)  or  Upper Cherokee
elanti — a  son;;  form  for  e'liidi,  q.  \
Elatse'yi  (abbreviated  El/Use') — possibly  "Green  (Verdant)  earth,"  from  eld,  earth,
and  itse'yl,  green,  fr    fresh-springing  vegetation.    The  name  of  several  former
Cherokee  settlements,  commonly  known  to  the  whites  as  Ellijay,  Elejoy  or
Allagae.  One  of  these  was  upon  the  headwaters  of  Keowee  river  in  South  Caro-
lina; another  wa-  on  Ellijay  creek  of  Little  Tennessee  river,  near  the  present
Franklin,  in  Macon  county.  North  Carolina;  another  was  about  the  present  Elli-
jay in  Gilmer  county,  Georgia;  and  still  another  was  on   Ellejoy  creek  of  Little
river  near  the  present  Marvville.  in    Blount  county.  Tennessee.
Klawa'.livi  (abbreviated  El&wd'di)—"  Red-earth  place"  fromeM,  earth,  wddi,  brown-
red  or  red  paint,  and  y\  the  locative.  I.  The  Cherokee  name  of  Yellow-hill
settlement,  now  officially  known  as  Cherokee,  the  postoffice  and  agency  head-
quarters for  the  East  Cherokee,  on  Oconaluftee  river  in  Swain  county,  North
Carolina.  2.  A  former  council  ground,  known  in  history  as  Red  ('lav,  at  the
site  of  the  present  village  of  that  name  in  Whitfield  county,  Georgia,  adjoining
the  Tennessee  line.
Ellijay — see  EUUse'yt.
eni'sl — my  paternal  grandfather  (Upper  dialect);  the  Middle  and  Lower  dialect
form  is  agini'st     Cf.  i  du'tft
KsK  OjCA   SCI-   IsK.M.lA.
EsTANAULA,    ESTINAULA — see    I '" -In  ><,,' I , .


518  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.asn.-19
Etawa'hS.-tsistatla'skl     "Deadwood-lighter,"  a  traditional  Cherokee  conjurer.     See number  100.
i'tl,  or  eti — old,  long  ago. Etowah — see  I't&wti/.
EtsaiyI' — see  UnUaiyV.
etsl' — my  mother  i  Upper  dialect  I;  the  Middle  and  Lower  dialect  form  is  agitsl'.
EUHARLEE — See    Ynli, i'Ii.
Feather  dance — see  Tsugidtilt,   Ulagi'sU.
Fighting-town — see  Wolds' -unAlslVyl.
Flax-toter—  see  T&Wdanigi'slit.
Fly i NG-SQUiiHtEL — see  K&'lalvti/.
French  Broad— see  UnLa'HyaMi'yt.
Frogtowx — see    Will, hi' in.
GadahrTu — the  proper  name  of  the  mountain  known  to  the  whites  as  Yonah  (from
iniiiii,  "bear"  ),  or  upper  Chattahoochee  river,  in  White  county,  Georgia.  The
name  has  no  connection  with  Tallulah  (see  Tahiln'),  and  can  not  be  translated.
Gadalu'tsi — in  the  corrupted  form  of  Cataluchee  this  appears  on  the  map  as  the  name
nl  a  peak,  or  rather  a  ridge,  on  the  line  between  Swain  and  Haywood  counties,
in  North  Carolina,  and  of  a  creek  running  down  on  the  Haywood  side  into  Big
Pigeon  river.  It  is  properly  the  name  of  the  ridge  only  and  seems  to  refer  to  a
"  fringe  standing  erect,"  apparently  from  the  appearance  of  the  timber  growing
in  streaks  along  the  side  of  the  mountain;  from  waMlu'ydUi,  fringe,  gaaWtfi.,
"standing  up  in  a  row  or  series."
gahawl'sita — parched  corn;  improperly  spelled  wissacltzw  by  Hawkins.  See  note under  number  83.
Gahutl  ( GahCiftH  and  Gwah&'Vl  in  dialectic  forms) — Oohutta  mountain,  in  Murray
county,  Georgia.  The  name  comes  from  i/nlu'ilii'i/i,  "a  shed  roof  supported  on
poles,"  and  refers  to  a  fancied  resemblance  in  the  summit.
Gakati'yi — "  Place  of  setting  free"  ;  s.  .met  ii nes  spoken  in  the  plural  form,  Diga/k&ti'yi,
"Place  of  setting  them  free."  A  point  on  Tuckasegee  river  about  three  miles
above  Bryson  City,  in  Swain  county,  North  Carolina.     See  number  122.
gaktun'ta — an  injunction,  command  or  rule,  more  particularly  a  prohibition  or  cere-
monial tabu.  Tsit/ii'tc'i/i'i,  "I  am  observing  an  injunction,  or  tabu";  adakte'gl,
"he  is  under  tabu  regulations."
Galagi'na — a  male  deer  (buck)  or  turkey  (gobbler) ;  in  the  first  sense  the  name  is
sometimes  used  also  for  the  large  horned  beetle  (Dynastes  lilyusf).  The  Indian
name  of  Elias  Boudinot,  first  Cherokee  editor.     See  page  111.
gali'sgisida/hu — I  am  dancing  about;  from  gdli'sgid',  "I  am  dancing,"  and  eddhti,',
"I  am  going  about."
galufikw'ti'yu — honored,  sacred;  used  in  the  bible  to  mean  holy,  hallowed.
gah'uVlati — above,  on  high.
gane'ga— skin.
ganidawa'ski — the  campion,  catchfiy  or  "rattlesnake's  master"  {Silene  si, Haiti ):  the
name  sigmnso     it  disjoints  itself,"  from  gatvAawCskt'       it  is  urrj  lntang  itseli
on  account  of  the  peculiar  manner  in  which  the  dried  stalk  breaks  off  at  the
joints.
Gansa'gl  (or  G&nsdgiyl) — the  name  of  several  former  settlements  in  the  old  Cherokee
country;  it  cannot  be  analyzed.  One  town  of  this  name  was  upon  Tuckasegee
river,  a  short  distance  above  the  present  Webster,  in  Jackson  county,  North
Carolina;  another  was  mi  the  lower  part  of  Canasauga creek,  in  McMinn  county,
Tennessee;  a  third  was  at  the  junction  of  Conasauga  and  Coosawatee  rivers,
where  afterward   was   located    the   Cherokee   capital,   New    Echota,   m   Gordon


gloss  Ma  5  19
county,  Georgia;  a  fourth,  mentioned  in  the  De  Soto  narratives  as  Canasoga  or
Canasagua,  was  located  in   1540  on  the  upper  Chattal    Iiee  river,  possibly  in
the  neighborhood  of  Kenesau  mountain,  <  ■   gia    si
ti'v)  "Robbing  place,"  from  txina'saliiiilsktY,  "I  am  robbing  him."  Venge-
ance creek  of  Vallej  river,  in  Cherokee  county,  North  Carolina.  The  name
Vengeance  was  originally  a  white  man'-  nickname  for  an  old  Cherokee  woman, of  forbidding  aspect,  who  lived  there  before  the  Remo  a       ?ei    number  122.
Ganse't)  —a  rattle;  as  the  Cherokee  dance  rattle  is  made  from  a  gourd  the  masculine
name,  '  ranse'tl,  i-  usually  rendered  b)  the  w  hites,  "  Rattling  gourd."
gatayustt  -the  wheel  and  stick  game  of  the  southern  tribes,  incorrectly  cal lei  1  h,i-
tecawaw  by  Timberlake.     Sec  note  under  nun
Gategwa      for  possibly  a  contraction  of  Igdt  Gi         wamp
(-thicket  place."     A  high  peak  southeast  from  Franklin,  Ma   i  county,  North
Carolina,  and  perhaps  identical  with  Fodderstack  mountain.     See  number  75.
.   i  -//,;'.
Gatu'gitse'yl  (abbreviated    Gaiu'gitse')     "New-settlement    place,"    from  gai
sgata'gt,  town,  settlement,    !     hi,   new,  especially   applied  to   new   vegetation,
.  tlic  locative.     A   former  settlement  on  Carto  of  Little  Ten-
nessei  rivi  r,  above  Franklin,  in  Macon  county,  North  Carolina.
Gatuti'yH — "Tow  n-building  place,"  or  "Settlement  place,"  f rom gatu'gl, a  settlement,
and  [ft,  locative.  A  place  on  Santeetla  creek,  near  Robbinsville,  in  Graham
county,  North  Carolina.     See  number  122.
Gatun'lti'yl — "Hemp  plan-."   from  gat&n/Uiti,  "wild  hemp"   {Apocyrm
num.),  and  yl,   locative.     A   former  Cherokee  settlement,  commonly  known  an
Hemptown,  on  the  creek  of  the  same  name,  near  Morganton,  in  Fannin  i   nty,
  irgia.
Gatun'wa'lf— a  noted  western  Cherokee  about  1842,  known  to  the  whites  as  "  Hard-
mush"  or  "Big-mush."  Gatufl'ivcCR,  from  ga'tV,  "bread,"  and  tinwuf'tt,  "made
into  balls  or  lumps,"  is  a  sori  of  mush  of  parched  corn  meal,  made  very  thick,
so  that  it  ran  be  dipped  oul  in  lumps  almosl  of  the  consistency  of  bread
gel     down  stream,  down  the  road,  with  the  current;  isd'gt,  up  stream.
geseTf-  was;  a  separate  word  which,  when  used  after  the  verb  in  the  present  tense,
makes  it  pasl  tense  without  change  of  form:  in  the  form  hi'gesefl  it  usually
accompanies  an  emphatic  repetition.
Ge'yagu'ga  i  for  Ag>  a  formulistic  name  for  the  moon  i  nufi'dti?) ;  it  can-
not   he  analyzed,  but    seems  t   intain    the  word  age'hyd,   "woman."      See   al-o
dfif.
giga— blood;  cf.  gi'g&geft,  red.
gi'ga-danegi'ski — " blood  taker."  from  gigCi,  bl   I,  and  ada'negi'skX,  "one  who  takes
liquid-."  from  tsi'negW,  "I  am  taking  it"  (liquid).    Another  name  forthetodm  '«1
oi  scorpion  lizard.     See  number  59.
gi'gage'I— red,  bright   red.   scarlet;   the  brown-red  of   certain  animals  and  clays  is
distinguished  as  u  d'digt '  •
L'i'-ja-tsuha''li— "lil   ly-mouth,"    literally,   "havinglbl   I   on  the  corners  of   his
mouth":  from  gi'ga,  1  ■  1   1.  and  tmili&n&nsi'yt,  the  corners  of  the  mouth  {dha'tt,
his  mouth  |.    A  large  lizard,  probably  the  Pleistodon.    See  number  59.
Lo'h'  -dog;  in  the  Lower  dialect,  ,
Gi'U'-dinehun'yl— " Where  the  dogs  live,"  from  ;///;'.  dog  they  dwell"
,;!,,;,     "I    dwell"  i.    and    yX,     locative.      A    plaee   on    Oconaluftee   river,    a    short
distance  above  Cherokee,  in  Swain  county,  North  Carolina.  See  number  I  Hi'.
Gi'H'-utsun'stanufi'yl— "  Where  the  dog  ran,"  from  gtW,  dog,  and  ute&fi'st&nCuYyl,
" footprints  made  bj  an  animal  running";  the  Milky  Way.  See  number  11.
ginunti — a  song  form  for  ginOflil',   "to  lay  him  (animate  object)  upon  the '.'round." See  number  75.


520  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
gi'ri'— see  gilt'.
Gisehftfi'yl —  "Where  the  female  lives,"  from  agi'tf,,  female,  and  yi,  the  locative.
\  place  "ii  Tuckasegee  river,  a  short  distance  above  Bryson  City,  Swain  countv,
North  Carolina.     Sec  number  122.
gitlu'— hair  (Upper  dialect) ;  in  the  Middle  and  tower  dialects,  gitsu'.
gitsiV — see  giilti'.
Glass,  The— see  Ta'gwadihi'.
Gohoma — A  Lower  Cherokee  chief  in  ]tiS4;    the  form  cannot   be   identified.     See
page  31. Going-ss  IKK— see  1'iiildtinal.
Gorhalekf. — a  Lower  Cherokee  chief  in  1HS4;  the  form  cannot  be  identified.     See
page  31.
Great  island — see  Am&ye'l-e'gioa.
Gregory  bald — see  TsiMu'yt.
Guachoule — see  Guaxule.
Guaquili  (  WaMli) — a  town  in  the  Cherokee  country,  visited  by  Pe  Soto  in  1540,  and
again  in  1567  by  Pardo,  who  calls  it  Aguaquiri  (see  pages  25  and  28).     The  name
may    have  a   connection    with    waguW,   "whippoorwill,"    or  with  u-)wd'gili,
"foam."
GUASULA — See  Gl'AXULE.
Guasili — see  Guaxule.
Guaxule — a  town  in  the  Cherokee  country,  visited  by  De  Soto  in  1540;  variously
spelled  in  the  narratives,  Guasili,  Guachoule,  Guasula,  Guaxule,  Quaxule,  etc.
It  was  probably  about  at  Nacooehee  mound,  in  White  county,  Georgia.  It  has
been  suggested  that  the  Spaniards  may  have  changed  the  Indian  name  to  resemble
that  of  a  town  in  Spain.     See  pages  2r)  and  194.
gi'i'daye'wu — "I  have  sewed  myself  together";  "I  am  sewing,"  talye'miS/;  "I  am
sewing  myself  together,"  gtidayeuriu.     See  number  31.
gugwg'  (or  i/ffwc') — the  quail  or  partridge;  the  name  is  an  onomatope.
gugwfi'-ulasula — "partridge  moccasin,"  from  gugwc'  or  g'gwi',  partridge,  and  utasula, moccasin  or  shoe:  the  ladyslipper  (Oypripedium).
Gulahi'yl  (abbreviated  Ouhilii',  or  Gilrdhi',  in  the  Lower  dialect) — "GuUVhl  place,"
so  called  from  an  unidentified  spring  plant  eaten  as  a  salad  by  the  Cherokee.  The
name  of  two  or  more  places  in  the  old  Cherokee  country;  one  about  Currahee
mountain  in  Habersham  county,  Georgia,  the  other  on  Cullowhee  river,  an  upper
branch  of  Tuckasegee,  in  Jackson  county,  North  Carolina.  Currahee  Pick  was
a  noted  chief  about  the  year  1820.
i  iu'lani'yi — a  ( Iherokee  and  Natchez  settlement  formerly  about  the  junction  of  Brass- town  creek  with  Hiwassee  river,  a  short  distance  above  Murphy,  in  Cherokee
county.  North  Carolina.     The  etymology  of  the  word  is  doubtful.
mile' — acorn.
gulc'-diska'nihl' — the  turtle-dove;  literally,  " it  cries,  or  mourns,  for  acorns,"  from
i/i'lr',  acorn,  and  diska'nihi',  "it  cries  for  them"  (di-,  plural  prefix,-/)/,  habitual
suffix).  The  turtle-dove  feeds  upon  acorns  and  its  cry  somewhat  resembles  the
name.  guW.
gule'gl — "climber,"  from  tsilahY,  "I  climb"  (second  person,  ht'lahV;  third  person,
gi'ilnli'i'  i;  the  blacksnake  {Bascanion  conslrintor).
Gul'kala'skl — An  earlier  name  for  Tsunu'l&kCifl'sKl,  q.  v.
guTkwa'gl — seven;  also  the  mole-cricket  (  GryUotalpa) .     See  number  59.
gul'kw:"i'gine( -I — seventh ;  ■  from  ijuf  kinh/i,  seven.
Gulsadihl'  (or  GfiltxadiliV?) — a  masculine  personal  name,  of  uncertain  etymology.
Gl'MLOG — see  Tsihihi'lii.
gunahi'ta — l"ii«_'.


>   sf.^  GLOSSARY  521
Gft'nilhitftiVyl  "Long  place"  i.e.,  Long  vallej  ,  from  gdnHhitn,  long,  and  »/7,  loca-
tive. A  former  settlement,  known  to  the  whites  as  Valleytown,  where  1 1 ■  ■  w  i-
the  town  of  the  same  name,  on  Valley  river,  in  Cherokee  county,  North  Carolina.
The  various  settlements  on  Valley  river  and  the  adjacent  part  of  Hiwassee  were
known  collectively  a-  tin'  "Valley towns."
i  iitn'-dl  'gaduhufi'yl  I  abbreviated  Giin'-dlgadu'hun  i— "Turkej  settlement"  i  gd'nd,
turkey),  so  called  from  the  chief,  Turkej  or  Little  Turkey.  A  former  settle-
ment, known  to  the  whites  as  Turkeytov  n,  upon  the  west  bank  of  Coosa  river,
opposite  the  present  <  tenter,  in  t  Iherok   'ounty,  Alabama.
glYni' — arrow.    Cf.  Seneca  ga'na1.
giin'nagel  (or  gtiil'n&ge)     black.
(  omne'hi     see  N&ilnS'h'i.
GOifiskSli'skl — a  masculine  personal  name  of  uncertain  etymology.
to  STERS  LANDING,  Gl  \  I'KHsv  I  I.I.K — srr   h'n'.o'l-  Xihlini'li'i.
Gfln-tsuskwa/'I'(— "Short  arrows,"  from  gtml',  arrow,  and  t»uskiva/'ti,  plural  of
".</ara'/i,  short;  a  traditional  western  tribe.     See  number  105.
<  lunuiVda'le'gl — see  Ntinnd'hl-dihV.
<  ■  ti-t  i '    a  traditional  Cherokee  settlement  on  Tennessee  river,  near  Kingston,  Roane county,  Tennessee.  See  number  79.  The  name  cannot  be  analyzed.  Wafford
thought  it  a  Cherokee  attempt  at  "Kingston,"  but  it  seems  rather  to  be  abo-
riginal.
Gu'wisguwl' — The  Cherokee  name  for  the  chief  John  Ross  and  for  tin-  district  named
in  his  honor,  conn   ily  spelled  Cooweescoowee.     Properly  an  onomatope  for  a
large  bird  said  to  have  been  seen  formerly  at  infrequent  intervals  in  the  old
Cherokee  country,  accompanying  the  migratory  wild  geese,  and  described  as
resembling  a  large  snipe,  with  yellow  legs  and  unwebbed  feet.  In  boyhood  John
Ross  was  known  as  Tsan'-iisdi',  "Little  John."
i  rwai'g&'hl — "Frog  place."  from  gwatgft,  a  variety  of  frog,  and  hi,  locative.  A  place on  Hiwassee  river,  just  above  the  junction  of  Peachtree  creek,  near  Murphy,  in
Cherokee  county.  North  Carolina;  about  1755  the  site  of  a  village  of  refugee
Natchez,  and  later  of  a  Baptist  mission.
gwehe'! — a  cricket's  cry.      See  number  11!'.
ha! — an  introductory  exclamation  intended   to  attract  attention  or  add  emphasis;
about  equivalent  to  Here!  Now!
ha'-ina'ma' — a  song  term   compounded  of  ha!   an  introductory  exclamation,   and
m&m&',  a  word  which  has  no  analysis,  but  is  used  in  speaking  to  young  children
to  mean  "let  me  carry  yon  on  my  hack."     See  number  117.
Hanging-maw — see  Ushvd'li-ffd'tu.
ha'nia-lll'-lll' — an  unmeaning  dance  refrain.     See  number  24.
IIaud-mish — see  GatHn'wa  I*.
ha'snyak' — a  song  form  for  hasuya'gl',  "(thou)  pick  itout"  (imperative);   "I  pick
it  out.  or  select  it."  gn'myHgiH';  second  person,  ha'suy&gHt'.     See  number  1!).
ha'tlu — dialectic  form,  ga'tud,  "where'"  i  interrogative).
ha'wive'ehr,  ha'u  iye'-hyuwe' — unmeaning  dance  refrains.    See  numbers  32  and  1 18.
hayu' — an  emphatic  affirmative,  about  equivalent  to  "Yes,  sir!"     See  number  ll">.
hayuya'haniwa' — an  unmeaning  refrain  in  one  of  the  bear  songs.     See  number 75.
he-e! — an  unmeaning  song  introduction.
1 1 1:  \i  i  •-<  akriek — see  TdWdam
HeMPTOWS — see  GttUlnli't'l/i.
hi! — unmeaning  di   •  exclamation.
hi'gtna'lil — "(you  are)   my    friend";   agina'lil,    "(he  is)    my    friend."     In    white
man's  jargon,  canaty.


522  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [bth.
IIu  kory-log — see  IVaiu  '-as&fl'tli
Hightower — see  Ft&tcG  '.
hfla'gu?  -how  many?  how   much?     (Upper  dialect);   the   Middle   dialed    form    is
liiui'iti' .
hilahi'yu — long  ago;  the  final  yu  makes  it  more  emphatic,
hi'lufinn — "(thou  i  %;••  to  sleep";  from  tst'lihu',  "  I  am  asleep."
hi'skl — five;  cf.  Mohawk  wish.     The  Cherokee  numerals  including  10  are  as  follows:
sd'gwu,  ii'i'li,  tsri'T.  ntin'g],  lil'skl,  tu't&H,  g&Ckwd'gl,  tsune'la,  saflve'la,  askd'lti.
Hiwassee — see  Ayuhwa'it.
hi'yagu'wS—  an  unmeaning  dance  refrain.     See  number  32.
Urn  ston',  Sum  el     see  Kd'Umd.
hungft' — scr  Ktta'gHt.
huhu — the  yellow-breasted  chat,  or  yellow  mockingbird  (lcleria  uirens);  tlie  name  is
an  onomatope.     See  number  45.
huiiyahu'ska — "he  will  die."
hwl'lahi'—  "tin  hi  i  must  I  go."
igagu'tl — daylight.  The  name  is  sometimes  applied  to  the  iriunsiYtt  (q.  v.),  and  also
to  the  clematis  vine.
i'hya — the  rani'  reed  (Arundinaria)  of  the  Gulf  states,  used  by  the  Indians  for  blow-
guns,  fishing  rods,  and  basketry.
ihya 'ga — se( i  atsil 's& titi.
i'naiUV — snake.
I'nadu-nal — "Going-shake,"  a  Cherokee  chief  prominent  about  eighty  years  ago.
The  name  properly  signifies  that  the  person  is  "going  along  in  company  with  a
snake,"  the  verbal  part  oeing  from  the  irregular  verb  askt/1,  "I  am  going  along
with  him."  The  name  has  been  given  to  a  district  of  the  present  Cherokee Nation.
i'nagS'hl — dwelling  in  the  wilderness,  an  inhabitant  of  the  wilderness;  from  i  'n&gt  %
"wilderness,"  and  Shi,  habitual  present  form  of  fln'i,  "he  is  dwelling";  /•'/(,
"I  am  dwelling."
['nage-utasiuVhl — "He  who  grew  up  in  the  wilderness,"  i.e.  "He  who  grew  up
wild";  from  i'ndge%  "wilderness,  unoccupied  timber  land."  and  utdstifl'M,  the
third  person  perfect  of  the  irregular  verb,  ga'tiffiskCi/ ,  "I  am  growing  up."
Ina'll — Black-fox;  the  common  red  fox  is  tsn/'ln  (in  Muscogee,  chula).  Black-fox
was  principal  chief  of  the  Cherokee  Nation  in  1810.     See  page  86.
Iskagua — "Iskagua  or  Clear  sky,  formerly  Nenetooyah  or  the  Bloody-Fellow."
The  name  appears  thus  in  a  document  of  1791  as  that  of  a  Cherokee  chief  fre-
quently mentioned  about  that  period  under  the  name  of  "the  Bloody  Fellow."
In  one  treaty  it  is  given  as  "Eskaqua  or  Bloody  Fellow."  Both  forms  and
etymologies  are  doubtful,  neither  form  seeming  to  have  any  reference  either
to    "sky"  (gQMin'lSM)  or   "bl   1"    [gi'ga).     The    lir>t    may  be   intended  for
//,-.';//r,/,  "Great-day."     See  page  69.
Istanait — see  I ''stilna'tt.
I'su'nigu — an  important  Cherokee  settlement,  commonly  known  to  the  whites  as
Seneca,  formerly  on  Keowee  river,  about  the  mouth  of  ( 'onneross  creek,  in  i  leo- nee  county,  South  Carolina.  Hopeweli,  the  country  seat  of  General  Pickens,
where  the  famous  treaty  was  made,  was  near  it  on  the  east  side  of  the  river.  The
word  cannot  be  translated,  bin  has  n   nnection  with  the  tribal  name,  Seneca.
Itaba — see  Ftiiuti  '.
Itagu'nahi — the  Cherokee  name  of  John  Ax.
I'tawiV— The  name  of  one  or  more  Cherokee  settlements.  One,  which  existed  until
the  Removal  in  1838,  was  upon  Etowah  river,  about  the  present  Hightower,  in
Forsyth  county    Georgia.     Another   may  have    been   on    Hightower  creek  of


GLOSSARY  523
--.■■■    river    in    Towns    county,    Georgia.     The    name,    commonly   written
Etowah  ami  corrupted  to  Hightower,  cannol  l>  I  and  seems  not   to  be
of  < Cherokee  origin.  \  town  called  [taba,  Ytaua  or  Ytava  in  the  DeSoto  chron-
ed  in  L540  among  the  Creeks,  apparently  on  Uabama  river.
Itsa'tl — commonly  spelled  Bchota,  Chota,  Chote,  <  ihoquata  (misprint),  etc;  a  name
occurring  in  several  places  in  the  old  Cherokee  country:  the  meaning  is  lost.
The  most  important  settlement  of  this  name,  frequently  distinguished  as  Great
Echota,  was  on  the  south  side  of  Little  Tennessee  river  a  short  distauci
>  creek  in  VIon  roe  county,  Tennessee.     It  was  the  ancient  capital  and  sacred
■■  peace  town"  of  the  Nation.     Little  Echota  was  on  Sautee  (i.  e.,  IM't
a  head  stream  of  the  Chattah   u  I  larkesville,  Georgia.     New  Echota,
pital  of  the  Nation  foi   some  years  before  the  Re   val,  was  established  at
i  originally  known  a-  i ,, ...  at   the  junction  of  the  Oostanaula
and  Conasauga  rivers,  in  Gordon  county,  Georgia.  It  was  sometimes  called
Newtown.  The  old  Macedonia  mission  on  Soco  creek,  of  the  North  Carolina
reservation,  is  also  known  as  Itsa'tl  to  the  Cherokee,  as  was  also  the  great Nacoochee  mound.     See  Nagn  !
New  green  plan"  or  "Place  of  fresh  green,"  from  itsi  'hi,  "green  or  unripi
egetation,"  and  yl,  the  locative;  applied  more  particularly  to  a  tract  of  ground
made  green  by  fresh-springing  vegetation,  after  having  been  cleared  of  timber  or
burned  over.     A  name  occurring  in  si  .Mia  I  places  in  the  old  Cherokee  country,
isly  written  Echia,  Echoee,  Etchowee,  and  sometimes  a  No  falsely  rendered
"Brasstown,"  from  a  confusion  of  Itsi/yl  with  CnliaiyV,  "brass."     One  settle
ment  of  this  name  was  upon  Brasstown  creek  of  Tugaloo  river,  in  Oconee  county,
South  Carolina;  another  was  on  Little  Tennessee  river  near  tin-  present  Franklin,
Macon  county,   North  Carolina,  and  probably  about  the  junction  of  Cartoogaja
Galug-Hsi  'yl  I  creek;  a  third,  known  to  the  whites  as  Brasstown.  was  on  upper
Brasstown  creek  of  Hiwassee  river,  in  Towns  county,  Georgia.     In  Cherokee  as
.-i   other  Indian  languages  no  clear  distinction  is  made  between  green  and
Line  i.«i'/.'n'./..
i'ya — pumpkin.
iya'-iyu'stl — "like  a  pumpkin,"  from  lya  and  iyu'nd,  like.
iva'-taw  i'skav'e — "of  pumpkin   smoothness.''   from   i'yn,   pumpkin,  and  Ub,vsi' 'singe, 5;   til.
JACKSON —  see  7s<  kfslnV.
Jessan-  -
.in,     see  Tsi'sl-Ska'tsi.
Joanna  bald — ee  Diyd'hali'yl.
Joara,  Jcada— see  -1".'  Suwa'tt. John — ee  /  a'lii.
John  A  \  — ee  It&g&'n&hi.
Jolly,  John — ee  Ahu'lude'gi.
J[\\n-K.  —see  TsanH'laMtfi'gki.
n  .w  ;   the  name  is  an  onomatope.
i  io»  place,"  from  k&'gti',  crow  and  yl,  locative.     See  number  6:?.
ka'i  -grease,  oil.
Kala'asufi'yl — " Where  he  fell  off,"  from  liUa'&ikdf,  "  I  am  fallingoff,"  and  yl,  loca-
tive.    A  cliff  near  Cold  Spring  knob,  in  Swain  county,  North  Carolina.
K&'lahft' — " All-bones,"  from  kd'Ut,  bone.     A  former  chief  of  the  East  Cherokee.
also  known  in  the  tribe  as  Saw&nu'gi  (Shawano),  and  to  the  whites  as  Sawn
6  ■  |uirrel.


524  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.asn-.19
Kiilniiu—"  The  Raven  " ;  Hie  name  was  used  as  a  war  tide  in  the  tribe  and  appears
in  the  old  documents  as  Corani  (Lower  dialect,  Kd'rtinfi)  Colanneh,  Colona,  etc;
It  is  the  Cherokee  name  for  General  Samuel  Houston  or  for  any  person  named
Houston.
Ka'lilnu  Ahyeli'ski— the  Raven  Mocker.     Sec  number  120.
Ksi'lanuii'yl —  "  Raven  place,"  from  kd'lS/nu,  raven,  and  yi,  the  locative.  The  proper
name  "l  Big-cove  settlement  upon  the  East  Cherokee  reservation,  Swain  county,
North  Carolina,  sometimes  also  called  Raventown.
kalas'-gunahi'ta  "long-hams"  {gUvAM'tn,  "long");  a  variety  of  bear.  See  num- ber 15.
Kiil-detsi'yufiyi  — "  Where  the  bones  are,''  fr   hi'i'lii,  bone,  and  detgi'y&nyi,  "  where
(//?)  they  (ill — plural  prefix)  are  lying."  A  spot  near  the  junction  of  East Buffalo  creek  with  Cheowa  river,  in  Graham  county,  North  Carolina.  See
number  122.
kania'ma — butterfly.
kama'mS  u'tanu — elephant;  literally  "great  butterfly,"  from  the  resemblance  of  the
trunk  and  ears  to  the  butterfly's  proboscis  and  wings.     See  number  15.
kanahe'na — a  sour  corn  gruel,  much  in  use  among  the  Cherokee  and  other  southern
tribes;  the  tumfuU  or  " Tom  Fuller"  of  the  Creeks.
kanane'ski — spider:  also,  from  a  fancied  resemblance  in  apjiearance,  a  wateh  or  clock;
ki'iiidm'xh'i  niin'tiii'li'i,  the  water  spider.
Kana'sta,  Kanasti'iii'vi — a  traditional  Cherokee  settlement  formerly  on  the  head- waters of  the  French  Broad  river  near  the  present  Brevard,  in  Transylvania
county,  North  Carolina.  The  meaning  of  the  name  is  lost.  A  settlement  called
Cannostee  or  Cannastioii  is  mentioned  as  existing  on  Iliwassee  river  in  177H.
See  number  si'  and  notes.
kana'talu'hl —  hominy  cooked  with  walnut  kernels.
Kana'tT—  "  Lucky  Hunter";  a  masculine  name,  sometimes  abbreviated  Kaiml'.  The
word  can  not  We  analyzed,  hut  is  used  as  a  third  person  habitual  verbal  form  to
mean  "he  is  lucky,  or  successful,  in  limiting";  the  opposite  is  u'hua'lf.gtt,
"unlucky,  or  unsuccessful,  in  hunting."     See  number  :;.
kanegwa'tl — the  water-moccasin  snake.
Kflnu'ga — also  written  Canuga;  a  Lower  Cherokee  settlement,  apparently  on  the
waters  of  Keowee  river  in  South  Carolina,  destroyed  in  1761;  also  a  traditional
settlement  on  Pigeon  river,  probably  near  the  present  Waynesville,  in  Hay-
wood county,  North  Carolina.     SeenuniherSI  and  notes.     The  name  signifies  "a
scratcher,"  a  sort  of   1   '-toothed   comb  with  which    hall-players  are  scratched
upon  their  naked  skin  preliminary  to  applying  the  conjured  medicine;
de'tsinuga'sh't,  "1  am  scratching  it."
kauugiVla  (abbreviated  migfYia) — " scratcher,"  a  generic  term  for  the  blackberry,
raspberry,  ami  other  brier  hushes.      Cf.  K&nu'ga.
Kaiiu'gu'luyl,  or  Kanu'gu'lun'y! —  "  Brier  place,"  from  h'tmnjiY la,  brier  (cf.  Kanu'ga  ) ;
a  Cherokee  settlement  formerly  on  Nantahala  river,  about  the  mouth  of  Brier-
town  creek,  in  Macoi   unty.  North  Carolina.
kani'nVnawu' — pipe.
Kasdu'vi —  "Ashes  place,"  from  hUdu,  ashes,  and  yi,  tin-  locative.      A  modern  ( Ihero-
kee  name  for  the  town  of  Asheville.  in  Buncombe  county.  North  Carolina.
The  ancient  name  for  the  same  site  is  Vntn'kiyasti'yi,  q.v.
Katal'sta — an  East  Cherokee  woman  potter,  the  daughter  of  the  chief  Yanagufi'skl.
The  name  conveys  the  idea  of  lending,  from  Myaldl'stil,  "  I  lend  it":  agatdl'std,
"it  is  lent  to  him."
Kawan'-ura'sunyl  (abbreviated  Ktiwdn'-urd'xufi  in  the  bower  dialect) — "Where  the
duck   fell"  from  /.ami'iia,  duck,  urd's/i    (idd'*&),   "it  fell,"  and  lit,  locative      A


QLOSSARY  525
point  on  Conneross  creek  I  from  K&iedii'-urtVsi'tn  I,  near  Seneca,  in  Oconee i   nty, South  Carolina.     See  number  123.
Kawi'yi  (abbreviated  Knwi')    -a  former  important  Cherokee  settle   nt,  commonly
known  as  C.wcc.  about  tin-  mouth  of  Cowee  creek  of  Little  Tennessee  river,  some
in  miles  belov    Franklin,   in  Macon  county,  North  Carolina.     The  na    may
possibly  It  a  contraction  of    Ani'-Kawi'yl,  "  Place  of  the  Deer  clan." K  n  i  >>\  in  i     see  K  eoweb.
K  exes  i«     see  (idnx&'gi.
Keowee — the  name  of  two  or  more  former  Cherokee  settlements.  One,  sometimes
distinguisherl  as  "<  >  1  •  I  Keowee,"  the  principal  of  the  Lowert  Iherokee  tow  ns,  was
on  the  ri\cr  ol  the  same  name,  near  the  present  Fort  <  ieorge,  in  Ocoi   county,
South  Carolina.  Another,  distinguished  as  Nev  Keowee,  was  on  the  headwaters
of  Twelve-mile  creek,  in  Pickens  county,  s< mth  ( !arolina.  According  to  Wafford
the  correct  form  is  Knwdhi'ifi,  abbreviated  Kuwdhi',  "Mulberry-grove  place";
says  Wafford,  "The  whites  murdered  t lie  name,  as  they  always  do."    Cf.  Kuwd'hl.
Ke'sl-ka'g&mu — a  woman's  name,  a  ( Jherokec   rruption  of  <  'assie  <  loekram;  hi'g&mti
is  also  the  Cherokee  corruption  for  "  cucumber."
K et< >< >w ,\ n  — set-  Kvn 'h wft .
Kittowa — see  tCttu/hwd.
KTtu'hwfl — An  important  ancient  Cherokee  settlement  formerly  upon  Tuckasegee
river,  and  extending  from  above  the  junction  of '  Iconaluftee  down  nearly  to  the
present  Bryson  City,  in  Swain  county,  North  Carolina.  The  name,  which
appears  aN..  as  Kettooah,  Kittoa.  Kittowa,  etc.,  has  lost  its  meaning.  The
people  of  this  and  the  subordinate  settlements  on  the  waters  of  the  Tuckasegee
wen-  known  as  Ani'-KV.u'hwag\  and  the  name  was  frequently  extended  to  include
the  whole  tribe.  Fortius  reason  it  was  adopted  in  later  times  as  the  name  ol
the  Cherokee  seeret  organization,  commonly  known  to  the  whites  as  the  Ketoo-
wah  Society,  pledged  to  the  defense  of  Cherokee  autonomy.  See  also  historical
notes  1  and  47.
kiyu'ga — ground-squirrel;  /<'»,,,  flying  squirrel;  sSM'U,  gray  squirrel.
Klausuna — see  Tlanusi'yl.
Knoxville — see  Kuwandd'td'liin'yl.
kn!— an  introductory  exclamation,  to  tix  attention,  about  equivalent  to  "  .Yen/"
kuku/ — '"  cymling";  also  the  "jigger  weed,"  or  "  pleurisy  root"!  Asclepiax  tub*  rom  i.
Coco  creek  of  Hiwassee  river,  and  Coker  postoffice,  in  Monroe  county,  Ten-
fjssee,  derive  their  name  from  this  word.
Kiilsetei  yi  (abbreviated  Kfihe'isri)  -"Honey-locust  place,"  from  ktifoe'tsl,  honey-
locust  til, o. ..irlii.i  i  and  i/J,  locative;  as  the  same  word.  k&lxe'Uii,  is  also  used
for  "sugar."  the  local  name  has  commonly  been  rendered  Sugartown  by  the
traders.  The  name  of  several  former  settlement  places  in  the  old  Cherokee
country.  One  was  upon  Keowee  river,  near  the  present  Fall  creek,  in  Oconee
county.  South  Carolina;  another  was  on  Sugartown  or  Cullasagee  [Kuhe'lxi)
.■reek,  near  the  present  Franklin,  in  Macon  county,  North  Carolina;  a  third  was
on  Sugartown  creek,  near  the  present  Morgantpn,  in  Fannin   uity,  Georgia.
Klnnesee — see  Tsi'yu-g&nxi'ril.
Kunstutsi'vi — "Sassafras  place,"  from  k&nsl&'tsl,  sassafras,  and  >/?,  locative.  A  gap
in  the  Great  Smoky  range,  about  the  head  of  Noland  creek,  on  the  line  between
North  Carolina  and  Sevier  county,  Tennessee.
kunu'nu  (abbreviated  ki'iimn'  i — the  bullfrog;  the  name  is  probably  an  onoinatope;
the  common   green    frog   is  wnld'si  and  there   are  also   name-  for  several   other
varieties  of  frogs  am!  toads.
Kusa' — Coosa  creek,  an   upper  tributary  of   Xottely   river,   near  Blairsville,  Union
county.    Georgia.     The   change   or   accent    from    Ku'sH      '   reek       Ani'-lin'xu)
makes  it  locative.     See  page  383


526  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
Ku'sa-nunna'hl — "Creek  trail,"  from  Ku'sO.,  Creek  Indian,  ami  nitftnd'M,  path,
trail;  cf.  Suwd'ti-nHalnd'lA.  A  former  important  Cherokee  settlement,  includ-
ing also  a  dumber  of  (.'recks  and  Shawano,  where  the  trail  from  the  Ohio  region
to  the  <  'reek  country  crossed  Tennessee  river,  at  the  present  Guntersville,  in  Mar-
shall county,  Alabama.  It  was  know  n  to  the  traders  as  Creek-path,  and  lateras
Gunter's  landing,  from  a  Cherokee  mixed-blood  named  Gunter.
Ku'saweti'yl  (abbreviated  Ku'sHweti') — "Old  Creek  place,"  from  Ku'sti,  a  Creek
Indian  (plural  AnV- Ku'sa) ,  uwe'ti,  old,  and  y%  locative.  Coosawatee,  an
important  Cherokee  settlement  formerly  on  the  lower  part  of  Coosawatee  river,
in  Gordon  county,  Georgia.  In  one  document  the  name  appears,  by  error,
Tensawattee.     See  page  3S2.
KuwA'hl — "Mulberry  place,"  from  ku'wd,  mulberry  tree,  and  hi,  locative;  Cling-
man's  dome,  about  the  head  of  Deep  creek,  on  the  Great  Smoky  range,  between
Swain  county,  North  Carolina,  and  Sevier  county,  Tennessee.     See  also  Keowee.
Kuwanda'ta'lufi'yl  (abbreviated  Kuwandd'tciMlfl) — "Mulberry  grove,"  from  kn'na,
mulberry;  the  Cherokee  name  for  the  present  site  of  Knoxville,  in  Knox  county,
Tennessee.
Kwa'll,  Kwaliifi'vl — Qualla  or  Quallatown,  the  former  agency  for  the  East  Cherokee
and  now  a  postoffice  station,  just  outside  the  reservation,  on  a  branch  of  Soco
creek,  in  Jackson  county,  North  Carolina.  It  is  the  Cherokee  form  for  "  Polly,"
and  the  station  was  so  called  from  an  old  woman  of  that  name  who  formerly
lived  nearby;  Kwa'U,  "Polly,"  Kwai&fl'yt,  "Polly's  place."  The  reservation  is
locally  known  as  the  Qualla  boundary.
kwandaya'hu — see  da'tihgtQ/.
la'lu — the  jar-fly  (Cicada  auletes).     See  number  59.
Little  Carpenter,  Little  Cornplanter — see  AUV-giit  knh'i' .
Lloyd — see  Da'sigiya'gi.
Long-hair — a  Cherokee  chief  living  with  his  band  in  Ohio  in  1795.  See  page  ''■>.
The  literal  Cherokee  translation  of  "Long-hair"  is  GMti'-gtimVii'ia,  but  it  is  not
certain  that  the  English  name  is  a  correct  rendering  of  the  Indian  form.  Cf.
Ani'-<lil<i'hi.
Long  island — see  Am&yeVt-gtm&hi'ta.
Lookout  Mountain  town — see  Danda/g&TvG.'.
Lowrey,  Major  George — see  Agftt:
Mayes,  J.  B. — see  TsiVwa  Gal/ski.
Memphis — see  Tsudd't&leg&n'yl
Mialaquo — see  Ammie'l-e'gvn.
Morgan — see  Agangtd'ta.
MoSEi — see   HVi'.si.
Moytoy — a  Cherokee  chief  recognized  by  the  English  as  "emperor"  in  1730.  Both
the  correct  form  and  the  meaning  of  the  name  are  uncertain;  the  name  occurs
again  as  Moyatoy  in  a  document  of  1792;  a  boy  upon  the  East  Cherokee  reserva-
tion a  few  years  ago  bore  the  name  of  Ma'tayl',  for  which  no  meaning  can  be
given. Muscle  shoals — see  lhigiY ndhl.
NaCOOCHEE — see  Xn'git 'tsi' '.
Na'du'li' — known  to  the  whites  as  Nottely.  A  former  Cherokee  settlement  on  Not-
tely  river,  close  to  the  Georgia  line,  in  Cherokee  county,  North  Carolina.  The
name  cannot  be  translated  and  has  no  connection  with  ndtuli,  "spicewood."
Nagu'tsi' — a  former  important  settlement  about  the  junction  of  Soquee  and  Santee rivers,  in  Naeooehee  valley,  at  the  head  of  Chattahoochee  river,  in  Habersham
county,  Georgia.     The  meaning  of  the  word  is  lost  and  it  is  doubtful  if  it  be  of


GLOSSARY  527
Cherokee  origin.     It  may  havi  tion  with  tin-  name  of  the  Uehei
[ndians.  The  great  mound  farther  up  Sautee  river,  in  White  county,  was  know  n
to  the  Cherokee  as  Tted'tl,  q.  v.
nakwlsf  (abbreviated  star;  also  the  meadow  lark.
nakuisi'  usdi' — "little  star";  the  puffball  fungus     Lycoperdori!).
Na'na-tlu'gun'yl     (abbreviated     Nd'nd-tlu'glih'',  or     Nd'nA-lsu  Spruce-tree
place,"  from  nd'nd,  spruce.  tlu'gdR"!  or  tsug&fl'X,  a  tree  (standing)  andt/2,  locative.
1.  A  traditional  ancienl  Cherokee  settlement  on  the  site  of  Jonesboro,  Washing-
ton county.  Tennessee.  The  name  of  Nolichucky  river  is  probably  a  corruption
of  the  same  word.  2.  NdnA-tsugAft,  a  place  on  Nottely  river,  close  to  its  junc-
tion with  Hiwassee,  in  Cherokee  county,  North  Carolina.
Xaxehi — see  Xi'ifnit'lr,.
N  kXTAH  M ,.\  —  st-c  Ntiitdi
Nashville — sec  Dagft'ndwi  'Idhl.
N  4TCHE2 — sec  A  in'- \<i l-f .
Na'ts-asun'tlufiyi  (abbreviated  Na'is-as&ii'Miil)  — " Pine-footlog  place,"  from  nri'lsl,
pine  asuil'tl}  or  asfintldn'1,  footlog,  l>rid'_'e.  ami  //;.  locative.  A  former  Chero-
kee settlement,  commonly  known  as  Pinelog,  on  the  creek  of  the  same  name,
in  Bartow  county,  Georgia.
na'tsl — [line.
na'tslkii' — "I  eat  it"  (tei'fcifi',  "I  am  eating"  I.
na'tu'll — spicewood  i  Lindera  benzoin
Nay e '111 — see  Xn'nii'h',.
Nayixiwi — see  N&nyunu'u  ?.
nehanduyanu' — a  song  form  for  nehadu'yanH',  an  irregular  verbal  form  denoting
"conceived  in  the  womb."    See  number  75.
Nki  i  ww.rmii — given  as  the  name  of  a  Lower  Cherokee  chief  in  1684.  Sec  page  31.
Tin'  correct  form  and  meaning  are  both  uncertain,  but  the  final  part  seems  to  be
the  common  suffix  dihV,  "killer."  Cf.  Ta'gw&diM'.
N  I   SI      5    Ul — Sec    IsK  \(.l    \.
3SEE — sec  Xl'kirasi'.
Nettecawaw — see  gatayti'sti.
Nettle-carrier — see  Tdle'danigi'skl.
\ru   l.i  lioTA.  Newtown — see  Itsd'ti.
NlCKAJACK — see  S'lknls,  './;.
Nn  i  'i  ini— see  Ani'-Kula'tii
NlkwasI'  i  or  Nikiv'sV) — an  important  ancient  settlement  on  Little  Tennessee  river,
where  now  is  the  town  of  Franklin,  in  Macon  county.  North  Carolina.  A  large
mound  marks  the  site  of  the  townhouse.  The  name  appears  in  old  documents
as  Nequassee,  Nucassee,  etc.     Its  meaning  is  lost,
NYkutse'gl  (also  N&kdtse'gt,  Nikwdtse'gt,  or  abbreviated  Nlkutseg') — Nickajack,  an
important  Cherokee  setth  ment  about  1790  on  the  south  bank  of  Tennessee  rivet
at  the  entrance  of  Nickajack  creek,  in  Marion  county.  Tennessee.  One  of  the
five  Chickamauga  towns  (see  Ttilk&ma'gl).  The  meaning  of  the  word  is  lost  and
it  is  probably  not  oi  Cherokei  origin,  although  it  occurs  also  in  the  tribe  as  a
man's  name.  In  the  corrupted  form  of  "Nigger  .lack,"  it  occurs  also  as  thi name  of  a  creek  of  Cullasagee  river  above  Franklin,  in  Macon  county.  North
Carolina.
NlLAQUE — see  Amdye'l-t  'girii. Nolichucky — ee  A<
Notcht — a  creek  entering  Tellico  river,  in  Monroe  county,  Tennessee.  The  name
evidently  refers  to  Natchez  Indian  refugees,  who  formerly  lived  in  the  vicinity
see  Ani'-A
Nottely — see  Xa'dltll'.


528  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.an.\.19
nu — used  as  a  suffix  to  denote  "and,"  or  "also";  u'li-nu,  "and  also";  na'ski-nti.',
"and  that,"  "that  also."
NUCASSEE — sec  NtfavtiM'.
nu'dufinehV — he  did  x<>  mul  *<,,-  an  irregular  form  apparently  connected  with  the
archaic  forms  adHnni'ga,  "it  lias  just  become  si>,"  and  udO/nmOf,  "it  is  matured,  or
finished."     See  number  U.S.
nufi'da' — the  sun  or  moon,  distinguished  as  nufl'dH'  igifhX,  "nUil'dd'  dwelling  in  the
day,"  and  n&fl'dti,'  s&nnd'yihi,  " n&WdA'  dwelling  in  the  night."  In  the  sacred
formulas  the  moon  is  sometimes  called  Gey&gu'ga,  q.  v.,  or  Su't&lidihV,  "Six-
killer,"  names  apparently  founded  upon  myths  now  lost.
nufi'da'-dika'nl — a  rare  bird  formerly  seen  occasionally  in  the  old  Cherokee  country,
possibly  the  little  blue  heron  (Floridtii  cerulea).  The  name  seems  to  mean  "it
looks  at  the  sun,"  i.  e.  ,  "sun-gazer,"  from  n&fl'dQ/,  sun,  and  du'ku'na'  or
detsi'kanO,,  "I  am  looking  at  it."     See  number  35.
NCuVdagun'yl,  Nunda'yJ — the  Sun  land,  or  east;  from  nufi'dd/,  sun,  and  »/7,  locative.
Used  in  the  sacred  formulas  instead  of  dl' ' gS.ltfigtLfi'yl,  "where  it  rises,"  the common  word.
Nuii'daye'll — "Middle  (i.  e.  Noonday)  sun,"  from  nCuUdQ.',  sun  and  aye  CI,  middle; a  former  Cherokee  settlement  on  Nantahala  river,  near  the  present  Jarrett
station,  in  Macon  county.  North  Carolina,  so  called  from  the  high  cliffs  which
shut  out  the  view  of  the  sun  until  nearly  noon.  The  name  appears  also
as  Nantahala,  Nantiyallee,  Nuntialla,  etc.  It  appears  to  have  been  applied
properly  only  to  the  point  on  the  river  where  the  cliffs  are  most  perpendicular,
while  the  settlement  itself  was  known  as  Kaau'guld'y'i,  "Briertown,"  q.  v.  Set- number  122.
Nugatsa'nl — a  ridge  sloping  down  to  Oconaluftee  river,  below  Cherokee,  in  Swain
county,  North  Carolina.  The  word  is  an  archaic  form  denoting  a  high  ridge
with  a  long  gradual  slope.     See  number  122.
nun'gl' — four.     See  hl'skl.
nugu'la — see  k&nugula.
Nuhxayie — see  Ndnni'ht.
nu'na — potato;  the  name  was  originally  applied  to  the  wild  "pigpotato"  {Phaseolus),
now  distinguished  as  nu'na  igdlehl,  "swamp-dwelling  potato."
Nundawe'gl — see  Ani'-Nwidawe'gt.
nuiina'hl  (abbreviated  ntiilnd) — a  path,  trail  or  road.
Nufina'hl-dihl'  (abbreviated  Xau'nd-tUhl') — "Path-killer,"  literally,  "He  kills
(habitually)  in  the  path,"  from  ni'tu'ndhl,  path,  and  ahiliY,  "he  kills"  (habit-
ually); "I  am  killing,"  txi'ilu)'.  A  principal  chief,  about  the  year  1813.
Major  John  Ridge  was  originally  known  by  the  same  name,  but  afterward  took
the  name,  Gunun'da'k'gl,  "One  who  follows  the  ridge,"  which  the  whites  made
simply  Ridge.
Nunna'hi-tsune'ga  (abbreviated)  XuH.nd-tmiiL>'ya — "White-path,"  from  n&flnd'hl,
path,  and  tsune'ga,  plural  of  une'ga,  white;  the  form  is  in  the  plural,  as  is
common  in  Indian  names,  and  has  probably  a  symbolic  reference  to  the  "white"
or  peaceful  paths  spoken  of  in  the  opening  invocation  at  the  Green  corn  dance.
A  noted  chief  who  led  the  conservative  party  about  1828.     See  pages  113,  132.
Nunne'hl  (also  Guniie'Ii'i;  singular  NayPhl) — a  race  of  invisible  spirit  people.  The
name  is  derived  from  the  verb  WMif,  "I  dwell,  1  live,"  r'lu',  "I  dwell  habitu-
ally," and  may  be  rendered  "dwellers  anywhere,"  or  "those  who  live  any-
where," but  implies  having  always  been  there,  i.  e.,  "Immortals."  It  has  been
spelled  Nanehi  and  Nahnayie  by  different  writers.  The  singular  form  Nay&'hl
occurs  also  as  a  personal  name,  about  equivalent  to  Edd'hl,  "One  who  goes
about."     See  number  78.
Miw-iiyu'stl — "potato-like,"  from  rni/nn,  potato,  ami  iyu'stt,  like.  A  flowering  vine
with  tuberous  root  somewhat  resembling  the  potato.     See  number  126.


m  i  isi  ■: !  GLOSS  \KV  529
niiiiyu' — rock,  stone.     CI.  ndyii,  sand.
Nuiiyu'-gunwani'skl—  "Rock  thai  talks."  from  n&flyli,',  rock,  and  tsiwa'nikH,  "I  am
talking."     A    rock   from   which    Talking-rock   creek    of   Coosawatee   river   in
i  Georgia  derives  its  name.     Sec  number  125.
Xun'yunu'wl     contracted   from   NtiflyA-unu'vit.     "Stone-clad,"  from    n&ilyli,    rock.
and  agw&nu'vfd,  "1  am  clothed  or  covered."     A  mythic-  monster,  invulnerable
by  reason  ol  his  stony  skin.    See  number  67.     The  name  is  also  applied  -   e-
times  to  the  stinging  ant,  das&fUdli  atatt&nsM,  q.  v.     It  has  also  been
Nayunuwi.
Xunyu'-thi  guilt  (or  NAfiyA-tsugHill) — "Tree  rock."     A  notable  rock  on  Hiwassee
river,  just  within  the  Ninth  Carolina  line.     See  number  66  and  notes,
Nufiyu'-tawi'skS  "Slick  rock,"  from  niniiiii',  rock,  and  t&uriskA,  smooth,  >lick;  the
form  remains  unchanged  for  the  locative.  1.  Slick-rock  creek,  entering  Little
Tennessee  river  jnsi  within  the  west  line  of  Graham  county.  North  Carolina.
2.    A  place  at  the  extreme  head  of    Brasstown  creek  of  Hiwassee  river,  in  Tofl  QS
county,  Georgia.
Ocoee — see  Uwag&'hX.
Oconaluftee — see  EgwdnvZCt.
Oconee — see  Vkuu'iii'i.
Ocoxostota — see  Aganstd'ta.
Old  Tassel — see  IM/dstUQ,'.
OOLTEWAH — see    I  'Itnin'-i.
OOLUNSADE — see    UKmS&'tt.
(  losTANALLA   See    V  St&W'tl.
'  ins i  in  \leii — see  Usl&na'K.
( ionic  aloga — see  Uy'git&'gi.
Otacite,  Otassite — see  Outacity.
Otari,  Otariyatiqtj] — mentioned  as  a  place,  apparently  on  the  Cherokee  frontier,
visited  by  Pardo  in  1567.  Otari  seems  to  be  the  Cherokee  dtclrl  or  dt&U,  moun-
tain, but  the  rest  of  the  word  is  doubtful.      See  page  28.
(  )ttare — see  d'la/'i.
Owasta — given  as  the  name  of  a  Cherokee  chief  in  16S4;  the  form  cannot  be  identi-
fied.    See  page  31.
(  ICi.II.LoGY — see    I'll'iJ'lu',/!.
Outacity — given  in  documents  as  the  name  or  title  of  a  prominent  Cherokee  chief
about  1720.  It  appears  also  as  otacite,  otassite,  Outassatah,  Wootassite  and
Wrosetasatow  (  !  I,  but  the  form  cannot  be  identified,  although  it  seems  t,,  con-
tain the  personal  name  suffix  diHl', "killer."  Timberlake says  (page  71  i:  "There
are  some  other  honorary  titles  among  them,  conferred  in  reward  of  great  actions;
the  first  of  which  is  Outacity  or  Man-killer,  and  the  second  Colona  or  the
Raven." Ill    |  \-~  \  |  1H— See  I  II    I'ACITY.
<  iu  issa — see  Ayuhwa'sl.
Paint-town — see  Am'-  Wd'dihl'.
Path-killer — see  N&find'hirdihV .
I'ikenix,  Cherokee — see  TsuWhUan^ifi  hi.
Pigeon  River — see  Wdyi.
Pine  Indians — see  AnV-Ndtsl.
Pineloo — see  NcCta-azCm'tlQA
Qo  vlatchee — a  former  ( Iherokee  settlement  on  the  headwaters  of  the  ( lhattahoochee
river  in  Georgia;  another  ol  the  same  name  was  upon  the  waters  of  Eeowee
river  in  South  Carolina.     The  correct  form  is  unknown.
19  ETH— 01   34


530  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.akh.19
Qualla — see  Kwali.
t^i  ixule — see  Guaxule.
Quinahaqui — a  place,  possibly  in  the  Cherokee  country,  visited  by  Pardo  in   1567.
The  form  cannot  be  identified.     See  page  28.
Quoneashee — see  Tlanusi'yt.
Rattlesnake  springs — see  Visan&tiyi.
Rattling-gourd — see  G&nsSU.
Raventown — see  Kdl&nwYy't.
Red  Clay — see  El&w&'diyl.
Reid,  Jesse — see  Tse' 'si-Ska' 'ts'i.
Ridge,  Major  John — see  NCunn&'lil-diW .
Ross,  John — see  Gu'wisguvrt' '.
Ross'  landing — see  Tsat&nu'gi.
Sadayl' — a  feminine  name,  the  proper  name  of  the  woman  known  t<>  the  whites  as
Annie  Ax;  it  cannot  be  translated.
Sagwd'hl,  or  SagwuiYyl — "One  place,"  from  sd/gwd,  one,  and  In  or  y%,  locative. Soco  creek  of  Oconaluftee  river,  on  the  East  Cherokee  reservation,  in  Jackson
county,  North  Carolina.  No  satisfactory  reason  is  given  for  the  name,  which  has
its  parallel  in  Tidskd'M,  "Thirty  place"  a  local  name  in  Cherokee  county,  in  the same  state.
s&'gw&U',  horse;  from  asdgw&lihti,,  a  pack  or  burden,  aedgwatW  \  "there  is  a  pack  on
him." sa'gwSU  dlgu'lanahi'ta — mule:  literally  "long eared  horse,"  from  m'ym'il'i,  horse,  and
digti/lan&M'ta,  q.  v.
Sakwi'yi  (or  fiuki'yt;  abbreviated  S'ikiri'  or  SukV) — a  former  settlement  on  Soquee
river,  a  head-stream  of  Chattahootcb.ee,  near  Clarkesville,  Habersham  county,
Georgia.     Also  written  Saukee  and  Sookee.     The  name  has  lost  its  meaning.
saWH — squirrel;  the  common  gray  squirrel;  other  varieties  are  kiyu'gd,  the  ground
squirrel,  and  tevm,  the  Hying  squirrel.  Sahi'tl  was  also  the  name  of  an  East  Cher-
okee inventor  who  died  a  few  years  ago;  S'lhi'lniti'ta,  "Young-squirrels,"  is  a
masculine  personal  name  on  the  reservation.
saligu'gl — turtle,  the  common  water  turtle;  soft-shell  turtle,  uWrnfi/wiX;  land  tortoise
or  terrapin,  lukxi'.
salikwa'yl — bear-grass  (Etryngium) ;  also  the  greensnake,  on  account  of  a  fancied
resemblance;  the  name  of  a  former  Cherokee  settlement  on  Sallacoa  creek  of
( !i  ii  isawatee  river,  in  Gordon  county,  Georgia.
Sa'nigilaVgl  (abbreviated  SarigiL&'gt) — Whiteside  mountain,  a  prominent  peak  of  the
Blue  ridge,  southeast  from  Franklin,  Macon  county,  North  Carolina.  It  is  con-
nected with  the  tradition  of  O'tlufi'ta  (see  number  66  and  notes).
Santeetla — the  present  map  name  of  a  creek  joining  Cheowa  river  in  Graham
county,  North  Carolina,  and  of  a  smaller  tributary  (Little  Santeetla) .  The  name
is  not  recognized  or  understood  by  the  Cherokee,  who  insist  that  it  was  given  by
the  whites.  Little  Santeetla  is  known  to  the  Cherokee  as  Tsunda nilli' y%  q.  v. ;  the
main  Santeetla  creek  is  commonly  known  as  Ndyu'hl  geyuii'i,  "Sand-place
stream,"  from  Xi'iyu/hl,  "Sand  place"  (ndyfi,  sand),  a  former  settlement  just
above  the  junction  of  the  two  creeks.
Sara — sec  Ani'-Swwa/U.
sa'sa' — goose;  an  onomatope.
Sautee — see  Itsd'ti.
Savannah — the  popular  name  of  this  river  is  derived  from  that  of  the  Shawano
Indians,  formerly  living  upon  its  middle  course,  and  known  to  the  Cherokee  as
Anl'-Siiiraun'ij'i,  q.v.,  to  the  Creeks  as  Surmnikii,  and  to  some  of  the  coast  tribes


«   sirs  OL08SARY  531
of  Carolina  as  Snimma.  [nold  documents  the  river  is  also  called  Twndiga,  from
I'si'i'niin'i  or  Seneca,  q.v.,  an  important  former  Cherokee  settlement  upon  its  upper waters.     See  number  99.
Sawanu'gl — "Shawano"  (Indian);  a  masculine  personal  name  upon  the  East  Cher-
okee reservation  and  prominent  in  the  history  of  the  band.  See  InV-Saidnu'tfl
and  Kii'hiln'i'. Sam  \<«.k — see  Kd'lahti'.
Sehwate'yl  "Hornet  plan',  from  » 'hwatCt.,  hornet,  and  yt,  locative:  Cheowa  Maxi-
mum and  Swim  bald,  adjoining  bald  peaks  at  the  brail  of  <  iheowa  river,  <  rraham
county,  North  Carolina.     See  number  122.
selu — com;  sometimes  called  in  the  sacred  formulas  Agawe'Ui,  "TheOld  Woman" See  number  L26.
sel-utsl'  (for  selu-visV)  "corn's  mother,"  from  selu,  corn  and  ulsl',  his  mother  [eUsV
or  ni/itxT,  my  mother);  the  bead-corn  or  Job's-tears  (Cbir  laeryma).  See  num- ber 126.
Seneca — see Ani'-Nim.'dd.we'g}  (Seneca tribe),  and  Vsdfmgii  (Sonera  town).
SEQUATCHEE — see  S'/./ir,  Is'i  ' .
Sequi  n  v     see  SUnvdyX.
Set  si — a  mound  and  traditional  Cherokee  settlement  on  the  south  side  of  Valley
river,  about  three  miles  below  Yalleytown,  in  Cherokee  county.  North  Carolina;
the  name  lias  lo>t    its  meaning.      See  number  711.       A  settlement    called    Ti1.ii' 1st.
[Tassetchii   in  some  old  documents)  existed  on  tin-  extreme  head  of  Hiwassee
river,  in  Towns  county,  Georgia.
Sevier-  -see  Zian'-iwcK'.
Shoe-boots — see  Da'sCgiya'gl.
Shooting  creek— sec  Dn'staini Ii'ih'i/i.
Sl'gwetsl'— a  traditional  Cherokee  settlement  on  the  south  bank  of  the  French  Broad
river,   not    far   from  Knoxville,    Knox  county,    Tennessee.     Near  by    was  the
quarry  from  which  it  is  said  the  stone  for  the  white  peace  pipes  was  obtained.
See  number  111  and  notes.     Sequatchee,  the  name  of  the  river  below  Chatta-
  _:i,  in  Tennessee,  is  probably  a  corruption  of  the  same  word.
sl'kwa — hog;   originally   the   name   of   the   opossum,    now  distinguished  as   sYkwH
uiset'slt,  q.  v.
sl'kwS  utset'stl — opossum:  literally  "grinning  hog,"  from  fl/hod,  hog,  and  titset'stt,,
"he  grins  i  habitually  I."     Cf.  sikud.
Sikwa'yl— a  masculine  name,  commonly  written  Sequoya,  made   famous  as  that   of
the  inventor  of  the  Cherokee  alphabet.     See  page  108.    The  name,  which  can
not  be  translated,  is  still  in  use  upon  the  East  Cherokee  reservation.
Sikwi'a — a  masculine  name,  the  Cherokee  corruption  for  Sevier.     See  also  Tsan-uidi'.
SINN  HI  N.H— See  lli'i'liliui'l.
sftiku'  (or  si.'ii'iijii',  in  dialectic  form) — a  former  Cherokee  settlement  on  Little  Ten-
nessee river  at  the  entrance  of  Citico  creek,  in  Monroe  county,  Tennessee.  The
name,  which  can  not  be  translated,  is  com   lily  spelled  Citico,  but  appears  also
as  Sattiquo,  Settico,  Settacoo,  Sette,  Sittiquo,  etc.
siyu' — see  i'i'siiiii' .
skinta' — for  sldn'tdgQ.',  understood  to  mean  "put  a  new  tooth  into  my  jaw."  The
word  ran  not  be  analyzed,  but  is  derived  from  g&nikd.'  {ganta'gH  in  a  dialectic
form  i  a  tooth  in  place;  a  tooth  detached  is  k&yu'gd.      See  number  15.
Skwan'-digii'gun'yi  i  for  Askwan'-digfi'glifl'y'i}     "  Where  the  Spaniard  is  in  the  water
[or  other  liquid]".     A  plac   i  Upper  Soco  creek,  on  the  reservation  in  Jackson
county,  North  Carolina.      See  number  lL'2.
Slice  rock — see  NAUyCi'-ldwi
Smith,  N.  .1. — see  TsalAdikV
Snow  bird — see  TuiVyi.


532  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [f.th.ann.19
Soco  creek — see  Sdgwd'ht.
Soco  g  up— see  AhMu'na.
Soquee — see  Sdkunfyt.
Spray,  H.  W. — see  WU&nV.
Spring-Frog — see  Du'stu'.
Standing  Indian — see  YtifivSi-Umh  nij.fl/yt
Stand  Watte — see  De'gaMgd.
Stekoa — see  Stilcd'yt
ste'tsi — your  daughter;  literally,  your  offspring;  agwe'ts\,  "my  offspring";  uwe'tsl,
"his  offspring";  to  distinguish  sex  it  is  necessary  to  add  asga'ya,  "man"  or
agefhya,  "woman."
Stika'yl  (variously  spelled  Stecoe,  Steecoy,  Stekoah,  Stickoey,  etc.) — the  name  of
several  former  Cherokee  settlements:  1.  On  Sticoa  creek,  near  Clayton,  Rabun
county,  Gorgia;  2.  on  Tuckasegee  river  at  the  old  Thomas  homestead  just  above
the  present  Whittier,  in  Swain  county,  North  Carolina;  3.  on  Stekoa  creek  of
Little  Tennessee  river,  a  few  miles  below  the  junction  of  Nantahala,  in  Graham
county,  North  Carolina.     The  word  has  lust  its  meaning.
Strixgfield — see  Tlihji '.-;.
stugi'stl,  stui'sti — a  key;  see  page  187  ami  under  Astu'gatd'ga.
Sick,  The — see  Ufi'tiguhl'.
Sugarto wx — see  Kfi  hi '  txi'y  l .
su/nawa/ — see  tWn  »  wa .
sunestla'ta — "split  noses";  see  tsunii liiii't'  mhii-slld/Ui.
suiigT — mink;  also  onion;  the  name  seems  to  refer  to  a  smell;  the  various  mints  are
called  generic-ally.  gaw's&R/gt.     See  number  29.
Suki'yi — another  form  of  Sahvi'i/i,  q.v.
su'll' — buzzard;  the  Creek  name  is  the  same.
Sun  laxd — see  NCtUdd/yV.
su'-Ba'-sai' — an  unmeaning  song  refrain.     See  number  66.
Bu'talidihl' — see  ui'in'da'.
Suwa'li — see  AnV-Suwa'U.
Suwa'li-nunna'hl  (abbreviated  Swwa'U-ntifba&'hX) — "  Suwali  trail,"  the  proper  name
for  the  gap  at  the  head  of  Swannanoa  (from  Siui-h'I'i-Xuh' iu'i  )  river,  east  of  Ashe-
ville,  in  Buncombe  county,  North  Carolina.  Cf.  Kv/sA-nOMnd'ht  Seepages  194
and  379,  also  AnV-Suwa'U.
Suwa'nl — a  former  Cherokee  settlement  on  Chattahoochee  river,  about  the  present
Suwanee,  in  Gwinnett  county,  Georgia.  The  name  has  no  meaning  in  the
Cherokee  language  and  is  said  to  be  of  Creek  origin.     See  page  382.
Suye'ta — "The  Chosen  One,"  from  ii.iui/i''tn,  "he  is  chosen,"  gam'yei'i,  "I  am  choos-
ing"; the  same  form,  suye'ta,  could  also  mean  mixed,  from  g'lm'yalu'i,  "I  am
mixing  it."  A  masculine  name,  at  present  borne  by  a  prominent  ex-chief  and
informant  upon  the  East  Cherokee  reservation.
Swannanoa — see  Suita'ti-nurinii'lil.
Swim  bald — see  Sekwate/y\.
Swimmer — see  A'yUM'inl.
tadeya'statakuhl' — "we  shall  see  each  other."     See  number  75.
Tae-keo-ge — see  TasM'gt
ta'gu — the  June-bug  (A ttorhina   nitida),  also  called  tu'ya-diskcUaiv'sti'sM,,  "one  who
keeps  fire  under  the  beans."     See  number  59.
Ta'gwa — see  Ani'ta/gwa.
Ta'gwadihi7  (abbreviated  Ta'gw&dV) — "Catawba-killer,"  from  Ata'giva  or  Tn'r/iva,
Catawba    Indian,   and    diMhV.    "he   kills   them"    (habitually)     from   tsi'ilnY,


GLOSSARY  533
•■I  kill."     An  old  masculine  personal  name,  .-till  in  use  upon  the  East  ( !h<  rokee
reservation.     It  was  the  proper  naj   >f  the  chief  known  to  the  whites  about
1790  as  "The  Glass,"  from  a  confusion  of  this  name   with  rtdak<S/'tt,   glass,  or mirror.
Tagw&'hl-   "Catawba  place,"  from   Ata'gwa   or    Ta'gv/a,  Catawba    Indian,  and  ftl,
locative.      \  nam   icurring  in  several  places  in  the  old  Cherokee  country.    A
settlement  of  tins  name,  known  to  the  whites  as  T   oa,  was  upon  Toccoa  creek,
cast  of  Clarkesville,  in  Habersham  county,  Georgia;  another  was  uj    Toccoa
  "iv  river,  about  the  present  Toccoa,  in  Fannin  county,  Georgia;  a  third
may  have  been  on  Persimmon  creek,  which    is   known   to  the  Cherokee  as  Tag-
led'M,  and  enters  Hiwassee  river  some  distance  below  Murphy,  in  Cherokee
county,  North  Carolina.
Tahkeyostee — tee  I  hta'kiyasti'jft.
TaHUEQUAH — see   Tnlihun'
Tahchee — see  T8M'.
Takatoka — see  /'<  'g&id'gd
ta'kldiV  (abbreviated  t&ldH,')-  twelve,  from  in'h,  two.    Cf.  t&la'lH,  cricket.
Tft'lasI'  a  former  Cherokee  settlement  on  Little  Tennessee  river,  about  Talassee
ford,  in  Blount  county,  Tennessee.     The  name  has  lost  its  meaning.
Talassee — see  T&lasV.
tala'tu — cricket;  sometimes  also  called  dita'staye'slA  (q.  v.  I ,  "the  barber."  Cf.  Ui'lAdW, twelve.
Tale'danigi'ski  i  IMU  'danigi'sl  in  a  dialectic  form) — variously  rendered  by  the  whites
"Hemp-carrier,"  "Nettle-carrier"  or  "  Flax-toter,"  from  tdWta  or  utdle'ta,
flax  (Linum)  or  richweed  [Pika  pumila),  and  danigi'sH,  "he  carries  them
(habitually)."  \  former  prominent  chief  on  Valley  river,  in  Cherokee  county, North  Carolina.     See  number  95  and  notes.
Tai.ihina — given  as  the  name  of  the  Cherokee  wife  of  Samuel  Houston;  the  form
cannot  be  identified.     See  page  223.
Talikwa'  (commonly  written  Tellico,  Telliquo  or,  in  the  Indian  Territory,  Tahle-
quah) — the  name  of  several  Cherokee  settlements  at  different  periods, viz:  1.
Creat  Tellico,  at  Tellico  Plains,  on  Tellico  river,  in  Monroe  county,  Tennessee;
2.  Little  Tellico,  on  Tellico  creek  of  Little  Tennessee  river,  about  ten  miles  below
Franklin,  in  Macon  county,  North  Carolina;  3.  a  town  on  Valley  river,  about
rive  miles  above  Murphy,  in  Cherokee  county,  North  Carolina;  4.  Tahlequah,
established  as  the  capital  of  the  Cherokee  Nation,  Indian  Territory,  in  1839.  The
meaning  of  the  name  is  lost.
Tali'wa — the  site  of  a  traditional  battle  between  the  Cherokee  and  Creeks  about  1755,
on  Mountain  (?)  creek  of  Etowah  river  in  upper  Georgia.  Probably  not  a  Chero-
kee but  a  ( 'reek  name  from  the  Creek  ta'lua  or  Ua'hta,  town.  See  pages  38  and :;s4-385.
Talking-rock — see  NUnyO.'-giifiwani'gkl.
TalLVLAH — see  Tnlnlfi'.
Tal-tsu'ska' — "Two-heads."  from  /.,'//.  two,  and  lxu'4;n'.  plural  of  uskd',  (his)  head.
A  Cherokee  chief  about  the  year  1800,  known  to  the  whites  as  I  loiihlehead.
talull — pregnant:  whence  aluOf,  (she  is)  a  mother,  said  of  a  woman.
TSluhV  (commonly  written  Tallulah,  and  appearing  in  old  documents,  from  the
Lower  dialect,  as  Taruraw,  Torino.  Turoree,  etc.) — a  name  occurring  in  two  or
more  places  in  the  old  Cherokee  country,  viz:  1.  An  ancient  settlement  on  the
tipper  part  of  Tallulah  river,  in  Rabun  county,  Georgia;  '-'.  a  town  on  Tallulah
creek  of  Cheowa   river,    in    Graham    county,    North    Carolina.      The  word    is  of
uncertain  etymology.     The  dulu'sl  frog  is  said  to  cry  t&hdi.'.    See  number  125.
The  noted  falls  upon  Tallulah  river  are  known  to  the  Cherokee  as  Ugtifi'tfl,  q.  v.
T  \\  I'NTISKI — see  Ala' I u Til i' xk'l .


534  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [rth.anx.19
Tama'li — a  name,  commonly  written  Tomotley  or  Tomatola,  occurring  in  at  least  two places  in  the  old  Cherokee  country,  viz:  1.  On  Valley  river,  a  few  miles  above
Murphy,  about  the  present  Tomatola,  in  Cherokee  county,  North  Carolina;  2.  on
Little  Tennessee  river,  about  Tomotley  ford,  a  few  miles  above  Tellico  river,  in
Monroe  county,  Tennessee.  The  name  can  not  be  translated,  and  may  lie  of
Creek  origin,  as  that  tribe  had  a  town  of  the  same  name  upon  the  lower  Chatta-
hoochee river.
Tanas!' — a  name  which  can  not  be  analyzed,  comrnonly  spelt  Tennessee,  occurring  in
several  places  in  the  old  Cherokee  country,  viz:  1.  On  Little  Tennessee  river,
about  halfway  between  Citico  and  Tom  creeks,  in  Monroe  county,  Tennessee;
2.  "Old  Tennessee  town,"  on  Hiwassee  liver,  a  short  distance  above  the  junc-
tion of  Ocoee,  in  Polk  county,  Tennessee;  :;.  on  Tennessee  creek,  a  head-stream
of  Tuckasegee  river,  in  Jackson  county,  North  Carolina.  Tanasqui,  visited  by
Pardo  in  1567  (see  page  29),  may  have  been  another  place  of  the  same  name.
See  number  124.
Tanasqui — see  T&n&sV.
Ta'ski'gi  (abbreviated  from  TdsHgi'yt  or  Ddskigi'yl,  the  locative  yl  being  commonly
omitted) — a  name  variously  written  Tae-keo-ge  (misprint),  Tasquiqui,  Teeskege,
Tnscagee,  Tuskegee,  etc.  derived  from  that  of  a  foreign  tribe  incorporated  with
the  Cherokee,  and  occurring  as  a  local  name  both  in  the  Cherokee  and  in  the
( ireek  country.  1.  The  principal  settlement  of  this  name  was  on  Little  Tennes-
see river,  just  above  the  junction  of  Tellico,  in  Monroe  county,  Tennessee;
2.  another  was  on  the  north  bank  of  Tennessee  river,  just  below  Chattanooga,
Tennessee;  3.  another  may  have  been  on  Tuskegee  creek  of  Little  Tennessee
river,  near  Eobbinsville,  Graham  county.  North  Carolina.  See  page  29  and
number  105.
Tasquiqui — see  Tdski'gi.
Tassel,  Old — see  Vlsi'ds&W.
Tatsi' — "Dutch,"  also  written  Tahchee,  a  western  Cherokee  chief  about  1830.  See
page  141. tatsu'hwa — the  redbird.
tawa'li — punk.
Tawa'li-ukwanuii'tl — "Punk-plugged-in,"  from  tawa'tt,  punk;  the  Cherokee  name  of a  traditional  Shawano  chief.     See  number  100.
tawi'ska,  tttwi'skage — smooth,  slick.
Tawi'skala — "Flint";  a  Cherokee  supernatural,  the  personification  of  the  rock  flint;
tairi'sl-ah'ui'"i,  lairi'skala,  flint,  from  l&v-i'xkti,  smooth,  slick;  cf.  Iroquois  Tiiwis- kiirnn.     See  number  25  and  notes.
Tayunkst — a  traditional  western  tribe;  the  name  can  not  be  analyzed.  See  num- "  ber  105.
Tellico — see  Tdlikwa'.
telun'latl — the  summer  grape  (  Vitis  aestivalis).
Te.nsaw.vitee — see  Ku's&weH'yi.
Terrapin — see  Tnkxi'.
tewa — flying  squirrel;  mld'tt,  gray  squirrel;  kiyu'ga,  ground  squirrel. Thomas,  W.  II. — see  WU-usdi'.
TlkwalPtsi — a  name  occurring  in  several  places  in  the  old  Cherokee  country,  viz:
1 .  Tuckalegee  creek,  a  tributary  of  War-woman  creek,  east  of  Clayton,  in  Rabun
county,  Georgia;  2.  the  Tlkwali'tsl  of  the  story,  an  important  town  on  Tucka-
segee river  at  the  present  Bryson  City,  in  Swain  county,  North  Carolina;  3.
Tuckalechee  cove,  on  Little  river,  in  Blount  county,  Tennessee,  which  probably
preserves  the  aboriginal  local  name.  The  name  appears  in  old  documents  as
Tuckarechee  (Lower  dialect)  and  Tuckalegee,  and  must  not  be  confounded  with
TsIksi'tsT  or  Tuckasegee.     It  can  not  be  translated.     See  nuhiber  100  and  notes.
Timossv — see  To.massee.


GLOSSARY  535
Field";  the  Cherokee  name  for  Lieutenant-Colonel  W.  VV.  Stringfield  of
Waynesville,  North  Carolina,  one  of  tl   fficers  of  the  Cherok   'ontingenl    n
the  Thomas  Legion.     It  is  an  abbreviated  rendering  of  his  proper  name,
tlage'situfi'    a  song   form  for  tldge'tii  a-at0.tl%   "on  the  edge  of   the   Beld,"    from
tMgeftit,  or UdgefsX,  field,  and  asMR/i,  edge,  border,  etc;  ctma'j/rtsftifi'',  "the  bank  of
a  stream."     See  number  24.
tla  meha — bat  (dialectic forms,  tsa'melUl,  (sa'wehd).     Seepage  187.
Uanu'sl' — leech  (dialectic  form,  tsanu'tit').     See  page  is7.
Tlanusi'yl  (abbreviated  Tlanusi')     "Leech  place,"  a  former  important  settlement  at
tin'  junction  of  Hiwassee  and  Valley  rivers,  the  present  siteof  Murphj  .  in  <  Ihero-
county,  Xorth  Carolina;  also  a  point  on  Nottely  river,  a  few  miles  distant,
in  the  same  county.     See  number  "7  and  notes.     The  name  appears  also  as  Clen- nuse,  Klausuna,  Quoneashee,  etc.
'1   wa'    (dialectic    forms,   US/nuwa' ,  tttifn&wll',    "sinnawah"     Adair)-  a    mythic
great  hawk.     Seenumbers  :;•">.  64,  65,  also  page  1*7.
tla'niiwa'  usdi' — " little  tla'nuwa'";  probably  tin-  goshawk  (Astur  atrieapillus).     See number  35.
Tl:'i'tiuua'-atsi\rhifi'isuiVyi — "  Where  the  Tla/nuwS,  cut  it  up, "  from  UO/nuwd     q
and  Isiihh'iu'isku',  an  archaic  form  for  Isiiii'inih'ui'hl-iY,  "1  am  cutting  it  up."       V
place  on  Little  Tennessee  river,  nearly  opposite  the  entrance  of  Citico  .-reck,  in
Blount  county,  Tennessee.    Sec  number  t>4  and  notes.
Tla'nuwaO     "Tla'nuwa  place,"  a  cave  on  the  north  side  of  Tennessee  river  a  short
distance  below  the  entrance  of  Citico  creek,  in   Blount  county,  Tennessee.     See
number  04  and  notes.
tlay'ku' — jay  (dialectic  form,  tsay'kti,'  l.     See  page  187.
tlunti'stl — the  pheasant  {Bonam  umbella),  called  locally  grouse  or  partridge.
tluthV — the  martin  bird  (dialectic  form,  (sutsO,'  I.     See  page  187.
tlufltlVtsl — panther  (dialectic  form,  ts&TM/t&).     See  page  L87.
Tocax— a  place,  apparently  in  the  Cherokee  country,  visited  by  Pardo  in   L567  (see
page  29).     It   may  possibly  have  a  connection  with  Toxaway  (see   D&faal)  or
Toccoa  I  see  Tagwd'Kt ).
Toccoa — see  Tagwd'Kt.
Toco — see  iMktru'-,.
TO!  II  NTEESKEE — see  Aln'l I'lnii'sl,} .
Tomassee  i  also  written  Timossy  ami  Tymahse) — the  name  of  two  or  more  former
Cherokee  settlements.  \iz:  1.  (Ill  Tomassee  creek  of  Keowee  river,  in  Oconee
county.  South  Carolina;  L'.  on  Little  Tennessee  river  near  the  entrance  of  I'.inii-
ingtown  creek,  in  Macon  county.  South  Carolina.  Tic-  correct  form  ami  inter-
pretation are  unknown.
Tom  m. ii  \,  Tomotley — see  Tama'H
Ton  Willi        -re    Thl'stU,'.
Toogelah — see  Dugilu'yl.
Toqua— see  Dtikwdl.
Toxaway — see  D&hsal.
Track  Kock  gap — see  Datm'naldsgti.fl'y'l.
rsaga'sl — a  Cherokee  sprite.     See  number  78.
upstream,  up  the  road;  the  converse  of  gen.     See  number  117.
Tsaiyt' — see  UfltsaiyX'.
Tsa'ladihl'— Chief  N.  J.  Smith  of  the  East  Cherokee.     The  name  might  be  rendered
"Charley-killer,"  from  TbaU,  "Charley,"  and  diKP,  "killer"  (in  composition  i,
but  is  really  a  Cherokee  equivalent  for  Jarrett  (Ibal&dV),  his  middle  name,  by
which  he  was  frequently  addressed.     I'i.  Tagw&diht
tsal-agayiifi'li — "old  tobacco,"  fr   UdlA,  tobacco,  and  ag&y&fi'li,  or  agdy&fl'lige,  <•!<!, ancient;  the  Nicotiana  rmtica  or  wild  tobai       See  number  126.


536  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [kth.ann.19
Tsa'lagI7  i  Tsa'ragl'  in  Lower  dialect) — the  correct  form  of  Cherokee.     See  page  182,
"Tribal  Synonymy."
Tsa'll — Charley;  a  Cherokee  shot  for  resisting  the  troops  at  the  time  of  the  Removal.
See  page  131.
tsaliyu'st)  —  "tobacco-like,"  from  tsdlti,  tobacco,  and  iyu'sCl,  like;  a  generic  name  for
the  cardinal-flower,  mullein  and  related  species.     See  number  126.
tsalii  or  tsaliin  (in  the  Lower  dialect,  tsdru) — tobacco;  by  comparison  with  kindred
forms  in  other  Iroquoian  dialects  the  meaning  "fire  to  hold  in  the  mouth  "  seems
to  be  indicated.     Lanman  spells  it  tso-lungh.     See  number  126  and  page  187.
tsa'meha — see  tla'mehu.
tsa'nadiska' — for  ts&ndiskdl'  "they  say."
tsana'seha'I' — so  they  say.  they  say  about  him.     See  number  118.
tsane'nl — the  scorpion  lizard;  also  called  gVgX-danegi'sld,  q.  v.     See  number  59.
Tsani — John.
TsantawiV — a  masculine  name  which  can  not  he  analyzed.
Tsan-uga'slta — "Sour  John";  John  Butler,  a  halfbreed  Cherokee  ball  captain,
formerly  living  on  Nottely  river.     See  number  122.
Tsan-usdi' — "Little  John";  the  Cherokee  name  for  General  John  Sevier,  and  also
the  boy  name  of  the  chief  John  Ross,  afterward  known  as  Gu' ' wisguwV ',  q.  v.
Sikwi'S.,  a  Cherokee  attempt  at  "Sevier."  is  a  masculine  name  upon  the  East Cherokee  reservation.
tsanu'sf — see  tlanu'xY.
tsa'nuwil' — see  tl&'nuw&' ,
Tsa'ragl' — Cherokee:  see  page  182,  "Tribal  Synonymy." tsaru — see  tsdlu.
Tsasta'wi — a  noted  hunter  formerly  living  upon  Nantahala  river,  in  Macon  county,
North  Carolina;  the  meaning  of  the  name  is  doubtful.     See  number  122.
Tsatanu'gl  ( commonly  spelled  Chattanooga) — the  Cherokee  name  for  some  point
upon  the  creek  entering  Tennessee  river  at  the  city  of  Chattanooga,  in  Hamilton
county,  Tennessee.  It  has  no  meaning  in  the  Cherokee  language  and  appears
to  be  of  foreign  origin.  The  ancient  name  for  the  site  of  the  present  city  is
A'tlil'mnni,  q.  v.  See  number  124.  Before  the  establishment  of  the  town  the
place  was  known  to  the  whites  as  Ross'  landing,  from  a  store  kept  there  by Lewis  Ross,  brother  of  the  chief  John  Ross.
Tsatu'gl  (commonly  written  Chattooga  or  Chatuga) — a  name  occurring  in  two  or
more  places  in  the  old  Cherokee  country,  but  apparently  of  foreign  origin  (see
page  382).  Possible  Cherokee  derivations  are  from  words  signifying  respec-
tively "he  drank  by  sips,"  from  gatu'giii',  "  I  sip,"  or  "he  has  crossed  the  stream
and  come  out  upon  the  other  side,"  from  galu'gi,  "I  have  crossed"  etc.  An
ancient  settlement  of  this  name  was  on  Chattooga  river,  a  head-stream  of  Savannah
river,  on  the  boundary  betweeu  South  Carolina  and  Georgia;  another  appears  to
have  been  on  upper  Tellico  river,  in  Monroe  county,  Tennessee;  another  may
have  been  on  Chattooga  river,  a  tributary  of  the  Coosa,  in  northwestern
Georgia.
Tsa'wft  GakskI — Joe  Smoker,  from  Tsdwa,  "Joe,"  and  gaksM,  "smoker,"  from
ga'gisku,  "I  am  smoking."  The  Cherokee  name  for  Chief  Joel  B.  Mayes,  of  the Cherokee  Nation  west.
Tsawa'sl — a  Cherokee  sprite.     See  number  78.
tsa'weha — see  ila'rru  ln'i.
tsay'ku' — see  Uay'kCtf.
Tsek'slnl' — the  Cherokee  form  for  the  name  of  General  Andrew  Jackson.
TsSsa'ni — Jessan,  probably  a  derivative  from  Jesse;  a  masculine  name  upon  the  East Cherokee  reservation.
TsOVi-Ska'tsi — "  Scotch  Jesse  " ;  Jesse  Reid,  present  chief  of  the  East  Cherokee,  so called  because  of  mixed  Scotch  ancestry.


GLOSSARY  537
tsetsttni'l)  "tin  two  elder  brothers"  (male  speaking);  my  elder  brother  (male
speaking),  (tilgini'tl.    See  note  to  numbei  63
Tsgagun'yl — " Insect  place,"  from  Isgdya,  insect,  an. I  yt,  locative.  \  cave  in  the
ridge  eastward  from  Franklin,  in  Macon  county,  North  Carolina.     See  number  13.
tsgaya — insect,  worm.  etc.      See  pa^'e  30S
Tslkama'gl  ;i  name,  commonly  spelled  Chickamauga,  occurring  in  at  l>a>t  two  places
in  thf  old  Cherokee  country,  which  has  losl  any  meaning  in  Cherokee  an. I
appears  t"  be  of  foreign  origin.  It  is  applied  to  a  small  creek  at  the  head  of
Chattahoochee  river,  in  White  county,  Georgia,  ami  also  to  the  district  about
tin-  southern  (not  the  northern)  Chickamauga  creek,  coming  into  Tennessee
river,  a  few  miles  above  Chattanooga,  in  Hamilton  county,  Tennessee,  in  1777
the  more  hostile  portion  of  the  Cherokee  withdrew  from  the  rest  of  the  tribe
and  established  here  a  large  settlement,  from  which  thej  removed  about  live
years   later   to    settle    lower   down    the   Tennessee    in    what  were    known    as   the
<  'hickamauga  towns  or  Five  Lower  towns.     See  page  54  and  number  124.
tslkl' — a  word  which  renders  emphatic  that  which  it  follows:  as  li'sh'i,  "  very  g   1."
dslii!  is'ik'i,  "best  of  all."    See  number  75.
tsikiki' — the  katydid;  the  name  is  an  onomatope.
tsl'kllill' — the  Carolina  chickadee  (Parus  carolinensis) ;  the  name  is  an  onomatope. See  number  35.
Tslksi'tsI  I  Ti'dvi'ts'i  in  dialectic  form;  commonly  written  Tuckasegee)  —  1.  a  former
Cherokee  settlement  about  the  junction  of  the  two  forks  of  Tuckasegee,  above
Webster,  ill  Jackson  comity.  North  Carolina  (not  to  be  confounded  with
TlkwiUi'tsX,  q.  v.).  2.  A  former  .settlement  on  a  branch  of  Brasstown  creek  of
Hiwassee  river,  in  Towns  county,  Georgia.     The  word  has  lost  its  meaning.
Tsi'nawi — a  Cherokee  wheelwright,  perhaps  the  first  in  the  Nation  to  make  a  spin- ning wheel  and  loom.     The  name  can  not  be  analyzed.     See  page  214.
tslne/u — I  am  picking  it  (something  long)  up;  in  the  Lower  and  Middle  dialect-.
tslnigi'ti.
tsinigi'u — see  tstm  ' >•
tsiska'i_rlll — the  large  red  crawfish;  the  ordinary  crawfish  is  called  tsist&'na.  See number  5fl
tsi'skwa — bird.
tsiskwa'gwa — robin,  from  t&i'skwa,  bird.
Tsiskwa'hl— "  Bird  place,"  from  tsi'skwa,  bird,  and  HI,  locative.  Birdtow  n  settlement
On  the  East  Cherokee  reservation,  in  Swain  county.  North  Carolina.
tsiskwa'ya — sparrow,  literally  "  principal  bird"  I  i.  e.,  most  widely  distributed) , from
tsi'shea,  bird,  and  yd,  a  sutiix  denoting  principal  or  real.
Tsilalu'hi  —  "Sweet-gum  place."  from  tsila'W,  sweet-gum  {Liquidambar),  and  hi, locative.  A  former  settlement  on  a  small  branch  of  Brasstown  creek  of  Hiwas-
see river,  just  within  the  line  of  Towns  county,  Georgia.  The  name  is  incor-
rectly rendered.  Gumlog  (creek  i.
Tsiskwunsdi'-adsisti'yi—"  Where  they  killed  Little-bird,"  from  TsiskwunsdV,
"  Little-birds"  (plural  form).  A  place  near  the  head  of  West  Buffalo  creek,
southeast  of  Robbinsville,  in  <  rraham  county.  North  Carolina.     See  number  122.
Tsistetsi'yl — "Mouse  place."  from  tstitetsl,  mouse,  ami  yt,  locative;  a  former  settle-
ment on  South  Mouse  creek,  of  Hiwassee  river,  in  Bradley  county,  Tennessee.
The  present  town  of  Cleveland,  upon  the  same  creek,  is  known  to  the  Cherokee
under  the  same  name.
tsistu — rabbit.
tsisti'i'na — crawfish;  the  large  horned  hectic  is  also  so  called.  The  large  red  crawfish i-  called  tsiskafgW.
tsist-um'gistl  —  "rabbit  foods"  (plural),  from  tsi'stu,  rabbit,  and  uni'gislt,  plural  oi
agi'stl,  food,  from  ixi,i,',/,,',    ■]  am  eating"  (soft  t   I).     The  wild  rose.


538  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [bth.aiw.19
Tsistu'yl — "Rabbit  place,"  from  tsistu,  rabbit,  and  yi,  locative.  1.  Gregory  bald,
high  peak  of  the  Great  Smoky  range,  eastward  from  Little  Tennessee  river,  on
the  boundary  between  Swain  county,  North  Carolina  and  Blount  county,  Ten-
nessee. See  number  75  and  notes.  2.  A  former  settlement  on  the  north  bank  of
Hiwassee  river  at  tin-  entrance  of  Chestua  creek,  in  Polk  county.  Tennessee.
The  name  of  ( 'hoastea  creek  of  Tugaloo  river,  in  Oconee  county,  South  ( 'arolina,
is  probably  also  a  corruption  from  the  same  word.
Tsiva'hT — "Otter  place,"  from  tsiyu,  otter,  and  ///,  locative;  variously  spelled  ( Ihei  iwa,
Cheeowhee,  Chewobe,  Chewe,  etc.  1.  A  former  settlement  on  a  branch  of
Keowee  river,  near  the  present  Cheohee,  Oconee  county,  South  Carolina.  2.  A
former  and  still  existing  Cherokee  settlement  on  Cheowa  river,  about  Robbins-
ville,  in  Graham  county.  North  Carolina.  3.  A  former  settlement  in  Cades  cove,
i  >n  Cove  creek,  in  Blount  county,  Tennessee.
Tsi'yu-giinsi'nT — "  He  is  dragging  a  canoe,"  from  tsi'yu,  canoe  (cf.  tsi'yu,  otter)  and
iii'inxi'iij,  "he  is  dragging  it."  "Dragging-canoe,"  a  prominent  leader  of  the
hostile  Cherokee  in  the  Revolution.  Tin-  name  appears  in  documents  as  ( Iheu-
cunsene  and  Kunnesee.     See  page  54.
Tskll-e'gwa — "Big-witch,"  from  atskllY,  or  tsic'ih',  witch,  owl,  and  efgwa,  big;  an
old  man  of  the  East  Cherokee,  who  died  in  1SHH.  See  page  179.  Although
translated  Big-witch  by  the  whites,  the  name  is  understood  by  the  Indians  to
mean  Big-owl  (see  number  35),  having  been  originally  applied  to  a  white  man
living  on  the  same  clearing,  noted  for  his  large  staring  eyes.
tsklll'  (contracted  from  atsHU') — 1.  witch;  2.  the  dusky  horned  owl  (Bubo  virginianus
saturatus).     See  number  35.
TSOLHNGH — See  tsa/n.
tskwa'yi — the  great  white  heron  or  American  egret  ( Herodias  egretta ).
Tsuda'talesun'yi — "Where  pieces   fall  off,"   i.  e.  where  the   banks  are  caving  in;
from  addtttle'ti,  "it  is  falling  off,"  ts,  distance  prefix,  "there."  ami    ///.  locative. The  Cherokee  name  for  the  present  site  of  Memphis,  Tennessee,  overlooking  the
Mississippi,  and  formerly  known  as  the  Chickasaw  bluff.
Tsuda'ye'lun'yi — "Isolated  place";  an  isolated  peak  near  the  head  of  Cheowa  river, northeast  of   Robbinsville,  in  Graham  county,   North  Carolina.     See  number
79  and  notes.     The  root  of  the  word  signifies  detached,  or  isolated,   whence
Udaf ye  lin/ip,  the  Cherokee  outlet,  in  the  Indian  Territory.
Tsu'dinunti'yl — " Throwing-down  place";  a  former  settlement  on  lower  Nantahala river,  in  Macon  county,  North  Carolina.     See  number  122.
Tsugidft'll  ulsgi'sti  (from  tsugidu'H,  plural  of  ugiduU,  one  of  the  long  wing  or  tail
feathers  of  a  bird,  and  tilsgi'stl  or  (tlsgi'ta,  a  dance) — the  feather  or  eagle  dance. See  number  35.
tsuiigili'sl — plural  of  Ciflgtti'si,  q.  v.
tsungini's] — plural  of  dfigini' '«?,  q.  v.
TsukilunnuiVyi — "Where  he  alighted";  two  bald  spots  on  a  mountain  at  the  head
of  Little  Snowbird  creek,  near  Robbinsville,  in  Graham  county,  North  Carolina.
For  tradition,  see  number  122.
tsufikina'tll — "my  younger  brothers"  i  male  speaking).
tsiinkihV — "my  younger  brothers"  (female  speaking  I.
tsu'la — fox;  cf.   tsiih'i,   kingfisher  and   tlutlu'  or   tsulsu',   martin.     The  black  fox   is
niti'li.     The  Creek  word  for  fox  is  chula.
tsula'skl — alligator;  the  name  is  of  uncertain  etymology.
TstY  la' wl — see  TsultiMwe'l.
Tsula'sinuii'yl — "Footprint  place."    A  place  on  Tuckasegee  river,  about  a  mile  above
Deep  creek,  in  Swain  county,  North  Carolina.     See  number  J 22.
Tsul'kahV — "Slanting-eyes,"    literally    "He  has   them   slanting"    (or   leaning   up
against  Something);  the  prefix  ts  makes  it  a  plural  form,  and  the  name  is  under-


moosei  GLOSSARY  539
stood  to  refer  to  the  eyes,  although  the  word  eye  {akW,  plural  dikUL'  is  not  a
pari  of  it.  Cf.  At&'-gHiJtkSU)/.  A  mythic  giant  and  ruler  of  the  game.  The  name
has  been  corrupted  toJutaculla  and  Tuli-cula.  Jutaculla  roci  and  Jutaculla
..hi  fields  about  the  head  of  Tuckasegee  river,  in  Jackson,  North  Carolina,  take
theii  name  from  him.     See  number  si  and  notes.
Tsule'hisanufi'h)  "Resurrected  One,  "from  di'gw&WhisaniXU'lit,  "  I  was  resurrected,"
literally,  "  I  was  down  and  have  risen."  Tia'l&gl'  Thile'hisan&filil,  the  Cherokee
title  of  the  newspaper  known  to  the  whites  as  the  Cherokee  Phoenix.  The
Cherokee  title  was  devised  by  Worcester  and  Boudinot  as  suggesting  the  idea  ol
the  phoenix  of  classic  fable.  The  Indian  name  of  the  recent  "  Cherokee  Advo-
cate" is  Tsa'l&gl  Asdeli'skt.
Tsul'kahy  tsunegufi'yl — see  Tbuneg6.fi  'yl.
tli.'  nuthatch  i  Sitta  carolinensis);  the  word  signifies  literally  "deaf"  (a
plural  form  referring  to  the  ear,  g&W),  although  no  reason  is  given  for  such  a
name.
tsu'lu — kingfisher.     Qf.  tsu'lA.
Tsu'lufiwc'i   (abbreviated  Tsu'lUfl'we  or    TsaWvii,  possibly     inected   with   ts&'lfi.,
kingfisher) — Chilhowee  creek,  a  north  tributary  of  Little  Tennessee  river,  in
Blount  e.  unity,  Tennessee.
Tsunda'nilti'yl— "Where  thej   demanded  the  debl  from  him";  a  place  on   Little
Santeetla  river,  \w;-t  of  Robbinsville,  in  Graham  county,  North  Carolina.     The
reels  also  is  commonly  known  by  the  same  name.     See  number  122.
Tsundige'wl — "Closed  anuses,"  literally  "They  have  them  closed,"  understood  t.>
refer  to  the  anus;  from  dige'vil,  plural  of  gefvft,  closed,  stopped  up,  blind;  cf.
Tsuf knhV;  alsi.  GMisge'ttfi,  "Blind,  or  closed,  ears,"  an  old  personal  name. Si  e  number  74.
tsun'digwfin'tskl  (contracted  fr.nn  tsun'digwCmlsugl,  "they  have  them  forked,"
referring  to  the  peculiar  forked  tail;  cf.  TsviCkdM/ ) — a  migratory  bird  which  once
appeared  for  a  short  time  upon  the  East  Cherokee  reservation,  apparently,  from
the  description,  the  scissortail  or  swallow-tailed  flycatcher  {Milvuhts  forficaius). See  number  35.
Tsunegufi'yl  i  sometimes  called  TsutkiUtif  Tsunegixn'yV) — Tennessee  bald,  at  the
extreme  head  of  Tuckasegee  river,  on  the  east  line  of  Jackson  county,  North
Carolina.  The  name  seems  to  mean,  "  There  where  it  is  white,"  from  is,  a  pre-
fix indicating  distance,  xme'gd,  white,  and  y\  locative.  See  number  81  and notes.
TsuniKkalu — the  plural  form  for  TxutktjM,  q.  v.:  a  traditional  u'iant  tribe  in  the
west.      See  number  106.
tsuinVliyu'sunestla'ta-  "they  have  split   noses,"  from  agwdliyu',  "  I  have  it."  and
>"'.  "it  is  cracked"  (asa  crack  made  by  the  sun's  heat  in  a  log  or  in  the
earth);  the  initial  -  makes  it   refer  to  the  nose,  kily&sii'.     See  number  7H  and notes.
tsunls'tsabi-  "(those)  having  topknots  or  crests,"  from  usts&hu',  "having  a  top-
knot," usts&hV,  "In-  hasatopknot"  (habitual).     See  number  76  and  notes.
Tsuniya'tiga-  "Naked  People";  literally  "They  are  naked  there,"  from  uya'tigd,
naked  (singular),  with  the  prefix  Is,  indicating  distance.  ,\  traditional  western
tribe.     See  number  105.
tMin-.ir  -contracted  from  tsunsdi'ga,  the  plural  of  usdi'ga  or  usdi',  small.
iiiuii'skl — "He  tries,  but  tails"  (habitually),  from  detsinu'\lxM.W gii'  (q.  v.),
"I  tried,  but  tailed."     A  former  noted  chief  among  the  Kast  Cherokee,  com-
monly known  to  the  whites  as  Junaluska.      In  early   life   he  was  called    <,,'ifl,n.
la'ilA,  a  name  which  denotes  something  habitually  falling  from  a  leaning  position
cf.  Atti-gCWkiUti/  and  TsuTkSM,'.)     See  page  164.
tsun-ka'wi-ye',  tsi'ifi-slkwa-ya',  isufi-tsu^la-ya',  tsun-wa/'ya-ya/— "  1  am  {tstifl  or  Isi,


540  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.
verbal  prolix  )  a  real  (yd,ye,  noun  suffix)  deer"  (kavil',  archaic  for  a'wV  :  opos-
sum, til'kwa;  tox,t$u'lit;  wolf,  n-n'iju.     Archaic  song  forms.     See  number  15.
Tsusgina'I — "  tin-  '  rhost  country,"  from  asgi'na,  "  ghost,"  I,  locative,  ami  ts,  a  prefix
denoting  distance.  The  land  of  the  dead;  it  is  situated  in  UsHnhi'yl,  the  Twi-
light land,  in  the  west.     See  number  5.
tsuskwa'li — plural  of  uskwdU,  short.
Tsuskwaniin'nawa'ta — "Worn-out  blanket,"  from  tmskw&n&fi'ril,  blanket  i  the  word
refers  to  something  having  stripes),  and  uwa'td,  "  worn  out."  James  I>.  Wafford,
a  prominent  Cherokee  mixed-blood  and  informant  in  the  Western  nation,  who
died  about  1896.     See  page  236.
Tsuta'ga  Cweyuii'i — "Chicken  creek,"  from  ts&ta'ga,  chicken,  and  uwey&a'i, stream.
An  extreme  eastern  head-stream  of  Nantahala  river,  in  Macon  county,  North
Carolina.     See  number  122.
Tsuta'tsinasun'yl — "  Eddy  place."  A  place  on  Cheowa  river  at  the  mouth  of  Cock-
ram  creek,  in  Graham  county,  North  Carolina.     For  tradition  see  number  122.
tsutsti' — see  tliitlu'.
tsuntu'tsi — see  Ih'inli'i'l.t'i.
tsuwsV — the  mud-puppy  or  water-dog  (Menopoma  or  Prolonopsis).     See  number  59.
Tsuwa'tel'da — a  contraction  of  Tsuwdteld&n'yi;  the  name  has  lost  its  meaning.  Pilot
knob,  north  from  Brevard,  in  Transylvania  county,  North  Carolina.  See  num-
ber 82  and  notes.
Tsuwa'-uniyetsiin'yl — "Where  the  water-dogs  laughed,"  from  tmwii'  (q.  v.),  "'water-
dog,"  uniye'lsd,,  "they  laughed"  [agiyel'shfi,  "I  am  laughing"),  and  yt,  locative;
Tusquittee  bald,  near  Hayesville,  in  Clay  county,  North  Carolina.  For  story  see
number  122.
Tsuwe'nahl — A  traditional  hunter,  in  communication  with  the  invisible  people.  See
number  83.  The  name  seems  to  mean  ' '  He  has  them  in  abundance, ' '  an  irregular
or  archaic  form  for  Uwefnfil,  "he  has  abundance,"  "he  is  rich,"  from  agwe'nal' ,
"I  am  rich."  As  a  masculine  name  it  is  used  as  the  equivalent  of  Richard.  See number  83.
Tuckalechee — see  TthuiSU'Wl.
TUCKASEGEE — See    Tgikgi'tti.
Tigaloo — see  Dugttu'yi.
tugahi ! — the  cry  of  the  diigiifku  goose.
tugalu'na — a  variety  of  small  fish,  about  four  inches  long,  frequenting  the  larger  streams
(from  gCdu'na,  a  gourd,  on  account  of  its  long  nose).     See  number  39  and  notes,
tuks'i' — the  terrapin  or  land  tortoise;  also  the  name  of  a  Cherokee  chief  about  the
close  of  the  Revolution.     Stiligv/gl,  common  turtle;  soft-shell  turtle,  n'li'iml'ira. Tiiksi'tsi— see  miasi'til.
Tuli-cula — see  Tmtk&W.
tulsku'wa — "he  snaps  with  his  head,"  from  uskH',  head;  the  snapping  beetle.
Tuna'i — a  traditional  warrior  and  medicine-man  of  old  Itsa/ti;  the  name  can  not  be
analyzed.     See  number  99.
Tl'RKEYTOWN — See  Gt'iii-ili'i/H'liilii'in' ' ifi.
TlTRNIPTOWX — see    /  "li'iil'i/i.
TrSKEGEE — see   7'.  iski 'ij'i.
Tusquittee  bald — see  Tsuwd/-uniyets6/ii/yt.
Trs.jUITTEE    CREEK — See  Ddnkiril  i'i H' ill .
tu'sti — for  tusti'gtt,  a  small  bowl*;  larger  jars  are  called  diwa^ti  and  GMi'yd,.
tuiVtawu' — a   small   yellow  night-moth.     The   name   comes   from   uhiiu'li'i,    a   word
implying  that  something  flits  into  and  out  of  the  blaze.     See  number  59.
tu'tl — snowbird.
Tuti'yi — "Snowbird  place,"  from  tu'Ci,  snowbird,  and  yX,  locative.     Little  Snow-bird
creek  of  Cheowa  river,  in  Graham  county,  North  Carolina,
tu'tsahyesl' — "he  will  marry  you."


GLOSS  \K\  "ill
bean.
in  i.i  dlskalaw'sti'skl — see  ta'gu.
tu'yahus) "     "she  \\  ill  die." Tym  ihse    see  Tom  issi  i
Dchee — see  AnV-  ru'teT.
uda'hale'y] — "on  the  sunny  side."
ii'l:M     the  baneberrj  or  cohosh  vine  I   Irfata?).     The  name  signifies  that  the  plant
has  something  long  hanging  from  il
uda'l) — "i  it  is)  married";  the  mistletoe,  so  called  on  account  of  its  parasitic  habit.
CPdawagufi'ta— "Bald."     A  bald  mountain  of  the  Great  s   ky  range,  in  Yancey county,  North  Carolina,  not  far  from  Mount  Mitchell.     See  number  51.
1  dsi  skala — a  masculine  name,
uga'sfta — sour.
ungida' — "thy  two  elder  brothers  "  i  male  speaking  I.     See  notes  to  i   ber63.
ufigili'sl  (plural,  lstiflgili/&) — "my  daughter's  child."     See  note  to  number66,  and
cf.  unffini'sl.
ungini'M — "  my  elder  brother"  (female  speaking  |.     See  notes  to  number  63.
iingini'sl  (plural  tsAHgini'tf.) — "my  son's  child."     See  note  to  number  66,  and  cf.
I'luqili'si.
u'giska7 — "  he  is  swallowing  it;  from  tslkiu',  "1  am  eating."     See  number  ffand  notes,
u'guku' — the  hooting  or  liar  red  owl  i  Syrnium  nebulosum);  the  name  is  an  onomatope.
See  also  '■-/.  Jfl  '  and  wafhuhu'.
ugufistefl     'i|/ii»jii'/n   in   dialectic  form) — the  hornyhead   fish   {Campostoma,  stone roller).     The  name  is  said,  on  doubtful  authority,  to  refer  to  its  having  horns.
See  number  59.
Ugufi'yl   Tallulah  falls,  on  the  river  of  that  name,  northeast  from  Clarkesville,  in
Etabersham  county,  Georgia;  the  meaning  of  the  name  is  lost.     See  number  84.
I'll-  \  r  \ — See  r'tli'in'la.
uk-ku'suiitsuteti' — "it  will  twist  up  one's  arm."     See  number  115.
Uk-ku'suStsuti — "Bent-bow-shape";  a  comic  masculine  name.     Cf.  gullsO/U,  bow. See  number  115.
uk-kwunagi'stl — "it  will  draw  down  one's  eye."     See  number  115.
Uk-kwunagi'ta — "Eye-drawn-down";  a  comic  masculine  name.     See  number  115'.
uksu'hi — the  mountain  blacksnake  or  black  racer  (  Coluber obsolelus  I;  the  name  seems
to  refer  to  some  peculiarity  of  the  eye.  akt&';  \iksuh&',  "he  has  something  lodged
in  his  eye."     See  number  53  and  notes.
Ukte'na — "Keen-eyed  (?)"  from  akt&',  eye,  akta'tl,  to  examine  closely.     -V  mythic
great  horned  serpent,  with  a  talismanic  diadem.     See  number  50  and   notes.
Ukte'na-tsuL'am'nVtatsufi'yl  —  "Where  the  Tktena  got  fastened."     A  spot  on  Tucka-
3i  gee  river,  about  two  miles  above  Bryson  City,  in  Swain  county,  North  Caro-
lina.    See  number  1 22.
tjktena-utansi'nastun'yl — "Where  the  Uktena  crawled."     A  ruck  on  the  north  hank
of  Tuckasegee  river,  about  four  miles  above  Bryson  City,  in  Swain  county,  North
Car'. Una.     See  number  122.
Ukwu'nu   ior    Ukw&'nl) — a  former  Cherokee  settlement,  commonly  known  to  the
whites  as  ( icoiiee,  on  Seneca  creek,  near  the  present  Walhalla,  in  ( Iconee  county,
South  <  arolina.
Dla'gfl' — the  mythic  original  of  the  yellow-jacket  tribe.     See  number  13.     The  word
signifies  "leader."   "boss,"  or  "principal  one,"  and  is  applied  to  the  tirst  yellow  -
jacket  i  if.<bi 'i  i  seen  in  the  spring,  to  a  queen  bee  and  to  the  leader  of  a  working
squad,
ul&n&'wa — the  soft-shell  turtle:  the  etymology  of  the  word  i-  uncertain.     See  also
.-ini'iijii'ifi  and
ulasii'la — moccasin,  -hoe.


542  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
61e' — and;  dH-nd,',  and  also.
Unli'ta — "(He  is!  long-winded,"  an  archaic  form  for  the  regular  word,  g&flli'ia;  an
old  masculine  name.  A  chief  about  the  year  1790,  known  to  the  whites  as
"The  Breath."
ulskwulte'gl — a  "pound-mill,"  a  self-acting  water-mill  used  in  the  Cherokee  moun-
tains. The  name  signifies  that  "it  butts  with  its  head"  (usk<Y,  head),  in  allusion
to  the  way  in  which  the  pestle  works  in  the  mortar.  The  generic  word  for  mill  is
dista'stt.
ulstlthV — literally,  "it  is  on  his  head."  The  diamond  crest,  on  the  head  of  the
mythic  Uktena  serpent.     When  detached  it  becomes  the  ClunsiYtl.
Ultiwa'I — a  former  Cherokee  settlement  about  the  present  Ooltewah,  on  the  creek
of  the  same  name,  in  James  county,  Tennessee.  The  name  has  the  locative
form  (?  suffix),  but  cannot  be  translated.
ulunni'ta — domesticated,  tame;  may  be  used  for  persons  as  well  as  animals,  but
not  for  plants;  for  cultivated  or  domesticated  plants  the  adjective  is  giiniitlun'1
(or  gunuxun'l).
Uluiisu'tl — "Transparent";  the  great  talismanic  crystal  of  the  Cherokee.  Spelled
Oolunsade  by  Hagar.     See  number  50  and  notes.
uluii'ta — "it  has  climbed,"  from  tsilahV,  "I  am  climbing";  the  poison  oak  (Rhus
radicans) .     See  number  126.
U'lun'yi — "Tuber  place,"  from  ("//',  a  variety  of  edible  tuber,  and  yt,  locative.  A
former  settlement  upon  Turniptown  (for  U'lun'yi)  creek,  above  Ellijay,  in  Gil- mer county,  Georgia.
Unacala — see  Une'g&diM'.
U'nadanti'yl — "Place  where  they  conjured,"  the  name  of  a  gap  about  three  miles
east  of  Webster,  in  Jackson  county,  North  Carolina,  and  now  transferred  to  the
town  itself.     See  number  122.
unade'na — woolly,  downy  (in  speaking  of  animals);  mod/nfi,  wool,  down,  fine  fur
(detached  from  the  animal).
u'naluV — see  iimlliu-V .
unahwl' — heart;  in  Middle  and  Lower  dialects,  un&hii,' .     See  page  187.
Unaka — see  une'gtt  and  Unicoi.
unatlunwe'hitu — "it  has  spirals";  a  plant  (unidentified)  used  in  conjurations.  See number  126.
une'ga — white.
une'guhl — "he  is  (was)  mischievous  or  had":  ts&ne' 'guhi'yu,  "  you  are  very  mischiev-
ous" (said  to  a  child ).     See  number,  118.
une'gutsatiV — "(he  is)  mischievous";  a'ginefgulsiitti',  "1  am  mischievous."
Une'lanuii'hi — "The  Apportioner" ;  "I  am  apportioning,"  ganelaskfi.';  "I  appor-
tion" (habitually),  gane'laskl.  In  the  sacred  formulas  a  title  of  the  Sun  god; in  the  Bible  the  name  of  God.
une'stalufi — ice.
Unicoi — the  map  name  of  the  old  Unicoi  turnpike  (see  page  87),  of  a  gap  on  the
watershed  between  Chattahoochee  and  Hiwassee  rivers,  in  Georgia,  and  of  a
county  in  eastern  Tennessee.  Probably  a  corruption  of  une'giL,  white,  whence
comes  also  Unaka,  the  present  map  name  of  a  part  of  the  Great  Smoky  range.
uni'gistl — foods;  singular,  agi'xCi.
Uniga'yata'ti'yi — "Where  they  made  a  fish  trap,"  from  uga'yattifl'l,  fish  trap,  and yl,  locative:  a  place  on  Tuckasegee  river,  at  the  mouth  of  Deep  creek,  near
Bryson  City,  in  Swain  county,  North  Carolina.     See  number  100  and  notes.
Uni'haluna — sec  Ah&lu'na.
Unika'wl — the  "Townhouse  dance,"  so  called  because  danced  inside  the  townhouse;
the  name  does  not  refer  to  a  townhouse  (gati'yi)  and  can  not  be  analyzed,  but
mav  have  some  connection  with  the  archaic  word  for  deer.     Cf.  Ani'-Kawl'.


the  gene ric  11
.i1 lie    In kle  bur,
jimsi >n
weed
loot,"  am 1  yl,
l0( ative
City,  in  S wain 11 11 1 1  V i   si  •  GLOSS  \i:i  5  13
Une'ga-dihl'     "White-man-killer";  fr    une'ga,  "white,"  for  yufl'vnme'ga,  "white
person,"  and  dihl',  a  noun  suffix  denoting  "killer"  ("he  kills  them"  habitually  i.
A  Cherokee  chief,  whose  name  appears  in  documents  about  1 790  as  White-man-
killer,  or,  by  misprint  Unacala.  It  is  an  old  masculine  name,  existing  until
recently  upon  the  reservation.     Cf.  Ta'gw&dihV.
u'niskwetu'g)  "they  wear  a  hat";  6lskwe?0.w&/,  hat,  from  uskO,',  head.  The  may-
apple  {Podophyllum).     See  number  126.
unistilufi'ist)     "thej    stick  on  along  their  whole   tengtn'
"stickers"  and  burs,  including  the  Spanish  needle,  cockle  bur,  jimson  weed, etc.     See  number  L26.
uni'tsl-  -her  mother;  agitsV,  my  mother.
[Jniya'hitufi'yf — " Where  they  shot  it,"  from  tsiyd'ihu,  "1 \  place  "ii  Tuckasegee  river  a  short  distance  above  Brysi
North  Carolina.     See  number  LOO.
I  hi, i, ila     see  TtibiyuWduW .
Uhta'kiyasti'yl—  "  Where  they  race,"  from  laMya'td.,  a  rare,  and  yl,  locative;  locally
corrupted  to  Tahkeyostee.  The  district  on  the  French  Broad  river,  around  A  she-
wn.-, in  Buncombe  county,  North  Carolina.  The  town  itself  is  known  to  the
Cherokee  as  Kdsdu'yi,  "Ashes  place,"  (from  kdedu,  ashes,  and  yl,  locative),
which  is  intended  as  a  translation  of  its  proper  name.     Sec  number  1l"_\
Ontlasgasti'y) — "Where  they  scratched";  a  place  at  the  head  of  Hyatt  creek  of
Valley  river,  in  Cherokee  county,  North  Carolina.     Fur  tradition  see  number  li"_'.
Qntoo]  \ — iee  Dihyufl'duld'.
unuii'tl — milk.
asdi'gA  (abbreviated  usdi'),  small;  plural  tsunsdi'gd,  tsunsdi'.
usga/se*'ti/yu — very  dangerous,  very  terrible;  intensive  of  usga'sfti,
Dskwale'na — "Big-head,"  from  uMf,  head;  a  masculine  name,  perhaps  the  original
of  the  "Bull-head,"  given  by  Haywood  as  the  name  of  a  former  noted  Chero- kee warrior.
Uskwa'll-gu/ta — "His  stomach  hangs  down,"  from  uskw&'U,  his  stomach,  and  gu'tH,
"it  hangs  down."  A  prominent  chief  of  the  Revolutionary  period,  known  to
the  whites  as  Hanging-maw.
U'stana'll  (from  vtst&naloYh't  or  uni'st&na'Ui  (a  plural  form),  denoting  a  natural
barrier  of  rocks  (  plural )  across  a  stream) — a  name  occurring  in  several  places  in
the  old  Cherokee  country,  and  variously  spelled  Eastinaulee,  Eastanora,  Esta-
naula,  Eustenaree,  Istanare,  ( lostanaula,  ( (ostinawley,  Ostenary,  etc.  One  settle-
ment of  this  name  was  on  Keowee  river,  below  the  present  Fort  George,  in
Oconee  county.  South  Carolina;  another  seems  to  have  been  somewhere  on  the
waters   of  Tuckasegee  river,    in    western    North  Carolina;  a   third,    pr   incut
during  and  after  the  Revolutionary  period,  was  just  above  the  junction  of  <  loosa-
watee  and  Conasauga  rivers  to  form  the  <  lostanaula,  in  Cordon  county,  Georgia,
and  adjoining  New  Echota  (see  G&nsd'gi).  Other  settlements  of  the  same  name
may  have  been  on  Eastanollee  creek  of  Tugaloo  river,  in  Franklin  county,
Georgia,  and  on   Eastaunaula  creek,   flowing  into  Hiwassee  river,  in   McMinn
COUnty,   Tennessee.       Cf.    '/■<"'  <ln  mil  i'i  n' ill .   under  D&gun&'hl.
u'stuti— see  utm'gl.
Ustu'tll — a  traditional  dangerous  serpent.     The  name  signifies  having  something  on
the  calf  of  the  leg  or  on  the  heel,  from  nsii'iii'ni'i,  i  his)  calf  of  the  leg  (attached  i.
It  is  applied  also  to  the  southern  hoop-snake  {Abastor  eryihTogrammus).     See
number  54.
I'si'inhi'vl — the  "Darkening  laud."  where  it  is  always  getting  dark,  as  at  twilight. The   name   used    for  the   west    in   t he   myths  and  sacred    formulas;   tin   niiiinii
word  is  a  a.  I,  'Ugufi'yl,  "there  where  it  (the  sun)  goes  down."  In  number  63  the
word  used  is  wwfihihuii'yl,  "there  where  they  stay  over  night."  See  also
TaCagindl.


544  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.anh.19
u'tanu — great,  fully  developed.     Cf.  e'gwa.
utawa'hilu — "hand-breadth,"  from  uwd'yi^hajid.  A  figurative  term  used  in  the
myths  and  sacred  formulas.
Ctfiwagun'ta — "Bald  place."  A  high  bald  peak  of  the  Great  Smoky  range  on
the  Tennessee-North  Carolina  line,  northeastward  from  Big  Pigeon  river.  See
number  51.
UiVtiguhi' — "Pot  in  the  water,"  from  &flti'yS  or  iurf't',  pot,  and  '/»//;'.  "it  is  in  the
water"  (or  other  liquid — habitually).  The  Suck,  a  dangerous  rapid  in  Tennessee
river,  at  the  entrance  of  Suck  creek,  about  eight  miles  below  Chattanooga,  Ten-
nessee.    See  number  63  and  notes.
r'tlun'ta — "He  (or  she)  has  it  sharp,"  i.  e.,  has  some  sharp  part  or  organ;  it  might
be  used  of  a  tooth,  finger-nail,  or  some  other  attached  portion  of  the  body,  but
in  the  story  is  understood  to  refer  to  the  awl-like  finger.  Ten  Kate  spells  it
Uilnta.     A  mythic  half-human  monster.     See  number  66  anil  notes.
("tluntuii'yl — "  U'tluii'ta  place;"  see  l"lh'ni'la.  A  place  on  little  Tennessee  river, nearly  off  Citico  creek,  in  Blount  county,  Tennessee.  See  number  66  and  notes
and  number  124.
U'tsala — "Lichen";  another  form  of  ats&le'ta.  A  Cherokee  chief  of  the  Removal
period.     See  page  157.
utsale'ta — lichen,  literally  "  pot  scrapings,"  from  a  fancied  resemblance.
Untsaiyr'  (also  Etmii/V  or  TsaiyV,  the  first  syllable  being  almost  silent) — "Brass."
A  mythic  gambler.  See  number  63  and  notes.  The  present  rendering,  "brass,"
is  probably  a  modern  application  of  the  old  myth  name,  and  is  based  upon  the
resemblance  of  the  sound  to  that  produced  by  striking  a  sheet  of  metal.
utsa'natl' — rattesnake;  the  name  is  of  doubtful  etymology,  but  is  said  to  refer  to  the rattle.
CJtsa'nati'yl — "Rattlesnake  place."  Rattlesnake  springs,  about  two  miles  south
from  Charleston,  Bradley  county,  Tennessee.     See  page  132.
utset'stl — "  he  grins  "   (habitually).     See  sl'kwa  utset'sti.
utsi' — her  (his)  mother;  etsl',  agvt&l',  my  mother.
Utsi'dsata' — "Corn-tassel,"  "Thistle-head,"  etc.  It  is  used  as  a  masculine  nameand
was  probably  the  Cherokee  name  of  the  chief  known  during  tin-  Revolutionary
period  as  "Old  Tassel."
utsu''gi — the  tufted  titmouse  (Parus  bicolor);  also  called  u/st&ti,  "topknot,  or  tip," on  account  of  its  crest.     See  numbers  35  and  66.
u'tsutl' — fish.     Cf.  u'tsutt,  many.
ufiwadii'll — store-house,  provision  house.     See  number  3  and  notes.
UiVwaVla-tsu'gilasuiV — "Where  the  storehouse  (unwada'll)  was  taken  off."  Either Black  rock  or  Jones  knob,  northeast  of  Webster,  on  the  east  line  of  Jackson
county,  in  North  Carolina.     See  number  122.
Uwaga/hi  (commonly  written  Ocoee) — "Apricot,  place,"  from  uim'ga,  the  "apricot
vine,"  or  "  may  pop,"  (Pass  [flora  incarnata) ,  and  lu,  locative.  A  former  important settlement  on  Ocoee  river,  near  its  junction  with  Hiwassee,  about  the  present
Benton,  in  Polk  county,  Tennessee.
uwa'yl — hand,  paw  generally  used  with  the  possessive  suffix,  as  iwiaye'tA,  "his
hand." u  we'la — liver.
uwe'nithl — rich;  used  also  as  a  personal  name  as  the  equivalent  of  Richard.  ( 'f.
Tsuwe'nahi.
Uw'tsiuVtit — "Bouncer"  (habitual);  from  k'tsl,  "it  is  bouncing."  A  traditional  ser-
pent described  as  moving  by  jerks  like  a  measuring  worm,  to  which  also  the
name  is  applied.     See  number  55.
I'yahye' — a  high  peak  in  the  Great  Smoky  range,  probably  on  the  line  between Swain  county,  North  Carolina,  and  Sevier  or  Blount  county,  Tennessee.  See
number  75  and  notes.


■oonby]  GLOSSARY  545
tJy'gila/gl — abbreviated  from  Tsuyu'gila'gl,  "Where  there  are  dams,"  i.  e.,  beaver
dams;  from  gtigilu'uftekA',  "he  is  damming  it."  1.  A  former  settlement  on  Ooth-
caloga  1 <  >ugillogj  creek  of  ( lostanaula  river,  near  the  present  Calhoun,  in  Gordon
county,  Georgia;  2.  Beaverdam  creek,  west  of  Clarkesville,  in  Habersham  county ,
i  reorgia.
Vaiaeytown — see  Gu'nahitufl'yt.
Vengeance  cheek — see  GS.nsa'ti'yt.
W  ichesa — see  Watsi'sU.
wadaiV — thanks!
wa'dl — paint,  especially  red  paint.
wa'ilige-aska'li — "his  head  tis)  brown,'.'  i.e.,  "brown-head,"  from  wddiget,  brown,
brown-red,  ami  askd'K,  possessive  of  mkH',  head;  the  copperhead  snake.
Wadi'yahf — A    feminine  name  .if  doubtful    etymology.      An   expert  basket-making
woman  among  the  East  Cherokee,  who  died  in  1895.     She  was  known  to  the
whites  as  Mrs  Bushyhead.     See  page  179.
Wafford — see  Tsuxkwantm'n&wa'ta'.
Wa'trlnsI' — The  name  of  an  eddy  at  the  junction  of  the  Little  Tennessee  and  main
Tennessee  rivers,  at    Lenoir,  in   Loudon  county,  Tennessee.     The  town  is  now
known  to  the  Cherokee  by  the  same  name,  of  which  the  meaning  is  lost.    See
number  124.
waguli' — whippoorwill;   the  name  is  an  onomatope;   the  Delaware  name  is   welcolU
i  Heckewelder) .
Wahnenauhi — see  Wani'n&M.
wa'huhu' — the  screech-owl  I  Megascops  asio);  see  also  tsfclM'  and  »;/»/.»'.
wa'ka — cow;  from  the  Spanish   vaca,  as  is  also  the  Creek  waga  and   the   Arapaho
irnll'trli.
wala'sl — the  common  green  frog;  there  are  different  names  for  the  bullfrog  (ki'inu'nii,
q.  v.  i  and  for  other  varieties;   warts  are  also  called  wald'sl.
YValasi'yl — "Frog  place."  1.  A  former  settlement,  known  to  the  whites  as  Frog-
town,  upon  the  creek  of  the  same  name,  north  of  Bahlonega,  in  Lumpkin
county,  Georgia.  2.  Le  Conte  and  Bullhead  mountains  in  the  Great  Smoky
range  on  the  North  Carolina-Tennessee  line,  together  with  the  ridge  extending
into  Sevier  county,  Tennessee,  between  the  Middle  and  West  forks  of  Little
Pigeon  river.     See  number  51  and  notes.
walas'-unul'sti — "it  fights  frogs,"  from  wald'sl,  frog,  and  unuVstl,  "it  fights"
(habitually);  gu'lihu',  "I  am  fighting."  The  Prosartes  lanuginosa  plant.  See number  126.
YValas'-unulsti'yl — "Place  of  the  plant  waMs'-unul'stt,"  commonly  known  to  the
whites  as  Fightingtown,  from  a  translation  of  the  latter  part  of  the  nam.-;  a
former  settlement  on  Fightingtown  creek,  near  Morganton,  in  Fannin  county,
i  leorgia.     Sec  number  1L'.">.
Walini'— a  feminine  name,  compounded  from  Watt,  another  form  of  Kwatt,  "  Polly,"
with  a  sutiix  added  for  euphony.
YVane'-asufi'tlunyl — "  Hickory  footlog  place,"  from  irane'1,  hickory,  ass6.n%uW\
(q.v  I,  footlog,  bridge,  and  //;,  locative.  A  former  settlement,  known  to  the
whites  as  Hickory-log,  on  Etowah  river,  a  short  distance  above  Canton,  in  Cher-
okee county,  <  leorgia.
Wani'nahl' — a  feminine  name  of  uncertain  etymology;  the  Wahnenauhi  of  the
Wahnenauhi  manuscript.
W  18HINGTON — see    Wn'slt u' un .
UVi'-i — the  Cherokee  form  for  Moses.
19   ETH— 01   35


5-JM1)  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
Wa'sitii'na,  Wa'siifitu'na  (different  dialectic  forms) — a  CheroKee  known  to  the
whites  as  Washington,  the  sole  survivor  of  a  Removal  tragedy.  See  page  158.
The  name  denotes  a  hollow  log  (or  other  cylindrical  object)  lying  on  the  ground
at  a  distance;  the  root  of  the  word  is  osi'te,  log,  and  the  w  prefixed  makes  it  at
a  distance
Wa'suhV — a  large  red-brown  moth  which  flies  about  the  blossoming  tobacco  in  the evening.
Wata'gl  (commonly  written  Watauga,  also  Watoga,  Wattoogee,  Whatoga,  etc.) — a
name  occurring  in  two  or  more  towns  in  the  old  Cherokee  country;  one  was  an
important  settlement  on  Watauga  creek  of  Little  Tennessee  river,  a  few  miles
below  Franklin,  in  Macon  county.  Tennessee;  another  was  traditionally  located
at  Watauga  Old  Fields,  about  the  present  Elizabeths  m,  on  Watauga  river,  in
<  'arter  county,  Tennessee.     See  page  21.     The  meaning  of  the  name  is  lost.
Watauga — see  Wat&'gt.
Watai'sa — a  prominent  old  Cherokee,  known  to  the  whites  as  Wachesa,  a  name
which  cannot  be  translated,  who  formerly  lived  on  lower  Beaverdam  creek  of
Hiwassee  river,  below  Murphy,  in  Cherokee  county,  North  Carolina.  From
the  fact  that  the  Unicoi  turnpike  passed  near  his  place  it  was  locally  known  as
the  Wachesa  trail.
wa'va — wolf;  the  name  is  an  onomatope,  intended  as  an  imitation  of  the  animal's
howl;  cf.  the  Creek  name,  yaha.
Wa'ya'hl — "Wolf  place,"  i.  e.  place  of  the  Wolf  clan;  the  form  Aui'-lVa' i/ii'lu  is  not
used.  Wolftown  settlement  on  upper  Soco  creek,  on  the  East  Cherokee  reserva-
tion, in  Jackson  county,  North  Carolina.
Wava  gap — see  A'tdhi'ta.
Wayc.ii — see   Wdyt.
Wavi — "Pigeon";  the  modern  Cherokee  name  for  Big  Pigeon  river  in  western
North  Carolina;  probably  a  translation  of  the  English  name.  It  appears  also  as
Way  eh.
Welch,  Lloyd — see  Da'sigiya'gl.
wesa — cat;  a  corruption  of  "pussy."
White-path — see  Ntmn&'M-txune'ga..
Willstown — a  former  important  settlement,  so  called  from  the  halfbreed  chief  known
to  the  whites  as  Red-headed  Will,  on  Will's  creek  below  Fort  Payne,  in  Dekalb
county.  Alabama.  The  settlement  was  frequently  called  from  him  WUi'yl,
"Will's  place,"  but  this  was  not  the  proper  local  name.
Wllslnl' — the  Cherokee  name  for  H.  W.  Spray,  agent  and  superintendent  for  the  East
Cherokee  reservation;  an  adaptation  of  his  middle  name,  Wilson.
Wil-usdi'—  "Little  Will,"  from  Witt',  Will  and  usdi'ga  or  usdV,  little.  The  Chero-
kee name  for  Colonel  W.  H.  Thomas,  for  many  years  the  recognized  chief  of  the
eastern  band.
Wissactaw — see  g&TiAwVsita.
Wolftowx — see  1 1  'a'yd'M. Wootassite        i  _ ' — see  Oi'tacity.
Wrosetasatow  i
Wude'liguii'yl — the  west;  literally  "there  where  it  (the  sun)  goes  down"  (w  pre-
fixed implies  distance,  yl,  locative).     See  also  Vsiinhi'yi  and  ivustihilinn'yi.
Wuliga'natutun — excelling  all  others,  either  in  good  or  bad;  it  may  be  used  as  equiva-
lent to  wasltifi,  "beyond  the  limit."     See  page  232.
wusuhihun'yl — "there  where  they  stay  over  night,"  i.  e.  "the  west."  An  archaic
term  used  by  the  narrator  of  the  story  of  Untsaiyl',  number  63.  The  common
word  is  wude'ligCifl''yl,q.  v.,  while  the  term  in  the  sacred  formulas  is  Us&fiM'yl, q.v.
Xuala — see  Ani-Suwa'tt.


hooked  GLOSSARY  517
-yS — a  suffix  denoting  principal  or  real,  as  taishva'yd,  "principal  bird,"  the  sparrow;
Ani'-Ytiiliviyd',  "principal  or  real  people,"  Indians.
V  ihooi  \    see  Yahuld'h
Yahulii'i— "  Yahu'la  place,"  from  Yahu'la,  a  Cherokee  trader  said  to  have  been  taken
by  tin'  spit-it  people;  Yahu'la  seems  to  be  from  the  <  !reek  yoho'lo,  a  name  ha\  ing
reference  to  the  song  (yoholo) ,  nsed  in  the  "  black  drink"  ceremony  of  the  Creeks;
thus  a'si-yoho'lo,  corrupted  into  Osceola,  signified  "the  black  drink  song";  it
may,  however,  be  a  true  Cherokee  word,  yahu'la  or  yahu'tl,  the  name  for  a
variety  of  hickory,  also  for  the  "doodle-bug";  UKyahu'la  is  a  feminine  name,
but  can  not  be  translated.     Yal   la  creek,  near  Dahlonega,  in  Lumpkin  county,
<  reorgia.     See  aumber  86  and  notes.
Yal:i'u'i  Alarka  creek  of  Little  Tennessee  river,  above  the  junction  of  Tuckasegee, in  Swain  county,  North  Carolina;  the  meaning  of  the  name  is  lost.
yafidaska'ga — a  faultfinder.     See  number  61.
Yftn-e'gwa— "  Big-bear,"  from  ydnu,  hear,  and  egwa,  great,  large.  A  prominent  chief
about  the  year  isno;  the  name  oeenrs  in  treaties  as  Yonah,  Yohanaqua  and  Ydna-
hequah.     See  page  164.
ya'nu — bear.
Ya'nu-dineliun'yl — "Where  the  bears  live,"  from  ydn&,  bear,  dinShu',  "they  dwell"
\:')m.  "I  dwell.  I  live  "),  and  yt,  locative.     A  plac   i  ( tconaluftee  river,  a  short distance  above  the  junction  with  Tuckasegee,  in  Swain  comity,  North  Carolina.
See  number  122.
Y:'inii>_run'skl —  "The  hear  drowns  him"  (habitually),  from  ydliU,  hear,  and  toig6.fi'-
ixl.n',  "I  am  drowning  him."  A  noted  East  Cherokee  chief,  known  to  tin-
whites  as  Yonaguska  or  Drowning-bear.     See  page  162.
Ya/nu-u'natawasti'yl — "  Where  the  hears  wash"  (from  y&nu,  hear,  and  yl,  locative);
a  former  pond  in  the  Great  Stnoky  mountains,  about  the  extreme  head  of
Raven  fork,  in  Swain  county,  North  Carolina.     See  number  121'.
yan'-utse'stu — "the  bear  lies  on  it";  the  shield  fern  (Aspidium).     See  number  126.
Yawa'I — "YawS  place";  a  place  on  Yellow  creek  of  Cheowa  river,  in  Graham  county, North  Carolina.     See  number  122.
Y'ellow-hill — see  El&wd'diyl.
Yohanaqua — see  Ydn-e'gwa.
yoho-o! — an  unmeaning  song  refrain.     See  number  75.
Yonaguska-  -see  Yd'n&gufl'sld.
Yonah — 1.  (mountain)  see  Gadalu'tu.  2.  An  abbreviated  treaty  form  for  the  name
of  the  chief  Yan-e'gwa.
Yonaheqcah — see  Ydn-e'gwa.
Ytaua,  Ytava — see  I't&wd'.
Yu! — an  unmeaning  song  refrain  and  interjection.
Yuha'H — Euharlee  creek,  of  lower  Etowah  river,  in  Bartow  county,  Georgia.  The
name  is  said  by  the  Cherokee  to  be  a  corruption  of  Yufala  (Eufaula),  a  well-
known  Creek  local  name.     See  number  105.
yunsiV — buffalo;  cf.  Creek  yena'sa,  Choctaw  yanash,  Hichitee  ya'nasi.
Yunsa'l — "  Buffalo  place";  West  Buffalo  creek  of  Cheowa  river  in  Graham  county,
North  Carolina;   the  site  of  a  former  Cherokee  settlement.      See  number  1L"_'.
yu've-yuwehe' — an  unmeaning  song  refrain.     See  number  118.
yufi'wi — person,  man;  cf.  Mohawk  oflgwe'.
Yun'wi  Ania'ytne'hl — "  Water  -  dwelling  People,"  from  yufl'vit,  person,  and  iiinii'-
ifnff'ln,  plural  of  S/mdyi'hl,  q.  v.;  a  race  of  water  fairies.     See  number  7s.
Y'un'w i-dlkatagun'yl  -  see    Yi'iu' 'in-lmil,  nn,',' yt,
Yufi'wl  Cunahi'ta — "'Long  Man";  a  formulistic  name  for  the  river,  personified  as  a
man  with  his  head  resting  on  the    uutain  and  his  feet  stretching  down  to  the
lowlands,  who  is  constantly  speaking  to  those  who  can  understand  the  message.


548  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
Yufi'wini'giskl — "Man-eaters,"  literally,  "They  eat  people"  (habitually),  from
yun'xvl,  person,  man.  and  uni'gisJA,  "they  eat"  (habitually),  from  Islkiu',  "I  am
eating";  the  Cherokee  name  for  a  distant  cannibal  tribe,  possibly  the  Atakapa
or  the  Tonkawa.     See  number  105.     Of.  AnOda'dtifitAild.
YuiVwI-tsulem'nVyl — "Where  the  man  stood,"  originally  Ytifl'vX-dtkcddgti.ii'y't,
"Where  the  man  stands,"  from  yufi'ifi,  person,  man,  Isitd'gCi,  "I  am  stand-
ing," and  j/7.,  locative;  Standing  Indian,  a  high  bald  mountain  at  the  head  of
Nantahala  river,  in  Macon  county,  North  Carolina.     See  number  122.
Yufi'wl  Tsunsdi' — "Little  People,"  from  yufi'wl,  person,  people,  and  Immdi'ga  or
tsunsdi',  plural  of  usdi'ga  or  usdi',  little;  the  Cherokee  fairies.     See  number  78.
Yufi'wl  Usdi' — "Little  Man."     A  formulistic  name  for  the  ginseng,  d'tatt-guW,  q.  v.
Yufi'wl-usga'se  tl — "Dangerous  Man,  Terrible  Man";  a  traditional  leader  in  the
westward  migration  of  the  Cherokee.     See  page  99.
YuiVwiya' — "Indian,"  literally,  "principal  or  real  person,"  from  yufi'wl,  person
and  yd,  a  suffix  denoting  principal  or  real.     See  pages  15  and  181.


INDEX  TO  PART  1
Page
Abbott  on  effect  of  Georgia  antl-Cheiokee
laws        lis
Abraham,  murder  of    66,66
V.   TJRATION,  Study  Of     xxi-xxv
A.   SMU  III",  VESTS       12-18
Acolafissa,  tribe  of  Choctaw  confederacy,     500
ACOMA,  work  nt    xiii
Activities,  discussion  of    Ixiv-lxv
Anvn:,  Jambs,  or  Cherokee  dialects         16
—  on  Cherokee  intratriba]  friction        496
—  on  Cherokee  lack  of  conservatism        "229
—  on  Cherokee  population          34
—  on  Cherokee  relations  with  Creeks   :      384
—  on  Cherokee  sacred  ark         503
—  on  Cherokee  snake  myths    167,459-160,461
—  on  Cherokee  sufferings  from  smallpox  ..        3ti
—  on  Cherokee  thunder  myths        441
—  on  Cherokee  war  of  1759-61          41
—  on  Christian  Priber's  work         37
—  on  Creek  myths        475
—  .  .11  (  reeks         499
—  on  decay  of  Cherokee  ritual  and  tradi-
tions         'JO
—  on  effects  of  Cherokee  war  (1760-61 )          45
^*—  on  gatayustl  game        434
—  on  Herbert's  spring        404
—  on  horses  and  swine  among  Cherokee . .  82,213
—  on  Indian  beliefs  concerning  birds     153  154
—  on  Indian  beliefs  concerning  fond         172
—  on  Indian  beliefs  concerning  wolf         us
—  on  Indian  conduct  during  eclipse        441
—  on  Indian  custom  of  removing  deers1
hamstrings        447
—  on  Indian  marriage  customs         482
—  on  Iroquois  wars    357-358, 491
—  on  name  Cherokee            10
—  on  peace  towns    207, 208
—  on  sacred  tire        503
—  on  scratching  ceremony         470
—  on  Shawano  wars        87]
—  on  Taskigi  among  Creeks        389
—  ..ii  tla'nuwa        166
—  on  welcome  ceremony        493
Adder,  myths  concerning        297,  136
Idoptiox  among  eastern  tribes        493
Advocate,  Cherokee,  sa  Cherokee  Ad-
vocate.
a  ..ansta'ta.  see    Morgan,  Washington;    IOSTOTA
■  i-i   in-,  ih  i  ..ii.  erning  .   .
Calientes,  examination  of   caves
near      xvii
Alabama  in  Texas, niiii  me. f,  with  Cherokee.      1 13
—  migration  acn.-s  the  Mi --i--ij.pl  by          '.i'.i
— ,  tribe  of  Creek  confederacy      198  199 Pagi
Alabama,  production  of  gold  in    220. 221
— .  Removal  forts  in        221
Algonquia.n  languages,  studj  of      xxv
—  myths      I ",:,  l  ,l
—  names  for  rabbit  and  dawn        2;;:!
—  tribes,  study  of    xvii-xviii.  xxix
Ai.KiNi',  Natchez  woman  among  Cherokee.      388
\  I  I    Ii"'.  I  -   so  Ka'i.aih".
Allegheny  river,  origin  of  name  of          18
Allegory,  development  of    Ixxxix-xe
Allen,  H.  X.,  on  Korean  myths        -117
Alligator,  myths  concerning          159
Almanac,  Cherokee,  establishment  of        112
Alphabet  used  for  Cherokee  words        500
— ,  so  also  Syllabary.
Altars  of  religious  fraternities,  study  of  ..  xlvi-
xhx,  1-lii Ambrosial  pleasures    lix-lx
AMERICAN  blood  among  Cherokee          83
American  Board  of  Commissioners  for
Foreign  Missions,  work  of,  among  Cher-
okee     104-105, 136
Anadarko,  see  Nadako.
Angola,  myths  of   441-442,  146,  147,450,  152,  153
Ani'-Kitu'whagI,  see  Kitu'whagI.
Ani'-Ku'sa,  see  Creeks.
Ani'-Kuta'nI,  legends  concerning  . . .  392  :;*..:;,  ."I
Animals,  chiefs  and  tribes  1  .f.  231,261-266,  145  n>
— ,  myths  concerning        39, 21.;.  -'.I.  2  .2, 280,  el  passim
ANl'-TSA'LiGi',  ANI'-Yf ■N'WIY.l',  80  Is  1 '
LA..!',  YUN'WIYA'.
Annuities,  Cherokee    81, 86, 124
— .  apportionment  of     Inf.,  138,  177
— ,  withholding  of         lis
ant,  myths  concerning         152
Antelope,  myths  concerning         151
apache,  murder  of  party  of,  by  scalp  hunt-
ers. 209
— ,  racing  among    191
— ,  study  of    xxiii
— ,  use  i>f  language  of,  as  trade  language. , .  188
— ,  so  also  Jicarilla;  Mesi  il  i  bo
Appalachee.  enslavement  ol    232
Appleton's  Cyclopedia  of  Ameru  >     Bi
ography  on  Rev.  David  Brainerd     217
—  on  Col.  Benjamin  Hawkins    212
—  on  chi.-i  McGillii  ra]       210
—  on  Col.  It  J.Meigs    212
—  on  i  icner;  1 1  Robertson     105
—  on   lolm  K..ss    Ill
onSI   Clairsdefeat     212
on  1  ei  iM.iiii;.    211;
—  on  Nancy  Ward    201
—  on  Wayne's  victory     213
54'j


550
Page
Aqcaqctbi,  see  Guaquili.
Arapaho,  genesis  legend  of        229
— ,  tribal  medicine  of       503
Arbuckle,  General,  on  adoption  of  Chero-
kee  constitution        135
— ,  reward  for  capture  of  Tahchee  offered  by      141
Arch,  John,  bible  translation  by        110
Arizona,  report  on  collections  from    xix-.xx
— ,  work  in    xiii-xv
Arkansas,  collection  from       xxi
Arkansas    Cherokee,    conference    with
Osage  by        105
— .  fixing  of  boundaries  to  lands  of        10.5
— .  friction  between  main  band  and   -  - .      133,
135, 147, 148
— .  history  of    77,102,136-143
— ,  request  of,  for  recognition  as  separate
tribe        105
— ,  union  of,  with  main  band        135
— ,  visit  of  Sequoya  to        110
Arkansas   river,  settlement  of  Cherokee
on         102
— ,  cession  to  <  Iherokee  of  tract  on    102-103
— .  exchange  of  tract  on        139
Arts,  sei  Fine  arts.
Asi.  characters  of        162
— .  recitation  of  sacred  myths  in        230
Astu'gatA'ga,  Lieutenant,  death  of        170
ATAoA'iii.  myths  concerning  —  321-82J,  161,  170
Atagul'kAlO,  see  Atakullakulla.
Atakapa,  Cherokee  relations  with        391
Ataki'LI.aki'I.i.a,    agreement     with,     for
building  of  forts          40
— ,  attempts  to  bring  peace  by    42, 44
— ,  offer  of  aid  to  Americans  by          54
— ,  rescue  of  Captain  Stuart  by    44,203
Athletic  pleasures    lxiii-lxviii
Atkins,   J.   D.   C,  on  east  Cherokee   suit
against  main  band        152
— ,  r   mmendation  for  cast  Cherokee  re-
moval by        177
Atlanta  Constitution  on  effect  of  Georgia
anti-Cherokee  law's         118
ATsi,  see  Arch,  John.
Augusta,  opening  of  path  from  Cherokee
country  to          30
— ,  treaty  of  (1703)          45
Autonomy,  Cherokee,  waning  of    153-157
Autossee,  battleat         92
Avery,  Mrs  A.C.,  acknowledgments  to          13
—  on  Cherokee  part  in  civil  war         109
—  on  Col.  W.  H.  Thomas        162
A'wani'ta,  myth  told  by        454
Ax,  JOHN,  Cherokee  story-teller    229-230.237
— .  myths  told  by       430,
l  n,  135,  136,438,440,  448-452,454-456,
160,  162,  163,  166,  471,473,476,  477,481
—  on  gatayustl  game        4:  ;4
Aya'sta.  Cherokee  story-teller        237
Aya'sta.  myths  and  songs  obtained  from..    430, 453.408,470,601,504
Ayllon  on  gigantic  Indians         Mil
— .version  of  Tsundige'wi myth  by        471
— ,  visit  to  Georgii   asi  by        193
A'YUN'INi,  see  Swimmer.
Aztec,  myths  of    431.451.4ti0
Bald  MOUNTAIN,  myth  concerning         299 Page
Kali,  game  among  East  Cherokee        170
—  among  western  Cherokee        146
— ,  figurative  use  of  expression        433
—.legend  connected  with        384
—.myths  and  lore  concerning       202,
286-287,308,312-313,369,  154
— ,  rites  and  practices  connected  with       230,
262,  122,  125,  171
Bancroft.  H.   H.,   on    Mexican    grant    to
Cherokee         148
—  on  scalping  by  whites        209
Baptist  gap,  engagement  at        170
Baptists,  work  of,  among  Cherokee..  107. 165,  loo
Barbarism,  features  of      xlix
Barcia,  A.  G.,  on  Creek-Cherokee  wars          38
—  on  De  Luna's  expedition        201
—  on  Rogers  expedition        202
—  on  Spanish  mission  among  Cherokee          29
—.version  of  Tsundige'wi  myth  by         472
Barnwell,   ,  Cherokee  reply  to        372
Barringer,  Rurus,  arbitrator  between  East
Cherokee  and  Thomas's  creditors        174
Bartram,  William,  on  cane-splint  fire  ..  429-430
—  on  cattle  among  Cherokee    213-214
—  mo  Cherokee  relations  with  <  Ireeks    ::s:;.  :;m
—  on  Creeks         499
  rigin  of  mounds  in  Cherokee  country.       22
—  on  ruins  at  Silver  bluff        193
—  on  sacred  fire        503
—  on  Seminole  regard  for  snakes        457
—  on  strawberries  in  Cherokee  country        468
—  on  traders'  bells        483
— ,  travels  of,  in  Cherokee  country          46
Barton.  B.  S.,  on  Cherokee  linguistic  rela-
tionship          16
—  on  traditional  predecessors  of  Cherokee..        22
Basketry  among  East  Cherokee        170
Basswood  in  Cherokee  lore    421,505
Bat,  myths  concerning    286-287,  151
Battey  on  visiting  ceremony        493
Batts,  Thomas,  exploration  into  Cherokee
country  by         31
Bayagoi'i.a,  tribe  of  Choctaw  confederacy.      500
Bean,  Lieutenant,  part  taken  by,  at  Horse- si  10c  bend         95
Bean,  Mrs,  rescue  of ,  by  Nancy  Ward  .  is.  204, 490
Bean  in  Cherokee  lore     124,471
Bear,  myths  and  lore  concerning    250,  264,
268, 273-274, 286-287,  325-329, 411,
436,446-447,  450-452,  472  174,504
-,  songsof    010,  101
Bear-grass  in  Cherokee  lore        420
1:1  \i:i>  .In iin.  killing  of  Indians  by          74
Bear  Man.  myth  of    262,327-329
Beasley,  Maj.  Daniel,  commander  of  Fort
Minis         216
Beast  fable,  development  of    lxxxii-lxxxiii
BEAl  champ,  W.  M.,  on  Iroquois  myths  . .    158,  169
—  on  Onondaga  name  for  violet         505
Beaver  on  Ohio  Cherokee          79
Beaver.  Cherokee    myths    ami    lore  con-
cerning    266, 314-315,  165-466, 171
Bechtler,  coining  of  gold  by        220
Bei  k  1  1:,  G.  F.,on  Southern  gold  fields  —      221
Bees  among  Cherokee    82,214
—  in  Cherokee  lore        309
Beetle, myths  and  lore  concerning       239,
308,314.430.463


19]
551
Bell,  John,  flight  of    13-1
!                            i  herokee  Na-
tion    1^1!
Bible,  translations  of,  into  Cherokee    108,
—  story  among  Cherokee
ob  m'ii'i  ,  work  in    xxx
Biedm  i  on  De  Soto's  i  xpedition.  26,  191  201
i.  mi  Natchez  among  Cheroki  i
Big-beak,  w<  V\
   161
Big-hush,  set  Hard
era  h,  death  oi    179
Biloxi  in  Texas,  anion  of,  with  I  Cherokee  1 13
— .  tribe  of  Choctaw  confederacy
Bibd  town,  purchase  of    161
I  hs  and  lore  concerning    241,
!  0    !94     00   10]    142   153   i  -I
Bi  li  kberry,  myth  concerning    259
Blackburn,  Re\   Gideon,  establishment  of
school  among  Cherokee  by    84
Black-eyed  Susan  in  Cherokee  lore    120
Blackfeet,  method    of    catching     eagli
practiced  by    153
— ,  myths  of      132,  151,  147
Black-fox,  an  unity  for    85
— .  enactment  signed  l>y    86-87
Blai  k  mountain,  myths  concerning.      132,  150
Blacksnake,  myths  concerning    241, 288  289
Blacks  station,  encounter  at    48
Bledsoe  on  French  and  Spanish  encour-
agement of  Cherokee  hostility
B   d  mountain,  myth  concerning  ...
Blount,  William, endeavors  of,  for  peace..  78
— .  governor  of  Tennessee    212
—  life  of    212
—  on  attack  on  Buchanans  station    73
—  on  Chickamauga  declaration  of  war  { L79
—  on  origin  of  Chickamauga  band    54
—  on  Shaw's  mission    71
— ,  propose  I  of ,  to  Cherokee    I  795)    81
— ,  Territorial  governor    68
— ,  treaty  and  cession  arranged  bj  (1791  68  69
Blount,   chief,    settlement    of    Tuscarora
under    198
iy,  myth  concerning    284
Bluff, Tn e, se<  Nashville.
Blythe,  David,  Cherokee  story-ti   lei
— ,  myths  told  by     "'.'.  is:;
Blythe,  James,  acknowledgments  to    13
nl  for  East  Cherokee    180
— .  Cherokee  story-teller    237
—,  myths  told  by     186,462  163
.  lion  of  Indian  myths
by
—  on  dissemination  of  Indian  myths    234
—  on  Tillamook  myths    440
SOES.
Bonnell   on    Cherokee    agreement    with
Mexico    145
—  on  Chi                                     :     i             —  145
—  on  Houston's kce    145
—  on  Mexican  grant  to  <  hi  roki                  143
myth  concerning
Bi  on,  Daniel,  leader  of  pioneer  advam  ■  I  ■
Boudinot,  Cornelius,  myths  told  by      149  155
— ,  opening  of  grave  on  farm  of    143 Boudinot,  Drl
Boudinot,  Elias,  Bible  translatioi 1 1 1
--.  education  of    108
— .  killing  of
.  signing  of  new  i   hi
vote  of,  on  Ridge  treal  s  122 1-1
Bow  ii-'.   M   acknowledgment"  to  13 146
emigration  ol  -     101,  138, 141,1 13
rol          145
— ,  paper  carried  by,  at  death
«  ith  Texas  signed  bj  1 14
Bi    •    i  opposition  to  McGillivrayb;         !10
Boyd,  D.T,  suit  of  United  States  againsl
Br  wm  bd,  lo  \    David   lifi         JIT
Brai    ii>    'i    tndnnce  ol    pupils
at
ishment  of
Brant.  Sir  William  Johnsoi
with
Brass,  ....  UntsaiyI'.
Breath,  the.  death  of          T'.i Brier  in  '  Iheroki  i   lore            125
Brinton,  D.G.,  edition  of  Walamt  ilumby.      190
..ii  Delaware  nam,,  for  <  Iherokee
on  Delaware  tribal  organization           497
—  on  deluge  myth         1 I  •
—  on  first  appearance  of  whins        191
—  on  Flint  and  Rabbit  myth         151
—  on  name  Kitu'whagl        182
..ii  Shawano  . . :   161,495
-on  Tallige'wi   19,184
British,   encouragement    of    fndiai
tility  by  .:          64,08
—  relations  with  Indians    98  99
retention  of  posts  by  1 1790)         68
—,  withdrawal  of,  from  interior  posts. .  81
— ,  withdrawal  of,  from  south           62
l; i:   .-,  Miss  A-  M.,  acknowledgments  to..        13
111    -  -.i  i  M  -'  nil-  -ii   I'.-  SotO'S  i.  "II'
—  on  Pardo's  expedition    28,29
Brown,  David,  Bible  translation  by        ill
—  on  Cher  a  in  1819        112
no Brown,  ,1.  M.,  on  ancestry  of  Sequoya  .
Blown.  Joseph,  capture,  adoption
leaseof
— ,  guide  to  expedition  of  1794          78
—  on  attack  on  Buchanan's  station         7:1
on  Martin's  expedition  1 1788)
Brown,  Orlando,  on  Catawba  among  East Cherokee
iken  by,  in
haul.-  ot  Horseshoe  bend
Brown,    Thomas,    teacher    a   -
ikee        l"l
Brown,  Col.    ,  British  agenl  al  Chii  i.
Brows    Mrs  ransomof         06
1 1    M.,  on  decisioi
—  on  East  I  airs        179
ee  strip
on  Mohawk  name  for  till
Bryant,      Ixxxix
Bryson,  Ii  imil  ..ii  Cherokee  heroism


552 [ETH.  ANN.  19
Bryson,  Maj.  James,  acknowledgments  to.        13
—  on  Cherokee  heroism        501
—  on  Cherokee  round  nj>        131
—  on  Rutherford's  route         205
Bbtson  city,  capture  of  East  Cherokee  at.      1 T 1
Buchanans  station,  attack  on  (17921          73
Buckle,   .  on  Cherokee-Chickasaw  war.       38
Buffalo,  Cherokee  gift  of  skin  of,  to  Span-
iards          27
— ,  myths  and  lore  concerning       263.
293.410,  112,  148
Buffalo  dance,  legend  of  origin  of    352.  485
Bugle  weed  in  Cherokee  lore        120
BUGL0SS  in  Cherokee  lore        426
Bullfrog,  myths  concerning    310-311,-163
— .  8< '  also  Frog.
Bullhead,  Cherokee  leader  in  war  with
Creeks        384
Burial,  myth  concerning    256,440
Burk,  John,  on  Cherokee  invasion  of  Vir-
ginia          30
Burnet,   ,  commissioner  to  Cherokee  ..      145
Burnt  tobacco,  contact  with  Nunnfi'M  by.      332 Burs  in  Cherokee  lore        426
Butler,  Rev.  D.  S.,  arrest  and  imprison-
ment of        119
— ,  Cherokee  missionary        105
—  on  Jackson's  attitude  toward  Cherokee  .      117
Butler.  John,  Cherokee  ball  captain        406
Butler,  S.  W„  myth  told  by        450
Buttkick  on  Cherokee  myths       430,
436-437,  445, 470, 476,  478,  483
—  on  Cherokee  sacred  fire        502
—  on  custom  of  removing deers'  hamstrings.      447
Buzzard,  myths  concerning       239,
266, 284, 293, 294, 430, 431, 456
Byhan,  Rev.  Gottlieb,  Cherokee  mission-
ary          S4
Cabot,  Sebastian,  visit  to  America  by        191
Caddo  in  Texas,  union  of,  with  Cherokee..      143
— ,  wanderings  of        146
Cairns  in  Cherokee  country    20-21, 491
Cai.eebee  creek,  battle  of          93
Calendars.  Kiowa,  publication  of  paper
on   :    xxvi,  xxix
Calendar  sysi  ems,  Mayan,  memoir  on.,  xli-xlii
Calhoun  on  Seneca  town        4S5
— ,  reply  to  Cherokee  memorial  by        115
— .  reply  to  Georgia's  protest  by        116
Cameron,   .  attempt  to  seize         48
— ,  encounter  between  Williamson's  force and           50
— ,  interception  of  letter  to          47
— ,  raid  led  by           48
Campbell,  Col.  Ani  hur,  defeat  of  Ferguson
by          57
— ,  expedition  under  (1780-81 1     57-68
—on  British  agent   and  Tories  at  Chicka-
mauga         55
—  on  Chickamauga  band    ...       54
—  on  Nancy  Ward         204
—  on  Sevier's  expedition  (1781)          59
Campion  in  Cherokee  lore          426
Canasagi  v,  De  Soto's  visit  to      26,197
Candy.,  John, printer  of  Cherokee  Phoenix,      in
Cane,  Indian  use  of         490 Cannibals,  mythseoneerning.  247, 349-350, 483, 501
Canoes,  Cherokee    4%
Canos,  see  Cofitachiqui.
Canup,  W.T.,  acknowledgments  to    13
Cape  Girardeau,  settlement  of  Delawarea
and  Shawano  at    99
Cardinal  flower  in  Cherokee  lore    424
Carrington  on  East  Cherokee  chiefs    175
—  on  East  Cherokee  constitution    173
—  on  East  Cherokee  in  Civil  war    170, 171
—  on  Iroquois    485
—  on  Iroquois  peace  towns    208
Carroll,  Gov.  William,  treatysigned  by.  125
Carroll,    .   on  Catawba  in  Cherokee
war    44
—  on  English  conduct  toward  Cherokee...  38
Cartier,  Indians  found  on  St  Lawrence  by  .  190
Cass,  Lewis,  reply  to  Schermerhorn's  pro- i  by
122
Casteei.  family,  murder  of         76
Castor  Hill,  treaty  of  (18521          99
Cat,  Cherokee  name  for        265
Cataracts  in  Cherokee  lore        426
Catawba,  Cherokee  relations  with        14.
36. 31-32, 44, 49, 165, 234,380-381
— ,  feather  ornament  of        504
— ,  myths  of        452
—  name  for  Cherokee    16, 183
— ,  population  of  (1755)          39
— ,  sketch  of        49S
— ,  Spanish  contact  with          28
"Catgut"  in  Cherokee  lore        425
Cati.in  on  Tahchee        141
Cattle  raising  by  Cherokee         82,
122,137,166,213-214
CAUCHI,  He  Soto's  visit  to           29 Cavitts  station,  attack  on          75
Cebollita   valley,    excavation    of    ruins
around       xiil
Cedar,  lore  concerning    421, 505
Censuses  of  Cherokee.  34, 103, 112, 125, 150, 156  157
—  of  East  Cherokee   167-168,172,176,179,180
Central  America,  memoir   on    numeral
systemsof    xliv.xlv
ceremony,  development  of    lxxviii-lxxix
Chalaque,  De  Soto's  visit  to    24, 194
— ,  see  also  Tsa'lagI';  synonymy.
Chance,  part  played  by,  in  games  ...  lxviii-lxix Charleville  on  Cherokee  wars        371
Charley*,  escape,  surrender,  and  shooting ,,f    131, 157, 158
Chat,  see  Huitu.
Chatelain,  Heli,  on  Angolan  folk  tales  ..     442, lie.  117.  150,  152,  153
Cheowa  Maximum,  myth  concerning         105
Cheraw,  Cherokee  relations  with     14,380
—  sketch  of        498
Cherokee,  meaning   and    derivation    of
name    182-183
—.memoir  on  myths  of      xxxvii-xxxix. 3-548
— ,  study  of  fraternities,  cults,  and  myths
of    xxvi.xlvii
Cherokee  Advocate, establishment  of . .  111,112
—.myths  published  by...   272-273,449,450
—  on  treaty  with  South  Carolina          31
—  on  western  Cherokee  history        146
-.revival  of  (1870)     147,151


:,.,:;
Page
Cherokee    agency,    attempt    to    annul
treat;  ol        104
—.treaties  of    102,120
— ,  proposal  made  at  treaty  of        113
■  :  w  ic,  establishment  of  —      112
cm  i:      Mi  -.i  sgi  r,  establishmenl  of.,      112
i  blishment  of.  124,  I  19  I  I
— ,  see  aim  Chi  rok  i  i   strip.
Cherokee  Phoznix,  establishment  of...    HI,
112,217-218
—  on  Sequoya's  ancestry        bis
— ,  suppression  of        123
Cherokee  strip,  cession  of        153
—.establishment  of    124,189,142
—, settlement  of  other  1  Julians  on     150,151
Cheucunsene,  see  Kunnesee.
Cheyenne, murder  of  party  of       209
— .myths  of   229,441,443,449,452,465  166
—.tribal  medicine  of        503
I'll  i  ah  a.  Spanish  visits  to.  23,24,26,28, 197, 199,200
Chiaroscuro,  development  of      lxxvi
Chii  k  v  i  h  e,  myths  concerning  285  286,319,  154,  168
Chickamauga    band,  declaration  of  war
by    1792)   71.72
— ,  hostility  of  (1875-94)      62-67,70,72-78
— .origin  of         54
Chickamauga    oil.  ii     pseudomyth    con-
cerning   413—114
Chickamauga  towns,  destruction  of...  ■  •  ■.  T-.-7'.'
— .expedition  against          60
Chickasaw,  attacks  on  Cumberland  towns
by          62
— ,  attitude  of,  in  Civil  war        148
— .  attitude  of,  in  Creek  war          90
—,  boundary  between  Cherokee  and     62,66
—.Cherokee  relations  with    14,
>    14,67,72,371,389-390,494
— ,  defeat  of  French  by        477
— ,  friendliness  of,  toward  English         35
— .  land  cessions  by          86
— .Natchez  among        386
— .  sketch  of     199,500
— .  treaty  with  Virginia  and  North  Carolina by
,,; ,saw  Council  House,  treaty  of  (1816)       98
Chickasaw  Old  Fields,  treaty  of          85
Chicken,  Col.  George, expedition  under..       ::.;
Chilhowee,  myth  concerning        375
— ,  threatened  burning  of  (1792)          73
ik  jargon,  character  and  use  of . .  is7-iss
riii-.  il,  Spanish  visits  t"    23,27,20]
CHIVINGTON,  Colonel,  murder  of  Cheyenne
by
i  Civil  war         lis
— ,  attitude  of,  in  Creek  war    90,91
— .  Cherokee  relations  with
—  in  Texas,  union  of,  witli  Cherokee         113
t.inythsof         501
—  nam.-  for  Cherokee    15-16,182-183
—  names  for  Indian  tribes    182-183
—.sketch  of
D  oak,  traditions  concerning     115-416
Christ]  in,  Col.  William,  expedition  und
-.life  of
— ,  j   :e  agri  emenl  arranged  '■>'■ Chrisi  ianity  amo
—  among  East  Cherokee        166
— ,  liit!".:  I  ituwha        165 Chi  bi  h,  Captain,  on  scalping  by  whites...      208
Citico,  ambuscade  at           65
Citizenship,    Cherokee,    recommendation
  ,          114
—  in  Cherokee  Nation,  decision  of
civn.  u  mi,  Cherokee  attitude  during     .     L48-149
— ,  Cherokee  loss  in   ■  'til    1  IS
i.i  Cherokee  nari  in     161    162,  168-172
Claiborne,  General,  defeat   of  Creeks  at
II. .h  Ground  by          92
—  on  Alabama  migration          99
Clan,  features  of    xlix.l
veng   '.-  (  herol   I... In i.. i
of    86-87,  H'7
Clans,  Cherokee    212-213
— ,  Chickasaw         199
— ,  ch.. .law         SO0
— ,  memoir  on  localization  of,  inTusayan..       xli
— ,  Muscogee         199
— .  Seneca         183
— .  Shawano          101
Clark,  Governor  William,  Osage-Cherokee
conference  arranged  by    105, 137
Clarke,  Peter,  on  Iroquoian  migrations..      189
Clay,  Henry,  opposition  c>  removal  proj-
ect bj          129
Clover  in  Cherokee  lore         121
i'ooa,  Spanish  visits  t.. ...  23,24,26,29, 194.2   1
Coi  I.    i  in  a  in  Cherokee  lore        1-''.
i '  .i  i  ii,  i  leneral,  attack  on  Cre.-ks  at  Talla-
sechatchee,  by    90,91
—  ..ii  battle  of  Horseshoe  bend    03-00
— ,  wound  received  by,  at  Emukfaw  creek.       02
Coffee  among  Cherokee        214
('..ill  \.lli. ,11  1.  1   pie  of        499
— ,  Spanish  visits  to    23,24,28,193  194
Cohutta  mountain,  myths  concerning —     2'.r.i.
302,  I-. I    162
.  ■,.:  .1.1    ,     CADWALLAD]  i:,  OD     1 1'.  1.(11.  an  II     lill-
ons    189
—  ..ii  Iroquois    is.
—  on  name  Allege'wi    lsi
Cold  mountain,  myth  concerning    180
Coldwater,  burning  of    67
Colerain,  Creek  peace  made  at          81
Colli:,  thins  made  by  the  Bureau    xviii, xx-xxi,xxix
Colonial  per   !  Cherokee  history    20-10
Color,  pleasures  of    lxiii
— ,  primitive  ideas  concerning    lxxxiv
Com  v  Sri m:,  attitude  of,  in  Civil  war        148
— .  use  of  language  of ,  as  trade  language...      188
.  ..mi  i .  Cherokee  nam.,  for        142
Confederacy,  features  of      xlix
Confederate   States,  Cherokee  declara-
tion for         lis
-,  Easl  Cherokee  reli   -  with    168-171
CONGABEE,  Chei  aions  with
is,  Cherokee  representation  in        125
.  ...  in  ( iherol   myth  255,  277-278,
279,320    i.i    I    '    193    !9I    01     ■  '  '  ps     im
— ,  Indian  pn   ■•  ol         195
EROS!  b  conci  rning        112
on  of,  with  Delawares        107
Hon,  Cherokee,  adoption  of.  112,116,135 1


554
[eth. Coosa,  Creek  peace  town     207-208
Ooosawatee,  establishment  of  mission  at..      107
— ,  surrender  of  prisoners  ;<  t         66
COOSHATTA,  See  K"  LSATI.
Cooweescoowee,  origin  of  name        285
Copper,  Indian  use  of    23, 26
Copperhead,  myths  and  lore  concerning  252-253,
296, 313 Corn,  Indian  use  of        481
— ,  myths  and  lore  concerning    244-245,
246,248,249,  121,  1-'::,  182,  171 Corncob  in  Cherokee  myth     136,441
Cornelius,  Rev.  Eli  as.  on  The  Suck      164-465
Cornells  on  Cherokee  reception  of  Proph-
et's doctrine         89
COBNWALLIS,  attempt  to  invade  North  Caro-
lina and  Virginia  by    56-57
Cornwall  school,  education  of  Cherokee
at         108
Coronado,  trick  attempted  on        191
COSMOGONIC  myths    239-261
— ,  scealso  Sacked  myths.
Coste,  De  Soto's  visit  to        200
Cotton  gin,  grant  to  Cherokee  of          85
Coi  i  an., is,  Fustf.i,  de,  description  of  the
"Ancient  City"  by          xli
Conns,  Cherokee,  narrowing  of  jurisdic-
tion oi         156
— ,  East  ( 'lierokee        166
Cow  in  Cherokee  myth        205
Cow-ant  in  Cherokee  lore        309
Cowee,  burning  of  (1783)           01
— ,  legends  of    375-378, 496
Coyattee,  treaty  of    63-64
Coyote,  myths  concerning    467, 468
Coytmore,  Lieutenant,  murder  of    42-43
Crab  orchard,  skirmish  at  (1794)    71, 7s
Crane,  myths  concerning   290-291. 325, 445, 455
Craven,  Governor,  defeat  of  1'amassee  by.       33 Crawfish,  myths  and  lore  concerning       239,
308,  125
Crawfokij,  — ,  on  East  Cherokee  desire  for
removal        105
—  on  numbers  of  East  Cherokee        168
Creeks  among  Cherokee    142-143
— ,  attitude  of,  during  Civil  war    148,149
— ,  attitude  of,  during  Revolution         55,
59-60,62-66,70,72,73,74,77
— ,  attitude  of,  in  1794,1795    78,80
— ,  blood  of,  among  Cherokee        234
— ,  boundary  between  Cherokee  and          62
— ,  cane-splint  fire  among    429-436
— ,  Cherokee  relations  with    14,15,22,
33,38,62,89,142,372,382-385
— ,  chiefs  of    209-210,216-217
— ,  Choctaw  relatii ins  with         390
— ,  conjuring  by        502
— ,  friendly,  part  taken  by,  in  Creek  war. ..  90-95
— ,  genesis  legend  of        229
—  in  Texas,  union  of.  with  Cherokee        113
— ,  massacre al  Fort  Minis  by        -21c,
— ,  mythsof    430-
132,  134,  1:111.  117.  150, 452-455, 463, 407,  17:1,  170
— .  Natchez  among        3,so
— ,  peace  town  of    21 17-21  is
— ,  peace  treaties  with  1 1796)    67  68,81
— ,  probable    origin    of     Cherokee    myths
among        2&5 Page
Creeks,  removal  of,  to  the  West        141
,  sacred  square  of        502
— .  sketch  of        498
— ,  songs  of        504
— ,  Taskigi  among
— ,  treaty  with  Virginia  and  North  Carolina
by          03
Creek    path,  Cherokee  attack  on  settle-
ment on    383-384
— .  withdrawal  of  Creeks  to  neighbor]   1 of          383
Cref:k  war,  beginning  of    s7-sy
— ,  Chen  ikee  loss  by    07, 98
— ,  Cherokee  part  in    sy,;i7, 164
— ,  Cherokee  remembrance  of        232
— .  pensions  to  Cherokee  veterans  of        123
cremation  by  Pueblo  Viejo  inhabitants...      xv
Cricket,  myths  and  lore  concerning       269,
309,  101,504
Crockett,  David,  opposition   to  removal
project  by        129
Crow,  Cherokee  name  for        282
—  in  Cherokee  myth    283,314-315
Crow  town,  building  of         54
Culture,  processes  of    xxi-xxv
Culver  root,  Cherokee  lore        426
Cumberland  settlements,  raids  on    02-05
Cuming,  sir  Alexander,  mission   of,    to
Cherokee         35
Curia,  mi  Fraternity.
Currahee  Di<  k.  establishment  of  mission
at  instance  of        108
Curtix,  J  eremiah,  myths  given  by   359-304, 305-370,  17::.  189
Curtis  act,  effect  of        156
Cushatta,  see  Koasati         199
Ccshi.no,  F.  H.,  model  of  Zufli  altar  by    xlviii
— ,  study  of  religious  fraternities  and  cults
by    xlvii
— .  work  of       xix
CUSICK  on  Iroquoian  migrations         189
—  on  Iroquois  myths    229, 444, 469. 501
Cuttawa,  see  KiTU'HWAGi;  Synonymy.
Cyclopedia  of  Indian  tribes,  work  on...  xxviii- xxix
Dagul'kO  geese,  myths  concerning      254- 255, 284,  439
Dahlonega,  establishment  of  mint  at        220
Dakota,  myths  of        432
DAkwA',  myths  concerning   307,320-321,469
Dance,  characters  of     lxxvii-lxxviii
— ,  influence  of,  on  development  of  music
anil  drama    lxxi,  lxxx
— ,  myths  concerning    251.271,279
— .  scalp        496
— ,  visiting   ).      493
Dandridge,  raid  near          75
Dangerous  man,  migration  under    99-100
Darkening  land,  myths  concerning       248,
253,261,262,313
D'Artaguette,  defeat  of  French  under        417
Dart  throwing  among  Indians        494
Daughter  of  the  Sun,  myths  concerning.     252-
254,297,436-438 Davidson,  see  Fay  and  Davidson.
Davies.  history  of  Antilles  by        202
—  on  Spanish  mission  among  Cherokee          29


L9
555
Davis,  Rebec  .   M     on  Whiteside  moun-
tain         167   168
I»\\  is,  Maj.  w.  M..  on  Cherokee  opposition
to  Removal        126
I>  v«  i  -  Commission,  organization  and  po«
ersol      153-154
-.  work  of        156
li  w\  n  libit  with        238
Dai    DrD    i     acl  nov  ....13
—  on  Southern  gold  fields        221
Di  mi   mytha  concerning
1   i:  ITIV1     I'l  I    \-i    RES  ...    Is    Ixiii,  Ixxil
lu  ■                             herokee  leader  in  civil
war         in
LTOK  A.
Deer,  myths  concerning
263,266,275-277,286-287,  132   150   152
—  songs,  i  herokei                135
Delawares  among  Cherokee     137, 157
— .  capture  of  c  Iherok'ee  medicine  by. .  ■■'.  0 — .  Cherokee  relations  with  .        It  19   fi
—  genesis  legend  of.        -J'-".i
— .  incorporation  of,  with  Cherokee    99, 151
—  in  Texas,  union  of,  with  Cherokee        143
—  in  Texas,  wanderings  of        146
— ,  invitations  to  join  Cheroki   xtended
to    105,136
— .  mode  of  address  used  to         I'.'l
— .  Moravian  missionary  work  among          83
— ,  name  of,  for  Cherokee         16
—  regard  for  snakes  among        45s.
— .  sketch  of        497
— .  trans-Mississippi  migration  of           99
Deli  gi  .  myths  i   lerning    261,444-445
in  l.i  s.i,  Tristan,  expedition  of        201
Demere,  Captain,  commander  of  Fort  Lou-
don             40
— ,  death  of    44
— .  surrender  of    43
usi  ofdrumsol         493
Deroqueod  Shaw's  mission    71
De    SCHWEINITZ,    Edmund,    on     Moravian
missions    s4
Descriitivk  ethniii.ii.. v.  work  in.,  xxviii-xxix
Di  Soto,  Hernando,  Cherokee  name  used
by    182
— .  expedition  of,  into  Chi  roke   untry...  23-
—  on  bees  amorjg  Cherokee           214
De'tsAtA,  Cherokee  fairy
■■  Devil's  shoestring  "  in  Cherokee  lore  ..      425
De  Witts  Corners,  treaty  of         53
Dialects,  Cherokee    16,188  189,. 506
Didapper,  m  Gallinule.
iam  Johnson.      203
Dillard,  .1.   11..  arbitrator  bel  wei  n    I  asl
Cherokee  and  Thomas's  creditors        174
i.  myths  ami  lore  concerning       250- ■
I)tsKw.\"Ni.  see  Bi.YTin     i    n  i
D   bbs,    .  on  Cherokee  and  Catawbs  pop-
on            39
<  Dog,  Cherokee  use  of,  for  food
— ,  myths  concerning      26)
Doherty,     Colonel,  guinsi
Cherokee  under         75
Donaldson  onlroquois        485 Page
Donelson,  Col      I
   ifi
te  Suck    H  i
Dorsi  y,  in'..  \   lels   iiM
under  direction  "i  ...  xlviii
on  Qui<         -  re   nj     153
Dorsi  '.    Rei     i    ' ' .,  ""  Siounn  mytl
,  stud)  of  fraternities  and  cults  by    xlviii
i   mil  ii      e  tpedition    against    Knox-
ville  under         75
— .  hostility  of,  in  iT'.u
eadei
-,  reservation  for
.treatj  signed  bj     1806
Doublehead,  leader  in  wai  «  ith  I  Ireel
hin  GHERTY,  i  tablishment  of,
i    i  radei  ami  ing  Cherokee
rd's  relationship  with
Douglas, Genera], defeat  of  Texas Cheroki b>
I  15
Dragging-canoe,    chiel    oi    Chickamaiiga
band     S3
— ,  enmit;  to  Americans  of    A
FLYin  Cherokee  lore    4.11
Draki  "ii  '  tierokee   fs  in  ' Ireek  war. . .  ','7
—  mi  Cherokee  government    in;
i  reek  war
■  mi  i'i  ei                       Removal    125
—  on  Fort  Minis  massacre    216
—  on  Georgia  acts  affecting  Cherokee.   ..  117,221
—  on  imprisonment  of  missionaries...    120
—  on  Indian  civilized  government    113
—  on  Chief  McGillivray    Jin
—  on  Chief  Mcintosh    jit
—  i  m  Ross  arrest    r:3
-  nil  scalping  by  whites    209
on  Shawano    195
—  on  Tecumtha    216
—  mi  Wayne's  victory    213
—  mi  Weatherford     217
mi  Ret .  S.  A.  Worcester    218
Drama,  nature  and  development  of.  lxxvii-lxxxi
hin  ss,  Cherokee,  in  1800    82
'  in  rokee,  in  1819    137
,Easl  Cherokee     166,176 Cherokee
lent     149
Drowning-bear,  «e<  Yonaguska.
Drums,  Cherokee    397
Duck,  myth   ncerning    266-267, 112
Duncan,  prof . Clinton,  mi  effecl  ofG
law-  in'                                         lis
Dunlap,  General,  on  removal  treaty,  etc.  i  -
Dunn,  D.  R.,acknov  ledgments  to..  13
—  mi  Mi  '■                            222 Dutch,  teeTk   i     in
Dwight  HI                        bment  of    ISi
— ,  provision  for  removal  of    140
Eagle,  method  of  obtainiu
— ,  myths  .mil
283,286-  ' i-  i.i
ii.i     '  i-i.   Eli  \s,    attempted    establish
lm-ni  i,i  iron  works  by


556
Earthquakes  in  Cherokee  country        471
East  Cherokee,  conservatism  of         12
-.  history  of    157-181
— ,  invitation  from  main  band  to         151
— ,  manuscript  material  obtained  among..      112
— .  present  status  of    227-228
— .  removal  to  West-oil  some  of         152
— ,  suit  against  main  band  by    151-152
Ecanachaco,  see  Holy  Ground.
Echota.  Cherokee  capital  and  peace  town.      14,
21,207
—.destruction  of  (1780)          58
— ,  killing  of  Indians  at          74
— ,  removal  of  capital  from          81
— ,  sparing  of,  in  1776          51
Eclipse,  beliefs  concerning    J.'iT.  441 Education  of  East  Cherokee        166
— ,  see  also  Schools;  Syllabary.
EDWARDS,  Haydex. rebellion  organized  by.       143
Eel  in  Cherokee  myth        308
Eggleston,  Edward,  onlTecumtha        216
Egoism  in  esthetic  activities        lix
Egret,  in  Cherokee  myth        284
Egyptians,  myths  of...*.        438 Elephant,  Cherokee  name  for        265
Elk  in  Cherokee  country    263,447
— ,  myth  concerning        467
Ei.vas,  Gentleman  op,  on  De  Soto's  expe-
dition    24-27,191-201
Emory,  — ,  study  of  ruins  discovered  by  ...     xiv
Emukfaw  creek,  battle  of          92
Enchanted  mesa,  exploration  of    xiii-xix
Energy,  discussion  of      lxiv
England.  Cherokee  visit  to          36
— ,  enlistment  of  Tecumtha  in  service  of.. .        88
— ,  see  <il<n  British.
Enotochopco  creek,  attack  on  Jackson  at.        92
Erie,  agreement  between  Seneca  and        852
Esaw,  see  Catawba.
Eskimo,  myths  of    441,443
— ,  publication  of  paper  on      xxx
Espanola.  visit  to  ruins  near         xv
Esthetology,  or  the  science  of  activities
designed  to  give  pleasure    lv-xcii
— ,  subject-matter  of         xii
— ,  work  in    xix-xx
Ethnic  science,  classification  of    xi-xii
Etowah,  burning  of  1 1 793 )    75,82
— t$et  also  Ytaua.
Etowah  valley, collection  from    xx-xxi
Ettwein  on  nameTallige'wi        184
European  myths,  connection  of  Cherokee
with    232-236
— ,  position  of  rabbit  in        232
Evans,  Dr  J.  B..  on  Ani'-Kuta'nl   392-393
Everett,  Edward,  on  Davis's  letter  to  Sec-
retary of  War         127
—  on  General  Dunlap's  address        128
—  on  Georgia  laws  affecting  Cherokee        lis
—  on  Jackson's  attitude  toward  Cherokee. .      117
—  on  Mason's  letter  to  Secretary  of  War        128
—  on  New  Echi  ita  treaty        123
—  on  number  of  troops  employed  in  Re-
moval        129
—  on  pressure  leading  to  Removal        125
—  on  Ridge's  letter  to  President  Jackson...      128
—  on  Ross  arrest,  etc        123 Page
Everett,  Edward,  on  Wool's  letter  con-
cerning Removal        127
— .opposition  to  removal  project  by        129
Evergreens  in  Cherokee  lore        421
Evil,  discussion  of    Ivii-lviii
Fable,  development  of    lxxxii-lxxxiii
Fair,  W.  A.,  acknowledgments  to          13
Fairbanks  on  De  Soto's  route        198
Fairies  in  Cherokee  myth   330-337.  475-477
Fallen  Timbers,  battle  of        213
Farming  among  Cherokee    82,105,112
—  among  East  Cherokee        166
— ,  Government  aid  in         82
—  tools  among  Cherokee        101
Fasting  among  Cherokee       120,
321, 329, 335, 340, 341-342, 423, 470, 480
Fay  and  Davidson  on  battle  of  Horseshoe
bend     95,96
—  on  battles  of  Emukfaw  and  Enotochopco
creeks          93
—  on  capture  of  Hillabee          91
Fayne,  Captain,  expedition  against  Cher-
okee under          65
Feathers,  Indian  use  of    503-504
— ,  study  of  symbolism  of        xx
Ferguson,  General,  attempted  invasion  of
North  Carolina  and  Virginia  by    56-57
Fernow,  Berthold,  on  Cherokee  popula-
tion         34
Ferns  in  Cherokee  lore        420
Fewkes,  Dr  J.  W.,  identification  of  Hopi
altar  by    xlix,  li-lii
— .  memoirs  by    xxxix-xl,  xlv-xlvi
— ,  model  of  Hopi  altar  by    xlviii
—  on  New-fire  ceremony        503
— ,  study  of  fraternities  and  cults  by    xlviii
— ,  work  of    xiii-xv,  xix-xxi,xxx
Field  on  Davies'  history        202
Field    Columbian    Museum,   models   of
altars  in    xlviii
Fiesta  de  San  Estevan,  witnessing  of       xiii
Fighting,  Indian  method  of,  in  1793         76
Financial  statement    xxxiii
Fine  arts,  discussion  of    lxx-xci
Finney,  Alfred,  Cherokee  missionary        136
Fire,  Indian  methods  of  keeping   429-430
— ,  myths  concerning   240-242, 404, 409, 431
— ,  sacred,  of  Cherokee    395-396,  501-503
Firearms,  Cherokee  use  of,  in  eighteenth
century          82
— ,  introduction  of,  among  Cherokee   32,213
— ,  introduction  of,  among  coast  tribes          31
Fire-carrier,  Cherokee  spirit   335,475
Firefly  in  Cherokee  lore        309
Fishes,  myths  concerning    251,
285,289,307,320,455,469
Fishing,  relation  of,  to  games    lxix
Fish  river,  identity  of        190
Five  Nations,  see  Iroquois.
Flageolets  among  Indians        455
Fleabane  in  Cherokee  lore        420
Fletcher,  Miss  A.  C,  study  of  fraternities
and  cults  by    xlviii
Flint,  myths  concerning    234, 274, 451
Flood,  myth  concerning    261,444-445
Florida,  Indian  migration  to          99
— .  study  of  collections  from       xix


557 Page
Floyd,  General,  assistance  given  by  Lower
Creeks  to    '.hi
— ,  capture  of  Autossee  by    92
— ,  defeat  of,  at  Calal   :reek     93
Flutes,  see  Flageolets.
Plyi  ati  her  iti  Cherokee  myth    285
I   i  \  M     SQ1   n:i;l  I     ..,  .     KA'LAHl
Flyinq  squirrel,  myth  concerning     262,
286  287,  154
Fontanedo,  Cherokee  name  used  bj  - .  L82  183  187
Food,  Indian  beliefs   icerning       -172
]   n    Presbyterian   missionary  work
among  Cherokee
Forbes,  John,  treaty  with  Cherokee  made l»v 111
Form,  pleasures  of   lx-lxiii,  lxxiv,  lxxvii
Fort  Armstrong,  garrisoning  of,  by  Cher-
okee         92
Fort  Dobbs,  building  of         40
FortJm    Quesne,  building  of         39
— ,  capture  of         40
Fort  Gibson,  claims  based  on  treats  of        125
— .  military  reservation  at         110
— .  provisions  of  treaty  of        124
— ,  treaty  of        142
Fort  Loudon,  building  of          4U
Fort  Mms,  massacre  at     89,216
i'ii  Patrick  Henry,  building  of         51
Fort  Pitt,  suggestion  made  at  treaty  of...      113
Fort  Prince  George,  building  of         40
— .  legend  of  siege  of        412
— .  siege  of    42-13
Fort  Recovery,  building  of        212
i  "in  Smith,  Osage-Cherokee  council  at —      137
iii  Stanwix,  treaty  of        203
Fort  Toulouse,  establishment  of    34-35
Foster  on  Cherokee  literature        112
—  on  Cherokee  myths    431,436
—  on  Cherokee  sehoolbooks        151
—  on  death  of  Sequoya        148
—  on  invention  of  the  syllabary        110
—  on  translation  of  St  John's  gospel        Ill
Fourfooted  tribes    261-266,445-448
Foormile,  collections  from       xxi
Fowke,  Gerard,  work  of    xviii
Fox,  myths  and  lore  concerning       263,
265,266,272,431,452
Franklin,  State  of,  intended  campaign
against  Creeks  and  Cblckamauga  by          65
— .  treaty  with  Cherokee  by   63-64
Fraternity,  features  of    1
— ,  study  of    xlvi-1
Fredonia    rebellion,  Cherokee    connec-
tion with        143
Freelanhs  station,  attack  on    62-63
French,  encouragement  of  Cherokee  hos-
tility by          I      64
— .  Natchez  war  with        386
— ,  relations  of,  with  Indians    98,99
— .  rivalry  of,  with  English    :n-;,~>
—  traders  m  Coldwater,  rapture  of          67
French  and  Indian  war,  Cherokee  part  in.  39-10
Friends,  work  of.  among  Cherokee    175-176
Frog,  myths  concerning    251
— ,  see  als<i  BULLFROG.
Frostbite,  Cherokee  ideas  concerning        263
Finn  GROWING  by  Cherokee     82,112
—  by  Fast  Cherokee        176 Page
Gaelic  myths    168
Gallatin.  Alrert,  on  Cherokee  linguistic
relationship         16
on  i  Ihi  roki  e  bj  llabary
on   he  Soto's  route      198,198
ik,  Cherokee  name  for          '-i
Galphin,  George,  establishmenl  of  trad-
ing post  by          193
GalCS'latI,  mytl   ncerning.'.  231,239,240  i  i2
Gambling  among  Indians  ...  lxvlii-lxix,434,465
Gambold,  Rev.  J.,  Cherokee  missionary         s4
Games  discussion  of    lxviii-lxix
Ga'na.',  legend  of    367-370,  192  194
GANE,  — ,  collection  by    xxix
Gann,  Thomas,  memoir  by    vii  \iii
I,  inogv.  i   -.   legend  of
■  i\-i  "ii   set  l;  vi  1 1  a    rd  387
G  ircilaso  de  la  Vega  on  DeSoto
tion       23-27,191-201
GATAYtSTl  CAME  of  Cherokee          434
—,  myths  concerning    258-259,310,311  315  164
GATSCHET.Dr  A.S..0D  Alabama  migration  -  '.>'.•
—  onBiloxi  linguistic  affinity    500
—  on  Catawba  linguistic  affinity       198
—  on  Catawba  name  for  Cherokee    16
—  on  Cherokee  relations  with  CI   taw    390
—  on  Chickasaw     500
—  on  Creek  genesis  legend    229
—  on  Creeks       499
—  on  Creek  towns    I'm,  201
—  on  Col.  Benjamin  Hawkins    212
—  on  1 1  it-li  i  t   leer  si  nigs    435
—  on  Koasati  migration    99
—  on  Mobilian  trade  language    187
—  on  inline  CotitMrhenii    193
—  on  sacred  fire    503
—  on  Taskigi  among  Creeks    389
—  on  Yuchi  myths    421
—  work  of    xvii-xviii,  xxv
GatOR'wa'li,  see  Hard-mi  sit. Gauntlet  running,  Indian  custom  of        490
GAYARRE  on  Natchez  among  Cherokee        386
Genesis    myths,    see   Cosmogonic    myths,
sacred  myths.
Gens,  features  of    xlix.l
'  1  -.  of  Elvas,  see  Elvas.
Gentleman's  Magazine  on  Cherokee  war
Of  1760-61           45
Geological  Survey,  aeknow  ledgments  to.       12
Georgia,  agreement  between  Federa  1  1  Ii  n
eminent  and  (1802)         114
— ,  arrest  of  John  Ross  by        122
— ,  expedition  from,  in  1776         50
— ,  extension  of  laws  of,  over  <  Iherokee        221
— ,  intended  campaign  of,  against  Creeks
and  Chickamauga         65
— ,  local  legends  of     415-419
— ,  opposition  to  a  Hot  merit  project  by         114
— ,  part  taken  by,  in  Cherokee  removal       114- 120. 129, 140
pressure  for  land  cessions  bj      114-115
— ,  product  ion  of  gold  in   2211,221
.  protest  against  conditions  of  Bopi
by         61
— .  raid  by  citizens  of           71
—.Removal  fort-sin        221
1  1  y.  ac-
knowledgments to         13


558 [ETH.  ANN.  19
( ;  i:  i:  M  a  n  blood  among  Cherokee          83
Ghost  country,  myths  concerning    253-254
Ghost-dance  religion  among  Cherokee  ..       89
Giants,  myths  of    391,500-501
Gibson,  Col.  John,  on  name  Talligewi        184
Gill,  DeLancey  \y.,  work  of    xxxi
Gill,  Rev.  W.W.,  on  Polynesian  myths..  431.112
GlLLESPIES  station,  attack  on     65-66
Gilmer,  Governor,  declaration  of,  concern-
ing delay  in  removal         129
Ginseng  in  Cherokee  lore    121, 425, 505
Gist,  George,  see  Sequoya.
Glass,  Cherokee  chief,  expulsion  of  whites
from  Muscle  shoals  by          68
Glossary  of  Cherokee  words    506-548
Glowworm  in  Cherokee  lore        309
Goat,  Cherokee  name  for        265
Gold,  discovery  of,  in  Cherokee  country...      116
— ,  occurrence  of,  in  Cherokee  country         26,
29, 220-221 Golden  Circle,  Knights  of,  secessionist
organization        14S
Golden  eagle,  Cherokee  ideas  concerning.      281
— ,  see  also  Eagle.
Going-snake,  signer  of  act  of  union        135
Gomez,  visit  to  America  by        191
Good,  discussion  of    lvii-lviii
Goose,  myths  concerning    251-255, 284, 325
Goshawk,  myths  concerning    284,466
Gourd  in  Cherokee  lore    454-455
Government,  Cherokee,  modification  in...    112-
113, 116, 135
— ,  East  Cherokee,  organization  of        1 73
— ,  Indian,  steps  toward  abolition  of   153-154
— ,  republican,  adoption  of,  by  Cherokee.  106-107
— ,  tribal,  organization  of      xlix
— ,  United  States,  aid  in  farming  and  me-
chanic arts  given  by    82-83, 104-105
Grant,  Col.   ,  expedition  against  Chero-
kee under           44
Grape  in  Cherokee  lore        422
Grapevine,  myths  concerning   465,501
Graphic  art,  nature  and  development  of.  Ixxiv-
lxxvii
Graves,  Edward,  supposed  introduction  of
spinning  wheels  by        214
Gray  squirrel,  myths  concerning        262
Greeley,   Horace,  on  Cherokee   part  in
civil  war   t         148
—  on  effect  of  Georgia  anti-Cherokee  laws. .      118
—  on  events  preceding  removal        125
—  on    imprisonment    of    missionaries    by
Georgia        120
Green-corn  dance  among  western  Chero-
kee        146
— ,  component  ceremonies  of    279, 290, 452
— ,  fire  lighting  before        396
— .purificatory  rites  in         230
Greenland,  work  in    xviii
Greensnake,  myths  concerning    280,296-297
Greer,  L.JI.,  acknowledgments  to          13
Gregg,  Josiah,  on  Shawano  myths        437
Gregory  bald, myths  concerning    407.473
Grinnell  on  Blackfoot  and  Pawnee  myths,      432
445-446, 447, 451. 462-463, 473
—  on  Blackfoot  method  of  catching  eagles .      453
Grippe  among  East  Cherokee        179 Page
Groundhog,  myths  concerning . .     279.152
Gboi  nd  squirrel,  myths  concerning.  251,263,436
Grouse,  see  Pheasant.
grub  worm,  myths  and  lore  concerning   251- 252,280,308
Guadalajara, Cherokee  in  vicinity  of         1 16
Guaquili,  De  Soto's  visit  to    25,28, 194 GUASII.I,  six  GUAXULE.
Gl'ATARI,  see  Wateree.
GUAXULE,  De  Soto's  visit  to    25,26,195-197
Guess  (Guest),  George,  see  Sequoya.
GCLSADmi',  legend  of    376-377 Guns,  see  Firearms.
GuSsk  Ali'sk i .  legend  of    375-377
Habitat,  Cherokee    14-15
Hagar, Stansbury, acknowledgments  to..        13
—  on  Cherokee  myths        431
437, 441, 442, 443, 445, 447, 470.  476,  481
—  on  Ulunsu'tl    460
Hale  on  Cherokee  linguistic  relationship..  16
—  on  Cherokee  migrations    191
—  on  Iroquoian  migrations    189
Haliburton,   ,  acknowledgments  to...  13
Hall,  Rev.  James,  shooting  of  negro  by...  52
Hall,  see  McKenney  and  Hall    85
Hamilton,  Governor,  project  of,  for  unit-
ing Indians  in  attack  on  American  fron-
tier    55
Hamilton,   ,  on  Fort  Mims  massacre...      216
Hamstrings,  Indian  custom  of  removing..      447
Handley,  Capt.  Samuel,  capture  and  re-
lease Of           74
Hanging-maw,  capture  of  Creek  murderer
by  order  of          77
— ,  conference  at  Tellico  attended  by          79
— ,  killing  of  wife  of          74
— ,  expedition  against  Creeks  under         77
— ,  wounding  of          74
Harden,  E.  J.,  on  events  leading  to  Re-
moval        125
Harden,  William,  acknowledgments  to  ..        13
Hard  Labor,  treaty  of    46,203
Hard-mush,  death  of        145
—  on  Iroquois  peace  embassy    353, 355, 356
— ,  treaty  with  Texas  signed  by        144
Harley,  Timothy,  on  Eskimo  myths       .441
—  on  primitive  ideas  concerning  eclipses ..      141
Harmony,  development  of    lxxii-lxxiii
Harris,  Bird,  plan  for  emigration  by        156
Harris,  I.  X.,  printer  of  Cherokee  Phoenix.      Ill
Harris,  J.  C,  on  character  of  rabbit  in  ne-
gro tales        233
—  on  negro  myths    448, 450, 452
—  on  relation  of  Indian,  negro,  and  Euro-
pean myths        234
Harrison,    Benjamin,    proclamation    by,
preventing  lease  of  Cherokee  strip        153
Harrison,  Gen.  W.  H.,  capture  of  Prophet's town  by        215
Hart,  J.  C,  on  East  Cherokee  condition  in
1897         179
Hatcher,  J.  B.,  work  of    xviii
Hatcinondon,  legend  of         362,490-491
Haunted  whirlpool,  legend  of        347
Hawk,  myths  and  lore  concerning  ..  284,286-287
— ,  see  also  TlA'nuwA.


55VI Page
Hawkins,  Col.  Benjamin,  life  of    211-212
ob  '  iherokee  attitude  in  war  ,,i  1812          89
—  mi  Cherokee  industries  in  1801  .  82
—  on  Cherokee  receptionof  Prophet  - trine
—  on  Chi  refugees  at  \\  illstown       209
ide          82
on  i  >,  eks        199
—  on  Fori  Mims  massacre        216
—on  introduction  of  spinning  »  1   Is        214
—  on  Koasati  migration         99
icred  fire        503
—  on  Taskigi  among  Creeks        389
—  mi  threatened  secession  of  progressives
(aboul  1800)         88
—  on  use  of  parched  corn         181
—  en  Yin  In         499
—,  treaty  concluded  bj           61
— ,  visit  to  Cherokee  b>          55
Haywood,  John,  or.  Cherokee  migrations
and  predecessors    21-22
—  on  Cherokee  heroism    394-395
—  on  Cherokee  myths        20,
229,  140,  111,  445,  169,  17!   178
—  on  Cherokee  relations  with  Chickasaw..      390
—  on  Cherokee  relations  with  Creeks ....  184
—  on  Cherokee  relations  with  Tuscarora...      379
—  on  conflicts  with  Cherokee         76
—  on  destruction  of  <  Ihickamauga  towns. . .  55, 79
—  on  tirst  trader  among  Cherokee          31
—  on  introduction  of  guns  among  Chero-
kee    32, 213
—  on  killing  of  Scott  party  and  Bowl  mi-
gration    77,100-101
—  on  Nancy  Ward        204
—  on  Natchez  among  Cherokee        388
—  on  office  of  "  pretty  woman  "        490
—  on   Sevier   and    Campbell's   expedition
(1780)          58
Haywood,  John,  on  Shawano  wars..  371,372,494
—  on  shining  rock  and  Track  Mock  gap  ...      4so
—  on  surrender  of  Fort  London         44
—  on  Tennessee  Assembly'smemorial  1 1794)       76 Headdress.  Cherokee        474
Hearin...  pleasure,  of    lxx-lxxiv
Heckewelder,  John,  on  Cherokee  migra-
tions         191
—  on  Delaware-Cherokee  relations       37.1, :;s    179,  194
—  ..n  Delaware  regard  for  snakes    158
—  on    Delaware     traditions     concerning
Cherokee          is
—  on  expression  "a night's  encampment".       20
—  on  Indian  attitude  toward  bear       44s
—  on  Indian  ideas  a  I   !  animals         445
—  on  name  Tallege'wi        184
—  on  Shawano         195
Hell,  development  of  concept  of    lxxxv
flEMR  .'ARRIKR.  legend  of     364,  367,  I'M
Henderson  purchase  from  Cherokee         4f>
Henry  on  Indian  attitude  toward  bears.  446-147
—  on  Ojibwa  myths        445
—  on  i  niiiua  regard  forsnakes    457-i.\s
Herbert's  9pbing,  legend  of    " Heron  on  Cherokee  myths    284,285
Heroism,  legends  of    894-395,501
Herring,  Elbert,  on  assassination  of  John
Walker        121 ius  by        176 Hewai    on   as   ul  ol    3i luth   ' larollna
u  ith  I  i  erol  ee         32
-on  Chei          34
  Iheroki  e  relations  with  Tuscarora...       32
—  on  Cherokee  »   i   3  i
—  on  first  i  iherokee  war  «  ith  col
on  surrender  of  F..rt  London           13,44
Hewitt,  J,  v  B„  on   Cherokee   lin
relationship    16
on  ]  roquois  mj  ths    i
—  on  Mohawk  language          188
—  on  Mohawk  name  for  Cherokee           16
—  on  name  Hiadeoni          189
— ,  study  of  fraternities  and  cults  by    xlviii
— .  work  of    xviii.  xxv-xxvi
IIey.iwam  iii  Texas,  union  of,  with  Chei
okee         143
II;   m.  legend  of    356,  189
Hichitee,  deei  songs  of           135
— ,  migration  of ,  to  Florida         99
— ,  tribe  of  Creek  confederacy      198  199
Hickoryntjt  oar,  myth  connected  with.         138
Hicks,  C,  R.,  election  of,  as  chief        112
— ,  endeavor  to  introduce  coffee  by        214
on    m  in  \  Ills         441
Hicks,  Elijah,  letter  to  Secretary  of  War  bj       11
Hightower,  establishment  of  mission  at  ..      105
Hillabee,  capture  of         91
Hindi-  myths        431
Hi n.man,  S.  D-,  on  Sioux  myths        450
Historical  traditions,  Cherokei
History  of  Cherokee     1 1-228
Histrionic  art,  development  of...  lxxix-lxxxi
Hiwassee,  pseudomyth  concerning         416
Hiwassee  Towns,  burning  of  (1788  i          65
— .  hostility  of  (1786)           63
Hobbs,  B.  C.  contract  for  schools  among
East  Cherokee  brought  aboul  by        176
Hobbs,  B.  C,  on  East  Cherokee  schools        176
Hodge,  F.  W.,  work  of      xiii,
xv.  xxix-xxx.  xxxi,  xxxii
HOG,  '  Iherokee  name  for        215
— ,  raising  of,  by  Cherokee    s2. 1 12
Hog-sucker  in  Cherokee  myth        308
Holbrook,  J.  E.,  on  Pleistodon    163
HoLMl  -,  J.  I...  on  Chief  X.  ,1.  Smith         178
—  on  Cherokee  missions    v  I
Holston,  supplement  to  treaty  of          77
-,  treaty  of    17911    69.211
Holy  Ground,  battle  of    92,217   .02
Honduras,  memoir  on  mounds  in    xli-xlii
Honey,  see  Bees.
Honey-locust,  myths  and  lore  concerning.  312-
,  a.',  i-i HOOTING  owl,  Cherokee  name  for    281,284
— .  myth  concerning    211
Hopewell,  location  of       211
—.treaty  of          61
— ,  violations  of  treaty  of          68
Hopewell  i  ommission  ers  on  spinning  and
weaving  among  Cherokee       211
Hori.  model  of  altar  of    xlviii-xlix
— , Owakulti  altar  ..f    l.liii
— ,-tud:   .a   ceremonies,   fraternities,  and
altars  of    xiii,  xlv-lii
Horned  owl,  Cherokee  name  for    281,284
—.myth  concerning        241
Hornet,  myth  concerning        106


560
[ETH. Page
Horses  among  Cherokee    82, 112,213
—  among  East  Cherokee        ITS
—  in  Cherokee  myth    265,346,  143,  182
Horseshoe  bend,  battle  of    93-96
— ,  Cherokee  warriors  at        104
— ,  conduct  of  Houston  at        222
"Hot-house,"  see  Asi        462
Hough,  Dr  Walter,  work  of         xv
Hoi'MA,  tribe  of  Choctaw  confederacy        500
Houses,  Cherokee    82, 137
— ,  East  Cherokee        166
Houston-,  Samuel,  adopted  father  of        136
— ,  conduct  of,  at  battle  of  Horseshoe  bend  .        95
— .  efforts  of,  in  behalf  of  Texas  Cherokee.  144-145
—  life  of    222-224
— ,  treaty  with  Cherokee  by        144
Huckleberries,  myths  concerning        259
Hudson,  Henry,  legend  of  landing  of        350
Huhu,  myths  and  lore  concerning        281
285, 292-293. 456
Hummingbird,  myths  concerning      254-
255,290-291,455
Humor, Cherokee    397-399,503
Hunting  among  Cherokee  (1800)          82
— ,  relation  of,  to  games  -  -      1  xix
Hutchins  on  Indian  warpath        207
Hyades,  myth  concerning        442
Iawanie,  see  Heyowani.
Ice  Man,  myth  of    322-323,470
Illustrations,  work  in    xxx-xxxi
Imitation,  part  played  by,  in  sports  lxiv,  lxy-lxvi
Indian  Territory,  population  of        154
— ,  steps  toward  opening  up  of    153-154
Insects,  myths  and  lore  concerning        239,
241-242,244,308,401,430
Intermarriage  of  whites  with  Cherokee. .  83
Intruders  in  territory  of  civilized  tribes.  152,154
Irish  blood  among  Cherokee          83
Iroquoian  tribes,  distribution  of          17
— ,  migrations  of    189-190
— ,  study  of  lauguages  of    x  xvi
— ,  work  among    xviii
Iroquois,  attitude  of,  during  Revolution  . .        47
— ,  blood  of,  among  Cherokee        234
— ,  Cherokee  relations  with    14, 18, 38
— ,  control  of  revenues  of         156
— ,  legends  of  Cherokee  wars  with      232,
351-370,485-494
— ,  migration  to  Canada  by           99
— ,  mode  of  addressing  Delawares  used  by. .      497
— ,  myths  of   229,234,429,430,432,436,439,440,
443, 447, 448, 451, 454, 469, 471, 473, 501, 504
—  name  for  Catawba        498
—  name  for  Cherokee          16
— ,  peace  embassies  of   109,352,
353-356, 365, 367-370, 485-488, 491-194
— ,  peace  towns  among        208
— ,  sketch  of    483-485
— ,  study  of  fraternities  and  cults  of    xlvii
Irrigation  by  inhabitants  of  Pueblo  Viejo.      xv
Irving  on  De  Soto's  route    193, 195, 198
Isu,  JOHN,  killing  of          77
Iskagua,  change  of  name  by          69
Issa,  De  Soto's  visit  to          28 Itaba,  see  Ytaua.
ItAgO'nAh!,  see  Ax,  John.
Ivy,  A.  E.,  on  Cherokee  schools        155 Page
Jack,  Col.  Samuel,  expedition  under          50
Jackal,  myth  concerning        453
Jackson,  Gen.  Andrew,  address  to  Chero-
kee by        122
— ,  attack  on  Creeks  at  Talladega  by         91
— ,  attitude  of,  toward  Cherokee   117,119
— ,  defeat  of  Creeks  at  Horseshoe  bend  by..  93-96
— ,  determination  of,  for  Cherokee  removal      123,
140, 159
— ,  election  of,  as  President        117
— ,  Houston's  relations  with        223
— ,  Junaluska's  saying  about        164
— ,  proclamation    against  crossing   Sabine
river  by         143
— ,  relief  of  Turkeytown  by  order  of          90
— ,  remark  of,  concerning  Supreme  Court
decision        120
— ,  reply  to  Cherokee  protests  against  New
Echota  treaty  by        126
— ,  retreat  from  Emukfaw  creek  by          92
— ,  treaty  signed  by        103
Jackson,  Mai.  R.  C,  acknowledgments  to..        13
—  on  assassination  of  John  Walker        121
Jamaica,  collection  from    xxix
Jar-fly  in  Cherokee  lore        308
JAY,  myth  concerning    284,466-468
Jefferson,  President  Thomas,  encourage-
ment of  westward  emigration  by. . .  101, 102, 113
—  on    attempted    establishment    of    iron
w  i  irks  in  Cherokee  country  (1807)          86
—  on  burial  mound  in  Virginia    20-21
— ,  suggestions  to  Cherokee  by        113
Jeffreys  on  Mobilian  trade  language        187
Jenks,  Dr  Albert  E.,  memoir  by    lii-liv
J  ESSAN,  ser  TSESA'NI.
Jesuits,  work  of,  among  Cherokee    36-37
J  ews,  peace  towns  among        207
Jicarilla,  myths  of       229,
431, 433, 443,  450. 451 , 452. 473
— ,  study  of  language  of    xxvi
— ,  work  among    xv-xvi
Jimsonweed  in  Cherokee  lore        426
Joanna  bald,  myth  concerning        407
Joara, sec  Xuala.
Job's  tears  in  Cherokee  lore        420
Johnson,   Sir  William,    arrangement   of
peace  between  Iroquois  and  Cherokee  by  38, 352
— ,  life  of    202-203
Johnson,  Gov.   ,  census  of  Cherokee  com-
piled by           34
—  on  Indian  civilized  government        113
Johnston,  Gen.  A.  S.,  commissioner  to  Cher- okee        145
Johnston,  William,  seizure  of  East  Cher-
okee lands  by    173-174
Johnston,   .study  of  ruins  discovered  by.     xiv
Jolly,  John,  Cherokee  chief    136-137
— ,  Houston's  relations  with    222-223
Jones,  Rev.  Evan,  admission  of,  to  Cherokee
citizenship        150
— ,  missionary  among  Cherokee        108
— ,  payment  to        150
— ,  translation  of  New  Testament  by        108
— ,  Wafford's  study  under        238
— ,  worl}  of  N.  J.  Smith  for        178
Jones,  John  B.,  admission  of,  to  Cherokee
citizenship        150
— ,  organization  of  Ketoowah  society  by  - . .      225


ETtl.  ANN.  19] 561
Fohn  B..  preparation  of  schoolbooks
by        153
lost:-.  \v.  A.,  mii  Cherokee  emigration  plana      156
i  told  by        Is!'
Junks.   .  on  Cherokee  refugees  in  Flor-
ida
— on  De  Luna's  expedition        201
—on  De  Soto's  route    193,195,197, 198
—on  Jack's  expedition         50
—on  petroglyphs  at  Track  Rock  gap  118
—  tin  Spanish  mines    201,202
—  on  Williamson's  expedition         :'ii
JUADA,  .-"    X'   Al   I.
Judgment,  discussion  of    Ivi-lvii
ska,  East  Cherokee  chief     i"i  165
— .  pan  taken  by,  in  Creek  war         '.'7
JTJTACULLA,  see  TSUL'KALU'. Jutaculi  ..  Dld  Kin  ds,  myths  concerning.     107,
176,  IT'.' Ki'i.  in"".  East  Cherokee  chief        178
-.  myth  told  by        139
Houston   -  imuel.
KAna'sta,  myth  concerning    Ml  342,  180
Kana'il  myths  concerning    242  249,
21  2,  264,280,  13]    135,  ill.  164
Kane  on  Nisqualli  myths        172
—  on  Wallawalla  myths        448
Kabankawa,  information  concerning  —     xvi
Katal'sta,  last  Cherokee  potter        164
K at y ini  i.  myth  concerning      Ill   16 3
Kaw,  settlement  of,  on  Cherokee  strip        151
Keenek.   Rev.    Ulrich,   preacher   among
Cherokee        165
Kennedy.    .  expedition  againsl  I  hero
kee  under  (1788)          65
Kentucky ,  work  in    xviii
K ei i wee.  stone  cirnm  in        397
Kerr,  Captain,  part  taken  by.  in  battle  of
Horseshoe  bend         94
Ketoowab  society,  eharactei  and  history
of. I-. J 226
— .  opposition  to  allotment  project  by    156
— ,  part  taken  by.  in  Civil  war    lis
Khasias,  myths  of    411
...  in  Texas,  wanderings  of .    lit;
— ,  union  of,  with  Cherokee    143
Kini4.  Cussetah,  mi  Cherokee  attitude  in
war  of  1812    89
Kingi  [SHER,  myths  concerning
Kings  mountain,  battle  at    7
Kinship,  Cherokee  term-  of    168
— .  Indian  use  of  terms  of     191, 197
— .  influence  of,  on  tribal  organization    xlix
Kintiei-  ruin,  excavation  of    xiii
— .  collection  from    xxi
Kiowa,  death  song  of  warrior  order  of  .
— .  myths  nf      i
— .  owl-inspired  medicine-man  of
-,  publication  of  paper  mi    xvi,  xxi x
— ,  tribai                              503
•.mii.y.  murder  oft                          ■■  65
— ,  murder  of  mi                       Chi  rokee —  65
Kituhwa,  introduction  of  Christianity  at..  1'-'' — ,  legend  of  mound  at
.  Ketoowah. ming  iimi  derive na  ine    16,182,878
— .  »,  also  >ym inymy.
kmi.ii  i-  -i    i  in    Golden   Ciri  i  e,    ret
secessionist  organization   i..m.  myth  told  bj
Knox   J   J,  instructions  of,  i"  Ethnologisl