story  of  Ontsaiyi'),  and  to  kill  one  is  to  destroy  one  of  the  most  prized
ornaments  of  the  thunder  god.  In  one  of  the  formulas  addressed  to
the  Little  Men.  the  sons  of  the  Thunder,  they  are  implored  to  take
the  disease  snake  to  themselves,  because  "it  is  just  what  you  adorn
yourselves  with."
For  obvious  reasons  the  rattlesnake  is  regarded  as  the  chief  of  the
snake  tribe  and  is  feared  ami  respected  accordingly.  Few  Cherokee
will  venture  to  kill  one  except  under  absolute  necessity,  and  even  then
the  crime  must  he  atoned  for  by  asking  pardon  of  the  snake  ghost,
either  in  person  or  through  the  mediation  of  a  priest,  according  to  a  set
formula.  Otherwise  the  relatives  of  the  dead  snake  will  send  one  of
their  number  to  track  up  the  offender  and  bite  him  so  that  he  will  die
(see  story.  "The  Rattlesnake's  Vengeance  ").  The  only  thine-  of  which
the  rattlesnake  is  afraid  is  -aid  to  be  the  plant  known  a-  campion,  or
""rattlesnake's  master"  (Silent  stellata),  which  b  used  by  the  doctors
to  counteract  the  effect  of  the  bite,  and  it  is  believed  that  a  snake  will
lice  in  terror  from  the  hunter  who  carries  a  -mall  piece  of  the  root
about  his  person,  ('hewed  linn  bark  b  also  applied  to  the  bite,  perhaps
from  tin'  supposed  occult  connection  between  the  snake  and  the  thun-
der, as  this  tree  is  said  to  be  immune  from  the  lightning  stroke.
Notwithstanding  the  fear  of  the  rattlesnake,  his  rattle-,  teeth,  flesh,
and  oil  are  greatly  prized  for  occult  or  medical  uses,  the  snakes  being
killed  for  this  purpose  by  certain  priests  who  know  the  necessary  rites
and  formulas  for  obtaining  pardon.  This  device  for  whipping  the
devil  around  the  stump,  ami  incidentally  increasing  their  own  re\  enues,


2V>(>  MYTHS    OF   THE    CHEROKEE
is  a  common  trick  of  Indian  medicine  men.  Outsiders  desiring  to
acquire  this  secret  knowledge  are  discouraged  by  beingtold  that  it  is  a
dangerous  thing  to  learn,  for  the  reason  that  the  new  initiate  is  almost
certain  to  be  bitten,  in  order  that  the  snakes  may  "try"  him  to  know
if  he  has  correctly  learned  the  formula.  When  a  rattlesnake  is  killed
the  head  must  be  cut  off  and  buried  an  arm's  length  deep  in  the  ground and  the  body  carefully  hidden  away  in  a  hollow  log.  If  it  is  left  ex-
posed to  the  weather,  the  angry  snakes  will  send  such  torrents  of  rain
that  all  the  streams  will  overflow  their  banks.  Moreover,  they  will  tell
their  friends,  the  deer,  and  the  ginseng  in  the  mountains,  so  that  these
will  hide  themselves  and  the  hunters  will  seek  them  in  vain.
The  tooth  of  a  rattlesnake  which  has  been  killed  by  the  priest  with
the  proper  ceremonies  while  the  snake  was  lying  stretched  out  from
east  to  west  is  used  to  scarify  patients  preliminary  to  applying  the
medicine  in  certain  ailments.  Before  using  it  the  doctor  holds  it
between  the  thumb  and  finger  of  his  right  hand  and  addresses  it  in  a
prayer. at  the  end  of  which  the  tooth  "becomes alive,"  when  it  is  ready
for  the  operation.  The  explanation  is  that  the  tense,  nervous  grasp  of
the  doctor  causes  his  hand  to  twitch  and  the  tooth  to  move  slightly
between  his  ringers.  The  rattles  are  worn  on  the  head,  and  sometimes
a  portion  of  the  flesh  is  eaten  by  ballplayers  to  make  them  more  terri-
ble to  their  opponents,  but  it  is  said  to  have  the  bad  effect  of  making
them  cross  to  their  wives.  From  the  lower  half  of  the  body,  thought
to  be  the  fattest  portion,  the  oil  is  extracted  and  is  in  as  great  repute
among  the  Indians  for  rheumatism  and  sore  joints  as  among  the  white
mountaineers.  The  doctor  who  prepares  the  oil  must  also  eat  the
flesh  of  the  snake.  In  certain  seasons  of  epidemic  a  roasted  (barbe-
cued) rattlesnake  was  kept  hanging  up  in  the  house,  and  every  morn-
ing the  father  of  the  family  bit  off  a  small  piece  andchewed  it,  mixing
it  then  with  water,  which  he  spit  upon  the  bodies  of  the  others  to  pre-
serve them  from  the  contagion.  It  was  said  to  be  a  sure  cure,  but  apt
to  make  the  patients  hot  tempered.
The  copperhead,  wd'dige-askd'U,  "brown-head,"  although  feared  on
account  of  its  poisonous  bite,  is  hated,  instead  of  being  regarded  with
veneration,  as  is  the  rattlesnake.  It  is  believed  to  be  a  descendant  of
a  great  mythic  serpent  (sec  number  5)  and  is  said  to  have  ••eyes  of
fire,"  on  account  of  their  intense  brightness.  The  blacksnake  is  called
ffide'gi,  "the  climber."  Biting  its  body  is  said  to  be  a  preventive  of toothache,  and  there  is  also  a  belief,  perhaps  derived  from  the  whites.
that  if  the  body  of  one  be  hung  upon  a  tree  it  will  bring  rain  within
three  (four?)  days.  The  small  greensnake  is  called  tsdlifotod'yl,  the  same
name  being  also  applied  to  a  certain  plant,  the  Eryngvum  virgmianum,
or  bear  grass,  whose  long,  slender  leaves  bear  some  resemblance  to  a
greensnake.  As  with  the  blacksnake.  it  is  believed  that  toothache
may  be  prevented  and  sound  teeth   insured  as  long  as  life   lasts   by


mooney]  THE    SNAKE    TRIBE  297
biting  the  greensnake  along  it-  body.  It  must  bo  held  bv  the  head
and  tail,  and  :ill  the  teeth  ;it  once  pressed  down  four  times  along  the
middle  of  it-  body,  bul  without  biting  into  the  flesh  or  injuring  the
snake.  Some  informants  say  that  the  operation  must  be  repeated
four  times  upon  as  many  snakes  and  that  a  certain  food  tabu  must
also  be  observed.  The  water  moccasin,  kanegwd'ti,  is  not  specially
regarded,  but  a  very  rare  wood  snake,  said  to  resemble  it  except  that
it  has  blue  eves,  is  considered  to  have  great  supernatural  powers,
in  what  way  is  not  specified.  The  repulsive  hut  harmless  spreading
adder  (Heterodori)  is  called  daWcstA',  "vomiter,"  mi  account  of  its
habit  of  spitting,  and  sometimes  kwanddya' hH,  a  word  of  uncertain
etymology.  It  was  formerly  a  man.  hut  was  transformed  into  a  snake
in  order  to  accomplish  the  destruction  of  the  Daughter  of  the  Sun
(see  the  story).  For  its  failure  on  this  occasion  it  is  generally
despised.
The  Wahnenauhi  manuscript  mentions  a  legend  of  a  greal  serpent
called  on  account  of  its  color  the  "ground  snake."  To  set'  it  was  an
omen  of  death  to  the  one  who  saw  it.  and  if  it  was  seen  by  several  per-
sons some  great  tribal  calamity  was  expected.  For  traditions  and
beliefs  in  regard  to  the  Uktena.  the  Uksuhi,  and  other  mythic  ser-
pents, see  under  those  headings.
50.  THE  UKTENA  AND  THE  ULONSO'TI
Long  ago — Mlahi'yit — when  the  Sun  became  angry  at  the  people
on  earth  and  sent  a  sickness  to  destroy  them,  the  Little  Men  changed
a  man  into  a  monster  snake,  which  they  called  Uktena,  ■"The  Keen
eyed."  and  sent  him  to  kill  her.  He  failed  to  do  the  work,  and  the
Rattlesnake  had  to  lie  -cut  instead,  which  made  the  Uktena  so  jealous
and  angry  that  the  people  were  afraid  of  him  and  had  him  taken  up
to  Galunlati,  to  stay  with  the  other  dangerous  things.1  He  left  others
behind  him.  though,  nearly  as  large  and  dangerous  as  himself,  and
they  hide  now  in  deep  pools  in  the  river  and  about  lonely  passes  in
the  high  mountains,  the  places  which  the  Cherokee  call  •"Where  the
Uktena  stays."
Those  who  know  say  that  the  Uktena  is  a  great  snake,  a-  large  around
a- a  tree  trunk,  with  horns  on  its  head,  and  a  bright,  blazing  crest  like
a  diamond  upon  its  forehead,  and  scales  glittering  like  sparks  of  fire.
It  has  rings  or  spot.-  of  color  along  its  whole  length,  and  can  not  lie
wounded  except  by  shooting  in  the  seventh  spot  from  the  head,  because
under  this  spot  are  its  heart  and  its  life.  The  blazing  diamond  is
called  I'l '"nisi)' ti,  "Transparent,"  and  he  who  can  win  it  may  become
the  greatest  wonder  worker  of  the  tribe,  hut  it  is  worth  a  man's  life
to  attempt  it,  for  whoever  is  seen  by  the  Uktena  is  so  dazed  by  the
bright  light  that  he  run-  toward  the  snake  instead  of  trying  toe-cape.
'  Sec    -'I'll..  Daughter  of  tl


298  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
Even  to  see  the  Ukfcena  asleep  is  death,  uot  to  the  hunter  himself,  but
to  hi*  family.
Of  all  the  daring  warriors  who  nave  started  out  in  search  of  the
Ulunsu'ti  only  Agan-uni'tsi  ever  came  back  successful.1  The  East
Cherokee  still  keep  the  one  which  he  brought.  It  is  like  a  large  trans-
parent crystal,  nearly  the  shape  of  a  cartridge  bullet,  with  a  blood-red
streak  running  through  the  center  from  top  to  bottom.  The  owner
keeps  it  wrapped  in  a  whole  deerskin,  inside  an  earthen  jar  hidden
away  in  a  secret  cave  in  the  mountains.  Every  seven  days  he  feeds  it
with  the  blood  of  small  game,  rubbing  the  blood  all  over  the  crystal
as  soon  as  the  animal  has  been  killed.  Twice  a  year  it  must  have  the
blood  of  a  deer  or  some  other  large  animal.  Should  he  forget  to  feed
it  at  the  proper  time  it  would  come  out  from  its  cave  at  night  in  a  shape
of  fire  and  fly  through  the  air  to  slake  its  thirst  with  the  lifeblood  of
the  conjurer  or  some  one  of  his  people.  He  may  save  himself  from
this  danger  by  telling  it,  when  he  puts  it  away,  that  he  will  not  need
it  again  for  a  long  time.  It  will  then  go  quietly  to  sleep  and  feel  no
hunger  until  it  is  again  brought  out  to  be  consulted.  Then  it  must  be
fed  again  with  blood  before  it  is  used.
No  white  man  must  ever  see  it  and  no  person  but  the  owner  will
venture  near  it  for  fear  of  sudden  death.  Even  the  conjurer  who
keeps  it  is  afraid  of  it.  and  changes  its  hiding  place  every  once  in  a
while  so  that  it  can  not  learn  the  way  out.  When  he  dies  it  will  be
buried  with  him.  Otherwise  it  will  come  out  of  its  cave,  like  a  blazing
star,  to  search  for  his  grave,  night  after  night  for  seven  years,  when,
if  still  not  able  to  find  him.  it  will  go  back  to  sleep  forever  where  he
has  placed  it.
Whoever  owns  the  Ulunsu'ti  is  sure  of  success  in  hunting,  love,  rain-
making,  and  every  other  business,  but  its  great  use  is  in  life  prophecy.
When  it  is  consulted  for  this  purpose  the  future  is  seen  mirrored  in
the  clear  crystal  as  a  tree  is  reflected  in  the  quiet  stream  below,  and
the  conjurer  knows  whether  the  sick  man  will  recover,  whether  the
warrior  will  return  from  battle,  or  whether  the  youth  will  live  to  be
old.
51.   AGAN-UNI'TSl'S   SEARCH    FOR  THE   UKTENA
In  one  of  their  battles  with  the  Shawano,  who  are  all  magicians,  the
Cherokee  captured  a  great  medicine-man  whose  name  was  Agan-
uni'tsi.  "The  Ground-hogs*  Mother."  They  had  tied  him  ready  for  the
torture  when  he  begged  for  his  life  and  engaged,  if  spared,  to  find  for
them  the  great  wonder  worker,  the  Ulunsu'ti.  Now.  the  Ulunsu'ti  is
like  a  blazing  star  set  in  the  forehead  of  the  great  Uktena  serpent,
and  the  medicine-man  who  could  possess  it  might  do  marvelous  things,
but   everyone  knew  this  could  not  be,  because  it  was  certain  death  to
See  tin'  next  story.


VGAN-UNl'TSl    AM)   THE    UKTENA  299
inert  the  Uktena.  They  warned  him  of  all  this,  but  he  onlj  answered
that  his  medicine  was  strong  and  he  was  not  afraid.  So  they  gave  him
his  life  "ii  that  condition  and  he  began  the  search.
The  Uktena  used  to  lie  in  wait  in  lonely  places  to  surprise  its  vic-
tims, and  especially  haunted  the  dark  passes  of  the  Great  Smok}
mountains.  Knowing  this,  the  magician  went  li i .-. t  to  a  gap  in  the
range  on  the  far  northern  border  of  the  Cherokee  country.  He
searched  and  found  there  a  monster  blacksnake,  larger  than  had  ever
been  known  before,  but  ii  was  not  what  he  was  looking  for,  and  he
laughed  at  it  as  something  too  small  for  notice.  Coming  southward
tn  the  next  gap  he  found  there  a  great  moccasin  snake,  the  largest
ever  seen,  but  when  the  people  wondered  he  said  it  was  nothing.  In
the  next  gap  he  found  a  greensnake  and  called  the  people  to  see  "the
pretty  salikwS'yi,"  but  when  they  found  an  immense  greensnake
coiled  up  in  the  path  they  ran  away  in  fear.  Coming  on  t<>  U'tawa-
gun'ta,  the  Bald  mountain,  he  found  there  a  great  diya'hali  (lizard)
basking,  but,  although  it  was  large  and  terrible  t<>  look  at,  it  was  not
what  he  wanted  and  lie  paid  no  attention  to  it.  Going  still  south  to
Walasi'vi.  the  Frog  place,  he  found  a  great  frog  squatting  in  the  gap,
but  when  the  people  who  came  to  see  it  were  frightened  like  the
others  and  ran  away  from  the  monster  he  mocked  at  them  for  being
afraid  of  a  frog  and  went  on  to  the  next  gap.  He  went  on  to  Duni-
skwa'lgun'yi,  the  Gap  of  the  Forked  Antler,  and  to  the  enchanted  lake
of  Ataga'hl,  and  at  each  he  found  monstrous  reptiles,  hut  he  said  they
were  nothing.  He  thought  the  Uktena  might  he  hiding  in  the  deep
water  at  Tlanusi'vi,  the  Leech  place,  on  Hiwassee,  where  other  strange things  had  been  seen  before,  and  going  there  he  dived  far  down  under
the  surface.  He  saw  turtles  and  water  snakes,  and  two  immense  sun-
percb.es  rushed  at  him  and  retreated  again,  hut  that  was  all.  Other
places  he  tried,  going  always  southward,  and  at  last  on  Gahu'ti
mountain  he  found  the  Uktena  asleep.
Turning  without  noise,  he  ran  swiftly  down  the  mountain  side  as
far  as  he  could  go  with  one  lone-  breath,  nearly  to  the  bottom  of  the
slope.  There  he  stopped  and  piled  up  a  great  circle  of  pine  tone-.
and  inside  of  it  he  dug  a  deep  trench.  Then  he  set  tire  to  the  cones
and  came  hack  again  up  the  mountain.
The  Uktena  was  still  asleep,  and.  putting  an  arrow  to  his  bow,
Agan-uni'tsi  shot  and  sent  the  arrow  through  its  heart,  which  was
under  the  seventh  -pot  from  the  serpent's  head.  The  great  snake
raised  his  head,  with  the  diamond  in  front  Hashing  tire,  and  came
straight  at  his  enemy,  but  the  magician,  turning  quickly,  ran  at  full
speed  down  the  mountain,  cleared  the  circle  of  tire  and  the  trench  at
one  bound,  and  lay  down  on  the  ground  inside.
The  Uktena  tried  to  follow,  but  the  arrow  was  through  his  heart.
and  in  another  moment  he  rolled  over  in   his  death   struggle,  spitting


300  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [bth.akn.19
poison  over  all  the  mountain  side.  But  the  poison  drops  could  not
pass  the  circle  of  fire,  l>ut  only  hissed  and  sputtered  in  the  blaze,  and
the  magician  <>n  the  inside  was  untouched  except  by  one  small  drop
which  struck  upon  his  head  as  he  lay  close  to  the  ground;  hut  he  did
not  know  it.  The  blood,  too.  as  poisonous  as  the  froth,  poured  from
the  Uktena's  wound  and  down  the  slope  in  a  dark  stream,  hut  it  ran
into  the  trench  and  left  him  unharmed.  The  dying  monster  rolled
over  and  over  down  the  mountain,  breaking  down  large  trees  in  its
path  until  it  reached  the  bottom.  Then  Agan-uni'tsi  called  every  bird
in  all  the  woods  to  come  to  the  feast,  and  so  many  came  that  when  they
were  done  not  even  the  bones  were  left.
After  seven  days  he  went  by  night  to  the  spot.  The  body  and  the
bones  of  the  snake  were  gone,  all  eaten  by  the  birds,  but  he  saw  a
bright  light  shining  in  the  darkness,  and  going  over  to  it  he  found,
resting  on  a  low-hanging  branch,  where  a  raven  had  dropped  it,  the
diamond  from  the  head  of  the  Uktena.  He  wrapped  it  up  carefully
and  took  it  with  him.  and  from  that  time  he  became  the  greatest  medi-
cine-man in  the  whole  tribe.
When  Agan-uni'tsi  came  down  again  to  the  settlement  the  people
noticed  a  small  snake  hanging  from  his  head  where  the  single  drop  of
poison  from  the  Uktena  had  struck;  but  so  long  as  he  lived  he  him-
self never  knewr  that  it  was  there.
Where  the  blood  of  the  Uktena  had  tilled  the  trench  a  lake  formed
afterwards,  and  the  water  was  black  and  in  this  water  the  women  used
to  dye  the  cane  splits  for  their  baskets.
52.  THE  RED  MAN  AND  THE  UKTENA  .
Two  brothers  went  hunting  together,  and  when  they  came  to  a  good
camping  place  in  the  mountains  they  made  a  tire,  and  while  one  gath-
ered bark  to  put  up  a  shelter  the  other  started  up  the  creek  to  look  for
a  deer.  Soon  he  heard  a  noise  on  the  top  of  the  ridge  as  if  two  animals
were  fighting.  He  hurried  through  the  bushes  to  see  what  it  might
be,  and  when  he  came  to  the  spot  he  found  a  great  uktena  coiled
around  a  man  and  choking  him  to  death.  The  man  was  fighting  for
his  life,  and  called  out  to  the  hunter:  "Help  me.  nephew;  he  is  your
enemy  as  well  as  mine."  The  hunter  took  good  aim,  and,  drawing the  arrow  to  the  head,  sent  it  through  the  body  of  the  uktena,  so  that
the  blood  spouted  from  the  hole.  The  snake  loosed  its  coils  with  a
snapping  noise,  and  went  tumbling  down  the  ridge  into  the  valley,
tearing  up  the  earth  like  a  water  spout  as  it  rolled.
The  stranger  stood  up,  and  it  was  the  Asga'va  Gi'gagei,  the  Red
Man  of  the  Lightning.  He  said  to  the  hunter:  "  You  have  helped  me.
and  now  I  will  reward  you.  and  give  you  a  medicine  so  that  you  can
always  find  game."  They  waited  until  it  was  dark,  and  then  went down  the  ridjje  to  where  the  dead  uktena  had  rolled,  but  bv  this  time


THE    HUNTER    ami    THE    ['K-r'KI  301
the  birds  and  insects  had  eaten  the  body  and  only  the  bones  were  left..
In  one  place  were  flashes  of  light  coming  up  from  the  ground,  and  on
digging  bere,  just  under  the  surface,  the  Red  Man  found  a  scale  of  the
uktena.  Next  be  wen(  over  to  a  tree  thai  had  been  struck  by  light
ning,  and  gathering  a  handful  of  splinters  he  made  a  fire  and  burned  the
uktena  scale  to  a  coal.  He  wrapped  this  in  a  piece  of  deerskin  and
gave  it  to  the  hunter,  saying:  "As  long  as  you   keep  this  you  can
always  kill   game."      Then   he  told  tin'  hunter  that   when  he  went   hack
to  camp  he  must  hangup  the  medicine  on  a  tree  outside,  because  it
was  very  strong  and  dangerous.  He  told  him  also  that  when  he  went
into  the  cabin  he  would  find  his  brother  lying  inside  nearly  dead  mi
account  of  the  presence  of  the  uktena's  scale,  hut  he  must  take  a  small
piece  of  cane,  which  the  Red  Man  gave  him.  and  scrape  a  little  of  it
into  water  and  give  it  to  his  brother  to  drink  and  lie  would  he  well
again.  Then  the  Red  Man  was  gone,  and  the  hunter  could  not  see
where  he  went.  He  returned  to  camp  alone,  and  found  his  brother
very  sick,  but  soon  cured  him  with  the  medicine  from  the  cane,  and
that  day  and  the  next,  and  every  day  after,  he  found  game  whenever
he  went  for  it.
53.  THE   HUNTER   AND   THE   UKSU'HI
A  man  living  down  in  Georgia  came  to  visit  some  relatives  at  Hick-
ory-log. He  was  a  great  hunter,  and  after  resting  in  the  house  a  day
or  two  got  ready  to  go  into  the  mountains.  His  friends  warned  him
not  to  go  toward  the  north,  as  in  that  direction,  near  a  certain  large
uprooted  tree,  there  lived  a  dangerous  monster  uksu'hi  snake.  It  kept
constant  watch,  and  whenever  it  could  spring  upon  an  unwary  hunter  it
would  coil  about  him  and  crush  out  his  life  in  its  folds  and  then  drag
the  dead  body  down  the  mountain  side  into  a  deep  hole  in  Hiwassee.
He  listened  quietly  to  the  warning,  but  all  they  said  only  made  him
the  more  anxious  to  see  such  a  monster,  so,  without  saying  anything
of  his  intention,  he  left  the  settlement  and  took  his  way  directly  up
the  mountain  toward  the  north.  Soon  he  came  to  the  fallen  tree  and
(limbed  upon  the  trunk,  and  there,  sure  enough,  on  the  other  side  was
the  great  uksu'hi  stretched  out  in  the  grass,  with  its  head  raised,  but
looking  the  other  way.  It  was  about  so  large  [making  a  circle  of  a
foot  in  diameter  with  his  hands].  The  frightened  hunter  got  down
again  at  once  and  started  to  run;  but  the  snake  had  heard  the  noise  and
turned  quickly  and  was  after  him.  Up  the  ridge  the  hunter  ran,  the
snake  close  behind  him,  then  down  the  other  side  toward  the  river.
With  all  his  running  the  uksu'hi  gained  rapidly,  and  just  as  he  reached
the  low  ground  it  caught  up  with  him  and  wrapped  around  him.  pin-
ning one  arm  down  by  his  side,  but  leaving  the  other  free.
Now  it  gave  him  a  terrible  squeeze  that  almost  broke  his  ribs,  and
then  began  to  drag  him  along  toward  the  water.      With  his  free  hand


•"'Hi'  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [ETH.
the  hunter  clutched  at  the  bushes  as  they  passed,  l>ut  the  snake  turned
its  head  and  blew  its  sickening  breath  into  his  face  until  he  had  to  let
go  his  hold.  Again  and  again  this  happened,  and  all  the  time  they
were  getting  nearer  to  a  deep  hole  in  the  river,  when,  almost  at  the
last  moment,  a  lucky  thought  came  into  the  hunter's  mind. He  was  sweating  all  over  from  his  hard  run  across  the  mountain,
and  suddenly  remembered  to  have  heard  that  snakes  can  not  bear  the
smell  of  perspiration.  Putting  his  free  hand  into  his  bosom  he  worked
it  around  under  his  armpit  until  it  was  covered  with  perspiration.
Then  withdrawing  it  he  grasped  at  a  bush  until  the  snake  turned  its
head,  when  he  quickly  slapped  his  sweaty  hand  on  its  nose.  The
uksu'hi  gave  one  gasp  almost  as  if  it  had  been  wounded,  loosened  its
coil,  and  glided  swiftly  away  through  the  bushes,  leaving  the  hunter,
bruised  but  not  disabled,  to  make  his  way  home  to  Hickory-log.
54.   THE   USTO'TLl
There  was  once  a  great  serpent  called  the  Ustu'tli  that  made  its  haunt
upon  Cohutta  mountain.  It  was  called  the  Ustu'tli  or  "•foot"  snake, because  it  did  not  glide  like  other  snakes,  but  had  feet  at  each  end  of
its  body,  and  moved  by  strides  or  jerks,  like  a  great  measuring  worm.
These  feet  were  three-cornered  and  flat  and  could  hold  on  to  the  ground
like  .suckers.  It  had  no  legs,  but  would  raise  itself  up  on  its  hind  feet.
with  its  snaky  head  waving  high  in  the  air  until  it  found  a  good  place
lo  take  a  fresh  hold;  then  it  would  bend  down  and  grip  its  front  feet
to  the  ground  while  it  drew  its  body  up  from  behind.  It  could  cross
rivers  and  deep  ravines  by  throwing  its  head  across  and  getting  a  grip
with  its  front  feet  and  then  swinging  its  body  over.  Wherever  its
footprints  were  found  there  was  danger.  It  used  to  bleat  like  a  young
fawn,  and  when  the  hunter  heard  a  fawn  bleat  in  the  woods  he  never
looked  for  it,  but  hurried  away  in  the  other  direction.  Up  the  moun-
tain or  down,  nothing  could  escape  the  Ustu'tli's  pursuit,  but  along  the
side  of  the  ridge  it  could  not  go,  because  the  great  weight  of  its  swing-
ing head  broke  its  hold  on  the  ground  when  it  moved  sideways.
It  came  to  pass  after  a  while  that  not  a  hunter  about  Cohutta  would
venture  near  the  mountain  for  dread  of  the  Ustu'tli.  At  last  a  man
from  one  of  the  northern  settlements  came  down  to  visit  some  rela-
tives in  that  neighborhood.  When  he  arrived  thi'y  made  a  feast  for
him.  but  had  only  corn  and  beans,  and  excused  themselves  for  having
no  meat  because  the  hunters  were  afraid  to  go  into  the  mountains.  He
asked  the  reason,  and  when  they  told  him  he  said  he  would  go  himself
to-morrow  and  either  bring  in  a  deer  or  find  the  Ustu'tli.  They  tried
to  dissuade  him  from  it,  but  as  he  insisted  upon  going  they  warned  him
that  if  he  heard  a  fawn  bleat  in  the  thicket  he  must  run  at  once  and  if
the  snake  came  after  him  he  must  not  try  to  run  down  the  mountain,
but  alone  the  side  of  the  ridare.


THE   rMi'Ti.f  303
In  the  morning  he  started  ou1  and  went  directly  toward  the  moun-
tain. Working  hi-  way  through  the  bushes  :ii  the  base,  lie  suddenly
heard  a  fawn  Meat  in  front.  He  guessed  at  once  that  it  was  1 1 1 * ■  Cstu'tlt,
l>ut  he  had  made  up  his  mind  to  see  it,  so  he  did  not  turn  back,  but  went
straight  forward,  and  there,  sure  enough,  was  the  monster,  with  itsgreal
head  in  the  air,  as  high  as  the  pine  branches,  looking  in  >-\  ery  direction
to  discover  a  deer,  or  maybe  a  man.  for  breakfast.  It  -aw  him  ami
came  sit  him  at  once,  moving  in  jerky  strides,  every  one  the  length  of
a  tii','  trunk,  holding  its  scaly  head  high  above  the  bushes  and  bleating
as  it  came.
The  hunterwas  so  badly  frightened  that  he  lost  his  wits  entirely  and
started  to  run  directly  up  the  mountain.  The  great  snake  came  after
him.  gaining  half  its  length  on  him  every  time  it  took  a  fresh  grip  with
it-  fore  feet,  and  would  have  caught  the  hunter  before  he  reached  the
top  of  the  ridge,  but  that  he  suddenly  remembered  the  warning  and
changed  his  course  to  run  alone-  the  sides  of  the  mountain.  At  once
the  snake  began  to  lose  ground,  for  every  time  it  raised  itself  up  the
weight  of  its  body  threw  it  out  of  a  straight  line  and  made  it  fall  a  little
lower  down  the  side  of  the  ridge.  It  tried  to  recover  itself,  but  now
the  hunter  gained  and  kept  on  until  he  turned  the  end  of  the  ridge  and
left  the  snake  out  of  sight.  Then  he  cautiously  climbed  to  the  topand
looked  over  and  saw  the  I'stu'tli  still  slowly  working  its  way  toward the  summit.
He  went  down  to  the  base  of  the  mountain,  opened  hi-  lire  pouch.
and  set  fire  to  the  grass  and  leaves.  Soon  the  tire  ran  all  around  the
mountain  and  began  to  climb  upward.  When  the  great  snake  smelled
the  smoke  and  saw  the  flames  coming  it  forgot  all  about  the  hunter
and  turned  to  make  all  speed  for  a  high  cliff  near  the  summit.  It
reached  the  rock  and  got  upon  it.  but  the  fire  followed  and  caught  the
dead  pines  about  the  base  of  the  cliff  until  the  heat  made  the  I'stu'tH's scales  crack.  Taking  a  close  grip  of  the  rock  with  its  hind  feet  it
raised  its  body  and  put  forth  all  its  strength  in  an  effort  to  spring
across  the  wall  of  tire  that  surrounded  it.  but  the  .-moke  choked  it  and
its  hold  loosened  and  it  fell  among  the  blazing  pine  trunks  and  lay
there  until  it  wa-  burned  to  ashes.
55.   THE   UW'TSUN'TA
At  Nun'daye'  li.  the  wildest  spot  on  Nantahala  river,  in  what  i-  now
Macon  county.  North  Carolina,  where  the  overhanging  cliff  is  highest
and  the  river  far  below,  there  lived  in  the  old  time  a  great  snake  called
the  Uw'tsflfi'ta or  ••bouncer."  because  it  moved  by  jerks  like  a  measur
ing  worm,  with  only  one  part  of  its  body  on  the  ground  at  a  time.  It
stayed  generally  on  the  east  side,  where  the  .sun  came  first  in  the
morning,  and  used  to  cross  by  reaching  over  from  the  highest  point  of
the  cliff  until  it  could  get  a  grip  on  the  other  side,  when  it  would  pull


304  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
over  the  rest  of  its  body.  It  was  so  immense  that  when  it  was  thus
stretched  across  its  shadow  darkened  the  whole  valley  below.  For  a
long  time  the  people  did  not  know  it  was  there,  but  when  at  last  they
found  out  al>out  it  they  were  afraid  to  live  in  the  valley,  so  that  it  was
deserted  even  while  still  Indian  country.
56.    THE    SNAKE    BOY
There  was  a  boy  who  used  to  go  bird  hunting  every  day.  and  all  the
birds  he  brought  home  lie  gave  to  his  grandmother,  who  was  very
fond  of  him.  This  made  the  rest  of  the  family  jealous,  and  they
treated  him  in  such  fashion  that  at  last  one  day  he  told  his  grand-
mother lie  would  leave  them  all,  but  that  .she  must  not  grieve  for
him.  Next  morning  he  refused  to  eat  any  breakfast,  hut  went  off
hungry  to  the  woods  and  was  gone  all  day.  In  the  evening  he
returned,  bringing  with  him  a  pair  of  deer  horns,  and  went  directly
to  the  hothouse  (asi),  where  his  grandmother  was  waiting  for  him.
He  told  the  old  woman  he  must  be  alone  that  night,  so  she  got  up  and
went  into  the  house  where  the  others  were.
At  early  daybreak  she  came  again  to  the  hothouse  and  looked  in,
and  there  she  saw  an  immense  uktena  that  filled  the  asi,  with  horns
on  its  head,  but  still  with  two  human  legs  instead  of  a  snake  tail.  It
was  all  that  was  left  of  her  boy.  He  spoke  to  her  and  told  her  to
leave  him,  and  she  went  away  again  from  the  door.  When  the  sun
was  well  up,  the  uktena  began  slowly  to  crawl  out,  but  it  was  full
noon  before  it  was  all  out  of  the  asi.  It  made  a  terrible  hissing  noise
as  it  came  out,  and  all  the  people  ran  from  it.  It  crawled  on  through
the  settlement,  leaving  a  broad  trail  in  the  ground  behind  it,  until  it
came  to  a  deep  bend  in  the  river,  where  it  plunged  in  and  went  under
the  water.
The  grandmother  grieved  much  for  her  boj-,  until  the  others  of  the
family  got  angry  and  told  her  that  as  she  thought  so  much  of  him  she
ought  to  go  and  stay  with  him.  So  she  left  them  and  went  along  the
trail  made  by  the  uktena  to  the  river  and  walked  directly  into  the
water  and  disappeared.  Once  after  that  a  man  fishing  near  the  place
saw  her  sitting  on  a  large  rock  in  the  river,  looking  just  as  she  had
always  looked,  but  as  soon  as  she  caught  sight  of  him  she  jumped  into
the  water  and  was  gone.
57.    THE   SNAKE   MAN
Two  hunters,  both  for  some  reason  under  a  tabu  against  the  meat  of
a  squirrel  or  turkey,  had  gone  into  the  woods  together.  When  even-
ing came  they  found  a  good  camping  place  and  lighted  a  fire  to  prepare
their  supper.  One  of  them  had  killed  several  squirrels  during  the
day,  and  now  got  ready  to  broil  them  over  the  fire.  His  companion
warned  him  that  if  he   broke  the  tabu  and   ate  squirrel  meat  he  would


mooney]  SNAKE    TALKS  305
become  a  snake,  but  the  other  laughed  and  said  that  was  only  a  con
jurer's  story.     I  If  went  <>n  with  his  preparation,  and  when  the  squirrels
were  roasted  made  liis  supper  of  them  and  then  lay  clown  beside  the
fire  to  sleep.
Late  that  night  bis  companion  was  aroused  by  groaning,  and  on
Looking  around  be  found  the  other  lying  on  the  ground  rolling  and
twisting  in  agony,  and  with  the  lower  part  of  his  body  already  changed
to  the  body  ami  tail  of  a  large  water  snake.  The  man  was  still  aide  to
speak  and  called  loudly  for  help,  hut  his  companion  could  do  nothing,
hut  only  sit  by  and  try  to  comfort  him  while  he  watched  the  arms  sink
into  the  body  and  the  skin  take  on  a  scaly  change  that  mounted  grad-
ually toward  the  neck,  until  at  last  even  the  head  was  a  serpent's  head and  the  great  snake  crawled  away  from  the  tire  and  down  the  hank
into  the  river.
58.  THE  RATTLESNAKE'S  VENGEANCE
One  day  in  the  old  times  when  we  could  still  talk  with  other  crea-
tures, while  some  children  were  playing  about  the  house,  their  mother
inside  heard  them  scream.  Running  out  she  found  that  a  rattlesnake
had  crawled  from  the  grass,  and  taking  up  a  stick  she  killed  it.  The
father  was  out  hunting-  in  the  mountains,  and  that  evening  when  com-
ing home  after  dark  through  the  gap  lie  heard  a  strange  wailing  sound.
Looking  about  he  found  that  he  had  come  into  the  midst  of  a  whole
company  of  rattlesnakes,  which  all  had  their  mouths  open  and  seemed
to  he  crying.  He  asked  them  the  reason  of  their  trouble,  and  they
told  him  that  his  own  wife  had  that  day  killed  their  chief,  the  Yellow
Rattlesnake,  and  they  were  just  now  about  to  send  the  Black  Rattle-
snake to  take  revenge.
The  hunter  said  he  was  very  sorry,  hut  they  told  him  that  if  he
spoke  the  truth  he  must  be  ready  to  make  satisfaction  and  give  his
wife  as  a  sacrifice  for  the  life  of  their  chief.  Not  knowing  what  might
happen  otherwise,  he  consented.  They  then  told  him  that  the  Black
Rattlesnake  would  go  home  with  him  and  coil  up  just  outside  the
door  in  the  dark.  He  must  go  inside,  where  he  would  rind  his  wife
awaiting  him,  and  ask  her  to  get  him  a  drink  of  fresh  water  from  the
spring.     That  was  all.
He  went  home  and  knew  that  the  Black  Rattlesnake  was  following.
It  was  night  when  he  arrived  and  very  dark,  hut  he  found  his  wife
waiting  with  his  supper  ready.  He  sat  down  and  asked  for  a  drink  of
water.  She  handed  him  a  gourd  full  from  the  jar.  hut  he  said  he
wanted  it  fresh  from  the  spring,  so  she  took  a  bowl  and  went  out  of  the
door.  The  next  moment  he  heard  a  cry,  and  going  out  he  found  that
the  Black  Rattlesnake  had  bitten  her  and  that  she  was  already  dying.
He  stayed  with  her  until  she  was  dead,  when  the  Black  Rattlesnake
came  out  from  the  grass  again  and  said  his  tribe  was  now  satisfied.
lft  eth— 01   20


306  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
He  then  taught  the  hunter  a  prayer  song,  and  said.  "When  you  meet
any  of  us  hereafter  sing  this  song  and  we  will  not  hurt  you;  but  if  by
accident  one  of  us  should  bite  one  of  your  people  then  sing  this  song
over  him  and  he  will  recover."  And  the  Cherokee  have  kept  the  song
to  this  day.
59.   THE    SMALLER    REPTILES— FISHES    AND    INSECTS
There  are  several  varieties  of  frogs  and  toads,  each  with  a  different
name,  but  there  is  very  little  folklore  in  connection  with  them.  The
common  green  frog  is  called  wald'si,  and  among  the  Cherokee,  as  among
uneducated  whites,  the  handling  of  it  is  thought  to  cause  warts,  which
for  this  reason  are  called  by  the  same  name,  wald'si.  A  solar  eclipse
is  believed  to  be  caused  bjr  the  attempt  of  a  great  frog  to  swallow
the  sun,  and  in  former  times  it  was  customary  on  such  occasions  to
fire  guns  and  make  other  loud  noises  to  frighten  away  the  frog.  The
smaller  varieties  are  sometimes  eaten,  and  on  rare  occasions  the  bull-
frog also,  but  the  meat  is  tabued  to  ball  players  while  in  training,  for
fear  that  the  brittleness  of  the  frog's  bones  would  be  imparted  to
those  of  the  player.
The  land  tortoise  (tufat')  is  prominent  in  the  animal  myths,  and  is
reputed  to  have  been  a  great  warrior  in  the  old  times.  On  account  of
the  stoutness  of  its  legs  ball  players  rub  their  limbs  with  them  before
going  into  the  contest.  The  common  water  turtle  (sdligu'ffi),  which  occu-
pies so  important  a  place  in  the  mythology  of  the  northern  tribes,
is  not  mentioned  in  Cherokee  myth  or  folklore,  and  the  same  is  true
of  the  soft-shelled  turtle  {u'lana'wa),  perhaps  for  the  reason  that both  are  rare  in  the  cold  mountain  streams  of  the  Cherokee  country.
There  are  perhaps  half  a  dozen  varieties  of  lizard,  each  with  a  dif-
ferent name.  The  gray  road  lizard,  or  dAy&MJA  (alligator  lizard.  Sa  I-
oporti*  viiiluhrtm),  is  the  most  common.  On  account  of  its  habit  of
alternately  puffing  out  and  drawing  in  its  throat  as  though  sucking,
when  basking  in  the  sun,  it  is  invoked  in  the  formulas  for  drawing
out  the  poison  from  snake  bites.  If  one  catches  the  first  diva/hall
seen  in  the  spring,  and,  holding  it  between  his  fingers,  scratches  his
legs  downward  with  its  claws,  he  will  see  no  dangerous  snakes  all  sum-
mer. Also,  if  one  be  caught  alive  at  any  time  and  rubbed  over  the
head  and  throat  of  an  infant,  scratching  the  skin  very  slightly  at  the
same  time  with  the  claws,  the  child  will  never  be  fretful,  but  will  sleep
quietly  without  complaining,  even  when  sick  or  exposed  to  the  rain.
This  is  a  somewhat  risky  experiment,  however,  as  the  child  is  liable
thereafter  to  go  to  sleep  wherever  it  may  be  laid  down  for  a  moment,
so  that  the  mother  is  in  constant  danger  of  losing  it.  According  to
some  authorities  this  sleep  lizard  is  not  the  diya'hali,  but  a  larger
variety  akin  to  the  next  described.
The  gi<jd-tstilii/Il  ("bloody  mouth,"  Pleistodonl)  is  described  as  a


i   sey]  LIZARDS    AND    FISHES  307
very  large  lizard,  Dearly  as  large  as  a  water  dog,  with  the  throat  and
corners  of  the  mouth  red,  as  though  from  drinking  blood.  It  is
believed  to  be  not  a  time  lizard  but  a  transformed  ugUnste'U  fish
(described  below)  on  account  of  the  similarity  of  coloring  and  the  fact
that  the  fish  disappears  about  the  time  the  giga^tsuha''!!  begins  to come  out.  It  is  ferocious  and  a  hard  biter,  and  pursues  other  lizards.
In  dr\  weather  it  cries  or  makes  a  noise  like  a  cicada,  raising  itself
up  as  it  cries.  It  has  a  habit  of  approaching  near  to  where  some  per-
son is  sitting  or  standing,  then  halting  and  looking  fixedly  at  him,  and
constantly  puffing  out  its  throat  until  its  head  assumes  a  bright  fed
color.  It  is  thought  then  to  he  sucking  the  Mood  of  its  victim,  ami  is
dreaded  and  shunned  accordingly.  The  small  scorpion  lizard  (i*<hi, ' m)
is  sometimes  called  also  gigd-danegi'ski,  "blood  taker."  It  is  a  striped
lizard  which  frequents  sandy  beaches  and  resemble  the  diva'hali.  hut  is
of  a  brown  color.  It  is  believed  also  to  he  sucking  blood  in  some  mys-
terious way  whenever  it  nods  its  head,  and  if  its  heart  he  eaten  by  a
doe- that  animal  will  he  able  to  extract  all  the  nutrient  properties  from
food  by  simply  looking  at  those  who  are  eating.
The  small  spring  lizard  (dv/w&'gd),  which  lives  in  springs,  is  supposed to  cause  rain  whenever  it  crawls  out  of  the  spring.  It  is  frequently
invoked  in  the  formulas.  Another  spring  (?)  lizard,  red.  with  black
spots,  is  called  ddgan'  tiV  or  aniganti'ski  '''the  rain  maker."  because  its
cry  is  said  to  brine-  rain.  The  water  dog  (tsuwd',  mud  puppy,  Meno-
poma  or  Protonopsis)  is  a  very  large  lizard,  or  rather  salamander,
frequenting  muddy  water.  It  is  rarely  eaten,  from  an  unexplained
belief  that  if  one  who  has  eaten  its  meat  goes  into  the  field  immediately
afterward  the  crop  will  be  ruined.  There  are  names  for  one  or  two
other  varieties  of  lizard  as  well  as  for  the  alligator  (tsula'ski),  but  no folklore  in  connection  with  them.
Although  the  Cherokee  country  abounds  in  swift-flowing  streams
well  stocked  with  fish,  of  which  the  Indians  make  free  use,  there  is  but
little  fish  lore.  A  number  of  "  dream  "  diseases,  really  due  to  indiges-
tion, are  ascribed  to  revengeful  fish  ghosts,  and  the  doctor  usually
tries  to  effect  the  cure  by  invoking  some  larger  fish  or  fish-eating  bird
to  drive  out  the  ghost.
Toeo  creek,  in  Monroe  county.  Tennessee,  derives  its  name  from  a
mythic  monster  fish,  the  Dakwa',  considered  the  father  of  all  the  fish
tribe,  which  is  said  to  have  lived  formerly  in  Little  Tennessee  river  at
that  point  (see  story,  "The  Hunter  and  the  Dakwa'").  A  fish  called
1/,/i'n/sf, '//,  ■■  having  horns."  which  appears  only  in  spring,  is  believed  to
lie  transformed  later  into  the  giga-tsuha'li  lizard,  already  mentioned.
The  fish  is  described  as  having  horns  or  projections  upon  its  nose  and
beautiful  red  spots  upon  its  head,  and  as  being  attended  or  accompanied
by  many  smaller  red  fish,  all  of  which,  including  the  ugunste'li,  are
accustomed    to    pile    up   small    stones    in    the    water.      As    the    season


308  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.  ann.  ui
advances  it  disappears  and  is  believed  then  to  have  turned  into  a  giga-
tsuha'  11  lizard,  the  change  beginning  at  the  head  and  finishing  with  the
tail.  It  is  probably  the  Cam/postoma  or  stone  roller,  which  is  con-
spicuous for  its  bright  coloring  in  early  spring,  but  loses  its  tints  after
spawning.  The  meat  of  the  sluggish  hog-sucker  is  tabued  to  the  ball
player,  who  must  necessarily  be  active  in  movement.  The  fresh-water
mussel  is  called  ddgH'nd,  and  the  same  name  is  applied  to  certain  pim-
ples upon  the  face,  on  account  of  a  fancied  resemblance.  The  ball
player  rubs  himself  with  an  eel  skin  to  make  himself  slippery  and  hard
to  hold.  and.  according  to  the  Wahnenauhi  manuscript,  women
formerly  tied  up  their  hair  with  the  dried  skin  of  an  eel  to  make  it
grow  long.  A  large  red  crawfish  called  tsiska' gili,  much  resembling
a  lobster,  is  used  to  scratch  young  children  in  order  to  give  them  a
strong  grip,  each  hand  of  the  child  being  lightly  scratched  once  with
the  pincer  of  the  living  animal.  A  mother  whose  grown  son  had
been  thus  treated  when  an  infant  claimed  that  he  could  hold  anything
with  his  thumb  and  ringer.  It  is  said,  however,  to  render  the  child
quarrelsome  and  disposed  to  bite.
Of  insects  there  is  more  to  be  said.  The  generic  name  for  all  sorts
of  small  insects  and  worms  is  tsgdya,  and  according  to  the  doctors,  who
had  anticipated  the  microbe  theory  by  several  centuries,  these  tsgaya
are  to  blame  for  nearly  every  human  ailment  not  directly  traceable  to
the  asgina.  of  the  larger  animals  or  to  witchcraft.  The  reason  is  plain.
There  are  such  myriads  of  them  everywhere  on  the  earth  and  in  the
air  that  mankind  is  constantly  destroying  them  by  wholesale,  without
mercy  and  almost  without  knowledge,  and  this  is  their  method  of
taking  revenge.
Beetles  are  classed  together  under  a  name  which  signifies  ''insects
with  shells."  The  little  water-beetle  or  mellow-bug  {Dint  utes  discolor)
is  called  ddyuni'si,  "  beaver's  grandmother,"  and  according  to  the genesis  tradition  it  brought  up  the.  first  earth  from  under  the  water.
A  certain  green-headed  beetle  with  horns  ( I'limni  us  carnifex)  is  spoken
of  as  the  dog  of  the  Thunder  boys,  and  the  metallic -green  luster  upon
its  forehead  is  said  to  have  been  caused  by  striking  at  the  celebrated
mythic  gambler,  Untsaiyi',  "  Brass"  (see  the  story).  The  June-bug
(Allorhina  niUda),  another  green  beetle,  is  tagii,  but  is  frequently
called  by  the  curious  name  of  tu'ya-di'skalaw  sti'sM,  "'one  who  keeps
fire  under  the  beans."  Its  larva  is  the  grubworm  which  presided at  the  meeting  held  by  the  insects  to  compass  the  destruction  of  the
human  race  (see  the  story,  "Origin  of  Disease  and  Medicine").  The
large  horned  beetle  (Dynaste*  tityux'.)  is  called  fxixtu'na,  ••crawfish,"'
a  wi',  "deer,"  or  gdldg/.'na,  "  buck,"  on  account  of  its  branching  horns.
The  snapping  beetle  (A?  at  in  ni-nliitiiNi)  is  called  tfilsku'wa,  '"one  that
snaps  with  his  head."
When  the  Idlu  or  jar-fly  {Cicada  avletes)  begins  to  sing  in  midsum,


KOONEY]  INSECTS  309
mer  they  say:  "The  jar-fly  has  brought  the  beans,"  his  song  being
taken  as  tin-  signal  that  beans  are  ripe  and  that  green  corn  is  not  far
behind.  When  the  katydid  (fslMW)  is  heard  a  little  later  thej  say,
"Katydid  bas  brought  the  roasting-ear  bread."  The  cricket  (tdla'tH')
is  often  called  "the  barber"  (nMtasta/yelsM),  on  account  of  its  habit  of
gnawing  hair  from  furs,  and  when  the  Cherokee  meet  a  man  with  his
hair  (dipped  unevenly  they  sometimes  ask  playfully,  "Did  the  cricket
cut  your  hair?"  (see  story,  "Why  the  Possum's  Tail  is  Bare").  Cer- tain persons  are  said  to  drink  tea  made  of  crickets  in  order  to  become
good  singers.
The  mole  cricket  i  Crri/llotalpa),  so  called  because  it  tunnels  in  the  earth
and  has  hand-like  (daws  fitted  for  digging,  is  known  to  the  Cherokee
a-  gtiThw&gi,  a  word  which  literally  means  ••seven."  hut  is  probably an  onomatope.  It  is  reputed  among  them  to  he  alert,  hard  to  catch,
and   an   excellent   singer,   who   "never  makes  mistakes."     Like   the crawfish  and  the  cricket,  it  plays  an  important  part  in  preparing  )   pie
for  the  duties  of  life.  Infants  slow  in  learning  to  speak  have  their
tongues  scratched  with  the  (daw  of  a  guTkw&gi,  the  living  insect  being
held  in  the  hand  during  the  operation,  in  order  that  they  may  soon
learn  to  speak  distinctly  and  he  eloquent,  wise,  and  shrewd  of  speech
as  they  grow-  older,  and  of  such  quick  intelligence  as  to  remember
without  effort  anything  once  heard.  The  same  desirable  result  may
he  accomplished  with  a  grown  person,  hut  with  much  more  difficulty,
as  in  that  ease  it  is  necessary  to  scratch  the  inside  of  the  throat  for
four  successive  mornings,  the  insect  being  pushed  down  with  the  fin-
gers and  again  withdrawn,  while  the  regular  tabus  must  he  strictly
observed  for  the  same  period,  or  the  operation  will  he  without  effect.
In  some  eases  the  insect  is  put  into  a  small  bowd  of  water  overnight,
and  if  —t: ill  alive  in  the  morning  it  is  taken  out  and  the  water  given  to
the  patient  to  drink,  after  which  the  gul  kwagi  is  set  at  liberty.
Bees  are  kept  by  many  of  the  Cherokee,  in  addition  to  the  wild  bees
which  are  hunted  in  the  woods.  Although  they  are  said  to  have
come  originally  from  the  whites,  the  Cherokee  have  no  tradition  id'  a time  when  they  did  not  know  them;  there  seems,  however,  to  he  no
folklore  connected  with  them.  The  cow-ant  (MyrmicaV),  a  large,  red.
stinging  ant.  is  called  properly  dastin't&U  atatsHn'sM,  "  stinging  ant,"
hut.  on  account  of  its  hard  body-case,  is  frequently  called  iv&n'yunu'wl,
•■stone-dress."  after  a  celebrated  mythic  monster.  Strange  as  it  may
seem,  there  appears  to  he  no  folklore  connected  with  either  the  firefly
or  the  glowworm,  while  the  spider,  so  prominent  in  other  tribal
mythologies,  appears  in  hut  a  single  Cherokee  myth,  where  it  brings
hack  the  tire  from  across  the  water.  In  the  formulas  it  is  frequently
invoked  to  entangle  in  its  threads  the  soul  of  a  victim  whom  the  con-
jurer desires  to  bring  under  his  evil  spells.  From  a  fancied  resem-
blance in  appearance  the  name  for  spider,  led' nd net 'sh  > .  is  applied  also


310  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
to  ;i  watch  or  clock.  A  small  yellowish  moth  which  flies  about  the
fire  at  night  is  called  b&n'tdwQ,,  a  name  implying  that  it  goes  into  and out  of  the  tire,  and  when  at  last  it  flits  too  near  and  falls  into  the  blaze
the  Cherokee  say,  "Tufi'tawu  is  going  to  bed."  On  account  of  its
affinity  for  the  fire  it  is  invoked  by  the  doctor  in  all  "fire  diseases,"
including  sore  eyes  and  frostbite.
60.   WHY  THE   BULLFROGS   HEAD   IS   STRIPED
According  to  one  version  the  Bullfrog  was  always  ridiculing  the
great  gambler  Untsai'yi,  "Brass,"  (see  the  story)  until  the  latter  at  last
got  angry  and  dared  the  Bullfrog  to  play  the  gatayWsti  (wheel-and-
stick)  game  with  him.  whichever  lost  to  be  scratched  on  his  forehead.
Brass  won,  as  he  always  did,  and  the  yellow  stripes  on  the  Bullfrog's
head  show  where  the  gambler's  fingers  scratched  him.
Another  story  is  that  the  Bullfrog  had  a  conjurer  to  paint  his  head
with  yellow  stripes  (brass)  to  make  him  appear  more  handsome  to  a
pretty  woman  he  was  courting.
61.   THE   BULLFROG   LOVER
A  young  man  courted  a  girl,  who  liked  him  well  enough,  but  her
mother  was  so  much  opposed  to  him  that  she  would  not  let  him  come
near  the  house.  At  last  he  made  a  trumpet  from  the  handle  of  a
gourd  and  hid  himself  after  night  near  the  spring  until  the  old  woman
came  down  for  water.  While  she  was  dipping  up  the  water  he
put  the  trumpet  to  his  lips  and  grumbled  out  in  a  deep  voice  like  a
bullfrog's:
Yafldaska'gS  hd.flyahu/8k&,
)'(in<I(iska/!/<1  liihlii<i!iii'sl:a.
The  faultfinder  will  die,
The  faultfinder  will  die.
The  woman  thought  it  a  witch  bullfrog,  and  was  so  frightened  that
she  dropped  her  dipper  and  ran  back  to  the  house  to  tell  the  people
They  all  agreed  that  it  was  a  warning  to  her  to  stop  interfering  with
her  daughter's  aflairs,  so  she  gave  her  consent,  and  thus  the  young man  won  his  wife.
There  is  another  story  of  a  girl  who,  every  day  when  she  went  down
to  the  spring  for  water,  heard  a  voice  singing,  Knuu'in'i  tti'tsahyesi',
Kilim' m'l  tti'tsahyesi' ,  "A  bullfrog  will  marry  you,  A  bullfrog  will
marry  you."  She  wondered  much  until  one  day  when  she  came  down
she  saw  sitting  on  a  stone  by  the  spring  a  bullfrog,  which  suddenly
took  the  form  of  a  young  man  and  asked  her  to  marry  him.  She
consented  and  took  him  back  with  her  to  the  house.  But  although  he
had  the  shape  of  a  man  there  was  a  queer  bullfrog  look  about  his  face,
so  that  the  girl's  family  hated  him  and  at  last  persuaded  her  to  send
him  awav.     She  told  him  and  he  went  away,  but  when  they  next  wTent


m.h.nky]  tiSTSAIYf,  THE   GAMBLER  31]
down  to  the  spring  they  heard  a  voice:  Stdtsl  tHya'kusi,  Stdt&l  tH'ya-
husi',  '-Your  daughter  will  die,  Your  daughter  will  die,"  and  so  it
happened  spon  after.
A.s  some  tell  it.  the  lover  was  a  tadpole,  who  took  on  human  shape,
retaining  only  his  tadpole  mouth.  Toconceal  it  he  constantly  refused
to  eat  with  the  family,  but  stood  with  his  back  to  the  tire  and  his  lace
screwed  up,  pretending  that  he  had  a  toothache.  At  last  his  wife  grew
suspicious  and  turning  him  suddenly  around  to  the  firelight,  exposed
the  tadpole  mouth,  at  which  they  all  ridiculed  him  so  much  that  he
left  the  house  forever.
62.  THE   KATYDID'S  WARNING
Two  hunters  camping  in  the  woods  were  preparing  supper  one  night
when  a  Katydid  began  singing  near  them.  One  of  them  said  sneer
ingly,  " Ku!  It  sines  and  don't  know  that  it  will  die  before  the  season
end.-."  The  Katydid  answered:  "  h'1'1 .'  nvwi  (onomatope);  O,  so  you
say:  but  you  need  not  boast.  You  will  die  before  to-morrow  night."
The  next  day  they  were  surprised  by  the  enemy  and  the  hunter  who
had  sneered  at  the  Katydid  was  killed.
Wonder  Stories
63.  UNTSAIYl',  THE  GAMBLER
Thunder  lives  in  the  west,  or  a  little  to  the  south  of  west,  near  the
place  where  the  sun  goes  down  behind  the  water,  in  the  old  times  he
sometimes  made  a  journey  to  the  east,  and  once  after  he  had  come  hack
'from  one  of  these  journeys  a  child  was  horn  in  the  east  who.  the  people
-aid.  was  his  son.  As  the  hoy  grew  up  it  was  found  that  he  had  scrofula
-ores  all  over  his  body. -0  one  day  his  mother  said  to  him.  "Your  father,
Thunder,  is  a  great  doctor.  He  lives  far  in  the  west,  hut  if  you  can
find  him  he  can  cure  you.*'' So  the  boy  set  out  to  find  his  father  and  lie  cured.  He  traveled  long
toward  the  west,  asking  of  every  one  he  met  where  Thunder  lived,  until
at  last  they  began  to  tell  him  that  it  was  only  a  little  way  ahead.  He
went  on  and  came  to  Untiguhl',  on  Tennessee,  where  lived  Untsaiyi'
■'  Brass."  Now  UStsaij  ['was a  great  gambler,  and  made  his  living  that
way.  It  was  he  who  invented  the  gatayHsti  game  that  we  play  with  a
stone  wheel  and  a  stick.  He  lived  on  the  south  side  of  the  river,  and
everybody  who  came  that  way  he  challenged  to  play  against  him.  The
large  Hat  rock,  with  the  line-  and  grooves  where  they  used  to  roll  the
wheel,  is  still  there,  with  the  wheels  themselves  and  the  stick  turned
to  stone.  He  won  almost  every  time,  because  he  was  SO  tricky,  so  thai
he  had  his  house  filled  with  all  kinds  of  tine  things.  Sometimes  he
would  lose,  and  then  he  would  bet  all  that  he  had,  even  to  hi-  own
life,  hut  the  winner  got  nothing  for  his  trouble,  for  Untsaiyi'  knew
how  to  take  on  different  shapes,  so  that  he  always  got  away.


312  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.
As  soon  as  Untsaiyi'  saw  him  he  asked  him  to  stop  and  play  a  while,
but  the  boy  said  he  was  looking  for  his  father.  Thunder,  and  had  no
time  to  wait.  ""Well.*'  said  Untsaiyi',  "he  lives  in  the  next  house;
you  can  hear  him  grumbling  over  there  all  the  time"— he  meant  the
Thunder  -"so  we  may  as  well  have  a  game  or  two  before  you  go  on."
Tlir  boy  said  he  had  nothing  to  bet.  "That's  all  right."  said  the
gambler,  "we'll  play  for  your  pretty  spots."  He  said  this  to  make the  boy  angry  so  that  he  would  play,  but  still  the  boy  said  he  must  go
first  and  find  his  father,  and  would  come  back  afterwards.
He  went  on,  and  soon  the  news  came  to  Thunder  that  a  boy  was
looking  for  him  who  claimed  to  be  his  son.  Said  Thunder,  ''I  have
traveled  in  many  lands  and  have  many  children.  Bring  him  here  and
we  shall  soon  know."  So  they  brought  in  the  boy,  and  Thunder  showed him  a  seat  and  told  him  to  sit  down.  Under  the  blanket  on  the  seat
were  long,  sharp  thorns  of  the  honey  locust,  with  the  points  all  stick-
ing up.  but  when  the  boy  sat  down  they  did  not  hurt  him.  and  then
Thunder  knew  that  it  was  his  son.  He  asked  the  boy  why  he  had  come.
"1  have  sores  all  over  my  body,  and  my  mother  told  me  you  were  my
father  and  a  great  doctor,  and  if  I  came  here  you  would  cure  me."
"Yes,"  said  his  father.  "I  am  a  great  doctor,  and  I'll  soon  fix  you."
There  was  a  large  pot  in  the  corner  and  he  told  his  wife  to  fill  it
with  water  and  put  it  over  the  fire.  When  it  was  boiling,  he  put  in  some
roots,  then  took  the  boy  and  put  him  in  with  them.  He  let  it  boil  a
long  time  until  one  would  have  thought  that  the  flesh  was  boiled  from
the  poor  boy's  bones,  and  then  told  his  wife  to  take  the  pot  and  throw
it  into  the  river,  boy  and  all.  She  did  as  she  was  told,  and  threw  it  into
the .water,  and  ever  since  there  is  an  eddy  there  that  we  call  Un'tiguhl',
"Pot-in-the-water."  A  service  tree  and  a  calico  bush  grew  on  the
bank  above.  A  great  cloud  of  steam  came  up  and  made  streaks  and
blotches  on  their  bark,  and  it  has  been  so  to  this  day.  When  the
steam  cleared  away  she  looked  over  and  saw  the  boy  clinging  to  the
roots  of  the  service  tree  where  they  hung  down  into  the  water,  but
now  his  skin  was  all  clean.  She  helped  him  up  the  bank,  and  they
went  back  to  the  house.  On  the  way  she  told  him.  "When  we  go  in,
your  father  will  put  a  new  dress  on  you.  but  when  he  opens  his  box
and  tells  you  to  pick  out  your  ornaments  be  sure  to  take  them  from
the  bottom.  Then  he  will  send  for  his  other  sons  to  play  ball  against
you.  There  is  a  honey-locust  tree  in  front  of  the  house,  and  as  soon
as  you  begin  to  get  tired  strike  at  that  and  your  father  will  stop  the
play,  because  he  does  not  want  to  lose  the  tree."
When  they  went  into  the  house,  the  old  man  was  pleased  to  see  the
boy  looking  so  clean,  and  said.  "I  knew  I  could  soon  cure  those  spots.
Now  we  must  dress  you."  He  brought  out  a  tine  suit  of  buckskin.
with  belt  and  headdress,  and  had  the  boy  put  them  on.  Then  he
opened  a  box  and  said.  "Now  pick  out  your  necklace  and  bracelets."


koonei  rvrs.viYi'.   THE    GAMBLER  313
The  hoy  looked,  and  the  box  was  full  of  all  kinds  of  snakes  gliding
over  each  other  with  their  heads  up.  He  was  nut  afraid,  but  remem-
bered what  tin'  woman  had  told  him,  and  plunged  his  hand  to  the  bot-
tom and  drew  out  a  greal  rattlesnake  and  put  it  around  his  neck  for  a
necklace.  He  put  down  his  hand  again  four  times  and  drew  up  four
copperhead-  and  twisted  them  around  his  wrists  and  ankles.  Then
his  father  gave  him  a  war  club  and  said.  "Now  you  must  play  a  ball
game  with  your  two  elder  brothers.  They  live  beyond  here  in  the
Darkening  land,  and  [have  sent  for  them."  He  said  a  ball  game,  but  he
meant  that  the  hoy  must  fight  for  Ins  life.  The  young  men  came,  and
the\  were  both  older  and  stronger  than  the  hoy.  but  he  was  not  afraid
and  fought  against  them.  The  thunder  rolled  and  the  lightning  flashed
at  everj  stroke,  for  they  were  the  young  Thunders,  and  the  hoy  him-
self was  Lightning.  At  last  he  was  tired  from  defending  himself
alone  against  two.  and  pretended  to  aim  a  blow  at  the  honey-locust
tree.  Then  his  father  stopped  the  tight,  because  he  was  afraid  the
lightning  would  split  the  tree,  and  he  saw  that  the  hoy  was  brave  and
strong.
The  hoy  told  his  father  how  Untsaiyi'  had  dared  him  to  play,  and
had  even  ottered  to  play  for  the  spots  on  his  skin.  "  Yes."  said  Thun-
der, "he  is  a  great  gambler  and  makes  his  living  that  way.  hut  T  will
see  that  you  win.**  He  brought  a  small  cymling  gourd  with  a  hole
bored  through  the  neck,  and  tied  it  on  the  boy's  wrist.  Inside  the  gourd
there  was  a  string  of  heads,  and  one  end  hung  out  from  a  hole  in  the
top,  hut  there  was  no  end  to  the  string  inside.  "  Now,'"  said  his  father,
"go  back  the  way  you  came,  and  as  soon  as  he  sees  you  lie  will  want
to  play  for  the  heads.  He  is  very  hard  to  beat,  but  this  time  he  will
lose  every  game.  When  he  eric-  out  for  a  drink,  you  will  know  he  is
getting  discouraged,  and  then  strike  the  rock  with  your  war  club  and
water  will  come,  so  that  you  can  play  on  without  stopping.  At  last
he  will  bet  his  life,  and  lose.  Then  send  at  once  for  your  brothers  to
kill  him,  or  he  will  get  away,  he  is  so  tricky."
The  hoy  took  the  gourd  and  his  war  (dub  and  started  east  along  the
road  by  which  he  had  come.  As  soon  as  Untsaiyi'  saw  him  he  called
to  him.  and  when  he  saw  the  gourd  with  the  head  string  hanging  out
he  wanted  to  play  for  it.  The  boy  drew  out  the  string,  but  there
seemed  to  be  no  end  to  it.  and  he  kept  o.n  pulling  until  enough  had  come
out  to  make  a  circle  all  around  the  playground.  "I  will  play  one
game  for  this  much  against  your  stake.""  said  the  boy,  ■'and  when  that
i-  over  we  can  have  another  game."
They  began  the  game  with  the  wheel  and  stick  and  tile  hoy  won.
I  Btsaiyi'  did  not  know  what  to  think  of  it.  but  he  put  up  another
-take  and  called  for  a  second  game.  The  hoy  won  again,  and  so  they
played  on  until  noon,  when  Untsaiyi'  bad  lost  nearly  everything  he
had  and  was  about  discouraged.      It  was  very  hot.  ami  he  said,  "  I  am


314  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  Letii.  ann.  l'j
thirsty,"  and  wanted  to  stop  long  enough  to  get  a  drink.  "No."  said the  boy.  and  struck  the  rock  with  his  club  so  that  water  came  out.  and
they  had  a  drink.  They  played  on  until  Untsaiyi'  had  lost  all  his  buck-
skins and  beaded  work,  his  eagle  feathers  and  ornaments,  and  at  last
offered  to  bet  his  wife.  They  played  and  the  boy  won  her.  Then
Untsaiyi'  was  desperate  and  offered  to  stake  his  life.  "If  I  win  I  kill
you,  but  if  you  win  you  may  kill  me."     They  played  and  the  boy  won.
"Let  me  go  and  tell  my  wife,"  said  Untsaiyi',  "so  that  she  will
receive  her  new  husband,  and  then  you  may  kill  me."  He  went  into
the  house,  hut  it  had  two  doors,  and  although  the  boy  waited  long
Untsaiyi'  did  not  come  back.  When  at  last  he  went  to  look  for  him
he  found  that  the  gambler  had  gone  out  the  back  way  and  was  nearly
out  of  sight  going  east.
The  boy  ran  to  his  father's  house  and  got  his  brothers  to  help  him.
They  brought  their  dog — the  Horned  Green  Beetle — and  hurried  after
the  gambler.  He  ran  fast  and  was  soon  out  of  sight,  and  they  fol-
lowed as  fast  as  they  could.  After  a  while  they  met  an  old  woman
making  pottery  and  asked  her  if  she  had  seen  Untsaiyi'  and  she  said
she  had  not.  "He  came  this  way."  said  the  brothers.  "Then  he
must  have  passed  in  the  night,"  said  the  old  woman,  "for  I  have  been
here  all  day."  They  were  about  to  take  another  road  when  the  Beetle,
which  had  been  circling  about  in  the  air  above  the  old  woman,  made
a  dart  at  her  and  struck  her  on  the  forehead,  and  it  rang  like  brass —
untsaiyi' !  Then  they  knew  it  was  Brass  and  sprang  at  him,  but  he
jumped  up  in  his  right  shape  and  was  off,  running  so  fast  that  he  was
soon  out  of  sight  again.  The  Beetle  had  struck  so  hard  that  some  of
the  brass  rubbed  off,  and  we  can  see  it  on  the  beetle's  forehead  yet.
They  followed  and  came  to  an  old  man  sitting  by  the  trail,  carving
a  stone  pipe.  They  asked  him  if  he  had  seen  Brass  pass  that  way  and
he  said  no,  but  again  the  Beetle — which  could  know  Brass  under  any
shape — struck  him  on  the  forehead  so  that  it  rang  like  metal,  and  the
gambler  jumped  up  in  hi.s  right  form  and  was  off  again  before  they
could  hold  him.  He  ran  east  until  he  came  to  the  great  water;  then
he  ran  north  until  he  came  to  the  edge  of  the  world,  and  had  to  turn
again  to  the  west.  He  took  every  shape  to  throw  them  off  the  track,
but  the  Green  Beetle  always  knew  him,  and  the  brothers  pressed  him
so  hard  that  at  last  he  could  go  no  more  and  they  caught  him  just  as
he  reached  the  edge  of 'the  great  water  where  the  sun  goes  down. They  tied  his  hands  and  feet  with  a  grapevine  and  drove  a  long
stake  through  his  breast,  and  planted  it  far  out  in  the  deep  water.
They  set  two  crows  on  the  end  of  the  pole  to  guard  it  and  called
the  place  K&giln'yi,  "Crow  place."  But  Brass  never  died,  and  can  not
die  until  the  end  of  the  world,  but  lies  there  always  with  his  face  up.
Sometimes  lie  struggles  under  the  water  to  get  free,  and  sometimes
the  beavers,  who  are  his  friends,  come  and  gnaw  at  the  grapevine  to


■oonei  THE    TLA'Nl'WA  315
release  him.     Then  the  pole  shakes  and  the  crows  at  the  top  cry  /f<>.' Ka!  Ka!  and  scare  the  beavers  away.
64.   THE   NEST  OK  THE   TLA'NUWA
On  the  north  bank  of  Little  Tennessee  river,  in  a  bend  Inlim  the
mouth  of  ( litico  creek,  in  Blount  county,  Tennessee,  is  a  high  cliff  hang-
ing over  the  water,  and  about  halfway  up  the  lace  of  the  rock  is  a  cave
with  two  openings.  The  rock  projects  outward  above  the  cave,  so  that
the  mouth  can  not  lie  seen  from  above,  and  it  seems  impossible  to
reach  the  cave  either  from  above  or  below.  There  are  white  streaks
in  the  rock  from  the  cave  down  to  the  water.  The  Cherokee  call  it
Tla  nuwa'i.  "the  place  of  the  Tla'nuwa,"  or  great  mythic  hawk.
In  the  old  time,  away  hack  soon  after  the  creation,  a  pair  of  Tla'nuwas
had  their  nest  in  this  cave.  The  streaks  in  the  rock  were  made  by  the
droppings  from  the  nest.  They  were  immense  birds,  larger  than  any
that  live  now.  and  very  strong  and  savage.  They  were  forever  flying
up  and  .low  11  the  river,  and  used  to  come  into  the  settlements  and  carry
off  dogs  and  even  young  children  playing  near  the  houses.  No  one
could  reach  the  nest  to  kill  them,  and  when  the  people  tried  to  shoot
them  the  arrows  only  glanced  off  and  were  seized  and  carried  away  in
the  talons  of  the  Tla'nuwas.
At  last  the  people  went  to  a  great  medicine  man.  who  promised  to
help  them.  Some  were  afraid  that  if  he  failed  to  kill  the  Tla'nuwas they  would  take  revenge  on  the  people,  but  the  medicine  man  said  he
could  tix  that.  He  made  a  long  rope  of  linn  bark,  just  as  the  ( Iherokee
still  do.  with  loops  in  it  for  his  feet,  and  had  the  people  let  him  down
from  the  top  of  the  cliff  at  a  time  when  he  knew  that  the  old  birds  were
away.  When  he  came  opposite  the  mouth  of  the  cave  he  still  could
not  reach  it.  because  the  rock  above  hung  over,  so  he  swung  himself
backward  and  forward  several  times  until  the  rope  swung  near  enough
for  him  to  pull  himself  into  the  cave  with  a  hooked  stick  that  he  car-
ried, which  he  managed  to  fasten  in  some  bushes  growing  at  the
entrance.  In  the  nest  lie  found  four  young  ones,  and  on  the  floor  of
the  cave  were  the  hones  of  all  sorts  of  animals  that  had  been  carried
there  by  the  hawks.  He  pulled  the  young  ones  out  of  the  nest  and
threw  them  over  the  cliff  into  tin'  deep  water  below,  where  a  greal
I'ktena  serpent  that  lived  there  finished  them.  Just  then  he  saw  the two  old  ones  coining,  and  had  hardly  time  to  climb  up  again  to  the  top
of  the  rock  before  they  reached  the  uest.
When  they  found  the  nest  empty  they  were  furious,  ami  circled
round  and  round  in  the  air  until  they  saw  the  snake  put  up  its  head
from  the  water.  Then  thej  darted  straight  downward,  and  while  one
seized  the  snake  in  his  talon-  and  Hew  far  up  in  the  sky  with  it.  In-
mate struck  at  it  and  bit  off  piece  after  piece  until  nothing  was  left.
They  were  -o  high  up  that  when  the  pieces  tell  they  made  hole-  in  the


316  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  Leth.ann.19
rock,  which  are  still  to  he  seen  there,  at  the  place  which  we  call  "  Where
the  Tla'nuwa  cut  it  up,"  opposite  the  mouth  of  Citico.  Then  the  two
Tla'nuwas  circled  up  and  up  until  they  went  out  of  sight,  and  they  have never  been  seen  since.
65.  THE    HUNTER    AND   THE   TLA'NUWA
A  hunter  out  in  the  woods  one  day  saw  a  Tla'nuwa  overhead  and
tried  to  hide  from  it,  but  the  great  bird  had  already  seen  him,  and  sweep-
ing down  struck  its  claws  into  his  hunting  pack  and  carried  him  far  up
into  the  air.  As  it  flew,  the  Tla'nuwa,  which  was  a  mother  bird,  spoke
and  told  the  hunter  that  he  need  not  be  afraid,  as  she  would  not  hurt
him.  but  only  wanted  him  to  stay  for  a  while  with  her  3roung  ones  to
guard  them  until  they  were  old  enough  to  leave  the  nest.  At  last
they  alighted  at  the  mouth  of  a  cave  in  the  face  of  a  steep  cliff.  Inside
the  water  was  dripping  from,  the  roof,  and  at  the  farther  end  was  a
nest  of  sticks  in  which  were  two  young  birds.  The  old  Tla'nuwa  set
the  hunter  down  and  then  flew  away,  returning  soon  with  a  fresh-
killed  deer,  which  it  tore  in  pieces,  giving  the  first  piece  to  the  hunter
and  then  feeding  the  two  young  hawks.
The  hunter  stayed  in  the  cave  many  days  until  the  young  birds  were
nearly  grown,  and  every  day  the  old  mother  hawk  would  fly  away  from
the  nest  and  return  in  the  evening  with  a  deer  or  a  bear,  of  which  she
always  gave  the  first  piece  to  the  hunter.  He  grew  very  anxious  to
see  his  home  again,  but  the  Tla'nuwa  kept  telling  him  not  to  be  uneasy,
but  to  wait  a  little  while  longer.  At  last  he  made  up  his  mind  to
escape  from  the  cave  and  finally  studied  out  a  plan.  The  next  morn-
ing, after  the  old  bird  had  gone,  he  dragged  one  of  the  young  birds  to
the  mouth  of  the  cave  and  tied  himself  to  one  of  its  legs  with  a  strap
from  his  hunting  pack.  Then  with  the  fiat  side  of  his  tomahawk  he
struck  it  several  times  in  the  head  until  it  was  dazed  and  helpless,  and
pushed  the  bird  and  himself  together  off  the  shelf  of  rock  into  the  air.
They  fell  far,  far  down  toward  the  earth,  but  the  air  from  below
held  up  the  bird's  wings,  so  that  it  was  almost  as  if  they  were  flying.
As  the  Tla'nuwa  revived  it  tried  to  fly  upward  toward  the  nest,  but  the
hunter  struck  it  again  with  his  hatchet  until  it  was  dazed  and  dropped
again.  At  last  they  came  down  in  the  top  of  a  poplar  tree,  when  the
hunter  untied  the  strap  from  the  leg  of  the  young  bird  and  let  it  fly-
away, first  pulling  out  a  feather  from  its  wing.  He  climbed  down
from  the  tree  and  went  to  his  home  in  the  settlement,  but  when  he
looked  in  his  pack  for  the  feather  he  found  a  stone  instead.
66.   U'TLUN'TA,  THE   SPEAR-FINGER
Long,  long  ago — httahi'yu — there  dwelt  in  the  mountains  a  terrible
ogress,  a  woman  monster,  whose  food  was  human  livers.  She  could
take  on  any  shape  or  appearance  to  suit  her  purpose,  but  in  her  right


"1
i'tUN'TA,    THE    Sl'KAK-FlNCKU  .'U  7
form  she  looked  very  much  like  an  * > I « 1  woman,  excepting  that  her
whole  body  was  covered  with  a  skin  as  hard  as  a  rock  that  qo  weapon
could  wound  or  penetrate,  and  thai  on  her  right  hand  she  had  a  long,
stony  forefinger  of  bone,  like  an  awl  or  spearhead,  with  which  she
stabbed  everyone  to  whom  she  could  gel  Dear  enough.  On  account  of
this  fact  she  was  called  U'tlUfl'td,  " Spear-finger,"  and  on  account  of
her  stony  >kin  she  was  sometimes  called  Nufl'yunu'wi,  "Stone  dress." There  was  another  stone-clothed  monster  that  killed  people,  but  that  is
a  different  story.
Spear-finger  had  such  powers  over  stone  that  she  could  easily  lift
and  carry  immense  rocks,  ami  could  cement  them  toe-ether  by  merely
striking  one  against  another.  To  get  over  the  rough  country  more
easily  she  undertook  to  build  a  great  rock  bridge  through  the  air  from
Nunyu'-tlu'gun'yi,  the  ••Tree  rock,"  on  Hiwassee,  over  to  Sanigil&'gi
(Whiteside  mountain),  on  the  Blue  ridga,  and  had  it  well  started  from
the  top  of  the  ••Tree  rock"  when  the  lightning  struck  it  and  scattered
the  fragments  alone-  the  whole  ridge,  where  the  pieces  can  still  he  -ecu
by  those  who  go  there.  She  used  to  range  all  over  the  mountains
about  the  heads  of  the  streams  and  in  the  dark  passes  of  Nantahala,
always  hungry  and  looking  for  victims.  Her  favorite  haunt  on  the
Tennessee  side  was  about  the  gap  on  the  trail  where  Chilhowee  moun-
tain comes  down  to  the  river.
Sometimes  an  old  woman  would  approach  along-  the  trail  where  the
children  were  picking-  strawberries  or  playing  near  the  village,  and
would  say  to  them  coaxingly.  ••Come,  my  grandchildren,  come  to  your
granny  and  let  granny  dress  your  hair."  When  some  little  girl  ran
up  and  laid  her  head  in  the  old  woman's  lap  to  he  petted  and  combed
the  old  witch  would  gently  run  her  fingers  through  the  child's  hair until  it  went  to  sleep,  when  she  would  stab  the  little  one  through  the
heart  or  hack  of  the  neck  with  the  long  awl  finger,  which  she  had  kept
hidden  under  her  robe.     Then  she  would  take  out  the  liver  ami  eat  it.
She  would  enter  a  house  by  taking  the  appearance  of  one  of  the
family  who  happened  to  have  gone  out  for  a  short  time,  and  would
watch  her  chance  to  stab  some  one  with  her  long  finger  and  take
out  his  liver.  She  could  stab  him  without  being  noticed. and  often  the
victim  did  not  even  know  it  himself  at  the  time  — for  it  left  no  wound
and  caused  no  pain — hut  went  on  about  his  own  affairs,  until  all  at
once  he  felt  weak  and  began  gradually  to  pine  away,  and  was  always
sure  to  die.  because  Spear-finger  had  taken  his  liver.
When  the  Cherokee  went  out  in  the  fall,  according  to  their  custom,
to  hum  tin'  leaves  off  from  the  mountains  in  order  to  get  the  chestnuts
on  the  ground,  they  were  never  safe,  for  the  old  witch  was  always  on
the  lookout,  and  as  soon  as  she  saw  the  smoke  rise  she  knew  there
were  Indians  there  and  sneaked  up  to  try  to  surprise  one  alone.  So
as  well   a-  they   could   they   tried   to    keep   together,   and    were  very


318  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
cautious  of  allowing  any  stranger  to  approach  the  camp.  But  if  one
went  down  to  the  spring  for  a  drink  they  never  knew  but  it  might  be
the  liver  eater  that  came  back  and  sat  with  them.
Sometimes  she  took  her  proper  form,  and  once  or  twice,  when  far
out  from  the  settlements,  a  solitary  hunter  had  seen  an  old  woman,  with
a  queer-looking  hand,  going  through  the  woods  singing  low  to  herself:
I'ii, 'hi  im'ts'iki'l' .       Su'  si'l'  sili' .
Liver,  I  eat  it.     Su'  sa'  sai'.
It  was  rather  a  pretty  song,  but  it  chilled  his  blood,  for  he  knew  it
was  the  liver  eater,  and  he  hurried  away,  silently,  before  she  might  see
him.
At  last  a  great  council  was  held  to  devise  some  means  to  get  rid  of
U'tlun'ta  before  she  should  destroy  everybody.  The  people  came  from
all  around,  and  after  much  talk  it  was  decided  that  the  best  way  would
be  to  trap  her  in  a  pitfall  where  all  the  warriors  could  attack  her  at
once.  So  they  dug  a  deep  pitfall  across  the  trail  and  covered  it  over
with  earth  and  grass  as  if  the  ground  had  never  been  disturbed.  Then
they  kindled  a  large  tire  of  brush  near  the  trail  and  hid  themselves  in
the  laurels,  because  they  knew  she  would  come  as  soon  as  she  saw  the
smoke.
Sure  enough  they  soon  saw  an  old  woman  coming  along  the  trail.
She  looked  like  an  old  woman  whom  they  knew  well  in  the  village,  and
although  several  of  the  wiser  men  wanted  to  shoot  at  her,  the  others
interfered,  because  they  did  not  want  to  hurt  one  of  their  own  people.
The  old  woman  came  slowly  along  the  trail,  with  one  hand  under  her
blanket,  until  she  stepped  upon  the  pitfall  and  tumbled  through  the
brush  to])  into  the  deep  hole  below.  Then,  at  once,  she  showed  her
true  nature,  and  instead  of  the  feeble  old  woman  there  was  the  terrible
U'tlun'ta  with  her  stony  skin,  and  her  sharp  awl  linger  reaching  out  in every  direction  for  some  one  to  stab.
The  hunters  rushed  out  from  the  thicket  and  surrounded  the  pit,  but
shoot  as  true  and  as  often  as  they  could,  their  arrows  struck  the  stony
mail  of  the  witch  only  to  be  broken  and  fall  useless  at  her  feet,  while
she  taunted  them  and  tried  to  climb  out  of  the  pit  to  get  at  them.  They
kept  out  of  her  way,  but  were  only  wasting  their  arrows  when  a  small
bird,  Utsu'gi,  the  titmouse,  perched  on  a  tree  overhead  and  began  to
sing  "  nil,  mi,  mi."  They  thought  it  was  saying  u'nultu',  heart,  mean- ing that  they  should  aim  at  the  heart  of  the  stone  witch.  They  directed
their  arrows  where  the  heart  should  be,  but  the  arrows  only  glanced
off  with  the  Hint  heads  broken.
Then  they  caught  the  Utsu'gi  and  cut  off  its  tongue,  so  that  ever  since
its  tongue  is  short  and  everybody  knows  it  is  a  liar.  When  the  hunters
let  it  go  it  flew  straight  up  into  the  sky  until  it  was  out  of  sight  and
never  came  back  again.  The  titmouse  that  we  know  now  is  only  an
image  of  the  other.


m   -ii  NTS'  stunu'w!  319
They  kept  up  the  fight  without  result  until  another  bird,  little  Tsi'-
kililf.  the  chickadee.  Hew  down  from  a  tree  and  alighted  upon  the
witch's  right  hand.  Tin'  warriors  took  this  as  a  sign  thai  they  must
aim  there,  and  they  were  right,  for  her  heart  was  on  the  inside  of  her
hand,  which  she  kept  doubled  into  a  ti-t.  tlii-  same  awl  hand  with
which  she  had  stabbed  so  many  people.  Now  she  was  frightened  in
earnest,  and  began  to  rush  furiously  at  them  with  her  lone- awl  finger
and  to  jump  about  in  the  pit  to  dodge  the  arrows,  until  at  last  a  lucky
arrow  struck  just  where  the  awl  joined  her  wrist  and  she  fell  down
dead.
Ever  since  the  tsi'kilili'  is  known  as  a  truth  tidier,  and  when  a  man
is  away  on  a  journey,  if  this  bird  comes  and  perches  near  the  house
and  chirps  its  song,  his  friends  know  he  will  soon  he  safe  home.
67.  NUN'YUNU'WI,  THE    STONE    MAN
This  is  what  the  old  men  told  me  when  1  was  a  hoy.
Once  when  all  the  people  of  the  settlement  were  out  in  the  moun-
tains on  a  great  hunt  one  man  who  had  gone  on  ahead  climbed  to  the
top  of  a  high  ridge  and  found  a  large  river  011  the  other  side.  While
he  was  looking-  across  he  saw  an  old  man  walking-  about  on  the  oppo-
site ridge,  with  a  cane  that  seemed  to  be  made  of  some  bright,  shining-
rock.  The  hunter  watched  and  saw  that  every  little  while  the  old
man  would  point  his  cane  in  a  certain  direction,  then  draw  it  back  and
smell  the  end  of  it.  At  last  he  pointed  it  in  the  direction  of  the  hunt-
ing camp  on  the  other  side  of  the  mountain,  and  this  time  when  he
drew  back  the  staff  he  sniffed  it  several  times  as  if  it  smelled  very  good,
and  then  started  along  the  ridge  straight  for  the  camp.  He  moved
very  slowly,  with  the  help  of  the  cane,  until  he  reached  the  end  of  the
ridge,  when  he  threw  the  cane  out  into  the  air  and  it  became  a  bridge
of  shining  rock  stretching  across  the  river.  After  he  had  crossed
over  upon  the  bridge  it  became  a  cane  again,  and  the  old  man  picked
it  up  and  started  over  the  mountain  toward  the  camp.
The  hunter  was  frightened,  and  felt  sure  that  it  meant  mischief,  30
he  hurried  on  down  the  mountain  and  took  the  shortest  trail  back  to  the
camp  to  get  there  before  the  old  man.  When  he  got  there  and  told
his  story  the  medicine-man  said  the  old  man  was  a  wicked  cannibal
monster  called  Nun'yunu'wi,  ■■Dressed  in  Stone,"  who  lived  in  that
part  of  the  country,  and  was  always  going  about  the  mountains  look-
ing for  some  hunter  to  kill  and  eat.  It  was  very  hard  to  escape  from
him.  because  his  stick  guided  him  like  a  dog.  and  it  was  nearly  as  hard
to  kill  him,  because  his  whole  body  was  covered  with  a  skin  of  solid
rock.  If  he  came  he  would  kill  and  eat  them  all,  and  there  was  only
one  way  to  save  themselves.  He  could  not  bear  to  look  upon  a  men-
strual woman,  and  if  they  could  find  seven  menstrual  women  to  stand
in  the  path  as  he  came  along  the  sight  would  kill  him.


320  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEKOKEE  [eth.ann.19
So  they  asked  among  all  the  women,  and  found  seven  who  were  sick
in  that  way.  and  with  one  of  them  it  had  just  begun.  By  the  order  of
the  medicine-man  they  stripped  themselves  and  stood  along  the  path
where  the  old  man  would  come.  Soon  they  heard  Nuii'yunu'wi
coming  through  the  woods,  feeling  his  way  with  his  stone  cane.  He
came  along  the  trail  to  where  the  first  woman  was  standing,  and  as
soon  as  he  saw  her  he  started  and  cried  out:  uYu!  my  grandchild;
you  are  in  a  very  bad  state! "  He  hurried  past  her,  but  in  a  moment
he  met  the  next  woman,  and  cried  out  again:  "TW  my  child;  you
are  in  a  terrible  way,"  and  hurried  past  her,  but  now  he  was  vomiting blood.  He  hurried  on  and  met  the  third  and  the  fourth  and  the  fifth
woman,  but  with  each  one  that  he  saw  his  step  grew  weaker  until
when  he  came  to  the  last  one,  with  whom  the  sickness  had  just  begun,
the  blood  poured  from  his  mouth  and  he  fell  down  on  the  trail.
Then  the  medicine-man  drove  seven  sourwood  stakes  through  his
body  and  pinned  him  to  the  ground,  and  when  night  came  they  piled
great  logs  over  him  and  set  tire  to  them,  and  all  the  people  gathered
around  to  see.  Nuii'yunu'wi  was  a  great  ada'wehi  and  knew  many
secrets,  and  now  as  the  tire  came  close  to  him  he  began  to  talk,  and
told  them  the  medicine  for  all  kinds  of  sickness.  At  midnight  he
began  to  sing,  and  sang  the  hunting  songs  for  calling  up  the  bear  and
the  deer  and  all  the  animals  of  the  woods  and  mountains.  As  the
blaze  grew  hotter  his  voice  sank  low  and  lower,  until  at  last  when
daylight  came,  the  logs  were  a  heap  of  white  ashes  and  the  voice
was  still.
Then  the  medicine-man  told  them  to  rake  off  the  ashes,  and  where
the  body  had  lain  they  found  only  a  large  lump  of  red  wa'di  paint  and
a  magic  u'lunsu'ti  stone.  He  kept  the  stone  for  himself,  and  calling
the  people  around  him  he  painted  them,  on  face  and  breast,  with
the  red  wa'di,  and  whatever  each  person  prayed  for  while  the  painting
was  being  done — whether  for  hunting  success,  for  working  skill,  or
for  a  long  life — that  gift  was  his.
68.  THE  HUNTER  IN  THE  DAKWA'
In  the  old  days  there  was  a  great  fish  called  the  Dakwa',  which
lived  in  Tennessee  river  where  Toco  creek  comes  in  at  Dakwa'i,  the
"Dakwa' place,"  above  the  mouth  of  Tellico,  and  which  was  so  large  that it  could  easily  swallow  a  man.  Once  a  canoe  tilled  with  warriors  was
crossing  over  from  the  town  to  the  other  side  of  the  river,  when  the
Dakwa'  suddenly  rose  up  under  the  boat  and  threw  them  all  into  the
air.  As  they  came  down  it  swallowed  one  with  a  single  snap  of  its
jaws  and  dived  with  him  to  the  bottom  of  the  river.  As  soon  as  the
hunter  came  to  his  senses  he  found  that  he  had  not  been  hurt,  but  it
was  so  hot  and  close  inside  the.  Dakwa'  that  he  was  nearly  smothered.
As  he  groped  around  in  the  dark  his  hand  struck  a  lot  of  mussel  shells


mooney]  THE    BUNTEB    IN'    THE    DAKW.V  .'!■_' 1
which  the  tish  had  swallowed,  and  taking  one  of  these  \'<>v -a  knife  lie began  to  out  bis  way  out,  until  soon  the  t i — 1 1  grew  uneasy  at  the
scraping  inside  his  stomach  and  came  up  to  the  top  of  the  water  for
air.  llf  kept  on  cutting  until  the  lish  was  in  such  pain  thai  it  -warn
this  way  and  that  across  the  stream  and  thrashed  the  water  into  foam
with  its  tail.  Finally  the  huh'  was  so  large  that  he  could  look  out  and
>aw  that  the  Dakwa'  was  now  resting  in  shallow  water  near  the  shore.
Reaching  up  he  climbed  out  from  the  side  of  the  tish,  moving  very
carefully  so  that  the  Dakwa'  would  not  know  it,  and  then  waded  to
shore  and  got  back  to  the  settlement,  hut  the  juices  in  the  stomach  of
the  great  tish  had  scalded  all  the  hair  from  his  head  and  he  was  bald
ever  after.
W.MINKNAI   III     VERSION
A  boy  was  sent  on  an  errand  by  his  father,  and  not  wishing  to  go  ne
ran  away  to  the  river.  After  playing  in  the  sand  for  a  short  time
some  boys  of  his  acquaintance  came  by  in  a  canoe  and  invited  him  to
join  them.  Glad  of  the  opportunity  to  get  away  he  went  with  them,
but  had  no  sooner  got  in  than  the  canoe  began  to  tip  and  rock  most
unaccountably.  The  hoys  became  very  much  frightened,  and  in  the
confusion  the  had  hoy  fell  into  the  water  and  was  immediateh  swal-
lowed by  a  large  fish.  After  lying  in  its  stomach  for  some  time  he
became  very  hungry,  and  on  looking  around  he  saw  the  fish's  liver hanging  over  his  head.  Thinking  it  dried  meat,  he  tided  to  cut  off  a
piece  with  a  mussel  shell  he  had  been  playing  with  and  still  held  in
his  hand.     The  operation  sickened  the  fish  and  it  vomited  the  boy.
69.  ATAGA'Hl,  the  enchanted  lake
Westward  from  the  headwaters  of  Oconaluftee  river,  in  the  wildest
depth- id'  the  Greal  Smoky  mountains,  which  form  the  line  between
North  Carolinaand  Tennessee,  is  the  enchanted  lake  of  Ataga'hi.  "Gall
place."  Although  all  the  Cherokee  know  that  it  is  there,  no  one  has ever  seen  it.  for  the  way  is  so  difficult  that  only  the  animals  know  how
to  reach  it.  Should  a  stray  hunter  come  near  the  place  he  would  know
of  it  by  the  whirring  sound  of  the  thousands  of  wild  ducks  flying  about
the  lake,  but  on  reaching  the  spot  he  would  find  only  a  dry  fiat,  with-
out bird  or  animal  or  blade  of  grass,  unless  he  had  first  sharpened  his
spiritual  vision  by  prayer  and  fasting  and  an  all-night  vigil.
Because  it  is  not  -ecu.  some  people  think  the  lake  has  dried  up  long
ago.  hut  this  is  not  true.  To  one  who  had  kept  watch  and  fast
through  the  night  it  would  appear  at  daybreak  as  a  wide-extending
but  shallow  sheet  of  purple  water,  fed  by  springs  spouting  from  the
high  cliffs  around.  In  the  water  are  all  kinds  of  tish  and  reptiles,
and  swimming  upon  the  surface  or  flying  overhead  are  great  flocks
of  ducks  and  pigeons,  while  all  about  the  shores  are  bear  tracks  cross-
L9  kth— 01   L'l


322  MYTH*    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
ing  in  every  direction.  It  is  the  medicine  lake  of  the  birds  and  ani-
mals, and  whenever  a  bear  is  wounded  by  the  hunters  he  makes  his
way  through  the  woods  to  this  lake  and  plunges  into  the  water,  and
when  lie  comes  out  upon  the  other  side  his  wounds  are  healed.  For
this  reason  the  animals  keep  the  lake  invisible  to  the  hunter.
70.  THE  BRIDE  FROM  THE  SOUTH
The  North  went  traveling,  and  after  going  far  and  meeting  many
different  tribes  he  finally  fell  in  love  with  the  daughter  of  the  South
and  wanted  to  marry  her.  The  girl  was  willing,  but  her  parents
objected  and  said,  "Ever  since  you  came  the  weather  has  been  cold,
and  if  you  stay  here  we  may  all  freeze  to  death."  The  North  pleaded hard,  and  said  that  if  they  would  let  him  have  their  daughter  he
would  take  her  back  to  his  own  country,  so  at  last  they  consented.
They  were  married  and  he  took  his  bride  to  his  own  country,  and
when  she  arrived  there  she  found  the  people  all  living  in  ice  houses.
The  next  day,  when  the  sun  rose,  the  houses  began  to  leak,  and  as
it  climbed  higher  they  began  to  melt,  and  it  grew  warmer  and
warmer,  until  finally  the  people  came  t<>  the  young  husband  and  told
him  he  must  send  his  wife  home  again,  or  the  weather  would  get  so
warm  that  the  whole  settlement  would  be  melted.  He  loved  his  wife
and  so  held  out  as  long  as  he  could,  but  as  the  sun  grew  hotter  the
people  were  more  urgent,  and  at  last  he  had  to  send  her  home  to  her
parents.
The  people  said  that  as  she  had  been  born  in  the  South,  and  nour-
ished all  her  life  upon  food  that  grew  in  the  same  climate,  her  whole
nature  was  warm  and  unfit  for  the  North.
71.   THE   ICE   MAN
Once  when  the  people  were  burning  the  woods  in  the  fall  the  blaze
set  tire  to  a  poplar  tree,  which  continued  to  burn  until  the  tire  went
down  into  the  roots  and  burned  a  great  hole  in  the  ground.  It  burned
and  burned,  and  the  hole  grew  constantly  larger,  until  the  people  became
frightened  and  were  afraid  it  would  burn  the  whole  world.  They  tried
to  put  out  the  tire,  but  it  had  gone  too  deep,  and  they  did  not  know
what  to  do.
At  last  some  one  said  there  was  a  man  living  in  a  house  of  ice  far  in
the  north  who  could  put  out  the  tire,  so  messengers  were  sent,  and  after
traveling  a  long  distance  they  came  to  the  ice  house  and  found  the  Ice
Man  at  home.  He  was  a  little  fellow  with  long  hair  hanging  down  to
the  ground  in  two  plaits.  The  messengers  told  him  their  errand  and
he  at  once  said,  "O  yes.  I  can  help  you,"  and  began  to  unplait  his  hair. When  it  was  all  unbraided  he  took  it  up  in  one  hand  and  struck  it  once
across  his  other  hand,  and  the  messengers  felt  a  wind  blow  against


HOONBY]  THE     ICE      MAN  323
their  cheeks.  A  second  time  he  struck  his  hair  across  his  hand,  and  a
lighl  rain  began  to  fall.  The  third  time  ho  struck  his  hair  across  his
open  hand  the i-e  was  sleet  mixed  with  t he  raindrops,  and  when  he  struck
the  fourth  time  greal  hailstones  fell  upon  the  ground,  as  if  they  had
come  out  from  the  ends  of  his  hair.  "Go  back  now."  said  the  lee  Man.
■"and  I  shall  l>e  there  to-morrow."  So  the  messengers  returned  to
their  people,  whom  they  Eound  >till  gathered  helplessly  about  the  great
burning  pit.
The  next  day  while  they  were  all  watching  about  the  lire  there  came  a
wind  from  the  north,  and  they  were  afraid,  for  they  knew  that  it  came
from  the  Ice  Man.  But  the  wind  only  made  the  tire  blaze  up  higher.
Then  a  light  rain  began  to  tall,  hut  the  drops  seemed  only  to  make  the
tire  hotter.  Then  the  shower  turned  to  a  heavy  rain,  with  sleet  and
hail  that  killed  the  blaze  and  made  cloudsof  smoke  and  -team  rise  from
the  red  coals.  The  people  tied  to  their  homes  for  shelter,  and  t  he  storm
rose  to  a  w  birlwind  that  drove  the  rain  into  every  burning  crevice  ami
piled  great  hailstones  over  the  embers,  until  the  fire  was  .lead  and  even
the  smoke  ceased.  When  at  last  it  was  all  over  and  the  people  returned
they  found  a  lake  where  the  burning  pit  had  been,  and  from  below  the
water  came  a  sound  as  of  embers  still  crackling.
72.   THE   HUNTER   AND   SELU
A  hunter  had  been  tramping  over  the  mountains  all  day  lone-  with-
out finding  any  game  and  when  the  sun  went  down,  he  built  a  tire  in
a  hollow  stump,  swallowed  a  few  mouthfuls  of  corn  gruel  and  lay  down
to  sleep,  tiled  out  and  completely  discouraged.  About  the  middle  of
the  eight  he  dreamed  and  seemed  to  hear  the  sound  id'  beautiful  sing- ing, which  continued  until  near  daybreak  and  then  appeared  to  die
away  into  the  upper  air.
All  next  day  he  hunted  with  the  same  poor  success,  and  at  night  made
his  lonely  camp  again  in  the  woods.  He  slept  and  the  strange  dream
came  to  him  again,  but  so  vividly  that  it  seemed  to  him  like  an  actual
happening.  Rousing  himself  before  daylight,  he  still  heard  the  song,
and  feeling  sure  now  that  it  was  real,  he  went  in  the  direction  of  the
sound  and  found  that  it  came  from  a  single  green  stalk  of  corn  (selu).
The  plant  spoke  to  him.  and  told  him  to  cut  off  some  of  its  roots  and
take  them  to  his  home  in  the  settlement,  and  the  next  morning  to  chew
them  and  "go  to  water"  before  anyone  else  was  awake,  and  then  to goout  again  into  the  woods,  and  he  would  kill  many  deer  and  from  that
time  on  would  always  he  successful  in  the  limit.  The  corn  plant
continued  to  talk,  teaching  him  hunting  secrets  anil  telling  him  always
to  be  generous  with  the  game  he  took,  until  it  was  noon  and  the  sun
was  high,  when  it  suddenly  took  the  form  of  a  woman  and  rose  grace-
fully into  the  air  and  was  gone  from  sight,  lea\  ing  the  hunter  alone  in
the  woods.
He  returned  home  and  told  his  story,  and  all  the  people   knew  that


324  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ahn.19
he  had  seen  Selu,  the  wife  of  Kana'tl.  He  did  a.s  the  spirit  had  directed, and  from  that  time  was  noted  as  the  most  successful  of  all  the  hunters
in  the  settlement.
73.    THE   UNDERGROUND   PANTHERS
A  hunter  was  in  the  woods  one  day  in  winter  when  suddenly  he  saw
a  panther  coming  toward  him  and  at  once  prepared  to  defend  himself.
The  panther  continued  to  approach,  and  the  hunter  was  just  about  to
shoot  when  the  animal  spoke,  and  at  once  it  seemed  to  the  man  as  if
there  was  no  difference  between  them,  and  they  were  both  of  the  same
nature.  The  panther  asked  him  where  he  was  going,  and  the  man
said  that  he  was  looking  for  a  deer.  "Well,"  said  the  panther,  "we
are  getting  ready  for  a  Green -corn  dance,  and  there  are  seven  of  us  out
after  a  buck,  so  we  may  as  well  hunt  together."
The  hunter  agreed  and  they  went  on  together.  They  started  up  one
deer  and  another,  but  the  panther  made  no  sign,  and  said  only  "Those
are  too  small;  we  want  something  better."  So  the  hunter  did  not
shoot,  and  they  went  on.  They  started  up  another  deer,  a  larger  one,
and  the  panther  sprang  upon  it  and  tore  its  throat,  and  finally  killed
it  after  a  hard  struggle.  The  hunter  got  out  his  knife  to  skin  it,  but
the  panther  said  the  skin  was  too  much  torn  to  be  used  and  they  must
try  again.  They  started  up  another  large  deer,  and  this  the  panther
killed  without  trouble,  and  then,  wrapping  his  tail  around  it,  threw
it  across  his  back.  "Now,  come  to  our  townhouse,"  he  said  to  the hunter.
The  panther  led  the  way,  carrying  the  captured  deer  upon  his  back,
up  a  little  stream  branch  until  they  came  to  the  head  spring,  when  it
seemed  as  if  a  door  opened  in  the  side  of  the  hill  and  they  went  in.
Now  the  hunter  found  himself  in  front  of  a  large  townhouse,  with  the
finest  detsanun'li  he  had  ever  seen,  and  the  trees  around  were  green,
and  the  air  was  warm,  as  in  summer.  There  was  a  great  company
there  getting  ready  for  the  dance,  and  they  were  all  panthers,  but
somehow  it  all  seemed  natural  to  the  hunter.  After  a  while  the  others
who  had  been  out  came  in  with  the  deer  they  had  taken,  and  the  dance
began.  The  hunter  danced  several  rounds,  and  then  said  it  was  grow-
ing late  and  he  must  be  getting  home.  So  the  panthers  opened  the
door  and  he  went  out.  and  at  once  found  himself  alone  in  the  woods
again,  and  it  was  winter  and  very  cold,  with  snow  on  the  ground  and
on  all  the  trees.  When  he  reached  the  settlement  he  found  a  party
just  starting  out  to  search  for  him.  They  asked  him  where  he  had
been  so  long,  and  he  told  them  the  story,  and  then  he  found  that  he
had  been  in  the  panther  townhouse  several  days  instead  of  only  a  very
short  time,  as  he  had  thought.
He  died  within  seven  days  after  his  return,  because  he  had  already
begun  to  take  on  the  panther  nature,  and  so  could  not  live  again  with
men.     If  he  had  stayed  with  the  panthers  he  would  have  lived.


ORIGIN    OF    THE    BEAE  325
74.  THE    TSUNDIGE'Wl
Once  some  young  men  <>f  the  Cherokee  set  out  to  see  what   was  in
the  world  and  traveled  south  until  they  came  to  a  tril   I'  little  people
called  I'siiniliii,  '//•/,  with  very  queer  shaped. bodies,  hardly  tall  enough
to  reach  up  to  :i  man's  knee,  who  had  no  houses,  but  Lived  in  nests scooped  in  the  sand  and  covered  over  with  dried  grass.  The  little
fellows  werfe  so  weak  and  puny  that  they  could  not  fight  at  all.  and
were  iii  (-(instant  terror  from  the  wild  geese  and  other  birds  thai  used
to  come  in  great  flocks  from  the  south  to  make  war  upon  them.
.lust  at  the  time  that  the  travelers  got  there  they  found  the  little
men  in  great  fear,  because  there  was  a  strong  wind  blowing  from  the
south  and  it  blew  white  feathers  and  down  along  the  sand,  so  that  the
Tsundige'w]  knew  their  enemies  were  coming  not  far  behind.  The
Cherokee  asked  them  why  they  did  not  defend  themselves,  hut  they
said  they  could  not.  because  they  did  not  know  how.  There  was  no
time  to  make  bows  and  arrows,  but  the  travelers  told  them  to  take
sticks  for  cluhs.  and  showed  them  where  to  strike  the  birds  on  the
necks  to  kill  them.
The  wind  blew  for  several  days,  and  at  last  the  birds  came,  so  many
that  they  were  like  a  great  cloud  in  the  air.  and  alighted  on  the  sands.
The  little  men  ran  to  their  nests,  and  the  birds  followed  and  stuck  in
their  long  bills  to  pull  them  out  and  eat  them.  This  time,  though,  the
Tsundige'w!  had  their  cluhs.  and  they  struck  the  birds  on  the  neck,  as
the  Cherokee  had  shown  them,  and  killed  so  many  that  at  last  the
others  were  glad  to  spread  their  wings  and  fly  away  again  to  the  south.
The  little  men  thanked  the  Cherokee  for  their  help  and  gave  them
the  best  they  had  until  the  travelers  went  on  to  see  the  other  tribes.
They  heard  afterwards  that  the  birds  came  again  several  times,  but  that
the  Tsundige'wi  always  drove  them  off  with  their  clubs,  until  a  dock  of
sandhill  cranes  came.  They  were  so  tall  that  the  little  men  could  not
reach  up  to  strike  them  on  the  neck,  and  so  at  last  the  cranes  killed
them  all.
75.   ORIGIN    OF   THE   BEAR:   THE   BEAR   SONGS
Long  ago  there  was  a  Cherokee  clan  called  the  Ani'-TsS'guhi,  and  in
one  family  of  this  clan  was  a  hoy  who  used  to  leave  home  and  be  gone
all  day  in  the  mountains.  After  a  while  he  went  oftener  and  stayed
longer,  until  at  last  he  would  not  eat  in  the  house  at  all.  1ml  started
off  at  daybreak  and  did  not  come  hack  until  night.  His  parents
scolded,  hut  that  did  no  good,  and  the  hoy  still  went  every  day  until
they  noticed  that  long  brown  hair  was  beginning  to  grow  out  all  over
his  body.     Then  they  wondered  and  asked  him  whv  it  was  thai  he


326  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
wanted  to  be  so  much  in  the  woods  that  he  would  not  even  eat  at  home.
Said  the  hoy.  "I  rind  plenty  to  eat  there,  and  it  is  better  than  the
corn  and  beans  we  have  in  the  settlements,  and  pretty  soon  I  am  going
into  the  woods  to  stay  all  the  time."  His  parents  were  worried  and
begged  him  not  to  leave  them,  but  he  said,  "It  is  better  there  than
here,  and  you  see  ]  am  beginning  to  he  different  already,  so  that  I  can
not  live  here  any  longer.  If  you  will  come  with  me,  there  is  plenty
for  all  of  us  and  you  will  never  have  to  work  for  it;  but  if  you  want
to  mme  you  must  first  fast  seven  days." The  father  and  mother  talked  it  over  and  then  told  the  headmen  of
the  clan.  They  held  a  council  about  the  matter  and  after  everything
had  been  said  they  decided:  •"Here  we  must  work  hard  and  have  not
always  enough.  There  he  says  there  is  always  plenty  without  work.
We  will  go  with  him.'1  So  they  fasted  seven  days,  and  on  the  seventh
morning  all  the  Ani'-Tsa'guhi  left  the  settlement  and  started  for  the
mountains  as  the  boy  led  the  way.
When  the  people  of  the  other  towns  heard  of  it  they  were  very
sorry  and  sent  their  headmen  to  persuade  the  Ani'-Tsa'guhi  to  stay  at
home  and  not  go  into  the  woods  to  live.  The  messengers  found  them
already  on  the  way,  and  were  surprised  to  notice  that  their  bodies  were
beginning  to  be  covered  with  hair  like  that  of  animals,  because  for
seven  days  they  had  not  taken  human  food  and  their  nature  was  chang-
ing. The  Ani'-Tsa'guhi  would  not  come  back,  but  said,  "  We  are  going
where  there  is  always  plenty  to  eat.  Hereafter  we  shall  be  called  y&n  a
(bears),  and  when  you  yourselves  are  hungry  come  into  the  woods  and
call  us  and  we  shall  come  to  give  you  our  own  Mesh.  You  need  not  be
afraid  to  kill  us,  for  we  shall  live  always.1'  Then  they  taught  the  mes-
sengers the  songs  with  which  to  call  them,  and  the  bear  hunters  have
these  songs  still.  When  they  had  finished  the  songs  the  Ani'-Tsa'guhi
started  on  again  and  the  messengers  turned  back  to  the  settlements,
but  after  going  a  little  way  they  looked  back  and  saw  a  drove  of  bears
going  into  the  woods.
Firxt  11  wr  Song
II:-:.'   Aui'-Tsti't/iilii,  Aiii'-Tsii'iji'ilii,  akwandv/li  e'lanffl  gin&n'ti,
Ani'-Ts&'gtihi,  Ani'-Tsd'giihi,  akwandu'li  e'lanti'  gmCm'ti — Yd!
He-e!   The  Ani'-Tsa'guhi,  the    Ani'-Tsa'guhi,   I   want    to   lay   them   low   mi   the
ground,
The   Ani'-Tsa'guhi,  the   Ani'-Tsa'guhi,   I    want    to   lay  them  low  on  the
ground — Yfi!
The  hear  hunter  starts  out  each  morning  fasting  and  does  not  eat
until  near  evening.  He  sings  this  song  as  he  leaves  camp,  and  again
the  next  morning,  but  never  twice  the  same  day.


THE    BE  \\i    man  327
St  cond  Bt  ar  Song
This  song  also  is  sung  by  the  bear  hunter,  in  order  to  attracl  the
bears,  while  on  his  way  from  the  camp  to  the  plan'  where  he  expects
to  hunt  during  the  day.     The  melody  is  simple  and  plaintive.
//.-..'  Hayuya'haniwd,' ,  lutyuya'haniwi.',  hayuya'haniwd',  liayuya'hm
Tsistuyi'  nehandu'yanOf ,  Tsistuyi'  nehandu'yanu' —  Yoho-o!
He-el  Hayuya'haniw&' ',  hayuya'haniicti,',  hayuya'haniwfl,',  hayuya'hm
Kuwdhi'  nehandu'yanu,  Kuwdhi'  nehandu'yanu'—  Yoho-o!
II,  -. .'  Hayuya'haniwa' ,  hayuya'haniwQ/ ,  hayuya'haniwQ,',  hayuya'haniwQ,',
handu'yanti,  Uydhye1  >>' — Yoho-o.1
II,-,:  Hayuya'haniwQ,',  hayuya'haniw&',  hayuya'haniwQ.' ',  hayuya'ha
Gdtegwd'  nehundu'yanOf ,  Gdtegwd'  nehandu'yanu' —  Yoho-o!
I  Recited  i   Uli-'nu'  aslM'  tadeyd'statakuhl'  gun'ndgt  asttif  teiiffl.
He!   Hayuya'haniwa'  (four  times),
In  Tsistu'yl  you  were  conceived  (two  times) — Yoho!
He!  Hayuya'haniwa'  (four  times),
In  Kuwa'hl  you  were  conceived  (two  times)-  Yoho!
He!  Hayuya'haniwa'  (four  times),
In  Uya'hye  you  were  conceived  (two  times) — Yoho!
He!  Hayuya'haniwa'  (four  times),
In  Gate'gwiS  you  were  conceived  (two  times) — Yoho!
And  now  surely  we  and  the  Lr<»>il  Mack  things,  the  best  of  all,  shall  see  eai  ii ..tiler.
76.   THE   BEAR   MAN
A  man  went  hunting  in  the  mountains  and  came  across  a  black  bear,
which  he  wounded  with  an  arrow.    The  bear  turned  and  started  in  inn
the  other  way.  and  the  hunter  followed,  shooting  one  arrow  after
another  into  it  without  bringing  it  down.  Now.  this  was  a  medicine
hear,  and  could  talk  or  read  the  thoughts  of  people  without  their  say-
ing a  word.  At  last  he  stopped  and  pulled  the  arrows  out  of  his  side
ami  gave  them  to  the  man.  saying,  "It  is  of  no  use  for  you  to  shoot
at  me,  for  you  can  not  kill  me.  Come  to  my  house  and  let  us  live  to-
gether." The  hunter  thought  to  himself.  "He  may  kill  me;'"  but  the
bear  read  his  thoughts  and  said.  "No,  I  won't  hurt  you."  The  man
thought  again,  "How  can  1  get  anything  to  eat;'*  but  the  hear  knew
his  thoughts,  and  said.  "There  shall  he  plenty."  So  the  hunter  went with  the  hear.
They  went  on  toe-ether  until  they  came  to  a  hole  in  the  side  of  the
mountain,  and  the  hear  said.  "This  is  not  where  I  live,  hut  there  is
going  to  he  a  council  here  and  we  will  see  what  they  do."  They went  in.  and  the  hole  widened  as  they  went,  until  they  came  to  a
large  cave  like  a  townhouse.  It  was  full  of  hear-  —old  bears,  voung
bears,  and  cubs,  white  bears,  black  hears,  and  brown  bears  and  a
large  white  hear  was  the  chief.  They  sat  down  in  a  corner,  but  -0011
the  hear-  scented  the  hunter  and  began  to  ask,  "  What  is  it  that  smells


328  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.a.nn.w
bad?"  The  chief  .said,  "Don't  talk  so;  it  is  only  a  stranger  come  to
see  us.  Let  him  alone."  Food  was  getting  scarce  in  the  mountains, and  the  council  was  to  decide  what  to  do  about  it.  They  had  sent  out
messengers  all  over,  and  while  they  were  talking  two  bears  came  in
and  reported  that  they  had  found  a  country  in  the  low  grounds  where
there  were  so  man}'  chestnuts  and  acorns  that  mast  was  knee  deep.
Then  they  were  all  pleased,  and  got  ready  for  a  dance,  and  the  dance
leader  was  the  one  the  Indians  call  Kalas'-giinahi'ta,  "Long  Hams,"  a
great  black  bear  that  is  always  lean.  After  the  dance  the  bears  noticed
the  hunter's  bow  and  arrows,  and  one  said,  "This  is  what  men  use  to
kill  us.  Let  us  see  if  we  can  manage  them,  and  may  be  we  can  tight
man  with  his  own  weapons."  80  they  took  the  bow  and  arrows  from
the  hunter  to  try  them.  They  fitted  the  arrow  and  drew  back  the
string,  but  when  they  let  go  it  caught  in  their  long  claws  and  the
arrows  dropped  to  the  ground.  They  saw  that  they  could  not  use
the  how  and  arrow's  and  gave  them  hack  to  the  man.  When  the  dance
and  the  council  were  over,  they  began  to  go  home,  excepting  the  White
Bear  chief,  who  lived  there,  and  at  last  the  hunter  and  the  bear  went
out  together.
They  went  on  until  the}7  came  to  another  hole  in  the  side  of  the
mountain,  when  the  bear  said,  "This  is  where  I  live,"  and  they  went
in.  By  this  time  the  hunter  was  very  hungry  and  was  wondering  how
he  could  get  something  to  eat.  The  other  knew  his  thoughts,  and  sit-
ting up  on  his  hind  legs  he  rubbed  his  stomach  with  his  forepaws — so —
and  at  once  he  had  both  paws  full  of  chestnuts  and  gave  them  to  the
man.  He  rubbed  his  stomach  again — so — and  had  his  paws  full  of
huckleberries,  and  gave  them  to  the  man.  He  rubbed  again — so — and
gave  the  man  both  paws  full  of  blackberries.  He  rubbed  again — so —
and  had  his  paws  full  of  acorns,  but  the  man  said  that  he  could  not
eat  them,  and  that  he  had  enough  already.
The  hunter  lived  in  the  cave  with  the  bear  all  winter,  until  long
hair  like  that  of  a  bear  began  to  grow  all  over  his  body  and  he  began
to  act  like  a  bear;  but  he  still  walked  like  a  man.  One  day  in  early
spring  the  hear  said  to  him,  "  Your  people  down  in  the  settlement  are
getting  ready  for  a  grand  hunt  in  these  mountains,  and  they  will  come
to  this  cave  and  kill  me  and  take  these  clothes  from  me" — he  meant
his  skin — "but  they  will  not  hurt  you  and  will  take  you  home  with
them."  The  hear  knew  what  the  people  were  doing  down  in  the  set-
tlement just  as  he  always  knew  what  the  man  was  thinking  about.
Some  days  passed  and  the  bear  said  again,  "This  is  the  day  when  the
Topknots  will  come  to  kill  me.  hut  the  Split-noses  will  come  first  and
find  us.  When  they  have  killed  me  they  will  drag  me  outside  the
cave  and  take  off  my  clothes  and  cut  me  in  pieces.  You  must  cover
the  blood  with  leaves,  and  when  they  are  taking  you  away  look  back
after  you  have  gone  a  piece  and  you  will  see  something."


THE     BEAK     MAN  329
Soon  they  heard  the  hunters  coming  up  the  mountain,  and  then  the
dogs  found  thecaveand  began  to  bark.  The  hunters  came  and  looked
inside  and  -aw  the  bear  and  killed  him  with  their  arrows.  Then  they
dragged  him  outside  the  cave  and  skinned  the  body  and  cut  it  in  quar-
ters to  carry  home.  The  dogs  kepi  on  barking  until  the  hunters
thought  there  must  be  another  hear  in  the  cave.  They  looked  in
again  and  saw  the  man  away  at  the  farther  end.  At  first  they  thoughl
it  was  another  bear  on  account  of  bis  lone-  hair,  but  they  soon  saw  it
was  the  hunter  who  had  been  lost  the  year  before,  so  they  went  in  and
brought  him  out.  Then  each  hunter  took  a  load  of  the  hear  meat  and
they  started  home  again,  bringing  the  man  ami  the  skin  with  (hem.
Before  they  left  the  man  piled  leaves  oxer  the  spot  where  they  had  cut
up  the  hear,  and  when  they  had  gone  a  little  way  he  looked  behind
and  saw  the  bear  rise  up  out  of  the  leaves,  shake  himself,  ami  go  back
into  the  woods.
When  they  came  near  the  settlement  the  man  told  the  hunters  that
he  must  he  -hut  up  where  no  one  could  see  him.  without  anything  to
eat  or  drink  for  seven  days  and  nights,  until  the  bear  nature  had  left
him  and  he  became  like  a  man  again.  So  they  shut  him  up  alone  in  a
house  and  tried  to  keep  very  still  about  it.  but  the  news  got  out  and
his  wife  heard  of  it.  She  came  for  her  husband,  but  the  people  would
not  let  her  near  him:  but  she  came  every  day  and  beggedso  hard  that
at  last  after  four  or  five  days  they  let  her  have  him.  She  took  him
home  with  her,  but  in  a  short  time  he  died,  because  he  still  had  a
bear'-  nature  and  could  not  live  like  a  man.  If  they  had  kept  him shut  up  and  fasting  until  the  end  of  the  seven  days  he  would  have
become  a  man  again  and  would  have  lived.
77.  THE  GREAT  LEECH  OF  TLANUSI'Yl
The  spot  where  Valley  river  joins  Hiwassee,  at  Murphy,  in  North
Carolina,  is  known  among  the  Cherokees  as  Tlanusi'vi.  "The  Leech
place."  and  this  is  the  story  they  tell  of  it:
Just  above  the  junction  is  a  deep  hole  in  Valley  river,  and  above
it  is  a  ledge  of  rock  running  across  the  stream,  over  w  Inch  people  used
to  go  as  on  a  bridge.  On  the  south  side  the  trail  ascended  a  high  bank,
from  which  they  could  look  down  into  the  water.  One  day  some  men
going  along  the  trail  saw  a  great  red  object,  full  as  large  a-  a  house,
lying  on  the  rock  ledge  in  the  middle  of  the  stream  below  them.  As
thej  stood  wondering  what  it  could  be  they  -aw  it  unroll — and  then
they  knew  it  was  alive-  and  stretch  itself  out  along  the  rock  until  it
looked  like  a  great  leech  with  red  and  white  stripes  along  its  body.
It  rolled  up  into  a  ball  and  again  stretched  out  at  full  length,  and  at
last  crawled  down  the  rock  and  was  out  of  sight  in  the  deep  water.
The  water  began  to  boil  and  foam,  and  a  great  column  of  white  spray
wasthrown  high  in  the  air  and  came  down  like  a  water-pout    upon  the


330  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
Very  spot  where  the  men  had  been  standing,  and  would  have  swept
them  all  into  the  water  but  that  they  saw  it  in  time  and  ran  from  the
place. More  than  one  person  was  carried  down  in  this  way,  and  their
friends  would  tind  the  body  afterwards  lying  upon  the  bank  with  the^ ears  and  nose  eaten  off,  until  at  last  the  people  were  afraid  to  go  across
the  ledge  any  more,  on  account  of  the  great  leech,  or  even  to  go  along
that  part  of  the  trail.  But  there  was  one  young  fellow  who  laughed
at  the  whole  story,  and  said  that  he  was  not  afraid  of  anything  in
Valley  river,  as  he  would  show  them.  So  one  day  he  painted  his  face
and  put  on  his  finest  buckskin  and  started  off  toward  the  river,  while
all  the  people  followed  at  a  distance  to  see  what  might  happen.
Down  the  trail  he  went  and  out  upon  the  ledge  of  rock,  singing  in
high  spirits: Tlmm'x}  giXne'ga  digVg&ge
Dafooa'nitlaste'sti.
I'll  tic  red  leech  skins
On  my  legs  for  garters.
But  before  he  was  half  way  across  the  water  began  to  boil  into  white
foam  and  a  great  wave  rose  and  swept  over  the  rock  and  carried  him
down,  and  he  was  never  seen  again.
Just  before  the  Removal,  sixty  years  ago,  two  women  went  out  upon
the  ledge  to  fish.  Their  friends  warned  them  of  the  danger,  but  one
woman  who  had  her  baby  on  her  back  said,  "There  are  fish  there  and
I'm  going  to  have  some;  I'm  tired  of  this  fat  meat."  She  laid  the
child  down  on  the  rock  and  was  preparing  the  line  when  the  water-
suddenly  rose  and  swept  over  the  ledge,  and  would  have  carried  off
the  child  but  that  the  mother  ran  in  time  to  save  it.  The  great  leech
is  still  there  in  the  deep  hole,  because  when  people  look  down  they  see
something  alive  moving  about  on  the  bottom,  and  although  they  can
not  distinguish  its  shape  on  account  of  the  ripples  on  the  water,  yet
they  know  it  is  the  leech.  Some  say  there  is  an  underground  water-
way across  to  Nottely  river,  not  far  above  the  mouth,  where  the  river
bends  over  toward  Murphy,  and  sometimes  the  leech  goes  over  there
and  makes  the  water  boil  as  it  used  to  at  the  rock  ledge.  They  call
this  spot  on  Nottely  "The  Leech  place"  also.
78.  THE   NUNNE'HI   AND   OTHER   SPIRIT   FOLK
The  Nunne'hl  or  immortals,  the  "people  who  live  anywhere,1' were
a  race  of  spirit  people  who  lived  in  the  highlands  of  the  old  Cherokee
country  and  had  a  great  many  townhouses,  especially  in  the  bald
mountains,  the  high  peaks  on  which  no  timber  ever  grows.  They  had
large  townhouses  in  Pilot  knob  and  under  the  old  Xlkwasi'  mound  in North  Carolina,  and  another  under  Blood  mountain,  at  the  head  of
Nottely  river,  in  Georgia.     They  were  invisible  excepting  when  they


iii l-    m  \  ni;'hi  33  1
wanted  to  be  seen,  and  then  thej  looked  and  -poke  just  like  other
Indians.  The}  were  verj  fond  of  music  and  dancing,  and  hunter's  in
the  mountains  would  often  bear  the  dance  songs  and  the  drum  beating
in  some  invisible  townhouse.  but  when  they  weni  toward  the  sound
it  would  shift  aboul  and  they  would  hear  ii  behind  them  or  awaj  in
some  other  direction,  so  that  they  could  never  lin<l  the  place  where  the
dance  mi-.  Thej  were  a  friendh  people,  too,  and  often  brought  lost
wandersrs  to  their  i»«  nhouses  under  the  mountains  and  cared  for  them
there  until  they  were  rested  and  then  guided  them  back  to  their  homes.
More  than  once,  also,  when  the  Cherokee  were  hard  pressed  by  the
i ■  1 1 < ■  1 1 1  \ .  the  Ni'inih 'In  w  arriors  have  <•<  >im'  out,  as  they  did  at  old  Nikwasi', and  have  saved  them  from  defeat.  Some  people  have  thought  that
they  are  the  same  as  the  Yuiiwi  Tsunsdi',  the  "  Little  People";  but
these  are  fairies,  no  larger  in  size  than  children.
There  was  a  man  in  Nottely  town  who  had  been  with  tin'  Nuiine'hi
when  he  was  a  boy,  and  he  toldWaflford  all  aboul  it.  lie  wasatruth-
ful,  hard-h  saded  man.  and  Wafford  had  heard  the  story  so  often  from
other  people  that  he  asked  this  man  to  tell  it.      It  was  in  this  way:
When  he  was  about  LO  or  L2  years  old  he  was  playing  one  day  near
the  river,  shooting  at  a  mark  with  his  bow  and  arrows,  until  he  became
tired,  and  started  to  build  a  fish  trap  in  the  water.     While  he  was  piling
up  the  stones  in  two  lone-  walls  a  man  came  and  si   1  on  the  bank  and
asked  him  what  he  was  doing.  The  boy  told  him.  and  the  man  said.
•■  Well,  that's  pretty  hard  work  ami  you  ought  to  rest  a.  while.  Comeand
take  a  walk  up  the  river."  The  boy  said,  uNo";  that  he  was  going  home
to  dinner  soon.  '"Come  right  up  to  my  house,"  said  the  st  ranger,  "and
I'll  give  you  a  good  dinner  there  and  bring  you  home  again  in  the
morning."  So  the  hoy  went  with  him  up  the  river  until  they  came  to
a  house,  when  they  went  in.  and  the  man's  wife  and  the  other  people there  were  very  glad  to  see  him.  and  gave  him  a  tine  dinner,  and  were
very  kind  to  him.  While  they  were  eating  a  man  that  the  boy  knew
very  well  came  in  and  spoke  to  him.  so  that  he  felt  quite  at  home.
After  dinner  he  played  with  the  other  children  and  slept  there  that
night,  and  in  the  morning,  after  breakfast,  the  man  got  ready  to  take
him  home.  They  went  down  a  path  that  had  a  cornfield  on  one  side
and  a  peach  orchard  fenced  in  on  the  other,  until  they  came  to  another
trail,  and  the  man  said,  "(in  alone-  this  trail  across  that  ridge  and  you
will  come  to  the  river  road  that  will  bring  you  straighl  to  your  home,
anil  now  I'll  go  hack  to  the  house."  So  the  man  went  hack  to  the
house  and  the  hoy  went  on  alone-  the  trail,  but  when  he  had  gone  a
little  way  he  looked  back,  and  there  was  no  cornfield  or  orchard  or
fence  or  house;   nothing  but  trees  on  the  mountain  side.
He  thought  it  very  queer,  but  somehow  he  was  not  frightened,  and
went  on  until  he  came  to  the  river  trail  in  sight  of  his  home.  There
were  a  great  many  people  standing  about  talking,  and  when  thej  saw


332  MYTHS    OK    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.  ann.  is
him  they  ran  toward  him  shouting,  "Here  he  is!  He  is  not  drowned
or  killed  in  the  mountains!"  They  told  him  they  had  been  hunting  him
ever  since  yesterday  noon,  and  asked  him  where  he  had  been.  "A
man  took  me  over  to  his  house  just  across  the  ridge,  and  I  had  a  fine
dinner  and  a  good  time  with  the  children."  said  the  boy.  "I  thought
I'dsi'skala  here" — that  was  the  name  of  the  man  he  had  seen  at  dinner —
"would  tell  you  where  I  was."  But  I'dsi'skala  said,  "  I  haven 'tseen  you.
I  was  out  all  day  in  my  canoe  hunting  you.  It  was  one  of  the  Nunne'hi
that  made  himself  look  like  me."  Then  his  mother  said,  "You  say
you  had  dinner  there  '.  "Yes,  and  I  had  plenty,  too,"  said  the  boy;  but
his  mother  answered,  "There  is  no  house  there — only  trees  and  rocks —
but  we  hear  a  drum  sometimes  in  the  big  bald  above.  The  people
you  saw  were  the  Nunne'hi."
Once  four  Nunne'hi  women  came  to  a  dance  at  Nottelv  town,  and
danced  half  the  night  with  the  young  men  there,  and  nobody  knew
that,  they  were  Nunne'hi.  but  thought  them  visitors  from  another  set-
tlement. About  midnight  they  left  to  go  home,  and  some  men  who
hail  come  out  from  the  townhouse  to  cool  otf  watched  to  see  which  way
they  went.  They  saw  the  women  go  down  the  trail  to  the  river  ford,
but  just  as  they  came  to  the  water  they  disappeared,  although  it  was  a
plain  trail,  with  no  place  where  they  could  hide.  Then  the  watchers
knew  they  were  Nunne'hi  women.  Several  men  saw  this  happen,  and
one  of  them  was  Wafford's  father-in-law,  who  was  known  for  an  honest
man.  At  another  time  a  man  named  Burnt-tobacco  was  crossing  over
the  ridge  from  Nottelv  to  Hemptown  in  Georgia  and  heard  a  drum  and
the  songs  of  dancers  in  tin'  hills  on  one  side  of  the  trail.  He  rode  over
to  see  who  could  be  dancing  in  such  a  place,  hut  when  he  reached  the
spot  the  drum  and  the  songs  were  behind  him,  and  he  was  so  frightened
that  he  hurried  back  to  the  trail  and  rode  all  the  way  to  Hemptown  as
hard  as  he  could  to  tell  the  story.  He  was  a  truthful  man,  and  they
believed  what  he  said.
There  must  have  been  a  good  many  of  the  Nunne'hi  living  in  that
neighborhood,  because  the  drumming  was  often  heard  in  the  high  balds
almost  up  to  the  time  of  the  Removal.
On  a  small  upper  branch  of  Nottelv.  running  nearly  due  north  from
Blood  mountain,  there  was  also  a  hole,  like  a  small  well  or  chimney,  in
in  the  ground,  from  which  there  came  up  a  warm  vapor  that  heated  all
the  air  around.  People  said  that  this  was  because  the  Nunne'hi  bad  a townhouse  and  a  tire  under  the  mountain.  Sometimes  in  cold  weather
hunters  would  stop  there  to  warm  themselves,  but  the}'  were  afraid  to
stay  long.  This  was  more  than  sixty  years  ago.  hut  the  hole  is  probably
there  yet.
('lose  to  the  old  trading  path  from  South  Carolina  up  to  the  Chero-
kee Nation,  somewhere  near  the  head  of  Tugaloo,  there  was  formerly
a   noted  circular  depression  about  the  size  of  a  townhouse,  and  waist


mookeyJ  THE    M'MVi    TSUNSDl'  333
deep.  Lnside  it  was  always  clean  as  though  swept  by  unknown  hands.
Passing  traders  would  throw  logs  and  rocks  into  it.  but  would  always,
on  their  return,  6nd  them  thrown  far  out  from  the  hole.  The  Indians
said  it  was  a  Nuiine'hi  townhouse.  and  never  Liked  to  go  near  the  place
or  even  to  talk  aboul  it.  until  at  last  some  logs  thrown  in  by  the  trad-
ers were  allowed  to  remain  there,  and  then  they  concluded  that  the
Nfmne'hi.  annoyed  by  the  persecution  of  the  white  men.  had  abandoned their  townhouse  forever.
There  is  another  race  of  spirits,  the  YQ/wwi  Tsunsdi',  or  "Little
People."  who  live  in  rock  caves  on  the  mountain  side.  They  are  lit-
tle fellows,  hardly  reaching  up  to  a  man's  knee,  hut  well  shaped  and
handsome,  with  lone-  hair  falling  almost  to  the  ground.  They  are  great
wonder  workers  and  are  very  fond  of  music,  spending  half  their  time
drumming  and  dancing.  They  are  helpful  and  kind-hearted,  and  often
when  people  have  been  lost  in  the  mountains,  especially  children  who
have  strayed  away  from  their  parents,  the  Yitnwi  Tsunsdi'  have  found
them  and  taken  care  of  them  and  brought  them  hack  to  their  homes.
Sometimes  their  drum  is  heard  in  lonely  places  in  the  mountains,  hut  it
is  not  safe  to  follow  it.  because  the  Little  People  do  not  like  to  he  dis-
turbed at  home,  and  they  throw  a  spell  over  the  stranger  SO  that  he  is
bewildered  and  loses  his  way,  and  even  if  he  does  at  last  yet  hack  to  the
settlement  he  is  like  one  dazed  ever  after.  Sometimes,  also,  they  come
near  a  house  at  night  and  the  people  inside  hear  them  talking,  hut  they
must  not  go  out.  and  in  the  morning  they  find  the  corn  gathered  or  the
field  cleared  as  if  a  whole  force  of  men  had  been  at  work.  If  anyone
.should  go  out  to  watch,  he  would  die.  "When  a  hunter  finds  anything
in  the  woods,  such  as  a  knife  or  a  trinket,  he  must  say.  "Little  People.
I  want  to  take  this."  because  it  may  belong  to  them,  and  if  he  does  not ask  their  permission  they  will  throw  stones  at  him  as  he  goes  home.
Once  a  hunter  in  winter  found  tracks  in  the  snow  like  the  tracks  of
little  children.  He  wondered  how  they  could  have  come  there  and
followed  them  until  they  led  him  to  a  cave,  which  was  full  of  Little
People,  young  and  old.  men.  women,  and  children.  They  brought  him
in  and  were  kind  to  him,  and  he  was  with  them  some  time:  hut  when
he  left  they  warned  him  that  he  must  not  tell  or  he  would  die.  lie
went  hack  to  the  settlement  and  his  friends  were  all  anxious  to  know
where  he  had  been.  For  a  lone-  time  he  refused  to  say.  until  at  last
he  could  not  hold  out  any  longer,  hut  told  the  story,  and  in  a  few
days  he  died.  Only  a  few  years  ago  two  hunters  from  Raventown,
e-oine-  behind  the  high  fall  near  the  head  of  Oconaluftee  on  the  Last
Cherokee  reservation,  found  there  a  cave  with  fresh  footprints  of  the
Little  People  all  over  the  Moor.
During  the  smallpox  among  the  East  Cherokee  just  after  the  war
one  sick  man  wandered  off,  and  his  friends  searched,  hut  could  not
find  him.     After  several  weeks  he  came  hack  and  said  that  the  Little


334  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
People  had  found  him  and  taken  him  to  one  of  their  eaves  and  tended
him  until  he  was  cured.
About  twenty-five  years  ago  a  man  named  Tsantawu'  was  lost  in  the
mountains  on  the  head  of  Oconaluftee.  It  was  winter  time  and  very
cold  and  his  friends  thought  he  must  be  dead,  but  after  sixteen  days
he  came  back  and  said  that  the  Little  People  had  found  him  and  taken
him  to  their  cave,  where  he  had  been  well  treated,  and  given  plenty  of
everything  to  eat  except  bread.  This  was  in  large  loaves,  but  when
he  took  them  in  his  hand  to  eat  they  seemed  to  shrink  into  small  cakes
so  light  and  crumbly  that  though  he  might  eat  all  day  he  would  not
be  satisfied.  After  he  was  well  rested  they  had  brought  him  a  part  of
the  way  home  until  they  came  to  a  small  creek,  about  knee  deep,  when
they  told  him  to  wade  across  to  reach  the  main  trail  on  the  other  side.
He  waded  across  and  turned  to  look  back,  but  the  Little  People  were
gone  and  the  creek  was  a  deep  river.  When  he  reached  home  his
legs  were  frozen  to  the  knees  and  he  lived  only  a  few  days.
Once  the  Yiifiwi  Tsunsdi'  had  been  very  kind  to  the  people  of  a  cer-
tain settlement,  helping  them  at  night  with  their  work  and  taking  good
care  of  any  lost  children,  until  something  happened  to  offend  them  and
they  made  up  their  minds  to  leave  the  neighborhood.  Those  who  were
watching  at  the  time  saw  the  whole  company  of  Little  People  come
down  to  the  ford  of  the  river  and  cross  over  and  disappear  into  the
mouth  of  a  large  cave  on  the  other  side.  They  were  never  heard  of
near  the  settlement  again.
There  are  other  fairies,  the  Yiinwi  Amai'ylne' hi,  or  Water-dwellers,
who  live  in  the  wTater,  and  fishermen  pray  to  them  for  help.  Other
friendly  spirits  live  in  people's  houses,  although  no  one  can  see  them,
and  so  long  as  they  are  there  to  protect  the  house  no  witch  can  come
near  to  do  mischief.
Tsdwa'si  and  Tsaga'si  are  the  names  of  two  small  fairies,  who  are
mischievous  enough,  but  yet  often  help  the  hunter  who  prays  to  them.
Tsawa'si,  or  Tsawa'si  Usdi'ga  (Little  Tsawa'si).  is  a  tiny  fellow,
very  handsome,  with  long  hair  falling  down  to  his  feet,  who  lives
in  grassy  patches  on  the  hillsides  and  has  great  power  over  the  game.
To  the  deer  hunter  who  prays  to  him  he  gives  skill  to  slip  up  on  the
deer  through  the  long  grass  without  being  seen.  Tsaga'si  is  another
of  the  spirits  invoked  by  the  hunter  and  is  very  helpful,  but  when  some-
one trips  and  falls,  we  know  that  it  is  Tsaga'si  who  has  caused  it.
There  are  several  other  of  these  fairies  with  names,  all  good-natured,
but  more  or  less  tricky.
Then  there  is  />-  'tsdtd.  De'tsata  was  once  a  boy  who  ran  away  to
the  woods  to  avoid  a  scratching  and  tries  to  keep  himself  invisible  ever
since.  He  is  a  handsome  little  fellow  and  spends  his  whole  time  hunt-
ing birds  with  blowgun  and  arrow.  He  lias  a  great  many  children
who  are  all  just  like  him  and  have  the  same  name.     When  a  flock  of


Kooney]  THE    REMOVED   TOWNHOUSES  335
birds  flies  up  suddenly  as  if  frightened  ii  is  because  De'ts&ta  is  chasing them.  He  is  mischievous  and  sometimes  bides  an  arrow  from  the  bird
hunter,  who  mu\  have  shot  it  off  into  a  perfectly  clearspace,  but  looks
and  looks  without  finding  it.  Then  the  hunter  says.  "De'tsata,  you
have  my  arrow,  and  it'  you  don't  give  it  up  I'll  scratch  you."  and  when he  looks  again  he  finds  it.
There  is  one  spirit  that  goes  aboui  at  night  with  a  light.  The  <  !hero-
kee  call  it  Atsil'-dihye'gt,  "The  Fire-carrier,"  and  thej  are  all  afraid  of
it.  because  they  think  it  dangerous,  although  they  do  not  know'much about  it.  They  do  not  even  know  exactly  what  it  looks  like,  because
they  are  afraid  to  stop  when  they  see  it.  It  may  lie  a  witch  instead
of  a  spirit.  Watford's  mother  saw  the  "  Fire-carrier"  once  when  she was  a  young  woman,  as  she  was  coming  home  at  night  from  a  trading
post  in  South  Carolina.  It  seemed  to  he  following  her  from  behind,
and  she  was  frightened  and  whipped  up  her  horse  until  she  gol  away
from  it  and  never  saw  it  again.
79.   THE    REMOVED    TOWNHOUSES
Long  ago,  long  before  the  Cherokee  were  driven  from  their  homes
in  L838,  the  people  on  Valley  river  and  Hiwassee  heard  voices  of  invis-
ible spirits  in  the  air  calling  and  warning  them  of  wars  and  misfor-
tunes which  the  future  held  in  store,  and  inviting  them  to  come  and
live  with  the  Nunne'hi,  the  Immortals,  in  their  homes  under  the  moun-
tains and  under  the  water-.  For  days  the  voices  hung  in  the  air.  and
the  people  listened  until  they  heard  the  spirits  say.  "If  you  would
live  with  us,  gather  everyone  in  your  townhouses  and  fast  there  for
seven  days,  and  no  one  must  raise  a  shout  or  a  warwhoop  in  all  that
time.  Do  this  and  we  shall  come  and  you  will  see  us  and  we  shall
take  you  to  live  with  Us." The  people  were  afraid  of  the  evils  that  were  to  come,  and  they
knew  that  the  Immortals  of  the  mountains  and  the  waters  were  happy
forever,  so  they  counciled  in  their  townhouses  and  decided  to  go  with
them.  Those  of  AnisgayS'yi  town  came  all  together  into  their  town-
house  and  prayed  and  fasted  for  six  days.  On  the  seventh  day  there
was  a  sound  from  the  distant  mountains,  and  it  came  nearer  and  grew
louder  until  a  roar  of  thunder  was  all  about  the  townhouse  and  they
felt  the  ground  shake  under  them.  Now  they' were  frightened,  and
despite  the  warning  some  of  them  screamed  out.  The  Nunne'hi,  who
had  already  lifted  up  the  townhouse  with  its  mound  to  carry  it  away,
were  startled  by  the  cry  and  let  a  part  of  it  fall  to  the  earth,  where
now  we  see  the  mound  of  Se  tsi.  They  steadied  themselves  again  and
hole  the  rest  of  the  townhouse.  with  all  the  people  in  it.  to  the  top
of  Tsuda'ye luB'yi  (Lone  peak),  near  the  head  of  Cheowa,  where  we
can  -till  see  it.  changed  long  ago  to  solid  rock,  but  the  people  are
invisible  and  immortal.


336  MYTHS    (IF    THE    CHEROKEE
The  people  of  another  town,  on  Hiwassee,  at  the  place  which  we  call
now  Du'stiya'lun'yi,  where  Shooting  creek  comes  in.  also  prayed  and
fasted,  and  at  the  end  of  seven  days  the  Nunne'hi  came  and  took  them
away  down  under  the  water.  They  are  there  now.  and  on  a  warm  sum-
mer day,  when  the  wind  ripples  the  surface,  those  who  listen  well  can
hear  them  talking  below.  When  the  Cherokee  drag  the  river  for  tish  the
fish-drag  always  stops  and  catches  there,  although  the  water  is  deep,
and  the  people  know  it  is  being  held  by  their  lost  kinsmen,  who  do  not
want  to  be  forgotten.
When  the  Cherokee  were  forcibly  removed  to  tin'  West  one  of  the
greatest  regrets  of  those  along  Hiwassee  and  Valley  rivers  was  that
they  were  compelled  to  leave  behind  forever  their  relatives  who  hail
gone  to  the  Nunne'hi.
In  Tennessee  river,  near  Kingston,  18  miles  below  Loudon,  Ten-
nessee, is  a  place  which  the  Cherokee  call  Gustf,  where  there  once
was  a  settlement  long  ago.  but  one  night  while  the  people  were  gath-
ered in  the  townhouse  for  a  dance  the  bank  caved  in  and  carried  them
all  down  into  the  river.  Boatmen  passing  the  spot  in  their  canoes  see
the  round  dome  of  the  townhouse — now  turned  to  stone — in  the  water
below  them  and  sometimes  hear  the  sound  of  the  drum  and  dance
coming  up,  and  they  never  fail  to  throw  food  into  the  water  in  return
for  being  allowed  to  cross  in  safety.
80.   THE   SPIRIT   DEFENDERS   OF   NIKWASI'
Long  ago  a  powerful  unknown  tribe  invaded  the  country  from  the
southeast,  killing  people  and  destroying  settlements  wherever  they
went.  No  leader  could  stand  against  them,  and  in  a  little  while  they
had  wasted  all  the  lower  settlements  and  advanced  into  the  mountains.
The  warriors  of  the  old  town  of  Nikwasi',  on  the  head  of  Little
Tennessee,  gathered  their  wives  and  children  into  the  townhouse  and
kept  scouts  constantly  on  the  lookout  for  the  presence  of  danger.
One  morning  just  before  daybreak  the  spies  saw  the  enemy  approach-
ing and  at  once  gave  the  alarm.  The  Nikwasi'  men  seized  their  arms and  rushed  out  to  meet  the  attack,  but  after  a  long,  hard  fight  they
found  themselves  overpowered  and  began  to  retreat,  when  suddenly  a
stranger  stood  among  them  and  shouted  to  the  chief  to  call  off  his  men
and  he  himself  would  drive  back  the  enemy.  From  the  dress  and
language  of  the  stranger  the  Nikwasi'  people  thought  him  a  chief who  had  come  with  reinforcements  from  the  Overhill  settlements  in
Tennessee.  They  fell  back  along  the  trail,  and  as  they  came  near  the
townhouse  they  saw  a  great  company  of  warriors  coming  out  from  the
side  of  the  mound  as  through  an  open  doorway.  Then  they  knew  that
their  friends  were  the  Nunne'hi,  the  Immortals,  although  no  one  had
ever  heard  before  that  they  lived  under  Nikwasi'  mound.
The  Nunne'hi  poured  out  by  hundreds,  armed  and  painted  for  the






mooney]  THE    SPIEIT    DEFENDERS    OE    NIKWASl'  337
fight,  and  the  most  curious  thing  about  it  all  wus  that  they  became
invisible  as  soon  as  they  were  fairly  outside  of  the  settlement,  so  that
although  the  enemy  saw  the  glancing  arrows  or  the  rushing  tomahawk,
and  felt  the  stroke,  he  could  not  see  who  sent  it.  Before  such  invis-
ible foes  the  invaders  soon  had  to  retreat,  going  first  south  along  the
ridge  to  where  joins  the  main  ridge  which  separates  the  French  Broad
from  the  Tuckasegee,  and  then  turning  with  it  to  the  northeast.  As
they  retreated  thej  tried  to  shield  themselves  behind  rocks  and  trees,
hut  the  Nunne'hi  arrows  went  around  the  rocks  and  killed  them  from
the  other  side,  and  they  could  find  no  hiding  place.  All  (done-  the
ridge  they  fell,  until  when  they  reached  the  head  of  Tuckasegee  not
more  than  half  a  dozen  were  left  alive,  and  in  despair  they  sat  down
anil  cried  out  for  mercy.  Ever  since  then  the  Cherokee  have  called
tin'  place  Dayulsun'yl,  "Where  the  y  cried."  Then  the  Nunne'hi  chief told  them  they  had  deserved  their  punishment  for  attacking  a  peaceful
tribe,  and  he  spared  their  lives  and  told  them  to  go  home  and  take  the
new-  to  their  people.  This  was  the  Indian  custom,  always  to  spare  a
few  to  carry  back  the  news  of  defeat.  They  went  home  toward  the
north  and  the  Nunne'hi  went  hack  to  the  mound.
And  they  are  >till  there,  because,  in  the  last  war.  when  a  strong
party  of  Federal  troops  came  to  surprise  a  handful  of  Confederates
posted  there  they  saw  so  man\  soldiers  guarding  the  town  that  they
were  afraid  and  went  away  without  making  an  attack.
*   -  ■:;  -.:■  *  ■;>  :.  *
There  is  another  story,  that  once  while  all  the  warriors  of  a  certain
town  were  off  on  a  hunt,  or  at  a  dance  in  another  settlement,  one  old
man  was  chopping  wood  on  the  side  of  the  ridge  when  suddenly  a
party  of  the  enemy  came  upon  him — Shawano,  Seneca,  or  some  other
tribe.  Throwing  his  hatchet  at  the  nearest  one.  he  turned  and  ran  for
the  house  to  yet  his  gun  and  make  the  best  defense  that  lie  might.  <  )n
coming  out  at  once  with  the  gun  lie  was  surprised  to  find  a  large  body
of  strange  warriors  driving  hack  the  enemy.  It  was  no  time  for  ques-
tions, and  taking  his  place  with  the  others,  they  fought  hard  until  the
enemy  was  pressed  back  up  the  creek  and  finally  broke  and  retreated
across  the  mountain.  When  it  was  over  and  there  was  time  to  breathe
again,  the  old  man  turned  to  thank  his  new  friends,  hut  found  that  he
was  alone  -they  had  disappeared  as  though  the  mountain  had  -wal-
lowed them.  Then  he  knew  that  they  were  the  Nunne'hi.  who  had
come  to  help  their  friends,  the  Cherokee.
81.  TSUL'KALU',    THE    SLANT-EYED    GIANT
A  lony  time  ago  a  widow  lived  with  her  one  daughter  at  the  old
town  of  Kanuga  on  Pigeon  river.     The  girl  was  of  age  to  marry,  and
her  mother  used  to  talk   with  her  a  good  deal,  and  tdl  her  she  must
l'.l    ETH— 01   22


3S8  MYTHS    OF   THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.aks.19
be  sure  tci  take  no  one  but  a  good  hunter  for  a  husband,  so  that  they
would  have  some  one  to  take  care  of  them  and  would  always  have
plenty  of  meat  in  the  house.  The  girl  said  such  a  man  was  hard  to
find,  but  her  mother  advised  her  not  to  be  in  a  hurry,  and  to  wait  until
the  right  one  eame.
Now  the  mother  slept  in  the  house  while  the  girl  slept  outside  in  the
asi.  One  dark  night  a  stranger  eame  to  the  asi  wanting  to  court
the  girl,  but  she  told  him  her  mother  would  let  her  marry  no  one  but
a  good  hunter.  •"Well."  said  the  stranger,  "1  am  a  great  hunter," so  she  let  him  come  in.  and  he  stayed  all  aight.  .hist  before  day  he
said  he  must  go  back  now  to  his  own  place,  hut  that  he  had  brought
some  meat  for  her  mother,  and  she  would  rind  it  outside.  Then  he
went  away  and  the  girl  had  not  seen  him.  When  day  came  she  went
out  and  found  there  a  deer,  which  she  brought  into  the  house  to  her
mother,  ami  told  her  it  was  a  present  from  her  new  sweetheart.  Her
mother  was  pleased,  and  they  had  deersteaks  for  breakfast.
Hi'  eame  again  the  next  night,  hut  again  went  away  before  daylight,
and  this  time  he  left  two  deer  outside.  The  mother  was  more  pleased
this  time,  but  said  to  her  daughter.  "'I  wish  your  sweetheart  would
bring  us  some  wood."  Now  wherever  he  might  be,  the  stranger  knew their  thoughts,  so  when  he  eame  the  next  time  he  said  to  the  girl.
'"Tell  your  mother  I  have  brought  the  wood":  and  when  she  looked out  in  the  morning  there  were  several  great  trees  lying  in  front  of
the  door,  roots  and  branches  and  all.  The  old  woman  was  angry,  and
said.  "  He  might  have  brought  us  some  wood  that  we  could  use  instead
of  whole  trees  that  we  can't  split,  to  litter  up  the  road  with  brush."
The  hunter  knew  what  she  said,  and  the  next  time  he  eame  he  brought
nothing,  and  when  they  looked  out  in  the  morning  the  trees  were
gone  and  there  was  no  wood  at  all.  so  the  old  woman  had  to  go  after
some  herself.
Almost  every  night  he  came  to  see  the  girl,  and  each  time  he
bi'ought  a  deer  or  some  other  eame.  hut  still  he  always  left  before
daylight.  At  last  her  mother  said  to  her.  "Your  husband  always
le;u  es  before  daylight.  Why  don't  he  wait?  1  want  to  see  what  kind
of  a  son-in-law  1  have."  When  the  girl  told  this  to  her  husband  he
said  he  could  not  let  the  old  woman  see  him.  because  the  sight  would
frighten  her.  "She  wants  to  see  you,  anyhow."  said  the  girl,  and began  t<>  cry,  until  at  last  he  had  to  consent,  hut  warned  her  that  her
mother  must  not  say  that  he  looked  frightful  (usga'sS'ti'yu). The  next  morning  he  did  not  leave  so  early,  hut  stayed  in  the  fisi,
and  when  it  was  daylight  the  girl  went  out  and  told  her  mother.  The
old  woman  came  and  looked  in.  and  there  she  saw  a  great  giant,  with
lone-  slanting  eyes  {tsul  LiihY).  lying  doubled  up  on  the  floor,  with  his
head  against  the  rafters  in  the  left  hand  corner  at  the  hack,  and  his
toes  scraping  the  roof  in  the  right-hand  corner  by  the  door.     She


tsul'k  \  l  i  ■"'•"■'.|
gave  "iil\  one  look  and  ran  back  to  the  house,  crying,  Usga'gt  ti'yu!
si  ti'yu!
Tsui  kahV  was  terribly  angrj  .     He  untwisted  himself  and  ca   ul
of  the  fisi,  and  said  good-bye  to  the  girl,  telling  her  thai  he  would  ne\  er
let  her  mother  see  him  again,  but  would  go  back  to  his  own  country.
Then  he  went  off  in  the  direction  of  Tsunegun'yi.
Soon  after  he  left  the  girl  had  her  monthly  period.  There  was  a  \  ery
great  Hoyi  of  blood,  and  the  mother  threw  it  all  into  the  river.  One
nighl  after  the  girl  had  gone  to  bed  in  the  sis)  her  husband  came  again
to  the  door  and  said  to  her.  "  It  seems  you  are  alone."  and  asked  where was  the  child.  She  said  there  had  been  none.  Then  he  asked  where
was  the  blood,  and  -he  said  thai  her  mother  had  thrown  it  into  the
river.  She  told  just  where  the  place  was, and  he  went  there  and  found
a  small  worm  in  the  water.  He  took  it  up  and  carried  it  hack  to  the
:1st.  and  as  he  walked  it  took  form  and  began  to  grow,  until,  when  he
reached  the  asi.  it  was  a  baby  uirl  that  he  was  carrying.  He  gave  it
to  his  wife  and  said.  "Your  mother  does  not  like  me  and  abuses  our
child,  so  come  and  let  us  go  to  my  home."  The  girl  wanted  to  lie  with
her  husband,  so,  after  telling  her  mother  good-bye,  she  took  up  the
child  and  they  went  off  together  to  Tsunegun'yi.
Now.  the  girl  had  an  older  In-other,  who  lived  with  his  own  wife  in
another  settlement,  and  when  he  heard  that  his  sister  was  married  he
came  to  pay  a  visit  to  her  and  her  new  husband,  hut  when  he  arrived  at
Kanuga  his  mother  told  him  his  sister  had  taken  her  child  and  gone
away  with  her  husband,  nobody  knew  where.  He  was  sorry  to  see  his
mother  so  lonely,  so  he  said  he  would  go  after  his  sister  and  try  to  find  her
and  bring  her  hack.  It  w  as  easy  to  follow  the  footprints  of  the  giant,
and  the  young  man  went  alone-  the  trail  until  he  came  to  a  place  w  here
they  had  re-ted.  and  there  were  tracks  on  the  ground  where  a  child  had
been  lying  and  other  marks  as  if  a  baby  had  been  horn  there,  lie  went
on  along  the  trail  and  came  to  another  place  where  they  had  rested,
and  there  wen^  tracks  of  a  baby  crawling  about  and  another  lying  on
the  ground.  He  went  on  and  came  to  where  they  had  rested  again,
and  there  were  tracks  of  a  child  walking  and  another  crawling  about.
Ih- went  on  until  he  came  where  they  had  rested  again,  and  there
were  tracks  of  one  child  running  and  another  walking.  Still  he  fol-
lowed the  trail  alone-  the  stream  into  the  mountain-,  and  came  to  the
place  Where  they  had  re-ted  again,  and  this  time  there  were  footprints
of  two  children  running  all  about,  and  the  footprints  can  -till  he  seen
in  tlie  rock  at  that  place.
Twice  again  he  found  where  they  had  rested,  and  then  the  trail  led
up  the  -lope  (if  Tsunegun'yi,  and  he  heard  the  sound  of  a  drum  and
voices,  as  if  people  were  dancing  inside  the  mountain.  Soon  he  came
to  a  cave  like  a  doorway  in  the  side  of  the  mountain,  hut  the  rock  was
so  -teep  and  smooth  that   he  could  not  climb  up  to  it.  hut  could  only


340  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
just  look  over  the  edge  and  sec  the  heads  and  shoulders  of  a  great  many
people  dancing  inside.  He  saw  his  sister  dancing  among-  them  and called  to  her  to  come  out.  She  turned  when  she  heard  his  voice,  and
as  soon  as  the  drumming  stopped  for  a  while  she  came  out  to  him,
finding  do  trouble  to  climb  down  the  rock,  and  leading-  her  two  little
children  by  the  hand.  She  was  very  glad  to  meet  her  brother  and
talked  with  him  a  long-  time,  but  did  not  ask  him  to  come  inside,  and
at  last  he  went  away  without  having-  seen  her  husband.
Several  other  times  her  brother  came  to  the  mountain,  but  always
his  sisler  met  him  outside,  and  he  could  never  see  her  husband.  After
four  years  had  passed  she  came  one  day  to  her  mother's  house  and
said  her  husband  had  been  hunting-  in  the  woods  near  by.  and  they  were
getting  ready  to  start  home  to-morrow,  and  if  her  mother  and  brother
would  come  early  in  the  morning  they  could  see  her  husband.  If  they
caine  too  late  for  .that,  she  said,  they  would  find  plenty  of  meat  to
take  home.  She  went  back  into  the  woods,  and  the  mother  ran  to  tell
her  son.  They  came  to  the  place  early  the  next  morning,  but  Tsuf-
kalu'  and  his  family  were  already  gone.  On  the  drying  poles  they
found  the  bodies  of  freshly  killed  deer  hanging,  as  the  girl  had  prom-
ised, and  there  were  so  many  that  they  went  back  and  told  all  their
friends  to  come  for  them,  and  there  were  enough  for  the  whole  settle-
ment.
Still  the  brother  wanted  to  see  his  sister  and  her  husband,  so  he
went  again  to  the  mountain,  and  she  came  out  to  meet  him.  He  asked
to  see  her  husband,  and  this  time  she  told  him  to  come  inside  with  her.
They  went  in  as  through  a  doorway,  and  inside  he  found  it  like  agreal
townhouse.  They  seemed  to  lie  alone,  but  his  sister  called  aloud.  "He
wants  to  see  you."  and  from  the  air  came  a  voice,  "You  can  not  see
me  until  you  put  on  a  new  dress,  and  then  you  can  see  me."  "I  am
willing."  said  the  young  man.  sneaking  to  the  unseen  spirit,  and  from
the  air  came  the  voice  again.  "Go  back,  then,  and  tell  your  peop'e
that  to  see  me  they  must  go  into  the  townhouse  and  fast  seven  days,
and  in  all  that  time  they  must  not  come  out  from  the  townhouse  or
raise  the  war  whoop,  and  on  the  seventh  day  I  shall  come  with  new
dresses  for  you  to  put  on  so  that  you  can  all  see  me."
The  young  man  went  back  to  Kanuga  and  told  the  people.  They  all
wanted  to  see  TsuTkalu',  who  owned  all  the  game  in  the  mountains,
so  they  went  into  the  townhouse  and  began  the  fast.  They  fasted
the  first  day  and  the  second  and  every  day  until  the  seventh — all  but
ont^  man  from  another  settlement,  who  slipped  out  every  night  when
it  was  dark  to  get  something  to  eat  and  slipped  in  again  when  no  one
was  watching.  On  the  morning  of  the  seventh  day  the  sun  was  just
coming  up  in  the  east  when  they  heard  a  great  noise  like  the  thunder  of
rocks  rolling  down  the  side  of  Tsunegun'yi.  They  were  frightened,
and  drew   near  together  in    the  townhouse,  and   no  one   whispered.


Tsl'l.'k  A  I.I   '  341
Nearer  and  louder  came  the  sound  until  it  gre^  into  an  aw  ful  rear,  and
everj  one  trembled  and  held  his  breath  all  but  one  man.  the  stranger
from  the  other  settlement,  who  losl  his  senses  from  fear  and  ran  cut
of  the  townhouse  and  shouted  the  war  crj .
At  once  the  roar  stopped  and  for  some  time  there  was  silence.  Then
tli«-\  heard  ii  again,  but  as  if  it  were  going  farther  away,  and  then
farther  and  farther,  until  at  last  ii  died  away  in  the  direction  of
Tsunegufi'yi.  and  then  all  was  still  again.  The  people  came  out  from
the  townhouse,  but  then'  was  silence,  and  they  could  see  nothing  but
what  had  been  seven  days  before.
Still  the  brother  was  not  disheartened,  but  came  again  to  see  his
sister,  and  she  broughl  him  into  the  mountain.  He  asked  why  Tsul'kalu'
had  not  brought  the  new  dresses,  as  he  had  promised,  and  the  voice
from  the  air  said.  "  I  came  with  them,  but  you  did  not  obey  my  word.
but  broke  the  fast  and  raised  the  war  cry."  The  young  man  answered,
•'It  was  not  done  by  our  people,  hut  by  a  stranger.  It'  you  will  come
again,  we  will  surely  do  as  you  say."  But  the  voice  answered,  "  Now
you  can  never  see  me."  Then  the  young  man  could  not  say  any  more,
and  he  went  back  to  Kanuga.
82.   KANA'STA,   THE   LOST   SETTLEMENT
Long  ago,  while  people  still  lived  in  the  old  town  of  Kana'sta,  03
the  French  Broad, two  strangei's, who  looked  in  no  way  different  from
other  Cherokee,  came  into  the  settlement  one  day  and  made  their  way
into  the  chief 's  house.  After  the  first  greetings  were  over  the  chief
asked  them  from  what  town  they  had  come,  thinking  them  from
one  of  the  western  settlements,  but  they  said,  "We  are  of  your  people
and  our  town  is  close  at  hand,  but  you  have  never  seen  it.  Here
you  have  wars  and  sickness,  with  enemies  on  every  side,  and  after
a  while  a  stronger  enemy  will  come  to  take  your  country  from  you.
We  are  always  happy,  and  we  have  come  to  invite  you  to  live  w  ith  u>
in  our  town  over  there."'  and  they  pointed  toward  Tsuwa  tel'da  (Pilot
knolii.  "We  do  not  live  forever,  and  do  not  always  find  game
when  we  go  for  it.  for  the  game  belongs  to  Tsulkalu',  who  lives  in
Tsunegufi'yi,  but  we  have  peace  always  and  need  not  think  of  danger.
We  g   w.  but  if  your  people  will  live  with  us  let  them  fast  seven
days,  and  we  shall  come  then  to  take  them."  Then  they  went  away toward  the  west.
The  chief  called  his  people  together  into  the  townhouse  andthej  held
a  council  over  the  matter  and  decided  at  hist  to  go  with  the  strangers.
They  got  all  their  property  read}  for  moving, and  then  went  again  into
the  townhouse  and  began  their  fast.  They  fasted  six  days,  and  on  the
morning  of  the  seventh,  he  fore  yet  the  sun  was  high,  they  saw  a  great
company  coming  along  the  trail  from  the  west,  led  by  the  two  men


342  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
who  had  stopped  with  the  chief.    They  see   <1  just  like  Cherokee  from
another  settlement,  and  after  a  friendly  meeting  they  took  up  a  part
of  the  goods  to  be  carried,  and  the  two  parties  started  hack  together
for  Tsuwatel'da.  There  was  one  man  from  another  town  visiting  at
Kana'sta.  and  he  went  along  with  the  rest.
When  they  came  to  the  mountain,  the  two  guides  led  the  way  into  a
cave,  which  opened  out  like  a  great  door  in  the  side  of  the  rock,
[nside  they  found  an  open  country  and  a  town,  with  houses  ranged  in
two  lone-  rows  from  east  to  west.  The  mountain  people  lived  in  the
houses  on  tlie  south  side,  and  they  had  made  ready  the  other  houses
for  the  newcomers,  hut  even  after  all  the  people  of  Kana'sta.  with
their  children  and  belongings,  had  moved  in,  there  were  still  a  large
number  of  houses  waiting  ready  for  the  next  who  might  come.  The
mountain  people  told  them  that  there  was  another  town,  of  a  different
people,  above  them  in  the  same  mountain,  and  still  farther  above,  at
the  very  top,  lived  the  Ani'-HyuntikwaM'ski  (the  Thunders).
Now  all  the  people  of  Kana'sta  were  settled  in  their  new  homes,  but
the  man  who  had  only  been  visiting  with  them  wanted  to  go  back  to
his  own  friends.  Some  of  the  mountain  people  wanted  to  prevent
this,  but  the  chief  said.  "No;  let  him  go  if  he  will,  and  when  he  tells
his  friends  they  may  want  to  come,  too.  There  is  plenty  of  room  for
all."  Then  he  said  to  the  man.  "Go  back  and  tell  your  friends  that  if
they  want  to  come  and  live  with  us  and  be  always  happy,  there  is  a
place  here  ready  and  waiting  for  them.  Others  of  us  live  in  Datsu'-
Dalasgun'yi  and  in  the  high  mountains  all  around,  and  if  they  would
rather  go  to  any  of  them  it  is  all  the  same.  We  see  you  wherever
you  go  and  are  with  you   in  all  your  dances,  but   you  can   not  see  us
unless  you  fast.     If  you  want  to  see  us.  fast    f   ■  days,  and  we  will
come  and  talk  with  you;  and  then  if  you  want  to  live  with  us,  fast
again  seven  days,  and  we  will  come  and  take  you."  Then  the  chief
led  the  man  through  the  cave  to  the  outside  of  the  mountain  and  left
him  there,  but  when  the  man  looked  back  he  saw  no  cave,  but  only
the  solid  rock.
*  *  *  *  *  *  *
The  people  of  the  lost  settlement  were  never  seen  again,  and  they
are  still  living  in  Tsuwa'tel'da.  Strange  things  happen  there,  so  that the  Cherokee  know  the  mountain  is  haunted  and  do  not  like  to  go
near  it.  Only  a  few  years  ago  a  party  of  hunters  camped  there,  and
as  they  sat  around  their  tire  at  supper  time  they  talked  of  the  story
and  made  rough  jokes  about  the  people  of  old  Kana'sta.  That  night
they  were  aroused  from  sleep  by  a  noise  as  of  stones  thrown  at  them
from  among  the  trees,  but  when  they  searched  they  could  find  nobody,
and  were  so  frightened  that  they  gathered  up  their  guns  and  pouches
and  left  the  place.


i   mm  THE    MOUNTAIN    PEOPLE  343
83.  TSUWE'NAhI:  a   legend   of   pilot   knob
Iii  the  old  town  of  Kanuga,  on  Pigeon  river,  there  was  a  lazy  fellow
named  Tsuwe'nahl,  who  lived  from  house  to  house  among  his  relativi
and  never  brought  home  any  game,  although  he  used  to  spend  nearly
all  his  time  in  the  woods.  At  last  his  friends  gol  ren  tired  of  keep
ing  him,  so  he  told  them  to  gel  some  parched  corn  ready  for  him  and
he  would  go  and  bring  back  a  deer  or  else  would  never  trouble  them
again.  They  filled  his  pouch  with  parched  corn,  enough  for  a  long  trip,
and  he  started  off  for  the  mountains.  l'a\  after  day  passed  until  they
thought  the\  had  really  seen  the  l:i-t  of  him,  but  before  the  month  was
half  gone  he  was  back  again  at  K&nuga,  with  no  deer,  but  with  a  won-
derful story  to  tell.
He  said  that  he  had  hardly  turned  away  from  the  trail  to  go  up  the
ridge  when  he  met  a  stranger,  who  asked  him  where  he  was  'join-.
Tsuwe'nahl  answered  that  his  friends  in  the  settlement  had  driven  him
out  because  he  was  no  good  hunter,  and  that  if  he  did  not  find  a  deer
this  time  he  would  never  go  hack  again.  "Why  not  come  with  me!"
said  the  stranger,  "  niv  town  is  not  far  from  here,  and  you  have  rela-
tives then'."  Tsuwe'nahl  was  very  glad  of  the  chance,  because  he was  ashamed  to  go  back  to  his  own  town;  so  he  went  with  the  stranger,
who  took  him  to  Tsuwa  tel'da  (Pilot  knob).  They  came  to  a  cave.
and  the  other  said.  "Let  us  go  in  hen':"'  hut  the  cave  ran  clear  to  the heart  of  the  mountain,  and  when  they  were  inside  the  hunter  found
there  an  open  country  like  a  wide  bottom  land,  with  a  great  settle-
ment and  hundreds  of  people.  They  were  all  glad  to  see  him.  and
brought  him  to  their  chief,  who  took  him  into  his  own  house  and
showed  him  a  scat  near  the  fire.  Tsuwe'nahl  sat  down,  hut  he  fell  it
move  under  him.  and  when  he  looked  again  he  saw  that  it  was  a  tur-
tle, with  it-  head  sticking  out  from  the  shell.  He  jumped  up,  hut  the
chief  -aid,  "It  won't  hurt  you;  it  only  wants  to  see  who  you  are."
So  he  -at  down  very  carefully,  and  tin-  turtle  drew  in  its  head  again.
They  brought  food,  of  the  same  kind  that  he  had  been  accustomed  to
at  home,  and  when  lie  had  eaten  the  chief  took  him  through  the  set-
tlement until  he  had  seen  all  the  houses  and  talked  with  most  of  the
people.  When  he  bad  seen  everything  and  had  re-ted  some  day-,  he
wa- an.\iou-  to  get  hack  to  his  home,  so  the  chief  himself  brought  him
to  the  mouth  of  the  cave  and  showed  him  the  trail  that  led  down  to  the
river.  Then  hi'  said.  "  Von  are  going  back  to  the  settlement,  but  you
will  never  he  satisfied  there  any  more.  Whenever  you  want  to  come
to  us,  you  know  tin'  way."  The  chief  left  him.  and  Tsuwe'nahl  went
dow  a  the  mountain  and  alone'  the  river  until  he  came  to  Kanuga.
lie  told  his  -tory.  hut  n«>  one  believed  it  and  the  people  only  laughed
at  him.  After  that  he  would  go  awa\  very  often  and  '»•  gone  for  sev-
eral days  at  a  time,  ami  when  he  came  hack  to  the  settlement  he  would


844  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.
say  he  had  been  with  the  mountain  people.  At  last  one  man  said  he
believed  the  story  and  would  go  with  him  to  see.  They  went  off
together  t<>  the  woods,  where  they  made  a  camp,  and  then  Tsuwe'nahi
went  on  ahead,  saying  he  would  !><•  hack  soon.  The  other  waited  for
him,  doing  a  little  hunting  near  the  camp,  and  two  nights  afterwards
Tsuwe'nahi  was  hack  again.  He  seemed  to  be  alone,  hut  was  talking
as  he  came,  and  the  other  hunter  heard  girls'  voices,  although  he  could
see  no  one.  When  he  came  up  to  the  fire  he  said.  "I  have  two  friends
with  me,  and  they  say  there  is  to  be  a  dance  in  their  town  in  two
nights,  and  if  you  want  to  go  they  will  come  for  you."  The  hunter
agreed  at  once,  and  Tsuwe'nahi  called  out,  as  if  to  some  one  close  by,
'"lie  says  he  will  go."  Then  lie  said.  "Our  sisters  have  come  for  some
venison."  The  hunter  had  killed  a  deer  and  had  the  meat  drying  over
the  tire,  so  he  said.  "What  kind  do  they  want?"  The  voices  answered.
"Our  mother  told  us  to  ask  for  some  of  the  ribs,"  but  still  he  could
see  nothing.  He  took  down  some  rib  pieces  and  gave  them  to  Tsu-
we'nahi, who  took  them  and  said.  "In  two  days  we  shall  come  again
for  you."  Then  he  started  oil.  and  the  other  heard  the  voices  going through  the  woods  until  all  was  still  again.
In  two  days  Tsuwe'nahi  came,  and  this  time  he  had  two  girls  with
him.  As  they  stood  near  the  tire  the  hunter  noticed  that  their  feet
were  short  and  round,  almost  like  dogs'  paws,  hut  as  soon  as  they  saw him  looking  they  sat  down  so  that  he  could  not  see  their  feet.  After
supper  the  whole  party  left  the  camp  and  went  up  along  the  creek  to
Tsuwatel'da.  They  went  in  through  the  cave  door  until  they  got  to
the  farther  end  and  could  see  houses  beyond,  when  all  at  once  the
hunter's  legs  felt  as  if  they  were  dead  and  he  staggered  and  fell  to
the  ground.  The  others  lifted  him  up,  hut  still  he  could  not  stand,
until  the  medicine-man  brought  some  "old  tobacco"  and  rubbed  it
on  his  legs  and  made  him  smell  it  until  he  sneezed.  Then  lie  was
able  to  stand  again  and  went  in  with  the  others.  He  could  not  stand  at
first,  because  he  had  not  prepared  himself  by  fasting  before  he  started.
The  dance  had  not  yet  begun  and  Tsuwe'nahi  took  the  hunter  into  the
townhouse  and  showed  him  a  seat  near  the  fire,  but  it  had  long  thorns
of  honey  locust  sticking  out  from  it  and  he  was  afraid  to  sit  down.
Tsuwe'nahi  told  him  not  to  be  afraid,  so  he  sat  down  and  found  that
the  thorns  were  as  soft  as  down  feathers.  Now  the  drummer  came  in
ami  the  dancers,  and  the  dance  began.  One  man  followed  at  the  end
of  the  line,  crying  Kh!  Kh!  all  the  time,  but  not  dancing.  The
hunter  wondered,  and  they  told  him.  "This  man  was  lost  in  the  moun-
tain- and  had  been  calling  all  through  the  woods  for  his  friends  until
his  voice  failed  and  he  was  only  able  to  pant  Kh!  Kh!  and  then  we
found  him  and  took  him  in."
When  it  was  over  Tsuwe'nahi  and  the  hunter  went  back  to  the  set-
tlement.    At  the  next  dance  in  Kanuga  they  told  all  they  had  seen  at


THE    THUNDER     \N1>    Ills    SISTERS  345
Tsuwa tel'da,  what  a  large  town  was  there  and  how  kind  everybody
was,  and  this  time  because  there  were  two  of  them  the  people
believed  it.  Now  others  wauled  to  go,  but  Tsuwe'nahi  told  them  they
must  firs!  fast  seven  days,  while  he  went  ahead  to  prepare  everything,
and  then  he  would  come  and  brine-  them.  lie  wen!  away  and  the
others  fasted,  until  at  the  end  of  seven  days  he  came  for  them  and  they
went  with  him  to  Tsuwa'tel'da,  and  their  friends  in  the  settlement never  saw  them  again.
84.   THE   MAN    WHO    MARRIED   THE   THUNDER'S   SISTER
In  the  old  times  the  people  used  to  dance  often  and  all  night.
Once  there  was  a  dance  at  the  old  town  of  Sakwi'yi,  on  the  head  of
Chattahoochee,  and  after  it  was  well  started  two  young  women  with
beautiful  lone-  hair  came  in.  but  no  one  knew  who  they  weir  or
whence  they  had  come.  They  danced  with  one  partner  and  another,
and    in    the    morning  slipped  awa\     before  anyone    knew    that    thej
were  gone;  hut  a  young  warrior  had  fallen  in  love  with    <  of  the
sisters  on  account  of  her  beautiful  hair,  and  after  the  manner  of  the
Cherokee  had  already  asked  her  through  an  old  man  if  she  would
marry  him  and  let  him  live  with  her.  To  this  the  young  woman  had
replied  that  her  brother  at  home  must  first  he  consulted,  and  they
promised  to  return  for  the  next  dance  seven  days  later  with  an  answer.
but  in  the  meantime  if  the  young  man  really  loved  her  he  must  prove
his  constancy  by  a  rigid  fast  until  then.  The  eager  lover  readily
agreed  and  impatient!)  counted  the  days.
In  seven  nights  there  was  another  dance.  The  young  warrior  was
on  hand  early,  and  later  in  the  evening  the  two  sisters  appeared  as
suddenly  as  before.  They  told  him  their  brother  was  willing,  and
after  the  dance  they  would  conduct  the  young  man  to  their  home,  but
warned  him  that  if  he  told  anyone  where  he  went  or  what  he  saw  he
would  surely  die.
He  danced  with  theinauain  and  about  daylight  the  three  came  away
ju-i  before  the  dance  closed,  so  as  to  avoid  being  followed,  and  started
oil  together.  The  women  led  the  way  alone- a  trail  through  the  woods,
which  the  young  man  had  never  noticed  before,  until  they  came  to  a
small  creek,  where,  without  hesitating,  they  stepped  into  the  water.
The  young  man  paused  in  surprise  on  the  bank  and  thought  to  himself,
"They  are  walking  in  the  water:  I  don't  want  to  do  that."  Tin-
women  knew  his  thoughts  just  as  though  he  had  spoken  and  turned
and  -aid  to  him.  "■This  is  not  water;  this  is  the  road  to  our  house."
He  still  hesitated,  hut  they  urged  him  on  until  he  stepped  into  the
water  and  found  it  was  only  soft  grass  that  made  a  tine  level  trail.
They  went  on  until  the  trail  came  to  a  large  stream  which  In-  knew
for  Tallulah  river.  The  women  plunged  boldly  in.  but  again  tin-  war-
rior hesitated  on  the  bank,  thinking  to  himself,  ""That  water  is  very


•~>4li  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
deep  and  will  drown  me;  I  can'tgo  on."  They  knew  his  thoughts  and
turned  and  said,  "'This  is  no  water,  but  the  main  trail  that  got'-  past
our  bouse,  which  is  now  close  by."  He  stepped  in,  and  instead  of
water  there  was  tall  waving  grass  that  closed  above  his  head  as  he
followed  them.
They  went  only  a  short  distance  and  came  to  a  rock  cave  close
under  [Jgufi'y]  (Tallulah  falls).  The  women  entered,  while  the  war-
rior stopped  at  the  mouth:  but  they  said.  "This  is  our  house:  come  in
and  oar  brother  will  soon  be  home;  he  is  coming  now.'"  They  heard low  thunder  in  the  distance.  He  went  inside  and  stood  up  close  to  the
entrance.  Then  the  women  took  off  their  long  hair  and  hung  it  up  on
a  lock,  and  both  their  heads  were  as  smooth  as  a  pumpkin.  The  man
thought,  "It  is  not  hair  at  all,"  and  he  was  more  frightened  than ever.
The  younger  woman,  the  one  he  was  about  to  marry,  then  sat  down
and  told  him  to  take  a  seat  beside  her.  He  looked,  and  it  was  a  large
turtle,  which  raised  itself  up  and  stretched  out  its  claws  as  if  angry  at
being  disturbed.  The  young  man  said  it  was  a  turtle,  and  refused  to
sit  down,  but  the  woman  insisted  that  it  was  a  seat.  Then  there  was
a  louder  roll  of  thunder  and  the  woman  said.  "  Now  our  brother  is
nearly  home."  While  they  urged  and  he  still  refused  to  come  nearer or  sit  down,  suddenly  there  was  a  great  thunder  clap  just  behind  him,
and  turning  quickly  he  saw  a  man  standing  in  the  doorway  of  the  cave.
"This  is  my  brother,"  said  the  woman,  and  he  came  in  and  sat  down
upon  the  turtle,  which  again  rose  up  and  stretched  out  its  claws.  The
young  warrior  still  refused  to  come  in.  The  brother  then  said  that  he
was  just  about  to  start  to  a  council,  ami  invited  the  young  man  to  go
with  him.  The  hunter  said  he  was  willing  to  go  if  only  he  had  a  horse;
mi  the  young  woman  was  told  to  bring  one.  She  went  out  and  soon
came  back  leading  a  great  uktena  snake,  that  curled  and  twisted
along  the  whole  length  of  the  cave.  Some  people  say  this  was  a
white  uktena  and  that  the  brother  himself  rode  a  red  one.  The  hun-
ter was  terribly  frightened,  and  said  "That  is  a  snake;  I  can't  ride
that."  The  others  insisted  that  it  was  no  snake,  but  their  riding
horse.  The  brother  grew  impatient  and  said  to  the  woman.  "He may
like  it  better  if  you  bring  him  a  saddle,  and  some  bracelets  for  his
wrists  and  arms."  So  they  went  out  again  and  brought  in  a  saddle and  some  arm  bands,  and  the  saddle  was  another  turtle,  which  they
fastened  on  the  uktena's  back,  and  the  bracelets  were  living  slimy
snakes,  which  they  got  ready  to  twist  around  the  hunter's  wrists.
He  was  almost  dead  with  fear,  and  said,  "What  kind  of  horrible
place  is  this?  1  can  never  stay  here  to  live  with  snakes  and  creeping
things."  The  brother  got  very  angry  and  called  him  a  coward,  and then  it  was  as  if  lightening  Hashed  from  his  eyes  and  struck  the  young
man.  and  a  terrible  crash  of  thunder  stretched  him  senseless.


r\Tii;riii'  3  I  7
When  at  last  he  came  to  himself  again  he  was  standing  with  hit-  feel
in  tin'  water  and  both  hands  grasping  a  laurel  bush  thai  grew  oul  from
the  bank,  and  there  was  no  trace  of  the  cave  or  the  Thunder  People,
l>ut  he  was  alone  in  the  forest.  He  made  his  way  oul  and  finally
reached  his  own  settlement,  bul  Eound  then  that  he  had  been  gone  so
very  long  that  all  the  people  had  thoughl  him  dead,  although  to  him
it  seemed  only  the  day  after  the  .lance.  His  friends  questioned  him
closely,  and.  forgetting  the  warning,  he  told  the  story;  l>nt  in  seven
days  lie  died,  for  no  one  can  come  back  from  the  underworld  and
tell  it  and  live.
85.   THE    HAUNTED    WHIRLPOOL
At  tin'  mouth  of  Suck  creek,  on  the  Tennessee,  about  ^  miles  below
Chattanooga,  is  a  series  of  dangerous  whirlpools,  known  as  "The  Suck,"
and  noted  among  the  Cherokee  as  the  place  where  UntsaijT,  the
gambler,  lived  long  ago  (see  the  storj  |.  They  call  it  Un'tiguhi',  "  Pot
in-the-water,"  on  account  of  the  appearance  of  the  surging,  tumbling
water,  suggesting  a  boiling  pot.  They  assert  that  in  the  old  times  the
whirlpools  were  intermittent  in  character,  and  the  canoemen  attempt-
ing to  pass  the  spot  used  to  hue-  the  bank,  keeping  constantly  on  the
alert  for  signs  of  a  coming  eruption,  and  when  they  saw  the  water
begin  to  revolve  more  rapidly  would  stop  and  wait  until  it  became
quiet  again  before  attempting  to  proceed.
It  happened  once  that  two  men.  going  down  the  river  in  a  canoe,  as
they  came  near  this  place  saw  the  water  circling  rapidly  ahead  of  them.
They  pulled  up  to  the  hank  to  wait  until  it  became  smooth  again,  hut
the  whirlpool  seemed  to  approach  with  wider  and  wider  circles,  until
the\  were  drawn  into  the  vortex.  They  were  thrown  out  of  the  canoe
and  carried  down  under  the  water,  where  one  man  was  seized  by  a
great  fish  and  was  never  seen  again.     The  other  was  taken  round  and
round  down  to  the   very    lowesl   center  of    the  whirlpool,  when  another
circle  caught  him  and  bore  him  outward  ami  upward  until  he  was
finally  thrown  up  again  to  the  surface  and  floated  out  into  the  -hallow-
water,  whence  lie  made  his  escape  to  shore.  Ho  told  afterwards  that
when  he  reached  the  oarrowesl  circle  of  the  maelstrom  the  water
seemed  to  open  below  him  and  he  could  look  down  as  through  the
roof  beams  of  a  house,  ami  there  on  the  bottom  of  the  river  he  had
seen  a  great  company  of  people,  who  looked  up  and  beckoned  to  him
to  join  them,  hut  as  they  put  up  their  hands  to  seize  him  the  swifl
current  caught  him  and  took  him  out  of  their  reach.
86.  YAHULA
Yahoola  creek,  which  flows  by  I  >ahlonega,  in  Lumpkin  countj  .  Geor
gia,  is  called  Yahula'i  (Yahula  place)  by  the Cherokees, and  this  i-  the