story  of  some  deed  against  the  enemy,  putting  his  words  into  a  song
which  he  first  whispered  to  the  drummer,  who  then  sang  with  him,
drumming  all  the  while.  Usually  it  is  serious  business,  but  occasion-
ally, for  a  joke,  a  man  will  act  the  clown  or  sing  of  sonic  extravagant
performance,  that  is  so  clearly  impossible  that  all  the  people  laugh.  One
man  after  another  stepped  into  the  ring  and  sang  of  what  he  had  done
against  the  enemies  of  his  tribe.  At  last  one  of  the  late  war  party  rose
from  his  seat,  and  after  a  whisper  to  the  drummer  began  to  sing  of  how
they  had  gone  to  Cowee  and  taken  scalps  and  the  gun,  which  he  carried
as  he  danced.  The  chief  and  the  people,  who  knew  nothing  of  the
treacherous  act,  laughed  heartily  at  what  they  thought  was  a  great  joke.


mooney]  THE    FALSE    WARKIOBS    OF   CHILHOWEE  377
But  now  the  gunstocker,  who  had  hern  waiting  outside  with  the
Cowee  men,  stripped  off  his  breechcloth  and  rushed  naked  into  the  town-
house.  Bending  down  to  the  drummer — who  was  one  of  the  traitors,
luit  failed  to  recognize  Gulsadihi'  he  gave  him  the  words,  and  then
straightening  up  he  began  to  sing,  "///'.'  Ask  who  has  done  this!" while  he  danced  around  the  circle,  making  insulting  gestures  toward
everyone  there.     The  song  was  quick  and  the  drummer  beat  very  fast.
11«'  made  one  round  and  bent  down  again  to  the  drummer,  then
straightened  up  and  sang,  "  Fit/  I  have  killed  a  pregnant  woman  at
the  ford  and  thrown  her  body  into  the  river!"  Several  men  started
with  surprise,  hut  the  chief  said.  "He  is  only  joking;  go  on  with  the
dance."  and  the  drummer  heat  rapidly. Another  round  and  he  bent  down  again  to  the  drummer  and  then
began  to  Sing,  "We  thought  our  enemies  were  from  the  north,  but  we
have  followed  them  and  they  are  here  '."  Now  the  drummer  knew  at last  what  it  all  meant  and  he  drummed  very  slowly,  and  the  people
grew  uneasy.  Then,  without  waiting-  on  the  drummer,  Gulsadihi  sane-.
"Cowee  will  have  a  ball  play  with  you!" — and  everyone  knew  this
was  a  challenge  to  battle— and  then  fiercely:  "But  if  you  want  to  fight
now  my  men  are  ready  to  die  here  !  " With  that  he  waved  his  hand  and  left  the  townhouse.  The  dancers
looked  at  each  other  uneasily  and  some  of  them  rose  to  go.  The  chief.
who  could  not  understand  it,  urged  them  to  go  on  with  the  dance,  but
it  was  of  no  avail.  They  left  the  townhouse.  and  as  they  went  out  they
met  the  Cowee  men  standing  with  their  guns  ready  and  their  hatchets
in  their  belts.  Neither  party  said  anything,  because  they  were  still  on
friendly  ground,  but  everyone  knew  that  trouble  was  ahead.
The  Cowee  men  returned  home  and  organized  a  strong  party  of
warriors  from  their  own  and  all  the  neighboring  Middle  settlements  to
go  and  take  vengeance  on  Chilhowee  and  on  Kuwa'hi.  just  below,  which had  also  been  concerned  in  the  raid.  They  went  down  the  Tennessee
and  crossed  over  the  mountains,  but  when  they  came  on  the  other  side
they  found  that  their  enemies  had  abandoned  their  homes  and  fled  for
refuge  to  the  remoter  settlements  or  to  the  hostile  Shawano  in  the  north.
103.  COWEE    TOWN
Cowee',  properly  Kawi'yi,  abbreviated  Kawi',  was  the  name  of  two Cherokee  settlements,  one  of  which  existed  in  1755  on  a  branch  of
Keowee  river,  in  upper  South  Carolina,  while  the  other  and  more
important  was  on  Little  Tennessee  river,  at  the  mouth  of  Cowee  creek,
about  10  miles  below  the  present  Franklin,  in  North  Carolina.  It
was  destroyed  by  the  Americans  in  ls7«i.  when  it  contained  about
a  hundred  house-,  but  was  rebuilt  and  continued  to  be  occupied
until  the  cession  of  1819.  The  name  can  not  be  translated,  but  may
possibly  mean  "the  place  of  the  Deer  clan"  (Ani'-KawT).      It  was  one


378  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
of  the  oldest  and  largest  of  the  Cherokee  towns,  and  when  Wafford
visited  it  as  a  boy  he  found  the  trail  leading-  to  it  worn  so  deep  in  places
that,  although  on  horseback,  he  could  touch  the  ground  with  his  feet
on  each  side.
There  is  a  story,  told  by  Wafford  as  a  fact,  of  a  Shawano  who  had
been  a  prisoner  there,  but  had  escaped  to  his  people  in  the  north,  ami
after  the  peace  between  the  two  tribes  wandered  back  into  the  neigh-
borhood on  a  hunting  trip.  While  standing  on  a  hill  overlooking  the
valley  he  saw  several  Cherokee  on  an  opposite  hill,  and  called  out  to
them,  "Do  you  still  own  Cowee'"  They  shouted  in  reply,  "Yes;  we
own  it  yet."  Back  came  the  answer  from  the  Shawano,  who  wanted
to  encourage  them  not  to  sell  any  more  of  their  lands,  "  Well,  it's  the
best  town  of  the  Cherokee.     It's  a  good  country;  hold  on  to  it."
104.   THE   EASTERN   TRIBES
Besides  the  Iroquois  and  Shawano,  the  Cherokee  remember  also  the
Delawares,  Tuscarora,  Catawba,  and  Cheraw  as  tribes  to  the  east  or
north  with  which  thev  formerly  had  relations.
The  Cherokee  call  the  Delawares  Anakwan'  ki,  in  the  singular
Akwan'ki.  a  derivative  formed  according  to  usual  Cherokee  phonetic
modification  from  Wapanaq'ki,  "Easterners,"  the  generic  name  by which  the  Delawares  and  their  nearest  kindred  call  themselves.
In  the  most  ancient  tradition  of  the  Delawares  the  Cherokee  are
called  Talega,  Tallige,  Tallige-wi,  etc.1  In  later  Delaware  tradition
they  are  called  Kitu'hwa,  and  again  we  tind  the  two  tribes  at  war,  for
which  their  neighbors  are  held  responsible.  According  to  the  Dela-
ware account,  the  Iroquois,  in  one  of  their  forays  to  the  south,  killed
a  Cherokee  in  the  woods  and  purposely  left  a  Delaware  war  club
near  the  body  to  make  it  appear  that  the  work  had  been  done  by  men
of  that  tribe.  The  Cherokee  found  the  body  and  the  club,  and  natur-
ally supposing  that  the  murder  had  been  committed  by  the  Delawares.
they  suddenly  attacked  the  latter,  the  result  being  a  long  and  bloody
war  between  the  two  tribes.2  At  this  time,  i.  e.,  about  the  end  of  the
seventeenth  century,  it  appears  that  a  part  at  least  of  the  Cherokee
lived  on  the  waters  of  the  Upper  Ohio,  where  the  Delaware's  made
continual  inroads  upon  them,  finally  driving  them  from  the  region
and  seizing  it  for  themselves  about  the  year  1708. 3  A  century  ago  the
Delawares  used  to  tell  how  their  warriors  would  sometimes  mingle  in
disguise  with  the  Cherokee  at  their  night  dances  until  the  opportunity
came  to  strike  a  sudden  blow  and  be  off  before  their  enemies  recovered
from  the  surprise.
Later  there  seems  to  have  been  peace  until  war  was  again  brought  on
1  Brinton,  Lunatic  inn]  Their  Legends,  p.  130  rt  passim,  isST>;  Schoolcraft,  Notes  on  Iroquois,  pp.  147,305
et  passim,  LS47;  Heckewelder,  Indian  Nations,  pp.  47-50,  ed.  1876.
-  Heckewelder,  op.  cit.,  p.  54.
3  Loskiel,  History  of  the  [Moravian]  Mission,  pp.  124-127;  London,  1794.


BUREAU   OF   AMERICAN   ETHNOLOGY  NINETEENTH   ANNUAL   REPORT      PL.    XVIII
WALINI',    A    CHEROKEE     WOMAN




mooney]  THE    DELAWARES    AND    THE    TUSCARORA  379
l>\  the  action  of  the  Shawano,  who  had  taken  refuge  with  the  1  >elawares,
after  having  been  driven  from  their  old  home  on  Cumberland  river
by  the  Cherokee.  Feeling  secure  in  their  new  alliance,  the  Shawano
renewed  their  raids  upon  the  Cherokee,  who  retaliated  by  pursuing
them  into  the  Delaware  country,  where  they  killed  several  Delawares
by  mistake.  This  inflamed  the  latter  people,  already  excited  by  the
sight  of  Cherokee  scalps  and  prisoners  brought  hack  through  their
country  by  the  [roquois,  and  another  war  was  the  result,  which  lasted
until  the  Cherokee,  tired  of  fighting  so  many  enemies,  voluntarily  made
overtures  for  peace  in  L 768,  saluting  the  Delawares  as  Grandfather,  an
honorary  title  accorded  them  by  all  the  Algonquian  tribes.  The  Dela-
wares then  reprimanded  the  Shawano,  as  the  cause  of  the  trouble,  and
advised  them  to  keep  quiet,  which,  as  they  were  now  left  to  fighl  their
battles  alone,  they  were  clad  enough  to  do.  At  the  same  time  the
Cherokee  made  peace  with  the  Iroquois,  and  the  long  war  with  the
northern  tribes  came  to  an  end.  The  friendly  feeling  thus  established
was  emphasized  in  177'.».  when  the  Cherokee  sent  a  message  of  con-
dolence upon  the  death  of  the  Delaware  chief  White-eyes.1
The  Tuscarora,  formerly  the  ruling-  tribe  of  eastern  North  Carolina,
are  still  remembered  under  the  name  Ani'-Skala'li,  and  are  thus  men-
tioned in  the  Feather  dance  of  the  Cherokee,  in  which  some  of  the
actors  are  supposed  to  be  visiting  strangers  from  other  tribes.
A-  the  majority  of  the  Tuscarora  fled  from  Carolina  to  the  Iroquois
country  about  1713,  in  consequence  of  their  disastrous  war  with  the
whites,  their  memory  has  nearly  faded  from  the  recollection  of  the
southern  Indians.  From  the  scanty  light  which  history  throws  upon
their  mutual  relations,  the  two  tribes  seem  to  have  been  almost  con-
stantly at  war  with  each  other.  Whenat  one  time  the  Cherokee,  hav-
ing already  made  peace  with  some  other  of  their  neighbors,  were  urged
by  the  whites  to  make  peace  also  with  the  Tuscarora.  they  refused,  on
the  ground  that,  as  they  could  not  live  without  war.  it  was  better  to  let
matters  stand  as  they  were  than  to  make  peace  with  the  Tuscarora  and
be  obliged  immediately  to  look  about  for  new  enemies  with  whom  to
tight.  For  some  years  before  the  outbreak  of  the  Tuscarora  war  in
1711  the  Cherokee  had  ceased  their  inroads  upon  this  tribe,  and  it  was
therefore  .-iippo-ed  that  they  were  more  busily  engaged  with  some
other  people  west  of  the  mountains,  these  being  probably  the  Shawano,
whom  they  drove  out  of  Tennessee  about  this  time."  In  the  war  of
1711-1713  the  Cherokee  assisted  the  whites  against  the  Tuscarora.  In
1731  the  Cherokee  again  threatened  to  make  war  upon  the  remnant  of
that  tribe  still  residing  in  North  Carolina  and  the  colonial  government
was  compelled  to  interfere.3
i  Heckewelder,  Indian  Nations,  pp  88  B9,  1876.
-  See  Haywood,  Nat.  and  Aborig.  Hist,  of  Tei   9see,pp.220,224,237, 1823.
•North  Carolina  Colonial  Records,  in,  pp.  153, 202,  345           1886


380  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
The  Cheraw  or  Sara  ranging  at  different  periods  from  upper  South
Carolina  to  the  southern  frontier  of  Virginia,  are  also  remembered
under  the  name  of  Ani'-Suwa'li.  or  Ani'-Suwa'la,  which  agrees  with  the
Spanish  form  Xuala  of  De  Soto's  chronicle,  and  Suala,  or  Sualy,  of Lederer.  The  Cherokee  remember  them  as  having  lived  east  of  the
Blue  ridge,  the  trail  to  their  country  leading  across  the  gap  at  the
head  of  Swannanoa  river,  east  from  Asheville.  The  name  of  the
stream  and  gap  is  a  corruption  of  the  Cherokee  Suwa'li-Nunna'hi,
"Suwa'li  trail."  Being  a  very  warlike  tribe,  they  were  finally  so
reduced  by  conflicts  with  the  colonial  governments  and  the  Iroquois
that  they  were  obliged  to  incorporate  with  the  Catawba,  among  whom
they  still  maintained  their  distinct  language  as  late  as  1743. '
The  Catawba  are  known  to  the  Cherokee  as  Ani'ta'gwa,  singular
Ata'gwa,  or  Ta'gwa.  the  Cherokee  attempt  at  the  name  by  which  they
are  most  commonly  known.  They  were  the  immediate  neighbors  of
the  Cherokee  on  the  east  and  southeast,  having  their  principal  settle-
ments on  the  river  of  their  name,  just  within  the  limits  of  South  Caro-
lina, and  holding  the  leading  place  among  all  the  tribes  east  of  the
Cherokee  country  with  the  exception  of  the  Tuscarora.  On  the  first
settlement  of  South  Carolina  there  were  estimated  to  be  about  7,000
persons  in  the  tribe,  but  their  decline  was  rapid,  and  by  war  and  disease
their  number  had  been  reduced  in  1775  to  barely  500,  including  the
incorporated  remnants  of  the  Cheraw  and  several  smaller  tribes.  There
are  now,  perhaps,  100  still  remaining  on  a  small  reservation  near  the
site  of  their  ancient  towns.  Some  local  names  in  the  old  Cherokee
territory  seem  to  indicate  the  former  presence  of  Catawba,  although
there  is  no  tradition  of  any  Catawba  settlement  within  those  limits.
Among  such  names  may  be  mentioned  Toccoa  creek,  in  northeastern
Georgia,  and  Toccoa  river,  in  north-central  Georgia,  both  names  being
derived  from  the  Cherokee  Tagwa'hi,  "Catawba  place."  An  old
Cherokee  personal  name  is  Ta'gwadihi',  "Catawba-killer."
The  two  tribes  were  hereditary  enemies,  and  the  feeling  between
them  is  nearly  as  bitter  to-day  as  it  was  a  hundred  years  ago.  Per-
haps the  only  case  on  record  of  their  acting  together  was  in  the  war
of  1711-13,  when  they  cooperated  with  the  colonists  against  the  Tusca-
rora. The  Cherokee,  according  to  the  late  Colonel  Thomas,  claim
to  have  formerly  occupied  all  the  country  about  the  head  of  the  Ca-
tawba river,  to  below  the  present  Morganton,  until  the  game  became
scarce,  when  they  retired  to  the  west  of  the  Blue  ridge,  and  afterward
"loaned"  the  eastern  territory  to  the  Catawba.  This  agrees  pretty
well  with  a  Catawba  tradition  recorded  in  Schoolcraft,  according  to
which  the  Catawba — who  are  incorrectly  represented  as  comparatively
recent  immigrants  from  the  north — on  arriving  at  Catawba  river  found
1  Mooney,  Siouan  Tribes  of  the  East  (bulletin  of  the  Bureuu  of  Ethnology), pp. 56, 61, 1894.


THE    CATAWBA  381
their  progress  disputed  by  the  Cherokee,  who  claimed  original  owner-
ship of  the  country.  A  battle  was  fought,  with  incredible  loss  on
both  sides,  but  with  do  decisive  result,  although  the  advantage  was
with  the  ( 'aiaw  ba,  on  account  of  their  baving  guns,  while  their  oppo- nents had  only  Indian  weapons.  Preparations  were  under  way  to
renew  the  fight  when  the  Cherokee  offered  to  recognize  die  river  as
the  boundary,  allowing  the  Catawba  to  settle  anywhere  to  the  east.
The  overture  was  accepted  and  an  agreement  was  finally  made  h\  which
the  Catawba  were  to  occupy  the  country  east  of  that  river  and  the
Cherokee  the  country  west  of  Broad  river,  with  the  region  between
the  two  streams  to  remain  as  neutral  territory.  Stone  piles  were
heaped  up  on  the  battlefield  to  commemorate  the  treatj  .  and  the  Broad
river  was  henceforth  called  Eswau  Huppeday  (Line  river),  by  the
Catawba,  the  country  eastward  to  Catawba  river  being  left  unoccupied.1
The  fact  that  one  party  had  e'uns  would  briny  this  event  within  the
early  historic  period.
The  Catawba  assisted  the  whites  against  the  Cherokee  in  the  war
of  L760  and  in  the  later  Revolutionary  struggle.  About  100  war-
riors, nearly  the  whole  fighting  strength  of  the  tribe,  took  part  in
the  first-mentioned  war.  several  being  killed,  and  a  smaller  number
accompanied  Williamson's  force  in  1770.'  At  the  battle  fought  under Williamson  near  the  present  site  of  Franklin.  North  Carolina,  the
Cherokee,  according  to  the  tradition  related  by  Watford,  mistook  the
Catawba  allies  of  the  troops  for  some  of  their  own  warriors,  and  were
fighting  for  some  time  under  this  impression  before  they  noticed  that
the  Catawba  wore  deer  tails  in  their  hair  so  that  the  whites  might  not
make  the  same  mistake.  In  this  engagement,  which  was  one  of  the
bloodiest  Indian  encounters  of  the  Revolution,  the  Cherokee  claim
that  they  had  actually  defeated  the  troops  and  their  Catawba  allies,
when  their  own  ammunition  gave  out  and  they  were  consequently
forced  to  retire.  The  Cherokee  leader  was  a  noted  war  chief  named
Tsaiu  (John).
About  1840  nearly  the  whole  Catawba  tribe  moved  up  from  South
Carolina  and  joined  the  eastern  band  of  Cherokee,  but  in  consequence
of  tribal  jealousies  they  remained  but  a  short  time,  and  afterward
returned  to  their  former  home,  as  is  related  elsewhere.
Other  tribal  names  (of  doubtful  authority)  are  Ani'-Sa'm  and  Ani'-
Sawaha'ni,  belonging  to  people  said  to  have  lived  toward  the  north;
both  names  are  perhaps  intended  for  the  Shawano  or  Shawnee,  prop-
erly Ajai'-Sawanu'gi.  The  Ani'-Gili'  are  said  to  have  been  neighbors
of  the  Anin'tsior  Natchez;  the  name  may  possibly  be  a  Cherokee  form for  Congaree.
i  Catawba  MS  from  South  Carolina  official  archives.    Schoolcraft,  Indian  Tribes,  m,  pp.  29
sibid.,  p.  294, 1853.


382  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
105.   THE    SOUTHERN    AND    WESTERN    TRIBES
The  nearest  neighbors  of  the  Cherokee  to  the  south  were  the  Creeks
or  Muscogee,  who  found  mixed  confederacy  holding  central  and  south-
ern Georgia  and  Alabama.  They  were  known  to  the  Cherokee  as  Ani'-
Ku'sa  or  Ani'-Gu'sa,  from  Kusa,  the  principal  town  of  the  Upper
Creeks,  which  was  situated  on  Coosa  river,  southwest  from  the  present
Talladega,  Alabama.  The  Lower  Creeks,  residing  chiefly  on  Chatta-
hoochee river,  were  formerly  always  distinguished  as  Ani-lvawi'ta, from  Kawita  or  Coweta,  their  ancient  capital,  on  the  west  side  of
the  river,  in  Alabama,  nearly  opposite  the  present  Columbus,  Georgia.
In  number  the  Creeks  were  nearly  equal  to  the  Cherokee,  but  differed
in  being  a  confederacy  of  cognate  or  incorporated  tribes,  of  which
the  Muscogee  proper  was  the  principal.  The  Cherokee  were  called
by  them  Tsal-gal'gi  or  Tsulgiil'gi,  a  plural  derivative  from  Tsa'lagf,
the  proper  name  of  the  tribe.
The  ordinary  condition  between  the  two  tribes  was  one  of  hostility,
with  occasional  intervals  of  good  will.  History,  tradition,  and  lin-
guistic evidence  combine  to  show  that  the  Creeks  at  one  time  occupied
almost  the  whole  of  northern  Georgia  and  Alabama,  extending  a  con-
siderable distance  into  Tennessee  and  perhaps  North  Carolina,  and
were  dispossessed  by  the  Cherokee  pressing  upon  them  from  the  north
and  northeast.  This  conquest  was  accomplished  chiefly  during  the  first
half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  culminated  with  the  decisive  engage-
ment of  Tali'wa  about  1755.  In  most  of  their  early  negotiations  with
the  Government  the  Creeks  demanded  that  the  lands  of  the  various
tribes  be  regarded  as  common  property,  and  that  only  the  boundary
between  the  Indians  and  the  whites  be  considered.  Failing  in  that,
they  claimed  as  theirs  the  whole  region  of  the  Chattahoochee  and
Coosa,  north  to  the  dividing  ridge  between  those  streams  and  the  Ten-
nessee, or  even  beyond  to  the  Tennessee  itself,  and  asserted  that  any
Cherokee  settlements  within  those  limits  were  only  by  their  own
permission.  In  1783  they  claimed  the  Savannah  river  as  the  eastern
boundary  between  themselves  and  the  Cherokee,  and  asserted  their
own  exclusive  right  of  sale  over  all  the  territory  between  that  river
and  the  Oconee.  On  the  other  hand  the  Cherokee  as  stoutly  claimed
all  to  a  point  some  70  miles  south  of  the  present  city  of  Atlanta,
on  the  ground  of  having  driven  the  Creeks  out  of  it  in  three  successive
wars,  and  asserted  that  their  right  had  been  admitted  by  the  Creeks
themselves  in  a  council  held  to  decide  the  question  between  the  two
tribes  before  the  Revolution.  By  mutual  agreement,  about  1816,
members  of  either  tribe  were  allowed  to  settle  within  the  territory
claimed  by  the  other.  The  line  as  finally  established  through  the
mediation  of  the  colonial  and  Federal  governments  ran  from  the  mouth
of  Broad  river  oh  Savannah  nearly  due  west  across  Georgia,  passing


THE    CREEKS  383
about  1"  miles  north  of  Atlanta,  to  ( !oosa  river  in  Alabama,  and  thence
northwest  to  strike  the  west  line  of  Alabama  about  2n  miles  south  of
tlir  Tennessee.  '
Among  the  names  which  remain  to  show  the  former  presence  of
Creeks  north  of  this  boundary  are  the  following:  Coweeta,  a  small
creek  entering  the  Little  Tennessee  above  Franklin.  North  Carolina;
Tomatola  (Cherokee,  Tama' II),  a  former  town  site  on  Vallej  river,
near  Murphy.  North  Carolina,  the  name  being  that  of  a  former  Creek
town  on  Chattahoochee;  Tomotley  (Cherokee,  Tama' In.  a  ford  at
another  town  site  on  Little  Tennessee,  above  Tellico  mouth,  in  Ten-
nessee; Coosa  {Cherokee.  Kusa'),  an  upper  creek  of  Nottely  river,  in
1'nion  county,  Georgia;  Chattooga  (Cherokee.  Tsatu'gl),  a  river  in
northwest  Georgia;  Chattooga  (Cherokee,  Tsatu'gl),  another  river,  a
head-stream  of  Savannah;  Chattahoochee  river  (Creek.  Chatu-huchi,
"pictured  rocks");  Coosawatee  (Cherokee,  Ku'sa-weti'yi,  "Old Creek
place"),  a  river  in  northwestern  Georgia;  Tali'wa,  the  Cherokee  form
of  a  Creek  name  for  a  place  on  an  upper  branch  of  Etowah  river  in
Georgia,  probably  from  the  Creek  ta'luaox  ita'lua,  ■"town":  Euharlee
(Cherokee.  Yuha'li.  said  by  the  Cherokee  to  be  from  Yufala  or  Eu-
faula,  the  name  of  several  Creek  towns),  a  creek  flowing  into  lower
Etowah  river:  Suwanee  (Cherokee.  Suwa'ni)  a  small  creek  on  upper Chattahoochee,  the  site  of  a  former  Cherokee  town  with  a  name  which
the  (  hei'okee  say  is  Creek.  Several  other  names  within  the  same  terri-
tory are  said  by  the  Cherokee  to  he  of  foreign  origin,  although  perhaps
not  Creek,  and  may  he  from  the  Taskigi  language.
According  to  Cherokee  tradition  as  given  to  Haywood  nearly  eighty
years  ago  the  country  about  the  mouth  of  Hiwassee  river,  in  Tennessee,
was  held  by  the  Creeks,  while  the  Cherokee  still  had  their  main  settle
ments  farther  to  the  north,  on  the  Little  Tennessee.  In  the  Shawano
war.  about  the  year  1700,  the  Creeks  pretended  friendship  for  the
Cherokee  while  secretly  helping  their  enemies,  the  Shawano.  The
Cherokee  discovered  the  treachery,  and  took  occasion,  when  a  party
of  Creeks  was  visiting  a  dance  at  Itsa'tf  ( Echota),  the  Cherokee  capital,
to  fall  upon  them  and  massacre  nearly  every  man.  The  consequence
was  a  war  between  the  two  tribes,  with  the  final  result  that  the  Creeks
were  forced  to  abandon  all  their  settlements  upon  the  waters  of  the
Tennessee,  and  to  withdraw  south  to  the  Coosa  and  the  neighborhood
of  the  ■•('reek  path,"  an  old  trading  trail  from  South  Carolina,  which
crossed  at  the  junction  of  the  ( lostanaula  and  Etowah  rivers,  where  now
is  the  city  of  Rome.  Georgia,  ami  struck  the  Tennessee  at  the  present
Guntersville,  Alabama.
A-  an  incident  of  this  war  the  same  tradition  relates  how  the
Cherokee  once  approached  a  large  Creek  settlement  "at  the  island  on
'  Royce,  The  Cherokee  Nation  of  In. linn-,  in  Fifth  Report  of  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  pp.  205   08,   <! 272,  1887    als   i  1783)  Bartram,  Travels,  p.  Is;,  1792,


384  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
tlic  Creek  path,"  in  Tennessee  river,  opposite  Guntersville,  and,  con-
cealing their  main  force,  sent  a  small  party  ahead  to  decoy  the  Creeks
to  an  engagement.  The  Creek  warriors  at  once  crossed  over  in  their
canoes  to  the  attack,  when  the  Cherokee  suddenly  rose  up  from  their
ambush,  and  surrounded  the  Creeks  and  defeated  them  after  a  desperate
battle.  Then,  taking  the  captured  canoes,  they  went  over  to  the  island
and  destroyed  all  that  was  there.  The  great  leader  of  the  Cherokee
in  this  war  was  a  chief  named  Bullhead,  renowned  in  tradition  for  his
bravery  and  skill  in  strategy.1  At  about  the  same  time,  according  to
Watford,  the  Cherokee  claim  to  have  driven  the  Creeks  and  Shawano
from  a  settlement  which  they  occupied  jointly  near  Savannah,  Georgia.
There  was  a  tradition  among  the  few  old  traders  still  living  in  upper
Georgia  in  1890  that  a  large  tract,  in  that  part  of  the  State  had  been
won  by  the  Cherokee  from  the  Creeks  in  a  ballplay.2  There  are  no
Indians  now  living  in  that  region  to  substantiate  the  story.  As
originally  told  it  may  have  had  a  veiled  meaning,  as  among  the  Chero-
kee the  expression  "to  play  a  ball  game"  is  frequently  used  figur-
atively to  denote  fighting  a  battle.  There  seems  to  be  no  good  ground
for  Bartram's  statement  that  the  Cherokee  had  been  dispossessed  by
tlie  Creeks  of  the  region  between  the  Savannah  and  the  Ocmulgee,  in
southwestern  Georgia,  within  the  historic  period.3  The  territory  is
south  of  any  traditional  Cherokee  claim,  and  the  statement  is  at
variance  with  what  we  know  through  history.  He  probably  had  in
mind  the  Uchee,  who  did  actually  occupy  that  country  until  incor-
porated with  the  Creeks.
The  victory  was  not  always  on  one  side,  however,  for  Adair  states
that  toward  the  end  of  the  last  war  between  the  two  tribes  the  Creeks,
having  easily  defeated  the  Cherokee  in  an  engagement,  contemptuously
sent  against  them  a  number  of  women  and  boys.  According  to  this
writer,  the  "true  and  sole  cause"  of  this  last  war  was  the  killing  of
some  adopted  relatives  of  the  Creeks  in  1749  by  a  party  of  northern
Shawano,  who  had  been  guided  and  afterward  sheltered  by  the  Chero-
kee. The  war,  which  he  represents  as  a  losing  game  for  the  Chero-
kee, was  finally  brought  to  an  end  through  the  efforts  of  the  governor
of  South  Carolina,  with  the  unfortunate  result  to  the  English  that  the
(reeks  encouraged  the  Cherokee  in  the  war  of  1760  and  rendered  them
very  essential  help  in  the  way  of  men  and  ammunition.4
The  battle  of  Tali'wa,  which  decided  in  favor  of  the  Cherokee  the
long  war  between  themselves  and  the  Creeks,  was  fought  about  1755
or  a  few  years  later  at  a  spot  on  Mountain  creek  or  Long-swamp
creek,  which  enters  Etowah  .river  above  Canton,  Georgia,  near  where
iHaywood,  Nal   and  Aborig.  Hist.  Trim.,  p.  241,  1823.    Bullhead  maybe  intended  for  Doublehead,
an  old  Cherokee  name.
SMooney,  The  Cherokee  Ball  Play,  in  The  American  Anthropologist,  m,  p.  107,  April,  1890.
Bartram,  Travels,  p.  618,1791.
«  Adair,  History  of  American  Indians,  pp.  227,  247,  252-256,  270,  276-279,  1775.


hooneyJ  THE    SOUTHEKM    TRIBES  385
the  old  trail  crossed  the  river  aboul  Long-swamp  town.  All  our
information  concerning  it  is  traditional,  obtained  from  James  Wafford,
who  heard  the  story  when  a  hoy.  aboul  the  year  1815,  from  an  old
trader  named  Brian  Ward,  who  had  witnessed  the  battle  sixty  years
before.  According  to  his  account,  it  was  probably  the  bardesl  battle
ever  foughl  between  the  two  tribes,  aboui  five  hundred  Cherokee  and
twice  that  number  of  Creek  warriors  being  engaged.  The  Cherokee
were  at  first  overmatched  and  fell  back,  but  rallied  again  and  returned
to  the  attack,  driving  the  Creeks  from  cover  so  that  they  broke  and
ran.  The  victory  was  complete  and  decisive,  and  the  defeated  tribe
immediately  afterward  abandoned  the  whole  upper  portion  of  Geor-
gia and  the  adjacent  part  of  Alabama  to  the  conquerors.  Before
this  battle  the  Creeks  had  been  accustomed  to  shift  about  a  good  deal
from  place  to  place,  but  thereafter  they  confined  themselves  more
closelj  to  fixed  home  locations.  It  was  in  consequence  of  this  defeat
that  they  abandoned  their  town  on  Nottely  river,  below  Coosa  creek,
near  the  present  Blairsville,  Georgia,  their  old'  fields  being  at  once
occupied  by  Cherokee,  who  moved  over  from  their  settlements  on  the
head  of  Savannah  river.  As  has  been  already  stated,  a  peace  was  made
about  1759,  just  in  time  to  enable  the  Creeks  to  assist  the  Cherokee  in
their  war  with  South  Carolina.  We  hear  little  more  concerning  the
relations  of  the  two  tribes  until  the  Creek  war  of  1813-14,  described
in  detail  elsewhere;  after  this  their  histories  drift  apart.
The  Vuehi  or  Uehee.  called  Ani'-Yu'tsi  by  the  Cherokee,  were  a
tribe  of  distinct  linguistic  stock  and  of  considerable  importance  in
early  days;  their  territory  bordered  Savannah  river  on  both  sides  imme-
diately below  the  Cherokee  country,  and  extended  some  distance  west-
ward into  Georgia,  where  it  adjoined  that  of  the  Creeks.  They  were
gradually  dispossessed  by  the  whites,  and  were  incorporated  with  the
Creeks  about  the  year  1740,  but  retain  their  separate  identity  and
language  to  this  day.  their  town  being  now  the  largest  in  the  Creek
Nation  in  Indian  Territory.
According  to  the  testimony  of  a  Cherokee  mixed-blood  named  I  ran-
-e'ti  or  Rattling-gourd,  who  was  born  on  Hiwassee  river  in  1820  and
came  west  with  his  people  in  1838.  a  number  of  Yuchi  lived,  before  the
Removal,  scattered  among  the  Cherokee  near  the  present  Cleveland,
Tennessee,  and  on  Chickamauga,  Cohutta,  and  Pinelog  creeks  in  the
adjacent  section  of  Georgia.  They  bad  no  separate  settlements,  but
spoke  their  own  language,  which  he  described  as  "  hard  and  grunting."
Some  of  them  spoke  also  Cherokee  and  Creek.  They  had  probably
drifted  north  from  the  Creek  country  before  a  boundary  had  been
fixed  between  the  tribes.  When  Tahlequah  was  established  a~  the
capital  of  the  Cherokee  Nation  in  the  West  in  1839  a  few  Yuchi  were
found  already  settled  at  the  spot,  being  supposed  to  have  removed
from  the  East  with  some  Creeks  after  the  chief  .Mcintosh  was  killed  in
19  eth— 01   25


386  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
1825.  They  perished  in  the  .smallpox  epidemic  which  ravaged  the
frontier  in  184:0,  and  their  graves  were  still  pointed  out  at  Tahlequah
in  1891.  Shortly  before  the  outbreak  of  the  Civil  war  there  was  a
large  and  prosperous  Yuchi  settlement  on  Cimarron  river,  in  what  was
afterward  the  Cherokee  strip.
Ramsey  states  that  *"a  small  tribe  of  Uchees"  once  occupied  the
country  near  the  mouth  of  the  Hiwassee,  and  was  nearly  exterminated
in  a  desperate  battle  with  the  Cherokee  at  the  Uchee  Old  Fields,  in
Rhea  (now  Meigs)  county,  Tennessee,  the  few  survivors  retreating  to
Florida,  where  they  joined  the  Seminoles.1  There  seems  to  be  no  other
authority  for  the  statement.
Another  broken  tribe  incorporated  in  part  with  the  Creeks  and  in
part  with  the  Cherokee  was  that  of  the  Na'rtsl,  or  Natchez,  who  origi- nally occupied  the  territory  around  the  site  of  the  present  town  of
Natchez  in  southern  Mississippi,  and  exercised  a  leading  influence  over
all  the  tribes  of  the  region.  In  consequence  of  a  disastrous  war  with
the  French  in  172M-31  the  tribe  was  disrupted,  some  taking  refuge
with  the  Chickasaw,  others  with  the  Creeks,  either  then  or  later,  while
others,  in  1736,  applied  to  the  government  of  South  Carolina  for  per-
mission to  settle  on  the  Savannah  river.  The  request  was  evidently
granted,  and  we  find  the  "Nachee"  mentioned  as  one  of  the  tribes
living  with  the  Catawba  in  1743,  but  retaining  their  distinct  language.
In  consequence  of  having  killed  some  of  the  Catawba  in  a  drunken
quarrel  they  were  forced  to  leave  this  region,  and  seem  to  have  soon
afterward  joined  the  Cherokee,  as  we  find  them  twice  mentioned  in
connection  with  that  tribe  in  1755.  This  appears  to  be  the  last  refer-
ence to  them  in  the  South  Carolina  records.2
.lust  here  the  Cherokee  tradition  takes  them  up,  under  the  name  of
Anin'tsi,  abbreviated  from  Ani'-Na'  tsi,  the  plural  of  Na'  tsi.  From  a
chance  coincidence  with  the  word  for  pine  tree,  natsi',  some  English
speaking  Indians  have  rendered  this  name  as  "Pine  Indians."  The Cherokee  generally  agree  that  the  Natchez  came  to  them  from  South
Carolina,  though  some  say  that  they  came  from  the  Creek  country.  It
is  probable  that  the  first  refugees  were  from  Carolina  and  were  joined
later  by  others  from  the  Creeks  and  the  Chickasaw.  Bienville  states,
in  1742,  that  some  of  them  had  gone  to  the  Cherokee  directly  from
the  Chickasaw  when  they  found  the  latter  too  hard  pressed  by  the
French  to  be  able  to  care  for  them.3  They  seem  to  have  been  regarded
by  the  Cherokee  as  a  race  of  wizards  and  conjurers,  a  view  which  was
probably  due  in  part  to  their  peculiar  religious  rites  and  in  part  to  the
interest  which  belonged  to  them  as  the  remnant  of  an  extirpated  tribe.
Although  we  have  no  direct  knowledge  on  the  subject,  there  is  every
1  Ratnsey,  Annals  of  Tennessee,  pp.  81, 84, 1853.
2  Mooney,  Siouan  Tribes  of  the  East  (bulletin  of  tbe  Bureau  of  Ethnology), p.  83,1894.
8  Bienville,  quoted  in  Gayarrfi,  Louisiana.


THK    SOUTHERN    TRIBES  387
reason  to  suppose  thai  the  two  tribes  had  had  communication  with  each
other  long  before  the  period  of  the  Natchez  war.
According  to  the  statement  of  James  Wafford,  who  was  born  in  L806
near  the  site  of -Clarkesville,  Ga. ,  when  this  region  was  still  Indian
country,  the  "Notchees"  had  their  town  on  the  north  bank  of  Hiwas-
see,  just  above  Peachtree  creek,  on  the  spot  where  a  Baptist  mission
was  established  1>\  the  Rev.  EvanJonesin  1821,  a  few  miles  above  the
present  Murphy,  Cherokee  county.  North  Carolina.  On  his  mother's
side  lie  bad  himself  a  strain  of  Natchez  blood.  His  grandmother  had
told  him  that  when  she  was  a  young  woman,  perhaps  about  17.'..'..  she once. had  occasion  to  go  to  this  town  on  some  business,  which  she  was
obliged  to  transact  through  an  interpreter,  as  the  Natchez  had  Keen
there  so  short  a  time  that  only  one  or  two  spoke  any  Cherokee.  They
were  all  in  the  one  town,  which  the  Cherokee  called  Gwal  ga'hif,  "Frog
place,"  but  he  was  unable  to  say  whether  or  not  it  had  a  townhouse.
In  lNi'4.  as  one  of  the  census  takers  for  the  Cherokee  Nation,  he  went
over  the  same  section  and  found  the  Natchez  then  living  jointly  with
the  Cherokee  in  a  town  called  (itVlani'yi  at  the  junction  of  Brasstown
and  Gumlog  creeks,  tributary  to  Hiwassee,  some  ti  miles  southeast  of
their  former  location  and  close  to  the  Georgia  line.  The  removal  may
have  been  due  to  the  recent  establishment  of  the  mission  at  the  old
place.  It  was  a  large  settlement,  made  up  about  equally  from  the  two
tribes,  hut  by  this  time  the  Natchez  were  not  distinguishable  in  dress
or  general  appearance  from  the  others,  and  nearly  all  spoke  broken
Cherokee,  while  still  retaining  their  own  language.  As  most  of  the
Indians  had  come  under  Christian  influences  so  far  as  to  have  quit
dancing,  there  was  no  townhouse.  Harry  Smith,  who  was  horn  about
1820,  father  of  the  late  chief  of  the  East  Cherokee,  also  remembers
them  as  living  on  Hiwassee  and  calling  themselves  Na'  tsi.
Cause' ti.  already  mentioned,  states  that  when  hi'  was  a  boy  the
Natchez  were  scattered  among  the  Cherokee  settlements  along  the
upper  part  of  Hiwassee.  extending  down  into  Tennessee.  They  had
then  no  separate  townhouses.  Some  of  them,  at  least,  had  come  up
from  the  Creeks,  and  spoke  Creek  and  Cherokee,  as  well  as  their  own
language,  which  he  could  not  understand,  although  familiar  with  both
of  the  others.  They  were  great  dance  leaders,  which  agrees  with  their
traditional  reputation  for  ceremonial  and  secret  knowledge.  They
went  west  with  the  Cherokee  at  the  final  removal  of  the  tribe  to  Indian
Territory  in  L838.  In  1890  there  was  a  small  settlement  on  Illinois
river  a  few  miles  south  of  Tahlequah,  Cherokee  Nation,  several  per-
sons in  which  still  spoke  their  own  language.  Some  of  these  may  have
come  with  the  Creeks,  as  by  an  agreement  between  Creeks  and  Chero-
kee about  the  time  of  the  Removal  it  had  been  arranged  that  citizens  of
either  tribe  living  within  the  boundaries  claimed  by  the  other  might
remain  without  question  if  they  so  elected.     There  are  still  several


388  J(YTHS    OF    THE    CHEKOKEE
persons  claiming-  Natchez  descent  among  the  East  Cherokee,  but  the
last  one  said  to  have  been  of  full  Natchez  blood,  an  old  woman  named
Alkini',  died  about  1895.  She  was  noted  for  her  peculiarities,  espe-
cially for  a  drawling-  tone,  stud  to  have  been  characteristic  of  her
people,  as  old  men  remembered  them  years  ago.
Haywood,  the  historian  of  Tennessee,  says  that  a  remnant  of  the
Natchez  lived  within  the  present  limits  of  the  State  as  late  as  1750,
and  were  even  then  numerous.  He  refers  to  those  with  the  Cherokee.
and  tells  a  curious  story,  which  seems  somehow  to  have  escaped  the
notice  of  other  writers.  According  to  his  statement,  a  portion  of  the
Natchez,  who  had  been  parceled  out  as  slaves  among  the  French  in
the  vicinity  of  their  old  homes  after  the  downfall  of  their  tribe,  took
advantage  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  troops  to  the  north,  in  175S,  to
rise  and  massacre  their  masters  and  make  their  escape  to  the  neighbor-
ing tribes.  On  the  return  of  the  troops  after  the  fall  of  Fort  Du
Quesne  they  found  the  settlement  at  Natchez  destroyed  and  their
Indian  slaves  tied.  Some  time  afterward  a  French  deserter  seeking  an
asylum  among  the  Cherokee,  having  made  his  way  to  the  Great  Island
town,  on  the  Tennessee,  just  below  the  mouth  of  Tellico  river,  was  sur-
prised to  find  there  some  of  the  same  Natchez  whom  he  had  formerly
driven  as  slaves.  He  lost  no  time  in  getting  away  from  the  place  to
rind  safer  quarters  among  the  mountain  towns.  Notchy  creek,  a  lower
affluent  of  Tellico,  in  Monroe  county,  Tennessee,  probably  takes  its
name  from  these  refugees.  Haywood  states  also  that,  although  incor-
porated with  the  Cherokee,  they  continued  for  a  long  time  a  separate
people,  not  marrying  or  mixing  with  other  tribes,  and  having  their
own  chiefs  and  holding  their  own  councils;  but  in  1823  hardly  any-
thing was  left  of  them  but  the  name.1
Another  refugee  tribe  incorporated  partly  with  the  Cherokee  and
partly  with  the  Creeks  was  that  of  the  Taskigi,  who  at  an  early  period
had  a  large  town  of  the  same  name  on  the  south  side  of  the  Little  Ten-
nessee, just  above  the  mouth  of  Tellico,  in  Monroe  count}-,  Tennessee.
Sequoya,  the  inventor  of  the  Cherokee  alphabet,  lived  here  in  his  boy-
hood, about  the  time  of  the  Revolution.  The  land  was  sold  in  1819.
There  was  another  settlement  of  the  name,  and  perhaps  once  occupied
by  the  same  people,  on  the  north  bank  of  Tennessee  river,  in  a  bend
just  below  Chattanooga,  Tennessee,  on  land  sold  also  in  1819.  Still
another  may  have  existed  at  one  time  on  Tuskegee  creek,  on  the  south
bank  of  Little  Tennessee  river,  north  of  Robbinsville,  in  Graham  county.
North  Carolina,  on  land  which  was  occupied  until  the  Removal  in  1838.
Taskigi  town  of  the  Creek  country  was  on  Coosa  river,  near  the  junction
with  the  Tallapoosa,  some  distance  above  the  present  Montgomery,
'Haywood,  Natural  and  Aboriginal  History  of  Tennessee,  pp.  105-107,  1823.  For  a  sketch  of  the
Natchez  war  and  the  subsequent  history  of  the  scattered  fragments  of  the  tribe,  see  the  author's paper,  The  End  of  the  Natchez,  in  the  American  Anthropologist  for  July,  1899.


hooney]  THE    SOUTHERN    TRIBES  389
Alabama.  We  find  Tasquiqui  mentioned  us  a  town  in  the  ( Ireek  coun-
ii\  visited  by  the  Spanish  captain,  Juan  Pardo,  in  L567.  The  name
is  c\  iilcrnly  the  same,  though  we  ran  not  be  sure  that  the  location  was
identical  with  thai  of  the  later  town.
Who  or  what  the  Taskigi  were  is  uncertain  and  can  probably  never
bo  known,  but  they  were  neither  Cherokee  nor  Muscogee  proper.  It
would  seem  most  probable  that  they  were  of  Muskhogean  affinity,  but
the\  may  have  been  an  immigrant  tribe  from  another  section,  or  may
even  have  constituted  a  distinct  linguistic  stock,  representing  all  that
was  left  of  an  ancient  people  whose  occupation  of  the  country  ante-
dated the,  coming'  of  the  Cherokee  and  the  Creeks.  The  name  may  be
derived  from  taska  or  ta&Jca'ya,  meaning  '"warrior"  h.  several  of  the
Muskhogean  dialects.  It  is  not  a  Cherokee  word,  and  Cherokee  inform-
ants state  positively  that  the  Taskigi  were  a  foreign  people,  with
distinct  language  and  customs.  They  were  not  Creeks,  Natchez.
Uchee,  or  Shawano,  with  all  of  whom  the  Cherokee  were  well
acquainted  under  other  names.  In  the  townhouse  of  their  settlement
at  the  mouth  of  Tellico  they  had  an  upright  pole,  from  the  top  of
which  hung  their  protecting  '•medicine,''  the  image  of  a  human  figure
cut  from  a  cedar  log.  For  this  reason  the  Cherokee  in  derision  some-
times called  the  place  Atsma'-k'taun,  "Hanging-cedar  place."  Before
the  sale  of  the  land  in  1819  they  were  so  nearly  extinct  that  the  Cher-
okee had  moved  in  and  occupied  the  ground.
Adair,  in  177.3,  mentions  the  Tae-keo-ge  {sic — a  double  misprint)  as
one  of  several  broken  tribes  which  theCreekshad  "  artfully  decoyed  "  to
incorporate  with  them  in  order  to  strengthen  themselves  against  hos-
tile attempts.  Milfort,  about  17S0,  states  that  the  Taskigi  on  Coosa
river,  were  a  foreign  people  who  had  been  driven  by  wars  to  seek  an
asylum  among  the  Creeks,  being  encouraged  thereto  by  the  kind  recep-
tion accorded  to  another  fugitive  tribe.  Their  request  was  granted  by
the  confederacy,  and  they  were  given  lauds  upon  which  the}7  built
their  town.  He  puts  this  event  shortly  before  the  incorporation  of
the  Yuchi,  which  would  make  it  early  in  the  eighteenth  century.  In
1799,  according  to  Hawkins,  the  town  had  but  3.5  warriors,  "  had  lost
its  ancient  language,''  and  spoke  Creek.  There  is  still  a  "white"'  or
peace  town  named  Taskigi  in  the  Creek  Nation  in  Indian  Territory.1
The  nearest  neighbors  of  the  Cherokee  on  the  west,  after  the  expul-
sion of  the  Shawano,  were  the  Chickasaw,  known  to  the  Cherokee  as
Ani'-Tsi'ksu,  whose  territory  lay  chiefly  between  the  Mississippi  and
the  Tennessee,  in  what  is  now  western  Kentucky  and  Tennessee  and
the  extreme  northern  portion  of  Mississippi.  By  virtue,  however,  of
conquest  from  the  Shawano  or  of  ancient  occupancy  they  claimed  a
1  Adair.  History  of  American  Indians,  p.  257,  1775.    The  other  statements  cor   rning  tie-  Taskigi
among  the  Creeks  are  taken  from  Gatschet'S  valuable  study,  A  Migration  Legend  of  the  Creek
Indians,  i.  pp.  122,  1 15,  228,  1884.


390  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
large  additional  territory  to  the  east  of  this,  including  all  upon  the
waters  of  Duck  river  and    Elk  creek.     This  claim   was  disputed  by
the   Cherokee      According  to   Haywood,    the   two  tribes    had   I   a
friends  and  allies  in  the  expulsion  of  the  Shawano,  but  afterward.
shortly  before  the  year  1769,  the  Cherokee,  apparently  for  no  suffi-
cient reason,  picked  a  quarrel  with  the  Chickasaw  and  attacked  them
in  their  town  at  the  place  afterward  known  as  the  Chickasaw  Old
Fields,  on  the  north  side  of  Tennessee  river,  some  twenty  miles  below
the  present  Guntersville,  Alabama.  The  Chickasaw  defended  them-
selves so  well  that  the  assailants  were  signally  defeated  and  compelled
to  retreat  to  their  own  country.1  It  appears,  however,  that  the
Chickasaw,  deeming  this  settlement  too  remote  from  their  principal
towns,  abandoned  it  after  the  battle.  Although  peace  was  afterward
made  between  the  two  tribes  their  rival  claim  continued  to  he  a  sub-
ject of  dispute  throughout  the  treaty  period.
The  Choctaw,  a  loose  confederacy  of  tribes  formerly  occupying
southern  Mississippi  and  the  adjacent  coast  region,  are  called  Ani'-
Tsa'ta  by  the  Cherokee,  who  appear  to  have  had  but  little  communica-
tion with  them,  probably  because  the  intermediate  territory  was  held
by  the  Creeks,  who  were  generally  at  war  with  one  or  the  other.  In
1708  we  find  mention  of  a  powerful  expedition  by  the  Cherokee,
Creeks,  and  Catawba  against  the  Choctaw  living  about  Mobile  bay.8
Of  the  Indians  west  of  the  Mississippi  those  best  known  to  the
Cherokee  were  the  Ani'-Wasa'si,  or  Osage,  a  powerful  predatory  tribe
formerly  holding  most  of  the  country  between  the  Missouri  and  Arkan-
sas'rivers,  and  extending  from  the  Mississippi  far  out  into  the  plains.
The  Cherokee  name  is  a  derivative  from  Wasash'.  the  name  by  which
the  Osage  call  themselves."  The  relations  of  the  two  tribes  seem  to
have  been  almost  constantly  hostile  from  the  time  when  the  Osage
refused  to  join  in  the  general  Indian  peace  concluded  in  1768  (see
"The  Iroquois  Wars")  up  to  IS'2'2,  when  the  Government  interfered to  compel  an  end  of  the  bloodshed.  The  bitterness  was  largely  due  to
the  fact  that  ever  since  the  first  Cherokee  treaty  with  the  United
States,  made  at  Hopewell.  South  Carolina,  in  1785.  small  bodies  of
Cherokee,  resenting  the  constant  encroachments  of  the  whites,  had
been  removing  beyond  the  Mississippi  to  form  new  settlements  within
the  territory  claimed  by  the  Osage,  where  in  1817  they  already  num-
bered between  two  and  three  thousand  persons.  As  showing  how  new
is  our  growth  as  a  nation,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  Watford,  when
a  boy.  attended  near  the  site  of  the  present  Clarkesville,  Georgia,
almost  on  Savannah  river,  a  Cherokee  scalp  dance,  at  which  the  women
1  Haywood,  Natural  and  Aboriginal  History  of  Tennessee,  p.  24, 1823.  From  a  contemporary  reference
in  Rivers,  South  Carolina,  page  57.  it  appears  that  this  war  was  in  full  progress  in  1757.
sjlargry,  quoted  in  Gatschet,  Creek  Migration  Legend,  i,  pp.  16,  87,  1884.
3  Wasash,  French  Ouasage,  corrupted  by  the  Americans  into  Osage.


uooney]  THE    LOST    CHEROKEE  391
dancedoversoraeOsagescalpsse.nl  b}  their  relatives  in  the  west  as
i  rophies  of  ;i  recent  \  ictorj .
( )ther  old  ( iherokee  names  for  western  tribes  which  can  not  be  iden-
tified are  Tayun'ksi,  the  untranslatable  name  of  a  tribe  described  sim-
pi\  as  living  in  the  West;  Tsuniya'tiga,  "Naked  |   pie,"  described  as
living  in  the  far  West;  Gun'-tsuskwa'  11,  "Short-arrows,"  who  lived
in  the  far  West,  and  were  small,  but  great  fighters;  i'un'wini'giski,
"Man-eaters,"  a  hostile  tribe  west  or  north,  possibly  the  cannibal
Atakapa  or  Tonkawa,  of  Louisiana  <>r  Texas.  Their  relations  with
the  tribes  with  which  they  have  become  acquainted  since  the  removal
to  Indian  Territory  do  not  come  within  the  scope  of  this  paper.
106.   THE   GIANTS   FROM   THE  WEST
dames  Warlord,  of  the  western  Cherokee,  who  was  born  in  Georgia
in  L806,  says  thai  his  grandmother,  who  must  have  been  born  about
the  middle  of  the  last  century,  told  him  that  she  had  heard  from  the
old  people  that  lone-  before  her  time  a  party  of  giants  had  come  once
to  visit  the  Cherokee.  They  were  nearly  twice  as  tall  as  common
men.  and  had  their  eyes  set  slanting  in  their  heads,  so  that  the  Chero-
kee called  them  Tsunil'  kahY.  "The  Slant-eyed  people,"  because  they
looked  like  the  giant  hunter  Tsulkalu'  (see  the  story).  They  said
that  these  giants  lived  very  far  away  in  the  direction  in  which  the  sun
goes  down.  The  Cherokee  received  them  as  friends,  and  they  stayed
some  time,  and  then  returned  to  their  home  in  the  west.  The  story
may  be  a  distorted  historical  tradition.
107.    THE   LOST   CHEROKEE
When  the  first  lands  were  sold  by  the  Cherokee,  in  1721,  a  part  of  the
tribe  bitterly  opposed  the  sale,  saying  that  if  the  Indians  once  con-
sented to  give  up  any  of  their  territory  tin  whites  would  never  be
satisfied,  but  would  soon  want  a  little  more,  ami  a  little  again,  until
at  last  there  would  be  none  left  tor  the  Indians.  Finding  all  they
could  say  not  enough  to  prevent  the  treaty,  they  determined  to
leave  their  old  homes  forever  and  go  far  into  the  West,  beyond  the
Great  river,  where  the  white  men  could  never  follow  them.  They
gave  no  heed  to  the  entreaties  of  their  friends,  but  began  preparations
for  the  long  march,  until  the  others,  finding  that  they  could  not  pre-
vent their  going,  set  to  work  and  did  their  best  to  lit  them  out  with
pack  horses  loaded  with  bread,  dried  venison,  and  other  supplies.
When  all  was  ready  they  started,  under  the  direction  of  their  chief.
A  company  of  picked  men  was  sent  with  them  to  help  them  in  crossing
the  (ireat  river,  and  every  night  until  they  reached  it  runners  were
sent  back  to  the  tribe,  and  out  from  the  tribe  to  the  marching  band,  to
carry  messages  and  keep  each  party  posted  as  to  how  the  other  was
getting  alone-.      At  last  they  came  to  the  Mississippi,  and  crossed  it  by


392  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEKOKEE  [eth.ann.19
the  help  of  those  warriors  wh<>  had  been  sent  with  them.  Those  then
returned  to  the  tribe,  while  the  others  kept  on  to  the  west.  All  com-
munication was  now  at  an  end.  No  more  was  heard  of  the  wanderers,
and  in  time  the  story  of  the  lost  Cherokee  was  forgotten  or  remem-
bered only  as  an  old  tale.
Still  the  white  man  pressed  upon  the  Cherokee  and  one  piece  of
land  after  another  was  sold,  until  as  years  went  on  the  dispossessed
people  began  to  turn  their  faces  toward  the  west  as  their  final  resting
place,  and  small  hands  of  hunters  crossed  the  Mississippi  to  learn
what  might  be  beyond.  One  of  these  parties  pushed  on  across  the
plains  and  there  at  the  foot  of  the  great  mountains — the  Rockies —
they  found  a  tribe  speaking  the  old  Cherokee  language  and  living  still
as  the  Cherokee  had  lived  before  they  had  ever  known  the  white  man
or  his  ways.
108.    THE    MASSACRE    OF    THE    ANI'-KUTA'Nl
Among  other  perishing  traditions  is  that  relating  to  the  Ani'-Kuta'm
or  Ani'-Kwata'm.  concerning  whom  the  modern  Cherokee  know  so
little  that  their  very  identity  is  now  a  matter  of  dispute,  a  few  hold-
ing that  they  were  an  ancient  people  who  preceded  the  Cherokee  and
built  the  mounds,  while  others,  with  more  authority,  claim  that  they
were  a  clan  or  society  in  the  tribe  and  were  destroyed  long  ago  by
pestilence  or  other  calamity.  Fortunately,  we  are  not  left  to  depend
entirely  upon  surmise  in  the  matter,  as  the  tradition  was  noted  by
Haywood  some  seventy  years  ago.  and  by  another  writer  some  forty
years  later,  while  the  connected  story  could  still  be  obtained  from
competent  authorities.  From  the  various  statements  it  would  seem
that  the  Ani'-Kuta'ni  were  a  priestly  clan,  having  hereditary  super-
vision of  all  religious  ceremonies  among  the  Cherokee,  until,  in  con-
sequence of  having  abused  their  sacred  privileges,  they  were  attacked
and  completely  exterminated  by  the  rest  of  the  tribe,  leaving  the
priestly  functions  to  be  assumed  thereafter  by  individual  doctors  and
conjurers.
Haywood  says,  without  giving  name  or  details,  "The  Cherokees  are
addicted  to  conjuration  to  ascertain  whether  a  sick  person  will  recover.
This  custom  arose  after  the  destruction  of  their  priests.  Tradition
states  that  such  persons  lived  among  their  ancestors  and  were  deemed
superior  to  others,  and  were  extirpated  long  ago,  in  consequence  of
the  misconduct  of  one  of  the  priests,  who  attempted  to  take  the  wife
of  a   man  who  was  the  brother  of  the  leading  chief  of  the  nation."1 A  more  detailed  statement,  on  the  authority  of  Chief  John  Ross  and
Dr  -T.  B.  Evans,  is  given  in  1S66  by  a  writer  who  speaks  of  the  mas-
sacre as  having  occurred  about  a  century  before,  although  from  the
ijiat.  ami  Aborig.  Hist.  Tenn.,  p.  266.


moonkv]  THE     ANl'-KT  TANI  393
dimness  of  the  tradition  ii  is  evident  that  it  must  have  been  much
earlier:
"Tin'  facts,  though  few,  are  interesting.  The  order  was  heredita rj  ;
in  this  respect  peculiar,  for  among  [ndians  seldom,  and  among  the
Cherokees  never,  does  power  pertain  to  any  family  as  a  matter  of
right.  Yi'i  tin-  family  of  the  Nicotani  for  it  seems  to  have  been  a
family  or  clan  enjoyed  this  privilege.  The  power  that  they  exer-
cised was  not,  however,  political,  nor  does  it  appear  that  chiefs  were
elected  from  among  them.
•■The  Nicotani  were  a  mystical,  religious  body,  of  whom  the  people
stood  in  great  awe,  and  seem  to  have  been  somewhat  like  the  Brahmins
of  India.  By  what  means  they  attained  their  ascendancy,  or  how  lone-
it  was  maintained,  can  never  be  ascertained.  Their  extinction  by  mas-
sacre is  neatly  all  that  can  be  discovered  concerning  them.  They
became  haughty,  insolent,  overbearing,  and  licentious  to  an  intoler-
able degree.  Relying  on  their  hereditary  privileges  and  the  strange
awe  which  they  inspired,  they  did  not  hestitate  by  fraud  or  violence
to  rend  asunder  the  tender  relations  of  husband  and  wife  when  a
beautiful  woman  excited  their  passions.  The  people  long  brooded  in
silence  over  the  oppressions  and  outrages  of  this  high  caste,  whom
they  deeply  hated  but  greatly  feared.  At  length  a  daring  yoiingjnan.
a  member  of  an  influential  family,  organized  a  conspiracy  among  the
people  for  the  massacre  of  the  priesthood.  The  immediate  provoca-
tion was  the  abduction  of  the  wife  of  the  young  leader  of  the  con-
spiracy. His  wife  was  remarkable  for  her  beauty,  and  was  forcibly
abducted  and  violated  by  one  of  the  Nicotani  while  he  was  absent  on
the  chase.  On  his  return  he  found  no  difficulty  in  exciting  in  others
the  resentment  which  he  himself  experienced.  So  many  had  suf-
fered in  the  same  way.  so  many  feared  that  they  might  lie  made  to
suffer,  that  nothing  was  wanted  hut  a  leader.  A  leader  appearing  in
the  person  of  the  young  brave  whom  we  have  named,  the  people  rose
under  his  direction  and  killed  every  Nicotani.  young  and  old.  Thus
perished  a  hereditary  secret  society,  since  which  time  no  hereditary
privileges  have  been  tolerated  among  the  Cherokees."'1
109.    THE    WAR    MEDICINE
Some  warriors  had  medicine  to  change  their  shape  as  they  pleased,
so  that  they  could  escape  from  their  enemies.  Once  one  of  these
medicine  warriors  who  had  been  away  from  home  came  hack  and  found
a  strong  party  of  the  enemy  attacking  the  settlement  while  nearly  all
the  men  were  off  on  a  hunt.  The  town  was  on  the  other  side  of  the
river,  but  his  grandmother  was  there,  so  he  made  up  his  mind  to  save
her.     Going  down  the  stream  a  little  way.  he  hunted  until  he  found  a
1  MacGon'an,  Dr  D.  J.,  Indian  Secret  Societies,  Historical  Magazine,  s  irrisania,  N.  Y.


3V>4  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEKOKEE  [eth.
mussel  shell.  With  his  medicine  he  changed  this  to  a  canoe,  in  which
he  crossed  over  to  his  grandmother's  house,  and  found  her  sitting
there,  waiting  for  the  enemy  to  come  and  kill  her.  Again  he  made
medicine  and  put  her  into  a  small  gourd  which  he  fastened  to  his  belt.
Then  climbing  a  tree  he  changed  himself  to  a  swamp  woodcock,  and
with  one  erj  he  spread  his  wings  and  flew  across  to  the  other  side  of
the  river,  whei'e  both  took  their  natural  shape  again  and  made  their
way  through  the  woods  to  another  settlement.
There  was  another  great  Cherokee  warrior,  named  Dasi'giya'gi,  or Shoe-boots,  as  the  whites  called  him,  who  lived  on  Hightower  creek,
in  Georgia,  lie  was  so  strong  that  it  was  said  he  could  throw  a  coru
mortar  over  a  house,  and  with  his  magic  power  could  (dear  a  river  at
one  jump.  His  war  medicine  was  an  uktena  scale  and  a  very  large
turtle  shell  which  he  got  from  the  Shawano.  In  the  Creek  war  he  put
this  scale  into  water  and  bathed  his  body  with  the  water,  and  also
burned  a  piece  of  the  turtle  shell  and  drew  a  black  line  around  his  men
with  the  coal,  and  he  was  never  wounded  and  never  had  a  man  killed.
Some  great  warriors  had  a  medicine  by  the  aid  of  which  they  could
dive  under  the  ground  as  underwater,  come  up  among  the  enenry  to
kill  and  scalp  one,  then  dive  under  the  ground  again  and  come  up
among  their  friends.
Some  war  captains  knewT  how  to  put  their  lives  up  in  the  tree  tops
during  a  fight,  so  that  even  if  they  were  struck  by  the  enemy  they
could  not  be  killed.  Once,  in  a  battle  with  the  Shawano,  the  Chero
kee  leader  stood  directly  in  front  of  the  enemy  and  let  the  whole  party
shoot  at  him,  but  was  not  hurt  until  the  Shawano  captain,  who  knew
this  war  medicine  himself,  ordered  his  men  to  shoot  into  the  branches
above  the  head  of  the  other.  They  did  this  and  the  Cherokee  leader
fell  dead.
no.   INCIDENTS   OF   PERSONAL   HEROISM
In  the  Cherokee  war  of  17»>o  when  small  bodies  of  the  enemy,
according  to  Haywood,  were  pushing  their  inroads  eastward  almost  to
Salisbury,  a  party  of  six  or  eight  warriors  was  discovered,  watched,
and  followed  until  they  were  seen  to  enter  a  deserted  cabin  to  pass
the  night.  The  alarm  was  given,  and  shortly  before  daylight  the
whites  surrounded  the  house,  posting  themselves  behind  the  fodder
stack  and  some  outbuildings  so  as  to  command  both  the  door  and  the
wide  chimney  top.  They  then  began  to  throw  fire  upon  the  roof  to
drive  out  the  Indians,  when,  as  the  blaze  caught  the  dry  shingles,  and
death  either  by  fire  or  bullet  seemed  certain,  one  of  the  besieged
warriors  called  to  his  companions  that  it  was  better  that  one  should  be
a  sacrifice  than  that  all  should  die.  and  that  if  they  would  follow  his
directions  he  would  save  them,  but  die  himself.  He  proposed  to  sally
out  alone  to  draw  the  tire  of  the   besiegers,  while  his   friends  stood


INCIDENTS    OF    HEROISM  395
reach  to  make  for  the  woods  as  soon  as  the  gains  of  the  whites  were
empty.  Thei  agreed,  and  the  door  was  opened,  when  he  suddenly
rushed  forth,  dodging  and  running  in  a  zigzag  course,  so  thai  every
gun  was  emptied  at  him  before  he  fell  dead,  covered  with  wounds.
While  ili"  white-  were  reloading,  the  other  warriors  ran  out  and  sur-
ceeded  iii  reaching  the  woods  before  the  besiegers  coul  1  recover  from
their  surprise.  The  historian  adds.  ••How  greatly  it  is  to  be  regretted
thai  the  name  of  this  hero  is  not  know  n  to  the  writer,  that  it  might  >»■
recorded  with  1 1 1 1  — -  specimen  of  Cherokee  bravery  and  patriotism,
firmness  and  presence  of  mind  in  the  hour  of  danger."
.Moii>  than  once  women  seem  to  have  shown  the  courage  of  warriors
when  the  occasion  demanded.  At  the  beginning  of  the  last  centuiy
then'  was  still  living  among  the  Cherokee  a  woman  who  had  killed  her
husband's  slayer  in  one  of  the  Revolutionary  engagements.  For  this
deed  she  was  treated  with  so  much  consideration  that  she  was  per-
mitted to  join  the  warriors  in  the  war  dance,  carrying  her  gun  and
tomahawk.  The  "Wahnenauhi  manuscript  has  a  tradition  of  an  attack upon  a  Cherokee  town  and  the  killing  of  the  chief  by  a  hostile  war
party.  Hi-  wife,  whose  name  was  Cuhtahlatah  (Gatun'lati,  ^Wild-
hemp"?),  on  seeing  her  husband  fall,  snatched  up  his  tomahawk,
shouting,  ■"Kill!  Kill!"  and  rushed  upon  the  enemy  with  such  fury that  the  retreating  Cherokee  rallied  and  renewed  the  battle  with  so
great  courage  as  to  gain  a  complete  victory.  This  may  he  a  different
statement  of  the  same  incident.
In  Rutherford's  expedition  against  the  Cherokee,  in  1 7 7 < '> .  the
Indians  made  a  stand  near  Waya  gap,  in  the  Nantahala  mountains,  and
a  hard-fought  engagement  took  place,  with  a  loss  to  the  Americans  of
nineteen  men.  although  the  enemy  was  finally  driven  from  the  ground.
After  the  main  body  had  retreated,  an  Indian  was  seen  looking  out
from  behind  a  tree,  and  was  at  once  shot  and  killed  by  the  soldier-.
who,  on  going  to  the  spot,  found  that  it  was  a  woman,  painted  and
stripped  like  a  warrior  and  armed  with  bow  and  arrow-.  She  had
already  been  -hot  through  the  thigh,  and  had  therefore  been  unable
to  flee  with  tin-  rest.
in.   THE    MOUNDS    AND    THE    CONSTANT    FIRE:    THE  OLD    SACRED
THINGS
Some  say  that  the  mounds  were  built  by  another  people.  Others
-ay  they  were  built  bythe  ancestors  of  the  old  Ani'-Kitu'hwagi  for  town- house  foundation-,  so  that  the  townhouses  would  lie  safe  when  freshet-
came.  The  townhouse  was  always  built  on  the  level  bottom  lands  by
the  river  in  order  that  the  people  might  have  smooth  ground  for  their
dame-  and  ballplays  and  might  be  able  to  go  down  to  water  during the  dance.
■  Haywood,  Nat.  and  Aborig.  Hist.  Tenn


396  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [kth.ann.19
"When  they  were  ready  to  build  the  mound  they  began  by  laying  a circle  of  stones  on  the  surface  of  the  ground.  Next  they  made  a  fire
in  the  center  of  the  circle  and  put  near  it  the  body  of  some  prominent
chief  or  priest  who  had  lately  died — some  say  seven  chief  men  from
the  different  clans — together  with  an  Ulunsu'ti  stone,  an  uktena  scale
or  horn,  a  feather  from  the  right  wing  of  an  eagle  or  great  tla'nuwa,
which  lived  in  those  days,  and  heads  of  seven  colors,  red,  white,  black.
blue,  purple,  yellow,  and  gray -blue.  The  priest  then  conjured  all
these  with  disease,  so  that,  if  ever  an  enemy  invaded  the  country,  even
though  lie  should  burn  and  destroy  the  town  and  the  townhouse,  he
would  never  live  to  return  home.
Tlie  mound  was  then  built  up  with  earth,  which  the  women  brought
in  baskets,  and  as  they  piled  it  above  the  stones,  the  bodies  of  their
great  men,  and  the  sacred  things,  they  left  an  open  place  at-  the  fire  in
the  center  and  letdown  a  hollow  cedar  trunk,  with  the  bark  on,  which
fitted  around  the  tire  and  protected  it  from  the  earth.  This  cedar  log
was  cut  long  enough  to  reach  nearly  to  the  surface  inside  the.  town-
house  when  everything  was  done.  The  earth  was  piled  up  around  it.
and  the  whole  mound  was  finished  off  smoothly,  and  then  the  town-
house  was  built  upon  it.  One  man,  called  the  fire  keeper, stayed  always
in  the  townhouse  to  feed  and  tend  the  tire.  When  there  was  to  be  a
dance  or  a  council  he  pushed  long  stalks  of  the  ihy&'ga  weed,  which
some  call aisil'-sun'tl,  "  the  fire  maker"  (Erig<  nm  canadt  nst  or  ileal >ane),
down  through  the  opening  in  the  cedar  log  to  the  fire  at  the  bottom.
He  left  the  ends  of  the  stalks  sticking'  out  and  piled  lichens  and  punk
around,  after  which  he  prayed,  and  as  he  prayed  the  fire  climbed  up
along  the  stalks  until  it  caught  the  punk.  Then  he  put  on  wood,  and
by  the  time  the  dancers  were  ready  there  was  a  large  fire  blazing  in
the  townhouse.  After  the  dance  he  covered  the  hole  over  again  with
ashes,  but  the  fire  was  always  smoldering  below,  .lust  before  the
Green-corn  dance,  in  the  old  times,  every  fire  in  the  settlement  was
extinguished  and  all  the  people  came  and  got  new  fire  from  the  town-
house.  This  was  called  ufsi'ln  gWffiifew''ti'yu,  "the  honored  or  sacred
fire."  Sometimes  when  the  fire  in  a  house  went  out,  the  woman  came
to  the  fire  keeper,  who  made  a  new  fire  by  rubbing  an  ihy&'ga  stalk
against  the  under  side  of  a  hard  dry  fungus  that  grows  upon  locust
trees.
Some  say  this  everlasting  fire  was  only  in  the  larger  mounds  at
Nikwasi',  Kitu'hwa.  and  a  few  other  towns,  and  that  when  the  new  fire
was  thus  drawn  up  for  the  Green-corn  dance  it  was  distributed  from
them  (o  the  other  settlements.  The  lire  burns  yet  at  the  bottom  id'  these great  mounds,  and  when  the  Cherokee  soldiers  were  camped  near
Kitu'hwa  during  the  civil  war  they  saw  smoke  still  rising  from  the mound.
The  Cherokee  once  had  a  wooden  box,  nearly  square  and  wrapped
up   in  buckskin,  in    which  they    kepi  (he    most  sacred   things  of   their


MISCELLANEOUS    MYTHS  397
old  religion.  Upon  everj  important  expedition  two  priests  carried
it  in  turn  and  watched  over  it  in  camp  so  that  nothing  could  come
near  to  disturb  it.  The  Delawares  captured  it  more  than  a  hundred
years  ago,  and  after  thai  the  old  religion  was  neglected  and  trouble
game  to  the  Nation.  They  had  also  a  great  peace  pipe,  carved  from
white  .-tone,  with  >e\  en  stem-holes,  so  that  seven  men  could  sit  around
and  smoke  from  it  at  onee  at  their  peace  councils.  In  the  old  town  of
Keowee  tiny  hail  a  drum  of  stone,  cut  in  the  shape  of  a  turtle.
which  was  hungup   inside  the   townhouse  and   used  at   all  the   town
dances.  Tin'  other  towns  of  the  Lower  Cherokee  used  to  borrow  it.
too.  for  their  own  dances.
All  the  old  things  are  gone  now  and  the  Indians  are  different.
Miscellaneous  Myths  and  Legends
112.  the  ignorant  housekeeper
Ail  old  man  whose  wife  had  died  lived  alone  with  his  son.  One  day
he  said  to  the  young  man.  "We  need  a  cook  here,  so  you  would  better
get  married.'"  So  the  young  man  got  a  wife  and  brought  her  home.
Then  his  father  said.  "Now  we  must  work  together  and  do  all  we  can
to  help  her.  You  go  hunting  and  bring  in  the  meat  and  I'll  look  after
the  corn  and  beans,  and  then  she  can  cook."  The  young  man  went into  the  woods  to  look  for  a  deer  and  his  father  went  out  into  the  field
to  attend  to  the  corn.  When  they  came  home  at  night  they  wrvf  hun-
gry, and  the  young  woman  set  out  a  bowl  of  walnut  hominy  {kand'ta-
Ui'lii)  before  them.  It  looked  queer,  somehow,  and  when  the  old  man
examined  it  he  found  that  the  walnuts  had  been  put  in  whole.  "Why
didn't  you  shell  the  walnuts  and  then  beat  up  the  kernels."  said  he  to
the  young  woman.  "I  didn't  know  they  had  to  he  shelled."  she
replied.  Then  the  old  man  said.  "You  think  about  marrying  and  you
don't  know  how  to  cook."  and  he  sent  her  away.
113.   THE   MAN    IN   THE   STUMP
A  man  who  had  a  field  of  growing  corn  went  out  one  day  to  see  how
it  was  ripening  and  climbed  a  tall  stump  to  get  a  better  view.  The
stump  was  hollow  and  a  hear  had  a  nest  of  cubs  in  the  bottom.  The
man  slipped  and  fell  down  upon  the  cubs,  which  set  up  such  a  squeal-
ing that  the  old  she-bear  heard  them  and  came  climbing  down  into  t  he
stump  tail  first,  in  bear  fashion,  to  sec  what  was  the  matter.  The  man
caught  hold  of  her  by  the  hind  legs  and  the  old  bear  was  so  frightened
that  she  at  once  climbed  out  again,  dragging  the  man.  who  thus  got
:  the  stump,  when  the  bear  ran  away.
114.   TWO    LAZY    HUNTERS
A  party  of  warriors  once  started  out  for  a  long  hunting  trip  in  the
mountain-.      They  went    on    until    they  came   to  a   g   1   game    region.


398  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
when  they  set  up  their  hark  hut  in  a  convenient  place  near  the  river
.side.  Every  morning  after  breakfast  (hey  scattered  out,  each  man
for  himself,  to  be  gone  all  day.  until  they  returned  at  night  with
whatever  game  they  had  taken.  There  was  one  lazy  fellow  who  went
out  alone  every  morning  like  the  others,  but  only  until  he  found  a
sunny  slope,  when  he  would  stretch  out  by  the  side  of  a  rock  to  sleep
until  evening,  returning  then  to  camp  empty-handed,  but  with  his
moccasins  torn  and  a  long  story  of  how  he  had  tramped  all  day  and
found  nothing.  This  went  on  until  one  of  the  others  began  to  suspect
that  something  was  wrong,  and  made  it  his  business  to  find  it  out.  The
next  morning  he  followed  him  secretly  through  the  woods  until  he
saw  him  come  out  into  a  sunny  opening,  where  he  sat  down  upon  a
large  rock,  took  off  his  moccasins,  and  began  rubbing  them  against  the
rocks  until  he  had  worn  holes  in  them.  Then  the  lazy  fellow  loosened
his  belt,  lay  down  beside  the  rock,  and  went  to  sleep.  The  spy  set
fire  to  the  dry  leaves  and  watched  until  the  flame  crept  close  up  to
the  sleeping  man.  who  never  opened  his  eyes.
The  spy  went  back  to  camp  and  told  what  he  had  seen.  About
supper  time  the  lazy  fellow  came  in  with  the  same  old  story  of  a  long
day's  hunt  and  no  game  started.  When  he  had  finished  the  others  all
laughed  and  called  him  a  sleepyhead.  He  insisted  that  he  had  been
climbing  the  ridges  all  day,  and  put  out  his  moccasins  to  show  how
worn  they  were,  not  knowing  that  they  were  scorched  from  the  fire,
as  he  had  slept  on  until  sundown.  When  they  saw  the  blackened
moccasins  they  laughed  again,  and  he  was  too  much  astonished  to  say
a  word  in  his  defense;  so  the  captain  said  that  such  a  liar  was  not  fit  to
stay  with  them,  and  he  was  driven  from  the  camp.
*  *  *  *  *  *  *
There  was  another  lazy  fellow  who  courted  a  pretty  girl,  but  she
would  have  nothing  to  do  with  him,  telling  him  that  her  husband  must
be  a  good  hunter  or  she  would  remain  single  all  her  life.  One  morn-
ing he  went  into  the  woods,  and  by  a  lucky  accident  managed  to  kill
a  deer.  Lifting  it  upon  his  back,  he  carried  it  into  the  settlement,
passing  right  by  the  door  of  the  house  where  the  girl  and  her  mother
lived.  As  soon  as  he  was  out  of  sight  of  the  house  he  went  by  a  round-
about course  into  the  woods  again  and  waited  until  evening,  when  he
appeared  with  the  deer  on  his  shoulder  and  came  down  the  trail  past
the  girl's  house  as  he  had  in  the  morning.  He  did  this  the  next  day,
and  the  next,  until  the  girl  began  to  think  he  must  be  killing  all  the
deer  in  the  woods.  So  her  mother — the  old  women  are  usually  the
matchmakers— got  ready  and  went  to  the  young  man's  mother  to talk  it  over.
When  she  arrived  and  the  greetings  were  done  she  said,  ''Your  son
must  be  a  good  hunter."  "  No."  replied  the  old  woman,  "  he  seldom  kills
anything."  "But  he  has  been  killing  a  great  many  deer  lately."  "I
haven't  seen  any,"  said  his  mother.    "Why.  he  has  been  carrying  deer


MISCELLANEOUS    MYTHS.  399
past  our  house  twice  a  day  for  the  last  three  days. '"  '  1  don't  know
what  he  did  with  them,"  said  the  young  man's  mother;  "he  never
brought  them  here."  Then  the  girl's  mother  was  sure  there  was  some-
thing wrong,  so  she  went  home  and  told  her  husband,  who  followed
up  the  young  man's  trail  into  the  woods  until  it  brought  him  to  where the  body  of  the  deer  was  hidden,  now  SO  far  decayed  that  it  had  to  be
thrown  away.
115.  THE   TWO   OLD   MEN
Two  old  men  went  hunting.      One  had  an   eye  drawn  down   and  was
called  Uk-kwunagi'ta,  "Eye-drawn-down."  The  other  had  an  arm
twisted  out  of  shape  and  was  called  Uk-ku'suntsuti.  "Bent- bow-shape."
They  killed  a  deer  and  cooked  the  meat  in  a  pot.  The  second  old  man
dipped  a  piece  of  bread  into  the  soup  and  smacked  his  lips  as  he  ate
it.  "Is  it  good '."  said  the  first  old  man.  Said  the  other,  " Hnyvl !
uk-kioundgi'sU — Yes.  sir!   It  will  draw  down  one's  eye."
Thought  the  first  old  man  to  himself,  "He  means  me."  So  he  dipped
a  piece  of  bread  into  the  pot,  and  smacked  his  lips  as  he  tasted  it.
"Do  you  rind  it  good?"  said  the  other  old  man.  Said  his  comrade.
••  Hayti'i  uk-Jcu'suntsuteti' — Yes.  sir!  It  will  twist  up  one's  arm."
Thought  the  second  old  man,  "He  means  me";  so  he  got  very  angry and  struck  the  rirst  old  man.  and  then  they  fought  until  each  killed  the
other.
116.   THE   STAR   FEATHERS
A  longtime  ago  a  warrior  of  roving  disposition  went  down  into  the
white  settlements  toward  the  east,  where  for  the  first  time  he  saw  a
peacock.  The  beautiful  lone-  feathers  surprised  and  delighted  bun,
and  by  trading  some  valuable  Indian  possession  of  his  own  he  managed
to  buy  a  few  of  them,  which  he  took  with  him  to  the  mountains  and
hid.  until  he  was  ready  to  use  them,  in  an  old  heaver  lodge  under  the
river  bank.  To  get  into  the  beaver  lodge  he  had  to  dive  under  the
water.
Then  he  set  to  work  secretly  and  made  himself  a  headdress,  with
the  long  peacock  feathers  in  the  front  and  trailing  out  behind  and  the
shorter  ones  at  the  sides.  At  the  next  dance  he  wore  the  new  head
dress,  and  asserted  that  he  had  been  up  to  the  sky  and  that  these  were
star  feathers  (see  number  '.».  "What  the  stars  are  like").  He  made  a
long  speech  also,  which  he  pretended  was  a  message  he  had  received
from  the  star  spirits  to  deliver  to  the  people.
Everyone  wondered  at  the  beautiful  feathers,  so  different  /from  any
they  had  ever  seen  before.  They  made  no  doubt  that  he  had  been  up
to  the  sky  and  talked  with  spirits.  He  became  a  great  prophet,  and
used  to  keep  himself  hidden  all  day  in  the  beaver  hole,  and  whenever
there  was  a  night  gathering  for  a  dance  or  a  council  he  would  sud-
denly appear  among  them  wearing   hi-  feather  headdress   and  give


4(10  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
the  people  a  new  message  from  the  sky.     Then  he  would  leave  them
again,  pretending  that  he  went  up  ti>  heaven.
He  grew  famous  and  powerful  among  all  the  medicine  men,  until  at
last  it  happened  that  another  Cherokee  went  down  among  the  white
settlements  and  saw  there  another  peacock,  and  knew  at  once  that  the
prophet  was  a  fraud.  On  his  return  he  quietly  told  some  of  his
friends,  and  they  decided  to  investigate.  When  the  next  night  dance
came  around  the  prophet  was  on  hand  as  usual  with  a  new  message
fresh  from  the  stars.  The  people  listened  reverently,  and  promised  to
do  all  that  he  commanded.  Then  he  left  them,  saying-  that  he  must
return  at  once  to  the  sky.  but  as  lie  went  out  from  the  circle  the  spies
followed  him  in  the  darkness,  and  saw  him  go  down  to  the  river  and
dive  under  the  water.  They  waited,  but  he  did  not  come  up  again,
and  they  went  back  and  told  the  people.  The  next  morning  a  party
went  to  the  spot  and  discovered  the  beaver  lodge  under  the  bank.  One
man  dived  and  came  up  inside,  and  there  he  found  the  prophet  sitting
with  the  peacock  feathers  by  his  side.
117.  THE    MOTHER    BEAR'S    SONG
A  hunter  in  the  woods  one  day  heard  singing  in  a  cave.  He  came
near  and  peeped  in,  and  it  was  a  mother  bear  singing  to  her  cubs  and
telling  them  what  to  do  when  the  hunters  came  after  them.
Said  the  mother  bear  to  the  cubs,  "When  you  hear  the  hunters
coming  down  the  creek,  then —
Tg&'gX,  tsd'ffl,  hvVlaMf;
Tsd'gi,  tsd'gX,  hiiu'luh'i. Upstream,  upstream,  you  (must)  go;
Upstream,  upstream,  you  (must)  go.
"  But  if  you  hear  them  coming  up  the  creek,  children,  then—
'.'.';,  </.';,  hii-i'laW;
'..';.  ge%  hwVlatil'.
Downstream,  downstream,  you  (must)  go;
Downstream,  downstream,  you  (must)  go."
*  *  *  *  *  *  *
Another  hunter  out  in  the  woods  one  day  thought  he  heard  a  woman
singing  to  a  baby.     He  followed  the  sound  up  to  the  head  of  the  branch
until  he  came  to  a  cave  under  the  bushes,  and  inside  was  a  mother  bear
rocking  her  cub  in  her  paws  and  singing  to  it  this  baby  song,  which
the  Ani'-Tsa'guhi  used  to  know  before  they  were  turned  into  bears:
Ilit'-iiitiiiiti',  ha'-mnma',  ha'-mama/,  ha'^mama/;
Ud&'hcde'yl  hi'ldnnd,  hi'l&nnH;
Udd'hale'y-t  hi'lfinnti,  hi'imnti.
Let  me  carry  you  on  my  back  ( four  times)  ;
On  the  sunny  side  >_">  to  sleep,  go  to  sleep;
On  the  sunny  side  •_"  1  to  sleep.  <_'.>  to  sleep.


m     mm  MISCELLANEOUS    MYTHS  401
118.   BABY    SONG,  TO    PLEASE    THE    CHILDREN
Hit' ii-iiji'-lniiiii-i  ',    Hn'irnj, '-lii/llli-i',
Yii'iir-i/iiirrln'.   Ilit'iriiifliiitt'-itin1' —
fii'lu'l   11  in-' 'ijlllli'  l.iiiinl'silni';
K'fi  iiiii'ijii/ii'  tsana'st hd';
Yii'nii  miili'iTui, lii'  tsa'nadiskd' '.
Ha'wiye'-hyuwe',  Ha'wiye'-hyuwe',
Yu'we-yiiwelie',   I  la'w  iyclivu'-uwe/ —
The  Bear  is  very  bad,  bo  they  say;
Long  time  ago  he  was  very  bad,  so  they  say;
The  Bear  did  so  and  so,  they  say.
119.   WHEN   BABIES   ARE   BORN:   THE   WREN   AND   THE  CRICKET
The  little  Wren  is  the  messenger  of  th<'  birds,  and  pries  into  every-
thing. She  gets  up  early  in  the  morning  and  goes  round  to  every
house  in  the  settlemenl  to  gel  news  for  the  bird  council.  When  a  new
bahy  is  horn  she  finds  out  whether  it  is  a  boy  or  girl  and  reports  to  the
council.  If  it  is  a  hoy  the  birds  sine-  in  mournful  chorus:  "Alas!  the
whistle  of  the  arrow!  my  shins  will  burn,"  because  the  birds  know
that  when  the  boy  grows  older  he  will  hunt  them  with  his  blowgun
and  arrows  and  roast  them  on  a  stick.
But  if  the  baby  is  a  girl,  they  are  glad  and  sing:  "Thanks!  the
sound  of  the  pestle!  At  her  home  I  shall  surely  be  able  to  scratch
where  she  sweeps."  because  they  know  that  after  a  while  they  will  be
able  to  pick  up  stray  grains  where  she  beats  the  corn  into  meal.
When  the  Cricket  hears  that  a  girl  is  horn,  it  also  is  glad,  and  says,
'•Thanks.  I  shall  sing  in  the  house  where  she  lives."  But  if  it  is  a  boy
thi'  Cricket  laments:  Grwe-Ju  .'  He  will  shoot  me!  He  will  shoot  me!
He  will  shoot  me!"  because  hoys  make  little  bows  to  shoot  crickets
and  grasshoppers.
When  inquiring  as  to  the  sex  of  the  new  arrival  the  Cherokee  asks,
"Is  it  a  bow  or  a  (meal)  sifter?"  or,  "Is  it  ballsticks  or  bread?"
120.   THE   RAVEN    MOCKER
Of  all  the  Cherokee  wizards  or  witches  the  most  dreaded  is  the
Raven  Mocker  ( Kd'lanii  A/n/*  U'sM),  the  one  that  robs  the  <l\  ing  man  of
life.  They  are  of  either  sex  and  there  is  no  sure  way  to  know  one,
though  they  usually  look  withered  and  old.  because  they  have  added
so  many  lives  to  their  own.
At  night,  when  some  one  is  sick  or  dying  in  the  settlement,  the
Haven  Mocker  goes  to  the  place  to  take  the  life.  He  flies  through
the  air  in  fiery  shape,  with  arms  outstretched  like  wines,  and  sparks
trailing  behind,  and  a  rushing  sound  like  the  noise  of  a  strong  wind.
Every  little  while  as  he  flies  he  makes  a  cry  like  the  cry  of  a  raven
when  it  "dives"  in  the  air     not  like  the  common  raven  cry     and  those
19  kth—  01   :.'»)


402  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
who  hear  arc  afraid,  because  they  know  that  some  man's  life  will  soon
go  out.  When  the  Raven  Mocker  comes  to  the  house  he  finds  others
of  his  kind  waiting  there,  and  unless  there  is  a  doctor  on  guard  who
knows  how  to  drive  them  away  they  go  inside,  all  invisible,  and
frighten  and  torment  the  sick  man  until  they  kill  him.  Sometimes  to
do  this  they  even  lift  him  from  the  bed  and  throw  him  on  the  floor,
but  his  friends  who  are  with  him  think  he  is  only  struggling  for
breath.
After  the  witcnes  kill  him  they  take  out  his  heart  and  eat  it,  and  so
add  to  their  own  lives  as  many  days  or  years  as  they  have  taken  from
his.  No  one  in  the  room  can  see  them,  and  there  is  no  scar  where  they
take  out  the  heart,  but  yet  there  is  no  heart  left  in  the  body.  Only
one  who  has  the  right  medicine  can  recognize  a  Raven  Mocker,  and  if
such  a  man  stays  in  the  room  with  the  sick  person  these  witches  are
afraid  to  come  in.  and  retreat  as  soon  as  they  see  him,  because  when
one  of  them  is  recognized  in  his  right  shape  he  must  die  within  seven
days.  There  was  once  a  man  named  Gunskali'ski,  who  had  this  medi-
cine and  used  to  hunt  for  Raven  Mockers,  and  killed  several.  When
the  friends  of  a  dying  person  know  that  there  is  no  more  hope  they
always  try  to  have  one  of  these  medicine  men  stay  in  the  house  and
watch  the  body  until  it  is  buried,  because  after  burial  the  witches  do
not  steal  the  heart.
The  other  witches  are  jealous  of  the  Raven  Mockers  and  afraid  to
come  into  the  same  house  with  one.  Once  a  man  who  had  the  witch
medicine  was  watching  by  a  sick  man  and  saw  these  other  witches  out-
side trying  to  get  in.  All  at  once  they  heard  a  Raven  Mocker  cry
overhead  and  the  others  scattered  '-like  a  flock  of  pigeons  when  the
hawk  swoops."  When  at  last  a  Raven  Mocker  dies  these  other  witches
sometimes  take  revenge  by  digging  up  the  body  and  abusing  it.
The  following  is  told  on  the  reservation  as  an  actual  happening:
A  young  man  had  been  out  on  a  hunting  trip  and  was  on  his  way
home  when  night  came  on  while  he  was  still  a  long  distance  from  the
settlement.  He  knew  of  a  house  not  far  off  the  trail  where  an  old  man
and  his  wife  lived,  so  he  turned  in  that  direction  to  look  for  a  place  to
sleep  until  morning.  When  he  got  to  the  house  there  was  nobody  in
it.  He  looked  into  the  asi  and  found  no  one  there  either.  He  thought
maybe  they  had  gone  after  water,  and  so  stretched  himself  out  in  the
farther  corner  to  sleep.  Very  soon  he  heard  a  raven  cry  outside,  and
in  a  little  while  afterwards  the  old  man  came  into  the  asi  and  sat  down
by  the  fire  without  noticing  the  young  man,  who  kept  still  in  the  dark
corner.  Soon  there  was  another  raven  cry  outside,  and  the  old  man
said  to  himself,  "Now  my  wife  is  coming."  and  sure  enough  in  a little  while  the  old  woman  came  in  and  sat  down  by  her  husband.
Then  the  young  man  knew  they  were  Raven  Mockers  and  he  was
frightened  and  kept  very  quiet.


THE    RAVEN    MOCKERS  103
Said  the  old  man  to  his  wife,  "Well,  what  luck  did  you  have?"
••  None,"  said  the  old  woman.  "  there  were  too  many  doctors  watching.
What  luck  did  you  have?"  "I  got  what  I  went  for,"  said  the  old
man.  "there  is  oo  reason  to  tail,  hut  yon  never  have  luck.  Take  this
and  cook  it  and  lct*s  have  something  to  eat."  She  fixed  the  fire  and
then  tin'  young  man  smelled  meat  roasting  and  thought  ii  smelled
sweeter  than  any  meat  he  had  ever  tasted.  He  peeped  out  from  one
eye.  and  it  looked  like  a  man's  heart   roasting  on  a  stick.
Suddenly  the  old  woman  said  to  her  husband,  "  Who  is  over  in  the
corner?"  "  Nobody,"  said  the  old  man.  "Yes,  there  is,"  said  the  old
woman,  "I  hear  him  snoring,"  and  she  stirred  the  tire  until  it  blazed
and  lighted  up  tin1  whole  place,  and  there  was  the  young  man  lying  in
the  corner.  Hi'  kept  quiet  and  pretended  to  lie  asleep.  The  old  man
made  a  noise  at  the  fire  to  wake  him.  hut  still  he  pretended  to  sleep.
Then  the  old  man  came  over  and  shook  him.  and  he  sat  up  and  rubbed
his  eyes  as  if  he  had  been  asleep  all  the  time.
Now  il  was  near  daylight  and  the  old  woman  was  out  in  the  other
house  getting  breakfast  ready,  hut  the  hunter  could  hear  her  crying
to  herself.  "  Why  is  your  wife  crying  ? "  he  asked  the  old  man.  "Oh,
she  has  lost  some  of  her  friends  lately  and  feels  lonesome,"  said  her
husband;  but  the  young  man  knew-  that  she  was  crying  because  he  had
heard  them  talking.
When  they  came  out  to  breakfast  the  old  man  put  a  bowl  of  corn
mush  before  him  and  said.  "This  is  all  we  have — we  have  had  no  meat
for  a  lony  time."  After  breakfast  the  young  man  started  on  again, but  when  he  hail  gone  a  little  way  the  old  man  ran  after  him  with  a
tine  piece  of  beadwork  and  gave  it  to  him,  saying.  "Take  this,  and
don't  tell  anybody  what  you  heard  last  night,  because  my  wife  and  I
are  always  quarreling  that  way."  The  young  man  took  the  piece,  hut when  he  came  to  the  first  creek  he  threw  it  into  the  water  and  then
went  on  to  the  settlement.  There  he  told  the  whole  story,  and  a  party
of  warrior-  started  back  with  him  to  kill  the  Raven  Mockers.  When
they  reached  the  place  it  was  seven  days  after  the  first  night.  They
found  the  old  man  and  his  wife  lying  dead  in  the  house,  so  they  set
fire  to  it  and  burned  it  and  the  witches  together.
121.    HERBERT'S    SPRING
"From  the  head  of  the  southern  branch  of  Savannah  river  it  does
not  exceed  half  a  mile  to  a  head  spring  of  the  Missisippi  water  that
runs  through  the  middle  and  upper  parts  of  the  Cheerake  nation  about
a  northwest  course,  and.  joining  other  rivers,  they  empty  themselves
into  the  great  Missisippi.  The  above  fountain  is  called  'Herbert's
spring,'  so  named  from  an  early  commissioner  of  Indian  affairs,  and
it  was  natural  for  strangers  to  drink  thereof,  to  quench  thirst,  gratify
their  curiosity,  and  have  it  to  say  they  had  drank  of  the  French  waters.


404  MYTHS    OE    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.anh.19
Some  of  our  people,  who  went  only  with  the  view  of  staying  a  short
time,  but  by  some,  allurement  or  other  exceeded  the  time  appointed,
at  their  return  reported,  either  through  merriment  or  superstition,
that  the  spring  had  such  a  natural  bewitching  quality  that  whosoever
drank  of  it  could  not  possibly  quit  the  nation  during  the  tedious  space
of  seven  years.  All  the  debauchees  readily  fell  in  with  this  super-
stitious notion  as  an  excuse  for  their  bad  method  of  living,  when  they
had  no  proper  call  to  stay  in  that  country;  and  in  process  of  time  it
became  as  received  a  truth  as  any  ever  believed  to  have  been  spoken
by  the  Delphic  oracle.  One  cursed,  because  its  enchantment  had
marred  his  good  fortune;  another  condemned  his  weakness  for  drink-
ing down  witchcraft,  against  his  own  secret  suspicions;  one  swore  he
would  never  taste  another  such  dangerous  poison,  even  though  he
should  be  forced  to  go  down  to  the  Missisippi  for  water;  and  another
comforted  himself  that  so  many  years  out  of  the  seven  were  already
passed,  and  wished  that  if  ever  he  tasted  it  again,  though  under  the
greatest  necessity,  he  might  be  confined  to  the  Stygian  waters.  Those
who  had  their  minds  more  enlarged  diverted  themselves  much  at  their
cost,  for  it  was  a  noted  favorite  place,  on  account  of  the  name  it  went
by;  and,  being  a  well  situated  and  good  spring,  there  all  travelers  com-
monly drank  a  bottle  of  choice.  But  now  most  of  the  pack-horse  men,
though  they  be  dry,  and  also  matchless  sons  of  Bacchus,  on  the  most
pressing  invitations  to  drink  there,  would  swear  to  forfeit  sacred
liquor  the  better  part  of  their  lives  rather  than  basely  renew  or  con-
firm the  loss  of  their  liberty,  which  that  execrable  fountain  occa-
sions."— Adair.  American  Indians,  p.  231,  1775.
122.   LOCAL    LEGENDS    OF    NORTH    CAROLINA
Owing  chiefly  to  the  fact  that  the  Cherokee  still  occupy  western
North  Carolina,  the  existing  local  legends  for  that  section  are  more
numerous  than  for  all  the  rest  of  their  ancient  territory.  For  the
more  important  legends  see  the  stories:  Agan-unitsi's  Search  for
the  Uktena,  Ataga'hi,  Hemp-carrier,  Herbert's  Spring,  Kana'sta,  The
Great  Leech  of  Tlanusi'vi,  The  Great  Yellow-jacket,  The  Nuiine'hl,
The  Raid  on  Tikwali'tsi,  The  Removed  Townhouses,  The  Spirit
Defenders  of  Nikwasi',  The  Uw'tsun'ta,  Tsulkalu.',  Tsuwe'nahl,
The  U'tlun'ta.
Akwe  ti'ti:  A  spot  on  Tuckasegee  river,  in  Jackson  county,  between
Dick's  creek  and  the  upper  end  of  Cowee  tunnel.  According  to  tra-
dition there  was  a  dangerous  water  monster  in  the  river  there.  The
meaning  of  the  name  is  lost.
Atsi'la-wa'i:  "Fire's  relative,"  a  peak,  sometimes  spoken  of  as
Rattlesnake  knob,  east  of  Oconaluftee  river  and  about  2  miles  north-
east of  Cherokee  or  Yellow  Hill,  in  Swain  county.  So  called  from
a  tradition  that  a  ballot  fire  was  once  seen  to  flv  through  the  air  from






m.m'nky]  LOCAL    LEGENDS    OF    NORTH    CAROLINA  405
the  direction  of  Highlands,  in  Macon  county,  and  alight  upon  this
mountai  The  Indians  believe  it  to  have  been  an  ulunsuti  (sec  num-
ber ."in),  which  its  owner  had  kept  in  a  hiding  place  upon  the  summit, from  which,  after  his  death,  it  issued  nightly  to  search  for  him.
Black  bock:  A  very  Inch  bald  peak  toward  the  head  of  Scott's
creek,  northeast  of  Webster,  on  the  line  of  Jackson  and  Haywood
counties.  Hither  this  peak  or  the  adjacent  Jones  knob,  of  equal
height,  is  known  to  the  Cherokee  as  Un'wad&-tsufgilasfin',  "  Where  l  he
storehouse  was  taken  off,"  from  a  large  flat  rock,  supported  by  four
other  rocks,  so  as  to  resemble  a  storehouse  (ufiwddd'li)  raised  on  poles,
which  was  formerly  in  prominent  view  upon  the  summit  until  thrown
down  by  lightning  some  fifty  years  ago.
Buffalo  creek,  Wf.st:  A  tributary  of  Cheowa  river,  in  Graham
county.  The  Cherokee  name  is  Yunsa'i,  "  Buffalo  place."  from  a  tra- dition that  a  buffalo  formerly  lived  under  the  water  at  its  mouth  (see
Tsuta'tsinasun'yi).
Cheowa  Maximum:  A  bald  mountain  at  the  head  of  Cheowa  river,
on  the  line  between  Graham  and  Macon  counties.  This  and  the
adjoining  peak.  Swim  bald,  are  together  called  Sehwate'yi,  "Hornet
place."  from  a  monster  hornet,  which,  according  to  tradition,  formerly
had  its  nest  there,  and  could  be  seen  flying  about  the  tree  tops  or  sun-
ning itself  on  the  bald  spots,  and  which  was  so  tierce  that  it  drove
away  every  one  who  came  near  the  mountain.     It  finally  disappeared.
Dakwa'i:  "Dakwa'  place,"  in  French  Broad  river,  about  ti  miles
above  Warm  Springs,  in  Madison  county,  and  80  miles  below  Ashe-
ville.  A  dakwa'  or  monster  fish  is  said  to  have  lived  in  the  stream
at  that  point.
Da'xawa-(a)  Sa'  tsunyi:  "War  crossing,"  a  ford  in  Cheowa  river
about  8  miles  below  Robbinsville,  in  Graham  county.  A  hostile  war
party  from  the  North,  probably  Shawano  or  Iroquois,  after  having
killed  a  man  on  Cheowa.  was  pursued  and  crossed  the  river  at  this
place.
DATLE'rAsTA'f:  "Where  they  fell  down,"  on  Tuckasegee  river,  at
the  bend  above  Webster,  in  Jackson  county,  where  was  formerly  the
old  town  of  Gansa'gi  (Conasauga).     Two  large  uktenas,  twined  about
each  other  as  though  in  combat,  were   :e  seen  to  lift  themselves  from
a  deep  hole  in  the  river  there  and  fall  back  into  the  water.
Datsi'yi":  "Dsttsi  place,"  just  above  Eagle  creek,  on  Little  Tennes- see river,  between  Graham  and  Swain  counties.  So  called  from  a
traditional  water  monster  of  that  name,  said  to  have  lived  in  a  deep
hole  in  the  stream.
Degal'oun'yi:  "  Where  they  are  piled  up."  a  series  of  cairns  on  both sides  of  the  trail  down  the  south  side  of  Cheowa  river,  in  Graham
county.  They  extend  along  the  trail  for  several  miles,  from  below
Sauteetla  creek  nearly  to  Slick  Rock  creek,  on  the  Tennessee  line  (the


406  MYTHS    OE    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.i-
first  being  just  above  Disg&'gisti'yi,  <l-  v.),  and  probably  murk  the site  of  an  ancient  battle.  One  at  least,  nearly  off  Yellow  creek,  is
reputed  to  be  the  grave  of  a  Cherokee  killed  by  the  enemy.  Every
passing  Indian  throws  an  additional  stone  upon  each  heap,  believing
that  some  misfortune  will  befall  him  should  he  neglect  this  duty.
Other  cairns  arc  on  the  west  side  of  Slick  Rock  creek  about  a  mile
from  Little  Tennessee  river,  and  others  south  of  Robbinsville,  near
where  the  trail  crosses  the  ridge  to  Valley  town,  in  Cherokee  county.
Dida'skasti'yk  "Where  they  were  afraid  of  each  other,"  a  spot  on the  cast  side  of  Little  Tennessee  river,  near  the  mouth  of  Alarka
creek,  in  Swain  county.  A  ball  game  once  arranged  to  take  place
there,  before  the  Removal,  between  rival  teams  from  Qualla  and  Val-
leytown,  was  abandoned  on  account  of  the  mutual  fear  of  the  two
parties.
Disga'gisti'yi:  "Where  they  gnaw."  a  spot  where  the  trail  down the  south  side  of  Cheowa  river  crosses  a  small  branch  about  half  way
between  Cockram  creek  and  Yellow  creek,  in  Graham  count}'.
Indians  passing  gnaw  the  twigs  from  the  laurel  bushes  here,  in  the
belief  that  if  they  should  fail  to  do  so  they  will  encounter  some  mis-
fortune before  crossing  the  next  ridge.  Near  by  is  a  cairn  to  which
each  also  adds  a  stone  (see  Dcgafgun'yi).
DuDUx'LEKsfN'Yi:  "Where  its  legs  were  broken  off,"  a  spot  on  the
east  side  of  Tuckasegee  river,  opposite  the  mouth  of  Cullowhee  river,
a  few  miles  above  Webster,  in  Jackson  county.  The  name  suggests
a  tradition,  which  appears  to  be  lost.
Dulastun'yi:  "Potsherd  place,"  a  former  settlement  on  Nottely
river,  in  Cherokee  count}-,  near  the  Geoigia  line.  A  half-breed  Chero-
kee ball  captain  who  formerly  lived  there,  John  Butler  or  Tsan-uga'sita
(Sour  John),  having  been  defeated  in  a  ball  game,  said,  in  contempt  of
his  men,  that  they  were  of  no  more  use  than  broken  pots.
Duxmr'LALf  nyI:  "Where  they  made  arrows,"  on  Straight  creek,  a
head-stream  of  Oconaluftee  river,  near  Cataluchee  peak,  in  Swain
county.  A  Shawano  war  party  coming  against  the  Cherokee,  after
baving  crossed  the  Smoky  mountains,  halted  there  to  prepare  arrows.
French  Broad  river:  A  magazine  writer  states  that  the  Indians
called  this  stream  "the  racing  river."  This  is  only  partially  correct. The  (  lierokee  have  no  name  for  the  river  as  a  whole,  but  the  district
through  which  it  flows  about  Asheville  is  called  by  them  Un-ta'kiyas-
ti'yi,  "  Where  they  race."  The  name  of  the  city  they  translate  as  Kas-
du'yi,  "Ashes  place."
Gakati'ti:  "Place  of  setting  free,"  a  south  bend  in  Tuckasegee  river about  3  miles  above  Bryson  City,  in  Swain  county.  It  is  sometimes
put  in  the  plural  form,  Diga'katiyi,  "Place  of  setting  them  free."  In
one  of  their  old  wars  the  Cherokee  generously  released  some  pris-
oners there.


koonei  LOCAL    LEGENDS    <>K    NORTH    CAROLINA  407
( !  Aii  Ti'vi:  "Town-building  place,"  near  the  In 'ail  of  Santeetla  creek,
southwest  from  Robbinsville,  in  Graham  county.  High  up  on  the
slopes  of  the  neighboring  mountain,  Si  ratton  bald,  is  a  wide  "  bench,"
where  the  people  once  started  to  build  a  settlement,  but  were  frightened
oil'  by  a  strange  noise,  which  they  thought  was  made  by  an  uktena.
(ii  i.i'-DiNKiif  n'i  i:  "Where  the  dogs  live,"  a  deep  place  in  Ocona-
1  uft it  river,  Swain  county,  a  short  distance  above  Yellow  Hill  (Chero-
kee) and  just  below  the  mound.  It  is  so  named  from  a  tradition  that
two  "red  does"  were  once  seen  there  playing  on  the  bank.  They
were  supposed  to  live  under  the  water.
Gisehun'yi:  ••  Where  the  Female  lives,"  onTuckasegee  river,about
2  miles  above  Bryson  City,  Swain  county.  There  is  a  tradition  that
some  supernatural  "white  people"  were  seen  there  washing  clot  lies  in the  river  and  banging  them  out  upon  the  bank  to  dry.  They  were
probably  supposed  to  lie  the  family  of  the  Agis'-e'gwa,  or  "Great
Female,"  a  spirit  invoked  by  the  conjurers.
Gregory  bald:  A  high  peak  of  the  Great  Smoky  mountains  on  the
western  border  of  Swain  county,  adjoining  Tennessee.  The  Cherokee
call  itTsistu'yl,  "Rabbit  place."  Here  the  rabbits  had  their  townhouse and  here  lived  their  chief,  the  Great  Rabbit,  and  in  the  old  times  the
people  could  see  him.  lie  was  as  large  as  a  deer,  and  all  the  little
rabbits  were  subject  to  him.
Joanna  bald:  A  bald  mountain  near  the  head  of  Valley  river,  on
the  line  between  Graham  and  Cherokee  counties.  Called  Diya'hali'yi,
"Lizard  place,"  from  a  traditional  great  lizard,  with  glistening  throat, which  used  to  haunt  the  place  and  was  frequently  seen  sunning  itself
on  the  rocky  slopes.
Jutaculla  old  fields:  A  bald  spot  of  perhaps  a  hundred  acres  on
the  slope  of  Tennessee  bald  (TsulkahY  Tsunegun'yi),  at  the  extreme
head  of  Tuckasegee  river,  in  Jackson  county,  on  the  ridge  from  which
the  lines  of  Haywood,  Jackson,  and  Transylvania  counties  diverge.
The  giant  Tsui  kahY,  or  Jutaculla,  as  the  name  is  corrupted  by  the
w  bites,  had  his  residence  in  the  mountain  (see  storj  ).  and  according  to
local  legend  among  the  whites,  said  to  be  derived  from  the  Indians,  this
bald  spot  was  a  clearing  which  he  made  for  a  farm.  Some  distance
farther  to  the  west,  on  the  north  bank  of  Cany  fork,  about  1  mile  abo\  e
Moses  creek  and  perhaps  In  miles  above  Webster,  in  the  same  county,
is  the  Jutaculla  rock,  a  large  soapstone  slab  covered  with  rude  carvings,
which,  according  to  the  same  tradition,  are  scratches  made  by  the  giant
in  jumping  from  his  farm  on  the  mountain  to  the  creek  below.
Jutaculla  rock:  See  Jutaculla  old  fields.
Kax-Detsi'iunti:  "  Where  the  bones  are."  a  ravine  on  the  north  side
of  Cheowa  river,  just  above  the  mouth  of  East  Buffalo  creek,  in
Graham  county.      In  the  old  time  two  Cherokee  were  killed  here  by


408  MYTHS    OF   THE    CHEROKEE  [ETH.Aira.19
the  enemy,  and  their  fate  was  unknown  until,  long  afterward,  their
friends  found  their  hones  scattered  about  in  the  ravine.
N  wiaiiai.a:  A  river  and  ridge  of  very  steep  mountains  in  Macon
county,  the  name  being  a  corruption  of  Nun'daye'  li.  applied  to  a  for- mer settlement  about  the  mouth  of  Briertown  creek,  the  townhouse
heing  on  the  west  side  of  the  river,  about  the  present  Jarretts.  The
tvord  means  ■■middle  sun."  i.  e..  ■•midday  sun,"  from  niinda' ',  "sun,"'
and  m/,  ''U,  "  middle."  and  refers  to  the  fact  that  in  places  along  the
stream  the  high  cliffs  shut  out  the  direct  light  of  the  sun  until  nearly
noon.  From  a  false  idea  that  it  is  derived  from  rnn'inti,  "milk,"  it
has  been  fancifully  rendered.  "Center  of  a  woman's  breast,"  ''Maiden's
bosom,"  etc.  The  valley  was  the  legendary  haunt  of  the  Uw'tsun'ta
(see  number  45).  As  illustrating  the  steepness  of  the  cliffs  along  the
stream  it  was  said  of  a  noted  hunter,  Tsasta'wL  who  lived  in  the  old
town,  that  he  used  to  stand  on  the  top  of  the  bluff  overlooking  the
settlement  and  throw  down  upon  the  roof  of  his  house  the  liver  of
the  freshly  killed  deer,  so  that  his  wife  would  have  it  cooked  and
waiting  for  him  by  the  time  he  got  down  the  mountain.
Nugatsa'ni:  A  ridge  below  Yellow  Hill  (Cherokee),  on  Oconaluftee
river,  in  Swain  county,  said  to  be  a  resort  of  the  Niiime'hi  fairies.
The  word  is  an  archaic  form  denoting  a  high  ridge  with  a  long,  grad-
ual slope.
Qualla:  A  post-office  and  former  trading  station  in  Jackson  county.
on  the  border  of  the  present  East  Cherokee  reservation,  hence  some-
times called  the  Qualla  reservation.  The  Cherokee  form  is  Kwall,  or
Kwalunyi  in  the  locative.  According  to  Captain  Terrell,  the  former
trader  at  that  place,  it  was  named  from  Kwali,  i.  e.,  Polly,  an  old
Indian  woman  who  lived  there  some  sixty  years  ago.
Saligu'gi:  "Turtle  place."  a  deep  hole  in  Oconaluftee  river,  about half  a  mile  below  Adams  creek,  near  Whittier,  in  Swain  county,  said
to  be  the  resort  of  a  monster  turtle.
Skwax'-digu'gun'yi:  For  Askwan'-digugun'yi.  "Where  the  Span-
iard is  in  the  water,"  on  Soco  creek,  just  above  the  entrance  of  Wright's
creek,  in  Jackson  county.  According  to  tradition  a  party  of  Span-
iards advancing  into  the  mountains  was  attacked  here  by  the  Chero-
kee, who  threw  one  of  them  (dead;)  into  the  stream.
Soco  gap:  Ahalu'na,  A'halunun'yi,  or  Uni'halu'na,  "Ambush,"  or
"Where  they  ambushed";  at  the  head  of  Soco  creek,  on  the  line
between  Swain  and  Haywood  counties.  The  trail  from  Pigeon  river
ciosses  tliis  gap,  and  in  the  old  times  the  Cherokee  were  accustomed
to  keep  a  lookout  here  for  the  approach  of  enemies  from  the  north.
On  the  occasion  which  gave  it  the  name,  they  ambushed  here,  just
below  the  gap,  on  the  Haywood  side,  a  large  party  of  invading  Sha-
wano, and  killed  all  but  one,  whose  ears  they  cut  off.  after  which.


ho     i.  LOCAL    LEGENDS    OF    NORTH    CAROLINA  40''
according  to  a  common  custom,  they  released  him  to  carry  the  news
hack  to  his  people.
Standing  Indian:  A  high  bald  peak  al  the  extreme  head  of  Nanta-
hala  river,  in  Macon  county.  The  name  is  a  tendering  of  the  Chero-
kee name,  Yun'wi-tsulenun'yi,  "Where  the  man  stood"  (originally
Yu'nwi-dlkatagun'j  i.  "  Where  the  man  -lands  "),  given  to  it  on  accouni
of  a  peculiarly  shaped  rock  formerly  jutting  out  from  the  bald  sum-
mit, but  now  broken  off.  A-  the  old  memory  faded,  a  tradition  grew
up  of  a  mysterious  being  once  seen  standing  upon  the  mountain  top.
Stekoa:  A  spot  on  Tuckasegee  river,  just  above  Whittier,  in  Swain
county,  better  known  as  the  Thomas  farm,  from  its  being  the  former
residence  of  Colonel  W.  II.  Thomas,  for  a  lone-  time  the  agent  of  the
East  Cherokee.  Tin'  correct  form  is  Stika'yi,  the  name  of  an  ancient
settlement  at  the  place,  as  also  of  another  on  a  creek  of  the  same  name
in  Rabun  county,  Georgia.  The  word  has  been  incorrectly  rendered
"little  grease,"  from  usdi'ga  or  usdi',  •"little."  and  ka'i,  "grease"  or
"oil,"  lint  the  true  meaning  is  lost.
Swannanoa:  A  river  joining  the  French  Broad  at  Asheville,  and  the
gap  in  the  Blue  ridge  at  its  head.  A  magazine  writer  has  translated
this  name  ••the  beautiful."  The  word,  however,  is  a  corruption  of
Suwa'li-nunna'(dii).  "Suwali  trail."  the  Cherokee  name,  not  of  the
stream,  hut  of  the  trail  crossing  the  gap  toward  the  country  of  the
Ani'-Suwa'li  or  Cheraw  (see  number  L04,  "The  Eastern  Tribes"). Swim  bald  ok  Wolf  Creek  bald.     See  Cheowa  Maximum.
Tsi'skwunsdi'-adsisti'yi:  "Where  they  killed  Little-bird,"  a  place
near  the  head  of  West  Buffalo  creek,  southwest  of  Robbinsville,  in
Graham  county.  A  trail  crosses  the  ridge  near  this  place,  which  takes
its  name  from  a  man  who  was  killed  here  by  a  hostile  war  party  in  the
old  fighting  days.
Tsu'dinunti'yi:  "Throwing  down  place,"  the  site  of  a  former  set
tlement  in  a  bend  on  the  wesl  side  of  Xantahala  river,  just  within  the
limits  of  Macon  county.  So  called  from  a  tradition  that  a  Cherokee
pursued  by  the  enemy  threw  away  his  equipment  there.
TsuKii.rxxt  x'vi:  "Where  he  alighted,"  two  small  bald  spots  on  the side  of  the  mountain  at  the  head  of  Little  Snowbird  creek,  southwest
of  Robbinsville,  in  Graham  county.  A  mysterious  being,  having  the
form  of  a  giant,  with  head  blazing  like  the  sun.  was  once  seen  to  fly
through  the  air.  alight  at  this  place,  and  stand  for  some  time  looking
out  over  the  landscape.  It  then  flew  away,  and  when  the  people  came
afterward  to  look,  they  found  the  herbage  burned  from  the  ground
where  it  had  stood.  They  do  not  know  who  it  was,  but  some  think  it
may  have  been  the  Sun.
Tsula'sinGn'yi:  "  Where  the  footprint  is,"  on  Tuckasegee  river,
about  a  mile  above  Deep  creek,  in  Swain  county.     From  a  rock  now


410  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [ethannW
blasted  out  to  make  way  for  the  railroad,  on  which  were  impressions
said  tn  have  been  the  footprints  of  the  giant  Tsulkalu'  (see  story)  and a  deer.
Tsinoa  mi.ti'yi:  "  Where  they  demanded  the  debt  from  him,"  a  tine
camping  ground,  on  the  north  side  of  Little  Santeetla  creek,  about  lialf-
way  up,  west  from  Robbinsville,  Graham  county.  Here  a  hunter  once
killed  a  deer,  which  the  others  of  the  party  demanded  in  payment  of  a
debt  due  them.     TheCherokee  commonly  give  the  creek  thesame  name.
Tsita'oa  I'wf.yun'i:  "Chicken  creek.'* 'an  extreme  eastern  head-
stream  of  Nantahala  river,  entering  about  4  miles  above  Clear  branch,
in  Macon  county.  So  called  from  a  story  that  some  hunters  camping
there  for  the  night  once  heard  a  noise  as  of  chickens  constantly  crow-
ing- upon  a  high  rock  farther  up  the  stream.
Tsuta'tsinasun'yi:  ••Where  it  eddies.'"  a  deep  hole  at  the  mouth  of Cockram  creek  of  Cheowa  river,  in  Graham  county,  where  is  an  eddy
said  to  l»e  caused  by  a  buffalo  which  lives  under  the  water  at  this  spot,
and  which  anciently  lived  at  the  mouth  of  West  Buffalo  creek,  farther
up  the  river.
Tusquittee  baud:  A  bald  mountain  at  the  head  of  Tusquittee  creek,
eastward  from  Hayesville,  in  Clay  county.  The  Cherokee  name  is
Tsinva'-uniyetsufi'vi,  •"Where  the  water-dogs  laughed,"  the  water-dog
of  the  southern  Alleghenies,  sometimes  also  called  mud-puppy  or  hell-
bender, being  a  large  amphibious  lizard  or  salamander  of  the  genus
Menopoma,  frequenting  muddy  waters.  According  to  the  story,  a
hunter  once  crossing  over  the  mountain  in  a  very  dry  season,  heard
voices,  and  creeping  silently  toward  the  place  from  which  the  sound
proceeded,  peeped  over  a  rock  and  saw  two  water-dogs  walking
together  on  their  hind  legs  along  the  trail  and  talking  as  they  went.
Their  pond  had  dried  up  and  they  were  on  the  way  over  to  Nantahala
river.  As  he  listened  one  said  to  the  other.  "  Where's  the  water?  I'm
so  thirsty  that  my  apron  (gills)  hangs  down."  and  then  both  water-dogs
laughed.
[Jkte'na-tsuganun'tatsun'yi:  '■Where  the  uktenagot  fastened,"  a
spot  on  Tuckasegee  river,  about  2  miles  above  Deep  creek,  near  Bryson
City,  in  Swain  county.  There  is  a  tradition  that  an  uktena,  trying  to
make  his  way  upstream,  became  fastened  here,  and  in  his  struggles
pried  up  some  large  rocks  now  lying  in  the  bed  of  the  river,  and  left
deep  scratches  upon  other  rocks  along  the  bank.
Ukte'na-TJTANSi'nastun'yi:  "  Where  the  uktena  crawled,"  a  large
rock  on  the  Hyatt  farm,  on  the  north  bank  of  Tuckasegee  river,  about
four  miles  above  Bryson  City,  in  Swain  county.  In  the  rock  bed  of  the
stream  and  along  the  rocks  on  the  side  are  wavy  depressions  said  to
have  been  made  by  an  uktena  in  going  up  the  river.
Untlasgasti'yi":  "  Where  they  scratched."  at  the  head  of  Hyatt
creek,  of  Valley  river,  in  Cherokee   county.     According  to   hunting


v       '  Local    LEGENDS    <>F    NORTH    ciK  'i.INA  411
tradition,  every  animal  on  arriving  at  tins  spot  was  accustomed  to
scratch  the  ground  like  a  turkey.
Vengeance  creek:  A  south  tributary  of  Valley  river,  in  Cherokee
countj .  So  called  by  the  lir-t  settlers  from  an  old  Indian  woman  who
lived  there  and  whom  they  nicknamed  "  Vengeance,"  on  account  <>!'
hercross  looks.  The  Cherokee  call  the  district  G&nsa"ti'yi,  "Robbing
place,"  from  their  having  fobbed  a  trader  there  in  the  Revolution.
W  iya  gap:  A  gap  in  the  Nantahala  mountains,  in  Macon  county,
where  the  trail  crosses  from  Laurel  creek  of  Nantahala  river  t<>  Car-
toogaja  creek  of  the  Little  Tennessee.  The  Cherokee  call  it  A  tahi'ta,
"Shouting  place."  For  the  tradition  see  number  13.  It  was  the
scene  of  a  stubborn  encounter  in  the  Revolution  (see  page  -J-'.n.  The
name  Wa.va  appears  to  be  from  the  Cherokee  wd''ya,  "wolf." Webster:  The  county  seat  of  Jackson  county,  on  Tuckasegee  river.
Known  to  the  Cherokee  as  Unadanti'yi,  "Where  they  conjured."
The  name  properly  belongs  to  a  gap  3  miles  east  of  Webster,  on  the
trail  going  up  Scotts  creek.  According  to  tradition,  a  war  party  of
Shawano,  coming  from  the  direction  of  Pigeon  river,  halted  here  to
"make  medicine"*  against  the  Cherokee,  but  while  thus  engaged  were surprised  by  the  latter,  who  came  up  from  behind  and  killed  several,
including  the  conjurer.
Ya'ni -pixehi  n'yi:  "Where  the  bears  live.**  on  Oconaluftee  river,
about  a  mile  above  its  junction  with  Tuckasegee.  in  Swain  county.
A  family  of  "water  hears""  is  said  to  live  at  the  bottom  of  the  river in  a  deep  hole  at  this  point.
Ya'nu-tj'natawasti'yi:  "Where  the  bears  wash,"  a  small  pond  of
very  cold,  purple  water,  which  has  no  outlet  and  is  now  nearly  dried
up,  in  a  gap  of  the  Great  Smoky  mountains,  at  the  extreme  head  of
Raven  fork  of  Oconaluftee.  in  Swain  county.  It  was  said  to  be  a
favorite  bear  wallow,  and  according  to  some  accounts  its  waters  had
the  same  virtues  ascribed  to  those  of  Atagfi'hi  (see  number  69).
Yawa'i:  "  Yawa  place.*"  a  spot  on  the  south  side  of  Yellow  creek  of Cheowa  river,  in  Graham  county,  about  a  mile  above  the  trail  cross
ing  near  the  mouth  of  the  creek.  The  legend  is  that  a  mysterious
personage,  apparently  a  human  being,  formerly  haunted  a  round  knob
near  there,  and  was  sometimes  seen  walking  about  the  top  of  the
knoli  and  crying,  Yiin-ii' !  Yawd'/  while  the  sound  of  invisible  guns
came  from  the  hill,  so  that  the  people  were  afraid  to  o-<>  near  it.
123.  LOCAL  LEGENDS  OF  SOUTH  CAROLINA
As  the  Cherokee  withdrew  from  all  of  South  ( larolina  except  a  small
strip  in  the  extreme  wot  as  early  as  1777.  the  memory  of  the  old
legends  localized  within  the  state  has  completely  faded  from  the  tribe.
There  remain,  however,  some  local  names  upon  which  the  whites  who


412  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
succeeded  to  the  inheritance  have  built  traditions  of  more  or  less
doubtful  authenticity.
In  Pickens  and  Anderson  counties,  in  the  northwest  corner  of  the
state,  is  a  series  of  creeks  joining  Keowee  river  and  named,  respectively
in  order,  from  above  downward.  Mile,  Six-mile,  Twelve-mile,  Eighteen-
mile,  Twenty -three-mile,  and  Twenty-six-mile.  According  to  the  local
stoiy,  they  were  thus  christened  by  a  young  woman,  in  one  of  the
early  Indian  wars,  as  she  crossed  each  ford  on  a  rapid  horseback
tiight  to  the  lower  settlements  to  secure  help  for  the  beleaguered  gar-
rison of  Fort  Prince  George.  The  names  really  date  back  almost  to
the  first  establishment  of  the  colony,  and  were  intended  to  indicate
roughly  the  distances  along  the  old  trading  path  from  Fort  Ninety-six,
on  Henlevs  creek  of  Saluda  river,  to  Keowee,  at  that  time  the  frontier
town  of  the  Cherokee  Nation,  the  two  points  being  considered  96  miles
apart  as  the  trail  ran.  Fort  Prince  George  was  on  the  east  bank  of
Keowee  river,  near  the  entrance  of  Crow  creek,  and  directly  opposite
the  Indian  town.
Coxxeross:  The  name  of  a  creek  which  enters  Keowee  (or  Seneca)
river  from  the  west,  in  Anderson  county;  it  is  a  corruption  of  the
Lower  Cherokee  dialectic  form.  Kawan'-ura'siinyi  or  Kawan'-tsura'-
sufiyi,  •""Where  the  duck  fell  off."  According  to  the  still  surviving Cherokee  tradition,  a  duck  once  had  her  nest  upon  a  cliff  overlooking
the  stream  in  a  cave  with  the  mouth  so  placed  that  in  leaving  the  nest
she  appeared  to  fall  from  the  cliff  into  the  water.  There  was  proba-
bly an  Indian  settlement  of  the  same  name.
Toxaway:  The  name  of  a  creek  and  former  Cherokee  settlement  at
the  extreme  head  of  Keowee  river;  it  has  been  incorrectly  rendered
•"Place  of  shedding  tears,"  from  dakxtlwu'lhu,  "he  is  shedding  tears."
The  correct  Cherokee  form  of  the  name  is  Duksa'i  or  Dukw'sa'i,  a
word  which  can  not  be  analyzed  and  of  which  the  meaning  is  now  lost.
124.  LOCAL  LEGENDS  OF  TENNESSEE
For  the  more  important  legends  localized  in  Tennessee  see  the  stories
The  Hunter  in  the  Dakwa',  The  Nest  of  the  Tla'nuwa,  The  Removed
Townhouses,  The  Haunted  Whirlpool,  Untsaiyi',  and  U'tliiii'ta. Buffalo  Track  rock:  This  rock,  of  which  the  Indian  name  is  now
lost,  is  indefinitely  mentioned  as  located  southwest  from  Cumberland
gap,  on  the  northern  border  of  the  state.  According  to  Watford,  it
was  well  known  some  eighty  years  ago  to  the  old  Cherokee  hunters,
who  described  it  as  covered  with  deep  impressions  made  by  buffalo
running  along  the  rock  and  then  butting  their  heads,  as  though  in
mad  fury,  against  a  rock  wall,  leaving  the  prints  of  their  heads  and
horns  in  the  stone.
Chattaxooga:  This  city,  upon  Tennessee  river,  near  the  entrance


LOCAL    LEGENDS    OF    TENNESSEE  413
of  the  creek  of  the  same  name  in  Hamilton  county,  was  incorporated
in  L848.  So  far  as  is  known  there  was  no  ( !herokee  settlement  at  the
place,  although  some  prominent  men  of  the  tribe  lived  in  the  vicinity.
The  name  originally  belonged  to  some  location  upon  the  creek.  The
Cherokee  pronounce  it  Tsatanu'gi,  l>ut  say  that  it  is  not  a  Cherokee
word  and  has  no  meaning  in  their  language.  The  best  informants
express  the  opinion  that  it  was  from  the  Chickasaw  (Choctaw)  lan-
guage, which  seems  possible,  as  the  Chickasaw  country  anciently
extended  a  considerable  distance  up  the  Tennessee,  the  nearest  settle-
ment being  within  80  miles  of  the  present  city.  The  Cherokee  some-
time- call  the  city  Atla'nuwa'.  "Tla'nuwa  (Hawk)  hole.'"  that  being their  old  name  for  a  bluff  on  the  south  side  of  the  river  at  the  foot  of
the  present  Market  street.  From  this  circumstance  probably  origin-
ated the  statement  by  a  magazine  writer  that  the  name  Chatta   ga
signifies  "The  crow's  nest." Ciiicka.m.u  i.a:  The  name  of  two  creeks  in  Hamilton  county,  enter-
ing Tennessee  river  from  opposite  sides  a  few  miles  above  Chatta-
nooga. A  creek  of  the  same  name  is  one  of  the  head-streams  of  Chat-
tahoochee river,  in  White  county.  <  reorgia.  The  ( !herokee  pronounce
it  Tsikama'gi,  applying  the  name  in  Tennessee  to  the  territory  about
the  mouth  of  the  southern,  or  principal,  stream,  where  they  formerly
had  a  town,  from  which  they  removed  in  1782.  They  state,  however,
that  it  is  not  a  Cherokee  word  and  has  no  meaning  in  their  language.
Filson.  in  17(.*3,  erroneously  states  that  it  is  from  the  Cherokee  language
and  signifies  "Boiling  pot."  referring  to  a  dangerous  whirlpool  in
the  river  near  by,  and  later  writers  have  improved  upon  this  by  trans-
lating it  to  mean  "Whirlpool."  The  error  arises  from  confound-
ing this  place  with  The  Suck,  a  whirlpool  in  Tennessee  river  15  miles
farther  down  and  known  to  the  Cherokee  as  Untiguhi',  "Pot  in  the
water"  (see  number  63,  "  Untsaiyi',  the  Gambler").  On  account  of  the hard  fighting  in  the  neighborhood  during  the  Civil  war.  the  stream  was
sometimes  called,  poetically.  "The  River  of  Death."  the  term  being
frequently  given  as  a  translation  of  the  Indian  word.  It  has  been  sug-
gested that  the  name  is  derived  from  an  Algonquian word  referring  to
a  fishing  or  fish-spearing  place,  in  which  case  it  may  have  originated
with  the  Shawano,  who  formerly  occupied  middle  Tennessee,  and  some
of  whom  at  a  later  period  resided  jointly  with  the  Cherokee  in  the
settlement-  along  this  part  of  the  river.  If  not  Shawano  it  is  prob-
ably from  the  Creek  or  Chickasaw.
Concerning  "Chickamauga  gulch,"  a  canyon  on  the  northern  stream
of  that  name,  a  newspaper  writer  gives  the  following  so-called  legend,
which  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  is  not  genuine:
The  Cherokees  were  a  tribe  singularly  rich  in  tradition,  ami  of  course  >■>  wild,
gloomy,  and  remarkable  a  spot  was  not  without  its  legend.  The  descendants  ol  the
expatriated  semi-barbarians  believe  t..  this  day  that  in  ages  gone  a  great  serpent  made


414  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
its  den  in  the  gulch,  and  that  yearly  he  demanded  of  the  red  men  ten  of  their  moat
beautiful  maidens  as  a  sacrificial  offering.  Fearful  of  extermination,  the  demand
was  always  complied  with  by  the  tribe,  amid  weeping  and  wailing  by  the  women.
On  the  day  before  the  tribute  was  due  the  serpent  announced  its  presence  by  a
demoniacal  hiss,  and  the  next  morning  the  fair  ones  who  hail  been  chosen  to  save  the
tribe  were  taken  to  the  summit  of  a  cliff  and  left  to  be  swallowed  by  the  scaly
Moloch.
Chixhowee:  A  mountain  and  station  on  the  north  side  of  Little
Tennessee  river,  in  Blount  county.  The  correct  Cherokee  form  is
Tsulunwe'i,  applied  to  the  lower  part  of  Abrams  creek,  which  enters
the  river  from  the  north  just  above.  The  meaning  of  the  word  is
lost,  although  it  may  possibly  have  a  connection  with  tstild,  "  king-
fisher."  It  has  been  incorrectly  rendered  "  fire  deer,"  an  interpretation founded  on  the  false  assumption  that  the  name  is  compounded  from
atsi'la,  "lire,"  and  «W,  '"deer,"  whence  Chil-howee.  For  legends
localized  in  this  vicinity,  see  the  stories  noted  above.  Chilhowee
occurs  also  as  the  name  of  a  stream  in  the  mountains  of  southwestern
Virginia.
Lenoir:  On  the  north  bank  of  the  main  Tennessee,  at  the  junction
of  the  Little  Tennessee,  in  Loudon  county.  The  Cherokee  name  is
Wa'ginsi',  of  which  the  meaning  is  lost,  and  was  applied  originally  to
an  eddy  in  the  stream,  where,  it  was  said,  there  dwelt  a  large  serpent,
to  see  which  was  an  omen  of  evil.  On  one  occasion  a  man  crossing
the  river  at  this  point  saw  the  snake  in  the  water  and  soon  afterward
lost  one  of  his  children.
Morganton:  On  a  rocky  hill  on  the  old  Indian  trail  on  the  west  side
of  Little  Tennessee  river,  above  and  nearly  opposite  Morganton,  in
Loudon  county,  are,  or  were  a  few  years  ago,  four  trees  blazed  in  a
peculiar  manner,  concerning  which  the  Indians  had  several  unsatisfac-
tory stories,  the  most  common  opinion  being  that  the  marks  were  very
old  and  had  been  made  by  Indians  to  indicate  the  position  of  hidden
mines.
Nashville:  The  state  capital,  in  Davidson  county.  The  Cherokee
name  is  Dagu'nawel&'hi,  "Mussel-liver  place,"  which  would  seem  to
have  originated  in  some  now  forgotten  legend.
Nickajack:  A  creek  entering  Tennessee  river  from  the  south  about
15  miles  below  Chattanooga.  Near  its  mouth  is  a  noted  cave  of  the
same  name.  The  Cherokee  form  is  Nikutse'gi,  the  name  of  a  former settlement  of  that  tribe  at  the  mouth  of  the  creek:  but  the  word  has
no  meaning  in  that  language,  and  is  probably  of  foreign,  perhaps
Chickasaw,  origin.  The  derivation  from  a  certain  "  Nigger  Jack,"
said  to  have  made  the  cave  his  headquarters  is  purely  fanciful.
Savannah:  A  farm  on  the  north  bank  of  Hiwassee  river  at  a  ford
of  the  same  name,  about  5  miles  above  Conasauga  creek  and  Columbus,
in  Polk  county.  Here  are  extensive  remains  of  an  ancient  settlement,
including  mounds,  cemetery,  and  also,  some  seventy  years  ago,  a  small


mooney]  GEORGIA    LEGENDS  415
square  inclosure  or  "fort"  of  undressed  stone.  According  to  a  tradi-
tion given  to  Wafford,  the  Cherokee  once  prepared  an  ambush  here
for  a  hostile  war  party  which  they  were  expecting  to  come  up  the
river,  hut  were  themselves  defeated  by  the  enemy,  who  made  a  detoui
around  the  Black  mountain  and  came  in  upon  their  rear.
Tennessee:  The  Cherokee  form  is  Tanasi',  and  was  applied  to  sev
era!  localities  within  the  old  territory  of  the  tribe.  The  mosl  impor
tant  town  of  this  name  was  on  the  south  bank  of  Little  Tennessee  river,
halfway  between  Citico  and  Toco  creeks,  in  .Monroe  county,  Tennes-
see. Another  was  on  the  south  side  of  Hiwassee,  just  above  the  junction
of  Ocoee,  in  Polk  county,  Tennessee.  A  third  district  of  the  same
name  was  on  Tennessee  creek,  the  extreme  easterly  head  of  Tucka-
segee  river,  in  Jackson  county.  North  Carolina.  The  meaning  of  the
name  is  lost.  It  was  not  the  Indian  name  of  the  river,  and  does  not
mean  "Big  spoon."  as  lias  been  incorrectly  asserted.
125.  LOCAL  LEGENDS  OF  GEORGIA
For  more  important  legends  localized  in  Georgia  see  the  stories
Yahula,  The  Nunnehi.  The  Ustu'tli,  Agan-uni'tsi's  Search  for  the
Cktena,  and  The  Man  who  Married  the  Thunder's  Sister.  White's Historical  Collections  of  Georgia  is  responsible  for  a  number  of
pseudo-myths.
Chopped  oak:  A  noted  tree,  scarred  with  hundreds  of  hatchet  marks,
formerly  in  Habersham  county.  6  miles  east  of  Clarkesville,  on  the
summit  of  Chattahoochee  ridge,  and  on  the  north  side  of  the  road  from
Clarkesville  to  Toccoa  creek.  The  Cherokee  name  is  Digalu'yatuH'yi,
••  Where  it  is  gashed  with  hatchets."  It  was  a  favorite  assembly  place
for  the  Indians,  as  well  as  for  the  early  settler-,  according  to  whom
the  gashes  were  tally  marks  by  means  of  which  the  Indians  kept  the
record  of  scalps  taken  in  their  forays.  The  tradition  is  thus  given  by
"White  (Historical  Collections  of  Georgia,  ]>.  489,  L855)  on  some  earlier authority:
Among  the  curiosities  of  this  country  was  the  Chopped  Oak,  a  tree  famous  in
Indian  history  and  in  the  traditions  of  the  early  settlers.  This  tree  stood  about  6
miles  southeast  of  Clarke-vibe,  and  was  noted  as  being  the  Law  Ground,  or  place  of
holding  company  musters  and  magistrates'  courts.  According  to  tradition,  the
Chopped  Oak  was  a  celebrated  rendezvous  of  the  Indians  in  their  predatory  excur-
sions, it  being  at  a  point  where  a  number  of  trails  met.  Here  their  plans  of  war-
fare were  laid;  here  the  several  parties  separated;  and  here,  on  their  return,  they
awaited  each  other;  and  then,  in  their  brief  language,  the  result  of  their  enterprise
»;t-  stated,  and  for  every  scalp  taken  a  gasli  cut  in  the  tree.  If  tradition  tells  the
truth,  and  every  Bear  en  the  blasted  oat  counts  for  a  scalp,  the  success  of  their  scout-
ing parties  must  have  been  great.  This  tree  was  alive  a  few  years  Bince  when  a  young
n  Kin.  possessing  all  the  prejudices  of  his  countrymen,  ami  caring  less  for  the  traditions
of  the  Indian-  than  his  ..«  11  revenge,  killed  the  tree  by  girdling  it.  that  it  might  be  no
longer  a  living  monument  of  the  cruelties  of  the  savages      The  stump  is  -till  standing.


416  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [ETH.i.vN.19
Dead  Man's  gap:  One  mile  below  Tallulah  falls,  on  the  west  side  of
the  railroad,  in  Habersham  county.  So  called  from  a  former  reputed
Indian  grave,  now  almost  obliterated.  According  to  the  story,  it  was
the  grave  of  an  Indian  who  was  killed  here  while  eloping  with  a  white
woman,  whom  he  had  stolen  from  her  husband.
Frogtown:  A  creek  at  the  head  of  Chestatee  river,  north  of  Dah-
lonega,  in  Lumpkin  county.  The  Cherokee  name  is  Walasi'yi,  "Frog
place."  The  name  was  originally  applied  to  a  mountain  to  the  north-
east {Hock  mountain  '?).  from  a  tradition  that  a  hunter  had  once  seen
there  a  frog  as  large  as  a  house.  The  Indian  settlement  along  the
creek  bore  the  same  name.
I  Iiwassek:  A  river  having  its  source  in  Towns  county,  of  northern
Georgia,  and  flowing  northwestward  to  join  the  Tennessee.  The  cor-
rect Cherokee  form,  applied  to  two  former  settlements  on  the  stream,  is
Ayuhwa'sl  (meaning  "A  savanna").  Although  there  is  no  especial
Cherokee  story  connected  with  the  name.  White  (Historical  Collections
of  Georgia,  p.  660)  makes  it  the  subject  of  a  long  pseudo-myth,  in
which  Hiwassee.  rendered  ''The  Pretty  Fawn,"  is  the  beautiful
daughter  of  a  Catawba  chief,  and  is  wooed,  and  at  last  won,  by  a
young  Cherokee  warrior  named  Notley,  ''The  Daring  Horseman,"
who  finally  becomes  the  head  chief  of  the  Cherokee  and  succeeds  in
making  perpetual  peace  between  the  two  tribes.  The  story  sounds
very  pretty,  but  is  a  pure  invention.
Nacoochee:  A  village  on  the  site  of  a  former  Cherokee  settlement,
in  a  beautiful  and  fertile  valley  of  the  same  name  at  the  head  of  Chat-
tahoochee river,  in  White  county.  The  Cherokee  form  is  Nagu  tsi',
but  the  word  has  no  meaning  in  that  language  and  seems  to  be  of  for-
eign, perhaps  Creek,  origin.  About  2  miles  above  the  village,  on  the
east  bank  of  the  river,  is  a  large  mound.  White  (Historical  Collec-
tions of  Georgia,  p.  486)  quotes  a  fictitious  legend,  according  to  which
Nacoochee,  "The  Evening  Star,"  was  a  beautiful  Indian  princess,  who
unfortunately  fell  in  love  with  a  chieftain  of  a  hostile  tribe  and  was
killed,  together  with  her  lover,  while  fleeing  from  the  vengeance  of
an  angry  father.  The  two  were  buried  in  the  same  grave  and  the
mound  was  raised  over  the  spot.  The  only  grain  of  truth  in  the  story
is  that  the  name  has  a  slight  resemblance  to  ?uikwlsi',  the  Cherokee
word  for  "star."
Nottely:  A  river  rising  in  Union  county  and  flowing  northwest-
ward into  Hiwassee.  The  Cherokee  form  is  Na'dii'li',  applied  to  a former  settlement  on  the  west  side  of  the  river,  in  Cherokee  county,
North  Cai'olina,  about  a  mile  from  the  Georgia  line.  Although  sug-
gestive of  mi' full,  "  spicewood,"  it  is  a  different  word  and  has  no  mean- ing in  the  Cherokee  language,  being  apparently  of  foreign,  perhaps
Creek,  origin.  For  a  pseudo-myth  connected  with  the  name,  see  the
preceding  note  on  Hiwassee.


LOCAL    LEGENDS    OF    GEORGIA  417
T.w.kim.  Rock:  A  creek  in  upper  Georgia  flowing  northward  to
join  Coosawatee  river.  The  Indian  settlements  upon  it  were  consid-
ered as  belonging  to  Sanderstown,  on  the  lower  part  of  the  creek,  the
townhouse  being  located  about  a  mile  above  the  present  Talking  Rock
station  on  the  west  side  of  the  railroad.  The  name  is  a  translation  of
the  Cherokee  Nunyu'-gunwani'skl,  ""  Rock  that  talks,"  and  refers, according  to  one  informant,  to  an  echo  rock  somewhere  upon  the  stream
below  the  present  railroad  station.  An  old-time  trader  among  the
Cherokee  in  (  reorgia  says  that  the  name  was  applied  to  a  roek  at  which
the  Indians  formerly  held  their  councils,  hut  the  etymology  of  the
word  is  against  this  derivation.
Tallulah:  A  river  in  Rabun  county,  northeastern  Georgia,  which
(low-  into  the  Tugaloo,  and  has  a  beautiful  fall  about  2  miles  above  its
mouth.  The  Cherokee  form  is  TaJulu'  (TariiiT  in  the  lower  Cherokee
dialect),  the  name  of  an  ancient  settlement  some  distance  above  the  falls,
as  also  of  a  creek  and  district  at  the  head  of  Cheowa  river,  in  Graham
county.  North  Carolina.  The  name  can  not  he  translated.  A  maga-
zine writer  has  rendered  it  "The  Terrible,"  for  which  there  is  no
authority.  Schoolcraft,  on  the  authority  of  a  Cherokee  lady,  renders
it  "There  lies  your  child,"  derived  from  a  story  of  a  child  having
been  carried  over  the  falls.  The  name,  however,  was  not  applied  to
the  falls,  hnt  to  a  district  on  the  stream  above,  as  well  as  to  another
in  North  Carolina.  The  error  arises  from  the  fact  that  a  word  of
somewhat  similar  sound  denotes  "having  children"  or  "  being  preg-
nant," used  in  speaking  of  a  woman.  One  informant  derives  it  from
fnliiln' '.  the  cry  of  a  certain  species  of  frog  known  as  dulusl,  which  is found  in  that  neighborhood,  hut  not  upon  the  reservation,  and  which
was  formerly  eaten  as  food.  A  possible  derivation  is  from  a'tdhtlti',
"unfinished,  premature,  unsuccessful."  The  tall  was  called  Ugun'yl, a  name  of  which  the  meaning  is  lost,  and  which  was  applied  also  to  a
locality  on  Little  Tennessee  river  near  Franklin,  North  Carolina.
For  a  myth  localized  at  Tallulah  falls,  see  number  84,  "The  Man  who
Married  the  Thunder's  Sister."
In  this  connection  Lanman  gives  the,  following  story,  which,  not-
withstanding its  white  man's  dress,  appears  to  he  based  upon  a  gen-
uine Cherokee  tradition  of  the  Nufine'hi:
During  my  stay  at  the  Kails  of  Tallulah  I  made  every  effort  to  obtain  an  Indian
legend  or  two  connected  with  them,  and  it  was  my  good  fortune  to  hear  one  which
has  never  yet  been  printed.  It  was  originally  obtained  by  the  white  man  who  first
discovered  tin-  falls  from  the  Cherokees,  who  lived  in  the  region  at  the  time.  It  is
in  substance  as  follows:  Many  generations  a^">  it  si.  happened  that  several  famous
hunters,  who   hail  wandered  from  the  West  toward  what  is  now  the  Savannah  river,
in  search  of  game,  never  returned  to  their  camping  grounds.  In  process  of  time  the
Quriositj  as  well  as  the  fears  of  the  nation  were  excited,  and  an  effort  was  made  to
ascertain  the  cause  of  their  singular  disappearance,  whereupon  a  party  of  medicine
men  were  deputed  t..  make  a  pilgrimage  toward  the  great  river.  They  were  absent
a  whole  m    and,  on  returning  t..  their  friends,  they  reported  that  they  had  dis-
l'.t    KTII— 01   27


418  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.  ass.  19
covered  a  dreadful  fissure  in  an  unknown  part  of  the  country,  through  which  a
mountain  torrent  took  its  way  with  a  deafening  noise.  They  said  that  it  was  an
exceedingly  wild  place,  and  that  its  inhabitants  were  a  species  of  little  men  and
women,  who  dwelt  in  the  crevices  of  the  rocks  and  in  grottoes  under  the  waterfalls.
They  had  attempted  by  every  artifice  in  their  power  to  hold  a  council  with  the  little
people,  but  all  in  vain;  and,  from  the  shrieks  they  frequently  uttered,  the  medicine
men  knew  that  they  were  the  enemies  of  the  Indian  race,  and,  therefore,  it  was  con-
cluded in  the  nation  at  large  that  the  long-lost  hunters  had  been  decoyed  to  their
death  in  the  dreadful  gorge,  which  they  called  Tallulah.  In  view  of  this  little  legend,
it  is  worthy  of  remark  that  the  Cherokee  nation,  previous  to  their  departure  for  the
distant  West,  always  avoided  the  Falls  of  Tallulah,  and  were  seldom  found  hunting
or  fishing  in  their  vicinity.1
Toccoa:  (1)  A  creek  flowing  into  Tugaloo  river,  in  Habersham
county,  with  ;i  fall  upon  its;  upper  course,  near  the  village  of  the  same
name.  (2)  A  river  in  upper  Georgia,  flowing  northwestward  into
Hiwassee.  The  correct  Cherokee  form  applied  to  the  former  settlement
on  both  streams  is  Tagwa'hi.  "Catawba  place,''  implying  the  former
presence  of  Indians  of  that  tribe.  The  lands  about  Toccoa  falls  were
sold  by  the  Cherokee  in  1TS3  and  were  owned  at  one  time  by  Watford's
grandfather.  According  to  Wafford,  there  was  a  tradition  that  when
the  whites  first  visited  the  place  they  saw,  as  they  thought,  an  Indian
woman  walking  beneath  the  surface  of  the  water  under  the  falls,  and
on  looking  again  a  moment  after  they  saw  her  sitting  upon  an  over-
hanging rock  200  feet  in  the  air,  with  her  feet  dangling  over.  Said
Watford,   "She  must  have  been  one  of  the  Nunne'hi."
Track  Rock  gap:  A  gap  about  5  miles  east  of  Blairsville.  in  Union
county,  on  the  ridge  separating  Brasstown  creek  from  the  waters  of
Nottely  river.  The  micaceous  soapstone  rocks  on  both  sides  of  the
trail  are  covered  with  petroglyphs,  from  which  the  gap  takes  its
name.  The  Cherokee  call  the  place  Datsu'nalasgun'yi,  "  Where  there  are
tracks,"  or  Degayeluii'ha,  "Printed  (Branded)  place."  The  carvings are  of  many  and  various  patterns,  some  of  them  resembling  human
or  animal  footprints,  while  others  are  squares,  crosses,  circles,  "bird
tracks,"  etc.,  disposed  without  any  apparent  order.  On  the  authority
of  a  Doctor  Stevenson,  writing  in  1834,  White  (Historical  Collections
of  Georgia,  p.  658, 1855),  and  after  him  Jones  (Antiquities  of  the  South-
ern Indians,  1873),  give  a  misleading  and  greatly  exaggerated  account
of  these  carvings,  without  having  taken  the  trouble  to  investigate  for
themselves,  although  the  spot  is  easily  accessible.  No  effort,  either
state  or  local,  is  made  to  preserve  the  pictographs  from  destruction,
and  many  of  the  finest  have  been  cut  out  from  the  rock  and  carried  ofl
by  vandals,  Stevenson  himself  being  among  the  number,  by  his  own
confession.  The  illustration  (plate  xx)  is  from  a  rough  sketch  made
by  the  author  in  1890.
The  Cherokee  have  various  theories  to  account  for  the  origin  of  the
carvings,  the  more  sensible    Indians   saying  that    they  were   made   by
!  the  Alleghany  Mountains,  pages  41-42.


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN   ETHNOLOGY NINETEENTH    ANNUAL   REPORT      PL.    XX
PETROGLYPHS    AT    TRACK-ROCK    GAP,    GEORGIA
From  sketches  by  the  author,  1889.     Portions  cut  out  bj  vandals  are  indicated  bj  lightei




LOCAL  LEGENDS  OF  GEORGIA  411)
hunters  for  their  own  amusement  while  resting  in  the  gap.  Another
tradition  is  thai  they  wore  made  while  the  surface  of  the  newly  cre-
ated earth  \\a^  Mill  soft  by  a  greal  army  tit'  birds  and  animals  fleeing
through  the  gap  to  escape  some  pursuing  danger  from  the  west — some
say  a  great  "drive  hunt"  of  the  Indians.  Haywood  confounds  them with  other  petroglyphs  in  North  Carolina  connected  with  the  story  of
the  giant  Tsui  kahV  (see  number  81).
The  following  florid  account  of  the  carvings  and  ostensible  Indian
tradition  of  their  origin  is  from  White,  on  the  authority  of  Stevenson:
The  numbei  visible  or  defined  is  L36,  some  of  them  quite  natural  and  perfect,  and
others  rattier  rode  imitations,  ami  most  of  them  from  the  effects  of  time  have  become
in. ire  nr  less  obliterated.  Tiny  comprise  human  feet  from  those  4  inches  in  length
to  those  of  great  warriors  which  measure  17J  inches  in  length  and  7f  in  breadth
across  the  toes.  What  is  a  hole  curious,  all  the  human  feet  are  natural  except  this,
which  has  6  toes,  proving  him  to  have  been  a  descendant  of  Titan.  There  are  *_'(>  of
these  impressions,  all  hare  except  one.  which  has  the  appearance  of  having  worn
moccasins.  A  fine  turned  hand,  rather  delicate,  occupied  a  place  near  the  great
warrior,  and  probably  the  impression  of  his  wife's  hand,  who  no  doubt  accompanied her  husband  in  all  his  excursions,  sharing  his  toils  and  soothing  his  cares  away.
Many  horse  tracks  are  to  be  seen.  One  seems  to  have  been  shod,  some  are  very
small,  and  one  measures  121  inches  by  9i  inches.  This  the  Cherokee  say  was  the
footprint  of  the  great  war  horse  which  their  chieftain  rode.  The  tracks  of  a  great
many  turkeys,  turtles,  terrapins,  a  large  bear's  paw,  a  snake's  trail,  and  the  foot-
prints of  two  deer  are  tn  In-  seen.  The  tradition  respecting  these  impressions  varies.
One  asserts  that  the  world  was  once  deluged  with  water,  and  men  with  all  animated
beings  were  destroyed,  except  one  family,  together  with  various  animals  necessary
to  replenish  the  earth:  that  the  Great  Spirit  before  the  floods  came  commanded
them  tn  embark  in  a  hit.'  canoe,  which  after  long  sailing  was  drawn  to  this  spot  by  a
bevy  of  swans  and  rested  there,  and  here  the  whole  troop  of  animals  was  disem-
barked, leaving  the  impressions  as  they  passed  over  the  rock,  which  being  softened
h\  reason  of  long  submersion  kindly  received  and  preserved  them.
War  Woman's  creek:  Enters  Chattooga  river  in  Rabun  county, northeastern  Georgia,  in  the  heart  of  the  old  Lower  ( Jherokee  country.
The  name  seems  to  be  of  Indian  origin,  although  the  Cherokee  name
is  lost  and  the  story  has  perished.  A  writer  quoted  by  White  (His-
torical Collections  of  Georgia,  p.  ±44)  attempts  to  show  its  origin  from
the  exploit  of  a  certain  Revolutionary  amazon,  in  capturing  a  party
of  Tories,  hut  the  name  occurs  in  Adair  (note,  p.  185)  as  early  as  177.">.
There  is  some  reason  for  believing  that  it  refers  to  a  former  female
dignitary  among  the  Cherokee,  described  by  Haywood  under  the  title
of  the  •■  Pretty  Woman"  as  having  authority  to  decide  the  fate  of
prisoners  of  war.  Waflord once  knew  an  old  woman  whose  name  was
Da  na-ga'sta.  an  abbreviated  form  for  Da'nawa-g&sta'ya,  •"Sharp
war."  understood  to  mean  ""  Sharp  (i.,  e.,  Fierce)  warrior."  Several
cases  of  women  acting  the  part  of  warriors  tire  on  record  among  the
Cherokee.


420  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.asn.18
126.    PLANT    LORE
The  Cherokee  have  always  been  an  agricultural  people,  and  their  old
country  is  a  region  of  luxuriant  flora,  with  tall  trees  and  tangled  under-
growth on  the  slopes  and  ridges,  and  myriad  bright-tinted  blossoms
and  sweet  wild  fruits  along  the  running  streams.  The  vegetable  king-
dom consequently  holds  a  far  more  important  place  in  the  mythology
and  ceremonial  of  the  tribe  than  it  does  among  the  Indians  of  the
treeless  plains  and  arid  sage  deserts  of  the  West,  most  of  the  beliefs
and  customs  in  this  connection  centering  around  the  practice  of  medi-
cine, as  expounded  by  the  priests  and  doctors  in  every  settlement.  In
general  it  is  held  that  the  plant  world  is  friendly  to  the  human  species.
and  constantly  at  the  willing  service  of  the  doctors  to  counteract  the
jealous  hostility  of  the  animals.  The  sacred  formulas  contain  many
curious  instructions  for  the  gathering  and  preparation  of  the  medicinal
roots  and  barks,  which  are  selected  chiefly  in  accordance  with  the
theory  of  correspondences.
The  Indians  are  close  observers,  and  some  of  their  plant  names  are
peculiarly  apt.  Thus  the  mistletoe,  which  never  gi-ows  alone,  but  is
found  always  with  its  roots  fixed  in  the  bark  of  some  supporting  tree
or  shrub  from  which  it  draws  its  sustenance,  is  called  by  a  name  which
signifies  "it  is  married"  (uda'  It).  The  violet  is  still  called  by  a  plural
name.  di '  mln  'xj.-intt,  'xki.  ••they  pull  each  other's  heads  off,"  showing  that the  Cherokee  children  have  discovered  a  game  not  unknown  among
our  own.  The  bear-grass  (  Eryngium),  with  its  long,  slender  leaves  like
diminutive  blades  of  corn,  is  called  sdlikwd'yi,  "greensnake,"  and  the
larger  grass  known  as  Job's  tears,  on  account  of  its  glossy,  rounded
grains,  which  the  Indian  children  use  for  necklaces,  is  called  sel-utsi',
"  the  mother  of  corn."  The  black-eyed  Susan  ( limlh,  chid)  of  our  chil-
dren is  the  "deer-eye"  (</  wi'-ccktd')  of  the  Cherokee,  and  our  lady-
sb  pper  ( Oypripedmm)  is  their  "  partridge  moccasin"  (gfigw&'-'idasu'la).
The  May-apple  {Podophyllum),  with  its  umbrella-shaped  top.  is  called
a' itislir,  tn'  t/i.  meaning  "  it  wears  a  hat,"  while  the  white  puffball  fungus
is  n&kwisi'-usdi',  "the  little  star."  and  the  common  rock  lichen  bears
the  musical,  if  rather  unpoetic,  name  of  utsdldta,  "pot  scrapings."
Some  plants  are  named  from  their  real  or  supposed  place  in  the  animal
economy,  as  the  wild  rose,  tsist-uni'gisti,  "the  rabbits  eat  it" — refer-
ring to  the  seed  berries — and  the  shield  fern  (Aspidiwri),  i/an-nts,  'stu,
"  the  bear  lies  on  it."  Others,  again,  are  named  from  their  domestic  or
ceremonial  uses,  as  the  fleabane (JErigeron  canad^  nst ).  called  atsil'-si&n  //',
"fire  maker."  because  its  dried  stalk  was  anciently  employed  in  pro-
ducing fire  by  friction,  and  the  bugle  weed  (Lycopus  virginicus),  known
as  aniwani'ski,  "talkers."  because  the  chewed  root,  given  to  children  to swallow,  or  rubbed  upon  their  lips,  is  supposed  to  endow  them  with
the  gift  of  eloquence.  Some  few,  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  term  in
use  among  the  common  people,  have  a  sacred  or  symbolic  name,  used


PLANT    LOBE  4'_»1
onh  bj  the  priests  and  doctors  in  the  prayer  formulas.  Thus  gin-
seng, or  '"sail":'."  as  it  is  more  often  called  by  the  white  mountaineers,
is  known  to  the  laity  as  A'taU-guW,  "the  mountain  climber,"  but  is
addressed  in  the  formula"  as  YUnvA  Ubdi',  "Little  Man."  while  selu
(corn)  is  invoked  under  the  name  of  Agawt  'la,  ""The*  )ld  Woman."  One
or  two  plant  names  have  their  origin  in  myths,  as,  for  instance,  that  of
Prosartes  lanuginosa,  which  bears  the  curious  nai   f  wdlds' -until' sti,
"frogsfight  with  it,"  from  a  story  that  inthelongago  Mlahi'yu  two
quarrelsome  frogs  once  fought  a  duel,  using  its  stalks  as  lances.  In
the  locative  form  this  was  the  name  of  a  former  Cherokee  settlement
in  Georgia,  called  by  the  whites  Fighting-town,  from  a  misapprehen-
sion of  the  meaning  of  the  word.  Of  the  white  clover,  the  Cherokee
sa\   that  "'it  follows  the  white  man.'"
The  division  of  trees  into  evergreen  and  deciduous  is  accounted  for
by  a  myth,  related  elsewhere,  according  to  which  the  loss  of  their
leaves  in  winter  time  is  a  punishment  visited  upon  the  latter  for  their
failure  to  endure  an  ordeal  to  the  end.  With  the  Cherokee,  as  with
nearly  all  other  tribes  east  and  west,  the  cedar  is  held  sacred  above
other  trees.  The  reasons  for  this  reverence  are  easily  found  in  its
ever-living  green,  its  balsamic  fragrance,  and  the  beautiful  color  of  its
fine-grained  wood,  unwarpingand  practically  undecaying.  The  small
green  twigs  are  thrown  upon  the  fire  as  incense  in  certain  ceremonies,
particularly  to  counteract  the  effect  of  asgina  dreams,  as  it  is  believed
that  the  anisgi'na  or  malevolent  ghosts  can  not  endure  the  smell;  hut the  wood  itself  is  considered  too  sacred  to  be  used  as  fuel.  In  the  war
dance,  the  scalp  trophies,  stretched  on  small  hoops,  were  hung  upon  a
cedar  sapling  trimmed  and  decorated  for  the  occasion.  According  to
a  myth  the  red  color  comes  originally  from  the  blood  of  a  wicked
magician,  whose  severed  head  was  hung  at  the  top  of  a  tall  cedar.
The  story  is  now  almost  forgotten,  hut  it  was  probably  nearly  iden-
tical with  one  still  existing  among  the  Yuchi,  former  neighbors  of  the
Cherokee.  According  to  the  Yuchi  myth,  a  malevolent  magician  dis-
turbed the  daily  course  of  the  sun  until  at  last  two  brave  warriors
sought  him  out  and  killed  him  in  his  cave.  They  cut  off  his  head  and
brought  it  home  with  them  to  show  to  the  people,  but  it  continued
still  alive.  To  make  it  die  they  were  advised  to  tie  it  in  the  topmost
branches  of  a  tree.  This  they  did.  trying  one  tree  after  another,  hut
each  morning  the  head  was  found  at  the  foot  of  the  tree  and  still  alive.
At  last  they  tied  it  in  a  cedar,  and  there  the  head  remained  until  it  was
dead,  while  the  blood  slowly  trickling  down  alone-  the  trunk  gave  the
wood  its  red  color,  and  henceforth   the  cedar  was  a  ••medicine"  tree.1
The  linn  or  basswood  (  Tilda)  is  believed  never  to  be  struck  by  light-
ning, and  the  hunter  caught  in  otic  of  the  frequent  thunderstorms  of
'Gate  hel  Some  Mythic  Stories  of  the  Yuchi  Indians,  in  American  Anthropologist,  vi,  p.  281,  ■Inly, 1893,


422  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
the  southern  mountains  always  seeks  its  shelter.  From  its  stringy
bark  are  twisted  the  hunting  belts  worn  about  the  waist.  Sourwood
((Irt/il, mlriiiii)  is  used  by  the  hunters  for  barbecue  sticks  to  roast  meat
before  the  fire,  on  account  of  the  acid  flavor  of  the  wood,  which  they
believe  to  lie  thus  communicated  to  the  meat.  Spoons  and  combs  are
also  carved  from  the  wood,  but  it  is  never  burned,  from  an  idea  that
lye  made  from  the  ashes  will  bring  sickness  to  those  who  use  it  in  pre-
paring their  food.  It  is  said  also  that  if  one  should  sleep  beside  a  fire
containing  sourwood  sticks  the  sourwood  "will  barbecue  him."  which may  possibly  mean  that  he  will  have  hot  or  feverish  pains  thereafter.
The  laurel,  in  its  two  varieties,  large  and  small  {Hhododend/ron  and
Kill  miii.  or  ■"ivy"),  is  much  used  for  spoons  and  combs,  on  account  of
its  close  grain,  as  also  in  medicine,  but  is  never  burned,  as  it  is  believed
that  this  would  bring  on  cold  weather,  and  would  furthermore  destroy
the  medicinal  virtues  of  the  whole  species.  The  reason  given  is  that
the  Leaves,  when  burning,  make  a  hissing  sound  suggestive  of  winter
winds  and  falling  snow.  When  the  doctor  is  making  up  a  compound
in  which  any  part  of  the  laurel  is  an  ingredient,  great  precautions  are
taken  to  prevent  any  of  the  leaves  or  twigs  being  swept  into  the  fire,
as  this  would  render  the  decoction  worthless.  Sassafras  is  tabued  as
fuel  among  the  Cherokee,  as  also  among  their  white  neighbors,  per-
haps for  the  practical  reason  that  it  is  apt  to  pop  out  of  the  tire  when
heated  and  might  thus  set  the  house  on  fire.
Pounded  walnut  bark  is  thrown  into  small  streams  to  stupefy  the  fish,
so  that  they  may  be  easily  dipped  out  in  baskets  as  they  float  on  the
surface  of  the  water.  Should  a  pregnant  woman  wade  into  the  stream
at  the  time,  its  effect  is  nullified,  unless  she  has  first  taken  the  precau-
tion to  tie  a  strip  of  the  bark  about  her  toe.  A  fire  of  post-oak  and
the  wood  of  the  telun'lutl  or  summer  grape  (  Vitis  aestivalis)  is  believed
to  bring  a  spell  of  warm  weather  even  in  the  coldest  winter  season.
Mysterious  properties  attach  to  the  wood  of  a  tree  which  has  been
struck  by  lightning,  especially  when  the  tree  itself  still  lives,  and  such
wood  enters  largely  into  the  secret  compounds  of  the  conjurers.  An
ordinary  person  of  the  laity  will  not  touch  it,  for  fear  of  having  cracks
come  upon  his  hands  and  feet,  nor  is  it  burned  for  fuel,  for  fear  that  lye
made  from  the  ashes  will  cause  consumption.  In  preparing  ballplayers
for  the  contest,  the  medicine-man  sometimes  burns  splinters  of  it  to
coal,  which  he  gives  to  the  players  to  paint  themselves  with  in  order
that  they  may  be  able  to  strike  their  opponents  with  all  the  force  of  a
thunderbolt.  Bark  or  wood  from  a  tree  struck  by  lightning,  but  still
green,  is  beaten  up  and  put  into  the  water  in  which  seeds  are  soaked
before  planting,  to  insure  a  good  crop,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  any
lightning-struck  wood  thrown  into  the  field  will  cause  the  crop  to
wither,  and  it  is  believed  to  have  a  bad  effect  even  to  go  into  the  field
immediately  after  having  been  near  such  a  tree.


PLANT    LOBE  423
Among  all  vegetables  the  one  which  holds  first  place  in  the  house-
hold economy  and  ceremonial  observance  of  the  tribe  is  selu,  "corn,"
invoked  in  the  sacred  formulas  under  the  name  of  Agawe'la,  "The
Old  Woman,"  in  allusion  to  its  mythic  oxdgin  from  the  blood  of  an
old  woman  killed  by  her  disobedient  sons  (sec  number  '■'>.  "  Kana'ti
and  Selu").  In  former  times  the  annual  thanksgiving  ceremony  of  the
Green-corn  dance,  preliminary  to  eating  the  lirst  new  com.  was  the
most  solemn  tribal  function,  a  propitiation  and  expiation  for  the  sins
of  the  past  year,  an  amnesty  for  public  criminals,  and  a  prayer  for
happiness  and  prosperity  for  the  year  to  come.  Only  those  who  had
properly  prepared  themselves  bj  prayer,  fasting,  and  purification  were
allowed  to  take  part  in  this  ceremony,  and  no  one  dared  to  taste  the
new  corn  until  then.  Seven  ears  from  the  last  year's  crop  were  always
put  carefully  aside,  in  order  to  attract  tin  corn  until  the  new  crop  was
ripened  and  it  was  time  for  the  dance,  when  they  were  eaten  with  the
rest.  In  eating  the  lirst  new  corn  after  the  Green  Corn  dance,  care  was
observed  not  to  blow  upon  it  to  cool  it,  for  fear  of  causing  a  wind
storm  to  heat  down  the  standing  crop  in  the  field.
Much  ceremony  accompanied  the  planting  and  tending  of  the  crop.
Seven  grains,  the  sacred  number,  were  put  into  each  hill,  and  these
were  not  afterward  thinned  out.  After  the  last  working  of  the  crop,
tlte  priest  and  an  assistant — generally  the  owner  of  the  field — went
into  the  field  and  built  a  small  inclosure  (detsdmdfl'li)  in  the  center.
Then  entering  it.  they  seated  themselves  upon  the  ground,  with  heads
bent  down,  and  while  the  assistant  kept  perfect  silence  the  priest,  with
rattle  in  hand,  sang  songs  of  invocation  to  the  spirit  of  the  corn.  Soon.
according  to  the  orthodox  belief,  a  loud  rustling  would  be  heard  out-
side, which  they  would  know  was  caused  by  the  "Old  Woman"  bring-
ing the  corn  into  the  field,  but  neither  must  look  up  until  the  song
was  finished.  This  ceremony  was  repeated  on  four  successive  nights,
after  which  no  one  entered  the  field  for  seven  other  nights,  when  the
priest  himself  went  in,  and,  if  all  the  sacred  regulations  had  been  prop-
erly observed,  was  rewarded  by  rinding  young  ears  upon  the  stalks.
The  corn  ceremonies  could  be  performed  by  the  owner  of  the  field
himself,  provided  he  was  willing  to  pay  a  sufficient  fee  to  the  priest  in
order  to  learn  the  songs  and  ritual.  Care  was  always  taken  to  keep  a
clean  trail  from  the  field  to  the  house,  so  that  the  corn  might  be
encouraged  to  stay  at  home  and  not  go  wandering  elsewhere.  Most
of  these  customs  have  now  fallen  into  disuse  excepting  among  the
old  people,  by  many  of  whom  they  are  -till  religiously  observed.
Another  curious  ceremony,  of  which  even  the  memory  is  now  almost
forgotten,  was  enacted  after  the  first  working  of  the  corn,  when  the
owner  or  priest  stood  in  succession  at  each  of  the  four  corners  of  the
field  and  wept  and  wailed  loudly.  Even  the  priests  are  now  unable,
to  give  a  reason  for  this  performance,  which  may  have  been  a   lament


424  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
for  the  bloody  death  of  Selu,  as  the  women  of  Byblos  were  wont  to
weep  for  Adonis.
Next  to  corn,  the  bean  [tuya)  is  the  most  important  food  plant  of  the
Cherokee  and  other  southern  Indians,  with  whom  it  is  probably  native,
but  there  docs  not  appear  to  be  much  special  ceremony  or  folklore
in  connection  with  it.  Beans  which  crack  open  in  cooking  are  some-
times rubbed  by  mothers  on  the  lips  of  their  children  in  order  to
make  them  look  smiling  and  good-tempered.  The  association  of  ideas
seems  to  be  the  same  as  that  which  in  Ireland  causes  a  fat  meal}'
potato,  which  cracks  open  in  boiling,  to  be  called  a  "laughing"  potato.
Melons  and  squashes  must  not  be  counted  or  examined  too  closely,
while  still  growing  upon  the  vine,  or  they  will  cease  to  thrive;
neither  must  one  step  over  the  vine,  or  it  will  wither  before  the  fruit
ripens.  One  who  has  eaten  a  May-apple  must  not  come  near  the  vines
under  any  circumstances,  as  this  plant  withers  and  dries  up  very
quickly,  and  its  presence  would  make  the  melons  wither  in  the  same  way.
Tobacco  was  used  as  a  sacred  incense  or  as  the  guarantee  of  a  solemn
oath  in  nearly  every  important  function — in  binding  the  warrior  to
take  up  the  hatchet  against  the  enemy,  in  ratifying  the  treaty  of  peace,
in  confirming  sales  or  other  engagements,  in  seeking  omens  for  the
hunter,  in  driving  away  witches  or  evil  spirits,  and  in  regular  medical
practice.  It  was  either  smoked  in  the  pipe  or  sprinkled  upon  the  fire,
never  rolled  into  cigarettes,  as  among  the  tribes  of  the  Southwest,
neither  was  it  ever  smoked  for  the  mere  pleasure  of  the  sensation.  Of
late  years  white  neighbors  have  taught  the  Indians  to  chew  it,  but
the  habit  is  not  aboriginal.  It  is  called  tsdlu,  a  name  which  has  lost
its  meaning  in  the  Cherokee  language,  but  is  explained  from  the
cognate  Tuscarora,  in  which  charhu',  "tobacco,"  can  still  be  analyzed
as  "fire  to  hold  in  the  mouth,"  showing  that  the  use  is  as  old  as
the  knowledge  of  the  plant.  The  tobacco  originally  in  use  among
the  Cherokee,  Iroquois,  and  other  eastern  tribes  was  not  the  common
tobacco  of  commerce  {Nicotiana  tabacum),  which  has  been  introduced
from  the  West  Indies,  but  the  Nicotioma  rustica,  or  wild  tobacco,  now
distinguished  by  the  Cherokee  as  tsdl-agaytin'M,  "  old  tobacco,"  and  by
the  Iroquois  as  "real  tobacco."  Its  various  uses  in  ritual  and  medi-
cine are  better  described  under  other  headings.  For  the  myth  of
its  loss  and  recovery  see  number  6,  "How  They  Brought  Back  the
Tobacco."  The  cardinal  flower  (Lobdia),  mullein  ( T'<  rbascvm),  and  one
or  two  related  species  are  called  ts&liyu'sU,  "like  tobacco,"on  account
of  their  general  resemblance  to  it  in  appearance,  but  they  were  never
used  in  the  same  way.
The  poisonous  wild  parsnip {Pt  itcedanum  '.)  bears  an  unpleasant  rep-
utation on  account  of  its  frequent  use  in  evil  spells,  especially  those
intended  to  destroy  the  life  of  the  victim.  In  one  of  these  conjura-
tions seven  pieces  of  the  root  are  laid  upon  one  hand  and  rubbed  gently


moonei  PLANT    LOBE  125
with  the  other,  the  omen  being  taken  from  the  position  of  the  pieces
when   the  hand    is  removed.     It   is   said  also  that  puis   rs  mix   it
secretly  with  the  food  of  their  intended  victim,  when,  if  he  eats,  hesoon
becomes  drowsy,  and.  unless  kept  in  motion  until  the  effect  wears  off,
falls  asleep,  never  to  wake  again.  Suicides  are  said  to  eat  it  topro-
cure death.  Before  starting  on  a  journey  a  small  piece  of  the  root  is
sometimes  chewed  and  blown  upon  the  body  to  prevent  sickness,  but
the  remedy  is  almost  as  bad  as  the  disease,  for  the  snakes  are  said  to
resent  the  offensive  smell  by  biting  the  one  who  carries  it.  In  spite
of  its  poisonous  qualities,  a  decoction  of  the  root  is  much  used  for
steaming  patients  in  the  sweat  bath,  the  idea  seeming  to  lie  that  the
smell  drives  away  the  disease  spirits.
The  poison  oak  or  poison  ivy  (Shus  radieans),  so  abundant  in  the
damp  eastern  forests,  is  feared  as  much  by  Indians  as  by  whites.
When  obliged  to  approach  it  or  work  in  its  vicinity,  the  Cherokee
strives  to  conciliate  it  by  addressing  it  as  "My  friend"  (M'ginalii).
If  poisoned  by  it.  he  rubs  upon  the  affected  part  the  beaten  flesh  of  a
crawfish.
One  variety  of  brier  (  Smilax)  is  called  di  nu'sM,  "  the  breeder."  from a  belief  that  a  thorn  of  it.  if  allowed  to  remain  in  the  tlesh.  will  breed
others  in  a  day  or  two.
Ginseng,  which  is  sold  in  large  quantities  to  the  local  traders,  as
well  as  used  in  the  native  medical  practice,  is  called  t"tt<il}-<j>'ili' ',  "the
mountain  climber,"  hut  is  addressed  by  the  priests  as  Yunwi  Usdi',
"Little  Man,"  or  Yunwi  Usdi'ga  Ada'wehi'vu.  "Little  Man,  Most
Powerful  Magician,"  the  Cherokee  sacred  term,  like  the  ( Jhinese  name,
having  its  origin  from  the  frequent  resemblance  of  the  root  in  shape
to  the  body  of  a  man.  The  beliefs  and  ceremonies  in  connection  with
its  gathering  and  preparation  are  very  numerous.  The  doctor  speaks
constantly  of  it  as  of  a  sentient  being,  and  it  is  believed  to  be  able
to  make  itself  invisible  to  those  unworthy  to  gather  it.  In  hunting-
it,  the  first  three  plants  found  are  passed  by.  The  fourth  is  taken,
after  a  preliminary  prayer,  in  which  the  doctor  addresses  it  as  the
"Great  Ada'wehi,"  and  humbly  asks  permission  to  take  a  small  piece
of  its  tlesh.  On  digging  it  from  the  ground,  he  drops  into  the  hole
a  bead  and  covers  it  over,  leaving  it  there,  by  way  of  payment  t<>  the
plant  spirit.  After  that  he  takes  them  as  they  come  without  further
ceremony.
The  catgut  or  devil's  shoestring  (  Tephrosid)  is  called  distai'yi,  k'they
are   tough."  in   allusion   to    its  stringy   roots,   from   which  Cherokee u   ii  prepare  a  decoction  with  which  to  wash  their  hair  in  order  to
impart  to  it  the  strength  ami  toughness  of  the  plant,  while  a  prepara-
tion of  the  leaves  is  used  by  ballplayers  to  wash  themselves  in  order  to
toughen  their  limb-.  To  enable  them  to  spring  quickly  to  their
feet  if  thrown  to  the  ground,  the  players   bathe  their  limbs  also  with


42<i  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.akn.19
a  decoction  of  the  small  rush  (Jtmcus  tenuis),  which,  they  say.  always
recovers  its  erect  position,  no  matter  how  often  trampled  down.  The
white  seeds  of  the  viper's  bugloss  (  Echium  vulgan  )  were  formerly  used in  many  important  ceremonies  of  which  the  purpose  was  to  look  into
the  future.  l>ut  have  now  been  superseded  by  the  ordinary  glass  beads
of  the  traders.  The  culver  root  (Leptcmdrd)  is  used  in  love  conjura-
tions, the  omen  being  taken  from  the  motion  of  the  root  when  held  in
the  hand.  The  campion  (Silent  stellata),  locally  known  as  •■rattle-
snake's master."  is  called  gcmidawd'ski,  "it  disjoints  itself."  because  the dried  stalk  is  said  to  break  off  by  joints,  beginning  at  the  top.  As
among  the  white  mountaineers,  the  juice  is  held  to  he  a  sovereign
remedy  for  snake  bites,  and  it  is  even  believed  that  the  deadliest  snake
will  flee  from  one  who  carries  a  small  portion  of  the  root  in  his  mouth.
Almost  all  varieties  of  burs,  from  the  Spanish  needle  Up  to  the
cocklebur  and  Jimsonweed,  are  classed  together  under  the  generic
name  of  u'nistilun'isM,  which  may  be  freely  rendered  as  "stickers."
From  their  habit  of  holding  fast  to  whatever  object  they  may  happen
to  touch,  they  are  believed  to  have  an  occult  power  for  improving  the
memory  and  inducing  stability  of  character.  Very  soon  after  a  child
is  born,  one  of  the  smaller  species,  preferably  the  Lespedeza  repens,  is
beaten  up  and  a  portion  is  put  into  a  bowl  of  water  taken  from  a  fall
or  cataract,  where  the  stream  makes  a  constant  noise.  This  is  given  to
the  child  to  drink  on  four  successive  days,  with  the  intention  of
making  him  quick  to  learn  and  retain  in  memory  anything  once  heard.
The  noise  of  the  cataract  from  which  the  water  is  taken  is  believed  to
be  the  voice  of  Yitnwi  Gunahi'ta,  the  "Long  Man,"  or  river  god, teaching  lessons  which  the  child  may  understand,  while  the  stream
itself  is  revered  for  its  power  to  seize  and  hold  anything  cast  upon  its
surface.  A  somewhat  similar  ceremony  is  sometimes  used  for  adults,
but  in  this  case  the  matter  is  altogether  more  difficult,  as  there  are
tabus  for  four  or  seven  clays,  and  the  mind  must  be  kept  fixed  upon
the  purpose  of  the  rite  throughout  the  whole  period,  while  if  the  sub-
ject so  far  forgets  himself  as  to  lose  his  temper  in  that  time  he  will
remain  of  a  quarrelsome  disposition  forever  after.
A  flowering  vine,  known  as  nuniyu'sU,  "potato-like,"  which  grows in  cultivated  fields,  and  has  a  tuberous  root  somewhat  resembling  a
potato,  is  used  in  hunting  conjurations.  The  bruised  root,  from  which
a  milk}-  juice  oozes,  is  rubbed  upon  the  deer  bleat,  dwi'-ahyeli'sM,  with
which  the  hunter  imitates  the  bleating  of  the  fawn,  under  the  idea
that  the  doe,  hearing  it,  will  think  that  her  offspring  desires  to  suck,
and  will  therefore  come  the  sooner.  The  putty-root  (Adam-and-Eve,
.[/>!< (tram  /u'emale),  which  is  of  an  oily,  mucilaginous  nature,  is  car- ried by  the  deer  hunter,  who,  on  shooting  a  deer,  puts  a  small  piece
of  the  chewed  root  into  the  wound,  expecting  as  a  necessary  result  to
find  the  animal  unusually  fat  when  skinned.     Infants  which  seem  to  pine


boone>  PLANT    LORE  127
and  grow  thin  are  bathed  with  a  decoction  of  the  same  root  in  order
to  fatten  them.  The  rool  of  the  rare  plant  known  as  Venus'  flytrap
(Dioncea),  which  has  the  remarkable  property  of  catching  and  digest-
ing insects  which  alight  upon  it.  is  chewed  by  the  fisherman  and  spit
upon  the  bail  that  no  fish  may  escape  him,  and  the  plant  is  tied  upon
the  fish  trap  for  the  same  purpose.
The  root  of  a  plant  called  unatMmwe' Mm,  "  having  spirals,"  is  used
in  conjurations  designed  to  predispose  strangers  in  Eavorof  thesubject.
The  priest  "'takes  it  to  water"  i.  e.,  says  certain  prayers  over  it
while  standing  close  to  the  running  stream,  then  chews  a  small  piece
and  rubs  and  Mows  it  upon  the  body  and  anus  of  the  patient,  who  is
supposed  to  he  about  tostart  upon  a  journey,  or  to  take  part  in  a  coun-
cil, with  the  result  that  all  who  meet  him  or  listen  to  his  words  are  at
once  pleased  with  his  manner  and  appearance,  and  disposed  to  give
ever)'  assistance  to  his  projects.


NOTES  AND  PARALLELS  TO  MYTHS
In  the  preparation  of  the  following  notes  and  parallels  the  pur-
pose has  been  to  incorporate  every  Cherokee  variant  or  pseudomyth
obtainable  "from  any  source,  and  to  give  some  explanation  of  tribal
customs  and  beliefs  touched  upon  in  the  myths,  particularly  among
the  Southern  tribes.  A  certain  number  of  parallels  have  been  incor-
porated, but  it  must  be  obvious  that  this  field  is  too  vast  for  treat-
ment within  the  limits  of  a  single  volume.  Moreover,  in  view  of
the  small  number  of  tribes  that  have  yet  been  studied,  in  comparison
with  the  great  number  still  unstudied,  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  the
time  has  arrived  for  any  extended  treatment  of  Indian  mythology.
The  most  complete  index  of  parallels  that  has  yet  appeared  is  that
accompanying  the  splendid  collection  by  Dr  Franz  Boas,  Indianische
Sagen  von  der  nordpaciiischen  Kiiste  Amerikas.1  In  drawing  the  line
it  has  been  found  necessary  to  restrict  comparisons,  excepting  in  a
few  special  cases,  to  the  territory  of  the  United  States  or  the  imme-
diate border  country,  although  this  compels  the  omission  of  several
of  the  best  collections,  particularly  from  the  northwest  coast  and  the
interior  of  British  America.  Enough  has  been  given  to  show  thatour
native  tribes  had  myths  of  their  own  without  borrowing  from  other
races,  and  that  these  were  so  widely  and  constantly  disseminated  by
trade  and  travel  and  interchange  of  ceremonial  over  wide  areas  as  to
make  the  Indian  myth  system  as  much  a  unit  in  this  country  as  was
the  Aryan  myth  structure  in  Europe  and  Asia.  Every  additional
tribal  study  may  be  expected  to  corroborate  this  result.
A  more  special  study  of  Cherokee  myths  in  their  connection  with
the  medical  and  religious  ritual  of  the  tribe  is  reserved  for  a  future
paper,  of  which  preliminary  presentation  has  been  given  in  the
author's  Sacred  Formulas  of  the  Cherokees,  in  the  Seventh  Annual
Report  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology.
Stories  and  story  tellers  (p.  229):  Migration  legend — In  Buttrick's  Antiqui-
ties2 we  find  some  notice  of  this  migration  legend,  which,  as  given  by  the  mission-
ary, is  unfortunately  so  badly  mixed  up  with  the  Bible  story  that  it  is  almost  impos-
sible to  isolate  the  genuine.  He  starts  them  under  the  leadership  of  their  "greatest
prophet,"  Wast — who  is  simply  Moses — in  search  of  a  far  distant  country  where
they  may  be  safe  from  their  enemies.  Who  these  enemies  are,  or  in  what  quarter
they  live,  is  not  stated.     Soon  after  setting  out  they  come  to  a  great  water,  which
1  Asher  &  Co.,  Berlin,  1895.
-'Antiquities  of  the  Cherokee  Indians, compiled  from  the  collection  of  Reverend Sabin  Buttrick,
their  missionary  from  1817  to  1S47.  its  presented  in  the  Indian  Chieftain;  Vinita,  Indian  Territory,  lsx.4.


koonei  NOTES    AND    PARALLELS  4-_",)
Wast  strikes  with  his  staff;  the  water  divides  so  that  they  pass  through  safely,  and
then  rolls  back  and  prevents  pursuit  by  their  enemies.  They  then  enter  a  wilder-
oess  and  come  to  a  mountain,  and  we  are  treated  to  the  Bible  story  of  Sinai  and  the
tables  of  stone.  Here  also  they  receive  sacred  fire  from  heaven,  which  thereafter
they  carry  with  them  until  the  house  in  which  ii  is  kepi  is  at  Ias1  destroyed  by  a
hostile  invasion.  This  portion  of  the  myth  seems  to  be  genuine  Italian  <*■*■  notes  to
number  111.  "  The  Mounds  and  the  Constant  Fire") .
In  this  journey  "the  tribes  marched  separately  and  also  the  elans.  The  elans
were  distinguished  by  having  leathers  of  different  colors  fastened  to  their  ears.  They
had  two  great  standards,  one  white  and  one  red.  The  white  standard  was  under
the  control  of  the  priests,  and  used  for  civil  purposes;  l>nt  the  red  standard  was
under  the  direction  of  the  war  priests,  for  purposes  of  war  and  alarm.  These  were
carried  when  they  journeyed,  and  the  white  standard  erected  in  front  of  the  build-
ing above  mentioned  [the  ark  or  palladium],  when  they  rested."
They  cross  four  rivers  in  all — which  ai   'ds  with  the   Indian   idea  of  the  sacred
four — and  -it  down  at  last  beyond  the  fourth,  after  having  been  for  many  years  on
the  march.  'Their  whole  journey  through  this  wilderness  was  attended  with  great
distress  and  danger.  At  one  time  they  were  l>eset  by  the  most  deadly  kind  of  ser-
pents, which  destroyed  a  great  many  of  the  people,  hut  at  length  their  leader  shot
one  with  an  arrow  and  drove  them  away.  Again,  they  were  walking  along  in  .single
tile,  when  the  ground  cracked  open  and  a  number  of  people  sank  down  and  were
destroyed  by  the  earth  closing  upon  them.  At  another  time  they  came  nigh  perish-
ing tor  water.  Their  head  men  dug  with  their  staves  in  all  the  low  places,  hut  could
find  no  water.  At  length  their  leader  found  a  most  beautiful  spring  coming  out  of  a
rock."1 At  one  point  in  this  migration,  a.   rding   to  a   tradition   given   to   Schoolcraft   by
Stand  Watie,  they  encountered  a  large  river  or  other  great  body  of  water,  which
they  crossed  upon  a  bridge  made  by  tying  grapevines  together.2  This  idea  of  a  vine
bridge  or  ladder  occurs  also  in  the  traditions  of  the  Iroquois,  .Mandan.  and  other
tribes.
Farther  on  the  missionary  already  quoted  says:  "Shield-eater  once  inquired  if
I  ever  heard  of  houses  with  tlat  roofs.  saying  that  his  father's  great  grandfather  used to  say  that  once  their  people  had  a  great  town,  with  a  high  wall  about  it;  that  ona
certain  occasion  their  enemies  broke  down  a  part  of  this  wall;  that  the  houses  in  this
town  had  tlat  roofs — though,  he  used  to  say.  this  was  so  long  ago  it  is  not  worth
talking  about  now."  3
/•'./.  of  cant  splints — Bartraro  thus  describes  the  method  as  witnessed  by  him  at
Attasse  (Autossee)  among  the  Creeks  about  1775.  The  fire  which  .blazed  up  so  mys-
teriously may  have  been  kept  constantly  smoldering  below,  as  described  in  number  111:
"As  their  virgils  [sic]  and  manner  of  conducting  their  vespers  and  mystical  fire  in
this  rotunda,  are  extremely  singular,  ami  altogether  different  from  the  customs  and
usages  of  any  other  people,  1  shall  proceed  to  describe  them.  In  the  first  place,  the
governor  or  officer  who  has  tie-  management  of  this  business,  with  his  servants
attending,  orders  the  black  drink  to  be  brewed,  which  is  a  decoction  or  infusion  of
the  leaves  and  tender  shoots  of  the  cassine.      This   is  done   under  an   open   shed   or
pavilion,  at  twenty  or  thirty  yards  distance,  directly  opposite  the  door  of  the  council-
house.  Next  he  orders  bundles  of  dry  canes  to  be  brought  in:  these  are  previously
split  and  broken  in  pieces  to  about  the  length  of  two  feet,  and  then  placed  obliquely
CrOSSWayS  upon  one  another  on  the  floor,  forming  a  spiral  circle  round  about  the
great  centre  pillar,  rising  to  a  foot  or  eighteen  inches  in  height  from  the  ground;  and
this  circle  spreading  as  it  proceeds  round  and  round,  often  repeated  from  tight  to
1  Buttrick,  Antiquities  of  tin-  Cherokee  Iii<li:m*.  pp.  y-10.
troq  lois,  p.  359,  1st;.
3Buttrick.  ..p.  cit..  p.  10.


430  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
left,  every  revolution  increases  its  diameter,  and  at  length  extends  to  the  distance  of
ten  or  twelve  feet  from  the  centre,  more  or  less,  according  to  the  length  of  time,  the
assembly  or  meeting  is  to  continue.  By  the  time  these  preparations  are  accom-
plished, it  is  night,  and  the  assembly  have  taken  their  seats  in  order.  The  exterior
or  outer  end  of  the  spiral  circle  takes  fire  and  immediately  rises  into  a  bright  flame
(but  how  this  is  effected  I  did  not  plainly  apprehend;  I  saw  no  person  set  fire  to  it;
there  might  have  been  fire  left  on  the  earth;  however  I  neither  sawnor  smelt  fire  or
smoke  until  the  blaze  instantly  ascended  upwards),  which  gradually  and  slowly
creeps  round  the  centre  pillar,  with  the  course  of  the  sun,  feeding  on  the  dry  canes,
and  affords  a  cheerful,  gentle  and  sufficient  light  until  the  circle  is  consumed,  when
the  council  breaks  up."1
1.  How  the  world  was  MADE  (p.  239) :  From  decay  of  the.  old  tradition  and  admix-
ture of  Bible  ideas  the  Cherokee  genesis  myth  is  too  far  broken  down  to  be  recovered
excepting  in  disjointed  fragments.  The  completeness  of  the  destruction  may  be
judged  by  studying  the  similar  myth  of  the  Iroquois  or  the  Ojibwa.  What  is  here
preserved  was  obtained  chiefly  from  Swimmer  and  John  Ax,  the  two  most  compe-
tent authorities  of  the  eastern  band.  The  evergreen  story  is  from  Ta'gwadihl'.  The
incident  of  the  brother  striking  his  sister  with  a  fish  to  make  her  pregnant  was  given
by  Ayasta,  and  may  have  a  phallic  meaning.  John  Ax  says  the  pregnancy  was
brought  about  by  the  "Little.  People,"  Yufiwi  Tsunsdi',  who  commanded  the  woman
to  rub  spittle  (of  the  brother?)  upon  her  back,  and  to  lie  upon  her  breast,  with  her
body  completely  covered,  for  seven  days  and  nights,  at  the  end  of  which  period  the
child  was  born,  and  another  thereafter  every  seven  days  until  the  period  was  made
longer.  According  to  Wafford  the  first  man  was  created  blind  and  remained  so  for
sometime.  The  incident  of  the  buzzard  shaping  the  mountains  occurs  also  in  the
genesis  myth  of  the  Creeks1  and  Yuchi,3  southern  neighbors  of  the  Cherokee,  but
by  them  the  first  earth  is  said  to  have  been  brought  up  from  under  the  water  by  the
crawfish.  Among  the  northern  tribes  it  is  commonly  the  turtle  which  continues  to
suj i] « irt  the  earth  upon  its  back.  The  water  beetle  referred  to  is  the  Gyrin us,  1<  ically
known  as  mellow  ling  or  apple  beetle.  One  variant  makes  the  dttsta'ydft,  water-
spider  ("scissors,"  Dolomedes) ,  help  in  the  work.  Nothing  is  said  as  to  whence  the
sun  is  obtained.  By  some  tribes  it  is  believed  to  be  a  gaming  wheel  stolen  from  a
race  of  superior  beings.     See  also  number  7.  "The  Journey  to  the  Sunrise."
The  missionaries  Buttrick  and  Washburn  give  versions  of  the  Cherokee  genesis,
both  of  which  are  so  badly  warped  by  Bible  interpretation  as  to  be  worthless.
No  native  cosmogonic  myth  yet  recorded  goes  back  to  the  first  act  of  creation,  but
all  start  out  with  a  world  and  living  creatures  already  in  existence,  though  not  in
their  final  form  and  condition.
Hand-breadth — The  Cherokee  word  is  utana'hih'i,  from  uwdyi,  hand.  This  is  not to  be  taken  literally,  but  is  a  figurative  expression  much  used  in  the  sacred  formulas
to  denote  a  serial  interval  of  space.  The  idea  of  successive  removals  of  the  sun,  in
order  to  modify  the  excessive  heat,  is  found  with  other  tribes.  Buttrick,  already
quoted,  says  in  his  statement  of  the  Cherokee  cosmogony:.  "When  God  created  the
world  he  made  a  heaven  or  firmament  about  as  high  as  the  tops  of  the  mountains,
but  this  was  too  warm.  He  then  created  a  second,  which  was  also  too  warm.  He
thus  proceeded  till  he  had  created  seven  heavens  and  in  the  seventh  fixed  His  abode.
During  some  of  their  prayers  they  raise  their  hands  to  the  first,  second,  third,  fourth,
fifth,  sixth  and  seventh  heaven,"  etc.4
i  Travels,  pp.  449-450.
-\\.  ii.  Tuggle,  Myths  of  the  Crooks,  lis,  lss7.  Copy  in  archives  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Eth- nologj
aA.  S.  Gatschet,  Some  Mythic  Stories  of  the  Yuchi  Indians,  in  American  Anthropologist,  vi,  p.
281,  .Inly.  1893.
4  Antiquities.


hooney]  NOTES    AM)    PARALLELS  4.'il
In  Hindu  cosmogony  also  we  find  seven  heavens  or  stages,  increasing  in  sanctity
as  they  ascend;  the  Aztecs  bad  nine,  as  bad  also  theancienl  Scandinavians.'    Some
Polynesian  tribes  have  ten,  each  built  of  azure  stone,  with  apertures  for  inten
munication.  The  low  est  originally  almost  touched  the  earth  and  was  elevated  to  its
present  position  b)  successive  pushes  from  the  gode  Ru  and  Mai t i,  resting  first  pros-
trate upon  the  ground,  then  upon  their  knees,  then  lifting  with  their  shoulders,  their
hands,  and  their  finger  tips,  until  a  last  supreme  effort  sent  it  toils  present  place.2
Seven.  Th  sacred  numbers — In  every  tribe  and  cult  throughout  the  world  we  find
sacred  numbers.  Christianity  and  the  Christian  world  have  three  and  seven.  The
Indian  has  always  four  as  the  principal  sacred  number,  with  usually  another  only
slightly  subordinated.  The  two  sacred  numbers  of  the  ( Iherokee  are  lour  and  seven,
the  latter  being  the  actual  number  of  the  tribal  clans,  the  formulistic  number  of
upper  world-  or  heavens,  and  the  ceremonial  number  of  paragraphs  or  repetitions  in
the  principal  formulas.  Thus  in  the  prayers  tor  long  life  the  priest  raises  his  client
by  successive  stages  to  the  first,  second,  third,  fourth,  and  finally  to  the  seventh
heaven  before  the  end  is  accomplished.  The  sacred  four  has  direct  relation  to  the
four  cardinal  points,  while  seven,  besides  these,  includes  also  "above,"  "below,"
and  "  here  in  the  center."  In  many  tribal  rituals  color  and  sometimes  sex  are
assigned  to  each  point  of  direction.  In  the  sacred  Cherokee  formulas  the  spirits  of
the  East,  South.  West,  and  North  are,  respectively,  lied.  White,  Black,  and  Blue,
and  each  color  has  also  its  own  symbolic  meaning  of  Power  (War),  Peace,  Death,
and  Defeat.
•_'.  The  first  fire  i  p.  240) :  This  myth  was  obtained  from  Swimmer  and  John  Ax,
It  is  noted  also  in  Fos  er's  "Sequoyah"3  and  in  the  Wahnenauhi  manuscript.4  The
uksu'hland  the  gule'g)  are,  respectively,  tin'  Colubt  robsoh  his  and  Bascanion  constrictor.
The  water-spider  is  the  large  hairy  species  Argyroneta.
Iti  the  version  given  in  the  Wahnenauhi  manuscript  the  Possum  and  the  Buzzard
first  make  the  trial,  hut  come  hack  unsuccessful,  one  losing  the  hair  from  his  tail,
while  the  Other  has  the  feathers  scorched  from  his  head  and  neck.  In  another  ver-
sion the  Dragon-fly  assists  the  Water-spider  by  pushing  the  tusti  from  behind.  In
the  corresponding  ('reek  myth,  as  given  in  the  Tuggle  manuscript,  the  Rabbit obtains  tire  by  the  stratagem  of  touching  to  the  blaze  a  cap  trimmed  with  sticks  of
rosin,  while  pretending  to  bend  low  in  the  dance.  In  the  Jicarilla  myth  the  Fox
steals  tire  by. wrapping  cedar  hark  around  his  tail  and  thrusting  it  into  the  blaze
while  dancing  around  the  circle.5
3.  Kana'ti  and  Self:  Origin  of  corx  and  game  (p.  242):  This  story  was  obtained  \n
nearly  the  same  form  from  Swimmer  and  John  Ax  (east)  and  from  Wafford  (west),  and
aversion  is  also  given  in  the  Wahnenauhi  manuscript.  Hagar  notes  it  briefly  in  his
manuscript  Stellar  Legends  of  the  Cherokee.  So  much  of  belief  and  custom
depend  upon  the  myth  of  Kana'ti  that  references  to  the  principal  incidents  are  con-
stant in  the  songs  and  formulas.  It  is  one  of  those  myths  held  so  sacred  that  in  the
old  days  one  who  wished  to  hear  it  from  the  priest  of  the  tradition  must  first  purify
himself  by  "going  to  water,"  i.  e.,  bathing  in  the  running  stream  before  daylight when  still  fasting,  while  the  priest  performed  his  mystic  ceremonies  upon  the  bank.
In  his  Letters  from  the  Alleghany  Mountains,  written  more  than  fifty  years  ago,
Lanman  gives  (pp.  136, 137)   a  very   fair  synopsis  of  this  myth,  locating  the  game
IE.  G  Squier,  The  Serpent  Symbol  and  the  Worship  of  the  Reciprocal  Principles  of  Nature  in  Amer-
ica i  Am.  Archaeological  Researches,  1 1;  New  York,  1851.
*Rei  Wm.  W.  Gill,  Myths  and  Songs  from  the  South  Pacific,  with  a  preface  bj  K  Max  Miiller;
London,  1876,  pp.  18,  21,  -S\  71.
G  I  Foster,  Sequoyah,  the  American  Cadmus  and  Modern  Moses;  Philadelphia,  [ndian  Rights
Association,  1885.
4  Historical  sketches  of  ii  ogether  with  some  of  their  Customs,  Traditions,  and  Super-
stitions, by  Wahnenauhi,  a  Cherokee  Indian;  MS  in  archives  of  the  Burei   t  American  Ethnology.
5  Frank  Russell,  Myth-  ..i  the  Jicarilla  Apaches,  In  Journal  of  Am.  Folklore,  October,  1898.


432  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
preserve  of  Kana'ti,  whom  he-  makes  an  old  Cherokee  chief,  in  a  (traditional)  cave
on  the  north  side  of  the  Black  mountain,  now  Mount  Mitchell,  in  Yancey  county,
North  Carolina,  tin-  highest  peak  cast  of  the  Rocky  mountains.  Alter  his  father  had
disappeared,  and  could  not  be  found  by  long  search,  "The  boy  fired  an  arrow
towards  the  north,  but  it  returned  and  fell  at  his  feet,  and  he  knew  that  his  father
had  nnt  travelled  in  that  direction.  He  also  fired  one  towards  the  east  and  the  south
and  the  west,  but  they  all  came  back  in  the  same  manner.  He  then  thought  that  he
would  tin-  one  directly  above  his  head,  and  it  so  happened  that  this  arrow  never
returned,  and  so  the  hoy  knew  that  his  father  had  gone  to  the  spirit  land.  The
Greal  Spirit  was  angry  with  the  Cherokee  nation,  and  to  punish  it  for  the  offense  of
the  foolish  boy  he  tore  away  the  cave  from  the  side  of  the  Black  mountain  and  left
only  a  large  cliff  in  its  place,  which  is  now  a  conspicuous  feature,  and  he  then
declared  that  the  time  would  come  when  another  race  of  men  should  possess  the
mountains  where  the  Cherokees  had  flourished  for  many  generations."
The  story  has  numerous  parallels  in  Indian  myth,  so  many  in  fact  that  almost
every  important  concept  occurring  in  it  is  duplicated  in  the  North,  in  the  South,  and
on  the  plains,  and  will  probably  be  found  also  west  of  the  mountains  when  sutticient
material  of  that  region  shall  have  been  collected.  The  Ojibwa  story  of  "The  YVeen-
digoes,"1  in  particular,  has  many  striking  points  of  resemblance;  so,  also,  the  <  hnaha
myth,  "Two-faces  and  the  Twin  Brothers,"  as  given  by  Dorsey.2
His  wife  was  Srln,  •'Com"— In  Cherokee  belief,  as  in  the  mythologies  of  nearly
every  eastern  tribe,  the  corn  spirit  is  a  woman,  and  the  plant  itself  has  sprung  origi-
nally from  the  blood  drops  or  the  dead  body  of  the  Corn  Woman.  In  the  Cherokee
sacred  formulas  thecorn  is  sometimes  invoked  as  Agawe'la,  "The  Old  Woman."  and
one  myth  (number  72,  "The  Hunter  and  Selu"  I  tells  how  a  hunter  once  witnessed
the  transformation  of  the  growing  stalk  into  a  beautiful  woman.
In  the  Creek  myth  "Origin  of  Indian  Corn,"  as  given  in  the  Tuggle  manuscript,
the  corn  plant  appears  to  be  the  transformed  body  of  an  old  woman  whose  only  son,
endowed  with  magic  powers,  has  developed  from  a  single  drop  of  her  (menstrual?)
blood.
In  Iroquois  legend,  according  to  Morgan,  the  corn  plant  sprang  from  the  bosom
of  the  mother  of  the  Great  Spirit  (gic  i  after  her  burial.  The  spirits  of  corn.  Lean,  and
squash  are  represented  as  three  sisters.  "They  are  supposed  to  have  the  forms  of
beautiful  females,  to  he  very  fond  of  each  other,  and  to  delight  to  dwell  together^.
This  last  belief  is  illustrated  by  a  natural  adaptation  of  the  plants  themselves  to  grow
up  together  in  the  same  field  and  perhaps  from  the  same  hill."  3
Sprang  from  U<><>il — This  concept  of  a  child  born  of  blood  drops  reappears  in  the
Cherokee  story  of  Tsul'kalu'  I  see  number  si  ).  Its  occurrence  among  the  Creeks  has
just  been  noted.  It  is  found  also  among  the  Dakota  (Dorsey,  "The  Blood-clots  Boy,"
in  Contributions  to  North  American  Ethnology,  ix,  1893),  Omaha  (Dorsey,  "The
Rabbit  and  the  Grizzly  Bear,"  Cont.  to  X.  A.  Eth.,  vi,  1890),  Blackfeet  (  "Kutoyis,"
in  Grinnell,  " Blackfoot  Lodge  Tales" ;  New  York,  1892),  and  other  tribes.  Usually
the  child  thus  born  is  of  wilder  and  more  mischievous  nature  than  is  common.
Dei  r  shut  up  in  hob: — The  Indian  belief  that  the  game  animals  were  originally  shut
up  in  a  cave,  from  which  they  were  afterward  released  by  accident  or  trickery,  is
very  widespread.  In  the  Tuggle  version  of  the  Creek  account  of  the  creation  of
the  earth  we  rind  the  deer  thus  shut  up  and  afterward  set  free.  The  Iroquois
"believed  that  the  game  animals  were  not  always  free,  but  were  enclosed  in  a  cavern
1  H.  R.  Schoolcraft,  Algic  Researches,  Comprising  Inquiries  Respecting  the  Mental  Characteristics  of
Hi-  North  American  Indians;  first  series,  Indian  Tales  and  Legends  (two  volumes);  New  York,  1.S39.
-  Tlie  Dhegiha  Language,  in  Contributions  to  North  American  Ethnology,  vi  (Department  of  the  Inte-
rior,  I",  S.  Geographical  and  Geological  Survey  of  the  Rocky  Mountain  Region.  J.  W.  Powell  in
charge),  Washington,  I>.  C.
A  League  of  tile  Iroquois,  pp.  161,  102,  and  199.


NOTES    AND    PARALLELS  433
where  they  had  Itch  concealed  by  Tawiskara' ;  but  that   they  might   increase  and
rill  the  forest  Yoskeha'  gave  them  freedom.'"    The  same  idea  occurs  in  the  Omaha
'Ictinike,   the   Brothers  and  Sister"  (Dorsey,  in  Contributions  to  North American   Ethnology,  m.   1890).     The  Kiowa  tell  how  the  buffalo  were  kept  thus
imprisoned  l>\  the  Crow  until  released  by  Sinti  when  the  |   pie  were  all  starving
for  want  of  meat.  When  the  buffalo  so  suddenly  and  completely  disappeared  from
tlic  plains  about  twenty-five  years  ago,  the  prairie  tribes  were  unable  to  realize  that
it  had  been  exterminated,  but  for  a  long  time  cherished  the  belief  that  it  had  been
again  shut  up  by  the  superior  power  of  the  whites  in  some  underground  prison,  from
w  hich  the  spells  of  their  own  medicine  men  would  yet  bring  it  back  i  see  references
iu  the  aiithiu's  Calendar  History  of  the  Kiowa  Indians,  in  Seventeenth  Annual Report  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  part  I.  1901).  TheKiowa  tradition  is
almost  exactly  paralleled  among  the  Jicarilla  |  Russell,  Myths  of  the  Jicarilla  Apaches,
in  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  Oct.,  L898).
Storehousi  -Theunwada'll,  or  storehouse  for  corn,  beans,  dried  pumpkins,  andothei
provisions,  was  a  feature  of  every  Cherokee  homestead  and  was  probably  common
to  all  the  southern  tribes.  Lawson  thus  describes  it  among  the  Santee  in  South
Carolina  about  the-  year  1700:
" They  make  themselves  cribs  alter  a  very  curious  manner,  wherein  they  secure
their  corn  from  vermin,  which  are  more  frequent  in  these  warm  climates  than  in
countries  more  distant  from  the  sun.  These  pretty  fabrics  are  ci  immonly  supported
with  eight  feet  or  posts  about  seven  feet  high  from  the  ground,  well  daubed  within
and  without  upon  laths,  with  loam  or  clay,  which  makes  them  tight  and  tit  to  keep
out  the  smallest  insert,  there  being  a  small  door  at  the  gable  end.  which  is  made  of
the  same  composition  and  to  be  removed  at  pleasure,  being  no  bigger  than  that
a  -lender  man  may  creep  in  at.  cementing  the  door  up  with  the  same  earth  when
they  take  the  corn  out  of  the  crib  and  are  going  from  home,  always  finding  their
granaries  in  the  same  posture  they  left  them — theft  to  each  other  being  altogether
mvpracticed
Rubh( d  h,  r  stomach — This  miraculous  procuring  of  provisions  by  rubbing  the  body
ocriii-  also  in  number  7ii,  "The  Bear  Man."
Knew  their  thoughts — Mind  reading  is  a  frequent  concept  in  Indian  myth  and  occurs
in  more  than  one  Cherokee  story.
S,r,  n  In, to — The  idea  of  sacred  numbers  has  already  been  noted,  and  the  constant
recurrence  of  seven  in  the  present  myth  exemplifies  well  the  importance  of  that
number  in  Cherokee  ritual.
.1  tuft  of down — In  the  Omaha  story,  "The  Corn  Woman  and  the  Buffalo  Woman"
i  Dorsey,  <  lontribiitions  to  North  American  Ethnology,  vi,  1890),  the  magician  changes
himself  into  a  feather  and  allows  himself  to  he  blown  about  by  the  wind  in  order  to
accomplish  hi- purpose.     The  wolf  does  the  same  in  a  Thompson  Rivermyth.8     The
self-transformation  of  the  hero  into  a  tuft  of  bird's  down,  a  feather,  a  leal,  or  some
Other  light  object,  which  is  then  carried  by  the  wind  wherever  he  wishes  to  go,  is
very  conn   l   in    Indian  myth.
PlaybaU  against  them — This  is  a  Cherokee  figurative  expression  for  a  contest  of  any
kind,  more  particularly  a  battle.
Left  'in  open  space — When  the  Cherokee  conjurer,  by  his  magic  spells,  coils  tin-
great  i  invisible  i  serpent  around  the  house  of  a  sick  man  to  keep  off  the  witches,  he
is  always  careful  to  leave  a  small  space  between  the  head  and  tail  of  the  snake,  so
that  the  members  of  the  family  can  go  down  to  the  spring  to  get  water.
1  Hewitt.  Cosmogonic  Gods  of  the  Iroquois,  in  Proc.  Am.  Ass.  Adv.  Sci.,  xliv.  1895.
!  History  of  Carolina,  ed.  I860,  p.  35.
;  Traditions  of  the  Thompson  River  Indians  of  British  Columbia,  collected  and  annotated  by  James
Teit.  with  introduction  by  Franz  Boas  (Memoirs  of  the  American  Folk  I.i.n  Society,  VI);  Huston
and  New  York,  1898,  p.  74.
1!'    ETH— 01   28


434  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
Wolves — The  wolf  is  regarded  as  the  servant  and  watchdog  of  Kana'tT.  See
number  15,  "The  Fourfooted  Tribes."
Prom  these  havi  comeatt — In  nearly  every  Indian  mythology  we  find  the  idea  of
certain  animal  tribes  being  descended  from  a  single  survivor  of  some  great  slaughter
by  an  early  hero  god  or  trickster.  Thus  the  Kiowa  say  that  all  the  prairie  dogs  on
the  plains  are  descended  from  a  single  little  fellow  who  was  too  wary  to  close  his  eyes,
as  his  companions  did,  when  the  hungry  vagrant  Sinti  was  planning  to  capture  them
all  for  his  dinner  under  pretense  of  teaching  them  a  new  dance.
.1  gaming  wheel — This  was  the  stone  wheel  or  circular  disk  used  in  the  wheel-and-
stick  game  called  by  the  Cherokee  gatayustl,  and  which  in  one  form  or  another
was  practically  universal  among  the  tribes.  It  was  the  game  played  by  the  great
mythic  gambler  I'fitsaiyi'  (see  number  63).  It  has  sometimes  been  known  in  the
north  as  the  "snow-snake,"  while  to  the  early  southern  traders  it  was  known  as
chunki  or  chungkey,  a  corruption  of  the  Greek  name.  Timberlake  (page  77)  men-
tions it  under  the  name  of  iirttcatintir — for  which  there  seems  to  he  no  other
authority — as  he  saw  it  among  the  Cherokee  in  1762.1  It  was  also  noted  among  the
Carolina  tribes  by  Lederer  in  1670  and  Lawson  in  1701.  John  Ax,  the  oldest  man
now  living  among  the  East  Cherokee,  is  the  only  one  remaining  in  the  tribe  who  has
ever  played  the  game,  having  been  instructed  in  it  when  a  small  boy  by  an  old  man
who  desired  to  keep  up  the  memory  of  the  ancient  things.  The  sticks  used  have
long  since  disappeared,  but  the  stones  remain,  being  frequently  picked  up  in  the
plowed  fields,  especially  in  the  neighborhood  of  mounds.  The  best  description  of
the  southern  game  is  given  by  Adair:
"They  have  near  their  state  house  a  square  piece  of  ground  well  cleaned,  and  line
sand  is  carefully  strewed  over  it,  when  requisite,  to  promote  a  swifter  motion  to  what
they  throw  along  the  surface.  Only  one,  or  two  on  a  side,  play  at  this  ancient  game.
They  have  a  stone  about  two  fingers  broad  at  the  edge  and  two  spans  round.  Each
party  has  a  pole  of  about  eight  feet  long,  smooth,  and  tapering  at  each  end,  the  points
flat.  They  set  off  abreast  of  each  other  at  6  yards  from  the  end  of  the  playground;
then  one  of  them  hurls  the  stone  on  its  edge,  in  as  direct  a  line  as  he  can,  a  considera-
ble distance  toward  the  middle  of  the  other  end  of  the  square.  When  they  have  ran
[sif]  a  few  yards  each  darts  his  pole,  anointed  with  bear's  oil,  with  a  proper  force,  as
near  as  he  can  guess  in  proportion  to  the  motion  of  the  stone,  that  the  end  may  lie
close  to  the  stone.  When  this  is  the  case,  the  person  counts  two  of  the  game,  and  in
proportion  to  the  nearness  of  the  poles  to  the  mark,  one  is  counted,  unless  by  meas-
uring both  are  found  to  be  at  an  equal  distance  from  the  stone.  In  this  manner  the
players  will  keep  running  most  part  of  the  day  at  half  speed,  under  the  violent  heat
of  the  sun,  staking  their  silver  ornaments,  their  nose,  finger  and  ear  rings;  their
breast,  arm  and  wrist  plates,  and  even  all  their  wearing  apparel  except  that  which
barely  covers  their  middle.  All  the  American  Indians  are  much  addicted  to  this
game,  which  to  us  appears  to  be  a  task  of  stupid  drudgery.  It  seems,  however,  to  be
of  early  origin,  when  their  forefathers  used  diversions  as  simple  as  their  manners.
The  hurling  stones  they  use  at  present  were  time  immemorial  rubbed  smooth  on  the
rocks,  and  with  prodigious  labour.  They  are  kept  with  the  strictest  religious  care
from  one  generation  to  another,  and  are  exempted  from  being  buried  with  the  dead.
They  belong  to  the  town  where  they  are  used,  and  are  carefully  preserved."  2
In  one  version  of  the  Kana'ti  myth  the  wheel  is  an  arrow,  which  the  wild  boy
shoots  toward  the  four  cardinal  points  and  finally  straight  upward,  when  it  comes
back  no  more.  When  they  get  above  the  sky  they  find  Kana'ti  and  Selu  sitting
together,  with  the  arrow  sticking  in  the  ground  in  front  of  them.  In  the  Creek
story,  "The  Lion  [Panther?]  and  the  Little  Girl,"  of  the  Tuggle  collection,  the  lion
has  a  wheel  "which  could  find  anything  that  was  lost."
1  Memoirs,  p.  77.
2  History  of  the  American  Indians,  p.  401.


NOTES     \M>    PARALLELS  135
The  twilight  land — I'sunhi'vl,  "Where  it  is  alwaj  -  gro^  ing  'lark."  the  spirit  land  in the  west.    Tliis  i-  the  word  constantly  used  in  the  sacred  formulas  to  denote  the
west,  instead  of  th<   linarj  word  Wude'ligun'yl,  "Where  it  sets."    In  the  same  way
Nufida'yl,  or  Nftndagufi'yl,  the  "Sun  place,  or  region,"  is  the  formulistic  name  for  the
easl  instead  of  DigiilunguiVyl,  "Where  il  [i.e.,  the  sun]  comes  up,"  the  ordinary
term.  These  archaic  expressions  give  to  myths  and  formulas  a  peculiar  beaut j  which
is  lost  in  the  translation.  As  the  interpreter  once  said,  "I  love  t"  bear  these  old
words."
Struck  l'ii  lightning — With  tin-  American  tribes,  as  in  Europe,  a  mysterious  potency
attaches  to  the  Vi   1  of  a  tree  which  has  been  struck  by  lightning.     The  Cherokee
conjurers  claim  to  do  wonderful  things  by  means  of  such  wood.     Splinb  i
frequently  buried  in  tin-  field  to  make  the  corn  grow.     It  must  not  )«■  forgotten  that
the  boys  in  this  myth  an-  Thunder  Boys.
The  •  ml  oflhi  world — See  note-  to  number  7.  "The  Journey  to  the  Sunrise."
Anisga'ya  Tsunsdi' — Abbreviated  from  ^nisga'ya  Tsunsdi'ga,  "Little  Men."
These  two  sons  of  Kana'ti,  «  ho  are  sometimes  called  Thunder  Boys  and  who  live  in
in  Osuflhi'yl  above  the,  sky  vault,  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  Yunwl  Tsunsdi',
or  "Little  People,"  who  are  also  Thunderers,  but  who  live  in  caves  of  the  rocks  and
cause  the  short,  sharp  claps  of  thunder.  There  is  also  the  Great  Thunderer,  the
thunder  of  the  whirlwind  and  the  hurricane,  who  seen  is  to  be  identical  with  Kana'ti
himself.
Deer  songs — The  Indian  hunters  of  the  "Men  time  had  many  songs  intended  to
call  up  the  deer  and  the  hear.  Must  of  these  have  perished,  but  a  tew  are  still
remembered.  They  were  sung  by  the  hunter,  with  some  accompanying  ceremony,  to
a  sweetly  plaintive  tune,  either  before  starting  out  or  on  reaching  the  hunting  ground.
One  Cherokee  deer  song,  sung  with  repetition,  may  he  freely  rendered:
O  Deer,  you  stand  close  by  the  tree.
You  sweeten  your  saliva  with  acorns.
Now  you  are  standing  near.
You  have  conic  win-re  your  food  rests  on  the  ground.
Gatechet,  in  his  Creek  Migration  Legend  I  i.  p.  79),  gives  the  following  translation
of  a  Hichitee  deer  hunting  song:
Somewhere  'the  deer)  lies  on  tin-  ground,  I  think;  I  walk  about.
Awake,  arise,  stand  up!
It  is  raising  up  its  head.  1  believe;  I  walk  about
Awake,  arise,  stand  up!
It  attempts  to  rise,  I  believe;  I  walk  about.
Awake,  arise,  stand  up!
Slowly  it  raises  its  body,   I  think;   1  walk  about.
Awake,  arise,  stand  up!
It  has  now  risen  on  its  feet.  I  presume;   I  walkabout.
Awake,  arise,  stand  up!
4.  Origin  of  disease  and  medicine  i  p.  250):  This  myth  was  obtained  first  from
Swimmer,  as  explaining  the  theory  upon  which  i-  based  the  medical  practiceof  the
Cherokee  doctor.       It    was  afterward    heard,  with    less  detail,  from   John    Ax     easl
and   James   Wafford    (west).      It  was  originally  published   in   the  author's  Sacred
Formulas  of   the   Cherokees,    in    the   Seventh    Annual    Report    of    the    Bureau  of
Ethnology.
In  the  mythology  of  most  Indian  tribes,  as  well  as  of  primitive  peoples  generally,
disea-e  is  caused  bj  animal  spirits,  ghosts,  or  witchcraft,  and  the  doctor's  efforts  are
directed  chiefly  to  driving  out  the  malevolent  spirit.  In  Creek  belief,  according  to
the  Tuggle  manuscript,  "all  disease  is  caused  by  the  winds,  which  are  horn  in  the
air  and  then  descend   to  the  earth."      It   i.s  doubtful,  however,  if  this  .statement  is


436  MYTHS    OF    THK    CHEROKEE  [Era-
intended  to  apply  to  more  than  a  few  classes  of  disease,  and  another  myth  in  the
same  collection  recites  that  "once  upon  a  time  the  beasts,  birds,  and  reptiles  held  a
council  to  devise  means  to  destroy  the  enemy,  man."  For  an  extended  discussion  of
the  Indian  medical  theory,  see  the  author's  paper  mentioned  above.
Animal  chiefsand  tribes — For  an  exposition  of  the  Cherokee  theory  of  the  tribal
organization  of  the  animals,  with  townhouses  and  councils,  under  such  chiefs  as  the
White  Bear,  the  Little  Deer,  etc.,  see  number  15,    •The  Fourfooted  Tribes."
Kwicd'hH  mountain — "The  Mulberry  place,"  one  of  the  high  peaks  in  the  Great
Smoky  mountains,  on  the  dividing  line  between  Swain  county,  Xorth  Carolina,  and
Sevier  county,  Tennessee.     The  bears  have  a  townhou.se  under  it.
Ask  thi  bear's  pardon — See  number  15,  "The  Fourfooted  Tribes,"  and  notes.
The  ground  squirrel' s  stripes — According  to  a  Creek  myth  in  the  Tuggle  collection
the  stripes  on  the  back  of  the  ground  squirrel  wen-  made  by  the  bear,  who  scratched
the  little  fellow  in  anger  at  a  council  held  by  the  animals  to  decide  upon  the  proper
division  of  day  and  night.  Precisely  the  same  explanation  is  given  by  the  Iroquois
of  New  York  state1  and  by  the  Thompson  River  Indians  of  British  Columbia. -
5.  The  Daughteb  of  the  Sun:  Origin  of  death  (p.  252):  This  is  one  of  the
principal  myths  of  the  Cherokee,  and  like  most  of  its  class,  has  several  variants.
The  sequel  has  an  obvious  resemblance  to  the  myth  of  Pandora.  It  was  obtained  in
whole  or  in  part  from  Swimmer,  John  Ax,, James  Blythe,  and  others  of  the  eastern
band.  The  version  mainly  followed  is  that  of  Swimmer,  which  differs  in  important
details  from  that  of  John  Ax.
As  told  by  John  Ax,  it  is  the  Sun  herself,  instead  of  her  daughter,  who  is  killed,
the  daughter  having  been  assigned  the  duty  of  lighting  the  earth  after  the  death  of
her  mother,  the  original  Sun.  The  only  snakes  mentioned  are  the  Spreading  Adder
and  the  Rattlesnake,  the  first  being  a  transformed  man,  while  the  other  is  a  stick,
upon  which  the  Little  Men  cut  seven  rings  before  throwing  it  in  the  pathway  of  the
Sun,  where  it  becomes  a  rattlesnake.  The  seven  rods  or  staves  of  the  Swimmer  ver-
sion are  with  John  Ax  seven  corncobs,  which  are  thrown  at  the  girl  as  she  passes
in  the  dance  (ef.  Hagar  variant  of  number  8  in  notes) .  The  Little  Men  (see  number  3,
"  Kana'tl  and  Selu,"  and  other  stories)  belong  to  the  John  Ax  version.  The  others
have  only  a  conjurer  or  chief  to  direct  proceedings.
This  myth  is  noted  in  the  Payne  manuscript,  of  date  about  1835,  quoted  in  Squier,
Serpent  Symbol,  page  67:  ''The  Cherokees  state  that  a  number  of  beings  were
engaged  in  the  creation.  The  Sun  was  made  first.  The  intention  of  the  creators
was  that  men  should  live  always.  But  the  Sun,  when  he  passed  over,  told  them
that  there  was  not  land  enough  and  that  people  had  better  die.  At  length  the
daughter  of  the  Sun,  who  was  with  them,  was  bitten  by  a  snake  and  died.  The
Sun.  on  his  return,  inquired  for  her  and  was  told  that  she  was  dead.  He  then  con-
sented that  human  beings  might  live  always,  ami  told  them  to  take  a  box  and  go
where  the  spirit  of  his  daughter  was  and  bring  it  back  to  her  body,  charging  them
that  when  they  got  her  spirit  they  should  not  open  the  box  until  they  had  arrived
where  her  body  was.  However,  impelled  by  curiosity,  they  opened  it,  contrary  to
the  injunction  of  the  Sun,  and  the  spirit  escaped;  and  then  the  fate  of  all  men  was
decided,  that  they  must  die."  This  is  copied  without  credit  by  Foster,  Sequoyah,
page  241.
Another  version  is  thus  given  by  the  missionary  Buttrick,  who  died  in  1847,  in
his  Antiquities  of  the  Cherokee  Indians,  page  3:  "Soon  after  the  creation  one  of  the
family  was  bitten  by  a  serpent  and  died.  All  possible  means  were  resorted  to  to
bring  back  life,  but  in  vain.  Being  overcome  in  this  first  instance,  the  whole  race
was  doomed  to  follow,  not  only  to  death,  but  to  misery  afterwards,  as  it  was  supposed
1  Ercnimtie  Smith,  Mythsof  the  Iroquois,  in  Second  Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology,
2Teit,  Thompson  River  Traditions,  p.  61.


moosey]  NOTES    ami    PAEALLELS  4.'57
thai  i hat  person  w.-iit  t   isery.      Another  tradition  saj  s  that  -.ion  after  tin-  creation
a  young  woman  «a-  bitten  bj  a  serpent  ami  died,  and  her  spirit  went  to  a  certain
place,  and  the  people  were  told  that  if  they  would  get  her  spirit  back  to  her  body
that  the  body  would  live  again,  ami  they  would  prevent  the  general  mortality  of  the
bod\  Some  young  men  therefore  started  with  a  box  to  catch  the  spirit.  They
went  to  a  place  ami  saw  it  dancing  about,  an. I  at  length  caught  it  in  the  box  and
shut  the  lid,  so  as  to  confine  it.  an. I  started  hack.  But  tin-  spirit  kept  constantlj
pleading  with  them  to  ..pen  the  box,  so  as  to  afford  a  little  light,  hut  they  hurried
on  until  they  arrived  near  the  place  H  here  the  ho.lv  was,  an. I  then,  on  account  of  her
peculiar  urgencj .  the)  re   ved  the  li'l  a  very  little,  and  out   flew  the  spirit  and  was
gone,  and  with  it  all  their  hopes  of  immortality."
In  a  variant  noted  by  II  agar  the  messengers  cany  tour  staves  and  are  seven  .lays
traveling  to  the  ghost  country.  "They  found  her  dancing  in  the  land  <.i  spirits.
They  struck  her  with  the  first  'stick.'  it  produced  no  effect  — with  the  second,  and  she
ceased  to  .lance — with  the  third,  and  she  looked  around — with  the  fourth,  and  she
came  to  them.  They  made  a  l>ox  and  placed  her  in  it."  He  was  told  by  one
informant:  "(Inly  one  man  ever  returned  from  the  land  of  souls.  He  went  there  in
a  dream  after  a  snake  had  struck  him  in  the  forehead.  He,  Turkey-head,  came  hack
seven  days  after  and  described  it  all.  The  dead  go  eastward  at  first,  then  westward
to  the  Land  of  Twilight.  It  is  in  the  west  in  the  sky,  but  not  amongst  the  stars"
(Stellar  Legends  of  the  Cherokee,  Ms,  1898).
In  a  Shawano  myth  a  girl  dies.  and.  after  grieving  long  for  her.  her  brother  sets
out  to  bring  her  hack  from  the  land  of  shadows.  He  travels  west  until  he  reaches
the  place  w  here  the  earth  and  sky  meet;  then  he  goes  through  and  climbs  up  on  the
other  side  until  he  comes  t..  the  house  ..I  a  great  beneficent  spirit,  who  is  designated,
according  to  the  Indian  system  of  respect,  as  grandfather.  On  learning  his  errand
this  helper  gives  him  " medicine "  by  which  he  will  he  able  to  enter  the  spirit
world,  and  instructs  him  how  and  in  what  direction  to  proceed  to  tin. 1  his  sister.
'■  He  -aid  she  would  he  at  a  dance,  and  when  she  rose  to  join  in  the  movement  he
must  seize  and  ensconce  her  in  the  hollow  of  a  reed  with  which  he  was  furnished,
and  cover  the  orifice  with  the  end  of  his  linger.''  lie  does  as  directed,  secures  his
sister,  and  returns  to  the  house  of  hi-  instructor,  who  transforms  both  into  material
beings  again,  an. I,  after  giving  them  sacred  rituals  to  take  hack  to  their  tribe,  dis-
misses them  by  a  shorter  route  through  a  trapdoor  in  the  sky.1
In  an  Algonquian my th  of  New  Brunswick  a  bereaved  fatherseeks  his  son's  soul  in
the  spirit  domain  of  Papkootpawut,  the  Indian  Pluto,  who  gives  it  to  him  in  the  shape
..I  a  nut.  which  he  is  told  to  insert  in  his  son's  body,  when  the  hoy  will  come  to
lit.-,  lie  puts  it  into  a  pouch. and  returns  with  the  friends  who  had  accompanied
him.      Preparations  are  made  for  a  dance  of  rejoicing.      "The  father,  wishing  to  take
part  in  it.  gave  his  son's  soul  to  the  keeping  of  a  squaw  who  st   1  by.      Being  curious
to  see  it.  she  opened  the  bag,  on  which  it  escaped  at  once  and  took  its  flight  for  the
realms  ..f  Papkootpawut."  ■'  In  a  myth  from  British  <  lolumbia  two  brothers  go  upon
a  similar  errand  to  bring  hack  their  mother's  soul.  After  crossing  over  a  great  lake
they  approach  the  shore  ..f  the  spirit  world  ami  hear  tin-  sound  of  singing  and  danc-
ing in  the  distance,  hut  are  stopped  at  the  landing  by  a  sentinel,  who  tells  them:
''Your  mother  is  here,  hut  you  cannot  enter  alive  to  see  her.  neither  can  you  take
her  away."  One  of  them  said,  "1  must  see  her!"  Then  the  man  took 'his  body  or
mortal  part  away  fr    him  and  he  entered.      The  other  brother  came  back.'
i  hi  i., urn:.:  ol  .1  Santa  1  e  I  radi  r  During  Eight
Expeditions  across  the  Great  Western  Prairiesand  .1  Residence  ■■<  Nearl;  Nine  Veais  In  Northern
Mexico;  vol.  11,  pp.  289-240;  New  Yorkand  I...111I..11,  1844.
Parkman,  The  Jesuits  in  North  v   rics  in  the  Seventeenth  Century,  second  edition,  p.
lxxxiii  (qu  Le  1  B       »n,  1867.
»Teit,  Thompson  River  Truditiom


438  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.anx.19
In  the  ancient  Egyptian  legend  of  Ici  and  Isis,  preserved  in  a  Turin  papyrus  dating
from  the  twentieth  dynasty,  the  goddess  Isis,  wishing  to  force  from  the  great  god
Ra,  the  sun.  the  secret  of  his  power,  sends  a  serpent  to  bite  him,  with  the  intention
of  demanding  the  secret  for  herself  as  the  price  of  assistance.  Taking  some  of  her
spittle,  "Isis  with  her  hand  kneaded  it  together  with  the  earth  that  was  there.  She
made  thereof  a  sacred  serpent  unto  which  she  gave  the  form  of  a  spear.  She  .  .  .
cast  it  mi  the  way  which  the  great  god  traversed  in  his  double  kingdom  whenever
he  would.  The  venerable  god  advanced,  the  gods  who  served  him  as  their  Pharaoh
followed  him,  he  went  forth  as  on  every  day.  Then  the  sacred  serpent  hit  him.
The  divine  god  opened  Ids  mouth  and  his  cry  reached  unto  heaven  .  .  .  The  poison
seized  on  his  flesh,"  etc.'
77c  sky  vault— See  other  references  in  number  1,  "  How  the  AVorld  was  Made;"
number  :;,  "  Kanati  ami  Selu,"  and  number  7,  "The  Journey  to  the  Sunrise."
My  grandchildren — The  Sun  calls  the  people  tsufigili'si,  "my  grandchildren,"  this
being  the  term  used  by  maternal  grandparents,  the  corresponding  term  used  by
paternal  grandparents  being  tsungini'si.  The  Moon  calls  the  people  tsunkina'ttt,  "  my
younger  brothers,"  the  term  used  by  a  male  speaking,  the  Moon  being  personified
as  a  man  in  Cherokee  mythology.  The  corresponding  term  used  by  a  female  is
MnkitcV.
Tin  Little  Mi  a — The  Thunder  Boys,  sons  of  Kana'ti  (see  number  :J.,  "  Kana'tl  ami
Selu  "  I.      They  are  always  represented  as  beneficent  wonder  workers,  of  great  power.
Changed  In  makes — The  Cherokee  names  of  the  rattlesnake  (Crotalus),  copper-
head i  Trigonocephalus),  and  spreading  adder  (Helerodon)  are,  respectively,  utsa'nati,
"  lie  has  a  bell  "  ('.');  wd'dige'i  askd'U,  "  red-brown  head";  and  da'tlksW,  "  vomiter,"
from  its  habit  of  vomiting  yellow  slime,  as  is  told  in  the  story.  For  more  concerning
the  Uktena  see  number  50,  "The  Dktena  and  the  Ulunsu'ti."
Hand-breadth — See  note  to  number  1,  "How  the  World  was  Made."
6.   How  they  brought  back  the  tobacco  {p.  254) :  The  first  version  of  this  myth
as  here  given  was  obtained  fr    Swimmer,  and  agrees  with  that  of  John  Ax,  except
that  for  the  humming  bird  the  latter  substitutes  the  wamHJ,,  or  large  red-brown  moth,
which  flies  about  the  tobacco  flower  in  the  evening,  and  states  that  it  was  selected
because  it  could  fly  so  quietly  that  it  would  not  be  noticed.  The  second  version  was
obtained  from  Watford,  in  the  Cherokee  Nation  west,  who  heard  it  from  his  great-
uncle  nearly  ninety  years  ago,  and  differs  so  much  from  the  other  that  it  has  seemed
best  to  give  it  separately.  The  incident  of  the  tree  which  grows  taller  as  the  man
climbs  it  has  close  parallels  in  the  mythology  of  the  Kiowa  and  other  Western
tribes,  but  has  no  obvious  connection  with  the  story,  and  is  probably  either  one  of
a  series  of  adventures  originally  belonging  to  tin-  trip  or  else  a  fragment  from  some
otherwise  forgotten  myth.  It  may  be  mentioned  that  Watford  was  a  man  of  rather
practical  character,  with  but  little  interest  or  memory  I'm'  stories,  being  able  to  till  in details  of  but  few  of  the  large  number  which  he  remembered  having  heard  when
a  1  loy .
In  his  Letters  from  the  Alleghany  Mountains,  pages  1 19-121 ,  Lanman  gives  the  story
asl   btained  it  in  1848  from  Chief  Kalahu  (see  p.  17.". ),  still  well  remembered  by  those
who  knew  him  as  an  authority  upon  tribal  traditions  and  ritual.  In  the  Kalahu
version  the  story  is  connected  with  Hiekorynut  gap,  a  remarkable  pass  in  the  Blue
ridge  southeast  from  Asheville.  North  Carolina,  and  a  comparison  with  the  later
versions  shows  clearly  how  much  has  been  lost  in  fifty  years.  The  whole  body  of
Cherokee  tradition  has  probably  suffered  a  proportionate  loss.
"Before  visiting  this  remarkable  passage  through  the  mountains  [Hiekorynut  gap],
I  endeavored  to  ascertain,  from  the  Cherokees  of  Qualla  town,  its  original   Indian
1  Alfred  Wiedemann,  Religion  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians;  New  Yurk,  1897,  p.


NOTES     \NI>    PABALLELS  4:i'.l
aame,  bu1  without  succeeding.  It  was  my  good  fortune,  however,  to  obtain  a  roman-
tic legend  connected  therewith.     T  heard  it  from  the  lips  of  a  chief  who  glories  in  the
aes  of  Ul-bones  and  Flying-squirrel,  and,  though  he  occupied  no  li
two  hours  in  telling  the  story,  I  will  endeavor  to  give  it  to  my  readers  in  about   five
minutes
"There  was  a  time  when  the  Cherokees  were  without  the  famous  txo-hmgh,  or
tobacco  weed,  with  which  they  had  previously  been  made  acquainted  bj  a  wander-
ing stranger  from  tlic  far  east.  Having  smoked  it  in  their  large  stone  pipes,  they
became  impatient  to  obtain  it  in  abundance.  The)  ascertained  that  the  country
where  it  grew  in  the  greatest  quantities  was  situated  on  the  big  wains,  and  that  the
gateway  t"  that  country  (a  mighty  gorge  among  the  mountains)  was  perpetually
guarded  by  an  immense  number  of  little  people  or  spirits.  A  council  of  the
men  in  the  nation  was  called,  and,  while  they  urn-  discussing  the  dangers  of  \  isiting
the  unknown  country,  and  bringing  therefrom  a  large  knapsack  of  the  fragrant
tobacco,  a  young  man  stepped  boldly  forward  and  saiil  that  he  would  undertake  tin-
task.  The  young  warrior  departed  on  his  mission  and  never  returned.  The  Cherokee
nation  was  now  in  great  tribulation,  and  another  council  was  held  to  decide  upon  a
new  measure.  At  this  council  a  celebrated  magician  rose  and  expressed  his  willing-
ness to  relieve  his  ]   pie  of  their  difficulties,  and  informed  them  that  he  would  \  i>it
the  tobacco  country  and  see  what   he  could  a<   mplish.     He  turned  himself  into  a
mole,  and  as  such  made  his  appearance  eastward  of  the  mountains;  but  having  been
pursued  by  the  guardian  spirits,  he  was  compelled  to  return  without  any  spoil.  He
next  turned  himself  into  a  humming-bird,  and  thus  succeeded,  to  a  very  limited
extent,  in  obtaining  what  he  needed.  On  returning  to  his  country  he  found  a  num-
ber of  his  friends  at  the  point  of  death,  on  account  of  their  intense  desire  for  the
fragrant  weed;  whereupon  he  placed  some  of  it  in  a  pipe,  and,  having  blown  the
smoke  into  the  nostrils  of  those  who  were  siek,  they  all  revived  and  were  quite
happy  The  magician  now  took  into  his  head  that  he  would  revenge  the  loss  of  the
young  warrior,  and  at  the  same  time  become  the  sole  p.  issessor  of  all  the  tobacco  in
tin-  unknown  land,  lie  therefore  turned  himself  into  a  whirlwind,  and  in  passing
through  the  Hickorynut  gorge  be  stripped  the  mountains  of  their  vegetation,  and
scattered  huge  rocks  in  every  part  of  the  narrow  valley;  whereupon  the  little  ]   pie
were  all  frightened  away,  and  he  was  the  only  being  in  the  country  eastward  of  the
mountains.  In  the  bed  of  a  stream  he-  found  the  bones  of  the  young  warrior,  ami
having  brought  them  to  life,  and  turned  himself  into  ;i  man  again,  the  twain  returned
to  their  own  country  heavily  laden  with  tobacco;  and  ever  since  that  time  it  has
been  very  abundant  throughout  the  entire  land."
In  the  Iroquois  story  of  "The  Lad  and  the  Chestnuts,'*  the  ( Iherokee  myth  is  par-
alleled with  the  substitution  of  :t  chestnut  tree  guarded  by  a  white  heron  for  the
tobacco  plant  watched  by  the  daguTkfi  geese  (see  Smith,  .Myths  of  the  Iroquois,  in
Second  Annual  Report  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  L883).
7',,/,,/rrr. — Tobacco,  a-  i-  well  known,  is  of  American  origin  and  is  sacred  among
nearly  all  our  tribes,  having  an  important  place  in  almost  every  deliberative  or  reli-
gious ceremony.     Thetobaci   i  commerce  (Nicotiana  labacum)  wa-  introduced  from
the  West  Indie-.     The  original  tobacco  of  the  <  Iherokee  and  other  eastern  tribes  «  as
the  "  wild  tobacco"  (Nicotiana rustica) ,  which  they  distinguish  now  as  Udl-ag
"old  tobacco."     By  the  Iroquois  the  same  species  i^  called  the  "real  tobacco."
Dag&tkfi  geese. — The  daguT'ku  is  the  American  w  hite-fronted  goose  i  Anst  r  albifroiw
gambeli).  It  is  said  to  have  been  of  bluish-white  color,  and  to  have  been  common
in  the  low  country  toward  the  coast,  hut  very  ran-  in  the  mountains.  Ahout  the
end  of  September  it  L"»s  south,  and  can  he  heard  at  night  flying  far  overhead  and
crying  dugalu!  dugalu!  dugalu!  Swimmer  had  heard  them  passing  over,  hut  had
nevi  r  -ci,  one.


440  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEIIOKEE  [eth.ann.19
7.  The  journey  to  the  sunrise  (]>.  255):  This  story,  obtained  from  John  Ax,
with  additional  details  by  Swimmer  and  Wafford.  has  parallels  in  many  tribes.
Swimmer  did  not  know  the  burial  incident,  but  said — evidently  a  more  recent  inter-
polation— that  when  they  came  near  the  sunrise  they  found  therea  race  of  Mack  men
at  work.  It  is  somewhat  remarkable  that  the  story  has  nothing  to  say  of  the  travelers
reaching  the  ocean,  as  the  Cherokee  were  well  aware  of  its  proximity.
What  the  Sun  is  like — According  to  the  Payne  manuscript,  already  quoted,  the
Cherokee  anciently  believed  that  the  world,  the  first  man  and  woman,  and  the  sun
and  moon  were  all  created  by  a  number  of  beneficent  beings  who  came  down  for  the
purpose  from  an  upper  world,  to  which  they  afterward  returned,  leaving  the  sun  and
moon  as  their  deputies  to  finish  and  rule  the  world  thus  created.  "Hence  \\  believer
the  believers  in  this  system  offer  a  prayer  to  their  creator,  they  mean  by  the  creator
rather  the  Sun  and  Moon.  As  to  which  of  these  two  was  supreme,  then-  seems  to
have  been  a  wide  difference  of  opinion.  In  some  of  their  ancient  prayers,  thej  speak
of  the  Sun  as  mail',  and  consider,  of  course,  the  Moon  as  female.  In  others,  however,
they  invoke  the  Moon  as  male  and  the  Sun  as  female;  because,  as  they  say,  the
Moon  is  vigilant  and  travels  by  night.  But  both  Sun  and  Moon,  as  we  have  before
said,  are  adored  as  the  creator.  .  .  .  The  expression,  'Sun,  my  creator,'  occurs frequently  in  their  ancient  prayers.     Indeed,  the  Sun  was  generally  considered  the
superior  in  their  devotions"  (quoted  in  Squier,  Serpent  Symbol,  p.  68).     Hayw   1.
in  1823,  says:  "The  sun  they  call  the  day  moon  or  female,  anil  the  night  moon  the
male"  (  Nat.  and  Aborig.  Hist.  Tenn.,  p.  266).  According  to  Swimmer,  there  is  also a  tradition  that  the  Sun  was  of  cannibal  habit,  and  in  human  form  was  once  seen
killing  and  devouring  human  beings.  Sun  and  Moon  are  sister  and  brother.  See
number  S,  "The  Moon  and  the  Thunders."
The  Indians  of  Thompson  river,  British  Columbia,  say  of  the  sun  that  formerly
"He  was  a  man  and  a  cannibal,  killing  people  on  his  travels  every  day.     .     .  He
hung  up  the  people  whom  he  had  killed  during  his  day's  travel  when  he  reached
home,  taking  down  the  bodies  of  those  whom  he  had  hung  up  the  night  before  and
eating  them."  He  was  finally  induced  to  abandon  his  cannibal  habit  (Teit,  Thomp-
son River  Traditions,  p.  53).
Tn  the  same  grave — This  reminds  us  of  the  adventure  in  the  voyage  of  Sinbad  the
Sailor,  as  narrated  in  the  Arabian  Nights.  The  sacrifice  of  the  wife  at  her  husband's
funeral  was  an  ancient  custom  in  the  Orient  and  in  portions  of  Africa,  ami  still  survives
in  the  Hindu  suttee.  It  may  once  have  had  a  counterpart  in  America,  but  so  far  as
known  to  the  author  the  nearest  approach  to  it  was  found  in  the  region  of  the  lower
Columbia  and  adjacent  northwest  coast,  where  a  slave  was  frequently  buried  alive
with  the  corpse.
Vault  of  solid  rock — The  sky  vault  which  is  constantly  rising  and  falling  at  the
horizon  and  crushes  those  who  try  to  go  beyond  occurs  in  the  mythologies  of  the
Iroquois  of  New  York,  the  Omaha  and  the  Sioux  of  the  plains,  the  Tillamook  of
Oregon,  ami  other  widely  separated  tribes.  The  Iroquois  concept  is  given  by  Hewitt,
"Rising  and  Falling  of  the  Sky,"  in  Iroquois  Legends,  in  the  American  Anthropolo-
gist for  October,  1892.  In  the  Omaha  story  of  "The  Chief's  Son  ami  the  Thunders"
l  I  >orsey,  ( iontributions  to  North  American  Ethnology,  vi.  1890),  a  party  of  travelers  in
search  of  adventures  "came  to  the  end  of  the  sky,  and  the  end  of  the  sky  was  going
down  into  the  ground."  They  tried  to  jump  across,  and  all  succeeded  excepting  one,
who  tailed  to  clear  the  distance,  and  "the  end  of  the  sky  carried  him  away  under  the
ground."  The  others  go  on  behind  the  other  world  and  return  the  same  way.  In
the  Tillamook  myth  six  men  go  traveling  anil  reach  "the  lightning  door,  which
opened  and  closed  with  great  rapidity  and  force."  They  get  through  safely,  but.  one
is  caught  on  the  return  and  has  his  back  cut  in  half  by  the  descending  sky  (Boas,
Traditions  of  the  Tillamook  Indians,  in  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  Jan.,  1898).
See  also  number  1,  " How  the  World  was  Made"  and  number  3,  "  Kana'tt  and  Selu."


■ooney]  NOTES    AND    PARALLELS  411
8.  The  Moon  and  the  Thundebs  [p.   256):  The  story  of  tin- sun  and  the    in,
as  here  given,  was  obtained  first  from  Swimmer  and  afterward  from  other  inform-
ants, ft  is  noted  by  Hagar,  in  his  manuscript  Stellar  Legends  of  the  Cherokee,  one
narrator  making  the  girl  blacken  her  brother's  face  u  ith  seven  i  charred?  i  corn  cobs
(cf.  John  \\'s  version  of  number  5  in  notes).  Exactly  the  same  myth  is  found with  the  native  tribes  of  Greenland,  Panama,  Brazil,  and  Northern  [ndia.  Among
the  Khasiaa  of  the  Himalaya  mountains  "  the  changes  of  the  moon  are  accounted  for
by  the  theorj  that  this  orb,  who  is  a  man,  i   ithlj   falls  in  love  with  his  wife's
  titer,    who   throws  ashes   in    his   face.      The  sun   is   female."      On    some    northern
branches  of  the  Amazon  "the  moon  is  represented  as  a  maiden  who  fell  in  love  with
her  brother  and  visited  him  at  night,  but  who  was  finally  betrayed  by  his  passing
his  blackened  hand  over  her  face."  With  the  Greenland  Eskimo  the  Sun  and  Moon
are  sister  and  brother,  and  were  playing  in  the  dark,  "when  Malina,  being  teased
in  a  shameful  manner  by  her  brother  Anninga,  smeared  her  hands  with  the  soot  of
the  lamp  and  rubbed  them  over  the  face  and  I  muds  of  her  persecutor,  that  sin-  might
recognize  him  by  daylight.  Hence  arise  the  spots  in  the  moon  (see  Timothy  liar-
lev.  Moon  Lore.  London,  1885,  and  the  story  "The  Sun  and  the  Moon."  in  Henry
Rink'sTales  and  Traditions  of  the  Eskimo,  London,  1875).  In  British  Columbia
the  same  incident  occurs  in  the  story  of  a  -_drl  and  her  lover,  who  was  a  dog  trans-
formed to  the  likeness  of  a  man  (  Teit,  Thompson  River  Traditions,  p.  62).  A  v.  ry
similar  myth  occurs  among  the  Cheyenne,  in  which  the  chief  personages  are  human,
but  the  offspring  of  the  connection  become  the  Pleiades  'A.  1..  Kroeber,  Cheyenne
Tales,  in  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  July,  1900).     In  nearly  all  mythologies  the
Sun  and  Moon  are  sister  and  brother,  the  M   i  being  generally  masculine,  while  the
Sun  is  feminine  (cf.  German,   l>erMond,   DieSotinel.
The  myth  connecting  the  moon  with  the  hallplay  is  from  Haywood  !  Natural  ami
Aboriginal  History  of  Tennessee,  p.  l's.'ii,  apparently  on  the  authority  of  Charles Hicks,  a  mixed-blood  chief.
Eclipse — Of  the  myth  of  tl   clipse  monster,  which  may  he  frightened  away  by
all  >orts  of  horrible  noises,  it  is  enough  to  say  that  it  is  universal  (see  Harley,  Moon
Lore).  The  Cherokee  name  for  the  phenomenon  is  n&fidii'  wald'st  u'giskCl',  "the
frog  is  swallowing  the  sun  or  moon."  Says  Adair  (History  of  the  American  Indians
p.65):  " The  first  lunar  eclipse  I  saw  titter  I  lived  with  the  Indians  was  among  the
Cherokee,  An.  1736,  and  during  the  continuance  of  it  their  conduct  appeared  very
surprizing  to  one  who  had  not  seen  the  like  before.  They  all  ran  wild,  this  way
and  that  way,  like  lunatics,  Bring  their  guns,  whooping  and  hallooing,  beating  of
kettles,  ringing  horse  bells,  and  making  the  most  horrid  noises  that  human  beings
possibly  could.  This  was  the  effect  of  their  natural  philosophy  and  done  to  assist
the  suffering  moon."
Sun  and  moon  names — In   probably  every  tribe  both  sun  and   i   mare  called  by
the  same  name,  accompanied  by  a  distinguishing  adjective.
Tin  Thunders— The  Cherokee  name  for  Thunder,  Ani'-Hyun'tlkwala'skl,  is  an
animate  plural  form  and  signifies  literally,  "The  Thunderers"  or  "  They  who  make
the  Thunder."     The  great  Thunderers  tire  Kana'ti  and   his  sons  (see  the  story  i.  but
inferior  thunder  spirits  people  all  the  cliffs  and  mountains,  and    re  particularly
thegreat  waterfalls,  such  as  Tallulah,  whose  never-ceasing  roar  is  believed  to  be  the
voice  of  the  Thunderers  speaking  to  such  as  can  understand.  \  similar  conception
prevailed  among  the  [roquois  and  the  eastern  tribes  generalh  .  ^.dair  says  (]  listory
of  the  American  Indians,  p.  65),  speaking  of  the  southern  tribes:  "1  havi
them  say,  when  it  mined,  thundered,  and  blew  sharp  for  a  considerable  time,  that
the  beloved  or  holy  people  were  at  war  above  the  clouds;  and  they  believe  that  the
war  at  such  times  i-  moderate  or  hot  in  proportion  to  the  noise  and  violence  of  the
storm."      In    Portuguese  West    Africa   also    tit.'   Thunderers  tire   twin    brothers  who
quarreled  ami  went,  one  to  tl   ast,  the  other  to  the  west,  whence  each  answers  the


•142  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [bth.ann.19
other  whenever  a  great  Btorm  arises.'  Among  the  plains  tribes  both  thunder  and
lightning  are  caused  by  ;i  great  bird.
Rainbow — The  conception  of  the  rainbow  as  the  beautiful  dress  of  the  Thunder  god
occurs  also  among  the  South  Sea  islanders.  In  Mangaia  it  is  the  girdle  of  tin-  ■_'■><  1
Tangaroa,  which  he  loosens  and  allows  to  hang  down  until  the  em  1  reaches  to  the
earth  whenever  he  wishes  to  descend  (Gill,  Myths  and  Songs  'if  tin'  South  Pacific,
p.  44  i.  For  some  unexplained  reason  the  dread  of  pointing  at  the  rainbow,  on  penalty
of  having  the  finger  wither  or  become  misshapen,  is  found  among  most  of  tin-  tribes
even  t< >  the  Pacific  coast.  Tin-  author  first  heard  of  it  from  a  Puyallup  boy  of  Puget
sound,  Washington.
ft.  What  the  stabs  are  like  I  p.  257):  This  story,  told  by  Swimmer,  embodies
the  old  tribal  belief.     By  a  different  informant  Hagar  was  told:     "Stars  are  birds.
We  know  Tlii—  because  one  once  shot  from  the  sky  to  the  ground,  and  some  Cherokee
who  looked  for  it  found  a  little  bird,  about  the  size  of  a  chicken  just  hatched,
when- it  fell"  (MS  Stellar  Legends  of  the  Cherokee,  L898).
The  -lory  closely  resembles  something  heard  by  Lawson  among  the  Tuscarora  in
eastern  North  Carolina  about  the  year  1700.  An  Indian  having  been  killed  by  light-
ning, the  people  were  assembled  for  the  funeral,  and  t lie  priest  made  them  a  long
discourse  upon  the  power  of  lightning  over  all  men,  animals,  and  plants,  save  only
mice  and  the  black-gum  tree.  "At  last  he  began  to  tell  the  most  ridiculous  absurd
parcel  .if  lies  about  liLjlitniii^  that  could  be;  as  that  an  Indian  of  that  nation  had  once
got  lightning  in  the  likeness  of  a  partridge;  that  no  other  lightning  could  harm  him
whilst  he  had  that  about  him;  and  that  after  he  had  kept  it  for  several  years  it  cot,
away  from  him,  so  that  he  then  became  as  liable  to  be  struck  with  lightning  as  any
other  person.  There  was  present  at  the  same  time  an  Indian  that  had  lived  from
his  youth  chiefly  in  an  English  house,  so  I  called  to  him  and  told  him  what  a  parcel
of  lies  the  conjurer  told,  not  doubting  but  lie  thought  so  as  well  as  I;  but  I  found
to  the  contrary,  for  he  replied  that  I  was  much  mistaken,  for  the  old  man — who,
I  believe,  was  upwards  of  an  hundred  years  old — did  never  tell  lies;  and  as  for  what
he  said,  it  was  very  true,  for  lie  knew  it  himself  to  be  so.  Thereupon  seeiiiL'  the
fellow's  ignorance,  I  talked  no  more  about  it  "     History  of  Carolina,  page  346). According  to  Hagar  a  certain  constellation  of  seven  stars,  which  he  identifies  as
the  Ilyades,  is  called  by  the  Cherokee  "The  Arm,"  on  account  of  its  resemblance  to
a  human  arm  bent  at  the  elbow,  and  they  say  that  it  is  the  broken  arm  of  a  man  who
went  up  to  the  sky  because,  having  been  thus  crippled,  he  was  of  no  further  use
upon  earth.
A  meteor,  and  probably  also  a  comet,  is  called  Alsil'-Tlmltu'tsl,  "Fire-panther,"
the  same  concept  being  found  among  the  Shawano,  embodied  in  the  name  of  their
great  chief,  Tecumtha  (seep.  21o).
10.  Origin  of  the  Pleiades  and  the  pixe  \  p.  258  I:  This  myth  is  well  known  in  the
tribe,  ami  was  told  in  nearly  the  same  form  by  Swimmer,  Ta'gwadihl'  and  Suyeta.
The  Feather  dance,  also  called  the  Eagle  dance,  is  one  of  the  old  favorites,  and  is  the
same  as  the  ancient  Calumet  dance  of  the  northern  tribes.  For  a  description  of  the
gatayu/sti  game,  see  note  to  number  3,  "Kana'ti  ami  Selu."  In  a  variant  recorded
by  Stansbury  Hagar  (MS  Stellar  Legends  of  the  Cherokee!  the  boys  spend  their
time  shooting  at  cornstalks.
According  to  Squid-  (Serpent  Symbol,  p.  69),  probably  on  the  authority  of  the
Payne  manuscript,  "The  Cherokee-  paid  a  kind  of  veneration  to  the  morning  star,
and  also  to  the  seven  stars,  with  which  they  have  connected  a  variety  of  legends,  all
of  which,  no  doubt,  are  allegorical,  although  their  significance  is  now  unknown."
1  Heli  Chatelain,  Folktales  of  Angul":  Fifty. Tales,  with  Ki-mbundii  text,  literal  English  transla-
tion, introduction,  and  notes  (Memoirs  of  the  American  Folk-Lore  Society,  i);  Boston  and  New  York


NOTES    AND    PARALLELS  44.*?
111.  corresponding  Iroquois  myth  below,  as  given  b)  Mrs  Erminnie  Smith  in  her
Myths  of  the   Iroquois    Second  Animal   Report   of  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  p    30  .
practically  the  same  so  far  as  it  e,„.s,  and  the  myth  was  probably  once  comi   i  over a  wide  area  in  the  Eas1 :
"Seven  little  Indian   boys  were  once  accustomed   to  bring  at  eve  their  corn  and
i  ,i  liulr  ii  i.  hi n.l,  ni «  hi  the  top  of  which,  after  their  feast,  the  sweetest  of  their
singers  would  -it  ami  sing  for  bis  mates  who  danced  around  the  mound.     On  one
thej    resolved   on  a   more  sumptuous   feast,  ami  each   was  t.>  ci
towards  a  savorj  soup.     But  the  parents  refused  them  the  needed  supplies,  ami  they
met  i"i' a  feastless  dance.     Their  heads  and  hearts  grets  lighter  as  they  flew  around
tin-  1 1 1.. in nl,  until  suddenly  the  whole  company  whirled  off  into  the  air.     The  i
solable  parents  called  in  vain  for  them  to  return,  but  it  was  too  late.  Higherand
higher  they  arose,  whirling  around  their  singer,  until,  transformed  into  bright  stars.
thej  t"<ik  their  places  in  tin'  firmament,  where,  as  the  Pleiades,  they  are  dancing
still  the  brightness  of  the  singer  having  been  dimmed,  however,  or  account  of  his
desire  t..  return  t"  earth."
Tn  an  Kskiimi  taK-  a  hunter  was  pursued  by  enemies,  ami  as  he  ran  h.-  gradually
rose  from  the  ground  ami  finally  reached  the  sky.  where  he  was  turned  into  a  star
Kroebei,  Tales  of  the  Smith  Sound   Eskimo,  in  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore).
This  trans  1 1  irmation  of  human  beings  into  stars  ami    stellar  a  a  is  i-  one  of  the  must
comi   i  incidents  of  primitive  myth.
11.  The  Milky  Way  (p.  259):  This  story,  in  slightly  different  forms,  is  well
known  among  the  Cherokee  east  ami  west.  The  generic  word  fur  mill  is  dista'sfi,
including  also  the  self-acting  pound-mill  or  ■Olskivtilte'gt  In  the  original  version  the
mill  was  probablj  a  wooden  mortar,  such  as  was  commonly  used  by  the  (  herokee
ami  other  eastern  ami  southern  tribes
In  a  variant  recorded  in  the  Hagar  Cherokee  manuscript  there  are  two  hunters,
i.ne  living  in  the  north  ami  hunting  big  game,  while  the  other  lives  in  tin'  smith
and  hunt-  small  game.  The  former,  discovering  tin-  latter' s  wile  grinding  corn,  seizes her  ami  carries  her  far  away  across  the  sky  tn  his  home  in  the  north.  Her  dog,
after  eating  what  meal  is  left,  follows  the  pair  across  the  sky,  tin-  meal  falling  from
his  mouth  as  he  runs,  making  tin-  Milky  Way.
With  the  Kiowa,  Cheyenne,  ami  other  plains  tribes  the  Milky  Way  is  the  dusty
track  along  which  the  Buffalo  ami  tin-  Horse  once  ran  a  rare  across  the  sky.
12.  Origin  of  strawberries  (p.  2S9):  This  myth,  a-  here  given,  was  obtained
from  Ta'gwadiW,  who  said  that  all  the  fruits  mentioned  were  then  fur  the  first  time
en  ated,  a  n.l  added.  "So  si  inn-  L"i"d  came  fnun  the  quarrel,  anyhow."  The  Swimmer
version  has  more  detail,  hut  seems  overdressed.
13.  The  Great  Yellow-jacket:  Origin  op  pish  ind  progs  (p.  260):  This  story,
obtained  from  Swimmer,  i-  well  known  in  the  tribe,  and  has  numerous  parallels  in
other  Indian  mythologies.  In  nearly  every  tribal  genesis  we  find  the  primitive  world
infested  bj  ferocious  monster  animals,  which  are  finally  destroyed  or  rendered
harmless,  leaving  only  their  descendants,  the  present  diminutive  types.  Conspicu-
ous examples  are  afforded  in  Matthew's  Navaho  Legends'  and  in  the  author's  story
oi  the  Jicarilla  genesis  in  the  American  Anthropologist  for  July,  1898.
Another  version  of  tin-  Cherokee  legend  is  given  by  Lanman  in  his  Letters  from
the  Alleghanj   Mountains,  pages  73-74:
"The  Cherokee-  relate  that  there  once  existed  among  those  mountain-  [about
Nantahala  and  Franklin]  a  very  large  bird,  which  resembled  in  appearance  the
green-winged  hornet,  and  this  creature  was  in  the  hai.it.  of  carrying  off  the  younger
children  of  the  nation  who  happened  to  wander  into  the  woods.  Very  many  chil-
dren had  mysteriously  disappeared  in  this  manner,  and  the  entire  people  d.  .  Ian  .  1  a
>  Memoirs  of  American  Folk-Lore  Society,  v;  Boston  and  New  v..rk,  1897.


444  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
warfare  against  the  monster.  A  variety  of  means  were  employed  for  his  destruction,
but  without  success.  In  process  of  time  it  was  determined  that  the  wise  men  for
medicine-men)  of  the  nation  should  try  their  skill  in  the  business.  They  met  in
council  and  agreed  that  each  one  should  station  himself  on  the  summit  of  a  mountain,
and  that,  when  the  creature  was  discovered,  the  man  who  made  the  discovery  should
utter  a  loud  halloo,  which  shout  should  be  taken  up  by  his  neighbor  on  the  next
mountain,  ami  so  continued  to  the  end  of  the  line,  that  all  the  men  might  have  a  shot
at  the  strange  bird.  This  experiment  was  tried  ami  resulted  in  finding  out  the
hiding  place  of  the  monster,  which  was  a  deep  cavern  on  the  eastern  sideof  the  Blue
ridge  and  at  the  fountain-head  of  the  river  Too-ge-lah  [Tugaloo  river,  South  Caro-
lina], On  arriving  at  this  place,  they  found  the  entrance  to  the  cavern  entirely
inaccessible  by  mortal  feet,  and  they  therefore  prayed  to  the  Great  Spirit  that  lie
would  bring  out  the  bird  from  his  den,  and  place  him  within  reach  of  their  arms.
Their  petition  was  granted,  for  a  terrible  thunder-storm  immediately  arose,  and  a
stroke  of  lightning  tore  away  one  half  of  a  large  mountain,  ami  the  Indians  were  suc-
cessful in  slaying  their  enemy.  The  Great  Spirit  was  pleased  with  the  courage
manifested  by  the  Cherokees  during  this  dangerous  fight,  and,  with  a  view  of
rewarding  the  same,  he  willed  it  that  all  the  highest  mountains  in  their  land  should
thereafter  be  destitute  of  trees,  so  that  they  might  always  have  an  opportunity  of
watching  the  movements  of  their  enemies.
Asa  sequel  to  this  legend,  it  may  be  appropriately  mentioned,  that  at  the  head  of  t  he
Too-ge-lah  is  to  be  found  one  of  the  most  remarkable  curiosities  of  this  mountain-land.
It  is  a  granite  cliff  with  a  smooth  sm-face  or  front,  half  a  mile  long,  and  twelve  hundred
feet  high,  and  generally  spoken  of  in  this  part  of  the  country  as  the  White-side  moun-
tain, or  Ihr  DeviPs  court-lwuse.  To  think  of  it  is  almost  enough  to  make  one  dizzy,  but
to  see  it  tills  one  with  awe.  Near  the  top  of  one  part  of  this  cliff  is  a  small  cave,  which
can  be  reached  only  by  passing  over  a  strip  of  rock  about  two  feet  wide.  One  man
only  has  ever  been  known  to  enter  it,  and  when  he  performed  the  deed  he  met  at  the
entrance  of  the  cave  a  large  bear,  which  animal,  in  making  its  escape,  slipped  off
the  rock,  fell  a  distance  of  near  a  thousand  feet,  and  was  of  course  killed.  When
the  man  saw  this,  lit  became  so  excited  that  it  was  some  hours  before  he  could  quiet
his  nerves  sufficiently  to  retrace  his  dangerous  pathway."
The  Cherokee  myth  has  a  close  parallel  in  the  Iroquois  story  of  the  great  mosquito,
as  published  by  the  Tuscarora  traditionist,  Cusick,  in  1825,  and  quoted  by  School-
craft, Indian  Tribes,  v,  page  638:
"About  this  time  a  great  musqueto  invaded  the  fort  Onondaga;  the  musqueto  was
mischievous  to  the  people,  it  flew  about  the  fort  with  a  long  stinger,  and  sucked  the
blood  of  a  number  of  lives;  the  warriors  made  several  oppositions  to  expel  the  mon-
ster, but  failed;  the  country  was  invaded  until  the  Holder  of  the  Heavens  was
pleased  to  visit  the  people;  while  he  was  visiting  the  king  at  the  fort  Onondaga,  the
musqueto  made  appearance  as  usual  and  flew  about  the  fort,  the  Holder  of  the  Heav-
ens attacked  the  monster,  it  flew  so  rapidly  that  he  could  hardly  keep  in  sight  of  it,
but  after  a  few  days  chase  the  monster  began  to  fail,  he  chased  on  the  borders  of  the
great  lakes  towards  the  sun-setting,  and  round  the  great  country,  at  last  lie  overtook
the  monster  and  killed   it  near  the  salt  lake  Onondaga,  and   the  hi   1  became  small
musquetos." V'h! in)' — This  is  not  the  name  of  any  particular  species,  but  signifies  a  leader,  prin-
cipal, or  colloquially,  "  boss,"  and  in  this  sense  is  applied  to  the  large  queen  yellow-
jacket  seen  in  spring,  or  to  the  leader  of  a  working  gang.  The  insect  of  the  story  is
described  as  a  monster  yellow-jacket.
14.  The  Deluge  I  p.  261):  Thi*  story  is  given  by  Schoolcraft  in  his  Notes  on  the
Iroquois,  page  358,  as  having  been  obtained  in  1846  from  the  Cherokee  chief,  Stand
Watie.  It  was  obtained  by  the  author  in  nearly  the  same  form  in  1890  from  James
Wafford,  of  Indian  Territory,  who  had  heard  it  from  his  grandmother  nearly  eighty


NOTES     \M>    P  \K  VLLELS  t  1 5
years  before.     The  incident  of  the  dancing  skeletons  is  tiol  given  by  Scl    rafl
and  seems   to   indicate  a   lost   sequel  to  the  story.     Hayw   I    (Nat.  and  Aborig.
Hist.  Tenn.,  p.  161  mentions  the  Cherokee  deluge  myth  and  conjectures  thai  the
petroglyphs  at  Track  Rock  gap  in  <  reorgia  may  have  some  reference  to  it.  The  ver-
sions given  by  the  missionaries  Buttrick  and  Washburn  are  simply  the  Bible  narrative
a-  told  by  the  Indians.  Washburn's  informant,  however,  accounted  for  the  phe-
nomenon by  an  upheaval  and  tilting  of  the  earth,  so  thai  the  waters  for  a  time  over-
Bowed  tin'  inhabited  parts  (Reminiscences,  pp.  1 ; '< >  L97).  In  a  variant  related  by
I  [agar  I  MS  Stellar  Legends  of  the  <  Iherokee  I  a  star  with  fiery  tail  falls  from  heaven
and  becomes  a  man  with  long  hair.  \\  ho  wains  the  \   pie  of  the  coming  deluge.
It  is  nol  in  place  here  to  enter  into  a  discussion  of  the  meaning  and  universality  of
the  deluge  myth,  for  an  explanation  of  which  the  reader  is  referred  to  Bouton's  Bible
Myths  and  Bible  Folklore.'  Suffice  it  to  say  that  such  a  myth  appears  to  have
existed  with  every  people  and  in  every  age.  Among  the  American  tribes  with  which
it  was  found  Brinton  enumerates  the  Athapascan,  Algonquian,  Iroquois,  Cherokee,
Chickasaw,  Caddo,  Natchez,  I  lakota,  Apache,  Navaho,  .Mam Ian,  Pueblo,  Aztec,  Mixtec,
Zapotec,  Tlasealan.  Michoac&n,  Toltec,  Maya,  Quiche,  Haitian,  Darien,  Popayan,
Muysca,  Quichua,  Tupinamba,  Achagua,  Auraucanian,  "and  doubtless  others."2  It
is  found  also  along  the  Northwest  coast,  was  known  aboul  Albemarle  sound,and,  as
has  been  said,  was  probably  common  to  all  the  tribes.
In  one  ('reek  version  the  warning  is  given  by  wolves;  in  another  by  cranes  (see Bouton,  eited  above) .
15.  The  four-footed  tribes  (p.  261):  No  essential  difference — "I  have  often
reflected  on  the  curious  connexion  which  appears  to  subsist  in  the  mind  of  an
Indian  between  man  and  the  brute  creation,  and  found  much  matter  in  it  for  curious
observation.  Although  they  consider  themselves  superior  to  all  other  animals  and
are  verj  proud  of  that  superiority;  although  they  believe  that  the  beasts  of  the
forest,  the  birds  of  the  air,  and  the  fishes  of  the  waters  were  created  by  the  Almighty
Being  for  the  use  of  man;  yet  it  seems  as  if  they  ascribe  the  difference  between  them-
selves and  the  brute  kind,  and  the  dominion  which  they  have  over  them,    •  to
their  superior  bodily  strength  and  dexterity  than  to  their  immortal  souls.  All  being
em  lowed  by  the  ( Ireator  with  the  power  of  volition  and  self  motion,  they  view  in  a
manner  as  a  great  society  of  "which  they  are  the  head,  whom  they  are  appointed, indeed,  to  govern,  hut  between  whom  and  themselves  intimate  ties  of  connexion
and  relationship  may  exist,  or  at  least  did  exist  in  the  beginning  of  time.  They  are,
in  fact,  according  to  their  opinions,  only  the  tirst  among  equals,  the  legitimate
hereditary  sovereigns  of  the  whole  animated  race,  of  which  they  are  themselves  a
constituent  part.  Hence,  in  their  languages,  these  inflections  of  their  nouns,  which
we  call  genders,  are  not.  as  with  us.  descriptive  of  the  masculine  and  ferninim  species,
but  of  the  in, limit,  and  inanimate  kinds.  Indeed,  they  go  so  far  as  to  include  trees,
and  plants  within  the  first  of  these  descriptions.  All  animated  nature,  in  whatever
degree,  is  in  their  eyes  a  great  whole  from  which  they  have  not  yet  ventured  to
separate  themselves.  They  do  not  exclude  other  animals  from  their  world  of  spirits,
the  place  to  which  they  expect  to  go  after  death."8
According  to  the  Ojibwa  the  animals  formerly  had  the  faculty  of  speech,  until  it
was  taken  from  them  by  Nanibojou  as  a  punishment  for  having  conspired  against
the  human  race.'
Animal  chief s  and  councils — In  Pawnee  belief,  according  to  Grinnell,  the  animals,
>J.  W.  Bouton,  Bible  Myths  and  their  Parallels  in  Other  Religions:  2d  ed.,  N.-u  Y..rk,  1883;  Bible
Folklore,  A  Study  in  Comparative  Mythology;  New  York, 1884.
-The  Myths  of  the  New  World,  A  Treatise  on  the  Symbolism  and  Mythology  of  the  Re
America;  3d  ed.,  Philadelphia,  1896.
3Heckewelder,  Indian  Nations,  p.  254,  ed.  1876.
'Henry,  Travel?-  and  Adventures  in  Canada,  etc.,  pp.  212-213,  New  York,  1809.


446  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.a.n-x.19
or  Xahurac,  possess  miraculous  attributes  given  them  by  the  great  creator,  Tirawa.
"The  Pawnees  know  of  five  places  where  these  animals  meet  to  hold  council — five
of  these  Xahurac  lodges."  He  gives  a  detailed  description  of  each.  The  fourth  is  a
mound-shaped  hill,  on  the  top  of  which  is  a  deep  well  or  water  hole,  into  which  the
Pawnee  throw  offerings.  The  fifth  is  a  ruck  hill  in  Kansas,  known  to  the  whites  as
Guide  rock,  and  "in  the  side  of  the  liill  then-  is  a  '/rent  hole  when-  tin-  Xahurac  hold
councils."  '
The  same  belief  is  noted  by  Chatelain  in  Angola,  West  Africa:  "In  African  folk
tales  the  animal  world,  as  also  the  spirit  world,  is  organized  and  governed  just  like
the  human  world.  In  Angola  the  elephant  is  the  supreme  king  of  all  animal  crea-
tion, and  the  special  chief  of  th   lible  tribe  of  wild  animals.     Next  to  him  in  rank
the  lion  is  special  chief  of  the  tribe  of  ferocious  beasts  and  highest  vassal  of  the  ele-
phant. Chief. if  the  reptile  tribe  is  the  python.  Chief  of  the  finny  tribe  is,  in  the
interior,  the  di-lnuhi,  the  largest  river  fish.  Chief  of  the  feathery  tribe  is  the  kafadu
lea  humbi,  largest  of  the  eagles.  Among  the  domestic  animals  the  sceptre  belongs  to
the  bull;  among  the  locusts  to  the  one  called  di-ngundu.  Even  the  ants  and  termites
have  their  kings  or  queens.  Every  chief  or  king  has  his  court,  consisting  of  the
iiijuliiiiihi)h\  luniliihi,  and  other  officers,  his  parliament  of  ma-kota  and  his  plebeian
subjects,  just  like  any  human  African  saba"  (Folk  tales  of  Angola,  p.  22).
Ashing  pardon  of  animals — For  other  Cherokee  references  see  remarks  upon  the
Little  Deer,  the  Wolf,  and  the  Rattlesnake;  also  number  4,  "Origin  of  Disease  and
Medicine,"  and  number  58,  "The  Rattlesnake's  Vengeance."  This  custom  was
doubtless  general  among  the  tribes,  as  it.  is  thoroughly  in  consonance  with  Indian
idea.  The  trader  Henry  thus  relates  a  characteristic  instance  among  the  Ojibwa  in
1784  on  the  occasion  of  his  killing  a  bear  near  the  winter  camp:
"The  bear  being  dead,  all  my  assistants  approached,  and  all,  but  more  particularly
my  old  mother  (as  I  was  wont  to  call  her),  took  his  head  in  their  hands,  stroking
and  kissing  it  several  times;  begging  a  thousand  pardons  for  taking  away  her  life;
calling  her  their  relation  and  grandmother;  and  requesting  her  not  to  lay  the  fault
upon  them,  since  it  was  truly  an  Englishman  that  had  put  her  to  death.
"  This  ceremony  was  not  of  long  duration;  and  if  it  was  I  that  killed  their  grand-
mother, they  were  not  themselves  behind-hand  in  what  remained  to  be  performed.
The  skin  being  taken  off,  we  found  the  fat  in  several  places  six  inches  deep.  This,
being  divided  into  two  parts,  loaded  two  persons;  and  the  flesh  parts  were  as  much
as  four  persons  could  carry.  In  all,  the  carcass  must  have  exceeded  five  hundred
weight.
"As  soon  as  we  reached  the  lodge,  the  bear's  head  was  adorned  with  all  the
trinkets  in  the  possession  of  the  family,  such  as  silver  arm-bands  and  wrist-bands,  and
belts  of  wampum;  and  then  laid  upon  a  scaffold,  set  up  for  its  reception,  within  the
lodge.     Xear  the  nose  was  placed  a  large  quantity  of  tobacco.
' ' The  next  morning  no  si  m  iner  appeared,  than  preparations  were  made  for  a  feast  to
the  manes.  The  lodge  was  cleaned  and  swept;  and  the  head  of  the  bear  lifted  up,
and  a  new  stroud  of  blanket,  which  had  never  been  used  before,  spread  under  it.
The  pipes  were  now  lit;  and  Wawatam  blew  tobacco  smoke  into  the  nostrils  of  the
bear,  telling  me  to  do  the  same,  and  thus  appease  the  anger  of  the  bear  on  account
of  my  having  killed  her.  1  endeavored  to  persuade  my  benefactor  and  friendly
ad\  iser,  that  she  no  longer  had  any  life,  and  assured  him  that  I  was  under  no  appre-
hension from  her  displeasure;  but,  the  first  proposition  obtained  no  credit,  and  the
second  gave  but  little  satisfaction.
"At  length,  the  feast  being  ready,  AVawatam  commenced  a  speech,  resembling,  in
many  things,  his  address  to  the  manes  of  his  relations  and  departed  companions;
but,  having  this  peculiarity,  that   he  here  deplored   the  necessity  under  which  men
1G.    B.   Grinnell,  Pawnee  Here  Stories  ami    Folktale*,   with   Notes  on  the  Origin,  Customs,  and
Character  of  the  Pawnee  People;  New  York,  1889,  pp.  358-359,


N0TE8    AM)    PARALLELS  447
labored  thus  to  destroy  their/r/<  nds.  He  represented,  however,  thai  the  misfortune
was  unavoidable,  since  without  doing  so,  they  could  by  no  mean-  subsist.  The  speech
ended,  we  all  ate  heartily  of  the  bear's  flesh;  and  even  the  head  itself,  after  remain-
bag  three  days  on  the  scaffold,  was  put  into  the  kettle."     Travels,  pp.  143   145.
The  part  played  by  the  Rabbit  or  Han-  and  his  symbolic  character
in  Indian  myth  has  been  alreadj  uoted  (see  "Stories  and  Storj  rellers").  In  his
pur.h  animal  character,  as  an  actor  among  the  fourfooted  creatures,  the  same  attri-
butes of  trickery  and  surpassing  sagacity  are  assigned  him  in  other  parts  of  the  world.
In  the  folktales  of  Angola,  West  Africa,  "The  Hare  seems  to  surpass  the  fox  in
shrewdness,"  and  "The  Hare  has  the  swiftness  and  shrewdness  of  the  Monkey,  but
he  is  never  reckless,  as  the  Monkey  sometimes  appears  to  be"  (Chatelain,  Folk-
tales of  Angola,  pp.  295,  300).  In  farthest  Asia  also  "The  animals,  too,  have  their
stories,  and  in  Korea,  as  in  some  other  parts  of  the  world,  the  Rabbit  seems  to  come
offbest,asa  rule"    H.N.Allen,  Korean  Tales,  p.  34;  New  York  and  London,1889
/  Timberlake  repeatedly  remarks  upon  the  abundance  of  the  buffalo
in  the  Cherokee  country  of  East  Tennessee  in  1762.  On  one  occasion,  while  in  camp,
they  heard  rapid  firing  from  their  scouts  and  "in  less  than  a  minute  seventeen  or
eighteen  buffaloes  ran  in  amongst  us,  before  we  discovered  them,  so  that  several  of
us  had  like  to  have  been  run  over,  especially  the  women,  who  with  some  difficulty
sheltered  themselves  behind  the  trees.  Most  of  the  men  fired,  but  firing  at  random,
one  only  was  killed,  tho'  several  more  wounded"  (Memoirs,  p.  101).  According
to  a  writer  in  tin-  Historical  Magazine,  volume  vm.  page  71, 1864,  the  last  two  wild
buffalo  known  in  <  >hio  were  killed  in  Jackson  county  in  1  son
-This  animal  ranged  in  eastern  Carolina  in  1700.      "Theelkisai   isterof
the  venison  sort.  His  skin  is  used  almost  in  the  same  nature  as  the  buffelo's  [sic].
.  .  .  His  flesh  is  not  -.,  sweet  as  the  lesser  deer's.  IIi>  hams  exceed  in  weight  all
creatures  which  the  new  world  affords.  They  will  often  resort  and  feed  with  the
buffelo,  delighting  in  the  same  range  as  they  do"  I  Lawson,  Carolina,  p.  203
'ili.  hamstring — No  satisfactory  reason  has  been  obtained  for  this  custom,
which  lias  Keen  noted  for  more  than  a  century.  Buttrick  says  of  the  Cherokee:  "The
Indians  never  used  to  eat  a  certain  sinew  in  the  thigh.  .  .  .  Some  say  that  if  they  eat
of  the  sinew  they  will  have  cramp  in  it  on  attempting  to  run.  It  is  said  that  once  a
woman  had  cramp  in  that  sinew  and  therefore  none  must  eat  it"  (Antiquities,  p.  12) .
Says  Adair,  speaking  of  the  southern  tribes  generally:  "When  in  the  w   Is  the
Indians  cut  a  small  piece  out  of  the  lower  part  of  the  thigh  of  the  deer  they  kill,  length-
ways and  pretty  deep.  Among  the  great  number  of  venison  hams  the)  bring  to  our
trading  houses  I  do  not  remember  to  have  observed  one  without  it"  History  of  the
American  Indians,  pp.  137-138).
mimals  sacred — According  to  a  formula  in  the  Tuggle  manuscript  for  curing
the  "deer  sickness,"  the  "White  Peer"  is  chief  of  his  tribe  in  (reek  mythology also.  Peculiar  sacredness  always  attaches,  in  the  Indian  mind,  to  white  and
albino  animals,  partly  on  account  of  the  symbolic  meaning  attached  to  the  color
itself  and  partly  by  reason  of  the  mystery  surrounding  the  phenomenon  of  albinism.
Among  the  Cherokee  tl   hiefs  both  of  the  Deer  and  of  the  Bear  tribe  wen-  white.    ( >n
the  plains  the  so-called  white  buffalo  was  always  sacred.  Among  the  Iroquois,
according  to  Morgan  League  of  the  Iroquois,  p.210),  "the  white  deer,  white  squir-
rel and  other  chance  animals  of  the  albino  kind,  were  regarded  as  consecrated  to  the
•  neat  Spirit."      <  >ne  of  their  most  solemn  sacrifices  was  that  of  the  White  I  >o'_'.
Tin  bear — A   reverence  for  the  hear  and  a  belief  that  it  is  half  human  is  very  gen-
eral among  the  trilns,  and  is  probably  based  in   part   upon    the  ability  of  the  animal
to  stand  upright  and  the  resemblance  of  its  tracks  to  human  footprints.  According
to  Grinnell  (Blackfoot  Lodge  Tales,  p.  260),  "Tin-  Blackfeet  believe  it  to  be  part
brute  and  part  human,  portions  of  its  body,  particularly  the  ribs  and  feet,  being  like
those  of  a  man."      In  a  note  upon  a  Navaho  myth    Matthews  says  iNavaho  Legends,


448  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [bth.asn.19
p.  249):  " The  bear  is  a  sacred  animal  with  the  Navahpes;  for  this  reason  the  hero
■  !iil  not  >kin  tin-  bears  or  eat  their  flesh.  The  old  man.  being  a  wizard,  might  do
both." TheOjibwa  ideahas  been  noted  in  connection  with  the  ceremony  of  asking  pardon
of  the  Blain  animal.  A  curious  illustration  of  the  reverse  side  of  the  piitun-  is  given
by  Heckewelder  (Indian  Nations,  p.  255):
"A  Delaware  hunter  once  shot  a  huge  bear  and  broke  its  backbone.  The  animal
fell  ami  set  up  a  must  plaintive  cry,  something  like  that  of  the  panther  when  he  is
hungry.  The  hunter  instead  of  giving  him  another  shot,  stood  up  close  to  him,  and
addressed  him  in  these  words:  '  Hark  ye!  hear:  you  are  a  coward  and  no  warrior  as
you  pretend  to  he.  Wen-  you  a  warrior,  you  would  shew  it  by  your  firmness,  and
not  cry  and  whimper  like  an  old  woman.  You  know,  hear,  that  our  tribes  are  at
war  with  each  other,  and  that  yours  was  the  aggressor  [probably  alluding  to  a
tradition  which  the  Indians  have  of  a  very  ferocious  kind  of  hear,  called  the  naked
bear,  which  they  say  once  existed,  hut  was  totally  destroyed  by  their  ancestors]  .  .  .
You  have  found  the  Indians  too  powerful  for  you,  and  you  have  gone  sneaking  about
in  the  woods,  stealing  their  hogs;  perhaps  at  this  time  you  have  hog's  flesh  in  your belly.  Had  you  conquered  me,  I  would  have  borne  it  with  courage  and  died  like  a
brave  warrior;  hut  you,  hear,  sit  here  and  cry,  and  disgrace  your  tribe  by  your  cow-
ardly conduct.'  I  was  present  at  the  delivery  of  this  curious  invective.  When  the
hunter  had  despatched  the  hear.  I  asked  him  how  he  thought  that  poor  animal  could
understand  what  he  said  to  it?  'Oh,'  said  he  in  answer,  'the  bear  understood  me
very  well;  did  you  not  observe  how  ashamed  he  looked  while  1  was  upbraiding
him?'" The  wolf  and  wolf  M/,r— Speaking  of  the  Gulf  tribes  generally.  Adair  says:  "The
wolf,  indeed,  several  of  them  do  not  care  to  meddle  with,  believing  it  unlucky  to
kill  them,  which  is  the  sole  reason  that  few  of  the  Indians  shoot  at  that  creature,
through  a  notion  of  spoiling  their  guns"  |  History  of  the  American  Indians,  p.  L6).
The  author  has  heard  among  the  East  Cherokee  an  incident  of  a  man  who,  while
standing  one  night  upon  a  fish  trap,  was  scented  by  a  wolf,  which  came  so  near  that
the  man  was  compelled  to  shoot  it.  He  at  once  went  home  and  had  the  gun  exor-
cised by  a  conjurer.  Wafford,  when  a  boy  in  the  old  Nation,  knew  a  professional
wolf  killer.  It  is  always  permissible  to  hire  a  white  man  to  kill  a  depredating  wolf.
as  in  that  case  no  guilt  attaches  to  the  Indian  or  his  tribe.
16.  The  Rabbit  ooes  DUCK  hunting  (p.  266):  This  story  was  heard  from  Swim-
mer, John  Ax,  Suyeta  (east),  ami  Wafford  (west).  Discussions  between  animals  as
to  the  kind  of  food  eaten  are  very  common  in  Indian  myth,  the  method  chosen  to
decide  the  dispute  being  usually  quite  characteristic.  The  first  incident  is  paralleled
in  a  Creek  story  of  the  Rabbit  and  the  Lion  (Panther?)  in  the  Tuggle  manuscript
collection  and  among  the  remote  Wallawalla  of  Washington  (see  Kane,  Wanderings
of  an  Artist  among  the  Indians  of  North  America,  p.  -t>K;  London,  1859).  In  an  Omaha
myth,  Ictinike  and  the  Buzzard,  the  latter  undertakes  to  carry  the  trickster  across  a
stream,  but  drops  him  into  a  hollow  tree,  from  which  he  is  chopped  out  by  some
women  whom  he  has  persuaded  that  there  are  raccoons  inside  (  Dorsey,  Contributions
to  North  American  Ethnology,  vi ).  In  the  Iroquois  tale,  "A  Hunter's  Adventures,"  a
hunter,  endeavoring  to  trap  some  geese  in  the  water,  is  carried  up  in  the  air  and  falls
into  a  hollow  stump,  from  which  he  is  released  by  women  (Smith,  Myths  of  the  Iro-
quois, in  Second  Annual  Report  of  Bureau  of  Ethnology).  In  the  Uncle  Remus
story,  '■  Mr.  Rabbit  Meets  His  Match  Again,"  the  Buzzard  persuades  the  Rabbit  to  get
upon  his  back  in  order  to  be  carried  across  a  river,  but  alights  with  him  upon  a
tree  <  iverhanging  the  water  and  thus  compels  the  Rabbit,  by  fear  of  falling,  to  confess
a  piece  of  trickery.1
1  Joel  <J.  Harris,  Uncle  Remus,  His  Songs  and  His  Sayings;  New  York,  1886.


m'm.nkv]  NOTES    A  N'H    PARALLELS  449
17.  How  tiik  Rabbit  stole,  the  Otter's  coah  (p.  267):  This  storj  i-  well  known
in  the  tribe  and  was  heard  from  several  informants,  both  east  an. I  west.  Nothing
issai.l  as  to  how  tin'  Otter  recovered  his  coat.     It  has  exact  parallels  in  the  Creek
myths  of  tin-  Tnggl   Ilection,  in  one  of  which  the   Rabbit  tries  to  personate  a  boy
lien,  bystealing  his  coat,  while  in  another  he  plays  a  trick  on  tin-  I. ion  i  Panther)  by
throwing  hot  coals  over  him  while  asleep,  at  a  creek  which  the  Rabbit  says  is  failed
"Throwing-hot-ashes-on-you."
18.  Win    mm    Possum's  tail  is  bare  (p.  269):  This  stor)   was  heard  from  several
informants,  east  and  west.     In  .air  variant  the  hair  clipping  was  .1   i  b)  thi    VIoth,
and  in  another  l>y  the  spells  of  the  Snail,  who  is  represented  as  a  magician.  The
version  here  given  is  the  most  common,  and  agrees  best  with  the  Cherokee  folklore
concerning  the  Cricket  (see  number 59,  "The  Smaller  Reptiles,  Fishes,  and  Insects").
En  the  Creek  myth,  as  given  in  the  Tuggle  collection,  the  Opossum  burned  the
hair  from  his  tail  in  trying  to  put  rings  upon  it  like  those  of  the-  Raccoon's  tail,  and
grins  from  chew  ing  a  bitter  oak  ball  w  hich  he  mi-took  for  a  ripened  fruit.
The  anatomical  peculiarities  ot  the  opossum,  of  both  sexes,  hav   icasioned  much
speculation  among  the  Indians,  mam  of  whom  believe  that  the  female  produces
ug  without  an)  help  from  the  male.  The  Creeks,  according  to  the  Tuggle
manuscript,  believe  that  the  young  are  born  in  the  pouch,  from  the  breathing  of  the
female  against  it  when  curled  up,  and  even  Lawson  and  Thnberlake  assert  that  they
are  horn  at  the  teal,  fr    which  the)  afterward  drop  off  into  the  pouch.
.1  council  and  a  dance—In  the  old  .lays,  as  to-day  among  the  remote  Western  tribes,
every  great  council  gathering  was  made  tl   :casion  of  a  series  of  .lane.-,  accompa-
nied always  by  feasting  an. I  a  general  good  time.
19.  How  the  Wlldi  \t  .  "ught  THE  Gobbler  (p.  269):  This  story  was  hear.]  from
.John  Ax  and  David  Blythe  (east)  and  from  Wafford  ami  Boudinot  (west).  The
version  given  below,  doctored  to  suit  the  white  man's  idea,  appears  without  signa- ture in  the  Cherokee  Advocate  of  December  18,  1845:
" There  was  once  a  flock  of  wild  turkeys  feeding  in  a  valley.  As  they  fed  they
heard  a  voice  singing.  They  soon  discovered  that  the  musician  was  a  hare,  and  the
burden  of  his  ».n«  was  that  he  had  a  secret  in  his  breast  which  he  would  on  no
account  divulge.  The  curiosity  of  the  turkeys  was  excited,  and  they  entreat.-. I  the
hare  t..  tell  them  the  secret.  Thi-  h.-  Snail]  consented  t..  .1..  it'  the)  would  procure
for  him  the  king's  daughter  for  his  wife  and  go  with  him  and  .lame  around  their
enemy.  They  engaged  to  do  all.  and  the  hare  led  them  to  where  a  wildcat  lay
apparently  .lead.  The  hare  prevailed  upon  them  to  .-lose  their  eyes  as  the)  danced.
The  wildcat  meanwhile  silently  arose  and  killed  several  of  them  before  the  rest  found
out  what  a  snare  they  had  been  caught  in.  By  this  artifice  on  the  part  of  the  wild-
cat, seconded  by  tin-  hare,  the  former  had  a  sumptuous  repast."
Thi-.  witli  it-  variants,  is  one  of  the  most  widespread  of  the  animal  myths.  The
same  story  told  by  the  Cherokee,  identical  even  to  the  song,  is  given  in  the  Creek
collection  of  Tuggle,  with  the  addition  that  the  Rabbit's  tail  is  afterward  bitten  of!
bythe  enraged  Turkey-,     in  another  Creek  version,  evidently  a  later  invention,  the
1 1'.   i  plays  a  similar  trick  upon  the  I  teerforthe  benefit  of  the  Panther.    The  Kiowa
.  .I  thesi  .1  it  hern  plains  tell  how  the  hungry  trickster.  Sinti,  entices  a  number  of  prairie
dogs  t'1  come  near  him,  under  pretense  of  teaching  them  a  new  dance,  and  then
kills  all  hut  ..ne,  while  the)  are  dancing  around  him,  according  to  instruction,  with
their  eyes  shut.  With  the  Omaha  the  Rabbit  himself  captures  the  Turkeys  while
they  dance  around,  with  closed  .yes,  t..  his  singing  (Dorsey,  "The  Hal. I. it  and  the
Turkeys,"  and  "Ictinike,  the  Turkeys.  Turtle,  and  Elk,"  in  Contributions  to  North
American  Ethnology,  vi).  The  same  stratagem,  with  only  a  change  of  names,
recurs  in  another  Omaha  story,  "The  Raccoon  and  the  Crabs,"  of  the  same  collection,
and  in  a  Cheyenne  story  of  White-man  i  A.  1..  Kroeber,  <  'heyenne  Tales,  in  Journal
L9    ETH— 01  !".»


4.r)()  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [kth.ann.19
of  American  Folk-Lore,  July,  1900),  and  in  the  Jicaijlla  story  of  "The  Fox  and
the  Wildcat"  (Russell,  Myths  of  the  Jicarilla,  ibid.,  October,  1898).  The  Southern
negro  version,  which  lacks  the  important  song  and  dance  feature,  is  given  by  Harris
in  his  story  of  "  Brother  Rabbit  and  Mr  Wildcat."  '
20.  How  the  Terrapin  heat  toe  Rabbit  (p.  270):  This  story  was  obtained  from
John  Ax  and  Suyeta  and  is  well  known  in  the  tribe.  It  is  sometimes  told  with  the
Deer  instead  of  the  Rabbit  as  the  defeated  runner,  and  in  this  form  is  given  by  Lan-
nian,  who  thus  localizes  it:  "The  race  was  to  extend  from  the  Black  mountain  to  the
summit  of  the  third  pinnacle  extending  to  the  eastward"  (Letters,  p.  37).
In  the  Creek  collection  of  Tuggle  the  same  story  is  given  in  two  versions,  in  one  of
which  the  Deer  and  in  the  other  the  Wolf  is  defeated  by  the  stratagem  of  the  Terra-
pin. The  Southern  negro  parallel  is  given  by  Harris  (Uncle  Remus,  His  Songs  and
His  Sayings)  in  the  story,  "Mr  Rabbit  Finds  His  Match  at  Last."  It  seems  almost
superfluous  to  call  attention  to  the  European  folklore  version,  the  well-known  story
of  the  race  between  the  Hare  and  the  Tortoise.
21.  Tfie  Rabbit  and  the  tar  wolf  (p.  271):  This  story  was  obtained  in  the
Indian  Territory  from  James  Wafford,  who  said  he  had  repeatedly  heard  it  in  boy-
hood about  Valley  river,  in  the  old  Nation,  from  Cherokee  who  spoke  no  English.
The  second  version,  from  the  Cherokee  Advocate,  December  18,  1845,  is  given,
together  with  the  story  of  "How  the  Wildcat  caught  the  Gobbler,"  with  this  intro- duction:
"  Indian  Fables.  Mr  William  P.  Ross:  I  have  recently  stumbled  on  the  following
Cherokee  fables,  and  perhaps  you  may  think  them  worth  inserting  in  the  .-'  Ivocate
for  the  sake  of  the  curious.  I  am  told  that  the  Cherokees  have  a  great  many  fables.
If  1  understand  the  following,  the  intention  seems  to  be  to  teach  cunning  and  artifice
in  war.  .Esop."  The  newspaper  paragraph  bears  the  pencil  initials  of  Sfamuel] W[orcester]  B[utler].
Other  Indian  versions  are  found  with  the  Jicarilla  ("Fox  and  Rabbit,"  Myths  of
the  Jicarilla,  by  Frank  Russell,  in  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  October,  1898)
and  Sioux  (S.  D.  Hinman,  cited  in  Transactions  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of
Washington,  i,  p.  103,  Washington,  1882).  The  southern  negro  variant,  "The  Won-
derful Tar-Baby  Story,"  is  the  introductory  tale-in  Harris's LTncle  Remus,  His  Songs
and  His  Sayings.  A  close  parallel  occurs  in  the  West  African  story  of  "Leopard,
Monkey,  and  Hare  "  (Chatelain,  Folktales  of  Angola).
22.  The  Rabbit  and  the  Possum  after  a  wife  (p.  273):  This  specimen  of  Indian
humor  was  obtained  at  different  times  from  Swimmer,  John  Ax,  Suyeta  (east !,  and
Wafford  (west),  and  is  well  known  in  the  tribe.  Wafford,  in  telling  the  story,
remarked  that  the  Rabbit  was  the  chief's  runner,  and  according  to  custom  was
always  well  entertained  wherever  he  went.
23.  The  Rabbit  dines  the  Bear  (p.  273):  This  favorite  story  with  the  Cherokee
east  and  west  is  another  of  the  animal  myths  of  wide  distribution,  being  found  with
almost  every  tribe  from  Maine  to  the  Pacific.  Beans  and  peas  in  several  varieties
were  indigenous  among  the  agricultural  tribes.
In  the  Creek  version,  in  the  Tuggle  manuscript,  "The  Hear  invited  the  Rabbit  to
dinner.  When  he  came  the  Bear  called  his  wife  and  said,  'Have  peas  for  dinner:
the  Rabbit  loves  peas.'  'But  there  is  no  grease,'  said  the  Bear's  wife,  'tocookthem
with.'  'O,'  said  the  Bear,  'that's  no  trouble,  bring  me  a  knife.'  So  she  brought,
the  knife  and  the  Bear  took  it  and  split  between  his  toes,  while  the  Rabbit  looked
onin  wonder.  'No  grease  between  my  toes!  Well,  I  know  where  there  is  some,'
so  he  cut  a  gash  in  his  side  and  out  ran  the  grease.  His  wife  took  it  and  cooked  the
peas  and  they  had  a  fine  dinner  and  vowed  always  to  be  good  friends,"  etc.     The
•J.  C.  Harris,  Nights  with  Uncle  Remus:  Myths  ami  Legends  of  the  Old  Plantation;  Boston,  1883.


moonky]  NOTES    AM)    PARALLELS  451
wounded  Rabbitispul  under  the  care  of  the   Buzzard,  who  winds  up  by  i
patient.
In  the  Passamaquoddy  version,  "The  Rabbit's  Adventure  w ith  Mooin,  the  Bear,"
the  Bear  cuts  a  slice  from  his  foot  and  puts  it  into  the  pot.  The  Rabbit  invites  the
Bear  to  dinner  and  attempts  to  do  the  same  thing,  but  comes  to  grief.'  InaJica-
rilla  myth  a  somewhat  similar  incident  is  related  of  the  Fox  Coyote?)  and  the
Prairie-dog  Russell,  Myths  of  the  Jicarilla,  in  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,
Octobi  r,  1898).     In  a  British  Columbian  myth  nearly  the  same  thing  happens  when
the  ( Soyote  undertakes  to  return  the  hospitality  of  the  Black  Bear  <  Teit,  Th   pson
River  Indian  Traditions,  p.  10)
L'4.  The  Rabbit  escapes  from  tin:  wolves  i  p.  274  i:  This  story  was  obtained  from
James  Wafford,  in  Indian  Territory.  Compare  number  19,  "How  the  Wildcat
Caught  the  Gobbler."
25.  Flint  visits  the  Rabbit  (p.274):  This  story  was  told  in  slightly  different  form
by  John  Ax  and  Swimmer  (east)  and  was  confirmed  by  Wafford  (west).  Although
among  the  Cherokee  it  has  degenerated  to  a  mere  humorous  tali-  for  the  amusement
of  a  winter  evening,  it  was  originally  a  principal  part  of  the  great  cosmogonic  myth
common  tn  probably  all  tin-  Iroquoian  and  Almoin plian  tribes,  and  of  which  we  find
traces  also  in  the  mythologies  of  the  Aztec  and  the  Maya.     A   ig  the  northern
Algonquian  tribes  "the  West  was  typified  as  a  Hint  stone,  and  the  twin  brother  of
Michabo,  the  Great  Rabbit.     The  lend  between  them  was  bitter,  and  the  contest
long   and   dreadful   U  last  Michabo  mastered  his  fellow  twin  and  broke  him
into  pieces.  He  scattered  the  fragments  over  the  earth.  .  .  ."  Among  the  Iro- quoian  tribes,  cognate  with  the  Cherokee,  the  name  is  variously  Tdvnskaron,  T&vnskard,,
and  sometimes  Ohaa,  all  of  which  are  names  both  for  flint  and  for  hail  or  ice.  Tawis-
kara  is  the  evil-working  god.  in  perpetual  conflict  with  his  twin  brother  Yoskeha,
the  beneficent  god,  by  whom  lie  is  finally  overpowered,  when  the  blood  that  drops
from  his  wounds  is  changed  into  flint  stones.  Brintoii  sees  in  the  '  treat  Rabbit  and
the  Flint  the  opposing  forces  of  day  and  night,  light  and  darkness,  locally  personi-
fied as  East  and  West,  while  in  the  twin  gods  of  the  Iroquois  Hewitt  sees  thi   n-
Bicting  agents  of  heat  and  cold,  summer  and  winter.  Both  conceptions  are  identical
in  the  final  analysis.  Hewitt  derives  the  Iroquois  name  from  a  root  denoting  "hail,
ice,  glass";  in  Cherokee  we  have  t&vriskai&fl'i,  ULwi'skW,,  "flint."  tUvA'skd,  "smooth,"
une'staMn,  "ice."  See  Brinton,  American  Hero  Myths,  pp. 48,56, 61;  Hewitt,  The
Cosmos"  mic  <  iods  of  the  Iroquois,  in  I'roc.    \m.  Ass.  Adv.  Sci.,  xi.iv,  1895.)
In  one  of  the  Cherokee  sacred  formulas  collected  by  the  author  occurs  the  expres-
sion: "The  terrible  Flint  is  coming,  lb- has  his  paths  laid  down  in  this  direction.
He  is  shaking  the  red  switches  threateningly.      Let  us  run  toward  the  Sun  land."
Siyu' — This  word,  abbreviated  from  dsiyii',  "good,"  is  the  regular  Cherokee  salu-
tation. With  probably  all  the  tribes  the  common  salutation  is  simply  the  word
"good,"  and  in  the  sign  language  of  the  plains  the  gesture  conveying  that  meaning
is  used  in  the  same  way.  The  ordinary  good-bye  is  usually  some  equivalent  of
"I  go  now  ."
L'ti.  How  the  Deee  cor  his  horns  i  p.  L'75  i :  This  story  war  heard  from  Swimmer,
Snyeht.  and  others,  and  is  well  known  in  the  tribe.
In  a  parallel  Pawnee  myth,  "How  the  Deer  Lost  His  Gall,"  the  Deer  and  Ante-
lope wager  their  galls  in  a  race,  which  the  Antelope  wins,  but  in  sympathy  take-  off
bis  own  dew  claw  s  and  L'ives  them  to  the  Deer.  In  the  Black  foot  variant  the  I  Icel-
and the  Antelope  run  two  races.  The  first,  which  is  over  the  prairie,  the  Antelope
wins  and  take-  tic-  Deer's  gall,  while  in  the  second,  which  the  Deer  stipulate-  -hall
lie  run  through  the  timber,  the  Deer  wins  and  takes  the  Antelope's  dewclaws
(Grinnell,  Pawnee  Hero  Tales,  pp.204,205).
>C.  G.  Lelaud,  Algonquin  Legends  of  New  England,  p.  212;  Boston,  1884.


452  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.W
27.  Why  the  Deer's  teeth  are  blunt  (p.  276):  This  story  follows  the  last  in  reg-
ular sequence  ami  was  told  by  the  same  informants.
In  a  Jicarilla  myth  the  Fox  kills  a  dangerous  Hear  monster  under  pretense  of  trim-
mi  m_r  down  liis  legs  so  that  he  can  run  faster  (  Russell,  Myth  of  the  Jicarilla,  in  Jour-
nal Of  American  F« ilk-Lore,  p.  262,  October,  1898).
28.  What  became  of  the  Rabbit  (p.  277):  This  version  was  obtained  from  Suyeta,
who  says  the  Rabbit  never  went  lip,  because  he  was  "too  mean"  to  be  with  the  other
animals.  Swimmer,  however,  says  that  he  did  afterward  go  up  to  Galuii'latl.  The
helief  in  a  large  rabbit  still  existing  beyond  a  great  liver  may  possibly  have  its  origin
in  indirect  reports  of  the  jack-rabbit  west  of  the  Missouri.
The  myth  has  close  parallel  in  the  southern  negro  story  of  "The  Origin  of  the
Ocean"  (Harris,  Nights  with  Uncle  Remus),  in  which  the  Rabbit  by  a  stratagem
persuades  the  Lion  to  jump  across  a  creek,  when  the  Rabbit  "cut  de  string  w'at  hoi'  de
banks  togedder.  .  .  .  Co'se  wen  Brer  Rabbit  tuck'n  cut  de  string,  de  banks  er  de
creek,  de  banks  dey  fall  back,  dey  did,  en  Mr  Lion  can't  jump  back.  He  banks dey
keep  on  fallin'  back,  en  de  creek  keep  on  gittin'  wider  en  wider,  twel  bimeby  Brer
Rabbit  en  Mr  Lion  ain't  in  sight  er  one  er  n'er,  en  turn  dat  day  to  dis  de  big  waters
bin  rollim  'twix  urn."
Ki'i.' — A  Cherokee  exclamation  used  as  a  starting  signal  and  in  introducing  the
paragraphs  of  a  speech.      It  might  be  approximately  rendered.  Now!
29.  Why  the  Mink  smells  (p.  277) :  Obtained  from  John  Ax.
30.  Why  the  Mole  lives  underground  (p.  277):  This  story,  from  John  Ax.  not
only  accounts  for  the  Mole's  underground  habit,  but  illustrates  a  common  Cherokee
witchcraft  belief,  which  has  parallels  all  over  the  world.
31.  The  Terrapin's  escape  from  the  Wolves  i  p.  i_'7si  :  This  story,  of  which  the
version  here  given,  from  Swimmer  and  John  Ax,  is  admittedly  imperfect,  is  known
also  among  the  western  Cherokee,  having  been  mentioned  by  Watford  and  others  in
the  Nation,  although  for  some  reason  none  of  them  seemed  able  to  till  in  the  details.
A  somewhat  similar  story  was  given  as  belonging  to  her  own  tribe  by  a  Catawba
woman  married  among  the  Last  Cherokee.  It  suggests  number  21,  "The  Rabbit
and  the  tar  wolf,"  ami  has  numerous  parallels.
In  the  Creek  version,  in  the  Tuggle  manuscript,  the  Terrapin  ridicules  a  woman,
who  retaliates  by  crushing  his  shell  with  acorn  pestle.  He  repairs  the  injury  by
singing  a  medicine  song,  but  the  scars  remain  in  the  checkered  spots  on  his  back.
In  a  variant  in  the  same  collection  the  ants  mend  his  shell  with  tar,  in  return  for  his
fat  and  blood.  Other  parallels  are  among  the  Omaha,  "How  the  Big  Turtle  went
on  the  Warpath  "  (Dorsey,  Contributions  to  North  American  Ethnology,  vi,  p.  275),
and  the  Cheyenne,  "The  Turtle,  the  Grasshopper,  and  the  Skunk"  iKroeber,  Chey-
enne Tales,  in  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  July,  1900).  The  myth  is  recorded
also  from  west  Africa  by  Chatelain  ("The  Man  ami  the  Turtle,"  in  Folktales  of
Angola,  18114).
Kanaliefna. — This  is  a  sour  corn  gruel,  the  tamfuli  or  "Tom  Fuller"  of  the  Creeks,
which  is  a  favorite  food  preparation  among  all  the  southern  tribes.  A  large  earthern
jar  of  kanahe/na,  with  a  wooden  spoon  upright  in  it,  is  always  upon  a  bench  just
inside  the  cabin  door,  for  even'  visitor  to  help  himself.
32.  Origin  of  the  Groundhog  dance  i  p.  279):  This  story  is  from  Swimmer,  the
supplementary  part  being  added  by  John  Ax.  The  Groundhog  dance  is  one  of  those
belonging  to  the  great  thanksgiving  ceremony,  Green-corn  dance.  It  consists  of
alternate  advances  and  retreats  by  the  whole  line  of  dancers  in  obedience  to  signals
by  the  song  leader,  who  sings  to  the  accompaniment  of  a  rattle.  The  burden  of
the  song,  which  is  without  meaning,  is
lln'iriiir'clii'  Yaha'wiye'Shi  [twice]    Yu-u
Hi'yagu'wi  Hahi'yagii'wl  [twice]   Yu-yu.


"ooi  NOTES    AND    PARALLELS  153
33.  The  migration  oi  the  inimals  (p.  280):  This  little  story  ia  given  just  as
related  by  Ayasta,  the  only  woman  privileged  to  speak  in  council  among  the  Easl
Cherokee.  A  similar  incident  occurs  in  number  76,  "The  Bear  Man  "  ^.ccordingto
one  Cherokee  myth  concerning  the  noted  Track  Rock  gap,  near  Blairsville  in
upper  Georgia,  the  pictographs  in  the  rocks  there  are  the  footprints  of  all  sorts  of  birds
and  animals  which  once  crossed  over  the  gap  in  a  great  migration  toward  the  south.
34.  The  Wolf's  revenge:  The  Wolf  and  the  Dog  (p.  280):  These  short  stories
from  Swimmer  illustrate  the  Cherokee  belief  thai  if  a  wolf  be  injured  his  fellows  will
surely  revenge  the  injury.     See  als   te  to  number  15,  "The  Fourfooted  Tribes,"
ami  number  '■<,  "  Kana'tl  and  Selu."
[n  a  Wesl  African  tale  recorded  by  Chatelain  (Folktales  of  A.ngola,  1894)  the  dog
and  the  jackal  are  kinsmen,  who  live  together  in  the  bush  until  the  jackal  sends  the
dog  to  the  village  for  fire.     The  dog  goes,  enters  a  house  and  is  fed  by  a  w   an,  and
thereupon  concludes  to  stay  in  tin-  village,  where  there  i-  always  food.
35.  Tin  bird  tribes  (p.  280):  Th  eagh  killer — Of  the  Southern  tribes  generally
Adair  says:  "They  use  the  feathers  of  the  eagle's  tail  in  certain  friendly  and  relig-
ious dances,  bul  the  \\  hole  town  will  contribute,  to  the  value  of  200  deerskins,  for
killing  a  large  eagle — the  bald  eagle  they  do  not  esteem — and  the  man  also  gets  an
honorable  title  for  the  exploit,  as  it  he  bad  brought  in  the  scalp  of  an  enemy."  '
Timberlake  says  that  the  Cherokee  held  the  tail  of  an  eagle  in  the  greatest  esteem,  as
these  tails  were  sometimes  given  with  the  wampum  in  their  treaties,  and  none  of  their
warlike  ceremonies  could  he  performed  w  ithout  them  (Memoirs,  p.  81  I.  The  figura-
tive expression,  "asnowbird  has  been  killed."  used  to  avoid  offending  the  eagle
tribe,  i-  paralleled  in  the  expression,  "  he  has  1   n  scratched  by  a  brier,"  nseil  bythe
Cherokee  to  mean,  "  he  has  been  bitten  byasnake."    Professional  eagle  killers  existed
ai   ig  many  tribes,  together* with  a  prescribed  ceremonial  fur  securing  the  eagle. The  most  common  method  was  probably  that  described  in  a  note  te  number  (is.
"Gana's  Adventures  among  the  Cherokee."  A  detailed  account  of  the  Blackfoot
method  is  given  by  Grinnell,  in  his  Blackfoot  Lodge  Tales,  pp.  236-240.  The  eagle,
beinga  bird  of  prey,  as  well  as  a  sacred  bird,  was  never  eaten.
The  shifting  of  responsibility  for  the  killing  to  a  vicarious  victim  is  a  common  fea-
ture of  Indian  formulas  for  obtaining  pardon,  especially  for  offenses  against  the  ani-
mal tribe  or  the  spirits  of  the  dead.  A  remarkable  parallel  to  the  Cherokee  prayer,
from  the  Quichua  of  Peru,  is  given  by  Dr  G.  A.  Dorsey.  Having  started,  with  a
party  of  Indian  laborers  and  a  Spanish  gentleman  who  was  well  acquainted  \\  ith  the
native  language,  to  examine  seme  cave  tombs  near  the  ancient  city  of  Cuzco,  they
had  arrive.  1  at  the  spot  and  he  was  about  to  give  the  or, lei  to  begin  operations,  when
the  Indians,  removing  their  blankets  and  hats,  knelt  down  and  recited  in  unison  in
theirown  language  a  prayer  to  the  spirits  of  the  dead,  of  which  the  following  transla- tion is  an  extract:
"Chiefs,  -on-  of  the  sun,  you  and  we  are  brothers,  sons  of  the  great  Pachacamac.
You  only  know   this,  hut  we  know  that  three  persons  exist,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and
the  Holy  Ghost.     This  is  th   »ly  difference  between  you  and  us.  .  .  .  Chiefs,  sons
of  the  .-un.  wo  have  not  come  to  disturb  your  tranquil  sleep  in  this,  your  abode.  We
come  only  because  we  have  been  compelled  by  our  superiors;  toward  them  may  you
direct  your  vengeance  and  your  curses."
Then  followed  sacrifices  of  coca  leaves,  aguardiente,  and  chicha,  after  which  they
called  upon  the  snow-capped  mountain  to  witness  their  affection  for  their  a  nee-tor-,
an, I  were  then  ready  to  begin  work  (Horsey,  A  Ceremony  of  the  QuichuaS  of  Peru,
in  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore.  October,   1894),
Night  birds — Says  Adair  of  the  Southern  tribes  (History  of  the  American  Indians,
p.  130,  I77.">i:  "They  reckon  all  birds  of  prey,  and  birds  of  night,  to  be  unclean  and
■History  of  the  American  Indians,  p  80


45-4  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
unlawful  to  in'  eaten."  The  mixed  feeling  of  fear  and  reverence  for  all  night  birds
is  universal  among  the  Western  tribes.  » 'wis  particularly  are  believed  to  bring  pro-
phetic tidings  to  the  few  great  conjurers  who  can  interpret  their  language.
Th,  hawk — This,  being  a  bird  of  prey,  was  never  eaten.  The  following  incident  is
related  by  Adair,  probably  from  the  Chickasaw:  "Not  long  ago  when  the  Indians
were  making  their  winter's  hunt  and  the  old  women  were  without  flesh  meat  at
home,  I  shot  a  small  fat  hawk  and  desired  one  of  them  to  take  and  dress  it;  but
though  I  Strongly  importuned  Iter  by  way  of  trial,  she  as  earnestly  refused  it  tor  fear
of  contracting  pollution,  which  she  called  the  'accursed  sickness,'  supposing  disease
would  be  the  necessary  effect  of  such  an  impurity"  (Hist.  Am.  Indians,  p.  130).
Chickadee  and  titmouse — Adair  speaks.of  having  once  observed  a  party  of  Southern
Indians  "to  he  intimidated  at  the  voice  of  a  small  unt   unon  bird,  when  it  pitched
and  chirped  on  a  tree  over  their  camp"  (op.  cit.,  p.  26).  At  a  conference  with  the
Six  Nations  at  Albany  in  1775  the  <  taeida  speaker  said:  "We,  the  Six  Nations,  have
heard  the  voice  of  a  bird  called  Tskleleli  (  TsWIMtM),  a  news  carrier,  that  came
among  us.  It  has  told  us  that  the  path  at  the  western  connection,  by  Fort  Stanwix,
would  be  shut  up  by  either  one  party  or  the  other."  In  reply,  the  commissioners
said:  "We  apprehend  the  bird  Tskleleli  has  been  busy  again;  he  seems  to  be  a  mis-
chievous bird  and  ought  not  to  be  nourished  or  entertained "  (New  York  Colonial
Documents,  vm,  pp.  612,  628,  1857).  The  bird  name  is  in  the  Oneida  dialect.
Bruyas  gives  teksi  reri  as  the  Mohawk  name  for  the  tomtit.
36.  The  ball  game  of  the  birds  and  animals  (p.286):  This  is  one  of  the  best-
known  animal  stories  and  was  heard  with  more  or  less  of  detail  from  John  Ax,  Swim-
mer, Suyeta,  and  A'wani'ta  in  the  east,  and  from  AVafford  in  the  Territory.
The  Creeks  and  the  Seminoles  also,  as  we  learn  from  the  Tuggle  manuscript  collec-
tion, have  stories  of  ball  games  by  the  birds  against  the  fourfooted  animals.  In  one
storv  the  bat  is  rejected  by  both  sides,  but  is  finally  accepted  by  the  fourfooted
animals  on  account  of  his  having  teeth,  and  enables  them  to  win  the  victory  from
the  birds.
The  ballplay— The  ballplay,  a'ne'tsd,  is  the  great  athletic  game  of  the  Cherokee  and the  Gulf  tribes,  as  well  as  with  those  of  the  St  Lawrence  and  Great,  lakes.  It  need
hardly  be  stated  that  it  is  not  our  own  game  of  base  ball,  but  rather  a  variety  of  ten-
nis, the  ball  being  thrown,  not  from  the  hand,  but  from  a  netted  racket  or  pair  of
rackets.  The  goals  are  two  sets  of  upright  poles  at  either  end  of  the  ball  ground,
which  is  always  a  level  grassy  bottom  beside  a  small  stream.  There  is  much  accom-
panying ceremonial  and  conjuration,  with  a  ball  dance,  in  which  the  women  take
part,  the  night  before.  It  is  the  same  game  by  which  the  hostile  tribes  gained
entrance  to  the  British  post  at  Mackinaw  in  1763,  and  under  the  name  of  lacrosse  has
become  the  national  game  of  Canada.  It  has  also  been  adopted  by  the  French  Cre-
oles of  Louisiana  under  the  name  of  raquette.  In  British  Columbia  it  is  held  to  be
the  favorite  amusement  of  the  people  of  the  underworld  (Teit,  Thompson  River
Traditions,  p.  116).  In  the  southern  states  the  numerous  localities  bearing  the  names
of  "Ballplay,"  "Ball  flat,"  and  "Ball  ground,"  hear  witness  to  the  Indian  fondness
for  the  game.  Large  sums  were  staked  upon  it,  and  there  is  even  a  tradition  that
a  considerable  territory  in  northern  Georgia  was  won  from  the  Creeks  by  the
Cherokee  in  a  ball  game.  For  an  extended  description  see  the  the  author's  article
"The  Cherokee  Ball  Play,"  in  the  American  Anthropologist  for  April,  1890.
Won  /In-  game— On  account  of  their  successful  work  on  this  occasion  the  Cherokee
ballplayer  invokes  the  aid  of  the  bat  and  the  flying  squirrel,  and  also  ties  a  small  piece
of  the  bat's  wing  to  his  ball  stick  or  fastens  it  to  the  frame  over  which  the  sticks  are
hung  during  the  preliminary  dance  the  night  before.
Gavt  th'  martin  a  gourd— The  black  house-martin  is  a  favorite  with  the  Cherokee,
who  attract  it  by  fastening  hollow  gourds  to  the  tops  of  long  poles  set  up  near  their
houses  so  that  the  birds  may  build  their  nests  in  them.     In  South  Carolina,  as  far


NOTES    ami    PARALLELS  455
back  as  L700,  according  to  Lawson:  "The  planters  put  gourds  on  standing  holes
[poles]  "ii  purpose  forthese  fowl  to  build  in,  because  thej  areavery  warlike  bird
and  beat  the  crows  from  the  plantations"  I  History  of  ( 'arolina,  p.  238).
37.  How  the  Turkey  got  ins  beard  (p.287):  This  storj  is  well  known  in  the
trilie  and  was  heard  from  several  informants.
According  to  a  (reek  myth  in  the  Tuggle  collection  the  Turkey  was  once  a  warrior
anil  still  wears  his  last  scalp  from  his  nee  k.      In  am  it  her  story  of  the  same  collection
it  is  a  man's  scalp  which  he  seized  from  the  Terrapin  and  accidentally  swallowed  as
he  ran  off,  so  that  it  grew  out  from  his  breast.
38.  Why  the  Turkey  gobbles  (p.288):  This  story  wasfirst  heard  from  John  Ax
(easl    and  afterward  from  Wafford  (west) .    The  grouse  is  locally  called  "partrid in  the  southern  Alleghenies.
39.  How  the  Kingfishek  got  ins  bill  (p.  288):  The  lirst  version  is  from  John
Ax.  the  other  from  Swimmer.
)'iirnn  txmixii:' — ••  i.ittle  People,"  another  name  for  the  Xufine'hi  (see  number  78).
These  are  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  Anisga'ya  Tsunsdi',  "Little  Men,"  or
Thunder  Boys.
TugHlu'n&—A  small  slender-bodied  spotted  fish  about  four  inches  in  length,
which  likes  to  lie  upon  the  rocks  at  the  bottom  of  the  larger  streams.  The  name
refers  to  a  gourd,  from  a  fancied  resemblance  of  the  long  nose  to  the  handle  of  a
gourd.
4ti.  Row  the  Partridge  got  his  whistle  (p.  289) :  This  little  story  is  well  known
in  the  tribe.
Whistles  and  flutes  or  flageolets  are  in  use  among  nearly  all  trihes  for  ceremonial
and  amusement  purposes.  The  w  histle,  usually  made  from  an  eagle  bone,  was  worn
suspended  from  the  neck.  The  flute  or  flageolet  was  commonly  made  from  cedar
w   1.
41.  How  the  Redbiro  hot  his  color  (p.  289):  This  short  story  was  obtained
from  Cornelius  Boudinot,  a  prominent  mixed-blood  of  Tahlequah,  and  differs  from
the  standard  Cherokee  myth,  according  to  which  the  redbird  is  the  transformed
daughter  of  the  Sun  (seenumber  5,  "The  Daughter  of  the  Sun").
Redpaint — Much  sacredness  attaches,  in  the  Indian  mind,  to  red  paint,  the  color
being  symbolic  of  war,  strength,  success,  and  spirit  protection.  The  word  paint,  in
any  Indian  language,  is  generally  understood  to  mean  red  paint,  unless  it  is  i  itherwise
distinctly  noted.  The  Indian  red  paint  is  usually  a  soft  hematite  ore,  found  in  veins
of  hard-rock  formation,  from  which  it  must  be  dug  with  much  labor  and  patience.
In  the  western  trihes  everyone  coming  thus  to  procure  paint  makes  a  prayer  beside
the  rock  and  hangs  a  small  sacrifice  upon  a  convenient  bush  or  -tick  before  beginning
operations.
41'.  The  Pheasant  beating  corn:  The  Pheasant  dance  (p.  290):  The  lirst  of
these  little  tales  is  from  John  Ax,  tin-  second  from  Swimmer.  The  pheasant  |  Bonasa
umbetta;  Cherokee  tlunti'slt)  is  also  locally  called  grouse  or  partridge.
4.;.  The  race  between  the  Crane  and  the  Hummingbird  (p.  290):  This  story
is  a  favorite  one  in  the  tribe,  and  was  heard  from  several  informants,  both  Easl  and
West.  The  sequel  may  surprise  those  who  have  supposed  that  woman  has  no  rights  in
Indian  society.
In  a  Creek  story  under  the  same  title,  in  the  Tuggle  collection,  the  rivals  agree  to
fly  from  a  certain  spot  on  a  stream  to  the  spring  at  its  head.  The  humming  bird  i-
obliged  to  follow  the  windings  of  the  stream,  hut  the  crane  takes  a  direct  cour.-e
above  the  trees  and  thus  win-  the  race.
Flu  around  the  world— Noi  around  a  globe,  hut  around  the  circumference  oi  a  disk,
according  to  the  Indian  idea.


45(i  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHKROKEE
44.  Tm-:  Owl  gets  married  (p.  201):  Told  by  Swimmer.  The  three  owls  of  the
Cherokee  country  are  known,  respectively,  an  tsklH'  (i.  e.,  "  witch,"  Bubo  wrginiarma
saturaivs,  great,  dusky-horned  owl),  wahuhv/  [Megaseops  <ixio,  screech  owl),  and
ugul "'  i  Syrruum  nebuhsum,  hooting  or  barred  owl).  There  is  no  generic  term.  The
Cherokee  say  that  there  is  almost  no  rlesh  upon  the  body  of  the  hooting  owl  except
upon  tile  head.
4.">.  The  Huho  lets  married  (p.  292):  This  story  was  heard  at  different  times  from
Swimmer,  John  Ax,  and  Ta'gwadihi'.     The  first  named  always  gave  in  the  proper
place  a  very  g   1  imitation  of  the  Imlm  call,  drawing  out  the  sau-h  slowly,  giving
the  In*.  h'i,  lifi,  In'i,  ln'i,  lu'i  in  quick,  smothered  tones,  and  ending  with  three  chirps
and  a  long  whistle.  From  this  and  one  or  two  other  stories  of  similar  import  it
would  seem  that  the  woman  is  the  ruling  partner  in  the  Cherokee  domestic  estab-
lishment. Matches  wen-  generally  arranged  by  the  mother,  and  were  conditional
upon  the  consent  of  the  girl  (see  notes  to  number  84,  "The  Man  who  Married  the
Thunder's  Sister").
The  huhu  of  the  Cherokee,  so  called  from  its  cry,  is  the  yellow-breasted  chat
(  Tcteria  irirens),  also  known  as  the  yellow  mocking  bird  on  account  of  its  wonderful
mimic  powers.
46.  Why  the  Buzzard's  head  is  rare  (p.  293):  This  story  was  told  by  Swimmer
and  other  informants,  and  is  well  known.  It  has  an  exact  parallel  in  the  Omaha