story  of  Nunyunu'wi  (q.  v.).  When  the  tsikilili'  perches  on  a  branch
near  the  house  and  chirps  its  song  it  is  taken  as  an  omen  that  an  absent
friend  will  soon  be  heard  from  or  that  a  secret  enemy  is  plotting  mis-
chief. Many  stories  are  told  in  confirmation  of  this  belief,  among
which  may  1  le  instanced  that  of  Tom  Starr,  a  former  noted  outlaw  of  the
Cherokee  Nation  of  the  West,  who,  on  one  occasion,  was  about  to  walk
unwittingly  into  an  ambush  prepared  for  him  along  a  narrow  trail,
when  he  heard  the  warning  note  of  the  tsikilili',  and,  turning  abruptly,
ran  up  the  side  of  the  ridge  and  succeeded  in  escaping  with  his  life,
although  hotly  pursued  by  his  enemies.
36.  THE  BALL  GAME  OF  THE  BIRDS  AND  ANIMALS
Once  the  animals  challenged  the  birds  to  a  great  ballplay.  and  the
birds  accepted.  The  leaders  made  the  arrangements  and  fixed  the
day.  and  when  the  time  came  both  parties  met  at  the  place  for  the
ball  dance,  the  animals  on  a  smooth  grassy  bottom  near  the  river  and
the  birds  in  the  treetops  over  by  the  ridge.  The  captain' of  the  animals was  the  Bear,  who  was  so  strong  and  heavy  that  he  could  pull  down
anyone  who  got  in  his  way.  All  along  the  road  to  the  ball  ground
he  was  tossing  up  great  logs  to  show  his  strength  and  boasting  of
what  he  would  do  to  the  birds  when  the  game  began.  The  Terrapin,
too — not  the  little  one  we  have  now,  but  the  great  original  Terrapin —
was  with  the  animals.  His  shell  was  so  hard  that  the  heaviest  blows
could  not  hurt  him,  and  he  kept  rising  up  on  his  hind  legs  and  drop-
ping heavily  again  to  the  ground,  bragging  that  this  was  the  way  he
would  crush  any  bird  that  tried  to  take  the  ball  from  him.  Then
there  was  the  Deer,  who  could  outrun  every  other  animal.  Alto-
gether it  was  a  tine  company.
The  birds  had  the  Eagle  for  their  captain,  with  the  Hawk  and  the
great  Tla'nuwa,  all  swift  and  strong  of  flight,  but  still  they  were  a
little  afraid  of  the  animals.  The  dance  was  over  and  they  were  all
pruning  their  feathers  up  in  the  trees  and  waiting  for  the  captain  to
give  the  word  when  here  came  two  little  things  hardly  larger  than
field  mice  climbing  up  the  tree  in  which  sat  perched  the  bird  captain.
At  last  they  reached  the  top,  and  creeping  along  the  limb  to  where
the  Eagle  captain  sat  they  asked  to  be  allowed  to  join  in  the  game.
The  captain  looked  at  them,  and  seeing  that  they  were  four-footed,  he
asked  why  they  did  not  go  to  the  animals,  where  they  belonged.  The
little  things  said  that  they  had,  but  the  animals  had  made  fun  of  them
and  driven  them  off  because  they  were  so  small.  Then  the  bird  cap-
tain pitied  them  and  wanted  to  take  them.
But  how  could  they  join  the  birds  when  they  had  no  wings '.  The
Eagle,  the  Hawk,  and  the  others  consulted,  and  at  last  it  was  decided


boone\  THE    BALL    SAME    OF    BIRDS    AND    ANIMALS  287
to  make  some  wings  for  the  little  fellows.  They  tried  for  a  lone-  time
to  think  of  something  that  might  do,  until  someone  happened  to
remember  the  drum  they  had  used  in  the  dance.  The  head  was  of
ground-hog  -kin  and  maybe  they  could  cut  oil*  a  corner  and  make
wine-sot'  it.  So  they  took  two  pieces  of  leather  from  the  drumhead
and  cut  them  into  shape  for  wines,  and  stretched  them  with  cane
splint-  and  fastened  them  on  to  the  forelegs  of  one  of  the  small  ani-
mal-, and  in  this  way  came  Tla'mehd,  the  Hat.  They  threw  tie-  ball
to  him  and  told  him  to  catch  it.  and  by  the  way  he  dodged  and  circled
about,  keeping  the  hall  always  in  the  air  and  never  letting  it  fall  to  the
ground,  the  birds  soon  saw  that  he  would  be  one  of  their  best  men.
Now  they  wanted  to  fix  the  other  little  animal,  but  they  had  \\>rt\
up  all  their  leather  to  make  wines  for  the  Bat,  and  there  was  no  time
to  send  for  more.  Somebody  said  that  they  might  do  it  by  stretching
hi-  skin,  so  two  large  birds  took  hold  from  opposite  sides  with  their
strong  bills,  ami  by  pulling  at  his  fur  for  several  minutes  they  man-
aged to  stretch  the  skin  on  each  side  between  the  fore  and  hind
feet,  until  they  had  Tewa,  the  Flying  Squirrel.  To  try  him  the  bird
captain  threw  up  the  ball,  when  the  Flying  Squirrel  sprang  off  the
limb  after  it,  caught  it  in  his  teeth  and  carried  it  through  the  air  to
another  tree  nearly  across  the  bottom.
"When  they  were  all  ready  the  signal  was  given  and  thegame  began,
but  almost  at  the  first  toss  the  Flying  Squirrel  caught  the  ball  and
carried  it  up  a  tree,  from  which  he  threw  it  to  the  birds,  who  kepi  it
in  the  air  for  some  time  until  it  dropped.  The  Bear  rushed  to  gel  it.
but  the  Martin  darted  after  it  and  threw  it  to  the  Bat,  who  was  flying
near  the  ground,  and  by  his  dodging  and  doubling  kept  it  out  of  the
way  of  even  the  Deer,  until  he  finally  threw  it  in  between  the  post-  and
won  the  game  for  the  birds.
The  Bear  and  the  Terrapin,  who  had  boasted  so  of  what  they  would
do,  never  got  a  chance  even  to  touch  the  ball.  For  saving  the  ball
when  it  dropped,  the  birds  afterwards  gave  the  Martin  a  gourd  in
which  to  build  hi- nest,  and  he  still  has  it.
37.  HOW  THE  TURKEY  GOT  HIS  BEARD
When  the  Terrapin  won  the  race  from  the  Rabbit  (see  the  story)  all
the  animals  wondered  and  talked  about  it  a  great  deal,  because  they
had  always  thought  the  Terrapin  slow,  although  they  knew  that  he
was  a  warrior  and  had  many  conjuring  secrets  beside.  But  the  Turkey
was  not  satisfied  and  told  the  others  there  must  be  some  trick  aboul  it.
Said  he.  "I  know  the  Terrapin  can't  run — he  can  hardly  crawl  and
I'm  going  to  try  him." So  one  day  the  Turkey  met  the  Terrapin  coming  home  from  war
with  a  fresh  scalp  hanging  from  his  neck  and  dragging  on  the  ground
a-  he  traveled.     The  Turkey  laughed   at   the    sight  and  said:   •"That


288  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEKOKEE  [eth.a.nn.19
scalp  don't  look  right  on  you.  Your  neck  is  too  short  and  low  down
to  wear  it  that  way.      Let  me  show  you." The  Terrapin  agreed  and  gave  the  scalp  to  the  Turkey,  who  fastened
it  around  his  neck.  "'Now."  said  the  Turkey.  "I'll  walk  a  little  way
and  you  can  see  how  it  looks."  So  he  walked  ahead  a  short  distance
and  then  turned  and  asked  the  Terrapin  how  he  liked  it,  Said  the,
Terrapin,  "It  looks  very  nice;  it  becomes  you."
"'Now  I'll  fix  it  in  a  different  way  and  let  you  see  how7  it  looks."  said the  Turkey.  So  he  gave  the  string  another  pull  and  walked  ahead  again.
"O,  that  looks  very  nice."  said  the  Terrapin.  But  the  Turkey  kept  on
walking,  and  when  the  Terrapin  called  to  him  to  bring  back  the  scalp
he  only  walked  faster  and  broke  into  a  run.  Then  the  Terrapin  got
out  his  bow  and  by  his  conjuring  art  shot  a  number  of  cane  splints  into
the  Turkey's  leg  to  cripple  him  so  that  he  could  not  run,  which  accounts
for  all  the  many  small  bones  in  the  Turkey's  leg,  that  are  of  no  use whatever;  but  the  Terrapin  never  caught  the  Turkey,  who  still  wears
the  scalp  from  his  neck.
38.   WHY    THE  TURKEY   GOBBLES
The  Grouse  used  to  have  a  tine  voice  and  a  good  halloo  in  the  ball-
play.  All  the  animals  and  birds  used  to  play  ball  in  those  days  and
were  just  as  proud  of  a  loud  halloo  as  the  ball  players  of  to-day.  The
Turkey  had  not  a  good  voice,  so  he  asked  the  Grouse  to  give  him  les-
sons. The  Grouse  agreed  to  teach  him,  but  wanted  pay  for  his  trouble,
and  the  Turkey  promised  to  give  him  some  feathers  to  make  himself  a
collar.  That  is  how  the  Grouse  got  his  collar  of  turkey  feathers.  They
began  the  lessons  and  the  Turkey  learned  very  fast  until  the  Grouse
thought  it  was  time  to  try  his  voice.  "Now,"  said  the  Grouse.  "  I'll stand  on  this  hollow  log,  and  when  I  give  the  signal  by  tapping  on  it,
you  must  halloo  as  loudly  as  you  can."  So  he  got  upon  the  log  ready
to  tap  on  it,  as  a  Grouse  does,  but  when  he  gave  the  signal  the  Turkey
was  so  eager  and  excited  that  he  could  not  raise  his  voice  for  a  shout,
but  only  gobbled,  and  ever  since  then  he  gobbles  whenever  he  hears  a
noise.
39.   HOW    THE    KINGFISHER    GOT    HIS    BILL
Some  old  men  say  that  the  Kingfisher  was  meant  in  the  beginning  to
be  a  water  bird,  but  as  he  had  not  been  given  either  web  feet  or  a  good
bill  he  could  not  make  a  living.  The  animals  held  a  council  over  it
and  decided  to  make  him  a  bill  like  a  long  sharp  awl  for  a  fish-gig  (fish-
spear).  So  they  made  him  a  fish-gig  and  fastened  it  on  in  front  of  his
mouth.  He  flew  to  the  top  of  a  tree,  sailed  out  and  darted  down  into
the  water,  and  came  up  with  a  fish  on  his  gig.  And  he  has  been  the
best  gigger  ever  since.
Sonic  others  say  it  was  this  way:  A  Blacksnake  found  a  Yellowham-


THE    BEDBIRD's    COLOR  28V)
iikt's  nc-t  in  a  hollow  tree,  ami  after  swallowing  the  young  birds,
coiled  up  to  sleep  in  the  nest,  where  the  mother  bird  found  him  when
she  came  home.     She  went  for  help  to  the  Little  People,  who  sent  her
to  the  Kingfisher.     He  ca    and  after  flying  back  and  forth  past  the
hole  a  few  times,  made  one  daii  at  the  snake  and  pulled  him  out  dead.
When  they  looked  they  found  a  hole  in  the  snake's  bead  where  the
Kingfisher  had  pierced  it  with  a  slender  tugcttu'/id  tish.  which  he  car
ried  in  his  bill  like  a  lance.     From  this  the  Little  People  c   bided
that  he  would  make  a  first-class  gigger  if  he  only  had  the  righl  spear,
so  they  gave  him  his  lone-  hill  as  a  reward.
40.   HOW    THE    PARTRIDGE    GOT    HIS    WHISTLE
In  the  old  days  the  Terrapin  had  a  tine  whistle,  but  the  Partridge
had  none.  The  Terrapin  was  constantly  going  about  whistling  and
showing  his  whistle  to  the  other  animals  until  the  Partridge  became
jealous,  so  one  day  when  they  met  the  Partridge  asked  leave  to  try  it.
The  Terrapin  was  afraid  to  risk  it  at  first,  suspecting  some  trick,  but
the  Partridge  -aid.  "  I'll  give  it  back  right  away,  and  if  you  an' afraid
you  can  stay  with  me  while  I  practice."  So  the  Terrapin  let  him  have
the  whistle  and  the  Partridge  walked  around  blowing  on  it  in  tine
fashion.  ••  How  does  it  sound  with  rpe  ?"  asked  the  Partridge.  "().
you  do  very  well,"  --aid  the  Terrapin,  walking  alongside.  "Now.  how
do  you  like  it."  said  the  Partridge,  running  ahead  and  whistling  a  little
faster.  "That's  tine."  answered  the  Terrapin,  hurrying  to  keep  up.
"  but  don't  run  so  fast."  "And  now,  how  do  you  like  this;"  called
the  Partridge,  and  with  that  he  spread  his  wings,  gave  one  long
whistle,  and  flew  to  the  top  of  a  tree,  leaving  the  poor  Terrapin  to  look
after  him  from  the  ground.  The  Terrapin  never  recovered  his  whistle,
and  from  that,  and  the  loss  of  his  scalp,  which  the  Turkey  stole  from
him.  he  grew  ashamed  to  be  seen,  and  ever  since  he  -.huts  himself  up
in  his  box  when  anyone  comes  near  him.
41     HOW   THE   REDBIRD   GOT   HIS   COLOR
A  Raccoon  passing  a  Wolf  one  day  made  several  insulting  remarks,
until  at  last  the  Wolf  became  angry  and  turned  and  chased  him.  The
Raccoon  ran  his  best  and  managed  to  reach  a  tree  by  the  river  side
before  the  Wolf  came  up.  He  climbed  the  tree  and  stretched  out  on
a  limb  overhanging  the  water.  When  the  Wolf  arrived  he  saw  the
reflection  in  the  water,  and  thinking  it  was  the  Raccoon  he  jumped  at
it  and  was  nearly  drowned  before  he  could  scramble  out  again,  all  wet
and  dripping.  He  lay  down  on  the  bank  to  dry  and  fell  asleep,  and
while  he  was  sleeping  the  Raccoon  came  down  tin'  tree  and  plastered
his  eyes  with  dunu'.  When  the  Wolf  awoke  he  found  he  could  not
open  hi- eyes,  and  began  to  whine.  Alone-  came  a  little  brown  bird
through  the  bushes    and    heard    the  Wolf   crying   and    asked  what   was
19    ETH— 01   19


290  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
the  matter.  The  Wolf  told  his  story  and  said.  "If  you  will  get  my
eyes  open.  I  will  show  you  where  to  find  some  nice  red  paint  to  paint
yourself."  ••All  right,"  said  the  brown  bird;  so  he  peeked  at  the
Wolfs  eyes  until  he  got  oil'  all  the  plaster.  Then  the  Wolf  took  him
to  a  rock  that  had  streaks  of  bright  red  paint  running  through  it.  and
the  little  bird  painted  himself  with  it.  and  has  ever  since  been  a  Red-
42.  THE  PHEASANT  BEATING  CORN;  ORIGIN  OF  THE  PHEASANT DANCE
The  Pheasant  once  saw  a  woman  heating  corn  in  a  wooden  mortar  in
front  of  the  house.  "I  can  do  that,  too,"  said  he,  but  the  woman
would  not  believe  it,  so  the  Pheasant  went  into  the  woods  and  got  upon
a  hollow  log  and  •"drummed"  with  his  wings  as  a  pheasant  does,  until
the  people  in  the  house  heard  him  and  thought  he  was  really  beating
corn.
*  *  *  *  *  *  *
In  the  Pheasant  dance,  a  part  of  the  Green-corn  dance,  the  instru-
ment used  is  the  drum,  and  the  dancers  heat  the  ground  with  their  feet
in  imitation  of  the  drumming  sound  made  by  the  pheasant.  They
form  two  concentric  circles,  the  men  being  on  the  inside,  facing  the
women  in  the  outer  circle,  each  in  turn  advancing  and  retreating  at  the
signal  of  the  drummer,  who  sits  at  one  side  and  sings  the  Pheasant
songs.  According  to  the  story,  there  was  once  a  winter  famine  among
the  birds  and  animals.  No  mast  (fallen  nuts)  could  be  found  in  the
woods,  and  they  were  near  starvation  when  a  Pheasant  discovered  a
holly  tree,  loaded  with  red  berries,  of  which  the  Pheasant  is  said  to
be  particularly  fond.  He  called  his  companion  birds,  and  they  formed
a  circle  about  the  tree,  singing,  dancing,  and  drumming  with  their
wings  in  token  of  their  joy.  and  thus  originated  the  Pheasant  dance.
43.  THE  RACE  BETWEEN  THE  CRANE  AND  THE  HUMMINGBIRD
The  Hummingbird  and  the  Crane  were  both  in  love  with  a  pretty
woman.  She  preferred  the  Hummingbird,  who  was  as  handsome  as
the  Crane  was  awkward,  but  the  Crane  was  so  persistent  that  in  order
to  get  rid  of  him  she  finally  told  him  he  must  challenge  the  other  to
a  race  and  she  would  marry  the  winner.  The  Hummingbird  was  so
swift — almost  like  a  Hash  of  lightning — and  the  Crane  so  slow  and
heavy,  that  she  felt  sure  the  Hummingbird  would  win.  She  did  not
know  the  Crane  could  fly  all  night.
They  agreed  to  start  from  her  house  and  fly  around  the  circle  of
the  world  to  the  beginning,  and  the  one  who  came  in  first  would  marry
the  woman.  At  the  word  the  Hummingbird  darted  off  like  an  arrow
and  was  out  of  sight  in  a  moment,  leaving  his  rival  to  follow  heavily
behind.      He  flew  all  day.  and  when  evening  came  and  he  stopped  to


THE    OWL    GETS    MARRIED  291
roost  for  the  night  be  was  far  ahead.  I '> m  the  Crane  lieu  steadily  ;ill
night  Long,  passing  the  Hummingbird  soon  after  midnighl  and  going
on  until  he  came  to  a  creek  and  stopped  to  rest  about  daylight.  The
Hummingbird  woke  up  in  the  morning  and  flew  on  again,  thinking
how  easily  he  would  win  the  race,  until  he  reached  the  creek  and
there  found  the  Crane  spearing  tadpoles,  with  his  lone-  bill,  for  break-
fast. He  was  very  nuieh  surprised  and  wondered  bow  this  could  have
happened,  hut  he  flew  swiftly  by  and  soon  left  the  Crane  out  of  sight
again.
The  ('fane  finished  his  breakfast  and  started  on.  and  when  evening catiie  he  kept  on  as  before.  This  time  it  was  hardly  midnight  when
he  passed  the  Hummingbird  asleep  on  a  limb,  and  in  the  morning  he
had  finished  his  breakfast  before  the  other  came  up.  The  next  day
he  gained  a  little  more,  and  on  the  fourth  day  he  was  spearing  tadpoles
for  dinner  when  the  Hummingbird  passed  him.  On  the  fifth  and
sixth  days  it  was  late  in  the  afternoon  before  the  Hummingbird  came
up.  and  on  the  morning  of  the  seventh  day  the  Crane  was  a  whole
night's  travel  ahead.  He  took  his  time  at  breakfast  and  then  fixed
himself  up  as  nicely  as  he  could  at  the  creek  and  came  in  at  the  start-
ing place  where  the  woman  lived,  early  in  the  morning.  When  the
Hummingbird  arrived  in  the  afternoon  he  found  he  had  lost  the  race,
hut  the  woman  declared  she  would  never  have  such  an  ugly  fellow  as
the  Crane  for  a  husband,  so  she  stayed  single.
44    THE  OWL  GETS  MARRIED
A  widow  with  one  daughter  was  always  warning  the  girl  that  she
must  be  sure  to  get  a  good  hunter  for  a  husband  when  she  married.
The  young  woman  listened  and  promised  to  do  as  her  mother  advised.
At  last  a  suitor  came  to  ask  the  mother  for  the  girl,  but  the  widow
told  him  that  only  a  good  hunter  could  have  her  daughter.  "1*111  just
that  kind."  said  the  lover,  and  again  asked  her  to  speak  for  him  to  the young  woman.  So  the  mother  went  to  the  girl  and  told  her  a  young
man  had  come  a-courting,  and  as  he  said  he  was  a  good  hunter  she
advised  her  daughter  to  take  him.  '•Just  as  you  say."  said  the  girl. So  when  he  came  again  the  matter  was  all  arranged,  and  he  went  to
live  with  the  girl.
The  next  morning  he  got  ready  and  said  he  would  go  out  hunting,
but  before  starting  he  changed  his  mind  and  said  he  would  go  fishing.
He  was  gone  all  day  and  came  home  late  at  night, bringing  only  three
small  fish,  saying  that  he  had  had  no  luck,  but  would  have  better  suc-
cess to-morrow.  The  next  morning  he  started  off  again  to  fish  and
was  gone  all  day.  but  came  home  at  night  with  only  two  worthless
spring  lizards  [duwS'gd)  and  the  same  excuse.  Next  day  he  said  he
would  go   hunting  this  time.     He  was  gone  again   until  night,  and


292  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEBOKEE  [eth.akk.1S
returned  at  last  with  only  a  handful  <>f  scraps  that  he  had  found  where
some  hunters  had  cut  up  a  deer.
By  this  time  the  old  woman  was  suspicious.  So  next  morning  when
he  started  off  again,  as  he  said,  to  fish,  she  told  her  daughter  to  follow
him  secretly  and  see  how  he  set  to  work.  The  girl  followed  through
the  woods  and  kept  him  in  sight  until  he  came  down  to  the  river,  where
she  saw  her  husband  change  to  a  hooting  owl  {ugvJcu')  and  fly  over  to
a  pile  of  driftwood  in  the  water  and  cry,  "  U-gu-ku!  huf  lm!  u!  «/"
She  was  surprised  and  very  angry  and  said  to  herself.  "I  thought
1  hail  married  a  man.  hut  my  husband  is  only  an  owl."  She  watched and  saw  the  owl  look  into  the  water  for  a  long  time  and  at  last
swoop  down  and  tiring  up  in  his  (laws  a  handful  of  sand,  from
which  he  picked  out  a  crawfish.  Then  he  flew  across  to  the  bank,  took
the  form  of  a  man  again,  and  started  home  with  the  crawfish.  His
wife  hurried  on  ahead  through  the  woods  and  got  there  before  him.
When  he  came  in  with  the  crawfish  in  his  hand,  she  asked  him  where
were  all  the  fish  he  had  caught.  He  said  he  had  none,  because  an  owl
had  frightened  them  all  away.  "I  think  you  are  the  owl,"  said  his wife,  and  drove  him  out  of  the  house.  The  owl  went  into  the  woods
and  there  he  pined  away  with  grief  and  love  until  there  was  no  flesh
left  on  any  part  of  his  body  except  his  head.
45.  THE  HUHU   GETS   MARRIED
A  widow  who  had  an  only  daughter,  but  no  son,  found  it  very  hard
to  make  a  living  and  was  constantly  urging  upon  the  young  woman
that  they  ought  to  have  a  man  in  the  family,  who  would  be  a  good
hunter  and  able  to  help  in  the  field.  One  evening  a  stranger  lover
came  courting  to  the  house,  and  when  the  girl  told  him  that  she  could
marry  only  one  who  was  a  good  worker,  he  declared  that  he  was
exactly  that  sort  of  man;  so  the  girl  talked  to  her  mother,  and  on  her
advice  they  were  married.
The  next  morning  the  widow  gave  her  new  sondndaw  a  hoe  and  sent
him  out  to  the  cornfield.  When  breakfast  was  ready  she  went  to  call
him,  following  a  sound  as  of  some  one  hoeing  on  stony  soil,  but  when
she  came  to  the  spot  she  found  only  a  small  circle  of  hoed  ground  and
no  sign  of  her  sondndaw.  Away  over  in  the  thicket  she  heard  a  huhu
calling.
He  did  not  come  in  for  dinner,  either,  and  when  he  returned  home
in  the  evening  the  old  woman  asked  him  where  he  had  been  all  day.
"Hard  at  work,"  said  he.  "But  I  didn't  see  you  when  1  came  to  call
you  to  breakfast."  "  I  was  down  in  the  thicket  cutting  sticks  to  mark
off  the  field,"  said  he.  "But  why  didn't  you  come  in  to  dinner??'
"  I  was  too  busy  working,"  said  he.  So  the  old  woman  was  satisfied,
and  they  had  their  supper  together.


moonei  THE    EAGLE'S    REVENGE  293
Early  next  morning  In-  started  off  with  his  hoe  over  his  shoulder.
When  breakfast  was  ready  the  old  woman  went  again  to  call  him,  but
found  no  sign  of  him,  only  the  hoe  lying  there  and  no  work  done.
And  away  over  in  the  thicket  a  huhu  was  calling,  " Sau-h.'  sau-h!
sau-h!  ku!  I<»:  //".'  /<».'  /"'•'  /"'■'  chi!  chi!  chi.'-whew/"
She  wont  back  to  the  house,  and  when  at  last  In'  came  home  in  the
e\  ening  -he  asked  him  again  what  he  had  been  doing  all  day.  "  Work-
ing hard,"  said  he.  "  But  you  were  not  there  when  I  came  after  you."
■•().  1  just  went  over  in  the  thicket  a  while  to  sec  some  of  my  kins-
folk," said  he.  Then  the  old  woman  -aid.  "  I  have  lived  here  a  long
time  and  there  is  nothing  living  in  the  swamp  but  huhus.  My  daugh-
ter wants  u  husband  that  can  work  and  not  a  lazy  huhu;  so  you  may
go."     And  she  drove  him  from  the  house.
46.  WHY  THE  BUZZARD'S  HEAD  IS  BARE
The  buzzard  used  to  have  a  tine  topknot,  of  which  he  was  so  proud
that  he  refused  to  eat  carrion,  and  while  the  other  birds  were  pecking
at  the  body  of  a  deer  or  other  animal  which  they  had  found  he  would
strut  around  and  say:  "You  may  have  it  all.  it  is  not  good  enough  for
me."  They  resolved  to  punish  him.  and  with  the  help  of  the  buffalo
carried  out  a  plot  by  which  the  buzzard  lost  not  his  topknot  alone,  but
nearly  all  the  other  feathers  on  his  head.  He  lost  his  pride  at  the
same  time,  so  that  he  is  willing  enough  now  to  eat  carrion  for  a  living.
47.   THE   EAGLE'S   REVENGE
Once  a  hunter  in  the  mountains  heard  a  noise  at  night  like  a  rushing
wind  outside  the  cabin,  and  on  going  out  he  found  that  an  eagle  had
just  alighted  on  the  drying  pole  and  was  tearing  at  the  body  of  a  deer
hanging  there.  Without  thinking  of  the  danger,  he  shot  the  eagle.
In  the  morning  he  took  the  deer  and  started  back  to  the  settlement,
where  he  told  what  he  had  done,  and  the  chief  sent  out  some  men  to
bring  in  the  eagle  and  arrange  for  an  Eagle  dance.  They  brought
back  the  dead  eagle,  everything  was  made  ready,  and  that  night  they
-tailed  thi'  dance  in  the  townhouse.
About  midnight  there  was  a  whoop  outside  and  a  strange  warrior
came  into  the  circle  and  began  to  recite  his  exploits.      X   ■   knew
him,  but  they  thought  he  had  come  from  one  of  the  farther  Cherokee
towns.  He  told  how  he  had  killed  a' man.  and  at  the  end  of  the  story
he  gave  a  hoarse  yell.  Hi!  that  startled  the  whole  company,  and  one  of
the  seven  men  with  the  rattle-  fell  over  dead.  He  sang  of  another
deed,  and  at  the  end  straightened  up  with  another  loud  yell.     A  second
rattler  fell  dead,  and  the  ]   pie  were  so  full  of   fear  that   they  could
not  stir  from  their  place-.  Still  he  kept  on.  and  at  every  pause  there
came  again  that  terrible  scream,  until  the  last  of  the  seven  rattlers  fell
dead,  and  then  the  stranger  went  out   into  the  darkness.     Long  after-


2U4  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
ward  they  learned  from  the  eagle  killer  that  it  was  the  brother  of  the
eagle  shot  by  the  hunter.
48.  THE   HUNTER  AND   THE  BUZZARD
A  hunter  had  been  all  day  looking  for  deer  in  the  mountains  without
success  until  he  was  completely  tired  out  and  sat  down  on  a  log  to  rest
and  wonder  what  he  should  do.  when  a  buzzard — a  bird  which  always
has  magic  powers — came  flying  overhead  and  spoke  to  him,  asking  him
what  was  his  trouble.  When  the  hunter  had  told  his  story  the  buzzard
said  there  were  plenty  of  deer  on  the  ridges  beyond  if  only  the  hunter
were  high  up  in  the  air  where  he  could  see  them,  and  proposed  that
they  exchange  forms  for  a  while,  when  the  buzzard  would  go  home  to
the  hunter's  wife  while  the  hunter  would  go  to  look  for  deer.  The hunter  agreed,  and  the  buzzard  became  a  man  and  went  home  to  the
hunter's  wife,  who  received  him  as  her  husband,  while  the  hunter became  a  buzzard  and  new  off  over  the  mountain  to  locate  the  deer.
After  staying  some  time  with  the  woman,  who  thought  always  it  was
her  real  husband,  the  buzzard  excused  himself,  saying  he  must  go
again  to  look  for  game  or  they  would  have  nothing  to  eat.  He  came
to  the  place  where  he  had  first  met  the  hunter,  and  found  him  already
there,  still  in  buzzard  form,  awaiting  him.  He  asked  the  hunter  what
success  he  had  had,  and  the  hunter  replied  that  he  had  found  several
deer  over  the  ridge,  as  the  buzzard  had  said.  Then  the  buzzard
restored  the  hunter  to  human  shape,  and  became  himself  a  buzzard
again  and  flew  away.  The  hunter  went  where  he  had  seen  the  deer
and  killed  several,  and  from  that  time  he  never  returned  empty-handed
from  the  woods.
Snake.  Fish,  and  Insect  Myths
49.  the  snake  tribe
The  generic  name  for  snakes  is  m&d>&'.  They  are  all  regarded  as
anida'wehl,  " supernaturals,"  having  an  intimate  connection  with  the
rain  and  thunder  gods,  ami  possessing  a  certain  influence  over  the  other
animal  and  plant  tribes.  It  is  said  that  the  snakes,  the  deer,  and  the
ginseng  act  as  allies,  so  that  an  injury  to  one  is  avenged  by  all.  The
feeling  toward  snakes  is  one  of  mingled  fear  and  reverence,  and  every
precaution  is  taken  to  avoid  killing  or  offending  one,  especially  the
rattlesnake.  He  who  kills  a  snake  will  soon  see  others;  and  should  he
kill  a  second  one,  so  many  will  come  around  him  whichever  way  he
may  turn  that  he  will  become  dazed  at  the  sight  of  their  glistening
eyes  and  darting  tongues  and  will  go  wandering  about  like  a  crazy  man,
unable  to  find  his  way  out  of  the  woods.  To  guard  against  this  mis-
fortune there  are  certain  prayers  which  the  initiated  say  in  order  that
a  snake  may  not  cross  their  path,  and  on  meeting  the  first  one  of  the


THE    SNAKE    TRIBE  295
season  the  hunter  huinbh  begs  of  him,  "Let  us  nol  see  each  other  this
summer.'''  Certain  smells,  as  thai  of  the  wild  parsnip,  and  certain
songs,  as  those  of  the  Unika'wl  or  Townhouse  dance,  arc  offensive  to
the  snakes  ami  make  them  angry.  For  this  reason  the  I'nika'u  1  dance is  held  ..nix  late  in  the  fall,  after  they  have  retired  to  their  dens  for
the  « inter.
When  one  dreams  of  being  bitten  by  a  snake  lie  must  he  treated  t  li<'
same  as  for  an  actual  bite,  because  it  is  a  snake  ghosl  thai  has  Kitten
hi  in;  otherwise  the  place  will  swell  and  ulcerate  in  the  same  way,  even
though  it  he  years  afterwai'ds.  For  fear  of  offending  them,  even  in
speaking,  it  is  never  said  that  a  man  has  been  bitten  byasnake,  but
onh  that  he  has  been  "scratched  by  a  brier."  Most  of  the  beliefs  ami
customs  in  this  connection  have  more  special  reference  to  the  rattle-
snake.
The  rattlesnake  is  called  utsa'ndti,  which  may  In'  rendered,  "he  has
a  bell,"  alluding  to  the  rattle.  According  to  a  myth  given  elsewhere,
he  was  once  a  man.  and  was  transformed  to  his  present  shape  that  lie
mighl  save  the  human  face  from  extermination  by  the  Sun.  a  mission
which  he  accomplished  successfully  after  others  had  failed.  By  the
old  men  he  is  also  spoken  of  as  "the  Thunder's  necklace"  (see  the