part  in  the  battle.     In  a  Washingtoi   wspaper  notice  of  the  treaty
>  Jackson  a  report  and  Colone]  Morgan's  report,  in  Fay  and  Davison,  Sketches  ol  the  War,  pp.  255,
250,259,  1815.  Pickett  makes  tin-  lossoi  the  white  troops 82  killed  and  99  wounded,  rhi  Houston
reference  Is  (rom  Lossing.  The  battle  Is  described  also  bj  Pickett,  Alabama,  pp.588  691,  reprint
ol  1896;  Drake,  in. Man-,  pp.  891,  100,  1880;  McKenney  an.!  Hall.  Indian  l  ribes,  n.  pp.98,99, 1858.
'McKenney  and  Hull,  op,  .'it.,  p.  98.


MooNKYj  TREATIES    OF    WASHINGTON   1816  97
delegation  of  1816  the  six  signers  arc  mentioned  as  Colonel  [John]
Lowrey,  Major  [John]  Walker,  Major  Ridge,  Captain  [Richard]  Taylor,
Adjutant  [John]  Ross,  and  Kunnesee  (Tsi'yu-gunsi'm,  Cheucunsene)  and
are  described  as  men  of  cultivation,  nearly  all  of  whom  had  served  as
officers  of  the  Cherokee  forces  w  ith  Jackson  and  distinguished  themselves
as  well  by  their  bravery  as  by  their  attachment  to  the  United  States.1
Among  the  East  Cherokee  in  Carolina  the  only  name  still  remembered
is  that  of  their  old  chief.  Junaluska  (Tsunu'Iahufl'ski),  who  said  after-
ward: "If  1  had  known  that  Jackson  would  drive  us  from  our  homes
u/'  I  would  have  killed  him  that  day  at  the  Horseshoe." The  Cherokee  returned  to  their  homes  to  rind  them  despoiled  and
ravaged  in  their  absence  by  disorderly  white  troops.  Two  years  after-
ward, by  treaty  al  Washington,  the  Government  agreed  to  reimburse
them  for  the  damage.  Interested  parties  denied  that  they  had  suffered
any  damage  or  rendered  any  services,  to  which  their  agent  indignantly
replied:  "It  may  he  answered  that  thousands  witnessed  both;  that  in
nearly  all  the  battles  with  the  Creeks  the  Cherokees  rendered  the  most
efficient  service,  and  at  the  expense  of  the  lives  of  many  tine  men.
whose  wives  and  children  and  brothers  and  sisters  are  mourning  their
fall."2 In  the  spring  of  1816  a  delegation  of  seven  principal  men.  accom-
panied by  Agent  Meigs,  visited  Washington,  and  the  result  was  the
negotiation  of  two  treaties  at  that  place  on  the  Name  date.  March  22,
1816.  By  the  first  of  these  the  Cherokee  ceded  for  five  thousand  dollars
their  last  remaining  territory  in  South  Carolina,  a  small  strip  in  the
extreme  northwestern  corner,  adjoining  Chattooga  river.  By  the  sec-
ond treaty  a  boundary  was  established  between  the  lands  claimed  by  the
Cherokee  and  Creeks  in  northern  Alabama.  This  action  was  made
necessary  in  order  to  determine  the  boundaries  of  the  great  tract
which  the  Creeks  had  been  compelled  to  surrender  in  punishment  for
their  late  uprising.  The  li no  was  run  from  a  point  on  Little  Bear
creek  in  northwestern  Alabama  direct  to  the  Ten  islands  of  the
Coosa  at  old  Fort  Strother,  southeast  of  the  present  Asheville.  Gen-
era] Jackson  protested  strongly  against  this  line,  on  the  ground  that
all  the  territory  south  of  Tennessee  river  and  west  of  the  Coosa
belonged  to  the  Creeks  and  was  a  part  of  their  cession.  The  Chicka-
saw also  protested  against  considering  this  tract  as  Cherokee  terri-
tory. The  treaty  also  granted  free  and  unrestricted  road  privileges
throughout  the  Cherokee  country,  this  concession  being  the  result  of
years  of  persistent  effort  on  the  part  of  the  Government:  and  an
appropriation  of  twenty-five  thousand  five  hundred  dollars  was  made
1  Drake,  Indians,  p.  401, 1880.
-  Indian  Treaties,  p.  187,  1837;  Meigs'  letter  to  Secretary  of  War,  August  19, 1816,  in  American  State
Papers:  Indian  Affairs,  n,  pp.  113,  114,  1X34.
It)    ETH — 01—   7


98  MYTHS    OF   THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
for  damages  sustained  i>\  the  Cherokee  from  the  depredations  of  the
troops  passing  through  their  country  during  the  Creek  war.1
At  the  lasl  treaty  the  Cherokee  had  resisted  r\<-\-\  efforl  to  induce
them  i"  cede  more  land  on  either  side  of  the  Tennessee,  the  Govern-
ment being  especially  desirous  t"  extinguish  their  claim  north  of  thai
river  within  the-  limit  -  of  the  state  of  Tennessee.  Failing  in  this.
pressure  was  at  once  begun  t<>  bring  about  a  cession  in  Alabama,  with
the  result  thai  on  September  11  of  the  same  year  a  treat]  was  con-
cluded at  the  Chickasaw  council-house,  and  afterward  ratified  in  gen-
eral council  at  Turkeytown  on  the  Coosa,  by  which  the  Cherokee
ceded  all  their  claims  in  thai  state  south  of  Tennessee  river  and  wesl
of  an  irregular  line  running  from  Chickasaw  island  in  thai  stream,
below  the  entrance  of  Flint  river,  to  the  junction  of  Wills  creek  with
the  Coosa,  al  the  presenl  Gadsden.  For  this  cession,  embracing  an
area  of  nearlj  three  thousand  five  hundred  square  miles,  they  were  to
receive  sixty  thousand  dollars  in  ten  annual  payments,  together  with
five  thousand  dollars  t'<>r  the  improvements  abandoned. We  turn  aside  now  for  a  time  from  the  direel  narrative  to  note  the
developmenl  of  events  which  culminated  in  the  forced  expatriation  of
the  Cherokee  from  their  ancestral  homes  and  their  removal  to  the  far
western  wilderness.
With  a  few  notable  exceptions  the  relations  between  the  French
and  Spanish  colonists  and  the  native  tribes,  after  the  first  occupation
of  the  country,  had  been  friendly  and  agreeable.  Qnder  the  rule  of
France  or  Spain  there  was  never  any  Indian  boundary.  Pioneer  and
Indian  built  their  cabins  and  tilled  their  fields  side  by  side,  ranged
the  w   Is  toe-ether,  knelt  before  the  >ame  altar  and  frequently  inter-
married on  terms  of  equality,  so  far  as  race  was  concerned.  The
7-esult  is  seen  to-day  in  the  mixed-blood  communities  of  Canada,  and
in  Mexico,  where  a  nation  lias  been  built  upon  an  Indian  foundation.
Within  the  area  of  English  colonization  it  was  otherwise.  From  the
lir-t  settlement  to  the  recent  inauguration  of  the  allotment  system  it
never  occurred  to  the  man  of  Teutonic  blood  that  he  could  have  for  a
neighbor  anyone  not  of  his  own  stock  and  color.  While  the  English
colonists  recognized  the  native  proprietorship  so  far  as  to  make  trea-
ties with    tile    Indians,  it  was   chiefly  for   the   purpose   of   fixing   limits
beyond  which  the  Indian  should  never  come  after  he  had    ;e  parted
with  his  title  for  a  consideration  of  goods  and  trinkets.  In  an  early
Virginia  treaty  it  was  even  stipulated  that  friendly  Indians  crossing
the  line  should  sutler  death.  The  Indian  was  regarded  as  an  incum-
brance to  be  cleared  oil',  like  the  trees  and  tin-  wolves,  before  white
men   could    live   in   the   country.      Intermarriages   were   practically
1  Indian  Treaties,  pp.  186  187,  1837;  Royce,  Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,
pp.  197  209,  1888
'Indian  Treaties,  pp   199,200,  1887;  Royce,  op.  cit.,  pp.  209-211.


mooney]  EARLY    WESTWARD    EMIGRATION  99
unknown,  and  the  children  of  such  union  were  usually  compelled  by
race  antipathy  to  cast  their  lot  with  the  savage.
Under  such  circumstances  the  tribes  viewed  the  advance  of  the
English  and  their  successors,  the  Americans,  with  keen  distrust,  and
as  early  as  the  close  of  the  French  and  Indian  war  we  find  some  of
them  removing  from  the  neighborhood  of  the  English  settlements  io
a  safer  shelter  in  the  more  remote  territories  still  held  by  Spain,  Soon
after  the  French  withdrew  from  Fort  Toulouse,  in  1763,  a  part  of  the
Alabama,  an  incorporated  tribe  of  the  ('reek  confederacy,  left  their
villages  on  the  Coosa,  and  crossing  the  Mississippi,  where  they  halted
for  a  time  on  its  western  bank,  settled  on  the  Sabine  river  under
Spanish  protection.1  They  were  followed  some  years  later  by  a  part
of  the  Koasati.  of  the  same  confederacy."  the  two  tribe.-  subsequently
drifting  into  Texas,  where  they  now  reside.  The  Hichitee  and  others
of  the  Lower  Creeks  moved  down  into  Spanish  Florida,  where  the
Yamassee  exiles  from  South  Carolina  had  long  before  preceded  them,
the  two  combining  to  form  the  modern  Seminole  tribe.  When  the
Revolution  brought  about  a  new  line  of  division,  the  native  tribes,
almost  without  exception,  joined  sides  with  England  as  against  the
Americans,  with  the  result  that  about  one-half  the  Iroquois  tied  to
Canada,  where  they  still  reside  upon  lands  granted  by  the  British  gov-
ernment. A  short  time  before'  Wayne's  victory  a  part  of  the  Shawano and  Delawares,  worn  out  by  nearly  twenty  years  of  battle  with  the
Americans,  crossed  the  Mississippi  and  settled,  by  permission  of  the
Spanish  government,  upon  lands  in  the  vicinity  of  Cape  Girardeau,  in
what  is  now  southeastern  Missouri,  for  which  they  obtained  a  regular
deed  from  that  government  in  1793. 3  Driven  out  by  the  Americans
some  twenty  years  later,  they  removed  to  Kansas  and  thence  to  Indian
territory,  where  they  are  now  incorporated  with  their  old  friends,  the
Cherokee.
When  the  first  Cherokee  crossed  the  Mississippi  it  is  impossible  to
say,  but  there  was  probably  never  a  time  in  the  history  of  the  tribe
when  their  warriors  and  hunters  were  not  accustomed  to  make  excur-
sions beyond  the  great  river.  According  to  an  old  tradition,  the
earliest  emigration  took  place  soon  after  the  first  treaty  with  Carolina,
when  a  portion  of  the  tribe,  under  the  leadership  of  Yunwi-usga'se'ti,
••Dangerous-man,"  forseeing  the  inevitable  end  of  yielding  to  the
demands  of  tin3  colonists,  refused  to  have  any  relations  with  the  white
man,  and  took  up  their  long  march  for  the  unknown  West.  Commu-
nication was  kept  up  with  the  home  body  until  after  crossing  the
Mississippi,  when  they  were  lost  sight  of  and  forgotten.     Long  years
'■Claiborne,  letter  to  Jefferson,  November  5,  1808,  American  State  Papers,  i,  p.  755,  1832;   Gatschet,
Creek  Migration  Legend,  i,  p.  88,  1884.
-  Hawkins,  1799.  quoted  in  Gatschet,  op.  cit.,  p.  89.
3  See  Treaty  of  St  Louis,  1S25,  and  of  Castor  hill,  1S52,  in  Indian  Treaties,  pp.  388,  539,  1837.


100  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
afterward  a  rumor  came  from  the  west  thai  they  were  Mill  livingnear
the  base  of  the  Rocky  mountains.'  In  1782  the  Cherokee,  who  bad
fought  faithfully  on  the  British  side  throughout  the  long  Revolution-
ary   struggle,  applied  to  the  Spanish  governor  al    New   Orleans   for
permission  to  settl   >  the  wesl  side  of  the  Mississippi,  within  Spanish
territory.  Permission  was  granted,  and  it  i-  probable  that  some  of
them  removed  to  the  Arkansas  country,  although  there  seems  to  be  no
definite  record  of  the  matter.'  We  learn  incidentally,  however,  that about  this  peried  the  hostile  Cherokee,  like  the  Shawano  and  other
northern  tribes,  were  in  the  habit  of  making  friendly  visits  to  the
Spanish  settlements  in  that  quarter.
According  to  Reverend  Cephas  Washburn,  the  pioneer  misssionary
of  the  western  Cherokee,  the  first  permanent  Cherokee  settlement
beyond  the  Mississippi  was  the  direct  result  of  the  massacre,  in  L794,
of  the  Scott  party  at  Muscle  shoals,  on  Tennessee  river,  by  the  hostile
warriors  of  the  Chickamauga  towns,  in  the  summer.  As  told  by  the
missionary,  the  story  differs  considerably  from  that  given  by  IIa\  wood
and  other  Tennessee  historians,  narrated  in  another  place.  According
to  Washburn,  the  whites  were  the  aggressors,  having  first  made  the
Indians  drunk  and  then  swindled  them  out  of  the  annuity  money  with
which  they  were  just  returning  from  the  agency  at  Tellico.  When
the  Indians  became  sober  enough  to  demand  the  return  of  their  money
the  whites  attacked  and  killed   two  of  them,  whereupon  the  others
boarded  the  boat  and  killed  every  white  man.     They  spared  the  wi   n
and  children,  however,  with  their  negro  slaves  and  all  their  personal
belongings,  and  permitted  them  to  continue  on  their  way.  the  chief
and  his  party  personally  escorting  them  down  Tennessee,  Ohio,  and
Mississippi  rivers  as  far  as  the  mouth  of  the  St.  Francis,  whence  the
emigrants  descended  in  safety  to  New  Orleans,  while  their  captors,
under  their  chief.  The  Bowl,  went  up  St.  Francis  river  then  a  part  of
Spanish  territory — to  await  the  outcome  of  the  event.  As  soon  as
the  news  came  to  the  Cherokee  Nation  tin'  chiefs  formally  repudiated
the  action  of  the  Howl  party  and  volunteered  to  assist  in  arresting
those  i   cerned.     Bowl  and  his  men  were  finally  exonerated,  but  had
conceived  such  bitterness  at  the  conduct  of  their  former  friends,  and.
moreover,  had  found  the  soil  so  rich  and  the  game  so  abundant  where
the]  were,  that  they  refused  to  return  to  their  tribe  and  decided  to
remain  permanently  in  the  West.  Others  joined  them  from  time  to
time,  attracted  by  the  hunting  prospect,  until  they  were  in  sufficient
number  to  obtain  recognition  from  the  Government.'
iSee  number  107,  "  Hie  Lost  Cherokee."
-sri-  lettei  of  Governor  Estevan   Mir.,  to  Robertson,  \pril  20,1783,  in   Roosevelt,  Winning  ol  the
West,  ii.  p   i".    !•"'
iSee  pp. 76-77.
i  Washburn,  Reminiscences,  pp.76  79, 1869;  -.  •  also  Royce,  Cherokee  Nation,  riiii.  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau
..i    I  ilili. .!"«>.  !•.  '-'Ml.  isss.


moosey]  THE    BOWL    EMIGRATION   1794  101
While  the  missionary  may  be  pardoned  for  making  the  best  show-
ing possible  for  his  friends,  his  statement  contains  several  evident
errors,  and  it  is  probable  that  Haywood's  account  is  more  correct  in
the  main.  As  the  Cherokee  annuity  at  that  time  amounted  to  but
fifteen  hundred  dollars  for  the  whole  tribe,  or  somewhat  less  than  ten
cents  per  head,  they  could  hardly  have  had  enough  money  from  that
source  to  pay  such  extravagant  prices  as  sixteen  dollars  apiece  for
pocket  minors,  which  it  is  alleged  the  boatmen  obtained.  Moreover,
as  the  Chickamauga  warriors  had  refused  to  sign  any  treaties  and  were
notoriously  hostile,  they  were  not  as  yet  entitled  to  receive  payments.
Haywood's  statement  that  the  emigrant  party  was  first  attacked  while passing  the  ( Ihickamauga  towns  and  then  pursued  to  the  Muscle  shoals
and  there  massacred  is  probably  near  the  truth,  although  it  is  quite
possible  that  the  whites  may  have  provoked  the  attack  in  some  such
way  as  is  indicated  by  the  missionary.  As  Washburn  got  his  account
from  one  of  the  women  of  the  party,  living  long  afterward  in  New
Orleans,  it  is  certain  that  some  at  least  were  spared  by  the  Indians,
and  it  is  probable  that,  as  he  states,  only  the  men  were  killed.
The  Bowl  emigration  may  not  have  been  the  first,  or  even  the  most
important  removal  to  the  western  country,  as  the  period  was  one  of
Indian  unrest.  Small  bands  were  constantly  crossing  the  Mississippi
into  Spanish  territory  to  avoid  the  advancing  Americans,  only  to  find
themselves  again  under  American  jurisdiction  when  the  whole  western
country  was  ceded  to  the  United  States  in  1803.  The  persistent  land-
hunger  of  the  settler  could  not  be  restrained  or  satisfied,  and  early  in
the  same  year  President  Jefferson  suggested  to  Congress  the  desira-
bility of  removing  all  the  tribes  to  the  west  of  the  Mississippi.  In
the  next  year.  1804,  an  appropriation  was  made  for  taking  prelimi-
nary steps  toward  such  a  result.1  There  were  probably  but  few  Chero-
kee on  the  Arkansas  at  this  time,  as  they  are  not  mentioned  in  Sibley's list  of  tribes  south  of  that  river  in  1805.
In  the  summer  of  1808,  a  Cherokee  delegation  being  about  to  visit
Washington,  their  agent.  Colonel  Meigs,  was  instructed  by  the  Secre-
tary of  War  to  use  every  effort  to  obtain  their  consent  to  an  exchange
of  their  lands  for  a  tract  beyond  the  Mississippi.  By  this  time  the
government's  civilizing  policy,  as  carried  out  in  the  annual  distribution
of  farming  tools,  spinning  wheels,  and  looms,  had  wrought  a  consider-
able difference  of  habit  and  sentiment  between  the  northern  and
southern  Cherokee.  Those  on  Little  Tennessee  and  Hiwassee  were
generally  farmers  and  stock  raisers,  producing  also  a  limited  quantity
of  cotton,  which  the  women  wove  into  cloth.  Those  farther  down  in
Georgia  and  Alabama,  the  old  hostile  element,  still  preferred  the
hunting  life  and  rejected  all  effort  at  innovation,  although  the  game
had  now  become  so   scarce   that   it  was   evident  a  change  must   soon
'Royee,  Cherokee  Nation,  Filth  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  op.  202, 203, lsss.


lli-_'  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [sth.an.n.19
come.  Jealousies  bad  arisen  in  consequence,  and  the  delegates  repre-
senting the  progressive  element  now  proposed  to  the  government  that
a  line  be  run  through  the  nation  I"  separate  the  two  parties,  allowing
t Ik ■-.•  on  the  north  to  divide  their  lands  in  severalty  and  become  citi-
zens  of  the  United  States,  while  those  on  the  south  might  continue  to
be  bunters  as  long  as  the  game  should  last.  Taking  advantage  of  this
condition  of  a  Hairs,  the  government  authorities  instructed  the  agent  to
submit  t<>  the  conservatn  es  a  proposition  for  a  cession  of  their  share  of
the  tribal  territory  in  return  for  a  tract  west  of  the  Mississippi  of  suf-
ficient area  to  enable  them  to  continue  the  hunting  life.  The  plan  was
approved  by  President  Jefferson,  and  a  sum  was  appropriated  to  pay
the  expenses  of  a  delegation  to  visit  and  inspect  the  lands  on  Arkansas
and  White  rivers,  with  a  view  to  removal.  The  visit  was  made  in  the
summerof  1809,  and  the  delegates  brought  back  such  favorable  report
that  a  large  number  of  ( Iherokee  signified  their  intention  to  remoi  e  at
once.  A-  no  funds  were  then  available  for  their  removal,  the  matter
was  held  in  abeyance  for  several  years,  during  which  period  families
and  individuals  removed  to  the  western  country  at  their  own  expense
until,  before  the  year  1817,  they  numbered  in  all  two  or  three
thousand  souls.1     They  became  known  as  the  Arkansas,  or  Western. Cherokee.
The  emigrants  soon  became  involved  in  difficulties  with  the  native
tribes,  the  Osage  claiming  all  the  lands  north  of  Arkansas  river,  while
the  Quapaw  claimed  those  on  the  south.  Upon  complaining  to  the
government  the  emigrant  Cherokee  were  told  that  they  had  originally
been  permitted  to  remove  only  on  condition  of  a  cession  of  a  portion
of  their  eastern  territory,  and  that  nothing  could  he  done  to  protect
them  in  their  new  western  home  until  such  cession  had  been  carried
out.  The  body  of  the  Cherokee  Nation,  however,  was  strongly  opposed
to  any  such  sale  and  proposed  that  the  emigrants  should  he  compelled
to  return.  After  protracted  negotiation  a  treaty  was  concluded  at
the  Cherokee  agency  (now  Calhoun.  Tennessee)  on  July  8,  1817,  by
which  the  Cherokee  Nation  ceded  two  considerable  tracts — the  first  in
Georgia,  lying  east  of  the  Chattahoochee,  and  the  other  in  Tennessee.
between  Waldens  ridge  ami  the  Little  Sequatchee — as  an  equivalent
for  a  tract  to  he  assigned  to  those  who  had  already  removed,  or
intended  to  remove,  to  Arkansas.  Two  smaller  tracts  on  the  north
bank  of  the  Tennessee,  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  Muscle  shoals.
were  also  ceded.  In  return  for  these  cessions  the  emigrant  Cherokee
were  to  receive  a  tract  within  the  present  limits  of  the  state  of  Arkan-
■  Royce,  Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Aim.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  pp.  202-204,  1888;  see  also  Indian
Treaties,  pp. 209-215, 1887.  The  preamble  to  the  treaty  of  1817  snys  thut  the  delegation  of  1808  had
de  treda  division  of  the  tribal  territory  in  order  that  the  people  of  the  Upper  (northern  townt  might
"begin  the  establishment  of  fixed  laws  and  «  regular  government,"  while  those  of  tin-  Lower
(southern)  towns  desired  t..  remove  t"  the  West  Nothing  i-  said  of  severalty  allotments  >>r citizenship.


mooney]  TREATY    OF    CHEROKEE    AGENCY — 1817  103
sas,  bounded  on  the  north  and  south  by  White  river  and  Arkansas
river,  respectively,  on  the  east  l>y  a  line  running  between  those
.streams  approximately  from  the  present  Ratesville  to  Lewisburg.  and
on  the  west  by  a  line  to  lie  determined  later.  As  afterward  estab-
lished, this  western  line  ran  from  the  junction  of  the  Little  North
Fork  with  White  river  to  just  beyond  the  point  where  the  present
western  Arkansas  boundary  strikes  Arkansas  river.  Provision  was
made  for  taking  the  census  of  the  whole  Cherokee  nation  east  and
west  in  order  to  apportion  annuities  and  other  payments  properly  in
the  future,  and  the  two  hands  were  still  to  he  considered  as  forming
one  people.  The  United  States  agreed  to  pay  for  any  substantial
improvements  abandoned  by  those  removing  from  the  ceded  lands,
and  each  emigrant  warrior  who  left  no  such  valuable  property  behind
was  to  be  given  as  full  compensation  for  his  abandoned  field  and  cabin
a  rifle  and  ammunition,  a  blanket,  and  a  kettle  or  a  beaver  trap.  The
government  further  agreed  to  furnish  boats  and  provisions  for  the
journey.  Provision  was  also  made  that  individuals  residing  upon
the  ceded  lands  might  retain  allotments  and  become  citizens,  if  they
so  elected,  the  amount  of  the  allotment  to  be  deducted  from  the  total
cession.
The  commissioners  for  the  treaty  w*ere  General  Andrew  Jackson,
General  David  Meriwether,  and  Governor  Joseph  McMinn  of  Ten-
nessee. On  behalf  of  the  Cherokee  it  was  signed  by  thirty-one  princi-
pal men  of  the  eastern  Nation  and  fifteen  of  the  western  band,  who
signed  by  proxy.1
The  majority  of  the  Cherokee  were  bitterly  opposed  to  any  cession
or  removal  project,  and  before  the  treaty  had  been  concluded  a
memorial  signed  by  sixty-seven  chiefs  and  headmen  of  the  nation  was
.presented  to  the  commissioners,  which  stated  that  the  delegates  who
had  first  broached  the  subject  in  Washington  some  years  before  had
acted  without  any  authority  from  the  nation.  They  declared  that  the
great  body  of  the  Cherokee  desired  to  remain  in  the  land  of  their
birth,  where  they  were  rapidly  advancing  in  civilization,  instead  of
being  compelled  to  revert  to  their  original  savage  conditions  and  sur-
roundings. They  therefore  prayed  that  the  matter  might  not  lie
pressed  further,  but  that  they  might  be  allowed  to  remain  in  peaceable
possession  of  the  land  of  their  fathers.  No  attention  was  paid  to  the
memorial,  and  the  treaty  was  carried  through  and  ratified.  Without
waiting  for  the  ratification,  the  authorities  at  once  took  steps  for  the
removal  of  those  who  desired  to  go  to  the  West.  Boats  were  provided
at  points  between  Little  Tennessee  and  Sequatchee  rivers,  and  the
emigrants  were  collected  under  the  direction  of  Governor  McMinn.
Within  the  next  year  a  large  number  had  emigrated,  and  before  the
'Indian  Treaties,  pp.  209-215,  1837;  Royee,  Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,
pp.  212-217,  1888;  see  also  maps  in  Royce.


104  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
end  of  1819  the  number  of  emigrants  was  said  to  have  increased  to  six
thousand.  "Flic  chiefs  of  the  nation,  however,  claimed  that  the  esti-
mate was  greatly  in  excess  of  the  truth.1
"There  can  be  no  question  that  a  very  large  portion,  and  probably
a  majority,  of  the  Cherokee  nation  residing  east  of  the  Mississippi  had
been  and  still  continued  bitterly  opposed  to  the  terms  of  the  treaty  of
18  L  7.  They  viewed  with  jealous  and  aching  hearts  all  attempts  to
drive  them  from  the  homes  of  their  ancestors,  for  they  could  not  but
consider  the  constant  and  urgent  importunities  of  the  federal  authori-
ties in  the  light  of  an  imperative  demand  for  the  cession  of  more
territory.  They  felt  that  they  were,  as  a  nation,  being  slowly  but
surely  compressed  within  the  contracting  coils  of  the  giant  anaconda
of  civilization;  yet  they  held  to  the  vain  hope  that  a  spirit  of  justice
and  mercy  would  be  born  of  their  helpless  condition  which  would
anally  prevail  in  their  favor.  Their  traditions  furnished  them  no
guide  by  which  to  judge  of  the  results  certain  to  follow  such  a  conflict
as  that  in  which  they  were  engaged.  This  difference  of  sentiment  in
the  nation  upon  a  subject  so  vital  to  their  welfare  was  productive  of
much  bitterness  and  violent  animosities.  Those  who  had  favored  the
emigration  scheme  and  had  been  induced,  either  through  personal
preference  or  by  the  subsidizing  influences  of  the  government  agents,
to  favor  the  conclusion  of  the  treaty,  became  the  object  of  scorn  and
hatred  to  the  remainder  of  the  nation.  They  were  made  the  subjects
of  a  persecution  so  relentless,  while  they  remained  in  the  eastern
country,  that  it  was  never  forgotten,  and  when,  in  the  natural  course
of  events,  the  remainder  of  the  nation  was  forced  to  remove  to  the
Arkansas  country  and  join  the  earlier  emigrants,  the  old  hatreds  and
dissensions  broke  out  afresh,  and  to  this  day  they  find  lodgment  in
some  degree  in  the  breasts  of  their  descendants."2
Two  months  after  the  signing  of  the  treaty  of  July  8,  1817,  and
three  months  before  its  ratification,  a  council  of  the  nation  sent  a  dele-
gation to  Washington  to  recount  in  detail  the  improper  methods  and
influences  which  had  been  used  to  consummate  it.  and  to  ask  that  it  be
set  aside  and  another  agreement  substituted.  The  mission  was  without
result.3 In  1817  the  American  Board  of  Commissioners  for  Foreign  Missions
established  its  first  station  among  the  Cherokee  at  Brainerd,  in  Ten-
nessee, on  the  west  side  of  Chickamauga  creek,  two  miles  from  the
Georgia  line.  The  mission  took  its  name  from  a  distinguished  pioneer
worker  among  the  northern  tribes  (37).  The  government  aided  in  the
erection  of  the  buildings,  which  included  a  schoolhouse,  gristmill,
and  workshops,  in  which,  besides  the  ordinary  branches,  the  boys  were
taught  simple  mechanic  arts  while  the  girls  learned  the  use  of  the
'  Royce,  Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  217-218,  1888.
•Ibid.,  pp.  218-219.  "Ibid.,  p. 219.


«   mn  PRESSURE    FOB    REMOVAL  105
needle  and  the  spinningwheel.  There  was  also  a  large  work  farm.
The  mission  prospered  and  others  were  established  at  Willstown,
Hightower,  and  elsewhere  by  the  same  board,  in  which  two  hundred
pupils  were  receiving  instruction  in  L820.]  Among  the  earliest  and most  noted  workersat  the  Brainerd  mission  were  Reverend  I).  S.  But
trick  and  Reverend  S.  A.  Worcester  {'■'■*<).  the  latter  especially  having done  much  for  the  mental  elevation  of  the  Cherokee,  and  more  than  once
having  suffered  imprisonment  for  his  zeal  in  defending  their  cause.
The  missions  flourished  until  broken  up  by  the  state  of  Georgia  at  the
beginning  of  the  Removal  troubles,  and  they  were  afterwards  renewed
in  the  western  country.  Mission  ridge  preserves  the  memory  of  the
Brainerd  establishment.
Early  in  1818  a  delegation  of  emigrant  Cherokee  visited  Washing-
ton for  the  purpose  of  securing  a  more  satisfactory  determination  of
the  boundaries  of  their  new  lands  on  the  Arkansas.  .Measures  were
soon  afterward  taken  for  that  purpose.  They  also  asked  recognition  in
the  future  as  a  separate  and  distinct  tribe,  but  nothing  was  done  in  the
matter.  In  order  to  remove,  if  possible,  the  hostile  feeling  between
the  emigrants  and  the  native  Osage,  who  regarded  the  former  as
intruders.  Governor  William  Clark,  superintendent  of  Indian  affairs
for  Missouri,  arranged  a  conference  of  the  chiefs  of  the  two  tribes  at
St.  Louis  in  October  of  that  year,  at  which,  after  protracted  effort,  he
succeeded  in  establishing  friendly  relations  between  them.  Efforts
were  made  about  the  same  time,  both  by  the  emigrant  Cherokee  and
by  the  government,  to  persuade  the  Shawano  and  Delawares  then
residing  in  Missouri,  and  the  Oneida  in  New  York,  to  join  the  western
Cherokee, but  nothing-  cameof  the  negotiations.2  In  1825  a  delegation
of  western  Cherokee  visited  the  Shawano  in  <  )hio  for  the  same  purpose,
but  without  success.  Their  object  in  thus  inviting  friendly  Indians  to
join  them  was  to  strengthen  themselves  against  the  Osage  and  other
native  tribes.
In  the  meantime  the  government,  through  Governor  McMinn,  was
bringing- strong  pressure  to  bear  upon  the  eastern  Cherokee  to  compel
their  removal  to  the  West.  At  a  council  convened  by  him  in  November,
L818,  the  governor  represented  to  the  chiefs  that  it  was  now  no  longer
possible  to  protect  them  from  the  encroachments  of  the  surrounding
white  population:  that,  however  the  government  might  wish  to  help
them,  their  lands  would  be  taken,  their  stock  stolen,  their  women  cor-
rupted, and  their  men  made  drunkards  unless  they  removed  to  the
western  paradise.  He  ended  by  proposing  to  pay  them  one  hundred
thousand  dollars  for  their  whole  territory,  with  the  expense  of  removal,
if  they  would  go  at  once.  Upon  their  prompt  and  indignant  refusal
he  offered  to  double  the  amount,  but  with  as  little  success.
•Morse, Geography,  i,  p.577,  1819;  and  p.  185,  1822.
-Rc.yiT,  Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau  ol  Ethnology,  pp. 221-222,  18S8,


106  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
Every  point  of  the  negotiation  having  failed,  another  course  was
adopted,  and  a  delegation  was  selected  to  visit  Washington  under  the
conduct  of  Agent  Meigs.  Here  the  effort  was  renewed  until,  wearied
and  discouraged  at  the  persistent  importunity,  the  chiefs  consented
to  a  large  cession,  which  was  represented  as  necessary  in  order  to  com-
pensate in  area  for  the  tract  assigned  to  the  emigrant  Cherokee  in
Arkansas  in  accordance  with  the  previous  treaty.  This  estimate  was
based  on  the  tigures  given  by  Governor  McMinn,  who  reported  5,291
Cherokee  enrolled  as  emigrants,  while  the  eastern  Cherokee  claimed
that  not  more  than  3,500  had  removed  and  that  those  remaining  num-
bered 12.544,  or  more  than  three-fourths  of  the  whole  nation.  The
governor,  however,  chose  to  consider  one-half  of  the  nation  as  in  favor
of  removal  and  one-third  as  having  already  removed.1
The  treaty,  concluded  at  Washington  on  February  27,  1819,  recites
that  the  greater  part  of  the  Cherokee  nation,  having  expressed  an
earnest  desire  to  remain  in  the  East,  and  being  anxious  to  begin  the
necessary  measures  for  the  civilization  and  preservation  of  their  nation,
and  to  settle  the  differences  arising  out  of  the  treaty  of  1817,  have
offered  to  cede  to  the  United  States  a  tract  of  country  "at  least  as
extensive"  as  that  to  which  the  Government  is  entitled  under  the
late  treaty.  The  cession  embraces  (1)  a  tract  in  Alabama  and  Ten-
nessee, between  Tennessee  and  Flint  rivers;  (2)  a  tract  in  Tennessee,
between  Tennessee  river  and  Waldens  ridge;  (3)  a  large  irregular  tract
in  Tennessee,  North  Carolina,  and  Georgia,  embracing  in  Tennessee
nearlyr  all  the  remaining  Cherokee  lands  north  of  Hiwassee  river,  and
in  North  Carolina  and  Georgia  nearly  everything  remaining  to  them
east  of  the  Nantahala  mountains  and  the  upper  western  branch  of  the
Chattahoochee;  (4)  six  small  pieces  reserved  by  previous  treaties.  The
entire  cession  aggregated  nearly  six  thousand  square  miles,  or  more
than  one-fourth  of  all  then  held  by  the  nation.  Individual  reservations
of  one  mile  square  each  within  the  ceded  area  were  allowed  to  a  num-
ber of  families  which  decided  to  remain  among  the  whites  and  become
citizens  rather  than  abandon  their  homes.  Payment  was  to  be  made
for  all  substantial  improvements  abandoned,  one-third  of  all  tribal
annuities  were  hereafter  to  be  paid  to  the  western  hand,  and  the  treaty
was  declared  to  be  a  final  adjustment  of  all  claims  and  differences  aris-
ing from  the  treaty  of  1817. 2
Civilization  had  now  progressed  so  far  among  the  Cherokee  that  in
the  fall  of  1820  they  adopted  a  regular  republican  form  of  govern-
ment modeled  after  that  of  the  United  States.  Under  this  arrangement
the  nation  was  divided  into  eight  districts,  each  of  which  was  entitled
1  Royce,  Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  pp.  222-228,  1888.
^Indian  Treaties,  pp.  265-269,  1S37;  Royce,  op.  cit.,  pp.  219-221  and  table,  p. 378.


mooney]  CHEEOKEE    GOVEENMENX — Missions  107
to  send  lour  representatives  to  the  Cherokee  national  legislature,
which  met  at  Newtown,  or  New  Echota,  the  capital,  at  the  junction
of  Conasauga  and  Coosawatee  rivers,  a  few  miles  above  the  present
Calhoun,  Georgia.  The  legislature  consisted  of  an  upper  and  a
lower  house,  designated,  respectively  (in  the  Cherokee  language),  the
national  committee  and  national  council,  the  members  being  elected
for  limited  terms  by  the  voters  of  each  district.  The  principal  officer
was  styled  president  of  the  national  council;  the  distinguished  John
Ross  was  the  first  to  hold  this  office.  There  was  also  a  clerk  of  the
committee  and  two  principal  members  to  express  the  will  of  the  coun-
cil or  lower  house.  For  each  district  there  were  appointed  a  council
house  for  meetings  twice  a  year,  a  judge,  and  a  marshal.  Companies
of  "light  horse"  were  organized  to  assist  in  the  execution  of  the  laws,
with  a  "ranger"  for  each  district  to  look  after  stray  stock.  Each  head
of  a  family  and  each  single  man  under  the  age  of  sixty  was  subject  to
a  poll  tax.  Laws  were  passed  for  the  collection  of  taxes  and  debts,
for  repairs  on  loads,  for  licenses  to  white  persons  engaged  in  farming
or  other  business  in  the  nation,  for  the  support  of  schools,  for  the
regulation  of  the  liquor  traffic  and  the  conduct  of  negro  slaves,  to  pun-
ish horse  stealing  and  theft,  to  compel  all  marriages  between  white
men  and  Indian  women  to  be  according  to  regular  legal  or  church
form,  and  to  discourage  polygamy.  By  special  decree  the  right  of
blood  revenge  or  capital  punishment  was  taken  from  the  seven  clans
and  \ested  in  the  constituted  authorities  of  the  nation.  It  was  made
treason,  punishable  with  death,  for  any  individual  to  negotiate  the  sale
of  lands  to  the  whites  without  the  consent  of  the  national  council  (39).
White  men  were  not  allowed  to  vote  or  to  hold  office  in  the  nation.1
The  system  compared  favorably  with  that  of  the  Federal  government
or  of  any  state  government  then  existing.
At  this  time  there  were  five  principal  missions,  besides  one  or  two
small  branch  establishments  in  the  nation,  viz:  Spring  Place,  the  oili-
est, founded  by  tin1  Moravians  at  Spring  place,  Georgia,  in  1801;
Oothcaloga,  Georgia,  founded  by  the  same  denomination  in  1S21  on
the  creek  of  that  name,  near  the  present  Calhoun;  Brainerd,  Tennes-
see, founded  by  the  American  Board  of  Commissioners  for  Foreign
Missions  in  L817;  "Valley-towns."  North  Carolina,  founded  by  the Baptists  in  1820,  on  the  site  of  the  old  Natchez  town  on  the  north  side
of  Hiwassee  river,  just  above  Peachtree  creek;  Coosawatee,  Georgia
("Tensawattee,"  by  error  in  the  State  Papers),  founded  also  by  the
Baptists  in  fs2L.  near  the  mouth  of  the  river  of  that  name.  All  were
in  flourishing  condition,  the  Brainerd  establishment  especially,  with
nearly  one  hundred  pupils,  being  obliged  to  turn  away  applicants  for
1  Laws  of  theCherol    Nation    several  documents),  1820,  American  State  Papers:  Indian  Affairs,  it,
pp.  279-283, 1834;  letter  quoted  by  McKei   y,  1825,  ibid.,  pp.  651, 652;  Drake,  In. linn-,  pp.  137,  138  i


108  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEBOKEE  [eth.ann.19
lack  of  accommodation.  The  superintendent  reported  that  the  children
were  apt  to  learn,  willing  to  labor,  and  readily  submissive  to  discipline,
adding-  that  the  Cherokee  were  fast  advancing  toward  civilized  life  and
generally  manifested  an  ardent  desire  for  instruction.  The  Valley-
towns  mission,  established  at  the  instance  of  Currab.ee  Dick,  a  promi-
nent local  mixed-blood  chief,  was  in  charge  of  the  Reverend  Evan
Jones,  known  as  the  translator  of  the  New  Testament  into  the  Cherokee
language,  his  assistant  being  James  D.  Watford,  a  mixed-blood  pupil,
who  compiled  a  spelling  book  in  the  same  language.  Reverend  S.  A.
Worcester,  a  prolific  translator  and  the  compiler  of  the  Cherokee
almanac  and  other  works,  was  stationed  at  Brainerd,  removing  thence
to  New  Echota  and  afterward  to  the  Cherokee  Nation  in  the  West.1
Since  1817  the  American  Board  had  also  supported  at  Cornwall,  Con-
necticut, an  Indian  school  at  which  a  number  of  young  Cherokee  were
being  educated,  among  them  being  Elias  Boudinot,  afterward  the
editor  of  the  Cherokee  Phcenix.
About  this  time  occurred  an  event  which  at  once  placed  the  Cherokee
in  the  front  rank  among  native  tribes  and  was  destined  to  have  profound
influence  on  their  whole  future  history,  viz.,  the  invention  of  the
alphabet.
The  inventor,  aptly  called  the  Cadmus  of  his  race,  was  a  mixed-
blood  known  among  his  own  people  as  Sikwa'yi  (Sequoya)  and
among  the  whites  as  George  Gist,  or  less  correctly  Guest  or  Guess.
As  is  usually  the  case  in  Indian  biography  much  uncertainty  exists  in
regard  to  his  parentage  and  early  life.  Authorities  generally  agree
that  his  father  was  a  white  man,  who  drifted  into  the  Cherokee  Nation
some  years  before  the  Revolution  and  formed  a  temporary  alliance
with  a  Cherokee  girl  of  mixed  blood,  who  thus  became  the  mother  of
the  future  teacher.  A  writer  in  the  Cherokee  Phnni.r,  in  lsi's.  says
that  only  his  paternal  grandfather  was  a  white  man."  McKenney  and
Hall  say  that  his  father  was  a  white  man  named  Gist.3  Phillips
asserts  that  his  father  was  George  Gist,  an  unlicensed  German  trader
from  Georgia,  who  came  into  the  Cherokee  Nation  in  1708.4  By  a
Kentucky  family  it  is  claimed  that  Sequoya's  father  was  Nathaniel  Gist,
son  of  the  scout  who  accompanied  Washington  on  his  memorable
excursion  to  the  Ohio.  As  the  story  goes,  Nathaniel  Gist  was  cap-
tured by  the  Cherokee  at  Braddock's  defeat  (1755)  and  remained  a
prisoner  with  them  for  six  years,  during  which  time  he  became  the
father  of  Sequoya.  On  his  return  to  civilization  he  married  a  white
woman   in  Virginia,  by  whom  he  had  other  children,  and  afterward
1  List  of  missions  and  reports  of  missionaries,  etc.,  American  State  Papers:  Indian  Affairs,  n,  pp.
277-279,  159,  1834;  personal  information  from  James  D.  Warlord  concerning  Valley-towns  mission.
For  notices  of  Worcester,  Jones,  and  Watford,  see  Pilling,  Bibliography  of  the  Iroqnoian  Languages,
1888.  " '-'<;.  < '.,  in  Cherokee  Phoenix;  reprinted  in  Christian  Advocate  and  Journal,  New  York,  September  26, 1828.
;i  McKenney  and  Hall.  Indian  Tribes. I,  p.  35,  et  passim,  1858.
*  Phillips,  Sequoyah,  in  Harper's  Magazine,  pp.  542-548,  September,  1870.


BUREAU   OF   AMERICAN    ETHNOLOGY NINETEENTH    ANNUAL   REPORT      PL.    IV
SEQUOYA      SIKWAYi
l-'r    McKenney  and  Hill      copi  uf  Hi   ginal  [iiiimiiiK  of  IS2S)




mooney]  8EQUOYA    AM>    III-    ALPHABET  109
removed  to  Kentucky,  where  Sequoya,  then  a  Baptist  preacher,  fre~
(|  in- nt  ly  visit  ed  hin i  and  was  always  recognized  by  the  family  as  his  son.1
Aside  from  the  fact  thai  the  Cherokee  acted  as  allies  of  the  English
during  the  war  in  whim  Braddock's  defeat  occurred,  and  that  Sequoya,
so  far  from  being  a  preacher,  was  not  even  a  Christian,  the  story  con-
tains other  elements  of   improbability   and  appears  to  he  one   of   those
genealogical  myths  built  upon  a  chance  similarity  of  name.     On   the
other  hand,  it  is  certain  that  Sequoya  was  horn  before  the  dale  that
Phillips  allows.  On  his  mother's  side  he  was  of  good  family  in  the
tribe,  liis  uncle  being  a  chief  in  Echota.2  According  to  personal  infor-
mation of  dames  Watford,  who  knew  him  well,  being  his  second  cousin,
Sequoya  was  probably  horn  about  the  year  L760,  and  lived  as  a  boy
with  his  mother  at  Tuskegee  town  in  Tennessee,  just  outside  of  old
Fort  Loudon.  It  is  quite  possible  that  his  white  father  may  have  been
a  soldier  of  the  garrison,  one  of  those  lovers  for  whom  the  Cherokee
women  risked  their  lives  during  the  siege.3  What  became  of  the father  is  not  known,  but  the  mother  lived  alone  with  her  son.
The  only  incident  of  his  boyhood  that  has  come  down  to  us  is  his
presence  at  Echota  during  the  visit  of  the  Iroquois  peace  delegation,
about  the  year  17Ty.'  His  early  years  were  spent  amid  the  stormy
alarms  of  the  Revolution,  and  as  he  grew  to  manhood  he  devel-
oped a  considerable  mechanical  ingenuity,  especially  in  .silver  work-
ing. Like  most  of  his  tribe  he  was  also  a  hunter  and  fur  trader.
Having  nearly  reached  middle  age  before  the  first  mission  was  estab-
lished in  the  Nation,  he  never  attended  school  and  in  all  his  life  never
learned  to  speak,  read,  or  write  the  English  language.  Neither  did
he  ever  abandon  his  native  religion,  although  from  frequent  visits  to
the  .Moravian  mission  he  became  imbued  with  a  friendly  feeling
toward  the  new  civilization.  Of  an  essentially  contemplative  disposi-
tion, he  was  led  by  a  chance  conversation  in  1809  to  reflect  upon  the
ability  of  the  white  men  to  communicate  thought  by  means  of  writing,
with  the  result  that  he  set  about  devising  a  similar  system  for  his  <>w  n
people.  By  a  hunting  accident,  which  rendered  him  a  cripple  for  life,
lie  was  fortunately  afforded  more  leisure  for  study.  The  presence  of
his  name.  George  Guess,  appended  to  a  treaty  of  1816,  indicates  that
he  «;i-  already  of  some  prominence  in  the  Nation,  even  before  the  per-
fection of  his  great  invention.  After  years  of  patient  and  unremitting
labor  in  the  face  of  ridicule,  discouragement,  and  repeated  failure,  he
finally  evolved  the  Cherokee  syllabary  and  in  1821  submitted  it  to  a
public  test  by  the  leading  men  of  the  Nation.  By  this  time,  in  con-
sequence of  repeated  cessions,  the  Cherokee  had  been  dispossessed  of
the  country  about  Echota,  and  Sequoya  was  now  living  at  Willstown,
■  Manuscript  letters  by  John  Mason  Brown,  January  17.  18,  22,  and  Februarj  I.  1889,  In  archives  oi
tli-  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology
SMcKenney  and  Hall.  Lndian  Tribes,  i.  p.  15,  1858.
*See  page  43.  *See  nunibrr  s'.i.  "Thu  lru<iiu>is  wars."


110  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
on  an  upper  branch  of  Coosa  river,  in  Alabama.  The  syllabary  was
soon  recognized  as  an  invaluable  invention  for  the  elevation  of  the
tribe,  and  within  a  few  months  thousands  of  hitherto  illiterate  Chero-
kee were  able  to  read  and  write  their  own  language,  teaching  each
other  in  the  cabins  and  along  the  roadside.  The  next  year  Sequoya
visited  the  West,  to  introduce  the  new  science  among  those  who  had
emigrated  to  the  Arkansas.  In  the  next  year,  1823,  he  again  visited
the  Arkansas  and  took  up  his  permanent  abode  with  the  western  band,
never  afterward  returning  to  his  eastern  kinsmen.  In  the  autumn  of
the  same  year  the  Cherokee  national  council  made  public  acknowledg-
ment of  his  merit  by  sending  to  him,  through  John  Ross,  then  presi-
dent of  the  national  committee,  a  silver  medal  with  a  commemorative
inscription  in  both  languages.1  In  1828  he  visited  AVashington  as  one
of  the  delegates  from  the  Arkansas  band,  attracting  much  attention,
and  the  treaty  made  on  that  occasion  contains  a  provision  for  the  pay-
ment to  him  of  five  hundred  dollars,  "for  the  great  benefits  he  has
conferred  upon  the  Cherokee  people,  in  the  beneficial  results  which
they  are  now  experiencing  from  the  use  of  the  alphabet  discovered  by
him.1' 2  His  subsequent  history  belongs  to  the  West  and  will  be  treated
in  another  place  (40). 3
The  invention  of  the  alphabet  had  an  immediate  and  wonderful
effect  on  Cherokee  development.  On  account  of  the  remarkable  adapta-
tion of  the  syllabary  to  the  language,  it  was  only  necessary  to  learn
the  characters  to  be  able  to  read  at  once.  No  schoolhouses  were  built
and  no  teachers  hired,  but  the  whole  Nation  became  an  academy  for  the
study  of  the  system,  until,  "in  the  course  of  a  few  months,  without
school  or  expense  of  time  or  money,  the  Cherokee  were  able  to  read
and  write  in  their  own  language.4  An  active  correspondence  began
to  be  carried  on  between  the  eastern  and  western  divisions,  and  plans
were  made  for  a  national  press,  with  a  national  library  and  museum  to
be  established  at  the  capital,  New  Echota.5  The  missionaries,  who  had
at  first  opposed  the  new  alphabet  on  the  ground  of  its  Indian  origin,
now  saw  the  advisability  of  using  it  to  further  their  own  work.  In
the  fall  of  1821  Atsi  or  John  Arch,  a  young  native  convert,  made  a
manuscript  translation  of  a  portion  of  St.  John's  gospel,  in  the  sylla-
bary, this  being  the  first  Bible  translation  ever  given  to  the  Cherokee.
It  was  copied  hundreds  of  times  and  was  widely  disseminated  through
1  AtcKenneyand  Hall,  Indian  Tribes,  i,  p.  46, 1858;  Phillips,  in  Harper's  Magazine,  p.  547,  September,
18711.
-  Indian  Treaties,  p.  425,  1837.
:1  Fur  details  concerning  the  life  and  invention  of  Sequoya,  see  McKenney  and  Hall,  Indian  Tribes,
1, 1858;  Phillips,  Sequoyah,  in  Harper's  Magazine,  September  1870-  Foster,  Sequoyah,  1885,  and  Story
of  the  Cherokee  Bible,  1S99,  based  largely  on  Phillips'  article;  G.  C,  Invention  of  the  Cherokee
Alphabet,  in  Cherokee  Pbcenix,  republished  in  Christian  Advocate  and  Journal,  New  York,  Septem-
ber 26,  1828:  Pilling,  Bibliography  of  the  Iroquoian  Languages,  1888.
4G.  C,  Invention  of  the  Cherokee  Alphabet,  op.  cit.
6  (Unsigned)  letter  of  David  Brown,  September  2,  1825,  quoted  in  American  State  Papers:  Indian
Affairs,  n,  p.  652,  1834.


uooney]  THE    CHEKOKEE    PHOENIX  111
the  Nation.1  In  September,  L825,  David  Brown,  a  prominent  half-
breed  preacher,  who  had  already  made  some  attempt  al  translation  in
the  Roman  alphabet,  completed  a  translation  of  the  N  i  •  w  Testament  in
the  new  syllabary,  the  work  being  handed  about  in  manuscript,  as
there  were  asyet  no  typescast  in  the Sequoya characters.8  In  the  same month  he  forwarded  to  Thomas  McKenney,  chief  of  the  Bureau  of
Indian  Affairs  at  Washington,  a  manuscript  table  of  the  characters,
with  explanation,  this  being  probably  its  first  introduction  to  official
notice. ; In  L827  the  Cherokee  council  having  formally  resolved  to  establish
a  national  paper  in  the  Cherokee  language  and  characters,  types  for
that  purpose  were  cast  in  Boston,  under  the  supervision  of  the  noted
missionary,  Worcester,  of  the  American  Hoard  of  Commissioners  for
Foreign  Missions,  who.  in  December  of  that  year  contributed  to  the
Missionary  Herald  five  verses  of  Genesis  in  the  new  syllabary,  this
seeming  to  be  its  first  appearance  in  print.  Early  in  the  next  year
the  press  and  types  arrived  at  New  Echota,  and  the  first  number  of
the  new  paper,  Tsa'lagi  Tsu'lehisanun' hi,  the  Cherokee  Phoenix,  printed
in  both  languages,  appeared  on  February  21,  1828.  The  first  printers
were  two  white  men.  Isaac  N.  Harris  and  .John  F.  Wheeler,  with
John  Candy,  a  half-blood  apprentice.  Elias  Boudinot  (Galagi'na,  ••The
Buck"),  an  educated  Cherokee,  was  the  editor,  and  Reverend  S.  A.
Worcesterwas  the  guiding  spirit  who  brought  order  out  of  chaos  and  set
the  work  in  motion.  The  office  was  a  log  house.  The  hand  press  and
types,  aftei  having  been  shipped  by  water  from  Boston,  were  trans-
ported two  hundred  miles  by  wagon  from  Augusta  to  their  destination.
The  printing  paper  had  been  overlooked  and  had  to  be  brought  by  the
same  tedious  process  from  Knoxville.  Cases  and  other  equipments
had  to  be  devised  and  fashioned  by  the  printers,  neither  of  whom
understood  a  word  of  Cherokee,  but  simply  set  up  the  characters,  as
handed  to  them  in  manuscript  by  Worcester  and  the  editor.  Such  was
the  beginning  of  journalism  in  the  Cherokee  nation.  After  a  precari-
ous existence  of  about  six  years  the  Phoenix  was  suspended,  owiny  to
the  hostile  action  of  the  Georgia  authorities,  who  went  so  far  as  to
throw  Worcester  and  Wheeler  into  prison.  Its  successor,  after  the
removal  of  the  Cherokee  to  the  West,  was  the  Oheroke*  Advocate,  of
which  the  first  number  appeared  at  Tahlequah  in  1S44.  with  William
P.  Ross  as  editor.  It  is  still  continued  under  the  auspices  of  the
Nation,  printed  in  both  languages  and  distributed  free  at  the  expense
of  the  Nation  to  those  unable  to  read  English — an  example  without
parallel  in  any  other  government.
In  addition  to  numerous  Bible  translations,  hymn  books,  and  other
1  Poster, Sequoyah, pp.  120, 121,1885.  ! Filling, Iroquoiun  Bibliography,  p.  21,  ls.sf<.
'Brown  letter  (unsigned  I,  in  American  State  Papers:  Indian  Affairs,  n.  p.  652,  1S34.


112  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
religious  works,  there  have  been  printed  in  the  Cherokee  language  and
syllabary  the  Cheroket  Phcenioo  (journal),  Cheroket  Advocate  (journal),
Cherokei  Messenger  (periodical).  Cheroket  Almanac  (annual).  Cherokee
spelling  books,  arithmetics,  and  other  schoolbooks  for  those  unable  to
read  English,  several  editions  of  the  laws  of  the  Nation,  and  a  large
body  of  tracts  and  minor  publications.  Space  forbids  even  a  mention
of  the  names  of  the  devoted  workers  in  this  connection.  Besides  this
printed  literature  the  syllabary  is  in  constant  and  daily  use  among  the
non-English-speaking  element,  both  in  Indian  Territory  and  in  North
Carolina,  for  letter  writing,  council  records,  personal  memoranda,  etc.
What  is  perhaps  strangest  of  all  in  this  literary  evolution  is  the  fact
that  the  same  invention  has  been  seized  by  the  priests  and  conjurers
of  the  conservative  party  for  the  purpose  of  preserving  to  their  suc-
cessors the  ancient  rituals  and  secret  knowledge  of  the  tribe,  whole
volumes  of  such  occult  literature  in  manuscript  having  been  obtained
among  them  by  the  author.1
In  L819  the  whole  Cherokee  population  had  been  estimated  at  15.000,
one-third  of  them  being  west  of  the  Mississippi.  In  1825  a  census  of
the  eastern  Nation  showed:  native  Cherokee,  13,563;  white  men  mar-
ried into  the  Nation,  117;  white  women  married  into  the  Nation,  73;
negro  slaves,  1,277.  There  were  large  herds  of  cattle,  horses,  hogs,
and  sheep,  with  large  crops  of  every  staple,  including  cotton,  tobacco,
and  wheat,  and  some  cotton  was  exported  by  boats  as  far  as  New  Or-
leans. Apple  and  peach  orchards  were  numerous,  butter  and  cheese
were  in  use  to  some  extent,  and  both  cotton  and  woolen  cloths,  espe-
cially blankets,  were  manufactured.  Nearly  all  the  merchants  were
native  Cherokee.  Mechanical  industries  nourished,  the  Nation  was  out
of  debt,  and  the  population  was  increasing.'-  Estimating  one-third beyond  the  Mississippi,  the  total  number  of  Cherokee,  exclusive  of
adopted  white  citizens  and  negro  slaves,  must  then  have  been  about
20,000.
Simultaneously  with  the  decrees  establishing  a  national  press,  the
Cherokee  Nation,  in  general  convention  of  delegates  held  for  the  pur-
pose at  New  Echota  on  July  26,  1827,  adopted  a  national  constitution,
based  on  the  assumption  of  distinct  and  independent  nationality.  John
Ross,  so  celebrated  in  connection  with  the  history  of  his  tribe,  was
president  of  the  convention  which  framed  the  instrument.  Charles  R.
Hicks,  a  Moravian  convert  of  mixed  blood,  and  at  that  time  the  most
influential  man  in  the  Nation,  was  elected  principal  chief,  with  John
1  For  extended  notice  of  Cherokee  literature  and  authors  see  numerous  references  in  Pilling,  Bibli-
ography of  the  Iroquoian  Languages,  1888:  also  Foster,  Sequoyah,  1885,  and  Story  of  the  Cherokee
Bible,  1899.  The  largest  body  of  original  Cherokee  manuscript  material  in  existence,  including
hundreds  of  ancient  ritual  formulas,  was  obtained  by  the  writer  anions  lie  Ivist  Cherokee,  and  is
now  in  possession  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  to  be  translated  at  some  future  time.
Brown  letter  (unsigned),  September  2,  1825,  American  State  Papers:  Indian  Affairs,  n,  pp.  651,652,
1884.


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN   ETHNOLOGY NINETEENTH   ANNUAL  REPORT     PL.   V
;
1) (llirrnhn
it 'iUpljalirt.
T/     oV \  // •
1/
0<///  \J/v/ & V        V •  y/           ail////     •■/// E*
\/„,
?*. t.)///         1W         I  //// (finiv
W/„ A I'//      0/"     aM  /// 'I  Iv
^///ll (L, 1  1  /III'               J////'             XT  Mil
v  w/ta.  *  %/im\.  ■  i/u/i
•   1  ///■ ll/// I  A  HO '1
i  //// C8t T i  1  i  ////// £u,/„s X//// y i/i//' \\J//////
Oqiiv
TLc-c..- '  r-rr
L*r/ tw Ojw K„
!♦////  \V/^ •V/"     V/r A'/iA/i V* V>////
m,  ■ ;  vbt//a  1 1  f/a I  A  f/e \Jf/r
a*.
%, 1  llv
1  t*£w
!,„■ \\/i
k*. (J  isa
Vr'isv
V*.  ww
Mr,- 0 c &r„ 6w
e£>,»
3- vV
t\,rs ilT/y/ Bv
a  as  //  i/i  firt/iw  rv  x/ir
r,//st///t    forte,  or  .t/)n>
/ .  <w  iff/  ///giu-./r  .t/ip Sounds  ropfi
•/  /zr  /'  //•  ///^y' 1 nled  by  Vowels. />.  eu  '/»  '"  /"><  «r  sfi/rrt  at  am  i
//  //s   ag  '//  //">/.  or  s///»/  r/s  ft  0t  /_
/;  /is    ll   m   /'///■  ////sr/S/e'"'/ iv/ .«//
Coll  SO  II  il  II Sounds
y  nnrr/r  si.,  w  AW///u/i ,  /„
/" /.-  /'A/w.ur/  i /a. i .  //j  ///
/"■>•"  "/'/./. VO'  /rrv   .vn/ttr-4 /*>/y//.V//.     Syffaii
Ssw/U-   .r/tii/trfr//  /r
.rw/tf •////// '/  /:.  /•/  rt/v/r/r  n.v  //i  fi.//y /'■?/'  '"/'  "/'/'
at  foymnmf  m?/Af  nrrr/'t. .y  *«iv  ,„„„
/>/.  //•  am£  S,//«M->-  I"'"''"  "'^  i
r  r„n  /"/// //mrj-///r
\
THE    CHEROKEE    ALPHABET




hooney]  WHITE-PATH'S    REBELLION   1828  II  .">
Boss  as  assistant  chief.1  With  a  constitution  and  national  press,  a
well-developed  system  of  industries  and  home  education,  and  a  gov-
ernment administered  by  educated  Christian  men.  the  Cherokee  were
now  justly  entitled  to  be  considered  a  civilized  people.
The  idea  of  a  civilized  Indian  government  was  not  a  new  one.  The
lirst  treaty  ever  negotiated  by  the  United  States  with  an  Indian  tribe,
in  177s.  held  out  to  the  D(  da  wares  the  hope  that  by  a  confederation  id'
friendly  tribes  they  might  he  aide  "to  form  a  stale,  whereof  the  1  >ela-
ware  nation  shall  he  the  head  and  have  a  representation  in  Con-
gress.'" Priber,  the  Jesuit,  had  already  familiarized  the  Cherokee
with  the  formsof  civilized  government  before  the  middle  of  the  eight-
eenth century.  As  the  cap  between  the  conservative  and  progressive
elements  widened  after  the  Revolution  the  idea  grew,  until  in  L808
representatives  of  both  parties  visited  Washington  to  propose  an
arrangement  by  which  those  who  clung  to  the  old  life  might  he  allowed
to  remove  to  the  western  hunting  grounds,  while  the  rest  should  remain
to  take  up  civilization  and  "begin  the  establishment  of  fixed  law- and
a  regular  government."  The  project  received  the  warm  encourage-
ment of  President  Jefferson,  and  it  was  with  this  understanding  that
the  western  emigration  was  first  officially  recognized  a  few  years  later.
Immediately  upon  the  return  of  the  delegates  from  Washington  the
Cherokee  drew  up  their  first  brief  written  code  of  laws,  modeled  agree-
ably to  the  friendly  suggestions  of  Jefferson. ;
By  this  time  the  rapid  strides  of  civilization  and  Christianity  had
alarmed  the  conservative  element,  who  saw  in  the  new  order  of  things
only7  the  evidences  of  apostasy  and  swift  national  decay.  In  1828
"White-path  (Nun'na-tsune'ga),  an  influential  full-blood  and  councilor,
living  at  Turniptown  (U'lun'yi),  near  the  present  Ellijay,  in  Gilmer county.  Georgia,  headed  a  rebellion  against  the  new  code  of  laws,  with
all  that  it  implied.  He  soon  had  a  large  band  of  followers,  known  to
the  whites  as  "Red-sticks,"  a  title  sometimes  assumed  by  the  more
warlike  element  among  the  Creeks  and  other  southern  tribes.  From
the  townhouse  of  Ellijay  he  preached  the  rejection  of  the  new  consti-
tution, the  discarding  of  Christianity  and  the  white  man's  ways,  and a  return  to  the  old  tribal  law  and  custom — the  same  doctrine  that  had
more  than  once  constituted  the  burden  of  Indian  revelation  in  the  past.
It  was  now  too  late,  however,  to  reverse  the  wheel  of  progress,  and
under  the  rule  of  such  men  as  Hicks  and  Ross  the  conservative  oppo-
sition gradually  melted  away.     White-path  was  deposed  from  his  seat
'SeeRoyee,  Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  p.  241, 1888;  Meredith,  inTheFive
Civilized  Tribes.  Extra  Census  Bulletin,  i>.  41,  1894;  Morse,  American  Geography,  i,  p.  677,  1819  (for
Hicks,.
=  Fort  Pitt  treaty,  September  17,  1778.  Indian  Treaties,  p.  3, 1837.
3  Cherokee  Agency  treaty,  July  8,  1817,  ibid.,  p.  209;  Drake,  Indians,  p.  450,  ed.  1880;  Johnson  in
Senate  Report  on  Territories;  Cherokee  Memorial,  Januarj  is.  1831;  see  lawsof  1808,  ism.  and  Inter,
in  American  State  Papers:  Indian  Affairs,  II,  pp.  279-283,  1834.  The  volume  of  Cherokee  laws,  com-
piled in  the  Cherokee  language  by  the  Nation,  in  1850,  begins  with  the  year  1808.
19    ETH— 01   8


114  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
in  council,  but  subsequently  made  submission  and  was  reinstated.  He
was  afterward  one  of  the  detachment  commanders  in  the  Removal,  but
died  while  on  the  march.1
In  this  year,  also,  John  Ross  became  principal  chief  of  the,  Nation,
a  position  which  he  held  until  his  death  in  1866,  thirty-eight  years
later.''  In  this  long  period,  comprising  the  momentous  episodes  of the  Removal  and  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,  it  may  lie  truly  said  that
his  history  is  the  history  of  the  Nation.
And  now.  just  when  it  seemed  that  civilization  and  enlightenment
wcic  about  to  accomplish  their  perfect  work,  the  Cherokee  began  to
hear  the  first  low  muttering  of  the  coming  storm  that  was  soon  to
overturn  their  whole  governmental  structure  and  sweep  them  forever
from  the  land  of  their  birth.
By  an  agreement  between  the  United  States  and  the  state  of  Georgia
in  L802,  the  latter,  for  valuable  consideration,  had  ceded  to  the  general
government  her  claims  west  of  the  present  state  boundary,  the  United
States  at  the  same  time  agreeing  to  extinguish,  at  its  own  expense,
but  for  the  benefit  of  the  state,  the  Indian  claims  within  the  state
limits,  "as  early  as  the  same  can  be  peaceably  obtained  on  reasonable
terms."3  In  accordance  with  this  agreement  several  treaties  had already  been  made  with  the  Creeks  and  Cherokee,  by  which  large
tracts  had  been  secured  for  Georgia  at  the  expense  of  the  general
government.  Notwithstanding  this  fact,  and  the  terms  of  the.  proviso,
Georgia  accused  the  government  of  bad  faith  in  not  taking  summary
measures  to  compel  the  Indians  at  once  to  surrender  all  their  remaining
lands  within  the  chartered  state  limits,  coupling  the  complaint  with  a
threat  to  take  the  matter  into  her  own  hands.  In  1820  Agent  Meigs  had
expressed  the  opinion  that  the  Cherokee  were  now  so  far  advanced  that
further  government  aid  was  unnecessary,  and  that  their  lands  should
be  allotted  and  the  surplus  sold  for  their  benefit,  they  themselves  to
be  invested  with  full  rights  of  citizenship  in  the  several  states  within
which  they  resided.  This  .suggestion  had  been  approved  by  President
Monroe,  but  had  met  the  most  determined  opposition  from  the  states
concerned.  Tennessee  absolutely  refused  to  recognize,  individual
reservations  made  by  previous  treaties,  while  North  Carolina  and
Georgia  bought  in  all  such  reservations  with  money  appropriated
by  Congress.*  No  Indian  was  to  be  allowed  to  live  within  those  states
on  any  pretext  whatsoever.
In  the  meantime,  owing  to  persistent  pressure  from  Georgia,
repeated  unsuccessful  efforts  had  been  made  to  procure  from  the
Cherokee  a  cession  of  their  lands  within  the  chartered  limits  of  the
1  Persona]  information  from  Jnines  D.  Wafford.    So  far  as  is  known  this  rebellion  of  the  conservatives
lias  never  hitherto  been  noted  in  print.
=See  Resolutions  of  Honor,  in  Laws  of  the  Cherokee  Nation,  pp.  137-140,  1868:  Meredith,  in  The
Five  civilized  Tribes,  Extra  Census  Bulletin,  p.  41, 1894;  Appleton,  Cyclopedia  of  American  Biography.
3  See  fourth  article  of  "Articles  of  agreement  and  cession,"  April  24, 1802,  in  American  State  Papers: class  viu.  Public  Lands,  i,  quoted  also  by  Greeley,  American  Conflict,  I,  p.  103,  1864.
<  Royce,  Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  pp.  231-233, 1888.


hookey]  PRESSURE    FOE    REMOVAL — 1823   24  L15
state.  Every  effort  met  with  a  firm  refusal,  the  [ndians  declaring
that  having  alreadjr  made  cession  after  cession  from  a  territory  once
extensive,  their  remaining  lands  were  no  more  than  were  needed  for
themselves  and  their  children,  more  especially  as  experience  had
shown  that  each  concession  would  be  followed  by  a  further  demand.
They  conclude:  "  It  is  the  fixed  and  unalterable  determination  of  this
nation  never  again  to  cede  one  foot  more  of  land."  Soon  afterward they  addressed  to  the  President  a  memorial  of  similar  tenor,  to  which
^Calhoun,  as  Secretary  of  War.  returned  answer  that  as  Georgia
objected  to  their  presence  either  as  a  tribe  or  as  individual  owners  or
citizens,  they  must  prepare  their  minds  for  removal  beyond  the  Mis-
sissippi.'
In  reply,  the  Cherokee,  by  their  delegates — John  Ross.  George
Lowrey,  Major  Ridge,  and  Elijah  Hicks — sent  a  strong  letter  calling
attention  to  the  fact  that  by  the  very  wording  of  the  L802  agreement
the  compact  was  a  conditional  one  which  could  not  he  carried  out
without  their  own  voluntary  consent,  and  suggesting  that  Georgia
might  be  satisfied  from  the  adjoining  government  lands  in  Florida.
Continuing,  they  remind  the  Secretary  that  the  Cherokee  are  not
foreigners,  but  original  inhabitants  of  America,  inhabiting  and  stand-
ing now  upon  the  soil  of  their  own  territory,  with  limits  denned  by
treaties  with  the  United  States,  and  that,  confiding  in  the  good  faith
of  the  government  to  respect  its  treaty  stipulations,  they  do  not  hesitate
to  say  that  their  true  interest,  prosperity,  and  happiness  demand  their
permanency  where  they  are  and  the  retention  of  their  lands.  '
A  copy  of  this  letter  was  sent  by  the  Secretary  to  Governor  Troup
of  Georgia,  who  returned  a  reply  in  which  he  blamed  the  missionaries
for  the  refusal  of  the  Indians,  declared  that  the  state  would  not  permit
them  to  become  citizens,  and  that  the  Secretary  must  either  assist  the
state  in  taking  possession  of  the  Cherokee  lands,  or.  in  resisting  that
occupancy,  make  war  upon  and  shed  the  blood  of  brothers  and  friends.
The  Georgia  delegation  in  Congress  addressed  a  similar  letter  to  Presi-
dent Monroe,  in  which  the  government  was  censured  for  ha\  ing
instructed  the  Indians  in  the  arts  of  civilized  life  and  having  therebj
imbued  them  with  a  de-ire  to  acquire  property."
For  answer  the  President  submitted  a  report  by  Secretary  Calhoun
showing  that  since  the  agreement  had  been  made  with  Georgia  in  1802
the  government  had.  at  its  own  expense,  extinguished  the  Indian  claim
to  24,600  square  miles  within  the  limits  of  that  state,  or  more  than
three-fifths  of  the  whole  Indian  claim,  and  had  paid  on  that  and  other
accounts  connected  with  the  agreement  nearly  seven  and  a  half  million
'Cherokee  correspondence  1823  and  1824,  American  State  Papers:  Indian  Affairs,  n,  pp.  168  it::,
1834;  Royce,  Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  pp.  j  16  237, 1888.
'Cherokee memorial,  February  11.  1824,  in  American  State  Papers:  Indian  Lffairs,  a,  pp.  II  I  194,
1834    Royce,  op  cit,  p  J 17
i  Letters  of  Governor  Troup  of  Georgia,  February  28, 1824,  and  of  Georgia  delegates,  March  10,1824,
American  State  Papers    Indian  Affairs,  n.  pp.  475,  177,  1834;  Royce,  op.  cit.,  pp.  287,  238.


V 116  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
dollars,  of  which  by  far  the  greater  part  had  gone  to  Georgia  or  her
citizens.  In  regard  to  the  other  criticism  the  report  states  that  the
civilizing  policy  was  as  old  as  the  government  itself,  and  that  in  per-
forming the  high  duties  of  humanity  to  the  Indians,  it  had  never  been
conceived  that  the  stipulation  of  the  convention  was  contravened.  In
handing  in  the  report  the  President  again  called  attention  to  the  con-
ditional nature  of  the  agreement  and  declared  it  as  his  opinion  that  the
title  of  the  Indians  was  not  in  the  slightest  degree  affected  by  it  and
that  there  was  no  obligation  on  the  United  States  to  remove  them  by
force.1 Further  efforts,  even  to  the  employment  of  secret  methods,  were
made  in  1827  and  1828  to  induce  a  cession  or  emigration,  but  without
avail.  On  July  26,  1827,  as  already  noted,  the  Cherokee  adopted  a
constitution  as  a  distinct  and  sovereign  Nation.  Upon  this  the  Georgia
legislature  passed  resolutions  affirming  that  that  state  "had  the  power
and  the  right  to  possess  herself,  by  any  means  she  might  choose,  of
the  lands  in  dispute,  and  to  extend  over  them  her  authority  and  laws,1'
and  recommending  that  this  be  done  by  the  next  legislature,  if  the
lands  were  not  already  acquired  by  successful  negotiation  of  the  gen-
eral government  in  the  meantime.  The  government  was  warned  that
the  lands  belonged  to  Georgia,  and  she  must  and  would  have  them.  It
was  suggested,  however,  that  the  United  States  might  be  permitted  to
make  a  certain  number  of  reservations  to  individual  Indians.2
Passing  over  for  the  present  some  important  negotiations  with  the
western  Cherokee,  we  come  to  the  events  leading  to  the  final  act  in  the
drama.  Up  to  this  time  the  pressure  had  been  for  land  only,  but  now
a  stronger  motive  was  added.  About  the  year  1815  a  little  Cherokee
boy  playing  along  Chestatee  river,  in  upper  Georgia,  had  brought  in
to  his  mother  a  shining  yellow  pebble  hardly  larger  than  the  end  of  his
thumb.  On  being  washed  it  proved  to  be  a  nugget  of  gold,  and  on
her  next  trip  to  the  settlements  the  woman  carried  it  with  her  and  sold
it  to  a  white  man.  The  news  spread,  and  although  she  probably  con-
cealed the  knowledge  of  the  exact  spot  of  its  origin,  it  was  soon  known
that  the  golden  dreams  of  DeSoto  had  been  realized  in  the  Cherokee
country  of  Georgia.  Within  four  years  the  whole  territory  east  of
the  Chestatee  had  passed  from  the  possession  of  the  Cherokee.  They
still  held  the  western  bank,  but  the  prospector  was  abroad  in  the
mountains  and  it  could  not  be  for  long.3  About  1828  gold  was  found
on  Ward's  creek,  a  western  branch  of  Chestatee,  near  the  present
Dahlonega.4  and  the  doom  of  the  nation  was  sealed  (11).
1  Monroe,  message  to  the  Senate,  with  Calhoun's  report,   March  30,  1824,  American  State  Papers:
Indian  Affairs,  II,  pp.  460,  462,  1834.
2  Royce,  Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology, pp. 241, 242, 1888.
3Personal  information  from  J.  D.  Warlord.
4Nitze,  H.  B.  C. ,  in  Twentieth  Annual  Report  United  States  Geological  Survey,  part  6  (Mineral
Resources),  p.  112,1899.


hookey]  EXTENSION    OF    GEORGIA    LAWS   —1830  117
In  November,  L828,  Andrew  Jackson  was  elected  to  succeed  John
Quinoy  Adams  as  President.  He  was  a  frontiersman  and  Indian  bater,
and  the  change  boded  no  good  to  the  ( Jherokee.  His  position  was  we'd understood,  and  there  is  good  ground  for  believing  thai  the  action  at
once  taken  by  Georgia  was  at  bis  own  suggestion.1  On  December  20,
1828,  a  month  after  his  election,  Georgia  passed  an  act  annexing  thai
part  of  the  Cherokee  countrj  within  her  chartered  limits  and  extending
over  it  her  jurisdiction;  all  laws  and  customs  established  among  the
Cherokee  were  declared  null  and  void,  and  no  person  of  Indian  Mood
or  descent  residing  within  the  Indian  country  was  henceforth  to  he
allowed  as  a  witness  or  party  in  any  suit  where  a  white  man  should  be
defendant.  The  act  was  to  take  effect  June  1.  L830  (42).  The  whole
territory  was  soon  after  mapped  out  into  counties  and  surveyed  by
state  surveyors  into  •'land  lots"  of  L60  acres  each,  and  "gold  lots"  of 40  acres,  which  were  put  up  and  distributed  among  the  white  citizens
of  Georgia  by  public  lottery,  each  white  citizen  receiving  a  ticket.
Every  Cherokee  head  of  a  family  was.  indeed,  allowed  a  reservation
of  160  acres,  hut    no  d   1  was  given,  and  his  continuance  depended
solely  on  the  pleasure  of  the  legislature.  Provision  was  made  for  the
settlement  of  contested  lottery  claims  among;  the  white  citizens,  hut
by  the  most  stringent  enactments,  in  addition  to  the  sweeping  law
which  forbade  anyone  of  Indian  blood  to  bring  suit  or  to  testify
against  a  white  man,  it  was  made  impossible  for  the  Indian  owner  to
defend  his  right  in  any  court  or  to  resist  the  seizure  of  his  homestead,
or  even  his  own  dwelling  house,  and  anyone  so  resisting  was  made  sub-
ject to  imprisonment  at  the  discretion  of  a  Georgia  court.  Other  laws
directed  to  the  same  end  quickly  followed,  one  of  which  made  invalid
any  contract  between  a  white  man  and  an  Indian  unless  established  by
the  testimony  of  two  white  witnesses — thus  practically  canceling  all
debts  due  from  white  men  to  Indians — while  another  obliged  all  white
men  residing  in  the  Cherokee  country  to  take  a  special  oath  of  allegi-
ance to  the  state  of  Georgia,  on  penalty  of  four  years'  imprisonment
in  the  penitentiary,  this  act  being  intended  to  drive  out  all  the  mis-
sionaries, teachers,  and  other  educators  who  refused  to  countenance
the  spoliation.  About  the  same  time  the  Cherokee  were  forbidden  to
hold  councils,  or  to  assemble  for  any  public  purpose,2  or  to  dig  for
gold  upon  their  own  lands.
1  See  Butler  letter,  quoted  in  Etoyce,  Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  p.  '-".>7,
ee  also  Everett,  speech  in  the  House  of  Representatives  on  May  31,  1838,  pp.  16-17,  3  s-33,  i    "
-For  extracts  and  synopses  of  these  nets  sit  Royce,  op.  clt.,  pp.  259-264;  Drake,  indians,  pp.  43!  i  6,
1880;  Greeley,  American  Conflict,  i,  pp.  105,  106,  1864;  Edward  Everett,  speech  in  the  House  of  Rep-
resentatives, February  14,  1831  I  lottery  law).  The  Hold  lottery  is  also  noted  incidentally  by  Lanman,
Charles,  Letters  from  the  Alleghany  Mountains,  p.  10;  New  York.  1849,  and  by  Nitze,  in  his  repO]  l    >n
the  Georgia  gold  fields,  in  the  Twentieth   annual   Report  of  the  United  States  Ge
part  6  I  Mineral  Resources  |,  p.  L12, 1899.  The  author  has  himseli  seen  in  a  mountain  villas  in  Georgia
an  old  book  titled  "The  Cherokee  Land  and  Gold  Lottery,"  containing  map' and  plats  covering  the
whole  Cherokee  country  of  Georgia,  with  each  lot  numbered,  aid  descriptions  of  the  watercourses,
soil,  and  supposed  mineral  veins.


118  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.ij
The  purpose  of  this  legislation  was  to  render  life  in  their  own
country  intolerable  to  the  Cherokee  by  depriving  them  of  all  legal
protection  and  friendly  counsel,  and  the  effect  was  precisely  as
intended.  In  an  eloquent  address  upon  the  subject  before  the  House
of  Representatives  the  distinguished  Edward  Everett  clearly  pointed
out  the  encouragement  which  it  gave  to  lawless  men:  "They  have  but
to  cross  the  Cherokee  line;  they  have  but  to  choose  the  time  and  the
place  where  the  eye  of  no  white  man  can  rest  upon  them,  and  they
may  burn  the  dwelling,  waste  the  farm,  plunder  the  property,  assault
the  person,  murder  the  children  of  the  Cherokee  subject  of  Georgia,
and  though  hundreds  of  the  tribe  may  be  looking  on.  there  is  not  one
of  them  that  can  be  permitted  to  bear  witness  against  the  spoiler."1
Senator  Sprague,  of  Maine,  said  of  the  law  that  it  devoted  the  prop-
erty of  the  Cherokee  to  the  cupidity  of  their  neighbors,  leaving  them
exposed  to  every  outrage  which  lawless  persons  could  inflict,  so  that
even  robbery  and  murder  might  be  committed  with  impunity  at  noon-
day, if  not  in  the  presence  of  whites  who  would  testify  against  it.2
The  prediction  was  fulfilled  to  the  letter.  Bands  of  armed  men
invaded  the  Cherokee  country,  forcibly  seizing  horses  and  cattle,
taking  possession  of  houses  from  which  they  had  ejected  the  occu-
pants, and  assaulting  the  owners  who  dared  to  make  resistance.3  In
one  instance,  near  the  present  Dahlonega,  two  white  men,  who  had
been  hospitably  received  and  entertained  at  supper  by  an  educated
Cherokee  citizen  of  nearly  pure  white  blood,  later  in  the  evening,
during  the  temporary  absence  of  the  parents,  drove  out  the  children
and  their  nurse  and  deliberately  set  fire  to  the  house,  which  was
burned  to  the  ground  with  all  its  contents.  They  were  pursued  and
brought  to  trial,  but  the  case  was  dismissed  by  the  judge  on  the
ground  that  no  Indian  could  testify  against  a  white  man.1  Cherokee
miners  upon  their  own  ground  were  arrested,  fined,  and  imprisoned,
and  their  tools  and  machinery  destroyed,  while  thousands  of  white
intruders  were  allowed  to  dig  in  the  same  places  unmolested.5  A
Cherokee  on  trial  in  his  own  nation  for  killing  another  Indian  was
seized  by  the  state  authorities,  tried  and  condemned  to  death,  although,
not  understanding  English,  he  was  unable  to  speak  in  his  own  defense.
A  United  States  court  forbade  the  execution,  but  the  judge  who  had
conducted  the  trial  defied  the  writ,  went  to  the  place  of  execution,  anil
stood  beside  the  sheriff  while  the  Indian  was  being  hanged.6
1  -I   eh  of  May  19,  1830,  Washington;  printed  by  Gales  &  Seaton,1830.
^Speech  in  the  Senate  of  the  United  States,  April  16,  1830;  Washington,  Peter  Force,  printer,  1830.
BSee  Cherokee  Memorial  to  Congress,  January  18,  1831.
*  Personal  information  from  Prof.  Clinton  Duncan, of  Tahlequah,  Cherokee  Nation,  whose  father's house  \\:is  the  one  thus  burned.
^Cherokee  Memorial  to  Congress  January  18,  1831.
clbid.;  see  also  speech  of  Edward  Everett  in  House  of  Representatives  February  14,  1831;  report  >>i
the  select  committee  of  the  senate  of  Massarhusettsupon  t  lie  Georgia  resolutions,  Boston,  1831;  Greeley,
American  Conflict,  I,  p.  106,  1864;  Abbott,  Cherokee  Indians  in  Georgia;  Atlanta  Constitution.  October
27,  1889.


koonki  ARREST    OF    MISSIONARIES — 1831  119
Immediately  on  the  passage  of  the  first  ad  the  ( Iherokee  appealed  to
President  Jackson,  but  were  told  that  no  protection  would  be  afforded
tlirni.  Other  efforts  were  then  made — in  1829 — to  persuade  them  to
removal,  or  to  procure  another  cession  this  time  of  all  their  lands  in
North  Carolina  but  the  Cherokee  remained  firm.  The  Georgia  law
was  declared  in  force  on  June  :;.  L830,  whereupon  the  Presidenl
directed  that  the  annuity  payment  due  the  <  Iherokee  Nation  under  pre-
vious treaties  should  no  longer  lie  jiaid  to  their  national  treasurer,  as
hitherto,  but  distributed  per  capita  by  the  agent.  As  a  national  fund
it  had  been  used  for  the  maintenance  of  their  schools  and  national
press.  A-  a  per  capita  payment  it  amounted  to  forty-two  cents  to  each
individual.  Several  years  afterward  it  still  remained  unpaid.  Fed-
eral troops  were  also  sent  into  the  Cherokee  country  with  orders  to
prevent  all  mining  by  either  whites  or  Indians  unless  authorized  by  the
state  of  Georgia.  All  these  measures  served  only  to  render  the  Chero-
kee more  bitter  in  their  determination.  In  September,  1830,  another
proposition  was  made  for  the  removal  of  the  tribe,  but  the  national
council  emphatically  refused  to  consider  thesubject.1
In  January,  1831,  the  Cherokee  Nation,  by  John  Ross  as  principal
chief,  brought  a  test  suit  of  injunction  against  Georgia,  in  the  United
States  Supreme  Court.  The  majority  of  the  court  dismissed  the  suit
on  the  ground  that  the  Cherokee  were  not  a  foreign  nation  within  the
meaning  of  the  Constitution,  two  justices  dissenting  from  this  opinion.8
Shortly  afterward,  under  the  law  which  forbade  any  white  man  to
reside  in  the  Cherokee  Nation  without  taking  an  oath  of  allegiance  to
Georgia,  a  number  of  arrests  were  made,  including  Wheeler,  the
printer  of  the  Cherokei  Phmnix,  and  the  missionaries.  Worcester.  But-
ler. Thompson,  and  Proctor,  who.  being  there  by  permission  of  the
agent  and  feeling  that  plain  American  citizenship  should  hold  good  in
an\    part  of  the  United  States,   refused  to  take  the  oath.      Soi   if
those  arrested  took  the  oath  and  were  released,  but  Worcester  and
Butler,  still  refusing,  were  dressed  in  prison  garb  and  put  at  hard
labor  among  felons.  Worcester  had  plead  in  his  defense  that  he  was  a
citizen  of  Vermont,  and  had  entered  the  Cherokee  country  by  permis-
sion of  the  President  of  the  United  Statesand  approval  of  the  Cherokee
Nation:  and  that  as  the  United  States  by  several  treaties  had  acknowl-
edged the  Cherokee  to  be  a  nation  with  a  guaranteed  and  definite  ter-
ritory, the  state  had  no  right  to  interfere  with  him.  1  Ie  was  sentenced
to  four  year-  in  the  penitentiary.  On  March  3,  1832,  the  matter  was
appealed  as  a  test  ease  to  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,
which  rendered  a  decision  in  favor  of  Worcester  and  the  Cherokee
Nation  and  ordered  his  release.  Georgia,  however,  through  her  ^n
ernor.  had  defied  the  summons  with  a  threat  of  opposition,  even  tothe
i     erokee  Nation,  Fifth  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  pp.  261,262,
2  Ibid.,  p.  262.


120  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [etb.ann.19
annihilation  of  the  Union,  and  now  ignored  the  decision,  refusing  to
release  the  missionary,  who  remained  in  prison  until  set  free  by  the
will  of  the  governor  nearly  a  year  later.  A  remark  attributed  to
President  Jackson,  on  hearing  of  the  result  in  the  Supreme  Court,  may
throw  some  light  on  the  whole  proceeding:  ■•John  Marshall  has  made
his  decision,  now  let  him  enforce  it."1 On  the  19th  of  July.  1832,  a  public  fast  was  observed  throughout
the  Cherokee  Nation.  In  the  proclamation  recommending  it,  Chief
Ross  observes  that  "Whereas  the  crisis  in  the  affairs  of  the  Nation
exhibits  the  day  of  tribulation  and  sorrow,  and  the  time  appears  to  be
fast  hastening  when  the  destiny  of  this  people  must  be  sealed;  whether
it  has  been  directed  by  the  wonted  depravity  and  wickedness  of  man,
or  by  the  unsearchable  and  mysterious  will  of  an  allwise  Being,  it
equally  becomes  us,  as  a  rational  and  Christian  community,  humbly  to
bow  in  humiliation,"  etc.2
Further  attempts  were  made  to  induce  the  Cherokee  to  remove  to
the  West,  but  met  the  same  firm  refusal  as  before.  It  was  learned  that
in  view  of  the  harrassing  conditions  to  which  they  were  subjected  the
Cherokee  were  now  seriously  considering  the  project  of  emigrating  to
the  Pacific  Coast,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Columbia,  a  territory  then
claimed  by  England  and  held  by  the  posts  of  the  British  Hudson  Bay
Company.  The  Secretary  of  War  at  once  took  steps  to  discourage  the
movement.3  A  suggestion  from  the  Cherokee  that  the  government
satisfy  those  who  had  taken  possession  of  Cherokee  lands  under  the
lottery  drawing  by  giving  them  instead  an  equivalent  from  the  unoc-
cupied government  lands  was  rejected  by  the  President.
In  the  spring  of  1834  the  Cherokee  submitted  a  memorial  which,
after  asserting  that  they  would  never  voluntarily  consent  to  abandon
their  homes,  proposed  to  satisfy  Georgia  by  ceding  to  her  a  portion  of
their  territory,  they  to  be  protected  in  possession  of  the  remainder
until  the  end  of  a  definite  period  to  be  fixed  b}^  the  United  States,  at
the  expiration  of  which,  after  disposing  of  their  surplus  lands,  they
should  become  citizens  of  the  various  states  within  which  they  resided.
They  were  told  that  their  difficulties  could  be  remedied  only  Iry  their
removal  to  the  west  of  the  Mississippi.  In  the  meantime  a  removal
treaty  was  being  negotiated  with  a  self-styled  committee  of  some  fif-
teen or  twenty  Cherokee  called  together  at  the  agency.  It  was  carried
through  in  spite  of  the  protest  of  John  Ross  and  the  Cherokee  Nation,
as  embodied  in  a  paper  said  to  contain  the  signatures  of  13,000  Chero-
kee, but  failed  of  ratification.*
Despairing  of  any  help  from  the  President,  the  Cherokee  delega-
1  Royce,  Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Ann.  Rep.  Bateau  of  Ethnology,  pp.  264-2titi,  1SS8;  JJrake,  Indians,
pp    i.ii   i  .T.  L880;  Greeley,  American  Conflict,  i.  106,1864.
s  Drake,  Indians,  p   158, 1880.
;|  Royce,  up.  cit.,  pp.  262-264,  -~-.  273. *  [bid.,  pp.274, 275.


'       '  TREATY    WITH    RIDGE    PARTY— 1835  121
tion,  headed  by  John  Ross,  addressed  another  earnest  memorial  to
Congress  on  May  17.  1834.  Royee  quotes  the  document  at  length,
with  the  remark,  "Without  affecting  to  pass  judgment  on  the  merits
of  the  controversy,  the  writer  thinks  this  memorial  well  deserving  of
reproduction  here  as  evidencing  the  devoted  and  pathetic  attachment
wilh  which  the  Cherokee  clung  to  the  land  of  their  fathers,  and,
remembering  the  wrongs  and  humiliations  of  the  past,  refused  to  he
convinced  that  justice,  prosperity,  and  happiness  awaited  them  beyond
the  Mississippi." '
In  August  of  this  year  another  council  was  held  at  Ued  Clay,  south-
eastward from  Chattanooga  and  just  within  the  Georgia  line,  where
the  question  of  removal  was  again  debated  in  what  i-  officially
described  a-  a  tumultuous  and  excited  meeting.  One  of  the  prin-
cipal advocates  of  the  emigration  scheme,  a  prominent  mixed-blood
named  John  Walker,  jr..  was  assassinated  from  ambush  while  return-
ing from  the  council  to  his  home  a  few  miles  north  of  the  present
Cleveland,  Tennessee.  On  account  of  his  superior  education  and
influential  connections,  his  wife  being  a  niece  of  former  agent  Return
,1.  Meigs,  the  affair  created  intense  excitement  at  the  time.  The
assassination  has  been  considered  the  first  of  the  long  series  of  political
murders  growing  out  of  the  removal  agitation,  but,  according  to  the
testimony  of  old  Cherokee  acquainted  with  the  facts,  the  killing  was
due  to  a  more  personal  motive.*
The  Cherokee  were  now  nearly  worn  out  by  constant  battle  against
a  fate  from  which  they  could  see  no  escape.  In  February,  1835,  two
rival  delegations  arrived  in  Washington,  One,  the  national  party,
headed  by  John  Ross,  came  prepared  still  to  tight  to  the  end  for  home
and  national  existence.  The  other,  headed  by  Major  John  Ridge,  a
prominent  subchief,  despairing  of  further  successful  resistance,  was
prepared  to  negotiate  for  removal.  Reverend  J.  F.  Schermerhorn
was  appointed  commissioner  to  arrange  with  the  Ridge  party  a  treaty
to  he  confirmed  later  by  the  Cherokee  people  in  general  council.  On
this  basis  a  treaty  was  negotiated  with  the  Ridge  party  by  which  the
Cherokee  were  to  cede  their  whole  eastern  territory  and  remove  to
the  West  in  consideration  of  the  sum  id'  $3,250,000  with  some  addi-
tional acreage  in  the  West  and  a  small  sum  for  depredations  com-
mitted upon  them  by  the  whites.     Finding  that  these  negotiation-  were
proceeding,  the  Ross  party  tiled  a  counter  proposition  for $20,000,   P,
which  was  rejected  by  the  Senate  as  excessive.  The  Schermerhorn
compact  with  the  Ridge  party,  with  the  consideration  changed  to
$4,500,000,  was  thereupon  completed  and  signed  on  March  14.  Ism;,.
hut  with  the  express  stipulation  that  it  should  receive  the  approval  of
•Royce.Chi  tion,  Fifth  Ann.  Report  Bureau  of  Etl   logy,  p.  276, 1888.
*  Commissioner  Elbert  Herring,  November  25,  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  p.  240,  L834;  author's
personal  information  from  Major  R.  C  Jackson  and  J.  D.  Wafford.


122  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
the  Cherokee  nation  in  full  council  assembled  before  being  considered
of  any  binding  force.  This  much  accomplished,  Mr.  Schermerhorn
departed  for  the  Cherokee  country,  armed  with  an  address  from
President  Jackson  in  which  the  great  benefits  of  removal  were  set
forth  to  the  Cherokee.  Having  exhausted  the  summer  and  fall  in
fruitless  effort  to  secure  favorable  action,  the  reverend  gentleman
notified  the  President,  proposing  either  to  obtain  the  signatures  of
the  leading  Cherokee  by  promising  them  payment  for  their  improve-
ments at  their  own  valuation,  if  in  any  degree  reasonable,  or  to  con-
clude a  treaty  with  a  part  of  the  Nation  and  compel  its  acceptance
by  the  rest.  He  was  promptly  informed  by  the  Secretary  of  War,
Lewis  Cass,  on  behalf  of  the  President,  that  the  treaty,  if  concluded
at  all,  must  be  procured  upon  fair  and  open  terms,  with  no  particular
promise  to  any  individual,  high  or  low,  to  gain  his  aid  or  influence,
and  without  sacrificing  the  interest  of  the  whole  to  the  cupidity  of  a
fev^  He  was  also  informed  that,  as  it  would  probably  be  contrary  to
his  wish,  his  letter  would  not  be  put  on  file.1
In  October,  1835,  the  Ridge  treaty  was  rejected  by  the  Cherokee
Nation  in  full  council  at  Red  Clay,  even  its  main  supporters,  Ridge
himself  and  Elias  Boudinot,  going  over  to  the  rnajoruy,  most  unex-
pectedly to  Schermerhorn,  who  reports  the  result,  piously  adding,
"but  the  Lord  is  able  to  overrule  all  things  for  good."  During  the session  of  this  council  notice  was  served  on  the  Cherokee  to  meet
commissioners  at  New  Echota  in  December  following  for  the  purpose
of  negotiating  a  treaty.  The  notice  was  also  printed  in  the  Cherokee
language  and  circulated  throughout  the  Nation,  with  a  statement  that
those  who  failed  to  attend  would  be  counted  as  assenting  to  any  treaty
that  might  be  made.2
The  council  had  authorized  the  regular  delegation,  headed  by  John
Ross,  to  conclude  a  treaty  either  there  or  at  Washington,  but,  finding
that  Schermerhorn  had  no  authority  to  treat  on  any  other  basis  than
the  one  rejected  by  the  Nation,  the  delegates  proceeded  to  Washing-
ton.8 Before  their  departure  John  Ross,  who  had  removed  to  Ten-
nessee to  escape  persecution  in  his  own  state,  was  arrested  at  his  home
by  the  Georgia  guard,  all  his  private  papers  and  the  proceedings  of
the  council  being  taken  at  the  same  time,  and  conveyed  across  the  line
into  Georgia,  where  he  was  held  for  some  time  without  charge  against
him,  and  at  last  released  without  apology  or  explanation.  The  poet,
John  Howard  Payne,  who  was  then  stopping  with  Ross,  engaged  in
the  work  of  collecting  historical  and  ethnologic  material  relating  to  the
Cherokee,  was  seized  at  the  same  time,  with  all  his  letters  and  scien-
i  Royce,  Cherokee  Nation,  Fifth  Ann.  Rep.  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  pp.  278-280, 1888;  Everett  speech
in  House  of  Representatives,  May  31, 1838,  pp.  28, 29,  1839,  in  which  the  Secretary's  reply  is  given  in full.
=  Royce,  op.  cit.,  pp.  280-281.  » Ibid.,  p.  281.


hooney]  TKKATY    OF    NEW    ECHOTA       1835  L23
tific  manuscripts.  The  national  paper,  the  Cheroket  Phamix,  had  been
suppressed  and  its  oilier  plant  seized  by  the  same  guard  a  few  days
before.1     Thus  in  their  greatest  need  the  Chei'okee  were  deprived  of
the  help  and  counsel  of  their  teachers,  their  national  press,  and  their
chief.
Although  for  two  months  threats  and  inducements  had  been  held
out  to  secure  a  full  attendance  at  the  December  conference  at  New
Echota,  there  were  present  when  the  proceedings  opened,  according
to  the  report  of  Schermerhorn  himself ,  only  from  three  hundred  to
five  hundred  men.  women,  and  children,  out  of  a  population  of  over
lT.ooii.  Notwithstanding  the  paucity  of  attendance  and  the  absence
of  the  principal  officers  of  the  Nation,  a  committee  was  appointed  to
arrange  the  details  of  a  treaty,  which  was  finally  drawn  up  and
signed  on  December  29,  L835.s
Briefly  stated,  by  this  treaty  id'  New  Echota,  Georgia,  the  Cherokee Nation  ceded  to  the  United  States  its  whole  remaining  territory  cast
of  the  Mississippi  for  the  sum  of  five  million  dollars  and  a  common
joint  interest  in  the  territory  already  occupied  by  the  western  Chero-
kee, in  what  is  now  Indian  Territory,  with  an  additional  smaller  tract
adjoining  on  the  northeast,  in  what  is  now  Kansas.  Improvements
were  to  be  paid  for.  and  the  Indians  were  to  lie  removed  at  the  expense
of  the  United  States  and  subsisted  at  the  expense  of  the  Government
for  one  year  after  their  arrival  in  the  new  country.  The  removal  was
to  take   place  within  two  years   from  the   ratification   of  the  treaty.
On  the  strong  representations  of  the  Cherokee  signers,  who  would
probably  not  have  signed  otherwise  even  then,  it  was  agreed  that  a
limited  number  of  Cherokee  who  should  desire  to  remain  behind  in
North  Carolina.  Tennessee,  and  Alabama,  and  become  citizens,  having
first  been  adjudged  "qualified  or  calculated  to  become  useful  citizens."' might  so  remain,  together  with  a  few  holding  individual  reservations
under  former  treaties.  This  provision  was  allowed  by  the  commis-
sioners, hut  was  afterward  struck  out  on  the  announcement  by  Presi-
dent Jackson  of  his  determination  "not  to  allow  any  preemptions  or
reservations,  his  desire  being  that  the  whole  Cherokee  people  should
remove  together."
Provision  was  made  also  for  the  payment  of  debts  due  by  the  Indians
out  of  any  moneys  coming  to  them  under  the  treaty:  for  the  reestab-
lishment  of  the  missions  in  the  West;  for  pensions  to  Cherokee
wounded  in  the  service  of  the  government  in  the  war  of  1812  and  the
Creek  war;  for  permission  to  establish  in  the  new  country  such  military
posts  and  roads  for  the  use  of  the  United  States  as  should  he  deemed
necessary;  for  satisfying  Osage  claims  in  the  western  territory  and
iRoyce,  Cherokee  Nation,  op.  cit.  (R.'ss  arrest),  p.  281;  Drake,  Indian-  Ross  Paj  le,  Phcenix),
p.  159,  1880;  Bee  also  Everett  speech  .»■"  May  31,  1888,  op.  cit.
-Royce,  op.  cit.,  pp.  :M  i  m  [>n  .[..,■!  ii   is:>.


124  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  Leth.ann.19
for  bringing  about  a  friendly  understanding  between  the  two  tribes;
and  for  the  commutation  of  all  annuities  and  other  sums  due  from  the
■United  States  into  a  permanent  national  fund,  the  interest  to  be  placed
at  the  disposal  of  the  officers  of  the  Cherokee  Nation  and  by  them
disbursed,  according  to  the  will  of  their  own  people,  for  the  care  of
schools  and  orphans,  and  for  general  national  purposes.
The  western  territory  assigned  the  Cherokee  under  this  treaty  was
in  two  adjoining  tracts,  viz,  (1)  a  tract  of  seven  million  acres,  together
with  a  "perpetual  outlet  west."  already  assigned  to  the  western
Cherokee  under  treaty  of  1833,  as  will  hereafter  be  noted,1  being
identical  with  the  present  area  occupied  by  the  Cherokee  Nation  in
Indian  Territory,  together  with  the  former  "Cherokee  strip,"  with
the  exception  of  a  two-mile  strip  along  the  northern  boundary,  now
included  within  the  limits  of  Kansas;  (2)  a  smaller  additional  tract  of
eight  hundred  thousand  acres,  running  fifty  miles  north  and  south
and  twenty-five  miles  east  and  west,  in  what  is  now  the  southeastern
corner  of  Kansas.  For  this  second  tract  the  Cherokee  themselves
were  to  pay  the  United  States  five  hundred  thousand  dollars.
The  treaty  of  1833,  assigning  the  first  described  tract  to  the  western
Cherokee,  states  that  the  United  States  agrees  to  "guaranty  it  to
them  forever,  and  that  guarantee  is  hereby  pledged."  By  the  same
treaty,  "in  addition  to  the  seven  millions  of  acres  of  land  thus  pro-
vided for  and  bounded,  the  United  States  further  guaranty  to  the
Cherokee  nation  a  perpetual  outlet  west  and  a  free  and  unmolested
use  of  all  the  country  lying  west  of  the  western  boundary  of  said
seven  millions  of  acres,  as  far  west  as  the  sovereignty  of  the  United
States  and  their  right  of  soil  extend  .  .  .  and  letters  patent  shall  be
issued  by  the  United  States  as  soon  as  practicable  for  the  land  hereby
guaranteed."  All  this  was  reiterated  by  the  present  treaty,  and  made to  include  also  the  smaller  (second)  tract,  in  these  words:
Art.  o.  The  United  States  also  agree  that  the  lands  above  ceded  by  the  treaty  of
February  14,  1833,  including  the  nutlet,  and  those  ceded  by  this  treaty,  shall  all  be
included  in  one  patent,  executed  to  the  Cherokee  nation  of  Indians  by  the  President
of  the  United  States,  according  to  the  provisions  of  the  act  of  May  28,  1S30.  .  .  .
Art.  5.  The  United  States  hereby  covenant  and  agree  that  the  lands  ceded  to  the
Cherokee  nation  in  the  foregoing  article  shall  in  no  future  time,  without  their  con-
sent, be  included  within  the  territorial  limits  or  jurisdiction  of  anystate  or  territory.
But  they  shall  secure  to  the  Cherokee  nation  the  right  of  their  national  councils  to
make  ami  carry  into  effect  all  such  laws  as  they  may  deem  necessary  for  the  govern-
ment ami  pre  itection  of  the  persons  and  property  within  their  own  country  belonging
to  their  people  or  such  persons  as  have  connected  themselves  with  them:  Provided
always,  that  they  shall  not  be  inconsistent  with  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States
and  such  acts  of  Congress  as  have  been  or  may  be  passed  regulating  trade  and  inter-
course with  the  Indians;  and  also  that  they  shall  not  be  considered  as  extending  to
such  citizens  and  army  of  the  United  States  as  may  travel  or  reside  in  the  Indian
!See  Fort  Gibson  treaty,  1833,  p.  142.


mooned  TREATY    OF    NEW    ECHOTA — 1835  125
country  by  permission,  according  to  tl»-  lu«>  and  regulations  established  by  the  gov- ernment of  the  same.  .  .  .
\ki.  6.  Perpetual  peace  and  friendship  shall  exist  between  the  citizens  of  the
I'niti'.l  States  nail  the  Cherokee  Indians.  The  United  stales  agree  to  protect  the Cherokee  nation  from  domestic  strife  and  foreign  enemies  and  against  intestine  wars
between  the  several  tribes.  The  Cherokees  shall  endeavor  to  preserve  and  maintain
the  peace  of  the  country,  and  not  make  war  upon  their  neighbors;  they  shall  also  be
protected  against  interruption  and  intrusion  from  citizens  of  the  United  stairs  who
may  attempt  to  settle  in  the  country  without  their  consent;  an. 1  all  such  persons
shall  be  removed  from  the  same'  by  order  of  the  President  of  the  United  States.  But
this  is  not  intended  to  prevent  the  residence  among  them  of  useful  farmers,  mechan-
ics, and  teachers  for  the  instruction  of  the  Indians  according  to  treaty  stipulations.
Ajrticle  7.  The  Cherokee  nation  having  already  made  great  progress  in  civiliza-
tion, and  deeming  it  important  that  every  proper  and  laudable  inducement  should
be  offered  to  their  people  to  improve  their  condition,  as  well  as  to  guard  and  secure
in  the  most  effectual  manner  the  rights  guaranteed  to  them  in  this  treaty,  and  with
a  view  to  illustrate  tin-  liberal  and  enlarged  policy  of  the  government  of  the  United
States  toward  the  Indians  in  their  removal  beyond  the  territorial  limits  of  the  states.
it  is  stipulated  that  they  shall  be  entitled  to  a  Delegate  in  the  Hou   i  Representa-
tives of  the  United  States  whenever  Congress  shall  make  provision  for  the  same.
The  instrument  was  signed  by  (Governor)  "William  Carroll  of  Ten-
nessee and  (Reverend)  .1.  F.  Schermerhorn  as  commissioners— the
former,  however,  having  been  unable  to  attend  by  reason  of  illness
and  by  twenty  Cherokee,  among  whom  the  most  prominent  were  Major
Ridge  and  Elias  Boudinot,  former  editor  of  the  Phoenix.  Neither
John  Ross  nor  any  one  of  the  officers  of  the  Cherokee  Nation  was  present
or  represented.  After  some  changes  by  the  Senate,  it  was  ratified
May  23,  1S36.1 Upon  the  treaty  of  New  Echota  and  the  treaty  previously  made  with
tlie  western  Cherokee  at  Fort  Gibson  in  1833,  the  united  Cherokee
Nation  based  it>  claim  to  the  present  territory  held  by  the  tribe  in
Indian  Territory  and  to  the  Cherokee  outlet,  and  to  national  self-govern-
ment, with  protection  from  outside  intrusion.
An  official  census  taken  in  L835  showed  the  whole  number  of  Chero-
kee in  Georgia,  North  Carolina,  Alabama,  and  Tennessee  to  he  16,542,
exclusive  of  1,592  negro  slaves  and  201  whites  intermarried  with
Cherokee.  The  Cherokee  were  distributed  as  follows:  Georgia, 8,946;
North  Carolina,  3,644;  Tennessee,  2,528;  Alabama,  1 .4i4.2
Despite  the  efforts  id'  Ro~s  and  the  national  delegates,  who  presented
protests  with  .signatures  representing  nearly  Id.ooot  'herokee.  the  treaty
■  See  New  Echota  treaty,  1835,  and  Fort  Gibson  treaty,  1833   Indian  Treaties,  pp.  633-64*  and    »i    I  -
1837;  also,  for  full  di sen-,  ion  of  l.nlli  t  rallies  [;.  ,vee,  Cherokee  Nat  inn.  Fifth  Ann.  iep.  I  tun  an  , .  I  i  h
nology, pp. 249-298.  For  a  summary  of  all  the  measures  of  pressure  brought  to  bear  upon  the  Cher
okee  up  to  the  final  removal  see  also  Everett,  speech  in  the  House  of  Representative-,  May  31,  1838;
the  chapters  on  "Expatriation  of  the  Cherokees,"  Drake,  Indians,  1880;  and  tin'  chapter  on  - 1  1 1.-
Rights— Nullification,"  in  Greeley,  American  Conflict,  i,  1864.  The  Georgia  side  of  the  controversy  is
presented  in  E..t.Harden'sLifeof  (Governor!  George  M.  Troup,  1849.
-  Ri  iyee.  op.  cit.,  p.  289.  The  Indian  total  is  also  given  in  the  Report  of  the  Indian  Commissioner,
p.  369, 1836.


126  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ank.19
had  been  ratified  by  a  majority  of  one  vote  over  the  necessary  number,
and  preliminary  steps  were  at  once  taken  to  carry  it  into  execution.
Councils  were  held  in  opposition  all  over  the  Cherokee  Nation,  and
resolutions  denouncing  the  methods  used  and  declaring  the  treaty
absolutely  null  and  void  were  drawn  up  and  submitted  to  General
Wool,  in  command  of  the  troops  in  the  Cherokee  country,  by  whom
they  were  forwarded  to  Washington.  The  President  in  reply  expressed
his  surprise  that  an  officer  of  the  army  should  have  received  or  trans-
mitted a  paper  so  disrespectful  to  the  Executive,  the  Senate,  and  the
American  people;  declared  his  settled  determination  that  the  treaty
should  be  carried  out  without  modification  and  with  all  consistent
dispatch,  and  directed  that  after  a  copy  of  the  letter  had  been  delivered
to  Ross,  no  further  communication,  by  mouth  or  writing,  should  be  held
with  him  concerning  the  treaty.  It  was  further  directed  that  no  coun-
cil should  be  permitted  to  assemble  to  discuss  the  treaty.  Ross  had
already  been  informed  that  the  President  had  ceased  to  recognize  any
existing  government  among  the  eastern  Cherokee,  and  that  any  fur-
ther effort  by  him  to  prevent  the  consummation  of  the  treaty  would  be
suppressed.1 Notwithstanding  this  suppression  of  opinion,  the  feeling  of  the
Nation  was  soon  made  plain  through  other  sources.  Before  the  ratifi-
cation of  the  treaty  Major  W.  M.  Davis  had  been  appointed  to  enroll
the  Cherokee  for  removal  and  to  appraise  the  value  of  their  improve-
ments. He  soon  learned  the  true  condition  of  affairs,  and,  although
holding  his  office  by  the  good  will  of  President  Jackson,  he  addressed
to  the  Secretary  of  War  a  strong  letter  upon  the  subject,  from  which
the  following  extract  is  made:
I  conceive  that  my  duty  to  the  President,  to  yourself,  and  to  my  country  reluc-
tantly compels  me  to  make  a  statement  of  .facts  in  relation  to  a  meeting  of  a  small
number  of  Cherokees  at  New  Echota  last  December,  who  were  met  by  Mr.  Scher-
merhorn  and  articles  of  a  general  treaty  entered  into  between  them  fur  the  whole
Cherokee  nation.  .  .  .  Sir,  that  paper,  .  .  .  called  a  treaty,  is  no  treaty  at  all,
because  not  sanctioned  by  the  great  body  of  the  Cherokee  and  made  without  their
participation  or  assent,  I  solemnly  declare  to  you  that  upon  its  reference  to  the
Cherokee  people  it  would  be  instantly  rejected  by  nine-tenths  of  them,  and  I  believe
by  nineteen-twentieths  of  them.  There  were  not.  present  at  the  conclusion  of  the
treaty  mere  than  one  hundred  Cherokee  voters,  and  not  more  than  three  hundred,
including  women  and  children,  although  the  weather  was  everything  that  could  be
desired.  The  Indians  had  long  been  notified  of  the  meeting,  and  blankets  were
promised  to  all  who  would  come  and  vote  for  the  treaty.  The  most  cunning  and
artful  means  were  resorted  to  to  conceal  the  paucity  of  numbers  present  at  the  treaty.
No  enumeration  of  them  was  made  by  Schermerhorn.  The  business  of  making  the
treaty  was  transacted  with  a  committee  appointed  by  the  Indians  present,  so  as  not
to  expose  their  numbers.  The  power  of  attorney  under  which  the  committee  acted
was  signed  only  by  the  president  and  secretary  of  the  meeting,  so  as  not  to  disclose
their  weakness.  .  .  .  Mr.  Schermerhorn's  apparent  design  was  to  conceal  the  real
number  present  and  to  impose  on  the  public  and  the  government  upon  this  point.
■Royce,  Cherokee  Nation,  op.  eit.,  pp.  283,284;  Report  of  Indian  Commissioner,  pp.  285, 286, 1836.


>   seyJ  GENERAL    wniil.'s    REPORTS — 1837  I  "J  7
The  delegation  taken  to  Washington  by  Mr.  Schermerhorn  had  no  more  authority
to  make  a  treaty  than  any  other  dozen  Cherokee  accidentally  picked  up  for  the
purpose.  I  no«  warn  you  and  the  President  thai  if  this  paper  of  Schermerhorn's called  a  treaty  is  sent  t"  the  Senate  and  ratified  you  «ill  bring  trouble  upon  the
government  arid  eventual!)  destroy  this  [the  <  Iherokee]  Nat  inn.  The  Cherokee  are
a  peaceable,  harmless  people,  bul  you  may  drive  them  to  desperation,  and  this
treaty  can  not  be  carried  into  effect  except  bj  the  strong  arm  of  force.1
General  Wool,  who  had  been  placed  in  command  of  the  troops  con-
centrated in  the  Cherokee  country  to  prevent  opposition  to  the  enforce-
ment of  the  treaty,  reported  on  February  L8,  1837,  thai  he  had  called
them  toe-ether  and  made  them  an  address,  but  "'it  is.  however,  vain  to
talk  to  a  people  almost  universally  opposed  to  the  treaty  and  who
maintain  that  they  never  made  such  a  treaty.  So  determined  are  they
in  their  opposition  that  not  one  of  all  those  who  were  present  ami  voted
at  tin'  council  held  hut  a  day  or  two  since,  however  poor  or  destitute,
would  receive  either  rations  or  clothing  from  the  United  States  lest
they  might  compromise  themselves  in  regard  to  the  treaty.  These
same  people,  as  well  as  those  in  the  mountains  of  North  Carolina.
during  the  summer  past,  preferred  living  upon  the  roots  and  sap  of
trees  rather  than  receive  provisions  from  the  United  States,  and
thousands,  as  I  have  been  informed,  had  no  other  food  for  weeks.
Many  have  said  they  will  die  before  they  will  leave  the  country."2
Other  letters  from  General  Wool  while  engaged  in  the  work  of
disarming  and  overawing  the  Cherokee  show  how  very  disagreeable
that  duty  was  to  him  and  how  strongly  his  sympathies  were  with  the
Indians,  who  were  practically  unanimous  in  repudiating  the  treaty.
In  one  letter  he  says:
The  whole  scene  since  I  have  hern  in  this  country  has  been  nothing  but  a  heart-
rending  one.  and  such  a  one  as  I  would  he  glad  to  get  rid  of  as  soon  as  circumstances
will  permit.  Because  I  am  firm  and  decided,  do  not  believe  I  would  be  unjust.  If
I  could,  and  I  could  not  do  them  a  greater  kindness,  I  would  remove  every  Indian
to-morrow  beyond  the  reach  of  the  white  men.  who,  like  vultures,  are  watching,
ready  to  pounce  upon  their  prey  and  strip  them  of  everything  they  have  or  expert
from  the  government  of  the  Dinted  state-.  Yes,  sir,  nineteen-twentieths,  if  not
ninety-nine  out  of  every  hundred,  will  go  penniless  to  the  West.:l
How  it  was  to  be  brought  about  is  explained  in  part  by  a  letter
addressed   to  the   President   by  Major  Ridge  himself,  the  principal
signer  of  the  treaty:
We  now  come  to  address  you  on  the  subject  of  our  griefs  and  afflictions  from  the
acts  of  the  white  people.  They  have  got  our  lands  and  now  they  are  preparing  to
fleece  US  of  the  money  accruing  from  the  treaty.  We  found  our  plantations  taken
either  in  whole  or  in  part  by  the  Georgians — suits  instituted  against  us  for  back  rents
for  our  own  farms.     These  suits  are  commenced   in  the  inferior  courts,   with  the
i  Quoted  by  Royce,  Cherokee  Nation,  op.  «-i  r . .  pp.  284-285;  quoted  also,  with  some  verbal  differ* by  Everett,  speech  in  House  oi  Representatives  on  Maj  31,1838.
i  .i  in  Royce,  op  'it.,  p  286.
» Letter  of  General  Wool,  September  10, 1836,  in  Everett,  speeeh  in  Hous  ol  Representatives,  May 31,  1838.


128  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [bth.ann.19
evident  design  that,  when  we  are  ready  to  remove,  to  arrest  our  people,  and  on  these
vile  claims  to  induce  us  to  com  promise  for  our  own  release,  to  travel  with  our  families.
Thus  our  funds  will  lie  filched  from  mir  people,  and  we  shall  he  compelled  to  leave
our  country  as  beggars  and  in  want.
Even  the  Georgia  laws,  which  deny  us  our  oaths,  are  thrown  aside,  and  notwith-
standing the  cries  of  our  people,  and  protestation  of  our  innocence  and  peace,  the
lowest  classes  of  the  white  people  are  flogging  the  Cherokees  with  cowhides,  hick-
ories, and  clubs.  We  are  not  safe  in  our  houses — our  people  are  assailed  by  day  and
night  by  the  rabble.  Even  justices  of  the  peace  and  constables  are  concerned  in  this
business.  This  barbarous  treatment  is  not  confined  to  men,  but  the  women  are
stripped  also  and  whipped  without  law  or  mercy.  .  .  .  Send  regular  troops  to  protect
us  from  these  lawless  assaults,  and  to  protect  our  people  as  they  depart  for  the  West.
If  it  is  not  done,  we  shall  carry  off  nothing  but  the  scars  of  the  lash  on  our  backs,  and
our  oppressors  will  get  all  the  money.  We  talk  plainly,  as  chiefs  having  property
and  life  in  danger,  and  we  appeal  to  you  for  protection.  .  .  .'
( reneral  Dunlap,  in  command  of  the  Tennessee  troops  called  out  to
prevent  the  alleged  contemplated  Cherokee  uprising,  having  learned
for  himself  the  true  situation,  delivered  an  indignant  address  to  his
men  in  which  he  declared  that  he  would  never  dishonor  the  Tennessee
arms  by  aiding  to  carry  into  execution  at  the.  point  of  the  bayonet  a
treaty  made  by  a  lean  minority  against  the  will  and  authority  of  the
Cherokee  people.  He  stated  further  that  he  had  given  the  Cherokee
all  the  protection  in  his  power,  the  whites  needing  none.2
A  confidential  agent  sent  to  report  upon  the  situation  wrote  in  Sep-
tember, 1837,  that  opposition  to  the  treaty  was  unanimous  and  irrecon-
cilable, the  Cherokee  declaring  that  it  could  not  bind  them  because
they  did  not  make  it.  that  it  was  the  work  of  a  few  unauthorized  indi
viduals  and  that  the  Nation  was  not  a  party  to  it.  They  had  retained
the  forms  of  their  government,  although  no  election  had  been  held
since  1830,  having  continued  the  officers  then  in  charge  until  their  gov-
ernment could  again  be  reestablished  regularly.  Under  this  arrange-
ment John  Ross  was  principal  chief,  with  influence  unbounded  and
unquestioned.  "The  whole  Nation  of  eighteen  thousand  persons  is
with  him.  the  few — about  three  hundred — who  made  the  treaty  having
left  the  country,  with  the  exception  of  a  small  number  of  prominent
individuals — as  Ridge,  Boudinot,  and  others — who  remained  to  assist
in  carrying  it  into  execution.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  Ross  and
his  party  are  in  fact  the  Cherokee  Nation.  ...  1  believe  that  the  mass
of  the  Nation,  particularly  the  mountain  Indians,  will  stand  or  fall
with  Ross.   .   .   .'"''
So  intense  was  public  feeling  on  the  subject  of  this  treat}*  that  it
became  to  some  extent  a  part}-  question,  the  Democrats  supporting
President  Jackson   while  the  Whigs  bitterly  opposed  him.     Among
1  Letter  of  .nine  30,  1836,  to  President  Jackson,  in  Everett,  speech  in  the  House  of  Representatives,
May  31,  1S38.
-  Quoted  by  Everett,  ibid,;  also  by  Royce,  Cherokee  Nation,  op.  cit.,p.286.
3  Letter  of  J.M.Mason,  jr.,  to  Secretary  of  War, September  25, 1837,  in  Everett,  speech  in  House  of
Representatives,  May  31, 1838;  also  quoted  in  extract  by  Royce,  op. cit., pp. 286-287.


MuusF.Y]  ARRIVAL    OF   TROOPS  129
notable  leaders  of  the  opposition  were  Henry  Clay,  Daniel  Webster,
Edward  K\  erett,  Wise  of  Virginia,  and  1  >avid  ( Ii'ockett.  The  speeches
in  Congress  upon  the  subject  ••were  characterized  by  a  depth  and  bit-
terness  of  feeling  such  as  had  never  been  exceeded  even  on  the  slavery
question."1  It  was  considered  not  simply  an  Indian  question,  but  an
issue  between  state  rights  on  the  one  hand  and  federal  jurisdiction  and
the  ( institution  on  the  other.
In  spite  of  threats  of  arrest  and  punishment,  Ross  still  continued
active  effort  in  behalf  of  his  people.  Again,  in  the  spring  of  I  838,  t  wo
months  before  the  time  fixed  for  the  removal,  he  presented  to  Con-
gress another  protest  and  memorial,  which,  like  the  others,  was  tabled
by  the  Senate.  Van  Buren  had  now  succeeded  Jackson  and  was  dis-
posed to  allow  the  Cherokee  a  longer  time  to  prepare  for  emigration,
but  was  met  by  the  declaration  from  Governor  <  rilmer  of  Georgia  that
any  delay  would  be  a  violation  of  the  rights  of  that  state  and  in  oppo-
sition to  the  rights  of  tht  owners  of  tin  sot?,  and  that  if  trouble  came
from  any  protection  afforded  by  the  government  troops  to  the  Chero-
kee a  direct  collision  must  ensue  between  the  authorities  of  the  state
and  general  go^  ernment.8
Up  to  the  last  moment  the  Cherokee  still  believed  that  the  treaty
would  not  he  consummated,  and  with  all  the  pressure  brought  to  bear
upon  them  only  about  2,000  of  the  17,000  in  the  eastern  Nation  had
removed  at  the  expiration  of  the  time  fixed  for  their  departure,  May
26,  1838.  As  it  was  evident  that  the  removal  could  only  he  accom-
plished by  force.  Genera]  Winfield  Scott  was  now  appointed  to  that
duty  with  instructions  to  start  the  Indians  for  the  West  at  the  earliest
possible  moment.  For  that  purpose  he  was  ordered  to  take  command
of  the  troops  already  in  the  Cherokee  country,  together  with  addi-
tional reenforcements  of  infantry,  cavalry,  and  artillery,  with  authority
to  call  upon  the  governors  of  the  adjoining  states  for  as  many  as 4,000
militia  and  volunteers.  The  whole  force  employed  numbered  about
7,000 men  -regulars,  militia, and  volunteers.3  The  Indian-  had  already
been  disarmed  by  General  Wool.
On  arriving  in  the  Cherokee  country  Scott  established  headquarters
at  the  capital,  New  Echota,  whence,  on  May  10,  he  issued  a  proclama-
tion to  tin*  ( Iherokee,  warning  them  that  the  emigration  must  he  com-
menced in  haste  and  that  before  another  moon  had  passed  every
Cherokee  man.  woman,  and  child  must  he  in  motion  to  join  his
brethren  in  the  far  West,  according  to  the  determination  id'  the  Presi- dent, which  he.  the  general,  had  come  to  enforce.  The  proclamation
conclude-:   ••  My  troops  already  occupy  many  positions     .      .      .      and
'  Royce,  Cherokee  Nation,  up.  eit.  pp.  287,  289.
-  [bid.,  pp.  289,290.
> Ibid.,  p. 291.    The  statement  "( the  total  number  of  trooj
in  tin-  House  "i  Representatives,  May  31,  1838,  covering  the  whole   stion  of  the  treaty.
lit    ETH— 01   9


130  MYTHS    OF   THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
thousands  and  thousands  are  approaching  from  every  quarter  to  render
resistance  and  escape  alike  hopeless.  .  .  .  Will  you.  then,  by
resistance  compel  us  to  resort  to  arms  .  .  .  or  will  you  by  night
seek  to  hide  yourselves  in  mountains  and  forests  and  thus  oblige  us  to
hunt  you  down?" — reminding  them  that  pursuit  might  result  in  con-
flict and  bloodshed,  ending  in  a  general  war.1
Even  after  this  Ross  endeavored,  on  behalf  of  his  people,  to  secure
some  slight  modification  of  the  terms  of  the  treaty,  but  without  avail.2
THE    REMOVAL — 1838-39
The  history  of  this  Cherokee  removal  of  1838,  as  gleaned  by  the
author  from  the  lips  of  actors  in  the  tragedy,  may  well  exceed  in
weight  <if  grief  and  pathos  any  other  passage  in  American  history.
Even  the  much-sung  exile  of  the  Acadians  falls  far  behind  it  in  its
sum  of  death  and  misery.  Under  Scott's  orders  the  troops  were  dis-
posed at  various  points  throughout  the  Cherokee  country,  where
stockade  forts  were  erected  for  gathering  in  and  holding  the  Indians
preparatory  to  removal  (43).  From  these,  squads  of  troops  were  sent
to  search  out  with  rifle  and  bayonet  every  small  cabin  hidden  away  in
the  coves  or  by  tin1  sides  of  mountain  streams,  to  seize  and  bring  in  as
prisoners  all  the  occupants,  however  or  wherever  they  might  be  found.
Families  at  dinner  were  startled  by  the  sudden  gleam  of  bayonets  in
the  doorway  and  rose  up  to  be  driven  with  blows  and  oaths  along  the  I
weary  miles  of  trail  that  led  to  the  stockade.  Men  were  seized  in
their  fields  or  going  along  the  road,  women  were  taken  from  their
wheels  and  children  from  their  play.  In  many  cases,  on  turning  for
one  last  look  as  they  crossed  the  ridge,  they  saw  their  homes  in  flames.
fired  by  the  lawless  rabble  that  followed  on  the  heels  of  the  soldiers  to
loot  and  pillage.  So  keen  were  these  outlaws  on  the  scent  that  in
some  instances  they  were  driving  off  the  cattle  and  other  stock  of  the
Indians  almost  before  the  soldiers  had  fairly  started  their  owners  in
the  other  direction.  Systematic  hunts  were  made  by  the  same  men
for  Indian  graves,  to  rob  them  of  the  silver  pendants  and  other  valu-
ables deposited  with  the  dead.  A  Georgia  volunteer,  afterward  a
colonel  in  the  Confederate  service,  said:  "  I  fought  through  the  civil
war  and  have  seen  men  shot  to  pieces  and  slaughtered  by  thousands,
but  the  Cherokee  removal  was  the  cruelest  work  I  ever  knew."
To  prevent  escape  the  soldiers  had  been  ordered  to  approach  and
surround  each  house,  so  far  as  possible,  so  as  to  come  upon  the  occu-
pants without  warning.  One  old  patriarch,  when  thus  surprised,
calmly  called  his  children  and  grandchildren  around  him,  and.  kneel-
ing down,  bid  them  pray  with  him  in  their  own  language,  while  the
astonished  soldiers  looked  on  in  silence.    Then  rising  he  led  the  way  into
1  Royce,  Cherokee  Nation,  op.  cit.,  p.  291.  =  Ibid,  p.  291.


hoonby]  OONCENTEATION   INTO   STOCKADES — 1838  18]
exile.  A  woman,  on  finding  the  house  surrounded,  went  to  the  door
and  <al l>'i I  up  the  chickens  to  be  fed  for  the  last  time,  after  which,
taking  her  infant  on  her  back  and  her  two  other  children  by  the  hand,
she  followed  her  husband  with  tin'  soldiers.
All  were  not  thus  submissive.  One  old  man  named  Tsall,  "( lharley,"
was  seized  with  his  wife,  his  brother,  his  three  sons  ami  their  families.
Exasperated  at  the  brutality  accorded  his  wife,  who,  being  unable  to
travel  fast,  was  prodded  with  bayonets  to  hasten  her  steps,  he  urged
the  other  men  to  join  with  him  in  a  dash  for  liberty.  As  he  spoke  in
Cherokee  the  soldiers,  although  they  heard,  understood  nothing  until
each  warrior  suddenly  sprang  upon  the  one  nearest  ami  endeavored  to
wfeheE  hi-  gun  from  him.  The  attack  was  so  suddenand  unexpected
that  one  soldier  was  killed  and  the  rest  fled,  while  the  Indians  escaped
to  the  mountains.  Hundreds  ofothers^some  ofthem  from  the  various
stockadesj  managed  also  to  escape  to  the  mountains  from  time  to  time,
where  those  who  did  not  die  of  starvation  subsisted  on  foots  and  wild
berries  until  the  hunt  was  over.  Finding  it  impracticable  to  secure
these  fugitives,  General  Scott  finally  tendered  them  a  proposition,
through  ('(  olonel)  W.  II.  Thomas,  their  most  trusted  friend,  that  if they  would  surrender  Charley  and  his  party  for  punishment,  the  rest
would  he  allowed  to  remain  until  their  ease  could  lie  adjusted  by  the
government.  On  hearing  of  the  proposition,  Charley  voluntarily
came  in  with  his  sons,  offering  himself  as  a  sacrifice  for  his  people.  By
command  of  General  Scott,  Charley,  his  brother,  and  the  two  elder
-oils  were  -hot  near  the  mouth  of  Tuckasegee,a  detachment  of  Chero-
kee prisoners  being  compelled  to  do  the  shooting  in  order  to  impress
upon  the  Indians  the  fact  of  their  utter  helplessness.  From  those
fugitives  thus  permitted  to  remain  originated  the  present  eastern
band  oft  Iherokee.'
When  nearly  seventeen  thousand  Cherokee  had  thus  been  gathered
into  the  various  stockades  the  work  of  removal  began.  Early  in  June
several  parties,  aggregating  about  five  thousand  persons,  were  brought
down  by  the  troops  to  the  old  agency,  on  Hiwassee,  at  the  present
Calhoun.  Tennessee,  and  to  Ros-"s  landing  (now  Chattanooga),  and
Gunter's  Landing  (now  Guntersville,  Alabama),  lower  down  on  the
Tennessee,  where  they  were  put  upon  steamers  and  transported  down
the  Tennessee  and  Ohio  to  the  farther  side  of  the  Mississippi,  when
the  journey  was  continued  by  land  to  Indian  Territory.     This  removal.
1  The  notes  on  the  Cherokee  round-up  and  Removal  are  almost  entirely  from  author's  information asfumishedby  actors  in  the  events,  both  Cherokee  and  white,  among  whom  may  benamed  the
ne]  W.  It.  Thomas;  the   late  Colonel  /..  A.  Zile,  of  Atlanta,  of  the  Georgia  volunteers;  the
Bryson,  of  Dlllsboro,  North  Carolina,  a  ho  a  volunteer;  James  l».  Wafford,  of  ■ Cherokee  Nation,  who  commanded  oi   i  the  emigrant  detachments;  and  old  [ndians,  both  east  and
west,  who  remembered  tin-  Removal  and  had  heard  the  story  from  their  parents.    Charley's  story  is a  matter  of  common  note  among  the  ha-:  Cherokee,  and  was  heard  in  full  detail  from  Colonel  Thomas
and  from  Wasituna  ("Washington"  , Charley's  youngest  -on,  who  alone  was  spared  bj  <■■  ■ on  account  of  his  youth.    The  incident  is  also  noted,  with  some  slight  inaccuracies,  in  Lanmau,
Letters  from  the  Alleghany  Mountains.    See  i>  157,


182  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
in  the  hottest  part  of  the  year,  was  attended  with  so  great  sickness  and
mortality  that,  by  resolution  of  the  Cherokee  national  council,  Ross
and  the  other  chiefs  submitted  to  General  Scott  a  proposition  that  the
Cherokee  be  allowed  to  remove  themselves  in  the  fall,  after  the  sickly
season  had  ended.  This  was  granted  on  condition  that  all  should
have  started  by  the  20th  of  October,  excepting  the  sick  and  aged  who
might  not  be  able  to  move  so  rapidly.  Accordingly,  officers  were
appointed  by  the  Cherokee  council  to  take  charge  of  the  emigration;
the  Indians  being  organized  into  detachments  averaging  one  thousand
each,  with  two  leaders  in  ehai"ge  of  each  detachment,  and  a  sufficient
number  of  wagons  and  horses  for  the  purpose.  In  this  way  the
remainder,  enrolled  at  about  13,000  (including  negro  slaves),  started  on
the  long  march  overland  late  in  the  fall  (11).
Those  who  thus  emigrated  under  the  management  of  their  own
officers  assembled  at  Rattlesnake  springs,  about  two  miles  south  of
Hiwassee  river,  near  the  present  Charleston,  Tennessee,  where  a  final
council  was  held,  in  which  it  was  decided  to  continue  their  old  consti-
tution and  laws  in  their  new  home.  Then,  in  October,  1S3S,  the  long
procession  of  exiles  was  set  in  motion.  A  very  few  went  by  the  river
route;  the  rest,  nearly  all  of  the  13,000,  went  overland.  Crossing  to
the  north  side  of  the  Hiwassee  at  a  ferry  above  Gunstocker  creek,
the}'  proceeded  down  along  the  river,  the  sick,  the  old  people,  and  the
smaller  children,  with  the  blankets,  cooking  pots,  and  other  belong-
ings in  wagons,  the  rest  on  foot  or  on  horses.  The  number  of  wagons
was  fI45.
It  was  like  the  march  of  an  army,  regiment  after  regiment,  the
wagons  in  the  center,  the  officers  along  the  line  and  the  horsemen  on
the  flanks  and  at  the  rear.  Tennessee  river  was  crossed  at  Tuckers  (?)
ferry,  a  short  distance  above  Jollys  island,  at  the  mouth  of  Hiwassee.
Thence  the  route  lay  south  of  Pikeville,  through  McMinnville  and
on  to  Nashville,  where  the  Cumberland  was  crossed.  Then  they  went
on  to  Hopkinsville,  Kentucky,  where  the  noted  chief  White-path,
in  charge  of  a  detachment,  sickened  and  died.  His  people  buried
him  by  the  roadside,  with  a  box  over  the  grave  and  poles  with  stream-
ers around  it,  that  the  others  coming  on  behind  might  note  the  spot
and  remember  him.  Somewhere  also  along  that  march  of  death — for
the  exiles  died  by  tens  and  twenties  every  day  of  the  journey — the
devoted  wife  of  John  Ross  sank  down,  leaving  him  to  go  on  with  the
bitter  pain  of  bereavement  added  to  heartbreak  at  the  ruin  of  his
nation.  The  Ohio  was  crossed  at  a  ferry  near  the  mouth  of  the  Cum-
berland, and  the  army  passed  on  through  southern  Illinois  until  the
great  Mississippi  was  reached  opposite  Cape  Girardeau,  Missouri.  It
was  now  the  middle  of  winter,  with  the  river  running  full  of  ice.  so
that  several  detachments  were  obliged  to  wait  some  time  on  the  east-
ern bank  for  the  channel  to  become  clear.      In  talking  with  old  men


HOOKEY]  VIJKIYAl.     IN     INDIAN     TKKKIToRY   1839  133
and  women  ;it  Tahlequafa  tln>  author  found  that  the  lapse  of  over  half  a
century  had  not  sufficed  to  wipe  <>ut  the  memory  of  the  miseries  of
thai  hall  beside  the  frozen  river,  with  hundreds  of  sick  and  dying
penned  up  in  wagons  or  stretched  upon  the  ground,  with  only  a  blanket
overhead  to  keep  out  the  January  blast.  The  crossing  was  made  at
last  in  two  divisions,  at  Cape  Girardeau  and  at  Green's  ferry,  a  short
distance  below,  whence  the  march  was  on  through  Missouri  to  Indian
Territory,  the  later  detachments  making  a  northerly  circuit  l>y  Spring-
field, because  those  who  had  gone  before  had  killed  oil  all  the  game
along  the  direct  route.  At  last  their  destination  was  reached.  They
had  started  in  October,  1838,  and  it  was  now  March.  1839,  the  journey
having  occupied  nearly  six  mouths  of  the  hardest  part  of  the  year.'
It  i-  difficult  to  arrive  at  any  accurate  statement  of  the  number  of
Cherokee  who  died  as  the  resull  of  the  Removal.  According  to  the
official  figures  those  who  removed  under  the  direction  of  Ross  lost  over
L,600  on  the  journey.-  The  proportionate  mortality  among  those
previously  removed  under  military  supervision  was  probably  greater,
as  it  was  their  suffering  that  led  to  the  proposition  of  the  Cherokee
national  officers  to  take  charge  of  the  emigration.  Hundreds  died  in
the  stockades  and  the  waiting  camps,  chiefly  by  reason  of  the  rations
furnished,  which  were  of  flour  and  other  provisions  to  which  they  were
unaccustomed  and  which  they  did  not  know  how  to  prepare  properly.
Hundreds  of  others  died  soon  after  their  arrival  in  Indian  territory,
from  sickness  and  exposure  on  the  journey.  Altogether  it  is  asserted,
probably  with  reason,  that  over  4. nun  Cherokee  died  as  the  direct
result  of  the  removal.
On  their  arrival  in  Indian  Territory  the  emigrants  at  once  set  about
building  houses  and  planting  crop-,  the  government  having  agreed
under  the  treaty  to  furnish  them  with  rations  for  one  year  after  arrival.
They  were  welcomed  by  their  kindred,  the  •'Arkansas  Cherokee"
hereafter  to  be  known  for  distinction  as  the  "Old  Settlers" — who
held  the  country  under  previous  treaties  in  1828  and  Is:'.::.  These,
however,  being  already  regularly  organized  under  a  government  and
chiefs  of  their  own.  were  by  no  means  disposed  to  be  swallowed  by
the  governmental  authority  of  the  newcomers.  Jealousies  developed
in  which  the  minority  or  treaty  party  of  the  emigrants,  headed  by
Ridge,  took  sides  with  the  Old  Settlers  against  the  Ross  or  national
party,  which  outnumbered  both  the  other-  nearly  three  to  one.
While  these  differences  were  at  their  height  the  Nation  was  thrown
into  a  feverof  excitement  by  the  news  that  Major  Ridge,  his  son  John
Ridge,  and  Elias  Boudinot  all  leaders  of  the  treaty  party  had  been
killed  by  adherent-  of  the  national  party,  immediately  after  the  close
onal  information,  aa  before  cited.
=  Asquo1  rokee  Nation.  Fifth  Ann  Rep.Bureauoi
makesthen   ber  unaccounted  for  1,428;  the  receiving  agent,  who  t'".],  chargi on  their  arrival,  makes  it  1.645.


134  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
of  a  general  council,  which  had  adjourned  after  nearly  two  weeks  of
debate  without  having  been  able  to  bring  about  harmonious  action.
Major  Ridge  was  waylaid  and  shot  close  to  the  Arkansas  line,  his  son
was  taken  from  bed  and  cut  to  pieces  with  hatchets,  while  Boudinot
was  treacherously  killed  at  his  home  at  Park  Hill.  Indian  territory,
all  three  being  killed  upon  the  same  day.  June  22,  1839.
The  agent's  report  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  two  days  later,  says  of the  affair:
The  murder  of  Boudinot  was  treacherous  and  cruel.  He  was  assisting  some
workmen  in  building  a  new  house.  Three  men  called  upon  him  and  asked  for
medicine.  He  went  off  with  them  in  the  direction  of  Wooster's,  the  missionary,
who  keeps  medicine,  about  three  hundred  yards  from  Boudinot's.  When  they  got
about  half  way  two  of  the  men  seized  Boudinot  and  the  other  stabbed  him,  after
which  the  three  cui  him  to  pieces  with  their  knives  and  tomahawks.  This  murder
taking  place  within  two  miles  of  the  residence  of  John  Ross,  his  friends  were  appre-
hensive it  might  be  charged  to  his  connivance:  and  at  this  moment  I  am  writing
there  are  six  hundred  armed  ( Iherokee  around  the  dwelling  of  Ross,  assembled  for
his  protection.  The  murderers  of  the  two  Ridges  and  Boudinot  are  certainly  of  the
late  Cherokee  emigrants,  and.  of  course,  adherents  of  I  loss,  but  I  can  not  yet  believe
that  Ross  has  encouraged  the  outrage.  He  is  a  man  of  too  much  good  sense  to  em-
broil his  nation  at  this  critical  time:  and  besides,  his  character,  since  I  have  known
him,  which  is  now  twenty-five  years,  has  been  pacific.  .  .  .  Boudinot's  wife  is  a
white  woman,  a  native  of  New  Jersey,  as  I  understand.  He  has  six  children.  The
wife  of  John  Ridge,  jr..  is  a  white  woman,  but  from  whence,  or  what  family  left,  I
am  not  informed.  Boudinot  was  in  moderate  circumstances.  The  Ridges,  both
father  and  son,  were  rich.  .  .  .'
While  till  the  evidence  shows  that  Ross  was  in  no  way  a  party  to  the
affair,  there  can  be  no  question  that  the  men  were  killed  in  accordance
with  the  law  of  the  Nation — three  times  formulated,  and  still  in  exist-
ence— which  made  it  treason,  punishable  with  death,  to  cede  away
lands  except  by  act  of  the  general  council  of  the  Nation.  It  was  for
violating  a  similar  law  among  the  Creeks  that  the  chief.  Mcintosh,  lost
his  life  in  1825.  and  a  party  led  by  Major  Ridge  himself  had  killed
Doublehead  years  before  on  suspicion  of  accepting  a  bribe  for  his