story  of  "Ictinike  and  the  Buzzard"  (Dorsey,  in  Contributions  to  North  American
Ethnology,  vi).
47.  The  Eagle's  revenge  (p.  293):  This  story,  told  by  John  Ax,  illustrates  the
tribal  belief  and  custom  in  connection  with  the  eagle  and  the  eagle  dance,  as  already
described  in  number  35,  "The  Bird  Tribes,"  and  the  accompanying  notes.
Dryingpoil — A  pole  laid  horizontally  in  the  forks  of  two  upright  stakes,  planted
firmly  in  the  ground,  for  the  purpose  of  temporarily  hanging  up  game  and  fresh
meat  in  the  hunting  camp,  to  protect  it  from  wolves  and  other  prey  animals  or  to
allow  it  to  dry  out  before  the  fire.
48.  The  Hunter  and  the  Buzzard  (p.  294):  Told  by  Swimmer.  The  custom  of
lending  or  exchanging  wives  in  token  of  hospitality  and  friendship,  on  certain  cere-
monial occasions,  or  as  the  price  of  obtaining  certain  secret  km  >w  ledge,  was  very  gen-
eral among  the  tribes,  and  has  been  noted  by  explorers  and  other  observers,  east  and
west,  from  the  earliest  period.
49.  The  snake  tribe  (p.  294):  Rattlesnake — The  custom  of  asking  pardon  of  slain
or  offended  animals  has  already  been  noted  under  number  15,  "The  Fourfooted
Tribe-."  and  number  :!5,  "The  Bird  Tribes"  (eagle).  Reverence  for  the  rattlesnake
wasnniVersal  among  the  Indians,  and  has  been  repeatedly  remarked  by  travelers  in
every  part  of  the  country.  To  go  into  a  dissertation  upon  the  great  subject  of  ser-
pent worship  is  not  a  part  of  our  purpose.
The  missionary  Washburn  tells  how,  among  the  Cherokee  of  Arkansas,  be  was  .  nice
riding  along,  accompanied  by  an  Indian  on  foot,  when  they  discovered  a  poisonous
,-nake  coiled  beside  the  path.  "I  observed  Blanket  turned  aside  to  avoid  the  serpent,
but  made  no  signs  of  attack,  and  I  requested  the  interpreter  to  get  down  and  kill  it.
He  did  so,  and  I  then  inquired  of  Blanket  why  he  did  not  kill  the  serpent.  He
answered,  'I  never  kill  snakes  and  so  the  snakes  never  kill  me;  but  I  will  tell  you
about  it  when  you  next  come  to  see  me.'  "  He  kept  his  word  soon  after  by  relating
as  a  personal  experience  (probably,  in  fact,  an  Indian  dream)  a  long  story  of  having
once  been  conducted  by  a  rattlesnake  to  an  underground  council  of  the  rattlesnake
tribe,  where  he  found  all  the  snakes  lamenting  over  one  of  their  number  who  had
been  recently  killed  by  an  Indian,  and  debating  the  method  of  punishment,  which
was  executed  a  day  or  two  later  by  inflicting  a  fatal  bite  upon  the  offender  while
engaged  in  the  ballplay  (Reminiscences,  pp.  208-212).     As  told  by  the  missionary,


NOTES    AND    PARALLELS  157
the  story  is  very  much  dressed  up,  hul  strikinglj  resemhlea  number  58,  "The  Rattle-
snake's Vengeance."
Adair,  evidently  confusing  several  Cherokee  snake  myths,  speaks  of  some  reputed
gigantic  rattlesnakes  in  the  Cherokee  mountains,  with  beautiful  changing  colors  and
great  power  of  fascination,  by  which  thej  drew  into  their  jaws  any  living  creatun
comingwithin  their  vision,  and  continues:  "They  call  them  and  all  of  t  In-  rattle-
snake kind,  kings  or  chieftains  of  the  snakes,  and  they  allow  one  such  to  every  dil
ferent  species  of  the  brute  creation.     An  old  trader  of  Cheeowhee  told  me  that  for
the  reward  of  twopiecesol  str   1  cloth  he  engaged  a  couple  of  \<   g  warriors  to
show  liim  the  place  of  their  resort;  but  the  headmen  would  not  by  any  means  allow
it.  on  account  of  a  superstitious  tradition—  for  they  fancy  the  killing  of  them  would
expose  tin  ii  i  to  the  danger  of  being  bit  by  the  other  inferior  species  of  the  serpentine
tribe,  who  love  their  chieftains  and  know  by  instinct  those  who  maliciously  killed
then i.  as  they  Bght  onlj  in  their  own  defense  and  that  of  their  young  ones,  never
biting  those  who  do  not  disturb  them."  He  mentions  also  an  instance  of  a  Chicka-
saw priest  u  ho,  after  having  applied  to  his  hands  the  juice  of  a  certain  plant,  took  up
a  rattlesnake  without  damage  and  laid  it  carefully  in  a  hollow  tree  to  prevent  Adair's
killing  it  (History  of  the  American  Indians,  pp.  237-238  I.
Of  the  Carolina  tribes  generally,  Lawson,  in  1701,  says:  "As  for  killing  of  snakes,
tln\  avoid  it  if  they  lie  in  their  way,  because  their  opinion  is  that  some  of  the  ser-
pents' kindred  would  kill  some  of  the  savage's  relations  that  should  destroy  him"
i  History  of  Carolina,  p.  341).
Bart  ram  says  of  the  Seminoles,  a  hi  nit  177.">:  "These  people  never  kill  the  rattlesnake or  any  other  serpent,  saying,  it  they  do  so,  the  spirit  of  the  killeil  snake  will  excite
or  influence  his  living  kindred  or  relatives  to  revenge  the  injury  or  violence  done  to
him  when  alive."  He  recounts  an  amusing  incident  of  his  own  experience  where the  Indians  sent  for  him  to  come  and  kill  a  rattlesnake  which  ha<l  invaded  their
camp  ground,  and  which  they  were  afraid  to  disturb.  Their  request  having  been
complied  with,  the  Indians  then  insisted  upon  scratching  him,  according  to  the  Indian
custom,  in  order  to  let  out  some  of  his  superabundant  blood  and  courage,  but  were
finally,  with  some  difficulty,  dissuaded  from  their  purpose.  "Tims  it  seemed  that
the  whole  was  a  ludicrous  farce  to  satisfy  their  people  and  appease  the  manes  of  the
dead  rattlesnake"  (Travels,  pp.  258-261).
Tin  trailer  Henry  (Travels,  pp.  176-179)  narrates  a  must  interesting  instance  from
among  the  Ojibwa  of  Lake  Superior  in  17"4.     While  gathering  w   I  near  the  camp
he  was  start  led  by  a  sudden  rattle,  and  looking  down  discovered  a  rati  lesnake  almost
at  his  feet,  with  body  coiled  and  head  raised  to  strike.
"1  no  sooner  saw  the  snake,  than  I  hastened  to  the  canoe,  in  order  to  procure  my
gun;  but,  the  Indians  observing  what  I  was  doing,  inquired  the  occasion,  and  being
informed,  begged  me  to  desist.  At  the  same  time,  they  followed  me  to  the  spot,  with
their  pipes  and  tobacco-pouches  in  their  bands.  On  returning,  I  found  the  snake still  coiled.
"The  Indians,  on  their  part,  surrounded  it.  all  addressing  it   by  turns. and  calling
it  their  arm  dfath  i     but  yet  keeping  at  some  distance.     During  this  part  of  the  cen
lie  my.  they  filled  their  pipes:  and  now  each  hie -a  the  smoke  toward  the  snake,  who.
as  it  appeared  to  me,  really  received  it  with  pleasure.     In  a  word,  after  remaining
coiled,  and  receiving  incense,  for  the  space  of  half  an  hour,  it  stretched  itself  along  the
ground,  in  visible g   I  humor.     Its  length  was  between  four  ami  five  feet.     Having
remained  outstretched  for  some  time,  at  last  it  moved  slowly  away,  the  Indians  fol-
lowing it.  ami  still  addressing  it  by  the  title  of  grandfather,  beseeching  it  to  take  car  •
of  their  families  during  their  absence,  an.  I  to  i„-  pleased  to  open  the  heart  oi  Sit  \\  Q-
liam  Johnson  [the  British  Indian  agent,  whom  they  were  about  to  visit],  so  that  he
might  shoiv  them  charity,  and  till  their  canoe  with  rum.  One  of  the  chiefs
petition,  that  the  snake  would  take  no  notice  of  the  insult  which  had  been  offered


458  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.
him  by  the  Englishman,  who  would  even  have  put  him  to  death,  but  for  the  inter-
ference of  the  Indians,  to  whom  it  was  hoped  he  would  impute  no  part  of  the  offence.
They  further  requested,  that  he  would  remain,  and  inhabit  their  country,  and  not
return  among  the  English;  that  is,  ^o  eastward." He  adds  that  the  appearance  of  the  rattlesnake  so  far  north  was  regarded  as  an
extraordinary  omen,  and  that  very  little  else  was  spoken  of  for  the  rest  of  the  even-
ing. The  next  day,  while  steering  across  Lake  Huron  in  their  canoe,  a  terrible  storm
came  up.
"The  Indians,  beginning  to  be  alarmed,  frequently  called  on  the  rattlesnake  to
come  to  their  assistance.  By  degrees  the  waves  grew  high;  and  at  11  o'clock  it  blew a  hurricane,  and  we  expected  every  moment  to  be  swallowed  up.  From  prayers,
the  Indians  now  proceeded  to  sacrifices,  both  alike  offered  to  the  god-rattlesnake,  or
manito-kinibic.  One  of  the  chiefs  took  a  dog,  and  after  tying  its  forelegs  together,
threw  it  overboard,  at  the  same  time  calling  on  the  snake  to  preserve  us  from  being
drowned,  and  desiring  him  to  satisfy  his  hunger  with  the  carcass  of  the  dog.  The
snake  was  unpropitious,  and  the  wind  increased.  Another  chief  sacrificed  another
dog,  with  the  addition  of  some  tobacco.  In  the  prayer  which  accompanied  these
gifts,  he  besought  the  snake,  as  before,  not  to  avenge  upon  the  Indians  the  insult
which  he  hail  received  from  myself,  in  the  conception  of  a  design  to  put  him  to
death.  He  assured  the  snake,  that  I  was  absolutely  an  Englishman,  and  of  kin
neither  to  him  nor  to  them.  At  the  conclusion  of  this  speech,  an  Indian,  who  sat
near  me,  observed,  that  if  we  were  drowned  it  would  lie  for  my  fault  alone,  and  that
I  ought  myself  to  be  sacrificed,  to  appease  the  angry  manito,  nor  was  I  without
apprehensions,  that  in  case  of  extremity,  this  would  be  my  fate;  but,  happily  for
me,  the  storm  at  length  abated,  and  we  reached  the  island  safely."
The  Delawares  also,  according  to  Heckewelder,  called  the  rattlesnake  grandfather
and  refrained  from  injuring  him.  He  says:  "One  day,  as  I  was  walking  with  an
elderly  Indian  on  the  banks  of  the  Muskingum,  I  saw  a  large  rattlesnake  lying  across.
the  path,  which  I  was  going  to  kill.  The  Indian  immediately  forbade  my  doing  so;
'  for,'  said  he,  '  the  rattlesnake  is  grandfather  to  the  Indians,  and  is  placed  here  on
purpose  to  guard  us,  and  to  give  us  notice  of  impending  danger  by  his  rattle,  which
is  the  same  as  if  be  were  to  tell  us,  •Inuk  about.'  'Now,'  added  he,  'if  we  were  to
kill  one  of  those,  the  others  would  soon  know  it,  and  the  whole  race  would  rise
upon  us  and  bite  us.'  I  observed  to  him  that  the  white  people  were  not  afraid  of
this;  for  they  killed  all  the  rattlesnakes  that  they  met  with.  On  this  he  enquired
whether  any  white  man  had  been  bitten  by  these  animals,  and  of  course  I  answered
in  the  affirmative.  'No  wonder,  then!'  replied  he,  'you  have  to  blame  yourselves
for  that.  You  did  as  much  as  declaring  war  against  them,  and  you  will  find  them  in
your  country,  where  they  will  not  fail  to  make  frequent  incursions.  They  are  a  very
dangerous  enemy;  take  care  you  do  not  irritate  them  in  our  country;  they  and  their
grandchildren  are  on  good  terms,  and  neither  will  hurt  the  other.'  These  ancient
notions  have,  however  in  a  great  measure  died  away  with  the  last  generation,  and
the  Indians  at  present  kill  their  grandfather,  the  rattlesnake,  without  ceremony,
whenever  they  meet  with  him"  (Indian  Nations,  p.  252).
S&likwdyi — "The  old  Tuscaroras  had  a  custom,  which  they  supposed  would  keep
their  teeth  white  and  strong  through  life.  A  man  caught  a  snake  and  held  it  by  its
head  and  tail.  Then  he  bit  it  through,  all  the  way  from  the  head  to  the  tail,  and
this  kepi  the  teeth  from  decay"  (W.  M.  Beauchamp,  Iroquois  Notes,  in  Journal  of
American  Folk-Lore,  July,  L892).
$  nd  torn  nis  of  rain — The  belief  in  a  connection  between  the  serpent  and  the  rain-
gods  is  well-nigh  universal  anion'.'  primitive  peoples,  and  need  only  be  indicated
here.
50.  The  Uktena  and  the  UluSsu'ti  (p.297):  The  belief  in  the  great  Uktena  and
the  magic  power  of  the  Ulufisu'ti  is  firmly  implanted  in  the  Cherokee  breast.  The
Uktena  has  its  parallel  in   the  Gitchi-Kenebig  or  Great    Homed    Serpent   of   the


NOTES     \M>    PARALLELS  45*,)
northern  Algonquian  tribes,  and  is  Bomewhal  analogous  to  the  Zemo'gu'ani  or  <  Ireal Horned  Alligator  of  the  Kiowa.     Myths  of  a  jewel  in  the  head  of  a  serpent  or  of  a
toad  are  so  common  to  all  Aryan  nations  as  to  have  beci    proverbial.     Talismanic
and  prophi  tic  stones,  which  are  carefully  guarded,  and  to  which  prayer  and  sacrifice
arc  offered,  arc  kept  in  many  tribes  (see  Dorse) .  Teton  Folklore,  in  American  Anthro-
pologist, April,  1889  .  The  name  of  the  serpent  is  derived  from  ctkta,  "eye,"  and
may  be  rendered  "strong  looker,"  i.e.,  "keen  eyed,"  because  nothing  within  the
range  of  its  vision  can  escape  discovery.     From  thi   -    root  is  derived  akta'tt,  "to
look  into,"  "to  examine  closely,"  the  Cherokee  name  for  a  field  glass  or  telescope
By  the  English-speaking  Indians  the  serpent  is  sometimes  called  the  diamond  rattle-
snake. The  mythic  diamond  crest,  when  in  its  proper  place  upon  the  snake'-  head,
is  called  ulstithV.  literally,  "it  is  on  his  head,"  but  when  detached  and  in  the  hands
of  the  conjurer  it  becomes  the  Ulufisu'tl,  "Transparent,"  thegreat  talisman  of  the
tribe.  On  account  of  its  glittering  brightness  it  is  sometimes  called  [gagu'tT,  "Day-
light." [nferii ir  magic  crystals  arc  believed  to  be  the  scale-  from  the  same  serpent,
and  an'  sometimes  also  called  ulufisu'tl.
The  earliest  notice  of  the  Ulufisu'tl  is  given  by  the  young  Virginian  officer,  Tim-
berlake,  who  was  sent  upon  a  peace  mission  to  the  Cherokee  in  1762,  shortly  after
the  close  of  their  tirst  war  with  the  whites.      He  says  i  Memoirs,  pp.  47-49):
"They  have  many  beautiful  stones  of  different  colours,  many  of  which,  I  am  apt
to  believe,  are  of  great  value;  but  their  superstition  has  always  prevented  their  dis-
posing of  them  to  the  trailer-,  who  have  made  many  attempts  to  that  purpose;  hut
as  thc\  use  them  in  their  conjuring  ceremonies,  they  believe  their  parting  with  them
or  bringing  them  from  home,  would  prejudice  their  health  or  affairs.  Among  others
there  i-  one  in  the  possession  of  a  conjurer,  remarkable  for  its  brilliancy  and  beauty,
hut  more  so  for  the  extraordinary  manner  in  which  it  was  found.  It  grew,  if  we
may  credit  the  Indians,  on  the  head  of  a  monstrous  serpent,  whose  retreat  was,  by
its  brilliancy,  discovered:  hut  a  great  number  of  snakes  attending  him.  he  being,  as  I
suppose  by  his  diadem,  of  a  superior  rank  amongthe  serpents,  made  it  dangerous  to
attack  him.  Many  were  the  attempts  made  by  the  Indians,  hut  all  frustrated,  nil  a
fellow  more  bold  than  the  rest,  casing  himself  in  leather,  impenetrable  to  the  bite
of  the  serpent  or  his  guards,  and  watching  a  convenient  opportunity,  surprised  and
killed  him,  tearing  his  jewel  from  his  head,  which  the  conjurer  has  kept  hid  fpr
many  years,  in  some  place  unknown  to  all  hut  two  women,  who  have  been  offered
large  presents  to  betray  it.  hut  steadily  refused,  lest  some  signal  judgment  or  mis-
chance should  follow.  That  such  a  stone  exists,  I  believe,  having  seen  many  of
great  beauty;  hut  I  cannot  think  it  would  answer  all  the  encomiums  the  Indians
bestow  upon  it.  The  conjurer,  1  suppose,  hatched  the  account  of  its  discovery;  1
have  however  given  it  to  the  reader,  a-  a  specimen  of  an  Indian  story,  many  of  which
are  much  more  surprising.'' A  few   years  later  Adair  gives  us  an  account  of  the  serpent  and  the  stone.      Accord-
ing to  his  statement  the  uktenas  had  their  home  in  a  deep  valley  between  tl
of  the  Tuckasegee  and  the  "northern  branch  of  the  lower  <  Iheerake  river"    i.  e.,  the Little  Tennessee  .  the  valley  being  the  deep  defile  of  Nantahala,  where,
of  its  gloomy  and  forbidding  aspect,  Cherokee  tradition  locates  more  than       i
endary  terror.     With  pardonable  error  he  confounds  the  Uktena  with  the  <
the  Rattlesnakes.     The-two,  however,  are  distinct,  the  latter  being  simply  the  head  of
the  rattlesnake  tribe,  without  the  blazing  carbuncle  or  the  i   tense  size  attributed
ti  i  the  Uktena.
"Between  two  Inch  mountains,  nearly  covered  with  old  mo— \  rock-,  lofty  cedars
and  pines,  in  the  valleys  of  which  the  beams  of  the  sun  reflect  a  powerful  heat,  there
are,  as  the  natives  affirm,  some  bright  old  inhabitants  or  rattlesnakes,  of  a  moreenoi
i    than  is  mentioned  in  history.      They  are  so  large  and  mi»  icldy,  that    they
take  a  circle  almost  as  wide  a-  their  length  to  crawl  around  in  their  shortest  orbit:
but  bountiful  natun   mpensates  the  heavy  motion  of  their  bodies,  for,  a


460  Mi'THS    OB'    THB:    CHEROKB:E  [eth.
no  living  creature  moves  within  the  reach  of  their  ^i<rl it,  but  they  can  draw   it  to
them.  .  .  .
"The  description  the  Indians  give  US  of  their  colour  is  as  various  as  what  we  are
told  of  the  camelion,  that  seems  to  the  spectator  to  change  its  colour,  by  every  different
position  he  may  view  it  in;  which  proceeds  from  the  piercing  rays  of  the  light  that
blaze  from  their  foreheads,  so  as  to  dazzle  the  eyes,  from  whatever  quarter  they  posl
themselves — for  in  each  of  their  heads,  there  is  a  large  carbuncle,  which  not  only
repels,  but  they  affirm,  sullies  the  meridian  beams  of  the  sun.  They  reckon  it  so
dangerous  to  disturb  these  creatures,  that  no  temptation  can  induce  them  to  betray
their  secret  recess  to  the  prophane.  They  call  them  and  all  of  the  rattlesnake  kind,
kings,  or  chieftains  of  the  snakes,  and  they  allow  one  such  to  every  different  species
of  the  brute  creation.  An  old  trader  of  Cheeowhee  told  me,  that  for  the  reward  of
two  pieces  of  Stroud  cloth,  he  engaged  a  couple  of  young  warriors  to  shew  him  the
place  of  their  resort,  but  the  head-men  would  not  by  any  means  allow  it,  on  account
of  a  superstitious  tradition — for  they  fancy  the  killing  of  them  would  expose  them  to
the  danger  of  being  bit  by  the  other  inferior  species  of  that  serpentine  tribe,  who  love
their  chieftains,  and  know  by  instinct  those  who  maliciously  killed  them,  as  they
tight  only  in  their  own  defence  and  that  of  their  young  ones,  never  biting  those  who
do  not  disturb  them." — History  of  the  American  Indians,  pp.  237-238.
In  another  place  I  page  87  I  he  tells  us  of  an  uluiisutl  owned  by  a  medicine-man
who  resided  at  Tymahse  (Tomassee),  a  former  Cherokee  town  on  the  creek  of  the
same  name  near  the  present  Seneca,  South  Carolina.  "  The  above  Cheerake  prophet
had  a  carbuncle  near  as  big  as  an  egg,  which  they  said  he  found  where  a  great
rattlesnake  lay  dead,  and  that  it  sparkled  with  such  surprising  lustre  as  to  illumi-
nate hi-  dark  winter  house,  like  strong  Hashes  of  continued  lightning,  to  the  great
terror  of  the  weak,  who  durst  not  upon  any  account  approach  the  dreadful  fire-dart-
ing place,  for  fear  of  sudden  death.  When  he  died  it  was  buried  along  with  him,
according  to  custom,  in  the  town  of  Tymahse,  underthe  great  beloved  cabbin  [seat],
which  stood  in  the  westernmost  part  of  that  old  fabric,  where  they  who  will  run  the
risk  of  searching  may  luckily  find  it."
Hagar  also  mentions  the  "Oolunsade,"  and  says,  on  the  authority  of  John  Ax:
"  He  who  owns  a  crystal  can  call  one  of  the  Little  People  to  him  at  any  time  and
make  him  do  his  bidding.  Sometimes  when  people  are  ill  it  is  because  some  evil
invisible  being  has  taken  possession  of  him.  Then  the  Little  Man  called  up  by  the
crystal  can  be  placed  on  guard  near  the  ill  man  to  prevent  the  evil  spirit  from
re-entering  after  it  has  been  expelled"  (MS  Stellar  Legends  of  the  Cherokee).
The  Southern  Alleghenies,  the  old  Cherokee  country,  abound  with  crystals  of
various  kinds,  as  avcII  as  with  minerals.  The  Ulunsu'tl  is  described  as  a  triangular
crystal  about  two  inches  long.  Hat  on  the  bottom,  and  with  slightly  convex  sides
tapering  up  to  a  point,  and  perfectly  transparent  with  the  exception  of  a  single  red
streak  running  through  the  center  from  top  to  bottom.  It  is  evidently  a  rare  and
beautiful  specimen  of  rutile  quartz,  crystals  of  which,  found  in  the  region,  may  be
seen  in  the  National  Museum  at  Washington.
Other  small  stones  of  various  shapes  and  color  are  in  common  use  among  the
Cherokee  conjurers  to  discover  lost  articles  or  for  other  occult  purposes.  These
also  are  frequently  called  by  the  same  name,  and  are  said  to  have  been  originally
the  scales  of  the  I'ktena.  but  the  Ulunsu'ti — the  talisman  from  the  forehead  of  the
serpent — is  the  crystal  here  described,  and  is  SO  exceedingly  rare  that  so  far  as  is  know  n
only  one  remained  among  the  East  Cherokee  in  1890.  Its  owner,  a  famous  hunter,
kept  it  hidden  in  a  cave,  wrapped  up  in  a  deerskin,  but  refused  all  inducements  to
show  it,  much  less  to  part  with  it,  stating  that  if  be  should  expose  it  to  the  gaze  of  a
white  man  he  could  kill  no  more  game,  even  were  he  permitted  to  live  after  such
a  sacrilege.
The  possession  of  the  talisman  insures  success  in  hunting,  love,  rain  making,  and


NOTES    AND    PARALLELS  H'>1
all  other  undertakings,  but  its  great  use  is  in  life  divination,  and  when  il  is  invoked
for  this  purpose  by  its  owner  the  future  is  mirrored  in  the  transparent  crystal  as  a
tree  is  reflected  in  the  quiet  stream  below.
When  consulting  it  the  conjurer  gazes  into  the  crystal,  and  after  some  little  time
sees  in  its  transparent  depths  a  picture  of  the  person  or  event  in  question.  By  tin1
action  of  the  specter,  or  its  position  near  the  top  or  bottom  of  the  crystal,  he  learns
not  only  the  event  Itself,  but  also  its  nearness  in  time  or  place.
Many  of  the  East  Cherokee  who  enlisted  in  the  <  lonfederate  service  during  the  late
war   suited  the  Ulunsu't)  before  starting,  and  survivors  declare  that  their  experi-
ences verified  the  prediction.  <  toe  of  these  bad  gone  \\  iih  two  others  to  consult  the
fates.  The  conjurer,  placing  the  throe  men  facing  him,  took  the  talisman  upon  the
end  of  his  outstretched  finger  and  bade  them  look  intently  into  it.  After  some
moments  they  saw  their  own  images  at  the  bottom  of  the  crystal.  The  images  grad-
ually ascended  along  the  red  line.  Those  of  the  other  two  men  rose  to  the  middle
and  then  again  descended,  but  the  presentment  oj  the  one  who  tells  the  story  con-
tinued to  ascend  until  it  reached  the  top  before  going  down  again.  The  conjurer
then  said  thai  the  other  two  would  die  in  the  second  year  of  the  war,  but  the  third
would  survive  through  hardships  and  narrow  escapes  and  live  to  return  home.  As
the  prophecy,  so  the  event.
When  consulted  by  the  friends  of  a  sick  man  to  know  if  he  will  recover,  the  con-
jurer shows  them  the  image  of  the  siek  man  lying  at  the  bottom  of  the  Ulunsfi'ti.
He  then  tells  them  to  go  home  and  kill  some  game  (or,  in  these  latter  days,  any  f   1
animal  |  and  to  prepare  a  feast.  <  >n  the  appointed  day  the  conjurer,  at  his  own  home.
looks  into  the  crystal  and  sees  there  the  picture  of  the  party  at  dinner.  If  the  image
of  the  siek  man  rises  ami  joins  them  at  the  feast  the  patient  will  recover;  ii  other-
w  ise.  he  is  .loomed.
51.  Agan-uni'tsI's  seakcb  fob  the   Uktena  i  p.  248):   This  is  one  of  the  most
important  of  the  Cherokee  traditions,  for  the  reason  that  it  deals  with  the  mythic
monster,  the  Uktena,  and  explains  the  origin  of  the  great  talisman,  the  Ulunsu'tl.  As
here  given  il  was  obtained  from  Swimmer  I  east  i  with  additions  and  variants  from
Wafford  (west  |  and  others.  It  is  recorded  by  Tell  Kate  as  obtained  by  him  in  the
Territory  (Legends  of  the  Cherokees,  in  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  January,
1889),  ami  is  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  riufisu'ti.  by  Adair,  in  1775,  and
by  Tiniberlake  as  early  as  1762  (see  notes  to  number  50,  "The  Uktena  and  the
riufisu'ti"  i.  One  variant  makes  the  riufisu'ti  a  scale  from  tin-  seventh  ring  of  the
serpent.
The  Shawano,  who  at  one  time  occupied  the  Cumberland  region  of  Tennessee
immediately  adjoining  the  Cherokee,  were  regarded  as  wizards  by  all  the  southern
tribe-.  Brinton  says:  "Among  the  Algonkins  the  Shawnee  tribe  did  more  than  all
others  combined  to  introduce  and  carry  about  religious  legends  and  ceremonies.    From
the  earliest  times  they  seem  to  have  had  peculiar  aptitude  for  the  eCStacies,  deceits,
and  fancies  that  make  up  the  spiritual  life  of  their  associates.  Their  constantly  rov-
ing life  brought  them  in  contact  with  the  myths  of  many  nations,  and  it  is  extremely
probable  that  they  first  brought  the  tale  of  the  horned  serpent  from  the  Creeks  and
Cherokees"  (Myths  of  the  New  World,  p.  137).
Zxtcalities — Utawagun'ta  mountain,  Walasi'yl  gap,  Duniskwa'lgun'yl  gap  and
AtaL'a'hf  (mythic)  lake,  are  all  points  in  the  Great  Smoky  range,  which  forms  the
dividing  line  between  North  Carolina  and  Tennessee.  Tlanusi'yl  is  the  native  name
for  the  site  of  Murphy,  at  the  junction  of  Hiwassee  and  Valley  rivers.  North  Caro-
lina. Cahu'tl  is  Cohutta  mountain  in  Murray  county,  Georgia.  According  to
Wafford  there  are  on  the  sides  of  this  mountain  several  stone  inclosures  which  were
built  by  Agan-uni'tsl  for  shelter  place-  before  attacking  the  Uktena  (see  also  Glos-
sary |.
52.  The  Rbb  Man  \m>  the  Uktena  (p.300):  This  story  was  obtained  from  John


462  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
Ax.  Swimmer  had  heard  italso,  but  remembered  only  a  part  of  it.  Fur  more  in
regard  to  the  Uktena  and  the  talisman  derived  from  it,  see  numbers  50  and  51,  with
notes.
Asga'ya  GH'gage'l—The  "Red  Man,"  or  lightning  spirit,  who  is  frequently  invoked in  the  sacred  formulas.
Struck  by  lightning — As  has  been  explained  elsewhere,  the  wood  of  a  tree  that
lias  been  struck  by  lightning  plays  an  important  part  in  Cherokee  folklore.
Strong  and  dang<  row — It  is  a  common  article  of  Indian  belief  that  the  presence  of
a  powerful  talisman,  no  matter  how  beneficent  in  itself,  is  enervating  or  positively
dangerous  to  those  in  its  vicinity  unless  they  he  fortified  by  some  ceremonial  tonic.
For  this  reason  every  great  "medicine"  is  usually  kept  apart  in  a  hut  or  tipi  built
for  the  purpose,  very  much  as  we  are  accustomed  to  store  explosives  at  some  distance
from  the  dwelling  or  business  house.
53.  The  Huntei.  and  the  Uksu'hi  (p.  301) :  This  story  was  told  by  Swimmer  and
John  Ax  as  an  actual  fact.  The  iiksu'hJ  is  the  mountain  blaeksnake  or  black  racer
(Coluber  obsoletus).  The  name  seems  to  refer  to  some  peculiarity  of  the  eye,  akttt
(cf.  uktena).  Hickory-log,  properly  Wane'asuiVth'tiiyi,  "Hickory  footlog,"  was  a Cherokee  settlement  on  Hiwassee  river,  near  the  present  Hayesville,  Clay  county,
North  Carolina.     Another  of  the  same  name  was  on  Etowah  river  in  Georgia.
Perspirution — The  Indian  belief  may  or  may  not  have  foundation  in  fact.
54.  The  Ustu'tlI  (p.  302):  This  story  was  told  by  Swimmer  and  John  Ax  (east)
and  by  Wafford  (west),  and  is  a  common  tradition  throughout  the  tribe.  The  name
ustu'tll  refers  to  the  sole  of  the  foot,  and  was  given  to  the  serpent  on  account  of  its
peculiar  feet  or  "suckers."  The  same  name  is  given  to  the  common  hoop-snake  of
the  south  (AbaMor  erythrogrammus) ,  about  which  such  wonderful  tales  are  told  by
the  white  mountaineers.  Cohutta  (Gahu'tl)  mountain,  in  Murray  county,  Georgia,
was  also  the  traditional  haunt  of  the  Uktena  (see  number  51,  "Agan-Uni'tst's  search
for  the  Uktena,"  and  compare  also  number  55,  "The  Uw'tsmVta.")
55.  The  Uw'tsuR'ta  (p.  303):  This  story  was  obtained  from  James  Blythe.  Nufl-
daye/<ll,  whence  Nantahala.  was  on  the  river  of  that  name  below  the  present  Jarrett's station.
56.  The  Snake  Boy  (p.  304):  This  myth  was  told  by  Swimmer.
AsH — The  Cherokee  asl,  or  "hot-house,"  as  it  was  called  by  the  old  traders,  is  the
equivalent  of  the  sweat-house  of  the  western  tribes.  It  is  a  small  hut  of  logs  plas-
tered over  with  clay,  with  ashed  roof,  and  just  tall  enough  to  permit  a  sitting  or
reclining,  but  not  a  standing,  position  inside.  It  is  used  f6r sweat-bath  purposes,  and
as  it  is  tight  and  warm,  and  a  fire  is  usually  kept  smoldering  within,  it  is  a  favorite
sleeping  place  for  the  old  people  in  cold  weather.     It  is  now  nearly  obsolete.
57.  The  Snake  Man  (p.  304):  This  myth,  obtained  from  Chief  Smith,  seems
designed  to  impress  upon  the  laity  the  importance  of  a  strict  observance  of  the  innu-
merable gaktufi'ta,  or  tabus,  which  beset  the  daily  life  of  the  Cherokee,  whether  in
health  or  sickness,  hunting,  war,  or  arts  of  peace  (see  the  author's  "Sacred  Formulas
of  the  Cherokees,"  in  the  Seventh  Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology).
Similar  transformation  myths  are  found  all  over  the  world.  One  of  the  most  ancient
is  the  story  of  Cadmus,  in  Ovid's  "  Metamorphoses,  '  with  the  despair  of  the  wife  as
she  sees  the  snaky  change  come  over  her  husband.  "Cadmus,  what  means  this?
Where  are  thy  feet'.'  Where  an-  both  thy  shoulders  and  thy  hands'.'  Where  is  thy
color?  and,  while  I  speak,  where  all  else  besides?"
In  a  Pawnee  story  given  by  Grinnell  two  brothers,  traveling,  camp  for  the  night.
The  elder  eats  some  tabued  food,  and  wakes  from  his  sleep  to  find  that  heischang-
ing  into  a  great  rattlesnake,  the  change  beginning  at.  his  feet.  He  rouses  his  brother
and  gives  him  his  last  instructions:
"  When  I  have  changed  into  a  snake,  take  me  in  your  arms  ami  cany  n   yer  to


\<n  l  -     \XI>    PARALLELS  t63
that  hole.  Thai  will  be  tuy  home,  for  thai  is  the  house  of  the  snakes."  Having
still  a  man's  mind,  !»'  continues  to  talk  as  the  metamorphosis  extends  upward,  until
at  last  his  head  changes  to  that  of  a  snake,  when  his  1  null  in-  takes  him  up  and  carries
him  to  ihe  hole.  The  relatives  make  frequent  visits  to  the  placetovisil  the  snake,
who  alwa  when  they  call,  and  the  brother  brings  it  a  share  ol  his  war
trophies,  including  a  horse  and  a  woman,  and  receives  in  return  the  protection
■  ■I  the  snake  man  (Pawnee  Hero  Stories,  pp.  171-181).  AcloseOmaha  variant  is
given  b)  I  torse)  l  "The  warriors  who  were  changed  to  snakes,"  in  Contributions  to
North  American  Ethnology,  vi).
58.  The  Rattlesnake's  vengeanci     p  305      This  story,  told  by  Swi   lei    exem
plifies  the  Imliaii  reverence  for  the  rattlesnake  and  dread  of  offending  it  already
explained  in  number  49,  "  The  Snake  Tribe."  and  the  accompanying  notes.
See  other  references  under  number  '■'>.  "  Kana'ti  and  Selu."     Many  of the  fndian  ceremonial  prayers  and  invocations  are  in  the  form  of  songs  or  chants.
59.  Tin.  smaller  reptiles,  pishes,  and  insects  (p.  306):  Gi'gd,-tsuha''tl — This
lizard  is  probably  the  Pleistodon  erythrocephalus,  which  is  described  in  Holbrook's
"Herpetology"  as  being  about  11  to  13  inches  long,  with  bright  red  head,  olive-
brown  body  and  tail,  and  yellowish-white  throat  and  abdomen.  "The  Pleistodon
erythrocephalus  chooses  his  residence  in  deep  forests,  and  is  commonly  found  about
hollow  trees,  often  at  a  height  of  30  or  40  feet  from  the  ground,  sometimes  taking  up
his  abode  in  the  last  year's  nest  .if  the  w.ii  m1  pecker,  nut  of  which  he  tli  rusts  his  bright red  head  in  a  threatening  manner  to  those  who  would  disturb  bis  home.  He  never
makes  his  habitation  on  or  near  the  ground,  and  in  fact  seldom  descends  from  his
elevation  unless  in  search  of  food  or  water.  Though  shy  and  timid,  he  is  very  fierce
when  taken,  and  bites  severely,  owing  to  the  great  strength  of  his  jaws,  as  well  as  the
size  and  firmness  of  the  teeth.  The  bite,  however,  though  sharp  and  painful,  is  n..t,
as  i>  commonly  supposed,  venomous."  '
/..or/.  horned  beetle — This  beetle,  variously  called  by  the  Cherokee  crawfish,  deer  ..r
buck,  on  account  of  its  branching  horns,  is  probably  the  "flying  sta._'"  of  early  trav-
eler- Says  Timberlake:  "  t  if  insects,  the  flying  stag  is  almost  the  only  one  worthy
of  notice.  It  is  about  the  shape  of  a  beetle,  but  has  very  large,  beautiful,  branching
horns,  like  those  of  a  stag,  from  whence  it  took  its  name  "  (Memoirs  p.  -hi  I.  Lawson,
about  1700,  also  mentions  " the  flying  stags,  with  horns."  among  the  insects  of  east- ern ( larolina.
60.  Why  the  Bullfrog's  head  is  stbiped  (p.  310):  The  first  version  is  from  John
Ax.  the  second  from  Swimmer,  who  had  forgotten  the  details.
HI.  The  Bullfrog,  lover  (p.  310 1 :  The  first  amusing  little  tale  was  heard  from
several  story-tellers.  The  warning  words  are  sometimes  given  differently,  but  always
in  a  deep,  gruff,  singing  tone,  which  makes  a  very  fair  imitation  of  a  bullfrog's  note.
The  other  stories  were  tol.l  by  Tsesa'ni  ( Jessan )  and  confirmed  by  Swimmer.
In  a  i  reek  variant  .if  the  first  story,  in  the  Tuggle  collection,  it  is  a  prettj  girl,
who  is  obdurate  until  her  lover,  the  Rabbit,  conceals  himself  ill  the  same  way  near
tin-  spring,  with  a  blpwgun  for  a  trumpet,  and  frightens  her  int..  consent  by  siu.-iir.'
out:     -The  girl  who  >tays  single  will  die,  will  die,  will  die."
61'.  The  Katydid's  warning  (p.  311):  Told  by  Swimmer  and  .lames  Blythe.
i;:;.    tjNTSAIYi',  the  GAMBLER     p.  311  i:   This  story  was  obtained  from  Swimmer  and
John  Ax  least),  and  confirmed  also  by  James  Wafford  (west),  who  remembered,
however,  only  the  main  points  of  the  pursuit  and  final  capture  at  Kagun'yI.    The
rsions   corresponded    very  closely,  excepting  that    Ax    sends    the    boy  to   the
Sunset  land  to  play  against  his  brothers,  while  Swimmer  brings  them  to  meet  him
1 .1.  E.  Hoi  brook,  North  American  Herpetology,  ora  Description  oil  he  Reptiles  intuitu i.  p.  119;  Phila.,1842.


464  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE
at  their  father's  house.     In  the  Ax  version, also,  the  gambler  flees  directly  to  the
wwt,  and  as  often  as  the  brothers  si   t  at  him  with  their  arrows  the  thunder  rolls
and  the  lightning  flashes,  but  he  escapes  by  sinking  into  the  earth,  which  opens  for
him,  to  reappear  in  another  form  somewhere  else.  Swimmer  makes  the  Little  Peo-
ple help  in  the  chase.  In  Cherokee  figure  an  invitation  to  a  ball  contest  is  a  chal-
lenge to  battle.  Thunder  is  always  personified  in  the  plural,  Ani'-Hyufi'tikwala'skl,
"The  Thunderers."  The  father  and  the  two  older  sons  seem  to  be  Kana'ti  and
the  Thunder  Boys  (see  number  3,  "  Kana'ti  and  Selu"  i.  although  neither  informant
would  positively  assert  this,  while  the  hoy  hero,  who  has  no  other  na    is  said  to
be  the  lightning.     Nothing  is  told  of  hie  after  career.
UntsaiyV — In  this  name  (sometimes  F/tsaiyi'  or  Tsaiyi')  the  first  syllable  ia
almost  silent  and  the  vowels  are  prolonged  to  imitate  the  ringing  sound  produced  by
striking  a  thin  sheet  of  metal.  The  word  is  now  translated  "brass,"  and  is  applied
to  any  object  made  of  that  metal.  The  mythic  gambler,  who  has  his  counterpart
in  the  mythologies  of  many  tribes,  is  the  traditional  inventor  of  the  wheel-and-
stick  game,  so  popular  among  the  southern  and  eastern  Indians,  and  variously  known
as  gatayustt,  chenco,  or  chunki  (see  note  under  number  3,  "Kana'ti  and  Selu").
He  lived  on  the  south  side  of  Tennessee  river,  at  I'lVtiguhl'.
(jH'tigvhV  or  The  Suck — The  noted  and  dangerous  rapid  known  to  the  whites  as
"The  Suck"  and  to  the  Cherokee  as  Un'tiguhl',  "Pot  in  the  water."  is  in  Tennessee river,  near  the  entrance  of  Suck  creek,  about  s  miles  below  Chattanooga,  at  a  point
where  the  river  gathers  its  whole  force  into  a  contracted  channel  to  break  through
the  Cumberland  mountain.  The  popular  name.  Whirl,  or  Suck,  dates  back  at  leas*
to  1780,  the  upper  portion  being  known  at  the  same  time  as  "The  boiling  pot'
(Donelson  diary,  in  Ramsey,  Tennessee,  p.  71  I,1  a  close  paraphrase  of  the  India
name.  In  the  days  of  pioneer  settlement  it  was  a  most  dangerous  menace  to  na\  iga
lion,  but  some  of  the  most  serious  obstacles  in  the  channel  have  now  been  removed
by  blasting  and  other  means.  The  Cherokee  name  and  legend  were  probably  sug-
gested  by  the  appearance  of  the  rapids  at  the  spot.  Close  to  where  Cntsaiyl'  lived,
according  to  the  Indian  account,  may  still  be  seen  the  large  flat  rock  upon  which  he  was
accustomed  to  play  the  gatayusti  game  with  all  who  accepted  his  challenge,  the  lines
andgrooves  worn  by  the  rolling  of  the  wheels  beingstill  plainly  marked,  ami  thestone
wheels  themselves  now  firmly  attached  to  the  surface  of  the  rock.  A  similarly
grooved  or  striped  rock,  where  also,  it  is  said.  ITitsaiyi'  used  to  roll  his  wheel,  is
reported  to  be  on  the  north  side  of  Hiwassee,  just  below  Calhoun,  Tennessee.
The  Suck  is  thus  described  by  a  traveler  in  ISIS,  while  the  whole  was  still  Indian
country  and  Chattanooga  was  yet  undreamed  of:
"And  here,  I  cannot  forbear  pausing  a  n   tent  to  call  your  attention  to  the  grand
and  picturesque  scenery  which  opens  to  the  view  of  the  admiring  spectator.  The
country  is  still  possessed  by  the  aborigines,  ami  the  band  of  civilization  has  done  but
little  to  soften  the  wild  aspect  of  nature.  The  Tennessee  river,  having  concentrated
into  one  mass  the  numerous  streams  it  has  received  in  its  course  of  three  or  four
hundred  miles,  glides  through  an  extended  valley  with  a  rapid  and  overwhelming
current,  half  a  mile  in  width.      At   this   place,  a  group  of  mountains  stand   ready  to
dispute  its  progress.      First,  the  'Lookout.'  an  independent  range   mmencing thirty
miles  below,  presents,  opposite  the  river's  course,  its  bold  and  rocky  termination  of two  thousand  feet.  Around  its  brow  is  a  pallisade  [sic]  of  naked  rocks,  from  seventy
to  One  hundred  feet.  The  river  flows  ujion  its  base,  and  instantly  twines  to  theright.
Passing  on  for  six  miles  farther  it  turns  again,  and  is  met  by  the  side  of  the  Rackoon
mountain.  Collecting  its  strength  into  a  channel  of  seventy  yards,  it  severs  the
mountain,,  and  rushes  tumultuously  through  the  rocky  defile,  wafting  the  trembling
navigator  at  the  rate  of  a  mile  in  two  or  three  minutes.     The  passage  is  called  'The
■  J.G. M.  Ramsey,  The  Annuls  of  Tennessee  to  the  end  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  <■!<■..  Philadel-
phia, ls.->3.      •


moosey]  NOTES    AND    PARALLELS  4<'>.r>
Suck.'    The  summit  of  the  I   koul   mountain  overlooks  the  whole  country.     And
to  those  who  can  be  delighted  with  the  view  of  an  interminable  forest,  penetrated
by  tin'  windings  of  a  bold  river,  interspersed  with  hundreds  of  verdant  prairies,  and
broken  by  many  ridges  and  mountains,  furnishes  in  the  month  of  May,  a  landscape,
which  yields  to  few  others,  in  extent,  variety  or  beauty. " — Rev.  Elias  Cornelius,  in
(Sillinian's]  American  Journal  of  Science,  i,  p.  223,  1818.
Bel  eren  hisKfe — The  Indian  was  a  passionate  gambler  and  there  was  absolutely
no  limit  to  the  risks  which  he  was  willing  to  take,  even  to  the  loss  of  liberty,  if  not
of  life.  Says  Lawson  (History  of  Carolina,  p.  287):  "They  game  verj  much  and
often  strip  one  another  of  all  they  have  in  the  world;  and  what  is  more,  I  have  known
several  of  them  play  themselves  away,  so  that  they  have  remained  the  winners'  -ei
vants  till  their  relations  or  themselves  could  pay  the  money  to  redeem  them."
His  skin  was  dean — The  idea  of  purification  or  cleansing  through  the  efficacy  of
the  sweat-bath  is  very  common  in  Indian  myth  and  ceremonial.  In  an  ( linalia  story
given  by  Horsey  the  hero  has  been  transformed,  by  witchcraft,  into  a  mangy  dot.'.
He  builds  a  sweat  lodge,  goes  into  it  as  a  dog  ami  sweats  himself  until,  on  his  com-
mand, the  people  take  off  the  blankets,  when  "Behold,  he  was  not  a  dog;  he  was
a  very  handsome  man"  i  "Adventures  of  Hingpe-agce,"  in  Contributions  to  North American  Ethnology,  vt,  p.  175).
From  thebottom — The  choice  of  the  most  remote  or  the  most  insignificant  appear-
ing of  several  objects,  as  being  really  the  most  valuable,  is  another  common  incident
in  the  myths.
Honey-loeust  tree — The  favorite  honey-locus',  tree  and  the  seat  with  thorns  of  the
same  species  in  the  home  of  the  Thunder  Man  may  indicate  that  in  Indian  as  in
Aryan  thought  there  was  an  occult  connection  between  the  pinnated  leaves  and  the
lightning,  as  we  know  to  be  the  case  with  regard  to  the  European  rowan  or  mountain
ash.
All  kinds  of  snakes — It  will  be  remembered  that  the  hoy's  father  was  a  thunder
god.  The  connection  between  the  snake  and  the  rain  or  thunder  spirit  has  already
been  noted.  It  appears  also  in  number  84,  "The  Man  who  Married  the  Thunder's
Sister."
Elder  brother — My  elder  brother  (male  speaking),  iMgim/U;  my  elder  brother
(female  speaking),  ungidtV;  thy  two  elder  brothers  (male  speaking),  tsets&ni'll.
Sunset  land — The  Cherokee  word  here  used  is  Wusuhihun'yt,  "there  where  they
stay  over  night."  The  usual  expression  in  the  sacred  formula  is  usunhi'yl,  "tin'
darkening,  or  twilight  place";  the  common  word  is  wude'ligun'yl,  "there  where  it
I  the  sun)  goes  down."
Lightning  at  every  stroke — In  the  Omaha  myth  of  "The  Chief's  Son  anil  the  Thun-
ders," given  by  Dorsey,  some  young  men  traveling  to  the  end  of  the  world  meet  a
Thunder  Man,  who  bids  the  leader  select  one  of  four  medicine  hags.  Having  been
warned  in  advance,  he  selects  the  oldest,  but  most  powerful,  and  is  then  given  also
a  club  wbii  h  causes  thunder  whenever  flourished  in  the  air  (Contributions  to  North
American  Ethnology,  vi,  p.  185).
Strike  the  rock — This  method  of  procuring  water  is  as  old  at  leasl  n-  the  Look  of Exodus.
The  brass  rubbed  off— The  beautiful  metallic  luster  on  the  head  of  Phanxus  earni
fex  is  thus  accounted  for.  The  common  roller  beetle  is  called  "dung  roller,"  hut
tin-  species  is  distinguished  as  the  "horned,  brass"  beetle.  It  is  also  .sometimes
spi  iken  of  as  the  dog  of  the  Thunder  Boys.
/,',  in,,-.'  i/miir  ul  tin  i/riijH  rim-  -Something  like  this  is  found  among  the  Cheyenne:
"The  earth  rests  on  a  large  beam  or  post.  Far  in  the  north  there  is  a  beaver  as
white  as  snow  who  is  a  great  father  of  all  mankind.  Some  day  he  will  gnaw  thrmiL.'li
the  support  at  the  bottom.  We  shall  lie  helpless  ami  the  earth  will  fall.  This  will
happen  when  he  becomes  angry.     The  post  is  already  partly  eaten  through.     For
19   ETH— 01   30


4()6  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
this  reason  one  band  of  the  Cheyenne  never  eat  beaver  or  even  touch  the  skin.  If
they  do  touch  it,  they  become  sick"  (Kroeber,  Cheyenne  Tales,  in  Journal  of
American  Folk-Lore,  July,  1900).
64.  The  nest  op  the  Tla'nuwa  (p.315):  This  story  was  obtained  first  from  John
Ax  and  Ta'gwadihi',  and  was  afterward  heard  of  frequently  in  connection  with  the
cave  at  Citico.  It  is  mentioned  by  Ten  Kate  in  "Legends  of  the  Cherokees,"
obtained  in  flu-  Indian  Territory,  in  the  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  January,  1889.
TUL'nuwQ,-  The  Tla'nuwa  (Tsa'nuwS  or  Su'nawain  the  Middle  dialect )  is  a  mythic
bird,  described  as  a  great  hawk,  larger  than  any  bird  now  existing.  There  is  a  small
hawk  called  tla'nuwa  usdi',  "little  tla'nuwa,"  which  is  described  as  its  smaller  coun-
terpart or  image,  and  which  the  Cherokee  say  accompanies  flocks  of  wild  pigeons,
occasionally  when  hungry  swooping  down  and  killing  one  by  striking  it  with  its  sharp
breast  bone.  It  is  probably  the  goshawk  (Astur  atricapUlus) .  The  great  Tla'nuwa,
like  the  other  animals,  "went  up."  According  to  Adair  (History  of  the  American
Indians,  p.  17)  the  Cherokee  used  to  compare  a  miserly  person  to  a  "sinnawah." When  John  Ax  first  recited  the  story  he  insisted  that  the  whites  must  also  believe
it,  as  they  had  it  pictured  on  their  money,  and  holding  up  a  silver"  coin,  he  trium-
phantly pointed  out  what  he  claimed  was  the  figure  of  the  Tla'nuwa,  holding  in  its
talons  the  arrows  and  in  its  beak  the  serpent.  He  was  not  so  far  wrong,  as  it  is  well
known  that  the  Mexican  coat  of  arms,  stamped  upon  the  coins  of  the  republic,  has
its  origin  in  a  similar  legend  handed  down  from  the  Aztec.  Myths  of  dangerous
monster  serpents  destroyed  by  great  birds  were  common  to  a  number  of  tribes.  The
Tuscarora,  formerly  eastern  neighbors  of  the  Cherokee,  told  "a  long  tale  of  a  great
rattlesnake,  which,  a  great  while  ago,  lived  by  a  creek  in  that  river,  which  was  Neus,
and  that  it  killed  abundance  of  Indians;  but  at  last  a  bald  eagle  killed  it,  and  they
were  rid  of  a  serpent  that  used  to  devour  whole  canoes  full  of  Indians  at  a  time"
(Lawson,  Carolina,  p.  346).
TWnuwa'l —  "Tla'nuwa  place,"  the  cliff  so  called  by  the  Cherokee,  with  the  cave
half  way  up  its  face,  is  on  the  north  bank  of  Little  Tennessee  river,  a  short  distance
below  the  entrance  of  the  Citico  creek,  on  land  formerly  belonging  to  Colonel  John
Lowrey,  one  of  the  Cherokee  officers  at  the  battle  of  the  Horseshoe  bend  (Wafford) .
Just  above,  but  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  is  LTtlunti'yl,  the  former  haunt  of
the  cannibal  liver  eater  (see  number  66,  "U'tlunta,  the  Spear-finger").
Soon  after  tin1  creation — As  John  Ax  put  it,  adopting  the  Bible  expression,  HUahi'yu
dine'ti&nii  a'nigwa — "A  long  time  ago    the  creation     soon  after."
Rope  of  linn  bark — The  old  Cherokee  still  do  most  of  their  tying  and  packing  with
ropes  twisted  from  the  inner  bark  of  trees.  In  one  version  of  the  story  the  medicine-
man uses  a  long  udii'I  or  cohosh  (  Actseal)  vine.
Holes  are  still  there — The  place  which  the  Cherokee  call  Tla'mnva-a'tsiyelunisun'yl,
"  Where  the  Tla'nuwa  cut  it  up,"  is  nearly  opposite  Citico,  on  Little  Tennessee  river,
just  below  Talassee  ford,  in  Blount  county,  Tennessee.  The  surface  of  the  rock  bears
a  series  of  long  trenchlike  depressions,  extending  some  distance,  which,  according  to
the  Indians,  are  the  marks  where  the  pieces  bitten  from  the  body  of  the  great  serpent
weredropt  by  the  Tla'nuwa.
65.  The  hunter  and  the  Tla'nuwa  (p.  316):  This  myth  was  told  by  Swimmer.
66.  U'tlun'ta,  the  Spear-finger  (p.  316) :  This  is  oneof  the  most  noted  among  the
Cherokee  myths,  being  equally  well  known  both  east  and  west.  The  version  here
given  was  obtained  from  John  Ax,  with  some  corrections  and  additions  from  Swim-
mer, Wafford  (west  I  and  others.  A  version  of  it,  "The  Stone-shields,"  in  which
the  tomtit  is  incorrectly  made  a  jay,  is  given  by  Ten  Kate,  in  his  "Legends  of  the
Cherokees,"  in  the  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore  for  January,  1889,  as  obtained
from  a  mixed-blood  informant  in  Tahlequah.     Another  version,  "The  Demon  of


NOTES    AND    PARALLELS  Mm
Consumption,"  bj  i  lapt.  .lam.  -  VV.  Terrell,  formerly  a  trader  among  the  East  <  Ihero-
kee,  appears  in  the  same  journal  for  April,  ls>n>.  still  another  variant,  apparently
condensed  from  Terrell's  information,  is  given  by  Zeiglerand  Grosscup,  "Heart  of
the  Alleghanies,"  page  24  Raleigh  and  Cleveland,  1883).  In  Ten  Kate's  version
il»'  stone  coal  of  mail  broke  in  pieces  as  soon  as  the  monster  was  killed,  and  the
fragments  were  gathered  up  and  kepi  as  amulets  by  the  |   pie.
There  is  some  confusion  between  this  story  of  U'tlufi'ta  and  that  of  Nun'yunu'wl (number  67).     According  to  some  myth  tellers  the  two  i   isters  were  husband  and
wife  and  lived  together,  and  were  both  alike  dressed  in  stone,  bad  awl  fingers  ami
ate  human  livers,  the  only  difference  being  that  the  husband  waylaid  hunters,  while
his  female  partner  ga\  e  her  attention  t..  children.
Thisstoryhas  a  rinse  parallel  in  the  Creek  myth  of  the  Tuggle  collection,  "The
Big  Rock  Man."  in  which  the  people  finally  kill  the  stony  monster  by  acting  upon the  a.l\  ice  i  if  the  Rabbit  to  shoot  him  in  the  ear.
Faraway,  in  British  Columbia,  the  Indians  tell  how  the  Coyote  transformed  him-
self to  an  Klk.  covering  his  body  with  a  hard  shell.  "Now  this  shell  was  like  an
armor,  for  no  arrow  could  pierce  it;  but  being  hardly  large  enough  to  cover  all  his
body,  there  was  a  small  h..le  left  underneath  histhroat."     He  attacks  the  people,
Stabbing  them  with  his  antlers  ami  trampling  them  under  foot,  while  their  arrows
glance  harmlessly  from  his  body,  until  'the  Meadow-lark,  who  was  a  great  telltale,
appeared  and  cried  out,  'There  is  just  a  little  hole  at  his  throat!'"  A  hunter  directs
his  arrow  to  that  spot  and  the  Klk  falls  .lead  (Teit,  Thompson  River  Traditions,
pp.  33  34
ta — The  word  means  literally  "he  (or  she)  has  it  sharp,"  i.  e.,  has  some
sharp  part  ororgan.  It  might  be  used  of  a  tooth  or  finger  nail  or  some  other  attached
portion  of  the  body,  but  here  refers  to  the  awl-like  finger.  Ten  Kate  spells  the
name   I'ilata.      On    Little   Tennessee    river,    nearly   opposite   the   entrance   of   Citico
creek,  in  Blount  comity,  Tennessee,  i-  a  place  which  the  Cherokee  call  D'tluntufi'yl,
"Sharp-finger  place."  because,  they  say,  F'th'uVta  used  to  frequent  the  spot.
NfmyCi'-tlit  tji'iu"t — "Tree  rock."  .so  called  on  account  of  its  resemblance  to  a  stand-
ing tree  trunk:  a  notable  monument-shape  rock  on  the  west  side  of  Hiwassee  river,
about  four  miles  above  Hayesville,  North  Carolina,  and  nearly  on  the  (  u-oruna  line.
Whitesidi  mountain — This  noted  mountain,  known  to  the  Cherokee  as  Sanigila'gf,
a  name  for  which  they  have  no  meaning,  is  one  of  the  prominent  peaks  of  the  Blue
ridge,  and  is  situated  southeast  from  Franklin  and  about  four  miles  from  Highlands,  0'
the  dividing  line  between  Macon  and  Jackson  counties.  North  Carolina.  It  is  4,900
feet  high,  being  the  loftiest  elevation  on  the  ridge  which  forms  the  watershed
between  the  tributaries  of  the  Little  Ten  lie-see  and  the  Chattooga  branch  of  Savannah.
It  takes  its  name  from  the  perpendicular  cliff  on  its  western  exposure,  and  is  also
known  sometimes  as  the  Devil's  courthouse.  The  Indians  compare  the  appearance
of  the  cliff  to  that  of  a  sheet  of  ice,  and  say  that  the  western  summit  was  formerly
crowned  by  a  projecting  rock,  since  destroyed   by  lightning,  which  formed  a  part  of
the  great  bridge  which  CTtlun'ta  attempted  to  build  across  the  valley.  Lanman's
description  of  this  mountain,  in  1848,  has  been  quoted  in  the  notes  to  number  13,
"The  Great  Yellow-jacket."     Following  is  a  notice  by  a  later  writer:
"About  five  miles  from  Highlands  is  that  huge  old  cliff,  Whiteside-,  which  forms
the  advanced  guard  of  all  the  mountain  ranges  trending  on  tile  south.      It  is  no  higher
than  the  Righi,  but.  like  it.  rising  direct    fr    the  plain,  it  overpowers  the  spectator
more  than  its  loftier  brethren.  Through  all  the  lowlands  of  upper  Georgia  and  Ala-
bama this  dazzling  white  pillar  of  rock,  uplifting  the  sky.  is  an  emphatic  and  signifi-
cant  landmark.  The  ascent  can  be  made  on  horseback,  on  the  rear  side  of  the
mountain,  to  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile  ..i  the  Bummit.  When  the  top  is  reached,
after  a  short    stretch   of  nearly  perpendicular  climbing,  the  traveler  finds  himself  on


468  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
the  edge  of  a  sheer  white  wall  of  rock,  over  which,  clinging  for  life  to  a  protecting
hand,  he  can  look,  if  he  chooses,  two  thousand  feet  down  into  the  dim  valley  below.
A  pebble  dropped  from  his  hand  will  fall  straight  as  into  a  well.  On  the  vast  plain
below  he  can  see  the  wavelike  hills  on  which  the  great  mountain  ranges  which  have
stretched  from  Maine  along  the  continent  ebb  down  finally  into  the  southern
plains" — Rebecca  H.  Davis,  Bypaths  in  the  Mountains,  in  Harper's  Magazine,  lxi, p.  544,  September,  1880.
Picking  strawberries — For  more  than  a  hundred  years,  as  readers  of  Bartram  wil'l
remember,  the  rich  bottom  lands  of  the  old  Cherokee  country  have  been  noted  for
their  abundance  of  strawberries  and  other  wild  fruits.
My  grandchildren — As  in  most  Indian  languages.  Cherokee  kinship  terms  are  usually
specialized, and  there  is  no  single  term  for  grandchild.  "My  son's  child"  is  t'lngiui'sl,
plural  ts&iigini'sl;  "my  daughter's  child"  is  ungiU'sl,  plural  ii&ngUi'st.  The  use  of
kinship  terms  as  expressive  of  affection  or  respect  is  very  common  among  Indians.
Taking  the  appearance — This  corresponds  closely  with  the  European  folk-belief  in
fairy  changelings.
To  bum  the  leave* — The  burning  of  the  fallen  leaves  in  the  autumn,  in  order  to  get
at  the  nuts  upon  the  ground  below,  is  still  practiced  by  the  white  mountaineers  of
the  southern  Alleghenies.  The  line  of  fire  slowly  creeping  up  the  mountain  side  upon
a  dark  night  is  one  of  the  picturesque  sights  of  chat  picturesque  country.
The  song — As  rendered  by  Swimmer,  the  songs  seem  to  be  intended  for  an  imita-
tion of  the  mournful  notes  of  some  bird,  such  as  the  turtle  dove,  hidden  in  the  deep
forests.
Pitfall — The  pitfall  trap  for  large  game  was  known  among  nearly  all  the  tribes,
but  seems  not  to  have  been  in  frequent  use.
Chickadee  ami  tomtit — These  two  little  birds  closely  resemble  each  other,  the  Caro-
lina chickadee  (Parus  carolinensis)  ortslkllill  being  somewhat  smaller  than  the  tufted
titmouse  (Parus  bicolor)  or  utsu'gi,  which  is  also  distinguished  by  a  topknot  or  crest. The  belief  that  the  tslkllill  foretells  the  arrival  of  an  absent  friend  is  general  among
the  Cherokee,  and  has  even  extended  to  their  neighbors,  the  white  mountaineers.
See  also  number  35,  "The  Bird  Tribes,"  and  accompanying  notes.
Her  heart — The  conception  of  a  giant  or  other  monster  whose  heart  or  "life"  is  in
some  unaccustomed  part  of  the  body,  or  may  even  be  taken  out  and  laid  aside  at
will,  so  that  it  is  impossible  to  kill  the  monster  by  ordinary  means,  is  common  in
Indian  as  well  as  in  European  and  Asiatic  folklore.
In  a  Xavaho  myth  we  are  told  that  the  Coyote  "did  not,  like  other  beings,  keep
his  vital  principle  in  his  chest,  where  it  might  easily  be  destroyed.  He  kept  it  in  the
tip  of  his  nose  and  in  the  end  of  his  tail,  where  no  one  would  expect  to  find  it."  He meets  several  accidents,  any  one  of  which  would  be  sufficient  to  kill  an  ordinary
creature,  but  as  his  nose  and  tail  remain  intact  he  is  each  time  resurrected.  Finally
a  girl  whom  he  wishes  to  marry  beats  him  into  small  pieces  with  a  club,  grinds  the
pieces  to  powder,  and  scatters  the  powder  to  the  four  winds.  "But  again  she  neg-
lected to  crush  the  point  of  the  nose  and  the  tip  of  the  tail,"  with  the  result  that  the
Coyote  again  comes  to  life,  when  of  course  they  are  married  and  live  happily  until
the  next  chapter  (Matthews,  Xavaho  Legends,  pp.  91-94).
In  a  tale  of  the  Gaelic  highlands  the  giant's  life  is  in  an  egg  which  he  keeps  con-
cealed in  a  distant  place,  and  not  until  the  hero  finds  and  crushes  the  egg  does  the
giant  die.  The  monster  or  hero  with  but  one  vulnerable  spot,  as  was  the  case  with
Achilles,  is  also  a  common  concept.
67.  NASyunu'wi,  the  Stone  Max  (p.  319):  This  myth,  although  obtained  from
Swimmer,  the  best  informant  in  the  eastern  band,  is  but  fragmentary,  fur  the  reason
that  he  confounded  it  with  the  somewhat  similar  story  of  U'tlun'ta  (number  66). It  was  mentioned  byAyastaand  others  (east)  and  by  Wafford   (west)  as  a  very  old


mooney]  NOTES    AND    PARALLELS  469
and  interesting  story,  although  none  of  these  could  recall  the  details  in  connected
form.    It  is  noted  as  oi   f  the  stories  heard  in  the  Territory  by  Ten  Kate  |  Legends
of  the  Cherokees,  in  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  January,  1889),  who  spells  the
name  Nayunu'wi.
Xi'niiiiinn' ni,  "Dressed  in  stone";  add'lan&ftsU,  a  staff  or  cane;  axufi'itt,  astfi'tttfCl,
a  foot  log  or  bridge;  ada'iuehl,  a  great  magician  or  supernatural  wonder-worker;  sec
the  glossary.
A  very  close  parallel  is  found  among  the  Iroquois,  who  have  traditions  of  an  inva-
sion by  a  race  of  fierce  cannibals  known  as  the  Stonish  tiiants,  who,  originally  like
ordinary  humans,  had  wandered  off  into  the  wilderness,  where  they  became  addicted
to  eating  raw  flesh  ami  wallowing  in  the  sand  until  their  bodies  grew  to  gigantic  size
ami  were  covered  with  hard  scales  like  stone,  which  no  arrow  could  penetrate  (see
Cusick,  in  Schoolcraft,  Indian  Tribes,  v,  p.  637).  One  of  these,  which  preyed  par-
ticularly upon  the  Onondaga,  was  at  last  taken  in  a  pitfall  and  thus  killed.  Another,
in  tracking  his  victims  used  ".something  which  looked  like  a  finger,  but  was  really  a
pointer  made  of  bone.  With  this  he  could  find  anything  he  wished."  The  pointer
was  finally  snatched  from  him  by  a  hunter,  on  which  the  giant,  unable  to  find  his
way  without  it.  begged  pitcously  for  its  return,  promising  to  eat  no  more  men  and
t.i  send  the  hunter  long  life  and  good  luck  for  himself  and  all  his  friends.  The
hunter  thereupon  restored  it  and  the  giant  kept  his  promises  (Beauchamp,  W.  M.,
[roquois  Notes,  in  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  Boston,  July,  1892.)  As  told  by
Mrs  Smith  ("The  Stone  Giant's  Challenge,"  Myths  of  the  Iroquois,  in  Second
Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  1SS3),  the  pointer  was  a  human  finger.
"He  placed  it  upright  upon  his  hand,  and  it  immediately  pointed  the  way  for  him
to  go." Menstrual  woman — Among  all  our  native  tribes  it  is  believed  that  there  is  something
dangerous  or  uncanny  in  the  touch  or  presence  of  a  menstrual  woman.  Hence  the
universal  institution  of  the  "  menstrual  lodge,"  to  which  the  woman  retires  at  such
periods,  eating,  working,  and  sleeping  alone,  together  with  a  host  of  tabus  and  pre-
cautions bearing  upon  the  same  subject.  Nearly  the  same  ideas  are  held  in  regard  to
a  pregnant  woman.
Sourwood  stakes — Cherokee  hunters  impale  meat  upon  sourwood  (Oxydendrum)
stakes  for  roasting,  and  the  wood  is  believed,  also,  to  have  power  against  the  spells  of
witches.
Began  In  lull; — The  revealing  of  "medicine"  secrets  by  a  magician  when  in  his
final  agony  is  a  common  incident  in  Indian  myths.
Whaten  r  In  prayed  for  -Sw  immer  gives  a  detailed  statement  of  the  particular  peti-
tion made  by  several  of  those  thus  painted.  Painting  the  face  and  body,  especially
with  red  paint,  is  always  among  Indians  a  more  or  less  sacred  performance,  usually
accompanied  with  prayers.
68.  The  hunteb  in  the  Dakwa' — This  story  was  told  by  Swimmer  and  Ta'gwadihi'
and  i-  well  known  in  the  tribe.  The  version  from  the  Wahnenauhi  manuscript  differs
considerably  from  that  here  given.  In  the  Bible  translation  the  word  dakwa'  is
used  as  the  equivalent  of  whale.  Haywood  thus  alludes  to  the  story  (Nat.  and
Aborig.  Hist.  Tenn.,  p.  244)  :  "  One  of  the  ancient  traditions  of  the  Cherokees  is  that
once  a  whale  -wallowed  a  little  boy,  and  after  some  time  spewed  him  upon  the  land."
It  is  pretty  certain  that  the  Cherokee  formerly  had  some  acquaintance  with  whales,
which,  aln. ut  the  year  L700,  according  to  Lawson,  were  "very  numerous"  on  the.
coast  of  North  Carolina,  being  frequently  stranded  along  the  sic. re,  so  that  settlers
derived  considerable  profit  from  the  oil  and  blubber.     He  enumerates  four  species
there  know  n,  and  adds  :i  general  Statement  that   "si .me  Indians  in  America"  hunted
then,  at  sea  (History  of  Carolina,  pp.  251   252).
In  almost  every  age  and  country  we  lind  a  myth  of  a  great  tish  swallowing  a  man,


470  MYTHS    OF    THE    CHEROKEE  [eth.ann.19
who  afterward  finds  his  way  nut  alive.  Near  to  the  Cherokee  myth  art' tin-  Bible